S2139 E18_20 99868829 121185
Gods warning to England BY the Voyce of his ROD. Delivered in A SERMON, Preached at Margarets Westminster, before the Honourable House of COMMONS, at their late Solemn Fast, Octob. 30. 1644. By HENRY SCUDDER, Rector of Collingborn-Ducis in Wiltshire. Published by Order of the said House. ZEPH. 2. 1, 2, 3. Gather your selves together, yea gather your selves together, O Nation, not desired. Before the Decree bring forth, before the day passe as the chaffe, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lords anger come upon you. Seck ye the Lord, all ye meck of the earth, which have wrought his Judgements, seek Righteousnesse, seek mecknesse; it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger. LONDON: Printed by J. R. for Philemon Stephens and Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold at their shops in Pauls Church-yard. 1644.
ORdered by the Commons As∣sembled in Parliament; That Mr Rous, Mr Long, and Mr Wheeler, do from this House give Thanks to Mr Scudder, for the great pains he took in the Sermon he Preached this day, at the Intreaty of the said Commons, at S. Margarets Westmin∣ster, (it being a day of publique Hu∣miliation) and to desire him to Print his Sermon; And it is Orde∣red, that none shall presume to Print his Sermon, but whom shall belicensed under the hand writing of the said Mr Scudder. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. I appoint Philemon Stephens and Edward Blackmore to Print my Sermon. HENRY SCUDDER.
To The honourable House of Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT. THis is a time of Englands trouble, most sad, and tempestuous: and if we look upon the face of things as now they are, and of the gathering of new clouds to the darkning of the heavens over us; and upon the ordina∣ry course of Gods Providence in the way of his Judgements, who can but Judge, and feare, that these are but the beginnings of troubles, and that they will be much greater and much worse then yet they are?Isai. 4. 5. 7. The Lord doth as well create darknesse as forme light, and doth as well create evill as make peace. And there is a vicissitude of these, a succeeding of these, one in the place of another in Gods Government of the sons of men. First, he giveth Peace and prosperity, and tryeth what the riches of his goodnesse will work upon men: he assayeth toHos. 11. 4. endear and draw them to himself, by the cords and bands of his love; to bring them to Repentance and Obedi∣ence.
But such is mans unhappinesse, since the fall of Adam, that usually this goodnesse and bounty of God is despised and abused: men quickly forget God, and grow proud, tyrannous, and Luxurious; and, waxing fat with Prospe∣rity, they are wanton, and kick against God, and do ex∣ceedDeut. 32. 15. in all manner of Impiety, uncleannesse, and unrigh∣teousnesse. Yea, amongst them, Gods own people, who professe his Name; even they will be too much tainted with the common sins of the times, and places where they live. With these, yet, God beareth a long time, being very loath to alter the course of his bounty, being unwilling to afflict or grieve the Children of men: but they continuingLam. 3. 33. and increasing in their wickednesse, he is enforced by his Justice and Truth, to Create and bring evill upon them, to plague and punish the whole world, or a great part of it, even so much of it as doth partake of like sinnes, with Fa∣mine and Pestilence, or other diseases, and last of all, with war, the sorest of his plagues. In such Generall Visitations it is Gods manner commonly to begin with his own people. For he is most provoked with their sins, and taketh it mostDeut. 32. 6. unkindly at their hands: as he saith, You onely have I known of all the Families of the earth; therefore IAmos 2. 3. will punish you for all your iniquities. He may also first begin with them, that they may repent and give good example to the rest of the world round about them. Also, that all men may see that God is Impartiall in his punishments. And also that the wicked enemies of Gods people may know that they certainly shall not go unpunished, as God saith,
Lo, I bring evill upon the City, which is called byJer. 5. 29. my Name, and should ye go unpunished? ye shall not be unpunished: for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth. In the dayes of King Asa there was war, not onely a∣gainst2 Chron. 14. 9, 10. gainst Judah, but in all Countries thereabout. It was with them then in that part of the world, as it is now with us in Europe. No peace was to him that went out, or came2 Chro. 15. 6. in, but great vexations were upon all the Inhabi∣tants of those Countries. Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City, God did vex them with all adversities. The like Generall punishing of the Nations by war, we read of in the Prophesie of Jeremiah, which ended in theJer. 25. destraction of Babilon. The like, when after Christs death, Jerusalem was de∣stroyed.Mat. 24. 6, 7. God hath his houres of temptation to bring upon allRev. 3. 10. the world, to try them that dwell therein, sometimes in one kinde of tryall, sometimes in another. At this time God is visiting of Europe and most of the Christian world with the fearfull Judgement of War. About six and twenty years since there was Peace and great prosperity in most, if not in all, parts of Europe: but the inhabitants thereof; nay, the Churches of God ser∣ved not the Lord, with joyfulnesse and gladnesse of heart, for that their abundance of all things. They corruped their wayes, and became notoriously wicked in all sorts of abhomi∣nations. The Religion of the best, take them in the generality, was but a form of Godlinesse without power, such as the Apostle Prophesied of, should be in the last times, which temper in Religion God hateth. And as they were increa∣sed2 Tim. 3. 1. 5▪
so they sinned. Wherefore the Lord changed his countenance towards us; and hath taken the Rod and sword in hand to correct and punish us. He caused the fire of war, the fire of his anger to begin to burn and break out in Bohemia, and in the Palatinate, (none of the worst of the Churches) yea it is run through all Germany, and where is it not now in Europe? It is now, to our woe, come into Ireland and England, and Scotland is not altogether free. This war layeth all wast before it in other Countries: How can we think it should do any otherwise in Eng∣land? The Symptomes of a desolation that shall over-run this kingdome are too too manifest: It was a true saying of our Saviour, A Kingdome divided against it self, is brought to desolation. Do not our divisions continue?Mat. 12. 25. do not they increase? Divisions in the Church, Divisi∣ons in the Common-wealth, Divisions in the Armie, Divisions in Counsells, Divisions every where; a∣mongst all sorts in the Kingdome, Whilst God doth thus divide us, and doth in his just judgement, give us over thus to make Divisions, certainly he meaneth that by our selves we shall be destroyed. We would not in time of Peace agree to∣gether to serve him with one consent; he will therefore that we shall agree in this, By our dis-agreements to destroy and consume one another. I beseech you take into your serious consideration those Symptomes which argued our utter ruine and destruction to be neere, if not speedily prevented; as you heard them, so you may help your memories, if you can gain time to read them in the ensuing Sermon, which as it was Preached, so now is Printed by your Order.
Are not gray haires upon us here and there already?Hos. 7. 9. Is not much of our strength devoured? Are we blind? Or will we still winke with our eyes, and not see? And not know all this? Doth not our wickednesse (which aboundeth more and more in England, even while we are under the Rod) testifie unto our faces, that we do not return to the Lord our God; and seeke him with our whole heart for all this? When you were pleased to call me to go before you, and to bear a part with you, in your day of Fast and so∣lemn Humiliation; I looked upon our Nation in this ill Condition, I knew no better Subject to Treate of, to be ap∣plyed to your selves and to all that then heard me, then to teach you, or atleast to remember you of a timely and pro∣fitable Use-making of the Rod of God, which is now so sore upon us; Namely, to learn what God teacheth us by it. To be shewed our danger in which we are, and the neere∣nesse of our ruine, for our sinnes; will be no discourage∣ment unto you in the work of standing in the gap, andPsal. 106. 23. making up the breach, in which you have so long stood; and which with unweariednesse and undauntednesse you have (to your eternall Renown) endeavoured, maugre all the mountains of opposition and difficulties which you have met withall. But it should rather put an edge to your cou∣rage, as all difficulties do to men of courage and true va∣lour. You are, Honoured and worthy Patriots, the re∣pairers of our breaches, under God: Be ye Mosesses, and Phineasses to our Israel. When Israel sinned in the matter of the golden Calf, God said, He would destroy them, hadPsal. 106. 23. not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them:
When Phineas executed Judgement the plague wasPsal. 106. 30. stayed; you are called not extraordinarily as he, but in an ordinary way to do it: God when he foretold his purpose to destroy the Kingdome of Judah, did look for such as you are, to make up the hedge and stand in the gap, beforeEzek. 22. 30. the Lord, that he might not destroy it. These Worthies by prayer held Gods hands from striking,Exod. 32. 10, 27. and by executing judgement for him, did save the King∣dome, did save the people from destruction. Whatsoever the event may prove, Noble Sirs, Let the fear of the Lord be upon you; Be strong: Let2 Chron. 15. 7. not your hands be weak, deal couragiously, The Lord will be with the good; and your work shall be re∣warded;2 Chron. 19. 11. and you may expect a happy issue: But how∣ever, it is honourable for a Souldier to dye in maintaining, or making up the breach; and your work shall be with the Lord, and if you save not the Kingdome, you shal withoutEzeck. 14. 18, 20. fail (as it is sayd of Noah, Job, and Daniel) save your own souls, and may expect some temporall deliverance. Neither should the knowledge of our likelinesse, and neerenesse to ruine disanimate any, or should it weaken the hands of the people of the Land: For when God sent Jeremiah to Prophesie against Jerusalem that he would destroy it, and that they should be carried Captive, this is the inference from it: Therefore amend your wayesJer. 25. 13. and your doings, and obey the voyce of the Lord your God, and the Lord will repent him of the evillJer. 18. 7, 8. that he hath pronounced against you. Moreover, let it be conceived that God is peremptorily determined to destroy a Nation, which we cannot be cer∣tain of, though we can see a Nation deserving it, and is neer to it; For God is not limitted, nor can be prescribed
to do what in like case he hath done, yet it will be pro∣fitable for a people to be warned of it: For they that fear God, will thereupon endeavour to prevent it; or toEzek. 9. 4. prepare for it. That making their own peace with God, they may be marked for safety as those in Ezekiel were, and may make their adresses to God, as to a safe and strong tower, thereby entring into the chambers spoken of in Isaiah, and shut the doores about them; and hide themselves for a little-moment, that is, cast themselves upon Gods Providence and Protection, securing themselvesIsai. 26. 20. in him, untill the indignation of the Lord be over∣past. No man can apprehend misery and destruction more certainly to come upon a people, then the Prophet Hab∣bacuk did, at which, at the first hearing he was much terrified: yet it was much for his good and advantage. For it did cause him to humble himself before God, and to seek his face, That he might rest in the day ofHab. 3. 16. trouble, when the Chaldeans should come up and in∣vade them with his Troops; Through faith he could see safety, and matter of comfort and joy in God: so that he could say, though he should be deprived of all livelihood, and means of subsistance for his person and outward man; Yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the GodHab. 3. 1. of my Salvation, &c. I have here given you some account of the choise of the Subject, whereof in my Sermon I spake unto you, and have prosecuted more fully something which I did then but hint unto you; I take the boldnesse to publish it and put it forth under the shelter of your honourable pa∣tronage. I have onely this maine suite unto you, that you would
continue resolute for God, and his true Religion, for the Kings Majesties just Rights, for the Laws of the King∣dome, and just Liberties to which we are all born. And the Lord of Hoasts and King of kings, our good God, He blesse and prosper the work in your hands, wherewith you are intrusted, The Lord prosper your handy work: So prayeth dayly The unworthiest of those, which you have imployed to serve you in the Lord, HENRY SCUDDER.
A Sermon at the monethly Fast, Octob. 30. 1644. BEFORE the Honourable House of COMMONS. MICAH 6. 9. The voyce of the Lord cryeth to the City, and the man of wisedome shall see thy Name: hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it. THe Word of the Lord came to the Prophet Mi∣cah in the dayes of Jotham, Ahas, and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah. This word concerned Samaria, and Jerusalem, the head Cities of the Kingdomes of Israel and Judah. The word now read unto you, concerneth us, as well as them; being written for our learning, and for the admo∣nitionRom. 15. 4. of us, upon whom the ends of the world are come according as we are like to them in their sin, and in their condition.1 Cor. 10. 11. In this Prophesie, the Lord by this Prophet setteth before these Cities and Kingdomes the many and great sinnes, which, with an high hand, they had committed against him. And withall fore∣telleth them of those Judgements which he would certainly bring upon them; if they continued in those their sins. And that at last, both kingdomes should be destroyed, and captivated by their enemies, the Assyrians and Chaldeans. But withall to support, and comfort, the hearts of the faithfull that were found in those kingdomes, he foretelleth the temporall deliverance of Judah out of the Babilonish Captivity, also the everlasting deliverance of the Church of God, to be gathered out of all Nations, through the
promised Messiah, the Lord Jesus Christ. The sins, whereof he would convince, and for which he de∣nounceth Judgement against these Kingdomes, were, extream op∣pression by all, from the Prince to the meanest, according as theyMicah 2. 1, 2. had power in their hand. The heads thereof judging for reward: The Prophets and Priests were prophane and wicked, all for theirMicah 3. 11. covetousnesse; teaching for hire, and divining for money. They were very licentious, promising liberty; saying, Peace, peace, toJer. 6. 13, 14. the wicked: The Prophets prophesying falsly, and the Priests bearingJer. 5. 31. rule by their means, and the people loved to have it so. They were also Idolaters, Superstitious, will-worshippers, silencers, (as much as they could) of the good Prophets, and Ministers of the Word: saying, to the Scers, see not; and to the Prophets, Prophesie not unto usIsa. 30. 10. right things, speak to us smooth things, prophesie deceits. They did set up and countenance false and wicked Prophets; They, notwith∣standing these sinnes, and other their abhominations; and not∣withstanding the severe threats of God, were presumptuously se∣cure, because they had the Temple of the Lord, a signe of his pre∣sence amongst them; and because they professed the name and Re∣ligion of God, having a forme of Godlinesse: they promised to themselves impunity, and freedome from the destroying Judge∣ment, They would yet as the Prophet saith, Lean upon the LordMicah 3. 11. and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evill can come upon us. All which sins of theirs are aggravated by their ingratitude to∣wards God, who had been good unto them, and had done great and wonderfull things for them, from Shittim to Gilgall, evenMicah 6. 3, , 5. from the miraculous leading them forth out of Egypt through the Wildernesse, till he brought them into the Land of Canaan, and untill this day. At the time of this Prophesie the Kingdome of Judah was under the rod of Gods Judgements. For in the dayes of Ahas, Pekah the son of Remaliah King of Israel, and Rezin King of Siria were2 King 16. 5. confederate, and came against Judah, and came up even to Jerusa∣lem, and though they did not prevaile to take Jerusalem, yet God delivered him and the people into the hand of the King of Syria, so that They smote him, and carried away a great multitude of them2 Chron. 28. . captive, and brought them to Damascus. And he was also delivered into the hand of the King of Israel, who smote him with a great
slaughter; for, one hundred and twenty thousand, of the men of Ju∣dah were slain in one day, which were all valiant men. At which time2 Chron. 28. 5, 6, 8. the Children of Israel carried away Captive of their brethren, two hundred thousand women, sons and daughters, and took much spoil from them, and brought the spoil to Samaria. In his dayes al∣so2 Chron. 28. 17. the Edomites had come and smitten Judah, and carried away captives. The Philistims also invaded their Cities and took many of them, with their villages, and dwelt there. God brought Judah very low at that time, because they had transgressed sore against the Lord. This I have premised to leade you unto the Text, and to2 Chron. 28. 19. give some light, for the better understanding of it. Do we not as in a glasse, see our selves, in this kingdome of Judah, wee being too to like them in their sin, beginning also to be too like to them; nay, in a worse condition then they were, if the Lord, as he hath begun, shall go on to powre out his wrath upon us. The likenesse of our condition now, with theirs then, hath given me occasion to make choise of this Scripture, to speak of it, and to speak to you by it. In these words God doth warn and advise his people what theyThe Text opened. should do, now they were under the rod of his anger, and were like to be more sorely punished according as it had been denoun∣ced against them by his Prophets for their sins. That whereas he had by fair and loving means, spoken to them, and warned them by his Prophets, and had gently smitten them by the rod of his mouth, that he might reclaim them, and they were not sensible of his Word, to obey it: He now thinketh it best to teach and warn them by the rod of his hand, and calleth upon them to hear and learn to be reformed by it. Now concerning this admonition and Councell given, the Pro∣phet doth three things. First, to gain attention, and that this Word might be entertained with the greater Authority, he sheweth, who it was that spake unto them. Secondly, who they were that would see God in his Judgements, and would hear his voyce, and would learn by his correction. Thirdly, what it is he warneth them of, and adviseth them to do.
Every sentence in this verse is diversly rendred by Translators, and Interpretors; each of them two or three wayes: but they agree in their scope, namely, That God would have them to hear him, and turn to him, that the judgement threatned might not come upon them. I have diligently considered the severall readings, and compared them with the Originall, observing the context and scope of the place, and do keep to the last Translation, as it is now before you. If I should rehearse them all, and give reason why I make choise of this reading rather than other, it would take up very much time, and hinder the delivering of things more needfull. First then, the Voyce of the Lord cryeth to the City: in this sen∣tence we are to observe who speaketh, and in what manner he speaketh, and to whom. The Voyce of the Lord, that is, God by his Prophet Micah utte∣reth his voyce. Cryeth, this sheweth the seriousnesse and earnestnesse of God, in warning his people, the Prophet lifting up his voyce like a Trum∣pet,Isa. 58. 1. that all might understand their danger, and might know what God would have them to do; To the City, some understand Samaria, the Metropolis of the Kingdome of Israel: but others understand it better of Jerusalem, the chief City of the Kingdome of Judah. The Prophet was to cry aloud to awaken them out of the deep sleep of security where∣in they lay, notwithstanding he had threatned and now began to punish them. Secondly, in declaring who would hear this voyce, and learn of the rod, he implyeth that there were not many; onely the man of wisdome, substance in proper speech in Hebrew. Now be∣cause a foolish man is empty, and hath nothing in him, but the wise have something, yea much in them, therefore this word is in Scripture used for Wisdome, so in this place, the abstract being usedJob 6. 13. for the concrete, the man of Wisdome, that is, he that is wise withJob 12. 16. godly wisedome, a man endued with the true knowledge and fearProv. 3. 21. of God. This the Prophet speaketh by way of complaint, and doth by an Apostraphe turn his speech to God, as if he had said;Prov. 8. 14. Lord, thou cryest aloud by us thy Prophets, to the City, but few have regarded or yet will regard it; Onely the wise they will
See thy Name; they will understand thee in thy Word and works, they will understand thy will thereby, and give glory to thy Name in accepting their punishment, and turning to thee that doest smite them. Thirdly, the thing which God doth admonish them of, is two∣fold: 1. To hear the rod, what it speaketh: which that they might the better do, he addeth, 2. and who hath appointed it. Hear the rod, that is, the judgements and asslictions you now feel, and the scourge or judgement threatned, which you have cause to fear. God hath divers rods; as, the rod of his mouth;Isa. 11. 4. this is the Word: or, the rod of his hand, wherewith he doth af∣flict and punish; and that is either the rod of correction, called, thePsil. 89. 32. 2 Sam. 7. 14. Psal. 2. 9. rod of men; or, the iron rod, the rod of destruction: What they then felt, was his rod of correction; what was threatned, and was shaken over them, was the rod of destruction. It is not a proper expression to say, Hear the rod; the rod pro∣perly is felt, and the word is heard: But as those acts of hearing and feeling are in the expressions thereof borrowed one of ano∣ther: they are very emphaticall. Men never do profitably hear the word, except they feel the stroke of it; and men do never pro∣fitably feel the rod, except they hear the voice of it. When the word is so heard, that it smites and affects the heart, to leave a printActs 2. 3. and impression upon it, then, and not till then, doth it work ef∣fectually. So the rod, when it is so felt, that Gods will is under∣stood by it, which is to hear the voice of it, then it also will work effectually. If men feel not the word, they hear it in vain: so they that feel the rod, and hear it not, do feel it in vain, and to no good purpose. There are too many that hear the word, but feel it not; and too many that feel the rod, but hear it not. To hear the rod, then, is to learn and understand why God striketh, and what he would have them to do that are stricken. Who hath appointed it? Not man, who is Gods rod, or Gods sword, but it is God; neither do these judgements come by chance,Isai. 10. 5. Psal. 17. 13. but they are appointed and ordered by God. This is first to be heeded and understood by the voice of the rod, namely, who smi∣teth; and then men shall understand for what he smiteth, and what he would have them to do when they are smitten: Then they will see that it is their duty, and that it shall be their wisedom to return
to him that smiteth them, and to make their peace with him.Isa. 9. 13. Having given the sense, I haste to the Observations. And first, whereas it is said, The voice of the Lord crieth to the City: what the Prophet spake, is called Gods voice; we are hence to observe, That, When the Prophets and Ministers of God speake to any peopleDoct. 1. from God, in his Name, it is the voice of God; God, in and by them, speaketh. Proof hereof is plentifull in the Prophets, who (to raise at∣tention, and to win authority to what they spake, that it might be received and obeyed) say, Hear the word of the Lord; or, Thus saith the Lord; or, The mouth of the Lord hath spoken. Such ex∣pressions as these, are many hundred times in the Scripture. Take one full proof for all: He spake by the mouth of his holy ProphetsLuke 1. 70. which have been since the world began. Though it was their mouth, it was Gods speech, it was Gods voice. They are, by way of Calling and Office, Gods stewards, they areReason. Ambassadours and Messengers of the Lord of Hosts. They receive1 Cor. 3. 1. Mark 1. 2. Mal. 2. 7. 2 Cor. 4. 19, 20 the word at his mouth, and it is committed to them, that in Gods and Christs Name and stead, they should speak to those to whom he doth send them: whether it be by information, intreatie, com∣mand, threat or promise. To apply this, I desire that every one of you would take this truth into serious consideration, that you may undoubtedly believe,Ʋse. that what the Prophets and Ministers formerly spake, and the Mi∣nisters of God now speak to you from him, in his Name; that God himself speaketh to you, in and by them. Did you indeed be∣lieve this, you would profit by this and all other Sermons. If it be objected, The Prophets and Apostles were immediatelyObject. inspired of God, and had an immediate Commission from God, and they could not, neither did they erre; but Ministers now are subject to errour. I answer, We do not compare ordinary Ministers with theAnsw. Prophets and Apostles, who could not erre: But even then they had false Prophets amongst them, as there will always be some2 Pet. 2. 1. false Teachers in the Church: And even then they were to try the Prophecies, whether they were of God or no. Reade Deut. 13. 2, 3, 5. and Deut. 18. 21. and yet were to receive the sayings of the
Prophets as the word of God. Besides, They had ordinary Ministers, who had not immediate inspiration, namely, the Priests, who were as subject to errour as the Ministers of the Gospel are; and Ministers now have as good a Calling to speak from God in his Name, as they had. The people were to receive the Law, the word of God, at their mouth; for they were Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, as well as the Pro∣phets,Mal. 2. 7. to deliver what they received from God, in the word writ∣ten by the Prophets, as were the Prophets, who received what they wrote, by immediate revelation from God. And ordinary Ministers of the Gospel are in the Scripture said to speak to men by1 Thess. 4. 15. Heb 13. 7. the word of the Lord, and to speak the word of the Lord, as well as the Prophets, who were immediately inspired of God. The people then had a Test, a Rule, to try whether that which the Messengers of God spake were his Message or no: To the Law and to the Testimony, saith God, if they speak not according to thisIsa. 8. 20. word, it is because there is no light in them: But if they spake ac∣cording to that word, it was to be received as the very word of God. God hath left as sure a means, nay, in respect of us, a more cer∣tain way of knowing the will of God, namely, the Scripture of2 Pet. 1. 19. the Prophets and Apostles, whereby Ministers may know what God would have spoken in his Name; and people may know whether God speak by them or no. Therefore all men are bid to trie the spirits, the Doctrines, whether they be of God or no; as the Bereans1 Joh. 4. 1. Acts 17. 11. did, searching the Scripture daily, whether the word spoken by Paul were so; and finding it to be so, they received it as the very word of God, and believed. Wherefore, though it be true that it is possible that Ministers may sometimes erre, both in their Doctrines and Application; and when they erre, that is to be rejected, because it is not the will and word of God; yet they are to be heard as men speaking in the Name and stead of God, and what they speak according to his Word, is to be received as if God himself spake unto you. I do with all earnestnesse presse this upon you, that you be con∣vinced of this truth, so as undoubtedly and firmly to believe it. I mean not onely the Doctrines we teach, whereby we shew you what is true, what is false, what is good, what is evil, are to be re∣ceived
as if God spake them himself; but all reproofs of your vi∣ces, all redargutions and confutations of your errours, all exhortati∣ons unto, and instructions in righteousnesse; also all threats, promi∣ses, and consolations, when they are all applied according to the Do∣ctrine of truth and godlinesse, they are to be received as reproofs, corrections, exhortations, threats, promises and consolations of God: For the word is profitable for all these purposes, as you may reade, 1 Tim. 3. 10. and 2 Tim. 4. 2. I do therefore now, as I have just cause, reprove a great fault andƲse 2. sin in most men, who when they come to hear, they come not to hear God speak, but man: and when they hear, they receive what they hear but as the word of man; they hear not the voice of God, they receive it not as the Word of God. I would to God that you would now hear God reproving you for this great sin. Most hearers of the Ministers of the word of God, receive and regard what they teach, but according as they have an opinion and esteem of the man that speaketh. As men are endued with rare parts and gifts, and shew themselves witty and learned (as carnall men count learned) if they shew much of this, in rarity of invention and elocution, in that excellency of speech and wise∣dom, with the entising words of mans wisedom, which wise, eloquent Cor. 2. 4. and learned Paul purposely shunned; their Sermons do take with them accordingly: but commonly, their fancies, and not their hearts, are taken therewith: Those who thus hear, may receive all that is of and from man in that Sermon, but little or nothing of that which is of and from God in it. Therefore many hear much, and learn little; they are not taught of God when they so hear, because they do not hear God speak in him that teacheth. These men should humble themselves before God, for that they have not heeded nor regarded God speaking to them by his Mini∣sters. God complaineth of and reproveth all such hearers: I sent all my Prophets, but they hearkned not to me, saith the Lord: He saithJer. 7. 25, 26. not, They hearkned not to my Prophets; but, They hearkned not to me. Know you, that a time will come when you shall be called to an account for your hearing: if you have not heard and obeyed, but have despised what the Ministers of God, though frail and mean men, have spoken unto you, in the Name of the Lord; youLuke 10. 16. shall answer for it, as if God himself had immediately spoken un∣to
you; for you have slighted and despised him: according to that of our Saviour; He that heareth you, heareth me; and he thatLuke 10. 16. despiseth you, despiseth me: and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me. Let me therefore intreat and perswade you, that you will both now, while you are hearing of me, and when hereafter the Lord shall please to speak unto you by any other of his Messengers, that you would receive what is spoken from God to you by us, not as the word of man, but as it shall be found to be indeed the Word of God. See and hear God in his Ministers instructing, reproving, commanding and exhorting, when you are instructed, reproved, commanded and exhorted by them; remembring and considering well, that they are Gods Ambassadours, that come not in their own name, but in Gods Name. If before you hear, you would, as Cornclius did, set your selvesActs 10.  before God, in the presence of God, to hear, not what a Peter should say; but whatsoever Peter should be commanded of God to speak unto you; then the Word would be powerfull to convert you, and save you, as it did him, and those that with like faith heardActs 10. 44. Peter preach the Word unto them. If a mean man bring a Message or a Command from a King, or from any that have power over us, be it a Constable, or other Officer, we do not receive the Message or the Command accord∣ing to the meannesse or greatnesse of the man that bringeth it, but according to the esteem we have, and obedience we owe to him whose Message and Command it is. When the Thessalonians re∣ceived the Word thus, not as the word of man, but as it was indeed1 Thess . 13. the Word of God, then it wrought in them mightily. Did you believe and consider that it is no other but the voice and word of God, it would perswade and command your belief; you would not choose but believe it, without doubting or gain∣saying; because you know that cannot but be infallibly true which the God of Truth speaketh: Christ saith to his Father,John 17. 1 The Word is truth. You would feel a Sovereign power in the Word, because it is the Word of an Almighty God, the Word of your God. You would then receive it as a good word, transcn∣dently good, good for you; then you would embrace it, and receive it in love: you would then conform your will and affections to it.
The Word thus received, would be a convincing word, a con∣verting1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. Psal. 19. 7. Psal. 119. 24. Acts 20. 32. word, a directing word, and an edifying word, which would build you up further, till it have given you an inheritance a∣mongst them that are sanctified. I pray you to consider what sins you are guilty of, and yet do lie in; say it be Blasphemie, Swearing, Drunkennesse, Pride, Oppres∣sion, Profanenesse, Whoredom, or any other sin, let your consci∣ence now minde you of your own sin; and then consider each one with himself, Have I not heard these my sins reproved, and inveighed against, by the Prophets of God, and Ministers of his Word? And have they foretold and threatned the Judgements of God, temporall and eternall, due for my sins? Did you believe that it was God that spake, that reproved and threatned you? and that it was Gods voice, in them, calling upon you to repent, and offering pardon through Christ? You would then hear, and fear, and repent, and thankfully receive the offer of grace, and believe to the salvation of your souls. If you have any conscience, the word thus received would, through God, work mightily upon you, to the pulling down of the strong holds of sin in you, casting2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth it self against the knowledge of God, and would bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. Learn therefore to hear God speak by his Ministers, or else all your hearing of Sermons will be in vain, will be lost, nay, will be to your hurt, and for the aggravation of your sins, and the hea∣ping up of Gods anger and wrath upon you, which he will pour out upon you in his Judgements, Spirituall, Temporall, and Eternall. Because his people would not hearken to his voice, spoken by hisPsal. 81. 11, 12. Prophets, God gave them up to their own hearts lusts, to walk in their own counsels. For this very sin of despising the Word of the Lord spoken by the Prophets, the Lord sent the Caldeans to de∣stroy and captivate Judah. And men are sentenced to eternall2. Chron. 36. Deut. 5. 27. Mal. 2. 7. Ʋse 3. 15, 16. 2 Thess. 1. 8. and 2. 11. death, because they believed not the truth of the Gospel witnessed by the Apostles. This doth much concern us in the Ministery, sith the people of God must receive what we teach them as the voice and word of God, that we therefore first go to God, and hear what the Lord hath
to say, and receive of him what we are to deliver unto them.1 Tim. 4. 13, 15 2 Tim. 2. 15. We must therefore diligently give our selves to the reading and studying of the Word of God, studying likewise to know theJer. 23. 28. 1 Pet. 4. 11. Ezek. 3. 9, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 3. 12. Ezek. 2. 6. Tit. 2. 15. 2 Cor. 17. 2. 1 Cor. 2. 1, 4. state and need of the people. And then, as the Prophet Jeremiah saith, He that hath the word, let him speak it faithfully; also, speak it as the Oracles of God, with all holy reverence and gravity, plainly, boldly, not fearing the face of any, unpartially, and with all authority, because it is not our word, but the word and will of God. We must deliver the sincere word of God purely, not sophisticating, or adulterating it with the mixture of our own or others fancies or errours: Neither must we hold it forth and deliver it in the dresse of the entising speech of mans wisedom, but in the evidence and demonstration of the spirit, and power; not in the words which1 Cor 2. 13. mans wisedom teacheth, but comparing spirituall things with spiritu∣all, speaking things of God, the things of the Spirit of God spi∣ritually, in Spirituall expressions, approving our selves unto every mans conscience, in the sight of God.2 Cor. 4. 2. When Gods Word is thus taught, and his voice thus heard from our mouthes, it will not return to him void, but shall accomplishIsa. 55. 11. that which he pleaseth, and shall prosper in the thing to which he sent it. It will be a sweet savour to God, both in them that are saved,2 Cor. 2. 15. and in them that perish. Thus speaking, so that Gods word and voice may be heard from us, we shall save our selves, and those that1 Tim. 4. 1. hear us. The man of wisedom shall be thy name. We may here observe, That, Onely the godly wise can and will see God, in his Word, and in hisDoct. 2. Judgements, or in any other his works which he doth amongst the sons of men. It is a high point of wisedom to understand and see God either in his Word or Works, so as to give him glory. They that are wise according to God, they understand; but all other, be they never so worldly wise, they cannot. David setting forth the many providences of God to be observed in divers varieties, and changes in this life, as, in casting down some, evengreat ones, andPsa. 107. 41, 43. raising up others, even the poor, setting him on high from affliction; he saith, Whoso is wise, and will observe these things, he shall under∣standJer. 9. 1. the loving kindnesse of the Lord. The Prophet Jeremiah la∣menting the estate of the Jews, for their many and great sins, and
for the Judgement to come on that Nation, making Jerusalem heaps, and dens of Dragons, Who is the wise man, that he may un∣derstand this? The Prophet Daniel foretelling the afflictions and trialls of the Church, and the good that should redound toDan. 12. 10. them, namely, their purifying, and being made white, he saith, None of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand. And when the Prophet Hosca told Israel that he had destroyed himself, and was fallen by his iniquity, and biddeth him take unto him words, and confesse his sin, and ask grace, God promiseth him he will take his anger from him, and love him freely, and promiseth to them, that then God will blesse them with all blessings, spirituall and temporall; after all this, he saith, Who is wise, and he shall understand all these things? prudent, and heHes. 14. 9. shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just, the wise and prudent, they shall walk in them; but transgressours shall fall therein. The wise could see the Name of God, even the goodnesse of God in these his counsels, and gracious offers and promises; he could see a great deal of reasonablenesse, equity and gratious∣nesse of God in them: but the wicked, they are blinde and foolish, they can see no such goodnesse of God, in his calling them to re∣pentance, and offer of his grace, so as to embrace it, and be con∣verted by it; but stumbleth, and is offended at it. Even as Christ the Corner-stone, and Foundation of his Church, is seen by the Pet. 2. 6, 7, 8. wise, and judged to be precious; they can see Gods Name in him: but the foolish, the unbelieving, and disobedient, they cannot see such preciousnesse in him, he is a stone of stumbling, and rock of of∣fence; yea, they are offended at that good Word of the Gospel of Christ, which makes a tender of salvation, upon their repenting of their sins, and believing in him. The naturall man he receiveth not the things of God, neither can he,Reas. 1. because they are spiritually discerned: They cannot see God aright,1 Cor. 2. 14. no not in his works of Creation, wherein the invisible things ofRom. 1. 20. him, his eternall power and Godhead, may be seen. For in the wisedom of God, the wisest of men in the world cannot by their naturall Cor. 1. 21. Wisdom know God. Nay, though God make himself known to them Cor. 2. 14. in his Word, in the offer of his grace in the Gospel, of salvation by Jesus Christ; even this is foolishnesse to them. Have they never so much quicknesse of wit, or depth of judgement, in things natu∣rall,
or be they never so politikely wise beyond others, they can see nothing of God, neither in his Word, nor Works, and Acts of Providence, whether of his mercy or Justice, so as to apply it to themselves for their good, untill God give unto them to be spiri∣tually wise. But to the Godly wise men, it is given, to know the Mysteries ofReason 2. the Kingdom of God. That which is hid from the wise of the worldMat. 13. 11. 16. God reveals even to the simple, and men accounted but as Ideots inMat. 11. 25. the world, when he hath made them wise to him-ward. They can also see the wonderfull excellencies of God in his workes.Psal. 63. 2. In them they can see the greatnesse of his power, and of his good∣nesse and of his truth, and of his justice: they can see his Name andIsai. 26. 8, 9. give him glory in and for all these, whether mercies or judgements.Reason 3. They who are indeed wise, they give all diligence to see the goodnesse and footsteps of God in all his works that may comeDan. 10. 1. under their consideration. They set their hearts to understand, they will observe what God doth; and as David saith, Wisely consider ofPsal. 107. 43. his doings: whereas the wicked be they never so worldly wise,Psal. 64. 9. They regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hand:Isai. 5. 12. they will not behold the Majesty of the Lord, when he sheweth them favour; nor yet will see his Name, when his hand is lift up a∣gainstIsai. 26. 10, 11. them in displeasure. Be wise therefore all ye that hear me this day, nay, which heareVse. Gods voyce crying unto you this day to heare the rod: you may see much of God in it, if you were wise and would improve your wisdome, that you may see God in his Works, and in the way of his Judgements. It is a sore Judgement of God to a people, when God shall make his name known to them, not onely in his word, but in his great and wonderfull works of mercies and Judgements, andDeut. 29. 4. leave them to their ignorance and folly, not giving them wisdome, not giving them hearts to perceive and understand Gods Name, Gods Greatnesse, Goodnesse, Soveraignty, so as to fear and adore him, submit to him and learn righteousnesse thereby. As the Bee can finde, and gather honey of every flower, so the wise man can see and learn something of God in all his works. Be wise therefore, as David calleth upon all Princes and JudgesPsal. 2. 10, 11, 12. of the earth, and be instructed; but by what, even by that Iron
rod threatned, and shaken over them, that thereby they might learn to fear, and serve, and might kisse that rod; his wrath being pacified and his anger turned away from them. Then a man is a man of wisdome, such a one as is meant in this doctrine, when he can discern what is the chiefe good, and hath the Judgement to esteeme it, and to make choyse of it, and of the right waies of attaining and retaining it. God is the chiefe good, the knowledge of him so as to beleeve in him, to feare him, and to rely on him, and obey him, this is true and sound wisdome: When you are thus wise, you will see Gods Name, you will see God in his Word and works, when he shall at any time speak by the voyce of his Word, or voyce of his Rod, you then can and shall understand the meaning of those voyces. To be wise to Salvation is the true Wisdome, by which a manProv. 14. 8. can see God in his works, so as may conduce thereunto: such aProv. 28. 5. man understandeth his way, and is said to understand all things; but evill men understand not judgement. The way to have true wisdome, is, to deny a mans own wis∣dome, and (as the Apostle adviseth) To be a foole (as the world Cor. 3. 18. counteth foolishnesse) that he may be wise. A man by his naturall wit and wisedome cannot know God. You must not think that because by the strength of wit and naturall reason you dive deep into the search of things naturall, and humane, and can under∣stand them; that it is therefore in the power of your own under∣standing to attain to deep things of God, the Divine things of God; as his Wisdome, Power, Justice, Truth, Goodnesse, and his Will which may be seen in and known by his works. Natu∣rall wise men may understand the letter of the Word of God, and the matter of Gods workes what they are; but he perceiveth not nor can he perceive God, and the things of God, in them, nor the end to which they tend, to affect his heart therewith, and to make a Spirituall use thereof to himself. These things are perceived onely by Spirituall wisdome, being1 Cor. . 2. revealed by the Spirit of God. The Word of God hath in it, instructions of this wisedome, and itProv. 1. 4, 5. giveth a spirituall subtilty and ability to discern the deep things ofPsal. 119. 99, 100. God, by it David came to be a man of wisdome, wiser than the Ancients, and wiser than his teachers: you must have recourse
therefore to the word to that end. But do not think to bring light with you, whereby to understand it, but bring faith withHeb. 4. 1. you to beleeve it, and come to it to receive sight by it, as wellRev. 3. 18. as light: for it is eye-salve and a meanes to open the eyes of the blind, as well as to give light to them that see. When we arePsal. 19. 8. rightly principled by the word, we shall learn by it, to see God inPsal. 19. 7. his works. You must first beleeve, and then you shall know, then it will make you wise. Also be you much in observing and considering the works ofPsal. 107. 43. God, and the wayes of Gods Providence; the more you exer∣cise your selves therein, the more able you shall be to see GodsPsal. 64. 9. Name. And lastly, pray for this Wisdome, as David saith, Open minePsal. 119. 18. eyes that I may behold wonderfull things out of thy Law; so, intreate the Lord that you may understand the voyce of his mercies, and Judgements what he would have you to learn by them, touchingJam. 1. 5. him. If any want wisdome, let him aske, Heare the rod. God would have his people learn by his corrections and by his Judge∣mentsDoct. 3. which he bringeth upon them, and doth execute amongst them. All that are under the rod, or that have it shaken over them, must learn what God teacheth them thereby. The Lord complaines of, and sharpely rebuketh the City Jeru∣salem,Reason. because she did not Hear and obey his voyce, nor receive cor∣rection, Zeph. 3. 2. Every morning the just Lord did bring his judge∣ment to light, but the unjust knew no shame, verse 5. He said to her, Surely thou wilt feare me, thou wilt receive instruction, verse 7. This sheweth what men should do when he doth afflict them. God expecteth his people should have heard his rod. The Rod of God is doctrinall, man may know Gods mind and will, and his own duty by it, as by the Word: God doth Disci∣pline his people by his rod, as well as by his Word; in the exer∣cise of both he doth Open the eares of men to Discipline, and doth seal their instruction, as we reade in the book of Job; The rod andJob 33. 16. reproof, when they go together give wisedome, as to a childe in a family, in whose heart folly is bound; so to such children and ser∣vants in Gods great family in the world, who will not learn, nor be corrected with words. Many (like Manasses) carry a deafJob 36. 10. care unto, nay, will not hear the Word, yet may be brought to
hear the rod; he thereby learned to see the Name of God, and to know that the Lord was God, and did humble himself greatly2 Chron. 33. 11, 12, 13. before him. The Judgements of God which are his rod, they do second his Word, and what it spake to the eare, they do speak to the other senses, with a louder voyce. Smart and pain seconding the Word, do usually make a deeper impression upon the soules and Spirits of men. The Lord never smites, but he hath spoken first, and warned by his Word: and like a father that standeth over his childe when he correcteth him, remembreth him of his faults and of his duty, When the Lord openeth the eare to discipline with the correcti∣on, and doth awaken the conscience, a wise child will readily know what God meaneth in those his corrections. We in this kingdome are under Gods Rod, and he is punishingVse. us with the rod of his anger: The sorest temporall judgement, that can come to a Nation, is come upon us. We must hearken and learn what God would have us to do, now that he is corre∣cting of us, we must hear what the rod speaketh unto us. If we consult the Word, it will tell us what it is that the rod speaketh, shewing us why God smiteth us, and what he would have us to do, now we are smitten; and it will tell us what he will yet do unto us; if when these his Judgements are upon us we do not learn righteousnesse, submit unto him, and make our peace with him. First, it telleth us that this Judgement is come upon us for sin, and it being a sore stroak, we may learn that it is for our great sins. When God was angry with the children of Israel at the siege of Ai, the men of Ai smote of them and chased them,Josuah 7. 2, 3, unto vers. 12. from before the gate and slew divers of them, and made them turn their backs upon their enemies: This caused Joshuah to humble himself before the Arke of the Lord; Gods answer unto him was, Get thee up, wherefore lyest thou upon thy face? Israel hath finned, and they have also transgressed my Covenant, which I com∣manded them: for they have even taken of the accursed thing. This sin of one man, was accompanied with other sinnes of Rulers and peo∣ple; namely, carnall confidence in the Arme of flesh, and carnall pollicy following it, not asking counsell of the Lord. They thought
all the people were too many to go up, they presumed that be∣cause there were but few men in Ai, a party of about two or three thousand men would be enough to take it. If thou say in thine heart, saith Jeremy to Judah, when God should punish,Jer. 13. 22. Wherefore come these things upon me? the answer is, For the greatnesse os thine iniquity are thy skirts discovered, and thy heels made bare. In all Gods judgements upon a person or people, they may hear God telling them that this is for your sin. But this is not all it speaketh. It secondly doth minde all of searching and trying their wayes, to finde out their sins, and that they might turn to him that smit∣eth them. This counsell the Prophet giveth after he had said, Wherefore doth a living man complain? A man for the punishment ofLam. 3. 39, 40. his sin: Let us search and try our wayes and turn to the Lord, &c. Come, say they in Hosea, and let us return to the Lord, he hath tornHos 6. 1. and he will heal us, he hath smitten and he will bind us up. Thirdly, the rod bids men not onely to finde out their sins, and confesse them to God, but to seek his face and to aske pardon, that God may be at peace with them. This is one end why God afflicteth men, that they might be brought to acknowledge their of∣fence,Hos. 5. 15. Hos. 14. 3. and seek his face: In their affliction they will seek me diligent∣ly, saith the Lord. To say from the heart I have sinned, I will do so no more, is a good answer to the voyce of the rod, upon this ground; namely, because God had already punished his people, and had threatned a great judgement; therefore, Prepare to meetAmos 4. 12. thy God, O Israel, saith the Lord. Fourthly, the rod teacheth another lesson, which is, If men do not amend by present Judgements, they shall be punished with more, and those greater, Seven times more for their sin; he willLevit. 26. from v. 10. to v. 40. then avenge the quarrell of his Covenant, and if yet they shall walk contrary to him, he will again and again chasten them, Se∣ven times more, untill their Land shall be desolate, and their Cities wast. But yet so, as if when he hath brought his sorest judge∣ments upon them, they should by them learn to humble them∣selves, and confesse their iniquity, and accept of the punishment of their iniquity, God will remember his Covenant and be mer∣cifullLevit, 26. unto them. Lastly, when the rod hath taught all the former lessons, if men
will not hear it, then it teacheth that the Lord may be so provo∣ked as to give over smiting, as one weary of striking: and to say, Why should you be smitten any more? you will revolt more and more.Isai. 1. 5. And because they adde leudnesse to their filthinesse, obstinacy, and impenitency to their wickednesse, the Lord saith to them as to those in Ezekicl; Because I have purged thee, that is, by my judg∣ments would have reclaimed thee, and thou wast not purged, Thou shalt not be purged from thy filthinesse any more, till I have cau∣sedEzek. 24. 13. my fury to rest upon thee. You may, in the taking away of his rod, if he give over smiting, hear him say: I have taught and cor∣rected you thus, and thus, and so long: I see all is in vaine, I will reserve you for utter ruine and destruction; and sith by no means you will learn to know me, and the things which concern your own peace and good; You shall dye without knowledge, you shall dye in your sins; I will reserve you to the day of evill. All this smi∣ting,Job 36. 12. John 8. 24. seeing it will not reforme you, shall but prepare you for de∣struction, and be an aggravation of your sin and condemnation. There is no man of wisdome but can heare the rod speaking to all the purposes before mentioned. You may hear most, if not all these lessons of the rod, in the thirty and sixt of Job, verses 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. If they be bound in setters and be holden in cords of as∣fliction,Job 36. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. then he sheweth them their worke, and their transgressions, that they have excceded. He openeth also their eare to discipline, and commandeth that they return from iniquitie: if they obey and serve him, they shall spend their dayes in prosperitie, and their years in plea∣sure: But if they obey not, they shall perish by the sword, and dye without knowledge: But the Hypocrites in heart (that is, such as professe they know God, but in their works deny him, that have a forme of Godlinesse but deny the power thereof) they heap up wrath, They cry not when he bindeth them, that is, they do not hear nor obey the voyce of the rod, to mourn for their sins, to aske pardon and to repent when God doth punish them. We are greatly afflicted, and under a most heavie Judgement, we cannot but be sensible of it. I beseech you therefore to hear the voyce of God now speaking by this rod. You do now beleeve it is for the sins of the Land: it should therefore put us upon a sad and serious search of our wayes. The Lord is now smiting, wounding, and in the way of destroy∣ing
of us. Let us consider our transgressions, that they have exceed∣ed. And truely, they are so many, and so great, that I tremble to think of them. As God shall bring them to my minde, I shall re∣member you of some of them; praying you to remember, that this Rod of God is upon us for our sin; and for this end, that we should humble our selves under his hand, that we should repent, and turn to him, and seek attonement and reconciliation with him. This is the work of the day; let us with all our might apply our selves to it. 1. It did please the Lord, long since, to begin a happie Reforma∣tionThe sins for which God is now punishing England. of Religion in this Kingdom; and shortly after, made triall what we would do, whether we would stand fast to the Truth re∣ceived or not. But in the generality the Land returned to their vo∣mit, and also persecuted the true Religion, and shed the blood of many Martyrs, in the days of Queen Mary. We have cause to judge, that the guilt of that blood, amongst other sins past, doth lie upon the Land, and crieth for vengeance, and that God is punish∣ing it this day. We must not onely look upon present sins, to be humble for them, and to bewail them; but upon them that have been com∣mitted long since, by our ancestours that have been before us. So did Daniel and Nehemiah confesse to God not onely their ownDan. 9. 6, 8, 16. Neh. 9. 33, 34. present sins, but the sins of their Kings, Princes and Fathers that lived before them; professing, that for their sins also, confusion of face was brought upon them, acknowledging Gods righteous∣nesse therein. It pleaseth the Lord many times to seal up, as in his treasury,Deut. 32. 34. Job 14. 17. 2 Kings 23. 26. 2 Kings 24. 3. 2 Chron. 33. 12, 13. the sins of a Land, and to keep them as in a Bag; not punishing them so soon as they are committed: and when they have heaped up more sins upon them, and their sins are ripe, then he reckons with them, and punisheth them for all at once. The sins of Ma∣nasseh brought judgements upon Judah, after his death, though he had repented him of his sin. 2. Also, when there was a Reformation both in King Edward and Queen Elisabeths time, though they reformed much, yet they wrought not a thorow Reformation. Too much of Rome was retained both in Religion and the Government of the Church: and the Land hath not been purged of it to this day.
Another great sin which hath been, and yet is committed in the Land, is Sacriledge. I speak not of the converting of the mainte∣nance of Abbies to other then pious uses, which may admit of question whether it were sin or no: I insist not on that: I speak of robbing God of the maintenance whereby his Ministers were and are to be maintained, which hath been a cause why many parts of this Kingdome have been destitute of such Pastours as should and could break unto the people the Bread of life. There were none to minister unto them Spirituall things, because their Carnall things, paid to maintain them, was turned another way. This Sacriledge lieth still as a sin upon the Land, provoking God against this Kingdom; and you may believe it, that he is now punishing it. For you are cursed with a curse, saith God, to themMal. 3. 8, 9. that lie in this sin. It is not possible for the law of man to make it lawfull to take away that maintenance that hath been designed, and yet is paid, for the maintenance of the Worship of God, it making no other sufficient provision of maintenance for the Church in the place thereof. I dispute not by what right Tythes are paid: But sith they are paid for the maintenance of the Mini∣stery, and yet taken from them, and given to those that do not mi∣ster in the Word and Doctrine, this can be nothing else but rob∣bing of God, and a great Sacriledge. The same sins also may be charged upon us in England, for which God had a controversie with his people, and did judge them here∣tofore.Hos. 4. 1. Ezek. 22. 4. The knowledge of God is not in the Land. This Kingdom notwithstanding the long time of our enjoying so plentifully the light of the Gospel, doth yet remain extreme ignorant of God, and their duty to him. And this not onely in the dark places of it, in Wales, and far North and West, but in the Countreys and Cities in the midst of the Kingdom. 5. The sins of Swearing and Cursing, of hellish and damming Blasphemie, have overgrown this Land, the cry whereof doth reach unto heaven: besides the sin of Perjury, concerning which sin God hath said, that his curse shall remain, and never depart fromEzek. 5. 3, 4. the committers thereof, nor from their houses, till they be consumed, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof. All sorts of persons, as Supreme, and all Officers in the State, from the Judge to the
meanest; all sorts of Jurours in any Jury, and all sorts of Wit∣nesses in all Courts, they binde themselves to God, by a solemn Oath. How many Protestations, Oaths and Covenants have been lately taken? But have men kept their Oaths, and do they keep them? are they not broken by all that take them? It hadEccles. 5. 5, 6. been much better for the Kingdom that we had not taken so many Oaths, Vows, and Protestations, then, having taken them, not to keep them. God is extremely incensed against a People guilty of Forswear∣ing; especially if the Oaths of State made by the supreme Magi∣strate2 Sam. 21. 1. 2 Chron. 36. 13 to the Subject, and of the Subject to the Magistrate, be bro∣ken and violated. We are blinde, if we do not see that God is punishing this Nation for these sins of vain swearing, cursing, blasphemie and perjury. We must call to remembrance these, amongst other the sins of the Land, to bewail them, and make ourHos. 4. 2, 3. peace with God, that he destroy us not for them. Because of these, the Land mourneth. 6. The Land is also guilty of not opposing of the man of fin, Popery and Idolatry, unto the extirpation or it out of the King∣dom. Idolatry hath not onely been tolerated to be committed in the secret Chambers of Imagery; but allowed in places elsewhere. We have complied much with Idolaters and Idolatry of Rome. We may judge that for this also the Lord is punishing us. The children of Israel did not drive out the Canaanites from a∣mongst them, therefore they were as pricks in their eyes, and thornsJudg. 2. 3. in their sides. And Joshua telleth them, that for their compliancesJosh. 23. 13. with them, they should remain to be snares and traps unto them, and scourges in their sides, and thorns in their eyes, untill they should perish from the good land which the Lord their God had given them. And they should make them sin against God, and surely be a snare un∣to them, as Moses telleth them. Popish and Antichristian Religi∣on,Exod. 23, 33. and Idolatry, is as abominable to God, as ever the Canaani∣tish. Religion and Idolatry was: For Rome is called, The mother of Abominations. Now whether the permitting of Popery and Papists amongst us, have not been thorns in our eyes, and pricks in our sides, and have been snares and traps, means of sin and vexation unto us, God using them as rods and instruments to punish us, I leave this to your consideration,
When the sons of God took them wives of the daughters of men,Gen. 6. 2. when those of the true married those that were of a false Religi∣on in the first Age of the world; and when, after that, both before and after the Captivity, Gods people by profession did mar∣ry strange wives the daughters of a strange god: Gods judge∣mentsGen. 6. 7. were upon the old world, and all those States that were guilty of this sin. As when the house of Judah made affinity with the house of Ahab, we see what evil followed thereupon, and what2 Chron. 22. Ezra 9. 2, 14. wrath it brought upon the Kingdom of Judah. When Solomon (a good King otherwise) forgat himself, and matched with Idolatrous wives, sinning therein against God, God gave him over to his folly (though otherwise the wisest of men) that (whether in complement or otherwise) he did accompany his wives to their Idolatrous Service; whether he joyned with them therein, it doth not so clearly appear: yet he went thus far, that it is said, He went after Ashteroth the goddesse of the Zidonians, and Milcom1 Kings 11. 4, 5, 6, 7. the abomination of the Amorites; and he did build an high place for Chemosh the abomination of Moab. For these very things God brought evil upon his Kingdom. He raised up adversaries against him; and what a division and rent it made in that Kingdom, we do well know. May not this be ano∣ther cause why Gods wrath is gone out against us? Let us hear the rod, doth it not tell us so? Let us humble our selves this day for these sins also, that God may be pleased to throw away this his rod from us. We are guilty of other sins, for which, as for that of Idolatry, when they reign in a Kingdom, God doth punish it with his seve∣rest Judgements. 7. These are, Oppression, and the not executing of Justice and Judgement in a Land. These were the sins of the Princes and Judges of Judah; they were for bribes and rewards. And all Ju∣dah,Micah. 3. 9, 11. according as they had power, did oppresse one another. Hath it not been thus in in England? and, which should humble us and grieve us most, complaints every where tell us, even while we are smarting by the rod of God, that these sins of oppression and not executing judgement do encrease upon us. Are not many par∣tiall and injurious in their Levies of moneys for the publike use of the State? sparing themselves and friends, laying intolerable
burdens upon those who have been most free, and are now lesse a∣ble to bear them. Also are there not those who were entrusted with the Moneys of the State, and to pay Souldiers, that do manage their Trust so ill, that the Souldier is necessitated to live upon free Quar∣ter, and spoil of those that pay ordinary great Taxes for the pub∣like Service. Men do exceedingly complain that they cannot have Justice. It concerneth you to look to these things. As these were crying sins heretofore, and God hath brought upon us these Judgements: if these continue and encrease, we cannot but fear that these Judge∣ments shall be continued and encreased, untill these sins be re∣formed. 8. Bloodguiltinesse is another provoking sin. It cannot goDeut. 19. 13. well with a Kingdom where the guilt of innocent blood is not put away by the hand of the Magistrate. God will not pardon a Land polluted with innocent blood: he will sooner or later be2 Kings 24. 4. avenged of it. How much hath been shed heretofore, and the murthers either not brought unto Judgement, or not prosecuted in Judgement? This polluteth a Kingdom with blood; and this blood crieth loud for vengeance upon those into whose hands God did put the sword of Justice, to revenge for him, and to execute wrath upon such as are murtherers, and do it not. This causeth the Lord to execute Judgement himself, in shedding the blood upon such a People as this. 9. The sinnes of Sodom, Pride, fulnesse of bread, idlenesse, un∣mercifulnesse, and all sorts of voluptuousnesse, have been the com∣monEzek. 16. 49. sins of this Kingdom, and yet are, notwithstanding the hand of God is so heavie upon us. Our Gentry, and such as were born and left rich in estate, they, in a generality, have given themselves so to live, as if they had been made and born for nothing else but to eat, and drink, and play, and sleep, and satisfie their sensuall lusts. They have ac∣counted it to be a blemish, and a matter of disrepute to them, to live in a Calling, or to give themselves unto any thing wherein they might be serviceable and profitable in any place of good em∣ployment in Church or Common-wealth. Men and women have been most luxurious and wanton in
matters of Diet, Apparell and Gestures, that they know not how or what to eat, what to wear, or how to attire themselves, or what gate or gesture to use. They, for delicacie in these, are tooIsai. 3. 16. like those inveighed against, and threatned, Isa. 3. 16. The Land hath been, and yet is polluted with Whoredoms, andHos. 4. 2. Isa. 28. 1, 7, 18. is even drowned with Drunkennesse. For these sins also the Lord is now visiting of us. 10. Another sin for which God will be wrath with a People, and doth scourge them sore, is formality in the true Worship and Re∣ligionTit. 1. 16. of God, when those who professe the Name of God, do in works deny him: and, having a form of godlinesse, deny the power of Tim. 3. 5. it. This is the common and great sin of this Kingdom. We in this declare that we are an hypocriticall Nation, and therefore the people of Gods curse, and people of his wrath. So God spake of his people the Jews against whom he sent the King of Assyria,Isa. 10. 6. the rod of his anger; I will send him against an hypocriticall Na∣tion, and against the people of his wrath, giving him a charge to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like mire in the streets. These sins I have remembred you of. There are many others, which I pray you to call to your remembrance. Consider your own sins, and the sins you see committed in the Land. And be sure that you take this into your serious thoughts, That for these, and other our sins, God is now punishing of us: and, which aggra∣vates them all, we are not amended by his Rod, but grow worse and worse. What is now therefore to be done? You have heard what the Rod hath taught us, that, It is sor our sins that God is wrath with us. We are this day therefore to humble our selves for those sins: we must confesse them, repent of them, and disclaim them, and be earnest suitors to God that he would make the Land sensible ofIsa. 9. 13. their sins, and of this his Rod, that we turn to him that smiteth us. And every one of us must endeavour a Reformation in the Land; first of our selves, and then of others; beseeching the Lord to work it. We must with all earnestnesse intreat the Lord to for∣give these sins of the Land, and that he will be mercifull to us, and be at peace with us, and heal the Land. We have great encourage∣ment
from God himself, who saith, If my people that are called2 Chron. 7. 1. by my Name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will for give their sins, and will heal their Land. We may make this stroke and wound incurable, if we go on still in our trespasses, if we do not speedily make our peace with our God. We have a promise; let us take hold on it, that he may make peace with us; and he will be at peace with us; forIsa. 25. 7. he waiteth for our turning unto him, and seeking favour of him, that he may be gracious unto us.Isa. 30. 18▪ But, as I said before, let us take heed that we go not on in our sin, lest we provoke the Lord to continue and encrease his iudgements, even to make us a desolation: We are in the high way to it: For, a kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolation. There are many Symptomes (if we consider the state of the Kingdom as now it is) that may cause us to fear, that, if time∣ly and thorow repentance do not prevent it, this Judgement shall not be taken off, but be encreased, untill the Land be de∣stroyed. 1. The first I shall mention, is, When lesser judgements doSymptomes of our being neer to utter ruine. not awaken and amend us; especially, if we are grown worse thereupon. God hath told us that he will destroy such a Nation as this: I sent cleannesse of teeth, and you have not returned to me,Amos 4. 6, 7, 9, 10, 11. saith the Lord: I withheld rain from you, I have smitten you with blasting, &c. I have sent among you the pestilence; I overthrew some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah; yet have ye not returned to me, saith the Lord: therefore thus will I do unto thee, that is, I will destroy thee utterly. This you may reade in Amos 4. 6, 7, 8 9, 10, 11, 12. God sware by his holinesse, vers. 2.Am. 4. . that he would take them away with hooks, and their posterity with fishhooks; they should be carried away captive, and ut∣terly ruined. 2. A second Symptome is, When the sins of a Land grow universall, in respect of the severall kinde of sins, and severall sorts of persons. All sorts of sins are committed, and all sorts of persons are grievous sinners. Reade Ezek. 22. Adde there∣unto
these sins; Contempt of the Word and holy Ordinances of God, despising of those that truely fear God, and enmity a∣gainst the power of Godlinesse. Every one wore in them to theirEzek. 22. power to shed blood: and so he reckons up many other, saying, In thee there are that commit such and such sins. There are many sins named. There is scarce any one sin reckoned there, but the salne sins are rife and common amongst us. And there you shall also finde Princes, and Nobles, and Judges, and Priests, andEzek. 22. 25, 27, 29. Prophets, and People were all guilty of some of the sins before mentioned. Therefore the Lord saith to the Prophet, Wilt thou judge? Wilt thou judge the bloody Citie? Thou shaltEzek. 22. 2. shew her all her abominations. He would have the Prophet declare to them, that he would punish them more then yet he had done. Indeed, before he did bring that destroying Nationall Judge∣ment, before he brought the Caldeans upon them; after he had threatned it, he did wait to see whether any would make up theEzek. 22. 30. hodge, and stand in the gap, before him, for the land, that he might not destroy it. So, if there be amongst us that will indeed get into the breach, and in a right way stand in it, and make it up, namely, by prayer, executing judgement, and reformation; we may have hope that God will not destroy us. We have reason to blesse God, that you, our Worthies of the Parliament, do en∣deavour it. But if the sinnes of the Land shall be too hard for you, because they make breaches faster then you can make them up; or if the Lord be not pleased that you shall continue in the breach to perfect the making it up; if the Lord be so angry with us, that nothing shall prevail in this way: then we may fear, that now this cloud of blood which hangeth over us, and hath fallen in most parts of the Kingdom, shall fall in all other parts, till it have gone thorow the whole Nation to de∣stroy it. 3. That which may cause us much to fear, is another Sym∣ptome, God is now visiting this part of the world, bringing the Sword upon it. Gods manner is, in such visitations, to be∣gin with his own people, as he did when Jeremiah was to takeJer. 25. 5, 18. the wine-cup of Gods futy, and cause all the Nations to drink
of it, beginning with his own people, to wit, Jerusalem, and the Cities of Judah. Thus the Lord hath begun with Bohemia, the Palarinate, and almost all Germany, and other parts of Europe. I am perswaded all this part of the world shall drink of it; The dregs of this cup, as that of Jeremies, was reserved for Heathenish Babilon,Jer. 25. 15. 18. who drunk of it last: so the dreggs of this our cup shall be re∣served for Antichrist, even for spirituall Babylon, for Rome, that mother of fornications, and for all those that are drunk with the wine of her fornications: she happily shall drink last, and drink up this cup of the Lords fury. It was a great while before we began to drink of it; but un∣lesse, by a specialty of humbling our selves before God, and tur∣ning to God and seeking of him more than ordinarily, we do procure that it may passe, and God do take it from us; as true as God hath threatned such sinners as we are, and hath begun to execute it, the sword shall not be put up till we be de∣stroyed. Our times are very troublous, and God useth to build hisDan. 9. . Church, as he did Jerusalem, in such troublous times: we are rea∣dy to hope that God will now reforme and build up his Church and make it a glorious Church in this Nation, and we would gladly beleeve that these shakings are but preparations to a happy reformation. I doubt not but these wars and commotions amongst the true Churches of God are preparations thereunto. But whe∣ther we of this present generation may not for our sins and for our tryall be much wasted and destroyed with the sword, and which is worse, be put under the power of those that are for Antichrist, we cannot promise to our selves. I know that ere long that mother of abhomination with herRev. 17. 6. children, who have been drunk with the blood of the Saints and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, shall receive double.Rev. 18. 6. In the cup that she hath filled, it shall be filled to her double: But whether (sith the time of Antichrists raign is but short) he may not have a lightning before his death, as to rise to have so much power added to his malice, as to shed more blood, that
the Lord may take a just occasion by it to execute vengeance up∣on that State for all the blood shed by it, we cannot tell: we have some cause to fear it, if we do but observe that already the Palatinate and other Churches that were reformed, are brought under the power of those that are Antichristian; why should we not think that the like may befall us? nothing but an unfained turning from our sins unto God, and a through re∣formation, which yet we are far from, can hinder it. I speak not this to discourage any, but that we should be pre∣pared for the worst, and to put us upon a more through hum∣bling of our selves before God, and of getting into, and making up the breach which our sinns have made, that he may spare us and not destroy us. 4. To adde one Symptome more, A Spirit of perversnesse, a spirit of Division is in the midst of us, and is spread through all the Kingdome; Divisions in Church, divisions in Com∣mon-wealth. A Kingdome thus divided, how can it stand? When the Lord is wrath with a people then he mingleth a per∣verseIsa. 19. 13, 14. Spirit amongst them, he makes their Princes become fools, and their Counsellors become brutish, destitute of right reason, yea he divideth them in their Councels. He setteth Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, to the ma∣kingIsa. 9. 19, 20, 21. of a Land dark through miseries, when no man shall spare his brother, because of the discords and civill wars which God in his wrath should raise amongst them; as a just punishment of their not joyning together to serve the Lord with one consent. It will not be much out of the place to mention a sin which I omitted before; which is, the growth of Errours and Schismes in this Kingdome, which are so much the more dan∣gerous, because this errour also is grown up with them (a strong means to nourish them,) Namely, that men must enjoy Liberty of Conscience, denying it to be in the power of any, no not in the Magistrate to restrain them. This is grown to a great height, and hath many abettors, and pleaders for it. Little course is taken to represse it. Some to whom it belongs to do it, I fear are corrupted with this Errour. This is an in-let and ground for the toleration of all Religions. Errours and Here∣sies
are Gangrens, which if their course be not stopped, will increase to the destruction of the whole. The Apostle will have that such should not onely be shunned, but that their mouthes should be stopped, lest they deceive others and it en∣creaseTit. 1. 11. to more ungodlinesse: and he requireth Timothy to1 Tim. 1. 3. Command that men preach no other Doctrine: every one there∣fore may not teach what Doctrine he pleaseth; but if he teach false Doctrine, he is to be restrained. I know the first way of stop∣ping the mouths of such, is by sound Doctrine to convince themTit. 1. 9. 11. of their Errour, and if they will not be convinced, to proceed against them by Ecclesiasticall censure; laying a command up∣on them not to teach such Doctrine; but if still they will per∣sist, God hath given power to the Civill Magistrate to restrain them: For he is to govern so, that under him men may live a1 Tim. 2. 2. godly as well as a quiet life: and he beareth not the sword in vaine, but is Gods Minister to punish, therefore to his powerRom. 13. 4. to restrain him that doth evill. And what greater evill can a man do, then to seduce his brother? But to return where I left; be sensible of the divisions that are amongst us, if they be not made up but increase, we shallGal. 5. 15. clash one against another, that we shall be consumed one of ano∣ther, and confusion will be in the end. It doth presage veryJam. 3. 19. much evill to a Land, when the Lord shall do with it as he did with the Land of Judah, when he shall sill the Kings, Priests, and Prophets, and the Inhabitants thereof with drunkennesse. First, drunk with Errour and wickednesse, which they have drunk in abundantly; then God maketh them drink, till they be drunk with the wine of his indignation. He saith he willJer. 13. 13. 14, 15. dash them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together, saith the Lord, I will not pitty, nor spare, nor have mercy; but de∣stroy them. Hear ye, and give eare, he not proud; (saith the Pro∣phet) for the Lord hath spoken. And his councell is to give glo∣ry to God, namely in confessing and amending their faults, and making their peace with him, Before he bring darknesse and theJer. 13. 1. sha low of death, this great destruction upon them. Happy should we be, if we would take this Counsell: We have need of it; if ever any Nation was silled with such a drunkennesse, certain∣ly
at this time this our Land is. God saith oft; Shall I not be a∣vengedJer. 5. 9. 29. of such a Nation as this? when men grow worse in stead of amending, proceeding from evill to evill, and will not know God and see his Name, when they are under his rod. I speak all this, to the end that we may earnestly seek the Lord, and cry aloud to him this day for mercy, who cryeth to us with a loud voyce, To hear the rod, and who hath appointed it.Jer. 9. 3, 4, 9, 16. Lastly, we have oft times fasted and humbled our selves be∣fore the Lord; yet you see that this great Judgement is not re∣moved, but increasing dayly. Certainly, this is because either we have not been sincere and unfeigned herein: which if it be, let us afflict and humble our selves this day as we ought to do, for our selves, and for the Land; or else it argueth that God will yet plague us more for our sins, and we may fear to our destru∣ction. Formall Fasts are just provocations of God against a Land; as were the solemn meetings and prayers of the Jews,Isa. 1. 14, 15. whose hands were full of blood, and their fastings seperate fromIsa. 58. 4, 5. Reformation. It concerneth us to repent of our former Fastings and hum∣blings, for in the generality, men have not kept such a Fast as God requireth, no marvell then if God have not regarded it. We have not fasted from our sins; we have fasted to strife, andIsai. 58. 3, 4. debate, and contention, and Schisme, and all manner of wicked∣nesse and ungodlinesse. We have not been so humbled as to turn from our sins to the Lord, as to loose the bonds of wickednesse,Isa. 58. 6, &c. and to walk in the wayes of holinesse, sobriety, mercy, and righteousnesse. That Land is in a very sad condition, when albeit Fasts are Proclaimed and kept, God shall say, I will not hear their cry, butJer. 14. 12. will consume them with the sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence. Yet God forbid that we should give over humb∣ling our selves, and our praying unto him; his deferring of help may be because he would have us seek him more earnestly, and more unfeignedly; then we may hope, He will be found of usJer. 29. 12. 13. when we shall seek him with our whole heart. And who hath appointed it, Namely, God hath appointed it; we learn hence:
In all Judgements and corrections of any person or people, whatso∣everDoct. the rod or instrument may be, God is the appointer, It is of God, it is from him, and is ordered by him. This is abundantly proved in Leviticus 26. and in Deut. 28.Levit. 26. Deut 28. where God saith, I will appoint over you, such and such disea∣ses, I will send such and such punishments, or the Lord shall smite thee thus and thus. Is there any evill in the City, (that is,Amos 3. 6. evill of punishment) and the Lord hath not done it? I make peace and create evill, I the Lord do all these things, saith the Lord:Isa. 45. 7. Affliction ariseth not out of the dust:Job 5. 6. Punishments and corrections are Acts of Gods vindicativeReas. 1. justice, which he reserveth to himself, as part of his Prerogative belonging to his Soveraignty. Vengeance is mine saith the Lord:Deut. 32. 35. Rom. 12. 19. God will have the ordering of all corrections. All things are of God, and in him do consist, and there is notReas. 2. any thing, but God willeth it to be, either by his effecting or per∣mitting. What Herod and Pontius Pilate did against Christ, wasAct. 4. 28. nothing but what his hand and Counsel determined before to be done. The creatures and second causes, they are all Gods servants to do and to execute his will. Man by whom he correcteth anyIsa. 10. 6. Psal. 17. 14. is but his rod, or his sword. I desire that this truth should be beleeved; for then when aƲse. man is afflicted, and under any judgement, he will know and consider, That it is God that smiteth, it is God to whom he must return; it is God of whom he must seek favour and mercy, and with whom he must make his Peace. This confuteth an Errour, and reproveth a great fault in ma∣ny,Vse. who look upon the punishments and judgements they feel, as upon things that come casually, by hap hazzard, or ill fortune, as they call it; or from the malice of men: they look no fur∣ther than to the immediate actors or instruments thereof. They do not, many will not, see the hand of God in it. This Atheism is common amongst men; beware of it; for from hence it is that men in their afflictions are impatient un∣der them, and do fret and chafe at the instrument, and do studie revenge against men, and use indirect means to get them off. Let none shut their eyes against this truth. The Prophet com∣plaineth
of those that, when Gods hand was lifted up, and hisIsa. 26. 11. Ezek. 7. 9. Micah 6. 13. judgements were upon the earth, they would not see: but they shall see, saith he, and be ashamed. He will make them know that it is he that smiteth. God will smite them, till he make them sick with smiting, and make them desolate, because of their sins. When men in their afflictions shall consider that God hathƲse 3. appointed them, it will humble them, and calm their spirits.Psal. 39. 9. They will lay their hands on their mouthes, and accept of their punishment, because God hath appointed it, bearing patientlyMicah 7. 9. the indignation of the Lord, because they have sinned against him. Would we have our present judgement taken off? Now we know who hath appointed it, let us prepare to meet him, letHos. 6. 1. us return to him that hath smitten us, and make our peace with him. This Rod and Sword being called, Gods rod, and Gods sword,Ʋse 4. which smite at Gods appointment, we may then see that the great Quarrell and Controversie, originally, is not betwixt man and us, but between God and us. We must therefore first sub∣mit to him, and make our peace with him, else we shall make no peace, or no good peace, with man. It is not any policie, or power, nor any other means (though good, and so necessary, that we shall sin if we use them not) can remove our evil from us, but as we shall obtain it of God, who hath appointed it. When the Sword of God was called upon to put it self up into the Scabbard, and asked How long it would be ere it would beJer. 47. 6, 7. quiet; answer is made, How can it be quiet, seeing the Lord hath given it a charge against Ashkelon, and against the Sea shore? there he hath appointed it. The Lord must command it to be put up, or it will not cease smiting till it have consumed us. It is not any Articles of Peace, be they never so equall and reasonable; it is not the power of the sword, nor of any means we can use, though never so lawfull and necessary, that can take off the rod from us, and give us peace; except in the use of all good means to satisfie him, we shall obtain it of him who hath appointed it. We may haply use such means as may skin over the wound,
and conclude a Peace; but it will break out again, if God be not at peace with us, and if he do not appoint and make our Peace for us. Wherefore I beseech you, that (with all the good means that possibly we can use) we endeavour, to the utmost of our power, to procure of God to take this rod from us, and give us Peace. Let us repent of our own sins, and endeavour that the Land may repent. Let us remove out of Gods sight whatsoever doth offend him. Let us seek, and finde out, and cast out those execra∣ble things which have provoked the Lord to appoint the rod and sword to smite and destroy amongst us. Let us give him no rest, but continue our wrestling with him, with Jacobs wrestlings, by humble, and earnest, and importunate prayer and supplication. By this strength we may have power with God,Hos. 12. 3, 4. and (to speak with holy reverence to his Omnipotency) we may have power over God, to prevail with him. Then we may expect that he that hath appointed the rod will lay it by, if not cast it into the fire, and will command it to cease smiting, and will command the sword to be put up into the Scabbard; and then we shall have peace, and not till then. Is we would cast away our sins, God would certainly cast away his rod. If we prepare to meet him, he will be friends with us. But to conclude with a word of comfort to those that true∣lyƲse 5. fear God. That God is the appointer and orderer of the rod in all punishments, is a Ground of stay, and support of their hearts and spirits in the greatest afflictions. Be enemies never so powerfull and malicious, we need not fear them; it shall not be as they intend, either for the greatnesse or continuance of the evil which they would bring upon us, but according to the will of God, who hath given them charge to asslict us. As it was in the case of the children of Judah, when the Lord gave a charge to the Assyrians to war against them, saying, O Assyrian, the sword of mine anger, and the staffIsa. 10. 6, 7. of mine indignation; I send him against an hypocriticall Nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take
the spoil, &c. Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so, namely, to correct or punish for God in measure, and for their good; he never thinketh that he is but a rod in Gods hand: But he being let loose to his own covetousnesse, and ambition, and malice against Gods people, it is in his heart to destroy Nations not a few, and to raise himself upon the ruines of Gods people. But God put a hook in his nostrils, that he could not have his will of them; and afterward, for his rage and cruelty in executing his charge in smiting Gods people, God did utterly destroy him. God doth with them, as withIsa. 10. 7, 12, 16, 17. the proud waves which would overflow the mountains; they have their chanell to flow in; Gods appointment doth set Bars to them, and saith, Hitherto shalt thou come, and no farther, andJob 38. 11. there shall thy proud waves be stayed. It is well for Gods people that the rod and sword is in the hand, and at the appointment of God, their Wise, Almighty, and tender Father. God punisheth his children in measure, both for how much,Isa. 27. 8. 9. and how long; not so much nor so long as the enemy inten∣deth: He measureth every dram for weight, and every minute for time. His rod shall be upon us no longer then he hath ap∣pointed it; no longer then is needfull to purge us from sin, andHeb. 12. 10. make us partaker of his holinesse. As he hath appointed a time of trouble, and tryall, so he hath appointed an end thereof. And the rod of the wicked shall notPsal. 125. 3. alwayes rest upon the Lot of the Righteous. He will not alwayesIsa. 28. 28, 29. be threshing: his smiting is for correction and for our good, not for our destruction. He is wonderfull in Counsell and excellent in working. When he hath sufficiently smitten us with his rod, he will take his rod and burn it: then he holdeth it to be suffi∣cient,Levit. 26. 41. when our uncircumcised hearts are humbled, and when we shall accept of the punishment of our sins, acknowledging that he hath punished us lesse then our iniquities; when we2 Chron. 7. 14. shall kindly submit unto God, and reform our wayes, pray, and ask forgivenesse, he hath then promised that he will forgive our sins and hel our Land; he will take this strok from us. And when God useth the wicked; His, and our enemies, to
be his rod; when he hath attained his end, our troubles shall end in their destruction, God may use Papists, Antichrist, and his Abettors, to be his rod, and sword, whereby to correct and refine his people; which when it is done, They, because God hath appointed it, shall certainly be destroyed. Let not your spirits sink nor fail, while you are under the rod, though it may happen to be much worse with us then yet it is: for it shall be onely so much and so long as he in his wisedome hath ap∣pointed for our good. I will end with that comfortable Scripture touching his Church then, and Babilon in Chalda; which is as applyable to us and to Babilon at Rome; Yet a very little while, and the indig∣nation shall cease, saith God, and mine anger in their destruction.Isai. 10. 25. For he hath appointed the rod of Iron to break in peeces his enemies; as well as his rod of men to correct his children: com∣fort we our selves with these thoughts, nothing commeth to passe in the way of correction of his children, but as he hath appointed. Let us therefore for all these good purposes, Hear the rod, and who hath appointed it. FINIS. ERRATA. Page 10. line 25, for , reade see. p. 14. l. 2. for that rod, read the Sn, p. 2 l. 24 for upon read the, p. 35. l. 8. blot out, these, P. 19. l. 24. for professing, reade confessing. P. 23. l. 18. for murthers, reade murtherers.
