24475.5 S106205 99841925 181128
FIVE GODLIE SERMONS, Preached by R. T. Bachi∣ler of diuinitie. 1. The Charge of the Cleargie. 2. The Crowne of Christians. 3. The annointment of Christ, or Christian ointment. 4. A festiuall Sermon vpon the Natiuitie of Christ. 5. The fruits of hypocrisie. LONDON, Printed by I.H. for Iohn Harison. 1602.
To the right worshipfull Maister Iohn Smith Alderman, Mai∣ster William Wilson Senior Burgesse, Iusti∣ces of peace, and the rest of the Brethren, Gouernors, and Magistrates of the Bur∣rough towne and corporation of Kendall: Grace, mercie and peace, in Christ Iesus our Lorde. AS The Beare (to begin not with an homely cō∣parison as it may seem, but such as the best wits, and most learned haue not been ashamed to vse before me) when she bringeth forth her young one, as Aristotle, or rather as Scaliger the subtile refiner of grosse Philosophie, when she casteth out her ab∣ortiue broode, finding it to be a rude,
vnformed and confused lumpe of flesh, not liking the shape thereof, neuer ceaseth to licke the same, till it hath brought it to a perfect forme and fashion, with apt pro∣portion of euerie parte and member: E∣uen so (right worshipfull) those suddaine, extemporall, and tumultuarie speeches, which at the first I did rawly and rude∣ly deliuer in your audience, as no absolute broode of full grouth, but rather as vn∣ripe fruite of little labour, for matter sound I am sure, but for maner not so sweete as I could wish, such howsoeuer as God thē presently gaue me grace to vtter; Behould here the same reduced into bet∣ter forme, perfected, polished, published, and presented vnto your selues, not for mine owne prayse which I neuer deserued nor desired, but for your profit, which I alwaies aymed at, and sought after, wishing not onely your worldly wealth that you may florish still as hetherto you haue done, in peace, plentie, and prospe∣rity, but thirsting after your soules health that you might growe vp more and more
in grace and knowledge, which is the finall and fruitfull ende and intendement of all sermons either preached or writen: as Peter making it his conclusion of his lat∣ter Epistle 3. Chap. 18.2. Peter. 3.18. For therefore haue I especially and of purpose, directed and dedicated these few sermons vnto you (worshipfull and welbeloued Bretheren in the Lord) that as you first harde them, so you might againe regarde them, yea re∣member and ruminate them, that by of∣ten reading and pervsing them, through continuall meditation they may be so in∣wardly engrafted and ingrauen in your harts and consciences, that you may take proffit, and make vse of them in the acti∣ons of your life and conuersation. O that you would consider thankfully, that as our Gratious Soueraigne hath greatly graced you, in making your town of a country vil∣lage, a corporate Borough, and vouchsa∣fed to bestow vpon you a faire and large Charter for the establishing of your state of gouerment, and publike benefit of your populous multitude. So likewise that God
himselfe hath as graciously blessed you in commending by his good prouidence your parish, for the spirituall cure and charge of your soules, to the patronage of so flori∣shing a Colledge, & so fruitfull of learned preachers, that you may be certaine and sure, neuer to faile of a sufficient and vi∣gilant pastour ouer you, and whereby noe doute you shal euermore cōtinew: I speake it to your comforte as one of the goulden candlesticks of Gods true catholike church, alwaise shining with the bright light of the Gospell. And would to God that as your towne is famous thorowgh the most partes of this Land, for your greate tra∣ding lik a little Tirus, for your meane yet nceessarie and profitable commodities for the common wealth; so your feruent zeale and fruitfull obedience vnto the word, were as faithfully showne heere & as fa∣mously knowne els where, to your owne cō∣mendation and consolation of others, that with gratulation vnto God I might truly say of you and your people and the rest of my parish, as the Apostle Paule of the Ro∣mans.
1.8. I thanke my God thorough Iesus Christ for you all because your faith is published thorough out the whole world: which would be my cre∣dit and crowne, yea and a cordiall of com∣fort to my conscience, among my many te∣dious discontentments in this place, which would gladly feast it selfe with the fruits of my labours in you, which I hope hereaf∣ter to finde in such ample measure in you all, that I againe may say with the Apostle vnto the Rom. That I shall reape and receaue at the length consolation to∣gether with you thorough our mutu∣all faith both yours and myne. 1.12. VVhich grace I trust in due time the Lord God in Christ Iesus will vouchsafe to grant vnto vs both to our owne good and his glorie. Your most louing Pastour in the Lord, R. T.
The charge of the clear∣gie: And the crowne of Christians. 1. PET. 5.3.4. v. Not as though yee were Lords ouer Gods heritage, but that yee may be examples to the flocke: And when the chiefe shepheard shall appeare, yee shall receiue an in∣corruptible Crowne of glorie. PETER the blessed A∣postle of our Sauiour Christ Iesus,Per. as he na∣meth himselfe in the beginning of this Epi∣stle and first verse,Cephas. that Cephas which was ac∣counted one of the pillers of the Church as Paul confesseth Gal. 2.9. writing to all the dispersed christians thorowout almost all Asia the great and the lesse, euen Pon∣tus, Galatia, Capadocia, and Bythinia, after a few precepts of doctrine and instruction to the building vp of their faith in the first
Chap. and then certaine generall exhorta∣tions to the reforming of their life and ma∣ners, from the beginning of the second ch. to the end of the fourth, in this cha. which is the fift and the last of this Epistle, hee commeth to a particular admonition on∣ly, concerning the Pastors of Christs flock and preachers of his word, which were in those regions and countries mentioned before, and that especially in the foure first verses of this chapter: which admonition of his containeth three especiall things to be considered of vs.Three things to be consi∣dered. First, the preface of Peter in the first verse: secondly, his speci∣al exhortation in the second and third ver∣ses: thirdly, a promise of reward in the fourth verse.The Pre∣face con∣taineth 3. things. The preface in the first verse containeth three things: a description of himselfe, the person that wrote this Epi∣stle, and that made the exhortation, and by three names: not in vanitie and osten∣tation as boasting of these titles, but to the honour and glorie of God, that vouchsa∣fed him these fauours. The first of office, I which am an elder: wherein he calleth and accounteth himselfe but fellow, and not aboue those to whom he writeth: and after this manner exhorteth the second of
degree, & that the highest of all christians, euē of martyrdom, partly in regard of that he was to suffer for the name of Christ Ie∣sus, and partly for that he had suffered, and that in way of prophesie of himselfe of his death and crucifying, which hapned vnder Nero afterwards, and as our Sauiour fore∣told of him, that another should gird him and leade him whither he would not Ioh. 21.18. in these wordes and a witnesse of the suffrings of Christ. The third of ho∣nour, a reward of the second, which sure∣ly followeth the former as the shadowe doth the body in the third and last place: and also a partaker of the glorie that shall be reueiled, and this for the description of his person. The second thing in the Preface, is his humble obsecration and supplication in this word I beseech, a great deigning and vouchsafing of Peter, as though he were their inferiour or fellowe at the least: as the words signifie in the originall . The third thing, the per∣sons to whom he wrote in the first words of this Chap: to the Elders that are among you, and this in the first verse. Then in the second verse he beginnerh his exhor∣tation,
and that of feeding, a necessarie duetie which he putteth them in mind of, as properly belonging vnto them being Pastors of the Church: but what should they feede the flocke of God, as likewise in the next verse it is called Gods heritage with an article and particle annexed there∣unto, signifying the cure & charge which they haue or ought to haue thereof, and therfore very wel translated , which dependeth vpon you, or which is com∣mitted vnto you, or els if you will, it may import the manner how they should feed, that is, , as much as in them lieth, or as it is expressed afterwards more plain∣ly. First generally in the word  caring for it, or watching ouer it: and se∣condly more particularly, and that in three respects in a threefold Antithesis or oppo∣sition  first, and then , first how they ought not, and then how they ought as first not by constraint, but willingly, secondly not for filthy lucre, but of a rea∣die minde, and this in the second and third verse, not as Lords ouer Gods heritage, but as examples of the flocke, and this in the third verse. The third generall thing to be conside∣red
in this portion of scripture, is the pro∣mise of reward contained in the fourth verse vpon the following of those things which they ought, and flying of those things which they ought not to doe in the two former verses, which compriseth in them three things. First, the reward in par∣ticular in those words yee shall receiue: what? no smal reward but a princely, euen a crowne. Secondly, what manner of crowne, an excellent crowne commended by two Epithites or adiuncts, first of glory for the worth and valew of the price, and pretiousnesse of it: secondly of the conti∣nuance: no earthly materiall temporanie crowne, but an incorruptible crowne: and when? not out of hand when wee wish and would, but when it pleaseth God to appoint and bestow vpon vs, that is, euen when the chiefe shepheards of our soules shal appeare, euen at the second comming of our Sauiour, after the end of the world at the day of iudgment, when euerie man shall receiue according to his works. And thus much of the diuision and resolution of these foure first verses, of the two first whereof I meane not to speake: as of the preface in the first, nor of the beginning of
the exhortation, nor of the two first op∣positions comprehended in the second: but will keepe my selfe onely within the compasse of the two last, the third and fourth: which, as they containe four mem∣bers and clauses in them, so I will presume to borrow but to each of them but a quar∣ter of an houre, for the entreatie and han∣dling of them. Not as though yee were Lords ouer Gods heritage. As Peter thrice denied our Sauiour: first, simply with a bare negation: second∣ly, with an asseueration and an oath: third∣ly, with cursing and periurie: Matt. 26.70.72.74. And as thereupon our Sauiour with a Tantundem dat tantidem, or a quid pro quo gaue him a semblable threefolde caueat and Memorandum of feeding his flocke, least he should eftsoones fall again into his former infirmitie, saying vnto him thrice togither, Simon Bar-Iona, Louest thou me? feed my lambs, feeed my sheepe, feed my lambs, Ioh. 21.15.16.17. To which Peter answering said, Thou knowest Lord I loue thee. Whereupon Austen in his 123. Tract. vpon Iohn hath these words: Red∣ditur negationi trinae trina confessio, ne minus
amori lingua seruiat quam timori, & plus vocis elicuisse videatur mors eminens, quam vita praesens, vt sit amoris officium pascere do∣minicum gregem, sicut fuit timoris indicium negare pastorem. So likewise in this place, our Apostle remembring his owne three∣fold deniall, and also vpon our Sauiours threefold warning his threefold protesta∣tion in professing that he did loue him, and then his threefold promise included in the same, as that he would shew forth a sign & effect of that his loue in diligently keeping his commandement, & carefully feeding his flocke. That which before he affirmed with al asseuerance, he now con∣firmeth with al assurance, in not only him∣selfe painfully preaching the Gospel to all both Iewes & Gentiles in his own person, and for his own part: but also exciting and stirring vp others, euen all pastours in all congregations whatsoeuer, to doe the like as he now doth to the elders of the Chur∣ches. To whom he writeth, and that with a threefold prouiso, as our Sauiour warned him, that they should carefully feede the flocke or heritage of God, not as vpon constraint, but willingly: secondly, not for filthy lucre, but of a readie minde as in
the former verse and third, as in this verse, not as though they were, &c. A three∣fold exhortation answerable to this three∣fold confession, and a threefold contesta∣tion answerable to this threefold protesta∣tion: wherein,Ministers warned to auoid three monstrous vices. Idlenesse. Auarice. Tyrannie. as with three watch-words he aduiseth all the Ministers of the word to auoid & abhorre three monstrous and vgly vices, to which most commonly they are subiect. The first, Idlenesse: the se∣cond, Auatice: the third, Tyrannie or am∣bition. But to leaue the other two, and to tie my selfe to the third contained in my text. If Ambition or tyrannie, is and al∣waies hath beene the cause of all cala∣mities & inconueniences in all states, and common wealths, as breeding not onely danger and destruction to the person that is affected therewith: but bringing also damage and detriment to the people that are afflicted therewith.Cyrus. As in Cyrus king of the Medes and Persians, who in aspi∣ring the Monarchie of the whole world through his exceeding pride and crueltie made himselfe and his people a pray vnto a woman. As also in Alexander the great,Alexander. whom seeking to be Lord ouer the whole earth, ambitiously tyrannising ouer
his seruants, souldiers, captains and coun∣sellors, was cut off by poison in the prime of his age, and flower of his youth: wher∣by his conquest was not accomplished, and his great segnories and kingdomes rent asunder and deuided among his cap∣taines, who brought themselues likewise finally to confusion by their continuall contention among themselues. As like∣wise in Iulius Caesar & Pompey,Iulius Cae∣sar. Pompey. whose am∣bitious dissention, the one in not suffering a Peere, the other a superiour, brought themselues to vntimely death, the one by Caesar, the other by the Senatours, and the slourishing estate of the Citie of Rome to a verie low ebbe, through the mightie fa∣ctions and cruel-ciuill warres which fol∣lowed after. Whereupon Euripides in his Phoenisse vpon occasion of the ambitious contention of Eteocles and Polenices, and the destruction of Thebs,Ambition. that followed thereupon, saith, , that is, that ambition is an vniust goddesse, or rather if ye will, a wicked fiende: because into what house or Citie soeuer it en∣treth, were it neuer so happy and flourishing, it neuer commeth out without the destruction of
all those that she layeth hold vpon. And ther∣fore Plato he calleth it , a thing that will fall out contrarie to our expecta∣tion, and worse then we wish and would, as causing infortunitie when we looke for felicitie, and aduersitie when we hope for prosperitie, or if you will , a mis∣chiefe that turnes all topsie turuie. Wher∣upon also Aristotle Pol. 2. cha. 7. saith, , that is, that all wrongs and iniu∣ries for the most part are caused through am∣bition and auarice. Then much more in the Church of God is hautie ambition and cruell tyrannie dangerous and damnable, both to those that are possessed therewith, & to those that are oppressed by it: which is such a vice, that whatsoeuer minister and preacher of the word from the highest to the lowest be tainted and infected with it, he ceaseth to be a shepheard, and be∣commeth a woolfe, a theefe, and a robber, such as were the Scribes and Pharises of whom spake our Sauiour, when he said, Ioh, 10.8. All that euer were before me are theeues and robbers when as they doe not feed, but fleese, and not fleese but flea the flocke of Christ, and pul the skinne ouer their eares,
and not milke them but spoile them and spill their bloud, deuoure their flesh and eate them vp as it were bread, that is, grinde the faces of the poore people, and tread them vnder their feete, dominering ouer them by intolerable pride and pre∣sumption, crushing and oppressing them by violent tyrannie, contrarie to all pietie and equitie, as the word in the originall doeth purport and signifie , which is here translated odiously and of set purpose, as we reade it. And I wonder that it hath been so long suffered vncorre∣cted, as though ye were Lords ouer the flocke to disgrace our Ecclesiasticall go∣uernment, to controule the estate of our Church, and checke and checkmate our Lord bishops, interpreting the compound as the simple  for , ma∣king no difference betweene a gratious gouernment and a moderate Magistracie, and betweene an ambitious vsurpation and cruell tyrannie, as they doe also vn∣learnedly and maliciously. That other place of the Gospell, which they vse as the strongest engine of their batterie against the present state of the Church, Mat. 20.25. Luk. 22.25. Where  is transla∣ted
likewise gracious Lords to take away the title of Grace from our Archbishops, and Lordship from our Bishops, when as the word signifieth no such thing. For what smatterer is there in the grammer, or that hath but small skill in the Greeke tongue that knoweth not what  or  and  or  signifieth, that is pro∣perly a Benefactor, an ambitious title of honour which the Emperor of Rome and other kings and Princes did vaineglori∣ously affect in a politicke & popular praise and applause of the common multitude, in bountifullie bestowing some publicke beneficence and beneuolence vpon the people, to colour their accustomed tyran∣nie and crueltie, and to insinuate them∣selues into the fauour of their oppressed subiects.Philip of Macedon. For so was Philip of Macedon called  of the Thebans, as Demosthe∣nes witnesseth in his oration pro Ctesiphon∣te, and besides Philos and . As also Ptolomey the sonne of Philadelphus King of Egypt,Ptolomey. was so surnamed, and finally Antiochus king of Syria,Antiochus which because partly it was a prophane name of the Gen∣tiles, and partly for that it was an ambiti∣ous name or title of tyrannie, our Sauiour
would in no wise haue his disciples tear∣med by that name: for it had been strange and wonderfull, as also too too offensiue and odious for those sorie and silly fisher∣men, although they were our Sauiours Disciples and afterwards the pillars of the Primitiue Church, then in the infancie of the Gospell, the swadling cloutes of chri∣stianitie and nonage of the church, to haue suffered themselues to haue beene called by such princely and reyall names, and those also taken from Ethnickes and Pa∣gans, who were to follow the president and example of our Sauiour in the like lowlinesse: That as he himselfe perfor∣med the whole worke of our redemption and saluation in humilitie: so were they to lay the foundation of this newe Church, not on the rocke of offence, but in sub∣mission and subiection, although other∣wise they deserued and enioyed as great spirituall titles, nay more high,Christs dis∣ciples Fishers of men. honourable and holy titles then that. As first, when they were called of our Sauiour, Fishers of men, for catching the soules of men with the hooke of the Gospell within the net of the Church. Secondly, Apostles,Apostles. as being Christs chiefe commissioners and
Ambassadors sent into al the quarters of the earth to preach and to baptise.Ambassa∣dours. 3. Euange∣lists as Gods messengers to carrie the glad tidings of peace throughout the world.Euange∣lists. Fourthly,Shepherds Shepheards, for feeding the flock of Christ with Angels food, the spirituall Manna of the word, as Homer was wont to call the princes of Greece . Fiftly and finally,Gods. Gods, because vnto them the word of God was giuen, Ioh. 10.34. as Dauid called kings and Princes, Psal. 82.6. As also they might haue beene called  had it not bin an heathenish name, for bestowing on the people wheresoeuer they became the inestimable benefit, yea the most pretious and peerelesse iewel and margarite of the word of God, as likewise  for sauing the soules of so many,. whom they daily added to the Church. But to leaue this and follow the word of my text which I haue in hand, as the same word is vsed in the same sence togither with , as it is in this place in Matt. mentioned before, for that this word is here taken in the bad, and not in the good part it is manifest; as also in Matthew, al∣though Beza be of the contrarie opinion, therein iniuriously and rashly controuling
the iudgement of Erasmus, and that be∣cause Luke in harmonie & consent with Matth. 22.25. vseth the simple for the o∣thers compound,Beza. which is but once in the whole Scripture so taken, and no where els, and that therefore is meant thereby not tyrannicall rule, but all ciuill gouern∣ment of temporall good politicke magi∣strates. But it may be said of him as it is in the Prouerb of Bernard, Beza non vidit om∣nia, although otherwise a learned father, and an excellent writer verie well deser∣uing of the Church of God. But to put this matter out of controuersie, if we will make Marke a moderator between Mat∣thew and Luke, and take him for a Iudge betweene Beza and Erasmus, we shal find not that word which is in Luke, but that which is in Matthew, and that which is in my text: and who will not say that the place of Luke is to be suspected of an o∣uersight in the libraries in leauing out the preposition because he differeth from the other two Euangelists, as Beza hath sus∣pected manie places of lesse account, and for smaller cause then this. And I am per∣swaded if some originall were throughly searched, a  would be found in Luke as
well as in the rest; but who is so blinde as he that will not see, for absurd it were that the preposition  found in the compound should make no difference from the sim∣ple, but to stand as a Cypher in Augrim, or as a pilcrow in a latine Primmer, what simple Gramarian will say this? But if any thing be to be gathered out of Luke his difference from the rest it is this; that e∣uen the simple also  is taken for a se∣uere tyrannizing, and not for serene go∣uerning; and therefore much more  the compound: for that it doth so signifie it appeareth Acts, 19.16. which place may stand in steed of a thousand, be∣cause we will not spend time in repeating manie, hasting to other matter. Where the euil spirit is said to haue ouercome the foure sonnes of Sceua by a violent assault, as it may appeare by the two effects fol∣lowing of rending their cloathes off their backs, and wounding them  in the originall. And therefore Hesicheus hee interpreteth this worde by , which signifieth not onely Dominari but domare euen to curbe a man, and to keepe him vnder by constraint, and in setting himselfe against him to vanquish him by
fine force, for that the preposition  is taken alwaies in the compound for aduer∣sus euerie Grammer scholer knoweth it. And the opposition in this place maketh the matter most manifest, for these two are put here as Antitheta, , insinuating thus much vnto vs, that a man cannot both  and also shewe himselfe an example; and yet who will not say that manie Kings, Princes, and Lords both ought to be and are oftentimes in their gouernment presi∣dents, and examples of many vertues vn∣to their people and subiects: so that the word is not here barely taken for any lord gouernour simple, but for cruell and ty∣rannicall Lords, which wring and wrong the poore people vnderneath them. And that therefore though the latter be here inhibited, yet the former is not forbidden, neither by Peter the Disciple, nor Christ the Master, being a state which may and ought to stand as well in the Church as in the common wealth, where there ought to be gouernment, degrees, and dignities, because of the difference of gifts and gra∣ces in one another, and that to the glorie of God and good of his people; for where
there is an , there must needs be an : For want of gouernment breedes confusion, and equalitie brings contempt. Here then in a word these Elders of Asia, and in them all the preachers of the word, of what degree, estate, condition soeuer, are dehorted from all hard, seuere, austere dominering ouer Gods heritage, they must not be , to al∣lude vnto the words of our Sauiour in the Gospel Mat. 25.24. Luk. 19.21. As the false prophets did in the daies of Ezechiel: for the which he inueigheth against them, who did neuer strengthen the weake nor heale the sicke, nor binde vp the broken, nor brought backe that which was driuen away, nor sought that which was lost; but did rule them with crueltie and rigour, fee∣ding themselues, and not their sheepe, ea∣ting vp the fat, cloathing themselues with the wool, and killing those that were fed among the flock, Ezech. 34.3.4. As like∣wise the Scribes and Pharises in the time of our Sauiour Christ; who did binde heauie burdens & grieuous to be borne, and layd them on the shoulders of the people, &c, like the taske-masters of Egypt vpon the children of Israel; for the which he sharp∣ly
reproueth them, Matt. 23.4. And fi∣nally, as the Pope, Cardinals, Byshops, and Cleargie of Rome doe, and euer haue done since Antichrist put foorth his horns, in behauing themselues too loftie and lordly ouer the poore people, exercising vpon them an intolerable crueltie and ty∣rannie, and laying on them a yoake of mi∣serable seruitude and slauerie, ouerburde∣ning them with their innumerable decrees canons and constitutions, powling, pilling and impouerishing them with their Peters pence, penance, pardons and purgatorie: and finally, vtterly vndoing them by their insupportable impositions, exactions, and oppressions. And as I feare me too manie do in these our daies, who follow herein the false pro∣phets, Pharises and popish prelates, who care not, nor spare not to vse hardly, not onely the common multitude, but also the ministerie of the Church, in not only loft∣tie looking ouer them as the Diuel lookes ouer Lincolne (as we say) but also in lay∣ing greater charge and burden vpon them then they are able to beare. But would to God these would remember, that for all their superioritie, they are but shepheards;
for all their magistracie, they are but mi∣nisters; and for all their Lordship, they are & ought to be labourers in the Lords vine∣yard, and louers of the vine, which they neither ought themselues to spoile nor waste, nor suffer the wilde boare of the wood to roote it vp, nor the sauage beasts of the field to deuour it. They ought nei∣ther to be  nor , they must not be like the great oakes of Basan and the tall Cedars of Libanon, which with their bignesse & height hinder the growth of young trees vnderneath them, by kee∣ping the moisture of the raine, the heate of the sunne, and the aire of the winde from them: so they to wipe the fat from other mens beards which they haue deer∣ly bought, as they to haue the sweete and that which other men haue painfully sweat for, others to beate the bush, and they to haue the bird. As couetous Vespasian was woont to vse his officers vnderneath him like spunges,Vespasian. to let them alone till they were full, and afterwards to presse them out againe; to suffer them first to stuffe their bagges with siluer and golde, that hee at his pleasure might emptie them againe. Not to be like
the great fishes which onely liue by eating vp the lesse, nor to make their treasure houses to be as the spleene is to the body, the receptacle of all ill humors; so they to be the store-house of euill gotten goods. O that the shepheards of Christs flocke would vouchsafe to follow the holsome counsell of an Heathen tyrant in this be∣halfe, euen Tyberius Emperour of Rome,Tyberius. to a rigorous exactour vnderneath him, Boni pastoris esse tondere pecus non deglubere. Or els as Alexander the great, who being also offended with the like hard vsages and sore extorsions of his subiects by his offi∣cers vnderneath him, Saying vnto those that were about him, , that is, That he should not a∣bide that Gardiner that would not cut his hearbs, but plucke them vp by the rootes; nor that would not croppe his trees, but fell them wholy to the ground: when as rather this is the duetie of a good gouernour either in the Church or common wealth, not to di∣minish and impouerish the estate of the people, but to countenance and comfort, to defend and shend them against all ad∣uersaries whatsoeuer. And therefore Iso∣crates to Nicocles councelleth him to take
this for a certaine sure and sound token of a wise and welordered gouernment, when all things did proceede well, and when the common people did profit and prosper euerie one in his place and calling through his prudence and prouidence. And thus much should suffice to haue been spoken of this first proposition, but that we must needs say something of this last word which is in the originall , and interpreted Gods heritage, which is in∣deed al one with that which in the former verse is called Gods flocke; for as God vouchsafes to call himselfe a shepheard, his Church a sheepfould; and our Sauiour to terme himselfe the doore of the sheep∣fould, his word the greene pastures, wher∣with he feedeth, and the waters of com∣fort whereunto he leadeth his flocke, and the faithfull and the elect, the sheepe of his flocke. Psal. 23. Ioh. 10. So it pleaseth him to liken himselfe to a rich man, whose lot is fallen in a faire ground, and hath a good∣ly heritage, as Dauid Psal. 16. And his son Christ Iesus our Sauiour to be his heire to succeed him in his Heritage, and this his heritage or inheritance to be the Church, the number of them that beleeue his word
and Gospel, and euerie particular congre∣gation in anie towne or countrey to be as Farmers, Lordships and manners, as it were parts and parcels of his whole inhe∣ritance committed to the seuerall charges of his ministers and pastors, being as it were his stewards, bayliffes, and farmers, who shal one day be called to a reckening & account with this sound of summance, Redde rationem villicationis. A deed of gift; of which inheritance the Lord did grant to our Sauiour from the beginning; the terme whereof is contained in the 2. Psal. in those words of Dauid, in the person of the Lord God himselfe. Thou art my son, this day haue I begotten thee: Aske of me, and I will giue thee Heathen for thine inheri∣tance, and the outmost parts of the world for thy possession, sealed vnto him by an euerla∣sting decree from before all worlds, as an eternall Charter for euer, and confirmed vnto him by diuers other testimonies of scripture, of which inheritance he hath now present fruition, then seizing it into his owne hands, when as he himselfe was here vpon earth, and claimed his right in his owne person, and sent his seruants his Apostles to all the coasts and quarters of
the world by the warrant of the word and seales of the Sacraments, to take possessi∣on for him of al people and nations what∣soeuer, admitting them his tenants by gi∣uing them the Gods penny or earnest pen∣nie of his spirit, that they might be assured to be his, whereby we that were before of the number of the heathen Pagans, and Gentiles, as dogs thrust out of doores, as wolues without the fould, as aliants and strangers from the common wealth of Is∣rael, and finally as tenants in villinage vn∣to Sathan the prince of the world, are now become of the societie of faithful Christi∣ans, as seruants, or rather children of the houshold of God, sheepe of Christs flock, franck-denisons and fellow citizens with the Saints; and to conclude, free-holders, and that in Capite, euen in our head Christ Iesus, who is the great King and Lord o∣uer all the world, of whose proper heritage and inheritance we are, to whom onely we belong, and to no other: which in∣heritance of his is of such account and re∣gard with him, that he will not suffer it to be spoiled and wasted at any hand, nor anie of his tenants to be abused or oppres∣sed by anie landlords, farmers, stewards,
auditors, receiuers, bailiffs, or surueigh∣ers, which he hath set ouer them. Some vnskilfully doe suppose because of  in the Greeke, that this word is on∣ly here taken for the Cleargie, because the whole ministerie of olde was woònt to be so called by a peeuish imitation of some doting fathers, who did catachrestically vse or rather abuse this word after this ma∣ner: but vnmeet it is and amisse, to restrain that name and appropriate it to a fewe, which the scripture attributeth in commō to the whole Church of God, and all the members thereof, the holy Ghost vsing in this word a Metonomia of the adiunct for the subiect  for , Lot for heri∣tage, because they were woont in old time to deuide all inheritances by lotte, as the children of Israel had the land of Canaan by equall portions parted amongst them. And thus much for the first proposition of this third Antithesis and first part of my text which is negatiue or dehortatorie, de∣claring to the ministers of the word what they ought to auoide in their charge and gouernment of Gods Church. Now therefore of the second propositi∣on of this opposition which is affirmatiue
and exhortatorie to a duetie, which they ought to performe being the second prin∣cipal part of my text, of which more brief∣ly. But that ye may be examples of the flocke; In Iurie the shepheards which led and fed any sheepe, went before them, and their flocks alwaies followed after them, contrary to our common vse and custome. Euen so here Peter, he would haue the spi∣rituall shepheards of Christs flocke to go before them,Preachers should be good ex∣amples to the people. non corpore sed animo, non via sed vita, non exeundo sed exemplo, that is, that they would shew themselues patterns and presidents, platformes and examples vnto the people in good life, godly manners, and vertu∣ous behauiour: which how necessarie and behoouefull it is,Example to them that beleue in 6. things Paul himselfe signifieth, when as he chargeth Timothie to be an ex∣ample vnto thē that beleeue in six things. First, in the word that is, in the doctrine of the Gospel. Secondly, in conuersation; that is, in keeping the same, and expressing the obedience thereof in all Christian de∣meanour. Thirdly, in loue, which signifi∣eth what manner of conuersation he re∣quireth, euen all deeds of mercie & works of charity which are contained vnder loue, which is the complement of the law, and
the accomplishment of the Gospell; the olde commandement of the Lord God, and the newe commandement of Christ Iesus; and containeth in it our two princi∣pall dueties both to God and man: vpon the which two things doe hang both the law and the prophets. Fourthly, in the spi∣rit; that is, in the gifts and graces, fruits and effects of the spirit, with which both preacher and people ought to be endued. Fiftly, in faith; that is, in stedfastly belee∣uing the truth of Gods word and certain∣tie of his promises, and in wholy relying vpon the mercies of God the Father, and the merits of Christ Iesus his sonne & our Sauiour, the onely badge and cognisance of true Christians, who are onely thereby discerned from Turkes, Saracens, Moores, Indians, Barbarians, and Infidels whatso∣euer. Sixtly and lastly, in puritie; which is the perfection of all religion, when as God is serued and feared in soundnesse and sinceritie, simplicitie and singlenesse of heart, without all doubting, deceit and dissembling, which may be as six rules of obseruation and imitation included, al∣though not expressed in these wordes of our Apostle. To the which if we adde a
seuenth particular vertue to make vp a per∣fect number, which is humilitie, I hope we shal fully attaine to the meaning of the holy Ghost in this place: for that Peter here would especially that they should be types and mirrours of humilitie, it is as cleare as the noone-day by the former part of the Antithesis or opposition in the words going before; for in steede of the lordly lowlinesse which he wisheth them to abhorre before, he commendeth vnto them lowly humilitie, as principally re∣quiring the same at their hands: and signi∣fieth vnto them, that they shall not shew themselues to be Lords ouer Gods heri∣tage, if they make themselues examples of meeknes and mildnes, modestic and mo∣deration vnto their flocks. The like exhortation also doth Paul make to Titus, that aboue all things hee shew himselfe an example of good works with vncorrupt doctrine, and this gene∣rally, then particularly how with grauitie and integritie of life and with the whole∣some word which cannot be reprooued. For doctrine, to what end or effect? euen twofolde, as a double fruit redounding from thence; as first to the shame & blame
of his aduersaries and his own good name and fame, that they which withstand may be ashamed, hauing nothing concerning you to speake euill of Tit. 2.7.8. Herein following the steps of our Sauiour Christ Iesus, who before warned his Disciples, and in them al the ministers and preachers of the word of what degree or place soe∣uer, that the light of their life doe shine forth before men, &c. for these two ends, for the good of men, and the glorie of God; when he saith, Let your light so shine before men, &c. Mat. 5.16. But more especially to this particular vertue of humilitie, which our Apostle principally aimeth at in this place Mat. 11.29. Learne of me, for I am meeke and lowly in heart, &c. wishing them to shew them∣selues examples of humilitie vnto the peo∣ple, as he declared himselfe a president of meeknesse and lowlinesse vnto them, and that in heart, and not in tongue; in deed, and not in word; in truth, and not in shew: for the learned ministerie ought so to con∣sult with their science, that they correct their conuersatiō according to an vpright conscience, and so to frame and fashion their whole life and manners, that they be∣ing
in holy as Christ is holy, they righteous as he is righteous, and perfect as their hea∣uenly father is perfect, their flock may imi∣tate them as they themselues are followers of Christ; and that as the word is a rule and square vnto them, so they to be a line and leuell, a platforme and scantling vnto others. Yea they ought to endeuour so to be endued with all the vertues of our Sa∣uiour, that if it were possible they might obtaine to his perfection, and attaine vn∣to the measure of his age and fulnesse, as Paul exhorteth Eph. 4.13. that all their workes might be nothing els but oracles, and their workes miracles; that although they be men, yet they may liue as Angels; and albeit they haue their habitation here on earth, yet to haue their conuersation in heauen; that they may be called Gods for practising the word, as they are tearmed Gods for preaching the Gospell. Ioh. 10.35. For they being as Cities scituate vpon an hill, as our Sauiour, as watchmen placed in a tower, as Ezech and as candles set vpon can∣dlesticks, as Iohn in the Apocalip. ought e∣specially to shew themselues as lights vnto the feete, and lanthornes vnto the pathes of the people, who are carried with full
force and swift streame, to follow the steps of their guides, and gouernours, for as it is in the Prouerb, Regis ad exemplum, &c. Such as the king is, such are the commons, as the magistrate, so the multitude; as the ruler, so the residue; as the Pastour, so are the people; and as the minister, such is the meanie, who thinke it lawfull and lauda∣ble to treade the same pathes with their teachers, who ought to conduct them in life as they doe instruct them in lear∣ning. In which respect all ministers and prea∣chers ought carefully to looke vnto them∣selues, that they direct their waies accor∣ding to Gods will and word, sith their sinnes are farre greater and more grie∣uous, yea more hainous and horrible then the trespasse of any other, being no single solid sinne; but double,Sinne by example two folde. and therefore dan∣gerous and damnable. Nam bis peccat qui exemplo peccat: For sinne by example is twofold: first, by sinning himselfe: se∣condly, by causing others to fall, by fol∣lowing his folly. Herein resembling Sathan, or Lucifer the great Dragon, who when he forsooke his first estate and came tumbling downe
out of heauen; fell not himselfe alone, but drewe downe with his taile as a traine, a great number of starres with him. Wher∣upon the best Schooleman verie wittily saith in this behalfe, That Magistrates and Ministers when they sinne, they doe, Peccare in quid essentialiter, but all others but in qua∣le accidentaliter. But good God, what mi∣nisters, what manners in this our time, in comparison of the daies of olde? What face, what fashions, what forme of a Church, in regard of the former state? Heretofore haue been holy Byshops, Re∣uerend fathers, Zealous preachers, Godly liuers, Learned writers, and constant Mar∣tyrs, Sed quantum mutamur ab illo? howe farre are wee fallen from the puritie and perfection of our predecessours? For now as our common shepheards go not before but follow after their sheepe; so doe for the most part our spirituall Pastours suffer the people to be an example of good life, and Godly conuersation vnto them, and giue them good leaue to goe before them into the kingdome of heauen: but yet so, as they list not themselues to follow after. As Augustine of the Churchmen and Cleargie of his time, Venit indoctum
vulgus & rapit coelum, nos verò cum tota no∣stra doctrina ruimus in gehennam. But not to inforce this point with any particular application for feare of offence, Nam quicquid tetigero vlcus erit: For yee know the olde Prouerbe, A gauld horse will soone winch, and a scabbed head is soone broken: Wherefore to passe on to the next wordes.
THE CROVVNE OF CHRISTIANS. 1. PET. 5.4. v. And when the chiefe shepheard shall appeare, yee shall receiue an incorruptible Crowne of glorie. IN these wordes as I haue partly declared before, are contained two things; the first, the person that shall reward them, that shall shew themselues to be examples of the flocke, whom here hee calleth the chiefe shepheard: and the time when they shall obtaine the same; that is, when as he shall appeare: first therefore of the one, and then the other. By chiefe shepheard,Christ a Shephard in three respects. no doubt in this place our Apostle meaneth our Sauiour Christ Iesus, who is our shepheard, and
that in three respects. First generally, in that by his heauenly fathers grace & pro∣uidence, hee prepareth and prouideth, granteth and giueth, feedeth and filleth vs with all temporall benefits and blessings, and all spirituall gifts and graces, needfull and necessarie for vs, and that with a full hand, full horne, and full haruest. And so is he called our shepheard, Psal. 23.1. The Lord is my shepheard, therefore shall I want nothing. He bringeth me into greene pastures, and leadeth me to the waters of comfort, &c. And therefore is called the Shepheard of Israel, that leadeth Ioseph like a sheepe, Psal. 80.1. And in diuers other places of scripture, which I cannot stand to repeate. Secondly, and more particularly, in feeding our soules with the spiritual bread of life, that Angell foode, that heauenly Manna of the word, whereby we are nou∣rished and grow vp to be the liuely mem∣bers of his misticall body, in which re∣gard he calleth himselfe a shepheard, Ioh. 10.11. as Esay also calleth him, 40.11. be∣ing that shepheard of whom Dauid was a type, mentioned before by Ezec. 34.23. who was such a vigilant heauenly shep∣heard,
as Iacob was a worldly; who in keeping and watching his flocke, was in the day consumed with heate, and in the night with frost; so that the sleepe de∣parted from his eies Gen. 31.40. such a carefull spirituall shepheard as Dauid was an earthly, who followed his Ewes great with young, feeding them according to the simplicitie of his heart, and guided them according to the discretion of his hands, Psal. 78.71.72. And finally such a diligent eternall shepheard, as the shep∣heards of Bethlem were temporall shep∣heards, who abode still in the fields, and kept watch by night, because of their flocke, Luk. 2.8. Such a painfull shep∣heard as gathereth the Lambes with his arme, and carrieth them in his bosome, and guideth them that are with young, as Esay, 40.11. saith. Such a tender-hearted shepheard, as whose bowels yearne with∣in him, when he seeth his sheepe scattered or going astray, Mat. 9.36. And such a louing shepheard, as who (if that any of his sheepe bee lost and go astray) neuer ceaseth seeking and following after it, vn∣till he finde it: and when he hath found it, layeth it on his shoulders with ioy and re∣ioicing,
Luk. 15.4.5. But thirdly and principally is he called a shepheard, be∣cause he laid downe his life for his sheepe, preseruing them with his owne pretious bloud, Ioh. 10.11. in which respect he is called the good shepheard in the same place, and the great shepheard of the sheepe, and therefore great, because of the bloud of the euerlasting couenant which he shed for his sheepe, Heb. 13.20. and the Prince that feedeth, or the princely shepheard of his people Israel, Mat. 26. out of Miche. 5.2. as Homer calleth the Princes of Greece . And ther∣fore to conclude, here called  the Archshepheard, as being the head and chiefe of the church, insomuch that all o∣ther ministers, byshops, and archbyshops, of what degree or dignitie soeuer they be, are nothing els but subpastours and vn∣dershepheards vnto him. He being that hundred eied-shepheard Argus signified by the Poets, that was no idoll or idle shepheard, nor once sleepie or slothfull, but alwaies watchfull and vigilant, being all eies and nothing but an eie to looke o∣uer his flocke. That wise Arcadian shep∣heard Apollo Nomius, who for his feeding
of sheepe may well be called Nomius; so also for his excellencie aboue all others, as hauing no compeere or compagnion, may rightly bee tearmed Apollo, finally that great Pan and God of all shepheards, who hath put downe all other Gods and idoll shepheards, and is become himselfe all in all. Exceeding therefore and intolerable is the pride and presumption of the Pope and Bishop of Rome, in taking vpon him, and calling himselfe Vniuersall Bishop, head of the Church, and Lord of all, be∣reauing and robbing Christ of his honor, wherein he sheweth himselfe to be the ve∣rie Antichrist, a woolfe, an Hienna, an Hy∣pocrite and hireling, a theefe and robber. But the vse hereof vnto vs to apply it to our selues is twofold, both which our Sa∣uiour teacheth and telleth vs himselfe; that if he be our Shepheard & our chiefe shep∣heard, that first wee ought to heare his voice, Ioh. 10.3. that is, not to heare it on∣ly with the outward eares of our body, but with the inward eares of our soules; but also to beleeue it faithfully in our harts to keepe it obediently in the actions of our life and conuersation, and to beare
fruit, and to bring foorth with Patience, some thirtie, some sixtie, &c. For, not the hearers of the lawe, but the doers, &c. Iames. And blessed are they that heare the word of God and keepe it, Luk. 11. And finally, who∣soeuer heareth my word and doth the same, &c. Mat. 7. And againe, his voice and not the voice of any stranger nor of any o∣ther, not the voice of any risen againe from the dead, nor of any Angell comming from heauen, that is only the truth of his word and Gospell. Secondly, that we ought to follow him as he is our Shepheard, Ioh. 10.4. and to flie from a stranger or any other whatso∣euer which is not a follower of him, and how to follow him, euen in all his vertues; as first in his humilitie as he commandeth vs himselfe, Learne of me, for I am meeke, &c. Mat. 11. the place mentioned before, and euen so to humble and submit our selues one vnto another, as if occasion re∣quire to doe the most base dueties and seruices that can be each to other, as he himselfe did when he washed his Disciples feete, and enioyned them to doe the like; Saying, Ioh. 13.14.15. If I, then your Lord and Master haue washed your feete, ye ought
also to wash one anothers feete, for I haue gi∣uen you an example that ye should doe euen as I haue done to you. Secondly, in suffering aduersitie, and bearing the crosse as he himselfe likewise warneth vs in the Gospell: Saying, He that will be my disciple, let him take vp his crosse and follow me; To which also Peter exhor∣teth vs, saying: For Christ also suffered for vs, leauing vs an example that we should fol∣low his steps, 1. Pet. 2.21. Thirdly in loue, as he himselfe likewise requireth, Ioh. 15.12. This is my comman∣dement, that ye loue one another as I haue loued you. Finally, least I dwell too long in this point, in all the workes of charitie, in all the deeds of mercie, in all the fruits of the spirit, that we may be holy as he is holy, righteous as he is righteous, and per∣fect as he is perfect, although not aequaliter as , which is altogether vnpossible; yet similiter and , as farre foorth as lieth in vs, that we may grow vp to a perfect man, euen vnto the measure of the age of the fulnesse of Christ; Ephes. 4.13. And thus much of the person of the chiefe Shep∣heard. Now of the time when he will bestow,
and we shall receiue the reward mentio∣ned in the words following; that is, when hee shall appeare. There are two com∣mings or appearings of this chiefe Shep∣heard. The first in humilitie, the second in maiestie: the first in pouertie, the second power: the first grace, the second glorie: first to be iudged, secondly to iudge: the first to die, the second to restore life; the first is gone and past, the second is com∣ming and approacheth, of which our A∣postle in this place and not of the other. Which second comming is called by di∣uers and sundrie names in the Scripture, according to the diuers and sundry effects and fruits, benefits and blessings, which we shall reape and receiue thereby. As sometimes it is called the kingdome of God, as Luke 17.20. because then the spi∣rituall, heauenly, and euerlasting king∣dome shall be restored to Israel, when as our Sauiour shall shew himselfe to be the king of heauen and earth, and shall haue an Archangell sounding a trumpet before him as his herauld, or harbinger: and the rest of the Angels, euen  as the author to the Heb. an whole troupe of heauenly souldiers which shall attend vp∣on
him as his guard, when as he shal make all the elect and faithfull his subiects, and admit them free-denizens and fellowe citizens with the Saints; yea when as they shall as heires and heires annexed with Christ, possesse, inherite and enioy that kingdome which God the Father prepa∣red and gaue vnto them; God the Sonne purchased and appointed vnto them; and into the which, God the holy Ghost re∣corded and enrowled them. which king∣dome hath these foure surpassing priuiled∣ges and prerogatiues, besides many other liberties, immunities and franchises, euen those foure last articles of our creed. First, the communion of Saints: secondly, re∣mission of sinnes: thirdly, resurrection of the body; and fourthly, life euerlasting. Cuius pax charitas, lex veritas, modus aeterni∣tas, as Austin: the peace whereof is nothing but charitie, &c. Secondly, it is called the day of Christs comming, Mat. 24. and Luke 17. because that then our Sauiour shall not only be with vs in spiritual presence & presidence, as hitherto be hath beene since the ascen∣sion of him selfe, and the descension of the holy Ghost, but shall come both in per∣son
and spirit, both in bodie & soule, both in his humanitie and in his diuinitie: of which comming of his, Austin hath these words, Veniet tanquam rex gloriosus è Pa∣latio tanquam sponsus speciosus èthalamo, &c. Thirdly, the great day in many pla∣ces of the Scriptures: great in respect of the greatnesse of our Sauiour that then commeth, the great King of glorie, the great Lord of heauen and earth: againe, great in regarde of the great thinges that shall be done that day; and finally, great of it selfe, greater then any of the feasts of the Iewes, then the feasts of Ta∣bernacles, Penticost or Easter, which were but shadowes and significations of this great day; Yea greater then the great high and solemne holy daies of Christians; greater then the day of the Incarnation, Passion, or Resurrection of our Sauiour. Fourthly, the latter day oftentimes in the Gospel wherein we must take our dernier adewe, after which there shall be no other day, which shall be neither artificiall day, nor naturall day, but an eternal day: a day without night, wherein shall be a light without darknesse, wherein shall neither Sunne shine nor Moone giue light, nor
starre appeare, but only the brightnesse of the glorie of God the last Sabaoth of Sa∣baoths; the day of that euerlasting Iubile wherein all men shall rest from their la∣bours, receaue continuall quiet, and liue in perpetuall peace for euer and euer. Fiftly, the time of cooling or refreshing,  Acts, 3.19. wherein after we haue sweat and swounke in this toile∣some and troublesome world, and beene scorched in the purgatorie of this life in the parching heate of persecution, we shal be cooled and comforted, refreshed and reuiued againe; not only with the fresh & holesome ayrie wind of the holy Ghost, but with the sweete springing water of the mercie of God: with which not only the tips of our tongues shall be cooled, which was all that Hel-burnt Diues did desire, but our whole bodies and soules shall be sprinckled with. Sixtly, , Rom. 3.5. the day of wrath and of the declaration or reuelation of the iust iudgement of God. As first the day of wrath of the effect in respect of the wic∣ked and reprobate, who shall then finde and feele the Lord to poure out the terri∣ble
effects of his furious affection of an∣ger vpon them, when as he shall shewe himselfe to be  harde and austere, as the slothfull seruant said of him, euen a seuere iudge and a consuming fire, as it is Heb. 12.20. out of Deut. 4.24. whose fierie wrath so hoatly inflamed a∣gainst them they shall not be able then to quench, no not with streames of drerie teares and flouds of bitter flittings. And , the day of the Reuelation of the iust iudgement of God, because that then our Sauiour will declare and reueile himselfe to be the Iudge of the world, to giue dome and definitiue sen∣tence both of quicke and dead, and that as it were in open court of generall Sessi∣ons or assises, when as he shall render to euerie man according to his workes; ven∣geance vpon the wicked, and reward vp∣on the righteous, destruction and damna∣tion vnto the vngodly, but soules health and saluation vnto the Godly. Seuenthly, , the day of the Epiphanie, not the first Epiphanie when Christs birth was manifested to the wise men of the East, by the leading of a starre: but when Christs glorie shall be reueiled
by the finall eclipse of the sunne, the dark∣ning of the moone, the falling of the stars, and the shaking of the powers of heauen: when as the sonne of man shall so come as the lightning commeth out of the East, and shineth vnto the West, Mat. 24.27. and 29. when as the hearts of all men shal be made manifest. Eightly, , the day of visitati∣on, when as Christ Iesus the great bishop of our soules shall visit the ample diocesse of his Church, and shall call all the clear∣gie before him and cause them to render account of their cures and charges, and shall make those shine as starres for euer and euer, that shal winne soules vnto God, but will remoue those candles out of their candlestickes, or els the candlestickes out of their places, which either giue no light or bad light, or are either dropping can∣dles by their lewd & lothsome life, or spit∣ting candles by their troublesome and se∣ditious doctrine. Ninthly, the day of appearing as in this place, because that then our Sauiour the sunne of Righteousnesse shall sodenly pearse the cloudes and breake fourth in glorious brightnesse, by the shining
beames of his heauenly grace; fulfilling the heartes of all the faithfull, with the cheerefull light and comfortable heate of his diuine presence, which haue lien long as it were in Iosephs colde yrons of aduer∣sitie and affliction, and languished in Da∣niels darke dungeon of despaire. As the naturall sunne with his gladsome glee af∣ter the dismall darkenesse of the wearie night, dispelleth and dispierceth the thicke clouds being long looked and longed for, at the last appeareth to the chearing and cherishing of all mankind: so called an ap∣pearing to the comfort and consolation of the good & the godly, that when they see the least glimpse and glimmering of him to peepe out or appeare, they should then lift vp their heads and looke vp, be∣cause their redemption is at hand: for then, and neuer till then shall the worke∣man receiue his wages, the labourer in the Lords vineyard his pennie, the faithfull seruant the rule of the Lords house, the thriftie vser of his talents, the gouernment of so many Cities, the constant runner his propounded garland, the spirituall souldi∣er his promised crowne, the little flocke their prepared kingdome, the followers of
Christ in their regeneration, their thrones of iudgement. Which time teacheth vs that we should not so doate as to dreame of any crowne, throne or kingdome in this life, or once to looke for any paradise, hea∣uen, or other blessednesse in this world, nor any time to hope for any happinesse before our chiefe shepheard doe appeare. For as there is no heauenly paradise but in Abrahams bosome, nor any pleasures for euermore but at the right hand of God, nor any true ioies to be found, but in the kingdome of heauen: so are we not to en∣ter into this paradise to enioy these plea∣sures and to be partakers of these ioies, vn∣till the day of his appearing. In the meane time therefore, we must not with the husbandman looke to reape with ioy, before we haue sown with tears; nor to looke to liue with him, before we haue died with him: to raigne with him before we haue suffered with him: to be glorisied with him, before we haue beene crucified with him: to sit with him on his right hand and on his left, before we haue drunck of the cuppe that he hath druncke of, and been baptized with the baptisme that he hath been baptized with: to bee
crowned with this crowne of glorie, be∣fore we haue bin crowned with his crown of thorns: to be found as fine gold for the treasure-house of the Lord, vntill we bee purged and purified in the fire and fornace of affliction: to be good corn in the Lords garner, before we haue been sifted by Sa∣than. Finally, not to sit on his throne, be∣fore we haue continued with him in his temptations. For first must the Church be militant here vpon earth, before it can be triumphant in heauen; first must we suffer affliction, before we can liue Godly in Christ Iesus: and to conclude, first must we be in tribulation, before we can enter into the kingdome of heauen. It follow∣eth in the next words. Yee shall receiue, &c. Now come we to the reward which our Apostle Peter promiseth in the person of our Sauiour Christ, which is no light thing of small valew, or meane account; but the greatest gifte and richest re∣ward that can be giuen and receiued; a bountie beseeming the person of our Sa∣uiour the bestower, and worthy the partie that is partaker. Kings and Princes, when they liberally conferre gifts and rewards,
they giue not toies and trifles, but great and royall guerdons, such as are agreeable to their maicstic and magnificence. Ari∣stotle writes of his Magnanimus, that he bestowes benefits vpon others freely and franckly; and that herecompenceth aboue measure and proportion, and that he will not vouchsafe to giue light & little things, but precious and peerelesse presents. But howsoeuer the Philosopher frame such a man, according to his owne fantasie as a Phaenix, seldome, or no whereto be found: yet such a one the Scripture describeth God the Father, and Christ Iesus his sonne and our Sauiour to be in all respects; as first to be the giuer of all things, and that liberally  and not vpbrai∣dingly, and those that he doth giue to be  good gifts and per∣fect gifts, Iames, 2.17. farre surpassing in worth and worthinesse the gifts of any Pa∣latines or Potentates, Kings and Keysars, Conquerors and Monerches in the world. Pharo King of Egypt gaue noble gifts vn∣to Ioseph, when he gaue him his owne signet to weare on his hand, fine garments of linnen to put on his backe, a chaine of golde to put about his necke, and gaue
him to wife a Princes daughter, and made him Vice-roy of all his land, and gaue him his best coach but one to sit in, Gen. 41. Saul king of Israel honourably rewarded Dauid, when as hee gaue him his royall robe and all his Princely garments, vnto his sword his bow & his girdle, and made him lieutenant generall of all his forces; and smally his owne daughter to wife, 1. Sam. 18. The Queen of Saba gaue prince∣ly presents to Salomon, when shee gaue him sixscore talents of golde, and an ex∣ceeding quantitie of sweete odours, and an infinit number of precious stones, King. 1.10.10. And king Salomon himselfe was most bountiful, when he gaue Hiram king of Tyrus 20. Cities in the land of Galilee, 1. King. 9.11. And when he gaue to the Queene of Saba whatsoeuer she would aske, besides that he gaue of his kingly liberalitie, 1. King. 10.13. And finally, when as hee gaue siluer in Ierusalem as stones, and gaue Caedars as the wilde fig∣trees which grow in great plentie on the plaine, 1. King. 10.27. Mordecay the Iew was highly honoured of Asuerus, when he caused him to weare his owne royall apparell, and to ride on his owne horse
in the streets of the Citie, and made Ham∣mon a great Prince to proclaime before him: Thus shall it be done vnto the man whom the King will honour. Ester, 6.11. Daniell the Prophet was greatly exalted of King Darius, when as he made him chiefe ruler ouer 120. gouerners, Dan. 6.1. The wise men of the East which might seeme to be great states or Potentates by their great giftes, offered vnto our Sauiour precious presents, euen gold, incense and mirrh. Mat. 3.11. Constantine the great, that re∣nowmed Emperour and Monarch of all the world, greatly promoted and enriched the Church, when as he bountifully be∣stowed vpon the same most liberall colla∣tions and donations, large rents and reue∣nues, ample landes and possessions; and with al, princely priuiledges and preroga∣tiues. As also diuers others Godly and christian Kings and Queens in the like roy∣all beneuolence, and benificence haue fol∣lowed his excellent example, in shew∣ing themselues foster fathers, and noble nourcing mothers vnto the Church. Fi∣nally many earthly princes haue notably exalted diuers of their wel-deseruing sub∣iects and seruants, by giuing vnto them
great mannors and honours, high degrees, honourable dignities, euen Lordshippes, Earldomes and Duchies, & to make them the second persons of the Realmes, but yet so, as they alwaies reserued and preserued their owne crownes, thrones, and king∣domes vnto themselues. But our Sauiour Christ Iesus, who is the king of all kings, the most mightie Souc∣raigne Monarch of heauen and earth, who so farre surpasseth all worldly princes as the sunne doth the moone or starres, hea∣uen the earth, and the creator the creature being  as Basil calleth him a gi∣uer of great things, bestoweth nothing vpon those whom hee will prescree and promote, honour and exalt, but a crowne, throne or kingdome, surinounting them in greatnesse of reward, as hee exceedoth and excelleth them in essence and power. And no maruell is it if our Sauiour giue nothing els but a crowne, as thinking all other things to be base for him to bestow vpon those to whom he promiseth any re∣ward, when as all principalities, domini∣ons and kingdomes are at his commaund and appointment, and at whose feete all kings and princes shall lay downe their
crownes, mounds, and scepters, as hauing receiued the same before at his hands, of which he so often ascertaineth & assureth the elect and faithfull in his Gospell, as Iob. 14. Feare not little flocke, for my hea∣uenly Father will giue you a kingdome, Luk. 22. As my Father hath appointed vnto me a kingdome, euen so doe I appoint vnto you, Mat. 19. ye shall sit on twelue thrones, and iudge the twelue tribes of Israel. Fi∣nally neuer doth our Sauiour or his Apo∣stles offer and profer in the name and per∣son of Christ any reward vnto the righte∣ous, but it is either a crowne, a throne or kingdome as it may appeare euerie where in the Gospels of the Euangelists and Epi∣stles of the Apostles. So gracious alwaies is God in his gifts, so rich in his rewards, and so bountifull in all his benefites, and blessings; so that in this, if euer in any thing, that Prouerb of the Poet is found most true, Non libet exiguis rebus adesse Ioui. As likewisein respect of vs that re∣ceiue the same, he giueth this so great a guerdon euen to crowne vs with mercie and louing kindnesse, in bestowing vpon vs of his owne gracious good liking more then we could expectare vel expetere re∣quire
or request, deserue or desire, hope to haue or dare to receiue at his hands, of his fauourable vouchasasing to make that account and regard of vs, as to deeme and esteeme vs woorthy of no meaner a re∣ward, then of a crowne; and that there∣fore, because we haue attained to that dig∣nitie to be called the sonnes of God by the election of the Father, the redemption of the spirit, whereby we euen loath and neglect al worldly things whatsoeuer and account them with Paul  euen as doung be they neuer so godly, and glori∣ous in the sight of flesh and bloud: but onely to aime at the high price of the cal∣ling of God in Christ Iesus. As whose he∣roicall spirits should disdaine al their tem∣poranie and transitorie trash, and trumpe∣rie, toies and trifles, but to crie and say, , As Achilles whē he follow∣ed Hector in Homer, and againe, Neque e∣nim leuia aut ludicra petuntur, with Aene∣as pursuing Turnus in Ʋirgil, for seeing all the faithfull are Eagles (as the Scripture tearmeth them) they must neither creepe on the earth with the Serpent, nor sit on dunghils with the Rauens, but soare aloft for their pray, and where the carkasse is,
thither must they resort, as our Sauiour in the Gospell, euen to aspire and ascend vp where he himselfe is to sit with him in his throne. For as it is in the Prouerb, Aquila non capit muscas: The Eagle will catch no flies, that is, regard little and light things: but as he is the Prince of birds, so will he be crowned as a King and Soueraigne. But if we shall then receiue a crowne, what manner of crowne shall it be?Diuers sorts of crownes. For there is diuers sorts of crownes: there is Ciuica co∣rona a crowne made of Oaken bowes, which was giuen of the Romans to him that saued the life of any citizen in battel against his enemies. Secondly, Obsidiona∣lis which was of grasse giuen vnto him that deliuered a town or citie from sicdge. Thirdly, Muralis which was of gold, gi∣uen vnto him that first scaled the wall of any towne or castle. Fourthly, Castrensis, which was likewise of golde, giuen vnto him that first entred the campe of the ene∣mie. Fiftly, Naualis, and that also of gold, giuen vnto him that first by valour bour∣ded the shippe of the enemy. Sixtly Oua∣lis, which was of Mirtle, which was giuen to those captaines that subdued any towne or Citie, or that woon any fielde casily
without losse or shedding of bloud. Se∣uenthly and lastly Triumphalis, which was of Laurell giuen to that chiefe Generall or Consul, which after some notable victorie and conquest came home triumphing. But all these or the most of them were rather garlands then crownes, yea the verie best of those that were of gold, rather coronets then crowns, and if crowns, rather crowns of honor then of glorie. This crowne therefore, that our chiefe Shepheard shall giue, and the faithfull el∣ders of the Church shall receiue, differeth from all other crownes in two respects, signified by these two adiuncts annexed vnto the same by the Apostles. As first, in that it is a crowne of glorie; and se∣condly, in that it is incorruptible. Aristo∣tle affirmeth in his Ethickes, vertue to bee only bonum landabile, making  to be the adiunct thereof: but his felicitie to be bonum honorabile, making  to be the ad∣iunct of it as farre surpassing vertue, and all other things in the world. But our A∣postle goeth farre beyond the philosopher in promising a blessednesse to the elect and the faithfull, which farre surmounteth this Ethick and Ethnicke happines, not a gift of
honour, but a guerdon of glorie; that as the giuer thereof is called the king of glo∣rie, and the place where this shall be be∣stowed is tearmed the kingdome of glo∣rie, and as his spouse is also glorious with∣in, and as his Angels in heauen sing no∣thing els but glorie to God on high, and and his Saints on earth; but glorie be to the Father and to the Sonne, &c. and as nothing but glorious things are spoken of his Citie, so he giueth nothing els but a a crowne of glorie. We reade of Princely crownes, Royall crownes, Imperiall crownes, and we heare of the Popes Triple crowne, and all these for matter and mettall of fine pure golde, for forme and fashion most curiously wrought, according to the skill and cun∣ning of the Artificer, pollished and garni∣shed with flower-deluces, and pomgra∣nets, with other varieties embelished and enameled with most flourishing and Ori∣ent colours, beautified and beset with pre∣cious stones and pearles of great price. But none of all these is like to this crowne of glorie, which he hath prepared for the elect. For if the streets of the Citie of God be of pure golde and shining christall, and
the walles of the same of precious stones, and the gates thereof of pearles, whatshal the crowne belonging to this kingdome be? who is able to expresse the glorie of it, or to what glorious thing in the world may it be compared? I must needes crie out and say with the Poet putting my selfe to silence, Ingenium fateor transcendit glo∣ria doni, Materia vires exuperante meas. If I had the tongue of men and Angels, I were not able to discipher it asit deserueth, for sooner shall a man measure the heauen with his spanne, hold the winde in his fist, ande containe the maine sea in a vessell, then declare the excellencie of this crown, which is not onely a crowne of glorie, but hath diuers other titles of preheminence giuen vnto it, which all shall be partakers of which are possessours of the same. As 2. Tim. 4.8. It is called a Crowne of righte∣ousnesse, by the imputation and participation of our Sauiours righteousnesse. And Iames, 1.12. the Apostle tearmeth it, as also Iohn Apocal. 2.10. a Crowne of life, because those that haue the same shall be partakers of life eternall; and finally Apocalips. 12.1. a Crowne of starres, because they that shall receiue this crowne, shall shine as the stars
for euer and euer. Not to speake of other crownes not found in the Scriptures, but in the Fathers, as of the crowne of virgins, the crowne of Doctours, the crowne of Martyrs, and the triple crowne which Au∣gustine mentioneth in his 243. Epistle to Cyrill, being tolde thereof by Hierom him∣selfe, whom he there saith he saw and tal∣ked withall in his vision: because I deeme Auguistin not to be the Author of that Epi∣stle, so I doubt of the truth of these things, because we haue no euidence of them in the written word. We leaue therfore this Adiunct and come to the next, which is, that this is not onely a crowne, but also an incorruptible crowne. Our Apostle hauing vsed here in this re∣ward, which he promiseth and propoun∣deth a metaphore or borrowed speech ta∣ken from wrastlers and champions, from their manner of crowning after they haue lawfully striuen, and vanquished; nowe notwithstanding he seemeth to shew a dif∣ference in this word betweene this crowne and their crowne, in that this is incourrup∣tible, but theirs to be subiect to corrupti∣on, notably amplifying the excellencie of the reward. Likewise the Apostle Paul
doth the like, but more fully following this Metaphore, 1. Cor. 9.25. Euerie man that trieth maistries abstaineth from althings and they doe it to obtaine a corruptible crown, but we for an incorruptible crowne. The word which our Apostle vseth in the Ori∣ginall is verie significant ; that is, which cannot perish or vanish, weare or waste away, being a Metaphore taken from flowers, which after they be gathe∣red doe soone and sodainly wither & fade away, or from the bodies of men which by labour are enfeebled, by age decayed, and by sicknesse consume away, and not only  but , signifying hereby that not only all other crownes, but also all other things should be corrupted and come to nothing, and only this to conti∣nue for euer, and therefore farre excelling all other rewards whatsoeuer. For what is there in the world so sound and substan∣tiall that is not transitorie and subiect to corruption? Gold the most solid mettall of all others, yet in time it weareth away. The Adamant though otherwise not to be broken, by Goates bloud mouldreth in pieces. Yea the sunne shall be darkened; the moone shall loose her light; all the
powers of heauen shal be shaken, and the heauens themselues shal wax olde as doth a garment, according to that of the Poet, Tempus edaxrerum, that is, as our Beau∣cleark interpreteth it, Eld eateth al things, onely this thing, this reward, this crowne, remaineth and abideth for euer. All o∣ther things whatsoeuer, whether they be rich araie, siluer, golde iemmowes or iew∣els, either the mothe freateth, or canker corrupteth, or theeues breake through and steale them. Let vs therefore laie vp onely this treasure in heauen, ayme onely at this crowne, seeke onely this glo∣rie, labour onely to reape and receiue this reward: for this treasure is onely sure, this pleasure onely sincere, this reward onely remaining, this crowne onely incorrupti∣ble; finally this glorie onely euerlasting. Tigranes king of Armenia said of his roial golden crowne (considering the heauie burden of his chargeable gouernment) that to weare and beare a crowne, was not so happie as honourable, nay so honoura∣ble as hard; and that therefore if it were to take againe, he would not vouchasafe to stoupe for it, if he found it lying on the ground.
But this Crowne of which our Apostle speaketh, and the chiefe shepheard giueth, cannot be tearmed hard, because our Sa∣uiour often offereth and profereth the same, now doth promise, and hereafter will performe it vnto vs; and yet withall, honourable, for it is a crowne of glorie; yea and happy too, because it maketh vs happy and blessed; yea and euerlasting happy, because it is an incorruptible crowne; and that therefore all men of e∣uerre degree, state, and condition, young and olde, rith and poore, high and lowe, euen Potentates and Princes, Kings and Keysars, Monarchs and conquerors ought not onely to stoupe for it, but to bestirre themselues and endeuour with all might and maine, and all meanes possible, yea with all the outward parts of their bodies, and inward powers of their minde to at∣taine vnto it. And here to conclude, let vs marke what Peter saith, Ye shalreceeive this crown, and this crowne of glorie, yea and this in∣corruptible crowne of glorie: but how? not in way of merite and desart, but as a grant and grace, gift and guerdon, which our Sauiour vouchsafeth to bestow vpon vs,
for so we reade in the conclusion of eue∣rie Epistle belonging to the seuen Chur∣ches, in promising vnto them crownes, thrones and kingdomes, he telleth them that he will giue and grant them; and yet in a manner of reward, when as Austin saith, Coronat in nobis dona sua, non bona no∣stra, munera sua, non merita nostra. And thus much of these words, and of this whole text, &c, The Lord, &c. FINIS.
THE ANNOIN∣TING OF CHRIST, OR Christian ointment. IOHN. 2.20. But ye haue an ointment from him that is ho∣ly, and ye know all things. THis Text (as it may ap∣peare by the first words hereof) is nothing else but an exceptiō or cor∣rection,An excep∣tion or cor rection. whereby our Apostle in this his Ca∣tholike Epistle seemeth to except and exempt those elect & faith∣full Christians, vnto whom hee writeth from those of whom he speaketh in the two verses going before. As if he had said: They were Scismatickes which cut them∣selues off from the body of the Church, for they went out from vs, but they were not of vs, but you haue fellowship with
vs, as in the 1. chap. 3. They reiected cast∣awaies, but you erected children; and ther∣fore tearmeth them not once, but often by the tender name of babes. Againe, they Antichrists or Antichristians, but you Christians; and thereupon telleth them that they haue an ointment from him that is Holy: finally, that they seeme to know much, and indeed know nothing; but ye haue knowne all things. The words thē∣selues being but one verse,Diuision. deuide them∣selues verie plainly (as it is euident) into two principall parts. The first a cause in the former words, But ye haue an ointment from him that is holy. The second, an effect of the same cause in the words following: And, or rather; for, ye haue known all things. In the first part the cause, are these foure things to be considered: First, an hauing; But ye haue, that is, a benefit receiued, and blessing bestowed. Secondly, who are they that haue the same (ye) those elect and faithful to whom Iohn writeth. Third∣ly, what they haue (an ointment.) Fourth∣ly, from whom, euen from him that is holy. In the secōd part, the effect, are to be noted two things: first knowledge in generall: secondly, what kinde of knowledge, a ful,
perfect and absolute knowledge of all things, of all which in their due order as they lie in the text. But ye haue, Before I begin to entreat of the matter or materiall points belonging to my text, mentioned before in my Diuision; I think it requisite first to speake of the manner of this speech, and of the exception and sig∣nification of the first word in the entrance of my text, which giueth a light and vn∣derstanding to the whole verse following. The word in the originall is , which the Apostle here vseth, which commonly is taken for a coniunction copulatiue and signifieth, And; but in this place it is o∣therwise to be accepted for an exceptiue particle, and therefore verie well transla∣ted, not et, but ac, by the Latin interpre∣tors and faithfully Englished, But, making this whole sentence to be nothing els but an exception or exemption as is before declared. And that this word is so vsually taken in the Scripture, it is euident by ma∣ny and manifest places; as Mat. 11.19. . But wise∣dome is iustified of her children, whereas our Sauiour maketh an exception against
the blasphemous Iewes which ceased not to raile & reuile him by the name of glut∣ton, wine-bibber, Samaritane, friend of Publicans and sinners; as if our Sauiour had said, exemptinhg others from them, that although they condemned and contem∣ned him so, yet there were others euen his owne children that did iustifie and glori∣fie him likewise, Mat. 12.39. An euill and adulterous generation seeke a signe in the Greeke , but no other signe shall be giuen them, but the signe of the Prophet Ionas. Againe, Act. 20.28. in those words of Peter vnto Cornelius and his companie: Ye know that it is an vnlaw∣full thing for a man that is a Iewe to accōpany or come to one of another nation , howsoeuer in the originall to be En∣glished; but God hath shewed me that I should not call any man common or vn∣cleane. The like in many other places of the Scripture, which I cannot stand to re∣hearse that I may proceede from the man∣ner of this speech to the matter of my text. The first of the foure things to be con∣sidered in the former principal part of this verse, is an hauing, where first we are to
note that the Apostle here vseth not either the preterperfect or the future tence, but onely the present, saying not, either you haue had or you shall haue, but  Habe∣tis, you haue: wherein hee signifieth the happy state of those to whom he writeth, in now possessing and presently enioying the heauenly blessing, of the which hee here speaketh: for had he said either you haue heretofore, insinuating that their be∣nefit past, he had seemed to haue accused them of vnthankefulnesse, and argued them of miserie: Miserum enim est fuissE & miserum habuisse, for this were an vn∣happy state for a man to haue had wealth, but now to be disabled by pouertie; or to haue had health, but now to be diseased by sicknesse; or finally to haue been endu∣ed with manie temporall gifts or spirituall graces, and afterwards to be dispoiled and dispossessed of the same: as the Troians once of themselues Fuimus Troes, that sometimes they gloriously flourished, al∣though afterwards they were victoriously vanquished by the Grecians; whereupon Virgil, Nunc seges est vbi Troia fuit, the soile where Troy diastand, is now become corne∣land; and where of that olde Prouerb, sere
sapiunt Phryges, that the Troians are wise afterwards. So the Iewes at the first as Peter tearmeth them 1.2.9. out of Moises. Exod. 19.6. were a chosen generation, a royall priesthood, an holy nation, and the peculiar people of God; but now by rea∣son of their rebellion against God, the re∣iecting of his Gospell, the killing of his Prophets, the crucifying of Christ, and the persecuting of the Apostles,The Iewes. are be∣come of children of the couenant, heires of promise, and seruants of Gods house, as banished rebels exiled out of his king∣dome, vngratefull tenants thrust out of the Lords vineyard, and as enuious dogs shut out of the doores, euen as reiected reprobates, and runnagate castawaies scat∣tered ouer the face of the whole earth, without land, without Lord, without a Church, without common wealth, with∣out gouernment, without grace, or with∣out any good thing at all.The abo∣mination of desola∣tion. Their diuine law changed into a corrupt Cabala, their heauenly Temple turned into a denne of Idolatrie, their mount Syon the hill of ex∣altation, and holy Ierusalem the Citie of Sanctification, the one the seate, the other the sanctuarie of God, become according
to the prophesie of our Sauiour in the gos∣pell; not onely a desolate habitation Mat. 23.38. but also the abomination of deso∣lation Mat. 24.15. as it was also foretold by Daniell, 9.29. The like of the seuen (sometimes excellent Churches of Asia) mentioned in the first of the Reuelation, of golden candlesticks then, now, made lea∣den shrines, Synagogues of Satan, sinkes of sinne, and puddles of perdition. First planted by Paul, as it appeareth in the Acts: and watred by Iohn, as it is manifest in the Apocal: and flourishing in Christ, but afterwards supplanted by the false A∣postles, choaked with Mahometisme; and finally fallen away by Apostasie. As also may be said of the church of Rome which was sometimes a congregation of Saints, Rom.The church of Rome. 1.7.8. but now a confusion of sinne and sinners, in Pauls time famous for faith, and obedience throughout the whole world 8. and 16. chap. 19. but in our daies infamous for Infidelitie and Apostasie throughout all christendome. Then trea∣ding downe Satan vnder their feet 16.20. but now trampling the Saints of God vn∣der their feete, then the seate of Christ, now the chaire of Antichrist; and there∣fore
now not olde Rome, but new Baby∣lon, as Peter tearmeth it by the confession of the Catholikes themselues. The vse of all which vnto vs is this: That hauing the good benefits and blessings of God, espe∣cially the gifts and graces of the spirit, we keepe sure and holde fast the same with might and maine, with tooth and naile, with hand and foote, especially the inesti∣mable iewell and invaluable margarite of the word of God and Gospell of Christ, whereof Mat. 13.46. least by vnthank∣full neglecting and lothing it, we finally leaue and leese the same: for as the Poet, Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri, It is no lesse masterie to keepe and saue that which a man hath gotten, then to haue and get at the first. Hauing therefore present possession and full fruition of this so great a treasure; let vs take heede be∣times, least by vnthankfully abusing the same, we afterwardes lament the lacke thereof, Carendo enim magis quam fruendo, when as rather by wanting then by enioy∣ing, we shal perceiue how gracious a bles∣sing this is. Nor doth our Apostle here say to the elect and faithfull Christians to whom he writeth; Ye shall haue, as that
they should haue hereafter, but had not yet, which although it might seeme to car∣rie some shew of an houering hope of fu∣ture consolation, yet had it not been halfe so comfortable; for many things may hap∣pen betweene hope and hauing. Accor∣ding to the Prouerb, , Multa cadunt inter calicem suprema{que} labra, many things may happen betweene the cuppe and the lippe. And while the grasse groweth the steede may starue, and it is ill hoping for dead mens shooes, as we say: and one birde in the hand is worth two in the wood; a little in re & esse is better, then much in spe & posse: and a small thing in present possession is more, then a great deale in reuersion and remainder. If hee had allured them by promise it had been verie forcible and effe∣ctuall, because God is faithfull in all his promises: nor is not as man that he should lie, nor as the sonne of man that he should repent, and when as all the promises of God are yea and amen in Christ Iesus, but he confirmeth them in putting them in remembrance of a diuine benefite already performed and bestowed vpon them, which at that instant they enioyed, which
must needs be more auailable and aduan∣tageable: they then feeling and finding in themselues the fruit and effect therof; and the rather, because the promises of God are but conditionall, that if we accomplish what he doth require, then shall we bee sure that he will performe what we do de∣sire, otherwise he may seeme to be chan∣ged in his word,Non Deus mutatur, sed nos ipsi mutamur Aug. by not obseruing coue∣nants with vs, when as indeed we are chan∣ged in our works by not keeping his com∣mandements. So that our Apostle could not haue spoken more fully and Emphati∣cally to shew foorth their perfect & happy state wherein they now stand, wherein al∣so note the great bountie and beneficence of the Lord God towards these his faith∣full, as being a Lord of great largenesse and liberalitie, as Iames describeth him 1.5. and that of his best gifts. If any of you want wisedome let him aske it of God, who giueth to alimen liberally and reprocheth no man, and it shall be giuen him. Not giuen sparingly as man doth by pence, farthings, & mites; but plentifully by talents, by pressed down measure, and running ouer; and not with one hand, but with both hands, yea with a full hand, full horne, and full haruest.
Nor obraidingly as we vsually doe by hit∣ting men in the teeth with that we haue bestowed vpon them; As the Comicall Poet Haec commemoratio est quasi exprobra∣tio, but gratiously and cheerefully aboue our desert or desire, and still multiplying his gifts and graces vpon vs more & more beyond our hope and expectation; and not content once but often to preuent and present vs with the blessings of his good∣nesse, but alwaies to crowne vs with mer∣cie and louing kindnesse, as it may appeare more in particular. As our Apostle putteth them in minde, that first they haue fellowship with the Fa∣ther, and with his sonne Iesus Christ. 1. ch. 5. v. Secondly, that they haue an aduocate with the father, euen Iesus Christ the righ∣teous 1. Ioh. 2.1. And that now thirdly, they haue an ointment from him that is holy: therefore insinuating that God hath so aboundantly blessed them, that they haue no want of any heauenly gifts or gra∣ces, yea so bountifull and beneficiall is the Lord God towards all in generall,Simile. that e∣uen as Kings and Emperours at their coro∣nation vse to cast out among the people handfuls of money, and to cause the com∣mon
conduits to runne with wine for all commers to drinke thereof, and to feast al whosoeuer will taste of their princely libe∣ralitie and royall munificence. And as Aristotle describeth his Magnificus in his Ethicks lib. 4. cap. 2. not onely to be sump∣tuous and surpassing bountiful in his gifts, according to the name and nature of the vertue which he vseth, but also to be large in his expences, as that he will not vouch∣safe exactly to take reckening and account of that which he laieth out: of the which the Philosopher giueth this reason, , that to require a straite and exact account of things, is a signe of a base and miserable nature; and the benefits that he bestoweth, to be both priuate and pub∣like both to profane vses and holy seruices not onely bestowing priuate profits vpon particular persons, but also conferring common commodities to whole cities and societies and all these  for honesty and honour sake; euen so dealeth the Lord God with all his creatures, by opening his hand and filling all things liuing with plentiful∣nesse, yea hand ouer head by scattering and squandring his gifts, not caring nor spa∣ring to whom, when or where, by conser∣uing
and preseruing, guiding and gouer∣ning, ordring and administring all things in the world for their good and his owne glorie: bestowing his ordinarie benefits & blessings generally vpon al alike, as whē he giueth the ayre to all that breathe, with the fire, water, and earth for the common vse and necessitie of man, and maketh the sunne to shine on the euill and the good, and sending raine on the iust and vniust, as our Sauiour in the Gospell Mat. 5.45. And in bestowing his choicest and chie∣fest gifts and graces vpon his chosen chil∣dren, which are most deare and neere vn∣to him. Euen as the mightie Kings and Keysers, the greatest states and potentates of the world do vsually giue to their coun∣sellers and courtiers, to their seruants and subiects, golde and siluer,Simile. chaines and bracelets, lands and liuings, offices and ho∣nours, and other princely preferments ac∣cording to their desire and desert, and vp∣on their suite and seruice; but yet reser∣uing his casket of precious pearles and peerelesse iewels, his rich treasurie and ex∣chequer, his royall crowne and dignitie, his Princely throne and chaire of estate, and all his glorious kingdomes and domi∣nions
vnto his owne sonne the Prince and Heire apparant, which is to succede him in his Soueraigne rule and gouernment. Semblably dealeth the Lord God with those that are Dilecti & electi Dei his cho∣sen children, his darlings and delight, for whom onely although he bestow vpon all others both good and bad, his temporall benefits and blessings; euen as Aug: saith of riches, so of all other externall things of this life, Dantur bonis ne videantur esse ma∣lae, & dantur malis ne videantur esse bonae, making them common as it were to all mankinde. He prouideth and prepareth, to whom alone he promiseth and perfor∣meth his spirituall gifts and graces, as pe∣cullars properly appertaining vnto them. So the prophet Dauid, He shewed his word vnto Iacob, his statutes and ordinances vnto Israel; He hath not dealt so with any nation, neither hath the Heathen knowledge of his lawes, Psal. 146.19.20. So vpon the faith∣ful which are the true members of the ho∣ly catholike church,Foure pri∣uiledges of the faithful God bestoweth foure especiall priuiledges and prerogatiues, 1. to be a communion of Saints, 2. remissi∣on of sinnes, 3. resurrection of the body, and 4. life euerlasting. So vnto the Disci∣ples
and Apostles of our Sauiour telleth them in the Gospell. It is giuen to you to know the mysteries of the kingdome of hea∣uen, but vnto others it was not giuen, Mat. 13.11. So vnto the little flocke saith Christ, the heauenly Father will giue a kingdome. So, vnto all those that loue Christs appea∣ring, Paul affirmeth that there is laid vp a crowne of righteousnesse, 2. Tim. 4.8. And to him that endureth temptation and loueth the Lord, shall be giuen a crowne of life, as Iames, 1.12. And to the Elders that feede the flocke of Christ committed to their charge, an incorruptible crowne of glorie, as Pet. 1.5.4. As finally Iohn in this place testifieth, that vppon these babes and beloued of God, is bestowed an ointment from him that is holy, which others had not obtai∣ned nor could attaine vnto, as those Anti∣christs mentioned in the last verse going before; who also are said in the next and former verse by our Apostle, to go out from vs because they were not of vs; not partakers of this ointment, because they were enemies of the grace of God, and such as denied Iesus to be Christ, as it is in the verse next following, but on the 22. whereby it cuidently appeareth what dif∣ference
the Lord maketh of his gifts, and what choise of his elect in singling them out from the rest, in reseruing his especiall and singular blessings for them alone, that they might be annointed with the oyle of grace and ointment of gladnesse aboue their fellowes, as it is said of Dauid and of Christ, Psal. 45. And such were these vnto whom Iohn. writeth in this place, and of whom may it be said as the Prophet, Psal. 144. Happy are the people that be in such a case, yea blessed are the people which haue the Lord for their God, and Christ for their Sauiour. And here likewise consider how the Lord God rewardeth the gratious and gratefull receiuing, and carefull and circumspect employing of such gifts and graces as he bestoweth vpon vs, euen by giuing vs a greater growth and encrease thereof, and by amplifying and multiplying the same vpon vs in more full measure and plentiful manner, whereas contrariwise they which either disdainfully contemne, or dissolute∣ly neglect, or slothfully let slippe or sleepe the good gifts of God in them, thereby suffering them to decay & die by not put∣ting them in vre and vse, shall be vtterly depriued of Gods heauenly grace, and fi∣nally
bereaued of all his diuine blessings: for the one, first as the Preacher, of Almes of deuotion, of charitie, workes and deeds of mercie, Cast thy bread vpon the waters, and after many daies thou shalt be sure to find it, Eccl. 11.1. As it is manifest by the wi∣dowe of Zereptha: The meale of whose barrell wasted not, nor the oyle of whose cruse diminished not, although shee did make and bake cakes thereof, for Elias, her selfe and her sonne, 1. King. 17.16. And as our Sauiour in the Gospell; of constan∣cie and continuance in the time of tribula∣tion and persecution, euen to the losse of life, friends, lands and goods: Ʋerily I say vnto you, There is no man that hath for saken house, or brethren or sisters, or father, or mo∣ther, or wife, or children, or land for my sake and the Gospels; but he shall receiue an hun∣dred folde more at this present; houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and chil∣dren, and lands with persecutions, and in the world to come eternall life, Mar. 10.29.30. As it is euident in Iob: that president of pa∣tience, whose captiuitie for his perseue∣rance in his temptations the Lord turned into libertie, his miserie into felicitie, his pouertie into wealth, and his sicknesse into
health, blessing his last daies more then his first, causing all his neighbours, friends, and kindred and acquaintance to flocke and flow vnto him, to accompanie and and comfort him, and to conferre and con∣tribute vnto him of their money, goods, and Iewels; multiplying his cattel in ex∣ceeding number, encreasing his offpring with a faire issue, beholding his posteritie vnto the fourth generation; and finally in crowning him with honourable olde age and fulnesse of daies, Iohn the last Chap∣ter. So our Sauiour, Mat. 13.12. Whosoe∣uer hath, to him shall be giuen, and he shall haue aboundance; but whosoeuer hath not, shall be taken away euen that which he hath. As we may see in Elizeus the Prophet, vp∣on whom for his willingnes and forward∣nesse in accepting that holy function, and for his faithfulnesse and zeale in following the same, and for his earnest and feruent praier, was doubled vpon him the spirit of Elias, 2. Kings, 2.9. but otherwise in Saul, from whom the good spirit of the Lorde was taken away, and an euil spirit of God was sent to vex him, 1. Sam. 16.14. Of both which, we haue a double euident de∣monstration.
First in the parable of the Virgins, of the which the first fiue being wise, vsed well their lampes, by trimming preparing and filling them with oyle a∣gainst the comming of the bridegroome, and therefore were receiued into the wed∣ding: but the other fiue foolish, abused their lampes, in suffering them to go out for want of oyle, and for not watching the time and season of the bridegroomes comming, and therefore were worthely thrust out of doores. Secondly in the si∣militude of the talents, wherein is decla∣red; that first he that had fiue talents oc∣cupying with them and gaining other fiue to his masters profit; and againe, he that receiued two to get other two to his ma∣sters vse, and that therefore they had not onely the praise of good and faithfull ser∣uants, but also the reward of their weldo∣ing, in being made rulers ouer much, be∣cause they were found faithfull in little; and were bidden to enter into their ma∣sters ioye. But as for that other euill and slothfull seruant, which had but one talent, who wrapt it vp in a napkin, & went and hid it in the earth, accusing his masters hardnes:
His Lord did not onely reprooue him of idlenesse, and bereft him of his talent, be∣stowing it on him that had tenne talents; yeelding that for a reason before remem∣bred, mentioned of our Sauiour, Mat. 13. but did also cast him as an vnprofitable seruaunt into vtter darkenesse, where is weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 25. The vse hereof in a word, is thus much vnto vs all, vpon whom God in any manner or measure hath bestowed any temporall benefits and blessings, or spiri∣tuall gifts and graces, that we take heede that we neither disuse them idly, nor abuse them vainely, nor misuse them vnlawfully, but wisely and warily, carefully and cir∣cumspectly, to vse them to the honor and glorie of God, to the good of our neigh∣bour and brother, and to our owne soules health and saluation. As for those in generall that haue the world at will, that they follow the precept of the Apostle in vsing the world as thogh they vsed it not, and particularly for those that haue riches, that they make them∣selues friends of the vnrighteous Māmon, for those that haue wit and wisedome, that they be wise, not in their generation, but
vnto regeneration for those that are indu∣ed with knowledge, that they be not ther∣by puffed vp, but that they vse it vnto edi∣fication and so foorth of the rest. For we are all of vs from the highest to the lowest, but Gods stewards of such gifts; graces, and other good things which he lendeth vs, and letteth vs haue for the tearme and time of our life, to be disposed, not accor∣ding to our will and wish, but for his ad∣uantage and aduancement; of the which we shall all at the last day of iudgement be called to a reckening, when as our Sa∣uiour shall say vnto euerie one of vs, as the Lord vnto the vnrighteous steward in the Gospell, Redde rationem villicationis tuae, Render an account of thy Baylieweeke, when as Iustice with equitie, and iudgment with seueritie shall be ministred vnto vs. And thus much of the two former points of this first principall part of my text. Of this hauing and of the persons that are heere said to haue. Now therefore let vs go for∣ward to the next; that is, to the thing that they are here said to haue: which is said to be an ointment. But ye haue an ointment. Of many kindes of ointments read we
in the Scriptures.Manie kindes of ointments. The first whereof as far as I can remember is that of Iacobs, with which he annointed the Pillar which hoe∣rected at Zuz: when he consecrated and named it Bethel the house of God. The second,Bethel. Gen. 6.28.18.31.13. that of Moises, the oyle of holy ointment which God commanded him to make for matter of the principall spices, namely of pure mirrh, sweete Cynamon, sweet Calamus, Cassia, and oyle oliue for forme after the art of the Apothecarie, for vse to annoint the Tabernacle therewith,The holy ointment. the Arke of the testimonie, the table, the candlesticks, the Altar of incense, with all their implements, yea and Aaron himselfe, with his sonnes, with an inhibition of not annointing any mans flesh therewith, nor to make any composition like vnto, it, Ex. 30. Of the which ointment Dauid, Psal. 133. to the which brotherly loue is by him resembled, where he calleth it the preci∣ous ointment, which was powred on Aa∣rons head,The priests ointment. and ranne downe on his beard, and so to the skirts of his cloathing. The semblable or the selfesame was that oyle or ointment, with which the Kings and Priests of Israel were wont ro be annoin∣ted. As that viole of oyle, with which Sa∣muel
annointed Saul, 1. Sam. 20.1.The Kings ointment. And that horne of oyle, with which the same Prophet annointed Dauid, 1. Sam. 16.13. And that box of oyle, with which one of the children of the Prophets annointed Iehu, 2. Kin. 9.1. And finally as that oint∣ment, with which Elias annointed Elize∣us, 1. Kin. 19.16. Other ointments like∣wise we reade of, as of a feasting ointment of which Dauid, Thou shalt prepare a ta∣ble before me against them that trouble me, thou hast annointed my head with oile and my cuppe runneth ouer, Psal. 23.5. Where the Propheticall king or kingly prophet reckening vp his outward bles∣sings & princely pleasurs, with which God had enriched him at his royall banquets, among his ful dishes of delicates and plen∣tifull bowles of wine, for which he gaue the Lord thanks, he had likewise no want of euerie precious ointment, both for the refection of his body, and the refreshing of his spirits; all which, he acknowled∣geth to proceede from the diuine proui∣dence of God. After the manner of the great Kings and Keysars of the world, who for their more magnificēce at their pompous feasts
wherein is all excesse, are woont to haue three sorts of costly ointments, as sumptu∣ous as may be.. The first , which be∣ing liquid, they vsed to drinke. The se∣cond ,. which being thicke, they were accustomed to eate. The third, the meane betweene both, , which being neither so thicke as the one, nor so thinne as the other, they did annoint themselues with all these, that deepe delight did in∣uent, and lasciuious luxurie did practise in their times: as doth the Romaine writers, Plutarch and Plinie; and the ancient greek Authors Atheneus and Aeschylus testifie. Againe, of a fastiing ointment of which our Sauiour in the Gospell: When thou fastest, annoint thy head with oyle, and wash thy face, Mat. 6.17. where he char∣geth his Disciples and the common peo∣ple, that they would not follow the hypo∣criticall guise of the dissembling Pharises in looking sowerly, & in disfiguring thei countenances; but to vse means of cheer¦fuluesse and comfort, that they seeme no outwardly to men to fast, but inwardl vnto God.An oint∣ment of Lust. There were also other ointments bot of Lust and of Loue; of the one the Pro∣phet
Amos, who among other lustfull de∣lights, which the prodigall Princes of Is∣rael, the Epicures and Libertines of his time, who put farre from them the euill day, and approching vnto the seate of ini∣quitie, togither with their stretching them vpon their Iuorie beddes, eating the fatte lambes out of the fould, and the calues out of the stall, singing to the sound of the viole, in∣uenting to themselues instruments of musicke, and drinking wine in bowles, did also annoint themselues with the chiefe ointments, Amos, 6.5.6. Of the other Euangelist Luke, be∣ing the ointment of that woman that was a sinner, with which she annointed our Sa∣uiour Christs feete, the cause whereof ac∣cording to the verdit of our Sauiour was the loue of the woman, whether she were Marie Magdalen as some thinke, or a∣ny other; and therefore may worthely bee called an ointment of Loue:An oint∣ment of Loue. and hereupon had for her reward, remission of all her sinnes, were they neuer so many in number, so hainous in qualitie, so grie∣uous in circumstance; for the which shee was more notoriously called a sinner, Luk. 7. We reade likewise in the Gospel of bu∣rying ointments, and those of two sorts.A burying ointment.
The first Generall,Generall. euen those sweet oint∣ments with which the Iewes by common custome were woont to embalme their dead; whereof Mark. 16.1. As Marie Magdalen, Marie the mother of Iames, and Salome would haue annointed our Sa∣uiours body.Speciall. The second Speciall, as that of Marie the sister of Martha, an ointment for matter, of Spicnard, for quan∣titie a pound waight, for qualitie verie costly, for valewe worth 300. pence, for sente so sweet, fragrant, and odoriferous, that the sauour thereof filled the whole house: the end hereof, against the day of the burying of our Sauiour by his owne confession,An healing ointment of 2. kinds. Ioh. 12.3.4.5. There are also healing ointmēts of 2. kinds in the gospel, both extraordinarie; the one materiall and meruailous, the other spiritual and diuine, both spirituall, and both eye-salues. Of the first, Ioh. 9.6. which our Sauiour like a most skilfull Apothecarie vouchsafed to make himselfe, by spitting on the ground, and making claie of the spittle; but home∣ly in forme, yet heauenly in force: with which he annointed the eies of him that was borne blind, and healed them, contra∣rie to the common course of nature. For
this medicine might seeme rather to hurt, then to heale, and to extinguish the eye-sight, then to cure and recouer the same. But this did our Sauiour of set purpose, to shew forth his Almightie power, in wor∣king sometimes extraordinarily without meanes, and sometimes wonderfully a∣gainst meanes, and sometimes ordinarily by meanes, thereby declaring his good∣nesse, and to teach vs not to tempt God, but to vse those secondarie causes as law∣full meanes which God hath appointed vs by his blessings, to our benefit. Of the se∣cond, Apocal. 3.18.. euen that heauenly medicinall Collyrium (as it is tearmed in the Greeke) or holesome spirituall eie∣salue; which the holy Ghost like a good Phisitian of the soule, prescribeth to the Angell of the Church of Laodicia, blind∣nesse, not outward but inward, the darke∣nesse of his minde, and the ignorance of his hart, by which is meant the verie word of God it selfe; which so openeth the eies of our vnderstanding, that it is the onely light vnto our feete, and lanterne vnto our pathes, as that without the which wee should dwell in darknes, blunder in blind∣nesse, and grope as it were at noone day.
None of all which ointments is this which our Apostle speaketh of in this place, which is indeed such an ointment, so so∣ueraigne, that for sente and sauour, for pu∣ritie and perfection, for grace and good∣nesse, and many other notable and surpas∣sing qualities and properties, it doth farre exceede and excell all other sweete odors, oiles and ointments in the world whatso∣euer, being the holy Ghost and the spirit of God it selfe, which although it be re∣sembled and that verie fitly to many other things in the word, as expressing in many respects the effects thereof;Spirit. As when it is tearmed the Spirit and likned to the wind, and therefore called , as being the Spirit of all spirits, as Gen. 1.3. The spirit mooued vpon the waters, because it is as it were the ayre of God that filleth all pla∣ces, Iouis omnia plena, and for that like vn∣to the Winde,Winde. it is swift and nimble, pas∣sing and piercing through, euen to make a priuie search into the inward secrets of the soule of man. And againe, for that our Sauiour, Ioh. 3.8. As the winde bloweth when it listeth, and we heare the sound thereof, but cannot tell when it commeth nor whither it goeth; so
is the heauenly course of the spirit to in∣spire whom, when, and as it listeth; and no man knowing the manner how. Some∣times to Fire, as in those words of the Bap∣tist,Fire, He will baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire, Mat. 3.11. And therefore it pleaseth the Spirit of God oftentimes in the gospell, when it speaketh of it selfe, to vse Metaphoricall phrases, and borrowed speeches taken from the fire, as 1. Thess. 5.19. , Spiritum ne extingui∣te, Quench not the spirit: and 2. Tim. 1.6. I put thee in remembrance that thou stirre vp the gift of God which is in thee. The word which, there the Apostle Paul vseth, being , which signifieth a kindling a∣gaine of a fire, which is raked vp in the embers or couered in the ashes, thereby exhorting Timothie to reuiue againe the spirit of God, which was in a manner de∣caied and dead in him. The holy ghost be∣ing semblable to fire in refining our can∣kred consciences from the drosse and cor∣ruption of sinne, and inflaming our colde benummed hearts in such a floud of ini∣quitie, and in such a frost of charitie, with a feruent zeale to Godward. And some∣times to water,Water. as Ioh. 3.5. Except a man
be borne of water and the spirit, he can∣not enter into the kingdome of heauen. Where the latter word spirit is put  and expoundeth, what should be meant by water going before: The spirit being like vnto water, not onely in mollifying and resoluing our obstinate hearts, and making them of hard, soft, and of stone, fleshie; but also in purging and purifying both our bodies and our soules, from the contagion & contamination of all world∣ly wickednesse. As it is likewise represen∣ted by diuers other things in sundrie other places of the Scriptures, but to nothing more commonly and fitly then to an oint∣ment. As Psal. 45.7. God, euen thy God hath annointed thee with the oyle of gladnesse aboue thy fellowes. First in type of Salomon: Secondly in truth of our Sauiour, Psal. 92.9. I am annointed with fresh oyle. Dauid of himselfe, Esay, 61.1. The spirit of the Lord is vpon me, because he hath annointed me, repeated of Christ, and applied to himselfe, Luk. 4.18. Dan. 9.24. The annointing of the most holy, or holy annointing, mea∣ning our Sauiour,Messias, or Christ an∣nointed. who therefore is called Messias in the Hebrew, and Christ in the Greeke, which signifieth nothing els but
annointed. Likewise Acts, 10.38. where Peter saith, That God annointed Iesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost: and 2. Cor. 1.21. where Paul certifieth the Corinthi∣ans, that God had established them togi∣ther with him in Christ, and had annoin∣ted them; and least they should doubt with what, he afterwards declareth in the verse following 22. euen the spirit with which they were sealed, and whose earnest they had receiued in their hearts. And so final∣ly in this place, and in the 27. verse of this Chapter, where the holy Ghost is twise tearmed togither the Annointing by our Apostle; when he saith, But the annointing which ye receiued of him dwelleth in you, and ye neede not that any man teach you, but as the same annointing teacheth you of all things, which as it is most commonly cō∣pared vnto, and called by the name of an ointment; so hath it the nature of an oint∣ment, and expresseth all the qualities, pro∣perties and effects of an ointment. That as materiall annointing hath these six vses:Six vses of ointment. 1, to prepare the body to fight: 2, to re∣fresh: 3, to heale: 4, to cause a cheerefull countenance: 5, to make vs sweete smel∣ling: 6, to consecrate Kings, Priests, and
Prophets. So this our spirituall ointment to be as profitable to so manie ends and purposes:Simile. as first, euen as wrastlers, cham∣pions and martialists, that giue themselues to valerous and venturous exercises of the body before they come into the Lists, to trie the maisterie or to performe the com∣bate or fight, are woont before to annoint their bodies all ouer to supple their ioints, and to soften their sinewes to make them apte and able to shew forth such feates of armes and actiuitie as are expected at their hands, as was the custome in the olde grecian Olympian games, and the late Romaine Circenses ludi: and therefore as they were tearmed Athletae of their stri∣uing, so were they called Alyptae of their annointing: So the souldiers of Christs campe, his Church, that weare and beare his badge, his crosse, and fight vnder his banner, his gospell, that are daily to wra∣stle by temptations with the common e∣nemies of the elect and faithfull, not flesh and bloud, but powers, principalities, and worldly gouernours in heauenly places, Sinne, death, hell, Satan, with all their complices and adherents in the field of this world, being annointed with this oint∣ment,
neede no other coate-armour, nor compleate harnesse to defend themselues with: for hauing this, they are rightly gar∣nished with all the gifts and graces of the holy ghost, and are fully furnished with that perfect Panoply of proofe which Paul commendeth to all Christians, Eph. 6.12. &c. Euen the helmet of saluation, the breast∣plate of righteousnesse, the girdle of veritie, the showes of the preparation of the Gospell, the shield of faith, and the sword of the spi∣rit. The prophane Poets prate much of their hellish riuer Stix, that whosoeuer is drēcht or dipt in the same, his body as plated with steele, is so surely fenced, that neither the force of fire, nor sword could any wise hurt or harme it. As they report of their Achilles, whom they affirme thereby to be made impregnable and inuincible, which is indeed but a fabulous fiction, and a sha∣dowe of this vndoubted, true, and cer∣taine effect of this diuine ointment; that whose soule soeuer shalbe annointed here∣with, shall be so safe and sure from all di∣uelish temptations, suggestions and pro∣uocations, that Satan notwithstanding all his Machines and methodies, that I may
vse the verie wordes of the Apostle,. and maugre all his power and policie with all his firie dartes, shall not be able to fasten one wound or venue vpon him; without the which our Sauiour himselfe, euen the Prince and captaine of our saluation had not been sufficiently armed, to haue with∣stood the fierce assaults of the temptour our graund enemy, in that his Monoma∣chie or single combate which hee had with him in the wildernesse. For then and not before, as saith the Euangelist Luk. 4.22. returned Iesus from Iordan, when the holy ghost was come downe in a bodily shape vpon him like a Doue, and 4.1. was led by the spirit into the wildernesse, when as he was full of the holy Ghost. Secondly,The 2. vse. Simile. as common ointment doth relieue, refresh and reuiue the bodies of men that are ouerwrought and ouerwea∣ried with worke, for-swat and for-swunck with labour; finally, toiled and turmoiled with ouermuch trauell: So doth this ex∣traordinarie ointment of the holy Ghost coole and comfort the elect and faithfull in this life, aster we haue been tormented with the troubles and tribulations of this world, scorched with the parching heate
of persecution, and singed or rather burnt in the fire and furnace of affliction; with which the three children in the middest of Nabuchodonosors furnace, were so preser∣ued,Dan. 27. that their garments were not scor∣ched, their skinnes not touched, nor the haire of their heads so much as singed, notwithstanding the infinit heate thereof. And with which Iohn the Euangelist was so protected,Iohn the Euangelist. Ante por∣tam latinā. that when he was cast into an hot boiling cauldron of scalding oyle, by the commandement of Domitian be∣fore the Latine gate of Rome, he came foorth safe and sound, without any hurt or harme at all of his body, the same indeed being of greater force in this respect then the Nasturcium of the Persians,The Persi∣ans Na∣sturcium. wherewith they were wont to recreate themselues a∣gaine, after that in their long hunting they were welny faint with labour, and famisht with hunger, which by the way, I take to be a more precious and soueraigne plant then our common Cresses, although it be vulgarly deemed the same. Of more ver∣tue then Homers herbe Moly,Homers Moly. which Mer∣curie ministred vntò Vlysses against the charmes and enchantments of Circe. And finally, hauing a more gracious operation
then the Poets Ambrosia and Nectar,Ambrosia Nectar. the meate and drinke of the Heathen Gods, whereby they doe but faine, that they were made immortall. And to conclude, bringing a more blessed effect with it, thē any powerfull ointment of the Thessalian witches,Apuleius. with which as Apuleius writeth; they were woont to Metamorphose men into bruite beasts, when as this contrari∣wise conuerteth men into gods, and ma∣keth them partakers of diuine nature. Thirdly,2. Pet. 1.4. The 3. vse. Simile. as ointments made of drugs and simples by the Apothecarie, and ap∣plied by the Physitian or Chyrurgion, doe remedie and redresse the sicknesses and diseases of the body: So doth this ointment of Gods owne making admini∣stred onely by our Sauiour Christ, heale and helpe all the soares of sicknesses of our soule, being indeede that same  or , which easily cureth and clean∣seth vs of all our infirmities, were we as full of botches and boiles as were the E∣gyptians Iob or Lazarus, yea although we we were as the Prophet Esay describeth vs, euen our whole head sicke, and our whole hart heauie, from the sole of the foote to the crowne of the head, there be nothing but wounds, swel∣ling,
and soares full of corruption,The balme of Gilead. 4.5.6. be∣ing more saluing then the balme of Gilead which God gaue as an extraordinarie and an especiall medicine to his people, the Iewes and Israelites; by the power where∣of our Sauiour Christ in his time, and the Apostles after his ascention healed all kind of maladies and diseases, not only the sick∣nesses of the body, but the sinnes of the soule; taking away togither both the ef∣fect and cause, as it appeareth in the Gos∣pell and the acts. Fourthly,The 4. vse. as ointment giueth such a pleasant sente and sauour, that it greatly delighteth the sence and smell of man, yea and in most corrupt and filthy places, the most infectious and contagious aires; the excellencie thereof taketh away the con∣trarie stench, euen where the most vile and lothsome carkases and carrions are cast: Euen so this ointmēt maketh vs, although of our selues as lothsome as a monstrous cloth, and by reason of our sinnes more stinking then Lazarus that had lien foure daies in his graue, Ioh. 11.39. more sweet, fragrant and odoriferous in the nostrels of the Lord God, then the best smelling sa∣crifice, then the incense of the Altar, or
then the perfume of the Tabernacle, being the sweete sauour of life vnto life, as Paul saith 2. Cor. 2.16. vnto all the elect and faithfull, which make their prayers, that I may vse the words of the Prophet Dauid as the incense and the lifting vp of their hands, as the euening sacrifice, euen like the precious ointment of Marie the sister of Martha, filling the whole house euen the church of God with the odour therof, Ioh. 12.3. giuing to all the members of the same, euen all the Saints and seruants of God, the sweete sente of a good name and fame, according to that of Salomon: That a good name is better then a precious ointment, Eccl. 7.3. which those famous Fa∣thers and honorable men had in their genera∣tions, who were well reported of in their times and left a name behinde them, so that their praise shall euer be spoken of, mentioned by Eccl. 44.7.8. And all those Elders which were well reported of, numbred by the A∣postle, Heb. 11. Fiftly,The 5. vse. as ointment causeth the counte∣nance of man to be cheerefull and com∣fortable, notwithstanding all inward cares and corosiues, or outward crosses and ca∣lamitics; and therefore as at feasts, so at
fasts, Christ would haue his Disciples and the common people, contrarie to the cu∣stome of the Pharises, to annoint their fa∣ces, not to looke smoothly as Hypocrites, but sweetly as I haue before declared out of Mat. 6.26. So this ointment, by rea∣son of the continuall feast, which is within vs, euen a good conscience, as Salomon cal∣leth it; and the welcome guest that lodgeth with vs, euen the holy Ghost, maketh vs and all the elect and faithfull, which are anoin∣ted therewith, to haue a lightsome and louely countenance, amiable in the sight of God; as hauing a shine and signe of di∣uine grace, and delectable in the eies of men, as vpon whom God himselfe hath shined with the light of his countenance. Such a countenāce had our Sauiour Christ,Christ. as he is described by Salomon, Psal. 45.2. Fairer art thou then the children of men, and full of grace are thy lippes, because God hath blessed thee for euer; and why, as it follow∣eth afterwards verse, 7. because God, euen thy God hath annointed thee with the oyle of gladnesse, aboue thy fellowes.Moises. Such a coun∣tenance had Moises, when as after fortie daies and forty nights he descended down from mount Sinay, with the two tables of
the testimonie in his hand, the skinne of his face shining bright, that the people were astonished at the goodly hew there∣of, Exod. 34.30. And such a countenance had Stephen,Stephen. when as he stood before the Elders and Scribes in the councel, not like other prisoners, that are arraigned before the Iudge; and because they are guiltie, are either pale for feare, or blush for shame, according to the Poet,Ouid Met. Acts 6.15. Heu quam difficile est crimen non prodere vultu? His face seeming to all the behol∣ders to haue been as the face of an Angell. Finally, such ioyfull countenances no doubt had the Apostles in the middest of their persecutions, when after they were beaten with rods by the commandement of the high priests, they departed from the Councell, reioycing that they were worthy to suffer rebuke for Christs name, Act. 4.41. This spirituall ointment in this respect, farre surpassing all other ma∣teriall ointments for the vse of man: As the Prophet hath declared most euidently, when hee saith among the creatures of God, which he numbreth in their order ordained for the seruice of man, That he hath giuen him bread to strengthen his body,
wine to glad his heart, and oyle to cheere his countenance, Psal. 104.15. Sixtly,The 6. vse. as the precious holy ointment did annoint, appoint, & consecrate priests, kings and prophets, according to the com∣mon custome of the Iewes, and the ex∣presse commandement of the Lord God, insomuch that none durst presume to take vpon him any of those honourable offices, before the holy oyle was powred vpon him; but after the receiuing thereof, was vsually accounted and called the Lordes annointed; as Dauid calleth Saul, when as he would not suffer his men to lay hands vpon him, because he is the Lords anoin∣ted, 1. Sam. 24.7. and tearmeth himselfe, when he expostulateth with the Iews and Gentiles, Princes and people, for assem∣bling thēselues togither against the Lord, and against his annointed,Psal. 2.2. meaning him∣selfe. So were Aaron and his sonnes so called, after they were so consecrated to minister before the Lord in the Priests of∣fice, Exod. 30.30. And so are the Pro∣phets of the Lord tearmed in those words of the Psalmist, in the person of God him∣selfe, Touch not mine annointed, and doe my Prophets no harme, the latter being put ex∣egeticos,
expounding the former, as who to be the Lordes annointed, euen the Pro∣phets, Psal. 105.15. Euen so doth this in∣ward, pure and precious ointment of the holy ghost, of the which the other out∣ward holy oyle was a type and figure, con∣secrate and sanctifie the chosen children of God, to bee vnto him spirituall Kings, Priests, and Prophets; as wee are often∣times so tearmed in the Scriptures. As first king and priest, so called by Peter, A chosen generation, a royall priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, 1. Pet. 2.9. out of the 19. Exod. 6. where the Lord promiseth to his people the children of Israel, that he will make them a kingdome of Priests, and an holy nation. Againe by Iohn, he hath made vs kings and priests vnto God, euen his father, Apoc. 1.6. As also Prophets, as likewise Peter, I will power out my spirit in the last daies vpon all flesh, and your sonnes and daughters shall prophesie: out of the Pro∣phet Ioel, 2.28. The elect and the faithfull shewing themselues to be such kings, whē the kingdome of God is within them, when Christ hath set vp his throne in their hearts, and when they rule and raigne ouer sinne by the power of God, the sword of
the word, and the Scepter of the spirit; not onely making their appetite to be subiect to their reason, and their will to their vn∣derstanding, but also their outward man, to be obedient to their inner man, and the law of the members to the law of the spi∣rit, by macerating their lust and lustful bo∣dies, by mortifying their carnall and cor∣rupt affections, and by crucifying their fleshie and filthy lusts & concupiscences, and by giuing their members seruants vn∣to righteousnesse, in holinesse, and not as seruants to vncleannes, to commit iniqui∣tie, Rom. 6.19. And such priests declare they themselues to be, when they offer vp those Christian spirituall sacrifices, which God requireth of them. As first, that whole burnt offring which Paul commen∣deth in giuing vp their bodies, a liuing, holy, and acceptable sacrifice vnto God, which is their reasonable seruing of God, Rom. 12.1. And secondly, the sacrifice of righteousnes, which Dauid commandeth, when he saith, Offer the sacrifice of Righte∣ousnesse, and put your trust in the Lord, Psal. 4.5. Which sacrifice of righteousnesse is twofold, of the hart, whereof the prophet, A sorrowfull spirit is a sacrifice to God, a bro∣ken
and contrite heart Lord shalt thou not de∣spise, Ps. 51.17. And of the hands, of which the Apostle, To doe good, and to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifice the Lord is well pleased, Heb. 13.16. And finally, such Prophets doe they appeare to be, when they search the Scripture as our Sauiour biddeth, Ioh. 5.39. when they exhort one another daily, while it is called to day as Paul warneth, Heb. 3.13. and when they labour to growe vp more and more, in grace and knowledge, as Peter requireth, 2. Epist. 3.18. and last verse, we see then how honourable, holy and happy the e∣state of all the children of God is, in be∣ing made partakers of this heauenly oint∣ment, in not onely bringing forth the for∣mer blessed fruits and effects; as thereby to be made both valiant Champions and victorious conquerours ouer our spiritual and ghostly enemies, and contraries to be refreshed and eased in the middest of our afflictions & aduersities, to be healed and helped of all the outward sicknesses of our bodies, and inward sinnes of our soules, to present vs as a sweet smelling sauour or odour in the nostrels of the Lord, to giue vs a glad heart and a cheerefull counte∣nance
both before God and man,The spiri∣tuall effect of this hea∣uenly oint∣ment. and to consecrate vs Kings, Priests, and Prophets vnto God, but also in bestowing vpon vs so high a dignitie, priuiledge and preroga∣tiue, as to make vs the elect vessels of such a diuine liquor, whereby we may be wor∣thily tearmed, not the gally Pots, for that is too base a name; but rather the Allaba∣ster boxes of so precious an ointment, yea and to be no siluer shrines, for that is too meane a mettall for such an excellent mat∣ter, and that not of Danae the Image that came downe from Iupiter, but indeede the golden Temples and Tabernacles of the holy ghost the spirit of God, which discended downe from Iehoua him∣selfe. This being that , of which first our Sauiour himselfe is called Christ, and we next his members, tearmed of the same Christians, that glorious title wherein we haue cause to ioie and reioice, for this is that precious ointment which Dauid figu∣ratiuely prophesied, should first be pow∣red vpon Aarons head, which is Christ, and then fall downe vpon his Disciples and A∣postles, which were the goodly ornaments of the golden age of the Church;Psal. 133. and the
beard as it were of Aarons body, annexed to the Head Christ; and lastly, which ran downe to the skirts of his cloathing, euen to the Preachers and teachers of the gos∣pell which liue in this last age of the Church, which are as it were the hemme of Aarons garment, euen the lowest and least members of the Church, and last mi∣nisters of Christ. And not only vnto them, but vnto all the number of the elect and faithfull in generall, as being purfles and appurtenances of Aarons body the church, and partaking as being the communion of Saints in proportion, according to the measure of Gods gifts and graces, of this holy and heauenly ointment. The duetie therefore of vs all and euerie one of vs, is this, so to prepare our selues, as that wee possesse our vessels in holinesse and pure∣nesse. As the Apostle warneth vs, euen to purge our hearts from all Hypocrisie, to cleanse our soules from all iniquitie, and to purifie our mindes from all impietie, that being washed with the water of regenera∣tion, perfumed with the incense of faith, and seasoned with the salt of grace, and sweetned with the fruits of charitie, wee may be found fit vessels and sweet recep∣tacles
for so soueraigne an ointment. For as new wine (as our Sauiour saith in the gospell) must be put in new vessels, least that both perish; so must this precious li∣quor be powred into new and pure vessels that both may be preserued. For euen as the dead flies (as Salomon saith) doth cause to stincke and putrisie the ointment of the A∣pothecarie, Eccl. 10.1. So doe the carnall affections of our mortall bodies, corrupt and contaminate this spirituall ointment of the holy ghost, by making it to be vnto vs, not the sweete odour of life vnto life, but the bitter sauour of death vnto death, and to preuent it rather to our destructi∣on and damnation, then to conuert it to our soules health and saluation. And thus much of the benefite or blessing, which they, vnto whom Iohn writeth, had recei∣ued, euen an ointment. Now therefore to that which next followeth, of the per∣son who bestowed the same vpon them; which is here said to be him that is holy. From him that is holy. There are many things in the Scripture which haue the name of Holinesse giuen vnto them, as they are often so tearmed;Holie. as the holy Temple, the holy Tabernacle,
the holy lawe, the holy catholike Church, the holy gospell, the holy word of God, the holy sacraments, the holy Citie of Ie∣rusalem, the holy Angels, holy Saints, ho∣ly priests, holy Prophets, holy ointment, holy oyle, &c. For it were infinit to re∣peate al, and too tedious to note & quoate their seuerall places, and these but in the inferiour degree of holinesse. This Attri∣bute of Holinesse,Holinesse. more especially and most properly belonging to the lord God himselfe, one in substance, three in per∣son; Holy Father, Holy Sonne, and Holy Ghost. As the Seraphins cried in Esaies vision 6.3. and the foure beasts in Iohns Reuelation, Apoc. 4.8. And Ambrose in his song, Holy, holy, holy; these being holy in themselues, & of themselues, they holy by them, euen by the imputation, participation, or imitation of their Holi∣nesse. These holy essentially, they holy ac∣cidentally; these holy  in way of singularitie and excellencie a∣boue others, they in their degree & estate, as they can be capable of Holinesse. And first, that God the Father is oftentimes so called in the Scriptures, it is euident that we may seuerally make proofe therof Leu.
20.26. Be holy vnto me, for I the Lord am holy, 144.13. The Lord is righteous in all his waies, and holy in all his workes, Esay, 1.4. The holy one of Israel. And therefore our Sauiour in his prayer in the gospel, calleth him by this name especially, Holy Father, Ioh. 17.11. And that Christ himselfe is so likewise tearmed, it is manifest: first by that of the Angel Gabriel in his annuncia∣ation vnto Marie, when he saith, that an holy thing shall be borne of thee, Luk. 1.35. And by the Virgin Marie her selfe in her Magnificat, For he that is mightie hath mag∣nified me, and holy is his name, Luk. 1.49. And by that of Peter, Ye denied the holy & iust one, and desired a murderer to be giuen vnto you, Act. 3.14. And this could not the Diuels themselues but cōfesse, euen when they were cast out of him, that he was e∣uen the holy one of God, Mark. 1.24. This being verie requisite and necessarie both for himselfe and vs, that he being our holy high priest, might enter into the Sanctum Sanctorum, the holy of holiest for vs. And as saith the Apostle, Such an high priest it became vs to haue, which is holy, harmelesse, vndefiled, seperate from sinners, &c. Heb. 7.26. Lastly, that the third person in Trini∣tie
is so tearmed it appeareth, being the spirit of God himselfe, which cannot o∣therwise be named without this title of holinesse, this being the proper attribute thereof; as it is euident euerie where in the gospell, when as it is not onely holy in it selfe, and of it selfe, but also holy by ma∣king others holy; both holy in cause, and holy in effect; holy by his owne instinct, and holy by inspiring others. But now of which of all these, which haue the name and title of holinesse, doth Iohn here say, that these babes had receiued the foresaid ointment? Certaine it is, that hereby can∣not be meant any of the first sort of holy things, or holy men, which are but in the lower degree of holinesse, and which draw and deriue all the holines they haue from the other, as being the welspring & foun∣taine of Holinesse. For none of these are so good and gracious, as to purchase and procure so great & glorious an ointment, or of such woorth and worthinesse, as to giue and bestow so high and heauenly a thing, which is farre better and more bles∣sed then themselues, no not the Apostles themselues, although they were the most holy of all other, next vnto our Sauiour
Christ himselfe, were not able to giue the same. For although Symon Magus seeme to aske the holy ghost euen this ointment at the hands of the Apostles, as though it were in their power to giue the same; Yet it is otherwise, if we marke the words of the Scriptures; that is, that Symon Magus onely offered them money, on condition that they would giue him also the same power, which they had themselues, that vpon whomsoeuer he might lay hands, he might receiue the holy ghost, Act. 8.19. As Aug. himselfe hath verie well noted, there being no mention of giuing, but on∣ly of receiuing the holy ghost, De Trinit. lib. 15. cap. 26. He that gaue this ointment must needs be one of the three most holy persons in the Trinitie, either God the Fa∣ther, or God the Sonne, or God the holy ghost. And yet can it not be said, that any one of these doth alone giue it, because it is indeed the common gift of them all; ac∣cording to that olde Scholasticall rule of diuinitie sound enough.A rule in Diuinitie. Omnia opera Tri∣nitatis ad extra sunt communia, and most certaine it is, that as the holy ghost in es∣sence proceedeth both from the Father & the Sonne, as Athanasius euidently decla∣reth
in his Creed;Athanasi∣us Creed. so the same holy ghost in effect: for the gifts and graces thereof, are conferred & bestowed to the publike profit of the whole Church, and to the priuate vse of some speciall children of God, by all the three persons in the Trini∣tie: for so Paul 1. Cor. 12.4.5.6. Now there are diuersities of gifts, but the same spirit. And there are diuersities of admi∣nistrations, but the same Lord. And there are diuersities of operations, but God is the same, which worketh all in all. Albeit, because here is one especially pointed at, we must finde out which of the three he should be, that gaue this ointment vnto them, and which is here more especially said to be holy. First, although it may be said to be God the Father, because euerie good and perfect gift commeth downe from a∣boue from the Father of lights, as Iames, 1.17. Or that he is the holy one of Israel, as E∣say, 1.4. Or againe, to be the holy ghost, because this ointment may seeme to be a gift of the spirit, and for that most proper∣ly he is called the holy ghost. Notwith∣standing, if we marke the circumstances of the text, the purpose of the Apostle, and the drift and intendiment of the doctrine
of the whole Epistle, the scope thereof be∣ing nothing els but this, euen to prooue Iesus to be Christ against Ebion, Cerinthus, Marcion and Carpocrates, with their sec∣taries, which were the Heretikes, Scisma∣ticks, and Antichrists of this time. The same point which Iohn aymeth at, both in his gospell, and in his Reuelation, as it may more euidently appeare by the 22. v. of this Chap. Againe it is manifest by the coherence of the wordes, that by him in this place he meaneth none other but him,1. Iohn 11.7.2.1.2. whom in the 1. chap. 1. he calleth the word of life, and affirmeth to be the purgation of our sinnes, verse, 2. at whom he especially driueth, from whom he draweth and de∣riueth the whole tenour of his exhortati∣on following vnto this my text, and so forth to the end both of the Chapter and the Epistle: besides it cannot so conueni∣ently be vnderstood of God the Father, for that the giuing of the holy ghost is ve∣rie seldome or neuer ascribed vnto him∣selfe in the Scriptures, nor of the holy Ghost; for that the holy Ghost cannot fitly be said to giue it selfe this ointment, being as it is already declared, no particu∣lar gift or grace, fruit or effect thereof, but
the verie spirite of God it selfe, which in the 27. verse, is said by the Apostle to dwel in them. And Aust. himselfe putteth this matter out of doubt, when he saith, Qui promisit, misit. First therefore to declare the cause, that Christ did certainly promise and faithfully perfourme, in sending afterwards the holy ghost, and did oftentimes giue the same vnto his Disciples and others, there is no∣thing almost more common in the gospel; As in Iohn, 14.16.26. the 15.26. and the 16.7. and in manie other places which were too long to rehearse. Where al∣though sometimes God the Father is said to send and giue the comforter; yet must we remember withal, that it is in the name and by the means and mediation of Christ alone. And therefore the Baptist likewise promised the same in Christs name, saying, that he should baptize with the holy ghost, and with fire, Mat. 3.11. at the first comming of Christ. As our Sauiour also doth him∣selfe in his owne person, when he saith, Ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost, with∣in these few daies, Act. 1.5. And this for his promise, now that he did likewise send the holy ghost accordingly, it appeareth Act. 2
when as vpon this day of Pentecost, hee sent the holy ghost in sensible and visible forme of firie clouen tongues, ver. 3. And that he gaue the holy ghost oftentimes, both before and after, it is manifest: As first, when hee endued his 12. Disciples with the holy ghost, and consecrated them his 12. Apostles; when as he first sent them forth by commission, to preach vnto the Iewes only, Mat. 10. Againe, bestowing the same spirit on the 70. disciples his fore∣runners, which he sent likewise to preach by two and by two, when he gaue vn∣to them power to treade on Serpents and Scorpions, and ouer all the power of the enemie, and that nothing should hurt them, Luk. 10.19. Secondly, when he breathed the Holy ghost into his Disciples, when he com∣manded them by a second commission to go and preach vnto all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, &c. Iohn, 20.22. Mat. 28. And afterwards, when he replenished the 7. Deacons, Stephen, Philip, &c. and also Paul, Barnabas and Cornelius, with diuers others, with the ho∣ly ghost, as we may reade euerie where in the Acts. Now that he most properly de∣serued
to be called holy, it is euident, not onely by that which is already said in this behalfe, but also shewing himselfe so to be in all respects; not only as he was God, but also as he was man, holy in his con∣ception; for he was conceiued by the ho∣ly ghost, & ouershadowed with the power of the most highest. Holy in his birth without corruption, and holy in his death without destruction; holy in his tentation, wherein hee was victorious; holy in his transfiguration, wherein he was glorious; holy in his words, which were diuine ora∣cles; and holy in his workes, which were heauenly miracles; holy in his prayers, which were feruent and faithfull; holy in his preachings, for they were earnest and powerfull; holy in all his afflictions, for they were pure; holy in all his actions, for they were perfect. Finally, holy in all his goings out and comming in. And there∣fore without all question, he only is the person who is here said of Iohn to be Holy, and of whom, they to whom he writeth, receiued the foresaid ointment. Now for the vse of this vnto our selues. First, for those that haue already recei∣ued the holy ghost, or any gift, grace, and
fruit thereof, they must not bragge, boast or be bolde thereof, as so to presume of their owne worthinesse, as though they had obtained it by their owne merit, when as they can neither possibly procure it of themselues, nor purchase it by any means; for euerie good and perfect gift commeth downe from aboue from the Father of Lights, Iames, 1.17. Christ Iesus, being the onely bestower of this ointment, from whom it proceedeth, who hath promised it, and who hath prepared it for all those that are able and capable of such a bles∣sing; and therefore let them remember what the Apostle saith, to plucke downe the Peacocks feathers of all prowd presu∣mers, which are carried away with an o∣uerweening conceit of their own endow∣ments. What hast thou, that thou hast not receiued? &c. Secondly, for those that haue not at all this ointment, but want as yet such neces∣sarie graces as are meete for their calling, let them hold vp holy hands, and lift vp holy hearts vnto him that is holy, especial∣ly vpon the Lords holy Sabaoth day in Gods holy house, and by holy prayer to aske this holy ointment, and endeuour to
be holy as he is holy, and to serue the Lord in holinesse all the daies of their life, and they shall certainly bee endued with the holy ghost and heauenly spirit of God, and shall fully be replenished with al com∣plements conuenient for their vocation, according to that promise of Christ, Luk. 11.13. That the holy ghost shall be giuen them that desire him, we must not then aske this ointment, that is the Holy ghost; neither of the Pope as the Catholikes do, who chalengeth arrogantly and presump∣tuously vnto himselfe, to haue authoritie to giue the same, with all the gifts thereof; and therefore weareth a girdle about him, hauing seuen keies, with seuen seales han∣ging thereupon, according to the seuen∣fold grace of the holy ghost, of binding, loosing, shutting, opening, sealing, resig∣ning and iudging. Pascall the second, Byshop of Rome suc∣ceeding Hildibrand, and more hautie then he, being the first that tooke vnto him this girdle of vanitie, contrarie to the Apostles girdle of veritie, putting it vpon him as an ornament of his holinesse, or rather as a monument of his blasphemie, and as a re∣cognisance of his heauenly power, or as
a resemblance of his hellish pride and pre∣sumption. Nor of Symon Magus, as his sectaries, the horrible Heretikes, the Simo∣nians did, who tearmed him & his strum∣pet Selene the holy ghost, as the Samari∣tanes called him the great power of God, Acts, 8.10. Nor of the Apostles as Symon Magus himselfe did, Act. 8.19. because it is not in their power, nor of any other Saint or Sorcerer, holy or vnholy, Arch∣heretike or Antichrist whatsoeuer. But of him which is here said to be especially holy, , in way of sin∣gularitie and excellencie aboue all other, who onely giueth it, and in whose name, and for whose sake it is onely giuen. And thus much and no more would I speake of these words, & so finish this first principal part of my text; but that our aduersaries the Papists, who absurdly abuse this place,Catholiks. as they do many other; wresting it to their Hypocriticall purpose, and forcing it to stablish their Hereticall doctrine, doe vrge me to contend with them in a matter con∣trarie to manifest truth. Seing that they are not ashamed corruptly to depraue these words, in confirmation of their for∣ged Sacrament of extreame vnction, and
applying them vnto themselues grossely after this manner:The Po∣pish forged Sacrament of extream vnction. That by this ointment, the Apostle here meaneth nothing els but extreame vnction, and that it onely ap∣pertaineth vnto them, because they are Catholike, and that they haue the same (as the Apostle saith) from him that is holy; that is, from their holy father the Pope and Byshop of Rome. First, therefore of their vnction, what affi∣nitie it hath with this our ointment. Se∣condly, how fitly they may be called Ca∣tholikes, as Iohn tearmeth this his Epistle Catholike. And thirdly, what agreement there is betweene him that is here called holy, and their holy, or rather vnholy Fa∣ther the Pope. For the first, their extreame vnction, the Catholikes describe the same after this manner:The mat∣ter. As for matter to consist of oyle oliue consecrated by a Byshop, the vse thereof to anoile the sicke aboue and beneath, forward and backward, vpon the eies, eares, mouth, nose, hands and feete; a man vpon the reines of the backe, and a woman vpon the belly; filthy to speake of vs, and more filthy to be done of them; because say they, concupiscence raigneth most in those parts.The forme For forme, the words
of the Priest in the time of the annointing,The vse. the effect thereof, to put away forgotten sinnes, and to purge all veniall sinne com∣mitted by mispending our sences; a Sacra∣ment as they tearme it, comfortable to the soule, and healthfull to the body, as farre forth as it is expedient, the holy Ghost, strengthening the weake with grace, a∣gainst the violent assaults of the Diuell, and the fearefull terrour of death, other circumstances and ceremonies belonging here vnto these.The circū∣stances & ceremo∣nies therof. The minister thereof sent for by the patient, who must first be con∣fessed of his mortall sinnes and receiue ab∣solution, & then humbly desire for Gods sake this extreame vnction. And if hap∣pily the party want any of the fore-named members, then must the next adioyning parts vnto the same be anoiled: for this reason as they alleadge, because they haue those members grounded in the soule. But with this double caueat. First, that the persons that are capable of this vnction, must be men and women, which haue rea∣son, discretion and deuotion to require and request the same, and not babes or in∣fants; and those, such as lie in perill of death by Gods visitation, and not by vio∣lence
of warre, or at the time of execution. This Laurence Ʋaux, that compendious compiler in English, of Catholike Cate∣chismes. But Kamnisius that Canon of Ca∣tholikes, and pillar of Poperie, in his Ca∣techisme first saith as concerning this vn∣ction; that we must beleeue whatsoeuer the Catholike Church hath constantly taught. Then he defineth the same after this manner: To be an holy signe institu∣ted in consecrated oyle, as whereby, hea∣uenly vertue is applyed to the sicke for the health, not onely of the soule, but also of the body by diuine institution. I come as neere his owne words as I can, And goeth further in bringing in the testimonie of of Iames the Apostle in confirmation here∣of, Chap. 5.14. Is any sicke among you? Let him call vpon the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him, and annoint him with oyle in the name of the Lord, &c. This as a precept, and withall, alleadging the exam∣ple of the Apostles for practise thereof, Mark. 6.13. that they annointed many that were sick with oyle, and healed them. And the Tridentine Councell denounceth a fourefold Anathema, or bitter curse a∣gainst all those that shall not acknowledge
and accept the foresaid extreame vnction as a Sacrament, with all the ceremonies belonging thereunto before mentioned. But Bellarmine the great Champion of Rome, and refiner of many grosse errours of other drossie Papists, although he seeme not in euerie respect to admit the former doctrine, but maketh exception of that place of Marke, as that the oyle there, not to be the verie Sacrament of vnction, but onely a figure, shadowing, and insinuation of the same. Herein warring and iarring from the rest of his fellowes, in this answe∣ring vnto his name: yet in effect doth he conclude and confirme that which the o∣ther said before. All which let vs consider, and compare the oyle of Iames with the ointment of Iohn, and the Apostles an∣nointing with the Priests anoiling. Theirs, a materiall oyle of oliues; ours, the spiri∣tuall ointment of the holy Ghost; theirs, hallowed by a Romish Byshop; ours, san∣ctified by the great Byshop of our soules, Christ Iesus: theirs, outwardly anoiling the bodie; ours, inwardly annointing the soul; theirs, against corporall diseases; ours, a∣gainst spirituall sicknesses; theirs, at the perill and point of death; ours, at all times
and seasons; theirs, must needs haue con∣fession going before; ours, faith the onely meanes to obtaine the same; and theirs, not for infants in any wise; ours for babes, for so our Apostle calleth these that are here said to haue this ointment. Now to trie their extreame vnction, how it is allowable by the touchstone of the word of God, and agreeable to the a∣nalogie of faith,Catho∣likes high traitors a∣gainst God first in making it a Sacra∣ment. First we accuse them of high trea∣son against the diuine maiestie of God, for forging this and other sacraments & seales, when as he himselfe hath ordained and ap∣pointed but two only, as his Petty or Priuy seale of Baptisme, and his great or broad seale of Eucharist; for which, they may truely be tearmed Sacramentaries them∣selues, as they falsely call vs. Secondly, in the matter and element thereof, they shew themselues absurd, when as they say that a Byshop must needs consecrate the same, when as they make any common hedge∣priest among them, sufficient to consecrate the greatest Sacrament of all other, as they will not denie of the Lords supper by vtte∣ring onely these words; Hoc est corpus me∣um, which they therefore call the words of
consecration. Thirdly, in the vse ridicu∣lous and filthie, in anoiling a woman on the belly, no holy action but an vnseemely gesture, not to be named with pure lippes, nor to be heard with chast eares, for the forme without forme, the words of the Priest, not the written word of God, when as in euerie Sacrament the word ought to be added to the element. As Aust:Austin. Ad∣datur verbum ad elementum & fit Sacra∣mentum. Fourthly, for the effect which they make double, both voide and vaine; the first for healing of the sicknesses, which neuer happeneth; the second for remission of sins, which is friuolous in two respects. First, because this is the effect of the Eu∣charist; and secondly, because it immedi∣ately followeth the absolution, & therfore altogither needlesse. Lastly, for all the rest of the circumstances and ceremonies be∣longing thereunto, being altogither fond and foolish; and the reasons thereof are rude and ridiculous, for the annointing of so many and outward members, or those adioyning vnto them, whē as a Sacrament as they cannot but confesse, concerneth ra∣ther the soule and the powers thereof, then the bodie, and the parts thereof, for the pa∣tient
alwaies to require it of necessitie which oftentimes cannot be, when as sick persons most commonly lie speechlesse at the point of death. And againe, in depriuing those of the benefit of this their Sacrament, which seeme to haue most need thereof: As ma∣lefactours that are put to execution, and souldiers that die in warres, when as the Sacraments ought to bee common to all that are capable thereof, for those places of Scripture which they alleadge for the foundation and confirmation thereof. As first for that of Marke, although herein they discent among themselues, some of them leauing this holde, as taking it to be weake for their defence, as the Tridentine Councell; Bellarmine and others, who seeth not that the example of the Apostles maketh little for their purpose, being al∣togither extraordinarie and miraculous, being an especiall and peculiar preroga∣tiue power giuen vnto them, for the time of their first receiuiug of the Gospell, that by such workes of wonder the simplicitie of the word should be established by signs following, as it is Mark. 16.26. when if we should for their healing of the sicke,
attribute that to the vertue of the oyle which is to be ascribed to the grace of the spirit of God, and gift of the holy Ghost, granted vnto them by Christ himselfe. To adde authoritie vnto this calling, his Dis∣ciples should rather be called Apotheca∣ries then Apostles, and this oyle to be ac∣counted not a Sacrament but a medica∣ment, and rather an impediment then an Adiument to their miracles, which facultie by that manner and meanes to cure disea∣ses, our Sauiour did not vouchsafe to be∣stowe vpon the posteritie of these primi∣tiue pillours of the Church, by any heredi∣tarie right and ordinarie custome, but on∣ly for a season made it to be a seale vnto the Gospell then preached. And secondly for that of Iames, which they abuse with common consent most superstitiously, corrupting the olde institution, and blen∣ding with all newe fangle inuentions and verie vnskilfully vsurping it as a continuall tradition, and turning the temporarie vse thereof into a perpetuall practise, without the warrant or witnesse of the word; ther∣by arrogantly assuming to themselues e∣quall authoritie with the Apostles, and prowdly presuming of the semblable spi∣rituall
power too too simply making that a Sacrament, which offereth vnto vs no o∣ther thing signified, which our faith should apprehend; but onely that which was forthwith effected, euen an healing, when as by as good reason, & for as good cause, they might make the clay made of dust and spittle by our Sauiour, wherewith he hea∣led him that was borne blinde. The hem also of Christs garment with which he cu∣red the woman of the bloudie flix and ma∣nie others, Matth. 8. the chirchiefes and handchirchiefes that came from Pauls bo∣dy, and healed manie diseased. And final∣ly Peters shadowe which likewise healed manie, Act. 5.15. to be Sacraments, by making euerie meane of healing to be a Sacrament, as they haue alreadie filled the word with Sacraments, by making euerie misterie therein to be a Sacrament, and so to number not seuen, but seuentie Sacra∣ments at the least. But this their Apish imitation of the Apostles, cannot bring in vre againe that heauenly operation, which ceased 1500. yeares ago.Iames. 5.15. And besides, it is manifest (if we mark the words of Iames) that it was not the force of the annointing with oyle, but the efficacie of the prayer of
faith that should saue the sicke, and there∣fore ought now only to be vsed both pub∣likely and priuately without others. And againe, lastly the Apostle in those words, in the name of the Lord, setteth not the forme of this their Sacrament, as Beliarmine will haue it, but onely giueth al Christians a prouiso, how they ought to pray, that is not to vse any Diuelish en∣chantments, Magicall charmes, and Ido∣lolatricall inuocations, as doth Iohn also giue the like caueat vnto them,Iohn. 4. vnto whom he writeth in the cōclusion of this his Epi∣stle, when he saith: Babes, take heed of I∣dols; that is, from all idolatrous worship, seruice and inuocation, but faithfully to call vpon the name of the Lord,Iohn 1.5. 12. euen the Lord onely who he saith in the next verse 16. can and will raise vp the sicke. And thus much of their extreame vnction how farre it differeth from our ointment in this place. Now of the second point briefly, for challenging this ointment to thēselues, because they are Catholiks and for that the Apostle entitleth his Epistle,Catholike Epistle, how taken. a Catholike Epistle: Iohn tearmeth his Epistle, so as it signifieth in the originall as Generall, be∣cause it was not written to any particular
Church, as Paul to the Romans, Corin∣thians, &c. or directed to any priuate per∣son, as likewise to Timothy, Titus and Phi∣lemon: or as our Apostle Iohn his second & third; To the elect Lady, and to Gaius, but in common, belonging to all the newe borne Christians in that time: or likewise Iames both Peters and Iudes Epistles, but they not so Catholike, because they are of a particular Church, euen Rome, which cannot be vniuersall, because it is but a part or member of the whole Church (if we may call such an Apostolicall Syna∣gogue by that name) except we wil tearm it Catholike, as the common woman, so named for her naughtinesse. For neither can they be Catholike, according to the true originall notation of the word, nor as the same more commonly and customa∣bly, then syncerely and sensibly, in the Ec∣clesiasticall Historie and auncient Fathers is vsed for the Orthodoxi; that is, for those that were of a sound iudgement in matters of faith. Neither Arrians, Donatists, No∣uatians, Pelagians, nor any other sort of Heretikes, when as they are not so, but contrariwise such as haue a tacke and taste of these Heretikes; and of all other what∣soeuer.
And for the third and last thing which in a word we will conclude, how can the Pope be named an holy father, vn∣lesse it  as Plautus calleth a bad fellow Homo sacerrimus,Catholike, so called why. when as although he sit as God in the temple of God, shewing himselfe that he is God; he is Antichrist, and exalteth himselfe against al that is called God, or that is worshipped, 2. Thess. 2.4. And who is full of the name of blasphemie, being drunke with the bloud of Saints and Mar∣tyrs of Iesus;A poct. 17.1.5. and finally which is aduersa∣rie and contrarie vnto him that is here cal∣led Holy, euen vnto Christ himselfe in all respects. As Beza hath verie well and ex∣cellently set downe at large in his booke intituled Antithesis Papae & Christi,Antithesis papae & Christi. to the which I referre you, for the further proofe. And thus of these words, and of the whole first principall part of my text. And ye haue knowne all things. In these words, as in my first diuision I haue declared, being the 2. principall part of this my text, is contained in effect, that followeth vpon the former as of the cause: which is first generally knowledge, then par∣ticularly an absolute knowledge, euen of all things; of both which in their order. But
before I enter into the discourse thereof, somewhat of this first word And, in the originall :. which as I said before of the other And and , in the entrie of my text, as that it is not to be taken as it is transla∣ted, not for a copulatiue, but for an excep∣tiue; so here for a causall coniunction. And as to be interpreted But, so here For, and not And: as it is euident by manie sembla∣ble places of the Scriptures, as Psal. 108.12. O helpe vs against the enemy: and in the He∣brew, but to be translated, For vaine is the helpe of man, likewise Esay the 6.4.5. Thou wert angrie O Lord; and as it is in the ori∣ginall And, but to be interpreted, For we haue sinned. So Luk. 1.42. in those words of Elizabeth vnto Marie, Blessed art thou among women, : in the Greeke but, in steed of for, for because the fruite of thy wombe is blessed. Euen so in this place our Apostle proueth, that they had the former ointment by an argument from the effect, as appealing vnto themselues, they could not finde and feele it to be in themselues, by reason of that wisedome & knowledge of the which they were made partakers; and that not shallow or slender, but com∣pleate and sufficient. But before we speake
of this,Knowledge let vs say somewhat of knowledge in generall; as to shew what a notable gift of God knowledge is, and how greatly these to whom the Apostle writeth, are bound and beholden vnto our Sauiour Christ Iesus, and how thankfull and how duetifull they ought to be vnto him for so great a benefit, and blessing bestowed vp∣on them. First therefore for knowledge, although rude and rough-hewed Aiax in Euripides sometimes said as being a Martialist,Aiax in Euripides. affe∣cting armes, rather then a Mercurist giuen to the Artes, or rather in his mad moode to crosse his wise and learned enemy Vlys∣ses, , That to know no∣thing, is the sweetest life of all. Againe,Agricola de vanitate Scientiarū. al∣though Agricola write a booke of the va∣nitie of sciences in comparison of the veri∣tie of the science of sciences, Diuinitie it selfe: And finally,Salomon. although Salomon hee say, That in the multitude of wisedome is much griefe, and he that encreaseth know∣ledge, encreaseth sorrow, Eccle. 1.11. spea∣king this of humane learning and know∣ledge of all worldly things, with the which he was now so inglutted, that being a new regenerate, a mortified man, he did alto∣gither
loath the same. Notwithstanding true is that olde Greeke Prouerb: , no sweeter thing in the world then to know all things. And ther∣fore the Poet accounteth him the most happy man that knoweth the cause of all things,Virgil. Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. This is it that maketh a difference betweene man and bruite beasts. For so saith the Psalmist, Man being in honour hath no vnderstanding, but is compared to the beasts that perish, 49.20. and betweene blessednesse and miserie, as saith the same Prophet, Blessed is the man O Lord, whom thou instructest and teachest in thy Lawe, and betweene this life and the life euerlasting: as our Sauiour in the Gospell.Iohn 17.3. This is life e∣uerlasting to knowe thee to be the onely true God, and him whom thou hast sent Christ Ie∣sus. This is that hath made manie to wast their goods, weaken their strength, spend their spirits, intoxicate their braines, and a∣bridge their life, according to that olde Greeke Prouerb, . And finally this is it, that hath caused, many to take great paines in trauell, euen to crosse manie seas and to compasse manie lands vnto the vttermost coasts, quarters and
corners of the world, not sparing to wea∣rie their bodies, to spend their yeeres, and to leaue their owne countrey, that they might attaine vnto this. As it may appeare in those two famous Philosophers, aunci∣ent Pythagoras and Diuine Plato,Pithago∣ras. Plato. of which the one trauailed into Egypt to be instruc∣in Diuinitie, into Caldea to be taught A∣strologie, and into Metapontum to learne to make lawes. The other into Italy to be instructed better in Philosophie by the Py∣thagorians, into Egypt where it is thought he read the bookes of Moyses, into Sicise to see the firie gulfe of Aetna, and into Ae∣thiopia and India among the Massagetes and Bracmans, to conferre with the Dyp∣nosophists and Gymnosophists, and to heare that noble Philosopher Hiarchas rea∣ding in his golden chaire. But to leaue prophane Histories, and to come vnto the Scriptures. This made the Queene of Sa∣ba, or the Queene of the South to come from the vttermost partes of the earth to heare the wisedome of Salomon, as our Sa∣uiour;Queene of Saba or South. Eunuch, Act. 8. this brought the Eunuch from Can∣dace Queene of Aethiopia vnto Ierusalem, to be instructed of Philip the Euangelist. This drew the wise men of the East from
the farthest parts of Persia vnto Iewrie,The wise men of the East. Matth. 2. to learne where Christ should be borne. This finally made the common people of the Iewes to flocke and flowe to our Sauiour Christ Iesus, euen from all places, from e∣uerie Citie, towne and village, following him in great multitudes out of Galile,Mat. 4.25. De∣capolis, Ierusalem, Iudea, from beyonde Iordan, and the sea coasts of Tyre and Si∣don, and that on foote, leauing their own houses and homes, hungrie and thirstie, their bodies almost famished, and their soules fainting within them, only to heare the gratious words that proceeded out of his mouth, and to be taught the misteries of the kingdome of heauen: of whome saith Augustin in this respect, Taedium ac∣cedendi studium audiendi superabat. And no maruaile, seeing this is one of the especiall graces, chiefest gifts, and fairest fruits or the holy Ghost, and spirit of God, which Christ Iesus hath bestowed vpō his church and the members thereof. And therefore 1. Cor. 12.8. is first placed wisedome, and then knowledge, as in the 1. Cor. 14.1. A∣mong all spirituall gists, Paul preferreth prophesie, which cānot be without know∣ledge, as being an effect thereof, as with∣out
the which, we should blūder in blind∣nesse, grope as it were at noone day, and finally fall into the darke dungeon of er∣rour. As our Sauiour vnto the Scribes and Pharises in the Gospell, You erre not know∣ing the Scriptures nor the power of God. First reproouing them of errour, & afterwards obraiding against them the cause thereof, euen want of knowledge; whereas con∣trariwise the hauing of knowledge is a light vnto our feete, and a lanterne vnto our pathes, whereby the eies of our soules are opened, the vnderstāding of our minds is illuminated, and the powers of our harts are enlarged, to conceiue and perceiue those things, that belong both to this life, and the life to come. If then knowledge be such an excellent thing, with what stu∣die and endeuour, yea and with what pains and importunitie ought we to labour to attaine vnto it? Euen to leaue no meanes, vnwrought, no waies vnsought, that we may be possessors of so precious a Iewell, and so inualuable a treasure. And so to seeke after knowledge, that we care not for it alone, and contemne al other things, as not so to stuffe and puffe vp our selues therewith; as that we doe not as the Apo∣stle
forewarneth, Rom. 12.3. , but to ioyne with our knowledge, charitie; with our science, conscience; with our speculation, practise; and with our contemplation, action. This being that sweete coupling and louely lincke, which the word of God comman∣deth and commendeth vnto vs, the one being friuolous and vnfruitful without the other; as knowledge without charitie to be nothing els but madnesse; as Festus thought of Paules knowledge, when hee obiected against him; that too much lear∣ning had made him mad, or vanitie, That knowledge puffeth vp, but charitie edifieth. And charitie without knowledge, to bee nothing els but a fond affection, and a de∣uout dotage; but both these combined to∣gither like two twins with two wings e∣qually poised, shall giue vs a speedie flight vp into the heauenly aire of the paradise of God; for the one being seasoned with the other, will make them both sauorie and sweete in the taste, both of God and man. So shall there bee neither errour in our knowledge, nor default in our Action: which all Christians ought especially to looke vnto. As hereupon Aug: he saith;
Cum cognitio & actio dona sint Dei, & bea∣tum hominem faciant, sicut in cognitione ca∣uendus est error: sic in actione cauenda est ne∣quitia. Errat autem quisquis putat verita∣tem se posse cognoscere, cum ad huc nequitèr viuat. De Agone Christi, cap. 13.Aug. de A∣gone Chri. cap. 13. And therefore Peter giueth the like caueat vnto those vnto whom he writeth in the con∣clusion of his latter Epistle, and the two last verses: That seeing they had the know∣ledge of the Scriptures, they should beware least they fall not from the stedfastnesse of the truth, by being plucked away by the errour of the wicked; but should growe vp more and more in grace and knowledge, 2. Pet. 3.17. But what shall we saie to the counterfaite Catholiks of the Church of Rome? among whom, although they bragge and boast of their knowledge and charitie, it is nothing els but an Odissea of errors,Odissea er∣rorum Ilias malorum. and an Ilias of euils, that I may vse the prouerbs, although profaine, yet properly applied vnto them, whose knowledge is nothing els but ig∣norance, and their religion Idolatrie, their learning errour, their life euill, their doctrine heresie, and their deuotion hy∣pocrisie: who are blinde leaders of the blinde, telling the people that Images are
lay-mens bookes,Canis in precepi. and teaching them, that ignorance is the mother of deuction, being themselues like the dogge in the manger, and semblable to the Scribes and Pharises, of whom our Sauiour: because they shut vp the kingdome of heauen before men, neither going in themselues nor suffering them that would enter to come in, Mat. 23.13. And as those Heretikes, of whom Aug: Superbi sunt, & non possunt discere, quia credere nolunt. De Agone Christi, cap. 15. or as he saith afterwards in the same booke of the Manichees, Tam caeci sunt isti, vt scripturas manifestas non intelligant, aut tam negligentes salutis suae, vt omnino non le∣gant, cap. 28. And as for the common sort of them, which are contemptuous recu∣sants and Non communicants, are they not altogither nusled, and misled of them on∣ly in superstitious ceremonies, without a∣nie smacke or tacke of anie sound Christi∣an doctrine? As though the same concer∣ned them not, perswading them to make more account of a mumbled masse and mattens, then of the Diuine truth of the Gospell. So that of them also may it be said in this respect, as Aug: in the same booke and Chap: of the same Heretikes,
Sed isti homines decipiunt eos, qui negligentes sunt in Catholica fide, & ipsam fidem suam quae in scripturis manifesta est nolunt discere; & quod est grauius & multum dolendum, cum in Catholica fide negligenter versantur, Haereticis diligenter aures accommodant: by whose perswasion the simpler sort are so hardly confirmed in obstinacie and contu∣macie, that with the deafe Adder they will stoppe their eares, and will not heare the voice of the charmer, charme he neuer so wisely; that I may vse the wordes of the Prophet Danid. Great therefore was the effect of this excellent ointment, whereby they were made partakers of so heauenly a bles∣sing, an happie and thtise happy estate in comparison of those miserable Ideots, which dissolutely neglect knowledge of those wretched castawaies, which stub∣bornly contemne so gracious a gift; and finally of those of the accursed crue, which of set purpose withstand and gamesay the truth of Christs Gospell against their own consciences. Of which three sorts of the enemies of knowledge, there are too ma∣nie in these daies, which is most lamenta∣ble in this noone light of the Gospel: And this of knowledge in generall.
But to come to the verie words of our Apostle, who saith not here, that they haue onely a bare and naked knowledge, but an excellent, absolute and perfect know∣ledge, euen that they knowe all things; then the which there cannot bee a more bountiful blessing bestowed vpon any the children of God in this life, being the faithfull performance of that sweete pro∣mise, which God made first by the Pro∣phets in the olde testament, and after in the new testament by Christ himselfe. As first that of Esay, 54.13. rehearsed by our Sauiour, Ioh. 6.45. They shall all be taught of God. Againe that of Ieremy, 31.33. re∣peated by the author of the Hebrewes, ch. 10.16. Behold, this is the new couenant that I will make with the house of Israel. After those daies (saith the Lord) I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts. I will be their God, and they shall be my people: and they shall teach no more euerie man his neighbour, and euerie man his bro∣ther, saying; Know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least of them to the grea∣test, &c. And lastly, not to heape vp too many places to this purpose, that of Ioel. 2.28. alleadged by Peter, Act. 2.17. And
it shall be in the last daies saith God, I will powre out of my spirit vpon all flesh, and your sonnes and your daughters shall Prophesie, &c. As thus the Prophets, so our Sauiour in the Gospell Ioh. 14.26. where he setteth downe both the cause and the effect. As the Apostle in this place: But the comforter which is the holy Ghost, whem the Father wil send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all thinges to your remembrance which I haue toulde you. And the 15.15. Henceforth call I you not seruants, for the seruant knoweth not what his maister doth; but I haue called you friendes, for all things that I haue heard of my Father, haue I made knowne vnto you. Againe, 16.13. Howbeit when he is come which is the spirit of truth, he wil leade you in al truth. And euen our A∣postle himselfe in this selfesame chap. that which he heere affirmeth with all asseue∣rance, ver. 27. when he saith, Ye neede not that any man teach you, but as the same an∣nointing teacheth you all things. First, because as Aug. saith, Nihil scire est bruti, omnia sci∣re solius Dei, quaedam vero scire, quaedam nes∣cire hominis. These Christians being ther∣fore but men, they could not knowe all things. Againe, they being but Babes, as
Iohn tearmeth them oftentimes in this E∣pistle; that is, new plants in the garden of the Lord, young scholers in the Schoole of Christ, tender nouices in the house of God, and late conuerts to the Gospell, such as were freshly Catechised in the Ar∣ticles of the faith, and rawly instructed in the first principles and rudiments of Chri∣stian religion; who because they could not brooke strong meates, were faine to be fed with milke as yet, and therefore could not haue such a depth of knowledge, as to vn∣derstand all things, being herein not vn∣like to the Hebrewes; of whom the Apo∣stle saith, Heb. 5.12. and 6.1. that they were so farre from perfection, that they had need be taught the doctrine of begin∣nings. And againe, how could these men know all things? when as the verie Apo∣stles of our Sauiour themselues, although they had been Christs continual Disciples, and were daily taught of him both pub∣likely and priuately, by the space of three whole yeares and more, bewraied them∣selues oftentimes in the Gospell, to bee meerely and miserably ignorant in many matters and misteries of the common sal∣uation; yea euen after they had receiued
this ointment, that is, were inspired with the holy Ghost. As Mat. 16.6. when as our Sauiour giuing them a caueat to take heed, and beware of the Leauen of the Pha∣rises and Saduces, they ignorantly misun∣derstood him to haue spoken of the mate∣riall leuen of bread, and not of the spiritu∣all leauen of false doctrine and heresie. Againe, when as they could not vnder∣stand that plaine parable of the tares, but must needs haue our Sauiour to expound the same vnto them, Matth. 13.36. Not∣withstanding our Sauiour had tolde them before, that they might marke the better, that it was giuen vnto them to know the mi∣steries of the kingdome of heauen, but to o∣thers it was not giuen, verse, 11. Againe, when as our Sauiour telling them apart by the way as they iournied with him, Be∣hold, we go vp to Ierusalem, and all things shall be fulfilled to the sonne of man that are written by the Prophets; for he shall be deli∣uered vnto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked and spitefully intreated and spitte vpon; and when they haue scorned him, they wil put him to death: but the third day he shall rise again. They notwithstanding vnderstood none of these things, and this saying was hidde
from them; neither perceiued they the things which were spoken, Luke. 18.31.32.34. besides many other infirmities, wants, and errours, which were too long to rehearse, and by which they made our Sauiour and their Master ashamed of them, euerie where mentioned in the gos∣pell: yea and the chiefest among them e∣uen Peter and Iohn, who were accounted pillars, euen by Pauls confession, Gal. 2.9. First for Peter, although Aug: call him Ari∣es gregis Dominici, euen the bell-weather of Christs flocke; yet what saith the same lear∣ned Father of him, reckening vp his neg∣ligences and ignorances, if not greater scapes and fowler faults, saying; Cum in mari titubasset, cum Dominum carnaliter à passione reuocasset, cum aurem serui gladio praecidisset, cum ipsum Dominum ter negasset, & cum in simulationem postea superstitiosam lapsus esset. De Agone Christiā. cap. 30. And for Iohn also, although he leaned on Christs breast, of which as a learned father saith, he squeesed out much matter of profoūd wisdome and knowledge, and is called the diuine, as be∣ing the chiefest Diuine of all other next vnto our Sauiour Christ Iesus himselfe. And therefore resembled also to an Eagle, for
soaring aloft aboue the rest of the Euan∣gelists, to the highest misteries, to the kingdome of heauen. Yet how euident∣ly did he togither with his brother Iames, declare his ignorant arrogance, or his ar∣rogant ignorance, when as he asked of Christ, to sit either on his right hand or on his left, in the kingdome of heauen; nei∣ther knowing what hee generally asked, nor vnderstanding particularly, what it is to be on Christs left hand, Mat. 20. And afterwards, when as he so grossely erred, not once but twise, euen in the middest of his Reuelations, in not knowing an Angel from Christ Iesus himselfe; and therefore would haue worshipped the creature for the Creator, Apoc. 19.10.22.8. Moreo∣uer, the verie Angels themselues knowe not all thinges, although they be called Cherubins in the Hebrew, and , of their perfect & absolute know∣ledge aboue all other creatures, as it is ma∣nifest, Ephes. 3.10. where it appeareth, that the fellowship of the mysterie, which from the beginning of the world had been hid in God, was but now, that is in Christs time and not before, made knowne vnto powers and principalities in heauenly pla∣ces;
yea and Christ himselfe is said by the Apostles, not to be seene of Angels, but after a while, euen after his manifestation or incarnation in the flesh, and then iusti∣fied in the spirit, then seene of Augels, &c. 1. Tim. 3.16. Furthermore, when as our Sauiour Christ Iesus himselfe, as he was man, knew not all things, as he confesseth of himselfe in the Gospell: That of that day and houre, speaking of the last day of his second comming to iudgement, knoweth no man, no not the Angels of heauen, but my Fa∣ther onely, Matth. 24.36. and as Marke, hath neither the sonne himselfe, 13.31. And therefore saith our Sauiour againe, That to know the times and seasons, hath the Father only put in his owne power, Act. 1.17. Last∣ly, how could these men know all things, when as Paul saith, that our knowledge is vnperfect, and that we know but in part now, that is in the world; but that then, that is hereafter, in the life to come, wee shall know euen as we are knowne, 1. Cor: 13.12. And againe, the same Apostle be∣fore in the same Epistle saith, That if any man thinke that he knoweth any thing,1. Cor. 8.2. hee knoweth nothing yet, as he ought to know; yea and this modestie, had the learnedst and
the wisest of all the heathen Philosophers, by the Oracle of Apollo himselfe, euen So∣crates to acknowledge of himselfe, that this one thing he knew, that he knew no∣thing. What then shall we say to all this? Euen briefly, and in a word, thus: That for the knowledge they had, and for all those things they knewe, of which noe doubt they had a great measure, by the be∣nefit of the annointing which they had re∣ceiued, they did not knowe the same of themselues as of their owne wit, labour, industrie, desert, or dignitie, but that they were endued therewith, by the gift and grace of the holy Ghost; and that there∣fore they were humbly, and thankfully to referre and resigne all their vnderstanding vnto the spirit of God, by whose blessing they had receiued the same; or els thus, all those things which they knew, were neither erronious lies, nor false fables, nor humane precepts, nor vnwritten verities, nor doubtfull dreames, but the sound and holesome, syncere, & holy truth of Christs Gospell, infused in their soules, by the sweet influence of this precious ointment, and instilled into their hearts by the hea∣uenly dewe of diuine grace. Or againe
thus, that indeed they perfectly knew all those things, that were necessarie vnto their soules health and saluation; that is, Christ and him crucified, Iesus and the Re∣surrection, which was so sufficient for thē, as that they needed no other secular know ledge or carnall wisedome, of any humane and prophane Artes, and sciences whatso∣euer; for as a learned writer saith, The A∣postle writeth not here vnto these Christi∣ans. Adulatoriè tanquam ad elementarios, as flatteringly, to soothe & smoothe them vp in their infancie and ignorance, for he oftentimes tearmeth them babes, not as carnall or as babes in Christ, but as spiri∣tuall; not such as Paul calleth the Corin∣thians, 1. Epist. 3.1.2. to whom he gaue milke to drinke, and not meat to eate, but such as he would haue had the Corinthi∣ans to be,1. Cor. 14.20. not children in malitiousnes, but in vnderstanding, of ripe age, nor yet vain∣gloriously to vaunt or boast himselfe of them being their Doctor, as a bragging schoolemaster of his good schollers, that profit vnderneath him, because afterwards verse 27. that they had no need that anie should teach them, for he arrogateth no∣thing vnto himselfe, but attributeth all vn∣to
to Christ Iesus, when as he telleth them as it is in my text, that they haue knowne all things, not by his instruction, but by the vnction of him that is holy. And there∣fore also in the 27. ver. he saith againe, that the annointing that they had receiued, and dwelled in them, did teach them all things. Neither is this to be meruailed at, that they should be said of our Apostle to haue knowne all things, when as they knew but Christ onely, and those things that con∣cerned the common saluation, which to know was all sufficient for them, & would alone without any supply of other know∣ledge whatsoeuer, bring them to eternall life. For so our Sauiour, This is life eternal euen to know thee to be the onely true God, and him whom thou hast sent, Christ Iesus, Ioh. 17.3. And therfore Paul ingenuously professeth no other knowledge, although he did abound in all humane learning, and that with a protestation, saying: God for∣bid, that I should reioice in any thing, but in Christ and him crucified: for as Christ the onely holy one, is the scope of all the scrip∣tures, both being the complement of the Lawe, and the intendiment of the Gospel So to knowe him, is to know all things,
whatsoeuer Scripture can teach vs, or na∣ture can tell vs; wherewith God will en∣lighten vs, or man can learne vs. So that in this respect, are those two olde Prouer∣biall verses found true, Hoc est nescire sine Christo plurima scire, Si Christū bene scis satis est si caetera nescis. As for the secular knowledge of other worldly things, it is either superfluous or superstitious, vanitie, or curiositie, such as a Christian man may well be without, and the want whereof, will not make him the more godly learned: for as Aug. saith, there is Docta ignorantia,Docta ig∣norantia. Rom. 12.3. a learned ignorance, when as a man is wise vnto sobrietie, and will not dare to learne that which God wil not vouchsafe to teach, and will not offer to open his care to heare, that which the holy Ghost will not proffer his mouth to vtter, euen the profound mysteries, deepe iudgements, and secret counsels of the hidden will of God. Of which, saith both the Prophet and the Apostle, His iudge∣ments are vnsearchable, and his waies past finding out, Esay 40.13. Rom. 11.33. Nor againe, by labour and industrie, to seeke to get the sound knowledge of foolish tri∣fling things, which rather swimme in the
braine with puffed vanitie, then sincke downe into the heart with sound veritie: like him in the Poet, Qui magno conatu magnas nugas egit: such trash and trumpe∣rie which Paul biddeth Timothy and Tytus to beware, that they giue no heed vnto them, 1. Tim. 1.4. and 4.7. and 6.25. and 2. Epist. Tim. 2.16. and Titus 3.9. as , aniles ineptias, Profaine fa∣bles, vaine bablings, olde wiues tales, endlesse genealogies, oppositions of science, falsely so called, foolish questions and braulings a∣bout the Lawe, which are vnprofitable, and breed contentions and controuersie, rather then Godly edifying, which is by faith:Seneca. Whereof may be said as Seneca of the like, Summa dementia est tam superua∣canea ediscere in tanta temporis egestate. Of which things, although these vnto whom our Apostle writeth, seemed to be igno∣rant; yet was that true in them, which Iohn here saith, that they knew all things, that is, all that concerned the saluation, edificati∣on, and consolation of their soules. Ac∣cording to that of Salomon, Prou. 28.5. That wicked men vnderstand not iudgement, but they that seeke the Lord vnderstand all things, and if any man meruaile at this, let
him also maruaile, how Dauid of a homely shepheard,Shepherds Prophets. Elizeus of a rude plowman, and Amos of a rough-hewed heardsman, Moyses of a stuttering stammerer, Ieremy of a tender childe, and Daniel of a young stripling, could become zealous, and lear∣ned professors and Prophets, full of hea∣uenly and diuine knowledge. And how Peter and Andrew, Iames and Iohn of sim∣ple fishermen,Fishermen Apostles. Matthew of a simple publi∣can, Paul of a poore tentmaker, and all the rest of the Disciples of Christ, who were , as the high priests of the Iewes tearmed them, might be endued with such rare giftes and graces, and be made the holy Apostles of our Sauiour. And finally howe Stephen and Philip, of meane Deacons, the lowest degree belon∣ging to the ministrie of the Church, should become excellent Euangelists, and so pow∣erfull in the word and spirit, as that the one could confute all the learned Rabbies in the Synagogues of Ierusalem, and the o∣ther confound that great Sorcerer Symon Magus in Samaria, whom the people cal∣led the great power of God, Act. 6.9. and 8.9. euen as Christ himselfe, although deemed of the Iewes, a Carpenter, or a
Carpenters sonne, and brought vp home∣ly vnder his poore parents, vntill he began to be thirtie yeeres of age, as it is in the Gospell, Luk. 3.23. was notwithstanding the word and wisedome of God his father, in whom were hidden all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge, as the Apostle, and therefore preached the Gospell with power vnto the poore people. But how, and why attained he this so great a gift? e∣uen as he himselfe rendreth a reason, both of his owne absolute sufficiencie, and of his heauenly calling, Luk. 4.18. When he first began to preach out of the Prophet, Esay, 61.1. when he thus saith, That he preached the Gospell vnto the poore, because the spirit of the Lord was vpon him, and did annoint him. Euen so they did know all things by the especiall grace of the spirit of God, which had led him in all truth, by the inward inspiration of the holy Ghost, who had inlightened their hearts from a∣boue, and by the diuine doctrine of Christ Iesus our onely Rabbi, Doctour, and Mai∣ster; and by the painfull ministerie of Iohn himselfe, an holy Euangelist and Apostle, an heauenly Prophet, and Diuine. The spi∣rit of God, in shewing and setting foorth
his vigour and vertue, in more full manner and plentifull measure, in that golden time of the primitiue Church, then in this last and leaden age of the world: yea that I may vse Austins words, in this floud of ini∣quitie, and frost of charitie; wherein there was neuer more preaching and teaching, and yet neuer lesse learning, nor worse li∣uing; insomuch, that I feare mee, that may be truly said of most of vs, which Paul sometimes said to some of the Corinthi∣ans,1. Cor. 15.4.4. That they haue not the knowledge of God, I speake it to their shame. And that I of my selfe may say with Peter, when our Sauiour Christ being in his Ship, bad him cast out his net, to make a draught; that I haue laboured not one whole night onely with him, but manie daies and nights, nay manie yeeres, and haue caught nothing, no not one soule by the baite of the word, into the net of the Church of God. For to make a triall of this matter by the fruites and effects of the Gospell, now so manie yeares publikely and painefully preached amongst vs, what profit and proceeding in the course of Christianitie? what grouth and encrease of knowledge in the word of God is there found amongst vs? May it
not be said of vs, as the Philosopher of the Athenians, That they did degenerate, decline,The Athe∣nians. and by degrees discend from better to worse, and from something to nothing at all. As that at the first, they were , wise men; and then they became , who were louers of wisedome; after , iangling Rhetoritians: and lastly , wrangling Sophisters. So we to haue been for lear∣ning in the beginning of the preaching of the gospel, Chatechistae, teachers of others, as euerie housholder ought to be in his owne family. Then , selfe-con∣ceited of that little knowledge that wee had, as that we cared for no more. After∣wards Catechumeni, such as had need to be taught our selues; and lastly , euen starke Ideots, altogithèr rude and igno∣rant. And for liuing: first Martyrs, such as would not sticke to seale the truth with our bloud, with the the Saints of God. Then , Zealous, but not so hot as that we could abide the firie triall with the Ephesians, who forsooke their first loue, Apoc. 2.4. Afterwards luke warme, nei∣ther hot nor colde with the Laodicians, Apoc. 3.16. Lastly, Libertines, according to the common course of carnall gospel∣lours.
Yea doe not the wisest and chiefest amongst vs, that should be presidents and patterns vnto others, doe they not as it is in the Greeke Prouerb,Prouerb. ? Hauing their hand & hart on their halfepennie, in contempt of God and all Godlinesse, preferre their own pri∣uate profite before the spirituall seruice of God, making their money their Mam∣mon, and their golde their God, contrarie to the precept of our Sauiour in the Gos∣pell:Mat. 6.33. First seeke the kingdome of heauen and the righteousnesse thereof, and all other things shall be administred vnto you. Herein not vn∣like the Romans, whom the Poet scoffing∣ly taunted with that Hysteron : O ciues ciues quaerenda pecunia primum, virtus post nummos: And howe doe parents and gouernours bring vp their children, and those that are committed to their charge? not as Gods darlings, according to the counsell of Paul Ephes. 6. in the institution and informati∣on of the Lord; but as young worldlings, training them vp in couetousnesse, how to get and gaine; and that vnrighteously, que iure qua{que} iniuria per fas nefasue, by hooke or crooke, by right or wrong, they care
not how. Herein likewise semblable to the former profaine people, as the Poet al∣so complaineth in his time, when he crieth out and saith; Hoc monstrāt vetulae pueris poscentibus assem, Hoc discunt omnes ante alpha & Beta puellae. Some because of the impossibilitie which these words seeme to pretend, reading this last word of my text, not  but ,, not . according to diuers copies, because it is so found in the Syriacke, affirme these words to be vnderstood of the knowledge of men, & not of the knowledge of things, as that they had the spirit of discretion, e∣uen that gift of the holy Ghost, of discer∣ning of spirits, which Paul mentioneth a∣mong the rest of the graces of the spirit. 1. Cor. 22.10. As that they could knowe Antichristians from Christians, to be such by Iohns definition which denie Iesus to be Christ, verse, 22. False Prophets from true, being rauening wolues in seely sheeps cloathing, euen by Christs rule of the fruit and effect of their workes, Mat. 6.15. Dis∣sembling Hypocrites from syncere wor∣shippers of Esaie and our Sauiours war∣ning, euen such as honor God with their lips, when their hearts are farre from him. Mat.
15.8. and Esay. 29.13. And this not on∣ly by the secret instinct, inspiration, and o∣peration of the holy Ghost, but also by a godly experience which they haue gotten and gathered, by hauing their wits exerci∣sed through long custome, to discerne be∣tweene good and cuill, as the Apostle to the Hebrewes, Chap. 5.14. which power of the spirit our Sauiour Christ declared, when as he called the ruler of the Syna∣gogue, Hypocrite, who tooke indignation, that our Sauiour should heale the people on the Sabboth day, Luk. 13.15. And when he called Herod Antipas a fox, know∣ing full wel his subtiltie in sending for him to shew him a signe, as he pretended, but indeed to put him to death as he intended, Luk 13.32. And lastly, when as he could discerne Iudas Ischariot from all the rest of his Disciples to be a theefe, a betraier, and a Diuell, Ioh. 6.70. And this gift of the ho∣ly Ghost did Peter giue euidence to be in himselfe, when as he could separate that paire of hollow-hearted Hypocrites, and halfe parting dissemblers, Ananias and Sa∣phira, from all other the sound christians, and faithfull beleeuing brethren in their time, Act. 5. As also in Symon Magus,
whose heart he sounded to the bottome, when as he would haue purchased the gift of the holy Ghost for money, telling him that his heart was not right in the sight of God, but that he was in the gaule of bit∣ternesse, and bond of iniquitie, Acts, 8.21.23. This did Paul likewise shew to∣wards Elimas the Sorcerer, in vnfoulding his hypocrisie before his face; and saying vnto him, O full of all subtiltie and mischiefe, the childe of the Diuell, and enemy to all righ∣teousnesse; wilt thou not cease to peruert the straight waies of the Lord? Actes, 13.10. Which gift of discerning of spirits, was not onely found to be in Christ himselfe and his Apostles, but also in Moyses himselfe and the Prophets. As in Moyses when he knew and vnderstood, that Eldad and Me∣dad that prophesied in the host of Israell, were the true prophets of the Lord, whom Iehosua suspected and misdeemed to haue been false prophets, Numb. 11. As also E∣lizeus, when he knewe the Hypocriticall minde of Gebezi, telling him that his heart was with him when he went to Naaman the Syrian, 2. King. 5.26. And finally in Iohn the Baptist, when as for their horrible Hypocrisie, he called the Pharises and Sa∣duces,
Generation of Ʋipers, and told them what they thought in their hearts, by soo∣thing and smoothing vp themselues, for that they had Abraham to their Father, Mat. 3.9. And not to these onely, but to manie other the faithfull and elect about this time, was this exceeding gift commu∣nicated, & that necessarily, for the streng∣thening and establishing of themselues, being as yet but new-borne babes in the house of God, amid so manie vpstart Scis∣matickes, Heretikes and Antichrists, in the faith of their profession,Two touch stones of the spirit of the word. that by the two touchstones; the one external of the word, the other internall of the spirit: of both which they were made partakers; and that in great manner and measure they might discerne and make difference between the false Doctour and the true teacher of the Gospell, euen to trie before they trust, and to touch before they take, to examine be∣fore they imbrace, and to be sure of the soundnesse and synceritie of any doctrine, before they beleeue and accept it. Accor∣ding to the counsell and commandement of our Apostle, afterwards to these men, to whom he here writeth in his Epistle; that they should in exercising this grace giuen
vnto them, when he saith, Dearely beloued, beleeue not euerie spirit, but trie the spirits whether they be good or no: annexing a rea∣son thereunto of the danger of the time, For many false Prophets are gone out into the world.A watch∣word of warning. A token of triall. And after this watch-word of war∣ning in the former verse, he giueth them a token of triall in the next verse: Hereby shall ye know the spirit of God; Euerie spirit that confesseth that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God, 1. Ioh. 4.1.2. &c. Yea how behoouefull this was, our Sauiour himselfe telleth vs in the Gospell: That there should arise false Prophets and false Christs, and should shew great signes and won∣ders; so that if it were possible they should de∣ceiue the verie elect, Mat. 24.24. Luk. 17.14. But not to dwell any longer in this matter, howsoeuer these words may after a manner be thus taken, fitly according to the Analogie of faith, yet is the former sence farre more proper, as comming nee∣rest to the meaning of the Apostle, and sentence of the Scripture, and to the which I my selfe doe in iudgement rather incline, being indeed nothing els but an holy Hy∣perbole: All thinges,All, for manie. here taken for many thinges, as it is vsuall euerie where in the
Scripture. As for example, and semblably as in this place: All Iudca all Ierusalem, and all the Region round about Iordan; went out into the wildernesse vnto Iohn the Baptist, not all, and none, least which had been vnpos∣sible; but manie, and all for the most part, Mat. 3.4. As likewise Luke, in that his definition of the Gospell; To be a treatise of all things which Iesus beganne to doe and teach: by all, meaning the especiall things, which were worthy to be written of him, and necessarie to be knowne of vs, Act. 1.19. For otherwise, the whole world could not containe the bookes that should be written of him, as Ioh. 21.25. And finally as Paul, That God will haue all men to be saued, &c. All,1. Tim. 2.4 not collectiue, but distributiue: Non pro singulis generum,Rom. 5.14.18. but pro generibus sin∣gulorum; or els all for many, as the same Apostle. All men iustified, verse, 18. and yet but many, ver. 14. Our Apostle signi∣fying hereby, that they had a great en∣crease and plentifull measure of know∣ledge, yea such and so great, as that they needed not any further instruction, hauing been alreadie fully informed in all things necessarie vnto their Saluation. As the Lord bethanked, the like may be saide of
many amongst vs in this time, of the noon light and sunshine of the Gospell, who al∣though they be but hearers of the word, yet in comparison of the lamentable igno∣rance of such blinde guides (which haue been heretofore in the time of Poperie, in whom was required no more then this, Qui bene Can: Con: Le: poterit is praesbiter esse: which must needs be the cause of the grosse superstition, and palpable darknesse of former ages) may be accounted in re∣spect of their learning in the holy Scrip∣tures, which they haue gotten by the blessing of God and their owne diligence, through their continuall hearing, reading, conference, meditation, and exercise in the word; not Disciples but Doctors, not Scholers but teachers, not young nouices, but perfect professours in the Church of God, being not onely sufficient to render an account of their faith, as Peter requi∣reth in euerie Christian, but also both apt to Catechise the ignorant, and able to con∣found the aduersarie, as Paul requireth in euerie Pastor. So that now if euer in this last age of the Church, is as it were the ri∣pest haruest of the Lord, the complement of the auncient prophesies, and the fulfil∣ling
of the former promises. There remai∣neth now no more but this, euen the ex∣pecting of the comming of the Lord of the haruest himselfe, of whom all the elect and the faithfull may reape and receiue that reward of their knowledge, which our Sauiour himselfe hath set downe in the Gospell, euen life euerlasting, which God the Father grant vs,Iohn. 17. who hath promised the same vnto vs in his word, Christ Iesus giue vnto vs that hath purchased the same for vs by his bloud, and the holy Ghost be∣stow vpon vs, who hath confirmed the same by this vnction: To whom, being three persons, and one immortal, inuisible and onely wise God, be all praise, honour, glorie, power, dominion and maiestie, both now, and for euer, A∣men. FINIS.
A FESTIVALL SERMON ON THE NA∣tiuitie of Christ. 1. TIM. 3.16. And without controuersie, great is the miste∣rie of godlinesse, which is God, manifested in the flesh, iustified in the spirit, seene of Angels, preached vnto the Gentiles, belee∣ned on in the world, and receiued vp into glorie. THE Apostle Paul, wri∣ting to his scholer Ti∣mothie, whether Elder or Euangelist, Doctour or Pastour, Byshop or Archbishop of Ephesus in the primitiue church; after he had described vnto him in most liuely, flourishing, and orient colours, the office both of a Byshop and Deacon, the two most necessarie functions in the
Churh of God, established by Christ, with all the adiuncts, properties, qualities, du∣ties, and complements belonging vnto them, both from the beginning of this chappter vnto the 15. verse thereof; and to what end and purpose? euen that Timothy might know how to behaue himselfe in Pauls absence, in the house of God. Which house of God, because he mentioned it, he taketh occasion to define the same, e∣uen to be the Church of God, the pillour and ground of truth. And taking his hint as it were from the last word of the defini∣tion, in the verse immediately before, which is truth; he taketh the like occasion to define the same truth, and so as it were descending downe from one thing vnto another;The parts of this text first defineth what that truth is, although he call it by another name, euen Godlinesse, and then setteth downe the parts of it. But before we come either to the one or to the other, he prefixeth a Pre∣face before. So that this text might seeme to consist of three parts:Preface. of a Preface in the first words. Without controuersie: of a de∣finition of Godlinesse or truth in the next,A definitiō Great u the mysterie of Godlinesse: and final∣ly of a description,A descrip∣tion. or rather an enumerati∣on
of the parts thereof, being six in num∣ber: Which is God manifested in the slesh, iu∣stafied in the spirit, &c. So that if you will, you may call this text a short summe or symbole of our faith, or an halfe creed con∣taining 6. Articles, or a small Catechisme consisting of 6. parts, or a breuiarie of chri∣stian religion comprehended in 6. princi∣pall points, or an Epitome of the Gospell comprised in 6. Aphorismes of diuinitie: to conclude, it may be tearmed the tree of truth which hath 6. branches,The tree of truth. the first and lowest branch toucheth the earth, and the highest and top branche reacheth to the heauens, not vnlike to a pleasant fountain or welspring, that deuideth it selfe into six streames. But of these things seuerally as they lie in order in the text. Without controuersie. It is the common course and custome of the holy ghost, and of the holy prophets and Apostles, the penclearkes and secreta∣ries of the spirit of God, thorow out the whole Scriptures, whensoeuer they menti∣on anie matter of waight or moment, whi∣ther it be wonder or miracle, strange in our eies and hard to be beleeuede; or ora∣cle and misterie, darke to be conceiued,
and obscure to be vnderstood; or an hea∣uie iudgment and punishment to be pow∣red vpon the wicked; or a gratious bene∣fit and blessing to be bestowed vpon the Godly, or any other thing that doth most neerely concerne our soules health and saluation, before they pronounce the one, or denounce the other; to the comfort and consolation of the elect, and to the terror and horror of the reprobate; to prefixe a preface before the same for to rouse vp their heauie soules, to waken their sleepie hearts, to quicken their dull spirits, and to stirre vp their deafe eares, heedfully to heare, and reuerently to regard that which followeth; that they might make vse and take profit, in faithfully beleeuing, and wil∣lingly allowing and approuing that which God commendeth and commaundeth in his word. As namely that most ordinarie preface, both in the olde & new testament; Ecce, Behold, as also that so common a∣mong the Prophets, Thus saith the Lord: likewise that so often in the Gospell of our Sauiour: I say vnto you: and verily I say vn∣to you: and againe, verely, verely I say vnto you. And finally that which is so vsual with Paul, to keepe our selues within the com∣passe
of our Apostle, and of his Epistle; yea this first Epistle to Timothy, It is a true saying, and by all meanes worthy to be recei∣ued, 1.15.3. 1. and 4.9. But this which is here vsed, passeth all the rest, being an affirmation of the Apostle with all asseue∣rance, and a confirmation with all assu∣rance: Signifying hereby, that the matter which followeth, is without all doubt, question, or controuersie; yea as the word it selfe purporteth in the Greeke, , Hoc est certum, compertum, conces∣sum, confessum ab omnibus, as being cer∣taine sure, granted and confessed of al men: and that therefore it is to be attended on diligently, receiued carefully, & kept saith∣fully. Against which if any obiect, that this is not onely not granted of some, but a so vtterly gainsaied, and not onely doub∣ted of, but flatly denied of manie; as first of Atheists, who neither acknowledge God nor Christ. Secondly of the Iewes, to whom this misterie is an offence. Thirdly of the Gentiles, to whom this Godlinesse is foolishnesse. Fourthly Turkes and Sa∣racens, to whom this truth is a fable. Fift∣ly of Heretikes, to whom this doctrine is nothing els but errour and falshood. As
namely, of the Martionites, that denie Christ to be manifested in the flesh; of the Arrians, that denie him to be iustified in the spirit; of the Saduces, that say there are no Angels nor spirits: and therefore that Christ could not be seene of Angels. As also some Infidels, who neuer yet heard of Christ: and likewise many worldlings, which neuer as yet beleeued on Christ. And lastly of the Apellites, Christolites, and Carpocratians, which gainsay Christ to haue been taken vp, and ascended into heauen, but onely his Godhead and Di∣uinitie; and if any part of his humanitie and manhood, then his soule onely, and not this body, which they affirme to be re∣solued into the foure Elements: and ther∣fore not this Scripture, nor no part thereof to be without controuersie. It may be an∣swered, that as Paul himselfe that wrote this, was the faithfull seruant of God; and as Timothy to whom this was written, was likewise a faithfull Pastour of the Church; euen so that the Apostle doth auerre and auouch this in the person and behalfe of al the faithfull; the children of God, the members of Christ, the conuerts to the Gospell, the numberof the elect, the pro∣fessors
of the truth, the beleeuing bre∣thren, as otherwise, not regarding and neglecting the crooked and corrupt iudg∣ment of the world, and the contrarie opi∣nion of the faithlesse, which are alients and strangers from the commonwealth of Is∣raell, as being without God in Christ Ie∣sus, who by reason of their ignorance doe dwell in darkenesse, blunder in blindnesse, and grope as it were at noone day, which neither care to learne nor can beleeue, be∣cause of their disobedience; and there∣fore casting them off, as it were in a reprobate sence. For according to the Philosopher, There is no reasoning with them that denie the principles of Arte; so there is no teaching of them that gainsay the Articles of our faith. But as hee also saieth concerning the humane sciences, Oportet addiscentem credere; that is, He that will learne, he must beleeue. So in the prin∣ciples or fundamentall points of true reli∣gion, it is first requisite and necessarie, that a Christian man bee fully resolued, that they are true before he be instructed in them. And so no doubt are all the good and the godly, the elect and the faithfull, thoroughtly perswaded of the whole Scrip∣ture
of God, giuen by diuine inspiration, that it is most certaine and true, and euerie part and parcell thereof; and therefore do giue their assent and consent thereunto, not onely with their heart beleeuing it, but with their mouth confessing it, with bold∣nesse professing it, with zeale protesting it, and finally with their liues witnessing it, becomming not onely belecuers, but also confessors and Martyrs of the same. So that our Apostle Paul might say safely and soothly, writing vnto such in way of pre∣face, to prepare them to attention and in∣tention, and without all contenrion, and to put them in minde of that wherein they before had been instructed and informed. Without contrcuersie, as being a matter a∣boue opinion without preiudice, and past all peraduenture, as containing nothing els in it, but demonstrations in Diuinitie. And thus much of the Preface or prepara∣tiue of the Apostle. Now of the matter or misterie it selfe in the next words. Great is the misterie of Godlinesse. In these words it contained the second part of this text,Misterie of Godlinesse euen a short summarie, sound and absolute definition of true reli∣gion, and the doctrine of the Gospel com∣prised
in the whole new Testament, here called of the Apostle Godlinesse, as he tear∣meth it, in the last words of the former verse Truth, being both one, as he likewise calleth it often by the same name, euen in this Epistle to go no further. As in the chap. following, 4.7. Cast away prophane and olde wiues fables, and exercise thy selfe vnto Godlinesse. And againe in the 8. verse next after, Bodily exercise profiteth little, but godlinesse is profitable to all things, &c. And thirdly, Chap. 6.6. Godlinesse is great gaine, &c. In all which places marke a threefold notable comparison and opposition. First, betweene the vanitie of prophane fables, and the veritie of syncere Godlinesse, in respect of the matter they both containe. Secondly, betweene the profit of the one and of the other, the one little, the other great; the one to a few things, the other to all things: as also of the promise, the one of the life present, the other of the world to come, in regard of the effects that followe them both. But especially in the third place, where it is: secondly called and accounted great, here a great misterie, there a great gaine; conferring and preferring it before all earthly gaine,
as being the chiefest good thing in this world, because it is without contention and with contentment. As in comparison whereof al wealth here on earth is but po∣uertie, all lucre losse, all aduantage dam∣mage, and this in respect of the reward that belongeth vnto them both. Being all one indeede with that pure religion and vndefiled before God, euen the Father which Iames describeth. 1.17. to consist in visiting the fatherlesse and widowes in their aduersitie, and to keepe a mans selfe vnspotted of the world; but with this dif∣ference, that Iames speaketh there of the practise, and Paul here of the contempla∣tion; the one of the vse, and the other of the knowledge, he of the doctrine therein comprised, our Apostle of the life therein commended. And here tearmed Godli∣nesse, as it is oftentimes in the Scripture for three reasons. As first in respect of the cause from whence it comes, which is God, from whom euerie good and perfect gift proceedeth; and therefore this most heauenly grace, much more of all the rest: for otherwise of our selues, how can we attaine vnto so diuine a blessing? being all such fooles as the Psalmist, 14.1. descri∣beth,
which say in their hearts (howsoe∣uer otherwise we speak with our mouths) That there is no God. And those wicked ones, which the same Prophet mentio∣neth, which haue not God in all our thoughts. Finally, those vngodly persons which Dauid likewise inueigheth against, which haue no feare of God before our eies, except the Lord of his great goodnesse, powre his spirit, plant his feare, roote his faith, and engraft his grace in vs. For al∣though we haue three sorts of preachers,3. sorts of preachers. which doe nothing els but preach & pro∣claime God vnto vs. As first Nature,Nature. which is the vnwritten law of God in our hearts, euen our owne consciences, which cannot but confesse and acknowledge e∣uen by naturall instinct onely, that there is a GOD, and that one and alone true God, of which the blessed Apostle Saint Paul, Romans the 2.15. which was the first and generall Preacher vnto all man∣kinde. The second preacher is the whole world, and all the workes that are therein,The world. which first offer and proffer themselues vnto our eies, to view and see as in a loo∣king glasse, the most mightie maker and creator of them: and secondly vnto our
hearts, to giue vs to vnderstand and per∣eeiue, that there is some excellent worke∣man and founder of this goodly Theater, and Royall Exchange: and finally to teach and tell vs, that he that framed and fashio∣ned all these things, was God himselfe. Of which second preaching Dauid, Psal. 19.1. The heauens declare the glorie of God, and the firmament sheweth foorth his handy∣worke. And of which Paul, Act. 14.17. when he saith, God left not himselfe without witnesse. And againe, Rom. 1.19. and 20. when he more fully saith, as that which may be knowne of God, , is manifest in his workes the inuisible things of God, that is his eternall power and Godhead, being seene and considered by the creation of the world.The word of God. The third prea∣cher is the word of God it selfe, wherein God himselfe, his goodnesse, and glorie is preached vnto vs most plainly, proclaimed lowdly, and described fully, and that so perfectly, as neither he will require, nor we desire any more knowledge as concer∣ning him, wherein we may bcholde him most cleerely, better then by the light of nature, which is as it were in the night, and darkely in comparison, and that more cui∣dently
then in the looking-glasse of his workes, which is but of steele, and there∣fore diuine in respect, when as in this as in a myrrour of Christall, God is seene o∣penly and face to face, and especially in the word of the Gospell, the vaile of the temple being rent, and Moyses vaile be∣ing taken away. As our Apostle, 2. Cor. 3.18. Notwithstanding, I say all which preachers and proclaimers, common cri∣ers and publike witnesses, which euidently testifie and certifie vs of God, yet are we so deafe and dull, that we wil not nor can∣not heare, except the Lord boare our eares with the piercer of his spirit, as he did the eares of Dauid, as he confesseth of him∣selfe, Psal. 40.6. Secondly his Truth is also called here Godlinesse,Truth. in respect of the subiect mat∣ter which it containeth, which is indeede nothing els but God, and that one God in vnitie of substance, and three in trinitie of persons, and all that is to be knowne of vs concerning him, not concealed in his se∣cret will, but reuealed in his manifest word; euen that which our Sauiour tear∣meth, Matth. 16.23. ; that is, the things which are of God, and not of men:
which Peter vnderstood not when he gaue ill counsell to our Sauiour, and therefore was worthily reprooued and called by the name of Satan, because he sauoured them not. And Paul, 1. Cor. 2.14. , the things of the spirit of God, which carnall or naturall man cannot per∣ceaue or conceiue, because they are foo∣lishnes vnto them; neither can they know or vnderstand them, because they are spi∣ritually discerned: Againe which Christ nameth , euen heauenly things, which are opposite and contrarie to , earthly thinges in the same verse, and finally that which Peter calleth , these words of eternall life, Iob. 6.68. which may be said to be the science of all sciences, being the knowledge of the only true God, and of him whom he hath sent, Christ Iesus, being of it selfe life eter∣nall, Ioh. 17.3. Yea as Aristole tearmeth his Logicke, ; so may it be called, euen not the instrument of all instruments, but the instruction of all instructions, , euen the hand and holdfast of the power, and horne of our saluation. Thirdly and lastly it is called Godlinesse,
of the end or effect, because it maketh or ought to make vs to liue a godly life: for as first Dauid saith of the Law, Psal. 19.9. and of the iudgement thereof, that they are true and righteous altogither; and then Paul, Rom. 7.17. that the law is holy, and the commandements holy, iust, and good. So Paul of all Scripture, which is giuen by diuine inspiration of God; That it is profitable to teach, to improoue, to cor∣rect, to instruct in righteousnes, that the man of God may bee absolutely perfect to euerie goodworke, 2. Tim. 3.17. but especially of the Gospell, which is the grace of God,The Gos∣pell. that bringeth Saluation vnto all men, and teacheth vs to denie vngodlinesse and worldly lusts, and to liue soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, 2. Tit. 11.22. which neither the golden sentences of Pythagoras, nor the Ethnicke Ethicks of Aristotle, nor the prophane Morals of Plutarch, nor the ver∣tuous Tables of Cebes, nor the studious offices of Tullie, nor the wise politicks of Lipsius, although they shew the way of li∣uing well, and containe in them notable and excellent precepts of ciuill conuersati∣on, in all kind of good manners and beha∣uiour, are able to effect, but onely this
powerfull word of Godlinesse, which can conuert the soule, and make a man on the earth, to be as an Angel in heauen, before whom all religions and professions which carrie the name of pietie and Godlinesse, are confounded, and fall as Dagon did be∣fore the Arke of the Lord. For as there is but one God, which is, which was, & which is to come, 1. Apoc. 3. One Iesus Christ, which is yesterday, to day, and the same also for euer, 12. Heb. 8. and one holy spirit, which is aboue all, thorow all, and in all, 2. Ephes. 6. In com∣parison of whom, all other Gods are but Idols; all other Sauiours, are but Seducers; and all other spirits, are but euill spirits of illusion. Euen so is there but one word of God only, which endureth for euer; in re∣spect whereof, all other wordes are but winde and vanitie; and but one truth of Christ, which is great and alwaies preuai∣leth; in regard whereof, all other verities are but fables and falshood; and but one pure and vndefiled religion, which al men are bound to confesse & professe; in com∣parison whereof, all other religions are but ceremonies and superstitions: and fi∣nally, but one sure and sound Godlinesse, which all Christians ought onely to know
and practise; in regard whereof, all other shewes and zeales of Holinesse, are but impieties, impurities, and pollutions; euen this Godlinesse, which our Apostle here mentioneth, and I my selfe now commend vnto you, which is neither the abhomina∣ble Idolatrie of the Papists, nor the absurd Vbiquitie of the Lutherans, nor the con∣fused communitie of the Famelists, nor the Phreneticall extacie of the Brownists, nor the phantasie of the Anabaptists, but only the pure diuinity of the Protestants, which embrace the synceritie of the Gospell. Great is the Mysterie. As we haue declared what this Godli∣nesse is,Definition of godlines so let vs now in orderspeake of the definition thereof, as it is here set down by our Apostle; calling it first a Mysterie, in regard of the matter therein contained: and secondly Great, in way of comparison. First therefore of the one, and then of the other. This word Mysterie in the Origi∣nall, signifieth an hidden secret, and not that which is hidden onely, but which is holy also of the Grecke , which is to teach deepe and diuine doctrine, from whence  proceedeth, and , an instiucter or minister of the word of God
and Sacraments; and therefore the aunci∣ent Lattin Fathers alwaies translate this word, Sacramentum tanquam sacrum secre∣tum; whereupon the foolish and vnlear∣ned Papists, tooke the occasion of that their foule error, in making so manie Sa∣craments: for wheresoeuer they found this word Mysterium in the Scripture; or Sa∣cramentum in the Fathers, straightway they being of a light credit, beleeued that ther∣by was meant a Sacrament: and therefore besides our two currant sacraments which Christ himselfe instituted, they haue coy∣ned fiue other which are counterfait, ma∣king them al to be in number seuen, wher∣in they shewe themselues guiltie of high treason against the diuine maiesty of God, in daring to be so bolde, as presumptuous∣ly to counterfait his sacred seales, and sa∣crilegiously to take vpon them the person of God himselfe, in robbing Christ of his Honor, and making newe Sacraments in his Church; and to conclude, in ignorant∣ly abusing this word, contrarie to the true sense and meaning therof. For if that were certaine that Mysterium shuld alwaies signifie a Sacrament,Misterium. that should there be manie more Sacraments then they them∣selues
make, sith the same is so often vsed in the olde and new Testament, but espe∣cially in the Gospell, for then should the kingdome of God be a Sacrament, Mar. 4.11. and the calling of the Gentiles, a Sacrament, Rom. 11.20. the preaching of the word, a Sa∣crament, Eph. 6.19. The iniquitie of Anti∣christ, a Sacrament, 2. Thess. 2.7. Faith, a Sacrament, 1. Tim. 3.9. The name of the whore of Bablyon, a Sacrament, Apoc. 17.5. And finally Godlinesse in this place, a Sa∣crament. And many more besides these which we cannot stand to repeate, because in the Greek they are said to be mysteries, which how absurd and foolish it is, those whom God hath induced with a wise hart of vnderstanding and knowledge, may ea∣sily perceiue and discerne. And how iniu∣rious they are against vs in calling vs Sa∣cramentaries, for syncere vsing and rightly receiuing the Sacrament of the Supper, ac∣cording to Christs owne institution and instruction, when as they rather deserue the same name in stamping out by the mint of their owne braine, more and other Sacraments then our Sauiour ordained in his Gospell; as we worthely also tearme them sacrificers, in that they seeme daily
to offer in their Idolatrous masse a bloudy sacrifice propitiatorie, both for the quicke and the dead. But the vnskilfull and super∣stitious Papists, make not so honourable account and holy regard of this word My∣sterie, and that for want of iudgement in the reading of the Scriptures and the Fa∣thers; for vnto them may it be said in this respect, as our Sauiour in the Gospell vnto the Scribes and Pharises in the like, Ye erre not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God: as on the contrarie part, the vulgar sort doe prophanely and irreligiously a∣buse the same, in tearming their vile and illiberall artes, their Mechanicall sciences Manuall craftes, by the name of Myste∣ries, they both running into extreamities, the one in enhauncing it too high, the o∣ther in debasing it too lowe, when as in∣deede to keepe the golden meane, we are to deeme so high of it, as to iudge it to be some heauenly and supernaturall thing: and therefore according to the phrase of the Scripture, and meaning of the holy ghost, we are to learne to call anie difficult and diuine secret by this name, as our A∣postle tearmeth Godlinesse in this place, sig∣nifying hereby not onely generally, that
the whole Scripture and the word of God contained both in the olde and new Testa∣ment, is a mysterie in this sense, and ther∣fore likened of Hierome, not only to a shallow fourd, wherein a lambe may wade; but also to a deepe sea, wherein an Elephant or Tyger may swimme. Whereupon our Sauiour in respect of the profunditie thereof, wil∣leth vs Iohn, 5.39. to search the Scriptures; the word in the Greeke which he there v∣seth, , signifying a diligent seeking and enquiring, being a Metaphore or bor∣rowed speech, taken from Didoppers or duckers vnder the water, which flock not aloft, but diue downe to the bottome, to finde and fetch any thing vp, called in Lat∣tin Vrinatores ab vrino, which is deriued of , or els from Miners, which doe not pare the ground, but digge deepely manie fadomes into the earth, for the gold, siluer, pearles, precious stones, or other mettals and minerals which there lurke & lie hid. As our Sauiour calleth the Doctrine of the Gospell, the mysteries of the kingdome of hea∣uen, Mat. 13.11. and therefore in another place he telleth his Disciples, that he had manie other things to speake vnto them, which were as then too heauie to carrie,
and too hard to bear away for them, which were not as yet able and stable pillours of Christs Church, but weake and young no∣uices in Gods house; for there is not onely in the Scripture milke fit for babes, which are vnexpert in the word of Righteousnes, but also strong meate which belongeth to them which are of age and perfect, which through long custome haue their wits ex∣ercised to discerne betweene good and e∣uill, as the Apostle Heb. 5.13.14. Wher∣upon Peter also he saith of the Epistles of Paul a part of this Scripture, that there are manie things in them that are hard to bee vnderstood, which many peruert euen to their owne damnation; for as in humane learning and secular arts and sciences, there are manie matters verie hard to be known and learned; as the Axiomes of the Logi∣tians, the Principles of the Mathematiti∣ans, the Aphorismes of the Physitians, the Maximes of the Lawyers, the Problemes of the Philosophers, the Emblemes of the Poets; euen so are there in the Diuine knowledge of godlinesse, manie difficult things to be vnderstood; the Apocrypha of the olde Testament, the Apocalips of the new Testament; and as prophane Authors
make mention of the leaues of the Sibyls, the Oracles of Apollo, the riddles of Sphinx, which no block-headed dunces like Da∣uus, but onely pregnant wits as Oedipus, can expound and declare. So are there in the holy writers, manie darke speeches and hard sentences, as the Prouerbs of Salomon, and the Parables of our Sauiour, the visi∣ons of Esay, Ezechiel and Daniel, and the Reuelations of Peter, Paul and Iohn; which passe in obscuritie Democritus depths, He∣raclitus darknesse, Aristophanes cloudes, Platoes members, Aristotles meteors and Metaphysicks, and Scipioes dreame; and which no naturall man by the helpe of rea∣son, but only the spirituall man by the gift of wisedome can conceiue and perceaue, as our Apostle before. So that I say not onely generally in regarde of the whole Scripture,Godlines. is Godlinesse here called a my∣sterie, but also particularly in respect of these speciall mysteries, hereafter named and set downe in their order; whereof the chiefest is the first, euen the greatest my∣sterie of all others, vpon which all the o∣ther depend, as consequences and cohe∣rents, euerie one of them containing in them, matter of great maruel and wonder,
in the eies and eares of flesh and bloud in∣credible and impossible, surpassing the reach of humane reason, and surmounting the mediocritie of mans wit, as shall bee shewed at large, when we come seuerally to discourse of them. And thus much of the former part of this definition of God∣linesse; that is, of the Genus of it, which is Mysterie. Now therefore of the other part, which is the difference in the same de∣finition, being here called not only a my∣sterie, but also a great mysterie. Great. In this word, our Apostle amplifieth this mysterie of godlinesse in way of com∣parison, preferring and extolling it aboue and before all mysteries; for euen in the chiefe points of our religion, in the princi∣pall articles of our faith, in the deepe my∣steries of God, some are greater, more ex∣cellent and heauenly then other some. In which respect our Apostle calleth also the spirituall marriage, betweene Christ the bridegroome, and the Church his spouse, a great mysterie, Ephes. 5.32. So called here great, as truth is said to be great and strongest, euen by the voice of all the peo∣ple, 3. Esd. 4.14. As being greater and stron∣ger
then wine, then the king, then women: As the Sunne and the Moone are called Great lights, 1. Gen. 16. in comparison of the rest of the Plannets, and all other fixt starres being greater then any of them all. As Niniuie is called a great and excellent Ci∣tie, because it was of three daies iourney, Ionas, 3.3. As the stone that was laide a∣gainst Christs Sepulchre, a great stone, be∣cause it was the greatest that could be got∣ten, Mat. 27.60.Mysterie great in 3. respects. This being great in three respects: first, in regard of the cause: se∣condly, of the matter: thirdly, of the ef∣fect thereof. Great therefore, because the efficient cause and Author of this myste∣rie is great, euen God, who is not an Idoll as the Gods of the Heathen, but great and terri∣ble, Deut. 7.21. euen a great Lord, feared aboue all Gods, Psal. 96.4. and of whom a∣gaine the Prophet Dauid saith, who is so great a God as our God? Psal. 76.14. As in respect of our Sauiour Christ Iesus, the mouth, word, and wisedome of his father, the speaker, opener, and vtterer of this mysterie, who is called the great prince Michael, Daniel, 22.1. and a great Pro∣phet by the common opinion of the people, Luk. 7.16. the great high priest by the Apostle,
Heb. 4.14. and the great shepheard of the sheepe, 13.20. And in respect of the A∣postles, the preachers and publishers of this mysterie, who were the great doctors of the people, and therefore called Pillours of the Church, 2. Gal. 9. and great Apostles, 2. Cor. 11.5. Yea, and greater then he, then whom there was not a greater borne of wo∣men, euen Iohn the Baptist. For euen so great doth our Sauiour Christ make euery one of thē, when he saith, He that is least in the kingdome of God, is greater then he, Luk. 7.28. For who so great as the Creator & founder of all the world? who so great as the great Sauiour and redeemer of al man∣kinde? who so great as those holy and hea∣uenly Ambassadours of God, vnto all the people and nations of the world? Not Iu∣piter so great, the father of all the Heathen Gods, although the Romans call him Op∣timum Maximum. Nor Diana Iupiters daughter so great, although the Ephesians crie out neuer so often; Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Nor Mercurie so great, the interpreter and messenger of the Gods, although the Grecians name him Trisme∣gistos. And according to the greatnesse of this God, so is the greatnesse of this my∣sterie.
Againe, it is great in respect of the matter which it containeth, and that not onely in regard of quantitie, but also of qualitie; as first great in quantitie, because it containeth all things requisite to bee knowne of God, and necessarie to be be∣leeued of vs, euen the whole dutie of man, consisting in two things, in fearing God, and keeping his commandements, which is the end of all, as Salomon saith; and the sum of all the olde Testament, Eccl. 12.13. As also the summe of all the new Testament, which is comprised likewise in two com∣mandemēts, in louing God with all our harts, &c. and in louing our neighbour as our selfe; vpon which two things hangeth (as our Saui∣our in the Gospell) the whole law and the pro∣phets, Mat. 22.40. and this in respect of the whole Scripture in generall. Which may be called the great Pandects of Gods holy lawe, wherein all things are set down so perfectly and fully concerning our sal∣uation, as that there is nothing wanting nor superfluous in the same, and therefore nothing to be added thereto, nor taken there from; insomuch, that it may be said of this booke of God, so called of the Greeke, , in way of
excellencie and singularitie, as being the booke of all bookes, as Martialis of Liuie: Pellibus exiguis arctatur Liuius ingēs, &c. so, Pellibus exiguis arctantur biblia magna, Omnia quae tamen haec nō capit orbis habet. Not as the Poet, that his studie could not holde, but as the Euangelists, that the whole world could not containe the things that are comprised therein, Ioh. 20.25. And last, which maketh the studie of the Scriptures, and profession of diuinity to be most hard, long, and infinit of all other, although to some shallow heads, shuttle braines, and simple wits, it seemeth to be a kinde of knowledge, that is plaine, easie, and soone learned, contrarie to the iudgement and prescript of Esra: in the 1. psalme, being a Preface to all the rest of the Psalmes, that for the necessitie, vtilitie, difficultie, and profunditie thereof, wee must meditate therein day and night, not in the booke of the Psalmes onely, but in the whole lawe of God; otherwise then a number of vaine worldlings do fondly suppose, who deem peeuishly & peruersly, that the holy Scrip∣ture is but a toy and triflle, and the matter thereof too base, as beeing too course and grosse for the fine edge of their politicke
sconces. Such as Galen the physitian, who reading the first booke of Moyses Genesis, dispraised the same, as wanting sound and sufficient arguments of proofe; saying scoffingly, that Moyses the Author thereof, affirmed much, but confirmed nothing. As also Alphonsus the tenth king of Spaine, who reading in the beginning of Genesis the Historie of the Creation, found great fault with the first making of the world, and the things that are therein, and said blasphemously, that if he had been present at the Creation, he would haue ordained or ordered things in a better course. And as Cardinall Bembus saide vnto Sadolet a Byshop most irreligiously, when as hee comming vnto him, and finding him dili∣gently studying the Scriptures, and paine∣fully writing a comment vpon the Epistle to the Romans. Lay aside this trash and trumperie; such vanitie becomes not a man of thy grauitie. And finally as Cle∣ment the fift, Pope of Rome, most wicked∣ly and Antichristianly said, that he might decree anie thing against the Epistles of Paul and the olde testament, as being greater then Paul or any other Author of the olde Testament, in the decrees of his
Parliament holden at Rome, called Deci∣siones Romae, 1. Dist. 10. cap. Si Papa. Which common prophane opinion and corrupt iudgment, is the cause why so manie preg∣nant and proper wits diuert their mindes from the studie and profession of Diuinitie, and why also the multitude make so vile an account of the word, and the ministers therof, loathing that which they ought to loue; and contemning them, whom they ought to honour: As being the cause also of so manie superficial diuines, leane clear∣gions, and speaking preachers, who thinke they haue a sufficient Librarie, if they haue a bible, Caluins Institutions, and Peter Martyrs Common places in English; and knowledge and learning enough, if they can Paraphrastically post ouer in haste a whole Psalme or Chapter at once, like vn∣to him that with light foote runneth ouer a quackmire for feare of falling in ouer head and eares, and can speake extempory, and that many houres togither, neither ty∣ing themselues to text nor time. But if we will beleeue Austin, we shall finde diui∣nitie to be a more deepe studie, and the Scriptures themselues to be more hard and profound, Tanta est enim Christianarum
profunditas literarum, as he saith in his Epi∣stle to Volusian; vt in eis quotidie proficerem, sieas solas ab ineunte pueritia, vs{que} ad decrepi∣tam senectutem, maximo ocio, summo studio, optimo ingenio conarer addiscere, &c. That is, that such and so great is the depth and pro∣funditie of Christian knowledge in the holy scriptures, as that a man might daily profit therein, and encrease his knowledge more and more; yea if he should doe nothing els but stu∣die them euen from his childhood to his olde age, hauing the greatest leasure, vsing the most diligence, endued with the sharpest wit, and holpen with the best memorie: giuing this reason thereof in the words following; Tam multa, tam{que} multiplicibus mysteriorum vmbraculis opaca, intelligenda proficientibus restant. So manie and manifold mysteries remaine behind, to be vnderstood of them that haue alreadie profited therein, & that not only in the words, but also in the mat∣ter of the Scriptures; such depth of wise∣dome lieth hid therein, vt annosissimis, acu∣tissimis, flagrantissimis, that euen to the most auncient, most wittie, and most studious for their infinite desire of learning, may be said that which the same Scripture hath in another place, when a man hath made an
end, then doth he begin againe: signifying hereby, that he that is the greatest Rabbi, and profoundest Doctour in the Vniuersi∣ties, is but a scholer, and that of the lowest forme in the schoole of Christ. And that therefore euerie wise Christian, be he ne∣uer so skilfull in the Scriptures, although he be so cunning with the Scribes & Pha∣rises, as that be can tell how often euerie word and euerie letter is contained in the Bible, may with sage Solon, although an Heathen, say truely ; that is, that he shall neuer cease to learne, vntill he leaue to liue, and this not onely in respect of the whole Scripture in generall is this mysterie of Godlinesse, for the subiect matter that it containeth, great in quantitie as I haue already declared; but also in regard of this special graund myste∣rie of the manifestation of God in the flesh, and of euerie one of those particular branches, which depend and follow vpon the same. The which when I seuerally con∣sider I must needes crie out and say with the Poet, Ingenium fateor transcendit copia rerum, Materia vires exuperante meas. For as concerning the first; it is so great a
mysterie,The great∣nesse of the mysterie. that it not only passeth the reach of mans reason, but farre surpasseth the capacitie & conceit of Angels themselues, to comprehend the depth, length, breadth, and height thereof, containing many mi∣racles, and comprising many mysteries in it; and vpon which dependeth the whole summe of our saluation, and the compleat worke of our redemption: and after the which in consequence and coherence, fol∣loweth all the rest of the Articles of our faith, all the promises of the Lord, all the mercies of God the Father, all the merits of Christ Iesus his sonne, all the fruits and effects of the holy Ghost; and finally, all the blessings and benefites which are be∣stowed vpon the Church, as shall be de∣clared more at large hereafter in the due place. The second, his iustifying in the spirit; it containeth in it the mysterie of the Hy∣postaticall vnion, as in one person to be two natures, the Humanitie and Diuinitie of our Sauiour, to be both God and man, whereby he is become our only mediator; which darke mysterie none can vnder∣stand, but by the gift of wisedome, nor perceiue but with the eies of faith. The
third, seene of Angels, a mysterie no lesse then the former, that flesh should be be∣holden of spirits, man to be admired of angels, principalities to testify of a wretch, and powers to beare witnesse of a worme, and no man. The fourth, he preached vn∣to the Gentiles as incredible a thing, as if a great Monarch of the world, should send his chiefe nobles with honourable ambas∣sage to bruit beastes, offering and proffe∣ring holy things to dogges, and precious pearles to swine. The fift, beleeued in the world like the other, as impossible a mat∣ter for dumbe and deafe blocks, stocks and stones: first to heare, and then to beleeue, and to become the children of Abraham. And finally the fixt, receiued vp into glo∣rie, the last miraculous mysterie, but not the least misticall miracle: for ignominie to become glorious, flesh to be made spi∣rit, and earth to be taken vp into heauen. All which, when a man considereth, hee must needs say, Great art thou O Lord, and great are thy workes, in wonderfull wisedome hast thou made them all. But not onely is this mysterie great in matter in respect of quantitie, as Loue is said to bee the greatest comandement, Mat. 22. but also for qua∣litie,
as charitie is said to be the greatest vertue. For first for whole godlines which containeth in it, the great promises and pu∣nishments, the great mercies and iudge∣ments of the Great Lord, which he descri∣beth out vnto vs; the great Citie of the great King, the great doome of the great day, the great signes of the great Sauiour, , Magnalia Dei, the great things of the great God, such as the eie of mā hath neuer seene, the care of man neuer heard, the heart of man could neuer conceiue, such as faith only apprehendeth, hope on∣ly taketh holde of, the spirit onely percei∣ueth, and grace onely receiueth, foretold of the Prophets, fulfilled of our Sauiour, promised in his word, performed in the life to come, here in desire, there in deede, of which now the elect haue but onely a tacke and tast, but hereafter shall haue a ful fruition and plenarie possession: great in ioy, great in pleasure, great in comfort, great in countenance; finally, great euerie way, and in euerie respect. And secondly, for this speciall mysterie and coherents thereof, what thing greater then the Incar∣nation of Christ, then the manifestation of God, in the flesh? and what greater then
the iustification of Christs diuinitie, and his declaration to be God? what greater then the testimonie of elect Angels? what greater matter then the publishing of the Gospell, the conuersion of the Gentiles, and the ascention of our Sauiour? Farre greater then any mysteries that were be∣fore time, mentioned in the olde Testa∣ment, then the creation of the wide world, then the inundation of the earth, then the deliuerance of the Israelites out of Egypt, then the promulgation of the Lawe, and the returne of the Iewes out of the capti∣uitie of Babylon; which are all notwith∣standing great miracles, and most meruai∣lous in our cies. And as this misterie is great, first in respect of the cause, and se∣condly in respect of the matter, both for quantitie and qualitie, not onely general∣ly, but also particularly, as we haue shew∣ed at large: So thirdly is it called great, in respect of the effect thereof, for that it maketh them great which vnderstand and beleeue this mysterie, which make vse and take profit by it. As first generally God∣linesse, this mysterie made Moyses verie great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaos seruants, and in the sight of the
people, Exod. 11.3. This made Dauid haue a name like the name of the great men, that are in the earth, 1. Chron. 17.8. This also made Daniel of great reputation with the people, Dan. 13.64. Euen as Alexander Pompey and Constantine the great, so called for their great Artes & atchieuements, but particularly this great mystery of the Gos∣pel, this manifestation of God in the flesh: for so saith our Sauiour whosoeuer shall obserue and teach anie of the commande∣ments of the Gospell, the same shall be called great in the kingdome of heauen, Mat. 5.19. And especially the precept of humilitie, and therein to follow the presi∣dent of our Sauiour, and be as a little child,Humilitie. the same shall be the greatest in the kingdome of heauen. 18.4. This made Iohn the Bap∣tist great, as the Angell foretolde, that he should be great in the sight of the Lord, Luk. 1.15. and not onely great, but the greatest Prophet that was borne of wo∣men. And yet such and so great is the ef∣fect of this misterie, that it maketh him that is the least in the kingdome of hea∣uen, to bee greater then he, 7.28. This made Marie great, as she confesseth her selfe saying, he that is mighty hath magnified
me; and therefore her soule magnified the Lord, as it is in her Magnificat, Luk. 2. Is this mysterie then of Godlinesse conside∣red either generally or particularly? Great that we may adde an edge to that which hath been spoken, great, in respect of the soueraigne Author thereof, which is God, great, in regard of the subiect matter ther∣of, the word and will of God; finally great in respect of the soule sauing effect therof, to be great in the kingdome of heauen. Then if thou wouldest be brought to God, if thou care for thine owne saluation, it thou desire euerlasting blisse; renownce all other false religions, forsake all other vain professions, make account of no other fond mysterie: there is but one way without wandring, and that is Christ; but one ve∣ritie without errour, and that is the Gos∣pell; but one life without death, and that is in heauen. This great mysterie in this text is that life, this truth is that veritie, and this Godlinesse is that way, Haec via sine de∣uio, haec veritas sine dubio, hac vita sine taedio, as saith a learned Father. To this mysterie let all new inuentions, vnwritten verities and humane doctrines giue place; the Ca∣bala of the Iews, the Alcaron of the Turke,
the obscurities of the Gnosticks, the pro∣fundities of the Valentinians, the illumi∣nations of the Catharists, and the traditi∣ons of the Catholiks; all which must needs vanish away as the mistie cloudes before the sunne, and be scattered as the dust be∣fore the winde, and finally be consumed as the rods of the charmers of Egypt by Aarons Rodde: euen as all the Oracles of the Heathen ceased at the comming of Christ, and all the religions were put to si∣lence by the preaching of the Gospell, and the euill spir its of Sathan which possessed men, were throwne out by the power of the spirit of the holy Ghost — To this religion therefore only ought all the faith∣full christians to giue their assent and con∣sent, which no Tyrant could euer extin∣guish, were he neuer so mightie or maliti∣ous, nor hereticke confute, were he neuer so learned or subtile, nor anie enemy con∣uince, were he neuer so powerfull or poli∣ticke: which may be for a time yclouded or ecclipsed, but shall neuer wholy loose her light, and pressed and depressed for a while, but shall neuer finally be oppressed; and lastly may be assailed and assaulted, but neuer vtterly vanquished. To con∣clude
therefore, leaue all other Doctrines and cleaue onely to this mysterie, forsake all other professions and betake thy selfe onely to this Godlines, cast away all other falshoods and holde fast this truth; and let neither the buffetings of Satan, the baites of the flesh, the pleasures of sinne, nor the golden apples of the world cause thee to let go thy holde, but holde it fast for euer, euen to the end. God manifested in the flesh. Thus much of this great mysterie of truth or godlinesse, as it is here generally defined of the Apostle; now of the parti∣cular parcels and branches thereof in their due order. But first of the maine branche, out of which the rest doe grow and flow, contained in these words. Man hauing lost his first perfection, forsaken his for∣mer puritie, and made himselfe subiect to corruption; in the beginning breaking Gods commandements, euer after trans∣gressing the lawe of the Lord, and neuer ceasing to sinne, in thought, word & deed, not onely our first parents, the Authors of our iniquities, causers of our infirmities, and originall rootes of our pollution; but also all the children of men in their gene∣rations,
in all times and ages of the world, as being the spawne of those rebels, the corrupt fruites of such rotten trees, the bitter water of vnpure fountaines, , foules of the same feather, birdes of the same brood, sinners of the same stampe, sinning sonnes of sinfull pa∣rents, according to that prouerbe of the Prophet; The fathers haue eaten sower grapes, and their childrens teeth are set on edge. For as the Apostle Paul saith out of the Psalmist, There is none righteous, no not one, there is none that vnderstandeth, there is none that seeketh after God, they haue all gone out of the way, they haue been made alto∣gither vnprofitable, there is none that doth good, no not one, &c. Rom. 3. And as the Prophet Esay, From the sole of the foote vn∣to the crowne of the head, there is nothing whole therein, but wounds, swellings, and soars full of corruption, 1.6. And finally as the Lord God himselfe, All the imaginations of the thoughts of mans heart are onely euill con∣tinually, Gen. 6.5. And therefore man to deserue nothing els but condemnation, curse and death: as first condemnation, for so the Apostle, By the offence of one, the fault came on all men vnto cōdemnation, Rom.
5.18. Secondly curse, for as saith the same Apostle out of Deut. 27.26. Cursed is eue∣rie man that continueth not in all things which are written in the booke of the Lawe, to doe them, Gal. 3.10. Thirdly death, for accor∣ding to the commination of the law, who∣soeuer shall not performe euerie iote and tittle of the lawe, shall die the death: and the conclusion of our Apostle, The wages of sinne is death, Rom. 6. And the last with condemnation, curse and death, not tem∣porall or for a time, but perpetuall and for euer, because man himselfe was neuer able to beare and abide as the Lord himselfe knew, who seeth all his frailties and infir∣mities; and yet it being necessarie that man hauing sinned, man should suffer; for that the sentence of condemnation should not be reuersed, nor curse of the lawe reuoked, nor the doome of death redeemed, but that one must needes die for the people, and one for all, and not that man alone, as being sufficient, because all men had trāns gressed; nor a beast being too base to sa∣tisfie, for so great and so manie trespasses; nor an Angell, as being too weake for such a punishment and passion. It pleased God the Father of his gratious goodnesse,
to send downe his onely begotten sonne out of his owne bosome, and it liked also Christ himselfe the sonne of God: yea God of God, light of light, verie God of verie God, of his owne intire loue, to vouchsafe to discend downe from the highest hea∣uen vpon the earth, and to be incarnate, incorporate, and compassed about with our claiey mould, to take vpon him our vile and seruile nature, and to be manife∣sted vnto the world in our weake, fraile and wretched flesh, and to be borne of a silly, simple and sinfull woman, to per∣forme for man all obedience, and to re∣forme his disobedience, to ransome sinne, and redeeme his transgression, by his body to saue our soules, and by his owne death to purchase our liues, by his owne crucify∣ing to take away our curse, by his owne condemnation to obtaine a common sal∣uation, and by his owne sacrifice to make a generall satisfaction for all other vnto God his father, O magna gratia, magna dig∣natio. And this is that great & wonderfull mystery which is so notably set out by the Euangelists in the Gospell, which when we consider, our spirite must needes be rauished, our senses benummed, our
Witts captiuated, and all our outward and inward parts and powers to be astoni∣shed, that the word should be come fleash Iohn. 1.14. and to be made of the seede of Da∣uid, according to the fleash, Rom. 1.3. and be∣ing in the fourme of God, and thinking it noe robberie to be equall with God, should make himselfe of no reputation, and take vpon him the fourme of a seruant, and be made like vn∣to men, and be formed in shape of a man, Phil. 2.6.7. which is such a misterie, that I may vse Austin, words in an other matter. Yet fitly applied to this purpose, Vt altitudine ipsa rerum superbos terreat, profunditate attē tos teneat, veritate magnos pascat, vtilitate paruulos nutriat: in his 5. lib Genesi ad Lite: Chapit 3. that with the depth thereof, it terrifieth the arrogant, which thinke they can conceiue all thinges, with the hardnesse there∣of, it will make men attentiue and studious, which otherwise would be idle and negligent; and with the truth thereof, will exercise the most perfit and able, which thinke all matters easie and plaine, and lastly with the pressire and fruitfulnesse thereof, will nourish the simplier sorte, which like younge sucklinges can hardly brooke anie stronge meates, and not onely such a misterie but such a greate
misterie, as what could be greater, saith the same Father, that a virgin should cōceaue a sonne without the seede of man. What greater, then that God should be borne of a woman? and what finally greater then this, that she that confesseth herselfe a low∣ly handmaid, should become the mother of her owne maker? Where vpon Austin saieth vpon the Magnificat, Misterium incarnationis verbi super omnia constat esse ineffabile. Wherein are not only manie, but also greate miracles, as that a virgin should become a mother, God a man,Greate miracles. and the Cre¦atour a Creature, that truth should come out from the Earth, that Righteousnesse should looke downe from Heauen, that maiestie shuld take vpon it Humilitie, that he that is the Auncient of daies; and was for euer before all daies, and created euery day, should be borne in a daie to deli∣uer vs from the euill of euerie day, that he by his birth, should bestow vpon his mo∣ther the gifte of fruitfulnes, & yet not take away from her the vertue of virginitie, that he that in the beginning of the world made the first Adā, according to his own Image and similitude, should make him∣selfe afterwards in the ending of the world
according to our similitude and likenesse, descending downe vnto vs by that which he tooke of ours, & deliuering vs by that, which remained in himselfe, conceiued by the holy Ghost, not of the substance, but by the power thereof, not by generation, but by benediction, Finally not by propa∣gation, but by sanctification, and his Mo∣ther conceauing him, not by man, but by God; not by seede, but by the spirit, not by humaine meanes, but by the ouer sha∣dowing of the most highest. So that as he was borne without Carnall copulation, so was he brought forth with out mortall corruption. And as he was first borne of his Father before al worldes without a mo¦ther, and did create the world; so secondly was he borne of his mother in the world without a father, that he might consecrate by his deuine Maiestie inuisible, by his hu∣maine birth visible in them, both wonder∣full, of the one as impossible to be expre∣ssed the Prophet saith, And who shall de∣clare his generation? Esaie. 53. Of the other as necessarie to be knowne and credible to be beleeued, The Euangelist; And the birth of Christ Iesus was after this māner, Math 1. Before he was borne abiding in the bo∣some
of his father, and yet filling the wo∣mbe of his mother, in the time of his birth the euerlasting Father in heauen, and yet a Young infant vpon the Earth after birth, a light shining in the world, as Iohn, and yet dwelling in the light that cannot be attained vnto, as Paule; of which his birth and of the manner and ende thereof Austin hath these sweete words. Ʋt Sponsus proce∣ssit de thalamo suo, vt gigas exultauit ad currendam viam, speciosus vt sponsus, fortis vt gigas, amabilis et terribilis, serenus & seue¦rus, pulcher bonis, asper malis, that is, he went forth as a bridegrome, &c. Which manner of his bringing forth, was farre more strāg then any other birthes of mankind that were before, then that first of Adam,foure crea∣tions of man. who was only formed of the slime of the Earth without man or woman, then the second, Eue, who was made of a ribbe of man on∣ly without any woman, and then the third of all men in generall both by man and woman, according to the ordinarie and common course of nature. This foure be∣ing by woman alone without man, a new thing, a strang matter, a wonderfull mira∣cle, neuer the like seene nor hard of before. Yea such a marueile, as that the reporte
of it made an infant to skippe in his mo∣thers wombe for Ioye, the Heauens to speake by a starre to declare the wonder of it, the wise men from the East to come from farre to see and be eyewitnesses of it, the Angels to singe in the Consort, and to shew fourth their gladnesse after it was made knowne vnto them, The sheaphards of Bethlem to runne in hast to behould it, after it was declared vnto them, the aunci∣ent father Simeon, to desire to die and de∣parte in peace after he had seene his salua∣tion. Finally, this made the ould Prophe∣tesse Anna, when as by the motion of the spirit this thing was reueled vnto her, to leaue her prayer to God, and to fal to prai∣sing the Lord Christ, and from fasting, to come not only to confesse him her selfe, but also to commend him vnto other. And such a misterie, as none was thought wor∣thie to be messenger of the same, not a ho∣ly preist nor a deuine Frophet, nor a greate Patriarch, but an holy Angell and Archan∣gel euen Gabriell that standeth in the pre∣sence of God. Whose countenance being terrible, his garments glorious, and his cōming sodaine, in visiting the virgin Ma∣rie, he troubled her, and yet his voice being
pleasant, his words sweete, and his tydings gladsome, in saluting her comforted her; telling her that as she was the beloued vir∣gin of God, and handmaide of God, so she should be the blessed mother of God, and spouse of God. And such a miracle, as whereby the word did not perish be∣ing turned into fleash, but fleash least it should perish cleauing to the word; that as man is both soule and bodie, so Christ might be both God, and man; not by con∣fusion of nature, but by vnitie of person, and this conceaued and perceaued not with the Eies of the fleash, but with the faith of the harte, the only begotten and the first begotten of his Father, and the first begotten of his bretheren lying in a manger, & filling the whole world, wrap∣ped in swadling clothes, and thundering in the Cloudes; sucking on earth the pappes of his mother, and yet sitting in Heauen at the right hand of God his Father; and is finally such a greate mysterie as that it compriseth the principall Pillour of our faith, the most certaine groūd of truth, the strongest foūdation of the Church: where∣in we are to consider first, the vnspeakea∣ble loue of God the father towards vs,
who would not spare his owne and only sonne, but freely gaue him to saue vs. And our Sauiour in the gospell, God so loued the world, that he gaue his only begotten sonne, &c. Secondly his owne incompara∣ble loue in shewing himselfe so kinde and courteous vnto mankind as to suffer him∣selfe to be cast in his mould, to be clothed with his fleash, & to be compassed about his infirmities which he himselfe commen deth, Iohn. 15.13. Saying to his disciples, greater loue then this hath no man, &c. Both which their loues our Apostle Paule set∣teth out most liuelie, Rom. 5.8. when he saith, God setteth out his loue towards vs, se∣ing the while we were yet sinners Christ died for vs. And thirdly our Sauiour Christs low¦ly humilitie herein likewise appeareth as Paule also declareth the same, as that he be∣ing in forme of God, and thinking it no rob∣berie to be equall with God, made himselfe of no reputation, &c. Phil. 2.6.7. Here then first we are to know for our instruction the two natures of Christ, secondlie the de∣stinction of both his natures,2 natures of Christ. as first his diuinitie, in that the Apostle calleth him God,Three di∣stinctions. and then his humanitie in affirming him to be manifested in the fleash, Thirdly
the Hipostaticall vnion and communitie of of properties in one & the same personne of our Sauiour, three deepe misteries con∣tained, and couched in three words in qui∣bus saieth Beza verie briefly duae ponuntur, distinguntur, vniuntur naturae Christi where∣by three sorts of Heresies are confuted. First the Arrirans that denie the diuinitie of our Sauiour Christ secōdly the Marcianits who gaine say Christ to haue a humaine and fleashlie bodie, but only an heauenly spiritual bodie, thirdly the Nestorians, who affirme Christ to haue two persons, one of his Humanitie, the other of his diuinitie, and that his manhoode was deified and changed into his godhead. Secondly we are to learne for our edification, that we may make vse and take proffit in our life and conuersation by this misterie, euen three thinges Austin comprehendeth them together in one sweete sentence, Ser. 22.3 things to be lerned by this mi∣sterie. De tempore in these words, omnis Natiui∣tatis schola est humanitatis officina patientiae massa, virtutis agonia. First humilitie in fol∣lowing him in the like lowlinesse, in ma∣king our selues equall with them of the lo∣wer sort, as Paule exacteth, secondly Pati∣ence, whereof he shewes himselfe a presi∣dent,
that we should follow his steppes in constantly bearing and abiding all kind of aduersitie and of affliction, as Peter ad∣monisheth. And finally vertue, and especi¦ally loue, that we should loue one another as Christ hath loued vs, as our sauiour him∣selfe cōmādeth. Thus much of these words, as hauing a general vew of them, but now let vs sift the same more narrowly and per∣ticularly consider them not in waie of am∣ple discourse, but in manner of a short sur¦uey as first to declare what manifestation this was, and secondly the forme thereof. For Paule here saith, not only that God was manifested, but also sheweth how: in the fleash, we read in Prophaine Histories, that the Gods of the Heathen, as first Iupiter the greate Father of these Gods, that he did metamorphose himselfe into diuers shapes and formes of sundrie Creatures. As into a Bull when he laye with Europa, into a swa∣nne, when he begat of Leda, Castor & Pol∣lux; and into Amphritrio, a man when he begatt of Alcmena Hercules, of which the Poet. Nā Deus humana lustrās sub imagine terras And likewise the other Gods, that they tooke vpon them the like semblance to the
same ends and purposes as Apollo, when he changed himselfe into a crowe, Bacchus into a goate, Diana into a catte, Iuno into a Cowe, Venus into a fishe, and Mercurie into the bird Ibis As Ouid conteineth thē altogether Metamorph. 5. Delius in Coruo proles Semeleia capra. Fele soror Phebi niuea Saturnia vacca Fisce venus latuit Cyllenius Ibidis alis. But these are but Poets faininges, be∣ing the Painters out of false fables, as sha∣dowes of some other truth, as that these mortall creatures supposed Gods and I∣dolles of the Gentles, were in a manner conuerted into such brute beasts, by their vncleane actions. Againe, we finde in the holy scriptures, that Satan transformed him selfe in to an Angell of light, 2. Cor. 11.13. & that the true Angels of God, haue often∣times takē vnto them the shapes & forms of men, in which they haue appeared, when they haue beene sente from Heauen downe into the earth, and whereby they haue not only spoken vnto men, but also eaten and druncken with men. Yea we shall reade in the ould Testament and new in manie places, that the Lord God, him∣selfe appeareth vnto his saints and seruants
in diuers semblances and fashions, but es∣pecially in the forme of fire. As when he appeared vnto Moises in the flame of a firie bush Exo. 3. Vnto the Children of Israell, when he led them throughe the wildernesse in a Pillour of fire, Exod. 13. and vnto the disciples and Apostles, when the Holy Ghost descended in the shape of fire clo∣uen tounges, whervpon Austin vseth these words, Hoc enim ele mentum est magnum sacramentum De Symb, ad Catech lib. 3. cap. 9. As also the Lord some times to haue shewed himselfe in other formes, as God the Father in the shape of a man, when he came to Abraham, sitting at the Oake of Mamre Gen. 18. And God the Holy ghost in the forme of a Doue, when he ap∣peared to Iohn Baptist after Christs bap∣tisme, Math. 3. But none of these before mentioned did keepe those shapes and sē∣blances which they tooke or seemed to take vpon them, but forsooke them imme¦diately, after they had perfourmed what they would by that meanes. But our Sa∣uiour Christ Iesus, whē he was thus mani∣fested in our flesh, he tooke it not vpō him for a time, but perpetually, euen to be our eternall mediatour both God and man
world without end, and to continewe a preist for euer, after the order of Melchesi∣decke. And here we are to note, how pro∣perly the Apostle writeth, when he here setteth downe, that God, was manifested in the fleash, and not the Godhead, spea∣king as the logitians say in the contract but not in the Abstract, being true in the one, as appeareth, but not in the other, as in the Contract because it containeth in it the whole person of Christ, consisting of both natures, but not in the Abstract, for that it considereth the seuerall nature of his diuinitie only, which in noe wise can be manifested in the fleash, nor be con∣founded with his humanitie, vnlesse we will runne into Eutiches errour, and thinke that his manhood was not taken only but also absorpt and consūpt of his Godhead, which is a foule Heresie: so that it appea∣reth euidently, what maner, of manifestati∣on this was. Now therefore only in a word or two, lette vs speake of the forme it selfe, into which god is here said to be manifested, & so to passe on to the nexte branche of this misterie; because we haue dwelt verie lōg in this alreadie which forme is here said to
be in the fleash that is in humaine nature. As that which was immortall, inuisible, in∣comprehensible and infinite, should take vnto it a kind of nature, which was mortal uisible, comprehensible, and finite, yea which might be seene, touched, and hand∣led, and like vnto vs in all respects, sinne on¦ly excepted; not by conuerting the God∣head in to manhood, but by conioyning the humaine nature to the diuine, vniting them both in one person of Christ our me∣diatour, euen as Iohn, 1.1. witnesseth that which we haue hard, that which we haue seen which we haue looked vpon, & our hands haue handled of the word of life, neither tooke he any other fourme either of any Creature vpon the earth, or of any power in heauē noe not of any Angell, but of the seede of Abraham onely, Heb. 2.16. And why? be∣cause as the Apostle in the same chapter rendreth the Reason, for as much as the children were partakers of flesh & bloud, he also himselfe tooke likewise parte with them Vers. 14 Here then flesh is not taken for the naturall vitiousnesse of mans corruption, as it is often times taken in the scriptures, especially in the Epistle to the Romanes for the vnregenerate parte of man
contrarie vnto the spirit, for then should our Sauiour Christ be subiect vnto sinne, as we are, which were blasphemie to affir∣me, but for the whole naturall and true es∣sence and substance of a mortal man, both of reasonable soule and of humaine fleash subsisting, and not of body only, least we fall into the Erronious opinion of the A∣pollinarists. And thus much of this maine branche of this greate misterie: now of the nexte. Iustified in the spirite As this is an annexiō vnto the words, go∣ing before, so is it an amplification of the former misterie, as if the Apostle Paule had said, although. Christ the sonne of God and God himselfe was manifested in the fleash, as he hath set downe more at large Phil. 2. Yet did th  most glorious shine and signe of diuine power and Godhead manifestly appeare and shew fourth it selfe which here is called spirit: as the same is expressed more plainely. First by our A∣postle Romans. 1.4. when he saieth that he was declared mightily to be the son of god, tou∣ching the spirit of sanctification by the resur∣rection from the deade, as being one nota∣ble and notorious action of his supernatu∣rall,
vertue. Secondly by Peter. 1.3.18. by an other semblable acte, euen the worthy worke of his passion, As that he was put to death according to the fleash, but was quickned in the spirit. And thirdly Iohn. 1.14. that the word became fleash and dwelt amongest vs and we sawe the glorie thereof, as the glorie of the only begotten sonne of the father full of grace and truth. So that to iustifie in this place is not to make or pronounce one Righte∣ous or iust, which is not so indeede as this word is taken. Luke. 16.15. in those words of our Sauiour vnto the Pharisies, Ye are they which Iustifie your selues before men, but God knoweth your harts, &c. And Luke. 18.14. in that conclusion of the parable and difinitiue sentence of our sauiour between the Pharisie and the publican, whē he saith that, the one departed ō, rather Iustified thē the other. And finally as it is taken so often in the Epistle to the Romans, where our A∣postle handleth that cheife pointe of our Religion euen our Iustification, but especi¦ally, Chap. 3.28. In those words. Therfore we cōclude, that a man is iustified by faith, without the workes of the lawe. But this word here signifieth to approue, shewe forth, or declare a man to be such an one,
by certaine signes and sure tokens, by infa∣llible Arguments and euident demonstra∣tions, such as cannot be refelled or refuted As Psal. 51. in those words of the Prophet Dauid, Against thee alone O Lord haue I sinned, and done this euill in thy sight, that thou mightest be iustified in thy sayinges, and cleare when thou art iudged. And Math. 11.14. where our Sauiour saith. And wisedome is Iustified of her children meaning himselfe. So likwise is it taken Luke. 7.20. where the E∣uangelist declareth that the Publicans iu∣stified God: for those things that are exa∣ctly perfect and exquisitly absolute with∣out any want or default, and therefore al∣lowed and liked of all, are saied by a com∣mon Phrase of Scripture to be iustified. Whereby Paule setteth out vnto vs the might and maiestie of our Sauiour, not in outward habit and appearance, or in ex∣ternall pompe or power, but in inward spi¦rit and deuine vertue, in mightie miracles, wonderful workes, heauēly doctrine, most glorious, greate, and other incomprehen∣sible effects, by which word and Phrase the Apostle endeauoreth to take away all kinde of weake diffidēce or distrust, which might any way be conceaued in our harts
by taking offence at the lowe and base est∣ate of Christs our sauiours māhood, which seemed to be so, vile, abiect, and contemp∣tible, as some supposed him to be only a base and silly man. As likewise by spirit in this place, is not onely meante that morti∣fied and regenerate partes of man, which is contrarie to the fleash, as it is vsu∣ally taken in the scriptures, and especially in the Epistle to the Romans, but for what soeuer was and is in Christ extraordinarie & supernaturall aboue cōmon manhood, and mortalitie. As if the Apostle Paule had said, although he was cloathed with our fleash, combred with our frailties, & cō∣passed with our infirmities, yet none of these, did weakē the power of his truth, the flower of the glorie of his diuinitie or once derogate from the honour of his maiestie. As that although he was verie mā, yet not withstanding he was true God, & although he tooke vpon him the fourme of a seruant, yet he thought it no robberie to be equall with his father, Phil. 2.7. for in him remaineth all the fulnesse of the Godhead bodily. Col. 2.9. And he was the brightnesse of the glorie, and ingra∣uen fourme of the substance of God his father, Heb. 1, 3. As it may appeare throughout
the whole historie of the Gospell, where∣by he is described vnto vs to be mighty in∣deede and in word: for so first he appro∣ued himselfe to be God, in his birth, in that he was borne after the common order and māner of men, his mother being ouersha∣dowed by the power of the most highest, and himselfe cōceaued by the holy ghost. Secondly at his inauguration & consecra∣ction after his baptisme, when as by the iuely voice and diuine oracle from heauen he was pronounced and proclamed to be the Sonne and heire apparent of God his father. Thirdly in his temptation, when s he vanquished Sathan in a Monomachie or single combate, and made him voide & uant from him: Fourthly in curing al kind of sicknesses and diseases, by taking a way both the cause & the effect. Fiftly in know ng both the thoughts and harts of men, as t appeareth oftētimes in the Gospel. Sixt∣y in stilling the winde & calming the sea, nd in working other strange signes and wonders. Seauenthly in his Passion, when as the weakenes of his fleash was succou∣ed and sustained by the strength of his Godhead. Eightly in his Resurection, in hat he was able to laye downe his life, and
to take it to him againe. Ninthly in ascē∣ding vp into Heauen, for as our Sauiour in the Gospell Iohn. 3. No man hath ascended vp into heauen, but he that descended downe from Heauen euen the sonne of man, which al¦so is in Heauen. And tenthly, in sending downe the Holy Ghost his blessed spirite, which proceeded as well from himselfe as from God his father; Insomuch that we can∣not but confesse and say with Nicodemus the Pharisie that none can doe such things as these except he came from God or ex∣cept he were God himselfe; without que∣stion, therefore to be iustified in this place is as Athanasius in his booke De surrectio∣ne carnis explaineth it. Iustitiam habere n humano more sed diuina puritate that is to be iust and Righteous in himselfe, and  himselfe, not according to humaine quali∣tie, but by a diuine spirit: for so signifieth this Hebrue Phrase, in this place, and i respect of vs being allone with that which our Apostle hath. 1. Col. 1.30. that he is b¦come our righteousnesse, redemption sanctifi∣cation, and saluation, being the whole and so scope, and hope of their faith which by th same spirit, doe beleeue & putte their tru in him, not resting or relying vpō any other
meane or merrit what so euer. And of this iustifiyng had not only our Sauiour Christ the testimonie of his owne spirit euen the Holy Ghost, which was a witnesse vnto Iohn the Baptist, whē he descended downe vpon him invisibly in the forme of a doue. Math 3.16. Which heauenly vision was a diuine oracle and siuely voice of God him∣selfe, which the Lord caused to appeare nto him, that when he knewe not our Sa∣viour it might be as an infallible token to iscerne him from all other, as he himselfe onfesseth. Iohn 1.33.34. And I knewe im not but that he sente me to baptize with water, he said vnto me vpon whome thou halt see the spirit come downe and tarrie still ne him, that is he that baptizeth, with the ho∣ly Ghost. And I sawe and bare record, that his is the sonne of God. But also the spirit of he Saints and seruants of God which giueth estimony vnto themselues and their owne oules that our Sauiour is their Lord and God or so saith Paule in the person of all the electe and faithfull. 1. Cor. 8.5.6. Though their e that are called Gods, whether in Heauē or in Earth as there be many Gods and ma¦ny Lords, yet vnto vs there is but one God which is the Father of whom are althings,
and we in him, and one Lord Iesus Christ by whom are althinges, and we by him & againe, 1. Col. 12.3. No man can say that Ie∣sus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost. But to drawe to an Ende for this point, and to make our vse of this matter, we are heere taught that we should laboure to iustifie our selues both before God, and man, not externally by carnall and earthly thinges, but internally after an heauenly and spiritu∣al manner, not with the hypocritical Iewe in Esaies daies 29.13. To drawe neere vnto God with their mouth and honour him with their lippes, but in hart to be farre from the And with the Scribes, and Pharises in our Sauiour Christs time to be serious obser∣uers of outward ceremonies and to be far from inward sinceritie Math. 15.8. not su∣perstitiously with the vnfaithfull Iewes, and Idolatrous Samaritans, to worshippe they know not what, nor ignorantly they knowe not how, nor blindly they knowe not where: but as the true worshippers to worshippe the father in spirit, & in truth for God is a spirit, and they that worshippe him must worshippe him in the spirit, and in trueth Iohn 4.23.24. not to declare our selues to be those of these last daies & perillous times,
which Paule foretould should be in the world, hauing ashew of Godlinesse but de¦nying the power thereof. 2. Tim. 3.5. not to loue one another, in tougne & in word only, but indeede and in truth, as Iohn ex∣horteth vs for such externall shewes, and semblances such outward facing and gra∣cing with such deepe dissembling and hol∣low harted hyprocrisie, God vtterly hateth and abhorreth: whē as we dally with God himselfe, double with men, & deceaue our owne soules as may well be said de∣ceauing and being deceaued, making this world as it were a Theator the Chu∣rch a stage, themselues as actours and play¦ers, in seeming to be that which they are not, in disguising thēselues as it were with the side Robes, broad Philactaries, and lōg fringes of the scribes and Pharises, vice ma¦sking vnder the visour of vertue, profaine∣nesse lurking vnder the couerture of holy∣nesse, and falsehood hiding it selfe vnder the coulour of truth and veritie, which is not to follow the steppes of our Sauioure, who would only as it is here sette downe, be iustified in the spirit, and thus much of this second branch of this tree of truth now of the thirde.
Seene of Angels. After that our Apostle had sette downe in the wordes going before that double heauenly misterie of our Sauiour Christ, that he was manifested in the fleash, and iustified in the spirit, he doth amplifie the miracle of that misterie and the power of God, by a notable circumstance of greate waight and moment, confirming and esta∣blishing the same by the witnesse and testi∣monie of high and Heauenly powers, as in matters of greatest importance, are requi∣sit to be eye and eare witnesses, not persons of base and meane estate and credit, but such as are of worthie estimation, and re∣putation, not mortall men of the inhabi∣tances of the earth, who would be astoni∣shed at the wonder of so greate a worke that Christ should become a man, but euē the immortall Angels the host of hea∣uen, who were excedingly glad and reioy¦ced to see the same within finite admiration praysing the name of God, being such a newe and strang thing vnto them, as they neuer wisht nor thought of before, for al∣thoughe it be to begrāted that these Saints and seruants of God, which stand in the presence of God, and behold the face of
God, doe know manie of the secrets of God, as being indewed with an excellent knowledge in heauenly mysteries, & there fore are called  as seeing and perceauing much, and therfore did no doute vnderstand that the world should at length be redeemed and saued, and that Christ in time should be borne, and final∣ly should suffer and be slaine for the sinnes of mankind. As we reade that the Angell Gabriell did foretell the same vnto the Pro∣phet Daniell 9. Dani. Notwithstanding most sure and certaine it is, that they know not euerie misterie, & miracle of God, nor all the secrets of the Lords whole deuine counsels, and therefore not euerie parti∣cular circumstance of time, place, and per∣son belonging to the incarnation, passion, and resurrection of our sauiour: neither yet knewe they the meanes, and howe these thinges should be brought to passe, Insomuch that all be it they sawe not this at the first, yet at the last the Lord vouch safed to reuele the same vnto thē, and not onely to make them behoulders thereof, but also messengers and ambassadours of so glad tidinges, and reioysers of so greate a grace bestowed vpon mankind: As was
Gabriell not onely the foretellour of these happie newes in general tearmes vnto Da∣niell as is before declared; but also as legate a latere frō the lord God himselfe, the sig∣nifier and certifier, of all the particular cir∣cūstāces belōging to his incarnation vnto Ioseph, Marie, Zacharie, and the shephards as it may appeare in the beginning of the gospell: as first who should be his forerun∣ner, euen Iohn the baptist the sonne of Za∣charie, and Elizabeth. Secondly how he should be conceaued, euen by the holy ghost. Thirdly who should be his mother euen the virgin marie. Fourthly the place where he should be borne, euen in Bethlē the least of all the cities of Iuda. Fifthly his name whereby he should be called, euē Iesus, because he should saue the people from their sinnes, with many other speci∣alties sette downe at large by the Euange∣lists, all which when it was perfourmed as the angell had prophesied, and had beene fullfilled as Gabriell had fore shewed to Io∣seph, Marie, Zacharias, and the sheaphards of Bethelem, not only he himselfe, but the Angels of God likewise were rapte and ra∣uished, as it were with ioy, when they saw it brought to passe, which made also an
host of heauenly souldiers to ioine in con∣sort, and to praise God and say. Glorie be to God on highe, on earth peace, and good will towards men. Luke. 2, 13.14. The cause of this their exceeding gladnes being this, not only for the common saluation of mākind, and generall grace that had appeared vn∣to all, but for that the Lord vouchsafed both to shew them that fauour, as to make them the spectatours of so notable a mira∣cle, & to giue them that honour, as to take them as witnesses of so greate a misterie, for the strengthning of our faith, enlarging of our hope, the ascertaning and assuring of our soules, and consciences, in the vndou∣ted truth thereof: and these as witnesses in the higher degree, as in the nexte wordes, he descendeth to the testimonie of these that are of lower accompt euen of men: & here note the Proprietie of the speech, the pregnancie of the Phrase, which it pleaseth he blessed spirite of God in holy and hea∣uenly wisedome here to vse, when as the Apostle saith, that he was seene of Angels and not that Angels did see him, signifying hereby, not any vertue in themselues in this respect, but Gods vouchsafing toward them. Seing that is said to appeare vnto
one, which is not in the behoulders pow∣er to see it. As when one hath a stone be∣fore his eies, which he looketh vpō, we say not a stōe is seene of him, but he seeth a stōe the like of the sunne, the moone the light, & the rest of the visible creatures of God here in the world the common and continuall obiects of our sight, so that not of their owne nature nor by their owne power, nor through any abilitie that was in them, did they see the lord Christ; but only by Gods gift, grace, and goodnes, was the incarnate word reueiled vnto them, and many other misteries which were before vnknowne of them; whereupon Beda saith, Quod in na∣tiuitate apparuit Angelis claritas, quae non a¦tea in veritate visa est hominibus: that is▪ that after the natiuitie of our sauiour, there appeared a clearer brightnesse in the an∣gells, then euer indeede appeared before vnto men, and that in two respects: first in regard of the ministerie of the Apostles, & secondly in respect of the knowledge of the people, being farre greater then was in the former times either in the prophets, or in the multitude. And therefore this holy host of God euer after Christs mani∣festation in the flesh, adioyned thēselues
vnto him as his guard, offered their seruice vnto him as his ministers, alwaies attended vpon him as his seruants, from the begin∣ning of his humiliation and inauguration, vntill his heauenly exaltation and glorifi∣cation, being not only messengers aboute his natiuitie, publishers of his birth, & cho∣risters of the glad tidings thereof: as it is before declared, but also ministers vnto him not at, but after his temptation, least by their helpe he should seeme to haue vanquished Sathan, as he might haue had legions of Angels at his death and passion, as he himselfe said: but he would not, be∣cause he would be destitute of all heauenly aide and humaine succour, that he might humble himselfe to the death of the crosse. As he had the same ministring spirites pro∣claimers of his resurrectiō vnto Marie Mag dalen and the other women, & to Peter & the rest of the Apostles, & as finally he thē had heauenly souldiers his waiters & atten∣ders at his ascension, doing him homage, and giuing him honour, & shewing all ser∣uisable dutie towards him in al respects, at all times, and in all places, being faine of their office, and forwarde to imploye their diligence about him, especially the greate
sauiour and redeemer of the world, when as they are glad of a meaner charge, euen to be ministring spirits to mē, which are heires appointed vnto saluation 1. Heb. 14. And here note, what greate accoūt and highe regard the blessed āgels are of in the sight of God, in causing and chosinge them to be the es∣peciall witnesses of his heauenly and holy misteries aboue all other. And therefore finde we so oftē in the scriptures such ho∣norable mention of them, as that the holy ghost vouchsafeth to name and number them nexte, and immediatly vnto God the father, and Christ Iesus his sonne, as in that place Luke. 10. He that confesseth me before men, him will I confesse before my father and his Angels &c. and 1. Tim. 5.21. I charge thee before God, and the lord Iesus Christ and the elect angels that thou obserue these things &c. And finally Apocalips. 1.4. grace be with you and peace from him which was, which is, to come, and from the seuen spirits, which are before his throne. And in diuers other pla∣ces of the Gospel, where they are adioined with God or associate with Christ as co∣partners with them of their glorie, but are ascited and appealed vnto, as witnesses of their grace. The vse that we are to make
hereof is this, euen fully & faithfully to be leeue that to be true and most true, as the which no aduersarie in the world shall e∣uer be of power to conuince, no heretique sufficiēt to gaine say, nor against the which the gates of Hell shall euer be able to pre∣uaile, because we haue the sure & certaine Testimonie of the angels themselues, in confirmation of the soundnesse of this do∣ctrine, so that we ought not to misdoute, or misdeeme the same, with the vnbelee∣uing Gentiles and Iewes, except we wil be as incredulous as the Saduces themselues, who thought that there were neither spi∣rites, not Angels, contrarie to many & ma∣nifest places of the scripture. Preached vnto the Gentiles. As an earthly Kinge and prince at the firste inauguration of his person into his royall estate and gouerment, doth obserue this course, first to gather together the no∣bles and the peeres of the lande, & before him to appeare and shewe themselues, and to require of them their due and duetifull homage, fealtie and allegiance, and then af∣terwardes they to accompanie him to be publickly proclamed, before all the people as right & lawfull inheritour to the croune
and kingdome, and then of all his subiects for their parte to be so accepted, accoun∣ted, and regarded: and so lastly, to aduance himselfe in to his seate of honour & chaire of estate, there to be most gloriously en∣thonized, crowned, and annointed with all princely pompe, & maiestie. Euen so our heauenly King of Kings Christ Iesus, in the degrees of the exaltation of his person, af∣ter his manifestation in the flesh, and iu∣stification in the spirit, which was as it were his first inauguration into his spiritu∣all kingdome in the progresse of his pro∣ceedinges, was first enterueiwed and con∣templated of the Angels his most noble creatures, powers, and principallities, who not only shewed vnto him diuine reuerēce & obediēce, but also did vnto him heauē∣ly honour and homage. After which it next followeth, that he should in their presence be publickely preached vnto the Gentils, to all the people, nations, and langua∣ges of the earth; as to his people and sub∣iects, & then to be beleeued in the world, that is, intertained with all faith and feal∣tie, and imbraced with all loue and loialtie, in all the corners, & quarters of the world; and so finally to be receaued vp into glory,
that is ascended vp into the highest hea∣uens ther to sit in the throne of his maiestie. These three thinges being the three last branches of this tree of truth, which we are to entreate of in the same order and with the semblable breuitie, as we haue done the former partes of this my texte. In the first whereof which we haue in hand are to be considered three thinges, who, what, to whome: for the first it is w euident who e∣uen he of whom we haue altogether spo∣ken before the matter of this misterie of godlinesse, the sappe of this tree of truth, the subiect of my text, the contentes of the Gospell, the lords annointed, Gods Christ, God manifested in the flesh, Christ incar∣nate, Iesus incorporate on earth, and con∣secrate in heanen, God humiliated, & man exalted, God gracing man and man glori∣fying God: and what? Euen first manifes∣ted, secondly iustified, and thirdly seene, & fourthly preached. As greate a worke of wonder as any of the rest in all respectes, first for the person, so base, so vile, so mise∣rable a man, the sonne of man, & a worme and noe mā to be proclamed a soueraigne sauiour, an heauenly king, an omnipotent God, incredible to be beleeued, impossible
to be perfourmed in the eyes of fleash and blood, that a woorme should saue al men that the seede of a woman should bruse a serpents heade, that the dewe of the birth which was of the wombe of the morning, should droune the greate Leuiathan with∣all his dragons in the redde sea: intollera∣ble to be suffered in policie, for the greate states and potentates of the world, for a poore babe, who was faine to haue an Inne for his lodging, a stable for his chamber, & a cracth or manger for his cradle, to be wor¦shipped of honorable estates, haue offered vnto him gould, mirrhe and franken cense, in signes and significatiō of his three fould office, that he was a royall kinge, an holie Preist, and an annointed prophet, yea for a carpenter, or carpenters sonne as he was commonly called, and accompted, to be soueraigne monarch of all the kinges, key∣sars, and conquerours of the earth. And iniurious to be borne with in pietie as it should seeme, for a base Nazarite and a rude Galeleā, to deface Moyses, & disgrace God, to abrogate the Law, abolish the ordinances, to frustrate circūsition and an∣nihilate former cerimonies, as the offēded Iewes did obiect against him. And in stead
thereof to ordaine two new sacraments, one of water, an other of wine, & to bring in a new doctrine, euen the Gospell, & for the former prophets appointed by the Lord, to assigne new Apostles of his owne making, neuer harde of before. All these thinges were not only maruelous, but al∣so odious and dangerous, in respect of his person, and therefore a deepe point of this misterie of godlinesse. Secondly in regard of the preaching it selfe, Preaching being at this time but a broaching of folly, and therefore called by Paule according to the common, crooked, and corrupt Iudgement of the world, the foolishnesse of preaching, be∣ing taken for madnesse, to crie as Iohn Bap∣tist did in the wildernesse and our Sauiour himselfe did in the temple Preachers being called mad men, as that son of the Prophet was in, Iehues time 2. Kinges 9.11. & drūc∣kardes, as the Apostles were said to be druncke with new wine Acts. 2. And bablers, as Paule was termed of the Athenians Acts. 17. distur∣bers of states and common wealthes, as Elias was called by Ahab a troubler of Israell. 18.17. as Micheah likewise the same by Ahab an vnhappie Prophet, 1. kin. 22.8. and as Iere∣mias, a discourager of the people by the princes
of Iudea Ierem 21.3. And as Amos a con∣spiratour by Amaziah the priest; Amos 10. yea as our Sauiour Chist Iesus himselfe of the high preist & scribes, a peruerter of the peo∣ple a forbidder to paye tribute to Cesar & an affecter of a kingdome. Luke. 23.2. As Stephen of the people, elders, and Scribes a blasphemer, Act. 6.11. And Paule by Tertullus to be a pe∣stilent fellow, a mouer of sedition among all the Iewes, and a cheife maintainer of the sect of the Nazarites Act. 24.8. Againe; for the man∣ner of this preaching contemned and con∣demned of all men, because it was not only bare and naked without a signe to counte∣nance and confirme it, and therfore a scan∣dall to the Iewes; but also plaine and sim∣ple without wisdome of words to shew & setit fourth, and therefore folly to the Gre∣cians, 1. Col. 1.2. And besides for the men that did preach being homely and rude poore fishermen verie simple, ignorant and vnlearned Ideots. Lastly, in respect of the persons that were preached vnto pro∣phaine Panims godlesse Pagans, Idolatours Gentiles, superstitious Grecians, to whome to preach, is as it is in the Prov. Surdo nar∣rare fabulam, euen to speake to dead and deafe men, deafe in obstinacie, and dead in sin, gi∣uen
ouer to vanitie, nusseled in ignorance, blundering in blindnesse, and almost cast of into a reprobate sense, euen as blockes, stockes, and stones, like vnto the Idoles which they worshipped, in whome nei∣ther the plowe of preaching could make any furrow, nor the seede of the Gospell take any roote, because neither the dewe of Gods grace could mollifie the soule of their hearts, nor the sunshine of his bles∣sing fructifie the ministerie of his word in their soules. Notwithstanding all which, see the misterie, beholde the wonder, how this is brought to passe: for the per∣son, though a vile woorme, yet a glorious Archangell or Prince of angelles, thought a meane mortall man, yet a mightie and immortall God, though a son borne and a child giuen, yet an euerlasting father, and the auncient of daies. Secondly for prea∣ching, though folly to men, yet the wisdōe of God, though an offēce both to the Iewes and Gentiles, yet the power of God vnto saluation, to the Iewes first, and also to the Gentiles though a stumblinge blocke, yet a sweete baite, whereby many soules were caught by the hookes of the Gospell. And for the preachers though poore fisher men
yet powrfull fishers of men, though rude Galileans, yet honorable Apostles, though not puffed vp with humaine knowledge, yet inspired with heauenly wisedome. And finally the persons that were preached vnto though Gētiles by generatiō, yet Israelites, by regeneration: though children of truth, yet of stones made the sonnes of Abraha though aliants and strangers from the cō∣mon wealth of Israell, yet free denisons & cittizens with the saints. This therefore is the Lords doing to vse the words of the Psalmist & it is meruelous in our eyes, & yet although maruelous and mistical, found by blessed proofe, and happie experience to be performed in vs, which were some∣times Gentiles, but now christians, by the greate power and gracious prouidence of God. But why was God manifested in the fleash, Iustified in the spirit? preached vn∣to the Gētiles; because otherwise he could not be beleeued in the world, so that with out this cause going before, the effecte which answeareth in the next brāch, could neuer haue followed: for as the prophet E∣saie: who should beleeue our report or to whōe is the arme of the Lord reuieled? and as the a∣postle Paule; How shall they beleeue in him, of
whome they haue not hard, and how shall they heare without a preacher, so that faith must needes come by hearing, and hearing by the word of God preached. Esaie 5.3.1. Rom. 10.15.16.17. But who preached not the workes of God by the creation of the world, although they after a sorte doe make manifest that, which may be knowne of God; they visible, shewing the inuisible thinges of him, that is his eternall power and godhead Rom. 1.19.20. and albeit as the Prophet Dauid saith The heauens de∣clare the glorie of god & the firmament shew¦eth forth his handie workes Psal. 19.1: For these were but dumbe teachers, and the text & intendiment of there teaching was only this, that there was a God that made the world. But the worde of God by the mouth and ministerie of man, speaking preachers which did plainely publish and proclaime, not by ocular demonstration, as the other, but auricular declaration and oracular manifestation, and the texte and drifte of their preaching being more, and a greater misterie euen God manifested in the fleash, that saued the world. And these not such preachers as Iacob. who said on∣ly that Siloam, should come Gen. 4.9. As
Moyses, that the Lord would raise vppe a prophet like vnto him Deut. 18. as Balaam, that a starre should rise out of Iacob. &c. Numb. 24. As Dauid, I will preach the lawe whereof the Lord &c. As Esay, that a virgin shall beare a child and so forth. Esaie. 7. As, Daniell, that the most holy shall be annointed Dan. 9. For all these were but propheticall Preachers, only such as saw him a farre of such as promised him to cōe in dwe time. But these both Euangelicall and Apostolicall, such as were eie-witnesses, and eare-wit∣nesses of his comming, such as in presence pointed at him vnto the people, or being past, reached him vnto posteritie; & how? not obscurely and darkely as Moyses, that had a vaile before his face and without cō∣ceite and vnderstanding, as vnto the Iewes who had a vaile before their harts, but af∣ter the vaile of the Temple was rente in sunder painefully with diligence, for they preached in season and out of season; as Paule to Timot. 2.4.2, plainely without ē∣loquence as the spirit gaue them vtterance acts. 2.4. and powerfully by heauenly in∣fluence, for it was not they that spake, but the holy ghost that spake in them, Math. 10.20. As Christ himselfe preached with
power, and not as the scribes, cōmanding as it were the hearts of men to yeeld reue∣rence and obedience to the Gospell, and conuerting manie soules at once vnto Christ: And finally to conclude, to whōe was he preached by them? euen vnto the Gentiles, new preachers deliuering an vn∣couth doctrine to a strange people, to whom they were sent as Ambassadours to a nation farre off, by our sauiour their Ma∣ster, to carrie with blessed feete the glad tidinges of the Gospell, and not to one na∣tion: for their charter & commission was larger, being commanded to teach all na∣tions baptising them in the name of the father. &c. Being the Apostles and messen∣gers of God, promising & profering grace and truth to all languages, degrees, sexes, callinges, and conditions, vnder the sun, being those seruants which were sent forth by the king, as is signified in the para∣ble Math, 22. and Luke 14. which made a mariage dinner for his sonne, to call those that were bidden, who because the vn∣worthie Iewes which were first inuited, ne∣glected dissolutely, and refused stubbornly to come, were cōmanded to go out quic∣ly into the high places and streetes of the
cittie, and to bringe in the poore, & mai∣med, the halt, and the blind, and yet there being roome, to go out into the high waies and hedges, euen to al outlandish, and for∣reigne regions, countries, and prouinces of the outcast despised Gētiles, poore in mind for the want of the riches of Gods grace, maimed and halte in their soules, for lacke of the integritie of good life, blind in their hartes, for want of the light of the truth, to compel them by the force of their commi∣ssion, by the power of their preaching, by the efficacie of the word of the gospell, to come vnto the wedding, of Christ Iesus, vnto his spouse the Church, as the guestes of the bridegrom, and frends of the bride, as the Apostles themselues perfourming that in practise, which our sauiour by the purport of the parable did prophesie should come to passe, when as the Iewes being moued with indignation thereat, did forsake them and betake themselues to the Gentiles did rēder this reason of this their doing, saying. It was necessarie that first the word of God, should haue beene spoken vnto you, but seeing you putte it from you and iudge your selues vnworthy of euerlasting life, loe we turne to the Gē∣tiles
Act. 13.4.6. As it was oftentimes be∣fore tould vnto the Iewes euen to their teeth. As first by the Baptist. That God would of the stonie harted Gentiles raise vp children vnto Abraham, Math. 3.9. And that the haughtie hills, that the loftie min∣ded Iewes which bare themselues bould of their mount Synai where their law was giuen, of their mounte Sion, where their temple was builded, and where the Lord promised his blessing for euer more, should be brought to lowe vallies, that is the hūble harted Gentiles, that liued in the vallie of the shadowe of death, should be exalted, that the crooked affections should be strēgthned by the line & leuill of the gos¦pell, and their rough waies, that is their ude and barbarous life, should be smo∣hed by the plainer of the word of God, and finally that all fleash, that is all men, and all manner of men, of what natiō, lan∣guage, degree, age, calling and condition whatsoeuer, should see the saluation of God. And this the Propheticall Euāgelist but of the Euangelicall Prophet Iohn out of Esaie. 40.3. And secondly by our Sauiour Math. 8.11.22. But I say vnto you, that ma∣ie shall come from the East, & West, and shall
sit downe with Abraham, Isaach, and Iacob, in the kingedome of heauen, and the children of the kingdome shalbe cast out into vtter darkenesse. And againe Math. 24.43. I say vnto you that the kingdome of God shall be ta∣ken from you, and shalbe giuen to a nation, that shall bringe forth the fruites thereof. And finally by Paule who in the 11. to the Romans telleth the Romaine Iewes, or Iewish Romans, that the natural oliues mea¦ning the Iewes, were cut of, and the vile oliues euen the Gentiles, were grafted in their stead; and that the election of the one was the reiection of the other, the cal∣ling of the one, the casting away of the o∣ther, the conuersion of the one, the subuer∣sion of the other, the ruine of the Iewes being the riches of the world, and their diminishing the riches of the Gentiles, the one proceeding frō the seueritie, the other from the bountifulnesse of God; as the Apostle amplifieth at large in the same chap. Whereby it is come to passe at this day (to apply it in a word vnto ourselues, because we haue beene ouer longe in this pointe) that we which dwelt sometimes in darkenesse, blundred in blindnesse, and groped at noone daie, & were the furthest
from the sunshine of the Gospel, haue bin made partakers of the gratious and glori∣ous light thereof. So that of vs, that of the Prophet Esaie. 9.3. and the Euang Math. 4.16. The people which satte in darkenesse and in the shadow of death, haue seene a greate light and to them that sitte in the region and shadowe of death, a greate light is risen vp; may seeme to be most truely verified. Our dutie to cōclude being this, to labour by all meanes possible, to keepe and continue still amongst vs, this lampe and lanthorne of light, which Christ the light and life of the world hath vouchsafed to bestowe vpon vs, by his blessed appea∣rance, least that, happelie, or rather vnhap∣pelie happen vnto vs, which God threat∣neth to the Angell, and the Church of E∣phesus Apo. 2.5. Euen a remouing of the Candlesticke of his Church from vs, and an extingushing of his word from amongst vs, and in turning the congregation of Christ in to the sinagogue, of Antichrist, or the changing of the consolation of our sal∣uation into the abomination of desolation; but it followeth in the texte. Beleeued in the world. Marueile was it, and noe doute a great
meruaile that God manifested in the flesh with the other misteries appertaining thereunto, should be preached by such sil∣ly ministers in so simple manner, & to such sinfull men; yet far more maruelous is it, that the same preaching should not only take such place as that it should be recea∣ued with such regard and reuerence, but also be so harboured in there hartes, that it should be embraced with credence and cōfidence; for of all those marueiles which are found to be in the incarnatiō of christ, the first is, Deus & homo, That God should become man; the second, virgo et mater that a virgin should become a mother; and thirdly Fides & corhumanum that faith and mans harte should make an harmonie toge∣ther. Which seeme to agree, like harpe and harrow; this last must needes be the greatest, because the other two, did make men only to wonder, but this did cause our sauiour Christ himselfe to marueile as is appeareth in the Gospell Math. 8.10. where it is said that whē he heard the Cen∣turion, declare his faith by his words, He marueled and said to them that followed verily I say vnto you I haue not found so much faith, noe not in Isaraell, for if we througly
consider both what faith is, and the vertue and the excellencie thereof, and what man is, and his frailtie and infirmitie, we shall easily perceiue as greate a distāce betwene them, as is betweene heauen and earth, yea as greate a discordance as Diapason, nay as greate a difference as is betweene light and darkenesse, or the spirit and the flesh, betweene the which saith the Apo∣stle there is  cuē peacclesse, or trucelesse iarre and warre, first for saith who knoweth not that it is the beauēly gifte of God Rom. 4.16. the precious fruite of the spirit Gal. 5.22. the cheifest cardinall Theolo∣gicall christian vertue. 1. Cori. 13.13: and therefore cannot be obtained, or attained vnto by any meane or merite of man: the rotten roote of whose originall corruption cannot bring forth so faire a blossome nor so sweete a fruite, but rather the con∣trarie, carnall heathenesh vice of infidilitie. Againe who will not say when as the faint fauourers of faith themselues, cannot but confesse so much, as Bellarmine in his pre∣face before his controuersies, that faith is the first gifte of grace, euen in the matter of Iustification, the first motion of a reui∣uing harte, and the first sense of spirituall
life, whereby the minde is stirred vp to hope, the will inflamed to loue, the toung moued to confession, and the hand pre∣pared to good workes; when as contrarie wise, we are so farre from this, as that we are destitute of the grace of God, Rom. 1. and so farre from quickning, that we are deade in trespasses and sinnes, Ephe. 2.1. and finally so farre from this spirituall life that we dwell in the shadow of death: Esay 9.2. Math. 4.16. yea that it is the first ground worke and foundation of the spi∣rituall tēple of the holy ghost, vpon which the wals of hope are reared vp, ouerwhich the roofe of charitie is laied, & where vnto the battlements of good workes are added as the full complement and beautifull or∣nament thereof: for so Austin. 22. De ver∣bis Apostoli: Domus dei credendo fundatur, sperando erigitur, diligendo perficitur, when as we one the other side, are nothing els, but the decaied and desolate ruines of the fall of our first father, forlorne Adam, who was dislodged and banished out of Paradise; further that it is the first bright beame of diuine light, with which the spirituall sunne of righteousnesse Christ Iesus, illuminateth our blind hartes, darke∣ned
with ignorance, that the morning spring or dawning of our minds might pro¦ceed vnto the perfection of the noone day when as we of our selues, haue such a flesh∣ie vaile cast before our hartes, yea such a starke blindnesse or rather such a blunde∣ring blindnesse, that though our eies be wide open with the Sodimites, Syrians and Balaam, yet we cannot perceaue the least peepe or appearing of anie glimpse, or glimmering thereof in our mind. Finally who is so ignorant in the scriptures, that hath not there redde, that faith is the only present, where with God is pleased, and appeased with vs? for without faith it is impossible to please God, the only salte that relisheth, & seasoneth all the cogitatiōs of our harte, the communications of our mouth, and the actions of our hands, from being sinfull, and vnsauerie in the sight of God: for whatsoeuer is not faith, is sinne, yea the maine post of our iustification, and sal∣uation: for as the Prophet, the iust man must liue by his faith, and to conclude in a word; As the aduersaries of faith them∣selues affirme thereof, that it is the verie gate of heauen, without the which we can neither come to God, nor call vpon
him, serue him nor deserue him. As Cani∣sius, in his Catechisme. This for the ex∣cellencie of faith, in comparison of our owne insufficiencie, for being partakers thereof; now for our selues, what we are by nature, in respect of our weaknes and disabilitie, the word of God, describeth vs out in our coullers. As when the Apostle calleth vs, sonnes of wrathe, the children of disobedience, aliants from the couenant of God, and strangers from the common wealth of Is∣raell. Againe when as God himselfe ana∣tomiseth vs out and saith, that all the Ima∣ginations, of the thoughts of our hartes, are only euill continually Gen. 6.5. as Esay a sinn∣full Nation, a people laden with iniquitie, a seede of the wicked, corrupt children, our heade sicke, and our harte heauie from toppe to toe, no whole parte, nothing but woundes swelling, and sores full of corruption, yea that we drinke vp iniquitie like water, and drawe one sinne vpon another, as it were with cart ropes, and coards, of vanitie, Esaie. 1.4. &c. And as Panle hath cōpiled out of holy pla¦ces, of scripture, that there is none righteous, noe not on, &c. Rom. Describing vs in euerie power of the soule, & parte of the bodie, to be farre from the feare of God, and faith
of Christ. Moreouer when as our Sauiour telleth Peter in the Gospell for the confe∣ssion of his faith, that flesh and bloud hath not reueiled that vnto him, but his father, which is in heauen; he signifieth our feeble∣nesse herein, that we are not capable of so greate a gift, as likewise Paule, that naturall and carnall man, cannot conceaue those thinges that are of God. And finally the same Apostle that we cannot so much as thinke a good thought, when as the disci∣ples and Apostles of our Sauiour himselfe, farre before vs, in all christian perfection, although they neuer departed from the side of Christ himselfe, the founder of faith, and who therefore taught them his word so long, and wrought so often his miracles before them, to noe other ende but this, euen to engender faith in them, that his disciples might beleeue on him, as it appeareth euerie where in the Gospell: yet oftentimes were found as our Sauiour himselfe tearmeth them, to their blame and rebuke, sometimes,  men of little faith. The feeblenesse whereof they often bewraied in their faintnesse and fai∣ling in following their Master Christ, som∣times hardharted, as whose hartes would
not yeald to receaue the impression of faith, and sometimes fooles, and sloe of harte, to beleeue all that the prophet had spoken, all of them from the highest to the lowest, shewing their weaknesse & want of faith, in some respect or other. First, Pe∣ter when ke walked on the water sincking with his bodie into the sea, as he fainted in faith, through the feare of his harte, when he disswaded our Sauiour from suf∣fering, and when he forsooke and for swore his Master. Insomuch, that our Sauioure as he himselfe tould him, was faine to praye for him, that his faith might not finally faile him: Iames and Iohn when as they affected the primacie & suprema∣cie aboue their fellowes, and when as they would haue had fire and lightninge to come downe from heauen to destroye those citties, that would not harbour our Sauiour. Phillip and Andrwe in the mira∣cle of loaues, whē they thought it vnpossi∣ble for our Sauiour to feede so many with so little. Thomas when as he would not beleeue that our Sauiour was risē, vn∣lesse he felte and handled him; and all the rest of the Apostles, when as they could not cast out the Deuill out of him that
was dombe and deafe, when as they consented with the reprobate Iudas, in dis∣daining that Maries ointment should be powred vpon our Sauiour, and finally in flying from their Lord and Master, when he was taken, and in counting the resurrection of our Sauiour as a fained thing, so that this cannot but be a greate misterie and maruelous wonder, that should be so generally accepted of all the world, which was so harde to be recea∣ued of the Iewes themselues the people of God, who ought by faith, to haue ex∣pected their owne saluation, and by hope waited for the consolation of Israell, by the incarnation of their Messias Christ Ie∣sus, the reconciliation of the word of the Gospell, and the operation of the spirit of God: insomuch that their incredulitie grewe into a common Prouerbe a mong the Heathen, as it is in the Poet, Credat Iu∣daeus Apella, and so difficult to be accep∣ted euen of the Apostles and disciples of our Sauiour themselues, whose hartes our Sauiour had so longe wrought and framed to prepare and make them readie to enter∣taine the same. As though it were easier to graue in stonie Marble, then to imprint
in soft waxe. And here note the Empha∣sis of the Antithesis which the holy ghost heare vseth making an oppositiō between faith and the world, as our Sauiour see∣meth to signifie in the Gospell, when he saith. When the sonne of man commeth shall he finde faith on earth? Luke. 18. The world being as Austin calleth it Musci∣pula diaboli, the Deuils trappe, rather a re∣ceptacle of infidilitie, then an harbour of faith. For as the Apostle. Totus mundo positus est in maligno, and as Iohn, all that is in the world, as the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eies, and pride of life, is not of the father, but is of the world Epist. 1. Cap. 2.16. then the which there can be nothing more contrarie to faith. Yea and if the A∣postle meane hereby, world by a Senedoc∣che or Metonomia, as noe doute he doth that are in the world, Continens pro con∣tento, the children of this world, euen the children of darkenesse, opposit to the chil∣dren of the light in the Gospell, that world which Iohn saith, which when the light came into the world, which made it knewe it not 1. Iohn. 10. That world which our Sauiour saith cannot receaue the spirite of truth, because it seeth him not, nor knoweth
him 14.17. That world that loueth his owne, and not those thinges which are of God, and out of which our Sauiour chose his disciples, and Apostles, taking them out thence, least they should perish with the world. 15.19, which world for waiwardnesse, and wickednesse thereof may be called, Mundus ab immundicie per Antiphrasin, being indeede inrespect of the  a confusion of sin, & iniquitie, rather to be counted a  then a  So that this must needes magnifie the great∣nesse of this misterie, and amplifie the power of the Gospell, by whose force and efficacie, such a marueilous effect is ac∣complished and brought to passe aboue the reach of mans reason, beyond the ca∣pacitie of humaine vnderstanding, and a∣gainst the crooked iudgemēt of the world; and thus much of this fifth pointe, that we may come to the conclusion of my texte euen the top branch of this tree of truth euen the highest degree of exaltation, and glorification of our Sauiour Christ Iesus. And receaued vp into glorie. This is the last but not the least, yea the deepest, and profoundest matter belon∣ging
to this misterie of godlinesse, euen the cheifest parte of this texte, the greatest thing that could be sette downe of the A∣postle, and the loftiest degree of our Saui∣ours glorification, and highest parts of his perfection that he could attaine vnto, be∣ing the corollarie and conclusion, not on∣ly of this excellent sentence of scripture, but also of the whole Chapiter: and final∣ly as the crowne and garland, guerdon and reward bestowed on our Sauiour Christ Iesus, for all those things which he himselfe atchiued, or caused to be perfor∣med for vs, mētioned in the former words: that is, that after he had skirmished, van∣quished, and triumphed ouer sinne, death, hell, and the deuell, and all other their cō∣plices and adherentes, hauing ascended on highe, and led captiuitie captiue, he sat at the right hand of God his Father, as in his chaire of estate, his seate of honour and throne of maiestie, there to raigne and rule for euer. Where by as in the people of the world, through the obedience of faith there was a greate conuersion, and alte∣ration: so in the person of our Sauiour was there a wonderfull chang and diuersitie as of humaine to be come diuine, of mortall
immortall, of temporall eternal, of vile glo∣rious, of earthly heauenly, of naturall su∣pernaturall, of carnall spirituall, of cursed blessed, of miserable happy, in so much that euerie hand is holden vp vnto him, eue∣rie knee is bowed downe vnto him, and euerie tounge confesseth his name, Phil. 2.10. The word which here our Apostle vseth is  which was assumpt or ta∣ken vp; as first Enoch was Gen. 5.24. and after Elias was in the fierie chariot: both which were tipes and figures of this as∣sumption of our Sauiour, which three are the only example of this kinde of as∣sumption into heauen, and noe other be∣sides, although our bold aduersaries the papists will presume to add a fourth, wher∣of there is noe mention in the scripture, e∣uen in the assumption of Marie, and in the memorie thereof, doe celebrate a sollem festiuall daie in an holy honour of her, not only to make the assumptions vnder the Gospell to be equal in number with those of the Law, but also to make the mother of our Sauiour to be compared with him in his aduancemēt, & highest degree of his glorification: but whatsoeuer the word be in this place, it is also found Acts. 1.2.
as signifying, both an adioyning vnto other as otherwise the Grecians call it  or  but also the preposition  purporteth a restoring againe or receiuing a dignitie or honour, of which he was partaker before, when he thought it no rob∣berie, to be equall with God his Father, as our Apostle Phil. 2. or els finally as the Phrase wil beare, a recouering againe of his fathers fauour, as being accepted againe and receaued into the bosome of God his father, from whence he descended when he tooke vpon him our flesh. And yet the word being all on with that which al the Euangelists vse  his assūption be∣ing nothing els but a volūtary ascentiō, a pa¦ssion in him in respect of his humanitie, & yet an action of him in regard of his di∣uinitie; that as he saith of him selfe, as he had power to lay downe his life and pow∣er to take it againe vnto him euen so as he had power to descend to take vpon him our flesh, so likewise had he power to as∣cend to resume againe vnto him selfe his owne glorie being caught or rapt vp in a cloude as he was man, and yet taking vn∣to himselfe the winges of the morning to flie vp into his holy sanctuarie as he was
God, as a worme in respect of his incar∣nation in creeping on the earth, but an eagle in regard of his ascention in moun∣ting vp into heauen. That as a captaine conquerer and Consull of Rome, when he had vanquished any enimie, won any cittie, or subdued any contrie, was wonte to ride in triumph with a roy∣all Pompe before him, and a greate traine behind him, vp into the Capitoll, the gates whereof were wide open to receaue him. Euen so our Sauiour Christ Iesus, after he had ouercome Sathan, his grand enimie, and by death as the Apostle saith subdued him that had the power of death, and with all vanquished the graue and hell, and did triumph ouer them, Saying as it is in the Prophet Esay and Osee and the A∣postle Paule. Death is swallowed vp in vic∣torie. O death where is thy stinge? O graue where is thy victorie? and so ascended on highe and led captiuitie captiue, and made a shew of them openly, hauing his mightie armes of heauenlie souldiars with him. As the Psalm. 1. discribeth them. The chari∣otes of the Lord are twentie thowsands of Angels, and he is in the middest of them,
as in his holy place of Sinaie, and vnto whom the gates of the Capitoll of heauen stoode open, as being gladde, and readie to re∣ceaue him into glorie, as the Prophet Da∣uid expresseth the same Psalm. 24. When he saith in the person of the Lord God. Lifte vp your heades O yee gates, and be yee lifte vp yee euerlasting dooers, that the King of glorie may come in. Here then as our heade is exalted highly, and aduanced vn∣to his glorie, so shall we also his mem∣bers be partakers of the same honour, for if we die with him, we shall liue with him, if we suffer with him, we shall be glorified with him. For as his Father appointed vnto him a kingdome, so hath he appointed vnto vs a kingdome Iohn. 5. As the father hath crowned him with glo¦rie and worshipe, Psalm. 8. So will he be∣ing the greate shephard of the sheepe, giue vnto vs an incorruptible crowne of glorie, as he sitteth with his father in his throne, so will he cause vs to sit with him in his throne, whē as our vile bodies shall be made conformable to his glorious bo∣die, of mortall becomming immortall, of corruptible becomming incorruptible, of
carnall spirituall, of naturall supernatu∣all, of earthly Heauenly, finally of tem∣porall eternall, in the kingdome of hea∣uen, where they shall reape and receaue fulnesse os ioye, and at the right hand of God haue full fruition and plenarie po∣ssession of surpassinge Pleasure for euer more. Which God the Father hath pre∣pared of his mercie, and Christ Iesus purchased by his merite for vs, those which haue beene promised vs from the beginning of the wotld, and shall be perfourmed vnto vs after the ende of the world, in the Celestiall Paradise, where the Sunne shineth not, nor the Moone giueth noe light, and yet where the Sunne setteth not, nor the Moone changeth not, but where only the glo∣rie of God and the Lambe giueth light Ap. 21.24. Where there is pleasure for euer without paine, victorie without skirmish, triumphe without warre, per∣petuitie without time, desire without default, sweenesse without varietie, and varietie without sacietie, where there is Ioye with out gesture, Knowledge with out discipline, and conference
without speache, where there is rest with out motion, partaking without enuie, and vnderstanding with∣out reasoning, vbi lex veri∣tas, pax charitas, modus aeternitas as Austin. FINIS.
THE FRVITS OF HYPOCRISIE. MATTH. 23. v. 5. All their workes they doe, to bee seene of men. THese wordes which I haue reade vnto you, as also those in the verse immediately going be∣fore, are a confirmation in particular pointes, of that reason contained in the last words of the third verse, of which I haue spoken at large heretofore. So that hauing before said, that these Scribes and Pharises, did far otherwise leade their liues, then they did teach and preach; now he addeth for the more certaintie and assurance of that which he affirmed before, that if they had any good thing in them at all in show and in semblance, that the same was altogether
vaine and trifeling, false and fained, because they had noe other thing in their purpose and intente, but palpably to please men & as it here appeareth to set out and shew forth themselues. These Scribes therefore and Pharises did either most manifestly transgresse the Law of God, or els did so notoriously dissemble, that they seemed to be altogether honest and holy, when they were nothing so nor so, hauing a foule vi∣sage vnder a faire visarde, for as all is not gould that glistereth, so all are not perfect that appeare so, nor all good and godly, that giue an outward glosse of integritie, and sanctimonie. For as Tullie saith. Frons, vultus, oculi, saepe mentiuntur, oratio vero sae∣pissime, and as the Poet. Fallit enim vitium specie vertutis & vmbra So that oftentimes counterfaite, in the militant Church here on earth (such is the deceite of sinne, & the fashion of this world) goeth for currant, such are the cloakes and coulours of hypo∣crisie; for euerie hypocrite is like the Ca∣melion, that can chang himselfe into euery coullour at commande and like to Prothe∣us, who can Metamorphose himselfe into euerie fourme forth with, and lastly like vnto the wethercocke that can turne it self
according to euerie wind. And here may we behould and see the nature of sinne in generall, that it is neuer single of it selfe but hath alwaies some companions and copartners conioyned with it; not vnlike the serpēt Hydra a monster of many heads and to the beast mentioned in the Apocal. On which the whoore of Babilon is said to sitie hauing many heades, and many hornes. But more particularly of the sinne of Hypro∣crisie, who is not commonly alone, but carrieth with it diuers other iniquities. And is indeede the mother of aduice, as in this place it hath twined and twisted with it Ambition a bird of the same feather, and a sinne of the same stampe. These two be∣ing like vnto Hipocrates twins alwaies lin∣ked together, and in these Scribes and Pha¦rises, their Hipocrisie engendring ambi∣tion in them as it appeareth in this place as also before in the sixte of this Gospell and the 1. verse. But here more couertly is the shadow of their workes and deedes, which were altogether to outward osten∣tation, sette as flatte opposit against the stu¦die and endeauour of Godlinesse, & good life, their workes being not workes in∣deede, but shewes and semblances of good
deedes, shadowes, without substance, clouds without raine, leaues without fruite being wholy fed as it were with the froth and fogge of vaineglorie, and puffe of mans praise: for the sincere worke of God would neuer be delighted so with the bubbles of vanities, wherwith all deepe di∣ssemblers & hollowharted Hypocrites are carried a way, as it were with full force and swifte streames. And here is not on∣ly reprehended the Ambition in these Scribes and Pharises with the which they were much tainted and infected; But when as our Sauiour had vtterly condemned the breach of the lawe of God in their whole life and conuersation, least they should obiect and alledge for their excuse as a buckler or defence their fained holinesse, by a Preoccupation he preuenting them answereth: that they are but triffles, trashe, and trumperie, yea and verie vanitie, of which they doe boast and bragge, meere ostentation raigning, and ruling in them; whereas If their holinesse were sincere, they would not seeke for the rewarde and regarde of mortall men: for as the Poet saith, Ipsa quidem virtus sibimet pulcherrima merces: and if they would needes gape af∣ter
guerdon; then they should haue aimed at the praise of the Lord God himselfe, and the price of the kingedome of hea∣uen; for as our Sauiour saith in the Gospell No man can serue two Masters. So that vn∣possible it is both to please God, and please men. And therefore Paule he saith, that he could not be the faithfull seruant of God, if he were  a menpleaser, that is such an one as sought by all meanse possi∣ble the praise and commendation of men. Herein therefore these Scribes and Phari∣sies approued themselues to be notable Hypocrits, and notoriously ambitious, when they thus hunted and hauked af∣ter the peoples applause verie popularly, al¦though their actions were tipped and coulered neuer so much with the shew of obedience to the Law of God. For as the same Apostle 1. Tim. 1.5. The ende of the commandement is loue out of a pure hart, and of a good Conscience and faith vnfained, which loue as saith the same Apostle 1. Cor. 13. boasteth not it selfe, nor is not puffed vp: which two metaphores of the Apostle in that place are diligently of vs to be obserued as first  here only founde in the whole new testament, as also of Tullie lib. 1
Ep. 12. Ad Atti. As also of Petrus Alexan∣drinus, Martyr, but sildome or neuer els where, which signifieth as much as Petrus Balsamus expoundeth it as  or is as much as , for as Clemens in the thirde booke of his Pedagogie and Basile in his contracted definitions  definition 49. But not as some interpret the same, in my opinion Perperā agit, who thinke the greeke word to be drawne from the Latine,  a Perpe∣ram verie strangly drawing the fountaine as it were from the Riuer, when as the same is nothing els but a Metaphore drawne from clawbackes and flatterers, who did nothing but faune and flatter and fleere in the faces of them with whom they would insinuate themselues, as did these Scribes and Pharises by setting to saile as it were all there good workes in the opē sight of the people, thereby to win vnto themselues the tearme and title of holinesse, integritie, and innocencie of life. As did also Abimeleke, as it is in the ninth of the Iudges, the Sonne of Gedeon or Ierubaall, when he by the meanes of his Mothers brethren, and with all the famely of his mothers Father, allured the
men of Sechem by faire & flattering words to cōdiscend vnto his ambitious purpose, whereby he vsurped the gouerment ouer them being but the sonne of a hand∣maide and a bramble indeede, as Ioathan calleth him, yet presumptuously boasteth himselfe as much of his shadow, as either the vine, oliue, or figge trees, yea or the tallest Cedar in Lybanon. So did Iob when he to enueigle Abner, tooke him a side in the gate, seeming to speake with him pea∣ceably, but minding to murther him as he did 2: Sam. 3.27. And lastly, so did Absolon, when he vsed such affabilitie, adu∣lation, and popular practises, and pro∣ceedinges, when as he ambitioussy by as∣piring, affected his fathers crowne & king∣dome, when as he vsed these and such like words vnto the people, and did steale a∣way the hartes of all the men of Israell, do∣ing them obedience, putting forth his hand vnto them, and kissing them saying. O that I were made Iudge in the Lande, that euerie man that hath any matter of controuersie might come to me, that I might do him iustice. Sam. 15. The other is a Me∣taphore taken from the heathen Sacrifices which the offerers were wont to puffe
and blowe vp artificially, to make them seeme fatte and goodly, hereby to gette the good name of deuoute and holy Sa∣crifices, in which sence Aristotle vseth the same word in the first Chap. of his Ethic. as the Scribes and Pharises did puffe and blowe vp their workes, to make thē seeme glorious and goodly vnto men, seeming to be the Sacrifices of Abell, fat, and frute∣full, and pleasant in the sight of God, but being indeede the offeringes, of Cain, irke∣some, lothsom, and stincking, in the nos∣trels of the Lord & like vnto those woorts, which made pottage for the children of the Prophets mentioned 2. King. 4. which seemed to be holesome hearbs, but indeed venomus weedes, like vnto a wild vine, and lastly like to Ionas his gourde, which seemed to be so spreading & sprouting, as that it would shroude and shadow him from the fainting heate of the sunne, but was indeede of noe continuance, soone growne, & soone gon, soone ripe & soone rotten, vanishing and withering away in one night Ionas. 4. But how proue we that these Scribes and Pharisies did all their workes to be seene of men? euen the same is euidēte by manie and manifest
places of the Scripture, so that he that shall doubt thereof, shall seeme to doute whi∣ther it be light at noone day. As our Saui∣our in the 6. of Math. here and els were testifieth, who did not only see their out∣warde deeds as an eie witnes thereof, & be∣ing conuersant among them, but did also know their inward hartes, being the sear∣cher of the reines, saying they gaue their almes before men, to be seene and praised of men, and caused a trumpet to be blowne be∣fore them, like Hypocrites in their sinagogues and in the streets. And againe, when they stoode praying in their sinagogues and in the corners of the streets to be behoulden of men, vsing Polulogies and Battologies that is vaine repetions, & much babblings, for which as our Sauiour here telleth, they had the guerdon and reward they li∣ked and looked for, that is the vaine praise and commendation of the common peo∣ple. Moreouer when they fasted, they like Hypocrites looked sowerly, and. dis∣figured their countenance, that they might seeme vnto men to fast; euen as the Heyre is said to weepe at the death of his father. As it is in the Prouerb. Haeredis luctus sub larua, risus est. As it appeareth
in the same chapter. And againe by de∣uouring widdowes howses vnder a cou∣lour of long prayers, as it is in this Chap∣ter. Further by tithing mint, comming and Annise, and leauing the greater mat∣ters of the law vndone, as iudgemēt, Mer∣cie and fidilitie, by making cleane the out∣side of the cuppes and platters, but within being full of briberie, and excesse. And therefore are likened of our sauiour (and that worthely) to whited tombes, which appeare beautifull outward, but within are full of deade mens boanes and all fil∣thinesse, they appearing outwardly Righ∣teous before men, but within full of Hy∣pocrisie and iniquitie. So that we see these words most fully confirmed vnto vs, that horrible vice did raigne and rule in those Scribes and pharisies, and noe maruaile, for a learned writer saith. Ʋt quemadmodum, semper in Cerimoniis, magis sunt operosi Hypocritae, quam qui solidam re∣rum-substantiam tenent: Ita factum est, vt qui a vera pietate disciuerant longe plus ostentationis sibi asciuerant quam qui fideles for as Diogenes Laertius saith, as the Greci∣cian horse did therefore deceaue the af∣ter wise Troians, because it came in forme
of Minerua, and as Lysimachus preuailed more by his foxes pelt then by his Lions skin, and lastly as Pirrhus was wonte to say, that he won more by his Orators po∣licie then by the power of his ar∣mie. Crocodiles neuer hurting more then when they weepe most, Syrenes neuer har∣ming more then when they singe sweetest Scrpentes, no where rather lurking then where the grasse is greenest. So the diuell neuer destroyeth more soules, then when he taketh vpon him an Angell of light. So Hypocrites neuer worse, neuer more vile and vitious, then when they put vpon them the visoure of vertue. And lastly so these Scribes, and Pharisies then were in∣deede rauening woules, when they did put on sheepes clothing. So that it is most true which Salomon saith in the Prouerbs The wicked man when he counterfaiteth him selfe good, then is worst of all, whereupon Austin saith on the 63. Psalm. Simulata ae∣quitas non est aequitas sed duplex ini∣quitas, quia iniquitas est & simulatio. Wherefore and if there be any such a∣mong vs, men pleasers, vaine glorious ambitious, and such like as these Scribes and Pharises were, let them remember
that all those woes denounced of our Sauiour in this Chap. and in manie other places of the Gospell against these Hypo∣crites, are not denounced in vaine. But let them remember what our Sauiour also saieth. That except our righteousnesse exceed the righteousnsse of the Scribes and Pharisies ye shal neuer enter into the Kingdome of Hea∣uē, & that which Paule affirmeth 1. Gal. 11. That those that are  that is mē plea¦sers cannot please God, nor be the seruants of God. But much more the Lord will pu∣nish the ministers of his word in this wise offending, whose words without workes are  wounders and woūds who when they ought to be light, are darkenesse, when salte vnsauerie, and last∣ly when they ought to be guides, had neede to be guided, and gouerned them∣selues, who as they vse not their handes whē they doe no good indeede, although they doe as Iuglers doe, shew knackes of Legerdemaine, seeming to do those feates which they doe not, by casting a mist be∣fore mens eies; so that it were noe matter at all if they were toungtied, & had there lippes glued together, sith they doe more hurte by their speaking, then
they could doe by their silence. Non enim ita in cident animae verba, vt opera, as Chriso∣stome Hom. 30. in Acts Apost. Cap. 14: quo∣niam si habueris, non solum non proderis lo∣quendo, sed etiam plus oberas vtilius fuerit ta∣cere; quid ita? quia sic mihi proponis opus vt si esset . Insomuch that the people might verie well put their Pastour to re∣buke, in replying against him and saying with the Poet. Quid verba audiam cum facta videam? And againe with Tul∣lie in another place in the same sence. Quorsum persuadere nobis conaris, quod tibi probare non vis? So that we see, that this vntowardnesse & perversenes of the mini∣sterie in not putting in practise that which they know, maketh this blessing of the Gospell oftentimes but halfe a ble∣ssing, this grace but halfe a grace, this light noe light at all, and I pray God they make it not a darkenesse, yea this blessing noe blessing, this grace noe grace, this light noe light at all, and I praye God we make it not a curse in the end, & extreame darkenesse worse thē that of Egipte. How often hath the Lord God commanded in the Law by the mouth of Moyses his greate Prophet, that his Preistes
should be holy as is in the, 19. Exod. Let the preistes which come vnto the Lord be sanctified, least that the Lord for∣sake them. And when they come to the Alter of the Holy, let them not bring vp∣on them the offence least they die againe Leuitic. 21. That man in whom there shall be found any spot or fault, he shall not come to offer any gifts vnto God. And therefore the purging of woundes began first at the Preists Esay. 1. So likewise in purging and correcting all sorts of men, first the purgation ought to beginne with them as it is writen in the Prophet E∣zechiell. First beginne with the Sanctuarie. For as the Psalm. saith Holinesse becom∣meth my house for euer. For when as in the Sacrifices the Preist had for his share the bracelet that couereth the harte as Origen writeth, signifying there∣by that he should be a man of councell, who had also allotted vnto him the right shoulder and the tongue, in token that he should be prompt and readie to good workes, and eloquence to declare the Lawe of God, besides hauing one his breast a tablet, wherein was embrodered with letters of gould Vrim and Thummim
in token that he should be a man both perfect in life, and plenteous also in the trueth of the Lord, twelue stones being sette in the same tablet, and therein engrauē the names of the twelue tribes of the people, that he might euermore haue thē in remembrance, the skirts & hemmes of his robes being hunge with belles of gould and pomegranets, in signe that his life should giue forth a greate sound and good sauor all abroade, and that his voice should ring and be hard a loude among the People, and therefore also the Lord requireth Leuit 21. That noe preist should be maimed or deformed but whole and sounde. Vpon which place Theoderite hath these wordes in his thirtie question A sacris arcentur corpore vitiati (saith he) vt per affectiones non sponte sus∣ceptas, ea quae a voluntate proficisci debent pro hiberentur. Oculorum enim occaecatio ino∣piam cognoscendi significat, auris am∣putatio in obedientiam, naris ablatio facul∣tatis discernendi, priuationem, manus ab∣scissio in agendo socordiam, atque ita in re∣liquis. Hereby signifying that he cannot be a perfect minister that faulteth or fai∣leth in any anie one of these deuties, not
so much standing vpon the deformites of the bodie, as respecting the giftes of the minde, which he hereby signifieth and insinuateth, as also is meante by the vn∣blemished sacrifices, that were required which also the verie Heathen did re∣garde, especially both in their Priests and offerings, for as Ieremie. Ad Fa∣biolam saith Corporis Ʋctia ad animum reeruntur, Ideoque talibus praeditos cor∣poribus ad rem Diuinam Esse ineptos. Besides this, how often hath our Sa∣uiour commanded his Disciples in the Gospell as concerning good life, and god∣ly couersation? How often also hath Paule giuen the same to Tymothie in charge? As the other Apostles to other Pastours and Teachers of the word. All which of the Preists in the lawe, of the Disciples in the Gospell, doe as well con∣cerne vs as them, as being spoken to all alike. As that in the Tim. 1.5. , That is a pure harte a good conscience and vnfained. For as he describeth a mini∣ster, in the third Chap: of the same Epist He must be ,
and as the Apostle requi∣reth in a Deacon, and therefore much more in a Bishop: , And as he requireth in the fourth Chapter. That he haue a good report of those that are with∣out, least they fall into the rebuke, and snare of the diuell, and in the same chapter, That he be vnto them that be∣leeue, an example in word, in conuersation in loue, in spirit, in saith, and in purenes as Peter, in the 1.5.3  that is as tipes, patternes, presidents and examples vnto your flockes, of which the Lord hath made you ouerseers as Paule againe lastly warneth vs in the same fourth Chapter last verse: Take heede vnto thy selfe and vnto thy doctrine, for in so doing thou shalt saue thy selfe, and those that heare thee, least that preaching vnto other thou thy selfe become a reprobate 1. Cor. 19. last verse. So that hereby we are all to learne what is our dutie, that take vpon vs to preach the word of God vnto others, that we our selues first giue example of good workes, who as we call others, we our solues may first leade and shewe the way to o∣thers
and be deafe our selues whoe should giue good example, and if we bid others goe and we our selues stand still, and if we pipe and sing to others and we our selues be not delighted there∣with, what doe we els but moke God & condeme them? for as the Poet saith, Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ip∣sum, and as another saith Quid didicisse viam prodest quia pergere nolis? Turpior igna∣ro factus es ipse sciens. But lette such loose and dissolute ministers remember that A∣gens Theologia contrarie to Aristotles opi∣nion of felicitie as saith, Barnarcinus Ochi∣nus. Tanto maior est contemplante quantum domina serua, etuiua fides mortuae anticellit dia¦logue 2.20. Better is he that hath actiue the hethat hath contemplatiue Diuinitie, & let them remember that which Austin saith to their sham evenit indoctum vulgus et. rapit caelum. The common people winning away as it were by violence the Kingdome of Heauen from them, being like Astrono∣mers and Starregasers which alwaies are pointing at it, but neuer possesse it, or sette foote in it: and being in the pul∣pitte as one a stage bearing the partes
and taking vpon them the persons of good men, but afterwardes become their owne men againe, when as, Christ saith in the eight of Iohn, if ye would abide in this my saying, then should ye be truely my disciples, which our Sauiour speaketh to all in generall, and therefore much more vnto the minister it was the saying of Prophaine Protagoraes in the Pa∣gane Plato, herein agreing with mischei∣vous Machiueli: he is as a madde man that cannot counterfaite Iustice, but contrarie wise godly Paule he saith. That the wrath of the Lord is reueiled from Heauen vpon all them that hould the trueth of God in vniustice. Let all Preachers therefore imitate the patriarch Iacob, in taking vnto them both Lea and Rachel that is both life and learning, manners and know∣ledge, science and conscience together that I may vse the Allegorie of a Iewish Rabbie: who likneth Action vnto Lea and contemplation to Rachel Lea see∣ming to be deformed or rather not so well fauoured in comparison to Rachel, which was most beautifull; workes and deedes more harde and laborious then
bare speculation, when as they doe o∣ther wise, they shall shew themselues like vnto Iacobs wiues maides Biltha and Zilpha: Who did bring forth children, which were free they themselues being bound, and likewise be∣ing themselues most sinnefull children of God, did make others good and Godly themselues continuing badde and wicked. But would to God they would call to mind whensoeuer they goe aboute to reprehende and reproue the sinnes of the people, that which the Heathen Tullie hath in his thirde of his Tusculan. Est propruim stultitiae aliorum vitia cernere & obliuisci suo∣rum. And againe in an other place Omni vitio carere debet is qui in ali∣um paratus est discere. And would they would remember that which they reade of that famous Lawgiuer Licurgus who gaue noe lawes but those which he first practised himselfe. They may happelie deceaue the ignorant and sim∣ple people who as Horace saieth 1. lib. Epist. Ʋertutem verba esse putant vt ligna lucum. But beloued, the Lord
is not mocked, who is the searcher of the Hartes, and reines. And is not as Mercurie to whome onelie tongues are offered and sacrificed, but requireth all both inward and outward partes, and powers, yea holy man perfect and absolute in euerie good worke, whose sacrifice is a sorrowfull soule and a contrite harte, whose worship consisteth in spirit and trueth, and whose offeringes are the fruites of the spirite euen all diuine vertues whatso∣euer: wherefore Cyprian saieth verie well in this behalfe. Vt Musici cor cum chordis ita ministri mens cum moni∣tionibus conueniret. Which cannot be when their practise and their Preaching their doctrine and their deedes, their wordes and their workes agree not together, for as a learned writer saieth , such lude ministers therefore are like vnto midwiues, who healpe other to bringe forth, but doe not bring forth them selues, who as Socra∣tes, saieth in the personne of a Philosopher in Plato his Thettetus likning himselfe to a
midwife, but in his doing more then a midwife that I may vse his words  Euen the Ministers of the word of God should shew themselues more then mid∣wiues, in bringing forth also themselues as theire function is a greate deale more honorable, in that they are as it were mid∣wiues not only to weomen but also to men and weomen, & in that they haue not a charge of their bodies but the cure and care of their soules and as Midwiues to discerne the moone calfe from the per∣fect fruite of weomen so Preachers should not bring forth moone calues: yea and they maie be likned againe to the crowe which Noe sente out of the Arke which was blacke, vncleane, delighting to light and rest on filthie and lothsome places, and feede on carrion carcases, so they blacked with ill fame, vncleane in life and couersation, and desiring the filthie corruption of the world; the crowe being greedie, Rauenous, abhor∣ring the companie of mē; So they couete∣ous, seruing their belly, sequestring them
selues from the true Church by their wicked workes; whereas contrariewise good Preachers irreprehensible in life, do∣ing that which is good, not forsaking the godly and Godlinesse, but comming with an Oliue branche in their mouth which is the word of grace, and practi∣sing the same according to their tea∣ching, which is signified by the greene leaues of the same Math. 23. Are alto∣gether like vnto the Doue. It was noe merueile (beloued) that the Aunciente Lawgiuers would haue their Preistes ab∣staine from, a dogge and a goate most noisome but especially from a goate, and whie? because as Plutarch answereth, making it a Probleme in his third Pro∣bleme because the people alwaies ab∣horred the same as the most luxurious, ill sauouring and infectious beast, as be∣ing most commonly diseased with the E∣pilepsie or falling sickenesse, so that they which tasted and touched the same beast were oftentimes infected with the same disease as likewise the Lord in Leuitic. Commandeth his Preistes to absteine from the like vncleane thinges, by which
is signified the puritie of life, and integri∣tie of manners, that ought to be in the Ministers. But let all deepe dissemblres and hollow harted Hypocrites acknow∣ledge that to be true, as it is most certaine although a Pagane spake it that Tullie hath in one of his Epist. Quam non est facilis virtus, quam vero difficilis euis diu∣turna simulatio? Seeing that as our Sauiour saieth in the Gospell. There is nothing hid that shall not be opened nor nothing secret that shall not be reueiled. In that last Epiphany and day of manifestation when as euerie Hypocrite shall be made as naked as Aesops crowe without his visour of vertue cloake of honestie, and colour of holinesse by which they haue deceaued so longe the simplier sorte, whose senses they do so be witche captiuate & intoxicate, like vnto the Iguis fatuus with the glimpse therof car¦ried headlōg to their destructiō by foolish¦ly following the same they know not whi∣ther. Euerie Phisition of the bodie Hyp∣pocrates was wonte to say . That they may say at the last with the Apostle Paule in the fourth of the second to Timot. When
they are departing out of this life, as he did. I haue fought a good fight and haue funished my course, I haue kepte the faith &c. Yea they ought to be such schole∣masters to the vnlearned people as Theo∣dosius the Emperour required to his chil∣dren, that is as well  as . And as this is requisite & necessarie espe∣cially in ministers, as comming nearest in calling and condition to these Scribes and Pharisies, whome we haue in hand; euen so doe these wordes of which we doe now entreate, concerne as well all others of what degree state and place socuer they be in Church or common wealth, euen all of anie age, sexe, or sorte, highe or low, rich, poore, young and ould, one with a∣nother. So that whosoeuer shall doe a∣nie good workes outwardlie to be seene of men, thereby to gette prayse and commendation of the people, and not for Gods cause with a single harte, a sincere, conscience, and faith vnfained, doe no∣thing at all exceede in righteousnesse these Scribes and Pharises, but shew themselues to be their deuelish Disciples, full of Hy∣pocrisie, fraught with ambition, and
deepe in dissimulation. As for example the Papists who for their resemblāce here∣in may rightly be called Romish Pharisies whose doctrine as it is nothing els but he∣resie so their life is nothing els but the leauē of these Iewish Leuites, their holines Hy∣pocrisie, their deuotion dissimulation their Godlinesse, vaine glorie, their Zeale superstition, their prayer , their Sacrifices sacriledge, there chastitie vncleannes, their worshipping Idolatrie, their blessinges Blasphemie, their pilgri∣mages pillinges, and powlinges of the peo¦ple, their Purgatorie Purging of other mēs purses, there fasting feasting their almesse deedes all misdeedes. To conclude their whol religiō being nothing els but a masse of sollem ceremonies consisting altoge∣ther in shewes and semblances, not sound∣nesse, in fantasies not in ueritie, and in cir∣cumstances, not in substance: all this appeareth to be most true when as these Scribes and pharises their workes are al∣together outwarde, consisting in externall pompe and pride, in glorie, and goodly ap¦paraile infine and costly linnen, and in all glittering glosse and glorie that may be
in the world euen as the whore of Babilō is discribed in the Reuelation, in vanitie of vestments in copes & corporasses, albes and amisses, in palles and purples, and such like trifles, their prayer being nothing els but lipp labour, in murmuring and mutte∣ring manie creeds, Paternosters, and Aue Maries, in blessing & beading, in kneelinge and knocking, in beating their breasts, in groueling on the ground, in houlding vp their hands, in lifting vp their eies to hea∣uen, like the proude Pharisie in the Gos∣pell, the same being in the tongue not in trueth, in voice not in spirit, in externall crying and calling, in bellowing and bawling in sorrowing and sighing, in greiues & growning frō the face outward but without remorse of consciēce, Hea∣uinesse of heart, contrition of minde, and cōuersiō of soule: their baptime stāding of water, creame, oile, salt, spittle, sneuill, and such like filthie slauerings, and yet those so necessary, as they dare be bold to say bloc∣kisly & blasphemously; without the which Saluation cannot be obtained. The Sa∣crament of the supper they make as it were a maske or mummerie by their
massing, yea they vse it as heathenish Sa∣crifice by their manifest Idolatrie, yea like a plaie or pageant by their goulden shewes by their bendinges and bowinges, moc∣king and mowinges, windinges and tur∣ninges, and such like vnseemly gesture, by their adoration, eleuation, and exaltati∣on: the shamelesse shaueling that cele∣brateth this Sacrifice or rather committeth this sacriledge not without most horrible blasphemie, dealeth with the baked God which they call an host, euen as a cat doth with a mouse, who after they haue dalied with it, dādled it towsed, & tossed it two & fro vpward and downeward, forward and backward, at the last, the iest turning in∣to earnest, he choppeth it vp at one bitte flesh, bloud, bones and all. To conclude their whole religion consisteth of nothing els, but of raggs and reliques, ringing and singing, censing and sancting, shaning and shriuing, thereby shragging the purses of the poore people, and all this in shew of sanctimonie and sinceritie, and being indeede nothnig els but deceite & dissem∣bling, And lastly in those their goodlie deedes of Charitie, which carrie the grea∣test
shew of good workes, when as they build Churches erect monasteries, found collegies, Hospitalls. Frieries, and nun∣neries, and other Religious howses, where by, they indeauour to merite their Saluati∣on, and get wordly commendation, to be hallowed in heauen of God, and honored in earth of men, what doe they els but shew themselues to be Hypocriticall and Pharisiecall dissemblers? and what are those their good deedes anie thing els but Splendida peccata being without faith, seeing that as the Apostle saith: what so∣euer is not of faith is sinne, for all their good intent: for although as Austin saith Intentio facit opus bonum, yet must we take therewithall that, which followeth after Sed fides dirigit intentionem. For as the same Apostle saith in another place. Without faith it is vnpossible to please God. So that for all their greate costs and charges thus vainegloriously bestowed, howsoeuer perhappes praise worthie before men, yet without regard and guerdon before God, they may be likened to the woman which had the bloodie flixe mētioned in the Gos∣pell, who had spent all her substance and
bestowed all her goods vpon Phisitions, for remedie of her disease, but could not be healed orhealped of anie and noe mar∣ueile, seeing that the best workes that a∣nie regenerat man in the world can doe with the liueliest faith, the strongest hope, with the colourablest intente, and to the best ende that may be, can not purchase anie sparke of grace or droppe of mercie by deserte, at the hands of God; for as our Sauiour saith in the Gospell. When we haue doune all that we can, yet are we vnprofitable seruants. What then shall be come of those glori∣ous workes of the Papists, which they bouldly affirme to merite, being died and tincte in the precious bloud of our Sa∣uiour Christ, and therefore must needes be acceptable and gratious in the sight of God? euen they shalbe in accompt vnto the Lord, as was Iesabell vnto Ie∣hu, who although shee cleared her eyes and painted her face with ruddie coul∣lours and other pleasant hewes, thereby to seeme faire to escape the furie of Iehu, yet for all that did he according to the commandment of God perfourme the
Iudgement of the Lord vpon her, with out anie regard of her beautie, or anie o∣ther respect whatsoeuer. But to leaue the Papists and to come neare ourselues here present, if anie shall in this congre∣gation vse to frequent diuine seruice and sermons, seeming to be a zealous Pro∣fessour of the Religion now sette vppe by publike Authoritie, for feare of incur∣ring the daunger of the Lawe prouided in this behalfe, or els to be well estee∣med of, and deemed of his neighboures as an ordinarie liuer, and ordinarie profes∣sour in the towne and parish where he dwelleth, and not for the truthes sake, as a faithfull Christian and his conscience cause; verily he is nothing els but a car∣nall gospeller, and a time seruer, nothing at all differing in this, from the dissembling Pharisies and Hypocriticall papists in dal∣lying with God, and making a mocke of his word, then the which their can be no wickednesse worse, noe sinne more hainous nor noe vice more odious in the sight of God; for as Tully saith in the first of offices, Totius Iustitiae nulia pars capitalior est, quam arum qui tum quum
maxime fallunt id agunt vt viri boni esse videantur. In consideration of which di∣ssembling nature and deceitfull minde of man in generall, Seneca he crieth out in his Hippolitus, in the person of Theseus which may also be truely verified of this our dowbling and coulourable age. Oui∣ta fallax, abditos sensus geris, animisque pul∣chram turbidis faciem induis, pudor impuden∣tem calat, audacem quies, pietas nefandum, vera fallaces produnt, simulantque molles du∣ra. For of what degree estate and order of men in this time may not that of Ho∣mer be truely sayd?  That is as Chytreus Translateth these words Qui bona dicebant animis & praua struebant Who speake roses but sauour of wormewoode. Their words being sweeter then honie, softer then butter, smoother then oile, but hauing warre in their hartes; hauing a shew of godlinesse & a semblance of zeale in outward profession, and deuotion, but vtterly denying the power thereof in their life and conuersation. But let all such in this behalfe follow the good & holesome counsell of a heathen Philosopher euen Plato in his Epist. to Dion  For
as Tullie saith in his second booke De¦natura Deorum of the worshippers of the heathen Gods, much more may it be said of the seruice of the only true and euerla∣sting God: Cultus Deorum est optimus, idem∣que castissimus atque sanctissimus, Plenissi∣musque pietatis vt eas semper pura, integra incorrupta & mente & voce veneremur. And as our sauiour himselfe saith in the fourth of Iohn, God is a spirite and they that worship him must worship him in spirite and trueth. And as he saith in another place not euerie one that saith vnto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingedome of heauē but he that doth the will of my fa∣ther which is in heauen. And thus much for these words which I haue reade vnto you. FINIS.
