C1200 R171038 52211977 175545
The CASE, or present State Of the Refiners of SUGARS in ENGLAND. THE Ancient Trade of Refineing Sugars has (by reason of its great Increase for Forty or Fifty Years past) occasioned the expending of vast Summs of Money in Erecting, and Fitting up in several parts of this Kingdom, ma∣ny large and convenient Works for the Manageing, and Carrying on of the same. The Growth and Increase of this Trade, did (for many Years past) run parrallel with the Success of our English Plantations, and through the Indulgence and Favour of the Government had not only beaten out the Lisbone Trade, from whence this Nation was formerly served with White Sugars; But had Extended it self to the supplying of most Forreign Parts, and particularly the greatest part of the East Country, which was a very beneficial Trade to this Kingdom, because the Returns were usually made in those profitable Commodities of Pitch, Tarr and Hemp. This Kingdom (being Master of the most Considerable and Profitable Sugar Planta∣tions in the whole World) stands upon the greatest advantage to Improve and Inrich it self, by Incourageing the Manufacturing of our own Plantation Broun-Sugars within its self, and thereby inable the English Merchants (in the way of their Trasick) to supply Forreign Markets with our own English Refined Sugars. And certainly, had God and Nature put so great an Advantage into the Hands of the Dutch, (their Prudence in Trade, leads us to conclude) they would not have Trifled with it, but by an effectual Incouragement of the Refineing of their Plantation Broun-Sugars within themselves, they would have secur'd the supplying of all Forreign Markets to themselves, and given Laws to the World as to that Commodity; which still remains in the power of England to do. Our Neighbours the Dutch, the Hamburgers and the French, have for some Years past, most Studiously (and that with great Success) Incouraged this expensive and beneficial Trade within themselves, having been greatly Inabled thereunto, by an Act made in the First Year of the late King James, allowing the Exporter of our Plantation Broun-Sugar to draw back, not only the 9 d. per hundred which is the half Impost, but also the whole Additional Duty of 2 s. and 4 d. which in the whole makes 3 s. and 1 d. draw back, upon every Hundred Weight of our Exported Broun-Sugars; By rea∣son whereof our Neighbours have afforded, those very Refined Sugars, which they have made from our own Plantation Broun-Sugars, near 20 l. per Cent cheaper then we could, even at those very Forreign Markets, which were formerly served from this Kingdom; whereby this Trade has been greatly Discouraged here at home, and the supply of all Forreign Markets put intirely into the hands of the Dutch. And by reason of another Act made in the last Sessions of this present Parliament, for Incouraging the Consumption of Corn, so high a duty is laid, not only on the low Wines drawn from Plantation Molosses (which pays but the small and unproportion∣able duty of 8 d. per hundred inwards) but also, on the low Wines drawn from our own home made Molosses, the English Refiners are quite cut off from the Vend of their Mo∣losses here at home, and are now wholly disabled from carrying on their Trades. And if this Trade be not timely Releived by the Wisdom of Parliament, it must una∣voidably be Totally lost in this Kingdom, and consequently given up to our Neighbours. The Releif that is Humbly Desired, for the preservation of this Ancient Trade in this Kingdom, Is, that the English Refiners may have (at least) as much Incouragement to Work our own Plantation Broun-Sugars here at home, as Forreigners now have to Ex∣port them and Work them abroad, by giving the English Refiners such a draw back up∣on the Exportation of their Refined Sugar and Molosses, as shall bare a proportion to the draw back of 3 s. and 1 d. which the Exporter now has upon the Exportation of our Plantation Broun-Sugars. This Releif and Incouragement being given to this Trade, the Consequences thereof will most certainly prove, the great Increase of our English Navigation, which (under God) is the Strength, Wealth and Glory of this Kingdom, The Imployment and Livelyhood of many Thousands of Their Majesties Subjects here at home, And a gen∣eral Increase of the Wealth, and Treasure of this Kingdom.
The CASE of the Refiners of Sugars in England.
