P4238A 53981558 180305
No Power but of God And yet a Power in every Creature. OR, A word in season, to all Men not void of Grace, or deprived of Reason. Where in is beld forth, That the Almighty God is not wanting to us, in im∣powering of us; but we are wanting to him, in not im∣proving our talent for him. The Almighty gives to every man some talent or talents, viz. To some Natu∣ral, to others Spiritual talents or gifts: But there is no man that improves his talent so well as he might, in point of obedience to him. Which appears, In our not doing so much good, and refraining so much evil, as by the power he hath given us we ought and might have done. And, That the Ordinances, Institutions, & appointments of Christ held forth in the Gospel, are still in force: so that to slight them, is to slight our own priviledges; and to forsake them, is to forsake our own mercies. The abuse of Gospel-Ordinances by some, doth not take away the lawful use of them to others. By ROBERT PURNEL. Isa. 28. 7. The Priests and Prophets, they erre in vi∣sion, and stumble in judgment. Psal. 140. 11. Therefore let not an evil speaker be established in the earth. Isa. 28. 11. But wih a stammering lip, and another tongue speak to thy people. London, Printed for Samuel Newton, dwelling in Wine-street in Bristol. 1651.
THE EPISTLE to the Impartial READER. Courteous Reader, TIme is one of the most preci∣ous Herbs in the Garden of the World; so that there is nothing more precious; and yet by most men, there is no one thing more slighted: Wherefore, if I shall here give thee the fruits of a lit∣tle redeemed time, think not hardly of me, but let it have acceptance with thee; I must confesse, that I am the most un∣meet
of many, which this Age doth af∣ford, to write or speak of things of so great concernment: Yet I suppose this will be granted by all men rational, that he which hath but a little strength, and improveth that to the uttermost, to doe good withall, is more acceptable in the sight of God and sincere-hearted men, then he which hath ten times the strength and useth it not. And although in me there is the least Candle that ever God enlightened, yet I shall not put it under a Bushel; and although I have but one Talent, I will not hide it in a Napkin; it's true, the Candle of the Lord cannot burn with a more dim light then in my selfe. (Though a little truth liveth in me, yet clouds and darknesse are round about me.) So that I have but a little of the Spirit, in abundance of weaknesse; Wherefore if any of the glory of Christ break forth, in the ensuing discourse, let him have the glory, who hath chosen the weak things of the World to con∣found the wisdome of the wise; and
although these things be not broug forth in the painted Dish of Human Learning, varnished and coloured over with the wisdome of man; yet if the fruit be good in the taste, though the Tree be not so beautiful in the eye, reject no the fruit for the Trees sake, but rather consider that which is most unpleasant in the eyes of men, is for the most part most pleasant in the sight of God; for man is apt to love that which God ab∣hors, and to abhor that which the Al∣mighty loves. For this Treatise, as much as in me li∣eth, I have avoided the crying up of any party or opinion, and endeavoured to own truth, and deny untruth wheresoe∣ver it is found, either in noble or ignoble, old or young, weak or strong, learned or unlearned; wishing with my whole heart that there were but only these two names under Heaven to know the sons and daughters by, viz. Saints and Sinners; for there is but light and darknes, heaven and hell, truth and errour, sheep and
wolves. But the muddy waters of Baby∣lon have run so long in the channels of our understanding, that it hath blinded our judgements and disordered our affe∣ctions. Understanding Reader! the things that I have written of are many, the method which I have observed is fami∣liar and plain, the rule which I have en∣deavored to walk by is the word of truth, the end I have aimed at is the glory of God, in the good of his people; and wherein I have come short of my end, at∣tribute that to my weaknesse, and not the truths asserted. The fore named conside∣rations have enflamed my desires, and winged my endeavours to cast in this mite also into the Cabinet of thy soule. And although I have met with some dis∣couragements already, and do suppose I shall have many more when this comes to publike view: Yet if any man doe reap any spiritual benefit by it, though I may suffer reproaches for it, I have not lost my end in it: I have endeavoured
according to the measure of light and strength that is in me, to speak the words of truth and sobernesse unto thee. But that I might not spin out my Epistle beyond the staple; I will endeavour to give thee a brief sum of what I have written, and leave the farther enlargement of these things to every one that shall reade this book: I have written these things, not as so many Infallibilities, but under corre∣ction, with submission to beter judgements I have given mine, and that, I hope, with∣out a preingaged affection, honouring the things of God, as well in those under one form, as those under another. And as in every place, and amongst all sorts of people, he that feareth God and work∣eth righteousnesse is accepted of him; so I would endeavour to love any, in whom I see the least appearance of Christ, let them go under what name or notion the Prince of darknesse and his children please. The sum of what I have hereafter written, in brief is this; First, I have laid before thee the several Temptations
that doe surround thee on every side; next I have exhorted thee to put on all the ar∣mour of God to defend thy self, and of∣fend thy enemies, and that thou might∣est so doe, abide in the Doctrine of Christ, which is a City of Refug, and then love in the will of God, which is the strong Castle of content; Improve thy power whether natural or spiritual for him who gave it thee, n whom are all our springs, from whom are all our supplies; yet let our omissions and commissions be charg∣ed upon our selves, that God may be true and every man a liar. There is darknesse in the Prophets, and grosse darknesse in their Flock; and but a little light in any of the Saints. A few words to the preiended Ministery, with a brief Epistle to the World, whom they have deceived, with a discovery of them, and how thou mayest easily know them; Of our fall in the first-Adam, and of our recovery by the second-Adam: The glorious state of those restored; the deliverances they have al∣ready had are great, and greater then
these be at hand; onely, the Saints be too suddain in their expecting these deliver∣ances. These with many other particu∣lars are laid before thee, and commended unto thee: Now although these things are not brought forth in the golden dish of humane Learning, painted and varni∣shed over with arts, parts, and wisdome of man, but in an earthen vessel; yet de∣spise not the meat for the dishes sake. Remember that Christ called those men Scribes, Pharisees and Hipocrites, because they looked so much upon the outside, and so little on the inside; even so now, in these dayes most of the sns and daugh∣ters of men, doe looke more upon gifts then upon Grace, upon Law then upon Gospel, upon the forme more then upon the power of godlinesse; viz. If a man come and speak with the tongue of men and angels, the people are presently say∣ing as once was said of learned, eloquent, yet wicked Herod; it is the voice of a God, and not of man: but if another come unto your Assemblies, though well grown
in grace, yet if he doth not equal you in natural gifts, you say he is an illiterate Mechanick, &c. But if I might be thought worthy to advise you, I should beseech you to call no man ignorant, whom God hath taught; nor no man learned, that hath not been taught at the School of Christ. Grace is more excellent then Gifts, yet both in their places are good: Gifts do adorn the outward man, and Grace doth beautifie the inward: The outward man may be adorned, and the inward man be left naked: And I think experience in these dayes doth abundantly prove it; and for my own part, if I am censured for it, I doubt not but I shall consider I am not better then my Master, for his doctrine was despised, and that of the learned, and well may mine: but I hope thou wilt try me before thou judge me, lest I should say to thee, as it is said to some in the same case, Pro. 18. 13. He that judgeth a matter before he heareth it, &c. But I hope better things
of thee, though I thus speak. So I wi hold thee no longer in the porch, but in∣vite thee into the house, and such as I have I will set before thee, desiring thee to taste of every dish, before thou dost spend thy judgment of the feast: For what is wanting in the first Course, may be made up in the second; and if there be not such varieties as was expected, yet let it have acceptance with thee, see∣ing it is according to my ability. 1 Pet. 4. 10. As every man hath received the gift, so let him administer the same. Thus do, and thou wilt engage him, Who is, Thy Friend and Servant, R. P.
The Contents of the most principal things handled in the ensuing Treatise. THere are three things for a Christian to doe, which are of great concernment, as to the well being of a Christian, viz. 1. To put on the Armour of Christ. 2. To abide in the Doctrine of Christ. 3. To live in the will of God; For there is no power but of God. The several temptations that lye before Christians. The way to withstand them, is not onely to put on this armour, but to keep it on also. And so to abide in the Doctrine of Christ, as in a Castle of Refge against all storms. And wait upon God in the use of Ordinances. Nine arguments to prove that Gospel Ordinances are still in force.
What the Doctrine of Christ is. What it is to abide in the Doctrine of Christ. That there is no power but of God, and yet a power in every Creature. Of our fall in the first Adam, and of the sub∣tiltie of Satan therein. Of our Restoration by the second Adam, in whom we have gotten more then we lost b the first Adam. A Dialogue between the Law and the Gospel. Of what we are delivered from by Christ, and what he hath restored his Elect unto. Wherein many men and women doe deceive themselves, thinking they are something, when they are nothing. A few words of Faith. A word to the pretended Ministers, or a few words to some of those that have taken to them∣selves the name of the Ministers of England. A brief Epistle to the World. Ten Characters of a false pretended Minister by which he may be known. Fourteen Characters of a faithfull Minister of the Gospel, whom we shall doe well to honour. A brief Epistle to all the Lambes, that through a providence have not been devoured by the Wolves. A brief Prophesie of the glorious state of the Church Militant that will be shortly.
There be glorious deliverances comming for the Saints, but the Saints be for the most part too sudden in their expecting these deliver∣rances. There be many other things held forth in this Treatise, very seasonable and useful, and wor∣thy our serious consideration. The heads of which, for some reason I forbear to mention in this Table.
The several Temptations that lie before us. THere are three things that be of absolute necessity for a Chri∣stian to doe at all times, but more especially in these divi∣ding times: I say, of absolute necessity, if not in point of being, yet in point of well-being as to Christians. First, To put on the Armour of Christ. Secondly, To abide in the Doctrine of Christ. Thirdly, To live in the will of God. First, Put on the whole armour of Christ. Before come particularly to speak of this point, I shall endeavour to lay before you the ne∣cessity that we have to arm our selves with this Armour at this time. For now Satan in more then an ordinary measure hath transformed himself into an Angel of light, and comes to us by his ministers in sheeps∣tloathing, though inwardly we find him to
be a ravening wolf. He is subtle, and knows that those former ordinary snares, gins, and baits will not take with many men: where∣fore now, though he can deceive but few with the history, yet he endeavours to de∣ceive many with the mysterie of iniquity. You will and may easily see him with those that call themselves our Joshua's, in the Pulpit, not only at their elbow, but some∣times in their Explications, and most fre∣quently in their Applications: Nay, there is scarce one Ordinance of the Gospel, but he will cloath himself withall. If he cannot keep people from the practice or use of Or∣dinances, he will as much as in him lies cause them to rest upon Ordinances: in a word, he will vail himself under any form or forms, under any order, or ordinance Again, he hath his gins, pits and snares for all sorts of men, in all administrations The Parliament is not free, but they doe o may see Sathan among them, and sometimes in them, improving all opportunities  deceive them: Our Armies both in Englan Ireland and Scotland call one upon another to stand upon their guard, to make ready present, and to give fire not only upon their bodily enemies, but upon their spiritua enemies. Methinks I hear many of the Soul∣diers
speaking one to the other in the lan∣guage of Paul, 1 Cor. 16. 13. First, Watch what comes in. Secondly, Watch what goes out. 1. Watch what comes in: You shall find thoughts arising one after another in your hearts; call them all to n account, saying, Who art thou? for if thou art for Christ, give me the word, thou shalt freely passe; if thou art not for Christ, and hast not his word, Stand, f thou comest up one step further, I'le fire at thee. 2. Watch what goes out: Take heed to thy words, let them be such as may ad∣minister grace to the hearers; remember what S. James saith, Jam. 3. 5. 6. The tongue s a little member, and boasteth great things; be∣old how great a matter a little fire kindleth! and he Tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity, it defileth he whole body, & setteth on fire the whole course f nature, &c. Wherefore watch what goes ut; remember, the Lord thy God hath et a double pale to rule that little mem∣er. Again, as he tempts Parliament and Army, o he tempts Magistrates and Ministry; high nd low, rich and poor, old and young; e hath his temptations suitable to all con∣itions: He will tempt you when you ar
praying, hearing, reading, meditating, eat∣ing, drinking, waking and sleeping; he im∣proves all opportunities, he takes all ad∣vantages, for he lies in wait to deceive, and winnow you, as Christ told Peter; He is a great traveller, he roves up and down the earth, as he told the Lord in the book of Job; He is a great Philosopher, he is ac∣quainted with all natures; he hath his Lo∣gick and his Rhetorick as perfect as the Heathen Philosophers, or the National Mi∣nisters, nay he outstrips them, for he often deceives them: You know he was too sub∣tle for the first Adam, he engaged him and overcame him, and gave Adam and all us in him the fall: Again, he imployes all his policie, improves all his subtilty, to foile the second Adam as he did the first, Mat. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, &c. Note these two things: 1. The Devil suits his temptation to our Lord Christs present condition: Christ had been fasting forty dayes, why, saith the De∣vil, Command that these stones be made bread The Lord answers him from Scripture, and tels him, Deut. 8. 3. it is written, Man shall  live by bread alone, but by every word that p∣ceedeth out of the mouth of God. The Devil see∣ing there is no dealing with Christ, unle
he could bring Scripture, he hastens and prepares his next temptation, as you may see Mat. 4. 5, 6. he intreats Christ to cast him∣self down from the pinacle of the Temple, and endeavours to ground his temptation upon Scripture, and cites Psal. 91. 11. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. The Devil cites this Psalm and this verse to Christ: but mark his po∣licie, he leaves out somewhat most consider∣able in that 11. verse, and addes somewhat that was not in that verse, as you may see, if you compare Mat. 4. 6. with Psal. 91. 11. Again, this subtile Serpent will bring pride into our hearts under the name of decencie and neatnesse, and covetousnesse under the name of good husbandry; nay he wil clothe drunkennesse with the garment of good∣fellowship, and gluttony with the robe of hospitality, nay he will hide frowardnesse under the name of zeale; he will promise you peace, and bring you into trouble; he ll promise you honour, and bring you into dishonour both with God and man; he will promise us liberty, and bring us in∣to bondage; In a word, (to adde no more) he will promise us life, as he did our first parents, and bring us to death, The wage of sinne is death.
2. O Christians, consider, that we have a deceitful heart within us, a map of misery which is more destructive to us then all the wiles of Sathan; it is desperately wicked, saith Jeremy in his 17. chap. v. 9. The heart is de∣ceitfull above all things, and desperately wick who can know it? There is a magazine of fil∣thinesse within us, in thine and mine heart; we have seen much of it, and there is a thou∣sand times more then we have seen, Who can know it? There is nothing called sin in the Word of God, but thou and I may find in more or lesse, taking up its lodging in our hearts; it doth mischief us more then Satan for he can but tempt, but our deceitful hearts do yield; it will make us believe that it is plodding for our good, when it is con∣triving our ruine; it will cheat us in our obediences to God, it will tell us we have done well when we have done ill; in a word, the Heart is the sole troubler of the times, see Eccles. 9. 3. The hearts of the sonn of men are full of madnesse, for evil and madne are in their hearts. Now there are three thing by which a mad man may be known. 1. Mischievousnesse to himselfe and o∣thers. 2. Unsensiblenesse, they feele not th smart.
3. Wilfulnesse; there is no perswading of them. First now, O Christian, deal impartially; dost not thou find that thou hast mischiefed thy self and others many a time? and yet thou wouldst be ready to spet in the face of him that should say thou art mad. Again in the next place, hast not thou been insensible at the present what misery thou hast brought upon thy self? And then Thirdly, for wilfulnesse: There are cha∣racters of wilfulness to be seen in those that do look on themselves as the chiefest Saints, and yet they would take it as a rash expressi∣on, if one tell them that there is madnesse in their hearts. 3. Consider, O Christians, there is not only a Devil without thee, and a deceitful heart within thee, but also there be all thy carnal Acquaintance before thee, which do claim an interest in thee, wherefore they will not forsake thee, but lie perswading of thee to run with them to the same excess of riot; and if thou begin to refuse to comply with them, they will say, You begin too soon to be precise: What, a young Saint! lose the best of your time, the flower of your age! what, wither your body with griefe for a few petty sins! what, spoil your selfe with
studying and poring upon books! what run into corners to weep and pray, when thou mightest be singing and dancing, eat∣ing & drinking with the rest of thy friends what, must you be so precise? shall no body be saved but you, and a few such as you b what is become of our forefathers, think you, which made no such ado? I hope you will not say but they be saved, &c. Wilt thou see now, O man, what is the cause that the sonnes and daughters of men are multiplying their iniquities, committing sinne with greedinesse: why, herein lies the cause; there is a devil without thee, and a deceitful heart within thee, and there be all thy car∣nal acquaintance before thee, all pretend∣ing love unto thee, and they all bending to∣gether and improving all opportunities to cheat, delude, and deceive thee. Hence it commeth to passe that the whole world lieth in wickednesse: hence it is, that when thou comest into the City, thou shalt see it swim with pride before thee, and abound with covetousnesse behind thee: on thy right hand, as thou gost along the streets, thou shalt hear them swearing, and on thy left hand in their shops lying; goe out of the streets into any by-place, thou shalt heard some cursing, and others backbiting, and all
almost (unlesse here and there one) in the City, bond their forces together against the Lord Christs Kingly power. Me thinks I see now and then a sincere∣hearted Country-Christian come walking along the streets of the City; and when he sees these abominations before him, behind him, on his right hand, and on his left, he begi to say, Lord, what is the cause of this great wicdnesse in the City? And if he receive no answer from the Lord, he en∣quires for the Lords people, and through Gods goodnesse he finds here and there a Christian following of Christ, and a pretty considerable party enquiring after Christ; well, he comes to one and asketh him, why doth sin so abound in this City? it is true, sin reigns much in the Country, but it ex∣ceeds in the City. Why (saith the Citizen to him) we have more Temptations living in the City, then you in the Country. Well but the Country-man is not fully satisfied, he goes to another, and demands a reason, Why doth sin reign in this City? have you not godly Magistrates, and godly Ministers, and other godly Officers in your City? Me thinks I hear the Citizen answering him and saying, Why through the Lords good∣nesse it is much better with us in that respect then it hath been here to fore.
Q. What then is the cause of the abound∣ing of sin? A. Sir, I think one or both of these fol∣lowing reasons may be given for it; either first we have sleighted the means of gra more then others, or else (as I have said be∣fore) we are under greater temptations in the City, then you in the Country. But shall we see a little farther, and en∣quire into the cause why both City and Country, not only in this Nation, but all the World-over is so overspread with all maner of abominations both in Principles and Practice; which is the reason so many thousands that would be looked upon as Saints and servants of Christ, are fallen off, one to this error, and another to that facti∣on. Some deny Ordinances, others deny the Scriptures, and some deny both: Some will acknowledge God, but deny the Son; others acknowledge both the Father and the Son, but despise the Spirit; others will acknow∣ledge Father, Son and Spirit, in word and in tongue, but deny all in their practice And here I am sure is the state of the greatest part of the English Nation, but the Lord (blessed be his name) is beginning to destroy this darknesse by his own light. But is not this the cause why the whole world lieth in
wickednesse, as John saith? There is a Devil tempting, and a deceitful heart yielding, and carnal friends perswading; the one comes and takes thee by one arm, the other by the other arm, the third ties as it were a string about thy middle, and all three say∣ing, Come along with us. Thus much of the cause of our divisions, backslidings, deadnesse, dulnesse, formality and infidelity. Now I shall in the next place lay before you the Cure, and therein speak of two things. The first is concerning the being, The second is concerning the well-being of a Christian. First then, if thou wouldest be preserved in these perilous times, Put on the armour of Christ, and abide in the doctrine of Christ. Secondly, for thy well-being; learn this lesson, There is no power but of God, who will turn all these things to his glory and thy good: Or, Abide in the will of God. First of the first, Put on the whole armour of Christ, and abide in the doctrine of Christ. The one is laid down by way of command in Ephes. 6. 11. the other by way of trial and prevention, in the 2. Epist. of John, v. 9. To each of these Scriptures, as far as I have light witnessed with experience, I shall hold forth briefly and plainly.
Ephes. 6. 11. Put on the whole armour of God that you may be able to stand against the wiles  the Devil. The armour here spoken unto  not a temporal, but a spiritual armour and what this spiritual armour is, you ha it laid down distinctly in this Epistle o Paul to the Ephesians, viz. 1. To gird them with the girdle of truth▪ Eph. 6. 14. 2. To put on the breast-plate of righteousnesse, ver. 14. 3. To be shod with the shooes of the Gospel o peace, v. 15. 4 To take the shield of faith, which is a most victorious weapon, v. 16. 5. To put on the helmet of salvation, v. 17. 6. To take into thy hand of faith the sword of the Spirit, v. 17. Beloved, I dare boldly say, that man o woman that puts on this armour, ma march forth into the field, and challenge al the Devils in hell, and all the wicked men in the world, and rout them all. What mad David go out against Goliah? Why, he saw himself armed, not with Sauls armour, but with this Spiritual armour. What was that that made him so confident, Ps. 27. 3. Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not feare, though warre should rise against me
n this will I be confident. What made him reak forth in such words, Psal. 3. 6. I will ot (said he) be afraid of ten thousand of people hat have set themselves against me round about. ov. 28. 1. The wicked flees when no man pur∣eth, but the righteous is as bold as a lyon. Q. Why be the righteous so bold as a Lion? A. They be armed with the armour of God. Q. What is meant or understood by the girdle of truth? A. To be rightly principled, & through∣y doctrinated in the doctrine of Christ. Again, Q. What is meant by the breast-plate of righteousnesse? A. A good conscience, or innocencie of life &c. and so for the shield of faith, what is it but the righteousnesse to Christ, able like a brazen shield to protect and cover us from the darts of the world, the flesh and the de∣vil? Nay I suppose it to be not only a de∣sensive, but an offensive weapon, I Joh. 5. 4. This is the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith. Heb. 11. 33, 34. Who through faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousnesse▪ obtained promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies
of the Aliens, &c. If we should see an Army of men marching into the field, where their Enemies had placed themselves in Battalia  I say, if we should see them march toward their enemy unarmed, why, we would pre∣sently conclude that these men will be put to the worst, they will receive the rout, they will be either taken, or else return hacked and hewed and terribly wounded. What is the cause that we be so easily and so often routed by Sathan? why, he comes and finds us unarmed; hence it is that we have so many cuts and sores in our inward man, we do not consider the strength and subtilty of our enemies; and hence it is that we do not put on the whole armour of God. Nay, how many thousands of men and wo∣men be there, nay of those that would be ac∣counted pious Christians, that are so far from puting on the whole armour of God, that they ne're put on a peece of it; Nay, it is a rare thing to find a Professor that can tell one what this armour is, and the right place of every peece: hence it is that some do put the peece behind, that should be be∣fore, and that upon the foot which should be on the head; and so though it be the ar∣mour of Christ, you cannot fight in it, it will be to thee as Sauls armour was to
David, unfit for service. Surely Christians, f I see any thing of God, this (I do know) s one of the greatest evils that now reigns mongst Professors, their disordering what God hath ordered. Take a thing that is ood, it is good but in its place; put it a ittle above, or something beneath its place, he thing that is good in it self becomes evil o you, &c. Again, let us examine what necessity there s for the sonnes of Sion thus to arm them∣elves. Oh consider, consider these ensuing criptures. Eph. 6. 11, 12. Put on the whole rmour of God, (there is the precept:) For we restle not against flesh and blood, but against rincipalities and powers, against the rulers of arknesse, against spiritual wickednesse in high laces, (there is the reason.) Take heed that no an deceive you, saith our Lord Christ, Mat. 4. 4. For we be living in those dayes spoken 0, v. 24. There shall arise false Christs and false Prophets, shewing great signes and wonders. These are the dayes spoken to, 1 Tim. 4. 1. Now the Spirit speaketh expressely, that in the ater dayes some shall depart from the faith, giving eed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils, &c. Oh what troops of men and women is Sathan driving before him! Look up a
little, intreat the Lord to take the vail off thy spiritual eye, and thou shalt see a great rode-way exceeding broad, and very popu∣lous, and drove after drove passing on, not softly, but swiftly, they all ride post. Mark diligently, and thou shalt see Sathan that great Prince af the aire, bravely mounted, and richly clothed, as their Generall marching before them, and his Angels bringing up the rear: Take a view of the Droves as they passe by thee, and thou shalt see some of all ranks of men amongst them. Me thinks I hear thee saying, look, look, methinks I see a Parliament-man there, me thinks I see here and there one of the Army, and abundance of the Clergie there; but they march more honourably then the rest, for Satan their Prince hath made them File-leaders. Look, look, what an innumerable company of men and women, old and young, high and low, rich and poor, are posting away to hel Now I see the words of Christ be true, Mat. 7. 13. For wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. Now I see what is the meaning of that text, Mat. 7. 22. Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out devils, and in thy name have done many wonderfull works! Depart from me
aith Christ, I never knew you. How! not know us, and we have taught in thy streets, and eat and drank in thy presence! Depart, saith Christ to them. How! depart! Dost thou speak to us that have done so many won∣derful things in thy name? Lord, let the word depart be given to the Ign rant, and not to us that are Scholars! Why, saith Christ, many of those whom you call Igno∣rant, are the greatest Scholars in my school, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28. Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are alled; but God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound he mighty, and base things of the world and things which are despised hath God chosen, yea and hings which are not, to bring to nought things that re, that no flesh should glory in his presence. Oh how doth flesh glory in his presence! if a man can speak scholastically, though he be not authentique, how is he admired of men! if he can speak eloquently, and lay down things methodically, (which be but the gifts of nature) how doth this flesh glo∣ry in his presence! Methinks I hear a voice from heaven saying, Come down thou proud self-seeking Flesh! Thou hast set thy self in my Spirits place, and hast caused the people to admire
thee, saying of thee as once it was said of Herod It is the vice of God, and not of man. I will smit thee, and the wormes shall destroy thee, saith the Lord. In a word, we may clearly see that Sathan hath his pits, gins and snares for al degrees and degrees and ranks of men, under all admi∣nistrations, form or forms: He endeavours to cheat us in all things, at all times, and in all places. But me thinks I see him lay the closest siege, and raise the strongest batteries, and plant his greatest peeces against these two things: FIrst, against the Doctrine of Christ. Secondly, against the Discipline of Christ 1. Against the Doctrine of Christ, which tells thou art freely justified by grace, Rom. 3. 24. in comes Antichrist, and tels thee it i partly by grace, and partly by works: And so though thou dost not seek to be justified by the Law, yet it is as it were by the works  the Law, Rom. 9. 3. 2. Wherefore? because the sought it not by faith, but as it were by the work of the law, for they stumbled at that stumbling stone Consider these ensuing Scriptures, which speak of justification by grace; and if thi point were well understood, men woul not so easily be led away with the error of th wiked. Ephes. 2. 5. By grace are you saved, a freely quickned when you were dead in your sin
and v. 8. For by grace are you saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Rom. 11. 6. And if it be by grace, then it is no more of works, &c. And in Rom. 3. 24. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ. In a word: Creation, Ele∣ction, Redemption, Justification, and San∣ctification are all of Free-grace, to which both Old and New Testament speaks abun∣dantly: And for want of understanding this point, the Papists erre in seeking salva∣tion by works; For want of understanding this point, the Arminians erre, saying, Ele∣ction and Salvation in effect depend upon Qualification; yea, for want of the true knowledge of this point, doth that error of Free-will and Generall Redemption so abound at this day: In a word, for want of the knowledge of this point, do so many at this time in this Common-wealth make a hotch-potch in mingling and interweaving Law and Gospel, in joyning their obedience with the obedience of Christ, to patch up a salvation. 2. Here is another cheat of Satan, wherein he endeavours to cheat thee and me in the Doctrine of Christ. The doctrine of Christ tels thee, that Christ came to re∣concile thee to God, 2 Cor. 5. 23. When this point is held forth a little, in creeps
Antichrist, and declares that Christ came also to reconcile God to thee; and so en∣deavours to make the immutable God mu∣table, or the unchangeable God changeable. You might trace him in every branch of the Doctrine of Christ, and find him either endea∣vouring to make thee to deny it, or if he cannot prevail in that, then he endeavours to make thee adde something to it, or take something from it. Wherefore put on the whole armour of God, stand upon thy guard and watch: Belieue not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God. 2. Again, as first he endeavours to cheat us in the doctrine of Christ, so secondly he endeavours to cheat us in the discipline of Christ. Now Discipline, though it be not of absolute necessity as to the being of a Church of Christ, yet it is absolutely ne∣cessary to the well-being of a Church: for as a City without walls, a Sea without banks, a Vineyard without hedges, so is a Church without discipline: For a Church without government is as a ship without a Pilot, or a Commonwealth without a Ma∣gistrate, or a World without a Sun. Hence it is that you shall find the Apostles so fre∣quently exhorting, perswading, and intreat∣ing the Church of Jesus Christ to walk by
rule, to observe order: The Pastor is com∣manded to walk as a Pastor and Teacher, that both by his doctrine and conversation he might win others to Christ: the Teach∣ers, Elders, Deacons have all their rules laid before them, how they ought to build up one another in their most holy faith, and to watch over the flock, &c. And so every mem∣ber in the Church in his place is to observe order, in endeavouring to be usefull to the whole body. Nay hence it is, that one quar∣ter part of the New Testament is spent a∣bout treating of the several gifts of the Spirit to several men, to several ends, viz. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evan∣gelists, some Pastors, and some Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the mi∣nistry, &c. Now that Ordinances were the appoint∣ments of Christ, I suppose that all rational men will easily grant; And that they be now in being, and ought to be in use, will be easily proved. The first is granted by all hands, viz. That there were Ordinances, appointments and institutions given forth by Christ unto the Churches in the Apostles dayes, accom∣panied with Gods presence, and confirmed y miracles, and extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit. But the question is, whether these are still to continue? are they now in being as to us? Prove that. For answer hereunto consider these things. 1 ORdinances are not of humane, but of divine institution, 1 Cor. 1. 28. 2. Consider, the Saints both in Old and New Testament, under the greatest discove∣ries, living in the greatest enjoyments, even these waited upon God in the use of Ordi∣nances; and Paul saith, Phil. 3. 17. Ye ought to walk so as you have us for an example: and in another place he saith, Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ, &c. 3. We have not only commands of God and the examples of the Apostles, but w have experience that God hath done u good by them: it is our Fathers walks, i which our soules do often meet with ou Beloved. 4. Consider, the Lord of glory doth blame those that neglect making use of Or∣dinances. Mal. 3. 7. Ye have gone away fro mine ordinances, and have not kept them. Is no this the state of this Nation? Luk. 19. 27 Those mine enemies that would not that I should reign over them, bring them before me. Com∣pare this 27 verse with the 13. and 14. an you shal see that there were a people who
Christ threatned to punish for not submit∣ing to his appointments, nor improving their talents. Not to wait upon God in the use of Ordinances, is to be carelesse to hearken to his voice; and so the Lord may justly complain of thee and me, as once he did, Psal. 81. 11. But my people would not heark∣en to my voice, &c. 5. Consider, while we are in a body we be in a form, and therefore cannot altoge∣ther live without forms, unlesse we will be monstrs, and neglect our own mercies. God hath given us an external body, as well as an internal soul, and will be waited up∣on, worshipped and glorified by both, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Glorifie God in your bodies and in your souls, which are the Lords. 6. Consider, that these appointments, institutions and ordinances, when they were appointed and instituted, were to con∣tinue in the Church till the Saints were perfected. Ephes. 4. 11, 12, 13. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evan∣gelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the mini∣stery, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man unto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of
Christ. In which there be four things con∣siderable: I will but name them. 1. Here is the giver, and that is the Lord Christ, the Fountain in whom all the fulnesse of the Godhead dwels bodily, from whom we receiv grace for grace. 2. Here is the gift, and that is his Spirit in its measures, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. 3. Here is the end why God gave such gifts, v. 12. For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministery, &c. 4. Here is the time, how long these insti∣tutions, offices and ordinances are to con∣tinue, and that is in v. 13. Till we all come i the unity of the faith into the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ. Now if there be any Church of Christ o Congregation o Saints that be compleatly come up to this state spoken unto in that verse, why then all that I would say to them is, Cast not a stumbling block in thy brothers way, speak not so disdainfully of those paths which thou thy self hast gone through; must not thy brother that is weak eat milk, because thou dost eat strong meat? must not he speak as a child, because tho dost speak as a man? must he see by thy eyes, o else wilt thou say he doth not see at all? Tho
that dost think thou standest, take heed lest thou dost fall. Think not of thy self above what thou art, Ro. 12. 3. Remember thy sister-Church, Rev. 3. 17. Because thou sayest, I am rich and increased with heavenly enjoyments, graci∣ous discoveries, and unspeakable manifesta∣tions, and art perfect and compleat, and come to the fulnesse of Christ, and hast need of nothing, neither Ordinance or Admini∣stration, helps nor governments. Dost thou think thus of thy selfe? why, so did that Church of Laodiceans, Rev. 3. 17. which was the most barren and unfruitful of all the seven Churches of Asia. Reason thus with thy self: Was that Church so exceedingly deceived? then why not I? 7. Consider, that in the last age of the Church, and in the most glorious times of that age, when both Jewes and Gentiles shall have one Shepheard, and one sheepfold, when knowledge shall cover the earth as the wa∣ters the sea, when the Law shall be written in our hearts, and Babylon fallen, and the mountain of the Lords house established upon the top of the mountaines; Even in these most glorious dayes of light and knowledge, freedome and liberty, shall the Saints wait upon God in the use of Ordinances, and call one up∣on another so to do, Isa. 2. 2. 3. Mic. 4. 1, 2.
Again, if there shall be Ordinances in th most glorious times that are to come, whe there shall be a full pouring out of the Sp∣rit of God upon the children of men; the certainly they are to remain now: And you look upon the last of Isa. Jer 3. Zac. 1 or upon other Scriptures where mentio is made of the most glorious times that an yet to come, ye shall find that there is me∣tion also made of Ordinances in tho times. Let us look into Rev. 11. 15. T seventh Angel sounded, and there were gre voices in Heaven saying, The kingdomes of th world are become the kingdomes of our Lord an of his Christs, and he shall reign for ever and eve Here are plainly the glorious times spoke of that are yet to come. Well, shall there b any Ordinances then? Yes: for, v. 19. An the temple of the Lord was opened in heaven, an there was seen in his emple the Ark of his Test∣ment. What is this but Ordinances? Th Ark, the visible signe of the presence of Go in way of Ordinances, and the Temple o∣pened, though it was shut before. 8. Consider, if the ministration of th Gospel be still to continue, then surel the Ordinances of Christ are still to abid 2 Cor. 3. 11. For if that which is done away w glorious, much more that which remains is gloriou
The Apostle here makes this difference be∣ he ministration of the Gospel, and  he Law; that the one is to be done d the other to remain. Now if the  were not to continue, what rence would there be as concerning his matter, between the ministration of Moses, and the ministration of the Gospel? ut the Apo here plainly speaks that his is the erence; The ministration of he one is to be done away, the ministration f the other doth still continue. Therefore he Ordinances of the Gospel doe still re∣naine. 9. Consider, if that the word of the new estament, as commanding to believe, and romising to give the Spirit; I say, if this Word do continue, then the Ordinances of Christ are still to continue; if the Ordi∣nances of Christ be not still to continue, hen the Word of the New Testament, as he commandment of believing, and the promise of giving the Spirit, doe not con∣tinue: There is the same reason for the one s for the other. You say you are bound to believe: (How prove you that?) Why, Christ hath commanded me, say you. But  answer you with your own answer, You ue to wait upon God in the use of Ordi∣nances.
(How prove you that?) I answ Christ hath commanded you. If Sathan  get us to lay down but one Ordinance  the Gospel, he will never leave tugging an pulling till he hath brought us out of lo with all Ordinances; and then he w teach us to deny the Scriptures, and then  deny God, and last of all we shall be denie of God, and so fitted for destruction. The Commonwealth of England doth  bound of two sorts of men and women and both in extremes: The first will have no Ordinances at al The second doe rest upon Ordinance or idolize them. The first will have no Ordinances at al call the Ordinances of Christ dead form beggerly—and those that wait upon God in them, Legalists, Heaven-drivers Formalists, and Duty-mongers: And fo themselves, they are taught of God, we have n need of the teachings of men, we be rich and f and want nothing; not knowing they be poo blind, miserable and naked. Secondly, there be another party that d rest upon Ordinances, and they be not a few you shall know them by their fruits: D not you hear them crying and pleading i City and Country, Give us Ordinances, or e
die! And this they plead for unto and ongst a Congregation of people, which  not capable of it, but for one Ordinance, d that is to stand under the droppings of the spel, and the powerful preachings thereof, the eanes appointed by Christ to work faith  their soules, Rom. 10. 17. For untill this ord doth come to them in power, they  not fitted for Fellowships and Commu∣ons: they must see their union with God, fore they can have true communion with s people. The Ordinances, or at least any of them be Childrens bread, and must t be given to Swine. Those Ordinances at be ordained for Conversion and Re∣neration are to be held forth to all, to the d as many as be ordained to eternal life may lieve. All other Ordinances belong to hildren, and they have right to them as ible members of that body whereof Christ the head. He who was the Son of God, came the Son of man, that we who be the these things were well considered, me∣inks it should abate the practice both of inister and People in City and Country, ho (for many of them) yet being in the d man, and having spent their dayes in the vice of Sathan, yet forsooth they would
known by the name of Christians, or least Apostle-imitators; though they cann bu know they want the power, yet th will cry up the form of godlinesse. Now whe the Ministers of our times, or at least so of them, have gathered a parcel of th Rabble-rout together, (I do not stile th so because they be the poorest; no, no, s they be such a people as David speaks  they flourish as the green bay-tree, their eyes st out with fatnesse, they go cloathed in the choice array, and be the most honorable men in th Parish: and they want but two thing which are, the knowledge of God, and obed to his will.) When the Minister hath gather a parcel of these together into fellowshi up he springs into the Pulpit to feed  Flock: and truly so he doth; for he giv them such food as is both pleasant to th palate, and easie for digestion, for he kno well the state of their bodies: And if  chance to see any poore Dove come in  mongst these fat Turkies, he will no leave throwing of stones till he hath gall her forth. (Had I not seen this with my  I had not written it with my pen.) An when this poor Dove is frighted forth,  flies up and down from one Congregati to another, and it may be finds no rest
he sole of her foot: then she retires into ome private Assemby, and there refresheth er self. Well, the publique Teachers heare f a company of Doves gathered together  such a place, and their carriage to be such hat it is like to draw away some of their Congregations; they lift up their voices, nd tell their hearers, that these be not Doves, but Wolves, Sabbath-breakers, Blas∣hemers, factious Sectaries, creeping into cor∣ers, and leading silly women captive: Often aying of them as once the enemies of Christ id, Have any of the Rulers believed on him? o, none but this ignorant people that know ot the Law. Are there Private Meetings, and doth that ffend you? Let me ask you, Are not you he cause of their meeting in private? Have ot you deprived them of their expectati∣ns in publique? They came to be instruct∣d in the Gospel, and you preach the Law: They came to be refreshed, and you sent them way sorrowfull: They came to heare of hrist, and you told them of Moses: They ame to know their freedome, & you brought hem into bondage: They came to be in∣ructed in their Union with their Father, nd you told them of Communion: They ame to be instructed in the Doctrinal part
of Divinity, and you told them of the Prac∣ctical part of Divinity: they came to hear of Grace, and you told them of Gifts: in  word, we and you have looked more upon Gifts then upon Grace, upon Law then upon Gospel, uon the form more then the power of godlinesse. Alas, what is the shadow without the substance? what is the Letter without the Spirit? what is an Or∣dinance without the presence of God in it Oh then make use of all Ordinances, bu rest upon none: Look upon them as th path to walk in, but not the pillar to re upon; look upon them as the way, but no  the cause of your acceptation with God account not thy self the better when tho hast made use of them, unlesse thou hast m God in them. Labour to be well informe in these four things, and then thou wil establish Ordinances in their right place viz. 1. Consider what is the ground of a these Ordinances. 2. Consider what is the end of all Go spel Ordinances. 3. Consider the time of them, how lo they be to continue. Eph. 4. 13. 4. Consider the proper use of them, th so thou and I may not abuse them in  use of them.
much concerning idolizing or resting pon Ordinances. Now then the way to defend and pre∣rve our selves from these or other like ex∣emes, is, to abide in the doctrine of Christ: d without this, let no man boast of his terest in the Father, or of his relation to e Sonne, or of his evidence by the Spirit. t us then a little consider the mind of od in that Scripture written for our lear∣ng, 2. Epist. of John, latter part of vers. 9. hosoever abideth in the doctrine of Christ, hath not the Father and the Son. The whole verse ns thus: Whosoever transgresseth and abi∣h not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God;  whosoever abideth in the doctrine of Christ, th both the Father and the Sonne. From the tter part of this verse, let us consider of d enquire into these two things. VVHat this Doctrine of Christ here meant, is. What it is to abide in this Doctrine. First, what this Doctrine of Christ here ant, is. Surely if ever it were needful for ristians to enquire into this, now much ore: For in these latter dayes there be ny Doctrines that are presented before u, and all in the name of the Doctrine of
Christ, saying, Lo here is Christ! lo here  Christ! And if we look upon their habi they be cloathed in sheeps-cloathing; ca your eyes upon their heads, and they ha horns like a Lanb, onely they speak as  Dragon: as in Rev. 13. 11. And I beheld a other beast comming up out of the earth, he  two horns like a Lamb, and he speaks as a Drag Surely these Lambs horns, and Dragon tongues are not alwayes in Monarchy, bu sometimes in Ministry. Let us then enquir what this Doctrine of Christ is: for the be many Doctrines with which people h taken, that have no relation to Christ. 1. We read of a Doctrine of vanity, Je 10. 8. Their stock is a doctrine of vanity. The be many taken with this doctrine in the days, but this is not the doctrine of Chri 2. There is the Doctrine of the Scribe and Pharisees, Mat. 15. 9. But in vain do th worship me, teaching for doctrine the comman∣ments of men. Mat. 16. 12. Christ bid the beware of the doctrine of the Pharisees. 3. We read in Scripture of another d∣ctrine, called the doctrine of Balaam. Re 2. 14. Who taught Balack to cast a stumbling bl before the children of Israel, to eat things sa ficed to idols, and to commit fornication. 4. We read in Scripture of another d∣ctrine,
called the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, Rev. 2. 15. So hast thou them that hold the do∣ctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. And their doctrine was this, To uphold the common use of women, that is, that women might be common; much like to those new upstart wantons of our times. 5. There is another Doctrine, which in∣cludes all the former, spoken of 1 Tim. 4. 1. Now the Spirit speaketh expressely, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils. But none of these is the Doctrine of Christ here spoken to. 6. Lastly, we find another Doctrine fre∣quently mentioned in Scripture, which if we abide not in, sad is our case, miserable is our condition, 2 Ep. Iohn 9. He that trans∣gresseth and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, (mark that man, mark that woman) they have not God. Let them talk of God, and make their boast of God, as it may be they do, they be without God in the world. These things being well consider d, we cannot but see the necessity we have to be well acquainted with the Doctrine of Christ. Which leads us to the first thing here to be enquired into, What this Doctrine of Christ here spoken unto is.
A It is a doctrine of Grace, and a do∣ctrine of Free-grace. I know what be the judgments of many knowing men concern∣ing this thing: If you ask them what the doctrine of Christ is, they will tell you it is a doctrine of Faith and Obedience: but this is the effects of the doctrine, rather then the doctrine it self: For the doctrine of Free∣grace being preached to a soule, and having gotten entrance to lodg in the inward man, then it works faith and obedience as the ef∣fects or fruits of that Spirit of grace. Hence it is that when Christ sent forth his Disci∣ples to preach this doctrine of Grace, he commands them saying, Into whatsoever house you enter, say, Peace unto this house. Lo, peace is the first word, which word is full of grace: Christ doth not bid them fire the people out of their nests by preaching the Law, and then heal them with the balm of the Gospel; no, they must first preach peace, for God is in the still voice, that so the love of Christ held forth in the doctrine of Free-grace, Tit. 2. 11, 12. might teach them to deny ungod∣linesse and worldly lusts, and constrain them out of a principle of love to live godly and soberly in this present world. Now that the doctrine of Christ is a doctrine of grace, it will appear by these and the like Scriptures
which I shall but name. Act. 13. v. 39 & 43 compared together. Act. 20. 24. Rom. 3. 24. Rom. 11. 6. Ephes. 2. 5. & 8 compar'd together. In a word, (as was said before) Creation, Election, Redemption, and Sanctification, it is all of Free-grace. Now me thinks I see most men in a sense give their assent and consent to the truth of this, that the doctrine of Christ is a doctrine of grace; and they will tell you further, that they do abide in this doctrine. Now then let us examine our selves a little by the effects of this doctrine: for as a tree is known by his fruit, so is this doctrine by its effects. First then, it is a doctrine of grace en∣lightening the soul. Secondly, it is a doctrine of grace work∣ing faith in the soul. Thirdly, it is a doctrine of grace work∣in love in the soul. Fourthly, it is a doctrine of grace work∣ing upon the will and affections to will and affect the things of God. 1. The doctrine of Christ is a doctrine of grace enlightening the soul. Luk. 2. 3 2. A light to lighten the Gentiles. This is spoken of Christ and his doctrine. Luk. 1. 79. To give light to them that sit in darknesse and in the sha∣dow
of death; to guide our feet in a way of peace. Joh. 1. 9. That was tha true light that lighteneth every man, &c. Now if thou dost abide in the doctrine of Christ, thy soul is enlighten∣ed by Christ: hence it is that the children of God are called the children of light, E. 5. 8 hence it is that they be exhorted to walks children of the day. Are you enlightened? You will say, I am. What mean these works of darknesse then? 2. The doctrine of Christ is a doctrine of grace working faith in the soul. Joh. 14. 1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Joh. 6. 29. This is the work of God, that you believe. Joh. 14. 11. If you will not believe me for my words, yet believe in me for the very works sake that you have seen me do. 1 Joh. 3. 23. And this is his command∣ment, that we believe on the name of his Sonne Jess Christ. No obedience like unto the o∣bedience of faith; no disobedience like un∣to that of unbelief, for it makes the God of truth a liar. 1 Joh. 5. 10. e that believeth on the Sonne of God hath the witnesse in himself; He that believeth not God hath made him a lia, because be believed not the record that God gave of his Son. But most men and women will say they do believe: but there be but few that can shew their faith by their wors; for faith without works is dead, Jam. 17, 18, &c.
3. The doctrine of Christ is a doctrine of grace working love in the soul. First to God. Mat. 22. 37. Christ told the Lawyer that came to him to know (at least s he pretended) what was his doctrine, and what was the most principal part of it: why, saith Christ, Mat. 22. 37. Thou shalt love he Lord thy God wih all thy heart, with ll thy trengh, and with all thy soule. Secondly, it works love to the people of God. Joh. 13. 34. A new commandment give I nto you, that you love one another as I have loved o. I loved you when you were in your lood and filthinesse; my love was free, let yours be so: I loved all mine, do you love all the Saints: I laid down my life for the rethren; you ought to lay down your lives for the brethren: I loved you with a constant love, having loved my own, I loved them to the end; so do you: My love carried me forth to become servant to all, even to wash your feet; you, if you will be followers of me, and be known to be my disciples, ought to do so too. Thirdly, as the doctrine of Christ is a do∣trine of grace working love in the soule, first to God, secondly to his people, so thirdly to our enemies. See and well con∣sider that place. Mat. 5. 44. But I say unto
you, love your enemies, do good to those that ha you, pray for those that despitefully use you a persecute you. Never think that you contin in my doctrine, unless you observe my com∣mands: My commands are, that you shoul not only love God, but also your brother and it must not be limited only there, bu you must love your enemies, or else yo will not be like unto me and my Father Mat. 5. 45. That you may appear to all th world to be the children of your Father which is in heaven; for he maketh his sun to arise  the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust: For if you love onely th that love you, the vilest man in the world go∣eth so far, this is no character or badge o my servants, the Publicans and Harlots did  much as this. Fourthly, it is a doctrine of grace work∣ing upon the will and affections, to will and affect the things of God. First it works upon the will, it resigns it up unto the will of God, nay it makes him live in the will of God. 1. By doing his will. 2. By suffering his will to be done, though it crosse thy will. Again, it works mightily upon thin affections: thy affections are taken off the creatures, and fixed upon the Creator: thou seest more and more beauty in God, and
nd lesse and lesse beauty in the creature. he things of the world would satisfie thee eretofore: Now thou cryest out, None but hrist, none but Christ! Nothing will satisfie ut his presence, nothing will make thee d but his absence. THe second Quaerie is, What is it to abide in the Doctrine of Christ. For the Scri∣ture saith, 2 ep. Joh. 9. He that abideth in the ctrine of Christ, hath both the Father and the onne. Now there be several discoveries or haracters of one that abideth in the do∣rine of Christ. First, there be some inward evidences. Secondly, there be some outward evi∣ences. For the inward evidence, Call a counsel  thy own heart, silence thy own thoughts, ll all the faculties of thy soul and mem∣ers of thy body to the bar, examine thy ill, thy affections, thy judgment, and me∣ory, Who are you for? what are you doing? ow are you imployed all day long? Search for hat White-stone that hath a Name in it that ne can read but he that hath it. See whether e Spirit of God doth witnesse with thy spirit at thou belongest to God. Doth the presence f Christ rejoice thee? doth his absence
grieve thee? See whether thou art like un Christ in thy desires, and in thy endeavou whose work it was to doe the will of his F∣ther, &c. Secondly, there be some outward e∣dences: I shall name a few. 1. He that abideth in the doctrine  Christ, is one that is not easily withdraw from the truth that he first received. 1 J 2. 24. Let that therefore abide in you which y have heard from the beginning: If that whic you have heard from the beginning shall remain  you, you shall continue in the Sonne and in th Father. 1. Tim. 4. 16. Take heed to thy self  unto the doctrine; continue in them; for in ∣ing this thou shalt both save thy self and such hear thee. Be not carried about with every wi of doctrine, saith Paul, Ephes. 4. 14. Beware  you fall from your steadfastnesse, saith Peter, 2 P 3. 17. If you continue in my words, then are y my Disciples, saith Christ, Joh. 8. 31. Oh the continue in the faith to be grounded an setled, rooted and established: Be ye stedfo and unmoveable, alwayes abounding in the wo of the Lord. 2. He that abideth in the doctrine  Christ, may be known by this; He is a ver fruitful Christian. What is the reason ther is so much barrennesse, coldnesse, deadness
lity, lukewarmnesse, evil furnishings and liperings? Why, behold the reason, y abide not in the doctrine of Christ: that abide in that doctrine doe beare ns, there is none barren among thm; y be planted in his house, they abide it; doctrine, therefore they flourish in his urts. Joh. 15. 4. The branch cannot beare t except it abide in the vine; no more can you, ept you abide in me. 3. He that abideth in the doctrine of st may be known by this also; He stands nd contends for the faith and obedience he Gospel against all opposers; he en∣vours by sound doctrine to convince all nsayers; He doth not so much plead for mane learning, as he doth for the mind God in the Spirit; he knows the spiri∣l learning can easily foyle the humane rning that wants the spiritual. See that ce Jude 3, 4. That you should earnestly contend  the faith that was once delivered to the Saints; n he brings the reason of this conenti∣, v. 4. For there are certain men crept in un∣ares, turning the grace of God into lascivious∣se. And surely this is one of Englands sins this day: There be many men and wo∣n puffed up with a high conceit of their n knowledge; and when their princi∣ples
and practices are a little examin they be but as clouds without rain, and  without water, as here Jude speaks. 4. He that abideth in the doctrine Christ, continueth stedfast in the doctr of the Apostles. Act. 2. 42. And they contin stedfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellows and in breaking of bread and prayer. Not th the Apostles doctrine was one thing, a the doctrine of Christ another thing;  whosoever abideth in the one, could n but abide in the other: And they abode fr fast in the Apostles doctrine, that is, they co∣tinued stedfastly in the doctrine of Chri for they delivered that unto us which th received from Christ. They continued in  Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in break of bread and prayer. Let us examine a litt how many men and women, that be god (for I do not speak of others) I say, ho many have we, that do walk together Fellowship? 2. How many are there, that enjoy that Ordinance of the Lords Supp here called Breaking of Bread? 3. How ma have the Spirit of Prayer? Are they not fe yea very few? And yet all be ready to sa that they do abide in the doctrine of Chr Go from one man to another through a whole Shire, and ask them one after
er, Do you abide in the doctrine of Christ? ou do not, you have not God. Yea, saith the , I do abide in the doctrine of Christ. Q. How prove you that? A. I do, saith he, for I have reformed y things that were amisse in me. So did od, that enemy of truth, Mark 6. 20. For od heard Iohn, knowing he was a just man:  when he heard him, he did many things. Q. Come to a second and ask him, Do  abide in the doctrine of Christ? A. I do, saith he; and I know it by this,  free from many gross sinnes that others my neighbours are guilty of. So was t Pharisee, Luk. 18. 11, 12. O God I thank e that I am not as other men are, I fast twice eek, and give tithe of all I do possesse. Q. Come to a third and ask him, Do you de in the doctrine of Christ? A. I do, saith he, and I prove it thus: ontinue waiting upon God in the use of Ordinances, which others neglect. So  those hypocrites, Isa. 58. 2, 3. Yet you seek daily, saith the Lord, and delight to know my es, as a Nation that did righteousnesse, and ook not the ordinances of God. And yet for this the Lord rejected them and their ices. Q. Come to a fourth, Do you abide in
the doctrine of Christ? If you do not, have not God. A. I do, and I prove it thus: I know will of God, that many others be ignor of, and I approve of his wayes. Rep. So those cast-awayes, Rom. 2. 18. And knowes will, and approvest the things that be more ex∣lent, &c. Yet we see the Lord rejects the upon this ground, They did not prac themselves that which they knew & taug to others. Q. Come to a fifth, Do you abide in  doctrine of Christ? A. I do, and I can make it good, saith  by this: I have humbled my self for all sinnes before the Lord. R. So did wi Ahab, 1 King. 21. 27, 28, 29. Q. Come to a sixth, Do you abide in  doctrine of Christ? A. I do abide in it, and I think there but few that do outstrip me: for I am  so cold and lukewarm as most be, doing Lords work by halfs; I am zealous for  Lord, I have had my hand in pulling do the Images and Crucifixes and Altars t the Idolaters had set up, nay I have b chief in this great Reformation. R. So Jehu, whom the Lord rejected, 2 King.  27, 28, 29.
Q. But I do abide in the doctrine of hrist, saith a seventh: If none of the for∣er, yet I am sure I do outstrip them all; r I do keep the commands of God, and at from my youth. A. So did that young man, Mat. 19. 20. ll these things have I kept from my youth up. hou art not fully in my doctrine, saith hrist; thou must go sell all that thou hast; ou hast abundance of self-righteousnesse, at must be sold. Q. But I do abide in the doctrine of hrist, saith an eighth; for I do confesse y sins both unto God and to his people, d I do pray for pardon, and desire them  pray for pardon also. A. So did Pharaoh, whom the Lord was leased to get him honour upon, in over∣rowing him and all his host in the midst f the sea, Exod. 10. 16, 17. Q. But I do abide in the doctrine of hrist, saith a ninth: for I am mercifull nd pittifull to those in want, yea I have elieved the Lords Prophets. A. The heathen did as much as this to aul, Act. 28. 2. and Ananias and Sapphira did ore then this, and yet perished, as you may e Act. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Q. But I go beyond all that you have
mentioned before, saith a tenth man. Wh what hast thou done? I have (saith he) n only heard the Lords word, but I ha heard it with delight, and it takes root  my heart, and growes within me both  knowledge and obedience. A. So did those mentioned by Christ  those parables, and yet were cast-awayes Mat. 13. 22. Mark 4. 16. Q. But (saith another) I abide in th doctrine of Christ here, and shall dwell in  holy hill hereafter; And that I am assured  by the testimony of Scripture, for I have kep mine oaths and promises, yea sometime although it hath been to my hurt: and I fin my name registred in the book of life. An if that fail me, then farewell all. I say, I hav kept my vowes, oaths and promises, thoug sometimes to my losse; and David tells  this is a sure mark of a son of Sion: see el Psal. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. The Psalm begins thus Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who sh dwell in thy holy hill? There is the question Then for answer, v. 2. He that walketh upright∣ly, and worketh righteousnesse, and speaketh th truth in his heart, he that backbiteth not with  tongue, nor doth evil to his neighbour, nor taket up a reproach against him; in whose eyes a vi person is contemned, but he honoureth them th
re the Lord; he that sweareth to his own hurt d changeth not, &c. See what a Catalogue of Evidences here for Heaven: and if I have not more, I am re I have the last; I have kept my promises d vowes, though to mine own hurt. Now if u can find in Scripture any man left up∣ record that hath gone so far as I have ne, and yet a Castaway at last, then speak, otherwise with silence give your consent this mine Evidence for Heaven. A. I could even say to thee, O man, as ce our Lord Christ said to that learned derate Scribe, Mark 12. 34. Thou art not from the Kingdome of God. But for keeping oathes and promises, ough it be an excellent ornament for a ristian, yet let me tell thee it is no in∣lible mark of a true Saint: and that will pear, if thou a little consider that in Dan. 29. & 16. compared together: the summe that Chapter is this. Belshazar had seen hand-writing on the wall, and it troubled m: He sends for the Astrologers and uthsayers to give the interpretation to e King: They could not do it: He hears Daniel by the Queens information, he ds for him, Daniel comes to the King; e King desires two things of Daniel, first
to read the writing, secondly to ma known the interpretation: which if Da could or would do, the King promiseth  three things: First, that he should be cl∣thed with Scarlet; secondly, that he shou have a Chain of gold about his neck; thi∣ly, that he should be made the third ruler his Kingdome. Well, Daniel read the w∣ting, and gave the interpretation, and to the King plainly and boldly, it tended his ruine, and the ruine of all his hou Yet this heathen King kept his oath, vow promise in every tittle of it, as you may Dan. 5. 29. Then commanded Belshazzar,  they cloathed Daniel with scarlet, and put a  of gold about his neck, & made a proclamation ∣cerning him that he should be the third ruler in kingdome. In that night was the King slain, v. 3 Oh how may this condemn many a ma Shall a Heathen keep promise, and a Ch∣stian break his promise? What, shall we outstript by Heathens? Doth not the S∣ptures say, Mat. 5. 20. For I say unto you, th except your righteousnesse shall exceed the righ∣eousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees, you s in no case enter into the kingdome of God. Is not a great shame for a Christian profess godlinesse, to be outstript by Heathens Truly I have been at a stand many time
when I read of Conversations of heathens, &c. The Gentiles had a law to themselues, and t of God. First, for Temperance. Secondly, for Obedience. Thirdly, for Mercy. Fourthly, for Justice and upright deal∣ng. 1. For Temperance: King Ahasuerus a eathen King made a law, Hest. 1. 8. And e drinking was according to the Law; none did mpell, for the King had appointed to all the fficers of his house, that they should do accord∣g to every mans pleasure. 2. For Obedience: when King Abimelech ok Abrahams wife, although he was a eathen King, he obeyed the voice of the ord; for no sooner did the Lord com∣and him to deliver Abraham his wife again t he did it: Jonah preached at Niniveh a∣ong the Heathen, and no sooner did they ar him, but the Text saith of them, they d believe and repent. 3. For Mercy: The barbarous heathen∣ people were very merciful to Paul and e rest of the company, Act. 28. 22. And the rbarous people shewed us no little kindnesse;  they kindled a fire, and received us every one, ause of the present rain and because of the cold.
4. For Justice and upright dealing: Th King of Sodome a heathen King, when Abra∣ham had overcome the foure Kings, and brought home the Sodomites, the King o Sodome said unto him, Give me the men, and take the goods for thy pains, Gen. 14. 21. Oh then were Heathens taught by th law of Nature the sweet principles and pr∣ctice of Temperance, Mercy, Obedience an Justice; and shall we who do think of ou∣selves far beyond them in matters natur and spiritual, shall we (I say) be outstrippe by them and come short of them? Shall  thus requite the Lord for all his love? shal shall we dishonour him, that hath so high honoured us as to call us his fervants, h brethren, his members, his Bride, his Body his Temple! Oh let not Heathens outstr us in obedience! let us outstrip them, y let us endeavour to outstrip the most for ward Saints in the world; Labour to exc all the Saints in love, in patience, in mee∣nesse, sobriety and temperance: impro all thy spiritual strength for him who ga it to thee; Thou hast enjoyments of hi improve it for him, yea let all thy know ledge of him bring thee neerer to him, an make thee more like him: Let thy longing desires and endeavours be more to grow
grace then gifts. 1. Cor. 12. 31. But covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet I shew no you a more excellent way. This more excellent way here spoken of, is the grace of Love, as you may see 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Now it will be useful a little to enquire how many sorts of gifts there be, seeing the Apostle saith, Covet earnestly the best. For answer hereunto in generall, There be but two sorts of gifts: First, there are gifts of Nature, or gifts Natural; and they are many. Secondly, there are gifts Spiritual, or gifts given by the Spirit; and they be se∣verall. 1. There are gifts of Nature, or gifts Na∣tural: And by these a man may doe many excellent things, and yet not have one grain of grace. If a man should preach as never man preached, and though he should pray as never man prayed, and though he confer and discourse of all things as never man did; may if he should speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and have gifts of Prophecie, and un∣derstand all mysteries: yea, though he be so pittiful as to give all his goods to the poor, & his body to be burned; nay though he hath all the gifts, arts and parts that ever were in man, only grace excepted, all this avails him nothing.
It is true, such a man is a little honoured of men, they cry him up for a brave Church∣man: if he be given to covetousnesse, of drunkennesse, or any other vice, Oh (say the people) he is a brave Scholar, there is not a man more deeper learned in all the City! And such is the grosse ignorance of this Commonweale, (to your shame be it spoken) that most of you do think and say, That he that is a Scholar cannot but be ac∣quainted with Religion; and when you hear him preach, he is so scholastick, and so eloquent, and so pleasing, that you are apt to say of him as once the people did of Herod when he made his oration, It is the voice of God, and not of a man. Act. 12. 21, 22. What excellent wisdome had gracelesse Achitophel? 2 Sam. 16. 23. And the counsels of Achitophel which he gave in those dayes, was, as if a man had enquired at the oracles of God; so was all the counsel of Achitophel both with David and Absolom. Here were gifts in the highest nature, but for want of grace he perished: and it is apparent that he was cryed up in those dayes, as our Achitophels be now a∣dayes. What wise and discreet answer did that Scribe give unto our Lord Christ, Mar. 12. 33, 34. And when Iesus heard his answer, he
told him, he was not far from the kingdome of od. There were but three things required, nd this Scribe had gotten two of them, nly he wanted grace: he had gifts in a∣undance, the least dram or grain of grace ad made him happy for ever. Oh then, (in a word, and so to close up is) would you live and abide in the doctrine f Christ? Oh then live out of your selves,  the Spirit, upon Christ! let him be high∣t in thy thoughts, dearest in thine affecti∣ns, constant in thy purposes! See him once  be the chiefest of ten thousand, and then ou wilt have no need of any man to bid ee enquire after him. Read and well on∣der this Scripture, Cant. 5. 9, 10, &c. This is all at present that I have to say of e Armour of Christ, and of the Doctrine of hrist. The next thing to be considered, hich neerly concerns all Christians, is this, iz. 3. To live in the will of God. For, There is no wer, but of God. In this third particular, here are two ings to be enquired into. Q. 1. What is it to live in the will of od? A. 1. To be doing the will of God. 2. By suffering the will of our Father.
Q. 2. How are we to understandth is, tha there is no power but of God? A. 1. We are to consider, there is n power but of and in God, essentially or o∣riginally, habitually or virtually &c. 2. And yet there is a power in ever Creature, distributively and by partici∣pation. Now then to live in the will of God, it is t be doing his will, and suffering his will. But o this I shall speak or write afterwards, and s enter upon the second Quaere. 1. There is no power but of God ori∣ginally and essentially; He hath his being in himself, and he alone gives being to al creatures: Of him, from him, and to him are al things. There was no motion, vigor or acti∣on, life or growth, untill he created and en∣livened the creatures: so that all things center in him, as having their being from him, who hath his being in himself, and gives being to them: He made all things for his own glory, who alone is worthy of al glory, honour and praise, and he will be glorified by every living thing in the whole creation, either by their salvation or de∣struction; He will magnifie the attribute of his mercy on the one, and the attribute of his justice on the other: yea, the whol
Creation is a book wherein we may read God, every thing doth utter its voice, the evens, the Stars, the Sun and the Moon, o all in their kind declare the handy work f God; nay every thing above us, beneath s, on our right hand, and on our left, do ll speak saying, Behold the wonderfull orks of the Lord God Almighty, from hom I had my being, in whom I center, y whose life I live, by whose strength I ove: his power may be seen in creation, edemption, vocation, justification, and anctification. Yea, by him all things con∣st, 1 Col. 17. The Fish cannot swim in the ater, but by his power; the Bird cannot y in the aire, but by his power; the Spar∣ow cannot fall to the ground, saith the criptures, without his providence. Mat. 2. 29. The attribute of his Wisdome is seen in he variety of Creatures that he hath made, nd the sweet harmony that there is among hem, each of them doing after his kinde, nely Mn excepted, which in his creation as made the most blessd of all creatures, ut by his fall in the first Adam, and not im∣racing the second Adam, is become the most rsed creature of all: so that we may say f all men and women fallen in the first A∣dam,
and not restored by the second, as on our Lord Christ said concerning Judas, Ma 14. 2. Good were it for that man, if he had neve been borne. So the attribute of his Power may be see in the upholding the whole Creation; an the attribute of his Mercy, in the preserv∣tion of his Creatures. All that we are, have, or do enjoy, ar gifts of God; and if we act and move b the power of God, then it is impossibly tha we should perform any spiritual duty o our selves without his assistance. Christ tel leth Pilate, that he could have no power at a against him, unlesse it was given him. A ma can receive nothing (saith the Baptist) excep it be given him from heaven, Joh. 3. 27. It i God (saith Paul) that worketh in us both to wi and to doe: what have we therefore which w did not receive? So then all things be from him, but al things are not him, (as some ignorantl imagine) I say again, all things are from hi but all things are not him: He is the Crea∣tor, we be the creatures; He hath his being in himselfe, we have our being from him▪ He was from everlasting before time, we ha our being from him in time; He is immu∣table, we are all mutable; He is Alpha an
Omega, the beginning and the ending, which  and which was, and which is to come. The  mighty, he can bring good out of evil, ht out of darknesse, strength out of weak∣sse, hobour out of dishonour. If the first am be deceived by the Serpent, he will rn it to his glory; if the second Adam be trayed by a Judas, he will turn it to  Glory: If the first fall by unbelief, he  raise us in a second by faith: in a word,  is the head of all principality & power, 2 Col. . All power is in him habitually, vertu∣y, primitively, originally, essentially. The Scriptures are so full in setting forth s, that there is no power but of God, almost every book from the beginning of Genesis  the end of the Revelation, that I suppose ere is no man, if he be endued but with mmon reason, will or can deny it: where∣e excuse me if I am silent and speak no ther to it. 2. The next thing to be considered is, e power that is in every Creature. If there be  power but in God, (as hath in some asure been proved in the former expres∣ns) Tell me then, without any evasions, w there is a power in every Creature? A. There is no power but of God, ori∣ally and essentially, habitually, primi∣tively,
or virtually: But there is a power  every Creature distributively. The pow is in God as in a fountain, it is in us streams flowing from that fountain, but n essentially, habitually or virtually. There is a twofold power that is dist∣buted or given forth to the Creature; t first is common to all, the second is prop only to some. First there is a natural power, as one tale which we ought not to hide in a napki given forth to all men and women, wi severall commands from the Giver to i∣prove that. Secondly, there is his blessed Spirit giv forth with a spiritual power only to som by vertue of which they can pray in the Sp∣rit, rejoyce in the Spirit, worship God wh is a Spirit in spirit and truth; they can re and understand the Ler in the Spirit, th can discourse of spiritual things unde∣standingly and feelingly: further, by th power they can bring down strong holds, th can cast down imaginations and every high thin they can bring more or lesse their though into captivity unto the obedience of Christ. Re and well consider 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5, 6. 1. First of the first: There is a natu power given forth from God to the Creature,
Talent; which the Creature is not to hide in apkin, but to improve. Now hough this wer was not ours, but Gods, in whom  power dwels: yet (he having given this  us) it becomes ours; for a man may as operly cal that his own which was given m, as that which he bought with his ony. Christ tels Pilate, that he could have  power either to release him or to condemn him, les it were given him, Jo. 19. 10, 11. But there as a power given to Pilate, even a natural ower; and Pilate judged him and con∣emned him. If there be no power given forth from od to the Creature, then there is no pow∣ in the Creature; and then all those ex∣ortations, perswasions, intreatings and eseechings are in vain. But that there is a ower in the Creature, I say a received pow∣r, a derivative power, it will appear, if you ill answer seriously to what followes, iz. Tell me, O man, whosoever thou art, hat dost read or hear these lines, Hast thou er done so much good, or refrained so uch evil, as thou mightest have done? Consider of it, and see: what knowledge, hat wisdome, what comfort, what full ssurance mightest thou and I by this time ave risen unto? What means that Scrip∣ture,
Heb. 5. 12. Where as by this time you mi have been teachers of others, you have need to taught your selves what be the first principles religion. You might have been teachers  others, if you had improved your talen Did Paul speak truly or falsely, O ma when he brake forth into these words, 1 C 9. 4, 5, 6. in v. 4. Have we not power to e and to drink? and have we not power to lead ∣bout a sister or wife as well as others? v. 6. Agai have we not power to forbeare working, &c. There is a place worth our noting, Jer. 3 6. & 18. 19. compared together. In v.  there is mention made of one Jonadah whic commanded his sonnes that they shoul drink no wine: and in v. 18. & 19. we fin that they in obedience to the command  their father did forbear to drink any during lif Insomuch that the Almighty took noti of this their obedience to their father, i improving their natural power in a wa of temperance. Just as Paul: I have power t eat and to drink (saith he) and as oft as  pleased he could forbear eating and drinking fo a season. Oh how much is God blamed, an man excused by denying this! Solomon saith Wherefore is there a price put into the hands of  foole to get wisdom? Mind, first here is a pric or talent given; 2. Where it is put, into th
hands of a fool; 3. For what end it is put in∣o his hands, to get wisdome, &c. 4. The rea∣on why he hath not wisdome, he hath no eart to mind it, no desire to it. Some would ave God not only to give them ability, ut to perform the action; and then indeed ey might say it was the will of God it uld be so, when they did evil; for then ey would be carried on as the Sun, Moon nd Stars are without resistance. But God aving made man a rational creature, and iven him power to act, he requires him to t by vertue of that power given him, and  commends him for acting well, & blames im for acting ill. And though our ability e but small at first, yet if we improve that ccording to the strength we have, God hath romised to increase it, and we shall grow om strength to strength: But if we be un∣ithful in that which is least, he will not ust us with more. It is good therefore to o what we can, and ask and seek for what e cannot do. It was possible for the sons f Jonadab to obey their fathers command,  not drinking wine: and it was as pos∣ble for Israel to obey their Lords com∣and; for God reproves them by that xample, Jer. 35. 14. I suppose that the ghteous God never commands impossible
things. The word is nigh thee, in thy mouth a in thy heart, saith Moses, that thou mayest do Deut. 30. 13, 14. Therefore (in the book)  bids them choose life. Choose (saith Joshu whom you will serve; as for me and my house,  will improve our selves to the utterm to serve the Lord, Jos. 24. 15. And therefo the Lord complains, because they did n chuse the feare of the Lord, Pro. 12. 9. The want of ability is not once mentioned as a excuse. Again, let me ask thee O man whosoev thou art that readest these lines, Dost tho not think and believe that God hath give everyman power and ability to do so muc as he requires of him? For the proof har of read understandingly Rom. 1. 19, 20, & For the Lord is so just, and his wayes  equal, that he never requires impossib things of his creatures: He dealeth wit man according to what he hath, and co∣mands what he knowes he may perfor He is not like Pharaoh, to command Brick  be made without Straw. He gives forth h Talents, and commands the Receiver  improve that: and when he comes to ca them to an account, he doth not dema five talents where he gave but one; only  blames that servant for not improvi
that one; he that was not able to bring old or Silver, Silk or fine Linnen to the ilding of the Temple, if he brought asse, or Goats haire, or such as he could, tha willing heart, it was accepted; Again,  finde that he that was not able to bring amb or a Kid for his sin Offering, must ing two Turtle Doves or young Pigeons; he could not bring those, then the tenth rt of an Ephah of fine flower should serve.  where the Lord gives much, he requires ch; and where he gives little, he re∣ires but little. Now is the Lord so tender of the people, t he would not have them to stretch emselves beyond their abilities in point  Sacrifices; and is not he as tender of ir weaknesse in other points of obedi∣ce; Doth he command impossibilities? n the Creature may have a just execuse at  last day; when every man shall be judged ording to his works, saying; If thou st given me power to doe that which u gavest me a command to doe, then I  done it; and so his disobedience is cast on his Judge, for not giving strength to e that he required: If this be true, then me not those that say, that God is the au∣r of sinne.
But shall I aske thee again, O vain man hast thou done so much good, and refrai∣ed so much evil that thou mightest ha done? Put this question to thy Conscienc saying, Conscience, I doe charge thee in t presence of the Lord to deal truly with me Have I done so much good, and refrained  much evil as I might have done? me thin I hear thy Conscience saying to thee, a mine hath often to me; No, no, thou ha been a sloathful servant in the Lords Vin yard: O poore filly man! art thou like t Bruites, that doe not know their ow strength? Why, dost thou not know,  vain man! that God that made thee, ha indued thee with power and abilit suteable to thy state and quality? Hat thy wise Creatour given forth a power t the Fishes of all sorts to swim, and to t Fowls of the Ayre to flye, and the Beasts  the Earth to go from place to place; ye hath he given wisdome and power to t meanest of Creatures, the Ant and Pismi Crane and Swallow, &c. and thou O ma whom the Lord of Lords hath made Lo over al these things, hast thou no ability, a thou a meer dead lump, doth God call, a canst thou not heare nor answer? wilt tho tell him when he shall judge thee, that
dd not impower thee? Wilt thou charge y Omissions and Commission upon him? ilt thou make him worse then wicked haroah, which made the Children of Is∣el make Brick without Straw? let me tell ee O man! thou art able by the power hat is given thee according to Gods com∣on Providence, I say, thou art able by ertue of that power received, to speake or  hold thy peace, to go or to sit still; and hen thou and I shall both appear before e Tribunal Seat of God at the day of udgement, thou and I shal not be charged ith what we could not doe, but for lea∣ng undone that which we ought & might ave done. Now that I might not be mista∣en, I shal make or propose these few excep∣ons, or limitations to what hath been said. 1. There is a power in God incommu∣cable, I doe not say, there is any such ower in us; there is a power also in him ommunicable, which dwels in us, accord∣g to the measure thereof communica∣d, &c. 2 We are to consider that this power in e Creature, as it was given forth from im, so it is limitted by him. 3 I doe not say or affirme, that natural wer can act in supernatural things; for
I know the contrary, that it cannot, bu only in naturall. 4. Although I doe affirm that all me have a natural power; yet I doe not sa that every man natural hath it in the sam measure; for I see men transcending o another in gifts natural; as men excee and goe beyond one another in gifts Spi∣ritual. Truly friends, it is worth our considera∣tion a litle to study or enquire into our na∣tural abilities, that so we might improv them to the bst advantage; for natura improvements shal have natural rewards, a spiritual improvements shall have spiritua rewards. If Ahab repent with a natural r∣pentance, Ahab shall receive a natural re∣ward, as you may see, 1 King. 21. 27. It wi further appear, that a natural man hath  natural power by this also; look upon th whole Nation of men and wmen natura and you shall see great differences in thei improvements; the one will avoid sin fo seare of punishment; another will avoi sin for fear of shame; another will run o in sin, fearing neither punishment no ame; some men meerly natural they wi speak soberly, and answer to things i their clemt difinctly and wisely.
Some men natural are so punctual in eeping their promises, and so faithful in he trust reposed in them; that they endea∣our to doe as they would be done unto▪ nd truly these things are to be commended  men natural and in men spiritual. And that a natural man may doe more hen he doth by his naturall power, will asily appear by these foure things: First, Because I have seen, and so have any others, that man meerly natural hath mitted evill, and set himself about the do∣ng of that which in it self is good, when he eye of the Magistrate hath been over im. Secondly, I have seen men, and that not  few, refrain from sin, as Drunkenesse, wearing, and Sabbath-breaking, because he Law of the Nation constrains them hereunto. A man could not for these any years walk along the Key of this City, but he should hear the Porters and alliers cursing and swearing, as men that ad never learned to speak any other lan∣guage; and so with the Butchers, you ould not walk along the Shambles, but our heart would even tremble to hear the ame of God so often, and fearfully taken n vain; Now, through the wisdom of our
Parliament to Enact, and the diligence  our Mayor to Execute (for the life of th Law lyes in the due execution thereof) yo may now walk the Key and Shambles, in th middest of the Porters, Hallies, and Bu∣chers, and hear them speak with ne tongues: Yea, you shall through the good nesse of the Lord in the care of the Mag∣strate scarce hear one man, woman, o childe from the beginning of the week t the end thereof, either swear or curse. No from what power is it that these men a able to forbeare swearing, being so accust∣med unto it, some twenty, some forty, som fity years? is there not a natural power i them which they did before abuse? or els will you say with our new Novelists or up start wantons, that it was God that di swear, and so swearing is no sin? I shall close up this point giving you m judgement therein, which is, that as the lo of Christ doth constrain some, so the fear o punishment doth compell others; the o to improve his spiritual parts, the othe his natural parts. Thirdly, That there is a natural powe in a natural man, which he may and ough to improve in all naturall things, as wil appear in this; if you take notice what
change there wil be in a mans actions when e fear of death possesseth him; his wick∣ company, and his wicked practices, e begins to complain of them both; and en he begins to acknowledge there was a ower in him, and promiseth the Lord in e presence of all his friends, if the Lord ill spare him a little longer time, he will ever be drunk, & swear, and lye and blas∣heme as he hath done; he will now reade & arn to pray, and come amongst the Lords eople, whom he hated; and waite at the oole of Bethesda till the Angel move the wa∣ers. Fourthly, Come to a Natural man, that s sitting still, and if thou wilt know whe∣her there be any power in him; tell him f he will travel to such a City, and doe uch and such businesse for thee, thou wilt give him so many pounds for his labour nd pains; see now how he will improve ll his natural parts to effect this businesse; e will imploy his tongue to enquire the way, and his feet to carry him on in the way, and he will imploy his memory to keep account of the miles; yea, every part n the whole man shall be imployed in his ace to accomplish this businesse; and the st wheel that sets all the rest on going is hope of gain.
Oh, what pains and care doe men tak for the hope of gain; they will rise early, a lye down late, and eat the bread of carefulnesse they will observe time and tide, and a things conducing thereunto, to accom∣plish their desires, they will improve all op∣portunities, make use of all means, depri themselves of sleep, and sometimes of the food, to get a little gain; they scrape an pull, and rake to make their Dunghi higher then their Neighbours; and the they get upon the top of their Dunghi and stand with their arms a Kimbo, an look so big and so lofty, that if any of hi neighbours whose Dunghil is not so high as his, hance to come to speak with him he must bend his Knee and take off his Ha and stand bare before him, or else he shal have but few words with him; and if thi man whose Dunghil is so high come once to be enlightned by the Spirit of God, h presently with Solomon, Eccles. 2. 11. writ vnity upon all his treasure, or else break forth with Zacheus, Luk. 19. 8. Behod, th hlf of my goods I give to the poore; and if  have wronged any man, I will restore him foure∣fold.
See the wisdome and policie of the un∣st Steward, and his improvement of both o the best advantage, as to himself, Lu. 16.  3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and for his policie the Lord ommends him, Luk. 16. 8. but for his un∣ithfulness as to his master the Lord blames m, Luk. 16. 10. and in the 11 v. the Lord aweth this conclusion from the former position, If therefore you have not been faith∣ in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit your trust the true riches? As if he had said,  you have abused your natural power, hich is the lesser, who will give you spi∣tual power, which is the greater? Read d well consider these Scriptures, viz. Cor. 11. 14. Doth not even nature it self teach  other things? Rom. 1. 26, 27. There you all finde that both men and women are arged by the Spirit of God for not im∣oving nature, and for doing things con∣ary to nature So again, Rom. 1. 19, &c. d Rom. 7. 14. and 1 Cor. 11, 15, 16.  loved, if these things be well considered,  will appeare that there is given forth by e Creator to the creature a power natu∣l; and our abuse of this power must be d upon ourselves, and not upon God. m. 1. v. 13, 14. Let no man say when he is pted, he is tempted of God, for God tempteth
no man: But he is drawn aside of his own l and enticed. 2. There is a Spiritual power; a and that is not given forth universally  all, but those, and those only to whom  hath given, and in whom he hath plant his Spirit, by vertue of which these men a women can pray in the Spirit, rejoice  the Spirit, and in some measure worsh God who is a Spirit, in spirit and in trut These can read and understand the letter  the spirit, they can discourse of spiritu things understandingly and feelingly; b this power they can pull down strong hol cast down imaginations. Read for the proof  this, 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. By this power th can keep down their natural or corrupt∣ble body, as Paul, 2 Cor. 9. 27. But I ke under my body and bring it unto subjection, left should be found to preach that to others that should not practise my self. Now this spiritual power, as it was r∣ceived from God, so it is to be improv for God: which if we be faithful and di∣gent so to do, then First, the Lord will have the glory, M 5. 16. Secondly, it will redound to our gre∣est good, Mat. 21. 22, 23.
And that there is a spiritual power, it ll further appear from the several com∣ands from the Lord to his people to be ing in spiritual things; which were all  vain, if there be no ability given forth to e Creature to do that which is required. ight instance in as many places as there  Chapters in the Bible, to prove it: but r brevities sake I shall mention but a few. t. 11. 23. Barnabas exhorted them all, that th purpose of heart they would cleave unto the rd. They did not answer him and say at they had no power, they could not doe it. il. 2. 12. Work out your own salvation with re and trembling. These people did not y, there was Free-will in the Text. As King AMES once said upon the like occasion, ere was Treason in the Text: when a inister that preached before him had taken Text of Scripture that did treat of the a∣se of Kingly power, the King burst forth  a passion and said, There was Treason in the xt. But if Kings will not cast down their rowns at the feet of Christ, Christ will uck them off and lay them at the feet of en. If there be no power in man Natural, nor  man Spiritual; then away with all the dmonitions, Instructions, Informations,
and so with the whole Bible! cease to tea Man! As good go teach the Sun, Moon an Stars which way they shall go, the Wind  blow or the Sea to ebb and flow; go tea the Fish to swim, and the Bird to flie; f they have power, but man hath none. And indeed, if man regenerated, if ma spiritualized have no power to act; go an race out these ensuing Scriptures, as requ∣ring that of man which man hath no abili to do. Luk. 13. 24. Strive to enter in at t strait gate. Many shall seeke to enter, & Rom. 15. 30. Now I beseech you brethren f the Lord Iesus Christs sake, and for the love  the Spirit, that you strive together with me yo prayers to God for me. Hb. 12. 4. You have n yet resisted unto blood, striving against si Heb. 12. 1. Let us lay aside every weight, and t sinne that doth so easily beset us; and let us  with patience the race that is set before us. 2 Pe 1. 5, 6, 7. And besides this give all diligence, ad to your faith vertue, and to vertue knowledge, a to knowledge temperance, and to temperance pa∣ence, and to patience godlinesse, and to godline brotherly kindnesse, and to brotherly kindne charity, &c. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give all diligence  make your calling and election sure. 2 Phil. 1 Work out your own salvation with fear and tre∣bling. Jer. 4. 14. O Ierusalem wash thine he
m wickednesse, that thou mayest be saved. r. 18. 11. Return from your evil wayes, and ake your wayes and doings good, saith the Lord. at. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labour and e heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Jr. 3. 13. ly acknowledge thine iniquity, & I wil pardon it. Now as many as have received this spiri∣al power, are able according to its mea∣re to doe the thing required. As to in∣nce: The Lord said to David, Seek my face. avid's heart being enlightened and im∣wered by God, makes this answer to the rds command, Lord, thy face will I seek. d sometimes God conveyes the power gether with the precept, to enable them  do what he commands them to do. And en if a man do it not, or do the contrary, e Scripture tels thee, thou art slothfull, d dost not use thy power; or covetous, d so abusest thy power. 1 C or. 9. 18. Now let me ask thee (O thou enlighten∣ Christian) hast thou since thou wast en∣ghtened by Christ, done as much for Christ thou mightest have done? Doth not thy nscience tell thee thou hast been negligent d slothful, and left undone those things hich thou oughtest to have done, and done ose things which thou mightest have left done? In a word, hast thou avoided so
much evil, and done so much good as th mightest have done? What thou wilt  now, I know not: but when thou an shall appear before the Searcher of all hea at the last day, we shall not tell the Lo we wanted power to obey him in his co∣mands. Surely if there be no life, vigor & pow in men and women regenerate, then in va are all those stirrings, perswafions and i treaties in Scripture: as to instance in a fe 2 Tim. 1. 6. Wherefore I put thee in remembra that thou stirre up the gift of God which is in th 2 Pet. 1. 13. Yea I think it meet as long as I  in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you remembrance, &c. 2 Pet. 3. 1. This epistle ( loved) I now write unto you, in which I sti up your pure minds by way of remembrance, & Heb. 3. 13. But exhort one another daily whil is called to day, lest any of you be hardened thro the deceitfulnesse of sin. Heb. 10. 24. Let us ∣sider one another to provoke one another to l and good works. 1 Cor. 4. 16. Wherefore I seech you be ye followers of me. 1 Pet. 1. 15.  as he which called you is holy, so be ye holy in manner of conversation. 2 Tim. 2. 19. Let e one that nameth the name of the Lord depart fr iniquity. Ephes. 4. 22. That you put off the  man which is corrupt. Mat. 5. 16. Let your l
shine before men, that they may see your good s, and glorifie your Father which is in heaven. Tim. 4. 13. Till I come, give attendance to ding, to exhortation, to doctrine, &c. Now if there be no power in a man re∣wed to do what is commanded, then rase t all the Commands, for they be all in in; they be worse then Pharaoh, they re∣ire heavenly bricks to be made of earthly aw. Away with all exhortations, perswasi∣s, intreatings, and heavenly strivings, if ere be no ability in the creature to whom u speak. Hath the Lord indeed made n an empty creature and void of reason? th not man many members in his body d faculties in his soul? cannot the Eye see, nnot the Ear hear? cannot the Legs go? nnot the hands work, &c. And for the ule, is there not an understanding to un∣stand? is there not a mind or memory to nde or remember? is there not a judge∣nt to judge and determine of things? is ere not a will to will the thing, that the dgment doth judge as good? Are there t Affections to affect that, which the dgment presents as good? Or else doth d speak to man as a stock or a stone? th the most righteous God require im∣possibilities
of his creatures? doth he ca and cannot man answer? or will he not a∣swer? or doth he call, and we hear him, r∣quiring many things to be done by us, a threatens us if we doe it not, and gives  no power to doe it? No, no, this is not t administration of the Gospel: for either  doth impowre them before he command them; or else, with the command the goes forth a power and a promise to enab his creature to the performance of what  requires; onely thou and I doe many tim resist that Spirit and power as much as w can; we are not faithfull to the Spirit, w grieve it, and sometimes in a sense quen it: yea, the Lord cals once, yea twice, an we doe not not, nor will not hear him; an if we cannot but hear him, instead of goi to him, we run to Elie, See 1 Sam. 3. 5, 6. Surely Joshua had a power as well as a r∣solution, when he spake these words, Jos 24. 15. I and my house will serve the Lord: an those whom he there spake to in tha chap. Jos. 24. 14, 15. I say, those people ha also a power to doe what he command them to doe, or else his commands are i vain: He exhorts them to fear the Lord, a to serve him in truth and sincerity: and in th 31. verse, we read, that they did as Josh
d commanded them; for the Text saith, at Israel served the Lord all the dayes of Io∣t, and all the dayes of the Elders that overlived shua, &c. So also in the twelsth of the mans, we have in that Chapter at least six d twenty particular duties that we are horted unto. Now if there is no ability  a Christian to perform or practise that ich there is recorded, then all those ex∣tations are in vain, and Paul had been good have spoken to the men and wo∣n that were laid in the graves, as unto se he then spake unto. If there be no power given forth from d unto his people, lay aside as needlesse uselesse all those precious directions, in∣ctions, perswasions, exhortations, and cepts mentioned in Scripture, and so u wilt at once lay aside half the Old and w Testament, as many deluded souls do his day; and then thou liest open, as ing no guard to further temptations: en in comes Sathan, and begins to reason  case with thee: Why (saith he) if half Bible be uselesse to us, why not all? And e will undertake to teach thee, and in∣ so he will, for he is one of the most la∣ious Schoolmasters in the world; he l improve all opportunities, and take
all advantages to fasten his doctrine up thee: he will wait on thee continuall when thou liest down, and when thou ri up he will be at thy elbow: he will prom thee great things, and give thee little;  will promise thee honour, and bring thee disgrace; he will promise thee pleasure, a bring thee to pain; he will promise th riches, and bring thee to poverty; he w promise thee life, and bring thee to da Oh then, remember that blessd wor Jam. 4. 7. Resist the Devil, and he shall flee  thee. Ob. But thou wilt object and say, I h not faith to resist him: And it is not in  power of man by nature to believe, as y may see I Cor. 1. 23. & 2. 14. Rom. 8. 7▪ John 40. & 44. Mat. 23. 37. An. It is true; I have affirmed bef that a man meerly natural cannot ac supernatural things: but I am not sp∣ing to a man natural, but to the recei power of a man spiritual, and the impro∣ment of that. Obj. But before you proceed further  desire satisfaction to this one question: Q. Why doth God promise eternal  only to those that believe, and threatene ∣nal death to those that do not, seeing
ot in their own power by nature to be∣ieve. A. First, that he might by his promises nd threatnings work us unto that which y nature we are averse to 2 Cor. 5. 11. & 20. Secondly, that we might appeare more excusable, when neither promises, nor reats will move us to imbrace free mercy. ct. 13. 46. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed ld and said, it was necessary the word of God ould first have been spoken unto you: but seeing  put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy  everlasting life, lo we we turn to the Gentiles. d in the 51. vers. And they shook off the dust  their feet against them, and came to Jerusalem. r the further proofe of this see Act. 18.  7. Thirdly, that the grace of God might as ll appear in giving power to believe, as giving Christ, and in him forgivenesse of nes to be believed. Rom. 9. 16. So then it ot of him that willeth nor of him that runneth,  of God sheweth mercy. Rom. 11. 6, 7. d if by grace, then it is no more of works. Fourthly, that we might apply our selves to God in the use of those means that hath appointed for the working of faith s. Joh. 6. 27. Labour not for the meat that sheth, but for that which endureth to ever∣lasting
life, &c. Isa. 55. 3. Incline your ear an come unto me, heare and your soul shall live, c▪ Rom. 10. 17. Faith cometh by hearing, and hear∣ing by the word of God. Fifthly, that we might wholly deny ou selves, and search, and by seeking find in th Covenant of grace matter of free convey∣ance of power to believe whatsoever is re∣quired to be believed. Rom. 4. 16. Rom. 3. 24▪ & Psal. 119. 104, 105. Joh. 5. 39. Again, when we look into the Old o New Testament, and there find a comman wherein thou art required to be acting an doing something for God. 1. Consider, thou hast a power alread given forth to thee, by which thou art  ble to do the thing required. 2. Or else with the command the Lor conveyes a power to enable thee to do th thing commanded. 3. When thou lookest upon the Co∣mand on thy left hand, then look upon t Promise on thy right hand, wherein t Lord God hath promised to assist thee, a not to faile thee nor forsake thee. For I d know no precept but hath its promis though not alwayes in the same chapter  verse. 4. For our more careful practising,
g and observing all the commands of our God, consider these three things. 1. As he hath promised to enable thee, 2. So he hath promised to reward thee or doing thy duty: so that to every pre∣pt there is two promises, the one to en∣le thee, the other to reward thee, and oth to encourage thee. 3. And in case of slothfulnesse and neg∣gence in leaving undone what we ought nd might have done, 1. The Lord complains on us. 2. He exhorts us, Be not slothfull in busines, t servent in spirit serving the Lord. 3. He threatens us, saying, Because I have lled and you have refused, you shall call, and I ill not answer. 4. He tels us that we have forsaken our own ercy; He put a price into our hands, but e as fools had no heart to it; and so our struction is of our selves: O Israel, thou ast destroyed thy self. Oh then, that all the Lords inheritance, aints by calling, Sons of Sion, would take e Lords advice in these and the like com∣ands, yea in all the will of God! Phil. 2. 2. Wherefore my beloved, as you have alwayes eyed not only in my presence, but now much more  my absence, work out your own salvation witle ar & trembling.
Q. How shall I do that? (thou wilt say.) A. Peter, being filled with the Holy Ghost, shewes thee and me how we ma do it. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, &c. And besides this, giv all diligence; adde to your faith vertue, and  vertue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance and to temperance patience, and to patience godli∣nesse, and to godlinesse brotherly kindnesse, and t brotherly kindnesse charity: For if these things b in you and abound, they make you that you sha neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowled of our Lord Iesus Christ; but he that lacketh the things is blind and cannot see afar off. Wherefor give all diligence to make your calling and elect sure, for so an entrance shall be ministred unto yo abundantly into the everlasting kingdome of  Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Wherefore I will imploy my power saith Peter, vers. 12. I will not be negligen put you alwayes in remembrance of these thing yea I think it meet aslong as I am in this tabern∣le to stir you up by putting you in remembranc Now if Peter had no spiritual strength, ho could he stir them up to spiritual things and if the people to whom he spake had n power, how could they be doing the thing commanded? Now thou, O most excellent peece of a Gods workmanship, Man and Woman
whosoever thou art that readest these lines, deavour to know thy own strength, that ou mayest imploy and improve it for him at gave it. Study thy self; examine, what  I able to doe by vertue of that power hich I have received from God? Surely I ave left many things undone for this very ason, I was unable to do it. It is true, I saw n the one hand, that I could of my self do othing; but I did not see on the other and, that I could do all things through hrist enabling me. It is a blessed thing to improve the power ceived, in making use of the present op∣ortunity; and it is a dangerous case to eglect it. 1. Because it may be thou mayest not ave another opportunity. Prov. 1. 24. 26. at. 23. 37, 38. 2. Because if he give another opportu∣ity, thou art not sure to live to see it. 3. Because, if he doth give another op∣ortunity, and thou live to see it, yet thou aving sleighted the Spirit at first, thou art most like to do so still, Heb. 3. 13. Act. 7. 51.  Tim. 3. 8. 4. Because if the Lord doth give thee an∣ther opportunity, and thou live to see it nd imbrace it, yet thou hast hindred thy
self exceedingly, and hast lost thy sight o Christ for many dayes. Joh. 20. 24, 25▪ A man that knowes not his own strength is like unto a man that hath a great summ of mony that lieth in a corner, and he dot not improve it, and so gets nothing by it for he knows not of it; he hath a Talen but it is hid in a napkin and buried in th earth. 1. I do but ask thee (O man) whosoeve thou art that readest these lines, dost tho not think in thine own conscience, tha there is many a man and woman belongin to the Election of grace, that do die in d∣spair (as it were) and without assurance i point of manifestation, that might have r∣signed up their souls to God in full assu∣rance, if they had obeyed God in giving  diligence to make their calling and election sure 2 Pet. 1. 10. 2. Again let me ask thee, whether tho dost not think in thy conscience that mo men and women, with Martha, are trouble about many things, whereas they might wit Mary, choose the better part. Luk. 10. 41, 42. 3. Again, I do but ask thee whether tho dost not deprive thy self of thy comfortabl well-being here in this life, by thy not look∣ing more narrowly to thy conversation 2 Cor. 1. 12.
Many things more might be here recited  the confirmation of this truth, That re is a power natural, and a power spiritual; d the neglect of the improvement of each is sin∣ll. But at present I shall be silent to make y further progresse therein, only I shall deavour to answer some objections that ply may arise against it; and then I shall e you a few reasons why I have written is, and shew you the necessity that we have  knowing this power, by the danger of t knowing it. First I shall endeavour to answer a few bjections that haply may arise in the oughts of some against it; and so much e rather, because I know that we live in  age wherein some men make it the great∣ peace of their Religion to lie at catch, d to esteem very highly of themselves and eir own judgments, and undervalue o∣ers, as the proud Pharisee, Luk. 18. 11, 12. d quite contrary to the command of od, Phil. 2. Let each esteem others better then emselves. But to proceed. Ob. 1. If there be a natural power in all, d a spiritual power in some, by vertue hereof they can act and do act: then I umbly conceive, that you must either by olding this dostry Free-grace, or else hold ree-will.
A. I answer: In all that I have said  done concerning the natural or spiritu power, I have endeavoured to fail btwe these two rocks, that I might not deny t one, nor hold the other: for if my  should sail against either of these two roc all hopes of coming safe to land would  taken from mine eyes. First, I have not destroyed Free-gra neither undervalued it in any measure;  I have said before, that all our springs a in him, and all our supplies are from hi and that all power centers in him as t Fountain from whence all small streams  power do flow. I have affirmed furthe that as this power was given freely to  from him, so it is limited in us by him; a when the creature hath improved his po∣er to the highest, he hath done but his dut Luk. 17. 10. Our salvation is of Free-grace notwit∣standing: I have not said that our impr∣ving, or not improving our power, c save us, or damn us: But this I have affir∣ed and do affirm, that by our non-improv∣ment it will exceedingly harm us; for  shall lose much of our outward, and pe∣haps inward joy and comfort both in  and death; I do not say, our eternal we
being doth depend upon it. All our sal∣ion is of Free-grace from God through  redemption of the Son, and evidence of Spirit. 1. So that our obedience is not the cause  our salvation; for Gods love was the fe. Joh. 3. For God so loved the world, &c. 2. Our obedience and good works is t the way; for Christ is the way, the truth  the life. 3. Our improvement of our power in y of good works, is not the evidence as our selves, for that is the work of the irit of God in us. 4. But our good works do glorifie God d inform and edifie our neighbours. First they glorifie God, Mat. 5. 16. Secondly it doth inform our neighbour;  he cannot judge of us but by our fruits,  shall know a tree by its fruits, saith Christ. Thirdly, it doth edifie our neighbour, en every step of our conversation is an truction to him: and the Apostle saith, t some are won to God by the good nversation of others. 2. And as for Free-will in man, I know ne, unlesse it be such a Free-will as was  Paul, Rom. 7. 18. For to will is present with . and ver. 13. When I would do good, evil is
present with me. I know no Free-will th unlesse it be a free-will to sin. A man na∣rally cannot act in things supernatur as to instance, a man cannot believe, unl the Spirit of God work faith in the sou and yet a man according to common p∣vidence may bring his body to the O∣nance of Hearing, which is the means or∣narily by which the Lord doth work fai Rom. 10. 17. But he, the Lord God  mighty, is the Author and finisher of Heb. 12. 2. And he makes us willing a desirous to have it wrought in us: so t he doth not work it whether we will no. So the Holy Ghost, that works fai is not said to believe; Man is said to ∣lieve. Now though man cannot believe of hi self, without the power of the Lord;  man is to attend upon all means, as heari reading, meditation, conference: for th be his appointments, and he hath promi his presence in, and blessing upon the us these means to make them effectual. H it is that the Lord commands us to wait him in the use of means. Prov. 20. 22.  wait on the Lord, and he shall save thee. Isa.  Blessed be all they that wait for him. Isa  31.
y that wait upon the Lord shall renew their gth. Isa. 49. 23. For they shall not be asha∣ that wait for me. Lam. 3 25. The Lord is  unto them that wait for him, to the soule  seeks him. Isa 64. 4. Eye hath not seen,  hath not heard what the Lord hath prepared hose that wait for him. Now a man cannot be said to wait upon d, unlesse he wait upon him in the use of ans, to which he hath promised his pre∣ce, which are his appointments and lks, wherein he hath been, now is, and eafter will be found. Next I shall come unto the Reasons why ave written of the Natural and Spiritual wer, viz. First, I have heard many say, They ought  to pray, read, meditate, conferre, or assemble mselves together, to the practice of any known y, untill the Spirit by its fresh gales and move∣s put them upon it; And I am mightily mi∣ken, if some have not staid so long for se fresh gales and movings of the Spirit, till they have quite forgotten to pray, or ar, or conferr of any spiritual thing, un∣se it be in a carnal way: Now it is true, at is the principal time in which a Soule ght to act, but not the onely time; I say ain, It is the principal time, but not the
onely time. First, that it is the princ time, I have no need to prove; for all ∣tional men will and doe grant that:  then, secondly, It is not the onely ti for we finde that the command lies up us as well at one time as another; ne there is no time, in which we are not  want, and therefore need still to seek. ∣gain, we finde in Scripture, written for  learning, that the Saints acted sometimes  their greatest deadnesse and coldnesse, as D∣vid and others; When they found the∣selves dead and dull, cold and slothfull,  we finde they stir up them selves as men, s∣sible of their state: to instance in one  all, Psal. 119. 25. Quicken thou me after  loving kindenesse, so shall I keep the testimony thy mouth, &c. Again, Psal. 119. 170. I  afflicted very much, quicken me O Lord, accordi to thy word: So vers. 159, &c. so in Psal 153. verse 11. Quicken me, O Lord, for t name sake: so in another place, he praye Renew a right Spirit within me; and agai Restore again to me the joy of thy salvation. In word, let me ask thee O man, who is it tha doth let us see our unfitnesse, luke warmne and coldnesse? Doth not God discover thi by his Spirit? and doth not the same Sp∣rit that doth enable us to see our want
move us to seek for supplies from the foun∣in; as it is said in Job, The Lord speaketh ce, yea twice, and man perceives it not. So I ow by experience in my self and others, at we have many movings and stirrings  the Spirit of God within us; and either e take no notice of it, or if we do, we que∣ion in our selves, whether it be the stir∣ngs of the good Spirit, or proceeds not om the evil Spirit? And so we cease to t, because we be unsatisfied. But in some ses the Spirit that doth move us to it, ill undoubtedly carry us forth to the do∣g of what it moves us to; What are we, ith the Scriptures, that we could withstand e Spirit? But in other cases we are said (as in the cts) to resist the Holy Ghost; and in another cripture, Quench not the Spirit, and be not un∣itfull to the Spirit of God; and grieve not the pirit of God, whereby you are sealed to the day  Redemption. It will be of singular use hen to Christians, to endeavour to dis∣ern between the motions of the Spirit of God from the motions of our own spirits; hat when we finde a motion begin to arise n us, before it come to action, we may ither suppresse it, or cherish it: if it come rom our own spirits, then to quench it,
and bring it into captivity to the obedien of Christ; If from the Spirit of God, th let the motion arise, let thy will will t thing, let thine affections affect it, that  that motion may end in action. Object. But how shall I know, when t motion doth arise from the Spirit of Go and not from mine own spirit? Answ. 1. The motions of the Lords Sp∣rit doth move thee to that, and onely tha which is agreeable to the spiritual sense  the Scriptures. 2. The true Spirit doth move us to tha which doth tend to the denying of o∣selves, and the exalting of God alone in th person of Jesus Christ; See Joh. 16. 13, 14. 3. The motions of Gods Spirit are no carried on, but with abundance of oppos∣tion; opposition within you and witho you, on the right hand and on the left. 4. When two motions arise within yo together, as it were, and both seem to be a∣cording to the Scripture, and both seem t exalt God, and to deny self; then befo thou prosecute either, consider as in th presence of God, whose servant thou ar which of these things that I am moved unt will be most for the honour of God? the that doe: If the Mistresse command the Se∣vant
to clean such a room immediately, and  to touch any thing till that be done; iles the Maid is in the midst of her rk, the childe falls in the fire; the servant ves the work, and runs and takes up the lde, and is commended of her Mistresse  so doing: So that which doth make st for the glory of God, and for our spi∣ual advantage, is first to to be done, and th undoubtedly proceed from the Spirit  God. I might instance in many other ticulars, as to examine the rise of the tion, next the prosecution, and thirdly  ends, but I forbear: So then the first son why I have endeavoured to prove re is a power natural, and a power spi∣ual, is, that we might so know it, as to ploy it to the best advantage. A second reason is, to prevent as much n me lyeth, the further spreading of se grosse and dangerous errours that l follow, if there be not a power in the ature which he hath received from the eator, either in his Creation or Rege∣ation to prevent those evils. First, if there be not a power in men ther natural or spiritual, but onely d in them; then all the creatures abuse  nature, laid to the creatures charge in
the first and second Chapters of the Rom must be taken off the creature, and laid  on God. Secondly, if there be no spiritual po in a man spiritualized; then it is no sin  him to neglect all spiritual duties, and he may charge all his omissions, and all  commissions upon his Maker. For he wo have done whatsoever he had been c∣manded, if he had received any power: Y might have been teachers of others by  time, if you had improved your pow saith Paul, Heb. 5. 12. This people did not answere the Lo and say they had no powere: and so for th commissions they did not charge them  on God, as our Ranters do at this day; a that they be liars, St. James will testi 1 James 13. 14, 15, 16. in the 13. vers.  no man say when he is tempted, he is tempte God, for God cannot be tempted with evil, nei tempteth he any man; v. 14. But euery ma tempted when he is drawn away of his own  and inticed. v. 15. Then when lust hath concei it bringeth forth sin, and sin when it is fini bringeth forth death. v. v. 16. Do not erre my  ved b ethren. Whosoever then doth cha the most ighteous God with our unri∣teous actions, doth erre in the highest ∣ture.
I have admired at the subtilty of Sathan, nd the simplenesse of men, to say, That od is the authour of sin; these be liars, ke their father the Devil who was a liar om the beginning. Let me tell thee, O in man, let me tell thee, That the Al∣ighty God cannot commit sinne if he ould: for if thou didst know what God is, d what man is; if thou didst know what is e nature of God, and what is the nature  sin, thou wouldest know that they can∣t dwell together. Now sin is a transgression of a Law, but od is under no Law, and therefore cannot nsgresse; there is none above God to give ule to him by which he should walk; erefore his own will in his rule; he is odnesse it self, and therefore cannot do y thing but what is good. So that which is justly called sin in us, nnot be called sin in him, if he should do  same thing, viz. If thou kill a man ou hast sinned against the Law of God, d the Law of Nature, and against the ws of men: if God overthrow Pharoah d all his host in the Red-sea, he hath done evil, he hath broken no Law; if he send the tilence and slay every man in the City, hath not sinned; if he drown all the
world at once, he hath committed  evill. If thou or I should take any thing that another mans, from a thread to a shoo latchet, we have sinned by thest: But if the Lord command the Israli to borrow Jewels of silver, and of gol and rayment of the Aegyptians: the Lo hath not sinned in bidding them do it, n they in taking it, Wherefore let God be true,  every man a liar. Canst not thou be content to father thy sin upon thy brother or siste or neighbour, as thou doest many times; b must thou father it upon the most ho Lord? doest thou know what thou dost  in this thing? will he not be avenged  such a wretch as thee? Oh remember fr whence thou art fallen and repent. And now to wind up all that I shal at pr∣sent say to the Power of the Creator giuen fo to the creature. Let me tell thee, if thou find any thing required of thee to be done, & h no ability to do it; consider there was ab∣lity once given thee in the first Adam, whi thou hast lost by thy fall in him, and it just with God to require that now of th which once he gave thee: then consider t as thou hast lost by the first Adam, so th hast gotten by the second Adam; so th
enabling thee, thou canst (with Paul)  all things. nd that will be the next thing that I shall deavour to lay before thee; Thy fall in e first, and the manner there of; and thy stauration by the second Adam, and the ory there of. And do desire, that some e or other that hath a greater discovery  the mind of God in these things, con∣rning The power of God, and the power of the eature; concerning the power Natural, and e power Spiritual: I should intreat them to ld it forth to publique view; for I am re there is great necessity of it, that man ight know his own strength. For I am consident, that I my self and any others have left undone many things at we ought and might have done, for ot knowing our own strength where with od, even the God of power had strength∣ed us. Wherefore I do in the presence of y Maker declare unto the whole world, hat I was not straightened in him, but in ine own bowels; That he hath not been anting to me, first not only to give me ength, but secondly to supply me in re∣wing that strength day by day. Where∣re let God be true, and I and all neglecters, if e charge God with not enabling us, lyars.
Rom. 3. 4. Let God be true and every man a lya Oh then, let not the righteous God  charged with your unrighteousnesse! an let not the most holy God be charged wi your unholinesse! But stirre up the talent th is in thee, as in 2 Pet. 1. 13. Do as Jacob did, wrestle with God, l him not go till he blesse thee; give him n rest till he make Jerusalem the praise of t whole earth. Isa. 52. 1. Awake, put on t strength O Sion, put on thy beautiful garment O Jerusalem, thou holy City, open to hi for he now knocks; flie to this City of r∣fuge, and thou shalt be safe: For the name  the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous run to  and are safe. If thou didst but see him, tho wouldest admire him, and count all thing vanity in comparison of him: if thou did but know him, thou wouldst be so ravishe with the love of him, that many waters co not quench it: If thou didst but taste hi thou wouldst hunger and thirst after hi more then doth the Hart after the water brooks. Oh taste and see that God is gracious It's life to know him, it's heaven to behol him, it's melody to hear him, it's endless happinesse to enjoy him. Let it be our ca to obey him, and improve all our strengt for him: let us not spend our money for th
which is not bread, and our pains for that which l not profit. Let us run the wayes of his com∣ndments, for he hath enlarged our heart, and d, that he that doth these things shall never moved. Improve thy power for him, part th thine estate for him; give, and it shall be en thee again, Luk. 6. 38. Good measure pressed n and shaken together and running over. Me thinks I hear the voice of thy Saviour ing to thee: O thou obedient sonne, come, e, thou hast been faithful in a little, I will e thee more; come, enter into thy Masters joy;  thine obedience to me did arise from thine in∣est in me, manifested to thee by me. NOw I shall speak to our Fall in the first Adam, and of the subtlety of Sathan erein. There be two things of absolute necessity r a Christian to be well acquainted with, z. 1. Our fall in the first Adam. 2. Our restauration by the second A∣am. Upon these two points doe the two estaments frequently treat; insomuch hat thou canst hardly read one Chapter, ut (more or lesse) thou shalt find the Pro∣het, or Apostle speaking to one or both
states, or something conducing thereunt and some Chapters speaking and treati wholly of that two fold state, as Rom. 5. & Nay, I have observed, that when I ha heard a Gospel-Sermon, wherein were m∣ny particulars; or when J have heard go ly men in a long debate about the prin∣ples of religion; I have (J say) observ that the summe and substance of their d course or teaching hath for the most pa been to shew what men were in the first ∣dam, and the misery of all in that state;  else what they be in the second Adam, a the glory of that state. And when my m∣mory hath been too weak to comprehe the abundance of particulars that J ha heard, J referre all that J have heard  these two particulars, and found singul benefit thereby, viz. What do J know mo now by all that J have heard this day, th J did before, of the state J was in, a of the state J am now in? First then of the first Adam, the Scriptu speak of him in a two fold state. 1. The first is the state of innocencie b∣fore he fell. 2. And secondly of his state of mise after he was fallen. Of the first of these states J shall say n
thing, it being well known to most men; d of the second of these states, I shall speak r write but a very few words. Adam and Eve being in Paradise, and oking upon themselves as indeed they ere the most excellent peeces of all the reation, bearing the Image of their Crea∣or; the Lord left them a Law, and left them o the freedome of their own will; if they id obey, to live; if they did disobey, to dye. ut through the temptation of Sathan, hey both soon cast off their Makers pre∣epts, and through the temptation of Sa∣han they transgressed the commandement f God in eating the forbidden fruit, and hereby fell from the state of innocency herein they were created, and so brought pon them and all their seed, the losse of ommunion with God, and his displeasure, nd obtained a curse, so as we are by nature he children of wrath, bondslaves to Sa∣han, and justly liable to all punishments n this world, and that which is to ome. O thou Adam, what hast thou done? for hough it was thou that sinned, thou art ot fallen alone, but we all that came of hee! O the infectiousnesse of Sinne, ten housand times more infections then the
Plague and Pestilence; for many have live in the City when the noysome Pestilen hath been, and yet have been free: but b hold this original transgression hath sprea it self into all the corners of the earth;  that no man, woman, or childe, that eve was, now is, or hereafter shall be, is fr from that infection; and that original sin as the root, bringeth forth actual transgre∣sion as the branches; sins of omission, o commission, as the fruit. Oh thou Adam, what hast thou done?  though it was thou that hast sinned, tho art not fallen alone; but we all that came  thee, as being then in thee, are infected b thee: O miserable men that we are, who shall  liver us from this body of death! Thus much of the nature of the Fall: no of the manner of the Fall, and of the subtil of the Devil, that old Serpent therei He himself being fallen, comes to the Ga∣den in the form of a Serpent, out of env to mans happinesse, he boards the woma thus: Hath God said, Ye shall not eat thereof as if he should have said, It is a likely ma∣ter that the Lord cares what you eat; wha do you think that he stands upon an apple hath he created all things for you? then d ye use them. This is the first assault, whic
woman weakly resisteth, beginning at  first to yeeld: whereas God had said, ou shalt dye; she answereth doubtfully and th, Lest I dye: Then the Devil perceiving e woman to stagger, and the ground of  faith to shake, plants all his peeces, and epares his Army for a storm; for his name egion, and he had beleagured the wo∣n before. So the word was no sooner t of her mouth, Lest ye dye: but he re∣es, Ye shall not dye at all. What? dye, with ing so fair an Apple? Can there be any rt in it, O filly woman! Ye shall not dye all. God he affirmeth, Ye shall dye certainly. The woman saith, Lest ye dye. The Devil that old Liar, saith, Ye shall  dye. Then not giving the woman any respite  be think her self, or to reply: Oh saith he, od knoweth that your eyes shall be ope∣d, and you shall be as gods: as if he should e said, God envies your happinesse, and ove you so well, that I cannot but tell u of it; for he knows very well, that if u should but eat of that Tree, you should e that which you never faw before, and at you shall be as gods. Oh impudent ar▪ for by cating, both Adam, and all we
his posterity became more like unto Sath then like unto God: Behold, O filly w man, saith he, what a goodly Tree this how pleasant to the eye, dlicate to t taste, divine for use; can it do you a hurt? would any but fools abstain? go  eat, and fear not, I will warrant you  harm. Then the woman seeing it was go for meat, pleasant to the eyes, and a T to be desired after to get knowledge;  took of it and did eat, and by these or  like reasons, perswaded her husband, a gave him, and he did eat. O all ye sonn and daughters of Adam, put on all the A∣mour of God; If it be possible, stand up your guard; Set forth your Sentinels; Ma ready for an Enemy which hath slain yo Father, deceived your Mother, cheated a almost undone all your Brethren, defil your Sisters, wounded your Childre and plundred all your Kindred to the sk and left them all as poor as Job; never be peace with him, maintain a continual w against him; acquaint all the men a women in the world of his base deceit cheating tricks, that his ill savour m stinke in the nostrils of all men and wome under the Sun, that they may loath hi and stand upon their guard to oppose hi
though his name be Legion, fear him not, is a conquered Enemy: If he meet but e poor Saint in the field cloathed with t a little faith as a grain of mustard-seed, s poor Saint will challenge all the devils hell to give him a meeting; and if they rst to appear, he will but resist them with ittle faith, James 4. 7. Resist the devil, and will flie from you. For he is a base cowardly beggerly Ene∣y; he is subtle, but there is one that takes re of thee, is wiser then he; he is ancient d experiences, but thy friend is more an∣nt then he; he is a Prince, but thy friend  King of Kings; he is swift of motion,  can fly in the air, but thy friend hath the avens for his Throne, and the earth for his otstool, filling heaven and earth with his essed presence; though his presence is not anifested to all, yet he is present in all pla∣s at all times, beholding all actions. Oh en keep the word of his patience, that he ay keep thee in the hour of temptation; ld fast the word of God, for with that hrist put Sathan to the worst, Matth. 4, 1, 2, , 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Next stand upon thy guard at all times,  all places, in all companies, in all duties, eep up faith (for thou and I fell in the first
Adam through unbelief, and we be rai again in the econd by faith;) so the D is foiled, he thought to conquer us who by unbelief, but we shall overcome him faith; Wherefore above all things take the shi of faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench all  fiery darts of the Devil, Eph. 6. 16. & Jam. 4▪ NOW I shall speak to our Restaurati by the second Adam, and of the glo∣ous state of all those that are appointed the Father to be restored by the Son, a sanctified by the Spirit. If I had the tongue of men and Angels, a understood all mysteries, I could not give th a full and compleat description in each pa∣ticular of the happy and blessed state of t Elect by the Father, that are redeemed  the Son, and are or shall be sanctified by t Spirit. They were servants, but now they  Sons and Heirs, they shall be shortly inh∣ritors and enjoyers; they once knew no thing, they do now know in part, they shall shor know as they are known. They were dead in sinne, they now a quickned from sinne; they are or shall b quite freed from sinne. They were naked, they be now cloathe
with the robe of Innocencie, and they shall  cloathed with Immortality. They were enemies, they be now recon∣led, and shall be saved. They once with Adam hid from the pre∣nce of God; they now take delight in his refence, and shortly they shall abide in it r ever. They were Sathans slaves; they now are e Lords Freemen, and shall dwel in Sion: ey were like a beast, they be now like a rince, they shall shortly be like the An∣els. They did glory in their shame; they now e ashamed of their sinne, they shall shortly e with out and shame. They were like the dirt and mire most thy; they be now like the Moon in her eauty, and shall shortly be like the Sun in is glory. Oh the depths of the riches boath of e wisdome and knowledge of God! Oh how un∣archable are his judgements, and wayes past ding out! What is man that thou art mindful of him, or e son of man that thou shouldest regard him! As in the first Adam we dyed; so in the second e are made alive. In the first we lost an earthly Paradise; y the second we have gotten a heavenly
Paradise. This is that seed of the woma spoken of by the Father to our first Parent that should bruise the Serpents head. This is he that is called, The repairer  the breach, and the restorer of paths to dwell in. So that what we lost in the first, we hav made good to us by the second Adam, wi many additions, as in Rom. 5. Much mor Much more, Much more; five times in th Chapter is that word, viz. in the 9, 10, 1 17, 20 verses, which is there laid down  declare that our gains by Christ is mo then our losses by our first Father, thoug that was very great. The first Adam brought us under t breach of the Law, and the curse due ther unto; the second Adam, being the Lord J∣sus Christ the Lord of glory and King  Saints, hath delivered us from the La viz. First, from the curse of the Law. Secondly, from the condemning pow of the Law. First, from the curse of the Law, For  was made a curse for us, as you may see  large, Gal. 3. 10. & 13. v. compared togethe So also upon him was laid the iniquities of us a Isa. 53. 6. and not onely our sinnes, but a the punishments due to us for them, of wh
nature, kind, and quality soever, as you y read at large in that fifty third Chapter  Isaiah, from the first verse to the last:  that whole Chapter, Rom. 6. speaks of  sufferings for us, and our freedome by . It would make a larger Volume then ntend to make of this whole Book, if I uld but onely name the Chapters and ses in the Old and New Testament that  speak to this thing. So I shall end this  point with the words of Pa He was de sinne for us, that knew no sin, that we ht be made the righteousnesse of God in . Secondly, he hath freed us from the con∣ning power of the Law, to which the iptures speak abundantly; I will men∣n but one or two for all, Rom. 8. 34. Who e that condemneth it is Christ that dyed, &c. o shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods ct? it is God that justifieth. Rom. 8. 1. There is condemnation to them that are in Christ; (and you desire to know who they are) thy  those that walk not after the flesh, but after  Spirit. Nay in a sense, being warily under∣od, we are delivered from the moral Law Christ Jesus the second Adam. There is the Ceremonial Law, and the itical Law; the Judicial Law, and the
Moral Law: that we are delivered from  two former, most of us do know; a that in a sense being warily understood,  are delivered from the two latter, very  do know. If the Scriptures do say we be not un the Law, why is it thought such an i proper word for a Christian to say too? A Dialogue between the Law and th Gospel: Or between a Believer, and the Law. Law. THe Law saith, If thou wilt  these things, thou shalt live  them, Lev. 18. 5. Gospel. Not he that doth this, but  that believeth in me shall live, Joh. 11. 26. Law. A man is justified by works, a that I will prove, Jam. 2. 21. & 24. Gospel. A man is justified by faith, wi out the works of the Law, Gal. 2. 19. Rom. 4. 5. Law. If thou wilt not do these thing
require of thee, I will curse thee, and there ave thee, Gal. 3. 10. Believer. But Christ was made a curse for e, and so freed me from thee, Gal. 3. 13. Law. Thou hast committed such and ch sinnes, but not brought a sacrifice for em. Believ. Oh, but take notice of that Scrip∣re, Matth. 9. 13. I will have mercy, and not crifice. Law. But thou hast gone beyond the unds of mercy, for thou hast committed ch sinnes, which God will not accept sa∣ifice for. Believ. But what sinnes are those that ere is no sacrifice to be accepted for? Law. First, there is no sacrifice that will  accepted for presumptuousnesse, Num. . 30. 2. No sacrifice to be accepted for negle∣ng Circumcision, Gen. 17. 14. 3. No sacrifice for breach of the Sabbath y, Exod. 31. 15. Believ. Oh but my faith layes hold on e that promised to cleanse me from all y sinnes, saith the believing soul, 1 Joh. . So, O Law, I have nothing to do with e in all these things. Law. But thou shalt know that I will
have to do with thee; for I am thy Schoo master, Gal. 3. 24. And Christ himself sait Matth. 5. 17. He came not to destroy me; a Paul saith, He doth not make void, b establish me, Rom. 3. last vers. Belieu. It's true, thou wast a Schoo master, and in some sense thou art so stil but he that is come to Christ, Is not und a Schoolmaster, Gal. 3. 25. And the Lo Christ came to fulfill thee, Matth. 5. 17. a if fulfilled by him, what dost thou requi of me? and whereas Paul saith, He do establish thee, that i, in thy place and roo and so the Law is good if a man use it la fully, 1 Tim. 1. 8. Law. But saith the Law, Dost thou ma no account of me? Dost thou not know i deed that tho act under me? Believ. I am not under thee; the Lo tells me so by the mouth of Paul, Rom. 10. Christ is the end of the Law to all that believ Again, Paul tells me from the Lord, Ro 7. 6. Thou art dead: and I finde it writt in 2 Cor. 3. from the 11. vers. to the  four times in that one Chapter, Thou a done away. Law. Dost thou think, saith the Law, I were at an end, or dead, that Ministers a Preachers would preach me up in almo
every Pulpit as they do, and set me up as a le to the people? yea and most of the ople of this Nation do stand for me, ough they do not obey me. Believ. O Law, see the Lord speaking by l, and answering this question for me, Tim. 1. 7. There be many that do teach the w, understanding neither what they say, nor at they affirm. And further I finde in ripture these things of thee, viz. Thou art weak, Rom. 8. 3. Thou art un∣ofitable, Heb. 7. 18, & 19. compared toge∣er. Thou art dead, Rom. 7. 6. Thou art ne away, 2 Cor. 3. 11. Law. I pray answer to these ensuing ueries, saith the Law: if not, let me ll thee, Thou shalt know that thou art nder me. First, what shall convince thee of sin, if I all not? Secondly, what shall work sorrow for n, if not my Threats and Judgements? Thirdly, what shall cause thee to forsake n, if I shall not? Believ. First, the Spirit shall convince e of sin, Joh. 16. 8. Secondly, the looking upon Christ hom. I have pierced; or if you will, Christ ooking upon me after my sin, as he did
upon Peter, will cause me to weep and r∣pent, Rom. 2. 4. The goodnesse of Go leads to repentance. Thirdly, the sweet love of God is no become my Schoolmaster to lead me int the paths of all righteousnesse, Tit.  11. 12. Law. Christ was made under me, an did observe me, so as to obey me, and h commanded thee to learn of him, Matt 11. 28. and to walk as he walked, 1 Jo 2. 6. Believ. If Christ was made under th Law, and did yeeld obedience to the Law why, it was for me, that he might set m free, Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast therefore in the li∣berty wherewith Christ hath set us free, and b not intangled again with the yoke of bondage O Law, wilt thou turn Extortioner, to take thy due in my Surety, and impriso me too; when Christ hath paid the deb that I owed thee to a penny, and hath take up the bond and can celled it? Col. 2. 14. Law. But saith the Law, I would have thee to know that the dearest servants o Christ, as well as Christ himself have been under me: what fayest thou of David? Psal. 38.  I having shewed him his sin, and pro∣nounced his terrours; he cryeth out, My
sin are too heavy for me to bear. And Jeremiah  Prophet lay a long time under me,  the whole book of the Lamentations doth undantly testifie. I could instance in al∣ost all the Saints in the Old and New Te∣ments, that lay under me: And dost thou ink thy self wiser then they, and so make e also of none account? Believ. The Lord for bid, that I should ake my self wiser then they, or copare y self with them! David and Jeremiah, they ere both glorious instruments to set forth e praise, power, and wisdome of God: t, O Law, this let me tell thee, I have now eat cause to praise, magnifie, and admire od in his wonderful love to me, in that he ave me a being in this latter day, wherein ere is greater light, and a clearer mani∣station of his free justification by saith, ithout the works of the Law, Rom. 3. 28. nd that he hath freed me from thee, O aw, and spirit of bondage, that I and o∣hers have a long time lain under, Rom. 0. 4. & Gal. 4. 4, 5. & Rom. 6. 14. & Rom. . 6. Law. But wilt thou not own me so as o take me for thy rule of life? Believ. No, by no means, and that or these reasons:
First, thou art dead to me, Rom. 7. 6. an I am dead to thee, Rom. 7. 4. Secondly, because thou wouldest be u profitable to me if I should observe the for save me thou canst not, for that is  grace, Eph. 2. 5. 8. Thirdly, I will not serve thee, because am not under thee, Gal. 3. 25. but after th faith is come, I am no longer under Schoolmaster. Law. Well, for all this, mind what ho and heavenly David said of me, Psal. 119. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have resp to all thy commandments. Believ. He that believeth on him, as t Scripture saith, shall not be ashamed, Rom. 1 11. 28. Isa. 16. Law. Though thou and others do  little esteem of me, because you do not  the excellencie that is in me; yet let me t thee, that I am glorious, so that the chi∣dren of Israel could not behold the face  Moses when he received me, 2 Cor. 3. 7. Believ. If that which was done away w glorious; much more that which remai is glorious, even the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3. 11. Law. But saith the Law, If thou ca clearly prove by Scripture that the Lo that gave me to Moses, did limit me a tim
and that I was not to continue to the end  the world in my full power, force and rtue, I will be silent. Believ. That I will presently prove, Gal.  19. Wherefore then serveth the Law, faith ul? why, it was added because of transgres∣on till the seed should come, &c. Now this ed is Christ, and this Christ is come: where∣re, O Law, give place. Law. Have I been so strictly observed in ll ages, ever since I was given forth, and hat by those men that were accounted the ost religious men upon the face of the rth: and dost thou, O sally mn, and a few uch as thou, that art ignorant, and dost ot know the Law; dost thou, I say, think o make me void? Believ. I do not make thee void, but ra∣her establish thee in thy place and room, om. 3. 31. and so in 1 Tim. 1. 8. But we now that the Law is good if a man use it law∣ully. Again, if I had lived in those dayes in which thou wast in force, I had been under hee as well as those you name before; and  do conceive that thou, O Law, wast in full orce, power, and vertue from the time that Moses received thee upon the Mount, untill Christ came in the flesh.
Nay, and after he came in the flesh, tho wast in force, until the Lord Jesus had su∣mitted unto thee in all thy demonstration and obeyed thee in all thy precepts; so th there was not one thing that thou require to be done, but he did do it, till at lengh there was no more required; so Christ d∣clares it was finished, Joh. 17. 4. I have finis∣ed the work that thou gavest me to do, &c. Nay, O Law, he did not only yeeld ob∣dience to thy commands, and so fulfill thee, but he did suffer all thy torments an judgements, as if he had broken thee. Tho couldest but require a compleat and inti obedience both in principles and practi and in case of disobedience, to suffer t punishment due to such a sinne or sinne this was all▪ thou hadst to say. Now t Lord Christ took mans nature, and wa made under thee, and in all things obse∣ved thee in point of action, and submitt to thee in point of suffering: And if tho ask me how this obedience of Christ th second Adam, is become mine? Let me as thee, O Law, how was the transgression  the first Adam imputed to me? was I not  his loyns, and so partaker of his sinne  natural generation? and am I not also  the second Adam by spiritual regeneratio
ad so partaker of all his obedience and hteousnesse by communication? Read derstandingly, 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. & 2 Cor. 1. Law. If thou, and a few such as thou art,  winde and twist your selves out of my wer, as not to hearken to me in my pre∣s, nor fear me in my threatnings; yet let  tell thee, O man, That the greater part en and women that ever have heard of , are yet under me, and shall be judged  Christ according as they keep me, or ak me. Believ. That the greater part of men d women that ever heard of thee are still der thee, I have granted before in what I e said in answer unto thee. And where∣hou sayest, they shall be judged by thee,  by Christ, according as they keep or ak thee; there is something in it, though nnot fully grant it. First, there is some∣ng in it: for our Lord Jesus Christ aching to the Jews which were under  Law, Joh. 5. from the 17. verse to the  of that Chapter, you may read many ngs to be considered; and in the 40. verse rist tells them, You will not come to me that might have life. And when Christ takes  leave of the unbelieving Jews in the 45
verse, he tells them, that seeing they wou not be brought off the Law to the Gosp he speaks to them saying, Do not think t I will accuse you to the Father for not imbrati me in the Gospel; no, no, there is no need of th there is another that is sufficient to condem you, even the Law of Moses in which you t As if Christ had said to them, th needs not mine accusation to comple your condemnation; that very Law th you seem to stick to, will condemne yo but had you understood that Law in t Spirit as you did in the Letter, you wou not have rejected me, for Moses writ of  verse 46. For ought I know, those that do live a dye under the Law of Nature, shall  judged by the Law of Nature. Rom. 1. Rom. 2. both those Chapters do spe much this thing. And so for those that do live under t Law of Moses, they shall, for ought I kno be judged by that Law, as in Joh. 5. 45. A whereas I said, I could not fully grant  these be my reasons or Scriptures; Thi condemnation, saith Christ, that light is co into the world, and men love darknesse rat then light: And again, they be condemn for unbelief, He that beleeveth not, is conde
d already, Joh. 3. And again, in the He∣ws, They were shut out because of unbelief∣t I have not said, that the Law in the irit did not lead them to faith. Law. I must indeed confesse, that there is greater and clearer light held forth in the ospel then in the Law, and a better Co∣nant established upon better promises, eb. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. But if I may not go before, doth it there∣re follow that I may not come after? If ay not sit in Mases Chair at the upper d of the table, must I not therefore sit at ? Pray, if thou canst, tell me where is my ace? Believ. Thon must not have any Taber∣cle built for thee, for a greater then thou art  here, Mar. 9. 7. When Peter saw Moses in s glory, he would have made a Taber∣cle for him; but the Lord took away oses, and answered Peter to his foregoing quest to Christ, touching a Tabernacle  Moses, saying, This is my beloved Sonne, ar him, Mar. 9. 7. But the Law in the spiritual substance of  I suppose is still in force; for the Law in e Spirit, is the Gospel; for the Gospel oth hold forth those things in substance,  the Law did in types and shadows: as we
do receive light from the same Sunne w he is under a cloud, as we do when  cloud is over, and he shine in his brig∣nesse; the light is the same for quality a nature, but not for quantity or measure. F the Gospel doth not teach any other Re∣gion then the Law did; but there is a m glorious administration, and a more cl∣rer dispensation of the love of God in t face of Jesus Christ under the Gospel, th was under the Law, I Cor. 12. 5. Now th are differences of administrations, but the fa Lord, and there are diversaties of operations,  it is the same God which marketh all in all:  that for the substance we have no oth Gospel now then that was preached to o first parents in Paradise after their fall,  you may see Gen. 3. 15. The seed of the wom shall break the Serpents head. Here is the s∣stance of all Law and Gospel included a contained in these words. But this Gosp was preached something darkly, and y not so darkly, but that many believed a were saved. Well, in processe of time, th Lord gave forth the Law, wherein we orders and ordinances, types and shadow held forth in several administrations;  that now there was a far clearer preachin that Gospel, Gen. 3. 15. The seed of the w
man shall break the Serpents head. Then shall ou finde all the Prophets rising up one ter another speaking of Christ, and the ory of his Kingdome; and as one did cceed after another in processe of time, so e latter did exceed the former in their owledge of this mystery; and at length  the fulnesse of time, Christ, whom all ese had spoken of, and many be lieved in, me into the world; then sprang up a eater light then ever was before, for here as come the substance of all the former pes, so that never man spake as this man, ither were there ever such miracles done  any as were done by him: well, Christ s the people, That those that did believe in n, should do the same works, and greater then se: And after his ascention, what won∣rful things were done by the Apostles, ry day? the love of God in the face of  Jesus Christ, was more and more held rth; and so through the goodnesse of od unto this day, and at this present me, is the Lord displaying the banner of s love in destroying our darknesse by the ghtnesse of his appearing. Now then, O w, thou in thy time and place wert glo∣ous, but the Gospel is much more glori∣s; the spiritual substance of thee doth re∣main,
but all thy rudiments and beggerl elements must tumble down. And for my part, I am commanded b my Father, Col. 2. 21. 22. saying of the Touch not, taste not, handle not, for all are  perish that use them. v. 23. Which things ha indeed a shew of wisdome in will-worship. Sha I run to the ight of a star, when I may ha the light of the Moon? Shall I run to th light of a candle, when I may enjoy th light of the Sun? Shall I cry up shadow when I may enjoy the substance? Shall abide under the Law, when I may be und the Gospel? No, Law, no; I have not so lea∣ned Christ. I desire now, with Paul, to kn nothing but Christ and him crucified, 1 Co 2. 2. Law. Well, saith the Law, as thou ha dealt plainly with me, so shall I do wit thee; give me leave then, and I will tell th that the fault lis not in me, that I am  much cryed up, and held forth at this da the Clergy and the Laity will not go  Christ, till (as they say, not I) I say they wi not go to Christ untill I have prepar them for Christ: they preach me in the le∣ter, and understand me in the letter; whe as if they understood me in the spirit, should lead them to Christ, if Christ did n
d them to me: yet these men in their rds, will many of them deny me, as to e any hand in their justification or ac∣tation; but though they deny me in rds in these or the like things, yet they nowledge me in their deeds, just as those rds of Paul, Rom. 9. 32. Wherefore? because  sought it not by faith, but as it were by the ks of the Law, for they stumbled at that bling stone. Now this word (as it were) t were unfolded, as now it lyes sealed;  should finde most men seeking righte∣snesse, if not absolutely by the Law,  as it were by the works of the Law, . Believ. In this that thou hast said, O w, I have nothing to except against, for e we both agree, though there was a s-understanding between us at first; yet it true, the fault is not in thee, O Law, that n put thee in the room of Christ, no ore then the brasen Serpent was in fault om the people did Idolize; the fault s in the people, and not in the Serpent: at this day, mens seeking righteousnesse  thee, becomes their own evill, not thine; d as thou hast said, though men will not knowledge that they seek righteousnesse  the Law, yet they doe seeke it as it
were by the workes of the Law. Now here lyeth one of the greatest ∣ferences between the Law and the Gosp both speak of working, and both speak resting; onely herein lyes the difference, ∣der the Law before Christ was come,  people were to work first, and rest aft∣wards; that is, they were to work six day and rest the seventh; when they had d their work, then enter into rest: n under the Gospel, we are to rest first,  work afterwards; for as the Sabbath of  was the last day of the week, so our Lo day of rest is the first day of the week:  are first to receive a Kingdome that cannot moved, Heb. 12. 28. and then next to se God acceptably with reverence and godly f We are first to believe, and then in then place, to shew our faith by i works;  are first to see our interest in the promis and then to cleanse our selves from all filthi of flesh, and spirit. Into what soever house  enter, we are to say, peace be to this house, first, fore we are to shake the dust off our feet as a w nesse against them. So much concerning fr∣dome from the Law by Christ that fulfill the Law, &c.
What Christ hath delivered us from, and restored us unto. Shall onely speak of two things more  briefly, viz. First, what we are delivered from by hrist. Secondly, what we are restored unto. First, what are delivered from, and here∣ I might instance in many things; I shall ely make mention of two. First, we are delivered from sinne. Secondly, from death the wages of sin. First, we are delivered from sinne, Isa. . 6. it was all laid upon him, and so we came free. Rom. 6. 18. & 22. verses com∣red together. 1 Pet. 2. 24. 2 Cor. 5. 21. atth. 8. 17. Rom. 6. 11. Col. 1. 22. 1 Thess.  13. Secondly, those, and onely those that e in Christ are delivered from death the ges of sinne; O death, saith Christ, I will thy death, Isa. 25. 8. He hath swallowed up th in victory. 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. O death ere is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory? e sting of death is sinne, and the strength of e is the Law. But thanks be unto God who eth us the victory through our Lord Jesus rist, &c. So then by Christ a believer is ed from the Law: First, from the curse.
Secondly, from the condemning powe Thirdly, from sinne; and Fourthly, fro death. Secondly, let us a little consider, as wh we be delivered from, so what we are r∣stored unto. I shall not undertake to  forth this in the heigth and breadth, dep and length, but onely give a hint to it,  I have ability and time, knowing that I a straitned in both: Ye were servants, you be now friends  Christs, Joh. 15. 15. And if that be too little, ye are Sonn and Daughters. If that be too little, are calls you his B∣thren, and Sisters, Heb. 2. 11. If that be too little, he calls you h Chosen, Spouse, and Wife, Rev. 21. 9. If that be too little, he tells you that yo be members of his own body, 1 Cor. 12. 12▪ If that be too little, he tells you that yo be heirs with him, Rom. 8. 17. If that be too little to expresse the abu∣dantnesse of his love to you, he tells yo That the glory which the Father gave to him,  hath given to you, that you may be one, as  Father and he is one. If that be too little, he tells you, Tha you be joyned to the Lord, you are one spirit, 1 Co 6. 17.
If this be too little, he tells you indeed, hat all these things above-mentioned, are t a taste of what you shall shortly be, Joh. 3. 12. Oh thou most noble overcomming Saint, rvant of the most High God, heir of pro∣ises, and Son of Sion! Consider what ou art come from, and now by Christ me to, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. But ye are come to Mount Sion, and to the City of the living od, the heavenly Jerusalem, and unto an innu∣erable company of Angels, to the general assem∣y and Church of the first born, which are writ∣n in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to e spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus e Mediator of the new covenant, and to the ood of sprinkling that speaketh better things then at of Abel. Now manifestly and truly mayest thou ay, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine. e that toucheth me, toucheth the apple of his ye. My Father is so tender of me, that he akes all the wrongs done to me, as done o himelfe; he that persecutes me, perse∣utes him, Act. 9. 4. And he that hath pity nd compassion on me, the Lord takes it as one to himself, Matth. 25. 40. David said, Who am I, that I should be son in aw to King Saul! but I may say, Who am I
that I should be Son and heire, yea cohei to the King of Kings. I was a dry a barren tree fit for nothing but burning, b I shall flourish like a tree planted by t rivers of water. O how often did he call, how earnest did he knock, how powerfully did  strive, how long did he wait upon me b∣fore my stubborn heart would yeeld! If  had never loved me, I had never loved hi If he had never drawn me, I had never r after him: If he had never sought me,  had been straying in the wildernesse of in∣quity, and feeding in the fields of vanity,  most are: but now he hath avouched him∣self to be mine, and I have avouched m self to be his, Hos. 2. 19. I will betroth thee  me; So I became the Bride, the Lamb wife. First, Christ comes and woes me, 2 Co 5. 20. Secondly, he gets my good will, and became his, 1 Joh. 12. Thirdly, he makes my soul fruitfull Joh. 15. 5. Again, as he is a husband to all hi people, in that he performs all offices o love as a husband, he comes not short i one thing, but transcends and goes be∣yond
a husband in every thing: as to in∣ce, Death or poverty, imprisonment, ke a separation in part or in whole be∣een a man and his wie; but none of ese can make a separation between Christ d my soul. Again, in other marriages a n seeks to marry one that is rich, but rist seeks for no riches, but takes the or to make them rich. In other marriages a man looks for auty, but Christ marries those that are  their blood, that he may beautifie them ith his own beauty. Again, in other arriages, infirmities in a wife do many mes abate the love of the husband to the ife; it is not so with Christ to his Spouse. gain, if the wife play the harlot, the man ill put her away, it is not so with Christ,  you may see, Jer. 3. 1. But thou hast played e harlot with many lovers, yet return unto me, ith the Lord. Well then, saith the soul, let friends for∣ake me, let enemies deride me, let all orldly comforts leave me; If I can but njoy Christ for my husband, it is enough. any more glorious things might be spo∣en of the blessed stte of a Christian resto∣ed by Christ: but I leave it to those that ave greater enjoymens of it, and shall
winde up all with this word of consol∣tion, Blessed, yea thrice blessed is the man, sai David, whose sinne is covered: If Sathan se for thy sinne, and wicked men seek for th sinne to lay it to thy charge, Who shall lay  thing to thy charge, saith Paul. Thy fin shall be sought for, and shall not be fou saith the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy, J 50. 22. Sinne may break thy communion, b not thy union with God. Those that have the enjoyment of their Restoration, may be known by their Conversation. THere be many men and women th will give their assent and consent  the foregoing truth, That the Lord Chr hath done many and wonderful thing yea such things, that eye hath not seen, e hath not heard, neither, say they, hath it ent into the heart of men to conceive or understand,  comprehend them. Nay, they can tell you large story of the blessed state of the Sain after death, how they shall be for ever in t presence of the Lord their God; In wh presence there is fulnesse of joy, and pleasu at his right hand for evermore; then sorrow a sighing shall flye away, and then the Lord o
pe away all tears from their eyes; and there ill be no more death, neither sorrow, or rying ither shall there be any pain. But, O man, whosoever thou art that th thus speak of the joyes of heaven, dost ou see thy own interest in these mercies? st thou see thy self to be a childe of this ther of mercies? canst thou say, My spirit th rejoyce in God my Saviour? canst thou y with Thomas, My Lord, and my God? or ost thou suppose it to be so, as the Church ev. 3. 17. O consider, most do deceive themselves, inking they be something when they are othing: nay let me tell thee, most of the ith, hope and assurance, that men have ken up, is not the faith, hope, and assu∣ance of the Gospel of Christ: It will not and thee in stead in the time of need. There e many will come to Christ at the last day, ying, Lord, Lord, open to us, for we have eat & unk in thy presence, Luke 13. 25, 26, 27. but e shall say, I tell you I know ye not whence you re. Why call you me Lord, Lord, and do not the ings that I say? O if thou art a servant of Christ indeed, hen it is thy meat and drinke to do his ill. Doth the Lord love thee? what evidence
hast thou of his love in thy soule? doth h Spirit witnesse with thy spirit that tho art his? or hast thou that white stone wit in thee, that hath a name that none can re but thy selfe? how shall I and others kno that the Lord loveth thee, and that tho hast this evidence of his love in thee, unle I see thee walk as one of those? Gal. 5. 25.  thou doest live in the Spirit, then walk  the Spirit; if thou say thatthou doest wa in the Spirit, then thou doest not fulfill th lust of the flesh, Gal. 5. 16. How shall I kno that thou art one of the disciples of Chr but by thy love to Christ and his peop Joh. 13. 35. Now, O man, wherein doth thy love  Christ appear? what dost thou do for him Again, wherein doth thy love to his peop appear? 1 Joh. 5. 1. Every one that loveth him that begat, loveth him also that is begotten of hi if thou sayest that thou dost love them, ask thee whether that love of thine be su a love as Christ requireth, Joh. 13. 34. Do thou love them as Christ doth love the with a free and an universal and consta love? Again, doest thou know God? if tho doest not, then he will come in flaming fi taking vengeance against thee, 2 Thess. 1. 8. If thou say that thou doest know him;
thee, how doth it appear? 1 Joh. 2. 4. He t saith he doth know him, and keepeth not his mandements, is a liar. If thou say, But I look upon my selfe as a dly man, and others do account me very lous and religious! But I say again, why en do so many unsavoury speeches pro∣d out of thy mouth? Jam. 1. 26 If any man ong you seem to be religious, and bridleth not  tongue; mark that man, his religion is ne. If thou object again, Oh but I am ac∣unted a very wise man, and a knowing n! But I say again, as in Jam. 3. 13. Who  wise man among you, and indued with know∣ge, let him shew out of a good conversation his rks with meeknesse of wisdom. Doth thy versation evidence to me thy regenera∣on? Thou art a tree; how shall I know thee t by thy fruit, Matth. 12. 33. If thou art grafted in the true Vine, why est thou bring forth wilde grapes? Isa. 4. It is true, thou doest say that thou art e of Christs: but then I say thou oughtest  walk as he walked, 1 Joh. 2. 6. If Christ  thy King, where is thy subjection to his ll? If Christ be thy Prophet to teach ee, why art thou so ignorant? If he be
thy Priest to offer sacrifices for thee, wh is thy faith to evidence thy trust in hi if thou sayest that thou hast faith,  doth it not appeare by thy workes? J 2. 20. But wilt thou know, O vain man, T faith without works is dead? thou beleevest  there is one God, thou doest well; but the de go thus far, Jam. 2. 19. But I am the Lords servant, for I en∣vour to forsake sin. But let me ask thee, O vain man, fr what principle dost thou endeavour leave sinne? doest thou refraine from si for fear of punishment or shame, or beca thou wouldest avoid hell, or obtain heav let me tell thee, the veriest hypocrite in  world may do as much. When thou art tempted to sinne, d thou with Joseph say, How shall I do this th and sinne against my God? Gen. 39. 9. Or  dost thou not rather in thy heart refra sinne upon that account as once Tamar d 2 Sam. 13. 13. If I should do this thing, sa Tamar, whither shall I cause my shame to g Joseph he refraines the evill, because  might bring dishonour to his God: Tam she endeavours to refraine the evill, becau it might bring shame to her selfe. O ma
hou wilt not deceive thy selfe, Examine m what principle doth thy refraining m sinne arise; from nature, or from ce? if from nature, then thou dost no re then any wicked man may do by the provement of nature: but thou shouldest  Christ saith, Matth. 5. 44, 45, 46, 47. Love e enemies, overcome evil with good, in do∣g good for evill as Christ did; examine ne inward man, is sinne in thee as the ne in the bladder, or as the wind in the ly; thou hadst rather, ten thousand times her it were out then in. Now when a n is troubled with the stone in the blad∣r with the in the blad∣r, or overmuch opprest with wind in the lly, he will seek to the Physitian, s troubled and rt with that that is as dear to him as his wne heart, to wit, gold and silver, to have cured: Doest thou deal thus with the sin  thy soule? dest thou go to the spiri∣al Physitian the Lord Jesus Christ? and ilt thou indeed part with that that is as ar as thine own heart, to wit, thy belo∣d sinne? doest thou wait upon him in the e of all Ordinances, without preferring e before another? Doest thou seek the ingdome of heaven, and the righteousnesse ereof, in the first place? Shall, or is all y worldly imployments brought into
subordination to that? doth thy calli as a Christian take up its time in the  place? doth thy particular Calling w upon thy general Calling as it ough doest thou indeed live out of thy selfe up God in the Spirit above the world? If  then the enjoyment of thy restoration evidenced by thy holy conversation. But there be many that do boast of th deliverance by Christ, and of their interest  Christ, and yet are ignorant of him, & ha no part in him. See the Church of t Laodiceans, Rev. 3. 17. Because thou sayest am rich, and increased with goods, and have n of nothing, and knowest not that thou art wretch and poor, and blinde and naked. I dare boldly s that this Text doth reach a quarter, if n half of the professors of religion at this da Nay where is there one assembly free, th can say they have never such a man amo them? can our Parliament in general f they be free? can our Armies say the be free? can Presbytery, Independenci Anabaptisme say they be free? Nay is an City or Town free from men and wome that are making their boast of God, and ye they be like those that are spoken of i Rev. 3. 17. or at least like those Rom. 2. 17▪
Behold thou art a few and restest in the Law, and akest thy boast of God; and yet in the 23. verse d the 24. you may read at large what retches they were. How do many boast of their gifts, arts, nd parts, and enjoyments, calling o∣hers that wait upon God in the use of Or∣inances, Duty-mongers, Heaven-drivers, For∣alists, and Legalists? these be the men that ould come forth in the last dayes, as the criptures speak, 2 Tim. 3. 2. Covetous, boasters, oud, blasphemers; but let them expect the me doom as their elder brother received, ct. 5. 36. For before those dayes rose up one heudas, boasting himselfe to be some body, to hom about foure hundred men joyned, who e sain, and all as many as were deluded by him ere scattered and brought to nought. They have but a little member, it is true, ut it boasteth great things, Jam. 3. 5. In a word, read the the second of Peter, e second Chapter, from the first verse to e last, and there thou shalt have a whole talogue of these new upstart Wantons: at Chapter doth speak of First, their rise. Secondly, of their prosecution, and Thirdly, of their miserable end. nd all to forewarn us, upon whom the
end of the world is almost come to be wear of their dangerous and desperate princ∣ples and practises; and yet these men wil boast of their deliverance by Christ, and  their interest in Christ, and yet are igno∣rant of him, and have no part in him; an to speak after the manner of men, as  was the design of Christ to take away sinn in the sight of God, and as it was his desig to take it out of the conscience, that the might be no more conscience of sinne, as  Heb. 10. so also it was the design of Christ  take away sinne in the conversation, 1 Pe 1. 15. Now there be many men that will bo of the former, that their finnes be done  way in their consciences, when their co∣versation gives them the lye, for Chri hath undertaken the latter as well as t former, see 1 Joh. 3. 6. & 9. verses. Now he that nameth the name of Chri ought to depart from sin, 2 Tim. 2. 9. And  that saith, he abideth in him, ought so to walk Christ walked, 1 Joh. 2. 6. He that saith he know him and keepeth not his sayings, is a liar, 1 Jo 2. 4. Those that are Christs, have crucified  flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5. 2. What profit is it unto a man if there be pr∣mised an immortal time, whereas he ha
ne the works that bring death? and that ere is promised us an everlasting hope, hereas our selves being most wicked are ade vain? And that there are laid up for dwellings of health and safety, whereas  have lived wickedly? And that the glory the most High is kept to defend them at have led a holy life, whereas we have lked in the most wicked wayes of all? d that there should be shewed a Paradise ose fruit endureth for ever, fith we shall t enter into it. Oh friends, what are all the sweet promi∣ in Scripture to thee and I, unlesse we do  faith see our names in the promises? hat are the general declarations, without rticular applications? what will it availe to hear that God is gracious, and long∣ffering, pardoning iniquity, transgression d finne, unlesse by faith thou and I see n to be so also to us? What will it profit us to heare and read, at sorrow and sighing shall flye away, and that tears shall be wiped from the eyes of his, and  there shall be no more sorrow nor paine; ereas thou and I have (it may be) neither tience to wait, nor faith to beleeve our  interest in these things? There be foure characters of a servant of
Christ, that I lately received from a frien 1. What is highest in thy judgement. 2. What is dearest in thy affections. 3. What is strongest in thy will. 4. What is the most constant thing thy resolution. So much shall serve at present to written of the temptations of the wor flesh, and the devil; and of the Armour Christ, wherewith a Christian may defe himselfe, and conquer his enemies; and  of the power natural, and of the po spiritual, which is our duty to impro and all our remisnesse to be charged up our selves, and not upon God; and how serious consideration of this, would be  bar to stop that blasphemous princi saying, God is the author of sinne: Of our in the first Adam, and of our recovery by second Adam, and how we may know th that are restored; of Ordinances, how t they be still in force. Next I shall spe of Faith; and then a few words to the ∣nisters. An Epistle to the world. Anot to those chosen out of the world. Of  deliverances of the Saints, and of their ∣ing too sudden in expecting deliverances
A few words of Faith. FAith is as it were the wings of the soule, whereby the soule doth flye to heaven, and bring downe it's evi∣nce under hand and seale, Heb. 11. 1. . Now this grace of Faith is of singular  to Christians; it is that first and princi∣ wheele that makes all the other wheeles move: But most men be mightily (as I ppose) mistaken in the true definition of th. Seeing then it is that whereby we live grace, and it is that whereby we are ried on to glory; that we might not be staken in that that is of such rare use to Give me leave to tell thee, there is a Faith the History, and a Faith of the Mystery, re is a Legal Faith, and a Faith of racles, dead Faith, and a temporary ith, &c. There is an Evangelical Faith, ing the Faith of the Gospel. Now men  various in their thoughts of the true na∣re of this Gospel Faith. I know one man, . Mr. H. D. that saith, that this is the faith the Gospel, to believe that Jesus Christ is  Son of God; and another saith that this the true faith of the Gospel, viz. Faith
is a holy and humble perswasion ground upon the word of God, and witnessed his holy Spirit. In a word, most men  give too general a definition of Faith.  general definition of the history, with a particular application of the myst will stand the soule in little or no stead the time of necessity. Therefore I humb conceive, that the faith of the Gospel th we are commanded to contend for, Jude is such a Faith, viz. Faith is a gift of God, begotten in  creature by the powerful preaching of  word, whereby the understanding is  lightned, whereby he believeth to be  whatsoever is revealed in the word;  cepting, receiving, and resting upon Chr alone for iustification, sanctification; wi a particular application of Christ, and a his benefits unto his own soul. I say, Faith is a gift of God begott in the creature by the powerful preachin of the word, whereby the understanding enlightned, so that he believeth to be tr whatsoever is revealed in the word;  cepting, receiving, and resting upon Chri alone for justification, sanctifieation, wi a particular application of Christ, and  his benefits unto his own soul, &c.
Now the life of all lyes in the particu∣r application, Psal. 18. 2. The Lord is my  and my fortresse, and my deliverer, my God, strength in whom I will trust, my Buckler, and  horne of my salvation, and my high ower, al. 118. 28. Thou art my God, and I will praise e: Thou art my God, I will exalt thee. Luke 46, 47. And Mary said, My soul doth magnifie  Lord, and my spirit hath rejoyced in God my viour. Joh. 20. 28. Thomas answered and d unto him, My Lord, and my God! In the xt verse Christ pronounceth him to be a iever. Gal. 2. 20. The life that I now live, ive by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me d gave himself for me. Phil. 3. 8. For the excel∣cie of the knowledge of Christ my Lord, &c. general declaration, without a particu∣r application, will not assure the soule of lvation. Is not faith the first stone in the iritual building, and the first step in a hristian race, the first linke in our golden aine of Christianity, the first act of our ew life, that first degree of our holy con∣ersation, the first round in our Jacobs lad∣r, whereby we ascend up into the presence f our Lord? First, there is in a true believer an assu∣ance of understanding. Secondly, there is an assurance of rejoy∣ing, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Thirdly, there is an assurance whi carrieth forth a soule to powerful a ings. A Christian believeth that he who ma man, was made man himselfe; he believe that no man hath seen God at any time, an yet he believeth that Moses talked with his face to face; he believeth him to be borne  time who was from everlasting, and him be shut up in a narrow room whom heave and earth could not containe. Religion is a mystery in every part of  Faith believeth strange things, Hope w for the accomplishment of that which re∣son cannot comprehend; and so for lo and patience, and all other graces, there  a great mystery in the actings of each  these; as to instance in one for all, a littl look upon faith, and see what it believe concerning the Trinity, and Election, Justi∣fication, and Sanctification, and Repen∣tance. First, concerning the Trinity. He believes that the Father is not th Sonne, and the Sonne is not the Spirit and yet the Father, Sonne and Spirit are a but one. He believes that God is Alpha and Omeg the beginning and the end, and yet he be
ves that God had never a beginning, and all never have an end. He believes that the Father sent forth the nne, and that the Sonne sent forth the pirit, and yet he believeth they were never parated the one from the other. And concerning Election, He believes that God is no respecter of ersons, and yet he believes that God elected me, and left others, when he found no fference. And concerning Iustification, He believeth that his qualifications doth ot cause Gods love; yet he would question hether God loved him, if he were not ualified. H works not for wages, yet hath an eye o the recompence of reward. He believes that the most just God, hath unished the most innocent person; and to ave justified himself, though a sinner: he is often in prison, yet alwaies at liberty, and a freeman though a servant. And concerning Sanctification, He believes that he goes not to heaven for holinesse, and yet he believes that he cannot go thither without it; he liveth on earth, but his conversation is in heavenly things; he is careful for nothing, and yet
none so careful as he. He esteems his nam as a precious ointment, yet he cares no who reviles him. Concerning Repentance. He often weeps for sorrow, and yet h doth rejoyce when he weeps. He is of all men most humble, and yet n man hath a heart so lifted up as he, 2 Cor. 7. . He is one who lives to dye, and dyes t live; yet he is dead whiles he liveth, and live when he dyeth. He believes himselfe to be precious i Gods sight, and yet he doth loath himself  his owne fight. And concerning the Scriptures. He believeth that the Scriptures wer written by men subject to errour, and yet he believeth there is no errour in them. Nay he believeth there is no errour in Scripture; and yet he findeth that which is commanded, Gen. 17. 12. to be forbidden Gal. 5. 22. Now there is a great controversie among men, whether it be Christs work or th creatures work to act faith. But I shall say nothing to that here, having spoken o laid down my judgement concerning it be∣fore. But a word or two of these things.
First, how Faith is wrought, or by what eans usually. Secondly, some lets to be removed. Thirdly, some motives or considerations move us to believe. First, how faith is wrought, or by what eans ordinarily; and that is by the mi∣stery of the Word. Rom. 10. 17. 1. The soul is enlightened to see it self ful, miserable, and naked, polluted in its ood. 2. Then the soul searcheth to find, if it ere possible, a promise should be made to ch a sinner as he is: well, at length he deth it. 3. Then the soul beginneth to enquire hether with out presumption he may lay old on the promise: Well, he finds it is o presumption to believe, but rebellion ot to believe. 4. The soule begins to consider what he that hath made these promises: Well, he nds him to be God, that cannot be worse hen his word, as man will. 5. He enquires further, and finds that his God is a most faithful God; so faith∣ul, that not one ot or tittle of his word all passe, till all be fulfilled. Then when he soul sees his sin, and a promise of par∣don,
and that it is his duty to believe, an that it is God that hath made these pr∣mises, and that to the worst of sinners, an that this God is a faithful and a true God then the soul roots it self upon Christ, an saith, There will I venture my soule; if perish, I perish: But I shall not perish;  I never did read of any man that went the far, and miscarried. And this is the fai of adherence, which soon grows up to  faith of evidence. Now the soul saith, It may be I shall be  in the day of the Lords wrath. But shortly will say, The Lord hath saved me, he doth s me, and he will save me; I will not be afraid ten thousands of people that haue set themselv against me round about. Q. Why wilt thou not be afraid, Christian? A. Because I know God, (saith he) an I know him to be able, and not only so, b I know him to be willing to help me:  my name in Scripture, and God speakin to me by name. Oh then (ye sons and daughters of me consider, that he that was the Son of Go became the Son of man; that we who we the sons of men, might become the sons God.
Would'st thou believe thine own interest this? First, gather up and establish thy thoughts on the object of faith, the Free-grace  God, in the righteousnesse of Jesus hrist. Secondly, claim thy common interest in  the promises which be made to sinners:  the promises be made to sinners, and as sinner thou hast an interest in them. Thirdly, consider the terms on which hrist is given; he is not given upon terms f qualifications, but upon terms of accep∣tion and believing; which believing is s gift also. Secondly, there are some lets to be re∣oved as hindrances of faith. 1. The first let is, Ignorance of thine wn misery, and Gods mercy. 2. The second let is; If thou dost know hine own misery, to despair of mercy. 3. A third let is, Carnal reasoning to onsult with flesh and blood, which will ell us either that it is well enough with us lready, or else it is impossible to have it etter. 4. A fourth let is, our hearkening to he motions of Sathan; and you shall know hem by these three things.
First, they drive a soul from God, as  dam hid himself after he had sinned, he we as far as he could from God. Secondly, the motions of Sathan may  known by this; they tend to the weakenin of that little that thou hadst before. Thirdly, the motions of Sathan m be known by this also, they tend to bre and destroy the soule, that is bruised  ready. 5. The fifth let of faith may be thi when the Lord by his word begins to di∣cover our sinnes, then we begin to cove them; and hence it is that we do not pro∣sper in our souls, Pro. 28. 13. Now as I lately heard from a servant  Christ, a man may be said to cover his sinn three wayes. 1. When we do not draw it forth to th hand of justice, when we let alone that tra∣tor that doth lurk in our souls: the Lon comes and calls for our pride, and cove∣tousnesse, and frowardnesse, saying, Brin it forth to justice! Then we conceae o hide it. 2. When we do something to cover i by lessening it: we should rather aggravat then extenuate our sinnes. 3. We hide our sinnes, when we preserv
ur sinnes. Now a man may be said to pre∣rve his sinne three wayes. (1. When we nourish it and feed it, as it ere.) 2. When we do defend it: it may be we  a great blow coming to wound, striking  the head of our beloved sinne; and we efend the blow with all our strength and olicie. 3. When we take no notice of it: per∣dventure a man will take notice of grosse ns, but not of secret sins: we say, This is t a little one; The Lord be merciful to me in is thing. This is all I shall say at present oncerning the lets of Faith. Next of those Considerations, as so many motives to ove us to believe. Thirdly, let us a little consider what en∣ouragements have we to move or prevaile with us to set about the beginning, or go∣ng on and growing up in this grace of aith. 1. Consider, that to believe in God, is he greatest obedience that we can give un∣o God; for in so doing, we are said to set o our seals that God is true. This is the most acceptable work with God. See Joh. . 29. and the first Epistle of John, chap. 3. er. 23.
2. This is the way to become fruitful our conversation. What is the reason the is such barrennesse among men and wom professing godlinesse? why, the reason  there is little fruit, because there is so litt saith. Joh. 15. 5. Ye are not planted in  house by faith, therefore ye do not flour in his courts. You want faith; hence it  that you have no works. Thou hast a  body, but a lean soul: Thy soul witho faith, is like a Dove without wings;  cannot fly to the storehouse for meat, the∣fore must needs be lean. 3. By this thou shalt be able to over come all the fiery darts of the World, Flesh and Devil. First, it overcomes the world, Joh. ep.  5, 4. Secondly, it overcomes all the Devil, 1 Pe 5. 8, 9. & Jam. 4. 7. Thirdly, it overcomes all the fiery dart of the wicked, Ephes. 6. 16. 4. Again, this is the way to be establish∣ed, Isa. 7. 9. What is the reason that men are carried about with every wind of doctrine? Why they do not believe, and so they are no established. Oh then, be ye stedfast, unmove∣able, rooted and grounded upon the rock
hrist, and so sicklenesse and instability will  done away. 5. Faith will reach forth her arm as far heaven, and fetch in to thy soule things at are absent, and make them present, eh. 11. 1. & 13. 6. This is the way, by believing, to tain that joy, that unspeakable joy,  Pet. 1. 8. What is the matter that Christians do  hang down their heads under a spirit of ondage? Why, they have but little or no ith; the more faith, the more joy, 1 Pet. . 8. 7. This is the way to have our hearts urified from that map of misery or store∣ouse of filthinesse, Act. 15. 9. 8. This is the way, namely to believe,  overcome that unprofitablenesse that is  thee and me. How many a Chapter hast hou read, and learned nothing from it? ow many a Sermon hast thou heard, and earned nothing? What is the reason? why, hou hast no faith. Heb. 4. 2. 9. And again, this is the way to obtain hat spiritual strength, to doe the will of God, although it be against our own wils. Faith will endeavour to please God, al∣hough we displease our selves and others.
See what a peece of self-denial Faith ha wrought in Abraham, who followed  command of God in whatsoever he r∣quired, as in his departing out of his o country, and there trusted upon Gods ba word, notwithstanding all improbabiliti in nature: he was willing to depart wit the most dear thing for God, as in offerin up his only son; and gave God his ow time for the accomplishment of his ow promises. To adde no more. 1. Consider, that whatsoever you  without it, it is sinne, Rom. 14. 23. 2. We cannot please God in any thing without it, Heb. 11. 6. 3. We cannot pray without it, as  ought, Mar. 11. 24. Iam. 1. 6. 4. We cannot be saved without it, M 16. 16. Ephes. 2. 8. When a soul begins to consider the grea necessity he hath of it, and the willingnes of Christ to work it, these two wings wi carry thee to the treasury of faith. Wha nccessity thou hast of it, is laid before; an as concerning the willingnesse of Christ  have thee believe, I might instance in all th it more (almost) speaking something  it more or lesse. Let me instance in one fo all. Joh. 14. 1. & 11. 12, 13 verses. In th
verse, Believe in me: and in the 11. verse, ieve in me for the very works sake. Then, that s precept might not be slieghted, he mes in with both his hands full of pro∣ses, verse 12. He that believeth in me, the ks that I do shall he do, and greater: and then he 13. verse, Whatsoever you shall aske in name, that will I do for you. As if he had d, O ye sonnes of men, I do but require  thing of you, and that is for your n good too, That you would believe in me;  is the one thing that I desire of you,  if you will do but this one thing for  I will doe two things for you: . You shall doe the works that I doe, and grea∣ Joh. 14. 12. . You shall but aske, and have what in on you desire, Joh. 14. 13. had thought to have written many gs more concerning Faith: But for e reasons I forbear.
A word to the Ministery, or a few words to th that have taken to themselves the name of the Ministery of England. BEloved, it may be thought strange you, that a man so mean as my  should so presume as to speake a word you, or to thinke that you should vouch to spend so much time as to hear or  what my thoughts are of you. But (O y learned Clergy) I will cast my selfe dow at your feet, and earnestly beseech you give me audience for one quarter of houre, for my heart doth burne within  and though I have been silent this ma months, yet now the words will burst o and let me indeed prevaile with you  your attention a little; for I will ass you, I have rode on horse-back, and run foot many miles, yea and many times heare a few words from you; yea many storme and shower, heat and cold, hav gone through to learne something of  from you, and I doe not repent of it,  should doe it if it were to be done agai wherefore let me intreat your patience little, if it be but to give you a briefe count of what I have heard and learn
m you: And although mine eyes have  been enlightned at the two fountains,  trust that they have been anointed th a little clay, for I see men like trees king If I do faulter a little in my speech, re with me, for I doe want the Hebrew  Greek tongue, which is so excellent, t a man would part with any thing  it unlesse grace, but I would not give the st graine of grace, if I had any to spare, not the third part of a graine for all  tongues, arts, and parts under the mne. The first would that I would whisper in ur eare is this, by way of Query con∣ning these times. My brethren, if I may so bold to call you so, let me aske you tly, Have you not seene nor heard of ose great and wonderful deliverances th in England, Scotland, and Ireland? or if u have heard of it, doe you not believe  that you be so silent in your thanks to mighty God the Father of these mercies? t it may be you have heard of it, and doe leeve it, and yet you cannot give the ory to God; why? because, these mercies d deliverances came in, as I have heard me of you say, by a blasphemous Secta∣n Army.
Oh what pride and selfishnesse is this mon! that when the Almighty doth se in deliverance after deliverance, one tu∣ling in after another; yet if these mer come not in by such instruments as  please, we will not take it as a mercy:  mercies no mercies, if they come not to by our own meanes, in our owne time, a in our owne way? why, shall not that G that gave them freely, reach them forth us by what hand he pleaseth? hath t Lord appeared in his Almighty power,  companied with his blessed presence in  head of our Armies? And yet are they blasphemous and Sectarian Army! When they and we have been in  greatest straits, and at the farthest distan from all humane helps, hath not the Lo appeared for our deliverance? And yet blasphemous Sectarian Army! Hath not our Army asked counsel  God, and advised with his people, befo they have entred upon the work? And yet blasphemous Sectarian Army! Hath not our Army had many dayes  fasting and praying? and have they not sen their letters to the well-affected both i England and Wales, to intreat them to see unto the Lord to cleare the way befor
em? & yet a blasphemous Sectarian Army! Are not the greatest part of the Officers  the Army, men so well doctrinated in  doctrine of Christ, that they can and are dy to render a reason of their hope in ? & yet a blasphemous Sectarian Army! Do they not endeavour to punish Swear∣, Stealing, Sabbath-breaking, and all er things punishable by the Law of God  man, to the utmost of their power?  yet a blasphemous Sectarian Army! Do they not look upon the Scriptures as  rule, and the Holy Spirit as their de? and if any Presbyierian, Independent,  Anabaptist come and bring not this do∣trine, they bid him not God speed?  yet a blasphemous Sectarian Army! Do they not in all their deliverances re and endeavour to give the glory to d, and lay themselves at his feet, as poor ruments in his hand? And yet are they asphemous and Sectarian Army! Do they not grow and thrive daily more  more in the knowledge of God, teach∣ one another in psalms and hymns and ritual songs? And yet a blasphemous arian Army! h not the Lord God Almighty crown'd r endeavours with blessed successes, and
unheard of deliverances? and yet a b∣phemous Sectarian Army! O my brethren, my brethren! Is the  indeed dark to you, that you cannot  Is that fallen upon you, that was threat upon your Tribe, Mic. 3. 6. Therefore  shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vi and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not vine; and the sun shall go down over the Proph and the day shall be dark over them, &c. Is  this your state at this day? Examine a li are you not guilty of those sins mention in this chapter, for which these plague darknesse were sent. Examine your se by the Spirit of God, in the 5. vers. of  third of Micah. Thus saith the Lord to Prophets, that make my people erne; that with their teeth, and cry peace; and he that  teth not into their mouths, they even prepare  against him. Now I do but ask you, whe you have not caused the people to  Again, I do but ask you, whether you  not bitten sorely with your teeth, of la Again, I do but ask you, whether you  not war in your hearts against him  putteth not into your mouths, or pa not his dues, as you call it? Now I do  ask you whether these things be so, or  You do not as yet hear me charge you
Now if it be so with you, lo then here the ground why you do not behold nor nnot see the Lord in all these mercies. hy, it may be you have caused the people  erre, and bit at the Saints with your eth: there is your sin (it may be) & the day dark unto you, and the sun is gone down; there the punishment. Many other things I might say to this: t I call to mind to whom I speak; A ord to the wise is or should be enough. t indeed bear with me a little, for I am our weak brother, and you have offended e, contrary to the command of Christ, ho saith, Thou shalt not offend thy weake other. If you ask me wherein you have ffended me? I tell you, in many things; will instance but in a few. First, you have caused me to stumble and lmost to fall, To see you fasting, and pray∣ng, when you should be rejoicing and raising; and again sometimes to see you ejoicing, when others are weeping. Oh why do you call these dayes of deliverances nd glorious appearances, suffering dayes, uffering times! What, is Sions King on comming; and et fad and suffering times! What, is the Sun rising with healing in
his wings; and yet sad and suffering times What, hath the Enemy ceased to spoil and now is he spoiled? and yet sad an suffering times! Hath the Lord God brought back th outcast of his people, and caused them  sit under their own vine? and yet sad an suffering times! What, hath the Lord made his people praise and a fame amongst and in the mid of those that had them in scorn and re∣proach? and yet sad and suffering times! What, is the Lord reducing Magistraci and Ministry to their primitive institution and yet sad and suffering times! Doth not the sword of Justice, without respect of persons or partiality, begin to be drawn out of that old scabberd, wherein it hath lain and rusted for many yeares? and yet sad and suffering times! Do we not live in an age, wherein men and women may be as good as they can, but not so wicked as they would? and yet sad and suffering times! Did we not lately live in such times, wherein it were safer to commit sinne then to reprove sinne; and now it is safer for a man to reprove sinne then to commit it? and yet sad times!
Indeed I have admired, when I have con∣ered of this, that you that should have en calling upon the people to take no∣e of the wonderful incomparable good∣sse of God to this English Nation of late, at so they might give the glory to God: u have endeavoured either not to suffer e people to take notice of it, or if you uld not prevaile in that, then you would telling the people, that this which they  Mercy is no mercy, if (say you) that you  consider by whom these things come But when I have turned over the leaves the Bible, and there taken notice that in ages, under all dispensations, there were innumerable company of that Tribe, mmonly knowne by the name of Priests, ophets, or Watchmen, or Seers: yet ese men above all others have had their ese hand in all the bloody and barba∣us plots, insurrections and rebellions: d to carry on these designes, have you not de use of the power and strength of Em∣ours and Kings to war one with ano∣r? and by this means have not you been  cause of the losse of thousands of Chri∣ns lives, their blood spilt? and all this th been under the pious pretences of Re∣formation,
Church-order, punishing  Hereticks, and Schismaticks, and so p∣tending to reform the Church of its Here and Schisme; on the contrary, you ha deformed it into Formality, Superstitio and Idolatry. I say, when I did a little co∣sider this, then I did not wonder that  same generation of men in our dayes ha∣trod in their predecessours steps. The∣fore now, O all ye Ministers of Engla that have sought your selves more then  glory of God! for to you I do speak:  eare a little unto me, and I will speake  you the words of truth and sobernesse; for  that I have written already, is but the co text or coherence. Now next will follo in order the division, and the doctrine, wi some reasons to prove the truth there and so I shall have done with the expli∣tion, and I will leave you to make the a∣plication, for you are wise, &c. Let me th begin at the beginning. As soon as ever  Church of God came to be a corporat people, and had a Temple with Ordinan and Offices, then immediately it was peste with false Prophets, wicked and Idolatro Priests; so all the Prophets all along gi large testimony to this. I should want bo time and strength to lay downe the clo
f witnesses to this truth; and I have gotten our patience but for a little time, where∣ore I will be briefe, and in as few words  I can, I shall trace this Tribe from the rophet Isaiahs dayes untill this day, Isa.  8. 7. The Priests and the Prophets have erred. Hos. 6. 9. As troops of robbers wait for a man, so he company of Priests murther in the way. Ezek. 22. 26. The Priests have violated the Law. o in Hos. 6. 9. & Jer. 26. 7. And thus we inde the foure hundred false Prophets a∣ainst one poore Micaiah. Thus also was the condition of the Church of God in Eliahs time, 1 King. 18. 19. o the 23. when there were foure hundred nd fifty Prophets in Israel, and yet saith Elijah to the people, v. 22. I even I onely re∣main a Prophet to the Lord. So in the Prophet Jeremiahs dayes, Jer. 50. that whole Chapter speaks of their sinnes and punishment. So in Ezekiel his dayes, what unheard of wickednesse did the Lord complaine of to be in them; as in Ezek. 34. from the first verse to the end of the tenth verse, as you may read at large? And then the Prophet Daniel and Hosea, do not they hint at the wickednesse of these men? &c. And then after all this, see what the Pro∣phet
Micah saith of them, Mic. 3. from th 5. verse to the end of that Chapter; and  from the time that the Church of Go had a Temple with Ordinances and officer untill the very time that Christ came in th flesh. You shall finde that there was har∣ly ever any wicked plot discovered again Church or State, but these men have had hand in it, if not the chiefe contriver of it. And so if you please to observe the Ol Testament, when ever you finde the Church before Christ came in the flesh, in Apostasie or declining from the true worship of God to Idolatry and Superstition, the origina or instrumental cause of it arose from th lying spirits in the mouths of the Prophets But to say no more of that, and to come  little nearer home, and search the New Testament, and we shall finde that when the Lord Jesus Christ came in the flesh, who were then the greatest opposers of him? were they not the learned Clergy-men? yea surely: if the Scriptures be true, these were the people that were the most cruel pesecuters that Christ met with in the flesh: it is need∣lesse to give you a relation of their carriage towards Christ, the foure Evangelists being but a briefe history of it, there you may
ad of their mockings and scourgings, aling him before Magistrates as an evill oer, as a sower of sedition, as a destroyer f their Temple and Law, and as a blasphe∣er; and who were the chiefest instruments  this but the Priests, yea the high Priests, he most knowing men in the Law? these en called the word of Reconciliation dition, and the pure doctrine of Christ eresie and Blaspemy: these leaders of the ople followed Christ from place to place  their owne persons, or in their Spies to snare him in his words, and to stirre up e people against him, Luk. 5. 21. & 6. 7. atth. 26. 3. & 15. 1. & 16. 21. Mar. 8. 11. 31.  14. 1. And as they dealt with Christ, so after they d put him to death, they mete the same easure to his Apostles, almost, if not alto∣ther: And it hath been since them the d condition of the Church of Christ, for most sixteen hundred years last past, espe∣ally since the falling away, spoken of Thess. 2. 3. to suffer by her enemies as an il doer: Truth hath been persecuted for ror, light for darknesse, Christ for Belial; d that by these men who pretended most  God: They will be wolves still, but ey will be in sheeps cloathing, Mat. 7. 15.
They will still kill you, but they will pr∣tend they do God service by it, Joh. 16. Obj. But me thinks I heare the Learn Clergie of our times, saying: Why,  grant all this, and more; we do not no cannot deny but the Priests, yea the Hig Priests and the great learned men in tho dayes were enemies, nay the greatest en∣mies that ever Christ and his Apostles  upon the earth: But what is that to  we have had a learned pious zealous Cleg in England for many years. A. But let me under correction in th you to consider what pious men they ha been: And if you grant me liberty,  hope you will, where shall I begin? in He the eighths time, or in Queen Maries daye for all those dayes they were most as R∣mish as some are now. We will begin th in Henry the eighth's dayes, when th Kingdom was under the height of Poper the Clergy and Laity were all cruel Papist And when the King denied the Popes S premacie, and went about to demolish t Abbies, which they knew was not out  any pious zeale he had for Reformation but out of wrath, pride, and covetousnes yet how did all the Clergy side with hi except a few poor Friars and Monks, th were all undone by it?
Then againe, in the dayes of Edward the xt, by reason of the Kings pious disposi∣on, though but young, the Clergy feared urne, and presently a great part of them ll on preaching against some particular ints of Popery; and in the meane time e Lord Protector, with several others, ere resolved to reforme the Church, and esently began to abolish the Masse-book, ith most of the Popish-Service, and caused e Common-prayer-book to be read in glish, and presently all the Clergy were alous Protestants, except some foure or e of them, as Gardiner, Bonner, Day, &c. nd then about three or foure years after at e most, Queen Mary was made Queen of gland, and then the Clergy bethought emselves, and presently turned about gaine, except a few, as Latimer and Hooper, d Cranmer, and Rodgers, and Ridley, c. Then these men began to be more cruel gainst the poore Saints then ever they ere before, Bonner then being Bishop of ondon, if the histories be true; and truly I ould not bring history to prove any thing write, had I not learned it from you: but  returne to our matter in hand. I have eard you often say, Keep close to the text
in hand, and I hope I shall as near as can. Well then, after Queen Mary was dead and Queen Elizabeth had the room, withi six months, the whole Tribe of them, ex∣cept somefew, turned quite about againe and all turned Protestants again; in which shape, and under which visage, they ha continued untill the beginning of th Parliament: they had gotten a trick to ca all their Antichristian Services and Popi Ceremonies, the Rights and Ceremoni of the Church of England; then all the an∣cient proud Prelates, with the rest of thei superstitious dumb Priests, must be called the Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and Mi∣nisters of Jesus Christ: and then for th Tapers and Candles, Tables and Altar Bowings and Cringings, Tippets, Hood and Surplesses, Bell, Book, and Candle and what would not then go down? An if any should refrain to come to their A∣semblies, to worship their God in thei decent order, Excommunicate him, agrie him, and at last banish him to New-England or some other remote Island, that he migh not disturb the peace of this most famou flourishing Church of England.
Well, the Parliament of England had not te long, but the Wolfe covered with sheeps oathing was discovered; and after a little nsideration, it was put to the Vote, then ddenly after tumbled downe the Prelati∣l Discipline root and branch, there must t be any more Archbishops, Bishops, eans and Chancellours, and Prebends: ell, what followed? why, presently the eatest part of our Clergy were become alous Presbyterians: and why so? is at the true discipline of Christ? why, hether it be or no, it is established by a w, and confirmed by a Covenant. Well, how doe they carry themselves der this Discipline? why, the change is eat both for our honour and means, saith e Clergy. First, for our honour; they will not let  sit in the Lords house, nor scarce in the ssemblies Synod. And secondly, for our means, that did long to our Tribe by inheritance; to wit, e Bishops, Deans, and Chapters lands; e Parliament have sold it, and gave e money to their Souldiers: and to tell e truth, this is the cause that many of  cannot speak well of the Parliament, or of the Souldiery neither, though some
of our Coat have better grounds to co∣plain on them both, then this. Obj. But indeed deal plainly with m what grounds have they for their dissenti from, and complaining of the Parliamen and Army, as they do at this day? Minister. What grounds, doest thou sa why, art thou a stranger in Israel? an doest thou not know, that this prese Parliament and Army (I put them both t∣gether, for they act as one) doest thou n know that this present pretended Parli∣ment, for so we call them, hath deni that to us, which was never denied to an of our fore-fathers since King Henry th eighth's time untill now? for though th Religion, both in Doctrine and Disciplin were often changed, as thou hast well sai before; yet shalt thou never finde in an history that doth speak of these things, th ever there was any liberty granted to any for all men and women in the Kingdom were under the present government, were  good or bad, they were to stoop to it,  pay for it, by which means we had all th people in subjection to us in a sweet wa of uniformity; but now although Presby tery be established by a Law, and confirmed by a Covenant; yet notwithstanding this
pretended Parliament doth suffer a blas∣hemous factious Sectarian generation of en and women, commonly called and owne by the names of Independent and Anabaptist, to Preach Publikely and pri∣tely, by which means they have drawne way many of our most hopefull hearers, nd loving Parishioners, and if we should t them alone, we feare that all men will unne after them; and by this means our inistery is slighted, and our persons de∣ised, and our dues lessened; and doest ou thinke that we can hold our peace? ake it thine owne case, and thou wilt not lame us. But to deale plainly, we have reater grounds (some of us) then all this, ut I forbear to name them. Answ. I must confesse, that these things hat you have named have something in hem; so that unlesse a man hath more then ature, he cannot beare it; but I hope bet∣er things of some of you, although I thus peak: it is true, if your tongues were your wne, you ought to speake, and plead for our honour, credit and profit. But after ll these things doe the Gentiles seeke, Matth. . 32. There is but one thing more in what ou have said to be answered, and that is
that Uniformity; it is true, it were to be ∣sired, and it would be sweet to see it  but we may not expect to have it in the fu∣nesse thereof untill that Scripture is f∣filled, Isa. 11. 9. See the 6, 7. & 8. verses. As long as a people agree in things su∣stantial, things circumstantial are to  borne with, for we cannot see all by o mans eyes; there are babes, and they m have milke, and there be young men th can eat strong meat, and there be old me that are going on to perfection, which a in a higher forme then the two forme And the Apostle saith, As every one hath r∣ceived Christ, so let him walke in him. But le all men be sure that they have a warran for what they doe; there is a rule for th Master, and another for the servant; a rul for the Husband, another for the wife; then is a rule for the Father, and another for th childe, and yet all from one and the sam God: so there is a rule for the abe that i in Christ, and another for the young ma that is in Christ, and another for the ol men that are in Christ; yet all from on God by one Spirit made good to us in on Lord Jesus Christ. But I have heard some of you render other reasons of your dissen∣ting from the Parliament and Army. sh∣all
but only name one of them, and that this. You say, both the Parliament and rmy, in their principles and practise, do derstand the Covenant in a way wherein ey do take to themselvs a greater latitude en ever the Covenant intended, if not int-blank break it. To which I answer, they do so, it is more then I know: I say, they do understand the Covenant in a y wherein they do give it too large a la∣ude, that I cannot clearly see: But this do clearly see and know, That you, or ost of you do draw or spin it out beyond e staple, I, into so small a thred, that it ll not hold the weaving. My meaning is, u go about to make the Covenant speak d tye men, wherein it doth not. But I bear; for if I should go to particulars rein, it would rise to a greater Volume en all this little Book. But it may be you have not been kindly alt with by this Parliament, and there∣re you complain of them. If so, let me ll you, this is but to render evil for evil. Pet. 3. 9. Let no man render evil for evil. But if you reply and say, that I do re∣ire that of others that I do not practise y self: Then let me answer for my self d speak plainly, and I must confesse, that
if any man have occasion to speak again the Parliament, I more: for if I shoul yield to nature, I should speak more again them then most of you do; for they ha not dealt kindly with me, as I suppose could instance in many things, I will me∣tion but a few; as first, I have ever from th first been on their side, and serviceable un them either in body or purse: besides, whe I have heard any treachery against them, have discovered it, I have endeavoured a∣wayes from the first untill now, and ho I shall, to vindicate them when I have hear them spoken against, as I have often accord∣ing to my ability to the uttermost; and  the reward I have received from them  temporals, is soon reckoned, just nothing yet all I expected from them. I have le mony upon the Publique faith, which ha been often promised, but never a farthin paid. Again, I lost mine estate by sidin with them, and standing for them: I wa in a banished condition, one hundred an forty miles from home, for the space o two full years; in which time it had bee no lesse then present death to me once t appeare in my native Country amongst  own Kindred, and all for siding with them and since I have returned home again, (th
mighty God making the way open, hose name I desire for ever to praise) I ve not medled with any of the Parlia∣ents profitable places as Excise or Custom  recruit my losses; yet ever since I have en still under hard Task-masters in point  payment, as Contribution, Excise, and e like, according to their necessity, and ine ability. And yet I dare not speak a ord against them, nor have a hard thought  them: For the Lord is with them, and ath told me that deliverance is coming, ut I am too sudden in mine expecting de∣verances. And as long as I behold the ord with them, I shall not think any thing oo dear for them. And now (if you will know) this is the eason that you grieve me, when you reach and pray against them, as I have ften heard you. And therefore beare a ittle with me, if I doe a little blame ou. Again, I would fain be satisfied of these nsuing particulars: they be not Charges, ut Queries, wherein I am a little unsatis∣fied, viz. 1. From whom did you receive your Commission? Who made you Ministers? God, or man?
2. By what power do you stand in th Ministery? you despise the Magisteri power, and also the Military power, as humbly conceive, by your disowning  your selves, and teaching others so  doe. 3. Whose worke do you doe, Gods  mans? if you have received your Commi∣sion from him, it will appeare by you practise in doing his worke. First, from whom did you receive you Commission? who made you Ministers  God, or men? I propound this to you, th rather because many men of understanding I heare say, That your calling to, an standing in the Ministery, is from Anti christ: Others say that you be called o men, but not of God; and both these have very strong arguments to prove what th say, and I (being weak) cannot answe them, wherefore I propound it to you They say further, that you were fitted for  the Ministery at Oxford or Cambridge, and or∣dained to it by the Anti-Bishops. Now if this be true, I am very much unsa∣tisfied in your calling to the Ministery, be∣cause Oxford and Cambridge be but humane and literal Schools, and cannot give know∣ledge in spiritual things; and if so, the
other man may be as spiritual as you t never was there; and if as spiritual as u, why is not he fit to speak of spiritual ngs publikly and privately as well as you. Againe, they say, that you were ordained the Ministery by the late Popish Bishops ich are now voted downe both root and nch, as Antichristian; and if those that d ordaine were Antichristian, what are ose that he ordained? (you are wise, I will ve you to judge) and if I might be ought worthy to give you advice, declare your several Congregations, your dis∣ning that fleshly carnal ordination, as lessed be God) some few of your Coat ve already done; and if you doe it, do it eedily, for many of you will be laid aside eedily; the day begins to be dark over the rophets, as in Mic. 3. 6. And the Lord will eake to his people by a stammering lip, and ano∣er tongue, as in Isa. 28. 11. Secondly, by what power doe you stand n the Ministery? you despise the present agisterial power, and also you disowne he Military power, and these were the two aine pillars that have borne up your ribe ever since King, Henry the eighth's aies, as hath been largely proved before; nd I am confident, that ulsse you doe im∣prove
all your policie and wisdome, a that speedily too, (for the businesse w not admit of delayes) you will be laid a for the most part. If I were by you, that might whisper a word or two in your ea I would tell you of other things which am confident will come to passe speedily but I hope the Seers do see. 3. The third Quaerie is, Whose work  you doe? If you be made able Ministers  the Gospel, then you are faithful labour in your Masters vineyard: If you have r∣ceived your commission from Christ, it wil be known to us by your doing his wor Now the people of this Nation, or many  them at least, are muttering and saying, th you be not like to your master Christ.  ask them wherein it doth appear that yo are unlike to him? They will produ many particulars; I will mention but few, viz. 1. You (say they) be unlike to Christ i this: Christ did reprove and blame thos and onely those that were reproveable an blame-worthy; and that to their face never behind their backs, as hath been ob∣served by you. The Scripture saith, Spea evil of no man! and he that doth, the Scri∣pture cals him Back-biter. Now it hath bee
served, that you have cryed out exceed∣gly against a people, that have been some∣es an hundred miles from you; Not ce, but often; and that not in the spirit meeknesse, but in passion. Now the Pro∣ets before Christ, that were good, did ver do so; neither did the Apostles after rist ever do so; as I can find. Those that  the true Prophets of Christ, will with icaiah speak the truth to Ahab, although th him they be beheaded for it, 1 King. . 8. They will with Nathan tell David hou art the man, 2 Sam. 12. 7. They that be e Lords true and faithful Prophets, will ith Nehemiah tell the Princes and Rulers  their faces, that they oppresse the people with xes, Nehem. 5. 7. Also the Lord commanded eremiah, that he should speak the mind of the ord to the faces of the people, 1 Jer. 17. The ue and faithful Prophets of the Lord must ith Amos preach the death of Jeroboam nd captivity of Israel, not behind their acks, but at Bethel in the Kings chappel, lthough with Amos they be beheaded for , Amos 7. 12, 13. Yea, they ought with the rophet Zechariah to tell the Rulers and eople of Israel to their faces, That because hey had forsaken the Lord, the Lord had forsaken hem; Although by the command of the
King, with Zechariah they be stoned for 2 Chron. 24. 20, 21. In a word, (to adde n more) they will with John Baptist t Herod to his face, tht it is not lawful fo him to have his Brothers wife, althoug with him they be beheaded for is, Mar.  18, 19. Now whether the Prophets of our daye be like unto these Prophets, I wil appeal to all England to judge. 2. The people are saying, that there is vast difference between Christ and his Apo∣stles, and you: For Christ and his Apostle did feed the people with true bread; and you make the people believe, you feed them with bread in their Fathers house, and you feed them with husks, and that among swine. Whereas you should feed his lambs, and give every one his meat in due season; it is observed that most of you (for I speak not of all) doe tie your selves to one Text and one Method, one rode and way; so that for the most part you doe not reach every mans condition. You be like unto Christ, when you are carried forth with a sweet temper of love to all men, as Christ was. Now there be two sorts of men. First, Saints. Secondly, Sinners.
To begin with the last. 1. There are sinners, and they are of two rts. 1. Ignorant. 2. Prophane. First, Ignorant: to these you should hold rth those meanes that Christ hath ap∣inted to enlighten them. Secondly, Prophane: deale with these as rist and his Apostles dalt with such men the spirit of meeknesse, instructing those at oppose themselves. Secondly, then there are also in your ongregations some few godly men and omen, sonnes and daughters, and these  of two sorts. 1. Weake. 2. Strong. First, weake bruised reeds, and smo∣ng flax; these must have have milke, these ust not be received to doubtful disputa∣ons. These be Lambs, doe as Christ, carry em in your bosomes: O let these have eir meat in due season; you may not spise these weak ones, nor grieve them. Secondly, those that be more strong, ercome them with love, 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9. Feed ese with food convenient for them. Build emup in their most holy saith. We finde
Paul in 14. Rom. give two directions to t weake Saints, and two directions to t strong Saints. 1. To the weake, that they should n envy the strong Saints in the use of the liberty. 2. That they being weake, should n doe those things that the strong did, wi a galled conscience. Then he gave two directions to t strong Saints. First, that they should not despise t weake. Secondly, that they should not grie the weake. Now my brethren, you have all th sorts of people (I suppose) in your  Congregations: do you give every one  meat in due season? are you indeed li Christ in this? whether you are or no, will appeale to all impartial hearers  judge. Thirdly, againe I heare the people sa∣ing of you; That if you were the faith ful Ministers of Christ, you would spen more time to seeke his honour, and les time in seeking your owne honour: Man of you are often praying to God to kee up the honour of the Ministery; but we ha
more need be praying to Almighty God establish a true Ministery, and then the rd will undoubtedly keep up their ho∣ur. Why, my brethren, it is your work, it was Pauls, to have Christ alone exalted. t may it not be said of many of you, That u seek your owne things in the first ace, and the things of Christ in the ond place? Doe you give the glory of all  good you doe to God, as Paul did? Cor. 15. 10. But I laboured more then y all, yet not I, but the grace of God in e. Doe you so exalt Christ, as to be nothing your selves, as he did? I am not worthy to called an Apostle, saith he: Again he saith himselfe, he was the greatest of sinners: d then againe in another place, I am lesse n the least of all Saints: And then againe, desire to know nothing among you but Jesus rist and him crucified. Now I appeale to ur own consciences, whether this be your actice. Fourthly, againe I heare the people eaking of you, and saying, That you be  like to Christ in this also, you put too gh a price upon gifts, and too low a ice upon grace. Hence it is, that you cry  one so frequently, and speak of the other
so codly: They say, and I doe almost  lieve it, that you carry up into the pulpi whole glasse full of humane learning an wisdome, so varnished and coloured ove that the world hath taken it for spiritu things, and so millions of poor souls ha been deluded by it for the space of man years. Now if I might be thought worth let me aske you, Did ever Christ and h Apostles cry it up so exceedingly? nay  ther did not they lay it by in the things  God? view well the first book of the Cor∣tians, and the two first Chapters. Now w set up humane wisdome in competitio with Christ, when we make it absolute necessary for the dispensation of the Go spel, yea such an essential qualification, as without it none could be inabled for th holding forth the word of life. Now th doth detract from the All-sufficiencie  Christ, as if he could not furnish his Sain with the tongue of the learned, to speak word in season to those that are wear without those humane arts and parts. I d not speak against learning, for it is excellen in its place; A good servant, but an ill M∣ster: and indeed it is no new thing to hea the learned Clergie cry out so much again these poor illiterate mechanick fellows, fo
h were Christ and the Apostles esteemed their forefather s  this the Carpenters ne? Matth. 13. 55. Mar. 4. 5. So in Act. 4. when Peter and John were ought before the high Priests, when they v the boldnesse of them, and perceived t they were unlearned and ignorant n, they marvelled, and they took know∣ge of them that they had been with us. These Priests doe out-strip many of r Priests, for they will scarce take notice any, whom they call unlearned, to have en with Jesus. O all ye Nations in the rld, beware of the Wolf that comes in eps cloathing, Matth. 7. 15. and of that st that hath a horne like a Lamb, Rev. . 11. I had many more things to enquire of u, I will but name them now, and ex∣aine them hereafter, viz. First, I would ask you, if the truth of God eak forth in the face of Jesus Christ in n destitute of learning, whether there th not appear the more of God, and lesse man? Secondly, I would aske you, whether all e grand errours, now in Rome, France, d Little England, were not brought in  first by great learned men in humanity?
Thirdly, I would ask you, whether  greatest persecutors that ever Christ and Apostles met with all, were not the great learned men, the chief Priests and Rabbi Fourthly, I would ask you, whet when the Lord Christ was upon Earth,  prophesied of the Persecution of his Chu in all ages, especially towards the la dayes; whether Christ hath not fore us that it shall be persecuted by the  learned Clergie, comming to us in Sh cloathing, Matth. 7. 15. and having ho like a Lambe, Revel. 13. 11. Fifthly, I would ask you, whether  not so at this day? and whether amongst  Ministry there be not many great Sch∣lars in humanity, meer ignorants in D∣nity? Sixthly, I would ask you, whether  mane learning in an erronious man do not prove the greatest enemy to truth? Seventhly, I would ask you, whether  do not think in your conscience, that  men and women in this Nation at this  be not deceived? and if so, then let me  you who deceived them? See Matt. 24. Eightly, Let me ask you whether the L Christ is not now beginning to advance Kingly glory, in reducing Magistracy
nistery to its primitive institution? and o, then most of you must become new n, or else you will be laid aside. I had ny more things to propound, but I call minde your patience which is not great,  mine own promise, which was that I uld be brief; and so I leave you as I nd you, so far your friend as you are ists and his Churches, &c.
A brief Epistle to the World. MY friends, I finde it written Joh. 3.  That God so loved the world, that he  his onely begotten Son, that whosoever believe him should not perish, but have everlasting  Again, the Lord doth express his love & w∣lingnes to save them, with an oath too, greatest that ever he took, Ezekiel 33. 10, As I live saith the Lord God, I have no pleasur the death of the wicked, but that he turn from way and live. Turn yee, turn yee, why will die O house of Israel? Again, this loving G hath laid his command upon me, Matt 44, &c. But I say unto you, love your enem blesse them that curse you, doe good to them  hate you, and pray for those that despitefully you and persecute you, that you may be the ∣dren of your Father which is in heaven; fo maketh the Sun to rise upon the just and un and sendeth rain upon the good and upon the  Now I cannot tell wherein I might exp my love to you, more then in these th things, viz. To shew you your misery, the causes thereof, and then the remedy. these three things as the grounds, I
iefly and plainly speak, not distinctly or rticularly, being straightned in my time ore then in my love. My friends, It is commonly reported t the Lawyer and the Physitian doe live the two ill humours of man; the one of  Body, the other of the Minde: and may not as truly say, that the Covetous wyer and the pretended Minister do cheat  people, the one in Temporals, the other Spirituals? Hence it is, that the Lord de∣unceth a Woe against the one, as Luk. 11. . 52. compared together; and a Wo, wo,  against the other, as you may see at ge, Matt. 23. 13, 15. Oh poore soules! ould even weep to consider, what a sad ndition you are in; First, in your bodies d estates; one while, in comes the Lawyer  his Bribes, next the Collectors for Con∣bution, and anon or the next day the nister or his Clerk for his Dues or thes; and when these be gone, the uldiers are on their March, and must ve quarter for a while, and so what the rmer have left, these take. I know these e your complaints, and I cannot altoge∣er blame yon; for as long as your treasure  upon the earth, it is almost as easie to part ith ones blood as with ones goods.
But my friends, these are but the least your Cheats, for there be ravening Wol that doe bite closer, and yet never bar these before mentioned doe but deprive y of temporals, but these Wolves doe ch you in spirituals; the former do but  the doore of your earthly comforts up you, but these that I now speak of doe  the doore of Heaven against you: See Ma 23. 13, 15, 16. O these Teachers of yo that you have so long cried up for bra Church-men and great Schollers, these ha brought in all their humane learning varnished and painted over, that you poo souls have taken it to be spiritual thing and so millions of poor souls are deceiv by them: these Wolves came to you sheeps cloathing, and after a little whi made you believe that you were Christian and so gave you the Sacrament of the Lor Supper, and Baptized your Children, an perhaps made you members of their Co∣gregations, and called you brethren; b these men have cheated you, they have ma you believe that they have fed you wi Bread and that in your Fathers house, b they have fed you with Husks, and that  mong Swine: Let me tell you, that you Faith, your Hope, your Patience and Sel
denyal is not the Faith, Hope, Patience and elf-denial of the Gospel; your assurance r Heaven is unfound; you have been daw∣d with untempered mortar: the day is al∣ost come that thou must die, & after death me to judgment, and then be judged ac∣rding to thy works: Then if thou doest ant Oyle in thy Lamp, which is Grace in e heart, thou wilt be shut out; it will be  vaine then with Balaam to fall a praying, ord let me die the death of the righteous, and let  latter end be like his: No, no, He that will  the death of the righteous, must live the life of  righteous. Those that he appointed for ory hereafter, shall have the beginning of ace here, for they be chosen to salvation rough sanctification of the Spirit and be∣ef of the truth; and without holinesse no man all see the Lord. Your Leaders have caused ou to erre; the blinde hath led the blinde, and th will fall into the ditch, unlesse you be∣are in time. O poore Souls! I cannot blame you to omplain of bad suffering times, to be thus heated on every side; you have but a Body nd a Soule; and to be deceived and depri∣ed of the comfortable being of the one here, and to have no assurance of rest for he other hereafter, is a sad condition in∣deed.
Oh how be the people destroyed for want of knowledge! Like Priest, like Peo∣ple, as in Hos. 4. 6, 9. The Prophets there of doe teach for hire, and the Priests divine for money, and you poore simple ones love to hav it so: O you simple ones, how long will yee lov simplicity, and you scorners delight in scorning  you are deceived, and by those that you least mistrusted, namely the Prophets, Mich. 3. 5. Do but spend a little time, and tracethis Trib from the Prophet Isaiah's dayes untill now First, Isaiah complains of them in his dayes, Isai. 28. 7. Jeremy complains of them in hi dayes, J. 0. 6. and Ezekiel the Prophe complain of them in his daies, Ezek. 22. 26. So the Prophets, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, and Amos; these also complains of the badnesse of this generation. Then the Prophet Mi∣cah he complains of their sins, and prophe∣sieth of their judgements, Mich. 3. from v. 5. to the end of the Chapter. Then when Christ came in the flesh, h was opposed by them, and complains o them, Matt. 23. 13, 15, 16. then the Apostles themselves were continually persecuted and afflicted from time to time by them, as you may read in the Acts of the Apostles. And if there be any truth in Histories, see what a sort of Ministry there were in Henry
eighth's dayes: when the King denied Popes Supremacy, how soon did this be face about and side with the King? en again, in the dayes of Edward the sixt, reason of his pious resolution, though  young, the Clergie feared a turn, and esently fell a preaching against the Masse∣ok, and it was soon abolished, and the mmon-Prayer-book set up in its place; d these men zealous Common-Prayer∣ok men. And then about three or foure ars after that Queen Mary was made ueen, the Clergie bethought themselves, d presently the greatest part of them tur∣d about again, from Common-Prayer∣ok to Masse-Book; for say they, the diffe∣nce is not great. Then after Queen Mary was dead, and Queen Elizabeth had the Crown, pre∣ently the whole tribe of them, except some w, turned Protestants again; under which shape, and in which visage they have ontinued untill the beginning of this pre∣ent Parliament: Well, the Parliament had not sate long, but the Wolfe covered with Sheeps cloathing was discovered; and af∣ter a little consideration it was put to the Vote, and suddenly after tumbled down the Prelatical discipline root and branch: Wel,
what follows? why, our Clergie for  most part threw aside their Surplisse Hoods and Tippets, Organs, and Altar Bowings and Cringings, Tapers and Ca∣dles, and perk up into the Pulpit, an lifts up their voices, and preach again those things; and so became the reveren laborious, zealous Ministers of England. thou desirest a fuller discovery of this look into what I have written before, ca∣led A word to the pretended Minister, and neither of these will  satisfie thee, if thou wil see the Wolfe stript of his Sheeps cloathing indeed, then look into the Chronicles  England, Scotland, and Ireland; Mr. Fox hi book of Acts and Monuments of th Church and his History of Martyrs, &c. O then, take heed how you hear! Luke 8. 18 take heed whom you heare, Jer. 27. 9. take hee what you hear, Mark 4. 24. Beloved, I have not written these things to take off your af∣fections from the true Ministers of the Go∣spel, but to disengage your hearts & affecti∣ons from the ravening Wolves, that the Lord Christ hath commanded me and you to be∣ware of, Matt. 7. 15, and Acts 20. 29. and Joh. 10. 12. Again, Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God, 1 Joh. 4. 1. For many deceivers are entred into the
orld, 2 Joh. 7. These things have I written nto you concerning them that seduce you; 1 Joh. . 26. Now that you might take heed whom you hear, how you hear, and what ou hear, and that you might not believe very spirit, but try the spirits, whether hey be of God: I shall (under correction) nd with submission to better judgements ive my thought of the one & of the other, nd endeavour to put a difference between  Prelate and a Pilate, a Feeder and a Flee∣er, a Blinde-beetle and a Seer, a Butcher nd a Shepheard, a Destroyer and an Instru∣ter, a Tyrant and a Father, a Thief and a Keeper, a Seducer and a Leader, a ravening Wolf and a moderate Shepheard; that so ou might cast off the one, and embrace the other: and truly herein I cannot speak in allibly, but give my thoughts at a distance, or Satan hath transformed himself into an Angel of light, and his works are more my∣terious then ever; the Lord cannot have is Church, but the Devil will have his Chappel; if they will have Ordinances, he will have them too; if they will congre∣gate themselves together by uniting in one spirit, Sathan and his company will unite together in one form of communion, and afterwards teach union: If the true Church
of Christ will teach first the Doctrinal par and then the practical part; Sathan wi allow his Ministers to preach the same, on∣ly with this difference, he will put the upon building before they have laid th foundation; if the true Chruch will buil upon the rock, Sathan and his compan will build too, but his foundation must  laid on sand. I shall now endeavour  give my judgement of the pretended Min∣ster first, and then of the true Minist next, that so you might hold to the o and forsake the other. A false Prophet or Minister then may  known, viz. 1. He is one that doth cause the peopl to erre, Mich. 3. 5. 2. He doth bark at the Sheep an bite at the Lambs, and teach others so t doe. Mich. 3. 5, 6. But God will write sham upon them. Vers. 7. 3. He is one that doth seek and se up himself, 1 Pet. 5. 3. and 1 Tit. 11. 4. He is one that seeks not to gain souls to Christ but rather to make divisions and factions, Act. 20. 30. 5. Although they pretend to it, they take no care of the flock of Christ, Joh. 10. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 3. Acts 20. 29.
6. They may be known by this also, ot withstanding all pretences of Pietie; ou shal finde them prophane either in rinciples or practice: 2 Pet. 2. 14, 18. ud. 4. 2 Tim. 3. 9. 13. 7. They deny and overthrow most f the substantial points in Religion un∣er specious pretences, 2 Pet. 2. 2. 2 Tim. . 18. 8. They may be known by this al∣o, they will pretend an interest in God, and an enjoyment of God, and so set up themselves, and speak evil of others. 2 Pet. 10 vers. 18, 19. 9. They doe break the bruised reeds and quench the smoking flax; streng∣then the hands of the wicked, and weaken the Saints, just as their forefathers left upon record and written for their learning, Ezek. 34, 2, 3, &c. 10. When these men doe suffer as evill doers, and that justly, they will be tel∣ling their Congregations it is suffering times, and they suffer for Christ; when alas poor souls! you doe now suffer for being enemies to Christ and his people: you are a little buffeted, but is it not for your faults? have you not of late backslided from Pres∣byterie to Cavalierisme? What would be∣come
of England this day, if the English Na∣tion had been ruled by you as the Scotti Nation was by their Clergie? Blood criet for vengeance in England and Scotland; an as for these things that you cal suffering fo Christ, let me tell you, these be but the be∣ginnings of sorrow to you. Now as for these false Prophets and pre∣tended Ministers, and ravening Wolves; le me tell them that their trade is at the best those daies of cheating do shorten apace their work is almost at an end; they or a least some of them may continue some moneths, but not many years, for Anti∣christ is going down, and then I am sur you cannot stand up; surely, his time is very short, death-pangs are upon him, he is now breathing his last gaspe, for he hath plaied his last game, and is discovered in his subtillest defigne, Sheeps cloathing and Lambs horns will no longer deceive; the Wolf is stript and the Beast discovered, and the stormie night of affliction is almost past with the Church; the time of the singing of Birds is come, and the voyce of the turtle is heard, though yee like liars are telling the people that these Birds are Birds of prey.
Then the true Ministers of the Gospel ay be known by these and the like Chara∣ers, viz. 1. He that is a faithful Minister of Je∣s Christ, will seek the honour of Christ be∣re his own good, Act. 3. 12, 13, &c. 2. A true Minister of the Gospel is  farre from Monopolizing the Trade of reaching to himself (& a few of his Coat) at he could wish in his heart with Moses hat all the Lords people were Prophets, umb. 11. 29. And with Paul rejoyce that he Gospel is preached, whether it be in retence or truth. Christ is preached; and  doe therein rejoice, and I will rejoice, Phil. 18. 3. A true Minister of the Gospel is xperienced in the mysterie; he accounts he historie dark without the mysterie,  Cor. 2, 4. 10. 13. and 2 Tim. 3. 16, 17. and  Joh. 1. 3. 4. He is or ought to be faithfull o dispence the Word of God in conscience nto God, freely, not as pleasing men. 1 Thess. 24. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. and 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. 1 Tim. 1. 12. and 2 Cor. 4. 2. 5. and 1 Cor. 9. 16. 5. He is one that is pure in Doctrine and holy and unblamable in life and con∣versation, 1 Tim. 4. 12. 1 Tim. 2. 7.
6. He is or ought to be one that is sou and well-grounded in himself, that so  might speak from experience. Rom. 15. 1 & 1 Cor. 11. 23. 1 Tim. 3. 6. Tit. 1. 9.  Tit. 1. 1. 7. He is or ought to be skilfull in d∣viding to every one his portion, that  may not give Childrens bread to dogs, an Dogs meat to children, as most do in th dayes. 2 Tim. 2. 15. Tit. 2. 1. 7. 15. 8. He that is a faithful Minister of Chri may be known by his tendernesse & gentle∣nesse towards his Flock, as a Father, Shep∣herd, and Nurse. Act. 20. 28. I Pet. 5.  1 Thess. 2. 11. 1 Cor. 3. 2. 9. He is one that accounts no time no place unfit or unseasonable to reprove, r buke, exhort, with all long suffering an doctrine, 2 Tim. 4. 2. 1 Tim. 4. 15. Rom 12. 7. 10. He is or ought to be one that dot freely and fully dispense the truth, and no thing but the truth. 2 Tim. 2. 2. Act. 20. 27 1 John 1. 3. 11. If he be a Scholar in humane schools he layes that by whiles he is preaching th Gospel. 1 Cor. 2. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 9. 19, 22 1 Cor. 3. 2. 1 Cor. 14. 18, 19. 12. He endeavours to carry himself so
that he may give no offence to any one in ny thing. 2 Cor. 6. 3, 4, 5, 6. 13. He is one that may be known by this so: If he hath ought against any man, ther superiors or inferiors, either King, arliament or Common wealth, he will re∣rove them sharply, yet with the spirit of eeknesse, and that to their faces, not raile ehind their backs. 1 King. 22. 8. & 2 Sam▪ 2. 7. Nehem. 5. 7. Jer. 1. 17. Amos 7. 12. 13.  Chron. 24. 20. 21. Mar. 6. 18. 14. A true and faithful Minister of the ospel, will not do a thing that is lawfull, nlesse it be expedient also. See an instance r this in your brother Paul, 2 Thess. 3. 9.  1 Cor. 9. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Here we find Paul ad power, and it was lawful for him to equire wages for preaching, but it was ot expedient, and therefore he would not o it, 2 Thess. 3. 8. 1 Cor. 9. 12, 15, &c. Now where there be men of this chara∣er, whether they have received Ordination rom Prelacie or Presbyterie yea or no, or ave renounced such their admission to the inistry (as many of them have done upon ound terms, and so must the rest, or else hey will be laid aside both by God & man)  say, of such men I am fully satisfied; I onour them, I love them, I embrace them,
as the servants of Christ, and leaders of h people: Yet I shall endeavour with th Bereans, when I hear them preach, to sear the Scriptures, to see whether they spea according to that rule: because I know,  the best, they be but men, and know but in pa and may erre in vision, and stumble in judge∣ment. Now if thou examine our present Mini∣stery by these and the like Rules, thou wi see how few there are, that may be trul called the Learned, laborious, zealou pious, faithful Ministers of Christ Jesus And when thou hast found such a faithfu Minister, esteem him highly for his work sake; for the feet of those that bring th glad tidings of peace are beautiful. But o poor souls! you have been deceived by th Deceivers, and devoured by the ravenin Wolves: wherefore if you will be undecei∣ved, you must be untaught again, and begi at the first principles of religion. The wa to become rich, is to see your selves poor  and the way to be wise, is to become a fool  and the way to get Christ, is to see the wan of Christ. Oh claime thy common interest in th promises! for they be made to sinners, and as a sinner thou hast an interest in them▪
and for thy direction herein, read my first ok called A word to the World. Read also at blessed place, Job 33. 27. 28. Joh. 3. 16. ev. 22. 17. Mat. 11. 28. Isa. 55. 7. Isa. 53. 56. Cor. 5. 19, 20, 21. brief Epistle to all the Lambs, that through  a Providence have not been devoured by the  Wolves. O You most noble, overcoming Saints, sonnes of Sion, and servants of the ost High God! Awake, awake; Put on  strength O Sion, put on thy beautiful garments  Jerusalem. Thou holy City, give eare a le, silence thy own thoughts, and thou lt hear the Lord Christ calling and say∣g, Arise my beloved and come away: for the  is dawning, and the day-star arising in your rts. Take the wings of hope, and flie in∣ the aire of comfort, where thy treasure  Behold, Christ cometh, leaping upon  mountains, and skipping upon the hils. s the voice of my welbeloved, saying, open to  my sister, my spouse. Oh how often did he ? how earnestly did he knock? how werfully did he strive? how long did he
wait upon you, before mine, and yo stubborne hard hearts would yeeld obe∣ence to his desires: if he had never lov you, you had never loved him; if he h never drawne you, you had never com if he had never sought you, you had be yet straying in the wildrnesse of fin Listen a little, for he knocks at the do of thy heart; open to him, bid him t possession of that which is his own; and th O the breathings, and celestial streamin forth of love that be between the Crea and this creature! Oh how doth the so dance and leap for joy! Oh how is it  vished with the presence of him so mu longed for! Oh how doth the love Christ affect the soule, and even transpo the heart to admiration! All the pangs  the new birth, all the throws of its trave all its after-births of sorrow, are now fo∣gotten, and swallowed up in ravishme For me to live, saith the soule, is Christ, and dye is gaine. I will not feare though the tr should yeeld no fruit, the fields no meat,  flocks perish from the stall, yet I will, saith  soule with Job, blesse the name of the Lo yea I will rejoyce in the name of the Lord, for  the time of famine he will feed me. The plagu of Egypt, the botches of Job, the enem
David, the imprisonment of Joseph, the verty of Lazarus, the bonds of Paul, can∣t deprive me; for his rod and his staffe doth fort me. Let the earth quake and swell, d seas roar, and hell rent, and rocks and untains be carried into the depth of the ; yea let all the proud opposers, and false chers tremble with horrour and asto∣hment, yet will I trust in the Lord, and tri∣h in my God (say the Lambs of Christ)  beloved hath pronounced me faire, and ere is no spot or wrinkle in me; the day  mine espousal is come, wherein all the orious holinesse of divine wisdome, yea  the all of Christ is made over to me: hat shall I want who have all things to joy? who shall lay any thing to my charge? it God that justifies me, who shall condemne me? what is man that thou art mindful of him, or  sonne of man that thou doest thus regard him!  blesse the Lord O my soule, and forget not  his henefits. I was a dry and barren ee, fit for nothing but burning, but he th given me life, and I have a promise at I shall flourish in his Courts. All the ings that be under the Sunne, are not so recious as one smile from his counte∣ance. Let friends forsake me, let enemies eride me, let all worldly comforts leave
me. If I enjoy one smile from him, it enough (say the enlightened Lambs  Christ) Oh how wonderfully he preser me from the late devouring sword whi hath cut downe thousands, and fro famine, plague, and pestilence, which h been round me! and for my spiritual en∣mies which were within me, he hath bee with me in the fire that it should not bu me, and in the water that it should  drowne me. He hath delivered me in  troubles, and the seventh could not hu me. O world, flesh, and devil. Let me li to him whose I am, for I am not my own I am bought with a great price, and I a now to live to him whose I am. O what  I render to the Lord for all his benefits? O th I knew wherein I might honour him th hath so highly honoured me, saith the tru believing soule. O taste and see that the Lo is gracious; it is life to know him, it is hea∣ven to behold him, it is melody to hear him, it is endlesse happinesse to enjoy him he is the brightnesse of his Fathers glory yea he is altogether lovely; he is all th tongue can aske, thine heart can wish, o thy minde conceive; he is light in darknesse joy in sorrow, rest in trouble, health i sicknesse, food in famine, life in death
eaven in hell. O be open everlasting doors, at the King of glory may enter in! Away from e all ye workers of iniquity, (say the Lambs f Christ) I will cleave to him that hath reserved me from the wolfe that came to eceive me in sheeps cloathing; I will now urne out of doors sinne and Sathan, as cob said to Laban, These many years have I rved you, but now it is time to look to my wne portion, mine owne house, my time  almost spent, for my dayes are swifter then a eavers shuttle, Job 6. 7. I will now returne to, and walk intire∣ with my Father, and when he seeth me mming, although afar off, he will runne  meet me with sweet kisses and loving sa∣tations. He will powre the oile and ine of his graces into my wounds, he will t me upon his owne strength, and bring e into communion and fellowship with m, and his Saints in Mount Sion. But now O Saints and servants of the ost High God, who have laid down your rowns at the feet of Christ, and have ade choice of him for your portion, re∣yce in your portion; let your thoughts e upon, and your speeches of your por∣on. You doe say, that ye be sonnes and ser∣vants
of the most High God: Let it appear by your obedience to your Father, Rom. 6. 16. You say that ye are his sheep: doe ye hear his voice? Joh. 10. 27. You say that you doe abide in him: learne to walke as he walked, 1 Joh. 2. 6. If Christ have dyed for you: let us know it by your living unto him, 2 Cor. 5. 15. You doe say that you doe know him: let us see it by your keeping his comman∣dements, 1 Joh. 2. 4. You doe say that you are righteous and religious: let us see it by your bridling your tongue: lst your Religion appear to be vaine, 1 Jam. 26. If you have received a Kingdome that cannot be moved, let us see it by your serving him with reverence and godly feare, Heb. 12. 28. You say he is your God, and that you see your particular interest in him: let it be knowne to us by your obedience to him, 1 Pet. 1. 17. You say that you be the Spouse of Christ: let us know it by your enquiring after him, and telling of the excellencies that be in him, Cant. 5. 6. 9. If you be his Disciples, let us know it
y your love one to another, Joh. 13. 35. You tell us that you believe in him, Shew  your faith by your works, 2 Jam. 18. If you live in the Spirit, let us know t by your walking in the Spirit, Gal. . 25. If you be grafted into the true Vine, et us know it by your fruitfulnesse, oh. 15. 5. If you are Christs, let us know it by the rucifying your flesh, Gal. 5. 24. If you be indeed planted in the house of he Lord, let us know it by your flourish∣ng in his Courts, Psal. 92. 13. You say that he hath chosen you to sal∣ation: let us know it by your fanctifica∣ion of the Spirit, and beliefe of the truth, Eph. 1. 4. You say that you live in the will of God: let us know it by your doing his will, nd by your rejoycing when his will is lone, though it crosse your owne wills, Job 1. 21. O my brethren, methinks the spirit of hankfulnesse is not up in your soules; we e more sensible of our wants, then we be of our mercies: O what could the Lord ave done more then he hath done already! we have all we have sought for, and much
more! O England, England! Awake, awa put on thy strength, O Sion, put on thy beautif garments. O Ierusalem, prepare to meet th King. Bid adieu to all earthly comforts▪  not mercies be so common, as not to re∣turn the praise to him that gave them. O what would we have parted with, withi these 10 years, for one of the least of the mer∣cies that we doe now enjoy! O be not s much in craving and begging, and so little in blessing and praising the fountaine o our mercies. Remember, praising the Almighty wil be the work of a Saint in the life to come  there will be no need of prayer, faith, hope, and patience; all these will end in fruition Oh then begin the work here, that thou shalt be alwayes doing in the life to come  The book of Revel. that speaks of the last state of the Church upon earth, it speaks of Praising, but seldome of Prayer: And why? Those things were granted that they had formerly prayed for. Beloved, can a man reckon those mercies that the Lord hath given in within these ten years, both National and Personal? shall we forget all; and in stead of rejoicing with the Saints fall a mourning with the world? The voice cries, Rejoice ye righteous, and howl O Babylon!
Rejoice ye righteous; for ye have a Father to stand by you, a Christ to deliver you, Angels to guard you, Comforts to refresh you, and Promises to sustain you; and ra∣ther then ye shall want, the Ravens shall eed you, the Heavens shall drop down food to relieve you, the Rocks shall stream forth rivers to refresh you: therefore let nothing dismay you, or draw your hearts back a∣gain, like Lots wife, into Sodome, or the Children of Israel unto the flesh-pots of Egypt. The wicked and unbelieving, they cannot praise him: And shall Christ have none to exalt him? O let your mouths be filled with his praises! sound Hallelujahs to him, who liveth for ever and ever, for this is he will of God concerning you. As for the world, alas, they know not how to praise him! How shall they sing the Lords song in Ba∣ylon? But the living, the living, in Mount Sion, shall praise thee. O thou in whom are all our springs, and rom whom we receive all our supplies; and all you that be the true sheep of Christ, make it your work with Mary to sit at his eet, and heare his voyce. You have heard trangers a long time, and have not consi∣dered that the glory of Christ doth over∣hadow all other glories, his voyce is sweet,
and his countenance is comely, his pre∣sence desireable, and his love unfathom∣able. A few words by way of Prophesie concerning the glorious state of the Church of Christ that will be shortly. BEloved, if you a little take notice of what is past and fulfilled, and diligenly observe what is present, you will be the better able to speak or write of something that is to come; if you look back and see that the Lord hath delivered us, and then look upon the present state, and finde that he doth deliver us, we shall be the better able to say with Paul, In whom we trust that he will yet deliver us, 2 Cor. 1. 10. O yee the flocke of Christ, for to you I speak chiefly: you were scattered, but the Lord hath gathered you together, and brought you home from exile, and banish∣ment, and caused you to sit under your owne vine, and made you a praise and a same amongst them that had you in deri∣sion, and a proverb of reproach; he hath advanced up between you and your ene∣mies, and taken your part, and over∣powered
them, and in a great measure stop∣ped the mouths of the dogs of Egypt that did so bark at you; some of them are fallen by the sword, others of them are fled be∣yond the seas, and those that doe still re∣maine, the Lord is now muffling their mouths. Againe, your spiritual enemies begin to fall also, the Lord hath given you a little more strength against them, and discovered his love in the face of Jesus Christ in the doctrine of Free-grace more fully then in former dayes; he hath given you liberty to worship him in his owne way, and esta∣blished your liberty by a Law both spiri∣tual and temporal. He hath manifested his care of you in answering all your prayers, and granting all your requests that you heretofore have, or now doe put up to him in faith; so that it is but aske and have, seek and finde; and yet all this is but the beginnings of mercies to you, these be but the dawnings of the day, and the first fruits of what is ripening: Your eies have not yet seen, your ears have not heard, your hearts have not yet understood what glo∣rious things are comming: you may now say to all the proud opposers yet remain∣ing, as once was said to Haman, Hest. 6. 12.
If Mordecai be of the seed of the Iews before whom thou hast begun to fall, thou shalt not pre∣vaile against him, but surely fall before him. If those that hereto fore you called Puritans, and now Separatists, be of the seed of Abra∣ham, the father of the faithfull, before whom ye have begun to fall, you shall not prevaile against them, but surely fall before them: Assemble your selves together against these people, you will be broken in pieces; take councel together, it will not stand; continue your Plots one after another as fast as you can, it will be discovered; take councel of Achitophel, and it will be turned into foolishnisse; lift up your voices with Herod like a god, the Worms will destroy you, and that immediately; Speak with the tongue of men and angels, you want love, and you are but as sounding brasse and tinkling Cimbals; Rejoice O Sion, thy day is dawning; Howle O Babylon! thy day is ending, and thy plagues are comming. The most glorious dayes that ever we read of in Scripture doe begin to dawn, although very few doe see it; and the most doleful times that ever appeared is almost come against the enemies of the kingdom of the Lord Jesus; for all that they have hi∣therto undergone is but the beginnings of sorrows: the first wo is past, the second is
omming, see Revel. 18. 2. Babylon is fallen,  fallen. v. 8. Her plagues are come in one day, eath, and mourning, and famine, and she shall be tterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord who dgeth her. Silence thy thoughts and listen  little, and thou shalt heare that voice poken of Rev. 9. 10. 15, 16, 19. Oh what weeping and wailing is there mongst the Great ones, the Kings and rinces, and Merchants, and mighty ones f the earth! Why, what is the matter? hy, Babylon is on fire, I cannot come neer er, I am fain to stand afar off: Alas, alas, at great City that is cloathed in fine linnen, and urple and scarlet, and decked with gold and pre∣ious stones and pearls, in an houre is so great easures come to nought! Well, what follows hereupon? v. 20. Rejoice O ye servants of the ord, for I am now avenging you on your enemies. Their day of mirth and carnal pleasure is ding, and their plagues beginning: but our day of perfecution is almost over. Ye hall rejoice, but they shall mourn; ye shall ng for ioy of heart, but they shall weep for orrow of heart, and howl for vexation of pirit. Your enemies have already received heir good things, with the rich man, and re now to receive the bad, Luk. 16. 25. But ou have been, with Lazarus, in misery, and
received your bad things, and now you ar to receive your good; you shall be com∣forted, but they shall be tormented, Luk. 16▪ 24, 25. Give eare a little, silence your ow thoughts, listen! Methinks I heare Chri saying to his people, as in Luk. 24. 17. wha manner of communication is this that yo have one to another, as you walk, and a sad? (what, sad! you had never so grea cause to rejoice.) v. 25. O fooles and slow o heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken▪ If ever these words were seasonable to them it is also seasonable to us, and it is written for our learning: O fools and slow of hear to believe all that the Prophets have said to believe all that Christ hath said, and tha all his Apostles have said! No marvel yo have communication together, as you wal and are sad: You do not believe the Pro∣phets, you do not believe Christ, you d not believe the Apostles; for if you did you could not be sad; forall these do te∣stifie abundantly, that there is none unde the heavens have so great cause to triump and rejoice as you; for as all things wor for the glory of God, so they turn to you good. All things work together for good to them that fear God.
Let not us then be fools & slow of heart believe all that the Prophets have said: Why, what have the Prophets said?) he Prophets speak of the state of the hurch in their dayes, and also they pro∣esied of the state of the Church in the yes of Christs incarnation, and lastly they ophesied of the state of the Church of hrist in the latter dayes before his coming  judgment. Now all is written for our arning: but that which doth most neerly ncern us, is to know what state we are der, and what God is now doing, and hat we are now to expect. First then, the Lord is even now begin∣g (for the time is at hand) to bring in the ws; and that will be of great advantage  all the elect Gentiles, as you may see om. 11. 12, 13. and Isa. 60. 3. 5. & 66. 1, 12. So that will be brought to passe, a. 2. 1, 2, 3. The mountain of the Lords house all be established on the top of the mountains, nd exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall ow unto it. So the Law shall go forth of ion, and the Almighty will have a glori∣us kingdom in the spirits of his people: nd this is the Name of Christ upon earth, nd the New heaven we read of. In a word, e will in and by his Saints rule the world.
See Dan. 7. 27. The kingdom, and the dominio and the greatnesse of the kingdome under t whole heaven, shall be given to the Saints the most High, whose kingdome is an everlastin kingdome, and all dominions shall serve and ob them. Oh what a blessed day will this b when the Power both supreme and su ordinate shall be in the hands of the Sain of the most High. The government ha for a long time been in the hands of t basest of men, as in Dan. 4. 17. and sette up over it the basest of men. Look back little, and consider what kind of Magisteri power we had: begin at the Head; was no vice advanced, & purity derided? on who Justice (that hath no respect of persons hath been executed. Next unto him, w any man fit for a Lord, unlesse he was railing persecuting Bishop? And then fo our Judges and Priests, did not the o judge for reward, and the other teach fo hire? Mic. 3. 11. And then for the lesse Lawyers, and Journy-men Priests, ho fast would the one ride, and the other run the one to cheat you in temporals, the o∣ther in spirituals? Then the Constables Church-wardens and Overseers, if yo come not to Church to hear their refin Masse, then they give in your names to th
Chancellor and Proctor, and by vertue of a Spiritual warrant from their reverend Lord and Master, the Apparitor must be imployed to summon you to appeare be∣fore them; and if they have no witnesses against you, then you must take an oath to accuse your self; and then the very meanest Officer, as the Clark, Sexton, and Tithing∣man, if there be ever a Puritan or Round∣head in the whole Parish, they will mischief him as much as in them lies. But the mea∣sure of their iniquity being full, and their day of calamity dawning, these men are in part lready laid aside, and shortly will be fully rejected both of God and man: And the Kingdom, and the Dominion, and the greatnesse of the Kingdom under the whole heavens shall be given to the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdome is an everlast∣ng Kingdome; and then the Nations shall ecome the Nations of Christ, and the go∣ernment shall be in the hands of the Saints; and the Nations and Kingdomes that will not serve thee, to wit Christ in the Saints, shall perish. Isa. 60. 12. 17, 18. For brasse I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brasse, and for stones iron. I will also make thine officers peace, and thine exactors righteousnesse; violence shall no more be heard
in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders, but thou shalt call thy walls salvation, and thy gates praise. Jer. 30. 21. And their Nobles shall be of themselves, and their Gover∣nors shall proceed cut of the midst of them, and so the Lord will punish all those that op∣presse you. Even now is the Lord begining to restore Magistracie and Ministery to it primitive institution: This work is begun in England; Ireland and Scotland will follow and if I mistake not, France, Holland, and Spain will come after, and so all other parts untill that be fulfilled Dan. 2. 35. Dan. 7. 27. & Rev. 11. 15. In Dan. 2. we read of a little stone cut out of the mountaines without hands, and it became so big as to fill the whole earth. And that in Dan. 7. 27. The greatnesse of the Kingdome under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints. Rev. 11. 15. And the kingdomes of this world shall become the king∣domes of our Lord and of his Christ, and so all his enemies shall be made his foot stool. The houre of temptation is begun, and will not end till it hath gone over all the earth. O England, England, thou was first in misery, thou shalt also be first in thy delivery: Oh that thou didst now know what thou shalt shortly enjoy! Thou hast been rough-hewed al∣ready, thou wantest nothing but plaining,
and so thou wilt be made fit for the spiri∣tual building: thou hast been rough-hewed by the open prophane, but now thou shalt be plained by the most zealous Pharisees, those that will fast twice a week, and give tythe of all they possesse, and pray in the corners of the streets, and say, Lo here is Christ. In a word, the greatest formall profes∣sors will be thy greatest persecuters; herein is the devils last, and most subtle design, he will now come with fair words and spe∣cious pretences; and if you look upon his habit, he is in sheeps cloathing, and if he hath feet like a beast, he will have hornes like a lamb; and although under another garb, he will execute the power of the first beast in persecuting thee, as Rev. 13. 12. But God will bring these proud oppo∣sers down unto the dust. See Isa. 24. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Then the Lord God shall reign in mount Sion and in Jerusalem gloriously. Therefore with Peter, let us expect a new heaven, and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousnesse, 2 Pet. 3. 13. Behold I create ew heavens, and a new earth, Isa. 65. 17. And you shall sing for joy of heart, and that whiles your enemies doe weep for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit,
Isa. 65. 1 , 14. For the Lord is now turning to his people a pure language, and they shall shotly serve him with one consent. Zeph. 3. 9. The eyes of the blinde begin to be opened, and the ears of the deaf to be unstopped, the lame man begins to leap as an Hart, and the tongue of the dumb to sing; for in the wildernesse do waters break out, an streams in the desart. The brightnesse of Christ doth begin to appear, which doth not onely discover, but also destroy Antichrist, 2 Thess. 2. 8. Yea unto all you that fear his name, is the Son of righteousnesse arising with healing in his wings. Mal. 4. 2. The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold. Isa. 30. 26. And so he will destroy i this mountain the face of the covering cast over people, and the vail that is spread over all nations, and the rebuke of his people he will take away. Isa. 25. 7. And so we shall all know him from the least to the greatest. Jer. 31. 34. And the Lord shall be one, and his name one, and as for  we shall all have one heart, and one way, Jer. 32. 39. & Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. And this he will do for light is sown for the righteous, and gladnesse or the upright in heart. Therefore rejoyce in the Lord ye righteous, and give thanks at the remem∣ance of hi holinesse. Gird up the loyns of you
inde, be sober, and hope to the end, for the grace at is to be brought unto you at the revelation of esus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 13. Now above half of the sons and daugh∣ers of men are of a contrary judgement, aying of these and the like Scriptures, hat they be either fulfilled already, or else ay they, there is some other meaning in hese Scriptures, which might be easily an∣wered. Then for those men that do see learly that these things are yet to be ful∣lled, they do vary and differ in their judge∣ments. 1. The first saith, It is true, glorious imes are at hand, Sathan shall be chained p, and Christ shall reign personally on the earth for a thousand years, Rev. 20. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 2. A second party of men stands up op∣posing the first, saying, It is true, Christ shall reign upon the earth in the midst of his people; but when? not till after the judgement is past, and this old earth burnt up, and then he will create a new heaven and a new earth, when the first heaven, and the first earth are past away, Rev. 21. 1. 2 Pet. 3. 13. 3. Then there be a third sort of sober Christians that do look for and expect
these glorious times, and yet they do deny that Christ shall reign personally: he shall reign, it is true, say they, but how? Christ will come in the spirit, and have a glorious Kingdome in the spirits of his people, and they shall by the power of Christ in them reign over the world, and this is the new heaven, and the new earth: And for my part, I do affirm that this is the glorious state that is now comming, Isa. 66. 22. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Rev. 21. 1. And these are the times of restitution so frequently spoken unto in the Scripture, Rom. 8. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Act. 3. 20, 21, 22, 23. Oh what a glorious time will this be, when Magistracie shall be restored to its primitive institution, to countenance those that do well, and punish evill doers! Rom. 13. 3. Dan. 7. 27. Isa. 2. 3. Isa. 1. 26. O what a joyful time shall this be, when Ministery shall be restored to its primitive Institution, Jer. 3. 18. & Jer. 24. 4. O what a blessed time will this be, when our God shall undeceive the people that have been deceived by the Priests, the Dra∣gon shall be cast out of heaven, and his Chaplains out of the Church. God will take away the nature of wicked men, that
lthough they remain wolves, lions, and ruits still, yet they shall not hurt nor de∣roy in all this holy mountain; For the arth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, Hab. 2. 14. Wherefore most noble overcoming Saints, ook for great alterations and mighty hanges: see what dissolutions God is making in the earth, and look for the Lord o be revaled from heaven, who will be mighty in his dispensation, and glorious n revelation, and strong and powerful in operation; and he will bring to passe his determination, which will be to the con∣founding of all things that are in oppo∣sition against him. Oh then taste and see, that the Lord is gracious; it's life to know him, it is heaven to behold him, it is me∣lody to hear him, it is endlesse happinesse to enjoy him. And as you like the end that the Almighty aims at, so approve of the way which he acts in, and wait with pati∣ence for the accomplishment thereof.
There be glorious Deliverances for the Saints; (as hath been said) but the Saints are too sudden in expecting these deliverances. WHen our first Parents were fallen, there was a promise made to them of a recovery by the second Adam, in these words: The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head. And as soon as Eve had con∣ceived and brought forth a son, Gen. 4. 1. saith she, I have got a man from the Lord; (for so some of our Translations render it) And seeing this was not he, when she brought forth her second sonne, she calls him Abel, which signifies vanity. Seeing she was deceived in the first, she calls the second vanity. Now our mother was just as we are, too sudden in our expectation of de∣liverances. So if we look into that of Moses, Exo. 5. ult. Neither hast thou delivered thy people at all, saith precious Moses. Why Moses, thou art a little too quick: Have not these people prayed, and hath not the Lord heard the cry, and sent thee to bring them out of E∣gypt, and am not I now upon delivering them? and yet are they not delivered at all?
oses, thou art a little too sudden in ex∣ecting deliverances. So it was with the Apostles, Act. 1. 6. ord (said they) wilt thou at this time restore e kingdome to Israel? The Apostles were too dden; this was not to be done till many undred years afterwards. Methinks I see he people of England, yea many of the Lords wn Lambs, some of them in Egypt under haraohs hard task-masters, murmuring and omplaining at other Saints, as they did at Moses and Aaron. And I see some others rought to the Red-sea, but in great fears, before and behind, as they were; and some re got over the sea, and seen all their ene∣ies drowned as they were pursuing them, nd so begin to sing; and many be marched nto the midst of the wildernesse, where they see great miracles, waters flow out of he Rocks, and raining Manna from hea∣ven; and yet notwithstanding the people begin to murmure, and desire to go back again to Egypt. Oh here is the state of the English Nation! they say, it is better to go back again to Egypt to King Pharaoh; or if he be dead, to his young Sonne, that he may reign over us, where we may enjoy our old Discipline, and eat our wonted food, the onions, and the garlicks, and the
leeks. But some are of a more choise spiri and have sent unto Canaan to spie out th land: Well, there were twelve men se ten of them bring up a false report of th land; onely two of them were of anothe spirit, and speak the truth: the greate part say it is a barren land, the lesser pa say it is a fruitful land. The people wer divided, and some fall to murmuring, an so are destroyed in the wildernesse. Well a few are gotten to Canaan; the enemy flie before them, they possesse their habitati∣ons; and having all things at the full they soon forget their God. Is not this all along our state at this day? Some are tra∣velling from Egypt to Canaan; and some are journeying from Canaan to Babylon; and some are walking from Babylon to Sion. Q. Methinks I hear many saying, If there be such glorious times at hand, and that God doth intend good to us, why is it thus and thus with us? A. It is true, there be many external and internal burdens lying upon us, that we would be glad to have removed: But con∣sider a little first, the fountain from whence these come, Gods love; secondly, the end of them, for thy good; this will cause the
ule to rejoyce in tribulation; for to you is given not onely to believe, but to suffer r his sake: must Job the justest man that  alive be fought against with the terrours f the Lord, Job. 6. 4. Must David a man after ds own heart have no rest in his bones, ecause of his sins, and be so wasted with e grief of his heart, that his moisture is rned to the drought of Summer, Psal. 32. rs. 3, 4. Must Hezeiah who walked before the ord in truth and with a perfect heart, ave the anger of the Almighty break his ones like a Lion, Isai. 38. 13. Nay must the Sonne of God himself lie leeding upon the crosse, and cry out in he bitternesse of his soule, My God, my God, hy hast thou for saken me! and shall we think o be altogether free from chastisement? was ot Abel murthered by his brother; Noah ocked by his son; Job scoffed by his wife; lie slain by his sons? See the hardships that acob a man chosen of God went through; e is threatened by his brother, banished om his Father, abused by his Uncle, efrauded of his Wife, in the day he is corched with heat, in the night troubled ith frost, as you may see at large, Gen. 31. ers. 40.
Then see the divisions between his tw Wives, two Sisters baulling for one Husban after this they both went from their Fathe and now see a fresh pursuit behinde hi Laban follows Jacob with a Hue and Cry before him Esau is marching up to him wi four hundred men: so to go forward were intollerable, to go backward un∣vailable: Well, after the Almighty had d∣livered him, and he marched into his ow Country; his Wife Rachel dieth, his daugh∣ter Dinah is ravished, his Son Reuben lie with his Concubines; then his most belo∣ved Son Joseph they report is dead; the soon after this arose a Famine, and ano∣ther of his Sons in prison, and nothing can redeem him but his onely Benjamine here is the losse of son after son, Gen. 42. 36 And Jacob said unto them, Me have ye bereave of my children, Joseph is not, and Simeon  not, and you will take Benjamin away;  these things be against me. But there was  time then drawing neer, that Jacob should b delivered from his troubles, and enjoy the company of all his Sons again: The way to true happinesse is through many difficul∣ties; you must suffer a while, before you shall be established, strengthened and setled. God is unstripping thee of thy riches and
righteousnesse, as he did Job, that he may give thee twice as much, and ten times bet∣ter in its room; the Vision is yet for an appointed time, Hab. 2. 3. and at the end it will come wait for it; nay, it will surely come, it will not tarry: It may be thou and I have heard, That the mountain of the Lords house shalbe established upon the top of the moun∣tains; well it shall come to passe: but the Vision is for an appointed time. Hath the Lord promised that knowledge shall cover the Earth, as the waters the Sea; and that we shall all know him from the least to the greatest: Wel, God is faithful, it shall come to passe; but the Vision is for an appointed time. Doest thou not read in Dan. 2. that there was a stone cut out without hands, and became a great mountain, and filled the whole Earth? well, the Vision is for an ap∣pointed time, wait for it, for it will surely come, it will not tarry. Hath the Lord indeed promised to take away thy filthy garments, as once he did from Joshua, Josh. 3. 3, 4. the Vision is for an appointed time, it will speak and not tarry. Hath he promised indeed that sorrow and sighing shall fly away, and that all tears shall be wiped from thine eyes, and thou shall have no more pain and sorrow; why, hs
faithful that hath promised; onely the Vi∣sion is for an appointed time, it will spee∣dily speak, it will not tarry. Do the Scriptures speak of the calling of the Jews, and of the bringing in of the ful∣nesse of the Gentiles, and of the restauration of all things? the Vision is for an appoin∣ted time, it will speak and not tarry. Hath the Lord indeed promised that the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shal be seven∣fold? the Vision is for an appointed time, it will speak, it will not tarry. Hath he said by his servant Isaiah, c. 25. 7. And he will destroy the face of the covering cast over all people, and rend the vaile that is spread over all nations. He is faithfull, so that one tittle shall not passe till all be fulfilled, one∣ly it shall be done in its appointed time. How shall hope and patience be exercised, if he should not make us wait? and how shall we say as in Isai. 24. 9. This is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us; this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation: say not with Moses; Neither hast thou delivered us at all; Exod. 5. last vers. but say with Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 10. Who hath delivered us, who doth deliver us; in whom we trust he will yet still deliver us.
e thankfull then for what is already done, and believe and wait for what is ow a doing. I see the Saints, saying with Abraham, Gen. 15. 2. Lord, what wilt thou give e? &c. But methinks you should rather be saying with David, Psal. 116. 12. What shall I give thee for all thy benesits to me? Again, we read in the book of the Revelation, of seven Seals, and seven Vials, and seven Trumpets: If we compare these Seales, Vials, and Trumpets together, I suppose we shall finde them hold forth one and the same thing; And then if we consider what Seale is now opening, what Trumpet is now sounding, what Vial is now pouring forth, thou wilt see what state the Church of Christ s now under, and what the Almighty s now doing for her deliverance. Is not he seventh Seal now opening? is not the eventh Vial now pouring forth? Is not he seventh Trumpet now sounding, and ome of the Saints begining to lift up their voices? Rev. 11. 15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven saying, The kingdomes of this world are become the kingdomes of our Lord and of his Christ, and e shall reign for evermore. Rejoice O Sion, hy day is dawning: Howle O Babylon, thy plagues are comming: he is gathering
his wheat into the barn, but he will burn the chaffe with an unquenchable fire. It i true, the Saints may be shaken once more, as in Heb. 12. 26, 27. that those things that may be shaken, may be taken away; and those, and only those that cannot be shaken may remain. But Babylon shall be shaken down to the earth and ground to powder and cast into the bottomlesse pit, there to continue for ever. Oh then lift up your hearts wth your hands unto our God in the heavens! Oh lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees! Take the two wings, the one of Faith, the other of Love, and flie into the aire of Comfort, where thy treasure is; saying, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; take possession of that which is thine own! I had many things more in my heart and mind to present unto thy consideration, whosoever thou art, that readest these words. I will here but name them unto thee, but in another Treatise shortly pre∣sent them before thee: which being done, I shall apply those words of Solomon, Eccles. 12. 12, 13. 1. Beware of extremes. Men be very apt in this age, either to cry up all Clergy-men, or cry down all Clergy-men: whereas we
should endeavour the plucking up and rooting out all false pretended Ministers, for they be the worst of men: the Scripture calls them Dogs and Wolves, and Cheaters and Deceivers, &c. But we should double our love to all that be faithful, for they are the mouth of the Lord to us, and their feet are beautiful. The Scriptures com∣mand us to esteem them highly for their works sake: And whereas they sow unto us spi∣ritual things, let not us keep back from them carnal things, 1 Cor. 9. 11. & Rom. 15. 27, &c. Let us do this, lest they say of us as Paul did of his hearers, 2 Cor. 11. 8. I have robbed other Churches, taking wages of them, to do you service. I once heard, that there was a godly man that had three friends; And to try their wisdome, he sent to each of them an Apple, he knowing by a small instrument that each Apple was rotten at the core. The first re∣ceives his apple, and cut it in the midst, and found it rotten at the core, and so threw it away. The second receives his apple, and found it rotten in the midst; but because it came from his friend, he eat it all. The third received his apple, and cut it as the former, and found it rotten; so he cut off the rotten, and threw it away, but eat
only the good. Now let us not be like to him that threw away all, because there was some unsound: Neither let us be like the second, that received good and bad to∣gether: But let us be like the last, that re∣ceived the good, and rejected the bad. And that thou maiest put a difference between the good and the bad, thou shalt see them set forth in their colours that they may be known, in what I have written before in my Epistle to the World. 2. Beware of murmuring. Thou hast been delivered from Egypt, and brought through the Red-sea, and art now in the wildernesse in thy journy towards Canaan: If thou murmure at the present dispensa∣tion, or distrust Gods power, or speak un∣advisedly with thy lips against our Moses and Joshua, Parliament and Army; thou art like to die in the wildernesse, and not to have any part in the deliverance that is at hand. See 1 Cor. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 3. My earnest desire and request is, that you would make Religion your businsse, and the world a thing by the bie: for now Religion with most men is but a stalking∣horse; men look after that, when they have nothing else to do; the World, not Religion is our businesse: contrary to the
mand of our Lord Jesus Christ, Seek ye first the kingdome of heaven, and the righteousnesse thereof, Mat. 6. 33. 4. Spend not so much time and pains aboutt he outside of Religion, as Discipline and Order; but spend thrice as much a∣bout the inside, the principles and grounds of truth. Me thinks I see most men spend much time in the outside of Religion, viz. whether Presbyterie, Anabaptisme or Inde∣pendencie be the way, &c. And so whiles they be disputing about the garment, the power of Religion is much abated. The Kings daughter is all glorious within. Look to the powr in the first place, and then the form will follow after in its order. 5. The more spiritual any truth is, let thy soul take the more delight in it; reject it not, as most do, if it be not clothed with some humane excellencie. Remember, the Stone which the wise builders rejected, is become the head of the corner. This is the Lords doing, and it is marvellous in the eyes of men. 6. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not asha∣med to own Christ and his cause in publike in the view of all men. If the things e hold be sound and true, bring them forth, Truth seeks no corners; light was never
ashamed of darknesse; the nature of tru light is to destroy darknes. The Bishops hav no Courts, the Apparitors no Commissions their day is ended: wherefore come forth ye Doves, that have lain a long time in the clefts of the rocks, in the secret places of the stairs: let us see thy countenance, let us hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy counte∣nance is comely, Cant. 2. 14. Wherefore come forth, and so much the rather, because there are some that seek occasion to speak evil of you: Take off that occasion, lest they say of you as 2 Tim. 3. 6. 7. If ever thou intendest to do any thing for God in honouring him in the world, do it presently, whiles it is called to day; for thy time here in this world is almost spent; it was but short, at the longest; the thred of thy life is almost spun out; thy dayes flie a way very swiftly, yea swifter then the Weavers shuttle, Job 7. 6. and so thou and I shall speedily cut off our life like a Weaver, Isa. 38. 12. R. P. FINIS.
Reader, Let me intreat thee to correct those greater faults that appear at first view; for I have not time to peruse it all: And pass by in love many lesser, caused through my absence, and the Correctors over∣sight.
