11403 S92602 [ocm]72799120 184044
THE GREAT FROST. Cold doings in London, except it be at the LOTTERIE. With Newes out of the Country. A familiar talke betwene a Country-man and a Citizen touching this terrible Frost and the great Lotterie, and the effects of them. The Description of the Thames frozen ouer. Londoners upon the frozen Thames Printed at London for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold at the signe of the
❧ A Table of the most spe∣ciall matters of note contained in this short Discourse. 1. A description of the Thames being fro∣zen ouer. 2. The daungers that hath happened to some persons passing vpon the Thames. 3. The harmes that this Frost hath done to the Citie. 4. The miserie that the Country people are driuen into by the meanes of this Frost. 5. The Frosts in other Kings times compa∣pared vvith this. 6. A description of the Lottery.
THE GREAT FROST. Cold doings in London. A Dialogue. The speakers. A Citizen. A Country-man. Citizen. OLd Father, you are most hartily welcome to London. Countryman. Sir, I giue you most kinde and heartie thankes: but you must par∣don me; I am an olde man, & haue those defects that go a long with olde age; I haue both bad eyes to discerne my friends and a weake memorie to keepe their names in minde: I haue quite lost the remembrance of you. Cit. Nay Father, I am a méere stranger to you. But séeing white haires to couer your head as well as mine owne, I make bold to reach out my hand to you: there is honestie in your verie lookes, and euery honest man is worthy, and ought to be taken into acquaintance.
Coun. I am beholden to you for this curtesse: you Ci∣tizens are ciuill, and wee poore country fellowes are plaine, but albeit I walke in russet and course gray, I haue a true heart. What is your pleasure Sir? Citt. If your haste be no greater then mine (for bles∣sed be God, we haue now too many idle howres against our will.) I would gladly confer with you of the state of the Country, and if I can delight you with any Citie newes, you shall haue my bosome opened fréely. Coun. The Plough-mans hands Sir are now held in his pocket as well as the Shop-kéepers: I haue as little to doe as you, and therefore an houres that shall please me well: wee olde men are old Chronicles, and when our tongues goe, they are not clockes to tell one∣ly the time present, but large, bookes vnclasped, and our spéeches, like leaues turnd ouer and ouer, discouer won∣ders that are long since past. Cit. I am glad that I haue met with an olde man that hath not stood still in his life (like a poole) but like a Riuer hath runne through the world to get experience. But I pray tell me, of what Country are you? Coun. Of Rippon in Yorkeshire. Cit. And (if it he not too much beyond the rule of good manners.) let me be bold to inquire what drew you, dwelling so farre off, to trauell to London? Coun. Marry Sir I will tell you, euen that drew me to London, which drawes you out of your houses: that which makes you cry out in London, Wee haue cold doings, and to leaue your shops to catch you heate in the stréetes, nay to leaue your new beautifull walks in Moore-fields, (for those I haue séene at my entring into the Citie) and to make newer and larger walkes (though not so safe) vpon a field of glasse as it were. That slippery world which I beheld (as I remember) in the fift yeare of the raigne of Quéene Elizabeth, (or I am sure I am not much wide) doe I come thus far to
behold againe in the fift yeare of our good King Iames, & that is (in a few cold words) thethames frozen ouer. Cit. Yea Father, and frozen ouer and ouer. Cou. I haue but two eares Sir (if I had more I were a monster) but those two eares bring me home a thou∣sand tales in lesse then seuen daies. Some I harken to, some I shake my head at, some I smile at, some I think true, some I know false. But because this world is like our Millers in the Country, knauish and hard to be tru∣sted, though mine eares be mine owne and good, yet I had rather giue credite to mine eyes: although they sée but badly, yet I know they will not cosen me, they haue not these fourescore yeares, and that is the reason I haue made them my guides now in this iourney, and they shall bee my witnesses when I get home againe, and sit, as I hope I shall, turning a crab by the fire) of what wonders I haue béene a beholder. Cit. In good sadnes Father I am proud, that such a heape of yeares lying on your back, you stoup no lower for them; I come short of you by more than twenty, and me thinkes I am both more vnlusty, & looke more aged. Cou. Oh Sir, riots, riots, surfets, surfets stick white haires vpon young mens chinnes, when sparing diets hold colour. Your cramd Capons féede you fat here in London, but our béefe and bacon féedes vs strong in the Country: long stéepes and late watchings, dry vp your bloods, & wither your chéeks; we go to bed with the lambe, and rise with the larke, which makes our bloods healthfull: you are still sending to the Apothecaries, and still crying out; to fetch Maister Doctortor to mee,, but our Pottecaries shoppe is our garden full of pot-hearbes, and our Doctor is, a good cloue of garlicke. I am as lustie and sound at heart (I praise my God) as my yoake of bullockes that are the seruants to my Plough. Cit. Yet I wonder that hauing no more sand in the
the glasse of your life (for yong men may reckon years, but we old men must coumpt vpon minutes,) I wonder I say how you durst set forth, and how you could come thus farre. Coun. How I durst set forth? If King Harry were now aliue againe, I durst and would (as old and stiffe as I am, goe with him to Bullen. We haue trées in our Towne that beare fruit in winter: I am one of those winter plums, & though I taste a little sower, yet I am sound at hart, & shal not rot yet I hope, for all this frost. Cittiz. It were pitty so reuerend an Oake should so soone be felled downe, you may stand and grow yet ma∣ny a yeare. Coun. Yes sir, downward, downward you and I must grow (like eares of corne when they be ripe.) But I beséech you tell me; Is that goodly Riuer of yours, I call it yours, because you are a Citizen, (and that Riuer is the Nurse that giues milke & hony to your citie: But is that Lady of fresh waters all couered ouer with ice? Cit. All ouer I assure you Father: the Frost hath made a floore vpon it, which shewes like gray Marble, roughly hewen out: it is a very pauement of glasse, but that it is more strong. The Thames now lies in, or ra∣ther is turned (as some thinke) bankerupt, and dares not shew her head; for all the water of it floates vp and downe now like a spring-tide in a celler. Coun. God helpe the poore Fishes; it is a hard world with them, when their houses are taken ouer their heads, they vse not to lye vnder such thicke roofes. But I pray sir, are all the arches of your famous London Bridge so damd vp with yce, that the flakes shew like so many frozen gates, shut vp close, and that nothing passes through them, nay, that a man cannot looke through them as he had wont? Cit. No such matter: the Thames with her ebbing & flowing hath at sundry times broght downe hay, win∣tercastles
of yee, which iustling against the arches of the Bridge, and striueing (like an vnruly Drunkard at a gate of the Citie in the night time) to passe through, haue there bin stayed and lodged so long, till they haue lyen in heapes and got one vpon another, but not so am∣bitiously as you speake of them. Countri. And doe not the Westerne-Barges come downe vpon certaine artificiall pullies and engines, sliding on the yce, to serue your Citie with fewell. Citti. That were a wonder worth séeing, and more strange than the rowing ouer stéeples by lande in a wherry; no I assure you, these stories shall neuer stand in our Chronicles: there is no such motion. Coun. But I hope Sir you & I may drink a pinte of sack in the Tauern that runs vpon whéels on the riuer, aswel as a thousand haue done besides, may we not? the motiō of that wine-celler I am sure is to be séen, is it not? Cit. The water-celler is, but the wine-cellers haue too good doings on the land, to leaue that, and to set vp Tauernes on the Riuer; you know more in the Coun∣try I perceiue then we doe in the Citie of these matters. Count. Nay Sir, we heare more, but know lesse: we heare the lyes, and you know the trueth: why law you now, had not I made this iourney to London, I had died in mis-beliefe: mine eare might thus haue made me to haue béene called olde doting foole: for I giuing cre∣dite to report, should haue vttered these fables for trueths; and I being an olde man, should haue béene beléeued, (for a white head ought not to hold a blacke tongue;) and so my sonnes and daughters (taking a fathers word) might peraduenture forty yeares hence, haue béene called clownes, for iustifying a lye so mon∣strous and incredible. Citti. Barre all these rumors hereafter out of your eares, for they are false and deceitful, & flie vp & downe like Lapwings, their in times being there it is, when it is not.
Coun You Sir are a man, that by your head and beard (as well as my selfe) should bee one of Times Sonnes, and should therefore loue his daughter Truth. Make me so much beholding to you, as to receiue from you the right Picture of all this your Water-workes; and how they began, and how they haue growne, and in what fashion continued? Citi. The Thames de∣scribed as it was Frozen. Most gladly will I satisfie your request. You shall vnderstand therefore that the Thames began to put on his Freeze-coote (which yet he weares) about the weeke before Christmas, and hath kept it on till now this latter end of Ianuarij, howe long time soeuer be∣sides to come, none but God knowes. Coun. Did it neuer thawe in thus many weekes? Citizen. Onely thrée dayes, or foure at the most, and that but weakely to disolue so great a hardnesse. The Cakes of Ise (great quantitie, and in great numbers) were made & baked cold in the mouth of winter, at the least a fortnight or thrée wéekes, before they were cru∣sted & cremēted togither; but after they once ioynd their strēgths in one, their backsheld out & cold not be brokē. Coun. We may make this good vse euen out of this watry and transformed element; that London vphold∣eth a state; and againe, that violent factions and com∣binations (albeit of the basest persons) in a Common∣wealth, are not easily disolued, if once they bee suffered to grow vp to a head. On Sir I pray. Cit. This cold breakfast being giuen to the Citie, & the Thames growing more & more hard-harted, wylde youthes and boyes were the first Marchant-venturers that set out to discouer these cold Ilandes of Ise vpon the Riuer. First going ouer the Thames on the Ice a∣bout Cold-Harbour. And the first path that was beaten forth, to passe to the Banck-side (with out going ouer Bridge, or by Boate) was about Cold-Harbour, and in those places neere the Bridge; for the Tydes still plying vp the flakes of Ise one vpon another in those places of the Thames.
it was held the best and the safest trauelling into our new found Fréezeland, by those créekes. Coun. But this onset prospering, and they comming offwell, hartened others to come on Sir, did it not? Cit. No souldiers more desperate to a skirmish: speak it Father from my mouth for an assured trueth; that there was as it were an artificiall bridge of yce rea∣ching from one side of the Riuer to the other, vppon which infinite numbers of people passed too and fro, iu∣stling one an other in crowdes, when the current of the water ran (in sight) more than halfe the breadth of the Thames, on eyther side of ye ycecy bridge, the bridge it selfe being not aboue fiue yardes broad, (if so much.) Cou. It was strange! But it was said of your Lon∣doners, that when you striue to be kind, you turne into prodigals; when you are cowards, you are arrant cow∣ards, and when you are bold, you are too desperately venturous. Cit. It appeares so by this frost: for no danger could nip their bloods with feare; but ouer some wēt in shoals when thousands stood gazing on and swore, they would not follow their steppes in that waterie wildernesse for many thousands of pounds: nay, euen many of those that were the discouerers, and did first venture ouer, would neuer vndertake the second voyage, but prote∣sted when they were halfe way, they would haue lost much to haue bin againe on shore. Coun. It is most likely, for perills that are not com∣mon make men foole-hardy, but being once tasted, they tremble to come néere them. Cit. You say true Father; but the feare of this ship∣wracke, and of these rockes, grew eueryday lesse and lesse, as the yce increased in hardnesse, so mens hearts increased in hardinesse: so that at the length, (the frost knitting all his sinewes together, and the inconstant water (by that meanes) being of a floating element,
changed into a firme ground as it were) What num∣bers of peo∣ple wal∣ked on the Thames. both men, women, and children walked ouer, and vp and downe in such companies, that I verily beléeue, and I dare al∣most sweare it, the one halfe (if not thrée parts) of the people in the Citie, haue béene séene going on the Thames. The Riuer shewed not now (neither shewes it yet) like a Riuer, but like a field where Archers shoote at prickes, whilst others play at foote-ball. It is a place of maisterie, where some wrestle, and some runne, and he that does best is aptest to take a fall. It is an Alley to walke vpon without dread, albeit vnder it be most assured daunger. The Gentlewomen that trembles to passe ouer a Bridge in the field, doth here walke bold∣ly: the Citizens wife that lookes pale when she sits in a boate for feare of drowning, thinkes that here shee treades as safe now as in her Parlour: Of all ages, of all sexes, of all professions this is the common path: it is the roade way betwéene London and Westmin∣ster, and betwéene South-warke and London. Would you drinke a cuppe of sacke Father? there stand some with Rundlets to fill it out. Countri. Ah ha, thats the Tauerne then is tal∣ked on. Cit. Beere, Ale, wine, victu∣alls, and fiers on the Thames. Thirst you for Béere, Ale, Vsquibath, &c. or for victualls? there you may buy it, because you may tell an other day how you dined vppon the Thames. Are you colde with going ouer? you shall ere you come to the midst of the Riuer, spie some ready with pannes of coales to warme your fingers. If you want fruite after you haue dined, there stands Costermon∣gers to serue you at your call. And thus doe people leaue their houses and the stréetes, turning the goodli∣est Riuer in the whole Kingdome, into the broadest-stréete to walke in. Coun. But tell mee I pray Sir, if all the merchants that vndertake this voyage to these your narrow seas,
are none vndone? doe none of your fresh-water souldi∣ers miscarry, & drop downe in these slipperie Marshes? Cit. Yes Sir, I haue heard of many, and haue béene an eye witnesse of some: of all which, I will be sparing in report, being rather willing to be reprehended for tel∣ling too little, then for discouering too much. Coun. It is a modestie well becomes any man, al∣beit nothing but trueth sit vpon his tongue. But I pray sithence you cracke the shell, let vs sée what kernell there is within it: sithence you haue bestowed the swéet, let me taste the sower, let your newes be as Country-folkes bringing fruit to your markets, the bad and the good togither: say, haue none gone westward for smelts (as our prouerbiall phrase is?) Citti. The harmes that haue fallen on se∣uerall per∣sons going on the Thames. Yes, it hath beene a kinde of battaile for the time, for some haue fallen in vp to the knées, others to the middle, others to the arme-pittes, yea and some haue béene ducked ouer head and eares, yet haue craw∣led out like drowned Rats, whiles others haue suncke to the bottome that neuer rose againe to the top: they had a cold bed to lye in. Amongst many other misfor∣tunes that are to bee pittied, this is one; A couple of friendes shooting on the Thames with birding-péeces, it happened they strooke a Sea-pie, or some other fowle, they both ran to catch it, the one stumbled forward, his head slipt into a déepe hole, and there was hee drownd: the other (in his haste) slipt backward, & by that meanes saued his life. A poore fellow likewise hauing heated his body with drinke, thought belike to coole it on the water: but comming to walke on the Ice, his head was too heauy for his héeles, so that downe he fell, and there presently died. Coun. Let his fall giue others warning how to stand. Your Citie cannot choose but bee much damnified by this strange congealing of the Riuer. Citti. Exceeding much (Father) straungers may
gesse at our harmes; yet none can giue the full num∣ber of them but wee that are the inhabitants: The hurt that the Ci∣tie hath re∣ceiued by this Frost. for the Citie by this meanes is cut off from all comerce: Shop-kéepers may sit and aske what doe you lacke, when the passengers may very well reply, what doe you lacke your selues: they may sit and stare on men, but not sit and sell: it was (before) called The dead Terme, and now may wee call this, The dead Vacation, The frozen Vacation, The cold Vacation. If it be a Gen∣tlemans life to liue idlely, and doe nothing, how ma∣ny poore Artificers and Trades-men haue béene made Gentlemen then by this Frost? For a number of Oc∣cupations (like the flakes of yce that lye in the Thames) are by this malice of Winter, trod cleane vnder foote, and will not yet bee able to stirre. Alas poore Watermen, you haue had cold chéere at this ban∣quet: you that liue altogether vpon water, can now scarce get water to your hands: it is a hard thing now for you to earne your bread with the sweate of your browes. Coun. This beating may make them wise, the want that this hard season driues them into, may teach them to play the Ants, and in Sommer to make a prouision against the wrath of Winter. There is no mischiefe borne alone I know; calamities commonly are (by birth) twinnes: me thinks therefore, yt this drying vp of the waters, should be a deuourer vp of wood: this colde Ague of the earth must needes haue warmth to helpe it▪ that warmth must come from fier, and that fier cannot be had without cost: how then I pray you in this so ge∣nerall an affliction, did poore people shift for fewell to comfort them? Citti. The want of fire. Their care for fier was as great as for foode: nay, to want it was a worse torment then to bee with∣out meate: the belly was now pinched to haue the bo∣dy warmed: and had not the Prouident Fathers of
this Citie (carefully, charitably, and out of a good and godly zeale) dispersed a reliefe to the poore, in seuerall partes and places about the outer bounds of the Citie, where pouertie most inhabiteth) by storing them before hand with Seacoale and other fiering at a reasonable rate, I verily perswade my selfe, that the vncon∣scionable and vnmercifull raising of the prices of few∣ell by Chandlers, Wood-mongers, &c. (who now meant to lay the poore on the Racke) would haue béene the death of many a wretched creature through the want of succour. Coun. Not vnlikely Sir. Cit. For neither could coale be brought vp the Ri∣uer, neither could wood be sent downe. The Westerne Barges might now wrap vp their smoakie Sayles, for albeit they had neuer so loftie a gale, their voyage was spoyld, the windes was with them, but the tide was cleane against them. And not onely hath this frost nipt away those comforts that should reuiue the out∣ward parts of the body, but those also that should giue strength and life to the inward. Darth of victualls. For you of the Coun∣try being not able to trauel to the Citie with victualls, the price of victuall must of necessity be enhaunced, and victuall itselfe brought into a scarcitie. And thus haue I giuen you (according to your request) a true picture of our Thames frozen ouer, and withall haue drawne in as liuely colours as I can (to my skill) as it were in a little Table, all the miseries, mischiefes, and inconue∣niences, which this hard time hath throwne vpon our Citie. Coun. Sir, you haue satisfied me to the full, and haue giuen vnto me so good a taste of your loue, that if I should liue double the yeares that are alreadie scored on my head, I cannot choose but die indebted to your kindnesse. Cit. Not so Father, for you shall if you please come
out of my debt presently, and your payment shallbe in the selft-same coyne, that you receiued of me, (that is to say wordes.) Countriman. I am glad Sir, you will take a poore country-mans worde for so round a summe as I ac∣knowledge is owing to you: you are a mercifull Creditor; GOD send mee allwayes to deale with such Chapmen. But how will you set downe my payments? Citi. Mary thus Father: As I haue discouered vn∣to you, what colde doings wee haue had (during this Frost) in the Citie, so I pray let me vnderstand from you, what kinde of worlde you haue liued in in the Country. Coun. Newes out of the Country. The worlde with vs of the Country, runnes vpon the old rotten whéeles: for all the Northern cloth that is wouen in our Country, will scarce make a Gowne to keepe Charitie warme, she goes so a cold. Rich men had neuer more money, and Couetousnesse had neuer lesse pittie: there was neuer in any age more mony stirring, nor neuer more stir to gette mony. Far¦mers are now slaues to racking yong prodigall lādlords, those Landlords, are more seruile slaues to their owne Riots and Luxurie. But these are the common disea∣ses of euery Kingdome and therefore are but common newes. The tunes of the Nightingale are stale in the midle of Sommer, because we heare them at the com∣ming in of the Spring, and so these harsh notes which are sung euerie day in euerie Countrie, do (be custome) grow not to be regarded. But your desire Sir is, to know how we spend the daies of this our Frozen age in the Country. Cittizen. That I would heare indéede Fa∣ther. Coun. Beléeue mee Sir, as wickedly you must thinke as you can heare in your Citie. It goes as
hard with vs as it doeth with you. The mise∣ries that Country people feele by this frost The same colde hand of Winter is thrust into our bosomes, the same sharpe ayre strikes woundes into our bodies: the same Sunne shines vppon vs, but the same Sunne doeth not heate vs no more then it doeth you. The poore Plough-mans children sit crying and blowing their nayles, as lamentably as the children and ser∣uants of your poore Artificers. Hunger pinches their chéekes as deepe into the flesh, as it doeth into yours here. You cry out here, you are vndone for coale, and wee complaine, wee shall dye for want of Wood. All your care is to prouide for your Wiues, children and seruants, in this time of sadnesse: but wée goe beyond you in cares; not onely our wiues, our children, and houshold seruants, are vnto vs a cause of sorrowe, but wée greeue as much to be∣holde the miserie of our poore Cattell (in this fro∣zen-hearted season) as it doeth to looke vppon our owne affliction. Our beastes are our faithfull ser∣uants, and doe their labour truely when wee set them to it, they are our Nurses that giue vs milke, they are our guides in our iourneyes, they are our partners, and helpe to enrich our state; yea, they are the verie vp-holders of a poore Farmers landes and liuings. Alas then, what Maister that loues his seruant as he ought, but would almost breake his owne heart-stringes with fighing, to sée these pine and mourne as they doe? The ground is bare, and not worth a poore handfull of grasse. The earth séemes barren, and beares nothing, or if shee doeth, most vnnaturally she kills it presently, or suffers it through cold to perish. By which meanes the lusty horse abates his flesh, and hangs the head, féeling his strength goe from him: the Oxe stands bellowing: the ragged Shéepe bleeting: the poore Lambe shiuering and star∣uing to death.
The poore Cottager that hath but a Cowe to liue vp∣on, must feed vpon hungry meales (God knows) when the beast her selfe hath but a bare Commons. He that is not able to bid all his Cattle home, and to feast them with Fodder out of his Barnes, will scarce haue Cat∣tell at the end of Sommer to fetch home his Haruest. Which charge of feeding so many beastly mouthes, is able to eate vp a Country-mans estate, if his proui∣dence before time hath not bin the greater to meet and preuent such stormes. Of necessity our Sheep Oxen &c. must be in danger of famishing, (hauing nothing but what our old grandam the earth will alowe them to liue vpon) of necessitie must they pyne, scithence all the fruits that had wont to spring out of her fertile womb, are now nipt in their birth, and likely neuer to prosper. And to proue that the Ground hath her very heart (as it were) broken, and that she hath not liuely sap enough in her vaines left as yet to quicken her, and to raise her vp to strength: behold, this one infallible token. The Leeke, whose courage hath euer binne so vndaunted, that he hath borne vp his lustie head in all stormes; and could neuer be compelled to shrinke, for Hayle, Snow, Frostes, nor showres; is nowe by the violence and cruelty of this Weather, beaten into the earth, being rotted, dead, disgraced and trode vpon. And thus (Sir) if wordes may bee taken for cur∣rant payment (to a Creditor so worthy as your selfe) haue I tendred some part of my loue in requitall of yours. You gaue vnto mee a Mappe of your Citie as it standes nowe in the Frost, and I bestowed vppon you a Moddell of the Country, which I pray receiue with as friendly a hand, as that is which of∣fers it. Citiz. I doe, with millions of thankes. The storie which you told (albeit it yet makes my hart bleede to think vpon the calamities of my poore Country-men)
yet was it vttered with so graue a iudgement, and in a time so well befitting your age, that I kept mine eares open, and my lippes locked vp; for I was loth to interrupt you, till all was told: wherein you shew your selfe to bee a care∣full and honest debter, in discharging your bond all at one summe, when you might haue done it in seuerall payments. But I pray you Father, what is your opinion of this strange Winter? I call you Father, albeit my owne head be whitened by old age, as well as yours: and bee not an∣gry that I doe so, it is an honourable title due vnto your yéeres: for as those that are young men to me, bestow that dignitie vpon my siluer haires, (and I am proud to take it) so would I not haue you disdayne that attribute from my mouth, (that am a young man to you) sithence I doe it out of loue and the reuerence I beare to my Elders. Tell mee therefore, I pray, your iudgement, of this Frost, and what (in the schoole of your experience) you haue read, or can remember, may be the effects, which it may produce, or which (of consequence) are likely to follow vpon it. Countr. The dan∣gers that a thaw is like to bring with it. I shall doe my best to satisfie you: When these great Hilles of yce shall be digged downe, and be made le∣uell with the waters; when these hard rockes shall melt in∣to soft riuers, and that a sudden thaw shall ouercome this sharpe Frost, then is it to be feared, that the swift, violent and vnresistable Land-currents, will beare downe Brid∣ges, beate downe Buildings, ouerflow our Corne-fieldes, ouer-runne the Pastures, drowne our Cattell, and endan∣ger the liues both of man and beast, trauailing on their way. Cittiz. You say right: This Prognostication which yuur iudgement thus lookes into, did alwayes fall out to be too true. But what other Weather doeth your Calender promise Countr. I will not hide within me from you, that time and obseruation haue taught mee. And albeit it may ap∣peare straunge vnto you, that an old Country Penny-fa∣ther,
(a plaine holland ruffe, and a kerzie stocking) should talke thus of the change of seasons, and the mutabilities of the world. Yet S. know I beseech you that my education was finer then my Russet outside, and that my parents did not only prouide to leaue me somthing, but tooke care (a∣boue that tansitorie blessing) that I should tast a little of the fruite of learning and knowledge. It will be a pleasing and profitable iourney to our coun∣treymen though a laborious voiage for you. King Willi∣am Ruphus I haue read how in the raigne of king William Ruphus (in the fift yeare as I remember) that Riuers of this king∣dome were so frozen ouer, that carts and waines laden, did without danger passe ouer them. King Iohn. In the sixth yeare of the raigne of King Iohn,a frost be∣gan vpon the 13. of Ianuary, and continued till the 22. of March following, the earth by meanes of this being so hardned, that the plow lay still, and the ground could not be tilled. The wounds that this frost gaue the common wealth were for that present scarce felt, they were not deepe, they were thought not dangerous. But in the sommer following did they freshly begin to bleede, for then a quarter of wheat was solde for a marke, which in the raigne of Henry the se∣cond (before him) was solde for no more then 12. pence. king Henry There was likewise so great a frost in the 53. yeare of the raigne of Henry the third, that being at Saint An∣drewes tide, it continued till Candelmas. So that men & beasts went ouer the Thames from Lambeth to West∣minster, and the goodes of Merchants not being able to be transported by water, were caried from Sandwich and o∣ther hauens, and so brought to London by land. But no extraordinary or memorable accident following or going before this frost, I will passe ouer it, and come to that frosty season in the tenth yeare of Edward the first, whose violent working was so cruell, and did build such castles of Ile vp∣on the Thames & other Riuers, that fiue arches of Londō bridge were borne downe, & all Rochesterbridge was caried
cleane away, with diuers others. K. Edw, 3. In the seauen and thirtieth yéere of Edward the third, a Frost began in England, about the midst of September, and thawed not till Aprill following, so that it continued al∣most eight moneths. K. Henry 4. In the ninth yeere of the raigne of K. Henry the fourth, was there a Frost that lasted fiftéene wéekes. The like happened in the fourth yeere of Edward the fourth.K. Edw. 4. K. Henr. 8. In the nynth yeere of K. Henry the eight, the Thames was frozen ouer, that men with horse and carts passed vpon it: And in the very next succéeding yeere, dyed multitudes of people, by a strange disease, called the Sweating Sicke∣nesse. Q Elizab. There was one great Frost more in England, (in our memorie,) and that was in the seuenth yeere of Queene E∣lizabeth, which began vpon the 21. of December, and held on so extremely, that vpon New yeeres éeue following, people in multitudes went vpon the Thames from London Bridge to Westminster: Some (as you tell mee, Sir, they doe now) playing at foote-ball, others shooting at prickes: This Frost began to thaw vpon the third day of Ianuary at night, and on the fifth of the same moneth, was no ice to be séene betwéene London-Bridge and Lambeth: which sudden thaw brought forth sudden harmes, for houses and bridges were ouer-turned by the Land-floudes: amongst which, Owes Bridge in Yorkeshire was borne away: ma∣ny numbers of people perishing likewise by those waters. Cittiz. You haue a happy memorie Father: your head I see is a very storehouse of antiquitie: you are of your selfe a whole volume of Chronicles: Time hath well bestowed his lessons vpon you, for you are a ready scholler of his, and doe repeate his stories by heart perfectly. Countr. And thus (as I said before) you may perceiue, that these extraordinary Feauers haue alwayes other euils attending vpon them. Cittiz. You haue made it plaine vnto mee: and I pray
God, at whose commaund the Sunne sendes forth his heat, to comfort the earth, and the windes bitter stormes to de∣face the fruites of it, that in this last afflictation of waters, which are hardned against vs, all other miseries may bee closed vp withall: and that the stripes of sundry plagues and calamities which for these many yéeres haue béen seene sticking in our flesh, may worke in our bodies such amend∣ment, and in our soules such repentance, that the rodde of the diuine Iusticer may be held backe from scourging vs a∣ny longer. Countr. I gladly and from my heart, play the Clarke, crying Amen. I haue been bolde and troublesome to you Sir. Cittiz. You teach me what language to speake to your selfe in, I would neither of vs both, had euer spent an houre worse. Countr. Indeed Time is a iewell of incomparable va∣lue, yet (as vnthrifts doe by their money) we are prodigall in wasting it, and neuer feele the true sweetnesse of inioy∣ing it, till we haue lost all. But sithence I haue waded thus farre into conference with you, and that it is our agrée∣ment to barter away newes one with another, (as Mer∣chants doe their commodities) I must request one kindnesse more at your handes. Cittiz. What is that, Father? I am now in your debt, and in Conference I must see you satisfied. Countr. I heare Sir strange report of a certayne Lot∣tery for Plate, of a great value, here in London: Is it true? Cittiz. It is true, that there is a Lottery, and it is set vp by Strangers. Countr. I remember, that (as I take it in the xi. yeere of Queen Elizabeth) a Lottery began here in London, in which, if my memorie faile not, were foure hundred thou∣sand lots to be drawne.
Cittiz. You say right: so much still lies in my remem∣brance. Count. Mary that Lotterie was onely for money, and euery lot was ten shillings. It was helde at the West doore of Saint Paules Church. It began vpon the eleuenth of Ianuarie, and continued day and night till the sixt of May following, which was almost foure Moneths: and the com∣mon burden of that song, when poore prizes were drawne, was Two pence halfe-pennie. Cittiz. That was a prize poore inough, Ile be sworne: Nay father, then was there another gallant Lotterie about the eight and twentie yeare of the same Queenes raigne, which began in the middle of Sommer, and was for mar∣ueilous rich and costly armors, guilt and engrauen. Countr. That Lotterie I heard of, but neuer saw it, for I was then in the Countrey. Cittiz. To win those armours, all the companies of the Cittie ventured generall summes of mony. But because you desire to heare some newes of this last Lotterie, that now tempteth people together, I will tell you so much of it as I certainly know for truth, referring your eare (if you would hear more) to the great voyce of the vulgar, of whom you may be sure to haue more then willingly you will carry home. Countr. Oh sir, the wilde beast with many heads, must needs haue as many tongues, and it is not possible those tongues should goe true, no more then all the clocks doe but I pray you speake on. Cittiz. The desc¦tion of the Lottery This Lotterie (as I sayd before) consisteth all of plate: it is a goodly Goldsmiths shop to come into: and to behold so many guilt Spoones, Cups, Bowles, Basons, Ewers, &c. fairly grauen, and richly guilded, who would not be tempted to venture a shilling (for thats a stake for a lot) when for that shilling hee may happily draw a peece of plate worth a hundred pound, or an hundred and fortie, fiftie, or threescore pounds, if he can catch it, which he may doe if
Fortune fauour him. Countr. Oh sir, that found of a hundred pound makes good musicke in the eare, and drawes men to hearken to it. Those are the sweete baytes: but vpon what hookes, I pray you, are those lickorish bayts hung? Cittiz. Vpon villanous long ones: for to euerie prize there are put in 40. blanks, so that there are so many tricks to set a man beside the saddle, and but one to leape in. There are 7600. prizes, and 42. mil. of Blanckes: a number of hard choaked Peares must be swallowed, before the delicate fruit can be tasted. Countr. And yet I heare that the people flie thither like Wild-geese. Cittiz. You may well say like Wild-geese: for some of them proue such Goose caps by going thither, that they leaue themselues no more feathers on their backs then a Goose hath when she is plucked. I haue sat there and be∣helde the faces of all sorts of people, that flocke to this faire of Siluer houshold-stuffe: It is better then ten Comedies to note their entrances into the place, and their Exits: and yet in good truth I haue beene heartily sorie, to see what tragicall endes haue falne vppon some poore housekeepers that haue come thither. About the doores multitudes still are crowding: aboue, the roome is continually filled with people. Euerie mouth is balling out for lots, and euery hand thrust out to snatch them: both hands are lifted vp, the one to deliuer the Condemned shillings, the other to Receiue the papers of life and death. And when the papers are payed for (which are rolled vp like Wafers) load: what praying is there in euery corner, that God would (if it bee his will) send them good fortune. How gingerly! doe they open their Twelue-pennie commoditie! How leysurely? with what gaping of the mouth! with what licking of the lippes (as though they felt sweetnesse in it before they taste it) how the standers by encourage him that hath drawne, to open bold∣ly, as if it were to venture vpon the mouth of a Canon, and
with what strange passions and pantings does he turne o∣uer his wast papers? But when he findes within but a pale peace of paper, Lord, how he sweares at his owne folly, cur∣ses the Frenchmen, and cries a plague on the house, and wishes all the plate were molten, and powred downe the throtes of them that owe it: Yet when hee hath emptied his bosome of all this bitternesse, the verie casting of his eye vpon a goodly faire Bason of siluer, so sweetens the remem∣brance of his lost money, that to it he falles againe, and ne∣uer giues ouer so long as he can make any shift for the other shilling. And thus doe a number of poore men labour with a kind of greedines to begger themselues. Countr. But amongst all these Land-Rouers, haue none of them the lucke of men of warre, to winne rich prizes? Cittiz. Yes, some doe: and the making of one, is the vndoing of an hundred: for the sight of a standing bowle be∣ing borne openly away in triumph by some poore fellow, so sets all their téeth on edge that are the gazers on, that ma∣ny of them are almost madde, till they haue sold their pew∣ter, in hope to change it into a cupbbord of siluer plate And so farre doth this frenzie leade some (especially the baser sort of people) that this man pawnes his cloake, that man his holliday breeches: this woman sells her brasse, that gossip makes away her linnen, and all these streames meete in the end in one riuer. These doe all suffer shipwracke, and the sea swallowes the spoyle. The one goes home crying and cur∣sing, the other standes still tickling with laughter: the one hugs himselfe for his good successe, the other is readie to hang himselfe at his il fortune. Carmen sell their horses, and giue ouer drawing of loades, to draw lots. There came a yong wench in one day (a maid seruant) that had newly receiued her quarters wages, and was going to buy clothes to her backe: But this Siluer-mine standing in her way, here she vowed to dig, and to trie if she could bee made for euer: she ventured all her money, and lost all. But when she
saw it gone, she sighed & sware, the losse of her maidenhead should neuer haue grieued her so much, as the losse of her wages. Countr. I beleeue her sir: Cittiz: Imagine how a Vintners boy hauing receiued a reckoning of his masters guests, and they falling presently to dice, if the drawer should set his maisters money, and cry∣ing at all, should loose it al, how would that fellow look? euen so looked that poore wench. Countr. Are there (think you sir) no deceits in this Lot∣terie, to cozen and abuse the people? Cittiz. Trust me father, I dare accuse no man of any, because I know of none: such accions as these (how war∣rant able soeuer,) & strengthned by the best authorities, who haue wisedome to looke through and through them, if there were any iugling conceit, notwithstanding stand from the stinges of slander, if any villanie be done, the people that swarme thither, practise it one against an other. Count. As how I pray sir? Cittiz. Knauis triks done at the Lottery For I haue been told, that some one crafty knaue amongst all the rest, taking vpon him to play the good Shepheard ouer the flocke, that standes about him, hath gathered mony from seuerall men, or women, he him∣self likewise putting in his owne, and then keeping a crow∣ding to passe through the presse, he comes backe and deliuers so many blanckes as he receiued shillings, which blankes were not of the Lotterie, but cunningly made vp by him∣selfe, and caried of purpose vp and downe by him in his pocket. Co. They are worthily serued that wilbe cheted by such a doctor in the art of knauery. If any man therfore wil néeds be, as the terme is now, one of this twelue peny Guls, let him hereafter set his owne limetwigs, and then if he catch no birde, no bodie els shall laugh at him. Citiz. Amongst many other thinges vpon the frosen
Thames, that will in times to follow, looke to be remem∣bred, this is one: That there were two Barkers shops (in the fashion of Boothes with signes and other properties of that trade belonging to them) fixed on the yce: to which many numbers of people resorted, and (albeit they wanted no shauing) yet would they here he trimmed, because an other day they might report, that they lost their haire be∣tweene the banke side and London. Both these shoppes werr still so full, that the workemen thought euery day had beene Saturday: neuer had they more barbarous doinges for the time: there was both olde polling and cold polling: and albeit the foundation of their houses stood altogether vpon a watry ground, yet they that were Doctors of the barbours chair, feared no danger, for it was a hard matter almost now for a man to find water to drowne himselfe if he had beene so desperate Then had they other games of nineholes and Pidgeon-holes in greate numbers. And this (father) did I obserue as worthy to be remembred, that when the watermen (who had cold doinges for a long time) had by maine labour cutte downe with axes, and such like instruments, a lane and open passage betweene Queene Hyth, & the further banke, so that boates went surely to and fro, yet were people in great multitudes running, walking, slyding, and playing at games and exercises, as boldly as if they had beene on the firme land (the Thames running mainely betweene them) and taking Boates at Queene Hyth, or any other Stayres, they would as fiercely leape vpon the verie vrim of the caked Ice, as if it had beene a strong Wharfe, or the ground it selfe. And thus much father, touching the great Frost here about our Cittie. Vnto which, vpon my conference with some Merchantes my friendes here in London, and vpon view of Letters from seuerall factors out of other Coun∣tries
beyond the Seas.) I adde this further report, that this Frost hath not onely continued in this extremitie here in England, but all or the greatest part of all the Kingdomes in Christendome, haue beene pinched by the same: amongst which those Countries Northward (as Russia, Muscouia, &c, which at these times of the yeare are commonly subiect to sharpe, bitter and violent Frosts) were now (this Win∣ter) more extreamely, and more extraordinarily afflicted, then vsually they haue beene in many yeares before. So that the calamities that haue falne vpon vs by this crueltie of the weather, are so much to be endured with the greater patience, and with more thankesgiuing to God, because his hand hath punished neighbors and other Nations as heaui∣ly (if not more seuerely) then he hath vs. Amongst all the serious accidents that haue hapned here vpon our Thames, I will now (father) quicken your heare∣ing with one a little more merry, it was merry to the be∣holders and strange, but I beleeue he found no great mirth in it that was the person that performed it. But thus it was. A Citizen happened to venture (with many others) vpon the Ice: but he with a couple of dogs that followed him, walked vp and downe so long, till he was in a maner alone from the rest of the company. You must vnderstand, that this was now towards the end of the frost, when it either beganne or was likely to thaw: so that people were not so bold vpon the Ice nor in such multitudes as they were be∣fore: but this Citizen (and his two dogs,) keeping as I said aloofe from others, it fortuned that the flake of Ice vpon which hee stood, was in a moment sundred from the maine body of the frosen Thames, like an arme of a tree cut from the body: so that he stoode, or rather swomme (as hée stood) vpon a floating Iland: the poore man perceiuing that his ground failed vnder him, began to faint in his heart, re∣penting
that now he was so vēterous, or so foolish to leaue firme ground where he was safe, and to trust a floore that was so deceitfull, was afraid to stir, and yet vnlesse hee did lustly stir for life, hee was sure there was no way but one, and that was to be drowned. In this extremity, and in this battell of comfort and despaire, he had no meanes (albeit he was a fresh water Souldier,) but to bee constant in cou∣rage to himselfe, and to trie all pathes how to get from this apparent danger: from place to place therefore doth he soft¦ly run, his two dogs following him closse and leaping vpon him: but his thoughts were more busied how to saue himself thē to regard them following, he neuer hated going a haw∣king with his dogs till this time: now the sport was loath∣some, now was he weary of it: for in all his hunting with his bound thus at his taile, hee mette one game that could make him weary: he iustled with other huge flakes of Ice that encountered with that whereon he stood, and gladly would haue leapt vpon some one of them, but to haue done so, had been to haue slipt out of one perill into an other: No∣thing was before his eyes but water, mingled with huge cakes of Ice, on euery side of him was danger and death. Innumerable multitudes of people stood looking on vp∣on the shores, but none were so hardie as to set out to his re∣scue. Being therefore thus round beset with the horrors of so present a wracke, he fell downe on his knees, vttering such colde prayers as in this feare a man could deliuer: his dogges not vnderstanding their maisters daunger, nor their owne, and not knowing why hee kneeled, leaping euer and anon at his head, and an his shoulders: but his mind being now more on his dying day then on his sports, continued praying, till the flake of yce on which he kneeled was dri∣uen to the verie Bridge, which hee perceyuing, started vp, and with a happie nimblenesse leaped vpon one of the Ar∣ches,
his dogs leaping after as nimbly as the maister, whilst the cake of yce passed away from him, and betweene the two Arches was sheuered all in little peeces. And thus did he escaped. Countr. It was a miraculous deliuerance. Citty. Other abuses are there daily (amongst the wor∣ser rankes of people) put one vpon another, which being but idle, ridiculous and not worth rehersing, I willingly am glad not to remēber: but only to content your longing (good old father) haue I set thus much of our golden Lottery be∣fore you. Countr. Sir you bind me more and more to you for these kindnesses to me being a stranger, & a person of so home∣ly an out side, from a Cittizen so graue as your selfe seems to be, I will euer rest abundantly thankefull. FINIS.
LONDON. Printed for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold at his shop at London-Bridge. 1608.
