C2325 [ocm]19318754 205527
HIS MAJESTIES GRACIOUS MESSAGE FOR PEACE, DECEMBER. 5th. To the Two Houses of Parliament at WESTMINSTER. With the Answer of both Houses to Sir THOMAS GLEMHAM. Together with His MAJESTIES second MESSAGE, Decem. 15. 1645. OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the Vniversity. 1645.
CHARLES R. HIs Majesty being deeply sensi∣ble of the Continuation of this blou∣dy and unnaturall Warre, cannot thinke himselfe discharg'd of the Duty he owes to God, or the Affection and regard he hath to the preservation of His People, without the constant application of His earnest en∣deavours to find some expedient for the speedy ending of these unhappy Distracti∣ons, if that may be, doth therefore desire, That a safe Conduct may be forthwith sent, for the Duke of Richmond, the Earle of Southampton, Iohn Ashburnham and Ieffery Palmer Esquires, and their
Attendants, with Coaches, Horses, and o∣ther Accommodations for their Journey to Westminster, during their stay there, and return when they shall think fit. Whom His Majesty intends to send to the Lords and Commons. Assembled in the Parlia∣ment of England at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, furnish'd with such Propositi∣ons, as His Majesty is confident will be the Foundation of a happy and well grounded Peace. Given at the Court at Ox∣ford,  the fifth of December, 1645. For the Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore. This Gracious Message came to Westminster De∣cember 6th, where he that brought it was detain'd five dayes, and at last sent back without any Answer at all to His MAJESTY; only these few words were written to Sr Thomas Glemham Governour of Ox∣ford.
SIR, WE have received your Letter of the 5th of this instant December, with His Majesties inclosed, and have sent back your Trumpet by command of both Houses who will with all convenient speed return an answer to his Majestie, and rest Your loving Friends Grey of Wark Speaker of the House of Peeres Pro Tempore. William Lonthal Speaker of the House of Commons. For Sr Thomas Glemham Governour of Oxford. This was all, after so many dayes expectation; which is indeed neither Answer nor Excuse, being on∣ly a Concession of nothing at present, and an intimati∣on that for future (when themselves judge it conveni∣ent) They will grant or deny. Notwithstanding all manner of difficulties and pretences, His Sacred Ma∣jesty hath againe sent to them a second Message, where all the World will testifie His Pious unwearied de∣sires for Peace, whereof this following is a perfect Copy. CHARLES R. HIs Majestie cannot but extreamly wonder, that after so many expres∣sions on your part of a deep and seeming sence of the miseries of this afflicted King∣dome,
and of the dangers incident to His Person during the continuance of this un∣naturall Warre, your many great and so often repeated Protestations, that the rai∣sing of these Armes hath been only for the necessarie defence of Gods true Religion, His Majesties Honour, Safetie, and pros∣peritie, the Peace, comfort and security of His People, you should delay a safe Con∣duct to the Persons mentioned in His Ma∣jesties Message of the fifth of this instant December, which are to be sent unto you with Propositions for a well grounded Peace: A thing so farre from having been denyed at any time by His Majestie when∣soever you have desired the same, that He beleeves it hath been seldome (if ever) practised among the most avowed and pro∣fessed Enemies, much lesse from Subjects to their King. But His Majestie is resolved, that no discouragements whatsoever shall
make Him faile of His part in doing His uttermost endeavours to put an end to these Calamities, which if not in time prevented, must prove the ruine of this unhappie Na∣tion; And therefore doth once again desire, that a safe Conduct may be forthwith sent for those Persons expressed in His former Message, and doth therefore conjure you, as you will answer to Almightie God in that day when he shall make inquisition for all the Bloud that hath, and may yet be spilt in this unnaturall Warre, as you tend∣er the preservation and establishment of the true Religion; by all the Bonds of Dutie and Allegiance to your King or Compassion to your bleeding and unhappie Countrie, and of Charitie to your selves, that you dis∣pose your hearts to a true sence, and imploy all your faculties in a more serious endea∣vour together with His Majestie, to set a speedie end to these wasting Divisions, and
then he shall not doubt, but that God will yet againe give the blessing of Peace to this distracted Kingdom. Given at the Court at Oxford, the 15th of Decem∣ber, 1645. For the Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore. This Gracious Message hath yet received no An∣swer, though now 'tis a Fortnight since His Majesties first Message. All that is desired is only a safe Con∣duct for such as should come with Propositions for Peace: sure their Thoughts are farre from an Ac∣commodation, who refuse that any should aske it of them, or bring it to them. God in his due time will reward such as truly seek Peace, and recompence those that delight in Bloud. FINIS.
