C2167 105.f.17[24] 190.g.13[378] R228988 99888075 194182
A COPY OF HIS MAIESTYS MOST GRACIOVS LETTER TO THE LORD Major and Aldermen of his City of London, and all other his wel-affected Subjects of that City. CHARLES REX, TRusty and well beloved, We greet you well. When we remember the many Acts of Grace and favour we and our royall predecessours have conferred upon that our City of Lond, and the many examples of duty and loyalty, for which that City have been likewise famous, wee are willing to beieve, notwithstanding the great defection w have found in that place, that all men are not so farre degenerated from their affectin to us, and to the peace of th Kingdome, as to desire a continuance of the miseries they now feele, and therefore being informed that there is a desire in some prin∣cipall persons of that City, to present a petition to us, which may tend to the procuring a good undrstanding, be∣tween us and that our City, whereby the peace of the whole Kingdome may be procured: We have thought fit to let you know that we are ready to receive any such petition, and the persons who shall be appointed to present he same to us, shall have a safe conduct, and you shll assure all our good Subiects of that our City, whose hearts are touched with any sence of duty to us, or of love to the Religion & Laws established, in the quiet and peaceable fruition wherof they & their ancestors have inioyed so great happiness, that we have neither passed any Act, nor made any profession or protestation for the maintenance and defence of the true Protestant Religion, and the Liberties of the Subiect, which we will not most strictly and religiously observe; and for the which we will not be alwayes ready to give them any security can e desired. And of these our gracious Letters we expect a speedy answer from you. And so we bid you farewell. Given at our Court at Oxford in the 19. yeare of our Raign, 26. Decem. 1643. By his Maiesties command George Digbie. To the Right Honourable the Lord Maior, Aldermen, and Common Counsell of the City of London. These, Right Honourable, and right Worshipfull, THis his Majesties most gracious Letter, I Thomas Violet of London Goldsmith, brought from Oxford to London: and for doing his Ma∣jestie this service for the benefit and weale publique of this famous City, I have been committed prisoner to the Tower of London for three yeares and halfe, and for nine hundred twenty eight dayes of that time, was kept close prisoner in my Chamber, my Estate to a great value sequestred (too gentle a word for so cruell usage to the Kings messenger.) I doe likewise send to you here inclosed, a booke printed by Peter Cole, in Corne hill neare the Royall Exchange the 16. of Ianuary, 1643. Wherein you may see the transaction of this Businesse concerning this his Majesties Letter, at large, printed by order of the two houses of Parliament, a booke worthy of your serious consideration, Now my humble request to you the Lord Major; Aldermen and Common Counsel and all other well affected people of the City of London is▪ 1. That you would seriously consider of this his Majesties most gracious letter unto you. 2. That you would examine all or any of the Records of the City of London, to see if ever any Messenger from any of his Majesties prede∣cessours to this City of London, with the Kings letter desiring peace, hath been so hardly used as I have been. 3. That you would improve your interest with both houses of Parliament, that I may be discharged from my cruell imprisonment, may have the Sequestration taken off from my estate, and receive full reparations for all my dammages, and may have leave to attend his Majestie. And if the partciulars in his Majesties letter which I send you here the Copy off, shall yet be taken into your serious consideration, I humb∣ly conceive it may prove in some measure an happy expedient, to prevent those dangers, mischiefes, and inconveniences, that seeme to threat∣en disturbance both of the City and Kingdome: which I am imboldned humbly to offer to your wisedome, out of the zeale and af∣fection my heart really beareth to the happinesse, peace, and prosperity both of this famous City of London, and the whole Kingdom. From my Prison in the Tower, this 28. of Iune, 1647. Your honours and the Cities most humble servant. Thomas Violet For the Worth. Mr. Michell Esquire, Towne-Clerke of the Citie of LONDON. July 16. 1647. SIR, I Have sent you by this Bearer, Mr. White, Warder of the Tower of London, this Letter, and request you that you would be pleased to pre∣sent it and the booke annexed, unto the Common Counsell, or a Common Hall of the Citie of London, and that I may obtaine so much Fa∣vour from them, as to receive an answer from them; what they please to do in the businesse, and any answer they please to returne mee, (so I may have one) that the Kings Majestie may know how the Citie of London deale with me HIS Messenger for Peace, shall obleidge me to re∣maine the Cities humble Servant: Thomas Violet. FINIS.
