T3047 [ocm]12076155 196883
A true RELATION Of the severall passages which have happened to our Army since it advanced towards GLOCESTER, WITH The manner of the reliefe of the same, Related in a Letter from a Friend in the Army, to an Ho∣nourable person here in the City. Likewise An Abstract of severall remarkable passages, which happened at Glocester between the Towne and the Enemy, in the time of the Siege, collected by an Eye-witnesse. This is Licensed, and entred into Stationers Hall Book, according to Order. LONDON, Printed by G. Dexter, for Stephen Bowtell, at the signe of the Bible in Popes-head-Alley. Anno 1643. Sept. 14.
A true Relation of the severall Passages which have happened to our Army, since it ad∣vanced towards GLOCESTER. SIR, COlonell Harvy is for present so busied in serving of you, as that he cannot serve you in this way of gi∣ving an account of his service and therefore to neg∣lect the City he will not: His desire is, that by my pen, your Honour with the Court of Militia may receive knowledge of the duty hee adventures and spends himselfe in for the Kingdomes good. Thus then briefly, of the Occurrences in his march from Ockingham to Tame, which in the way befell his Cornet, who came off from the Enemy by whom he was set upon, his last Letter to you gave a sufficient rela∣tion: what Occurrences since that, worthy your knowledge, have come to hand, shall now offer themselves nakedly to your view: Thus therefore, from Tame, the 31. of August, wee advanced to usset, thorow and in a faire Champian: beyond Bsiter found the Lord Generall with his whole Army drawne up on a very faire greene, where Colonel Manwarings Brigade (consisting of the Ci∣ty Trained Bands and Auxiliaries) first met the Lord Generall, at which meeting, there was such expressions of joy; the Londo∣ners by their showtings and the Lord Gener ll by his Courteous behaviour, Riding with his Hat off, bowing to them, which would have ravished any heart almost to have seen it: And the like to Colonel Harvies Brigade. His whole Army being thus drawn up it was indeed a very powerfull strength; hee may justly boast it likely enough (God succeeding us) to compasse great designes by. A Trumpeter of the Kings came the day before (Thursday I
meane) pretending his businesse to bee onely the procurement of a passe for some Lady, though many presumed his intent might be to view the Army: when therefore the London Brigade under Colonell Manwarings command was drawne up, the Trumpeter brought blind-folded, had leave to take sight of those Companies onely, the Lord Generall assuring him these were onely the Lon∣doners, added to, and no part formerly of his Army, and then sent him out of us. He was carryed blinded into the field. This was all the newes of that day, besides that in the evening the Horse un∣der my Colonells command received an Alarme againe neere Somerton, where they were to Quarter that night, being faced by 2000 of the Kings horse: all the hurt we received by this was one∣ly some houres kept from refreshment, they not daring to adven∣ture on us, and we not able to fall upon them, the hill they had being too high for us to charge upon in the night, and a strange Country; especially from Frithwell two miles off that Somerton, the place our foot Quartered in that night: wee marched on Sa∣turday morning towards Awtlebury, and in a field neare to it found the whole Army drawne up, which (a while after we had taken our place with our horse) were commanded off a little way from us, as a reserve to Colonell Middleton, who had been ingaged all that day thitherto with a Party of the Kings, the same we believe that faced us the night before; of which when Colonell Middleton tooke a Lievtenant Colonell Prisoner, they wheeled off, refusing to Skirmish with us; we therefore drew off to Hookenorton, where quartering that night, wee continued our march on the Sabbath day to Cornewell in Oxford-shire; and as wee were on our march the next morning towards Stowe of the Old, the enemy appeared in a bottome neare Emlard, wee being then upon Adle∣strap-hill, from whence Colonell Harvy fired his Demi-Culve∣rin three or foure times successively: with the first and last shot we conceive we did some execution: upon this the Enemy retreated, Colonell Middleton pursuing faced them againe with∣in twice musket shot, drew out a forlorne hope, who at great disad∣vantage charg'd upon the enemy, and with the losse of one, shot dead, and some sixe or eight taken prisoners, came off, the Ene∣nemy retreating. Two or three houres after, about two of the Clock in the after∣noon, they faced the London Brigado, who were that day part of the Van Guard, under Colonell Manwaring command, but up∣on
the discharge of a great Gun or two, they wheeled off, and the whole Army therefore held on their march quartering that night in the hilly open fields beyond Stow of the Old. Next morning, then after a cold lodging without any refreshment (for the Souldiers could not the day before, in all their hard march, get a∣ny considerable modicum of bread and beere) wee renewed our march, and held on our way, without any interruption from, or indeed newes of the Enemy; till towards evening, from the top of Prestbury hills, two miles short of Chetnam, yet within sight of Glocester, we discovered in the bottome, a mile from us, severall bodies of the Kings Horse. On the nearest of them my Lord Generall bestowed a demy-Culverin, at the noise if not execution thereof, that party wheeled: anon after we perceived a great smoak and fire near Glo∣cester, the sight at first a little troubled some, and my Lord Gene∣rall at adventure (that the Towne might have notice of our ap∣proach) fired foure of his great Guns, at which the other bodies of the Enemy retreated also: Our Army being then to march down, my Lord Generall himselfe led on the forlorne hope, to clear the way for his Army to passe downe the hill, and by going downe some steep place, sprained his legge: this done, the Army marched for Quarter to severall Villages adjacent, Colonell Harveyes foot, the London Redcoats, and Kentish Regiment, drawing off towards Southam, a little Village not farre from the foot of the hill, side∣wards, which when we were within two or three bow-shoots of, my Colonell himselfe, with Colonel Sir William Springate, Ma∣jor Shepheard, and his owne Cornet, with my selfe and some few others, out-marcht the foot, the rather indeed that my Colonell might (according to his wonted vigilancy) view the Avenues before the darknes of the night should overtake him; which while he, with Major Shepheard, were about, Major Bourne and Captain Buller with their Troops (mistaking us for Cavaliers) dismounted at our Quarter, & by a Pistol shot (before we could make them un∣derstand who we were) wounded sorely, we fear mortally, Cornet Flesher, and we strongly presume had Pistolled more of us had not my Colonell seasonably returning, made knowne himselfe, and so rescued us. This is all we have to acquaint you with, save that the siege be∣ing raised, & the Kings forces fled toward Bristol, we are with the
whole Army about Chetnam, ready to serve our Countrey as God shall direct us. Septemb. 6. 1643. POSTSCRIPT. THis night Colonell Manwarings Brigado could not march downe the hill, and therefore was forced to quarter that night upon the hill, the next morning they marched down the hill into the Vale, his Excellencie quartered at Chetnam, and the rest of the Armie in the adjacent Parishes. The enemie having raised his seige on Tuesday in the afternoon, and gone the way that leads to Bristol, wee rested the Thursday: the next day being Fryday, his Excellency marched into Gloucester, with so many of his Army as it could containe, and the rest of the Armie quartered in the adjacent Parishes. An Abstract of severall remarkable passages which hap∣pened at Gloucester, during the siege, collected by an eye∣witnesse thereof. THe close siege began the tenth of August 1643. and was raised the fifth of September, during which time there were between three and foure hundred great Shot, and above 20. Granado's, and as many fiery Bullets; which Granado's and fiery Bullets did no execution, save onely that one woman was killed, and about three others with the great Shot; neither were there any maimed, but some few lightly hurt. Most that were killed with their Musket-shot, was by looking over the Wall at Friars Orchard, to see their Workes. The whole number that was killed on our part in the City we cannot guesse to be above fourty: the losse on their parts we cannot exactly set downe, One that dwelt in the Su∣burbs saw the Last, and made re∣port. but by their owne relation there was a List of 900 and odde of sicke and maimed Souldiers, beside those that were killed, which (by the re∣port of the Countrey, that saw them carried away) were many, some thousands. Many likewise ran away, and more would if the Horse had not kept them in. These relations are within compasse.
Reliefe was not heard of untill August 29. that was on∣ly this: A Messenger of ours saw a Letter at Warwicke, which was written from Sir Samuel Luke to the Gover∣nour of Warwick-castle, dated at Twvverd, August 22. to this effect, That he should send two Messengers to Glo∣cester, to encourage us to stand out, and that we should have reliefe very speedily; but we perceived none untill we saw their Carriages drawn from the Leaguer then firing their Huts they marched off with their Colours: thereupon our Souldiers perceiving the enemies Trenches to bee cleare, they got over the Towne wall and spoiled their Gallery, and set fire on some of the Cannon baskets. A message shot into the City of Gloucester upon an Arrow. These are to let you understand your God Wal∣ler hath forsaken you, & hath retired himself to the Tower of London: Essex is beaten like a Dog: yeeld to the Kings mercy in time, otherwise if we enter perforce, no Quarter for such Tray∣terly Rogues. The ANSWER. VVAller is not our God, in that you lie, Our God still lives from all Eternity. Though Essex beaten be as you doe say, Romes Yoke we are resolv'd not to obey. But for our Cabbages that you have eaten, Be sure ere long you must be soundly beaten. Quarter we aske you none if we fall downe, King Charles shall lose true Subjects with the Towne. So saith your best Friend if you make timely use of him.
An Epigram upon two Lawyers, Bell and Hill, who were sent into Glocester to perswade them to yeeld. TWo pettifogging Lawyers came of late, In love, to tell us of our present state, And seem'd to be affected with our streights, Thinking to worke us out with their deceits: One speakes as if he had been soundly feed By the Popes agents; and tells us in our need No hope of helpe; all passages were block'd, We must deliver, or be soundly knock'd. The other sayes, Armies of strength appeare, Yet for his life he could not tell us where: Storme us they would, and that in severall places, Although as yet they dare not shew their faces. If storming would not doe, then famine shall, We having Beefe, they eating Cabidge all. If none of these will perfect their desere, Then without question they'll get all by fire, Being sure to doe it by some grand Granado, As erst the Spaniard did with his Armado. The verdict past, amongst the cursed crew Men, women, children, they must taste of rew. If we refuse to give them enterance, Then all alike after their pipe must dance. This was the Message: Th' answere thus in short: Neighbours, as for your love, we thanke you for't, But for your bug-beare threats so huge and big, If seven-score Cannons can but kill one Pig, We then have cause to feare nothing but sin Can make a breach to let such Rebels in: We trust in God, whose power, can make you quaile, Although you make so sure for to prevaile. Come when you will, and enter where you can, Be sure wee'll fight it out to the last man, And if for to provaile it be your fate, You'll finde we sold our lives at a deare rate. Bell. All know fall well That every Bell Is uselesse till't be hanged, And none, I hope, Denies a rope To have his sides well banged. Hill. This Hill was seen In sinner green Fresh, faire, and flourishing, Now, Proteus-like, 'Tis altered quite, 'Tis fading, perishing. FINIS.
