12490 99853108 18476
POPISH GLORYING IN ANTIQVITY turned to their shame. WHEREBY IS SHEWED, how they wrong, villifie, and disgrace, that whereunto they pretend to carry greatest reuerence: and are most guilty of that which they vp∣braid vnto others. Collected and proued out of themselues, for the singular profit both of PASTORS and PROFESSORS. By WILLIAM GVILD, Minister at King Edward. LONDON, Printed for Robert Allot, and are to be sold in Pauls Church-yard at the signe of the blacke Beare. 1627.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, And truely honorable, SIR ALEXANDER GORDON BARONET, of CLUNIE KNIGHT, &c. NEver more subtily inten∣ded the Gibeonits vnder pretence of olde Furni∣ture, & comming from a-farre, to deceiue the Lordes People, nor vnder the like pretence of Antiquitie novv, doeth Ba∣bels
brood intende to doe the same to Bethels Children. Nei∣ther more braggingly did ever the carnall Iewes, dissenting frō his Faith, yet claime a corporal descent from Abraham their fa∣ther, nor doe the craftie Iesuits, dissenting frō their doctrine, yet claime a full consent vvith orthodox Antiquitie: accusing vs of Noveltie, as Christs ovvn doctrine, & His Apostles, vvas before vs, that it may be seene true vvhich Sainct Peter fore-prophecied of such: to vvit, That in the latter times there should come false prophets,Marke 1.27. Acts 17.19. 2. Pet. 1.2. vvho privilie should bring in damnable heresies; and by rea∣son of vvhome the vvaye of trueth shoulde bee evill spo∣ken of. While as vve, notvvithstan∣ding, adhere so to truest Anti∣quitie,
as that consenting vvith Tertullian,Te. Apol. lt. vvho saith, Constat id verius esse, quod prius, id prius, quod ab initio, id ab initio, quod ab Apo∣stolis, Is is manifest, that that is truest, which is first; that that is first, which hath bene from the be∣ginning; that that hath beene from the beginning, which hath procee∣ded from the Apostles; vvee con∣clude vvith Lyrinensis vvordes, Quod it a docemus,Lyrinens. ad∣versiu hereses. vt cum dicimus nove, nont amen dicimus nova, & vniversum penitus mundum saeva repentinae haereseos tempestate per∣culsum, adantiquam fidem, à novel∣la perfidia, ad antiquam sanitatem, à novitatis vesania, ad antiquam lucem, à novitatis caecitate revo∣camus, That we so teach, that when wee speake after a new manner, yet notwithstanding wee speake not new things: and we draw back the whole worlde, affrighted with the cruell tempest of sudden heresie,
from recent-broached perfidie, vn∣to the ancient Faith; from the mad∣nesse of Noveltie, vnto sound An∣tiqultie; from the darknesse of No∣veltie, vnto the ancient Light. Yet it is no marvell, that as vnder pretence of keeping the lavve made against blasphe∣mers, our Head vvas condem∣ned as a blasphemer, by that Iewish High priest;Iohn, 19.7. So vnder pre∣tence of pleading for Antiqui∣tie, the members be condem∣ned by the Romane High priest, as violaters of Antiquitie. And as the Hagarenes called them∣selues Saracenes, so likevvise that vnder a name contrary to their nature, that Iesuitish crue, vvho seeme moste to procure for Antiquitie, practize moste against the same. This Pharisaicall brood being herein (as in other things) like
to their fore-fathers, of vvhom our Saviour aith, Dicūt, sed non faciunt, They say, but doe not: So these men, (as Ioab did to Abner) they speake fairlie, but deale most foulie vvith vene∣rable Antiquitie: 1. Rejecting Scripture (vvhich is most pri∣mitiue to vs, and Gods ovvne mouth) from being sole deter∣miner in Gods ovvne cause; because it is indeed that breath of consumption to their man of sinne: and, like the Arke, it plagueth those Philistimes, and over-throvveth their Dagon. Next, vvhen they haue made their recourse frō divine Au∣thoritie, to humane Testimo∣nie, challenging those ho∣lie Fathers of the primitiue Church, as impudentlie to bee altogether on their side, as e∣ver that Whoore challenged
Athanasius, to be her associate in her filthie Whoordome. Yet notvvithstanding, vvhen they finde that vvherein they repose, so clearly and peremp∣torly to depose against them; no more disdainfully did e∣ver the Iewes reject Christ, pre∣ferring to Him Barabbas, than they reject those Ancients, and their famous testimonies, pre∣ferring there-vnto the giddie Wine of their inebriating Er∣rors: and regarding them only so farre as they seeme to make for them; as Elias sate no lon∣ger by Cherith, nor Ionas vnder the Gourd, than the one flo∣vved, & the other flovvrished. Yea, not only dismisse they them, vvith contempt, vvhen they make not for them; but as the envious man, after the hus¦band-mans fielde vvas sovvne
vvith good seede, came craftily & quietly there-after, & min∣gled in his tares: So haue our Romanists sundry vvayes sophi∣sticated the famous vvorks of the Lords Worthies, eyther by intermingling their language of Babel, vvith the language of Bethel; and so making their Books lyke a Lincie-vvoolsie Garment: or doing to their paines, as Hanun did to the per∣sons of Davids Embassadours, cutting and curtayling them; or els altering their vvords, & vvhere they vvould say Shibbo∣leth, making to say Siboleth. And as Paul vvas accused, for bringing in Strangers and Gre∣cians in the Temple, to pollute the same; So most justly may they be accused, for vnjust in bringing of strangers (vvhich are Counterfeits, vnder the
name of Fathers) into the Church of GOD, vvith such fraudfull Forgerie, to corrupt craftily; and inventing vvitti∣ly, to circumvent vvickedly. And all this they doe for the Diana of the Papacie, and supporting of that glorious Whoore of their proude Mo∣narchie; setting not only a Ci∣tie, vvith Demetrius, but the vvhole vvorld in vproare: for (as that silver smith sayd) by that Craft they haue their vvealth: & if the Lords vvord prevaile, they see their Craft is in danger to be set at naught, and Dagon vvill surely dovvne before the Arke of GOD. The proofe and particulari∣zing of vvhat is formerly spo∣ken, both in their dealing vvith Fathers, Councels, and Histories, I haue summarily
hereafter digested, & succinctly set dovvn, & dedicate the same to Your Worships Name, as a most vvorthy Patrō & Pattern of Vertue, sincere in the Truth, zealous against Errour, a Mir∣rour of Policie, a Map of Hu∣manitie, an Honour to Your Name, an Ornament to Your Countrey, & a sole Moecenas of Letters amongst Your Equals in this respectlesse and clayie Age: vvhose Name, therefore, justly the Penns of the painful shal perpetuate, propagat your Fame, & cōtinue your memo∣rie. And amongst many astri∣cted to your Worship, for your Honorable & vertuous parts, I shall ever approue my selfe Your Worships in all respectiue duetie, W. GVILD.
To the Reader. AS the Iewish People ador∣ned the Burials of the ancient Pro∣phets, as honourers of their memories; but in the meane time rejected that Great Prophet fore-tolde by them, and persecuted their successors: or, as that Romane Band; who crucified our Head, how∣soever by wordes of salutation they seemed to giue Him honour & cour∣tesie; yet they shew by their deeds they meant disgrace and crueltie. Even so the Romish brood of that
lamed souldior, howsoever by words they would seeme to pleade for An∣tiquitie, yet their practises doe pro∣claime, that they are the defacers & defamers thereof in veritie. So that amongst them, (as Lyrinensis saith) Dum pro coelesti dogmate humanae superstitiones introducun∣tur, bene fundata antiquitas scelesta novitate subruitur, & nova cōtagio non tantū portiunculam, sed totam pariter Ecclesiam invasit: that is, While as humane superstitions are broght in for an heavenly point of Faith, well grounded Antiquitie is overthrowne by wicked Noveltie; and a new contagion hath broken in, not vpon a little part, but vpon the whole Church alyke. As the Ephesians therefore tu∣multuously cried out,Acts 19. Great is Dia∣na of Ephesus; so howsoever they in like manner crye, and appeale (as Paul did to Caesar) to Antiqui∣tie, to Fathers and Doctors of the primitiue Church; yet when they
are brought thither whither they haue appealed, they are seene evi∣dentlie as much to reject their or∣thodox doctrine, as ever the Ievves did the Prophets, whose Tombes they were decoring; and as much to abuse them in their holie pains, as ever their truest successours were in their harmlesse persons;Genesis 38. and (like Iudah to Tamar) to be most guiltie them∣selues of what they vp-braide to others; straining out the Gnat, but swallowing the Camell. Yea, as Salomō judged between the two Women, which of them was the mother of the living child; or as Saul confessed of David,1. Samuel 24. that hee was more righteous than he: So eve∣rie judicious discerner may easilie here-by perceiue, which of vs more righteouslie, or reverentlie dealeth with Antiquitie: for (beside the particulars ensuing in this Treatise) they thinke it no fault to appeale frō
the Fathers, to the Popes judgement, and so to mans mouthPlus uni pon∣tifi crederem, qum mille Au∣gustinis. Corn. Mus, in Rom. 3.4.. But wee never appeale from them, but to Scripture, and so to GODS Mouth. Againe, to reject their say∣inges, when they are contrarie to Scripture, is thought piaculum in vs: But to reject them, when they are contrarie to the Popes Decrees, is thought onelie pium to them Turrer. sum∣ma. lib. 2. c. 107 Also Stapicton, lib. 7. de doct. prin. c. 10. nec concilia, nec pa∣tres, nec ullus alius, nisi papa controversiarū ex est.. In like manner, wee sub∣ject Councels, and their dire∣ction, onelie to Scripture, and so vnto GOD: But they subject Councels, and their direction, to the Pope, and so to fraile man Bellar. l. 2. de pont. c. 27. in fine. Wee esteeme likewise no man to bee exeemed from the authori∣tie of a lawfull Councell, nor no flesh to bee aboue the same: But they advance their papall Dignitie aboue Councels in authoritie,
and exeeme the same there-frae; not only in suffering & correction, but also (as Terrecremata affir∣meth Turrecr. sum∣ma. lib. 2. c. 52. §. 9.) in matter of doing and direction. The other particulars of their dealing with Antiquitie, I haue in some measure heere-after manisted more amplie; and espe∣ciallie cleared the same succinctlie out of their Grand Bellarmine, to avoyde thy distraction about ma∣nie Bookes, and that (Gentle Reader) thou mayest haue the evidence out of one of best account with them, and moste obvious to vs, Et ut ex ungue Leonem, That thou mayest know the Lyon by his Paw, and rightlie consider, if so great evidence may bee had in one, or a fewe, how much more ample may bee had in the Writs of manie.
These paynes then, taken by mee heere-in for thine avayle, and excitation of others, accept thou graciouslie, censure charitablie, per∣use profitablie, applie prudentlie, and the LORD giue thee the good, and His owne Name the Glorie. Thine in CHRIST IESUS, W. Guild.
The Contents. FATHERS. OF Antiquitie, & what we bold of the severall sorts therof, Chap. 1 What the Romanists say of all the Fathers in generall, both in exposition of the Scripture, and dogmaticall pointes of Fayth. FATHERS.Chap. 2 How they reject them all, when they make not for them, altho consenting in one, Chap. 3 1. In dogmaticall points of Faith. 2. In exposition of Scripture. How they deale with the Fathers se∣verallie, and first, with those of the Greeke Church, Chap. 4 Howe they deale next with the Fa∣thers of the Latine Church, Chap. 5 Howe they haue corrupted the Fa∣thers, & ancient Writers of both, chap. 6 1. By adding vnto them, (lyke co∣loquintida vnto the whole∣some Herbs) prooved by ex∣amples.
2. By purging, and pairing from them, and so making them Eunuches, by violent castra∣tion. 3. By altering their words, and so prooving vnfaythfull Mes∣sengers, by fraudfull rela∣tion. Howe, manie vnder the name of Fa∣thers amongst them, are eyther shame∣leslie counterfeit, or wofullie vitiate, (going masked, lyke Ieroboams wyfe, to deceiue:) and this thorowe the first fiue Ages, or Centuries of the Church, Chap. 7 How (like those who vse divers weights in the Bag) they adduce Testimonies of some Fathers against vs as true; whom they disclaime as counterfeit, and corrupt, when they are opposed against them∣selues, Chap. 8 How (like those who cryed Osanna, and anone Crucifie,) they extoll and bring the Fathers for them in one place and point of Doctrine, and at their plea∣sure reject them in another, chap. 9 Some notable Fraudes (like the Snares
of that proverbiall Harlot) vsed by our Adversaries, in citation of the Fathers, where-of the Reader would carefullie beware, Chap. 10 How they preferre the judgementes of their late Divines, to the Fathers, both in dogmaticall points of Fayth, and expo∣sition of Scripture: as Rehoboam did the counsell of the young Men, to his Fa∣thers Ancients, Chap. 11 Last, by what partiall and corrupt rule, they admit, or reject, the Exposition of the Fathers, Chap. 12 COUNCELS. HOW, manie wayes, injuriouslie they deale with ancient Coun∣cels, COVNCELS.Chap. 13 1. By corrupting them, them∣selues, and that diverslie. 2. By accusing them, when they make against them; eyther of ignorance and fraude in determination, or of after falsification.
3. Howe they admit Councels, onelie where-in they make for them; and disdainfullie reject them, where-in they make against them. Popish avowed rejection in their late Councels of the most powerfull, prin∣cipall, and Primitiue Antiquitie, Chap. 14 HISTORIES. LAst of all, how they deale with an∣cient Historiographers, and their owne Records, Chap. 15 1. By giving them the Lie, ve∣rie vncivellie. 2. By alleadging them also to bee corrupt, when they make against them. 3. By admitting them onelie where-in they make for them: but other-wyse, without reason, roughlie rejecting them. 4. Howe them-selues haue for∣merlie corrupted those Re∣cordes
which were ex∣tant, and taken some wholie out of the waye: that, in matters of trueth, that maketh agaynst them, they haue left little to bee seene, and foysted in, in their place, manie contra∣rie Falsehoods.
TO THE AVTHOR. THis late, not least embroydred Worke of Thyne, With costlie Arras of a rich Engyne, Argues, that Tullie did to thee bequeath His flowing Tongue, when hee did lose his Breath. Haere thou vnfoldest those Sophisticke Charmes Of rayling pedant-Papistes, by strong Armes Even of their owne Confession; making plaine Their Wronges to Age, and their vnjust disdaine. Heere thou mak'st clere, to all judicious Eyes, That they, not wee, Antiquitie despyse. Even from their sheathes thou doest vnsheath these Swords, Which to vs Lyfe, but Death to them affords. Hence feare not then, fond Criticks, sharpe-vngrate▪ Thy Works beare proofe against the puffe of Hae. M. WALTER FORBES. TO THE PATRON. IT is no wonder, tho the Learned Crue Of Thee, and of none else, Protection sue; Since Thou doest Vertue, Vertue doth Thee crowne, With Bayes Eternall, of most high Renowne. Then vnto Thee, and to none else belong, The IO PEAN'S of a Poets Song. M. WALTER FORBES.
DE AUTHORIS INDUSTRIA. IActat ROMA Patrum è placitis se posse tueri dogmata, queis vitiat Solis utramque domum; His assentiri, quod & his reverentia prima Debetur, Patres pulpita tota sonent. Ista tamen falso jactat; qui nescis haeret GUILDUS erit dubiae Duxque Comesque viae: Consulet hunc doctè monstrantem cuncta, videbit ROMA probris laceret queis pia scripta Patrum. TO THE AUTHOR. LEarnd GUILD, how learndly div'st thou in the depth Of Romish Errours, with the Lead of Skill! And letst all see That hath not ev'r beene kept As Truth, with which Rome now the World doth fil. Scripture repugnes, the Fathers all repyne, Antiquitie vntaynted doth declare, How much Rome will from them in trueth declyne, Although shee seeme to them still to adhere. But if the Fathers were on Earth agayne, With thanks, braue Guild, they would thy payns repay, Because thou hast reliev'd them from that Stayne, Which Rome would rubbe vpon them everie day. Goe forward, Guild, and feare not for Thy Foes, To take such Payns, Romes Errours to discose. M. W. C.
CHAPTER I. Of Antiquitie, and the severall sorts there-of. 1. OF SCRIPTURE. AGe is a Crovvne of Glorie, (sayeth the Wyse) when it is found in the way of Righteousnesse: and, Aske for the olde way, which is the good waye, is a wholesome counsell: For if we speake of AN∣TIQUITIE in the Superlatiue, wee may positiuelie affirme, Quod Anti∣quissimum est, est verissimum; & quod
verissimum est, est tutissimum: That that which is most ancient, is truest; and that which is moste true, is moste sure. Therefore, Gods affirmatiue Trueth to Eva, was prior to Satans negatiue Lie, Non moriemini, Yee shall not die: And therefore ever since, after the Be∣raeans exemple, To the Law, and to the Testimonie, hath beene the soundest directorie. Neyther must rash credulitie (as that of the young Prophets) against the warrand which wee haue out of Gods owne mouth,1. Kings 13. induce vs, so to hearken to Gray hairs, as they anie way seduce vs. Neyther was it a sufficient war∣rand for the Pharisaicall doctrine in our Saviours tyme, that it was sayd of olde: but the true Touch-stone, where-to wee are taught to reduce each thing for reformation, is to that, Quod fuit ab initio, which was from the beginning. Divine Institution be∣ing onelie lyke the First-borne, to whom, as Primacie in order, so Su∣premacie of authoritie, as the ex∣cellencie of Dignitie, and preroga∣tiue
of Strength is sole and onelie competent. This is that which Peter calleth the moste sure worde; which as it came from Heaven by inspiration, & leadeth to Heaven by direction: so hath it ever beene guarded by Heaven, by powerfull protection. And as by it the manner of Gods worship, as by a patterne, hath bene formed and prepared: so haue the aberrations there-frae, and decay there-of,2. Chron. 31.21.35. beene ever reformed, and repared. This is the Christians Non ultra, No further; whose comprehension & Consummatum, Accomplishment, (as it is in Scripture,) So doeth the Soule solie borrow light, (as the Moone from the Sunne,) and onelie from Scripture: Gods word there-in onlie resounding, His enlightning beams there-in onelie shyning, His will being there-in fullie revealed, and His whole counsell clearlie dete∣cted. So that as the sole rule of Re∣ligion wee doe embrace it, and as
the perfect patterne on the Mount we doe proclaime it: although our Adversaries would seeme to supply a defct there-in, partlie by Apocry∣phall Writings, against all Antiquitie, and partlie by sophisticating the sound sense there-of, with vnwrit∣ten veritie: the glorious light where-of they woulde lyke-wyse obfuscate, with an vnknowne tongue, against all authoritie, and the comfortable knowledge wher∣of, by an impious prohibition they with-holde from their Laitie. 2. Of Councels and Fathers. NExt vnto Sacred Scripture, wee reverence Councels,Bell. lib. 1. de Concil. cap. 5. in fine. and Fathers of the primitiue Church: and there∣fore Bellarmine granteth, that we re∣ceiue the first sixe Councels: which we account as Subjects at the right hand (lyke Bathsheba) beside the Throne, but will not place them in the Throne, (lyke Salomon himselfe) giving the Priviledge of
not vnto them, but to their GOD and ours.Iohn 4.42. And as the Samari∣tanes, believing them not so much because they sayde it, as that we find their speach, lyke the Womans, agree with Christes wordes: and therefore take not their sentences as a Law, but as they homologate with the Law,Isai 8.22. and are tryed by the Testimonie. How-so-ever then wee account them Fathers to vs, yet wee esteeme them sonnes and subjectes to the Trueth it selfe: and that wee are no further bound to follow them, than Paul willed the Corinthians to be fol∣lowers of him:1. Cor. 11.1. And therefore, as Orpah left Naomi,Ruth 1. when she left Mi∣dian: or as Augustine left Cyprian be∣fore him, when hee, and a whole Councell, left Scripture, concerning Re-baptizing. So we may leaue them lawfullie, when they leaue the Trueth erringlie, else, why are not the Papists them-selues Millenaries, Quae opinio,Bell. lib. 3 de Pont. cap. 17. §. hac. fuit multorum Veterum, Which was the opinion of many of the Ancients, sayeth their Grand Bellarmine.
Wee may not, therefore, sacri∣fice to the paynes of Man, what is due onelie to the pen of the Spirit: nor as if gods had come downe, in the shape of men, as the people of Lystra thought Paul and Barnabas, dare we giue to them that supreame honour of absolute beliefe, as to the mouth of God: but must with saint Ierome distinguish wyselie of the persons, and with saint Augustine discerne warilie of their payns: Ie∣rome saying of the one, Scio me aliter habere Apostolos,Hieron. epist. 62 cap. 2. aliter reliquos tractato∣res, illos semper vera dicere, istos in qui∣busdam ut homines aberrare: I know I respect the Apostles one way, and other entreaters of mat∣ters another: the one, as those that ever speak truth; the others, as men in some things subject to errour. And Augustine saying of the other,August. de beno persv. c. 2. Neminem velim sic amplecti omnia mea, ut me sequatur, nisi in iis, in quibus me non errare perspexerit, I would haue no man so to embrace all my writings and sayings, that he should follow mee, but in those things in which he knoweth well that I am free from errour. So that they them-selues subject their worke to the fyerie tryall of the Spirit, their building to the measu∣ring
Reede of the Temple; their speach, to the Law and Testimonie; their Coyne, to the Ballance of the Sanctuarie; and tho never so skil∣full for the worke of the LORDS Tabernacle, like Bezaleel & Aholiab, yet must their cunning bee lyable to the canon of Scripture, and their labours levelled according to that patterne, whereby no more indig∣nitie is done so, to their venerable persons, nor worthie paines, and happie memories,Iohn 5.39. than CHRIST wished to be done to his heavenlie Speaches; or the Baereans did to the Apostles Preachings. And in a word, Reserving to GOD, and sa∣cred inspyred Scripture, their pre∣rogatiue royall, wee protest, that wee afford as much authoritie, as Pietie will permit, Reason require, Equitie admit, or themselues doe desire. So farre are wee from vili∣fying Antiquitie, disdaining the Fa∣thers, contemning of Councels, or rejecting their Authorities, as most impiouslie we are belied, and more
impudentlie slandered, by those who are of alike temper in their Faces,Daniel, 2. as Nebuchadnezar's Image was in his yron legs, being suteable of a whorish fore-head, that cannot bee ashamed, who are the suppor∣ters of that Whoore of Babylon. While as they (as shalbe showne God-willing) eyther contradict openlie, castrate craftilie, vilifie dis∣dainfullie▪ reject contumeliouslie, corrupt wilfullie, counterfeit auda∣ciouslie, or glose shameleslie, and slander injuriouslie, not onelie Fa∣thers severallie, but the most inno∣cent proceedings in the first, and most famous, Councels. 3. Of Historie. ANd as for Histories, the Vn∣folder of Prophecie, the Light of Times, the Lyfe of Memorie, the Eternizer of Actions, the Glasse of Sufferings, & Detecter of Trueth, wee admit the same more than our Adversaries, & dimit them as pro∣bable Witnesses, with farre lesse In∣jurie:
wherein wee clearlie see, that Sainct Peter and his true Succes∣sours, were never more busie to found Reigion, than his preten∣ded Successours at Rome haue bene there-after to confound Religion, & on the ruines thereof to ground their usurpation: which made their owne Author of Fasciculus temporum, to cry out,F. 49. defecit sanct as primi∣tiv, & dii∣ntae sunt veri∣tate: that is, Primitiue ho∣linesse was ec∣clipsed, and verites were impared. of the 900. yeare of GOD, that in that most wicked time, and in the Papall Seat, both Pietie and Veritie was altogether decayed: and Platina to say, Quod eo tum Pontificatus devenerat ut qui plus largitione & ambitione valeret, is tan∣tummodo dignitatis gradum bonis oppres∣sis & rejectis obtineret: that is, that at that time the Popedome came to that passe, that hee who was able to doe most by bryberie and ambition, good men being borne downe and re∣jected, did onlie obtaine the place of honour. Thus is made plaine the falling of that Starre from Heaven,Revelation, 9. to whome was given, the Key of the bottomlesse Pit: Thus did that Beast rise out of the Earth, horned like the Lambe, but speaking lyke
the Dragon, and aspire both to such matchlesse power, and pompous pryde: Thus began that Whoore to sit on manie Waters, and that Mother of Harlots to make the Earth drunke, with the Wine of her Fornications, beeing drunke her selfe with the Blood of the Saincts. Thus out of cleare Storie we see, how what budded both in Demas and Diotrephes, had its perfection in the Apex of the Papacie; never ceasing, till that which before was a preaching Church, became there∣after a pompous Court: and those whose Predecessours were made Martyres, became themselues, by cruell massacring, Martyr-makers. So that as in the first period of the Church, there was trueth and pa∣tient suffering, (against Satans force) with holie simplicitie; and in the second there was learned and pithie wrestling (against Satans fraud) by errour and Heresie: So in the third poysonable corruption,
entred in the Romane Church by Pelfe and Pryde, Mammon and Monarchie: till at last Sodomiticall ease and fulnesse of Bread, bred ty∣rannous securitie: which being joy∣ned with Craftinesse and obstina∣cie, doth now with bloodie cruel∣tie and impudencie, fill vp the Cup, and summe vp the Mysterie. All which is made manifest by their owne Friends and Favourers, who, howsoever they be the brood of their Bowels, yet like Vipers, who discover the bowels of their venomous Mother; so these declare the lamentable decay of the light of religious Trueth, vnder the cloud of Papacie; and the worlds dolefull declyning, to that palpable and mistie darknesse of ignorance and Apostacie. They likewise de∣tect the Schismes and Simonies of the Romane Church, the pride and prevailing of that Apostaticke Sy∣nagogue, the craft and crueltie of that brutish Beast, the licentious luxurie of that lustfull Harlot, the
cloaked hypocrisie of that false Pro∣phet, with the damnable entries, desperate liues, & dreadfull deathes of those men of Sinne: Sometimes a Whoore possessing the Seate of that Whoore of Babylon, as wee reade of Pope Ioane: Sometimes a Whoore obtaining that Seate to her filthie Whoore-master, as wee reade of Theodora, advancing Iohn X. Sometimes the Whoorish Ba∣stard of a Pope, and a Whoore sit∣ting therein, as Iohn XI. procreated betweene Sergius III. and Marozia, Meretrix famosissima, a most notorious Whoore, (sayeth Onuphrius.) Some∣times by Monsters for filthinesse, and all sort of Vice, as Iohn XII. Steven VII. Sylvester III. Bennet IX. Sometimes entring by pactiō with the Devill, as Sylvester II. Some∣times by Simonie, or violent intru∣sion, as wee see was common, by Histories consent:Plaina in vita Syla. 3. and sometimes by such craftie cousenage, as wee see in Boniface VIII. who entred lyke a Foxe, lived like a Lyon, and died
like a Dog,Fasc. temp. f. 49. & 59. saith their owne Fasci∣culus. All these Witnesses of their owne wee produce faithfullie, wee desire them to bee heard indiffe∣rentlie, acknowledging their pens by GODS providence to haue beene guided carefullie, and for them wee thanke the LORD for their detection of veritie. But how they are of late belied in their Works, disgraced in their Writs, rejected in their Testimonies, and vilified by our Adversaries, the Reader may heereafter see, and the peruser consider.
CHAP. II. What the Romanists say of all the Fathers, and Ancients in generall, both in exposition of Scripture, and Dogmaticall pointes of Fayth. HOwsoever Thraso∣nicklie their great Golia Bellarmine doth brag of the consent of Anti∣quitie with them in everie point of controversie,Bell. lib. 3. de pont. cap. 19. §. hoc iem. saying to vs, Vos nihil aliud fere afferre soletis, quam vestram ipsorum interpretationem: Nos vero pa∣trum consensum:Bell. lib. 1. de Cristo. cap. 10 Initio. that is, You vse to bring no other thing almost, but your owne interpreta∣tion: but wee bring the consent of the Fathers. And howsoever hee slanderouslie vpbraideth vs,Bellar. oratione ante Tom. 4. §. Corona. saying, Adversarij parum aut nihil tribuunt patribus, imo nihili faciunt mille Cyprianos, & mille Augustinos:Bell. lib. 4. de Euch. cap 26. Itio. that is, Our Adver∣saries giue little or no credit to the Fathers; yea,
they count nothing of a thousand Cyprians, and a thousand Augustines; forgetting himselfe when else-where for communion of the Cup to all, hee sayeth, Mul∣ta loca Adversarij ex patribus citant: that is, Our Adversaries cite manie places of the Fathers for them▪ yet notwithstan∣ding what hee especiallie sayeth of them all in generall, and thereafter how hee and others dealeth with them in particular, both severallie one by one, & conjunctlie convea∣ned in Counsell, wee shall heereaf∣ter (God willing) declare. First then, speaking of their in∣terpretation of Scripture,Bell. lib. 3. de verbo. cap. 10. §. respondeo a∣liud. he sayeth as much as anie Protestant, affir∣ming, that they expone Scripture, More Doctorum solum, non Iudicum; ideo{que} sententiam eorum non necessariò sequendam, sed quatenus ratio suadeo: that is, As Doctors only, and not as Iudges, therefore the Sentence is not necessarilie to be fol∣lowed, but so farre as reason perswadeth. Next, speaking of their other writtes of dogmaticall pointes of Faith, hee sayeth, Scripta Patrum non sunt regulae, nec habent authoritatem
obligandi: that is, The Writs of the Fa∣thers are not Rules, neyther haue they authoritie to astrict vs to them The reason whereof their owne Roffensis doeth render, saying,Roff. in resut  7. . Nec diffitemur errasse Patres, Homines enim erant sicut & nos: that is, Neiher deny wee but the Fathers haue erred, for they were Men, even as wee are. Imo constat (sayeth Bellarmine) quosdam ex prae∣cipuis eorum in quibusdam non leviter lapsos,Bell. lib. 3. de terbo cap. 10. §. at. is. Bell. lib. 4. de Christo cap. 8. § respondo. Bell lib. 1. de Sacrā. cap▪ 26. §. tertio. ut Hilarium vix dolores corpo∣ris in CHRISTO agnovisse, & Cy∣prianus improbabat Sacramenta tradita ab Hereticis aut Schismaticis: that is, Yea, it is sure, that some of the chiefe of them er∣red, and that not lightlie in some things, as Hilarie did, who searce did acknowledge that CHRIST suffered any paine in His Bodie; and Cyprian de∣nyed, that they were Sacramentes, which were ministred by Heretickes, or Schismatickes. Item▪ Iraeneus contendit (sayeth hee) CHRISTUM fere ad annum 50 pervenisse antequam passus est: that is, Ireus also did holde, that CHRIST almost came to bee fiftie yeares of age before Hee suffered: which is flat contrarie to Scripture, and S. Iohns relation, who showeth, that hee was baptized at 30, and at the third Passeover thereafter that hee suffered Death, &c.
I omit their confession how ma∣nie were millenaries; as also Au∣gustines condemning of Children vnbaptized to hels fire,See Camus l. 3. c. 3 of the Fa∣thers errours. with Ieromes errour of second marriages, &c. Therefore,Aquin, part▪ 1. quast,  art 8. §. odd secundū. (sayeth Aquinas) Authoritatibus canonicae Scripture uti∣tur sacra doctrina propriè ex necessitate arguendo, authoritatibus autem aliorum doctorum Ecclesiae, arguendo proabiliter. Innititur enm fides nostra revelationi Apostolis & Prophetis factae, qui cano∣cos libros scripserunt, non autem reve∣laioni siqua fuit alis doctoribus facta; vnde dicit Augustinus in Epistola ad Hieronymum, Solis enim Scriptura∣rum Libris qui canonici appellantur, di∣dici hunc honorem deferre, ut nullum au∣thorem eorum in scribendo errasse aliquid, firmissime credam: Alios autem it a lego, ut quantalibet sanctitate doctrina{que} prae∣polleant, non ideo verum putem quia ipsi ita senserunt, vel scripserint: that is, Holie doctrine vseth the authoriti of canonicke Scripture, properlie and necessarilie concluding out of them, bu gueth onlie probablie out of the authorities of other Doctors of the Church for our fayth is grounded on that which was revealed to the Prophets and Apostles, who wryte the cano∣nicall
Bookes, but not to that which was revealed to anie other Doctors, (if any such thng was) wherefore sayeth Augustine in his Episte to rome, For I haue learned (sayeth hee) to giue this ho∣nour onlie to the Bookes of Scripture, which are called Canonicke, that I most firmlie belieue that no Author of any of them in their writing erred in a jet▪ but as for others, I so reade them, that altho they were never so excellent, eyther in godlinesse or learning, yet I doe not belieue that it is true, be∣cause they thought or wrote so. Wherefore in Patribus legendis (sayeth their Salmeron) servanda vi∣detur sententia Quintiliani,Saler. Is. in Epist. ad Rom. disp. 6. s si∣ne. . l. 10. Cap. 1.qui sic scribit; Neque statim (inquit) id le∣genti persuasum sit, omnia quae magni Authores dixerunt, uti{que} esse perfecta, nam labuntur interdum & oneri cedunt, & indulgent ingeniorum suorum volupta∣ti, summi sunt, homines tamen, acci∣ditque lectoribus ut quicquid apud ipsos reperiunt, dicendilegem putant, ut dete∣riora imitentur: that is, In reading of the Fathers, the judgement of Quintilian would bee kept, who wryteth fo neyther instantlie (sayeth hee) let the Reader bee assured, that all thinges which great Authors haue sayde, are everie way perfect, for they erre sometyme, and succumbe, and giue loose reines to the pleasure of their own wits. It is true, they are great Authors, but yet they are men; and it befalleth their Readers, that whatso∣ever they finde in them, they thinke it a Law to their speaches, that so they may follow the worse thinges. And for a particular practise of
this fore-saide direction,Lyra in Mat. 1. Lyra set∣teth downe his owne example, saying, Nec debet aliquis moveri, si in hoc ob opinione Hieronymi discssero: nam dicta sanctorum non sunt tantae au∣thoritatis, quin liceat contrarium tenere, in iis quae per Scripturas non determi∣nantur, ut ait Augustinus ad Vincen∣tium, de sanctorum doctorum scriptis; hoc genus scribendi à canonicis Scriptu∣ris distinguendum est, nam testimonia ex eis non depromuntur, quasi non liceat aliter sentire: that is, Neyther should any man bee moved, if I depart in this from the opi∣nion of Ierome, for the sayings of the holy Fathers are not of so great authoritie, but it is lawfull to hold the contarie to them, in those things which are not determined by the Scriptures, as Augustine sayeth to Vincentius of the writs of the holie Do∣ctors. This sort of writing is to bee distinguished from canonicke Scriptures; for Testimonies are not taken out of them, as if it were not lawfull to any other-wyse to thinke. Now then, if any Protestant say farder, than the foresayde Popish Doctors avouch concerning the Fathers, eyther in exposition of Scripture, or other points of Faith, let the most malicious Adversarie instance, and the vnpartiall Reader judge and discerne.
CHAP. III. Hovv they reject Them all, when They make not for them, altho consenting in one: And first, In doctrinall points of Fayth. BELLARMINE answering to Her∣mannus in the mat∣ter of Traditions,Bell l 4 de ver∣bo, c. 7. §. ad . layeth this as a ground; Etsi enim erraverint aliqui pa∣trum (sayeth hee) in quibusdam dog∣matibus, nunquam tamen omnes simul in eodem errore convenerunt proinde cum ostendimus omnes convenire in Traditio∣nibus non scriptis asserendis, satis effi∣caciter probamus in eo illos non errasse: that is, Albeit some of he Fathrs haue erred in some points of fayth, yet they never agreed all in anie one errour: thereore when wee show, that they all agree for the estblishing of vnwritten Tra∣ditions, wee poue sufficientlie, that they erred not in that.Sal. Is. in 1 Ioh. 3. disp. 25. §. tertio. Salmeron yet commeth nea∣rer,
and sayeth, Non sunt improbanda veterum testimonia, quando omnes, vel fere omnes, in unam sententiam con∣veniunt, vel in uno aliquo Scripturae loco interpretando concordant, quia tunc Pa∣tres certissimum & inevitabile reddunt argumentum veritatis catholicae, & cer∣tae ac legittimae interpretationis: that is, The Testimonies of the Fathers are not to bee re∣jected when they all, or almost all, agree in one opinion, or in the exposition of any place of Scrip∣ture, because then the Fathers giue a sure and ine∣vitable argument of catholick veritie, and of a sure and lawfull exposition of Scripture. And yet how they deale with Antiquitie in this point, let these particulars heereafter declare. FIrst, in the freeing of the Vir∣gine Maries owne conception,Bell. de amiss. gratiae l. 4. c. 15 §. a hac. from all originall Sinne, Bellarmine is so resolute a decreeter, that hee sayeth, Altho there bee sundrie amongst the Catholicks that count it the surest trueth, That except CHRIST alone, none was ever conceived without originall sinne: yet seeing the Councell of Trent hath decreeted otherwise, hee con∣cludeth, That whosoever believeth
the contrarie, Inter Catholicos (sayth hee) non sunt numerandi: that is, They are not to bee numbred amongst Catholicks. And yet beholde, Ex hoc loco, (Rom. 5.12. In qu omnes peccarunt) Sancti omnes (sayeth Canus) uno ore asseverarunt beatā Virginem in pecca∣to originali conceptam fuisse:Caus loc. tl. col. l. 7. c. 1. num. 1. §. Sancti . that is, Out of this place (Rom. 5.12. In whom all haue sin∣ned) THE WHOLE holy Fathers with one mouth affirme the blessed Virgine to haue beene conceived in originall sinne. Therefore wee see that neither doe the Romanistes now holde that, which with one consent the Fathers helde of olde, nor are they accounted good Ca∣tholicks, who now belieue the same which they before professed. This selfe same agreement of all the Ancients, most clearlie wit∣nesseth their great Master of Sen∣tences,Lombard. l. 3. dist. 3. saying, Of the Flesh which CHRIST assumed in the Wombe of the Virgine, Sane dici potest, & credi oportet, Iuxta Sanctorum attestationis convenientiam, ipsam prius peccato fuisse obnoxiam sicut reli∣qua Virginis caro. Sed Spiritus sancti operatione ita mundatam ut ab omni
peccati▪ contagio  uniretur ver∣bo▪ that is, Surely it may bee sayde, and must bee believed, according to the Testimonie of the Saincts, agreeing all in one, that it was at first sub∣ject to Sinne, (to wit, that where-of Christ took His humanitie) as the rest of the flesh of the Vir∣gine but there-after, that it was so cleansed, by the operation of the holy Ghost▪ that being fred from all Contagion what-so-ever of Sinne, it might bee so vnited to the Word. The same Consent of Fathers, con∣fesseth lykewyse Salmeron:Salmeron in Rom. 5. disp. 5. but yet, how would this Iesuit escape▪ Re∣spondems ex Augustino, &c. We answere (sayeth hee) out of Augustine, and the doctrine of S. Thomas, That a Reason ta∣ken from Authoritie, is infirme. Also: A∣gaynst this Multitude which they object, wee answere (sayeth hee) out of God's word, Exod. 23, Thou shalt not follow the judgement of manie, to depart frō the Trueth. For when the Donatists gloried in the multitude of Authors, Augustine answered, That it was a token of a cause▪ destitute of the strength of Trueth, which leaned to the sole authoritie of a multitude who might ere, (sayeth hee.) Now how deep this Point drawes, wherin Poperie avowedly opposes it
selfe agaynst all Antiquitie▪ in equal∣ling the Virgine Marie, even with CHRIST Him-selfe, let Bernard, in his 172 Epistle, and their owne S. Thomas testifie, whose mynde the fore-named Salmeron in these words doeth expresse,Salm. in Rom. 5. Disp. 49. saying, Privilegium hoc Thomas quasi nimis excelsum Virgini denegavit, putans per illud adequari Chri∣sto: that is, S. Thomas denyed this Pri∣viledge to the Virgine, as too high; thinking it an equalling of her, even to CHRIST Him-selfe. And yet this blasphemous Doctrine is not onlie generally helde by Romanists▪ but decreed, as a mat∣ter of Fayth,Concil. Basil. sess. 36. appen∣dix 5. sess. con∣l. Trid. in their Councell of Ba∣sill, and confirmed in Trent. Wherefore, we may say▪ as Bellar∣mine formerlie sayd in the matter of Traditions, when wee show, that all the Ancients agree, in affirming, that the Conception of all Men & Wo∣men what-so-ever, (except Christ alone) is not without Originall sinne: Therefore we may conclude (vsing his owne wordes) Quod st efficati∣er probamus In eo illos non errasse: that
is, That wee proue sufficientlie enough, that in this  they o-wyse erred: And consequently, that the contra∣rie Doctrine, and Decree there-vnto, is al-to-gether Erronious▪ & that Church which maintained the same, is vn∣avoydably hereticall, as the mouth also of that holie Father, Augu∣stine most clearly with vs pronoun∣ceth saying,Aug. lib. 5. con∣tra Iuan. c. 9. & de fide ad Petrum, c. 26. Si absque dubio cara Chri∣sti, non est car , sed  carni eccati, quid  intelligamu  excepta omnem, raliqua  car∣nm essa pectati▪ & quisquis hoc gat, detstandus hereticus . That is, If without doubt the flesh of Christ as not sinfull flesh; but  onelie to sinfull flesh, what resteth to bee, vnderstood, but that it onlie being excepted, all other hu∣mane flesh is sinfull  and who-so-ever denyeth this, hee is found to bee a detesta∣ble Hereticke. The second Point, concerning Worship of Images, wherin Poperie opposeth it selfe palpablie against all Antiquitie. SEcondlie, concerning the Wor∣ship of Images at their Polydorus Vir∣gilius
testifieth,Polyd. Virg. lib. 6. de invent. rerum, cap. 13. That all Antiquitie, in one Voyce, abhorred anie such thing: Nam imaginum cltum (sayeth he) nn modo nostrae Religionis exprtes, sedteste Hieronim,  veteres sancti pa∣trs damnabant obmetum idoltariae, qua nullum execrabilias slus esse pots: that is, For not onelie those that are not of our Religion, but as S. Ierome testified, al∣most all the ancient holy Fathers, condem∣ned the worship of Images, for feare of Idolatrie, than  there can bee no more an cursed Villanie. Hence it was, that all adoration of Images, what-so-ever, was con∣demned as Idolatrous, both in the East, in that famous Councell of Constantinople, of 338 ancient Bis∣shops, conveaned in the yeare of God 754; as also in the West, in that famous Councell of Frankford, vnder Charles the Great, holden by the Fathers and Bishops of Italie, France, and Germanie, in the yeare of God 794. And vvhat vvas the Doctrine vvhich the verie papall Sea it selfe
did hold in the 600 yeare of Christ before that,Greg. lib. 9. epist. 9. let Pope Gregorie his Letter to Serenus, Bishop of Marsils, testifie; vvilling him, how-so-ever Images were to bee tollerated for instruction, to bee in Churches, yet that hee should suffer them by no means to be adored, or anie wise worshipped. The Reason where-of hee giveth, is this, Quia omne manu∣factum adorare non licet, quoniam scrip∣tum est, Dominum Deum tuum adorabis, & Ipsi soli servies: that is, Because it is not lawfull to worship anie thing that is made with hands, in respect it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord, thy God, & Him onlie shalt thou serue. Where we see Dulia, or religious service, which is the most inferiour sort of popish worship, forbidden to Images, by a Pope him selfe. But how crosse to this ancient Pope's direction, is the new Papall prescription, let the wordes of the Roman Catechism, set out by the command of the Councel of Trent to all men notifie, declaring, That
Images of Saincts are put in the Chur∣ches,Cateches. Rom. part. 3. cap. 2. sect. 14. as well that they may be worshipped, as for instruction▪ that people being admo∣ished by their example, may conforme them selues to their lyfe and manners. Yea, not onlie in Gregorie's tyme were they forbidden to bee wor∣shipped, but by an vniforme con∣sent of ancient holie Fathers, con∣veaned in the Councell of Eliberis, holden Anno 310,Cocil. . lib. cap. 36. for feare of Ado∣ration that might ensue, they were forbidden to bee put in Churches at all. And therefore Epiphanius, who lived there-after,Epiphan. Epist. ad Iohan. Hie∣rosolym. tom. 1. operum Hieron. epist. 60. in Anno 390, fin∣ding a Vayle where-on was payn∣ted the Picture of Christ, or some Sainct, in a Church at Anablt, hee rent the ame in pieces, and wrote to the Patriarch of Ierusalem (within whose bounds it was) showing that it was agaynst the authoritie of Scripture, and repugnant to Chri∣stian Religion, to  or suffer any such Wayles, or Images to be  Churches. Therefore it was lykewyse, when
Adrian the Emperour had comman∣ded,Lampridis, in vita Alexandri Severi. that▪ Temples should be made in all Cities without Images, that strayght-wayes it was presentlie conceited, & rumoured, that he did prepare those Temples for Christ. The reasō was, because the ancient Christians had no Images in their Churches. Of whome when it was demanded by the Gentiles, why they had no Images? Minutius Foelix gaue them this answere,Minutius Foe∣lix, in Octavio. What I∣mage (sayeth hee) shall I make to God, when man him selfe, if thou rightly judge, is God's Image? Yea, such was the more carefull warinesse yet, of the ancient Fa∣thers, to prevent Idolatry, that they would not haue the Images of God nor His Saincts, so much as set vp in private houses. To which pur∣pose was that speach of the foresaid Epiphanius ascribed vnto him in the Councell of Constantinople,Epiph. citat. a Concil. Constant. in act. 6. to. 5. Concil. Ni∣cen. il. saying, Haue this in mynd, beloed, Sonnes, not to bring Images into the Church,  Church¦yards,  places of the ,
not into an ordinarie house; but al∣wayes carrie about the rememberance of God into your hearts: for it is not lawfull for a Christian man to bee carried in sus∣pense by his eyes, and the wandring of his mynde. Nay, in the ancientest and best ymes, some would not so much as admit the Arte of making Images, to be amongst Christians, being so jealous of the danger that might ensue of their vnfit location, and il∣licite adoration: vvhich made Cle∣mens Alexandrinus to say,Clem. Alexan. Protreptie. ad . We are playn∣lie forbidden (sayeth hee) to exercise that deceitfull Arte. And yet to what height both of Impietie & Impudencie, agaynst all Antiquitie, is Popish doctrine ari∣sen vnto in this point, let their own wordes testifie. First, that the same worship is due to the Image, which is due to that which it representeth, so tea∣cheth S. Thomas of Aquin, and their S. Bonavee?Aquin. 5. pa est. 25. and therefore, that the highest degree of divine wor∣ship,
which is Latria, is due to anie Image of Christ. And that this is not the doctrine of the forenamed, or of a few, but the constant do∣ctrine of Romane divinitie, thus te∣stifieth Azorius the Iesuit,Azorius insti∣tut. moral. tom. 1. lib. 9. cap. 6. It is the con∣stant judgement of Divines (sayeth he) imaginem eodem honore & cultu honorari & coli, quo colitur id cujus est imago: that is, That the Image is to be honoured, and worshipped, with the same honour and worship, where-with that is worshipped, where-of it is an Image. Secondlie, Per se & proprie st vnerandae, (sayeth Bellarmine) it a utip∣sae cerminum & venerationem, ut in se considerantur, & non solum ut vicem ge∣runt exemplaris: that is, By them selues, and proprlie they are to bee worshipped; so that they themselues doe limit the wor∣ship, that it goeth not farder, as they are considered in them selues, and not onlie as they supplie the roome of that which they represent. Than which Position, ne∣ver anie was ever more blasphe∣mous, nor taught more grosse Ido∣latrie. And yet, lest that it should
seeme to bee Bellarmine's, or the mynd of a few,Pet. de Cabre∣ra, in 3. part. Thoma, q. 25. art. 3. disp. 2. num. 32. Frier Pedro de Cabre∣ra, a great Divine in Spayne, telleth vs, that it is, Communis Theologorum conclusio: that is, The common conclusion of the Romish Divines. The third Poynt, where-in avowedlie Po∣perie rejecteth Antiquitie: to wit, in placing their consecration of the Eu∣charist, in the words, Hoc est cor∣pus meum. THirdlie, the Arch-bishop of Caesarea,Archiep. Cas. lib. 1. f. 115. in his Booke of the ne∣cessitie of amending Schoole Theo∣logie, dedicate to Sixtus 5, sayeth, that it is the doctrine, Omnium Or∣thodoxorum, tum Graecorum, quam Lati∣narum, per verba sacrae orationis fieri con∣secrationem: that is, That all the Ortho∣dox Fathers, both Greeke and Latine, holde, that Consecration is made by the words of holie Prayer. And yet all Pa∣pists refusing this Verdict of Fa∣thers, affirme it to bee onelie by these words, Hoc est corpus meum.
The fourth Poynt, concerning Limbus Patrum: and for probation there-of whether it was Samuel truelie, who appeared 1 Kings 28, us. Bellar∣mine holdeth, agaynst the most cōmon consent of venerable Antiquitie. LAst, when the consent of Fa∣thers is particularlie adduced agaynst Bellarmine, both Greeke and Latine, to infirme his proofe of Limbus Patrum, out of 1 Kings 28; they affirming, that it was Satan that appeared to Saul, and not the Prophet Samuel; thus disdaynfullie doeth hee reject their harmonie,Bell. lib. 2. de Purg. cap. 6. §. respond. saying, His non bstantibus, enendum est vere Smith elis animain fuisse: that is, Notwithstanding that all those Fathers say so, it is to bee helde, that it was truelie the soule of Samuel who appeared. I omit how Bellarmine showeth, that in the matter of Marriage,Bell. lib. 1. de Matrim. c. 7. §. ex quo. their Canus did holde an opinion, both singular & new, agaynst all Antiquitie: wherfore hee concludeth, that Canus opinion must bee altogether false: or else it should folow that in a most weigh∣tie
poynt the whole Church assu∣redlie had for manie Ages rred. As also how Gropperus,Bell. ibid. c. 20. § respond. another of their number, in the same matter of Matrimonie, dissented from all An∣tiquitie. Wee see then, howe consonant to their Practise, is their Thrasonick Bragging, who sayeth, Nos Patrum doctrinam non aliqua ex parte admitti∣mus, alia repudiamus, sed integram am∣plectimur: that is,Durie resp. adv. VVhiak. f. 125. (sayeth Durie) We admit not the doctrine of the Fathers in one poynt, and reject the same in another, but whollie embrace all that they holds. Or as Campian sayth, ora∣tione 5. Tenemus integra horum volumina: that is, Hee keepe vs close, by their whole Wytings. Ethos ma∣gistros à De dats in omnibus audiunt Catholici,Costeri chi∣rid. in praef. an∣tithes. 9. sayeth Costerus: that is, The Catholicks hearken vnto them in althings, as to Masters given vnto them from God. Beeing here-in no lesse impudent, than was the Hereticke, Dioscorus, vvho dissenting most clearlie from the Orthodox Fathers, yet hee vt∣tered these wordes most peartlie
and perverselle,Concil. Chalced. act. 1. pag. 97. edit. Rom. in the Councell of Chalcedon, saying, I am cast out with the Fathers, I defende the doctrine of the Fathers, I transgresse them not in anie Poynt. Secondly, How the Romanists re∣ject the Fathers, consenting in one, in exposition of Scripture, as formerlie hath bene showne they doe in doctrinall points of Fayth. VALENTIA declareth,Valent. in analys. fid. lib. 8. cap. 8. sect. 2. that their Councell forbiddeth expresselie, to expound Scripture agaynst the vni∣forme consent of Fathers, as beeing altogether infallible and sure. The reason where-of,Canus loc. Theol lib. 7. cap. 3.  10. Canus doeth giue, Quippe cum Sanctorum omnium sensus, Spiritus sancti sensus ipse sit: that is, To wit, Seeing the meaning of all the holie Fathers, is the meaning of the holy Ghost him selfe (sayeth hee.) And yet, what the Popish pra∣ctise
is heere in, let vs by a few Ex∣amples beholde. First, in the interpretation of that place, Rom. 5.12. In whom al ha sinned, the whole Aūncientes, vvith one mouth,Can. loc. Theol. lib. 7. cap. 1. num. 1. . Sancti. (sayeth Canus) affirme the blessed Virgine, to haue beene conceived in Originall sinne and so all agree, that by the word [All] the whole race of Adam▪ are inclu∣ded, that ever were procreated be∣tweene Man and Woman. But the Romanists will no-wyse acqulesse to this exposition, because they vvill haue the Virgin Maries conception without originall sinne; and o, contrarie to the exposition o all the Fathers, will haue her exclu∣ded. Where also it is to be noted, that seeing no Graduate in Divinitie is promoted in Paris, without giving a solemne Oath, to mayntayne this Priviledge of the Virgine Marie: and that this Text, and exposition there-of, is close contrarie there-to, as also to that Ordinance of their
owne Councell, for exposition of Scripture, according to the vni∣forme consent of Fathers. There∣fore it will clearly follow, that they sweare both to impugne Scripture, Veritie, as also consenting Antiqui∣tie, together with their Popes and his Councells authoritie. Stella in lyke manner, expoun∣ding the 21 verse of the 10 chapter of Luke, saith, All the Expounders, whom I could commonlie see, eyther of ancient holie Doctors, or of recent Divines, all these, and their Commentaries, declare▪ that the word confiteor, is not taken heere for Confession of sinnes▪ but for that (sayeth hee) which wee call Thanks-gi∣ving, Commending, or to blesse, &c. Not∣withstanding this meaning of thes can neyther agree with the wordes, nor could it ever satisfie anie-wyse my mynde. Agayne, Maldonat, commenting on Matthew 26, 29, where our Sa∣viour sayeth, I will not drinke hence∣foorth of the fruite of the Vine, sayeth thus, Origen, Cyprian, Chrysostome, Epi∣phanius, Ierome, Augustine, Beda, Euthy∣mius,
and Theophilast; all these referre those wordes to Christ's blood, (or that which was so called in the Sacrament:) but I cannot be perswaded, (sayeth hee) that they can bee referred to the Blood of Christ. Because he (forsooth) would haue them vnderstood of the com∣mon Cuppe, before the institution of the Sacrament, to avoyde the force of this Testimonie agaynst Transsubstantiation. In lyke manner, expounding these wordes for Papall Suprema∣cie▪ Thou art Peter,Maldon. in Matth. 16.18. and vpon this Rocke I will build My Church, hee sayth thus of the interpretation of Fathers, ex∣pounding the Rocke, not to be Pe∣ter, but Christ Him selfe, or that Confession of Fayth, which was made of Christ. This meaning (sayeth he) of these words, seemes not to me to be the true meaning, which all other Fathers thinke to be so, whom ever I remember to haue read, except onlie Hilarie. Also, for mayntaynance of the same Supremacie, commenting on the subsequent Verse, Neyther will I
interpret (sayeth hee) that this which is spoken heere to Peter, is spoken also in the same sense to the other Apostles, Whatsoever thou loosest on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven, altho I see all Interpreters, except Origen onelie, to bee of that mynde. More-over, commenting on Matth. 11, 13, which speaketh of Elias that was to come, meaning Iohn the Baptist, hee sayeth, Almost all the Fathers so expound that place, but this their exposition is not fit enough. And why? But because the Iesuit would haue Elias yet only to come, in the reigne and time of their con∣ceited Antichrist. Last of all,Maldon. in Matth. 19.11. expounding these words of Matthew, All men cannot receiue this Saying; after that he hath adduced the interpretation of the Fathers thereon, to be this, Non om∣nes praestare possunt, ut sint sine uxore, quia carent dono continentiae: that is, All men cannot attayne to this, that they may be without a wyfe because they want the gift of chastitie; hee concludeth,
Sic fere omnes exponunt, quibus equidem ego non assentior: that is, Indeede almost all Interpreters so expound, with whome not-withstanding I doe not agree. And why? But because hee is a Pleader agaynst this Text, and the exposi∣tion of Antiquitie, for forced single lyfe, and the Vow of Continencie. Agayne, in the exposition of the last Commandement,Bell. lib. 2. de Imag. c. 7. § perre. when Bel∣larmine hath adduced a number of Fathers, holding that Comman∣dement, Thou shalt not covet, &c. to be but one entire Commandemēt, and not divisible in two, as the Pa∣pists make it, to make vp ten, con∣founding the first and second; for defence of their Imagerie, hee reje∣cteth al their judgements, as grosse and erronious. Bell. lib. 1. de purg. c. 6.In lyke manner, when he hath adduced the expositions of all the Fathers, which they giue on that place of the Corinthians (1. Cor. 15.29.) where-by hee would establish Purgatorie, because they serue not for his purpose, hee roundlie there∣fore
rejecteth them all, calling them haske, and both false and for∣ced; and therefore taketh one of later Forgerie, more suteable to his mynde. Agayne,Tolet. in Ioh. 7. at. 23. when Cardinall Tolet, in the exposition of Iohn 7, 37, hath adduced Chrysostome, Euthymius, and Theophilact, their agreement in one, yet this is his censure, saying, that their exposition is both forced and vnfit: and therefore hee professeth not to follow it anie way. Last of all,Cajet. pref. in Pentateuch. thus sayeth Cardi∣nall Cajetan, of the exposition of Scripture in generall, Let no man ab∣horre (sayth hee) any new sense of Scrip∣ture for this cause, because it disagreeth frō the ancient Doctors: but let him search more nearlie the Text, and coherence of Scripture: and if hee finde agreement, let him prayse God, who hath not tyed the exposition of Scripture, to the meaninges of ancient Doctors, but to the integritie of Scripture it selfe. How-so-ever then Bellarmine braggeth of their syde, that they
follow the consent of Fathers,Bell. lib. 3. de pnt. c. 19 sect. hoc item. Also, Lib. 1. de Chri∣sto, c. 10. miti. false∣lie imputing to vs, that wee onelie followe our owne exposition; yet wee see heere-in, that it may bee justlie sayde vnto them, that of the Poet, Mutato nomine de te, fabula nar∣retur. Their owne Cardinall Baro∣nius,Baron. annal. tom. 1. ad ann. 34. num. marg. 213. (besyde their fore-named pra∣ctise) confessing clearlie, that al-be-it the holie Fathers, whom we (sayeth he) for their heavenlie learning, worthilie doe call, The Doctors of the Church, were evi∣dentlie endewed beyond others, with the grace of the holie Ghost, yet in the ex∣position of Scripture, the Catholicke (that is, the Romane) Church, doeth not ever, and in all thinges, follow them.
CHAP. IIII. How contumeliouslie they deale with the Fathers, and especial∣lie, first, with those of the Greeke Church, conjunctlie, and in Councell. IT is reported of Pelagius, that even when he most dis∣agreed from the Orthodox Fathers of the Primitiue Church, yet in his third Booke for Free-will, hee soo∣thed vp his Heresie, and thought to amaze all men with his prayse of Sainct Ambrose; Blessed Sainct Ambrose, that Bishop (sayeth he) in whose bookes the Romane Fayth especiallie appeareth, who lyke a beautifull Flowre, shyned a∣mongst the Latine Wryters, and whose Fayth, and most pure vnderstanding of
the Scriptures, the verie Enemie himselfe dare not reprehende. Even so, our Ad∣versaries, when they most disagree lyke-wyse from the most ancient Fathers, and primitiue Councels, yet how they doe soothe vp their Errours? But with the lyke Salue: alleadging the holie Fathers, and fa∣mous Councels of the primitiue Church, al-to-gether to make for them; and therefore they highlie extoll and advance them. But as Ambrose not-with-standing made a∣gaynst his Prayser Pelagius, So doe the Fathers and Councels make close agaynst the Romanistes: and then, how they turne their Osanna, to Crucifie; their Praysing, to Depres∣sing; and their High Valuing, to Low Vilifying, let their owne Mouth, and these Examples, verifie. Their ancient Pope Gregorie de∣clareth,Gre. lib. 1. E∣pist. 24. sub i∣n. . that hee reverenced the foure first Councels, as the verie foure Gospels; holding firmlie, that they only stood for Trueth, and on∣ly with-stood Errour: and yet, what
is it that Bellarmine accuseth the ve∣rie second of these Councels of? Even the standing for, & decreeing of a most grosse Heresie, and the with-standing of such a necessarie Trueth, which by the definition of Pope Boniface the eight,Extran. lib. 1. tit. 8. de ma∣jor & obed. c. vnam sanctam. is of such importance to belieue, that by him who holdeth not the same, there is no salvation to bee expected, be∣cause hee is without the Church. And this great Poynt is the Pope's Supremacie. Bellarmine's owne wordes then are these,Bellar. prf. de pontif. § veni. The first (sayeth hee) who most earnestlie with-stood the Supremacie of the Bishop of Rome, seemeth to be the Grecian Fathers: for they, since the yeare of God 81, would haue the Bishop of Constantinople, (who before was not a Patriarch at all) preferred notwithstan∣ding to the three Patriarches of the East, and in the second roome, next the Bishop of Rome. And this may bee vnderstoode (sayeth hee) by the second Generall Councell. Wher-vnto he might haue joyned like-wise the sixt Canon of
the first Nyce Councell, no lesse peremptor against the fore-saide Supremacie. Where it is to be noted, that Pa∣pall Supremacie, which the Greeke Orthodox Church never would admit, can no-wise therefore bee called (as the Papists tearme it) a Catholicke point of Doctrine: as also if the Pope cannot erre, ex Ca∣thedra, it will follow, according to Boniface fore-said definition, that all the Greeke Fathers are absolutelie damned. Next, hee spareth not to blotte those holie Fathers, of that fourth and famous Councell of Chalcedon,Bel. ibidem. both with Fraud and Deceit, in the fore-named point, saying, Thereaf∣ter, in the yeare 451, the Greeke Fathers (sayth he) not being content with their former Determination, they preassed to make the Bishop of Constantinople equall alway to the Bishop of Rome: for in the Councell of Chalcedon, in the sixteenth Act thereof, the Grecian Fathers decreed, (but not without deceit (sayeth hee)
and the Romane Legates beeing absent,) that the Bishop of Constantinople should bee so in the second Roome, after the Bi∣shop of Rome: that notwithstanding thereof, bee should haue the same equall Priviledges, as the other had. Now, if anie grosser Imputations can bee layde vpon anie, than hee doeth vpon these holie Fathers, and famous Councels, let any man consider; making them hereticall in Mind and Opinion, and false or fraudulent in Manners and Action▪ Yea, what farther falsehood and fraude hee layeth to the charge of that famous & Orientall Church, in corrupting the works of others,Bell. lib. 4. de pont. c. 11. §. ad secundum, & sect. secundo. Item, lib. 2. de Christo, c. 23. se. Graci. let his owne wordes testifie. For it was the ordinarie Custome of the Gre∣cians, (sayeth hee) to corrupt the Bookes of other men. Where-of hee cleareth the Occidentall, or Latine Church, by a reason to be laughed at, for the palpable evidence of the contrarie, (as shall bee showne) saying, Quoniam Romani sicut non accu∣mina, it a nec impostur as habent: That
is, Because the Romanes, as they haue no sharpnesse of wit, so they cannot vse de∣ceit, (sayth he:) while as all men know, & experience hath taught, that there are none that haue beene more subtill, nor sharper witted than they. Secondlie, how they deale with the Greeke Fathers, severallie and a-part. FIrst, when Chrysostome is addu∣ced for peoples reading of Scripture,Bell. lib. 1. de verbo, cap. vlt. §. respondeo verbo. Bellarmine answereth, That continuallie hee exhorted all men (sayeth hee) to reade the Scriptures: Non quod vellet omnes rudissimos id fa∣cere: That is, But not, that hee would had all men, altho never so vnlearned, so to doe. And so hee imputeth to this holie Father, that hee spake farre other-wise, than hee meant; and dissimulatelie required that to bee done, which hee would not haue done in earnest. Next, when wee vrge Ireneus te∣stimonie (for proving the Pope to
bee Antichrist) that the number of the name of the Beast most fitlie is Lateinus, (according to the olde forme of pronouncing, as Lipsius witnesseth) thereby showing,Lipsius de an∣tiq. pronun. cap. 8. that hee was to bee a Latine Bishop, ha∣ving his Seate in the Latine Church: and more particularlie, in Latium, or Italie, his Decrees also in Latine, and all publicke Service in these Churches, subject to him in Latine like-wise. Vnto this Testimonie of Ireneus, Bellarmine answereth thus,Bell. lib. 3. de pont. cap. 10. sect. has opinio. Conjectura illa Irenei (sayth he) quae tunc aliqua fuit, nunc nulla est: That is, That light conjecture of Ireneus, which was some-what in his dayes, is of no ac∣count with vs now: As if such Varlets were best Valuers, or Trueth chan∣ged with Time, and Veritie ran on the Wheeles of vnconstant Varie∣tie. Agayne, when Saynct Cyprian is opposed agaynst Traditions,Bell. lib. 4. de verbo c. 11. sect. profert. 12. Bell. lib. 2. de sacr. cap. 30. sect. 4. Bel∣larmine answereth, that Cyprian wrote so (sayeth hee) when hee would defend his Errour, (which hee calleth else∣where
the Heresie of Anabaptisme) and therefore it is no marvell, that he rea∣son after the manner of Heretickes. By which answere, hee condemneth not onlie Saynct Cyprian, but Augu∣stine lyke-wyse, who in this poynt, of requyring recourse to bee had onlie vnto holie Scripture, greatlie commended Saynct Cyprian. Lyke-wyse, when Theodoret is objected agaynst Transsubstantiation, witnessing in his second Dialogue, called, Inconfusus, That after Conse∣cration, the Elements remayne still in their former substance; Valentia answereth,Valen. lib. de transsub. c. 7. sect. 11. saying, That some of the Ancients in this Matter, neyther thought nor wrote truely, nor con∣sideratelie, as they ought. Or hee might haue added, At least, as the Iesuits now would haue had them. In lyke manner, when Chryso∣stome is produced to proue, that the Virgine Marie had originall sinne, because shee sinned actuallie, when Christ rebuked her at the Marriage of Cana in Galile;Tolet, in Ioh. 2. annot. 5. sect. vtm. Cardinall Tolet an∣swereth
thus onlie, In ho Chrysosto∣mus probandus non est: that is, (sayeth hee) Chrysostome is not to be approved in saying so. More-over, when Ignatius, a Greeke Father, is opponed agaynst the mutilation of the Sacrament,Bell. lib. 4. de Euch. c. 26. sect. respondeo pri∣um. Bellarmine answereth, Non multum fi∣dendum est Graecis condicibus Ignatii: that is, (sayeth hee) The Greeke Wri∣tinges of Ignatius, are not greatlie to bee trusted. Agayne, when Origen is obje∣cted, to proue, that Marriage is no Sacrament, Bellarmine answereth,Bell. l. 1. de ma∣trim. c. 5. sect. alteram. Origines autem non est tantae authoritatis in Ecclesia, ut ejus sententia neessario approbanda sit: that is, Origen (sayeth hee) is not of such authoritie in the Church, that his opinion necessarilie is to bee followed. And yet how frequent∣lie hee obtrudeth him agaynst vs, as of great authoritie, let his cita∣tion of him, and his fellow Iesuits, in their Bookes, testifie: Lindanus, when hee citeth him,Lind. l. 3. c. 4. calling him, Illustre Alexandriae lmen: that is, The
bright light of Alexandria:Durcus contra VVhitak. f. 109. and Durie calling him, Testis omni exceptione ma∣jor: that is, A Witnesse, without all ex∣ception, greatest. Lyke-wyse, when Euthimius is alleadged, in the matter of the Sayncts beatitude,Bell. lib. 1. de sanct. c. 4. sect. hbemu. Bellarmine answe∣reth, Non est ac in re usque adeo magni faciendus: that is, (layeth hee) In this matter, bee is not so much to bee esteemed. Now, to resume: if with impu∣tations onelie of double Dissimula∣tion, conjecturall Lenitie, damnable Heresie, rash Inconsideratenesse, se∣ducing Errour, and such lyke, wee should thus aunswere the Testimo∣nies of Fathers, consenting clearlie with Scripture; affirming them vn∣worthie of Christian approbation, of honest mens trust, wyse mens re∣gard, or Fatherlie Authoritie; what clamours of Indignitie, done to An∣tiquitie, should wee heare of our op∣posed Partie? forgetting that Pre∣cept of Equitie, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alterine feceris.
CHAP. V. How the Romanists deale with the Latine Fathers, conjunctly and apart. AS Canus sayeth of the Fathers in ge∣nerall,Can. loe. theol. lib. 7. cap. 3. num. 7. The canonick Authors (sayth he) as they are supream, heavenlie, and di∣vine; so they keepe a perpetuall and firmè constancie of trueth; but other holie Wryters being inferiour, and humane, they erre some-times, yea, and bring foorth Monsters, against the convenient order, and ordinarie course of Nature.Alph. l. 1. adv. heres. c. 7. So doth Alphonsus de Castro, declare, that they are oftentimes found cōtradictorie to themselues, (saith he:) the particular examples where-of Iansenius,Ians. concord. Evang. c. 137. p. 541. & cap. 146. p. 624. in his Concor∣dance of the Evangels, hath labou∣red
to show, in Ierome, Ambrose, and Augustine. Like-wise, with levitie and in∣constancie, thus doeth both Bellar∣mine and Alphonsus brand holie S. Ierome, who when hee is objected vnto them against their Pompati∣call and Papall Hierarchie, allead∣ging no difference to bee in Scrip∣ture, betweene a Bishop, and a Presbyter,Bell. lib. 1. de cler. c. 15. sect. est antem. Bellarmine answereth, Est autem observandum Hieronymum in hc sententia, non adeo constantem videri: That is, It is to bee observed, (sayeth hee) that Ierome in this point seemeth not to bee so constant, as hee should bee. Alph. l. 6. adv. heres. tit. Epis∣copus.The like sayeth Alphonsus, in these wordes, Ex quibus verbis apparet B. Hieronymum sibi ipsi in hac parte minime constare: That is, By which words it is evident, that S. Ierome was no wise con∣stant in this point. Yea, more-over, when Ierome is produced, consenting with a num∣ber of Fathers, whom their Medina nominateth, to prooue the same point, that primitiuelie a Bishop
and Presbyter were all one,Bell. lib. 1. de pont. c. 8. §. respondeo. Bellar∣mine answereth grossely, giving him the Lie, saying, Videtur revera Hiero∣nymum in ea opinione fuisse, quae falsa est: That is, It appeareth indeede, that Ierome was of that opinion, but yet the same is false. After the same manner doeth Pigbius also vse Augustine,Pigh. de orig. pecc. whose do∣ctrine when hee hath brought, in two pointes, concerning originall sinne, (agreeable to Scripture) yet thus he speaketh thereof, Quae Au∣gustini sententia [sayth hee] non so∣lum incerta, sed & falsa est: That is, Which doctrine of Augustine's, is not on∣lie vncertaine, but lyke-wyse vntrue, or false. Yea, little lesse vnreverentlie doth Bellarmine vse one of their own Popes, to wit, Pius the secōd, whose testimony when we oppose against Papall Supremacie, proving, that no such thing was knowne, nor acknowledged, in the primitiue Church; the fore-saide Pope testi∣fying, Quod ante Nicenam Synodum
parum respectus habebatur ad Romanam Ecclesiam: That is, That little regard was had to the Romane Church, before the Councell of Nice: Bellarmine thus answereth, Quae sententia (sayth he) partim non est vera: That is, Which declaration of his heere-in, is in a part false and vntrue. Agayne, when Tertullian is pro∣duced agaynst the Pope's infallibi∣litie,Bell. lib. 4. de pot. c. 8. §. respondo. proving Pope Zepherin to haue beene a Montanist, Bellarmine answe∣reth roundlie, That Tertullian is a Liar, saying, Non est omnino Tertullia∣no hac in parte fides adhibenda: that is, In that matter there is no credit at all to bee given to Tertullian. Bell. lib. 2. de bon. oper. c. 9. sect. 8.So lyke-wyse, when the same Tertullian is adduced, for proving Christian libertie in fasting, Bellar∣mine answereth thus, Tertullian (saith hee) in that booke expoundeth the Catho∣licke Doctrine after that manner, as at this tyme the Lutherians vse; that is, eve∣rie-where mixing in Calmnies and Lies. More-over, when Augustine in his Retractions,Bell. lib. 1. de pont. c. 10. §. ad Augustin̄. interpreting the
Rocke, where-on Christ was to build his Church, is adduced agaynst the Papists, to signifie, not Peter, but CHRIST Him-selfe; Bellarmine an∣swereth, Ex sola ignorantia linguae He∣breae esse deceptum: that is, that Augu∣stine was deceived heere-in, onelie by his ignorance of the Hebrew tongue. And agayne,Bell. de uch. l. 1. c. 11. sect. fi rùrsus. when he is produ∣ced agaynst Transsubstantiation, sho∣wing, that Christ's wordes, saying, I will not drinke hence-foorth of the fruit of the Vine, were spoken of the con∣secrated Cup, Bellarmine answereth, Augustinum non expendisse hunc locum diligenter: that is, that Augustine did not weigh or consider this place diligent∣lie: to wit, not so friendlie for the Pope's behoofe, and his Darling of Transsubstantiation, which was hat∣ched after. In lyke manner,Bell. lib. 1. de purg. c. 5. sect. quarta diff. when the fore∣sayde Augustine, and Pope Gregorie's expositions, on 1 Cor. 3, 13, are ad∣duced, showing, by that Fyre which is spoken of there, are meaned the Troubles of this lyfe, and no other
Fyre of Purgatorie, Bellarmine sum∣marilie goeth to worke, and sayth, Sed hoc jam rejecimus: that is, But as for this exposition of theirs, (sayth hee) wee haue alreadie rejected it. And when hee hath showne, how many ancient and famous Au∣thors haue vehementlie oppugned their ydle begging Orders,Bell. lib. 2. de mon. c. 45. yet he answereth, At ihileminus vitam men∣dicantium, tanquam sanctam & perfe∣ctam, approbarunt multi Pontifices: that is, Not-with-standing of all those An∣cients and Authors, it is enough, that ma∣nie Popes haue approved the lyfe of beg∣ging Friers, as holie and perfect. Yea, more-over, when both a Romane Councell,Bell. lib. 2. de mon. c. 35. §. at his. Greg. l. 3. Ep. 11. 1 Tim. 5.9. and a Romane Pope, are produced, forbidding the vayling of Nunnes, before 60 years of age, according to that Apostoli∣call Precept, of receiving of Wi∣dowes, Bellarmine there-vnto an∣swereth, His non obstantibus licere in quacunque aetate, si adsit usus liberi arbi∣rii, talia vota nuncupare: that is, Not∣with-standing of all that is alleadged,
(to wit, out of Scripture, Councels, or Fathers) it is lawfull (sayeth hee) of what age so-ever they bee, (provyding that they haue the vse of Free-will) to vnder-goe such Vowes. I omit, how hee answereth the Authorities of other Fathers, onlie with imputation of Ignorance, and want of Learning vnto them, when they are objected; as where hee sayeth,Bell. lib. 1. de Christo, c. 6. §. at contra. Procopius was a better Ora∣tor, than a Divine, (sayeth hee:) La∣ctantius also was better seene in Ci∣cero's Bookes,Bell. lib. 1. de sanct. c. 5. sect. habenius. than hee was in the Scriptures: and Victorius was indeed (sayeth hee) a Martyr, but he wan∣ted Learning. To conclude, therefore; if with baser Money anie can bee payed, who exacteth Satisfaction to the Testimonies of Fathers, than you see by our Adversaries layde down heere, let anie one judge: Or if Im∣putations to those Auncientes, of Monstrous Births, crosse Contra∣dictions, grosse Errour, light In∣constancie, base Lying, vilde Slan∣dering,
blynde Ignorance, carelesse Neglect, with vndeserved Distru∣sting them, and open Rejection, can passe for currant, eyther on their bare word, to satisfie vs, or to expresse their so much preten∣ded, and bragged of reverence to venerable Antiquitie, then let Light and Darknesse, and GOD and Be∣liall be agreed, or as the Poet sayth, Iungentur jam gryphes equis, aevoque sequenti Cum canibus timidi venient ad pocula damae.
CHAP. VI. How the Romanists haue shame∣fullie corrupted the Fathers, both by adding to them, payring from them, and altering their wordes. AS the particulars of the proofe here-of, are heere-after set downe, of Popish corrupting of Fa∣thers, making thē either to suffer, if not for their works, a Purgatorie heere-after, yet in their workes, a sure Purgatorie heere; or else, making them against their willes, to speake the Language of Israel and Ashdod together: So what was the sensible seene expe∣rience of that worthie and lear∣ned Iunius, which him-selfe re∣lateth, let his owne wordes, and protestation, bona fide, testifie. I will relate (sayeth hee) truelie that
vvhich I saw vvith mine eyes: vvhen I re∣mayned in Lions,Franc. Iuius, prar.die. expurg. belg. (in the Yeare of GOD 1559. and the next Yeare after) I vvas familiarlie acquainted vvith the Correcter of a PRINTING-HOUSE there, na∣med Ludovicus Saurius, vvho dwelt not farre from Mercurie Street, in the Lodging close adjacent to the signe of the three Doues. Now vvhen I had come to salute this Man, it fell out by chance▪ or rather by the singular providence of GOD, that I found him busied in revising over the Workes of S. Ambrose, vvhich then Frelonius vvas printing: and after much talke hither and to, vvhen I shewed him, that I vvould no lon∣ger bee a vvith-drawer of him from his work, hee having begun againe the reading over of one Page, saide to mee, See yee not the manner of this our Edition of S. Ambrose, how prettie and perfect it is? and to looke vpon it, is vvorthie to bee preferred before anie Edition that ever hitherto came out. And after I had behelde, and praysed the finenesse of the Edi∣tion, hee saide then vnto mee, But if I vvere to buy anie Copie of S. Ambrose Workes, I vvould buy anie other Copie vvhat-so-ever, before I bought this vvhich thou seest. And vvhen I had asked the reason vvhy hee saide so; Then hee taking out some Pages foorth of the Hutches, or Drawers vnder the Table, vvhich vvere all razed and cancelled, either in part, or in vvhole: hee saide to mee, This
is the first Impression (sayeth hee) of the Pages vvhich vvith-in those few dayes vvee printed most faithfullie according to the Copie of the Olde and true Impression: but two Gray-Frers since then, according to the authoritie given to them, haue blotted out in all these Pages, as thou seest, and haue causd those new ones to bee put in the place of the former, a∣gainst all credite of these our Books; vvhich thing hath bred both Charges, and exceeding great fashrie to the Printer Frelonius. The veritie of which Relation, if anie should doubt there-of, he may easilie perceiue, by collation of S. Ambrose works, printed at Paris, an∣no 1529, by Claudius Chevallonius, which I haue beside mee: or at Ba∣sill, by Hieronymus Frobenius, anno 1538, with that Impression at Lions, by Frelonius, anno 1560: and as the particulars ensuing shall giue proofe of others. First, Examples of Popish adding to the Fathers. FIrst, of adding to the Fathers, and their Decrees, being con∣veaned
in Councell, wee haue a notable evidence, in that impu∣dent and audacious fact of Pope Zozimus, who added a Canon in his owne behalfe, to the verie first Councell of Nice; which by that fa∣mous sixt Councel of Carthage was, as a notable Forgerie, detected, and declared, and could never hitherto, by all the croaking Frogges of that Iesuiticall Crew,See Bell. l. 2 de pon. c. 25. bee soothed suffici∣entlie, or colourablie excused. Againe, in the matter of appeals, where-as the Councel of Milevi de∣creed,Concil. Milev. c. 22. vnder paine of Excommuni∣cation, That none with-in Africke should appeale to any part beyond Sea: Bellarmine is forced to grant a forged addition,Bell. lib. 2. de pont. c. 24. §. respondeo ali∣qui. in favours of the Pope, to haue beene there-after grosselie by Gratian added to the Canon, saying, Addidit ad hunc Cano∣nem exceptionem, nisi forte ad Apostoli∣cam sedem appelletur, sed haec exceptio non videtur quadrare (sayth hee) nam praecipue propter Romanam Ecclesiam A∣fricani statuerunt ut non liceret appellare
ultra mare: That is, Hee added to this Canon, this exception, to wit, Except per∣haps the appeale bee made, vnto the Sea Apostolicke; but this exception (sayeth Bellarmine) seemeth not to agree with the Canon, for it was chiefelie for the Romane Churches cause, that it was de∣creed, to bee vnlawfull to anie, to appeale out of Africke, to anie part beyond Sea. Thus wee see for the Pope's ad∣vancement, and gratifying, how false, and trickie his Supposts haue beene of olde, even by our Adver∣saries owne confession clearlie. Like-wise, when that grosse and blasphemous place in Dist. 19. c. In canom. Gratian, al∣leadged on S. Augustine, is vpbrai∣ded, affirming, that the Pope's De∣cretals ought to bee accounted a∣mongst canonicall Scripture,Bell. lib. 2. de concil. c. 12. §. respondeo ad. Bel∣larmine answereth, Deceptum esse ex depravato codice, quem ipse babuit B. Au∣gustini cui tribuit illum canonem, codices vero veri & emendati B. Augustini non habent ut Gratianus refert: That is, Gratian (sayth hee) was deceived by a corrupt Copie of S. Augustine's, which
hee had beside him, to whom bee attribu∣teth that Canon; but the true and mended Copies of S. Augustine since then, haue not these words as Gratian reporteth thē. How bolde then the Pope's Para∣sites haue beene with the works of the Fathers, in corrupting them, for supporting that Whoore of Ba∣bylon, wee may clearlie see, by this confession of Bellarmine's, & others, who now in their latter and men∣ded Copies, are forced, for shame, to haue razed out of their olde Co∣pies, such grosse corruptions, and openlie to disclaime the same. In like manner, to proue that in Purgatorie some sinnes are remit∣ted,Bell. lib. 1. de purg. c. 4. initio. Bellarmine citeth a place of Au∣gustine, which their owne Vives in his Notes vpon that Chapter, de∣nyeth anie wayes to bee found in the olde Copies and Manuscripts of Augustine,Aug. l. 2. e civit. De. c. 24. kept amongst them∣selues, in their chiefest and Metro∣politane Bibliotheakes, saying, In Antiquis libris Brugensibus & Coloniensi∣bus, non habentur isti decem aut duode∣cim
qui leguntur versus: That is, In the ancient Copies which are at Birges and Colen, these ten or twelue Lynes, which are heere read, are not to bee had there. More-over, the same Ludovicus Vi∣ves, in his Notes vpon the 8 Chap∣ter, of the 22 Booke of Augustine, De Civitate Dei, Also a no∣table patch is added to the 24 Chapter, of the 21 Booke. sayeth plainlie, In hc capite, non dubium quin multa sunt addita, veluti declarandi gratia, ab iis qui omniū magnorum authorum scripta spur∣cis suis manibus contaminabant: That is, In this Chapter, (sayth hee) with∣out doubt, many thinges are added, as it were for explanations sake, by those who with their filthie Handes, haue defyled the Wrytings of all Authors, that are of great Authoritie. And more particu∣larlie, who those are, who haue done so, their owne Erasmus telleth vs clearlie,Erasmus, in iu∣dic Scholio∣rum in Hieron. saying, Monachi Patrum corruperunt Scripta: That is, It was the Monkes (saide hee) that haue cor∣rupted the Wrytings of the Fathers: as is cleare, both by that addition in the fore-alleadged corrupt Copie of Gratianus his Augustine, making on∣lie
for the Pope, and as shall bee, Godwilling, here-after also shown, of the Monks of Weingart, and Bel∣larmine's own Testimonie, of their forging of Chrysostome's Homilies,Bell. dscrip. rec. an. 396. Rhem. in Math. 3.1. on Marke, cited by the Rhemists, for mo∣nasticall lyfe. Againe, in the works of Fulbertus, B. of Chartres, published at Paris, anno 1608, fol. 168, are set downe these words of Augustine, Vnlesse yee eate (saith Christ) the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his Blood, yee shall haue no lyfe in you, Facimus vel flagitum videtur jubere, figura ergo est dicet haereticus praecipiens passioni Domi∣ni esse communicandum, &c. That is, Hee seemeth to command a great wicked∣nesse; it is therefore a figure, will the Hereticke say, requyring vs onely to com∣municate with the Lord's Passion, and sweetly and profitably to lay vp in our me∣morie, that His flesh was crucified, and wounded for vs. Remarke then, how the publisher hath put in of his owne these wordes, dicet Haereticus into Augustine's Testimonie, cited
by the fore-saide Fulbertus; and by so doing, thinking to meete with the Hereticks of this time, (as hee calleth vs) was not a-ware, that hee made Augustine lyke-wyse an Hereticke for Companie, whose verie words these are, and no other mans, Lib. de doct. Christ. cap. 16. Like-wise, Gratian relating the second Councell of Cavaillon,Distinct. 1. cap. Quidam. their words concerning Confession, set∣teth them downe thus, Quidam ve∣ve sacerdotibus confitenda esse percensent, ut tota fere sancta Ecclesia: That is, But some are of mynde, that our sinnes are to bee confessed vnto the Priest, as almost the whole holie Church thinketh. But that these wordes, ut tota fere sancta Ecclesia, are favourablie ad∣ded for Popish Confession, to insi∣nuate, that the same was a catho∣licke doctrine, and practise in the Church then, not onlie the precee∣ding wordes, comprehending the whole Greeke Church, their minde in the contrarie, verefieth, Qui Deo solummodo confiteri peccata dicunt, (saith
the Canon:) That is, Who sayth, that sinnes should bee confessed onelie to God: but also the Note vpon this place of their Canon Law, latelie publi∣shed by Gregorie the 13, freelie gran∣teth, that these words, ut tota fere sancta Ecclesia, are added, and are not neither in the Capitular, nor Coun∣cell. What forged and farsed Addi∣tions like-wise are everie-where through-out S. Cyprian's workes, put in by that impudent Patcher Pamelius, let that Edition of his of S. Cyprians workes, conferred with ancient Copies, as Gulartius hath verie well observed them, to all men testifie: one example where-of I will onelie instance, of the allead∣geance, of a testimonie of S. Cyrian's, of that Edition, adduced for the Pope's Supremacie, in a written Popish Pamphlet, sent of late to a Brother of our Presbyterie, to an∣swere vnto; and which, for evi∣dence of the trueth there-of, wee yet keepe beside vs, containing
foure grosse Additions, even in one onelie Testimonie, besides a most fraudfull Alteration, of most mate∣riall words. The Testimonie then or S. Cy∣prian,Cyprian. tract. de simpl. prae∣lat. Lugdu, apud Seb. Gry∣phium. 1537. printed amongst them-selues of olde, (as I haue the Booke to exhibite) is thus: The Lord speaketh thus to Peter, (sayeth Cyprian) I tell thee, (sayeth Christ) that thou art Peter, and vpon this Rocke I will build my Church, &c. And Hee sayeth vnto him againe, after His Resurrection, Feed My Sheepe. And albeit after His Resur∣rection, (marke this) he gaue a-like power to all His Apostles, and said, As My Father sent Mee, so sende I you, receiue the holie Ghost: to whom ye forgiue sinnes, they shall be forgiven, &c. Yet that Hee might manifest that vnitie should bee amongst them, by His autho∣ritie, Hee disposed it so, that the begin∣ning of this Vnitie should bee at one, yet were the rest of the Apostles the verie same, as was Peter, (remarke this againe) endued with alike fel∣lowship, both of Honour & Power:
but a beginning proceedeth from Vnitie, that it may bee showne, that Christ's Church is one. Thus we may see, that this Testi∣monie sincerelie cited, and conside∣red, maketh no wayes for Peter's Supremacie of Iurisdiction over the rest of the Apostles, or the Pope's, (as his Successor, over all other Bishops) but is flat agaynst the same: seeing it is sayde, That the rest were the same, as hee was, and all had the a-lyke, or equall power, as hee had. But this fore-sayde Testimo∣nie, as it is clowted and clamped, and by him who out of his Pame∣lius hath cited, and set downe the same with his owne hand, is thus, Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum, &c. that is, The Lord speaketh thus to Peter (saith Cyprian) I say vnto thee (sayeth Christ) that thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church, &c. And Hee sayeth to him agayne,1. Addition. Feede my Sheep: Super illum unum aedificat Ecclsiam , & illi pscendas mandat oves suas:
that is, Vpon him alone did Christ build His Church, and to him onelie recommen∣ded Hee His Sheepe to bee fed. (This is the first Addition to this Testimo∣nie▪) And al-be-it (sayeth Cyprian) af∣ter His Resurrection Hee gaue equall po∣wer to all His Apostles, and sayeth, As my Father sent mee, so send I you: and, to whom yee forgiue their sinnes, they shall bee forgiven, &c. Yet that Hee might manifest that Vnitie that should be amongst them, Vnam Cathedram consti∣tuit: that is,. Addition. He appointed one only Chayre to bee (sayth the clowting Tinker:) And by His authoritie He dis∣posed it so (sayeth Cyprian) that the be∣ginning of this Vnitie should bee at one; yet were the rest of the Apostles the verie same, as was Peter, endewed with the lyke Priviledge, Honoris & Potestatis, (sayeth Cyprian) that is,Alration. of Honour and Iurisdiction. But, Honoris & Dig∣nitatis, (sayth our metamorphosing Exchanger) nimirum ante illa verba Christi ad B. Petrum, Pase Oves meas: that is▪ And the rest of the Apostles had this honour, of equall dignitie, onelie be∣fore
these wordes of Christ were spoken to Peter, saying, Feede my Sheepe. (This is the third new Patch.3. Addition.) But a be∣ginning proceedeth from Vnitie, (sayeth Cyprian) & primatus Petro da∣tur: that is, And the Primacie is given to Peter,4. Addition. (sayeth our false Re∣corder, in Cyprian's name) that Christ's Church may bee showne to bee one, (sayeth Cyprian) Et ca∣thedra una monstretur:5. Addition. that is, And that lyke-wyse one Chayre (to wit, of Infallibilitie) may bee demon∣strate (sayeth this monstrous Mun∣grell.) Thus haue they sowne in their Tares, in anothers Fielde: thus also haue they put in their Colloquintida, in the Pottes of the Lord's Pro∣phets, and the Asse hath joyned to plow with the Oxe together. And by so doing, they haue made the workes of manie ancient and wor∣thie Wryters, lyke Hermophro∣dites, which are hardlie knowne to which Sexe they inclyne most; joy∣ning their newe Clowt, to the
others graue Garment; and so mar∣ring both Colour and Credit of the whole Vesture. Secondlie, examples of Popish purging from the Fathers. AS in the former Examples we haue seene their illicite Lin∣cie-wolsie mixture of Addition, So wee will show now, God willing, how these cunning Arithmeticians are as perfect in their manner of Substraction, and so cannot onelie decline in the Datiue, but as well in the Ablatiue Case: & as Naash would haue pulled out the right Eyes of the men of Iabesh, so how they haue (Crow-lyke) picked out manie or∣thodox Speaches, out of the works of holie Fathers, that were most peremptor against them, making them Eunuches so by violent ca∣stration after their deaths, whome they could not finde to haue made for their Errours by vnjust decla∣ration in their liues.
Senensis, therefore, in the Preface of his worke, dedicated to Pius the fift, not onelie confesseth this pra∣ctise of Purgatorie paines by the Pen, taken about the Ancientes, but highlie also commendeth the Pope, for his care of performing the same, saying, Tu beatissime Pater expurgaricurasti omnia Catholicorum au∣thorum scripta, & praecipue veterum pa∣trum: that is, Thou most blessed Father (sayth hee) hast caused purge all the Writs of Catholicke Wryters, and chiefe∣lie the Fathers. Lyke-wise, this is avowed in the late Edition of S. Augustine,Printed at Pa∣ris, by Nivel, in S. Iacques street, at the signe of the Storks, 1571. in the Preface where-of, it is saide, That by the command of the most holie Councell of Trent, the Bookes of the Ancient Fathers, are ordained to bee purged. Yea, the Iesuit Possevin, showeth, that this Expurgatorie Practise,Possevin, l. 1. bibliothec. s∣lct. c. 12. is not onlie to bee extended to those that are Print, but to manuscript Copies. Gretzer. de ju∣re prohib. l. 2. c. 10. p. 328. & 329.And this the Iesuit Gretzeras con∣fesseth,
after that hee hath spoken of the proscription of some whole Fathers, as Tertullian and Origen, hee subjoyneth of others, saying, Et si librum integrum proscribere fas est, fas etiam erit prscribere partem, seu mag∣nam, seu parvam, eam exscindendo, de∣lendo, obliterando, vel simpliciter omitten∣do ob lectoris utilitatem: That is, If it bee lawfull to suppresse or inhibite whole Bookes, then it is lawfull lyke-wyse to sup∣presse a great, or lesser part of one, by cut∣ting out, deleting, blotting away, or by omitting the same simplie, for the Rea∣ders well-fare, (sayth hee.) This lyke-wise, the Expurgatorie Index it selfe showeth in particu∣lar, both that which is printed at Madrill, by Alphonsus Gomezius, 1594. for Belgia; also the other, printed by Ludovicus Zanches, their King's PRINTER, for Spaine, anno M.DCXII. In the which Spanish Index,Index expurg. Hisp. lit. B. tit. Bibliotheca Pa∣trum. our of the Bookes of Abbot Antonius, 36 places are commanded to bee blot∣ted out, who is one, that is set
downe in the fift Tome of the Bi∣bliotheca Patrum. Like-wise a great part of a whole Treatise of Doro∣theus Archimandrita, is ordained to be razed,P. 103. who is in the first Tome. The like is also ordained to bee done with the 29 and 30 whole Chap∣ters of Nicolaus Cabasila, who is in the ixt Tome:P. 91. P. 106. P. 109. & besids two places of Melito, all the whole Chapters of his worke, which follow after the eight Chapter, are appointed, by a vehement purging Pill, to bee cleane rid out of the way, who is in the seaventh Tome. To instance like-wise more par∣ticulars,Bell. lib. 4. de verbo. c. 11. §. fxto. by confession of our Ad∣versaries them-selues; when Chry∣sostome is vrged for perfection of Scripture, against Papall Tradi∣tions, the Testimonie beeing taken out of his Commentarie on Mat∣thew, (like as hee giveth witnesse to the same Trueth, commenting on the first to the Galatians, and 95 Psalme, which are vnsuspect works, and by all acknowledged to be his)
Bellarmine answereth thus, Locus hic ab Arrianis insertus, est quibusdam codi∣cibus nuper emendatis sublatus: that is, This place (sayth he, by bare allead∣geance onlie) was insert by the Ar∣rians, and out of some Bookes that are newlie amended, is quite purged away. Like-wise, for prooving of the same point of the Scriptures perfe∣ction, where-as the olde Impres∣sion of Athanasius hath a notable place,Athan. lib. 1. contra gtes. saying, Sufficiunt sacrae ac di∣vinitus inspiratae Scripturae ad omnem instructionem Veritatis: That is, The holie and divine inspyred Scriptur, are sufficient for ALL instruction of Trueth; This word [omnem] or [ALL] which galleth them, and where-in the verie pith of the Testimonie lyeth, in their latter Editions, which they haue at Rome, they haue al-to∣gether razed, and left out: for so Bellarmine professeth, that it is not now in their Bookes,Bell. lib. 4. de verbo▪ c. 11. . profert. quarto. and therefore would haue that word to be added of late by vs; were not the oldest Copies printed amongst them∣selues
maketh him a Liar; and where-of I haue one beside mee, to witnesse to anie the veritie there∣of. In lyke manner, in that fourth Booke, & fourth Chapter of Sainct Ambrose, De Sacramentis, it is thus in the ancient and vncorrupted Co∣pies, agaynst Transsubstantiation, Si ergo tanta vis est in sermone Domini, ut inciperent esse quae non erant, quanto ma∣gis est operatorius est ut sint quae erant, & in aliud commutentur? that is, If there∣fore there bee such power in the speach of our Lord, that thinges which were not before, began to bee, (to wit, at the Creation) how much more (sayeth Ambrose) is the same powerful to make, that things may still bee that which they were before, and yet bee changed to an∣other thing? But because these wordes, Vt sint quae erant, so clearlie crosse their Conceit, who after the wordes of Consecration, would haue the Ele∣mentes of Bread and Wyne, not to
bee anie more, that which they were before in substance; and to bee changed, onelie into that, which they were not before in vse: to wit, To bee Sacramentes. There∣fore, they haue, for avoyding the troubling of their Braynes, in for∣ging fectlesse Evasions, rather ta∣ken the shorter Cut, (as wee say) and haue in their Romane Edition, (which is also followed in that, set out in Paris, Anno 1603) quyte cut out, and purged away these words, which like evill Humours so much before distempered them; making them now smoothe so to run, Quan∣to magis operatorius est, ut qua erant, in aliud commutentu: that is, How much more powerfull is our LORD'S speach, to make that those thinges which were, should bee changed into another thing? And so no Bone sticketh in their Throat. Agayne, in the same Matter, the Author of the imperfect worke, on Saynct Matthew, attributed to Chry∣sostome, Hom. 11. wryteth thus; If
it bee so dangerous a matter (sayeth hee) to transferre vnto private vses those holie Vessels, in which the true Bodie of Christ is not, but the mysterie of His Bodie is contayned; how much more for the Vessels of our Bodie, which God hath prepa∣red for Him-selfe to dwell in, ought wee not to giue way to the Devill, to doe in them what hee pleaseth? Now these wordes, In quibus non est verum corpus Christi, sed mysterium cor∣poris ejus continetur: that is, In which His true, or naturall Bodie, is not; but in which the mysterie of His Bodie is onelie contayned: because they did threatten so the Eversion of that Transsubstantiating Conver∣sion of theirs, therefore it is, that in their later Editions, they haue hear∣kened to that saying, Abscindantur qui nos perturbant: and accordinglie, both in that Impression of this worke, at Antwerpe, apud Ioannem Steelsium, Anno 1537, and at Paris, apud Ioannem Roigny, Anno 1543, and at Paris agayne, apud Audoenum par∣vum,
Anno 1557, not one Syllable of them is to bee seene, tho extant in the older Editions, of the date of 1487, and after. More-over, Bertram, who wrote in the 800 yeare of GOD, agaynst Transsubstantiation, then peeping out, when in his Booke, of the Bodie and Blood of Christ, dedicated to the Emperour Carolus Calvus, who set him a-worke, hee hath clearlie in these wordes dashed that Babels Brood, agaynst the Stone of solide holie Writ, saying, Thinges which differ one from another, are not the same: the Bodie of Christ, which was dead, and rose agayne, and beeing made immortall, dieth no more, (Death having no more do∣minion over it) it is nowe ever-la∣sting, and not subject to suffering: But this which is celebrated in the Church, is temporall, not ever-la∣sting; it is corruptible, and not free from Corruption.. But as they professe, in the Expurgatorie In∣dex of this Author, when they haue
essayed, for escaping, to invent some fyne Devyce, and feigne some cōmodious Sense for them, which is this, to wit, That this is meant of the Accidents, or Formes of the Sa∣crament, (sayth he) which are cor∣ruptible. or of the vse of the Sacra∣ment, which continueth onelie in this present worlde, and in that sense, is temporall. And when not∣with-standing they see, that this will not serue them, in respect the whole scope of the Discourse is agaynst this Shift, and tendeth to proue, That it is not the naturall Bodie of Christ, which was borne, died, and rose agayne, which Chri∣stians externally receiue in the bles∣sed Sacrament; what then is their next Recourse? Even this bankrout Shift, Non male aut inconsulte igitar omittantur omnia haec: that is, It is not amisse then, (say they) nor vnad∣vysedlie done, that those things be left out al-to-gether. Yea, not onlie haue they paired away parcels,Chap. 15. §. 4. but (as shall bee
showne, God willing, heere-after) they haue razed, and bereaved vs of whole Records, and entire Trea∣tises, that haue made against them. And, as Erasmus in a word tolde vs before, who were those Aegyptian Flies, who were the Corrupters of the wholesome travels of ancient and holie Authors in the Church of CHRIST, before the noysome Crew of Iesuiticall Frogges, with more whoorish fore-heads, eased that filthie Swarme; and being the last Emissaries of that false Pro∣phet, vnder-tooke that Taske: So, to confirme the trueth of Erasmus speach, I will heere relate one on∣lie proofe there-of, which that lear∣ned Father B. Vsher, helped to dis∣cover. In the yeare 1616, one Pe∣trus Stuartius set foorth at Ingolstadt, amongst other Treatises, one espe∣ciallie, of Rabanus Maurus, Arch∣bishop of Mentz, called his Peni∣tentiall; in the 33 Chapter whereof, answering to a question of a Bis∣shop, named Heribaldus, concerning
the Eucharist, what became of it, after it was consumed after the manner of other Meates, and sent into the Draught; Rabanus hath these wordes, Pag. 669; Some of late, (sayth he) not holding right∣lie of the Sacrament of the Bodie and Blood of our LORD, haue saide, That the verie Bodie and Blood of our LORD, vvhich vvas borne of the Virgine Marie, and in which our LORD Him-selfe suffe∣red on the Crosse, and rose againe from the Graue. Against which Er∣rour, writing vnto Abbot Egilius, According to our abilitie wee haue declared (sayth hee) what is true∣lie to bee believed concerning CHRIST'S Bodie. Heere wee see, then, that Rabanus tongue is clipt for telling of Tales, (as sayth that former Father:) first, there∣fore, wee must see who is the Doer, and next, what are the words that are razed out. Stevartius, the pub∣lisher, freeth him-selfe of the fact, telling vs in the margent, that hee
found that blank in the manuscript Copie. But whence had hee that manuscript? Out of that famous Monasterie of Weingart, (saith he:) So that wee see clearlie, that the Monkes of Weingart stand on the Chalke. Next, let vs see vvhat are the words that are razed: B. Vsher (as I said before) hath helped notablie to cleare this to Posteritie, thus: In the Liberaries of that worthie Knight, Sr Robert Cotton, and D. Ward, Mr of Sidney Colledge in Cambridge, hee found a Treatise of the Sacrament, of great Antiquitie, (as he reporteth) beginning thus, Sicut ante nos quidam sapiens dixit, &c. In which the Au∣thor laying downe the opinion of Paschasius Radbertus, (who was Ber∣tram's Antagonist) that the flesh which is received at the Altar, is no other than that which was borne of the Virgine Marie, and suffered on the Crosse, and rose out of the Graue, and is yet daylie offered, for the life of the Worlde, Contra quem
(sayth this Author) satis argumenta∣tur & Rabanus in Epistola ad Egilonem Abbatem, & Ratrannas quidam libro com∣posito ad Carolum Regem, dicentes ali am esse: that is, Against vvhom, both Rabanus sufficientlie doth reason, in an Epistle vvritten to the Abbot E∣gilo; as also, one Ratrannus, (alias Ber∣tramus) in a Booke made vnto King Charles, saying, That it is another kinde of fesh, (to wit, Sacramen∣tall.) Where-by we may now see, what it is that these razed-headed Monkes of Weingart, haue razed with their hands out of Rabanus Pe∣nitentiall; seeing vvee are given to vnderstand by this Author, vvhat his opinion vvas in this point, in his Epistle to Abbot Egilo. And therefore, that the fore-said blanke hath beene filled vp before vvith these vvords: to vvit, That the na∣turall Bodie of CHRIST, is that selfe same Bodie, which is by the mouth received at the Altar. Against vvhich Errour, (sayeth Rabanus) vvriting to Abbot Egilo, vve haue,
according to our abilitie, declare vvhat is truelie to bee believed, (to vvit, the cleane contrarie.) Thirdlie, Examples of Popish Al∣tering the words of the Fathers. FIrst, for proofe of this Practise, as the thirteenth Chapter shall giue Instances of their Alteration of the wordes of a whole Convent of Fathers, conveaned in Councell; So, how they deale with them par∣ticularlie, let these Examples testi∣fie. Saynct Ambrose, to show, that Personall Succession, is nothing, without Succession of Doctrine, sayeth, Petri hereditatem non habea, qui nō habent Petri fidem: that is, They haue not hereditarie Succession from Peter, who keepe not Peter's Fayth. But how is this Testimo∣nie corrupted? (as is to bee seene in Gratian,De penit. dist. 1. c. potest. and in their later Editions) For mayntayning the Pope onelie to bee the lawfull Successour to Pe∣ter,
and that such locall and perso∣nall succession, is the Note of the true Church. Petri hereditatem non ha∣bent, qui non habent Petri sedem, (say they:) that is, They haue not here∣ditarie Succession to Peter, who haue not Pter's Chayre. Where ye see, Sedes, put for, Fides; The Chayre at Rome, for, The Christian Fayth where-so-ever. Bell. lib. 2. de verbo, cap. 12. sect. dic se∣cunde.Lyke-wyse, Bellarmine, (to esta∣blish the adoration of the Virgine Marie) hee citeth Chrysostome, trans∣lating that place of Genesis, 3, 15. [Ip∣sa, Shee:] which Chrysostome hath plainlie in the Greeke masculine,  [Ipse, or bee shall treade the head of the Serpent] vnderstan∣ding CHRIST, and not the Virgine Marie. Also, to prooue the adoration of Reliques,Bell. l. 2. de r∣liq. c. 3. sect. 8. Iohans. he citeth againe the fore∣saide Chrysostome, saying, Tumulos Martyrum adoremus; vvhere-as Chry∣sostome vvithout anie vvord of ado∣ration, sayeth onely, , angamus.
Againe, vvhen as Pope Leo his Epistle, is cited for the privi∣ledge of Marriage in the Clergie, speaking (as Moses did of the con∣ditions of the High-Priest's Wyfe) De muliere sacerdotis eligenda: that is, What a one for Wyfe the Priest should make choyse of; without a∣nie more warrandable Reason than bare Alleadgeance,Bel. l. 1. de cler. c. 21. sect. a∣lium. Bellarmine sayth, Legitur in codicibus melioribus, de mulie∣re sacerdotio elegendi: that is, It is read in those Bookes that are better re∣formed, (to wit, by Popish Trans∣forming) of the Wyfe of the Priest that is to bee chosen. Insinuating there-by, that howsoever he might haue had a Wyfe before his Su∣ception of Priesthood, yet there-af∣ter hee might not haue anie. In lyke manner,Bell. lib. 3. de pont. c. 7. sect. quod autem. the same Bellar∣mine, to proue, that Antichrist is not yet come, hee bringeth this reason; That when hee commeth, the Per∣secution of the Church shall bee so great, and manifest, that such a sepa∣ration shall bee made, (contrarie to
Matthew 13, 30) that all the Wic∣ked, and lurking Hypocrites, shall bee conveaned together in Anti∣christ's Hoaste, & openly oppugne the Church of the Sayncts: which (sayeth hee) hath not yet beene: and therefore, that Antichrist is not yet come. But to proue his Major, hee adduceth a falsified Te∣stimonie of Augustine's, saying, A tunc erumpent omnes in apertam persecu∣tionem, ex latebris odiorum: that is, And then all the Wicked shall burst foorth in open Persecution, out of the lurking Holes of their hatred. VVhere-as Augustine's true wordes are these, onlie speaking of Satan's loosing, Exibit atem, dictum est (sayth hee) in apertam persecutionem, de laeb is rumpet odiorum: that is, As is sayde, Satan shall goe foorth, in open per∣secution, and out of the lurking Holes of his hatred to the Godlie, shall hee then breake out. More-over, vvhen Pope Clements owne Testimonie in Eusebiu,Eub. l. 2. . c. 1. is ad∣duced to show, that of the Apostles,
after CHRIST'S Assumption, Nemo sibi vendicabat primatus gloriam: that is, Never one of them did challenge to them-selues the honour of Pri∣macie, one aboue another; Bellar∣mine answereth,Bell. lib. 1. de pont. c. 26. §. ad testimonium. That albeit in the Edition of Basill, of Ruffinus Version, (which is the oldest, and vnsus∣pect) these fore-named words be: yet in the Edition of Colen, turned, and set foorth by a Catholicke Ro∣mane, since then, (vvhich is later, and done by a Partie) the vvord of [Primacie] is not to be seene: (there is notable purging.) And for these vvords, (saith he) Bishop of the Apo∣stles, (speaking of S. Iames) is to be found, Bishop of Ierusalem. (Heere is againe a notable alteration, and both the former Purgings, & this, are cleared by our Adversaries.) Like-wise,Bell. l. de con∣firm. c. 12. §. est quidem. the same Bellarmine freelie confesseth Pope Gregorie's E∣pistles to be cunninglie corrupted, by Popish Episcopal Parasites, who vvould haue Confirmation onlie to belong to Bishops; and therefore
they haue put in the fore-saide Epi∣stles, baptizandos, for, baptizatos: that is, Those that are to bee baptized, for, Those that are baptized. The like corruption hee confes∣seth to bee in Pope Gregorie's Mo∣rals,Bell. lib. 1. de purg. c. 11. sect. secund. by those vvho affirming the Fire of Purgatorie not to bee mate∣riall, and bodilie, haue put in, incor∣poreum, for corporeum: that is, Incor∣poreall, for, Corporeall. And vvhen a Testimonie out of Socrates is produced against the An∣tiquitie of their fourtie dayes of Lent,Bell. l. 2. de bo∣is oper. c. 15. sect. sed. after that Bellarmine, vvithout anie vvarrand, or certaintie, hath saide onlie, Probabile est codicem Socratis esse corruptum: that is, It is likelie, that So∣crates booke bath beene corrupted: hee subjoyneth, sect. Ita{que}. Pro tribus septimanis scribendum esse quinque: that is, That for three weekes, it is best to write fiue: and concludeth, that this metamor∣phosing of Authors, is the only fit∣testvvay (when they are straited) to extricate them-selues, and compose their differs, saying, Ita{que} si corriga∣mus
textum Socratis, & pro tribus septi∣manis ponamus quinque, nulla erit discor∣dia inter Socratem & Cassianum: that is, Therefore (sayth he) if wee amend the Text of Socrates, and if wee put for three weekes, fiue, then no discord shall bee betweene Socrates and Cassian. Againe, vvhere-as the Author of the imperfect vvorke vpon Mat∣thew, attributed to Chrysostome, in the 19 Homilie of the olde Edition 1487, hath Sacrificium panis & vini: that is, The offering of bread and wyne: the latter Edition at Paris, Apud Au∣doenum Parvum 1557, hath altered them into these vvords, Sacrificium corporis & sanguinis CHRISTI: that is, The sacrifice, or oblation of the Bodie and Blood of CHRIST. Likewise, this Prayer is found in the elder Editions of the Gregorian Sacramentarie, Greg. oper. tom. 5. dit. Paris. 1505. col. 135. vvhere-by is proven, That Prayer which was vsed of olde for the Dead, did not necessa∣rilie inferre, That their Soules were therfor in Purgatorie, for whō they did pray. Annue nobis, Domine, ut anima
famuli tui Leonis haec prosit Oblatio: that is, Grant vs, O Lord, that this Ob∣lation may profit the Soule of thy Servant Pope Leo. For which, the later Editions haue chopt in this Prayer,Liturgis. Pa∣mel, tom. 2. p. 14. Annue nobis, Domine, at interces∣sione famuli tui Leonis haec nobis prosit oblatio: that is, Grant vs, O Lord, that by the intercession of thy Ser∣vant Leo, this Offering may pro∣fit vs. I neede not to repeat agayne, that alteration of Cyprian's wordes,See also Aug. in Psal. 37, ci∣ted by Bell. l. 4. de purge. 5. §. Aug. ha∣ving for, em̄∣dato, emenda∣ri. which is alreadie mentioned in this same Chapter, putting, Dignitatis, for, Potestatis; Honour, for, Power: where-vnto the Reader, for inspe∣ction of the whole Forgerie, may haue his Recourse. By such fraudfull Relation, then, of their Myndes, and Alteration of the words of ancient Fathers, they haue not onelie, as it were, marred their Complexion, and for Shibbo∣leth, made them say, Siboleth; but shamelesselie also to haue called, Light, Darknesse; and Darknesse,
Light; as in their dealing with the purging of Bertram they openlie professe; ordaining by their Expur∣gatorie Index, for, Visibiliter, fol. 1137, to bee put Invisibiliter: And so, for founding their Vsurpation, haue sought so to confound the Trueth; that if their owne Mouths did not condemne those naughtie Servantes, and their owne Pennes and Paynes, discovered not vnto vs some Examples, by Hercules Foote to cognosse the rest of his hudge Stature; Wee should doubt, that those whome the LORD made in their age (lyke Elias) to pleade for the Trueth, lyke Iesabels Priestes, that they had beene rather Pleaders for Baal. And therefore we see, how necessarie is that Caveat of Vincen∣tius Lyrinensis,Vin. Li. de heres. c. 34. . 37. That it is dangerous to commit the Tryall of inveterate Errours, to the Wrytinges of Aun∣cientes, (how-so-ever he commend the Tryall of such as are new broa∣ched, to bee made by the consent of Fathers:) his wordes are these,
But neyther al-wayes, nor all kinds of Heresies, are to bee impugned after this manner, but such as are new, and latelie sprung vp, namely, when they first aryse, whyle by the straytnesse of Tyme it selfe, they may bee impeded, from falsifying the Rules of ancient Fayth, and be∣fore that their Poyson spreading farther, they attempt to corrupt the Wrytings of the Ancients. (Note this.) But farre spread, and inveterate Heresies, (sayeth hee) are not to be dealt with after this manner, for as much as by long continuance of tyme, a long Occasion hath lyen open vnto them, to steale away the Trueth. VVhere-of, by a few In∣stances, (in place of manie) wee haue proven the Popish Packe to be most guiltie, and whose Errours haue sielie spread so farre as a con∣tagious Gangren in tyme of pre∣vayling Darknesse, and haue con∣tinued so long in the Christian Church, as a longsome Sicknesse, that the very Mayntayners of them
hither-to, bragge of their Vni∣versalitie, and Duration in the Church. CHAP. VII. How manie vnder the Names of Fathers, Bellarmine acknow∣ledgeth to be meerly counterfeyt, and this thorow the first fiue Ages, or Centuries of the Church. FIrst, Clement's Anno 7. E∣pistles are such, for so hee sayth of the fift,Bell. l. 3. de bo∣nis oper. c. 11. sect. caterum. It is sure (sayth hee) either that it is not his, or else by some mightilie corrupted. The like hee sayth of his Recog∣nitions, Lib. 5. de lib. arb. cap. 25. §. ad hunc. Also of his Constitutions,Baron. epit. ad an. 102. p. 72. Baro∣nius sayth, that by all men they are counted counterfeyt.
Againe, Iustinus Martyr,Anno 163. his Que∣stions, are justlie suspect by Bellar∣mine,Bell. lib. 4. de pen. c. 9. §. . to bee counterfeit: seeing in the 82 Question, Origen is made men∣tion of, vvho lived after Istinus, more than an hundreth yeares and fiftie. The verie like is cleare of Diony∣sius Areopagita, Anno 70. that hee is likewise a counterfeit, as their owne Lauren∣tius Valla, by the like reason maketh good: to vvit, because in his booke, De divinis nominib{us}, Clemen Stroateus is cited, who lived two hundreth yeares after Dionysius. And yet this is hee, whom Bellarmine oft tymes citeth, to proue the most points of Poperie, as their Hirarchie, Mo∣nasticall lyfe, Purgatorie, and such lyke: but of whome Ierome maketh no mention of in his Booke, De Vi∣ris Illustribus; which hee would not haue omitted, if anie such had bene acknowledged in his tyme,Act. 17.34. (whose name especiallie had beene in-rol∣led in Scripture) and had beene a famous Wryter.
In lyke manner, Bellarmine ac∣knowledgeth Tertullian's Anno 200. Bell. lib. 1. de Christ, c. 10. . responde. Booke, De Trinitate, not to bee his, because the Sabellians are there refuted, who rose not in his tyme. For the verie lyke reason also hee declareth, that Cyprian Anno 250. his Ex∣plicatio Symboli,Bell. ibidem. is not his, because Arrius, Eunomius, and Pbotinus, who were not borne in Cyprian's tyme, are by name refuted. Lyke-wyse,Bell. l. de con∣fir. c. 5. §. au∣thor. & l. 2. de Euch. c. 9. sect. xta. hee declareth, That the Sermons of the Cardinall Ver∣tues of Christ, as also his Sermon of the Supper of the Lord, are not Cyprian's, but counterfeyt. In lyke manner,Bell. l. de n∣fir. c. 8. & l. 1. de penit. c. 10. hee suspecteth his Sermon of the Vnction of holy Chrisme; and the other, of the Ab∣lution of Feere, to bee none of Cy∣prian's, but to bee meerelie coun∣terfeyt. As also, he declareth that Booke, which is given out vnder the name of Arbius,Anno 300. Bell. l. 4. de a∣miss. gra. c. 9. sect. hic ver. Master to Lactantius, to bee none of his, but a more re∣cent Counterfeyt.
More-over, Bellarmine declareth, that the Homilies on Leviticus, at∣tributed to S. Cyrill, Anno 430. Bell. lib. 4. de verbo, c. 11. sect. item. are none of his, but a counterfeyt, and of no Au∣thoritie. Likewise, hee suspecteth the Questions attributed to S. Basill, Anno 370. Bell. l. 1. de a∣mis. gra. c. 13. sect. respondo. to be none of his, but a miere coun∣terfeyt. The like sayeth Possevin, of the Questions attributed to Athanasius, Anno 340. Possevin, ap∣parat. sac. tit. Athanasius. that they are mierlie counter∣feyt. In like manner, the same Posse∣vin, showeth, that manie Treatises attributed to S. Ambrose, Anno 370. Possevin. in ap∣para. tit. Ambrosis. are sure∣lie onlie Counterfeytes, as, De vir∣tutum & vitiorum, conflictu, expositio fidei, libellus de sp. sancto, liber de con∣cord. Mathei & Lucae; liber de poeniten∣tia, ad poenitentiam exortatio, de rigine & moribus Brachamorum, expositio in Cantica, & Epistola ad Demetriadem, ac opuscula. And as for his Com∣mentaries on Sainct Paul's Epistles, Bellarmine sayeth,Bell. l. 2. de lib. ab. c. 14. sect. respondeo. they are surelie none of his, but counterfeyt.
As concerning Chrysostome, Anno 400. Bell. lib. 2. de ch. c. 22. §. Respondeo. Bel∣larmine showeth, that those Bookes attributed to him, are counterfeyt: to vvit, his Commentarie on the Psalmes,Ibid. and his Homilies on Mat∣thew, called, Opus imperfectum: as al∣so, that his Liturgie is counterfeyt, appeareth heere-by, because Prayer is made there-in for Pope Nicolas, who almost 300 yeares lived after Chrysostome. Of those workes also that goe vnder the name of Augustine, Anno 410. those hee discards, as counterfeyt: to wit, 1,1. Bell. l. 3. de sanct. c. 4. 2. Bell. l. 2. de sacram. c. 10. 3. L. 1. de ex∣trem. vnct. c. 4. 4 L. 2. de gra.  l. arb. c. 3. 5. L. 1. de ap. c. 6. 6. L. 3. de pe∣nit. c. 9. 7. L. 6. de a∣mis. gra. c. 2. 8 L. 3. de Eccl. c. 6. his Exposition of the Apocalypse: 2, his Questions vpon the Olde and New Testament: 3, his Booke, De visitatione infirmorum: 4, his Booke, De Predestinatione & gratia: 5, his Booke, De Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus: 6, his Booke; De vera & falsa poenitentia: 7, his Booke called Hypognosticon, he pronounceth also suspicious: and last, his Booke Contra Donatistas, hee declareth to bee corrupt. Besides the former also, Possevin declareth, that those Bookes follo∣wing,
attributed to Augustine, are none of his,Possevm, Is. in appr. tit. August. De vita eremitica, Epi∣stola ad Cyrillum, Epistola 16, ad Boni∣facium, Liber de Spiritu & anima, Liber de speculo, Liber de conflictu virtutum & vitiorum, item Liber de Antichrsto. Also hee showeth, that those are suspect, his Exposition vpon the Gospell, and Epistles of Iohn, his booke De Pastoribus, De Ovibus, De Disciplina Christiana, De Homiliis, & De verbis Apostoli. Of those works in like manner, which passe vnder S. Ierome's name, Anno 390. Salm. Ies 2. Thess. 2. desp. 2. §. tertia spi∣ci. Salmeron declareth, that his Notes and Commentaries on all Paul's E∣pistles, are counterfeyt. Senensis likewise disclaimeth his Commen∣taries on the Proverbes, both for vn∣lyknesse of Style: and that the Au∣thor on the 30 Chapter commen∣ting,Sen. app. l. 4. tit. Hieromes. alleadgeth by name S. Ierome, vpon Ieremie. Bellarmine in like manner decla∣reth, that Booke attributed to Euse∣bius Emissenus, Anno 340. Bell. l. 2. de Eu∣char. c. 30. to be a plaine Coun∣terfeyt; vvhich is cleare by this,
That hee maketh mention there-in of the Pelagian Heresie, vvhich was not broached long after his death. And for Eusebius Pamphylus Anno 330. Dit. 15. cap. Sancta. Hi∣storie, as the Councell of Rome de∣fined it to bee an Apocryphall wri∣ting,Bell. lib. 1. de pont. c. 26. so Bellarmine likewise affirmeth it to bee corrupt. Thus of the Fathers, of the first fiue Ages, in the primitiue Church, wee see, howe manie are confessed by our Adversaries, to bee corrupt and counterfeyt: and so, what vn∣sure Warrand Men haue to gather, or ground their Fayth, on such Writs and Workes. Which made their owne Senensis ingenuouslie to confesse,Senens. l. 4. in titulis patrum. saying, Incertum est quid de∣finiant Patres, idque propter libros suppo∣sitios, qui falso Patribus ascribuntur, &c. Et propter foedissimas corruptelas quae eis inscribuntur: that is, It is vncertayne, what the Fathers define, and that both for the counterfeyt Bookes, which falselie are ascrybed vnto them, as also for the most filthie Errours that are insert into them.
More of which Bastardlie Brood, who pleaseth to see, he may behold in the fore-sayde Senensis, and Posse∣vin's apparatus; and especially of late, in Master Cooke, an English Man, an Armie of such discovered, bred most of them in the Brayne-sicke Pates of ydle Monkes, and forged on the Anvill of doting Supersti∣tion, for building vp of Babell, and opposing the Trueth: And lyke that Harlot before Salomon, who would haue Mothered her dead Chylde vpon her, who truelie did owe the living; So haue they Fa∣thered their Bastardlie Brood, vp∣on the LORD'S Worthies, as if they had beene their legittimate seed, and brought them with-in the Sanctuarie, Vt ementitis titulis fidem authoritatém{que} erroribus suis conciliarent, (as sayeth Senensis:) that is, That by their counterfeyt Titles, they might conciliate trust and authori∣tie vnto their owne Errours: and which practise, of bringing vp such deluding Counterfeytes, for
true Samuels,Erasmus, de∣clar. 91. ad censur. theolog. . Erasmus showes was so ryfe in the tyme of the seventeenth Generall Councell, when Errour began to prevayle, that hee sayeth, Scatebant omnia libris falso celebrium vi∣rorum titulo commendatis: that is, All places were full of Bookes, set foorth vnder the false Title of ex∣cellent Mens Names. The Devill having begun this Practise, even in the Apostles owne tymes, when the Mysterie of Iniquitie began to worke, which made the Apostle Paul to bee therefore so carefull,2. Thess. 2.3. to fore-warne the Thessalonians, That they should not bee deceived, ney∣ther by worde, or alleadged Tradi∣tion, nor by Writ, as from him, that is, by counterfeyt Epistles in his name, to belieue the Lord's Day to bee then at hand. And which Pra∣ctise, wee see, continued after the Apostles dayes most perniciouslie: Therefore the Arrians wrote a Let∣ter to Constantine, vnder the name of Athanasius: the Eutychians also a Let∣ter, agaynst Cyrillus Alexandrinus,
beeing dead, vnder the name of Theodoret: and the Maniheans, and others, manie Bookes; some Fathe∣red on Adam, some on Enoch, ome on the Apostles, and Disciples of Christ, and some on Christ Him∣selfe; vvho were rejected, (as Augu∣stine sayeth) Non quod eorum qui Deo placuerunt reprobetur authoritas, sed quod ista non credantur esse ipsoum: that is, Not that the authoritie of such Men,Aug. l. 18. de  38. who haue pleased God, is re∣jected; but because it is believed, that those are not the workes of such Men, but of other men (sayeth Beda) vnder those mens names.Beda, in Epist. Iudae. But the last, tho not the least, craftie Counterfeyts, and Corrupters, that ever Satan prevayled by, for erecting his kingdome of Darke∣nesse, and a Throne to the Vicar of his Power, was that Locust brood, which came out of the bottomlesse Pit;Revel. 9. even that numerous and noy∣some swarme See Bell. de scrip. Eccl. ad an. 396. of Monks, & other Popish Clergie: to whome I may say, as Ierome sayde to Ruffinus, for
preassing to substitute a certayne Arrians Booke, for Theophilus Mar∣tyr, In the Day of Iudgement, con∣sider what they will answere to the Complayntes of such holie Men, Whose Reverend Names they haue so Roguishlie abused, vn∣to most wicked purposes. AN APPENDIX, For discerning of Counterfeyts. FIrst, there are 30 Epistles, or there-about, of ancient Ro∣mane Bishops, obtruded vnto vs, for the Pope's Suprema∣cie, and other Popish Errours, vvhich to bee altogether counter∣feyt, heere-by may bee knowne. 1. By the matter contained in them, of pleading for Supremacie, which was never so much as once thought vpon by those holie Bi∣shops, as their owne Duaren,Duaren. l. 3. de saer. Eccl. mnist. c. 1. out of ancient Records, testifieth, and con∣cludeth, saying, Nec dubium est quin
vetustiores, sancteors{que} urbis Romae E∣piscopi, sede Ecclesia{que} propria contenti, equis Episcopis Ecclesiarum ipsis com∣missarum liberam administrationem reli∣querint, quasi urbis unius magis quam or∣bis Episcopi: that is, It is no doubt, but that the more ancient and ho∣lie Bishops of Rome, contenting them-selues with their owne pro∣per Seat, and Church, did leaue to other Bishops the free administra∣tion of their Churches in like man∣ner; as being Bishops rather of one Citie, than of the whole World, (to wit, by the new, and now claimed vniversall Supremacie.) A Pope of their owne testifying likewise,Aeneas Sylvius, alias Pus, 2. E∣pist. 22. that before the Councell of Nice, small respect vvas had to the Church of Rome, but everie Bishop lived to himselfe:Duaren, lco supra cit. Cu∣san. concord. l. 2. c. 12. and as the same Duaren, and Cardinall Cusanus testifieth, it beeing but later, that the Bishops that succeeded those, did farre transgresse those limits of ancient Moderation. Next, those Epistles are farced
vvith the injunction of an heape of Ceremonies, vvhich were not, not onlie in their times heard of, but a long time after in the Church of CHRIST,Aug. Epist. 119. ad larium, B. Rhenan. an∣ot. in Trt. de corona  San. Is. tom. 9. tract. 32. p. 253. as Augustine, and Rbena∣nus witnesseth: and the reason vvhere-of, their owne Salmeron gi∣veth to bee this, Quia primitivi ma∣gis essentialibus fidi plantandis, quam ceremoniis vacabant: that is, Because the primitiue Bishops did vake more, and ooke care to plant the essentiall Doctrines of Faith, than to plant Ceremonies in the Church of CHRIST. 2. By the manner, or forme of speach vsed in them, as by a cleare Shibboleth, they may bee discerned counterfeyt; beeing written in such a barbarous sort of Diction, vvhich was no wayes to bee heard, espe∣ciallie amongst such learned Bi∣shops, as then vvere in Rome; the Latine Language in those times be∣ing there (as it were, at the Foun∣taine head) pure, terse and neate, in the mouthes of all Men.
3. Their Style is all one, which never hapneth to bee so, vvithout diversitie, amongst diversitie of Wters, except these  onlie: vvho vvere the Spirits Pen men, of Sacred and holie Scripture, where one was onlie Indyter, altho the Scribes were diverse. 4. There is no alleadgeance of them, in the most famous Councels, by anie Romane Bishops, or their Deputies, where either Lawes were made against anie such Suprema∣cie, as in the Councels of Constanti∣nople, Chalcedon,Concl. Con∣stt. c. 5. Conl. Chaled  16. Concil. Ephes. c. 6. and Ephesus, or where hottest contestation was for anie such; either by the Bishop of Rome, for himselfe, as in the fact of Zozimus, at the Councell of Carthage, or in the impugning the vsurpatiō of it by another, as in the writings of Gregorie is apparent, against the Patriarch of Constantinople. 5. There is no mention of those Epistles in the works and writings of the most ancient and primitiue Doctors, that either lived then, or
a long time there-after, in the first 400 yeares, & aboue: which doubt∣lesse, if anie such had beene, they had not escaped so their notice, nor they omitted some-where, and vp∣on some occasions, to made men∣tion thereof. Secondlie, for discerning be∣tweene the true vvrytinges of Fa∣thers, and those that are counter∣feyt, and palliate vnder their names. 1. The diversitie of the Stile, dis∣covers the diversitie of the writers, to a judicious Remarker; so that, as Augustine speaketh of Cyprian,Aug. Epist. 48. saying, Cypriani stylus habet propriam quandam faciem, qua possit agnosci: that is, Cy∣prian's Style hath a certayne proper Face, or resemblance, where-by it may bee knowne: Even so, the verie lyke may bee sayde of others. And by this Note of Cognisance, Bel∣larmine him-selfe maketh sequestra∣tion, of sundrie Patches, from the other Workes of ancient Wryters, whose name they pretende.
2. The grosse Slips, which are found in those counterfeyt Addi∣tions show, that they goe masked onelie, vnder false Titles, which proceedeth from Ignorance, or neglect of computation of Tymes: and those Slips are eyther in nomi∣nation of persons, or recording of Heresies, or mentionating of Actions. By the first sorte, are discove∣red, Iustinus Questions to bee none of his, because in the 82 Question, mention is made of Origen, who was not borne an hundreth and od yeares after. So is Dionysius Areopagi∣ta, dignosced to bee counterfeyt, in hi Booke, De Divinis nominibus; Cle∣ments Stromateus beeing cited, who lived not 200 after. So is Chryso∣stome's Liturgie, Pope Nicolas being made mention of there-in, who li∣ved almost 300 yeares after. So are Eucherius Commentaries, where-in hee citeth Gregorius, who lived 100 yeares there-after. As also, so are judged Saynct Ambrose Epistles: in
the 82 where-of, mention is made of Venice, which was not builded, nor begun, long after his death. By the second sorte, are disco∣vered, Cyprian's Exposition of the Creede, to bee none of his; Because Arrius, Eunomius, & Photinus, Here∣tickes, who were not borne in Cy∣prian's tyme, are by him refuted. So is that booke of Eusebius Emissenus, dignosced to be counterfeyt; wher∣in hee maketh mention of the Pela∣gian Heresie, which was not a long tyme broached after his death. In lyke manner, Saynct Ambrose Epi∣stles are discovered, to bee of the same Stampe, where-in the same Heresie is mentionated: which vn∣to Saynct Ambrose was vtterlie vn∣knowne. And Tertullian's booke, De Trinitate, is made to march in the same Ranke; Because the Sabellians are there refuted, who rose not in his tyme. By the last sort, is that Epistle of Pope Clement,Bell l. 3. debo.  sect.  rum. to S. Iames, Bshop of Ierusalem, by Bellarmine himselfe thus
proven to be counterfeyt; Because Saynct Iames died seaven years be∣fore Saynct Peter's death; after whom Clement then onelie succee∣dd: and therefore beeing Bishop seaven yeares after the death of Saynct Iames, could not therefore as Bishop of Rome written to Sainct Iames, who had died (as sayde is) seaven yeares before. An-other notable Example I will set downe, How that counter∣feyt Letter, 206. of that notable Popish Impostor, as written by Saynct Cy∣rill, Bishop of Ierusalem, vnto Saynct Augustine, touching the Miracles of Saynct Ierome, is clearlie discove∣red. This counterfeyt Pedler, sharp∣lie taxeth the Grecians, for their de∣nyall of Purgatorie, saying, These wicked Sectaries did also mayn∣tayne, That there was no place of Purgatorie, where-in the Soules, which had not done full Pennance for their sinnes in this worlde, might bee purged, (sayeth hee.) Then he telleth a Tale, how Sainct
Ierome, being at that tyme after his death with God, for the confuta∣tion of this New-sprung-vp Here∣sie, raysed vp three Men from the dead, after that he had first led their Soules into Paradise, Purgatorie, and Hell: to the ende, that they might make knowne to all men, the thinges that were done there. Now remarke, that Saynct Cyrill, who is made the Relater to Saynct Augustine, of this Miracle, which Saynct Ierome wrought after his death, died before Saynct Ierome, the space of 30 yeares, (as is known to everie one, who knoweth the Historie of those tymes.) And so hee maketh Saynct Cyrill to wryte 30 yeares after his death; as if hee had beene the Surviver of Saynct Ierome: where-as, on the contrarie, Saynct Ierome was his Surviver so long after. And therefore, it would haue fitted him, rather to wryte of anie thing, that fell foorth after the death of Saynct Cyrill, than Saynct Cyrill to haue related, what befell
after the death of Ierome. And yet, not-with-standing of the palpable∣nesse of such Forgerie,Suarez, in 3. part. Thomae. tom. 4. disp. 45. sect. 1. Suarez is not ashamed, to bring such Bag∣gage as this, in the cleare Noone∣day, to purchase Credit of Antiqui∣tie, to their new Staple of Purgato∣rie: while as their owne B. Fisher, playnlie proclaymeth, that it is but Sero cognitum & receptum: that is, That it is but of late onelie knowne,Rossns. adv. Luther. art. 18. p. 314. and received in their catholick Church: De quo apud priscos illos, nulla vel quam rarissima fiebat mentio, sed & Graecis ad bunc usque diem non est creditum Purga∣torium esse: that is, Of the which (sayth hee) there is no mention at all in the Ancients, or if there was anie, it was most seldome; and even vnto this day, the Grecian Church believeth no Purgatorie. And yet remarke, how this Impostor would haue cleare mention made thereof, in a most ancient Doctor, and a Gre∣cian Father to patronize, what the whole Grecian Church hitherto ever did reject.
3. The contrarietie that is found in the writings of Ancients, discovereth clearlie, that manie things goe vnder their names oft∣times, where-vnto they were never accessorie: and by this Bellarmine him-selfe proveth, that pretended Epistle written by Pope Clement, to S. Iames the Apostle, to bee a plaine Counterfeyt; it beeing maintained there-in, That all things should bee common: which else-where S. Cle∣ment had refuted. And therefore, Quis credat ea à S. Clemente Christianis tradi,Bell. l. 3. de bo∣nis oper, in part. c. 11. §. cate∣rum. (saith Bellarmine) quae ipse idem alibi à Faustiniano ethnico refutavit? that is, Who can belieue, (saith he) that such things were taught vnto Christians by S. Clement, which he him-selfe else-where did refute, a∣gainst an Heathen Faustinian? 4. The Application also of the pretended writinges of the most ancient Doctors, vnto those times where-in they lived, will serue much lyke-wyse, to discover such Counterfeyts, which march insi∣diouslie
vnder wrong Colours: as when wee see them made Patrons of Errours, which were never hat∣ched, nor durst peepe out, in the Sunne-shyne of those cleare Dayes: as namelie,Bell. lib. 1. de sanct. c. 19. Bell. lib. 1. de purg. c. 6. Bell. lib. 2. de mon. c. 27. Bell. ib 3. de Euchl c. 2. Bell. l. de bpt. c. 25. Bell. lib. 2. de pont▪ c. 14. Dionysius, the Areopagite, in the Apostles tymes, to maintaine the Invocation of Saynctes, and Purgatorie: Martialis, the Disciple of Christ, to mayntayne forced Continencie in the Clergie: Iustinus Martyr, to mayntayne Transsub∣stantiation, Vnction in Baptisme, and Papall Confirmation: and Cle∣ments, the verie Successour of Peter, immediatelie, to stand for the Su∣premacie: with manie such, which the puritie of those primitiue tymes, together with the deposi∣tion of after Records, and Historie, joyned oft tymes with the verie confession of our Partie, declareth, and discovereth manifestlie, their Forgerie.
CHAP. VIII. 1. How the Romanists adduce the Testimonies of Fathers, agaynst vs as true; whom not withstan∣ding them selues else▪ where doe pronounce Coutfyt. IT is reported of one Evagrius Poti∣cus Hypeborita, that hee et vpon the Works of one Xi∣stus Pythagoreus, an Heathen Philoso∣pher, the counterfeyt name of one Xistus, a Martyr; and so cunninglie brought out of him, so manie Te∣stimonies, agaynst the true Ortho∣dox, in the Poynt of Man's naturall Abilitie, & Perfection; that Saynct Ierome restifieth of him,Hieron. Epist▪ ad Tsiphon∣tem. That they who knewe not, that it was the booke of an Heathen Philosopher, might haue beene easilie induced,
vnder the borrowed Name, and fayre Show, of the booke of a Mar∣tyr, to drinke of the Golden Cup of that Whoore of Babylon: His practie beeing there-in, lyke that where-of Lucretius speaketh; Ac veluti pueris absynthiatetra medentes Cam dare conātur, prius oras pocula circū Contingunt, dulci mellis flavo{que} colore. That is: Lyke those, for Cure, who giue to Babes Fell Worme-wood to drinke out, With yealow & sweet Honey first, They stroake the Cuppe about. Even so, how cunning our Ad∣versaries are agaynst vs, in the lyke practise, for oppugning the Trueth, adducing Testimonies of Antiquitie, vnder the borrowed Name of Ho∣lie and ancient Fathers, which the force of Trueth maketh them else∣where, to acknowledge and con∣fesse to bee counterfeyt; let the en∣sewing practise, and these proofs, testifie.
A First, Arnobius is adduced by Bel∣larmine, agaynst vs, in the matter of Free-will,Bell. l. 5. de grat. & l. arb. c. 26. §. 21. as a most ancient Father: but is disclaymed else-where by him, as a mere Counterfeyt, and Novice.L. 4. de a∣mis. gra. c. 9. §. hic vero. Next, Abdias his Workes, are ci∣ted by Bellarmine, for Monasticall lyfe:L. 2. de mn. c. 27. and yet hee confesseth, that the Learned of their owne Church, holde the same for counterfeyt.L. 2. de bon▪ oper. c. 24. §. sd. Agayne, Amphilochius his Vita S. Basilii, is cited by Bellarmine, to proue, That vnder the Spece of Bread on∣lie, the Eucharist of olde was had to the Sicke,Lib. 4.  Euch. c. 24. and for proofe of Papall confirmation:L. de confiz. c. 5. and yet else∣where, without anie doubt, he pro∣nounceth that booke, to bee a false Counterfeyt.Bell. descrip. Eccl. ann. 380. Lyke-wyse, Athanasius Sermon, De Sanctissima Deipara, is cited by Bel∣larmine, for Invocation of Sayncts,Bell. l. 3. de Sanct. c. 16. but is declared by Baronius, to bee a miere Counterfeyt.Brn. tom. . ann. 4. nū. 19. So is the 82 Epistle of Saynct
Ambrose, cited by Bellarmine, for the Vow of single life: Bell. lib. 1. de Cler. c. 16. yet Possevin granteth, that it is none of Ambroses.Possevin▪ p∣pr. verb. Am∣brosius. In like manner, Anselmus is cited by Bellarmine, for Purgatorie, Bell. l. 1. de purg. c. 6. for Reall presence, Lib. 2. de Eu. c. 36. for the Virgines immaculate conception, L. 4. de a∣mis. gra. c. 15. and for Free-will: L. 5. de gra. & l. arb. c. 26. and yet Possevin sho∣weth, that one Herveus Natalis, who lived onlie 250 yeares since, is the writer of those Commentaries, falselie attributed to Anselmus.Possev. ap∣par. vero Her∣veus. More-over, Anacletus Epistles are cited by Pighius and Stapleton, for the Supremacie, Pigh. Hie∣rar. l. 6. c. 6. and yet Cardi∣nall Cusanus pronounceth them, but miere forgerie.Cusan. con∣cord. cathol. l. 3. c. 34. B. Againe, Boniface second Epistle, is cited by Pighius, Harding, Staple∣ton, and Turrecremata, to proue, that the African Councell submitted thē∣selues to the Pope: Tur. lmma de Eccl. l. 3. c. 49. yet Bellarmine declareth, that this Epistle is but suspicious, and counterfeyt. Bell. l. 2. de pon. c. 25. C. Likewise, Bellarmine citeth Cassia∣nus,
as a verie ancient Father, in the matter of Prayer, Bell. lib. 1. de bon. oper. c. 2. of Popish Satis∣faction, Liv. 4. de po∣nt. cap. 9. of Iustification, Lib. 1. de Iustis. cap. 13. and set fasts L. 2. de bon. oper. cap. 2. against vs: & yet he acknow∣ledgeth, that Booke else-where, to bee but Apocryphall, and counter∣feyt, Lib. 6. de grat. cap. 4. §. accedat. and condemned as such, in a Romane Councell, vnder Pope Ge∣lasius. In which Councell in like man∣ner, was the Canons of the Apo∣stles, declared to bee such also;Grat. dist. 15 cap. sancta. and yet as the true Canons of the Apo∣stles, are they cited by Bellarmine, for proofe of Easters observation, Bll. lib. de Sanct. cap. 12. and Papall Confirmation. Lib. 2. de Confir. cap. 8. Likewise, Bellarmine citeth that Sermon, De ablutione pdum, as S. Cy∣prian's, against vs, to proue the inde∣leble Character of holie Orders: Bell. lib. 1▪ de Sa. rd. c. 10. and yet else-where he pronounceth the same, Apocryphall. Lib. 1. de pnt. c. 10. So are Pope Clement's Epistles ci∣ted by Bellarmine, for the Suprema∣cie, Lib. 2. de pon. cap. 1. reservation of the Sacrament, Lib. 4. de Euch. cap. 5. and Popish Confirmation: Lib. . de confir. cap. 3. and yet else-where hee showeth, that it
is vncertaine who writ them:Lib. 2. de pnt. c. 7. and some hee prooveth clearlie, to bee mierlie counterfeyt. Lib. 3. de bon. oper. c. 11. Of the same Stampe he acknow∣ledgeth Calixtus Epistle, the first of Clement's, the third of Anacletus, the first of Anicetus, the first of Victors, the first of Zepherius, the second of Calixtus, the first of Lucius, and of Marcellus, the third of Eusebius, and the first of Melchiades, and Marcus, which notwithstanding are all ad∣duced, by him and others, ordina∣rilie to prooue the Pope's Supre∣macie.Lib. 2. de pont. c. 14. §. ad ha. Vnder the same Coloures also marcheth Cornelius Epistle, cited by Bellarmine, for prayer to the Dead:Lib. 1. de Sanct. c. 19. which Baronius declareth assuredlie to bee but falselie fathered. Baron. . to. 2. an. 221. Also, that Booke, De Cardinalibus operibus Christi, is cited by Bellarmine, as Cyprian's, for Transsubstantiation, Bell. l. 3 de Euch. c. 20. and by sundrie others, for other points of Poperie: and yet hee else-where clearly disclaimeth the same, as a craftie counterfeyt. Lib. 2. de confir. c. 6.
In like manner, is that Epistle written to S. Augustine, of S. Ierome's Miracles, cited as S. Cyrils, (as I shewed before by Suarez) and by Eckius, for Purgatorie, Eck. om. 2. dm. . advent. and by o∣thers, for the Reall presence, and worshipping of Saincts: which Pos∣sevin notwithstanding, and that which is before discovered, decla∣reth to bee a grosse Forgerie. Poss. appar. 1. Aurelius Au∣gustinus. D Agayne, Bellarmine citeth Diony∣sius Areopagita, for Invocation of Sayncts, Bell. l. 1. de sanct. c. 19. Purgatorie, Lib. 1. de purg. c. 6. and Mona∣sticall lyfe, Lib. 2. de mon. c. 5. Rhem. in Act. 17.34. &c. And this is that famous S. Dennice (say the Rhemists) who prooveth playnlie almost all things that the Church now vseth in the ministration of the holie Sa∣crament, and affirmeth, that hee learned them of the Apostles: gi∣ving also testimonie for the Catho∣licke Fayth, in most thinges nowe contraverted, so playnlie, that our Adversaries haue no Shift, but to deny this Dennice to haue bene the Author of them. And yet, what
sayeth their owne Bellarmine of this booke? It is vncertayne at all, (sayeth he) if that booke be Saynct Dennices, whose name is pretended.Bell▪ lib. 2. de. confirm. cap. 7. §. am. Lyke-wyse, Damasus Pontificall is cited by Bellarmine, to proue, that Election of Bishops, onelie belon∣geth to the Pope, Lib. 1. de Cler. cap. 8. for Chrisme in Baptisme,Lib. 1. de bapt. cap. 27. for Images,Lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 9 and Cere∣monies of the Masse: Lib. 2. de Miss. cap. 14. and yet hee sayeth else-where, that it is notor∣lie known, that Damasus was never the wryter of that booke, but Ana∣stasius onelie, the master of the Pope's Librarie. Bell. de Scrip. Eccl. ann. 367. Damascen in lyke manner, his booke, De iis qui in fide migrarunt, is cited by Bellarmine, for the proofe of Purgatorie, Bell. lib. 1 de purg. c. 6 and yet else-where hee disclaymeth the same, to bee Damascen's at all, and sayeth, that most easilie the same may bee pro∣ven. Lib. 2. de purg. c. 8. §. prima. E Agayne, Eusebius his third Epistle is cited by Bellarmine, for the Supre∣macie, Lib. 2. de pont. c. 14. and yet he professeth, that
it is no-wyse certayne, who is the wryter there-of. L. . de con¦fir. c. 7. Eucherius Commentaries also, on Genesis, and the Kinges, are cited by Bellarmine, for Free-will, L. 5. de gra. & l. arb. c. 22. and the Masse: L. 1. de mis∣sa. c. 6 but he declareth else∣where, that those cannot bee Euche∣rius bookes, seeing hee oft tymes ci∣teth Gregorie, who lived not an hun∣dreth yeares after.Bell. de scrip. Eccl. ann. 440. In lyke manner, Eusebius Epistle of the death of Saynct Ierome, is ci∣ted by Peresius, for Transsubstantia∣tion, Peres. de trad. part. 2. f. 18 b. and by Durandus, for the ado∣ration of the Host: Dur. de r∣tib. Eccl. l. 2. c. 40. and yet this Epistle not onlie (sayth Bellarmine) doeth it manifest the Noveltie there-of, but also both Ignorance and Deceit. Bell. de scrip. Eccl. an. 390.1. Hironymus. F. Againe, Fabianus Epistle is cited by Bellarmine, to proue Traditions,Bell. l. 1. de verb. c. 16. and by the Rhemists, to proue Trans∣substantiation; Rhem in act. 8.10.17. but that this Booke is counted counterfeyt, and Apo∣cryphal, Bellarmine else-where clear∣lie granteth vnto vs.Bell. l. 2. de confir. c. 8. §. secuno pre. ex concil
G. Gregorie Nyssen, his 8 books, De Phi∣losophia, are cited like-wise by Bellar∣mine, for Free-wil,Bell. l. 4. de gra. & l. ar. c. 14. & yet else-where hee confesseth, that they looke no wayes like such a man's bookes. Bell. de script. Eccl. an 380. So are Pope Gregorie's Epistles frequentlie adduced, to proue, that Sacraments conferre Grace, Ex ope∣re operato, L. 2. de sa∣cram. c. 7. for Popish Confirma∣tion; L. 2. de con∣firm. c. 3. and that Concupiscence, af∣ter Baptisme, is no Sinne: L. 5. de amiss gra. c. 8. and yet he confesseth else-where, that they are corrupt and vitiate. L. 2. de con∣fi. 12. And Pos∣sevin declareth also his booke on the Canticlos, to bee a miere coun∣terfeyt, which Bellarmine citeth for the fore-saide Confirmation. Possiv. ap∣par. . Greg. Mag. H. Againe, Hegesippus booke is cited by Bellarmine, to prooue Peter's bee∣ing, Bell. l. 1. de cofir. c. 3. & 8. and dying at Rome: L. 2. de pont. c. 3. and yet Baronius testifieth, that this booke is a plaine counterfeyt. Bar. ann. tom. 2. a. 167. num. 15. So are Hermes works, called Pasto∣ralis, cited by Coccius, for the Angel Custos, and for Purgatorie: Cor. om. 2. l. 7. art. 5. but
Possevin declareth, that by the most Learned it is discovered, and decla∣red a Counterfeyt. Possev. ap∣par. 1. pastor. I In like manner, Iustin Martyr, his Questions are cited by Bellar∣mine, for Vnction in Baptisme, Bell. lib. de bapt. c. 25. for Papall Confirmation, Lib. de co∣fir. c. 5. and Trans∣substantiation; Lib. 3. de Euch. c. 2. but else-where hee declareth them, no wayes to be Iu∣stine Martyr's, but a more recent counterfeyts. Lib. 1. de sanct. c. 4. §. tertius. So also is Sainct Iames Lyturgie alleadged by ellarmine, for the Masse, L. 1. de miss▪ c. 18. whereas the word  vsed there-in, which began after O∣rigen's dayes, (as witnesseth Senen∣sis) Senen bibl. l. 4.1. Origenes. as also the commemoration of Confessors therein, which was farre later in Sylvester's dayes, as te∣stifieth Pope Innocent the third, In. . de mis r. mis l. 3. c. 10. showeth clearlie, that it is a coun∣terfeyt. L Agayne, Lucius Epistle is cited by Bellarmine, to proue the Pope's Supremacie, Bell. l. 2. de  c. 14. and his Infallibili∣tie:Lib. 3. de  5.
and yet hee affirmeth clearlie, that there is such a doubt, who is the wryter, that hee dare not assu∣redlie pronounce, that Lucius was the Author.L. 2. de pont. c. 14. Lyke-wyse, he citeth Lactantius Verses, De Passione, for Adoration of the Crosse, L. 2. de I∣mag. c. 28. and yet else-where hee confesseth, that the Author of those Verses, and of the other, on the Resurrection, is not surelie knowne.L. de script. Eccles. In lyke manner, Linus workes are cited, by Coccius, for Apparition of Soules, & establishing of Purga∣torie: Coc. tom. 1. l. 5. de snct. art. 9. and yet Bellarmine decla∣reth, that both Prochorus, (which some cite) and Linus works, are but false, and counterfeyt. Bell. l. 2. de pont. c. 9. §. sed. M Agayne, Marcus Epistle is cited by Bellarmine, for the Pope's Supre∣macie, Bll. l. 2. de pont. c. 14 and Infallibilitie: Ib. 3. de pont. . 5. and yet hee granteth else-where, That it is most sure, that the same is counterfeyt. Bel. de scrip. Eccl. a. 340. & 1145. So doeth hee cite Marcellus, and
Melchiades Epistles, for the same Su∣premacie: Lib. . de pon. c. 14. but granteth else-where, that hee dare not say assu∣redlie, that they are theirs.Ibidem. O In lyke manner, Bellarmine addu∣ceth Origen's Homilies on the Gos∣pels, for popish Reall presence: Lib. 2. d Euch. . 8. but anone hee disclaymeh them else-where, and sayeth, they ae none of Origen. Bell. de scrip. Ecl. So are his Homilies, on the Psalms, cited by Bellarmine, for the same former poynt, and Auricular Confession: L. 3. de pe∣ . 7. and yet hee freelie confesseth else-where, that it is in doubt, who is the Wryter. L. de srit. Eccles. P Agayne, Primasius Commenta∣ries on the Hebrewes, are cited by Bellarmine, for popish Carnall pre∣sence, Lib. 2. de Euch. c. 31. & Sacrifice of the Masle: L. 1. de missa. c. 6. and yet Salmeron showeth, that Pri∣masius never wrote them, but Hay∣mo, a late bishop in Germanie. Sal. tom. 1. disp. 10. in Ep. Paul. V In lyke manner, Vrbanus Epistle is
cited by Bellarmine to proue Con∣firmation: Bell. l. 2. de confir. c. 7. and yet hee professeth, that it is no-wyse sure, if he be the Author of this Epistle, or if it be a Counterfeyt. Ibidem. §. ad haec. The Rhemists also, howe no lesse impudent they are, than others, in obtruding to the Readers of the Rhemish Testaments, false Counter∣feyts, for famous Fathers: and so se∣ducing simple Soules, make them, in the golden Cuppe of pretended Antiquitie, to drinke onlie the giddie Wyne of superstitious Idolatrie, let these few Examples, in place of manie, testifie. Rhem. in Act. 17.34.First, they obtrude the booke of Dionysius Arcopagita, as making in all the poyntes of Poperie, almost al∣to-gether for them: which hee lear∣ned (say they) from the verie Apo∣stles. And yet,Bell. l 2. de con∣fir. c. 7. §. jm. besides Bellarmine's confession, of the vncertayntie of the Author, it is clearlie proven, even by their owne side, and the booke it selfe, that it is but a ranke Counterfeyt, as may bee seene in
our seaventh Chapter. Lyke-wyse,Rhem. on A. .10.17. for Popish Confir∣mation, they produce Pope Fabia∣nus Epistle, which Bellarmine telleth them clearlie,Bell. l. 2. de con∣fir. c. 8. §. s∣cundo. is accounted by sun∣drie, to bee counterfeyt. Agayne, they bring in Ambrose 82 Epistle,Rhem. on 1. Cor. 15.32. Possevin. ap∣par. . Ambro∣sius. for the merit of Fasting, which their owne Possevin declareth heere-by, to bee a miere Counter∣feyt; Because there is made mention in that Epistle, of Venice, which was not founded long after Saynct Am∣brose death. In lyke manner, Saynct Ierome on the Epistles,Rhem. on Rm. 3.20. is cited by the Re∣mists, for Iustification by Workes: and yet Bellarmine telleth them,Bell. lb. 4. de verbo c. 5. §. Hu. That this booke is a shamelesse Counter∣feyt; and hath for its Author, ra∣ther the Hereticke Pelagius, than such an holie Father. So are Chrysostome's Homilies, vpon Marke▪Rhem in Math. 3.1. cited by the Remists, to prooue the Antiquitie of their Monkish Orders: and yet Bellarmine testifieth,Bell. de scrip. Ecel. an. 396. ☞ Note▪ That they are none of
Chrysostome's, but some simple Monke's. Augustine lyke-wyse, De Ecclesiae dogmatibus, 1. Cer. 11.28. Bll. lib. 1. de bapt. cap 6. §. Nota. M. de Castro. her. 10. tit. bap∣tis. is cited by the Rhemists, for Auricular Confession: and yet both Bellarmine, and Alphonsus de Ca∣stro, denyeth it to bee Augustines, but a craftie Counterfeyt's. So is Augustine, De fide ad Petrum, cited by the Rhemists,Rhem. n 1. or. 7.9. to proue, that they are damned, who marrie after the Vow of Continencie: and yet Bellarmine declareth,Bell. de scrip. Eccl. an. 420. that it nowayes appeareth vnto anie, to bee a booke of Augustines. And agayn, Augustines Questions on the Olde and New Testament, are cited by the Rhemists,Rhem. on Math. 17.27. for Papall Supremacie: and yet this booke is neyther Augustines, (sayeth Bellar∣mine) nor yet anie Catholicke Au∣thor's.Bell. de gra. prim: homis. c. . We may, cōcerning such coun∣terfeyt Stuffe, there-fore, safelie cō∣clude, where-of at all occasion these Merchands of Babell by Voyce and Writ are such deceitful Venters: evē
as Bellarmine sayeth of Linus forged Historie,Bell. lib. 2. de pont. c. 9. Historia Lini verè conficta est, & si conficta, non est ullius authoritatis: that is, The Historie of Linus, is truelie a forged Counterfeyt; and if it bee forged, it is not of anie au∣thoritie at all. Even so may wee say of all such Pedler Trash, (a view of some where-of, wee haue layde open to judicious Eyes) that this one Censure may passe on all the Packe, to sende them packing for ever out of open sight; seeing the most part of that which they adduce of humane Testimonie, and obtrude agaynst the Trueth, vnder colour and pretext of Venerable Antiquitie, proveth playnly but craf∣tie Counterfeyting, and obscure Forgerie: there-fore, by their owne Verdict, wee pronounce their Doome, That they are vnworthie of Credit and Authoritie. Neyther mar∣vell wee,Revel. 9. that those Locusts, who are sayde to haue counterfeyt Crownes on their heads, had lyke-wyse of olde such counterfeyting
Conceits in their heads; and lyke Babels worke-men, that they haue beene so busie, in the Night tyme of Darknesse, to prepare so much Stuffe, for those Merchands of Ba∣bell nowe: who for reparing the Ruines of their rottering King∣dome, and the imparing and impe∣ding the Grouth of the Gospell of Light, are no lesse busie in venting, than they were at anie tyme in in∣venting the same: their Master bu∣silie bestirring him-selfe in his ser∣vantes, because his Kingdome is neare an ende. Vpon both which sorts of his Suppostes, there can no juster Sentence passe in this pur∣pose, than their owne Fellow Par∣sons pronounceth in such case,Parson. de trip. convers. Angl. pars 1. c. 4. p. 86. Ne∣bulones esse perditissimos, non solum qui opera spuria claris ascribunt autoribus, verum eos etiam qui pro veris & genuinis obtrudunt: that is, That they are most damnable Villanes, not onlie (sayth hee) who ascrybe counterfeyt workes, vnto famous Authors; but lyke-wyse they who obtrude them
vnto anie, for true and vpright Wrytinges. The second part of the VIII. CHAPTER. How the Romanists answere vs, when wee adduce the Te∣stimonies of those same Fa∣thers agaynst them, which they obtrude vnto vs as true. 1. Disclayming some, as counterfeyt. 2. Alleadging of others, That perhaps only they are so. THE Rhemists call this an olde Tricke of Hereticks,Rhem. in Act. 17.34. when they were preassed with the Testimonies of ancient Fathers, to deny that those were the Authors: but some others, of a later age,Rose-wd dis∣sert. de fide he∣reticis servanda c. 17. p. 191. and Rose-weed, the Ie∣suit, sayth, That this was a common Shift of Hereticks, when they were straited with anie cleare Testimo∣nie of Antiquitie, to cry out, That
the booke was counterfeit, or cor∣rupt,Hard. respons. ad provoc. uc∣l: art. 1. Evasionem (saith Harding) om∣nium miserrimam, & à ratione & conjue∣tudine doctissimrum alienissimam: that is, A most miserable sort of esca∣ping, (saith hee) and most contra∣rious both to Reason and Custome of the most Learned. And yet not∣withstanding how guiltie these Ie∣suiticall Impostors are of this Pra∣ctise, which they vpbrayde to o∣thers, and how vnmindfull they are of that saying, Omni vitio debet ca∣rere, qui in alterum paratus est dicere, let these few Examples that doe ensue testifie. First, Bellarmine, (as also the Rhe∣mists) to prooue the Pope's Supre∣macie,Bll. li. 1. de pnt. c. 10. §. tertis. Rhem. on 1. Tim. .15. Bell. lib. 1. de Euch. c. 13. §. Deni{que} as also Popish Reall pre∣sence, bring their Testimonies out of S. Ambrose his Commentaries on Paul's Epistles: and yet when wee object a place out of the same, to proue, that the Sacramentall Bread is the representatiue Bodie of CHRIST onlie, Bellarmine plainlie then disclaimeth those Commenta∣ries,
and saith,L. 2. de Euch. c. 14. §. Dilui∣mus. they are not S. Am∣broses. Againe, L. 1. de vbo c. 14. sub fiem. L. 2. de missa c. 12. §. Ad lo∣cum. Bellarmine adduceth Au∣gustine, Ad Orosium, against vs, as the true Father, to prooue Ecclesiasticus, to bee Canonicall Scripture: but declareth him counterfeyt, when wee oppose him to him, agaynst the Order of the Masse. Arnobius also is brought foorth, as a most ancient Father,L. . de gra. & l. arb. . 26. L. 4 de amis gra. c. 9. against vs, in the matter of Free-will: but disclaimed else-where, when hee maketh against him, as  and a miere counterfeit. In like manner, Augustine's Que∣stions, on the Olde and New Te∣stament, are produced against vs, as Augustine's owne worke;L. 1. de missa c. 15. sect. . And. both to proue the Masse, to bee a Sacrifice properlie, in one place; as also, to be propitiatorie, in another: but are rejected by the same Bellarmine,L. . de missa. c. 2. sect. Ex Latin. as counterfeit and hereticall, when wee prooue out of the same, That Sacraments conferre not Grace,Bell. lib. 2. de Sacr. c. 10. sect. Resp. Ex opere operato.
Bell. lib. 1. de n. c . §. quā∣tm. L. 3. de justif. c. 7. §. 5. Basil.Lyke-wyse, Bellarmine citeth S. Basill's Questions, to proue Mona∣sticall lyfe, and a man's incertayntie of his owne Salvation: but when wee vrge agaynst them those same Questions, agaynst their Distin∣ction of Sinne, into Veniall and Mortall, he disclaymeth that book to bee Saynct Basill's,L. 1. de amis. ga. . 13. §. Resp. but one Eu∣statbius Sebassenus, a condemned he∣reticke. . de Euc. ann.More-over, Bellarmine adduceth Saynct Cyprian's Sermon, Le oena  poyntes of Poperie,L. 2. de missa. c. 2. §. ex la∣ti. as Transsubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Masse, and Purga∣torie, &c. And yet, when the same is objected agaynst their Mutila∣tion of the Sacrament,L. 1. de purg. . 6. §. Haec expos. by taking away the Cp from the People, he disclaymeth that Sermon to be Cy∣prian's,L. 4. de Euch. c. 26. sect. Resp. but some vncertayne Au∣thor's. L 2. de on. c. 2. sect. Chry∣sost. L. 1. de amis. gra. c. 10. sect. . Ioh.Agayne, Bellarmine produceth Chrysostome, on Matthew, to proue manie Popish poyntes, as Monasti∣call lyfe, Veniall sinnes, Free-will,
Transsubstantiation, Adoration of the Host,L. 5. de gra. & l. ar. c. 7. and agaynst the Magi∣strates lawfull power, in matters of Reigon. But when wee proue out of that same Commentarie on Mat∣thew,L. 2. de Euch. c. 22. L. 3. de Laicu, c. 17. L. 4. de verbo c 11. sect. sexto. Lib. 1. de ma∣trim. c. 9. set. secudu. the perfection of Scripture, & that the people should reade the same, & opposeth him in the mat∣ter of Matrimonie; then he disclay∣meth that worke to be Sainct Chry∣sostome's, but some Hereticke's, as hee pleaseth to style him. In lyke manner,L. 5. de gr. & l. arb. c. 25. Bellarmine brin∣geth out Clement's Recognitions, for Free-will;Hard. cons. apol. par 1. f. 34. & Harding bringeth him for Traditions: and yet, when they are alleadged agaynst the Pope's Succession to Peter, proving, that Peter died not at Rome:Bell. lib. 2. de pont. c. 2. sect. adde huc. then hee dis∣claymeth them, as Apocryphall, and counterfeyt. Damasus lyke-wyse,L. 4. de po. c. 4. sect. Da∣masus. L. 2. de sanct. c. 9. sect. Da∣masus. an ancient Pope, his Pontificall is cited by Bel∣larmine, to proue the tyme of Peter's sitting at Rome, and for the setting vp of Images in Churches: but is rejected, as a Counterfeyt of vncer∣tayne
authoritie; when out of the same wee proue,Bell. lib. 2. de pont. c. 5. sect. Ne{que} multum. that Linus, whome they make Pope after Peter & Cle∣ment, died before Peter him-selfe: & so improveth the Line of their Pa∣pall Succession, as false and absurd. Agayne, Damasus Epistles are vr∣ged agaynst vs,L. 2. de pont. c. 14. sect. Secun∣dus. L. 2. de con∣firm. c. 3. sect. Septimus. L. 2. de pont. c. 24. Initio. to proue Papall Su∣premacie, and Popish Confirma∣tion: But are disclaymed, as none of his, when they are opposed agaynst Appeales to Rome. Lyke-wyse, Damascen is cited by Bellarmine,L. 1. de sanct. c. 13. sect. de∣a{que}. agaynst vs, to proue the Adoration of Saynctes: but is dis∣claymed as a Counterfeyt, when the absurd Tale of their Popes,L. 2. de purg. c. 8. sect prima. and other Saynctes, their Freeing of Soules (which were damned) out of Hell, is objected to them. L. 4. de Euch. c. 6. sect. Cy∣prian.Epiphanius also, his Epistle to Iohn of Ierusalem, is cited by Bellar∣mine, in the matter of the Sacra∣ment: but when the same Epistle is opposed agaynst their Images, hee disclaimeth those words thereof,L. 2, de Imag.  9, sect. ad quium. to bee but forged, and counterfeyt.
In lyke manner, Eusebius Emisse∣nus Homilies are cited by Bellarmine,L. 2, de sant. c. 3. sect. Euse∣bius. L. 4, de Euch. c. 13, sect. de∣inde. L. 2, de Euch. c. 30, initio. for Adoration of Reliques, & that Consecration is by these wordes, Hoc est Corpus meum: and yet are else∣where freelie acknowledged, to be none of his. Ignatius also, a Greeke Father, is oft tymes cited by Bellarmine,. 2, de Euch. c. 2, initio. for sundrie poynts of Poperie, as Trans∣substantiation, and others: but when he is adduced clearlie agaynst their Mutilation of the Sacrament,L. 4, de Euch. c. 26, sect. resp. Bel∣larmine aunswereth, That Ignatius Greeke Wrytinges, are not much to bee trusted to. Agayne, Martialis, as Christe's owne Disciple,L. 2, de mon. c. 27, sect. S. Mart. recog. l. 2, de mon. is produced by Bel∣larmine, for the Vow of Chastitie, and other poyntes: and yet, in his Recognitions, hee acknowledgeth both Abdias booke, and Martialis, to bee miere Counterfeyts, and of no Authoritie. Lyke-wyse, Synopsis Dorothei, is ci∣ted by Bellarmine, to prooue Peter's sitting at Rome,L. 2, de pont. c. 4, as Bishop of that Ci¦tie:
but when the same Synopsis is produced,Ibidem c. 2. prooving, That it was not Peter, but rather Barnabas, that founded that Church; hee dsclay∣meth that booke then, as full of Lies, and Forgerie. L. 2. de Euch. c. 27.After the lyke manner, hee dis∣claymeth that booke of Pope Gela∣sius, agaynst Eutyches, as none of his, when he is cited clearly against Transsubstantiation; altho hee bee so styled (Romanus Episcopus) in their owne Bibliotheca Patrum, and that their Massonius lyke-wyse, in the lyues of the Popes, comming to Gelasius, maketh mention of this worke. And no lesse causelesse also, disclaymeth hee,L. 2. de Im. c. 15. with a shamelesse fore-head, the foure bookes of Charles the Great, agaynst Images: as lyke-wyse,L. 1. de er. c. 22. that Epistle of Vdalricus, to Pope Nicolas, agaynst forced Continencie: alleadging those for∣mer, to bee none of theirs; and that onelie, because they make agaynst him. I omit the lyke answere of Gret∣zer,
to Athanasius Synopsis,Gret. comment. in Iudith. prol. 4. agaynst Apocryphall Bookes. Of Parsons,Pars. tripl. conv. Ang. par 1. c. 8. to Elentherius Epistle, to Lucis, agaynst the Pope's tem∣porall Supremacie. Of the same Parson's impudent lyke answere to Bertram's booke,Ibidem parte se∣cunda, c. 10. agaynst Transsubstantiation. Of Harding's disclayming also Hilarius Epistle,Hard adv. Iuel. epli. contra sacrific. Miss. sect. 11. to his Daughter Afra, agaynst forced Continencie. Of Baronius lyke rejecting of Pope Leo's Epistle,Baron. epit. ann. 683. which proveth, That Pope Honorius was an Here∣ticke. And Of Dureus disclayming that Testimonie of Saynct Bernard's,Dureus adv. VVhitak. l. 6. vvhich is produced agaynst the vnlawfull keeping of impossible and vnlawfull Vowes.
2. How the Romanists, without anie farther Warrand, alleadge onlie of some Fathers, That perhaps they are counterfeyt. FIrst, when the Treatise of Gregorie Nyssen, or his Epistle, is produced against Pilgry∣mages,Bell. lib. 3. de cult. sact. c. 8. sect. Ad Mad∣burg. Bellarmine answereth thus heere-to, Fortenon est Nysseni: that is, Perhaps that Epistle is not Gregorie Nyssen's. Agayne, when Basill is cited agaynst their distinction of Sinne, into Mortall and Veniall, Bellarmine aunswereth,L. 1. de amiss. gra. . 13. That probablie that worke is not Basill's. Lyke-wyse, vvhen Pope Boni∣facius seconde Epistle, is brought foorth, agaynst papall Supremacie, Bellarmine answereth,L. 2. de pnt c. 25. sect. Rsp. Valde mihi sus∣pecta est haec Epistola: that is, I sus∣pect that Epistle greatlie. In lyke manner, when OEcume∣nius is adduced,L. 3. de pont. c. 13. sect. Solus. to proue, that Anti∣christ shall not sit in the Temple of
Ierusalem, Bellarmine answereth, For∣tasse depravatus est textus illius: that is, Perhaps his Text, or Copie, is cor∣rupt, and vitiate. Also, when pope Honorius owne Epistles are exhibited, which proue him to haue beene an Hereticke, and are insert in the eight Generall Councell, where-in hee was con∣demned, Bellarmine answereth,Bell. lib. 4, de pont. c. 11. sect. ad primum. For∣tasse illas Epistolas esse confictas, & inser∣tas Concilia generali ab Hereticis: that is, Perhaps those Epistles were counterfeyted, and inserted in the Generall Councell, by Heretickes. More-over, when Venerable Beda is adduced, testifying, that this same pope Honorius was an Here∣ticke, and solemnlie condemned in a Generall Councell as such, and therefore consequentlie hee proo∣veth Facto, by deed, agaynst their doctrine now, That the pope may erre;Ibidem, sect. ad. . Bellarmine heere-vnto aunswe∣reth, Videtur aliquis sciolus addidisse no∣men Honorii in libo Bedae: that is, It would seeme, that some Smatterer
hath added the name of Honorius, in Beda's booke. Lyke-wyse, vvhen in the matter of their superstitious Fast on set Dayes, a Canon of the Apostles, and Ignatius Epistle also, are produ∣ced agaynst fasting on Saturday, Bellarmine answereth,Bell. l. 2. de bon. oper. c. 18. sect. Posset. Potest fieri ut tam in Canone Apostolico, quam in Epi∣stolam Ignati, solum probiberetur jeju∣nium diei Dominicae, sed postea à Graecis posteioribus insertum fuerit nomen Sab∣bathi: that is, It may bee, that as well in the Canon of the Apostles, as in the Epistle of Ignatius, onelie Fasting on the Lord's Day was for∣bidden: but after that, the Grecians, who were later, inserted the word, Sabbath. In lyke manner, when Damasus, the Author of the Pontificall, and their owne Gratian lyke-wise, decla∣reth,Grat. dist. 19. c. Anastasius. That Pope Anastasius the se∣cond, was of one communion with the Hereticke Photinus, Bellarmine answereth,Bell. lib. 4. de pont. c. 10. sect. Illud. Illud de Photino forte est mendaciam: that is, That Relation
concerning Photinus, Perhaps, it is a Lie. Agayne, when wee produce Socrates Testimonie, agaynst the an∣tiquitie of their superstitious four∣te dayes Lent,Bell. l. 2. de bon∣oper. c. 15. §. sd probabi. Bellarmine answereth, Probabile est codicem Socratis esse cor∣ruptum▪ that is, It is lykelie, or may bee, that Socrates booke bee corrup∣ted. More-over,Concil. Rom. c. 10. when a whole Con∣vent of Fathers, in a Romane Coun∣cell, vnder pope Sylvester, are brought foorth, agaynst the recei∣ving of young Nunnes, forbidding them to bee vailed, before 72 years of age: Yet Bellarmine,Bell. lib. 2. de mon c. 35. §. de primo. without anie farther assurance in the contrarie, answereth onlie, Fortasse multo mino∣rem numerum debee poni pro 72: that is, Perhaps a farre lesse number of Yeares ought to bee put there, than 72. And when a Canon, of the Councel of Laterane, is adduced, for the lawfulnesse of the Marriage of the Clergie, not reprehended there
in the East Church,Bell. l. 1. de cler. c. 21. . ad se∣cudum. Bellarmine aun∣swereth, Canonem illum forte non esse ullius authoritatis: that is, That per∣haps that Canon is of no authori∣tie. So that, what solide answeres these are, to elide that which so clearlie maketh agaynst them; and howe they would bee hissed at, on our part, let anie vnpartiall Man judge: And yet these are they, who shamelesselie clayme all Antiquitie so clearlie to make for them. As the Lyon, there-fore, may bee knowne by his Paw, and Hercu∣les hudge stature, by his Foote on∣lie; So by these few Examples pre∣ceeding, and from the practise but of one To wit, Bel∣larmine. especiallie proceeding, wee may see, what is the lyke Trade, and Custome of the rest. This is the Direction of that Popish Crue at Duay,Index. exp. . Bertramus. saying of An∣cients that make agaynst them, Ex∣cogitato commento persaepe negemus: that is, By devising out a Shift, let vs even often times disclaime them.
Which their Cardinal Baronius cal∣leth,Baron. annal. tom. 1. an. 32. num. 18. Honeslum Confugiū, or an honest vvay of escaping: (an vnhonest, he should haue saide.) And their San∣ders calleth,Sand. l. 2. de ader. Disp. 5. c. 3. Verissimum & praesenta∣neum Remedium, A most true, & pre∣sent Helpe. And if they cannot, vvithout grosse Impudencie, dis∣claime Auncientes, wee see, they come next to the last Bore of their conjecturall Alleadgeances, of Per∣haps, and I suspect, or It is probable, and would seeme, or may bee, that they are so, (as they would haue them.) And this is their Non ultra, & hic baerent. Therefore, justlie wee see, that wee may turne over vpon them, that vvhich Hart saieth to Raynolds,Hart. cont. Rayn. c. 8. Di∣vis. 3. Viam tenetis facilem & expeditam, modo stre∣nue per gatis, respuite omnes authores qui contra vos faciunt, & supposititios esse dicite, it a nempe par est patronos impuden∣tes, pudendam causam pudendis viis de∣fendere: that is, Yee haue gotten (saieth he) an easie, and cleare way, so that yee cowragiouslie goe for∣wardes there-in, reject all Authors
that make against you, and call them counterfeit: for so it is fit, that shamelesse Patrons, by shamefull vvayes, should defende a shamefull Cause. Their practise herein, being like that of the Manicheant, (as Au∣gustine showeth) concerning Apo∣stolicall Writs▪ Inde probo (saide Fau∣stus the Manichean) hoc illius esse,. illud non esse, quia hoc pro me sonat, illud con∣trame: that is, Hence I proue this, to bee Apostolicall Writ, and that, not to bee, because this maketh for me, and that maketh against mee. Even as Bellarmine hath no better War∣rand,. to reject Paschasius Testimo∣nie, cited against their Mutilation of the Sacrament, as none of his, but corrupt and vitiate; Because (saieth hee) vvhere it is saide, Bibite, it should haue beene saide, Edite. Which is as much to say, That Pas∣chasius, is not Paschasius, except hee speake in the Romane Dialect, and frame his Daunce, to the Pope's Spring.
CHAP. IX. How the Romanists alleadge the Fathers for them, in one place and poynt of Doctrine; and at their pleasure reject them in an∣other, when they can neyther al∣leadge them to bee corrupt, nor counterfeyt. FOR PROBATION heere-of,Bell. lib. 2. de Euch. c. 24. first, Bel∣larmine adduceth S. Augustine for him, to proue their sore of Reall Presence in the Sacrament▪ but with a nore of Ignorance he re∣jecteth him,Bell. . 1. de po. . 10. §.  Aug. where he expoundeth by the Rocke, whereon the Church is builded, that Christ onelie mea∣ned, (revoking anie other Exposi∣tion that he had made of the same.) And when wee adduce, out of his
booke, De moribus Ecclesiae, (which they oft cite) Testimonies against their worshipping of Reliques, Bel∣larmine rejecteth the same,Bell. lib. . de sanct. c. 16 §.  tertis. with this answere, Scripsit librum binc in primor∣diis conversionis suae: that is, He wrote that booke in the beginning of his Conversion. Which Answere, how little it is to the purpose, anie Man may see, seeing wee finde no-wise, that ever hee retreated the same. Bell. lib. 2. de Euchar. c. 22.Like-wise, hee citeth Chrysostome, for the same manner of Reall Pre∣sence: but vvhen hee is cited, to prooue, that the Virgine Marie was conceived in originall Sinne, be∣cause shee actuallie offended;Tolet in Ioh. 2. annet. 5. Tolet rejecteth Saynct Chrysostome, and sayeth, That heere-in hee is not to bee allowed. Bell. lib. 2. de Euch, c. 5.In like manner, Bellarmine addu∣ceth Cyprian, for the same point yet, of Reall Presence: but hee rejecteth him flatlie, when he maketh against Traditions,L. . de verbe, c. 11. § prosert. saying, That hee wrote that, when hee would defende his Errour against the Romane Church.
Sainct Ierome also is brought foorth,L. 2. de Euch. c. 23. as a Patron of the same Reall Presence: but is roundlie re∣jected in the point of Ecclesiasti∣call Hierarchie,L. 1. de pont. c. 8. §. Resp. saying, that hee maintained a verie false Opinion. More-over, Ireneus is cited by Bellarmine,L. 2. de Euch. . 6. for the same preceeding point: but is rejected, in his Exposition of the Number of the Beast's Name,L. 3. de pont. c. 10. §. haec. that it is Lateinus. Lactantius, like-wise, as a most ancient Father,L. 4. de penit. c. 9. is adduced by Bel∣larmine, to prooue Popish Satisfa∣ction: but is rejected roughlie, with this Dittie, when he maketh against him, as in the matter of Images, &c.L. 1. de sanct. c. 5. § habemus. Lactantius (sayeth hee) fell in manie Errours. Againe, through all his Con∣troversies, Origen is cited by Bellar∣mine, for speciall Confirmation,L. 2. de men, c. 11. L. 1. de Christa c. 10. as of Monasticall life, workes of Su∣pererogation, and such like: but when in the matter of Traditions, or other pointes, hee is opposed, then hee is rejected, as one (saieth
Bellarmine) of no Authoritie.. lib. 4. de verbo cap. 11. sect. item. L. 2. de purg. c 8. sect. septi∣mum. Yea, more-over, hee showeth, where hee was seene in Hell, with Arrius, and Nestorius. Like-wise, Prudentius is adduced by Bellarmine,L. 2. de confir. c. 6. for Popish Confirma∣tion, Pilgrymage, and vowing to Sainctes,L. 2. de sanct. c. 8. & 9. &c. But when he maketh against him, hee is rejected round∣lie, saying,L. 2. de purg. c. 18 sect. ad se∣cundum. More poetico lusisse Pruden∣tium: that is, That Prudentius playeth him-selfe, after a poeticall manner. When Ruffinus also seemeth to make for Adoration of Reliques, he is cited by Bellarmine,L. 2. de sanct. c. 3. as a most an∣cient and Reverende Father. But when hee clearlie maketh against the Pope's Supremacie, hee is verie vnmannerlie rejected,L. 2. de pont. c. 13. sect. obser∣vandum. as one that is false, and vntrue. In like manner, Theophylact is frequentlie cited by Bellarmine, as for Monasticall lyfe,L. 2. de . c. 26. L. 1. de pont. c. 25. and Papall Su∣premacie: but is rejected thus, whē hee maketh against him, saying, That hee lived in the time of a Schisme;L. 2. de Christ c. 26. sect. sexo. and therefore his authori∣tie
is not worthie to bee received. Enthymius, like-wise, is cited by Bellarmine,L. 1. de Christ c. 6. L. 1. de sanct. c. 4. sect. hab∣mus. as one of great authori∣tie, when hee maketh for him: but is thus casten at his heeles, when hee maketh against him, saying, Nō est adeo à nobis magnifaciendus: that is, Hee is not much to bee estee∣med by vs. Thus may it truelie bee spoken of the Romanistes, vvhich Anastasius Sinaita Patriarch of Antioch, repor∣teth of the Hereticke Severus, in his booke written against the Severians: to wit, Even as hee had beene the Iudge of the quicke and the dead, hee so vsed, at his pleasure, the Fa∣thers of the Church: receiving vvhome hee pleased, and rejecting in them what-so-ever hee listed. And that this same is done now, by our Adversaries, the preceeding Examples doe evidentlie show.
AN APPENDIX. Of the Romanistes, their other shamelesse and fraudulent forme of Answeres, to cleare Testimo∣nies of Fathers, objected against them. 1. By giving a Sence, cleare contra∣rie to their wordes. EXamples heere-of, we haue in that Directorie of the Duay Seminarie,Inde purg. tit. Bertramus. where they ordaine, in the booke of that aun∣cient Bertram, not onlie, Invisibiliter, to bee put for, Visibiliter: but there∣after, that the words, Secundum crea∣turarum substantiam: that is, Accor∣ding to the substance of the Crea∣tures; shall bee expounded, Secun∣dum externas species Sacramenti: that is, According to the externall qua∣lities, or accidents, of the Sacramēt. No lesse absurdlie, like-wise, doeth Bellarmine affirme, That by the substance of the Elementes,
vvhich Theodoret avoweth to re∣maine still, as they were before, af∣ter Consecration; that he meaneth, not onelie bare Accidentes to re∣maine, but the nature onlie of Acci∣dents to abide, saying, While Theo∣doret affirmeth (saieth hee) that the substance of the Elements abideth,Bll. lib. 2. de Euch. cap. 27. sect. sd. and is not changed, hee speaketh of the Essence and Nature of the Accidentes. But a most pregnant Example of anie which wee haue of late, is that, which is in the Compende of Becanus Manuell,Becani epit. ma∣nual. c. 8. sect. de communione sub vra{que} spe∣cie. conclu. 3. a Iesuit: who aun∣swering to those wordes of Chry∣sostome, which are so cleare against the Popish Mutilation of the Sa∣crament, to wit, Omnibus unus Panis proponitur, & unum Poculum: that is, To all men who-soever, one Bread is offered, and one Cup together; Be∣canus answereth, That by the Cup, the Cup is not meaned, but the Blood, which by concomitance is the Bodie, and which after that manner the Laicks receiue. Where∣as
the holy Father, Chrysostome, could not haue meaned by the Cup, the blood in the bodie: seeing by the contrarie, the Cup is ever called, (and that by Christ Him-selfe) The blood that is shed, and powred out of the bodie: neyther could hee possiblie more clearlie haue spo∣ken, distinguishing betweene the Bread and the Cup, and declaring, that vnder both kindes, Eating and Drinking, the people of olde did duelie communicate. 2. How they answere, by tempering the words of the Fathers. OF this fraudfull Shift, by tem∣pering (as they call it) the wordes of the Fathers, to play to their Tune, wee haue a notable Example, in our fore-saide Bellar∣mine:Bell. l. . de p∣nit. c. 16. sect. hac. vvho treating of the Irremis∣siblenesse of the Sinne against the Holie Ghost, and that it is helde to bee absolutelie such, he saieth, This appeareth to be the minde of Atha∣nasius,
Hilarie, Ierome, and Anselmus, on the twelft of Matthew, Videtur tamen temperanda, (saieth hee) id est, irremis∣sibile esse ordinarie & ut plarimum: that is, But their speach would bee tem∣pered, to wit, that this Sinne is or∣dinarilie irrimissible, and for the most part. Which is both contrarie to the wordes of those Fathers, as also contrarie to the verie absolute speach of Christ;Bell. l. 4. de pa∣nit. c. 13. sect. Resp. and last of all, crosseth his owne Rule, saying, Non oportet restringere, quod Deus am∣plum esse voluit: that is, We must not make a restriction of those words, which God will haue to bee abso∣lutelie taken. The like Example we haue al∣so, in qualifying of Sainct Bernard's wordes, which wee adduce against popish Merites, out of his 310 Epi∣stle: where-in hee declareth, that his whole life, even to the verie last period there-of, which hee calleth Calcaneum, was al-to-gether desti∣tute of Merites. But how aunswe∣reth Bellarmine, and qualifieth, or
tempereth hee this Speach? Perhaps (saieth hee) hee spake this humbly, but not truely.Bell. lib. 5. de Iustif. c. 6. sect. ad alia. Which sense against sense, Bernard him-selfe else-where pithilie over-throweth, saying, When ye haue done all things that are commanded, say, that yee are vnprofitable Servantes. But thou wilt say,Bern. ser. de tripl. custodi. (saieth Bernard) that hee willed vs to say so, for Humilities sake. Yes, indeede. But willed he thee to say that, against the Trueth? No. 3. How they fraudfullie, in their Aun∣sweres to the Fathers, disjoynt thinges, not to bee disjoyned; and conjoyne thinges, that are not con∣joyned. AN Example of the first, wee haue in Bellarmine,Bell lib. 4. de Euch. c. 16. who intrea∣ting of the lawfull Minister of the Eucharist, hee citeth Epiphanius, to proue, that Christ gaue no power, even to the Virgine Marie, to cele∣brate a Sacrament. But when the
same Father is cited by vs, against baptizing by Women; showing al∣so, out of Epiphanius, That the Vir∣gine Marie was never permitted by Christ, nor his Apostles, anie way to baptize;Bell. lib. 1. de Bapt. c. 7. sect. Quario. Bellarmine aunswe∣reth, Loquitur (saieth hee) de publico ministerio baptismi: that is, Epiphanius speaketh onlie of the publicke Mi∣nisterie of Baptisme. Where-as by disjoyning the publicke ministra∣tion of Baptisme, from the private ministration, hee may see, that the verie like answere might bee made vnto him-selfe, That Women are not excluded from celebrating the Communion in private; but that they are debarred onelie from the publicke ministration of the same. And so his Conclusion out of Epi∣phanius, concerning the lawfull Mi∣nister of the Eucharist, shall bee quite over-throwne. An Example of the seconde, which is a fraudfull Conjunction of diverse Speaches, which are of diverse matters, as if they were one,
we haue like-wise in Bellarmine,Bell. lib. 2. de  c. 35. who for the defence of the receiving of young Nunnes, not onelie against God's word,2. Tim. 5 9.11. but also against their owne pope's Epistle, he alleadgeth, that Gregorie speaketh onelie of the Abbatesse,Greg. l. 3. Epist. 11. and no-wise of the age of Nunnes: VVhere-as, both the Title, and the Epistle it selfe, sho∣weth, that hee speaketh, both of the Abbatesse in the generall, Ne sit Iuvencula, that is, That shee bee not a young woman;1. Tim. 3.6. as Paul spea∣keth of a Bishop, That hee be not a young Scholler: and of the Nunnes which are to bee vailed in particu∣lar, Ne fiat earum velamen, (saieth hee) ante annum sexagesimum: that is, Let them not bee vailed, before they be three-score yeares of age. 4. How they answere the Fathers, al∣leadging their speaches to be hyper∣bolicke, when they are no-wise so. EXamples of this, like-wise, Bel∣larmine affordeth vs, who when
Chrysostome's speach is adduced,Bell. lib. 2 de verboc. vlt. §. Resp. ex∣horing secular men, to get Bibles to them-selues: and if they could not get more, to get the New Te∣stament: hee answereth, That Chry∣sostome's speach, is an Hyperbolicke forme of speach; and not that hee would haue all to doe so, as hee by word exhorted them. And againe, when hee is oppo∣sed against their Private Masse, saying, That it is better, not to bee present at the Sacrament, or at that (cōmemoratiue) Sacrifice of Christs bodie, than to be present, & yet not to communicate:Bell. lib. 1. de missa. c. 10. §. Resp. Bellarmine▪ heere∣vnto answereth; I say, that Chryso∣stome spake this (sayeth hee) hyper∣bolicallie, as he doeth-sundrie other thinges. Now, by his owne defini∣tion, of an hyperbolicke speach, let vs see then, howe sillie a Shift hee vseth, for fraudfull Evasion. An hy∣perbolicke speach (saieth hee) re∣quireth,Bell. l. , depnit. cap. 10. §. qud. that truelie some-what be in a thing, altho not in so excellent a manner, as the wordes signifie:
other-wise, it should not bee an Hyperbole, but a Lie: neither should a speach bee there-by so much adorned, as al-to-gether spoi∣led. Now, let anie applie this, to the fore-said Testimonies, and they shall clearlie see, that in them there is no hyberbole. 5. How they vrge such Answeres to An∣tiquitie agaynst vs, which they will not (as they ought) justlie accept of vs. TWo diverse Examples here-of, wee haue like-wise furnished vnto vs, Bell. lib. 4. de Eh. c. 10. Bell lib. 1. de miss. c. 18. by our fore-said Bellarmine; who for sundrie Pageates of the Masse, bringeth, as the greatest An∣tiquitie, Sainct Iames Lyturgie: but when the wordes of that Lyturgie, saying, long after the words, Ho est Corpus Meu; those wordes of Prayer, Fiat hic Pais Corpus Christi, are adduced, to show, that after the words of Consecration, Bread still remained:Bell. lib. 4. de Euch. c. 13. §. . then Bellarmine rejecteth
Sainct Iames Lyturgie, vpon this reason, Nam non omnia quae in Lyturgia habentur (saieth hee) depompta sunt ex Domini exemplo aut praecepto, constat enim multa esse addita ab aliis, &c. that is, For all things that are contained in that Lyturgie, are not taken out of the Lord's Example, or Cōman∣dement: for it is evident, that ma∣nie thinges were added, or patched to, by others. Therefore the Gre∣cians (saith Bellarmine) should proue by some Testimonie, (which they are not able to doe) that those wordes did flow from the wordes, or else from the fact of CHRIST. VVhich Reason given by Bellarmine against the Grecians, (who with vs denye Consecration to be by those wordes recited, Hoc est Corpus meum) is a most valide Reason, furnished by him, vnto vs, VVhy we doe, and should, reject all thinges in the Masse, which doeth not flowe, either from the wordes, or fact of our Saviour, but are mens Inven∣tions, added to, or altring that holie Institution.
Like-wise, to proue that Caper∣naitish forme of Christ's presence, and eating in the Sacrament, lib. 2. de Eu. c. 7. Bellar∣mine adduceth Tertullian, saying, Al∣be-it hee was a Montanist in his latter dayes, yet hee was reprehen∣ded by none of the Auncientes in this, That ever hee erred, concer∣ning the Sacrament of the Lord's Bodie.Bell l. 5. de gra. c. 26. §. At. And againe, else-where hee saieth, It is sure (saieth hee) that hee erred not in this, because no Au∣thor counteth this amongst Tortul∣lian's Errours. And yet, when wee produce Tertullian, against Popish Indulgences, and other pointes of Poperie,Bell. l. 1. de in∣dulg. cap. 3. §. . Bellarmine rejecteth him, as hereticall, altho his owne wordes may stop his mouth. And wee may say even so vnto him, That al-be-it hee was a Montanist in his latter age, yet hee was never reprehen∣ded by anie of the Ancients in this, That ever hee erred in the matter of Indulgences, &c. and no Au∣thor counted ever this amongst Tertullian's Errours.
Thus vse they diverse Weights in the Bag, which is Abhomina∣tion: they claime, and disclaime, for craftie Seduction, against all Civill Honestie, Setled Constancie, Chri∣stian Integritie, Reasons Rule, Con∣science Regiment, or any way equi∣table Indifferencie. Neither is there anie, but may see, that wee yeelding vnto them, the Fathers to bee onelie Expoun∣ders of Scripture, and admitting their Writs to decide all Contro∣versies; yet are wee not with them at anie nearer point, while as they will bee such Expounders of the Fathers againe, making their Ex∣position often times quite contra∣rie to the Text, and (as Pharaoh's leane Kye did to the farte) the one (as hath beene showne) to eate vp the other.
6. How they answere vs, to some Fathers; impudentlie denying the cleare words which are in then Writs. HOw peart and perverse they are, in this their last mentio∣ned, and most vnthristie Shift, let this one Example, in place of ma∣nie, restifie. VVhen Chemnitius, out of Athanasius,Ahan. l. 1. con∣tra gente ini∣tio. bringes this Testimo∣nie, for perfectiō of Scripture, Saffi∣ciūt sacrae ac divinits inspiratae Scripturae ad OMNEM instructionem veritatis; that is, The Holie and Divine inspired Sciptures, are sufficient for ALL instruction of Trueth,Bell. lib. 4. de vrb. c. 11. §. Presert quarto. Bellarmine denyeth, that the word Omnem, or ALL, is in Athanasius: affirming yet more impudentlie, that Chemnitius added this worde (where-in the whole pith of the Testimonie con∣sisteth) to Athanasius, of his owne head. The contrarie where-of, may bee seene in all olde Impressions of that Father, where-of I haue one beside mee, printed at Paris, by Iohn Petit, Anno 1520, or anie later, over
which the seaming Fire of the Ex∣pugatorie Index hath not passed, hither-to. CHAP. X. Some notable Frauds, vsed by the Romanists, in Citations of the Fathers, where-of the Reader would carefullie beware. 1. By citing of Heretickes wordes for them as if they were the wordes of the Orthodox Fathers. A Notable Example of this fraudfull Tricke,1. Fraud. wee haue in Bellamine, who to proue, by the Testimonie of Fa∣thers, That Scrip∣ture without Tradition, is sufficient to determine Controversies citeth Ireneus: alleadging, Because the
Scriptures are Variouslie expounded, that there-fore Scripture onlie can∣not bee Iudge. VVhich wordes are not Ireneus owne wordes,Bell. l. 3. de ver∣o c. 8. (as Bellar∣mine giveth them out) neither did Ireneus ever alleadge anie such Rea∣son, as that There was need of Tra∣dition, because the Scriptures were Variouslie expounded: but hee setteth downe this, to bee the Hereticke's Reason, for Traditions, whome Ireneus refuteth.Iren. l. 3. c. 2. There-fore, Ireneus wordes are these, VVhen they are convinced out of Scripture, (saieth Ireneus, speaking of the Heretickes of his time) straight-way they fall out, in the accusing of Scripture it selfe, as if thinges were not well set downe there, nor that the same had not authoritie of its owne, and be∣cause the same is variouslie expoun∣ded, and there-fore Trueth cannot bee found there-in, by those that are ignorant of Traditions. In which wordes, Ireneus, if hee had beene living, and heard a Papist in our dayes, pleading for Traditions,
and accusing God's word of Im∣perfection, Obscuritie, plyablenesse anie way, and wanting authoritie of its owne, (but such as it hath from the Church, and the Pope) he could not more viuelie haue pain∣ted, nor described him, than hee doeth heere, by the Patterne of an olde Hereticke. This necessarie Caution, there∣fore, wee would keepe, for obvia∣ting such Fraude; that is, we would carefullie remarke, that the wordes bee a Father's owne words, which are adduced, and expressing to vs, his owne mynde and meaning. And this wee should doe, not onelie in cleare places, as this former is; but vvee would more carefullie advert the same, in some that are obscurer, in which it can bee hardlie discer∣ned, vvhether the vvords bee a Fa∣ther's owne, or some Heretick's, vvhom hee refuteth. An Instance vvhere-of, Bellarmine him-selfe gi∣veth vs, saying of a Testimonie ci∣ted out of Clemens Alexandrinus,
which seemeth to favour the Pela∣gian Heresie, It is not surelie known (sayth he) whose those words bee,Bell. l. 4. de a∣mss. gra. c. 9. whether Clement's owne wordes, or those Hereticke's with whom he is in that place disputing. And to this, the Reader would the more di∣ligentlie take heede, because the Pa∣pists (lyke the Donatists) out of the obscurest places of Scripture, or Fa∣thers, ever seeke to make their best advantage. 2. How they cite the Fathers, quyte contrarie to their mynde. A Remarkable Example heere∣of,raude. Bell. l. 4. de a∣miss. gr.. c. 15. §. Habem. wee finde in Bellarmine's ci∣tation of Augustine, out of whom to proue, that the Virgine Maie was conceived without Originall Sin, hee adduceth a Testimonie, where∣in Augustine never meaned, nor af∣firmeth, that in her owne concep∣tion shee was free from Originall Sinne; but onlie, that from the time of CHRIST'S cōception in her wombe, that shee was preserved
thence-foorth from actual sinning, thorow that singular Priviledge (as he thought) that then was granted vnto her, by being the Mother of the Lord Iesus. And that this is the trueth, we shall cleare the same, out of their Master of Sentences, who speaking of Christ's conception, showeth what was the qualitie of the flesh of the Virgine Marie, be∣fore that time, and in that verie in∣stant, to wit, sinfull, as the rest of the race of Adam,Lombard. l. 3. Dist. 3. saying, Surelie it may bee cruelie saide, and must bee believed, according to the vni∣forme agreement of the holie Fa∣thers witnessing the same, that, that substance of Marie, (where-of Christ tooke His humanitie) was first subject to sinne, Sicut reliqua Virgin car. as all the rest of the flesh of the Virgine was: but there-after, by the operation of the holie Ghost, the same was so puri∣fied, and made cleane, that beeing free of all tainture of Sinne, it might bee so vnited to the WORD. And after that the fore-saide Master of
Sentences haue saide thus farre, of Christ's owne conception, then he commeth in the next Section, to dclare what Priviledge was given to Marie, after that time of Christ's conception, to wit, That from thence-foorth shee was fred from actuall sinne: and to this effect, hee citeth that same place of Augustine, which Bellarmine wresteth, and abu∣seth, to proue her Immunitie from Originall Sinne, even in her owne conception; and which Augustine, nor none of the Fathers, ever once did meane. 3. How they vrge vs, with Testimonies of Fathers, which are the brood of those Errours, which them-selues disclayme. AN Instance heere-of, (in place of manie) is cleare,Frade. in the Point of Purgatorie, and prayer for the dead, where-in Bellarmine, and his Fellowes, adduce Testimonies of Fathers, importing the last, ther∣by
to proue the first: and from prayer to the dead, argue so to Purgatorie, as if there were such a Relation betweene those two, that there could no separation bee anie wyse made between them. Where∣as prayer for the dead, (where-of the Fathers speak) proceeded from this ground Errour, for the most part, which both the Grecian and La∣tine Fathers mayntayned: to wit, That the Soules of the Faythfull, vvho departed this lyfe, remayned till the day of the generall Refurre∣ction, vvithout attayning to the blessed Vision of GOD, in certaine Places of Rest,Iren. l. 5. vvhich Ireneus cal∣leth, Invisible Holds, destinated to them by GOD:Aug. Enhird. c. 108. or, as Augustine tear∣meth them, Hid Receptacles: or, as Lactanctius styleth the same,Lt▪ l. 7. in∣sist c. 21. Hiar. in Psal. 120. Amb. d Cain & Ab 2. c. 2. A com∣mon Custodie: or, as Hilarie spea∣keth, A Bosome of Rest: or, as Am∣brose nameth them, Places of Sus∣pence, and Habitacles: or, last of all, as Bernard calleth them, Atria, or Vt∣ter Portches, or Courtes.Bern . 3 de omnibus, . Nowe,
seeing this was their , or ground Errour, (which the Papistes disclayme,Bell. lib. 1. de Sanct. c. 1.2.3. & 4. as well as wee) and vpon this evill layde ground, that they founded onelie their Pra∣ctise of prayer for the dead; seeing the Papistes reject the first, as an il∣legittimate Birth; why vrge they vs then, with the secōd after-birth? vvresting their speaches, farre a∣gaynst the mynde of the Fathers▪ for their new-conceited Purgato∣rie, where-vnto their prayers for the dead had no Relation at al. And there-fore, when as they vrge vs with the Testimonies of the Fa∣thers, for prayer for the dead, they them-selues must first belieue this confining of Soules of the Godlie, in those hidden Receptacles of Rest, where-in they are kept, from the tyme of their death, vntill the Resurrection, as in a Common Cu∣stodie, (and which quyte everteth Purgatorie, as their owne Suarz confesseth:Suarez in 3. part. Thomae . 59. Art. 6. Disp. 57. §. 1.) or else they must cease by those Testimonies, to induce vs,
fraudfullie to belieue, that there is such coherence, and inviolable de∣pendance, (as they pretende) be∣tweene prayer for the dead, and Purgatorie, that the one necessarily doeth inferre the other, and where∣of the auncient Fathers never once dreamed▪ as witnesseth their owne Fisher, bishop of Rochester, saying, That amongst the Fathers,Roffen. art. 1 conta Luther. pag. 314. there was never any mention there-of at al, or at the least, verie seldome any wyse; and that the doctrine of Pur∣gatorie, was onelie latelie knowne, and of late aanrlie received by the Church. And where-as in the ancient al∣leadged Lyturgies,S. Iacobi Li∣turg  29. they finde men∣tion of prayers for the dead, the extense of persons beeing conside∣red, to whome those prayers did reach, shall no lesse forciblie evert their Fornace of Purgatorie. In the Lyturgie (which they call Aposto∣licall) of Saynct Iames, prayer being made for all, even fō Abell the just, that had died hither-to: and more
particularlie in Chrysostome's Lytur∣gie (vvhich is called the Lyturgie of the Easterne Church) the prayer that is vsed there for the dead,Liturg. Chry∣sost. p. 9. ex∣tending it selfe by name, to the Pa∣triarches, Prophets, Apostles, Mar∣tyrs, Confessours, and even to the blessed Virgine, which is there no∣minate: none of whome the most impudent Papist dare place in their Fyre of Purgatorie:Bell. lib. 2. de purg. c. 18. &c. 5. and Bellarmine him-selfe informeth vs, how those prayers stand without anie suppo∣sall of Purgatorie at all, to wit, Re∣lation beeing had to the seconde Sentence, or full accomplishment, that the whole Man is to receiue, by a solemne and publick Sentence of Acquitall in that Day frō Sinne, or the Consequences▪ there-of, and by an Adjudgement to a full Con∣summation of all perfect Happi∣nesse, compryzed al in short words, by the Apostle, for Onesiphorus, say∣ing, (whyle hee was alyue) The Lord grant vnto him, that hee may fynde Mercie of the Lord in that Day.
Agayne, it was the Errour of manie Fathers, (sayeth Bellarmine) that after this lyfe,Bell. lib. 2. de purg. c. 1. Aug. l. 20. de civit. Dei c. 25. Lact. l. 7. instit. c. 21. Og: in Ie. hom. 13. Amb. in Psal. 11. Serm. 3. & 20. all the Godlie, (the Virgine Marie, nor the Apo∣stles, no beeing excepted) should bee purged, by a Fyre, at the Day of Iudgement: Yet, not-with-stan∣ding, Bellarmine addceth the Testi∣monies of those Fathers, vvhich speake of this same Fyre, and none other, to proue the Popish Fyre of Purgatorie, immediatly after death, although so farre different, both in tyme, and in extense to persons. Seeing, therefore, Bellarmine dis∣claymeth this fore-sayde Opinion, as erronious, vvhy vrgeth hee the Testimonies of Fathers agaynst vs, to proue fraudfullie, vnder the name of (Ignis Purgans) their Po∣pish Fyre of Purgatorie? before the Resurrection, & which after death is indured by some onlie: where-as those Fathers meaned a farre di∣verse Fyre, to wit, which should be at the Resurrection onelie, and should bee suffered by all indiffe∣rentlie.
And yet, that he doth this most impudentlie, let this cleare the Trueth. To proue that the Fathers held such an erronious Opinion, as is fore-saide,Bell. lib. 2. de purg. c. 1. Bellarmine bringeth S. Ambrose wordes, on the 118 Psalme, and twentie Sermon, saying in the fourth of Genesis, That the Lord did put a flaming Sworde before the entrie of Paradise: which (sayeth Bellarmine) hee calleth that purging Fyre, thorow which of necessitie everie one must passe, who-so-ever they bee that enter into Paradise. And yet hee bringeth the same Fa∣ther,Bell. lib. . de purg. c. 5. §. Ambrosias. in this same verie place, and those same verie wordes, to proue the Elph-fyre of their Popish Pur∣gatorie. In lyke manner, Bellarmine citeth Augustine,Bell. lib. 1. de purg. c. 10. §. B. Aug. to patronize their Purga∣torie, in his 21 booke, De Civitate Dei, and 16 Chapter, and 24: where hee affirmeth, That some shall suf∣fer certayne Purgatorie Punish∣mentes, before the last Iudgement. Which beeing compared with the
25 Chapter, of the 20 booke, it will appeare clearlie there-by, that hee meaneth that Fyre of Conflagra∣tion, that shall immediatelie goe be∣fore the last daye of Generall Doome; and not that Popish Fyre of Purgatorie, that is suffered after the day of particular Death. And the effect where-of, hee showeth shall bee this,Aug. in Psal. 103. conc. 3. to wit, That it shall separate some to the left hand, and melt out others, to the right hand of CHRIST; and so consequently shall seaze on all men, both wicked and Godlie. To obviate, therefore, this Fraude, the , or ground Errour, would carefully be adverted; that if they reject the Roore of such Colloquintid them∣selues, they vrge vs not with the Blade, or Branch, nor fraudfullie make that to serue their Turne, by clayming the Fathers, in such a poynt, wholie to make for them, vvhyle as tryall doeth discover, that them-selues rejecting the
Ground, they, Ipso facto, lyke-wyse disclayme the super-structure. And this the more warily would bee seene vnto, because the Ground Errour is some-tymes more latent, especiallie to one, that is not ac∣quaynted with such a Father his whole workes, whose Testimonie is cited: one notable Example where-of, I will instance, out of our Adversaries bringing of Theo∣phylact, for the countenancing of their praying, and offering for the dead: not considering his Ground Errour, where-vpon this a-rose; vvhich was not for bringing the Soules of those out of Purgatorie, who died onelie with the guilt of Veniall Sinnes; but to saue the Soules of those out of Hell, vngone there, who had died impenitentlie, with the guilt of haynous sinnes; and which hee thought, by the Prayers and Oblations of the li∣ving, might be gotten done: groun∣ding his Errour on that Speach of our Saviour,Theophyl. in Luk. 12. Luke 12, 5, in which
hee wisheth vs, to obserue, That Christ did not say, Feare him, who after hee hath killed, casteth into Hell; but, hath power to cast into Hell. For the sinners, which die, (sayeth he) are not all-wayes casten into Hell: but it remayneth in the power of GOD, to pardon them also. And this I say, for the Obla∣tions and Doales, which are made for the dead, which doe not a little avayle them, which die even in grievous sinnes: Where-fore, let vs not cease, by Almes, and Interces∣sion, to appeale Him that hath po∣wer to cast, but doeth not alwayes vse this power, (sayeth hee) but is able to pardon also. 4. How they cite words of Fathers, which no-wyse are in their Writs. FOR a cleare Evidence of this,Bell. lib. 1. de purg. c. 10. let this one Practise of Bellar∣mine's sufficientlie examplifie, who to proue Purgatorie, doeth cite these wordes, out of Theodoret's
Commentarie, on the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and third Chap∣ter, saying, Hunc ipsum igem prgato∣rium credimus: that is, Wee belieue this same Fyre of Purgatorie to bee indeede. Which wordes, not-with-standing, their owne Senensis testi∣fyeth,Senen. l. 6. an∣not. 258. are no-wyse to bee found in the Writs of Theodoret. CHAP. XI. How the Romanists not onelie equall, but preferre the judge∣ment of their late Divines, to the Fathers, (not-with-stan∣ding of the Reverence they pre∣tend to Antiquitie) and this, both in Dogmaticall poynts, and exposition of Scripture. FIrst then, forequal∣ling their new Do∣ctors, with the most auncient Fa∣thers, let the Iesuit,
Sandeus his speach concerning Bel∣larmine,Sandeus in ad∣moni. sua ad Laurentium p. 63. in Proofe haue the Prima∣cie: A Man (sayeth hee) most lear∣ned, and modest, Quem veluti saeculi nostri Augustinum venerabitur posteritas, & boni omnis & catholice eruditi suspi∣ciunt: that is, Whom the Posteritie shall reverence, as the Augustine of our Age, and whom all good men, and Catholicke-instructed, doe wonder, and admire. Agayne,Senens. bibli. l. 4. t. Ioamies Fisherus. thus saith Sixtus Senensis, of Fisher, late B. of Rochester: In the a∣boundance of Learning, (sayth he) and sinceritie of Godlinesse, and in constancie of mynde, Cui{que}ue ex san∣ctissimis & acerrimis Ecclesiae propugna∣toribus merito comparandus: that is, Worthilie to bee compared with anie who-so-ever, of the most holie Fathers, and most cowragious De∣fenders of the Church. In lyke manner,Perer. in gen. 25.15. Disp. 1. num. 24. thus sayeth Pe∣rerius, of his Fellow Tostatus: A man (sayeth hee) surelie not onelie for the multitude of Wrytinges, but also for the subtiltie and rypnesse of
Wit, gravitie of Iudgement, and excelling in sundrie kynd of Lear∣ning, Antiquis illis magnisque patribus & doctoibus merito annumerandus: that is, Who is worthilie to bee numbe∣red with the ancient Fathers, and great Doctors of the Church. Next, for preferring their newe Doctors,Roffn. contr. uther. art. 1. to the most auncient Fa∣thers, let their bishop Fisher testifie, vvho sayeth, That it cannot be ob∣scure vnto anie, that manie things, as well in the Gospels, as in the rest of the Scriptures, are now more ex∣quisitelie discussed, by later Wry∣ters, and more clearlie vnderstood, than they haue bene heere-to-fore. Stella in Lu. 10. p. 15.Againe, when Frier Stella hath rejected the Exposition of all the Fathers, on Luke 10, 21, hee sayeth, That tho it bee farre from him, to condemne the common Exposition given by the ancient Fathers, yet hee knoweth verie well, that Pig∣meis beeing put vpon Giants shoul∣ders, doe see farther than Giants them-selues.
Like-wise,Salm. in Rom. l. 2. Disp. 51 §. secundo. when the Iesuit Sal∣meron, getteth the whole Fathers (as Erasmus showeth) in his Teeth, against the conception of the Vir∣gine Marie, without original Sinne, in their exposition of Rom. 5, 12, yet hee answereth, That the whole devotion towardes the Mother of God, did not consist in Bernard, Bo∣naventure, and other Fathers: for she had manie then, as shee hath now, better knowne to her selfe, (that were of the contrarie minde) then they were knowne to the World: and there-after, hee concludeth, in favours of the new Romish Clergie, saying, Quo Iuniores, o perspicaciores esse Doctores: that is, That the later their Doctors bee, that they are the more wittie and clearer sighted. In like manner, in another Que∣stion of great moment, Whether the Law of Moses, concerning De∣grees forbidden in Marriage, be∣long to Christians, where-in from the authoritie of ancient Fathers affirming the same, when the
Church of Rome is attainted, as pa∣trons of Incest, by her Dispensa∣tions with such forbidden Degrees, the Author of Apologia tumultuaria,Lib. pro dispens. matrim. Heu. 8. cum vore fra∣tru. sect. po∣str. answereth heer-in thus, Let the Fa∣thers (sayeth hee) haue their owne reverence, &c. But I dare say, that the more recent Divines, in manie places, are more pertinent and pi∣thie, yea, more exquisite, diligent, & watchfull. And even so sayth Co∣sterus,Costeri Enchi∣rid. cap. 3. That as the Church is grown now in number, so is the same in Learning, and Sharp-sightednesse. CHAP. XII. By what partiall & absurd Rule the Romanists do admit, or reject, the Testimonies of Fathers. FIrst, for clearing here-of sufficient∣lie, Bellarmine gi∣veth evidence, who amongst the diverse Expositi∣ons of Fathers, &
others, vpon that place of the Ro∣manes, 14, 5, which sayth, One man esteemeth one day aboue another; taketh that onelie, and admitteth as true, Quae nobis maxime fave,Bell. Lib. 3. de sanct. cap. 10 sect. 2 (sayth he:) that is, Which most favoureth our side, being heere-in like Faustus the Manichean,Aug. Lib. 11. contra Faust. cap. 2 who by this Rule ad∣mitted some Apostolicall Writs, & rejected others, Qula hoc pro me so∣nat, (sayde hee) illud nequaquam: that is, Because this maketh for me, and the other not so▪ Partiall Iniquitie, but not precious Veritie; and no wise the loue of the Trueth, but selfe-loue, bearing the whole swey. Againe, whether the same vn∣ction bee meaned, Marke 6, and Iames▪ 5, in this point for defence of extreame vnction, to be by Christ's institution, Bellarmine rejecteth the judgement of Beda, Theophylact, and OEcumenius, who are contrarie to his mynde; & he receiveth a newer Exposition, of their owne Divines, saying of the same, Mii saue eo no∣mine gratior est, quia video Lutherum
Calvinum, & Chemnitium, in priori opi∣nione: that is, Surelie this Exposition is the better liked by mee, because I see Luther, Calvine, and Chemnitius, of the first opinion. Thus is our consent with Antiquitie, (wee see) a sufficient ground to them of dis∣senting there-from, direction of Reason not inducing, but distra∣ction of Affection seducing them from the Trueth. In like manner, Maldonat, on the sixt of Iohn, giving an Exposi∣tion of the 63 verse, saith, I deny not, (saith hee) that I haue no Au∣thor before me of this Exposition, Sed bane eo magis probo, quam illam alte∣ram Augustini caeterrum{que} alioquin pro∣babilissima, quod haec cum Calvinista∣rm sensu magis pugnet: that is, But I approoue this Exposition the ra∣ther, & preferre it before the other of S. Augustine's, and the other An∣cients, (altho other-wise the same bee most probable, and lykliest to bee the true meaning) because this Exposition fighteth, or is more
contrarie to the meaning of the Cal∣vinists. Thus wee see Faction, not Affection to the Trueth; Prejudice, not sound Iudgement; and the ha∣tred of persons, and not the regard of Cause simplie, so in these to pre∣vaile, that we may loose hope, that wee can availe them. THE SECOND BOOKE, OF▪ COUNSELS. CHAP. XIII. As the Romanists deale with the Fathers, so how they manie vvayes deale injuriouslie vvith ancient Councels. 1. By adding to them. AS for the Tomes of Councels in the generall,Bell. lib. 1. de Concil. c. 2. thus farre doeth Bellarmine in∣geniouslie cōfesse, Quod Libri Concilio∣rum negligenter conservati snt, (sayeth hee) & multis vitiis scatent: that is,
That the bookes of the Councels, being negligentlie kept, doe indeed abound with manie Errours. And so, howe sure reasoning, in matters of Fayth, can bee now, out of their Canons, for most part, may easilie bee seene. And of the truest, and most vn∣suspect Canons, of the most ancient Councels, most impudentlie doeth Bellarmine professe; speaking thus of that most famous Councell of Chal∣cedon,Bell. Lib. 2. de Pont. cap. 22 sect. sacudo. (which their Pope Gregorie did reverence, as one of the foure Gospels) That the Canons thereof had not authoritie with them, Nisi quatenus sunt renovati (sayth hee) à Romanis pontificibus: that is, But in so farre, as they are renewed by the Popes of Rome. In particular, therefore, to show how this Fyning, and Forging, is practized in the Romane Mint, be∣fore the Canons of Councels passe for currant Money, in the Papall Kingdome, wee will first instance their Popish Patching, and adding to the same.
A notable Example where-of, wee haue in that fact of Pope Zozi∣mus, who added to that famous first Councell of Nice, a Canon in his owne favours: whose Fraude was detected, his Pryde checked, and his Vsurpation prevented, by that famous Councel of Carthage, which standeth vp yet, in the faythfull Re∣cords thereof, as a Clowde of Wit∣nesses, to testifie the same, even vn∣to this day. Next, whereas the fourth Coun∣cell of Carthage, decreeth expresse∣lie, That no Woman baptize; yet not-with-standing, for mayntay∣ning their Popish Practise in the contrarie, they Gratiam▪ de consi. dist. 4 c. muier. Lmbard. Lib. 4. sent. dist. 6 haue added (as Bellarmine confesseth clearlie) this Condition, to that Canon, Nisi ne∣cesitate cogente: that is, Except Neces∣sitie compell: Quamvis non habeatur illa exceptio in tomis conciliorum, (sayeth Bellarmine:Bell. Lib. 1. de bapt cap. 7. sect. quarto.) that is, Altho that Ex∣ception bee not in the Tomes of the Councels. Agayne, for vp-holding of Pa∣pall
Supremacie, vvhere-as the Councell of Milevi decreed, That in no Case what-so-ever, anie Ap∣peales should bee made out of A∣fricke, to anie beyond Sea: yet Bellar∣mine confesseth,Bell. lib. 2. de pont. c. 24. §. Respondent. That Gratian added of his owne head, this Clause to the Canon, Nisi forte ad Apostolicam sedem appelletu: that is, Except per∣haps that Appellation bee made to the Apostolical Sea of Rome. Which Clause annulleth the whole Canō, and as Bellarmine testifieth, is close contrarie to the mynd and expresse intention of that whole Councell. 2. How they purge and pare from the Councels. NExt, vnto their adding to Councels, nay, I may say, ad∣ding whole Suppositions, and for∣ged Councels, vnto the number of those that were true and reall, as that Rome Councell, vnder Sylvester, vvhere-in is pretended, that it was concluded, That no man might
judge the first Seate.Cocil. Rom. anno 325. . 20. And for fayling in that, and drawing the matter yet more vp-wardes, an el∣der Councell yet, is brought out of a Corner, and hollowlie made to pronounce, That the first Seat must not bee judged by anie.Con. Sinnessn. anno 303. circa finm. Next, then, (I say) to such liberall adding in grosse, and in piece-maile, after the fore-sayde manner, let vs see, that they are as Skilfull in Subduction, as they are for Seduction, by their Arithmeticall Addition. In the olde Copies of the Gene∣rall Councels, there is inset the fourth Decretall Epistle of Pope Clement,Gratian. causa. 12.. 1. . Di∣ectissimu. (vvhich is contayned lyke∣wyse in their Canon Law) wherein the Popes mayntayning of that Ni∣colaitane Errour, is evident, to wit, Of having all thinges in common, where-in Wyues are also compre∣hended: and where-vpon it clearlie and consequentlie followeth, that the Pope may erre, and Popes haue monstruously erred. But what haue they done for this, in the new
Editions of the Councels? Even this, to wit, They haue purged, and put out those wordes, that Wyes should bee common, as is confessed in the Notes set out of late vpon their Canon Law, by Authoritie & Cōmand of Gregorie the thirteenth: where-in wee are beholden to them, that how-so-ever they vvill haue the Men, yet they desire not the Wyues, to bee Catholicke also. 3. How they alter the Wordes and Ca∣nons of the Councels. A Notable Example heere-of, in Surius his Editiō of the Coun∣cels, 97. and their Epitomizer Caranza, who for eschewing the clearnesse of that ancient Councell of Laodi∣cea, 35. against the worshipping of An∣gels, hath without either sense, or shame, put Angulos, for Angelos: So that, where-as the Councell sayth, : that is, It is not lawfull for Christians to pray vnto Angels,
they make the wordes to bee, Non oportet Christianos ad angulos congrega∣tiones facere: that is, Christians must not conveane in corners. And where-as the Title of the Canon is, De iis qui angelus colunt: that is, Of those that worship Angels: they make it to be thus, agaynst all sense, De iis qui angulos colunt: that is, Of those that worship Corners. An absurd Tale. VVhich Fraude, and Falsifica∣tion, Saynct Theodoret most clearlie convinceth;Theod. in Co∣loss. . who commenting on the Collossians, maketh mention thus, of this famous Decree, They who defended the Law, (sayth hee) they induced Christians also to the wor∣shipping of Angels, saying, That the Law was given by them. And this erronious Vyce cōtinued long in Phrygia and Pisidia: VVherefore, that Councell, (sayth he) which as∣sēbled at Laodicea, which is the Me∣tropolitane Citie of all Phrygia, by a Law did prohibite, That no man should pray to Angels.
The same Caranza lyke-wyse, for mayntayning the Pope's Su∣premacie, agaynst the sixt Canon of the Councel of Nice, alleadgeth, that hee sawe in a most ancient La∣tine Edition of the Councels, which the most Reverend Cardinall Mar∣cellus shew him, (who was Legate to the Pope, in the Councell of Trent) the wordes of that Canon, set downe thus, Quoniam Metropoli∣tano Episcopo hoc idem moris est: that is, Because this same is the Custome of the Metropolitane Bishoppe. VVhere-as in the vp-right Copies of the Nicene Councell, it is thus, Quoniam Episcopo Romano parilis mos est: that is, That the Bishop of Alex∣dria should haue power over those that were in his Diocie, because the Bishop of Rome had the same custome of jurisdiction, to wit, over those that were in his Diocie. VVhich confyning of his jurisdi∣ction, onelie within his Westerne Precinct, or Diocie of Rome, and equalling other Bishops with him,
in a-lyke jurisdiction within their severall Precincts, doeth al-to-ge∣ther ever this Challenge of Supre∣macie: & there-fore, for eschewing the force of that Canon of Nice, the Falsifyer of the same, had pulled out the Pope, out of the Compari∣son, as if none should compare with him in Iurisdiction, and put in anie poore Metropolitane Bishop, in that Comparison with the Bishop of Alexandria. And which grosse and filthie Falsification of Coun∣cels, wee see is an olde Practise of theirs, & may bee seene yet, in their Cardinals Liberaries, and in the Bosome of the Church of Rome. Like-wise, where-as the seconde Councell of Orange, holden in Anno 529, agaynst the Pelagians, and Se∣mi-Pelagians, condemning their er∣ronious Doctrine, concerning Grace, and Free-will, set downe, amongst other Conclusions, this in particular: This also we wholesom∣lie professe, and belieue, (say they) That in everie good worke, wee
doe not begin, and are holpen af∣ter-wardes, by the Grace of God: but Hee first of all, [Nullis praeceden∣tibus bonis meritis,] that is, No good merites of ours going before, inspi∣reth in vs, both Fayth, and the loue of Him, &c. This Canon Bi∣nius, in his Edition of the Tomes of the Councell, for mayntayning Po∣pish Free-will, and Merits of Con∣gruitie, hath taken both Freedome of Will, and of Action also, noto∣riouslie to corrupt this wholesome Canon, and to put in for Nullis me∣ritis bonis praecedentibus: that is, No good Merits of ours going before, Multis meritis bonis praecedentibus: that is, Manie good Merites of ours going before. Now, for Merites of Congruitie; what Congruitie is be∣tweene Nullis and Multis; None, and Manie, let anie one judge. And that this Corruption of Binius, or at least, (if they call it) The Errour of the TYPOGRAPHER, were careful∣lie attended, and avoyded in latter Editions, I would gladlie wish.
Secondlie, How they accuse the Councels, when they make against them, ey∣of Fraude, and Ignorance, in deter∣mination; or else, of after-falsifi∣cation. A Cleare instance wee haue of this,Bell.  d. Rom. pont. in Bellarmine, who spea∣king of that most ancient and fa∣mous Councell of Chalcedon, holden Anno 451, & of their Decree against anie Papall Supremacie, layeth no lesse to their charge, than Frad and Falsehood, in expresse tearmes. Againe, to prooue that the Pope may erre, and hath erred, and that hee was likewise subject to Coun∣cels of olde, when the sixt Synode is alleadged, condemning Honorius, as a Monothelite,Bell. lib 4 de pont. c. 11 §.  secudum▪ Bellarmine answe∣reth thus, Decepts fuisse patres ex fal∣sis rumoribus, & non intellectis Episcolis Honorii, ideo{que} immerito cum Haereticis numerasse Honorium: that is, That those Fathers were deceived, by false Rumours, and by Ignorance, in not vnderstanding the Epistles
of Honorius; and therefore, that ve∣rie vndeservedlie they reckoned Honorius amongst other Heretickes: imputing so, both blind Ignorance, and vnwise Rashnesse, to all those Reverend Fathers. And when this will not serue his turne, hee layeth an imputation of after-falsification on all the Registers, and Record keepers of this famous Councell, saying, Honori nomen sine dubio inter cos qui damnati erant, est insertum ab aemulis Romanae Ecclesiae: that is, That the Name of Honorius, without doubt, was insert amongst others that were condemned, by the En∣viers of the Church of Rome. Likewise, when the seaventh Synod is alleadged,Bell. ibid. §. ad tertium. where-in (after long time that interveined, and due tryall was taken) the sentence of the condemning Honorius, is confir∣med, and the sixt Synod there-in is approven, Bellarmine answereth, De∣ceptos fuisse patres ex sexta Synodo, quae vel corrupta erat, vel per errorem Hono∣rium damnaverat: that is, That those
Fathers also were deceived by the sixt Councell, which was either corrupt, or else through Errour, had condemned Honorius. In lyke manner, when the E∣pistle of Pope Leo,Bell. iid sect. ad sm. contained also and registrated in those Councels, is adduced for probation of the preceeding point, which hee wrote to the Emperour Constantinus Pogo∣natus, witnessing the trueth of Hono∣rius Heresie, and just condemnation in the fore-said Councels, Bellarmine replyeth vnto that also, saying, Di∣o Epistolam Leonis esse etiam corruptam: that is, I say, (altho without anie warrand) that the Epistle of Pope Leo is also corrupt, &c. Nec tenemur unum Leonem magis sequi, quam alios tot summos pontifices: that is And if that Epistle bee true, yet wee are not bound to follow one Pope, Leo, more than so manie other Popes. Yea, some seeing the evidence so cleare, and vnavoydable, of Pope Honorius conviction of Heresie, in so solemne and famous free Coun∣cels,
haue beene so impudent, as to say, That they were but forged, and counterfeyt,Bell. lib. 1. de concil. c. 5. sect. Corvenerunt. as Bellarmine testi∣fieth of Albertus Pighius: But Turria∣nus (sayth hee) deendeth the con∣trarie, that they are both sincere and vpright. Thus wee see, when they are straited, how they flie in others Faces: and this cleare evi∣dence doth Bellarmine afford vs, in a weightie matter of their Popish Vnitie. Thirdlie, How they admit Councels, onlie where-in they make for them; and reject them disdaynfullie, as no Coun∣cels, where-in they make agaynst them. FOR probation heere-of, let vs adduce Bellarmine,Bell. lib. 1. de sanct. c. 18. §. secundus. vvho vvhen out of the third Councell of Car∣thage, hee would proue the Maccha∣bees to bee Canonicke Scripture, he giveth this reason, why Calvine can∣not denye the authoritie there-of, in this, because hee vseth the au∣thoritie
there-of in another poynt him-selfe, to wit, agaynst the invo∣cation of Sayncts: and therefore he cannot say, Patres in uno sapere, (sayth hee) & in alio delirasse: that is, That the Fathers were wise in one point, but proved sottish in another. And yet, speaking of that famous first Councel of Chalcedō,Bell. lib. 3. de Laicu c. 20. §. ad hoc. & their decree∣ting agaynst Papall Supremacie, he bringeth in Pope Gelasius Verdict there-of, where-with himselfe con∣senteth, saying, Quod in eo quaedam fuerunt bona, & admittenda, quaedam ve∣ro mala, & rejicienda: that is, That in that Councell, some thinges were good, and to be admitted; and some thinges were evill, and to bee reje∣cted. And consequentlie, that the Fathers were wyse in some things, and in other things proved but sot∣tish: to wit, in such things, as they make agaynst Poperie, viz. that great Dagon especially of the Pope's Supremacie. Agayne, when this fame Coun∣cell of Chalcedon (which he acknow∣ledgeth
was vniversallie and whol∣lie approven) is cited agaynst For∣raigne Appeales, to Rome; yet Bellar∣mine answereth heere-to,Bell. lib. 2. de Pont. cap. 2. sect. secuno. thus: That Pope Leo did approue the same, on∣lie so farre as it medled with the ex∣plication of matters of Fayth. Now if Papall Supremacie be not a point of Fayth, let Boniface the eight his Decree witnesse, declaring, That except a man belieue the same, hee cannot bee saved. Seeing, therefore, that Pope Leo approved the Coun∣cell, in so farre as it defyned matters of Fayth; in so farre, then, as it defy∣ned concerning Papall Suprema∣cie, it will followe, by Bellarmine's owne consent,Extravag. unam sanctm. That the same was approven by Pope Leo fore-sayde. In lyke manner, Bellarmine addu∣ceth the Councell of Eliberis,Bell. lib. 1. de . cap. 7. sect. quno. for Baptisme by Laickes. But when the same is adduced, agaynst Ima∣ges in Churches,Lib. 2.  c. 9 sect. add. hee rejecteth the same, as of no authoritie. Also, that famous Councell of Franckford, holden vnder Charles the
Great, agaynst the worship of Ima∣ges, was confirmed by Pope Ha∣drian▪ (sayeth Bellarmine) in so farre as it defyned,Lib. 1. de con. c. 7. sect. quar∣tum. That Christ was not the adoptiue Sonne of God. But is rejected by him, (sayeth hee) vpon the other part, in so farre, as that Councell condemned the seaventh Councell before it, to wit, for de∣creeing the worshipping of Ima∣ges. Agayne, where-in Concilium Qui∣nisextum, or Trullanum, maketh for picturing of Images in Churches, Bellarmine sayeth,. § hos ergo. That in so farre it was approven by Pope Hadrian, but wherin it displeased his Holinesse, it was rejected, vpon this reason, Because the Pope was not there-by him-selfe, nor his Legates. VVhich reason, if it were sufficient for reje∣cting a Councell; then vpon the same might that second famous & Generall Councell bee rejected, vvhich was celebrated at Constanti∣nople, agaynst Macedonius, that de∣nyed the Deitie of the Spirit. For
thus doeth Bellarmine confesse here∣of,Bell. lib. 1. de concil. c. 5. §. Est vero. saying, That it is to bee noted, that in that Councell, not one of the Westerne partes was there: and yet it is whollie approven, & Pope Gregorie reverenced the same, as one of the foure Gospels. Bell. lib. 2. de pont. c. 13. §. Deni{que}.Lyke-wyse, in the poynt of Pa∣pal Supremacie, Bellarmine, to proue the same by ancient Councels, ci∣teth the Florentine. But when a Ca∣non of the same Councell, is cited agaynst Vnction in Confirmation, as no-wyse Apostolicall,Bell. lib. 2. de confirm. c. 9. §. Resp. Bellarmine answereth, That all things that are in Councels, pertayne not to the Fayth. Bell. lib. 4. de Ech. c. 10. §. Eusse.In lyke manner, Bellarmine, to proue the Communion, vnder one kynde, to haue beene an olde Cu∣stome, long before Constance, hee ci∣teth the Councel of Basill. But when the same Councel is cited, to proue the Councell, aboue the Pope, it is rejected, with no gentler Styles, than Conciliabulum Schismaticum, Se∣ditiosum, & nullius Authoritatis: that is,
A Schismaticke Conventicle, and a seditious, which is of no Authori∣tie.Bell. lib. 3. de Eccles. c. 16 §. Ad. So highlie doeth Bellarmine ad∣vance here-by their Note of Popish Vnitie.☜ Againe, the Councell of Con∣stance, (sayth Bellarmine) in the first Sessions thereof,Bell lib. . de conci. c 7. §. Quttum. where it defineth the Councell to bee aboue the Pope, is rejected: but in the last Sessions thereof, and in all things that Pope Martine 5 approved, it is received by all good Catholickes. Basill then was lawfull in the begin∣ning, but vnlawfull in the ending, because it displeaseth the Pope. And Constance heere in the contrarie, is vnlawfull in the beginning, but lawfull in the ende, because it plea∣seth him. So that wee may see, al∣tho Bishops in Councels be Iudges, and haue a decisme Vote, so that, whereon they agree, (according to Bellarmine's assertion) they may say,Bell. lib. 2. de Co. c 11. §. Quarto. It seemed good to the holie Ghost, and to vs. Yet when they haue de∣creeted all, even Sub anathemate, yet
the Pope, out of his supereminent power, may admit what hee list, or reject what hee pleaseth; and so ad∣vanceth himselfe aboue the holie Ghost, (to whom in the decreeing those things, seemed good) and consequentlie aboue GOD, and that which is worshipped. CHAP. XIIII. Popish avowed Rejection, in their late Councels, of the most primitiue and principall An∣tiquitie. LAST of all, what regard they carrie in their late Papall Councels, to the most principall, & onlie greatest Anti∣quitie of Divine In∣stitution, Apostolicall Practise, and holie Custome of the primitiue Church, which is the onelie way
that should bee inquired for, let their avowed Confession, of the Transgression of those Sacred Li∣mits, & their professed Declyning from that primitiue Path, testifie: saying thus in Councel, concerning the matter of the holie Eucharist. Al-be-it Christ did institute this Venerable Sacrament after Supper,Concil. Constan. Sess 13. Conl. Trid. Sess. 21. (say they) and gaue the same to His Disciples, vnder both kyndes of Bread and Wyne: And lyke-wyse, al-be-it in the primitiue Church, the same Sacrament was received by the Faythful vnder both kynds; yet, not-with-standing, this custom is, vpō speciall reasons now broght in, to wit, For the eschewing of Pe∣rils, and Scandals, That it shall bee hence-foorth received by the Priest vnder both kyndes; but by the Laickes, onelie vnder one kynde, of Bread. These are the verie plaine wordes of those Popish Prelates, in the Councell of Constance. And yet Bellarmine, for this Reâ∣son onelie, of Disagreement from
Christ's Institution,Bell. lib. 1. de Euch. c. 2. and His owne Practise or Example there-in, reje∣cteth Saynct Iames Lyturgie: ma∣king, that want of Conformitie there-to, (as to the Patterne in the Mount) a just cause of rejecting any prescription in God's Sacred wor∣ship, vvhether contrarie, or diverse there-from. No marvell, there-fore, as the Iewes rejected Christ Him-selfe, preferring to Him, Barabbas; so that after Him, also they persecuted His Disciples: And even so, it is no mar∣vell, that the Romanists nowe reject at their pleasure, the fore-sayde hu∣mane Testimonies, which are a∣gaynst them; preferring to Sacred Antiquitie, their new Venome of Heresie; vvhen they so peartlie, and publicklie, professe their Incroa∣ching vpon the most ancient Insti∣tution, and Sacred Testament of the verie Sonne of GOD, and the Great Seale of HIS Glorious Kingdome.
THE THIRD BOOKE. OF HISTORIE. CHAP. XV. How they deale with the aun∣cient Histriographers, and their owne Records. 1. By giving them the Lie, when they make agaynst them. FIrst, then, for Pre∣cedencie, to begin with a Pope: when Aeneas Sylvius (cal∣led there-after Pius the second) decla∣reth, That before the Councell of Nice, little respect was had to the Church of Rome, but each one lived to him-selfe, Bellarmine answereth, Sententia Aeneae Sylvii partim non est vera:Bell. lib. 2. de pont. c. 17. §. Cum. that is, The
Relation of Aeneas Sylvius, is not partlie true. And so the Cardinall giveth his Holinesse, roundlie the Lie. Next, to a Pope, howe hee vseth a Cardinall, let his owne wordes witnesse: For when Benno the Car∣dinal, is truelie relating the Vitious∣nesse of Pope Gregorie the seaventh, and the Innocencie of the Empe∣rour, Henrie the fourth, whome hee persecuted, Bellarmine calleth him a Lowde Liar:Bell. . 1. de pont. c. 17. Pet. ▪ and sayeth, that his booke is full of moste shamelesse Lies. Thirdlie, howe conjun̄ctlie a Troupe of Wryters, for companie, get the Lie together, let Bellarmine giue Testimonie vnto vs; who tel∣leth vs, That al-be-it all auncient Wryters agree in this, That the Councell of Franckford condemned the seaventh Synode, which esta∣blished the worshipping of Images; yet Alanus Copus sayeth, Mentiuntur omnes: that is, They are all Liars. Which Bellarmine calleth,Bell▪ . 2. de con∣cil. c. 8. sect. . Paulo du∣rius
dictum: that is, Some-what hardlie spoken. But beholde, how hee next falleth into this Ditch him-selfe. VVhen Martinus Polonus relateth the Historie of Sylvester the second▪ who solde him-selfe to the Devill, to attayne to the Papacie: which Historie Platina, Bembus, Nauclerus, Fasciculus, Onupbrius, and all other Histriographers,Bell. l. 4▪ de pont. c. 12. §. Resp. testifie: Yet Bellar∣mine (having a Face of the lyke tem∣per with the brazen bellie of Nebu∣chadnezar's Image) aunswereth, saying, Respondeo sine dubio esse fabulas quae narrantur de magia & morte Sylve∣strit that is, I answere, That without doubt, (sayeth hee) they are but Fa∣bles, which are tolde of the Witch∣craft, and death of pope Sylvester. Agayne, when the same Marti∣nus Polonus, and other thirtie & three Historicians, (all Friendes to the Church of Rome, most of them Cler∣gie Men, & some of them Sayncts) report, howe pope Ioane, a vitious Whoore, possessed the papall Sea
so long, and died publicklie in birth, in her pontificall procession, Bellarmine giveth him,Bell.  1. de pont. c. 24. §. Deinde. and all the rest, the Lie. In lyke manner, when Paphnu∣tius Opposition, in the first Coun∣cell of Nice, to compelled Single lyfe, is recorded, not onelie by Socra∣tes and Zozomen, but also by Epipha∣nius; and received as true, by all their owne Wryters,Espen. de con∣tin. l. 1. c. 4. Alth. l. 13. t. Sacerdos. Grat. dist. 31. c. 12. P. Cost. Ep. ad fratrem. Bell. lib 1. de cler. c. 20. §. At ne{que}. as Espenseus, Alphonsus de Castro, Gratian, Petrus Co∣stus, and others: yet not-with-stan∣ding, Bellarmine answereth, saying, Eyther that all is false, which those men report of Paphnutius; or else, if anie such thing fell out, that it was but badlie tolde by them. Last of al, how they vse their own Wryters severally, let these few In∣stances lyk-wyse to vs notifie. Whē Beatus Rhenanus deponeth faythful∣lie, That pope Zepherin was a Mon∣tanist, Bellarmine aunswereth thus,Bell lib. 4. de pont. cap. 8. §. Quia. Mentitur Rhenanus: that is, Hee is a lowde Liar.
VVhen Canus, lyk-wyse, de∣clareth, That pope Honorius vvas an Hereticke; having for his war∣rand, not onelie his condemning in Councels, but also his owne Letter, contayning a cleare Evi∣dence, That hee was a Monothelite, Bellarmine,Bell. lib. 4. de pont. c. 11. §. ad secundam. not-with-standing, aun∣swereth thus, Dico Canum, his errare: that is, I saye, that Canus twyse strayeth from the Trueth. And, vvhen Durand and Adrian, are produced, to testifie, That Gre∣gorie did erre, Bellarmine aunswereth shortlie,Bell. ibidem c. 10. §. Resp. and sayeth, That Gregorie erred not: but they rather erred, departing from the Trueth, (sayeth hee) in reporting so.
2. How they alleadge them to be corrupt, when they make agaynst them. FOr instancing heere-of: vvhen vvee bring a place out of Euse∣bius, agaynst papall Supremacie; showing, If anie had the same in the Apostles dayes, it was Iames, the Lord's Brother, who was bishop of Hierusalem, and is called Episcopus Apostolorum; Bellarmine aunswereth heere-to,Bell. l. 1. de pont. c. 26. sect. ad. Locum sine dubio esse corrup∣tum: that is, That the place of Euse∣bius, is without all doubt, corrup∣ted. Agayne, when we bring agaynst the same Supremacie, the Act of that auncient Councell of Carthage, (as their owne Gratian citeth,Grat. Dist. 99. c. prima. and setteth it downe) That none, no, not the bishop of Rome, should bee called Vniversall; and which in ef∣fect pope Gregorie him-selfe doeth testifie;Greg. l. 4. E∣pist. 8. Bell. lib. 2. de pont. cap. 31. sect. ad. Bellarmine aunswereth, That Gratian corrupted that Canon, by adding some wordes there-vnto,
and there-fore, that the same is of no authoritie, nor his Relation there-of, of anie credit at all. Like-wise, let vs see, how vpō in∣certayne probabilities, and conje∣cturall suspicions onlie, they reject what-so-ever they finde to make agaynst them. VVhen that Record is adduced of pope Boniface the second, who in his Letter to Eulalius, bishop of Thes∣salonica, maketh manifest, That the whole Fathers, of that famous Councell of Carthage being excom∣municated of the bishop of Rome, in token of their not acknowledge∣ment of such power, or Suprema∣cie, that they remayned so, without regard there-of, for the space of an hundreth yeares, and died, moste of them all, vnder the said Censure, (Augustine being one of them, & yet accounted a Saynct) Bellarmine here∣to aunswereth,Bell. l. 2. de pont. c. 25. sect. Resp. Valde mihi Epistolas eas esse suspectas: that is, That hee suspecteth greatlie those Epistles of Boniface: vvhere-as their owne Lin∣danus
sayeth,Lind. panopl. l. 4. cap. 89. in fin. That hee that scor∣neth those as forged, I pray you, vvhat will hee leaue (sayeth hee) of all the Storie of Antiquitie, safe or sound vnto vs? And when wee produce Socrates Testimonie, against the Antiquitie of the fourtie dayes of their Popish Lent,Bell. lib. 2. de oper. bon. c. 11. §. Sed proba∣bile. Bellarmine answereth, That it is probable, that Socrates booke is corrupted. 3. How they admit them as true, onelie when they make for them; but other∣wyse roughlie reject them. TO cleare this out of our fore∣sayde Bellarmine,Bell. l. 4 de pont. c. 9. when hee is to liberate Pope Liberius of Arria∣nisme, hee citeth the Testimonie of Socrates,Bell. l. 1. de cler. c. 20. Zozomen, and Niceporus, as the faithfull Recorders of that Age: and yet when Socrates, is cited by vs, to witnesse the Nicen Councels acquiescing to Paphnutius speach, concerning the married Clergie, and Zozomen is brought to witnesse
Nectarius fact, against Auricular Confession, Bellarmine calleth hem both in those points, manifest Liars, and Heretickes:Baron. annal. anno 325. nū. 6. even as Baronius sayth the lyke of Nicephorus, where∣as their owne Canus avoweth all those to bee,an. loc. Theol. l. 11. c. 5. sect. Quod. Probatae fidei Authores: that is, Authors of approved Cre∣dite. In lyke manner, Sopbronius, and Simeon Metaphrastes, are cited by Bel∣larmine, ut illustres Historici, to proue his point of Papacie: but when they report, that Linus died before Peter, whome they make to haue beene Pope after Peter,Bell. l. 2. de pont. c. 6. sect. Ad∣versus. and o alsifieth their Succession, then are they dis∣dainfullie repudiated by Bellarmine. Lyke-wyse, Bellarmine adduceth Zonaras, to proue Honorius Innocen∣cie, as there-in, one of sole and sin∣gular Authoritie: yet in another case, concerning the Emperour Con∣stantines commanding of Pope Syl∣vester, Bellarmine rejecteth his Nar∣ration and Testimonie.Bell. l. 1. de Con∣cil. c. 20. sect. Resp. Also, Bellarmine adduceth Maria∣nus
Scotus,Baron. Ann. tō. 1. anno 34. (whom Baronius calleth Nobilis Chronologus) to proue Pope Zacharie's just deposing of Childerike, King of France,Bell. l. 2. de pont. c. 17. sect. Ac. and Pope Gregorie's the seaventh just oppositiō to Hen∣rie the fourth. But when Fasciculus Temporum,L. 4. de pont. c. 13. sect. Maria∣nus. who followeth him, and the Passionall, (two of their fa∣mous Histories) are produced to improoue Peter's sitting at Rome, Bellarmine answereth,L. 2. de pont. c. 5. sect. Quo∣rca. Wee justlie contemne (sayeth hee) Fasciculus Temporum, and the Passional chiefe∣lie, seeing Fasciculus followeth Ma∣rianus Scotus, who contradicteth most clearlie both himselfe and the Trueth. Againe, for the justnesse of the fore-named Pope Zacharie's deposi∣tion of King Childericke,Bell. l. 2. de pont. c. 17. sect. Ac. Bellarmine citeth Sigebert: but when hee is ci∣ted to testifie the Innocencie of Henrie the fourth, whom Hildebrand persecuted,L. 4. de pont. c. 13. §. Deinde. then Bellarmine allead∣geth him to bee vnworthie of Cre∣dite.
Lykewyse, for the clearing of the orderlie and just proceedinges in Pope Gregorie's Election to the Papacie,Bell. ibid. sect. Extat. Bellarmine citeth Platina, as the onelie saythfull Recorder, in whom (sayeth hee) is the verie forme of his election set downe. But when hee is adduced by vs, to prooue the noveltie of Auricular Confession, and that the first enjoy∣net there-of, was Innocent the third, Bellarmine rejecteth Platina,Bell. l. 3. de pu∣nit. c. 13. sect. Deinde. saying, I trow it bee a Lie (sayeth hee) which Platina reporteth: adding, that hee is no authorized Author, altho his Declaration in his Preface to the Pope, by whose command hee vvrote, doeth evidentlie shovv the contrarie. In lyke manner, in a matter of Historie, for proofe, that Peter sub∣stituted Clement to succeed him,Bell. lib. 2. de Pont. cap. 5. sect▪ deinde. Bel∣larmine citeth Tertullian, Tanquam gra∣vissimus author: but vvhen hee is ad∣duced by vs, to proue, that Pope Zepherin vvas a Monatist, in this poynt of Historie,L. 4. e pont. c. 8. §. Resp. Bellarmine answe∣reth,
That there is no trust to bee given to him. Also Gregorie's Dialogues, and the Stories there-in contayned, are cyted by Bellarmine,Bell. l. 2. de mon. c. 21. §. Alia. L. 1. de sanct. c. 19. §. S. Greg. L. 2. de purg. c. 6. sect. prima. for Monasticall lyfe, and invocation of Sayncts, &c. but is rejected as false, when he ri∣diculouslie telleth of a Purgatorie of Soules, after death, into warme Bathes. Thus vse they their Historicians at their pleasure, whether ancient or more recent, even as Herod vsed the Baptist; who altho hee heard him in manie things gladlie, yet he rejected and persecuted him, in the matter of Herodias.
4. How they haue so forged, and corrupted Recordes that are extant, and taken others al-to∣gether out of the way, that in things concerning the Trueth, which maketh agaynst them, they haue left verie little to bee seene, and feysted in, manie contrarie False∣hoods. THE thing that ever that Whoore of Babylon hath most laboured for,Aeneas Syl∣vius, alias Pius 2. Epist. 288. and her Suppostes for her haue most endevoured, hath beene still A Supreame, and sole Soveraignitie. The which, altho a Pope, and one of the Sitters on that Scarlet-coloured Beast, doeth ingenuouslie confesse, That Rome was free, and farre from the lyke Challenge, or the Church of GOD, from the acknowledge∣ment of anie such Diotrephes-lyke
Preheminence, in her purest and primitiue tymes, whyle as shee re∣mayned as an holie and chaste Spouse vnto CHRIST, vnder the Dragon's Persecution, till the tyme of the Councell of Nice. Yet, that the World may bee borne in hand, That such Supremacie, as is nowe challenged, was ever reckoned due to that Seate of Majestie; and that even from the verie beginning, and profession of true Christianitie▪ that shee did sit as a Queene; there-fore, for probation heere-of, and to make vp that Gappe betweene the Apostolicall tymes, and that Coun∣cell of Nice, they haue forged some Decretall Epistles,Decretall Epistles coun∣terfeyt. of the bishops of Rome, to haue interveaned, fraugh∣ted with no other Ballast, nor Burden, but Soveraignitie, and their Hornes still sounding on high, the trebble tune onelie of Lordes Para∣mont, and Vniversall Seignorie. And if the Nicene Fathers haue beene too niggardlie disposed, by
passing a Sentence, of confyning those Romane bishops, within their owne Circuites, agaynst anie such boundlesse, and vniversall Supre∣macie: then, the VVorlde must knowe, that shee is not so destitute of Lovers, but that shee hath her Favourites, which can mende their Fault; and lyke Picke-Lockes, with wrong Keyes, release their holie Mother, from such narrowe Impri∣sonment, and can make Canons be∣fore hande, to bee vrged in due tyme, by their pope Zozimus, and to giue such an hard Charge,A Canon of Nice, counter∣feyt. to a whole Africane Councell, as they shall bee in hope, that those shall yeelde presentlie, to such a braue Batterie. VVhich if that fayle them (as vnluckilie it did) and that Paper onelie bee found in the shot, in place of hard Bullet; Then shall bee made vp, two famous counter∣feyt Councels: the one where-of, shall bee a Romane, (and there-fore no marvell, if in Favours of Rome)
which shall checke Nice,Concil. Rom. Cap. 20. Anno 315. . ins∣san. anno 301. oth counter∣feyt. for its Nycenesse, and match, yea, out∣match the same, in Venerable Anti∣quitie: and shall not yeelde onelie, That the Pope hath power, to judge all others; but (as if that were too narrow a Scantling) shall giue him this Prerogatiue, by their Declatatour, expresselie to bee jud∣ged by none. And if this will not yet serue, to bee so Supreame in Ecclesiasticis, as to bee both Law-giver, and Law-lesse: but being glutted, with the Surfer of Spirituall Iurisdi∣ction, his large Maw also, and ap∣petite after Temporall power, must bee lyke-wyse satiate: There-fore, to set him on the highest pinacle of Pryde, and to put on the Kep∣stone of Absolute Monarchie, on his loftie and triple-crowned head, for the completing of the Mysterie of Iniquitie, and full in-thronizing of that Vicar of the Prince of Dark∣nesse, into the Possession, (or at
least the Clayme) of Satan's full Graunt, vnto this pretended Ser∣vaunt, of that which the Master had before reused, vvhen it vvas sayde vnto Him, All these vvill I giue thee, if thou wilt fall downe, and worshippe mee. There-fore, there must bee an ample and fayre Donation,Constantine's Donation, counterfeyt. of Constantine's vvell framed out, vvhere-in his Holi∣nesse is invested, not onelie in the Citie of Rome, but also infeft, and seazed, as Lord Paramont, in Tempo∣ralibus, in the whole Seignorie, and Empyre of the West. VVhich Donation, howe grosselie it is for∣ged, and Knavishlie counterfeyted, is clearlie showne, by their owne VALLA, a Romane, and Chan∣non of Laterane. And, as yet, the Pope not con∣tenting with this, Boniface the eight, there-fore, doeth steppe farthest of all, and maketh the highest Reach: So that their owne FASCICU∣LUS TEMPORUM testifyeth
of him, Quod in tantam arrogan∣tiam erexit seipsum, ut Dominum to∣tius Mundi se diceret tam in Tempo∣ralibus, quam in Spiritualibus: that is, He rose vp, vnto so high pryde, that hee called him-selfe, Lord o∣ver the whole VVorlde, as well in Temporall thinges, as in Spiri∣tuall. And which Clayme, him∣selfe, in his large Decretall, clear∣lie profeseth. So that hee hath left it, as a Non ultra, to his Papall Successours. Next, vnto forging whole Trea∣tises, to come to their corrupting of other Records, for the Papall be∣hoofe, let Cardinall Benno stand vp as a witnesse, in the life of Gregorie the seaventh, of whom their owne Aventin thus lykewyse reporteth, that, Non solum ad ambitionem suam occultandam fabulas comminiscitur, an∣nales corrumpit, res gestas invertit; sed etiam coelestia oracula adulterat, &c. that is, That Gregorie the seaventh, (alias Hildbrand) to hyde his
pryde, did not onelie make vp Fables, as true Histories, did cor∣rupt the sound Registers, and in∣verted things that were done; but also did adulterate the verie hea∣venlie Oracles, expounding sacred Scripture falselie, (sayeth hee) and forcing the same, so to serue his wicked Lusts. And last of all, how they haue taken all things almost out of the way, that could make agaynst them, (so that it is GOD'S great providence, that wee haue the Scripture left vnto vs sound) their owne Alphonsus de Castro fur∣nisheth vs with a notable Exam∣ple,Aphons. de Hares. lib. 1. cap. 13. testifying, Quod ducenta volumi∣na Wickle, Episcopus Pragensis, (sayeth hee) concremai fecit, pul∣cherrime conscripta & regumentis pre∣tiosis ornata: that is, That the Bi∣shop of Prague caused burne two hundreth Volumes of Wicklesse's, most excellentlie well, written, and covered with most ritch Co∣vers.
And this hee did at his owne had, without anie supe∣riour warrand, long before the condemning of the sayde deceassed Wickleffe, or Ierome of Prague either, in their ensewing Councell; ma∣king so of their Bookes, the bones of Bethel's Priestes, which was in∣deede their most succinct sort of confutation, Non arguendo, seit com∣burendo, all their Reasons, beeing Razing, and their firmest Argu∣mentes, beeing the Fire and Fe∣rio. Againe, Pope Gelasius had a notable Epistle, against the muti∣lation of the SACRAMENT, and is cited by Gratian: But what doeth Bellarmine freelie confesse heere-of?Bell. Lib. 4. de Euch. cap. 26. §. Resp. Haec Epistola (sayeth hee) modo fortasse non extat: that is, Perhaps, now, this Epistle is out of the way. Even as those Romish purgers doe professe of Ber∣tram, that they care not,Index expurg. . Bertram. Si vel nus∣quam sit, vel intercidat: that is,
That it were not in the Worlde at all, or were perished: because it is such a cleare Evidence, of the learned opposition, that was made eight hundreth yeares agoe to Transsubstantiation, when it was but hatching, as no clearer anie wayes can bee. And in like manner, in the matter of Divorce, and priviledge of the partie vvronged, to marrie againe, Gratian citeth a Canon of an auncient Councell:Bell. Lib. 1. de Matrim. c. 17 §. ecruidus. but Bellar∣mine sayeth, That now, Ne nomen quidem illius Concilii extat, ex quo canon ille depromptus est: that is, That not so much as the verie name of that Councell is extant, out of vvhich that Canon is taken. Likewise, Bellarmine granteth plainlie,Bell. Lib. . de Pont. cap. 14. §. Triss ter. that the Decretall Epistle of Celestine the third, showing, that hee maintained the Heresie, That difference in Religion, is cause of Divorce, was before, amongst the olde Decretals, and that Alphonsus
de Castro sawe it in his tyme; but that the same is nowe quyte aboli∣shed, and taken away, hee freelie confesseth. Besides those Suppressions of Evidences, what Oppressions lyke∣wyse haue beene of the persons of the good and Godlie, vnder Papa∣cie prevayling, since the eight hun∣dreth yeare of GOD, let their owne Platina, in the lyfe of Sylve∣ster the thirde, and their owne Fas∣ciculus, after the lyfe of Steven the fift, testifie: the one recording, That all good Men suffered Op∣pression, and Rejection: and the other telling of such Persecution, that hee sayeth, Eia! Quis conventus, quae Congregatio, quis Homo jam secu∣rus erit? that is, Alace! what Com∣panie, what Assemblie, yea, what Man nowe, can bee safe? And there-fore, hee calleth that Age where-of hee spake, The vvorst Tyme that ever was, In quo defe∣cit Sanctus, (sayth hee) & diminu∣tae
sunt veritates à Filiis Hominum: that is, VVhere-in the holie Man is perished, and Trueth is depar∣ted from the Sonnes of Men. Thus were the Godlie (as them-selues confesse) in their persons eyther oppressed forciblie, or else their paynes were suppressed fraude∣fullie. VVhich Oppression towardes the Godlie,Revel. 11. joyned vvith strong Delusion towardes the God-lesse, caused the Warning, vvhich the fewe Witnesses gaue, that the same was eyther not heard, or if it was heard, it was not believed; or what was witnessed, and belie∣ved, could not the least part there∣of come to our Eares, vvho liue so long after them: Partlie tho∣rowe ignorance of the Age, lac∣king Historicians, as BELLAR∣MINE testifyeth of that nynth CENTURIE,Bell. Lib. 4. de Pont. cap. 12. in fin. Quo nullum indo∣ctius, (sayeth hee) nullum infoelicias: that is, Than vvhich Age, none was
ever more vnlearned, and more vnhappie: Partlie, also, thorowe the vvant of the ARTE OF PRINTING, and propagating of the true Travels of the LORD His Servauntes: Partlie thorowe the violent Curbing of the Pennes of the Pious, and partlie by inter∣ring their Paynes after them, by totall Deletion, whome they could not deterre in their Lyues, from faythfull Relation: or else so vvoe∣fullie and vvickedlie vitiating their Workes, that Corruption of Writs and Falehoode is seene, vvhere Correption of Vyce, and Trueth vvas et down: and vvith the EDO∣MITES agaynst the Temple, al∣though not crying openlie, yet practizing privilie, razing, even razing to the Foundation, and drowning (lyke the AEGYPTIANS, manie Birthes of ISRAELL, in their Rivers of Suppression, and in the LETHE of Eternall Ob∣livion.
So that wee may saye with the PROPHET, Except the LORD had left a verie small Remanent, as ISRAELL would haue beene lyke to SODOME, and lyke vnto GOMORRHA:Isai. 1.. So, except the LORD HIS Providence had made some to escape,Iudges, 9. as IOTHAM did from the Handes of ABIME∣LECH, or as IOASH was pre∣served,2. Chron. 23. by the Wyfe of IEHOI∣DA, wee had not knowne so the Sedulitie and Subtiltie of ANTI∣CHRISTIAN HIERARCHIE, as nowe wee see traced foorth, and treated of in their owne Historie. Neyther howe comfortablie, and carefullie; mercifullie, and marvel∣louslie, lyke MOSES in PHA∣RAOH his Court, ISRAELL in afflicting AEGYPT, the three Children in the fyerie Fornace, and the seaven thousand vnder cruell ACHAB: Even so, howe those Sealed, and Virgine Worshippers, haue beene reserved, and GOD'S
People, in the midst of BABELL, ever beene preserved; lyke the Temple vnpolluted, in the midst of Court and Ci∣tie, of that defyled multitude with Idolatry, who followed the Beast. FINIS.
ERRATA. PAg. 7. Lin. 5. Is is, for It is. Lin. penult. affrighted, for stric∣ken. Pag. 11. lin. 17. to, for them. Pag. 30. lin. pen. by, for with. Anie other Escapes in Printing, let the Reader amende.
