12678 99853782 19178
THE KINGS PRO∣phecie: OR VVeeping Ioy. Expressed in a Poeme, to the Honor of Eng∣lands too great Solemnities. Ios. Hall. LONDON Printed by T. C. for Symon Waterson. 1603.
THE KINGS PROPHECY or weeping Ioy. 1. WHat Stoick could his steely brest containe (If Zeno self, or who were made beside Of tougher mold) from being torne in twaine With the crosse Passions of this wondrous tide? Grief at ELIZAES toomb, orecomne anone With greater ioy at her succeeded throne? 2. Me seems the world at once doth weep & smile, Washing his smiling cheeks with weeping dew, Yet chearing still his watered cheeks the while With merry wrinckles that do laughter shew; Amongst the rest, I can but smile and weepe, Nor can my passions in close prison keepe.
3. Yet now, when Griefe and Ioy at once conspire To vexe my feeble minde with aduerse might, Reason suggests not words to my desire, Nor daines no Muse to helpe me to endite; So doth this ciuil strife of Passions strong, Both moue and marre the measures of my song. 4. For long agone, when as my weaker thought Was but assaylde with change of Ioy & paine: I wont to finde the willing Muse vnsought, And vent my numbers in a plenteous vaine, Whether I wisht to write some loftie verse, Or with sad lines would straw some sable hearse.
5. So, when but single Passions in the field Meet Reason sage; soone as she list aduance Her awful head; they needs must stoop, & yeeld Their rebell armes to her wise gouernance: Whence, as their mutin'drage did rashly rise Ylike by Reasons power it cowardly dies. 6. But when that Passions ranke arayes beset Reason alone, without or friend, or Fere, Who wonders if they can the conquest get And reaue the crown her royal head did weare? Goe yet tumultuous lines, and tydings bring What Passion  in Reasons silence sing.
7. Oft did I wish the closure of my light, Before the dawning of that fearfull day Which should succeed Elizaes latest night, Sending her glorious soule from this sad clay, Vp to a better crowne then erst she bore Vpon her weary browes, and Temples hoare: 8. For then I fear'd to finde the frowning skie Cloathed in dismall black, and dreadfull red, Then did I feare this earth should drenched lie With purple streames in ciuil tumults shed: Caesar & Pompey. Like when of yore in th'old Pharsalian downes, The two crosse Eagles grapled for the crowne.
9. Or when the riper English Roses grew On sundrie stalks, from one selfe roote ysprung, Lanc. & Yorke. And stroue so lōg for praise of fairer hew, That milliōs of our Sires to death were stung With those sharp thornes that grew their sweets beside Or such, or worse I ween'd should now betide. 10. Nor were leud hopes ought lesser thē my dread, Nor lesse their Triumphs then my plained woe, Triumphs, and Plaints for great Eliza dead; My dread, their hope for Englands ouerthrow: I fear'd their hopes, & waild their pleasāt cheare, They triumpht in my griefes, & hop't my feare.
II. Waiting for flames of cruell Martyrdome, Alreadie might I see the stakes addrest, And that stale strumpet of imperious Rome, Hie mounted on her seuen-headed beast, Quaffing the bloud of Saints in boules of gold, Whiles all the surplus staines the guiltles mold. 12. Now might I see those swarmes of Locusts sent, Hell's cursed off-spring, hyred slaues of Spaine, Till the world sawe, and scorned their intent, Of a sworne foe to make a Soueraigne; How could but terrour with his colde affright Strike my weake brest vpon so sad foresight?
13. Tho on that day before the world began Eliza dyde, and with the closing yeare March. 25. Her dayes vpclosde; when I the light did ban, And chide the Heauens that they left not there: And thought it wrōg (yet God that thought forefended) That the worlds course with her course was not ended. 14. Now, not moe worlds could hire my closed light Ere but the setting of that Euen-sun, Which late her breathing sawe with beames so bright, And early rising found her life for done; Ah most vnhappie wights that went beforne, That dyde ere this, or that are yet vnborne!
15. Oh turned times beyond all mortall feare, Beyond all mortall hopes! Not till this day Began the fulnesse of our blisse appeare; Which dangers dimmed erst with fresh dismay: Still euer checking ioy with seruile care, Still charging vs for Tragick times prepare. 16. False starres, and falser wisards that foresaine By their aspects the state of earthly things: How bene your bold predictions proued vaine, That here brake off the race of Brittish Kings? Which now alone began; when first we see Faire Britaine formed to a Monarchie.
17. How did I better long agone presage, (That ioyes me still I did presage so right) When in the wardship of my weaker age Virgils fourth Egloge transla∣ted and applyed to the birth of Hen. the prince. My puis-ne Muse presumed to recite The vatick lines of that Cumean Dame, (Which Maro falsely sung to Pollios name) 18. To the deare Natals of thy princely sonne, O dreadest Soueraigne; in whose timely birth Mee seem'd I sawe this golden age begonne, I sawe this wearie loade of Heauen and Earth Freshly reuiu'd, rouze vp his fainting head, To see the sweete hopes this day promised.
19. And now I liue (I wisht to liue so long Till I might see these golden dayes succeed, And solemne vow'd that mine eternall song Should sound thy name vnto the future seed) I liue to see my hopes; ô let me liue Till but my vowed verse might me suruiue. 20. So may thy worth my lowly Muse vpraise, So may mine hie-vp-raised thoughts aspire That not thy Bartas selfe, whose sacred layes The yeelding world doth with thy selfe admire, Shal passe my sōg, which nought cā reare so hye, Saue the sweete influence of thy gracious eye.
21. Meane while, amongst those throngs of Poesies Which now each triuial Muse dares harshly sing This vulgar verse shall feed plebeian eies, Nor prease into the presence of my King; So may it safely praise his absent name; That neuer present tongue did voyd of blame. 22. Well did the wise Creator, when he laid Earth's deepe foundations, charge the watery maine, This Northerne world should by his waues be made Cut frō the rest, and yet not cut in twaine Diuided, that it might be blest alone, Not sundred, for this fore-set vnion.
23. For here he ment in late succeeding time, To seat a second Paradise below; Or for composed temper of the Clyme, Or those sound blasts the clensing North doth blow. Britaine compa∣red with the olde Paradise Or, for he sawe the sinfill continent Should with contagious vice be ouerwent. 24. 1 Riuers of Para∣dise. For great Euphrates and the swelling Nile, With Tigris swift; he bad the Ocean hoare Serue for the great moate of the greatest Ile, 2 Word and Sa∣cram: And wash the snowy rocks of her steepe shore As for that tree of life faire Edens pride, Hee set it in our mids, and euery side.
25. From oft attempted, oft repulsed spight More then one Angell gards our safer gate; Nought wāts of highest blisse, & sweet'st delight That euer was attaind by mortall state. But that giues life to all, and all exceeds He sets his princely Image in his steed. 26. His liuely Image, in whose awfull face Appeare deepe stamps of dreadfull maiestie, Whose glorious beames from his diuiner grace Dazle the weake, and dim the bolder eye. Mercie sits on his brow; and in his brest Vnder his Lions paw, doth courage rest.
27. Deepe wisedome doth adorne his princely head, Iustice his hand, his lips graue Eloquence, And that which seld in Princes brest is bred, (The Princes greatest praise, and best defence) Purest religion hath his heart possest. O Iland more then fortunate and blest. 28. Heauens chiefest care, Earth's second Paradise, Wonder of Times, chiefe boast of Natures stile, Enuy of Nations, president of blisse, Mistresse of Kingdomes, Monarch of all Iles; World of this world, & heauen of earth; no lesse Can serue to shadow out thine happinesse.
29. Thou art the worlds sole glory, he is thine; Frō him thy praise is fetcht, the worlds frō thee, His from aboue; So the more famous bene His rarest graces, more thy fame shall bee. The more thy fame growes on, the fairer shew His heauenly worth shal make to forraign view. 30. Like when by night, amids the clensed skie, The Suns faire sister by her louely rayes Gathers a circled Halo vp on hie, Of kindly vapours that her spouse did raise: Shee thus inclos'd in her cleare ouall round, Doubles her light vnto the gazing ground.
31. But for the onely bane of blessed state Is ignorance of blisse; let mee deare Dread For thy diuiner Oracles relate The sum of those sweet hopes that long haue fed Thy liegest Nation; Pardon thou the while Mine high attempt, harsh verse, and ruder stile. 32. And yet thrise happy mates, whō that great king Endowes with equall peace: so more his raigne Aboue your hopes, eternall comfort bring To your late Nephewes race; as ye may daigne Credulous eares to my Prophetick lines, Truer thē those were fetcht frō Delphick shrines.
33. He that giues crownes (as crowns frō heau'n are sent The sum of Bazil. Doron drawne in forme of pro∣phecy in∣to verse. Not since the day that Ishay's yongest son Rose from the fold; hath euer yet besprent With the sweet oyle of sacred vnction An holyer head: then that this present day The weight of Englands roial crown doth sway. 34. Nor can his subjects more him feare or loue, (Loyall their loue, and lowly is their feare) Then he shall loue and feare his King aboue, Whose name, place, Image, Scepter he doth bear, Religions spring, Autumne of Heresie, Winter of Atheisme his raigne shall bee.
35. And thou great Rome, that to the Martian plaine Long since didst lowly stoope; and leaue for lore Thy loftie seate of Hils: shalt once againe Creepe lower to the shade of Tybers shore: Yet lower shall his Arme thy ruines fell, Downe from thy Tyber into lowest Hell. 36. Not number shall, but weight his lawes cōmend; Which wisely made, shall iustly be maintain'd, His gentle brows shal first seuerely bend And lowre at vice: whose course eftsoones re∣straind They smooth shal wax again; mixing by mesure Ounces of grace, with drams of iust displeasure.
37. So haue I seene a Morne of chearefull May Orecast with clouds to threatē sormfull stoures, Which yet ere Noone, hath prou'd the clearest day: Whiles brighter morns haue broght vs euening shoures; His frownes shall fright the ill; his mercious cic Shall raise the humble soule of Modestie. 38. The treble mischiefe that was wont infest Our holy state (ah me what state can misse Some staine of natiue ill) shall be redrest By timely care: and now shall fairely rise The noble name of our diuiner trade, From out the dust wherein it long hath laid.
39. Longlay it in the dust of wrong disdaine; Expos'd to euery rascall Pesants spight: O times! but now, were best my rage containe Vntill I mought a second Satyre write. But ah fond threat, as if these mended daies Would once deserue the brand of my dispraise? 40. Nor shall the Lordly Peeres once ouerlooke Their humble vassals dwelling all below: Like as we see some large out-spreading Oke Ore-drop the silly shrubs that vnder grow. Nor noble bloud shall want true honors fee, Whiles it shall light on Groomes of low degree
41. Nor now the greedy Merchant that for gaine Sailes to both Poles, & sounds both Indian seas Whe his long beaten bark from forth the maine Vnlades her weary fraight; shall as he please Raise by excessiue rate his priuate store, And to enrich himselfe make thousands poore. 42. Vnder the safer shadow of his wing Shall exilde Aliens shroud their restlesse head; And here alone shall forced exile bring Better contentment to the banished Then home-smelt smoke; O I land kind & free In fauouring those that once befrended thee.
43. And for the Princes eye doth life inspire To loyall brests (like as the vernall sunne Cheares the reuiued earth with friendly fires That lustles lies when those hote rayes are gone) Oft shall his presence blesse our hungry eyes, To our Horizon oft this sunne shall rise. 44. For ere the worlds great lamp shal thrise decline Into his Southern spherc, and thrise retyre Vp to the turning of his Northern line, Our second Sunne shall in his earthly gyre Turn once to al the realms his light doth guide; And yet obserue his yearly race beside.
45. Then shall my Suffolke (Englands Eden hight As England is the worlds) be ouer blest And surfet of the ioy of that deare sight Whose pleasing hope their harts so long possest Which his great Name did with such triumph greet When erst it loudly ecchoed in our street. 46. And thou, renowmed Drury mongst the rest, Aboue the rest; whether thee still detaine, The snowy Alpes, or if thou thoughtest it best To trust thy speed vnto the watery playne, Shalt him receiue; he thee, with such sweet grace As may beseeme thy worth and noble race.
47. The yron doores of Ianus by his hand Shall fast be bard; vnlesse some hostile might (If any hostile might dares him withstand) Shall break those bars; and boldly shall excite Our sleeping Lyon; who but once awoke Woe to the wight that did his wrath prouoke. 48. Wise and not wrongfull Stratagems shall speed His justest warre, and straiter discipline Shal guide the war like troupes himself shal lead To doubtfull field; O let the shield diuine Protect my Lieges head; and from on hie Let it be girt with crownes of victorie.
49. His frequent Court (yet feare I to fore-saine Too much of Princes courts, which ages past Haue long since noted with the secret staine Of wanton daliance and luxurious wast) His Court shall be a church of Saints: quite free From silth, excesse and seruile flattery. 50. Hence ye false Parasites, whose only guise Is feeding Princes eares with wrongful praises, And euer who mought hope to honor rise, By what large bribes their leuder brocage raises. The Courtiers onely grace shal henceforth lie In learning, wisedome, valour, honestie.
51. O Court fit for thy King; and like to none But heauens Court, where nought impure may bide; Like as thy King resembleth God alone, For such on earth were vaine to seeke beside. Well might I here his vertues rolle rehearse, But them his life speakes better then my verse. 52. Yet let me not thy learned Muse omit, The onely credit of our scorned skill, Redoubted Liege; whose rarely polisht writ Sauors of long sleep in that sacred hill; Looke that the Muses all shall once agree, As thou hast honor'd them, to honor thee.
