12798 99853955 19360
❧A famous dittie of the Ioyful receauing of the Queens moste excellent maiestie, by the worthy Citizens of London the xij day of Nouember, 1584. at her graces comming to Saint Iames. To the tune of Wigmores Galliard. THe twelfe day of Nouember last, Elizabeth our noble Quéen: To Londen-warde she hied fast, which in the Cuntry long had béen The Citizens went then apace, on stately stéeds to méet her grace. In veluet coats and chaines of golde, moste gorgiously for to beholde. ¶ Each company in his degrée, stood orderly in good aray: To entertaine her maiesty, as she did passe along the way. And by each man did duly stand: a wayter with a torch in hand. Because it drue on toward night: along the way her grace to light. ¶ The people flocked there amain, The multitude was great to sée: Their Ioyful harts were glad and fain, to view her princely maiesty. Who at the length came riding by: within her chariot openly. Euen with a noble princely train: of Lords and Ladies of great fame. ¶ Her maiesty was glad to sée, her subiects in so good a case: Which then fell humbly on their knée, desiring God to saue her grace. And like a noble prince that day: for them in like sorte did she pray. And curteously she answered still: I thank you all for your good will. ¶ And bowing down on euery side, moste louingly vnto them all: A poor man at the length she spied, which down before her grace did fall. And curteously she then did stay to héer what he had then to say. To whome he did present anon, an humble supplication. Then plesantly she passed on, til she vnto Saint Iames came: And alwaies as she went along,, the people cri'd with might and main. O Lord preserue your noble Grace: and all your secret foes deface. God blesse and kéep our noble Quéen: whose like on earth was neuer séen. What Traitors hart can be so hard, to hurt or harme that princely flower: What wretch from grace is so debard, that can against her séem to lower. Which is the onely star of light: that doth amaze all princes sight. A moste renowned virgin Quéen, whose like on earth was neuer séen. The daughter of a noble King, desending of a royall race: Whose fame through all the world doth rīg whose vertues shines in euery place. The Diamond of delight and ioy, which guides her cuntry from anoy. A moste renowned virgin Quéen: whose like on earth was neuer séen. ¶ The péerles pearle of Princes all, so ful of pitty, peace, and loue: Whose mercy is not proued small, when foule offendors doo her mooue. A Phenix of moste noble minde, vnto her subiects good and kinde. A moste renowned virgin Quéen: whose like on earth was neuer séen. ¶ The seruant of the mighty God, which dooth preserue her day and night: For whome we féel not of his rod, although the pope hath doon his spite. The chéef maintainer of his woord: wherein consists our heauenly food. O Lord preserue our noble Quéen: whose like on earth was neuer séen. ¶ And such as hollow harted be, partakers of the romish rout: Which thinketh mischéef secretly, the Lord wil suerly finde them out. And giue them their deseruings due: which to her grace is found vntrue. But Lord preserue our noble Quéen: whose like on earth was neuer séen. ¶ In many dangers hath she béen, but God was euermore her guide: He wil not sée our gratious Quéen, to suffer harme through traitors pride. But euery one which sought her fall, the Lord did stil confound them all. And such as thought her life to spill: them felues moste desperately did kil. ¶ And euery traitor in this land, Whose wicked thoughts are yet vnknown The Lord consume them out of hand, before they be more riper grown. Whose harts are set with one accord: against th'annointed of the Lord. But God preserue our noble Quéen: whose like on earth was neuer séen. ¶ Lord send her long and happy daies, in England for to rule and raigne: Gods glory euermore to raise, true Iustice alwaies to maintain. Which now these six and twenty yéers, so royally with vs appéers. O Lord preserue our noble Quéen: whose like on earth was neuer séen. FINIS. Richard. Harrington. ¶ AT LONDON Printed by Edward Allde for Yarath Iames and are to be solde in New∣gate Market against Christ Church gate. 1584.
