13143 S92937 99848829 13945
A True Discourse of the most happy victories obtay∣ned by the French King, against the Rebels and enemies of his Maiesty. With a particuler declaration of all that hath béene done betweene the two Armies, during the monthes of September and October, and part of Nouember. 1589. Also of the taking of the Subburbes of Paris by the King. Faithfully translated out of French into English, according to the Coppy imprinted at Tours. By T. D. LONDON: Printed by I. Wolfe, and E. White. 1589.
To the right Honourable Lord Robert Deuorax, Earle of Essex and Ewe, Vicount of Harryford, and Bourchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Burchier and Louaine, maister of the Queenes maie∣sties Horse, and Knight of the most honourable order of the Garter: Luke Wealsh wisheth all heauenly happinesse, and increase of honourable vertue. THe viewe of Scipio his valiant exploites (right Honourable) was no lesse admired amongst the hardie Carthageni∣ans, then the report of his conquestes were ioyfull among the Senators and Citizens of flourishing Rome. But if they in regarde of Heathen honour, and onely forworldly causes conceaued such felicity in their victories, yeelding their graue ears to the discourse therof, then need I not feare to present to your honors hands, the vndoubted truth of these happy victories obtained by the most noble and Christian French King, who for the recouery of his right & ad∣uancement of Gods glory, is inforced to maintaine wars against them. Wherfore
in respect of your honourable and mag∣nanimious minde, your wisedom and vertuous inclination, your hardinesse in warres, and hatred to rebellion sondrie times manifested to your eternall and well deserued praise, as also to declare my well affected hart to your honour, I haue chosen you the Patrone of this warlike discourse, that the noble ex∣ploits herein mentioned may be the bet∣ter regarded, and the more esteemed by the name of so honourable a personage, whose loue as it is generally planted in the harts of all the Cōmons of this land, so it is euery day augmented through hope of your neuer dying fame. Thus shielding my selfe vnder your honours protection, with hope of your honou∣rable fauour and pardon for my bolde attempt, in most humble manner I take my leaue. Your Honours most humble at command Luke VVealsh.
Certain verses written by master Wealsh as a thankesgiuing vnto God, for the prospe∣rous successe of the King. OVr mighty God in highest heauens doth sitte, And yet behouldes all things on earth below: How godles men applies their chiefest witte, With might and maine his truth to ouerthrow. But praised be our God of greatest power, Who can confound their doings in an howre. Though all the Princes of the earth conspire, Against the Lord and Christ his onely sonne: They shalbe scattered in his furious ire, And be constraind to leaue where they begunne. For praised be our God of greatest power, Who can confound their doings in an howre. By him alone all royall Kings do raigne, By him they rule and sitte in Princely throne: Then flie you Rebels with your trayterous traine, Your sinne and shame throughout the world is knowne, And praysed be our God of greatest power, Who did confound their doings in an howre. In Pharaos sight the stout Egyptian King, The Lord by Moyses many wonders wrought: His chosen flocke from bondage great to bring, But all his threats hee leaudly set at nought. Yet praised be our God of greatest power, Who did destroy his army in an howre.
And thou O France whose fame in former daies, Did glorifie the pleasant Westerne partes: How oft in thee did God his wonders raise, Which neuer yet could mollify your hartes? But praised be our God of greatest power. Who can confound his foes within an howre. What grieuous tumultes in thy townes are wrought? What rage and bloudshed by thy City wales? What wrongfull broyles and causelesse wars are sought? What great Rebellion on thy people falls? But praysed be our God of greatest power, Who can confound his foes within an howre. Ierusalem that Citty of renowne, By diuers tokens warned was of sinne: And thou O France didst lately sée a Crowne Plast in the skie, by God ouer the King. As many men affirme and plainely shoe, A wonderous thing if that the truth be so. Then cease your iarres obey your soueraigne Lord, Whom God from Heauen affirmes your louing King: Whose heart, whose hand, doth séeke with one accord, Your health, your wealth, and Realme in peace to bring. And blessed be our God of greatest power, Who can confirme these blessings in an howre. FINIS.
A true discourse of the most happy victo∣ries obtained by the French king, against the re∣bels and enemies of his Maiesty. With a parti∣culer declaration of all that hath bene done be∣tweene the two Armies, during the months of September and October and part of Nouem∣ber. Also of the taking of the Subburbes of Pa∣ris by the king. IT is too common and manifestlye knowen with what pompe and va∣nity the Duke de Main and all those of his side, had vanted in euery place, of the supposed successe which they assured themselues to obtaine in the voyage which they enterpri∣sed in September last past, against royall Maiesty in the partes of Normandy. But it is more manifestly knowen how those vainglorious brags giuen out both by wordes and writing were gain-saide by God in the effectes which followed, for it pleased him clean contrary to their Imaginations, and published boastinges, to turne their glory into shame. As by the following dis∣course most plainely shall appeare to the comfort of all such as wishe the aduancemente of the glorious Gospell of Ie∣sus Christ. His Maiesty hearing that the enemy approched very fast intamped himselfe at Arques, a good league from the towne of Dieppe by the prudent counsaile of the Lorde Marshall de Birron. And viewing the place, hee by and by iudged, what the enemy was able to doe against him: whereuppon he caused certaine trenches to be made on the toppe of the hill, in most substantiall manner as farre from
Arques as a cannon can shoote. A deuise so excellente and pollitickely framed, that all the Army (for a néede) mighte be couered therewith, out of all danger, vppon which tren∣ches, his Maiesty planted foure péeces of great Artillerye, this being done in sight of a faire plaine, where he supposed the enemy would come to fight, whether also wée might come without any daunger, this Campe of the Kings was pitched close almost after the fashion of the Romanes in olde time. All the companies were quartered in villages rounde about according as his Maiesty had ordained their lodginges. The meane while the enemy approched more and more very fast, and on Friday the fiftéenth of this mo∣neth of September, he came and lodged his vantgard with∣in a league and a halfe of the towne of Diepe, whether his Maiesty was gone that morning to mark the enemies intent, who saw plainly by their present dealing, that they minded vtterly to spoil the suburbe called le Paullet, before hee came to Arques. The king therefore with all diligence fortified the saide suburbe, but especially the milles which stoode must open to the enemy. Which being done, his said Maiesty woulde once againe as neere as he could with smal company mark and sée, how the enemy was lodged, and perceiuing through the occasion of some one that they were to forwarde, com∣maunded fiue or sixe of his company to geue them a charge, which was done to the losse of seauen of the enemy vppon that place, his Maiesty retourning at night lay in his quar∣ter of Arques, doing nothing al that night. But many be∣fore day marched out of the subburbs of Diepe to the field who made against the enemy moste hot skirmiges, where mounsier de Chastilion commanded ouer the footemen, who shewed himselfe more and more a most skilfull and va∣liant leader, in so much that our Arquebuzers neuer dis∣charged bullet in vaine. The horsemen also were so sette and placed by the king, who behaued themselues so well, that no person could passe to the enemy, without his ex∣presse
commandement, otherwise there had béene greate disorder among vs, so earnest were our souldiers to the fight. Among other his Maiesty permitted certaine Englishe Lords well mounted and armed, and most sumptuously at∣tired, I knew among the rest the noble gentleman maister d'Euerax, brother to the right honorable Earle of Essex, who was one of the formost and forwardest in the fight. Who imployed themselues so valiauntly and with suche hardy courage that they fiue many of the enemies, and in lesse then the turning of an hand, threw them to the ground and tooke prisoners all that incountred them. About ten of the clocke this forenoone, we saw aboue the milles, how the enemy in great troupes came downe the hill, to conti∣nue their passage after some of their company which had already passed the brooke which seperated their armye and ours, and being entred in the medowe, they purposed to assault a village called Boutielle, where the kinges white cornet was, At what time wee sawe comming againste them the very same instant sixe gentlemen, well armed whom we knew not, but the King was since certifyed, two of them wer the Lords of Saint Marke and Sturbe, which tooke their swordes in hand to such purpose, with two Ar∣quebuzeirs on foot, that the enemies being in number thir∣ty or thirty fiue, which before had passed the brooke, were constrained to turne their backs and wade againe through the same brooke, to escape their hard pursute, flyinge with great feare and sorrowfull countenance. Vppon this ac∣cident it is greatly to be considered, that if the enemy might haue had their wiles without expulse, and that their whole Army might haue got ouer the water as those few did, our litle hoast had béene soone seperated in the halfe, by theire mighty and huge Armye, which woulde haue béene verye hardly ioyned together againe. His Maiesty had sent the two companies of light horse∣men of Mounsier de Lorges and Harambres to the me∣dowe.
Notwithstanding they had by and by a contrarye commandement to goe to Arques to méete Mounsieur de Birron: but all the while there continued this day greate skirmiges at the milles of Paullet. And his Maiesty ad∣uainicing himselfe alwayes to sée theyr doinges, a Harque∣buze shot came and strooke in the thigh of his horse, but ma∣ny more bullets passed on the contrary side of Arques. Now those two companies of light horsmen, (of which one part belonged to my Lord the Prince of Countie, con∣ducted by Mounsieur d'Armillie his lieftenant) whom the king had before sent to Monsieur de Birron, had comman∣dement of the said Monsieur, to go and spie out the lodging of the enemy, who lay in a village called Martinglize be∣yond the riuer, where also was the Duke, and Cheualliers d'Amall, of Nemoures and Sagonne, but our men being come to the place, ran vpon the enemy so fiercely, that they had no leisure to cary word to Monsieur de Birron of that they had sene, and with so great fury they did it being eager in fight, that they broke downe on horsebacke all theire rampiers or barrycades, and slue of the enemy more then an hundreth and fifty, some helde the Marques De mene∣laye to be in the number, besides diuers Captains and ma∣ny good prisoners which they tooke. The Cheualliers d'Aumall and Sagonne were the first that fled, with four regimens of footemen, who found more safety in their féete, then in their swords. His maiestye which was on the side of Diepe, perceiuing by the ene∣mies doings that they determined some secrete mischiefe, came into his quartor, where he found how those of his side had most faithfully serued in that incounter latelye made, which was done so manfully, that if he had had those three hādred horses redy which afterward came, we had brought away their chiefest forces. Notwithstanding we were ve∣ry sorowfull for mounsieur d'Armille, who had receiued a dangerous wound through the body by a sworde, but wee haue good hope of his recouery. On Sunday the seuenteeth
of that moneth, his Maiesty caused a Cannon to bee dis∣charged against the enemy, on the side of Arques, while mounsieur de Chatellon made a moste valiaunt skir∣mige, winning many prisoners that day, from the enemy, without the losse of any one man, and but fewe of his sol∣diours wounded. Which was done while those of our side recouered a village where they flew thirtie men at the least. Euery day of that wéeke they spent in the like skir∣mishes, by the meanes wherof an infinite number of gentle men and souldiours came of their voluntarie goodwil, and yéelded themselues and seruice to the King, parte whereof were the troupes & regiment of Mounsier de Rubempree which before was taken of the enimie at Gornay, who fol∣lowed ye enimies armie for the safegard of their armes. On Tewesday the one & twentieth by breake of day, about fiue of the clocke in the morning, the enimie marched out from the saide Martinglize in battel ray, so wel ordered as might be, their faces set against Arques and against the side of our Swizers, the most part of their horsemen in sundrie troupes wonderfull strong and thicke, their footemen in their winges excellently well placed. Then the Lord de Billin with two thousand shot, was chosen to giue the on∣set vpon vs. But his maiestie who was a horsebacke vn∣till midnight, perceiuing that the einimies intent was to winne the riuer, and to passe the same, for which purpose they had made certaine bridges of wood to be cast ouer, he presently set such order in euery place, that they coulde doe him no hurt without great losse to themselues. And now hauing séene the order of their battell incontinent hee sent forth his light horsemen: And the company belonging to my Lord, the Prince (gouerned by Mounsieur de Mon∣tater) and his maiesties owne Cornet, wherein were my Lords le graund prior, le graunde Esquier, le count Rochfoucaue, le count de Rousye, le count de Roch∣ford, with diuers other gentlemen which were nearest to the person of his maiestie. And these he placed by those that
were his footemen, deuiding his Swizers in two partes. And in this order he set against the enimie, knowing that God could as well vanquish with a small as a great num∣ber, hauing earnestly desired his aide, as well by his publike as priuate prayers. Then marched he against his eni∣mies with such resolued and princely courage, that the in∣counter and charges which hee gaue against his enimies (being in number twentie fiue thousand men of warre, and himselfe but nine thousand) was most wonderfull. The enimie lost at that time nere hand fiue hundreth men, beside prisoners and wounded souldiours: And the rest were in such feare, that eightie of our men chased and put to flight a thousand horsemen of the enimies, following the pursute most couragiously, and crying, God saue the King. But they were so astonished, that the helpe which the Duke de Maine had prouided to send to succour them, standing in a raye behinde, were so disordered by their owne men whom wée had in chase, who mingled them selues among the rest for safegarde, that they were all brought into such an horrible confusion, that had his Maiestie receiued the forces which afterwarde came, it had surely béene the end of our miseries, for we had not left one of them liuing. But our liues are not yet sufficiently amended, that we shoulde receiue so great a blessing of God. But when his Maie∣sties forces were refreshed, the launce-knights of the eni∣mie, to the number of fiftéene hundred presented themselues in a little trench that was nearest to the enimy (which was kept by part of our two hundred launce-knights) who lif∣ting vp their hands, protested vnto them, and desired to yéelde them selues to the King, condicionally that euerye one of vs might put vp our weapons. This was estéemed such good newes among vs, and so credibly belieued, that we made no other account but to receiue them with great ioy, and thereupon we were commanded that wee shoulde put vp euery man his weapon: so we mingled our selues a∣mong them without any suspicion of treason, shaking one
another by the hand, then two of the Captaines of the saide launce-knights went to méete with the King: but being examined sodenly, faultring in their wordes, and scant knowing what they saide, named themselues seruants to the Duke de Maine. The meane while they fedde vs with faire wordes, onely to delay the time till their whole troupes of horsemen might come to sustaine them, desiring much to sée the King. But to come to the effect of their treason, the King hauing no confidence in them, com∣manded vs to march downe the medowes from them. And the while these villaines passed toward the Switzers; as though in déed they would yéelde themselues wholy to the King. But on a sodaine they seased vpon Mounsieur le countie de Rochford: and séeing no more our horsemen before them (and contrariwise theirs approching still) they began to set vpon vs with all their might, while fiftéene hundreth more of their horsemen came marching along the Medowes in battell raye, very strong and close to chase vs. We being no more but two hundred and fiftie, or thrée hundred horsemen at the most. The Cornet of Mounsieur de Monpancier, and the Cornet of the great Esquier go∣ing before vs. This notable and subtill treason astonished vs so much, that the most part of our company maugre our chiefest commanders, went backe towarde our Switzers, which Switzers neuer moued or shronke for all that, but stood still most firmely, shewing such a manly countenance, that the enimie suspected our shrinking was but for a pol∣licie to bring them within the daunger of the Switzers, as was a great likelyhood: for retyring in such good order as we did, wee put our selues in two partes: our Arquebu∣zers very well placed, so that if the enimie had passed a little farther (which he durst not doe) they had surely had their payment,, and the whiles our Cannons played vpon them and killed many. And they séeing, that by the diligence of the King, we which were before in great disorder, were so
soone set in faire and good order, who in this extremitie being on the other side, to gather the troupes together, to the end he might expulse these traiterous launce-knights (which he did) he shewed himselfe both King, Captaine, and souldier, al at one time, bearing himself with such a princely courage that thereby he became the onely myrror to incourage the Switzers them selues, as they haue since confessed. But his magnanimious and hardie exploites was not done without perrill of his royall person, for one of his bootes was pearced, and his horse was hurt with a Caliuer shotte at what time his Maiestie fought both on horsbacke and on foot, with the assured assistance of the Marshall de Birron, and so much preuailed, as though the enimie had had the lesser, and his Maiestie the greater number. The enimie then retired himselfe very shamefully, and sore scattered, leauing their dead & ours, in the fielde behinde them, séeking to shroude themselues in the village of Mar∣tinglize, marching about by the hill to scape from vs. On the side of Dipe to paullet, Mounsieur de Chastelon, and Mounsieur de Guittery had a good number of footmen, of the which mounsieur de Chastillon brought fiue hundred good Calléeuers, who came very fitly, the very instant that the treason was discouered. His Maiestie stayed yet in the fielde and commaunded that certaine péeces of Ordenance should be brought to our little trenches, to bee discharged against Martinglize wher the enimie laye. Which being done, he after commanded all persons in most solemne sorte to render thankes vnto God for their deliuerance, euen as he had before desired his aide in his iust cause. Then great∣ly did his Maiestie commend the seruice of the Switzers in the presence of their Captaines, and in drinking, he drunke vnto them for the valiant exploites performed that day by them. And to the end you may know all thinges that hath passed, that nothing may be forgotten here worthy the no∣ting, we are most credibly informed that Saga collonel of
the light horsemen on the enimies side dyed that day, who was since buried in Roan with mounsienr Saint Vidal chiefe maister of their Artillery, the Lord of Saint Andrew brother to the Countie of Saux, mounsieur de Vuiuille yonger sonne to the Marshall of Vienele, the Chiuallier de Picart and many other of name and account whom I can not remember, we tooke prisoners ye Earle of Billin, Mar∣shall of the Campe. Tremblecourt, le count de Loraine who had the first regiment, and mounsieur Sauelack with diuers other Captaines for the fight was so heat that nothing could be heard, which was the cause that manie died which woulde gladly haue yéelded themselues to our mercie. And although we deserued no such fauour at Gods handes, yet he blessed vs in such sort that we lost but seauen and twentie men in all this fight: neuerthelesse we were verie sorrowfull for the death of Mounsieur the Count de Rousy (brother to the Count de la Rouchfoucaue) and Mounsieur de Bacqueuille whose vertues were most commendable among all men but especially the valiant and hardy seruice which they performed in this fight, wherein they declared their wonderfull courage. Neither can I forget Mounsieur le graund Prior who séeing Monsieur Sagonne, (a most proud and ambitious enemie, and one that boasted himselfe ouer all men, for the opinion hee con∣ceaued in his manhood and strength of armes) he called him to the fight, and so néere they ioyned togither that when they parted, Sagonne bore away his markes: And sée the iudgement of God vpon this vnhappie man, lighting down from his horse he broke his necke. The next day after, that is to say, on Saterday the thrée and twentie my Lord Stafford (Ambassadour to the most Noble Quéene of Englande) arriued at Déepe, bringing both money and victuals, but he sawe not his Maiestie till the next day. About midnight the same Saterday wee perceaued that the enemie changed his opinion, and that he would rayse his armie (which in déede he did on the Son∣day
morning very early without any sound of Driumne or Trumpet in sight of his Maiestie and all his armie) which were for the most part in battell raye on the otherside of the hill, where my Lord Ambassadour mette him: this re∣moouing of theirs was doone with such great feare and so cowardly, that they left their wounded men in their villa∣ges behinde them, leauing by the way both their victualles and munition for warre, and to their greater shame, they staied not so much as to giue their Sentriles warning to retire or saue themselues. They tooke their iourney as though they went to a Towne called Ewe, but we pursu∣ing them tooke some prisoners, who being demaunded the cause of their soddaine retire, were founde in diuers tales concerning the same, for some sayde it was because of the comming of the English shippes which lately ariued there, wherein they doubted great aide to be sent to his Maiestie. Some other saide it was vppon occasion of placing of newe Gouernours among them, in stéede of those which had béen slaine, whereupon great strife grew among them, some al∣lowing of one man, some choosing an other: but we must referre that vnto God, who can worke confusion among his enemies when it pleaseth him. Then the enemie went past the forrest and riuer, to S. Vax, Quinqueuille, and Bures, & lodged himselfe on the otherside of the towne of Déepe, where he spredde his troopes all about, intrench∣ing himselfe in the néerest Villages, as Ianuall, Boutiles, Apeuiell, and others. The king séeing that caused his bat∣tell to be pitched in the plaine néere Arques, and sent the regiment of Monsieur de la Gard into the Castle of Ar∣ques (but the day before he brought all his armie into Déep and the suburbes of the same, with thrée péeces of great or∣dinance) and being come, all that night he caused great and large trenches to be made in a place called the Mount of Cattes, on the side of the enemie, so that he had a faire de∣fence in the morning, in which place he lodged a part of his footmen, vnder the Gouernement of Monsieur de Chaste∣lon,
with thirtéene ensignes of Suitzers: the rest of his ar∣mie he placed in the towne, and in the fort of Paulet, but in the fort of the Mount of Cats on the side of Ianuell the King caused two double Cannons to bee planted, which were shott off vpon the enemie without any shott in vaine, because they were all on an heape, and their horsemen could not come into their quarter, but by the fauour of the Can∣non. The first day of October the enemie planted sixe péeces of ordenance vpon the toppe of the hill by Ianuall shootting fiue or sixe vollies of shot into the towne, wherewith was slaine one of the Kings Cookes, a woman, a maiden, and a boye, doing also great hurt vnto two shippes which lay at Anker in the hauen. But they withdrewe soone after their Cannons from that place, because by our Cannons their master gonner was slaine, & two péeces of their ordenance dismounted, which was done by a skilfull English Canno∣neir, who was presented to the King by my Lord Stafford, Ambassadour to the Quéene of England. The fourth day of October the enemie broke downe all their Rampiers or Gabions, because our men visited them more then they de∣sired, making them to forsake them euery foote, And sée∣ing they could no better preuaile the enemie retired himself againe with great shame and losse of men, and the vtter ruine of his armie (after he had vsed all the cruelties that might be) taking his way toward Picardie, not daring to fight against the helpe which was comming towarde the King. His Maiestie little thinking of the enemies sodaine departure, sawe how he raised his campe on a soddaine in sight of them all, whereupon he presently imagined that he went to fight against the helpes which were comming to∣warde his Maiestie, (which were brought by the Earle of Soysson, the Duke de Longeuiell, and the Marshall d'Aumont before they could ioyne with his Maiestie. And the more his highnesse mistrusted the matter by their shif∣ting into thrée seuerall places and neuer farre off from his
Maiesties armie. But his grace knowing that these helpes were come within seauen or eight leagues, he determined with thrée or foure hundred horsemen to go méete and ioine with them, leauing the Marshall de Birron in Déepe with all the rest of the armie. And although the enemie was but fiue leagues off when his Maiestie ioyned with his newe forces, yet in sight of them all: his highnesse tooke parforce the towne and Castle of Gamasche, and since hee tooke in like manner the towne of Ewe, which was as great an oc∣casion as might be to procure the Duke de Maine to the fight. But in stéede thereof, and fearing he should be con∣strained therevnto, he most cowardly went ouer the riuer of Some, into Picardie, séeking to excuse this shamefull re∣tire with a greater disgrace, for he published abroad that he was constrained to come downe into Picardie to take him selfe possession of the townes of that Prouince, which mat∣ter was before intreated of by his Deputies, in the towne of Aras at what time the saide Duke de maine had bound himselfe to the Spaniardes to deliuer all those townes into their hands: but the Spaniards wold not come to aide him, before he had performed what he was bound to doo, vnto which composition hee was in doubt the people of those townes would not easily censent. The King which had a speciall desire to bring the enemie to an open battell: séeing he would not do it so long as he was on this side of the riuer of Some, and now being the first that had passed the sayde riuer, he thought it now vnpossible hee should be brought thereunto. His Maiestie therefore resolued himselfe to stay for the enemies returne backe againe, not caring much for his passing into Picardie, for that he knew the people wold neuer yéelde vnto him. And although the Frenchmen in their heate and naturall hastinesse, sell sometime into sedi∣tion and rebellion, yet he knew their anger lasted not long, and that they are not so farre degenerated from the opinion of their Ancestors, that they would (to please another mans minde) subiect themselues to a strange Gouernement, ha∣uing
so many examples before their eyes to beware, know∣ing also that there is no Dominion in the worlde more swéete vnto them, then their owne Countrie. So his Maiestie staying yet a while in the town' of Déep, as well for the affaires of Normandie (where he lefte the Duke de Monponcier) as also to receiue the foure thou∣sand Englishmen, sent vnto him by the most renowmed Quéene of England. He departed from the said Déepe the one and twentieth of October, taking small iourneyes on this side the riuer, kéeping himselfe still on the enemies side vntill he came to Meulan, ten leagues from Paris, whe∣ther the king with all spéed purposed to goe, thinking that the enemie for his credits sake, and in respect of the promise which he made to al those of his side, hereafter to performe, would come to their aide at the least, and what he woulde not doe to winne Déepe, he would doe without faile for the defence of Paris. In consideration wherof the king thought good to go ouer the riuer of Seinne at the bridge of Mullin, which done he came presently to Paris, for two causes: ei∣ther to compell the enemie to the fight, or to make him re∣tire from Picardie, where by treason he sodeinly tooke the towne of Ferre, and he might well doe the like by others, especially because the most part of the nobilitie of that coun∣trie came to méet the king. His Maiestie a mile from Paris lodged his armie in the néerest vilages round about, and the verie same daie his Grace went all about to suruaie the trenches along the suburbes on the other side of the riuer. And sodeinly by the aduice of the Princes and Marshals of France, with other expert Captaines, his Maiestie deter∣mined to assault the sayde suburbes the next morning by breake of daie, by thrée seuerall troupes, and in thrée sundrie places, whom, he diuided himselfe into this sorte. In one of the troups were the foure thousand Englishmen, vnder the gouernment of my Lord Willoughbie their generall, with two regiments of French men, and one regiment of Swi∣sers, with the Marshall de Birron accompanied by the Ba∣ron
de Birron his sonne, and Monsieur de Gettrie, with diuerse other noble men, who had commandement to assalt the suburbes of Saint Marcel and Saint Vidor. The se∣cond troupe was of foure regiments of French men, two regiments of Swisers, and foure companies of aduenturers with the Marshall of Aumont accompanied with Monsi∣eur le Grand Esquier, and Monsieur de Rieulx Marshall of the field, and a good number of Nobles and Gentlemen, who had in charge to assault the suburbes of Saint Iames, and Saint Michael. The third troupe with ten regimentes of French souldiers, one regiment of Lanceknights, condu∣cted by Monsieur de la Noe & Monsieur de Chastellon assaulted the suburbs of Saint Germain Bucie, and Nele, each troupe hauing a good number of Gentlemen on foote well armed, to sustaine the footemen, if anie extreame resi∣stance should be made. Moreouer, on the rereward of euery troupe, two Canons and two culuerings were planted. He also had separated all the horsmen of the armie in thrée com∣panies, his Maiestie commanding ouer the first, Monsieur le Count de Soyson ouer the second, and the Duke of Lon∣gueuill ouer the third, each of them appointed ouer one of the thrée sides of the suburbes. And in this order the first of Nouember by breake of the daie, the said suburbes were so shaken by the Kings power, that in lesse then an houre they were all taken, with the losse of fiftéene hundreth of the ene∣mie or there about, winning also the same time fouretéene Ensignes and thirtéene péeces of ordinance great and small. And with such furie we followed the chase of our enemies yt our men were mingled among them, euen within the verie gates of the citie. And had the Kings great ordinance come so soone as it was appointed, the gates of Paris had bin sure∣ly beaten downe before they could anie waie haue streng∣thened them. So his Maiestie came into the suburbes of S. Iames about seauen or eight of the clocke in the mor∣ning, the people crying along the stréetes with a loud voice, God saue the King, with more shew of ioy, then any feare
at all. Beside, the King obserued so good an order among his souldiers, that no man started from his companie for anie pillage, till the quarters were appointed what they shoulde doe. The enimie about an hundred and fiftie shot, tooke for their defence the Abbie of Saint Germaine, shewing them selues as though they would holde it perforce, as they might verie well doe by reason of the strength thereof. But about midnight being by vs charged to render the same, they gaue ouer their holde, and then was his Maiestie maister of all the suburbes beyond the water, which are estéemed almost as bigge as the Citie of London within the wals. All that daie we imployed about the intrenching of our selues before the gates of the Citie, and in setting Warders in euerie place. His Maistie was aduertised about midnight, that the Duke de Maine came into the Citie of Paris with his for∣ces. Whereby the King had part of his wish, because the e∣nemie was now retired from Picardie. He would therefore trie if he woulde fulfill the other part of his desire, that is to make battaile against him, that he might not altogether ex∣ecute his iustice against the wals of the Citie, and his owne subiects who were greatly seduced by the bad persuasions of his enemies, wherevpon he stayd all the Thursdaie to sée if they would come forth to the fight. But séeing they shewed not anie féeling of their losse receiued the daie before, the king came forth of the suburbes the Friday morning, and set himselfe in battaile raie offering fight to the enimie, but staying in the field from eight of the clocke in the morning, vntill eleuen, and séeing all that time no man appearing, hée marched quite from thence, contenting himselfe for that time, to haue enterprised and executed vpon that Citie, that which heretofore was neuer done, leauing his enemies a perpetuall reproch among all men, that being offered the fight, durst neuer come thereto. Which may serue for a spe∣ciall warning hereafter, neuer more to beléeue the greate brags and baunts which they haue and shall publish of their great valour and courage, which was a manifest token to
the inhabitants, how néere they were brought to their utter ruine and confusion, and as for the helpe which they had, it was almost worse vnto them then the losse of all their sub∣stance. And I cannot thinke but they did at this time suffi∣ciently learne to their cost, that they cannot stand in safetie, without the kéeping of a great & mightie armie, the charge whereof would be worse vnto them in the end, then if they were taken by the surie of the enemie. And no doubt but it would be the vniuersall desolation of that faire and wealthie Citie, which is the chiefe and principall ornament in the Realme, of whose welfare and safetie his Maiestie hath plainly shewed he hath more tender care then themselues. FINIS.
