16768.22 29905408 28127
To the most Honble Assemblie of the high Court of Parliament, The humble Petition of many thousands of poore distressed Carpenters, Bricklayers, Smithes, Plaisterers, Glaziers, Painters and other handy-crafts men. IN most humble wise sheweth, that whereas your poore Petitioners exhibited their humble Petition vnto the Honourable house of Commons, concerning the manner of building and repiring of houses being denyed, which they lovingly heard, and presently gaue order for the calg in, of M. Innago Iones to answer the cause, how be it he did not attend the Committees at Dday of hearing, as your poore distressed petitioners did, which made the Kings Majestie conceiue (as we take it) that the Commissioners were never called before the Honorable House of Commons, as it appeares in His most Royall speech at the last Session. In tender consideration whereof, it would please your Honours, to take into your Noble and graue considerations, the few Arguments and Reasons herevnto annexed, which doe tend vnto the generall good, benefite and safetie of the Honourable Citties of London and Westminster, and to graunt, that if their be any opposition made, their may be a publike hea∣ring, betweene those apposers and vs, whereby the said Arguments and reasons may passe with authoritie to the generall good, as shall seeme best vnto this most Honorable Assembly. And your poore Petitioners shall (as duty bindeth them) daily pray vnto God, for your Honorable healthes, peace and tranquillity long to continue. Reasons moving this their humble Petition. 1 First it doth vndoe many, that can repaire their houses but not new build them. 2 Secondly, Whereas fiue or ten pounds, will make a house serue 30 or 40. yeares, whereas three or foure hundred pounds will not new build it. 3 Thirdly, it hath and will be a meanes to wast abundance of timber, when houses must be pulled downe before they haue need. 4 Fourthly, if a man take a Lease of 21. yeares, and if the house stand not aboue 14 or 16. yeares, but must be repaired, and being denyed repairyng, the house must either fall or else the building will be to chargable for the remainder of the yeares, besides breach of Cove∣nants contrary to Law. 5 Fifthly, If a caviling tenent be not disposed to repaire his house, according to his Cove∣nants but to wrong his Landlord will complaine vnto the Commissioners for building, and so ave it puld downe, when reasonable reparations will serue. 6 Sixthly, by this occasion, many thousands haue ben cast out of imployment in their law∣full callings, and by this meanes many haue perished.
