16786.12 29900286 28120
❧VICESIMO OCTAVO Ianuarij, 1611. Nono Regni Regis IACOBI. Present, The Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Company of Stationers. FOrasmuch as this Company out of their zeale to the aduancement of Learning, and at the request of the Right worshipfull Sir THOMAS BODLEY Knight, Founder of the present publique Librarie of the Ʋniuersitie of Oxeford, being ready to manifest their willing desires to a worke of so great pietie, and benefit to the generall state of the Realme, did by their Indenture vnder their common Seale, dated the twelfth day of December, In the eighth yeere of his Maiesties raigne of England, France and Ireland, and the foure and fourtieth yeere of his Raigne of Scotland, For them, and their successors, graunt and confirme vnto the Chauncellour, Masters, and Schollers of the Ʋniuersitie of Oxeford, and to their successors for euer, That of all Bookes, after that, from time to time to be Printed, in the said Company of Stationers, being new Bookes and Copies neuer Printed before, or though formerly Printed, yet newly augmented or enlarged, there should be freely giuen one perfect Booke of euery such Booke (in quiers) of the first Impression thereof, towards the furnishing and increase of the said Library; NOW therefore to the intent the said Grant may take due effect in the orderly performance and execution thereof, And that so good and godly a worke and purpose may not be disappointed or defeated by any meanes, IT IS ordeined by this Company, That all and euery Printer and Printers, that from time to time here∣after, shal either for him, or themselues, or for any other, Print or cause to be Printed any new Booke or Copie ne∣uer Printed before, or although formerly Printed, yet newly augmented or enlarged, shall within Tenne dayes next after the finishing of the first Impression thereof, and the putting of the same to Sale, bring and deliuer to the yonger Warden of the said Company of Stationers for the time being, one perfect Booke thereof, to be deliue∣red ouer by the same Warden to the recited vse, to the handes of such person or persons, as shall be appointed by the said Chancellour, Masters and Schollers for the time being, to receiue the same. AND it is also ordeined, That euery Printer, that at any time or times hereafter shall make default in perfor∣mance hereof, shall for euery such default forfeit and pay to the vse of this Company, treble the value of euery Booke, that he shall leaue vndeliuered, contrary to this Ordinance; Out of the which forfeiture, vpon the leuy∣ing and payment thereof, There shalbe prouided for the vse of the said Library, that Booke, for the not deliuery whereof, the said forfeiture shalbe had and payed. AND to the intent all Printers and others of this Company whom it shall concerne, may take notice of this Or∣dinance, And that any of them shall not pretend ignorance thereof, IT IS ordeined, that once in euery yeere at some generall Assembly and meeting of the said Company vpon some of their vsuall Quarter dayes, or some other time in the yeere at their discretion, this present Ordinance shalbe publiquely read in their Hall, as other their Or∣dinances are accustomed to be read there. Iohn Norton, Master. Wardens. Richard Field Humfrey Lownes Iohn Harison. Robert Barker. Thomas Man. Thom. Dawson. Edward White. Humfrey Hooper. Simon Waterson. William Leake. Iohn Standish. Thomas Adams. Iohn Harison. Ri. Collins, Clerke of the Company. HAuing lately beene intreated, as well by the said Sir THOMAS BODLEY Knight, as by the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the foresaid Company of Stationers, to take some spe∣ciall notice of this their publike Act and Graunt, and (in regard of our being of his Maie∣sties high Commission in Ecclesiasticall causes) to testifie vnder our hands with what allow∣ance and good liking, we haue thought it meete to be receiued: wee doe not onely as of me∣rit commend it to posteritie, for a singular token of the feruent zeale of that Company to the furtherance of good Learning, and for an exemplarie Gift and Graunt to the Scholers and Students of the Vniuersitie of Oxeford: But withall, we doe promise by subscribing vnto it, That if at any time hereafter occasion shall require, that we should helpe to maintaine the due and perpetuall execution of the same, wee will be readie to performe it, as farre as either of our selues through our present authoritie, or by any what∣soeuer our further endeauors, it may be fitly procured. G: Cant. Io: London. R: Cou. & Lich. Jo: Roffens. John Benet. John Boys. George Montaigne. Thomas Ridley. Char: Fotherby. Robert Abbott. Tho: Edwards. Henry Hickman. G: Newman. Martin Fotherby. Iohn Dix. John Spenser. John Layfield. William Ferrand. Richard Moket.
