18018 99835913 146
CERTEINE MATTERS CON∣cerning the Realme of Scotland, composed together. The Genealogie of all the Kings of Scotland, their liues, the yeeres of their coronation, the time of their reigne, the yeere of their death, and maner thereof, with the place of their buriall. The whole Nobilitie of Scot∣land, their surnames, their titles of honour, the names of their chiefe houses, and their mariages. The Arch-bishopricks, Bishop∣ricks, Abbacies, Priories, & Nunries of Scotland. The Knights of Scotland. The forme of the oth of a Duke, Earle, Lord of Parliament, and of a Knight. The names of Barons, Lairds, and chiefe Gentlemen in eue∣rie Sherifdome. The names of the principall Clannes, and Surnames of the Borderers not landed. The Stewartries and Baileries of Scotland. The order of the calling of the Table of the Session. The description of whole Scot∣land, with all the Iles, and names thereof. The most rare and woonderfull things in Scotland. As they were Anno Domini, 1597. LONDON, Printed by A. Hatfield, for Iohn lasket dwelling at the signe of the Blacke Beare in Pauls Churchyard. 1603.
A CRONOLOGIE OF all the Kings of Scotland, declaring what yeere of the world and of Christ they began to reigne, how long they reigned, and what qualities they were of, according as they be set foorth and imprinted with the great booke of the Statutes of the Realme of Scotland. FERGVS, the first king of Scotland, the sonne of Ferquhard, a Prince of Ire∣land, began to raigne in the yeere of the world 3641. before the comming of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, 330. yeeres: In the first yere of the 112. Olympiade: and in the 421. yeere of the building of Rome: about the beginning of the 3. Monarchy of the Grecians, when Alexander the great ouer∣threw Darius Codomannus the last Monarch of Persia. He was a valiant Prince, and died by shipwracke, vpon the sea-coast of Ireland, neere vnto Craig-fergus, in the 25. yere of his raigne. 2 Feritharis, brother to Fergus, began to raigne in the yere of the world, 3666. in the yeere before the comming of Christ 305. He was a good Iusticiar. In his time there was a Lawe made, that if the sonnes of the King departed, were so young, that they could not rule, that then in that case, the neerest in bloud should raigne, being in age sufficient for gouernment: and then after his death, the Kings children should succeed: which law continued vnto Kenneth the third his daies, 1025. yeeres almost. He was slaine by the meanes of Ferlegus, Fergus
his brothers sonne, in the fifteenth yeere of his raigne. 3 Mainus, king Fergus sonne, succeeded to his fathers bro∣ther, in the yeere of the world, 3680. and in the yere before the comming of Christ, 290. He was a wise and good king, and maried the King of Picts daughter, that did beare him two sonnes. He died peaceably in the 29. yeere of his raigne. 4 Dornadilla succeeded to his father Mainus, in the yeere of the world, 3709. In the yeere before the comming of Christ, 262. A good king. He made the first lawes concerning hun∣ting. He had two sonnes, and died peaceably in the eight and twentieth yeere of his raigne. 5 Nothatus succeeded to his brother Dornadilla in the yere of the world, 3738. & the yeere before the comming of Christ 233. Hee was a greedy and a cruell tyrant. He was slaine by Doualus, one of his Nobles, in the twentieth yeere of his raigne. 6 Reutherus, Dornadilla his sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 3758. in the yeere before the comming of Christ, 213. He was a good King, and died peaceably in the sixe and twentieth yeere of his raigne. 7 Reutha succeeded to his brother Reutherus, in the yeere of the world, 3784. In the yere before the comming of Christ, 187. A good King. Hee of his owne accord left the king∣dome, and liued a priuate life, when he had ruled foureteene yeeres. 8 Thereus, Reutherus sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 3798. in the yeere before Christ, 173. He was an vn∣wise and cruell Tyrant. Hee was expelled and banished the realme, in the twelfth yeere of his raigne, by his Nobles: And Conanus, a wise and graue man, was made gouernor of the land. He died in exile in the city of Yorke. 9 Iosina succeeded his brother Thereus, in the yeere of the world, 3810. In the yeere before Christ, 161. He was a quiet and good Prince, a good Medicinar and Herbister, or skilfull in Physicke and the nature of herbs. He died in peace, in the foure and twentieth yeere of his raigne. 10 Finnanus, Iosina his sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 3834. In the yeere before Christ, 137. A good
King. He was much giuen to the superstitious religion of the Druydes. He died in peace, in the 30 yeere of his raigne. 11 Durstus, Finnanus sonne, succeeded to his father in the yeere of the world, 864. In the yeere before Christ, 107. A cruell and trayterous Tyrant, slaine by his Nobles in battell, in the ninth yeere of his raigne. 12 Euenus the first, succeeded to his brother Durstus, in the yeere of the world, 3873. In the yeere before the comming of Christ, 98. A wise, iust and vertuous Prince. He died peace∣ably in the ninteenth yeere of his raigne. 13 Gillus, Euenus bastard sonne, succeeded to his father, in the yeere of the world, 3892. In the yeere before Christ, 79. A crafty Tyrant, slaine in battell by Cadallus, in the second yeere of his raigne. 14 Euenus the second, Donallus sonne, King Finnanus bro∣ther, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 3894. In the yeere before the comming of Christ, 77. A good and ciuill King. He died in peace, in the 17 yeere of his raigne. 15 Ederus, sonne to Dochamus, that was sonne to Durstus the eleuenth King, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 3911. In the yeere before the comming of Christ 60. A wise, valiant and good Prince. He died in the eight and fortieth yeere of his raigne. 16 Euenus the third, succeeded to his father Ederus, in the yeere of the world, 3959. In the yeere before the comming of Christ, 12. A luxurious and couetous wicked King. He was taken by his Nobles, and imprisoned, and died in prison in the seuenth yeere of his raigne. 17 Metellanus, Ederus brothers sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 3966. Foure yeeres before Christs In∣carnation. A very modest and good King. He died in the 39 yeere of his raigne. In his time there was peace at home and a∣broad, and our Sauiour Iesus Christ was borne, and suffered death in his raigne. 18 Caractatus, the sonne of Cadallanus and of Eropeia, which was daughter to Metellanus, began to raigne in the yeere of the world 4005. In the yeere after the birth of Christ, 35. He was a wise and valiant King, and raigned twenty yeeres.
19 Corbredus 1. succeeded to his brother Caractacus, in the yeere of the world 4025. In the yeere of Christ 55. A wise King, and a good Iusticiar, or Executor of Iustice. He died in peace in the 18 yeere of his raigne. 20 Dardannus, Nephew to Metellanus began to raigne, in the yeere of the world 4042. In the yeere of Christ 72. A cru∣ell tyrant. He was taken in battell, and beheaded by his owne subiects in the fourth yeere of his raigne. 21 Corbredus 2. surnamed Galdus, sonne to the former Cor∣bredus, began to raigne in the yeere of the world 4046. In the yeere of Christ, 76. A valiant and worthy King: for he had many warres with the Romanes, and was oft victorious ouer them. He died in peace, in the 35. yeere of his raigne. 22 Lugthacus, succeeded to his father Corbredus the second, In the yeere of the world 4080. In the yeere of Christ, 110. A lecherous bloudy Tyrant. He was slaine by his Nobles in the third yeere of his raigne. 23 Mogallus, sonne to the sister of Corbredus the second. He began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4083. In the yeere of Christ, 113. A good King and victorious in the beginning of his raigne: But in the end of his life, became inclined to ty∣ranny, lechery and couetousnesse, and was slaine by his Nobles in the 36 yeere of his raigne. 24 Conarus succeeded to his father Mogallus, in the yeere of the world, 4119. In the yeere of Christ, 149. A lecherous ty∣rant. He was imprisoned by his Nobles, and died in prison in the 14 yeere of his raigne, and Argadus a Noble man was made Gouernour. 25 Ethodius the first, sonne to the sister of Mogallus, began to raigne in the yeere of the world 4133. In the yeere of Christ 163. He was a good Prince. He was slaine by an Irish Harper, whom he admitted to lie in his chamber, in the 33 yeere of his raigne. 26 Satraell succeeded to his brother Ethodius the first, in the yeere of the world, 4165. In the yeere of Christ, 195. A cruell Tyrant. He was slaine by his owne Courtiers in the 4 yeere of his raigne. 27 Donald 1. the first Christian King of Scotland, succee∣ded
to his brother Satraell in the yeere of the world 4169. In the yeere of Christ 199. A good and religious King. He was the first of the Kings of Scotland that coined money of gold and siluer. He died in the eighteenth yeere of his raigne. 28 Ethodius the second, sonne to Ethodius the first, began to raigne in the yeere of the world 4186. In the yeere of Christ 216. An vnwise and base-minded King, gouerned by his No∣bles. He was slaine by his owne Guard in the sixteenth yeere of his raigne. 29 Athrico succeeded to his father Ethodius the second, in the yeere of the world 4201. In the yeere of Christ, 231. A va∣liant Prince in the beginning, but he degenerated and became vicious: and being hardly pursued by his Nobles for his wicked life, slew himselfe in the twelfth yeere of his raigne. 30 Nathalocus, as some write, sonne to the brother of Athri∣co, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4212. In the yeere of Christ, 242. A cruell tyrant, slaine by his Nobles, and cast away into a priuy, in the eleuenth yeere of his raigne. 31 Findocus, sonne of Athrico, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4223. In the yeere of Christ, 253. A good King and valiant, slaine by fained Hunters, at the instigation of Donald, Lord of the Iles, his brother, in the eleuenth yeere of his raigne. 32 Donald the second, succeeded to his brother Findocus, in the yeere of the world 4234. In the yeere of Christ, 264. A good Prince. He was wounded in battell, and being ouercome, died for griefe and sorrow in the first yeere of his raigne. 33 Donald the third, Lord of the Iles, brother to Findocus, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4235. In the yeere of Christ, 265. A cruell tyrant, slaine by Crathilinthus his suc∣cessor, in the twelfth yeere of his raigne. 34 Crathilinthus, Findocui sonne, began to raigne in the yere of the world 4247. In the yeere of Christ, 277. A valiant and a godly King. He purged the land from the Idolatrous super∣stition of the Druides, and planted the sincere Christian Re∣ligion. He died in peace in the foure and twentieth yeere of his raigne. In his time was Constantine the great Emperour of Chri∣stendome borne in England.
35 Fincormachus, sonne to the brother of the father of Cra∣thilinthus, began his raigne in the yeere of the world, 4271. In the yeere of Christ, 301. A godly King and valiant. He was a worthy furtherer of the kingdome of Christ in Scotland. He died in peace in the seuen and fortieth yeere of his raigne. 36 Romachus, brothers sonne to Crathilinthus, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4318. In the yeere of Christ, 348. A cruell Tyrant, slaine by his Nobles, and his head stri∣ken off, in the third yeere of his raigne. 37 Angusianus, Crathilinthus brothers sonne, succeeded to Romachus in the yeere of the world 4321. In the yere of Christ, 351. A good King, slaine in battell by the Picts, in the third yeere of his raigne. 38 Fethelmachus, another brothers sonne of Crathilinthus, he began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4324. In the yere, of Christ, 354. He was a valiant King: for he ouercame the Picts, and slew their King. He was betraied to the Picts by an Harper, and slaine by them in his owne chamber, in the third yeere of his raigne. 39 Eugenius the first, Fincormachus sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world 4327. In the yeere of Christ, 357. A valiant, iust and good King. He was slaine in battell by the Picts and Romanes in the third yeere of his raigne and the whole Scottish nation was vtterly expelled the Ile, by the Picts and Romanes, and remained in exile about the space of foure and forty yeeres. 40 Fergus the second, Erthus sonnes sonne to Ethodius, Eugenius the first his brother, returning into Scotland, with the helpe of the Danes and Gothes, and his owne countrey-men, who were gathered to him out of all countries where they were dispersed, conquered his Kingdome of Scotland againe out of the Romanes and Picts hands. He began his raigne in the yere of the world, 4374. In the yeere of Christ, 404. He was a wise, valiant and good King. He was slaine by the Romanes in the sixteenth yeere of his raigne. 41 Eugenius the second, sonne of Fergus the second, suc∣ceeded to his father in the yeere of the world, 4390. In the yeere of Christ, 420. He was a valiant and a good Prince.
He subdued the Britons, and died in the two and thirtith yeere of his raigne. 42 Dongardus succeeded, to his brother Eugenius the se∣cond, in the yeere of the world, 4421. In the yeere of Christ, 451. A godly, wise and valiant Prince. He died in the fifth yeere of his raigne. 43 Constantine the first, succeeded to his brother Dongar∣dus, in the yeere of the world, 4427. In the yeere of Christ, 457. A wicked Prince. He was slaine by a Noble man in the Iles, whose daughter he had defiled, in the two and twentieth yeere of his raigne. 44 Congallus the first, sonne of Dongardus, began to reigne in the yeere of the world, 4449. In the yeere of Christ, 479. A good and quiet Prince. He died in peace in the two and twen∣tieth yeere of his raigne. 45 Goranus, or Conranus succeeded to his brother Congallus the first, in the yeere of the world, 4471. In the yeere of Christ 501. A good and wise Prince. He died in the foure and thirtith yeere of his reigne. 46 Eugenius the third Congallus sonne, succeeded to his fa∣ther and vncle, in the yeere of the world 4505. In the yeere of Christ 535. A wise king and a good Iusticiar. He died in the three and twentith yeere of his raigne. 47 Congallus the second, or Conuallus, succeeded to his brother Eugenius the third, in the yeere of the world, 4528. In the yeere of Christ 558. A very good Prince. He died in peace in the eleuenth yeere of his raigne. 48 Kinnatillus succeeded to his brother Congallus the se∣cond, in the yere of the world, 4539. In the yere of Christ, 569. A good Prince. He died in the first yeere of his raigne. 49 Aidanus, sonne of Goranus, the forty fifth king, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4540. In the yere of Christ, 570. A godly and good Prince. He died in the fiue & thirtieth yeere of his raigne. 50 Kenethus the first, surnamed Keir, Congallus the second his sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4575. In the yeere of Christ, 605. A peaceable Prince. He died in the first yeere of his raigne.
51 Eugenius the fourth, sonne of Aidanus, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4576. In the yeere of Christ, 606. A valiant and a good King. He died in the sixteenth yeere of his raigne. 52 Ferquhard, or Ferchard 1. succeeded to his father Euge∣nius the 4. in the yeere of the world, 4591. In the yeere of Christ, 621. A bloudy tyrant. He slew himselfe in the prison, whereinto he was put by the Nobles of his Realme, in the twelfth yeere of his raigne. 53 Donald the fourth, succeeded to his brother Ferquhard the first, in the yeere of the world, 4602. In the yeere of Christ, 632. He was a good and religious King. He was drowned in the water of Tay, while he was fishing, in the foureteenth yeere of his raigne. 54 Ferquhard, or Ferchard 2. succeeded to his brother Do∣nald the 4. in the yeere of the world, 4616. In the yere of Christ, 646. A very wicked man. He was bitten by a Woolfe in hun∣ting: of the which ensued a Feuer, whereof he died in the 18. yeere of his raigne. 55 Malduine, sonne to Donald the fourth, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4634. In the yeere of Christ, 664. A good Prince, strangled by his wife, who suspected him of adul∣tery, in the twentieth yeere of his raigne. She was therefore burned. 56 Eugenius the fift, Malduine his brothers sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4654. In the yeere of Christ, 684. A false Prince, slaine by the Picts in battell, in the fourth yeere of his raigne. 57 Eugenius the sixt, sonne to Ferquhard the second, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4658. in the yeere of Christ, 688. A good Prince. He died in peace in the tenth yeere of his raigne. 58 Ambirkelethus, sonne of Findanus, sonne of Eugenius the fift, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4667. In the yere of Christ, 697. He was a vicious Prince, and was slaine by the shot of an arrow in the second yeere of his raigne. The shooter thereof is vnknowne or set out in historie. 59 Eugenius the seuenth succeeded to his brother Ambir∣kelethus,
in the yeere of the world, 4669. In the yeere of Christ, 699. He died in peace in the seuenteenth yeere of his raigne. A good Prince. 60 Mordacus, Ambirkelethus sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4685. In the yeere of Christ, 715. A good Prince. He died in the sixteenth yeere of his raigne. 61 Etfinus, Eugenius the seuenth his sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4700. In the yeere of Christ, 730. He died in peace in the one and thirtieth yeere of his raigne. 62 Eugenius the eight, Mordacus sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4771. In the yeere of Christ, 761. A good Prince in the beginning of his raigne: and then after, de∣generating from his good life, he was slaine by his Nobles in the third yeere of his raigne. 63 Fergus the third, Etfinus sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4734. In the yeere of Christ, 764. A leche∣rous Prince, poisoned by his wife in the third yeere of his raigne. 64 Soluathius, Eugenius the eight his sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4737. In the yeere of Christ, 767. A good Prince. He died in peace in the twentieth yeere of his raigne. 65 Achaius, Etfinus sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4757. In the yeere of Christ, 787. A peaceable, good and godly Prince. He made a league with Charles the great Emperour, and King of Fraunce, which remaineth inui∣olably kept to this day. He died in the two and thirtieth yeere of his raigne. 66 Congallus, or Conuallus, Achaius fathers brothers sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4789. In the yeere of Christ, 819. A good Prince. He died in the fifth yeere of his raigne. 67 Dongallus, Soluathius sonne, succeeded in the yeere of the world, 4794. In the yere of Christ, 824. A valiant and good Prince. He was drowned, comming ouer the riuer of Spey, to warre against the Picts, in the seuenth yeere of his raigne. 68 Alpinus, Achaius sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4801. In the yeere of Christ, 831. A good Prince.
He was taken in battell, and beheaded by the Picts, in the third yeere of his raigne. 69 Kenneth the second, surnamed the Great, succeeded to his father Alpinus, in the yeere of the world, 4804. In the yeere of Christ, 834. A good and a valiant Prince. He vtterly ouerthrew the Picts in diuers battels, expelled them out of the land, and ioined the kingdome of the Picts to the Crowne of Scotland. Hee died in peace, in the twentieth yeere of his raigne. 70 Donald the fifth, succeeded to his brother Kenneth the second, in the yeere of the world, 4824. In the yeere of Christ, 854. A wicked Prince. He slew himselfe in the fifth yeere of his raigne. 71 Constantine the second, sonne of Kenneth the second, be∣gan to raigne in the yere of the world, 4829. In the yeere of Christ, 859. A valiant Prince. He was slaine by the Danes in a battell, stricken at Carraill in Fife, in the sixteenth yeere of his raigne. 72 Ethus, surnamed Alipes, the sonne of Constantine the second, succeeded to his father in the yeere of the world, 4844. In the yeere of Christ, 874. A vicious prince. He was impri∣soned by his Nobles, where he died in the second yeere of his raigne. 73 Gregory, surnamed the Great, sonne of Dongallus the se∣cond, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4846. In the yeere of Christ, 876. A Prince valiant, victorious & renowmed through the world in his time; he died in peace in the eight∣teenth yeere of his raigne. 74 Donald the sixt, sonne of Constantine the second, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4863. In the yeere of Christ 893. A valiant Prince. He died in peace, being loued of his subiects, in the eleuenth yeere of his raigne. 75 Constantine the third, sonne of Ethus, surnamed Alipes. began to raigne in the yere of the world, 4874. In the yeere of Christ, 904. He was a valiant King, yet he prospered not in his warres against England, and therefore being wearie of his life, hee became a Monke, and died after he had raigned fortie yeeres as King.
76 Malcolme the first, sonne of Donald the sixt, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4913. In the yeere of Christ, 943. A valiant Prince, and a good Iusticiar, or Executor of Iustice. He was slaine in Murray, by a conspiracy of his owne subiects, in the ninth yeere of his raigne. 77 Indulfus, sonne of Constantine the third, beganne to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4922. In the yeere of Christ. 952. A valiant and a good Prince. He had many battels with the Danes, whom he ouercame; but in the end he was slaine by them in a stratageme of warre, in the ninth yeere of his raigne. 78 Duffus, the sonne of Malcolme the first, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4931. In the yeere of Christ, 961. A good Prince, and a seuere Iusticiar, or Executor of Iustice. He was slaine by one Donald at Forres in Murray, and was buried secretly vnder the bridge of a riuer beside Kinlosse; but the matter was reuealed, and the murderer and his wife that con∣sented thereto, seuerely punished. He raigned fiue yeeres. 79 Culenus, Indulfus sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4936. In the yeere of Christ, 966. A vicious and effeminate Prince. He was slaine at Methuen, by Radardus, a Noble man (whose daughter he had defiled) in the fourth yere of his raigne. 80 Kenneth the third, Duffus brother, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4940. In the yeere of Christ, 970. A va∣liant and a wise Prince: but in the end he became cruell, and slew Malcolme his brothers sonne: and in Gods iudgement, who suffereth not innocent bloud to be vnpunished, he was slaine, as some say, by a shaft or arrow, shot by a deuice or sleight, out of an image fixed in a wall, at Fetticarne, by the meanes of a Noble woman there, called Fenella, in the foure and twentieth yeere of his raigne. 81 Constantine the fourth, surnamed Calvus, Culenus sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 4964. In the yeere of Christ, 994. An vsurper of the Crowne. He was slaine in bat∣tell, at the towne of Crawmond in Louthian, in the second yere of his raigne. 82 Grimus, Duffus sonne, began to raigne in the yeere of
the world, 4966. in the yeere of Christ, 996. A vicious Prince. He was slaine in battell by Malcolme the second, his successor, in the eighth yeere of his raigne. 83 Malcolme the second, sonne of Kenneth the third, began to raigne in the yere of the world, 4974. In the yere of Christ, 1004. A valiant and a wise Prince, who made many good lawes, of the which a few are yet extant. He was slaine by a conspiracie of his Nobles at the Castell of Glammes, who after the slaughter, thinking to escape, were drowned in the water of Forfar: for it being winter, and the water frozen and couered with Snow, the Ice brake, and they fell in, in the righteous iudgement of God. He reigned thirtie yeeres. Some write, that after a great victorie in battell, hee did giue much of his lands to his Nobles, and they agreed that he should therefore haue the wardship and custodie of their heires, as long as they were vnder the age of one and twentie yeeres, and the profits of all their lands, ouer and aboue their charges for education, and the disposing of them in marriage, and the money that should be giuen for their mariage: And that he first did giue vnto his Nobles sundry seuerall titles of Honor. Which ward∣ships, mariages, times of full age, and reliefes, and maner of Liueries of their lands out of the Kings hands, be in Scotland, very much agreeing to the Lawes of England, as many other parts of the Lawes do. 84 Duncane the first, sonne of Beatrix, daughter of Mal∣colme the second, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 5004. In the yeere of Christ, 1034. A good and a modest Prince. He was slaine by Macbeth traiterously, in the sixth yeere of his raigne. 85 Macbeth, sonne of Douada, daughter of Malcolme the second, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 5010. In the yeere of Christ, 1040. In the beginning of his raigne he beha∣ued himselfe as a good and iust Prince, but after, he degene∣rated into a cruell Tyrant. He was slaine in battell by his Suc∣cessour Malcolme the third, in the seuenteenth yeere of his raigne. 86 Malcolme the third, surnamed Cammoir, sonne of Dun∣cane the first, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 5027.
In the yeere of Christ, 1057. A very religious and valiant Prince: he maried Margaret, daughter to Edward surnamed the Out-law, sonne to Edward surnamed Yron-side, King of England, a very good and religious woman, according to those times, who bare vnto him sixe sonnes and two daughters. The sonnes were Edward the Prince, Edmond, Etheldred, Edgar, A∣lexander, Dauid: the daughters were Mathildis or Maud, sur∣named Bona, wife to Henrie the first, surnamed Beauclearke, King of England, the sonne of William the Conqueror of Eng∣land: of her vertues there is extant this old Epigram: Prospera non laetam fecêre, nec aspera tristem; Prospera terror ei, aspera risus erant: Non decor effecit fragilem, non sceptra superbam; Sola potens humilis, sola pudica decens. That is: Prosperitie reioiced her not, to her griefe was no paine; Prosperitie affraied her alas, affliction was her gaine: Her beautie was no cause of fall, in royall state not proud; Humble alone in dignitie, in beautie onely good. She founded the Church of Carleill. The other daughter was Marie, wife to Eustathius Earle of Boloigne. King Mal∣colme builded the Churches of Durehame and Dumfermeline. He was slaine with his sonne the Prince Edward, in the sixe and thirtieth yeere of his raigne, at the besieging of Anwicke, by Robert Mowbray, surnamed Pearce-eie, and was buried at Tin∣mouth; but after, he was remoued to Dumfermeline. 87 Donald the seuenth, surnamed Bane, vsurped the crowne after the death of his brother, in the yeere of the world, 5063. In the yeere of Christ, 1093. and was expelled in the first yeere of his raigne, by Duncane the second, the bastard sonne of King Malcolme the third. 88 Duncane the second, vsurped the Crowne, in the yeere of the world, 5064, in the yeere of Christ, 1094. A rash and foolish Prince. He was slaine by Makpendir the Thane or Earle of the Meirnes, when he had raigned little ouer a yeere, by the procurement of Donald the seuenth.
Donald the seuenth, made King againe in the yeere of the world, 5065. In the yeere of Christ, 1095. And raigned three yeeres. He gaue the West and North Iles to the King of Nor∣way, for to assist him to attaine to the Crowne of Scotland. He was taken captiue by Edgar, his eyes put out, and died mise∣rably in prison. 89 Edgar, the sonne of Malcolme the third, began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 5068. In the yeere of Christ, 1098. He builded the Priory of Coldingham. He was a good Prince. He died at Dundie without succession, and was buried at Dumfermeline, in the ninth yeere of his raigne. 90 Alexander the first, surnamed Fearce, succeeded to his brother, in the yere of the world, 5077. In the yeere of Christ, 1107. A very good and valiant Prince. He builded the Abba∣cies of Scone and of Saint Colmes-Inche. He maried Sybilla, daughter to William Duke of Normandie, &c. He died in peace, without succession, at Striuiling, in the 17 yeere of his raigne, and was buried at Dumfermeline. 91 Dauid the first, commonly called S. Dauid, the yongest sonne of King Malcolme the third, succeeded to his brother in the yeere of the world, 5094. In the yeere of Christ, 1124. A good, valiant and religious Prince, according to those times. He builded many Abbacies, as Haly-rude-house, Kelso, Ied∣burgh, Dun-dranan, Cambus-kenneth, Kin-losse, Mel-rosse, New-bottle, Dumfermeline, Holme in Cumberland, and two religious places at New castle in Northumberland. He erected foure Bishopricks, Rosse, Brechin, Dumblane and Dunkeld. He maried Maude, daughter of Woldeofus Earle of Northum∣berland and Huntingdon, and of Iuditha, daughters daughter to William the Conquerour, King of England, by whom he had one sonne named Henrie, a worthie and good youth, who ma∣ried Adama, daughter to William Earle Warren, who bare vnto him three sonnes, Malcolme the Maiden, William the Lion, and Dauid Earle of Huntingdon, and two daughters, Adama wife to Florentius Earle of Holland, and Margaret wife to Co∣nanus Duke of Britaine. He died before his father. S. Dauid died in peace at Carleill, in the 29 yeere of his reigne, and was buried at Dumfermeline.
92 Malcolme the fourth, surnamed the Maiden (because he would neuer marrie) succeeded to his grand-father Dauid 1. in the yeere of the world, 5123. In the yeere of Christ, 1153. A good and meeke Prince. He builded the Abbay of Cowper in Angus, and died at Ied-burgh, and was buried at Dumfer∣meline in the twelfth yeere of his raigne. 93 William, surnamed the Lion, succeeded to his brother Malcolme the fourth, in the yere of the world 5135. In the yere of Christ, 1165. A good and a valiant King. He maried Emer∣garda, daughter to the Earle of Beau-mount. He builded the Abbacy of Aber-brothok, and she builded the Abbacie of Bal∣merinoch. He died at Striuiling in the 49. yeere of his raigne, and was buried at Aber-brothok. 94 Alexander the second succeeded to his father William, in the yeere of the world, 5184. In the yeere of Christ, 1214. A good Prince. He maried Ieane, daughter to Iohn, King of Eng∣land, by whom he had no succession. After her death he maried Marie, daughter to Ingelrame, Earle of Coucey in Fraunce, by whom he had Alexander the third. He died at Kernery in the West Iles, and was buried at Mel-rosse in the 35. yeere of his raigne. 95 Alexander the third succeeded to his father, in the yere of the world, 5219. In the yeere of Christ, 1249. A good Prince. He maried first Margaret, daughter to Henry the third, King of England, by whom he had Alexander the Prince, who maried the Earle of Flāders daughter, Dauid & Margaret, who maried Hangonanus, or as some call him, Fricus, son to Magnus 4. King of Norway, who bare to him a daughter, named Mar∣garet, commonly called, The Maiden of Norway, in whom King William his whole posteritie failed, & the crowne of Scot∣land returned to the posteritie of Dauid Earle of Huntingdon, K. Malcome 4. and King William his brother. After his sonnes death (for they died before himself without succession) in hope of posteritie, he maried Ioleta, daughter to the Earle of Dreux in Fraunce, by whō he had no succession. He builded the crosse Church of Peibles. He died of a fall from his horse, vpon the sands, betwixt Easter and Wester King-horne, in the 37. yeere of his raigne, and was buried at Dumfermeline.
After the death of Alexander the third, which was in the yeere of the world, 5255. In the yeere of Christ, 1285. there were sixe Regents appointed to rule Scotland: for the South side of Forth, were appointed Robert, the Arch-bishop of Glas∣gowe, Iohn Cummin, & Iohn the great Steward of Scotland. For the North side of Forth, Mak-duffe, Eare of Fife, Iohn Cummin Earle of Buchan, and William Fraser, Arch-bishop of Saint Andrewes, who ruled the land about the space of seuen yeres, vntill the controuersie was decided betwixt Iohn Ballioll and Robert Bruyse, Grand-father to Robert Bruyse the King of Scot∣land, who did come of the two eldest daughters of Dauid Earle of Huntingdon: for Henry Hastings, who maried the yongest daughter, put not in his sute or claime with the rest, and there∣fore there is little spoken of him. 96 Iohn Ballioll was preferred before Robert Bruyse, to be King of Scotland, by Edward 1. surnamed Longshanks, King of England, who was chosen to be the Iudge of the controuersie: which preferment was vpon a cōdition, that Iohn Ballioll should acknowledge King Edward the first, as superiour: which con∣dition he receiued. He began his raigne in the yeere of the world, 5263. In the yeere of Christ, 1293. He was a vaine∣glorious man, little respecting the weale or Common-wealth of his Countrey. He had not raigned fully foure yeeres, when he was expelled by the said Edward the first, King of England: and leauing Scotland, he departed into the parts of Fraunce, where he died long after in exile. And so Scotland was with∣out a King and gouernment the space of nine yeeres: during which space, the said Edward the first, surnamed Longshankes, cruelly oppressed the land, destroied the whole auncient mo∣numents of the kingdome, and shed much innocent bloud. 97 Robert Bruyse began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 5276. In the yeere of Christ, 1306. A valiant, good and wise King. In the beginning of his raigne, he was subiect to great miserie and affliction, being oppressed by England: but at length, hauing ouercome and vanquished Edward the second, King of England, commonly called Edward of Carnaruan, at the field of Bannock-burne, he deliuered Scotland from the warres of England, and set it at full libertie, all Englishmen by
force being expelled out of the land. He maried first Isabel, daughter to the Earle of Mar, who bare vnto him Mariory, the wife of Walter, the great steward of Scotland, from whom, and the ofspring of the Stewards, the King now ruling is descended. After her death, he maried Isabel, daughter to Haymerus de Burc, Earle of Hultonia or Hulster in Ireland, who bare vnto him Dauid the second, Margaret the Countesse of Sutherland, and Maude that died yong. He died at Car∣dros, and was buried at Dumfermeline, in the foure and twen∣tieth yeere of his raigne. 98 Dauid the second succeeded to his father, Robert Bruise, in the yeere of the world, 5300. In the yeere of Christ, 1330. A good Prince, subiect to much affliction in his youth, being first after the death of Thomas Ranulph his Regent, forced to flie into France, for his owne safegard, and then returning home, was taken at the battell of Durhame, and was holden twelue yeeres almost, captiue in England: but after, he was restored to his liberty. He maried first Ieane, daughter to Edward the se∣cond, King of England: and after her death, he maried Mar∣garet Logie, daughter to Sir Iohn Logie, Knight, & died without succession at Edinburgh, in the fortieth yeere of his raigne, and was buried at Haly-rude-house. 99 Edward Ballioll, sonne to Iohn Ballioll, vsurped the crown of Scotland, being assisted by Edward the third, King of Eng∣land, in the yeere of the world, 5302. In the yere of Christ 1332 But he was expelled at length by Dauid the 2. his Regent, and Dauid the second established King. 100 Robert the second, surnamed Bleare-eie, the first of the Stewards, sonne to Walter Steward, and Margery Bruyse, daugh∣ter to K. Robert Bruyse, succeeded to his mothers brother, in the yeere of the world, 5341. In the yeere of Christ, 1371. A good and a peaceable Prince. He maried first Eufem, daughter to Hugh Earle of Rosse, who bare vnto him Dauid Earle of Stra∣thern, Walter Earle of Athol, and Alexander Earle of Buchan, Lord Badzenoth. After her death, for the affection he bare to his children begotten before his first mariage, he maried Eliza∣beth Mure, daughter to Sir Adam Mure, Knight, who had borne vnto him Iohn, after called Robert the third, Earle of Car∣rict,
Robert Earle of Fife & Menteith, and Eufeme, wife to Iames Earle of Dowglas. He died at Dun-donald the 19 yeere of his raigne, and was buried at Scone. 101 Robert the third, surnamed Iohn Farne-zeir, succeeded to his father, in the yeere of the world, 5360. In the yeere of Christ. 1390. A quiet & a peaceable Prince. He maried Ana∣bel Drummond, daughter to the Laird of Stobhall, who bare vn∣to him Dauid the Prince, D. of Rothesay, that died in prison of very extreame famine at Falkland, and Iames 1. taken cap∣tiue in his voiage to France, and detained a captiue almost the space of eighteene yeeres in England. He died of griefe and sorrow at Rothesay, when he heard of the death of the one sonne, and captiuity of the other, and was buried at Paisly, in the 16 yeere of his raigne. Robert Earle of Fife and Menteith gouerned Scotland, in the yeere of the world, 5376. In the yeere of Christ. 1406. He died in the 14 yeere of his gouernment, Iames the first being a captiue in England. Murdo Steward succeeded to his father Robert Earle of Fife, in the gouernmēt of Scotland, in the yeere of the world 5390. In the yeere of Christ, 1420, and ruled foure yeeres, Iames the first being yet a captiue in England. Both the father and the sonne Walter, were executed after, for oppression of the sub∣iects, by King Iames the first. 102 Iames the first began to raigne in the yeere of the world, 5394. In the yeere of Christ, 1424. He was a good, learned, vertuous and iust Prince. He maried Ieane, daughter to Iohn Duke of Summerset & Marques Dorset, sonne to Iohn of Gaunt, the 4. sonne to Edward the 3. the victorious King of England: who bare vnto him, Iames the 2. and sixe daugh∣ters, Margaret wife to Lewes the 11. the Daulphine, after King of France, Elizabeth, Dutches of Britayne, Ieane, Countesse of Huntley, Eleanor, Dutches of Austria, Marie, wife to the L. of Camp veere, and Anabella. He was slaine at Perth trayte∣rously by Walter Earle of Athole, and Robert Grahame, & their Confederates, in the 31. yeere of his raigne, if we count from the death of his father; and in the 13. yeere, if we count from his deliuerance out of England, and was buried at the Charter
house of Perth, which he builded. 103 Iames the second succeeded to his father, in the yeere of the word, 5407. In the yeere of Christ, 1437. A Prince subiect to great troubles in his youth, He maried Mary, daugh∣ter to Arnold, Duke of Geldre, daughter to the sister of Charles surnamed Audax, the last Duke of Burgandy, &c. who bare vnto him three sonnes, Iames the third, Iohn Earle of Mar, A∣lexander Duke of Albany, & Mary, wife first to Thomas Boyde, Earle of Arrane, and after his beheading, to Iames Hammilton of Cadzou. He was slaine at the siege of Roxburgh in the 24 yeere of his raigne. 104 Iames the third succeeded to his father in the yeere of the world, 5430. In the yeere of Christ, 1460. A Prince corrupted by wicked Courtiers. He maried Margaret, daugh∣ter to Christianus 1. surnamed Diues K. of Denmarke, Norway and Sweden. He was slaine at the field of Bannock-burne, in the 29 yeere of his raigne, & was buried at Cambus-kenneth. 105 Iames the fourth succeeded to his father, in the yeere of the world 5459. In the yeere of Christ 1489. A noble and couragious Prince. He maried Margaret, eldest daughter to Henry Earle of Richmond, King of England, and of Elizabeth, daughter to Edward 4. K. of England, in whose two persons, the two houses of Lancaster and Yorke were vnited, and the bloody ciuill wars of England pacified. He was slaine at Flow∣don by England, in the 25 yeere of his raigne. 106 Iames the fift succeeded to his father in the yeere of the world, 5484. In the yeere of Christ, 1514. A iust Prince and seuere. He maried first Magdalene, daughter to Frances 1. King of France, who died shortly thereafter without succes∣sion. After, he maried Mary of Lorayne, Dutches of Longe∣vile, daughter to Claude, Duke of Guise, who bare to him two sonnes, that died in his life time, and one daughter, named Ma∣ry, mother to our Soueraigne Lord the King Iames that now is. He died at Falkland, in the 29 yeere of his raigne. He was bu∣ried at Halyrude-house. 107 Mary succeeded to her father Iames 5. Anno mundi, 5513. Anno Christi. 1543, a vertuous princesse: she maried first Frances 2. Dolphin, after King of France: then after his death,
returning home into Scotland, she maried H. Stewart Duke of Albany &c. Lord Darley, sonne to Mathew, Earle of Lennox, (a comely Prince, Pronepnoy sonne, the daughters daughter of Henry the seuenth, King of England) to whom she did beare Iames the sixt. She was put to death in England the eighth of Febr. after eighteene yeeres captiuitie. 108 Iames the sixt, a good, godly and learned Prince, suc∣ceeded to his mother in the yeere of the world, 5537. In the yeere of Christ, 1567. He maried Anna, daughter to Frede∣ricke the second, King of Denmark, &c. and Sophia, the daugh∣ter of Vlricus the Duke of Mekelburgh, who hath borne vn∣to him already, Henry Frederick the Prince, the ninteenth of Februarie, 1593. And Elizabeth, the ninteenth of Au∣gust, 1596. Margaret, 1598, the 24 of December. Charles, D. of Rosay, the 19 of February. He is now in this yeere of our Lord Iesus Christ 1603. not only King of Scotland where he hath raigned 36 yeeres, but also King of England, France and Ireland, after the decease of our late most gracious Soueraigne Ladie, Elizabeth our Queene, who died the 24 of March now last past. Miracano: Soloccubuit, nox nulla secuta est. FINIS.
THE EARLES OF SCOTLAND, THEIR SVRNAMES, TITLES OF HONOVR, THEIR mariages, and names of their chiefe houses. LOdouicke Steward, Duke of Lennox, maried the se∣cond sister of Iohn Ruth-vene, Earle of Gowry that now is. His chiefe house, Cruikstone. EARLES. IAmes Hammilton, Earle of Arran, vnmaried: His chiefe house, Hammilton Castell. 2 William Douglasse, Earle of Angusse, maried the eldest daughter of Laurence, now Lord Ole∣phant: his chiefe house, the Castell of Douglasse. 3 George Gordon, Earle of Huntley, maried the eldest sister of Lodouicke, now D. of Lennox, his chiefe house Strath-bogy. 4 Colene Camphell, Earle of Argyle, Lord Iustice generall of Scotland, maried a daughter of William Dowglasse, now earle of Morton: his chiefe house, Inuer-aray. 5 Dauid Lyndesay, Earle of Crawfurd, maried the sister of Pa∣tricke, now Lord Drummond: his chiefe house Fyn-heauin. 6 Francis Hay, Earle of Arroll, Constable of Scotland, maried the daughter of William, Earle of Morton: his chiefe house, Slaynes. 7 Iohn Stewart, Earle of Atholl, maried the sister of Iohn, Earle of Gowry, his chiefe house, Blayre-Athole. 8 George Keyth, Earle of Marshell, maried the sister of Alex∣ander, Lord Home, his chiefe house, Dunnotter Castell. 9 Francis Steward, Earle Bothwell, maried the sister of Arch∣bald, Earle of Angus: his chiefe house, Creichton.
10 Andrew Leisly, Earle of Rothes, maried the daughter of Sir Iames Hammilton: his chiefe house, Bambreich. 11 Iames Stewart, Earle of Murrey, vnmaried: his chiefe house, Tarneway. 12 Alexander Cunningham, Earle of Glencarne, maried the el∣dest sister of Camphell of Glonorchy, Knight: his chiefe house, Kilmawres. 13 Hugh Mont-gomery, Earle of Eglinton, yong, vnmaried: his chiefe house, Ardrostan. 14 Iohn Kenedy, Earle of Cassils, vnmaried: his chiefe house, Dun-vre. 15 Iohn Grahame, Earle of Montroze, maried the sister of Pa∣trike, Lord Drummond that now is: his chiefe house, Kin∣cardin. 16 Patrike Stewart, Earle of Orknay, yoong, vnmaried: his chiefe house, Kirk-wall. 17 Iohn Erskin, Earle of Mar, maried the second sister of Lodo∣vicke, now Duke of Lennox: his chiefe house, Erskin. 18 William Dowglasse, Earle of Morton, maried the sister of the Earle of Rothes that now is: his chiefe house, The Castle of Dalkeith. 19 Iames Dowglasse, Earle of Buquhan, yoong, vnmaried: his chiefe house, Auchter-house. 20 George Sincler, Earle of Caithnes, maried the sister of the Earle of Huntly that now is: his chiefe house, Girnego. 21 Alexander Gordon, Earle of Sutherland, maried the fathers sister of the Earle of Huntly that now is: his chiefe house, Dunrobene. 22 Iohn Grayme, Earle of Monteith, maried the sister of Camp∣bel of Glenorchy, Knight: his chiefe house, Kirk-bryde. 23 Iohn Ruthvene, Earle of Gowry, yong, vnmaried: his chiefe house, Ruthven. 24 The Earle of March. The rents thereof are annexed to the Crowne.
THE LORDS OF SCOTLAND. ALexander, Lord Home, maried the eldest daughter of William, Earle of Morton that now is: his chiefe house, Home Castle. 2 Iohn Fleming, Lord Fleming, maried the daughter of the Earle of Montroze: his chiefe house Cummernauld. 3 Iohn Stewart, Lord Innermaith, yong: His chiefe house, Red Castle. 4 Iames Hay, Lord Zester, maried the daughter of Marke, now L. of Newbottle: his chiefe house, Neydpeth. 5 Iohn Maxwell, L. Maxwell, maried the sister of Archebald, Earle of Angusse: his chiefe house, Loch-maben. 6 William Maxwell, now L. Harreis, maried the sister of Mark, now L. of Newbottle: his chiefe house, Terreglis. 7 Thomas Boyd, L. Boyd, maried the sister of the Sherife of Aëre that now is, called Campbell, Knight of Lothiane: his chiefe house, Kilmarnok. 8 Allane Cathcart, L. Cathcart, maried the sister of the Knight of Bargany a Kennedy: his chiefe house Cathcart. 9 Robert Semple, L. Semple, maried the daughter of Hugh, Earle of Eglinton: His chiefe house, Castle-Semple. 10 Alexander Leuingston, L. Leuingston, maried the sister of Francis, now Earle of Arrol: his chiefe house, Callender. 11 Iames Lyndesay, L. Lyndesay, maried the daughter of the Earle of Rothes: his chiefe house, Byris in Lothien. 12 Robert Seyton. L. Seyton, maried the daughter of Hugh Earle of Eglinton: his chiefe house, Seyton by the Sea. 13 Iohn Abirnethie, Lord Salton, yong, vnmaried: his chiefe house, Rothe-may. 14 Robert Elpheston, L. Elpheston, maried the daughter of the Knight of Stobhall, called Drummond: his chiefe house Kil-drymmy. 15 Iohn Lyon, L. Glammis, vnmaried: his chiefe house Glāmis. 16 Patrik Gray, L. Gray, maried the sister of the Earle of Ork∣nay that now is: his chiefe house, Fowlis. 17 Iames Ogilbie, L. Ogilbie, maried the sister of the Knight of Bonitoun: his chiefe house, Boshayne. 18 Andrew Stewart, Lord Ochiltrie, maried the daughter of
the Knight of Blarwhan, called Kennedy: his chiefe house, Ochiltry. 19 Henry Sincler, Lold Sincler, maried the sister of the Lord Forbesse: his chiefe house, Rauins-heuch. 20 Hugh Someruell, Lord Someruell, vnmaried: his chiefe house Carne-wath. 21 Iohn Fraser, Lord Louat, maried the Knight of Mackenzies daughter: his chiefe house, Bewly. 22 Robert Rosse, Lord Rosse, maried the daughter of Hammilton of Roploch: his chiefe house, Hakket. 23 Robert Chreichton, Lord Sanquhar, vnmaried: his chiefe house, The Castle of Sanquhar. 24 Laurence Olephant, Lord Olephant, maried the fathers sister of Frances now Earle of Arrol: his chiefe house, Duplene. 25 Patrike Lord Drūmond, maried the Knight of Edgles sister, called Lynsay: his chiefe house Drymmen. 26 Iohn Forbes, Lord Forbes, maried the sister of Seyton of Towch: his chiefe house, Drummenor. 27 Iames Borthuike, Lord Borthuike, maried the sister of the Lord Zester that now is: his chiefe house, Borthuike Castell. Lordships newly erected, since the yeere 1587. 28 IOhn Maitland, Lord Thirlestane, Chancellour of Scot∣land, maried the fathers sister of the Lord Fleming that now is: his chiefe house, The Castle of Lawder. 29 Alexander Lindesay, Lord Spyny, maried the daughter of Iohn, Lord Glammisse, Chancellor for the time of Scotland: his chiefe house, the Castle of Spyny. 30 Claud Hammilton, Lord Paisly, maried the sister of Robert, Lord Seyton that now is: his chiefe house, Halsyde. 31 Robert Keyth, Lord Altry, maried the heretix of Benholme: his chiefe house Benholme. 32 Alexander Seyton, Lord Vrquhard, President of the Col∣ledge of Iustice, maried the daughter of Patrike, Lord Drum∣mond: his cheife house, Vrquhard. 33 Marke, Lord of Newbottell, maried the sister of the Lord Harreis: his chiefe house, Preistons-graynge.
The Bishoricks of Scotland. ARch-bishops. Saint Andrewes. ARch-bishops. Glasgow. Orknay. Caithnes. Rosse. Murray. Abirdene. Brechin. Ilis. Dunkell. Dumblane. Galloway. Argyle. THE ABBACIES, PRIORIES, and Nunries of Scotland. Abbacies. FErne. Kinlosse. Deir. Abirbrothok. Cowper. Scoone. Lundores. Balmerynnoch. S. Colmes Inche. Dunfermeling. Culrosse. Inche-chaffray. Straphillane. Cambuskinneth. Manwell. Hallyrud-house. Newbottle. Kelso. Melrosse. Dryburgh. Iedburgh. Paislay. Kilwinning. Corsragwel. Salsett. Sweet-heart, or New Abbay. Dundranane. Glenluce. Priories. Bewly. Monimuske. S. Andrewes. Pettenweeme. Portmooke. Inche-mahomo. Coldinghame. S. Mary Ile. Haly-wood. Blantyre. Pluscarden. Nunries. Hadington. North Berwick. S. Bothanis. Ekkillis. Cauldstreame. The sisters of Seynis.
THE NAMES OF THE KNIGHTS OF SCOTLAND. SIR Robert Stewart of Straichtdone, knight. Sir Robert Stewart of Largis, knight. Sir Alexander Stewart of Dalswintone, knight. Sir Iames Stewart of Done, knight. Sir William Murrey of Tillibarne knight. Sir William Dowglasse of Hawyk, knight. Sir Patrik Houstone of that ilk, knight. Sir Iohn Maxwell of neather Pouok, knight. Sir William Leuingstone of Kylsith, knight. Sir Iohn Muir of Cauldwoll, knight. Sir Robert Drummond of Carnoch, knight. Sir Iames Home of Sunlawis, knight. Sir Iames Streueling of Keir, knight. Sir William Ruthuene of Bandane, knight. Sir Hugh Someruell of Lynton, knight. Sir Alexander Stewart of Garleis, knight. Sir Iohn Gourdoun of Lochinuar, knight. Sir Iames Wemis of that ilk, knight. Sir Walter Scot of Branxholme, knight. Sir Patrik Hepbrowne of Lufnes knight. Sir Simon Prestoun of that ilk, knight. Sir Dauid Holme of Wedderburne, knight. Sir Robert Lawder of Popell, knight. Sir Iames Schaw of Sawquhy, knight. Sir Iohn Edstou of that ilk, knight. Sir William Sinclair of Roslyne, knight. Sir Iohn Colhoune of the Lusse, knight. Sir Iames Cokburne of Skirlyne, knight. Sir Archebald Neper of Edinbelly, knight. Sir Iames Forrest of Corstarfin, knight. Sir Iames Dunbar of Mochrom, knight. Sir Iames Stewart of Cragihall, knight. Sir Iohn Ormistoun of that ilk, knight. Sis Thomas Young of old Bar, knight. Sir Iohn Carmichell of that ilk, knight.
Sir Iohn Campbell of Lauers, knight. Sir Iames Iohnstone of Dunwiddie, knight. Sir Iames Meluill of Auld-hill, knight. Sir Alexander Stewart of Garleis, knight. Sir Robert Ker of Sesford, knight. Sir Walter Scot of Brank-sholme, knight. Sir Thomas Kennedy of Cullaine, knight. Sir Iames Scrymgeor of Duddop, knight. Sir Duncane Campbell of Glenorquhy, knight. Sir Iames Scot of Ballwery, knight. Sir Robert Gordoun of Glen, knight. Sir Patrik Gordoun of Auchindoun, knight. Sir George Ogilby of Dunbog, knight. Sir Iames Chesholme of Dundorne knight. Sir Mathew Stewart of Minto, knight. Sir George Balquhannan of that ilk, knight. Sir Iames Edmestoun of Duntreth, knight. Sir Alexander Home of Symbie, knight. Sir George Stewart of Innerketoun, knight. Sir Dauid Lyndesay of Edgell, knight. Sir Thomas Stewart of Garntully knight, Sir Alexander Bruce of Arthe, knight. Sir Walter Ogilby of Finlater, knight. Sir Patrik Bannantine of Kna, knight. Sir Iohn Meluill of Grantoun knight. Sir Andrew Murray Arngosk, knight. Sir Robert Meluill of Murdocarny, knight. Sir Robert Maxwell of Spottis, knight. Sir Iohn Maxwell of Nether-Pooke, knight. Sir Robert Maxwell of Dunwiddie, knight. Sir Richard Cokburne of Clerkingtoun, knight. Sir Iames Lyndesay of Pitroddy, knight. Sir Michael Balfoure of Balgaruy, knight. Sir Robert Meluill of Bruntyland, knight. Sir Iohn Hammilton of Lethrisk, knight. Sir Dauid Lyndesay of the Mont, knight. Sir George Home of Prymroknow, knight. Sir Iohn Anstruther of that ilk, knight.
Sir Hugh Carmichell of Westone, knight. Sir Iohn Lyndesay of Wodheid, knight. Sir Iames Saundelands of Slammanno Mure, knight. Sir William Cokburne of Skeirling, knight. Sir Iohn Kar of Hersell, knight. Sir Thomas Gourdoun of Cluny, knight. Sir Iohn Gourdoun of Pitlurg, knight. Sir William Lawder of Haltoun, knight. Sir George Dowglasse, knight. Sir Andrew Stirling of Keir, knight. Sir William Stewart of Kaberstoun, knight. The othe of a Duke. YEe shall fortifie and defend the true and Christian Religi∣on, and Christs holy Euangell, presently preached in this Realme, and shall be leill and true to our Soueraigne Lord, the Kings Maiesty: and shall defend his highnes Realme & lieges, from all allieners & strangers, at the vttermost of your power: so helpe you God, and by the othe that ye haue else made. The othe of an Earle. YEe shall fortifie and defend the true & Christian Religion, & Christs holy Euangel presently preached in this Realm, and shalbe leill & true to our Soueraigne Lord the Kings Ma∣iesty: and shall defend his Highnes Realmes and lieges from all allieners and strangers, at the vttermost of your power: so helpe you God, and by the othe that ye haue else made. The othe of a Lord of Parliament. YEe shall giue due and faithfull counsell to our Soueraigne Lord, the Kings Maiesties weale, publikely in Parliament, as in all other places needfull, and secretly according to your knowledge, for the preseruation of his Realme, and Common weale thereof: And shall neuer hide nor conceale anie point of treason or crime of Leismaieste, that shall appeare to be con∣spired against his said Royall person, but shall incontinent with all possible diligence reueale the same: so helpe you God, and by the othe that ye haue else made.
The Othe of a Knight. 1 I Shall fortifie and defend the Christian Religion, and Christs holy Euangel, presently preached in this Realme, to the vttermost of my power. 2 I shall be loiall and true to my Soueraigne Lord, the Kings Maiestie, to all orders of Chieualry, and to the noble of∣fice of Armes. 3 I shall fortifie and defend Iustice at my power, and that without fauour or feud. 4 I shall neuer flie from my Soueraigne Lord, the Kings Maiesty, nor from his Highnesse Lieutenants in time of mel∣lay and battell. 5 I shall defend my natiue Realme from all allieners and strangers. 6 I shall defend the iust action and quarrell of all Ladies of Honour, of all true and friendlesse Widdowes, of Orphe∣lings, and of maidens of good fame. 7 I shall doe diligence wheresoeuer I heare there are any murtherers, traytors, ormasterfull Reauers, that oppresse the Kings Lieges, and peure people, to bring them to the Law at my power. 8 I shall maintaine and vphold the Noble estate of Che∣ualry, with Horse, Harnesse, and other knightly Habiliments: And shall helpe and succour them of the same order at my power, if they haue need. 9 I shall enquire and seeke to haue the knowledge and vnderstanding of all the Articles and points contained in the booke of Cheualrie. All these premises to obserue, keepe, and fulfill, I oblesse mee: so helpe mee, God, by mine owne hand, so helpe mee God, &c.
THE NAMES OF THE BARONS, Lairds, and chiefe Gentlemen in euery Sherifdome. Innernes. MAcloyd of the Lewis. Macloyd of Harrich. Donald Gormesoun. Mackneill of Barray. Mulcalloun of Rosay. Iohn Mudzart captaine of the Clanrannalts. The Laird of Glengarry. The L. of Kneydart. Mackenzie. L. of Garloche. L. of Balnagowne. L. of Fowles. Sherife of Cromartie. Dumbeith. Forsse. Otansceale. Mackye. Neill Huchesoun in assent. Macken-tosche. Captaine of the Clanchani∣roun. L. of Glenewes. Raynold Mack-raynald of Keppache. Narne. Laird of Caddell. Baron of Kilrawake. L. of Parke. Dolesse of Cantrey. Dolesse of Budzert. Elgin and Fores. The Sherife of Murray. Iames Dumbar of Tarbert. Robert Dunbar of Grangehil, Alexander Dumbar of Kil∣boyake. The L. of Innes. The L. of Innermerkie. The L. of Duffus. Alexander Innes of Crumby. The L. of Brodie. The L. of Altrie. The L. of Densyde. The L. of Cowbin. L. of Pettendreigh, Dowglasse. The L. of Mayne. The Baron of Vrtane. The L. of Grant. Patrik Grant of Ballindal∣loche. Bamff. The Laird of Findlator. The L. of Boyne. George Ogiluie of Dunlugus The L. of Durn. The L. of Ley, Abircromney. The L. of Ratie. The L. of Pettendreight, of that ilk. Iohn Ogiluie of Glashanthe. Walter Ogiluie of Baldanie. Walter Ogil. of Carncowsies. Iohn Ogil. of Auchannany. The L. of Auchannaquhy. Adame Gordon of Auchin∣downe. Alaster Gordon of Beldorny.
Abirdene. The Laird of Fyuie. Thomas Meldrum of Eden. The L. of Delgatie. The L. of Vrie. The L. of Petslégo. The L. of Fillórth. Troupee. The L. of Pettindrum. New forrest. Mueske. The L. of Boquhollie. The L. of Towie. L, of Vdache. The L. of Garnestoun. The L. of Geych. The L. of Petlurge. The L. of Lesmoir. Craig of Achindoir. The L. of Abirgeldie. The L. of Clunie, Gordon. Iohn Gordon of Carnbor∣rowe. Iohn Gordon of Anachie. Robert Gordon of Halhead. Iohn Gordon of Kennartie. Alexander Gordon of Knoke-spak. George Gordon of Auch∣menzie. Master William Gordon of Dulpersie. George Gordon of Creichie. The L. of Corfindá. The L. of Bruix. Iohn Forbes of Towy. The L. of Corse. The L. of Asslowne. The L. of Cragular. Master Duncane Forbes of Monimusk. Iohn Forbes of Poffling. The L. of mekle Frasyre. The L. of Carndauie. The L. of Petféchie. The L. of Achinhoofe. The L. of Auchlossin. The L. of Cushuie. The L. of Skene. The L. of Thamestoun. The L. of Tulligownie. Patrik Gordon of Bracanch. The L. of Portestoun. The L. of Caskyben. Patrik Keyth of Harthill. William Keyth of Lyklyheid. The L. of Balquhane, Leslie. The L. of Warderis. The L. of Petcapill. The L. of Leslie. Andrew Leslie of new Leslie. Patrik Leslie of Kincragy. Alexander Leslie of Dyce. The L. of Glake. The L. of Meldrum. Seyton. The L. of Stralóth. The L. of Toquhone. The L. of Ondney. The L. of Essilmont. Cheyne. The L. of Arnaigé. The L. of Petmeddun. The L. of Dumbrek. The L. of Haddó. The L. of Tibbertie. The L. of Lesk.
The L. of Feuerne. The L. of Colestoun. The L. of Auchinhampers. The L. of Tullet. L. of Fendraucht, Creichton. The L. of Kelty. The L. of Culter. The L. of Sanquhin. The L. of Echt. The L. of Glenkindy. The L. of Wattertoun. The L. of Tillemorgund. Iames, king of Barrauch. William Blakehall of Bar∣rauch. The L. of Randeistoun. The L. of Gartly. The L. of Achmacoy. Kincardin or the Mernes. The Laird of Glenberuie, Dowglasse. The L. of Petarro, Wishert. The L. of Lawrestoun. The L. of Arbuthnot. The L. of Thornetoun, Balbegenot Wood. The L. of Hakerton, Falconer, Kelhyll. Archibald Wood of witston. Robert Keith of Canterland. L. of Matheris. L. of Morphie. Allerdes. Balmayne. Bry. Halgreene. The L. of Muchales. Dulyward. Monbodo. Cair. The L. of Benholme. Iohn Moncurre of Slaines. Forfaire. The L. of Dun. The L. of Balnamone. Colloss. The L. of Balzordy. The L. of Edzell, Lyndesay, The L. of Kinnaber. The L. of Craig, Keyth. The L. of Vllishauen. The L. of Dysert. Robert Guthré of Lownane. Andrew Gray of Donynad. Robert Guthré of Emblath∣mont. The L. of Bonnytoun. The L. of Kinnard. Arrot. Auld-bar. L. of Guthré. Hilton. The L. of Kilcadrum. Halkerton Guthré. L. of Gardin. The L. of Lyes. The L. of Kelly. The L. of Innerquharratie, Clouay. The L. of Balfour, Ogiluie. The L. of Powrie, Ogiluie. Duntrune The L. of Balumbrée. The L. of Grainge, Durham. Lawes.
Westhall. Strikmartine. L. of Teling. The L. of Lundie, Campbell. The L. of Auchinlecke. The L. of Carmylie. Strathauchin of Claypots. Constable of Dundie, Skrim∣gore. The L. of Powrie, Fothring∣hame. The L. of Fintrie, Grayme. The L. of Clauerhous, Grayme L. of Innernitie, Creichton. Andrew Gray of Lowrie. Brigtoun. Cossumes. Thorneton of that ilk. Lyon of Wester, Ogyll. Fenton of Easter, Ogyll. The L. of Casse, Reynd. Melgund. Logywischert. L. of Drumkilbo, Tyrie. Duncany. Logie Mekle. Cowtie. Alexander Lindsay of Vaine. Dauid Lindesay of Barnyard. Kingany. Vnnaquhy. Gagy. Thomas Ogiluie of West∣craige. Iohn Ogiluie of Innerkeil∣lour. Archibald Ogiluy of Lawton. Balmly. The L. of Rossie of that ilke. Perth, and Stewartries of Stratherne and Mon∣teith. The Laird of Petcur. The L. of Ruthuene. The L. of Banff, Ogiluie. George Creichton of Camnay The L. of Balgilbo. Gormotre. Ardblair. The L. of Drumlochie. George Drommond of Blair. The L. of Lethintree, Herring. Mekillour. Rettray of Craighall. L. of Murthlie, Abircrombie. The L. of Moncur. Inchesture. The L. of Inchemartyne. The L. of Kynnard. William Bruce of Fingask. Patrik Gray of Belligarnó. Patrik Drummond of Abir∣nethie. Euillilke. The L. of Kilspindie. Peter Hay of Moeginche. L. of Leyis. L. of Hill. Murey. Petfour. Segydén. The L. of Kilfawnes, Lyndesay. The L. of Bathyóke, Blayre. The L. of Balhouie. The L. of Ballindayne.
The L. of Cultmalondie. Moncreif of that ilk. Easter Monctreif. Baron of Fingask, Dundas. The L. of Cragie. Patrik Murray of Tibber∣mure. Tibbermallauch. Kinuaid. L. of Innernytie, Creichton. The L. Strathurde. Loncardie. L. of Glennurquhy, Campbel. The L. of Weym. The L. of Garntullie. The L. of Glenlyoun. Baron of Fandowy. L. Strowane, Robertson. Arntillie. Fastcalzé. Baron Read. Baron Ferguson. Baron Cunyson. Baron of Monnesse. Innermytie, Petcarne. Balmamo, Aflek. L. of Duncrub, Rolloc. L. of Keltie. L. of Tullibarden. L. of Abircarnie. Strowane. Patrik Murray of Auchter∣tyre. George Drummond of Ballot L. of Innerpeffré. Iohn Drummōd Coquholzé. Baron of Bordland, Drum∣mond. L. of Perkellony, Drummond. Cultiuragane. L. of Comrie. Cromlix. L. of Laweris, Campbell. Monyware. Monzé. Cultoquhay. Gorthie, Lundy. L. of Inchbrachy. L. of Keir. L. of Kippanrosse. L. of Knokhill. L. of Laeny. L of Glennegeis, Haddan. Blair of Bagray. Alexander Ruthuen of Fré∣lands. George Norrie of Boquhop∣pill. Fyfe. L. of Mukdrum. L. of Baluaird; Murray. L. of Casche. L. of Rossie. L. of Halhill, Meluill. Iohn Arnot of Woodmill. L. of Perbroth, Seyton. L. of Culermie, Barclay. Iohn Aiton of Drummure. L. of Creich, Betone. L. of Fairnaie. Sir Alexander Lindsay of the Mont, Lyon King of Armes. Sir Robert Meluill of Murdo∣carnie. Francis Tullos of Hilcarnie.
L. of Monquhany, Balfoure. L. of Nauchtane, Creichton. L. of Kenneir. L. of Forret. Iohn Leslie of Parkhill. L. of Carselogie, Claypen. L. of Wilmerstoun. L. of Dersy, Learmont. Kembake. Brachmont, Nydie. L. of Sandfurde, Haye. L. of Sandfurde, Narne. Dauid Balfoure of Kirktoun. Cullochie. L. of Erlishall, Bruce. L. of Reres, Forbesse. Alexander Inglis of Straty∣rum. L. of Inglis Tarbet. Craighall. Patrik Kinninmont of Callinche. Blaebó. Lathóccar. Balfoure of Lambilaethame. Kinkell. L. of Petmylie. L. of Ardrie, Lummisdayne. L. of Balcomye, Learmont. L. of Barnys. L. of Saegy. L. of Camnó. Randerstoun. L. Saint Monanes, Sādelands. L. of Anstruther. L. of Carruber. L. of Ardrós. Sanfurd, Dudingstoun. Gordonishall. L. of Balkaskie, Strang. L. of Largo, Wode. Kincraig. Giblestoun. Innerdeuat. L. of Lundie, Lundie. L. of Durie, Durie. L. of Bafoure, Beton. L. of Balgonie. L. of Lorrie, Wardlaw. Further, Petcarne. Kirkfurther. Peter Balfoure of Bandone. L. of Cletty, Ramsay. Gondlane. L. of Ramornie. Lathriske. Orky. William Skringeour of the myres. Arnot. Stratherney. Auchmowtie. L. of Easter Wemes, Coluill. L. of Wester Wemes, Weymes. L. of Abats Hall, Scot. L. of Raith, Meluill. L. of Balwerie, Scot. L. of Bamowtow, Boswell. L. of Seyfeild. Orroke. Iohn Beton of Capildrá. Balram. Walter Lesly of Otterstoun. Aytoun. Martyme.
L. of Pettincreif. L. of Petfirrane. L. of Rossythe, Stewart. L. of Dowhill. L. of Cleische, Coluill. Kinrosse. L. of Lochleuen, Dowglasse. L. of Burlie, Balfoure. Clackmannan. L. of Clackmannan, Bruce. L. of Tulliallane, Blacater. L. of Sawchy. Bruce of Kennet. L. of Maner. Striuiling. L. of Garden. L. of Arthe, Bruce. L. of Carnoke, Drummond. L. of Carnoke, Bruce. L. of Plean. Goodman of Kersie. Goodman of Throske. Archibald Bruce of Pow∣fowles. Dauid Bruce of Kinnaird. Thomas Bruce of Barbar∣schels. M. Dauid Rollok of Powes. L. of Skemure. L. of Denneuay. L. of Donipace, Leuingston. L. of Haning. L. of Pentasken. L. of Castelcarie. L. of Kerss, Monteith. L. of Polmaiss. L. of Towch, Seyton. L. of Leckie. L. of Gargunnoke, Seyton. L. of Randifurde. Iohn Buchannan of Arn∣priour. Iohn Shaw of Broiche. Linlithgow. Sheriffe of Linlithgow, Ham∣milton. L. of Dundas, Dundas. L. of Cragiehall, Stewart. L. of Barnebowgal, Mowbray. Iames Dundas of Newliston. Alexander Drummond of Medope. Robert Hammilton of Inch∣machane. Mungo Hammilton of Par∣donen. Iohn Hammilton of the Grainge. L. of Ballinhard, Cornwell. L. of Ricarton, Hepburne. Durhame of Duntervie. Bathcart, Hammilton. Edinburgh principall. L. of Cawder, Sandelands. L. of Halton, Lawder. L. of Pumphraston, Dowglass. Hirdmanschelis. L. Barbachlaw, Cochran. Lennox. L. of Stanypéth. L. of Dalmohoy.
L. of Ricarton, Drummond. L. of Currihill, Wardlaw. L. of Colingtoun, Fowlis. L. of Reidhall, Otterburne. L. of Cowmistoun, Fairlie. L. of Costorphin, Foster. L. of Brade, Fairlie. L. of Marchistoun, Neper. L. of Innerleith, Towris. L. of Laureistoun of that ilk. L. of Pilrig, Monipenie. L. of Restalrig, Logane. L. of Cragmiller, Preston. L. of Edmiston of that ilk. L. of Nuderie, Wachop. Hill of that ilk. L. Brunstoun, Creichton. Edmeston of Wowmet. Hay of Mounktoun. L. Shiref-hall, Gyffert. L. of Langton. Bellendyne of Leswade. L. of Dalhousie, Ramsay. L. Kokpen, Ramsay. Whytehill, Preston. Poultoun. L. of Rosling, Sincler. L. of Pennicuke of that ilk. L. Newhall, Creichton. L. Southhouse. Elphingston of Schank. Constabularie of Haddington. L. Fawsyde of that ilk. L. Elphingston, Iohnstone. L. Prestoun, Hammilton. L. of Langnederie, Dowglasse. L. of Ormestoun, Cokburne. L. of Hirmedstoun. L. of Blansse. L. of Samelstoun, Hammilton. L. of Newtoun. L. Newhall, Cockburne. L. of Clerkintoun, Cockburne. L. of Colstoun. L. of Talló, Hay. L. of Benestoan. L. of Stanypéth. L. of Whittinghame, Dow∣glasse. L. of Cosfurde, Acheson. L. of Wauchton, Hepburne. Hepburne of Gylmerton. Hepburne of Smeton. Hepburne of Kirklandhill. L. of Sydserff. L. of Congilton. L. of Knowes. L. of Scowgall. Sincler of Whytekirk. L. of Bas, Lawder. L. of Spot, Dowglasse. L. of Innerwike, Hammilton. L. of Broxmouth, Home. Alexander Home of North∣berwike. Robert Home of the Hewch. L. of Waddalie. Hartrem Wood. Berwike and Lawderdaill. L. of Wederburne, Home. L. of Blacatour, Home. L. of Aytoun, Home. L. of Coldenknowes, Home. L. of Polwart, Home.
Home of Manderstoun. L. of Huton hall, Home. L. of Langton. L. of Cockburne. L. of Billie, Renton. L. of Blanerne, Lummis-dayne. L. of Cumleche, Aflek. L. of Edingtoun. Slychthous. Butterdayne. Hoprig. Easter Nisbet. West Nisbet. Wedderlie. Thorniedykes. L. of Spottiswood. Cranston of Thirlstane∣maines. Corsbie. Bemersyde. Mertoun. L. Swyntoun. L. Redpeth. Greenlaw. Lochurmacus. L. Gammilscheilis, Home. Wyliclewcht. Roxburgh. L. of Cesfurde, Ker. L. of Lilteldane, Ker. L. of Greynheid, Ker. L. of Corbet, Ker. Gradon, Ker. Ker of Gaitshaw. Mow. Haddane. Shiriffe of Teuiotdail, Dow∣glasse. Tympenden. Hundeley. Hunthill. Edzarstoun. Bedreull, Turne-bull. Mynto. Wawchop. William Turnebull of Barn∣hils. George Turnebull of Hal∣reull. Hector Lorane of Harwood. Grinyslaw of little Newton. Mader of Langton. Mungo Bennet of Cheftis. Ouertoun, Frasier. Riddale of that ilk. L. Makkayrstoun, Makdowgal. Andrew Ker of Fadownsyde. L. of Backcleuch, Scot. Raph Haliburton of Mour∣houslaw. Thomas Ker of Cauers. Howpasloth, Scot. Baron Gledstanes. Langlands. William Ellot of Torsly hill. Scot of Sintoun. Scot of Eydschaw. Walter Vaich of Northsin∣toun. Scot of Glaeke. L. of Chesholme of that ilk. L. of Cranstoun. Kirktoun of Stewartfield. L. of Linton, Ker. Ker of Ancrum.
Carncors of Colmissie. Selkirk. Murray of Fawlahill, Sheriffe. Scot of Tuschelaw. Scot of Thirlstane. Scot of Aikwood. Turnebull of Phillophauch. Ker of the Shaw or Dalceiff. Hoppringle of Galloscheilis. Hoppringle of Whytebank. Hoppringle of Torwodley. Hoppringill of Blindley. Hoppringill of Bukholme. Hoppringill of Newhall. Peibles. The Knight of Traquair, Stewart. of Pyrn, Cranston. L. of Horsburgh. L. of Greistoun. L. of Cardrono. L. of Henderstoun. L. of Smeythfield, Haye. Winkistoun, Twedie. L. of Blackbarrony, Murray. Bernys. Cauerhill. Fowllaeche, Stewart. L. of Drummelzear, Twedie. Dawik. Pobinde. Frude. Halkshaw. Glengirk. Geddes of Rachane. Inglis of Langlandhill. L. of Straling. Hartire. Romannos. Prettishoill. Meluingsland. Ormestoun. Bonytoun. Posso, Nasmyth. Iohn Hammilton of Colt∣cote. Lanerk. Captaine of Crawfurde Castle, Carmichell. L. of Carmichael. L. of Lamington, Baillie. L. of Bakebie. L. of Symontoun. L. of Cultérmaines. Flemming of Carwood. Dowglasse of Todholes. West-hall, Grahame. Baillie of the hilles. Menzeis of Culterrawes. L. of Westraw, Iohnestone. L. of Annestoun. L. of Cobingtoun, Lyndesay. Crimpcramp. Hammilton of Crawfurde-Iohne. L. of Ley. L. of Cleghorne, Barclay. L. of Corhouse, Bannatyne. Ierverswod, Leuingstoun. Bonytoun, Cunninghame. Blackwood. Staniebyres. Auchtyfardill. Weir of Kirktowne.
L. Cambusnethan, Someruel. L. of Carphin, Baillie. Cleland. Murdeistoun. Ieruestoun. Ernoke. Lawchope. Steuingstoun. Hammilton of Roploch. Hammilton of Hagges. Hammilton of Lethame. Hammilton of Orbestoun. Hammilton of Nelisland. Hammilton of Stanehouse. L. of Siluertonhil, Hammilton. L. of Dunrod. L. of Calderwood, Maxwell. L. of Castelmylk. L. of Mynto, Steward. L. of Gilbertfield. Renfrew. Cathcart. Ouer-Pollok. Neather-Pollok, Maxwell. L. of Stanelie. L. of Iohnstoun, Wallace. L. of Ellerslie, Wallace. L. Houstoun. Newerk. L. Caldwell. Shaw of Grenoke. Crawfurd of Cartisburne. Cunninghame of Waterston. L. Craganis. Walkinschaw. Barrochane. L. Biltries, Semplo. Barscube. L. Boghall, Stewart. Bishoptoun. Cardonald, Stewart. Foulwood. Thirdpart. Wheitfurne. Scottistoun. Ardgowane. Balgarrane. Ramfurley. Porterfield of that ilke. Raálstoun. Dumbretoun. L. of Lusse. L. of Cowgrane. L. of Ardardane. L. of Arnecapill. L. of Kilmahòw. Bullull. Manis. Balney. Noblestoun. Camstródane. Darleith. Hammilton of Cochnó. Craigernalt. Gloret. Striueling of Letrer. Lucas Striueling of Baldor∣rane. Edmistoun of Balewin. L. of Bardowie. L. of Kincaid. L. of Woodhead. L. of Blairshógill. L. of Ballykinrane.
L. of Auchinloche. L. of Kilsythe, Leuingston. L. of Baddinheth, Boyd. Bord. Drumry, Hammilton. L. of Kilcrewch. Gartskeddane. Gartschoir. L. of Mackferland. L. of Buquhannane. L. of Drummakcill. Tarbert. L. of Auchinbrek. L. of Archinlais, Campbell. L. of Lawmont. L. of Macklawchlane. Macknachtan. Skippinche. Ottir. Duntrune. Straquhir. Mackowle of Lorne. Iohn Stewart of Appin. Mackondoquhy of Inneraw. Mackoneil of Dunniveg and Glennes. Macklane of Dowart. Macklane of Cowle. Macklane of Lochbwy. Macklane of Arndnamurchy. Bute. The Sheriffe of Bute, Stewart. The L. of Camys. Aere and Bailleries of Kyle, Krik and Cunninghame. L. of Kilburnie. L. of Crawfurdland. L. of Ladyland, Barclay. Auchnamys. L. of Kerrisland. L. of Kelsoland. Trierne. L. of Glengarnoke. L. of Cunninghame heid. L. of Auchinharuie. L. of Aiket. Cunninghame. L. of Clonbaith. Montgomerie. L. of Longshaw. L. of Heslet. Giffin. Stane. Braidstane, Montgomerie. L. of Blair. L. of Portincorsse. L. of Huncarstoun. L. of Fairlie. L. of Dreghorne. L. of Perstoun, Barclay. L. of Rowallane, Mure. L. of Montgrenane. L. of Robertland, Cunning∣hame. Cunninghame of Towrlands. Cunninghame of the hill. Sheriffe of Air. Cesnockle. Skeldoun. Campbell of Glenoske. Campbell of Kinzeclewcht. Gastoun, Sewart. Halrig.
Hammilton of Sanquhair, Sornebeg. L. of Bar. L. of Craggie-wallace. Carnell. Wallace. Sewalton. Wallace. Dundonald. Adamtoun. Gairgirth. Chalmers. Lefnoreis. Crawfurde. Kerst. Crawfurde. Doungane. William Crawfurde of Clo∣lynane. Dowglasse of Penieland. Cunninghame of Lagland. L. of Caprington. Cunning∣hame. Cunninghame of Poquharne. Shaw of Glenmure. L. of Eutirkin. Dunbar. L. of Scankistoun. Campbell. L. of Barkymmem. Stewart. L. of Auchinlek. Boswell. L. of Bargany. Kennedie. L. of Blairquhane. Kennedie. Kennedie of Giruanmaynis. Kennedie of Skeldon. L. of Carmichaell. Goodman of Ardmillane. Goodman of Dromnellane. Kennedie of the Coist. Balmaclennochane. L. of Kelwood, Currie. L. of Carltowne. Cathcart. Kennedie of Knotidaw. Kennidie of Bramestoun. Boyde of Penkill. Boyde of the Throchrig. L. of Dundaffe. L. of Kilkerane. L. of Kilhenzie. Kennedie of Tornagannoch. Schaw of Halie. Schaw of Germet. Wigtoun. L. of Garlies, Stewart. L. of Mochrum, Dumbar. L. of Garthland, Makdowgall. Agnew Shirefe of Wigton. L. of Kynhylt. L. of Ardwell, Makculloch. Killassyre. Laerg. L. of Maerton, Maggeé. L. of Maerton, Mackulloch. L. of Barnbarrawch, Vaus. L. of Craichlaw, Mure. Kennedie of Barquhome. Kennedie of Vchiltré. Campbell of Arie. Dumfreis, with the Stewartries of Kirkenbright, and Annandail. L. of Lochin-war, Gordon. L. of Troquhayne, Gordon. L. of Barskeoche, Gordon. L. of Airdis, Gordon. Sheirmaes, Gordon. Gordon of the Cule. L. of Broghton, Murray. L. of Dalbatie. L. of Portoun, Glendonyng.
L. of Bumby, Mackclellane. Mackclellane of Maerton. L. of Cardenes. Lidderdaill of S. Mary Ile. Lindesay of Barcloy. Heries of Madinhoip. L. of Mabie, Heries. Macknaucht of Kilquhanatie. Glenduynning of Drūrasche. Maxwell of the Hill. Sinclair of Auchinfranke. Maxwell of the Logane. Maxwell of Dromcoltrane. Stewart of Fintillauche. Leuingston of little Ardis. L. of Drumlanrig, Dowglasse. Dowglasse of Gashógill. Creichton of Carco. Creichton of Liberie. Mackmath of that ilk. Dowglasse of Daluene. Menzies of Castelhill. Menzies of Auchinsell. L. of Auchingassill, Maitland. L. of Closburne, Kirk Patrik. Kirkmichaell. Goodman of Frier, Kersse. L. of Lag, Greir. L. of Amysfield, Charterhouse. Maxwell of Gowhill. Maxwell of Porterrake. Maxwell of Tynwald. Maxwell of Conhaith. Maxwell of Carnsallauch. Maxwell of the Ile. Browne of the Lawne. Cunninghame of Kirkschaw. L. of Craigdarroch. L. of Bardannoch. Kirko of Glenesslane. Ballaggane. L. of Iohnestoun. L. of Wamfrá, Iohnestone. L. of Eschescheiles. L. of Corheid, Iohnestone. L. of Corry. L. of Newbie, Iohnestone. L. of Graitnay, Iohnestone. Iohneston of Craighop-burne Iohneston of Newton. Iohneston of Kirkton. L. of Apilgirth, Iarden. L. of Holmends. L. of Cock-poole, Murray. L. of Moryquhat. L. of Wormondby. L. of Knok. Goodman of Granton. Boidisbyke. The names of the principall Clannes, and surnames on the Borders not landed, and chiefe men of name a∣mongst them at this present. EAST MARCH. Brumfieldes. IOhn Brumfield, Tutor of Greynelawdeyne. Adame Brumfield of hand∣aikers.
Brumfield of Pittilesheuche. Alexander Brumfield of East∣field. Alexander Brumfield of Ha∣silton maines. Iames Brumfield of Whyte∣house. The Laird of Toddorike. Alexander Brumfield of Gor∣don maines. Trotter. The Laird of Pentennen. William Trotter of Foule∣schawe. Cuthbert Trotter in Fogo. Tome Trotter of the hill. Diksons. The Goodman of Buchtrig. The Goodman of Bolchester. Dikson of Haffington. Dikson in new bigging. Ridpeths. Thomas Ridpeth of Crum∣rig. Alexander Ridpeth of An∣gellraw. Haitlies. The Goodman of Lambden. Iohn Haitlie of Brumehill. George Haitlie in Hordlaw. Laurence Haitlie in Halibur∣ton. Gradenis. Iasper Graden in Ernislaw. Youngs. Iames Young of the Crie. Will Young of Otterburne. Dauid Young of Oxemsyde. Williā Scot of Feltershawes. Dauisons. Roben Dauison of Symeston. Iok Dauison of Quhitton. Iames Dauison of Byrnirig. George Dauison of Throgdā. Pringils. Iames Hoppringill of Tow∣ner. Wat Hoppringill of Clifton. Iohn Hoppringil of the Bēts. Dauid Hoppringill of Mor∣bottle. Tates. Will Tate in Stankfurde. Dauid Tate in Cheritries. Dauid Tate in Bair-ers. Will Tate in Zettane. Middlemaists. Robin Middlemaist in Milrig. Burnes, Dauid Burne of Ellisheuch, Raph Burne of the Coit. Dagleschis. Iok Dagleisch of Bank. Robert Dagleisch in wideopē. Gilchristis. Hugh Gilchrist called of Cowbene. Will Gilchrist in Cauertoun. MIDDLE MARCHES. Hall. Iohn Hall of Newbigging. George Hall, called Pats Ge∣ordie there. Andrew Hall of the Sykes. Thom Hall in Fowlscheils.
Pyle George Pyle in Milkheuch. Iohn Pyle in Swynside. Robeson. Raph Robeson in Prēderlech. Rinzean Robeson in Howstō. Anislie. William Anislie of Fawlaw. Lancie Anislie in Cxnem. Oliuer. Dauid Oliuer in Hynhācheid Will Oliuer in Lustruther, George Oliuer in Clareley. Laidlow. Ryne Laidlow in the Bank. Iohn Laidlow in Sonnyside. LIDDISDAIL. The Laird of Mangerton. The Lairds Iok. Chrystie of the Syde. Quhithauch. The Laird of Quhitauch. Ionie of Quhitauch. Sym of the Maynes. Merietoun quarter. Archie of West burnflat. Wanton Sym in quhitley side. Will of Powderlanpat. Ellots. Redhench. Robert Ellot, and Martyne Ellot. Thoirlishop. Rob of Thoirlishop, Arthure fire the Brays. Gorrumbery. Archie Keene, Will of Mor∣spatriks hors. Parke. Ionie of the Parke, Gray Will. Burnheid. Gawins Iok, Adé Cowdais. Welshaw. Will Colichis Hob, Hob of Bowholmes. Niksons. Iohn Nikson of Laiest burne. Georgies Harie Nikson. Cleme Nikson, called The Crune. Crosers. Hob Croser, called Hob of Ricarton. Martine Croser. Cokkis Iohn Croser. Noble Clemeis Croser. Hendersons. Rinzian Henderson in Ar∣miltonburne. Ienkyne Henderson in Kart∣ley, Debaitable Land. Sandeis Barnes Armestrangs. Will of Kinmonth. Krystie Armestrang. Iohn Skynbanke. Lardis Rinzians gang. Lairdis Rinziane. Lairdis Robbie. Rinzian of Wanchop. Grahames. Priors, Iohn and his Bairnes. Hector of the Harlaw. The griefes & cuts of Harlaw.
EWISDAIL. Armestrangs of the Gyngils. Ekké of the Gingils. Andrew of the Gyngils. Thome of Glendoning. Scots. Thome the Flower. Anfe of the Busse. Ellots. Iohn the Portars sonne. Will of Deuislies. Will the Lord. ESKDAIL. Battisons of Cowghorlae. Dauid Batie. Hugh Batie. Mungoes Arthurie. Adame of the Burne. Batisons of the Scheill. Nichol of the Scheill. Androw of Zetbyre. Iohn the Braid. Wat of the Corse. Iohnes. Iohn Armstrang of Hoilhons. Iohn Armstrang of Thorne∣quhat. Wil Armestrāg of Ternsnihill. Littils. Iohn Littill of Cassoke. Thome Littill of Finglen. Ingrahames Archy Littill. ANANDAIL. Irwingis. Edward of Bonschaw. Lang Richies Edward. Iohn the young Duke. Chrystie the Cothquhat. Willie of Graitnayhill. Bellis. Will Bell of Alby. Iohn Bell of the Tourne. Mathie Bell called the King. Andro Bell called Lokkis. Androw. Will Bell Reidcloke. Carlilles. Adame Carlile of Bridekirk. Alexander Carlile of Eglefor∣hame. Grahames. George Grahame of Reupa∣trik. Arthour Grahame of Bla∣woldwood. Richie Grahame called The Plump. Thomsons. Young Archie Thomson. Sym Thomson in Polloden. Romes. Roger Rome in Tordoweth. Mekle Sandie Rome there. Gassis. Dauid Gasse in Barch. Iohn Gasse, Michaels sonne in Rig.
THE SHRIEFDOMES AND Shriefs of Scotland. Orknay, The Shriefe thereof heritable, Earle of Caythnes. Innernes, The Earle of Huntlie. Cromartie, Vrquhart of Cromartie. Narne, Iohn Campbell of Lorne. Elgene and Forress, Dumbar of Cumnok. Abirdene, The Earle of Huntlie. Kincardin, The Earle of Marshall. Forfar, The Lord Gray. Perth, alias Saint Iohnstone, The Earle of Gowry. Fyfe, The Earle of Rothosse. Kynross, The Earle of Morton, of Lochleuin and Dalkeyth, Clackmannan, The knight of the Karss. Sterling, The prouost of the towne for the time. Dumbarten, Earle of Lennox Sterling-shire, extra Burgum, The Earle of Mar. Tarbart, The Earle of Mar. Laynrik, The Earle of Arran, Lord Hammilton. Renfrew, The Lord Sampill. Aere, Campbell, Knight of Lowdon. Wigton, Patrik Agnew, of that ilk. Drumfreis, Lord Sanquhat. Pebles, Lord Zester. Selkirk-Murray, of Fallahill. Roxburgh, Dowglasse of Cauers, called sherife of Tiuidaill. Barwik Lord Home. Edinburgh, The prouost of the Towne for the time. Lothien, The Earle Bothwell. The Cunstabularie of Hadington, The Earle Bothwell. Lithgow, Hammilton of Kenneill. THE STEWARTRIES OF SCOTLAND. Stratherne. Monteith. The Lord Drmmond. Kircudbricht. Annandaill. The Lord Maxwell.
THE BAILLERIES OF SCOTLAND. Kyle, The Knight of Cragy wallace. Carik, The Earle of Cassils. Cunninghame, The Earle of Eglinton. THE ORDER OF THE CALLING of the Table of the Session. Munday. Redemptions of lands. Reductions of all kinds. Transferrings. Losse of Superiorities. For making, sealing, and sub∣scribing of Reuersions. Tewsday. Recent spoiles without the time of vacants. Acts of Aiurnall. Wednesday. The common Table of the foure quarters of the Realme, by order, euery one after ano∣ther, as is diuided in the acts of the Institution, in the print books of Parliament. Thursday. The same Table. Friday. The Kings actions, stran∣gers, the poore. Saturday. The Lords of Session, and members thereof, The Pre∣lates, payers of contribution, and the common Table fore∣said. And vpon the Wednes∣day and Thursday, to cal com∣mon priuileged matters, such as Hornings, Free-persons, E∣uidents, Fortalices, Warnings, Letters conforme to role∣ments, Decreits, Arbitrailes, Taks, Pensions, Ordinarie letters, Gifts, Registring of contracts, Actions to become ciuill or prophane, Double poindings, Billes, Supplicati∣ons, And their last actions to be called of new by ordinance of the Lords of Session, for expedition of causes.
The Shires of Scotland. The Shires of the first quarter as followeth: that is to say, Forfair, Kineardin, Banff, Elgin, Forres, Narne, Innernes, and Cromartie. The Shires of the second quarter, Edinburgh, Lynlythgow, Selkirk, Roxburgh, Peblis, Berwick, and Hadington. The third quarter, Striuiling and Renfrew, Lanerk Wigton, Dumfreis, Kilcudbright, and Annandaill. The fourth quarter, Perth, Clackmannan, Argyle, and Bute. The Senators begin their sitting and rising as followes. They begin to sit downe in Edinburgh, on the morne after Trinitie Sunday, while the first day of August, and after to be vacant while the first day of Nouember next ensuing; and then to begin and sit, while the xix. day of March next, & then to be vacant, while the morning after Trinitie Sunday, as aforesaid. THE NAMES OF THE FREE BVRROWES, subiect to pay extent and subsidie within Scotland. SOVTH. Edinburgh. Sterling. Lithgow. Rothsaye. Dumbarten. Renfrew. Ruglen. Aere. Irwing. Glasgow. Kircudbricht. Wigtoun. Whithorne. Laynerik. Iedburgh. Sel-kirk. Peblis. NORTH. Abirdene. Dundie. Saint Iohnston, aliâs Perth. Banffe. Dumfermeling. Carraill. Forfar. Brechin. Mont-rosse. Elgene. Innernes. Arbrothe. Saint Andrewes. Cowpar. Cullane. Fores.
The Kings Palaces and Castels. Haddington. North-Barwick. Dumbar. Drumfreis. Narne. Thaine. Dysert. Kirkady. Palaces appertaining to the King. THe Palace of Halyrud-house, beside Edinburgh in Lo∣thien. 2 The Palace of Dalkeyth, reserued for the vse of the Prince, with the Orchard, Gardens, Banks, and wood adia∣cent thereunto, within foure miles of Edinburgh. 3 The Palace of Lithgow, within the towne of Lithgow, in Lithgow-shire 4 The Palace of Falkland, and the towne of Falkland ad∣iacent thereunto, with the Parke: In Fyfe. Castels appertaining to the King. Desert. The Castell of Roxburgh, now demoleist by the Lawe, and by the commaundement of the King, and three Estates: In Teuiotdaill. The monuments yet stand to this houre, but desert. The Castell and fortalice of Dumbar, a house of great strength: till within these late yeeres, it was de∣moleist by Iames Earle of Murray, Regēt of Scotland. In Lothien. Desert. 1 The Castell of Edinburgh, inhabited by Iohn Earle of Mar. 2 The Castell and strength of of Blacknes in Lothien, inhabi∣ted by Sir Iames Sandelands. 3 The Castel and strength of Sterling, inhabited by Iohn Earle of Mar, and his Deputies. 4 The Castell of Dumbarton, inhabited by Iohn Lord Ham∣milton. 5 The Castell of Lochmaben in Annandaill, occupied by the Lord Maxwell. 6 The Castell of Kirkwall, in Orknay, appertaining to the King, inhabited by the Earle of Orknay.
A true description and diuision of the whole countrey of Scotland: of the situation, distance and commodities in euery part thereof. SCotland is diuided from England, first, by the high hilles of Cheuiot, and where the hilles doe end, by a wall called, The Marchdike, made in our time; and then by the waters, Esk and Se∣loua. By North,The borders in order. those borders from the Scots sea to the Ireland sea. The Countries lie in or∣der as followeth: The Maers (wherein stands the Towne of Barwicke, at this present possessed by England) lies vpon the North side of Tweed, which is compassed by the Firth of Forth on the East, by England on the South: Westward on both the sides of Tweed lies Teuiotdail, taking the name from the wa∣ter of Tiot,The causes of their denomi∣nations. diuided from England by the hilles of Cheuiot. Next vnto Teuiotdail, lie Countries that are not great: Liddis∣dail, Ewisdail, and Esdail, taking their names from three waters, Liddall, Ewis, and Esk. The last is Annandail, which also hath the name from the water of Annan, diuiding the Countrey al∣most in two, and runnes after Solo, into the Ireland sea. Now let vs returne to Forth. The Countrey of Lothian is compas∣sed by it at the East. Coeburnspeth, and Lamermure, diuides it from the Maers, and then turning somewhat Westward, it ioynes with Twedaill, and Lawderdaill: Tweddaill taking the name from the Riuer of Tweed, which runnes through the same, and Lawderdhill from the Towne of Lawder, or rather from the water of Lider, running through the Countrey. Lid∣daill, Nithisdaill, and Clyddisdaill, march with Tweddaill at the South and West parts thereof: Nithisdaill taking the name from the water of Nith, running through it into the Ireland Sea. Lothian, so named from Loth, King of Pights, is bor∣dered
on the South-east by Forth, or the Scottish sea: on the Northwest by Clyddisdaill. This Countrie in ciuilitie, and aboundance of all other things necessarie for the vse of man excelles very farre, all the rest of the countries of Scotland. There runne fiue waters through it. Tyne and Esk, (which both runne in one at the foote of the wood of Dalkeith, before they enter into the sea) Leith and Almon. Of those waters, some spring out of Lamermure, and some out of Pentland hils, and runne into Forth.The Townes of Lothian. The Townes of Lothian, are Dunbar, Hading, commonly called Hadington, Dalkeith, Edinburgh, Leigh. Linlithgow lieth more westwardly: Clyddisdaill lies on both the sides of Clyde, which for the length thereof, is deui∣ded in three shires. In the Ouerward, there is an hill, not to call hich, out of the which, spring riuers running into three sundry seas: Twede into the Scottish sea, Annand into the Ireland sea, and Clyde into the great Ocean.The chiefe townes of Clyd∣disdaill. The chiefe Townes of Cliddisdaill are, Lanark, and Glasgow: North-west from Cliddisdaill, lies Kyle: beyond Kyle lies Galloway, which is diuided from Clyddisdaill by the water of Cloudan. All Galloway almost declines to the South, the shire whereof incloseth all the rest of that side of Scotland: It is more plentifull in store, than Cornes. Glloway de∣scribed.The waters of Galloway, Vxe, Dee, Kenne, Cree and Losse, runne into the Ireland sea: There is almost no great hilles in Galloway, but it is full of Craggie knolles: The wa∣ters gathering together in the vallies betwixt those knolles, make almost innumerable Loches, from whence, the first flood that comes before the Autumnall Equinoctiall, causeth such aboundance of waters to runne, that there come foorth of the said Loches, incredible numbers of Eeles, and are taken by the Countrimen in wand Creeles, who salting them, ob∣taine no small gaine thereby. The farthest part of that side, is the head, called Nonantum, vnder the which, there is an ha∣uen at the mouth of the water of Lussie, named by Ptolome, Re∣rigonius. In the other side of Galloway oueragainst this Ha∣uen, from Clyddis-forth, there enters another Hauen, named commonly Lochryen; and by Ptolome, Vidogora: all that li∣eth
betwixt these two Hauens, the Countrie people call the Rynns, that is, the point of Galloway: who also call it Nonan∣tum, the Mule, that is, the Beck. The whole Country is named Galloway: for Gallovid, in the ancient Scottish tongue, signifies a man of Gallia: vnder Lochrien at the backe of Galloway,Carrik descri∣bed. lies Carrik, declining easily till it come to Clyddisforth. The waters of Stenzear, and Gre∣uan deuide Carrik: vpon the cruiks of those waters, there are many prettie villages. Carrik, betwixt the waters, where it ri∣seth in knolles, is firtill of beastiall, & reasonable good ground for Corne. The whole Country of Carrik, both by sea and land, hath aboundance, not only sufficient for themselues, but also largely to support their neighbours. The water of Dunes, deuides Carrik from Kyle. Dune springs out of a Loch of the same name, in the middest whereof, is an Yle, on the which is builded a little Tower.Kyle described Next vnto Carrik, lies Kyle, marching vpon the South with Galloway, vpon the South∣east with Clyddisdaill, vpon the West with Cunninghame, separated from thence by the water of Irwing. The water of Air runnes through the midst of Kyle: at the mouth of the water, stands the towne of Air, a notable market stead: The Countrey generally, is more aboundant of valiant men, then of Corne and cattell, the ground being but poore and sandie, which sharpens the mens industrie, and con∣firmes the strength of the minde and body, by scarcenesse of liuing. From Kyle Northward,Cunninghame described. lies Cunninghame, renewing Clide, and reducing it to the quantity of a reasonable riuer. The name of this countrey is Dens, signifying in that language, the Kings house: whereby it appeares that the Danes haue beene sometimes masters thereof. Next vnto Cunningham Eastward lies Renfrew,Renfrew descri∣bed. so named from a little towne, wherein they vse to keepe Session of Iustice to the countrey. It is commonly na∣med the Barronie, and is diuided in the midst by two waters, both called Carth.Clyddisdaill. After the Barronie, followeth Clyddisdaill, lying on either side of Clyde, which in respect of the quantitie thereof, and landes of Glasgow, is diuided in manie iurisdi∣ctions. They that dwell vpon the landes of Glasgow, haue
their owne Iustice seat within the Towne of Glasgow. The most notable waters of Clyddisdaill, are Eruenne and Doug∣lasse running into Clyde, vpon the South side thereof, and vp∣on the North side there is another called Auenne, which cuts Lothian from Striueling shire. These two waters haue got∣ten their names of Walter at the beginning, instead of proper names, as also the water of Auone in Walles hath done, with a little difference for the propriety of the language sake. Auenne deuides Sterling shire from Lothian at the South: The Firth or Forth at the East, which peece and peece be∣comes narrow, till it growe to the quantity of a reasonable Riuer, neere vnto Striueling bridge. There is but one wa∣ter worthy to make account of, that runnes through it, na∣med Carron, neere vnto the which there are some ancient mo∣numents vpon the East side of Carron. There are two little earthen knolles,Two ancient monuments. builded as may appeare by men, common∣ly called Duini pacis; that is, The knolles of peace. Two miles downward vpon the same water, there is a round buil∣ding without lyme, made of hard stone, in such sort, that one part of the vppermost stones is indented within the stone that lies directly vnder it: so that the whole worke, by this coniun∣ction mutuall, and burthen of the stones, vpholds it selfe, gro∣wing narrow by little and little, from the ground to the head; where it is open like a Doue-coat.The countrey people doe call it Arthours ouen. The common sort of people, following there owne fantasies, haue deuised sundry Authours of this worke, and that the same was appointed for sundry vses, euery man appropriating an vse according to his owne deuise: And I led by coniecture, was sometime indeed of opinion, that this was the Chappell of the God Terminus, which as we read, was appointed to be open aboue. The two knolles Duini pacis, lying so neere it, doe somewhat fortifie this my coniecture; as, that peace had beene concluded there, and this worke set vp in the memory thereof; and that the same should be the border of the Romane Empire. I could not be drawne from this opinion, vntill I vnder∣stood, that there are sundry workes in a certaine Ile, like vn∣to this Chappell in all things, except that they are broader and wider. In which respect, I am compelled to suspend my
iudgement farther, than to thinke that these haue beene monu∣ments of things done, and especially of victories gotten, and set vp in those places, as it had beene out of the world, the ra∣ther to be kept from the iniuries of enimies: But truely, whe∣ther they be monuments of victory, or (as some beleeue) Se∣pulchers of Noble men, I trust they haue beene monuments to continue in eternall memory, but builded by rude and vn∣learned men, like to this Chappell standing vpon Carron: There is a peece of ground at the right side of Carron, plaine almost round about, growing to a knoll: neere midway, be∣twixt the Duini pacis and this Chappell, into the which, at the turning of the corner, appeares at this day, the roomes of a pretty Towne: But by labouring of the ground where it stood, and taking away of the stones, for building of Gentle∣mens houses thereabouts, the foundations of the Walles, and description of the roomes cannot be discerned. Beda, the English Writer, disertly names this place Guidi, placing the same in the very corner of Seuerus Wall. Many notable Romanes haue made mention of this Wall: Heere∣of as yet remaine sundry apparances, as stones gotten, bea∣ring inscriptions, containing testimonies of safegard recei∣ued of Tribunes and Centurions, or else of their Sepulchers. And seeing that from the Wall of Adrian, to this Wall of Se∣uerus (as the grounds of both doe witnesse) it is little lesse then an hundred miles, the ignorance of them that haue writ∣ten the English matters, was either great, not vnderstanding the Latine Writers who intreated of them, or else their ouer∣sight that so confusedly handled that, which was so cleerely written. Howsoeuer the matter be, if they be not worthy to be reprooued for this their deed, at least, I thinke them worthy to be slightly admonished thereof, specially, for that of the Records foresaids, and of the History of Beda, the English Writer; it is certaine, that there was sometime the Bordour betweene the Bryttaines and the Scottes. They that tell that Camelot stood heere, alleadge also, that this Chappell before mentioned, was the Temple of Clau∣dius Caesar, and both the one and the other is a vaine lier:
for that Camelot is a Colonie of the Romanes, three hundred miles distant from this place, if trueth may be giuen to Ptolo∣meus, or Itinerarium Antonins. And Cornelius Tacitus maketh this errour with the rest of the whole narratiue, most knowen; chiefly in that he writeth, that the Romanes, after they had lost Camelot, fled for their owne preseruation, to the temple of Claudius Caesar: And (whether this Chappell was the Temple of Terminus, or a monument of any other thing wanting a doore, whereof presently it hath neither signe or token, being the height of a stones cast) yet it could neuer couer ten armed men of warre, or scarsely containe so many within the walles thereof. Besides this, after Claudius Caesars iourney, almost fortie yeeres, Iulius Agricola was the first Romane that euer entred in those parts. Also was it not fiftie yeeres after Agricola, that A∣drianus made a wall betwixt Tyne and Esk, to be the border of the Romane Prouince, whereof to this present in diuers places signes do remaine? Septimius Seuerus, about the yeere of God 210, entred into Britannie, and beyond this border appointed by Adrian, 100 miles, he made a wall from the Firth of Clyde, to the mouth of Euen, where it entreth into Forth. Of this wall, euen at this day, there are many and cleare demonstrati∣ons. Moreouer, we neuer finde in the ancient monuments, that Camelodonum was the chiefe seat of the Pights: but that their Regall seat was in Abirnethie, as also the Metropolitane seat of their Bishop: which afterwards was transported to Saint Andrewes. If it were inquired, what mooued the Romanes to bring a Colonie there, or how they susteined the same in so barraine a ground; and, as things were at that time, wilde and vnmanu∣red, and subiect to the dayly iniuries of most cruell enemies: they will, as I suppose, answere, (for I can not see what other thing they can say) that they furnished it by sea, what time ships sed to passe vp Garron, euen to the towne wall. If this were e, of necessitie the ground of both the banks of Forth, was then ouerflowed by the great Ocean, and so was barren: & yet now, that is the only ground that is supposed to be plen∣tifull of cornes in those parts. There is another question
somewhat more difficill. If both the bankes of Forth were drowned with salt water, why ended not the Romanes their wall rather at that part, then with superstuous laboures, to drawe it further in length by many miles? Beyond Striui∣ling-shire, lieth the Lennox, deuided from the Barrony of Renfrew, by Clyde: from Glasgow, by the water of Hel∣uin: from Striuiling-shire, by hilles: from Teth, by Forth: and then ends in the hils of Grangebean; at the foote where∣of, Loch-lomond runnes downe a lowe valley, foure and twentie miles of length, and eight of bredth, hauing moe then foure and twentie Islands within the same. This Loch, be∣sides aboundance of other fishes, hath a kinde of fish of the owne, named Pollac, very pleasant to eate. The water of Le∣uin runneth out of Loch-lomond southward, which water hath giuen the name to the countrey. Leuin entreth into Clyde, neere to the Castle of Dumbarton, and towne of the same name. The westmost of the hilles of Grangebean, make the border of the Lennox. The hilles are cutted by a little bo∣some of the sea, named for the shortnes thereof, Ger-loch. Be∣yond this Loch, there is a farre greater Loch, named from the water that runneth in it, Loch-long: and this water is the march betweene Lennox and Couall. This Couall, Argyle (or rather Ergyle) and Knapdaill, are deuided in many parts, by many narrow creekes, that runne out of the firth of Clyde into them, whereof there is one most notable, named Loch-fyne, from the water of Finne that runneth into it. This Loch is threescore miles of length. In Knapdaill, is Loch-haw, and therein a little Island, with a strong Castle. The water of Aw runneth out of this Loch, and is the onely water of all that countrey, that doth runne into the Deucalidon Sea. North-west from Knapdaill, doth lie Kentyir, (the head of the countrey ouer-against Ireland,) from which it is deuided by a little Sea. Kyntyir is more long then broad, ioyning to Knapdaill by so narrow a throate, that it is scarce one mile in bredth, and the same throate is nothing else but very sand, lying so lowe, that Mariners drawing their ships ofttimes through it, make their iourney a great deale shorter, then it would bee, kee∣ping the common course. Lorne, lying vpon Ergyle, doth
march with it, vntill it come to Haber, a plaine countrey, and not vnfruitfull. The countrey where the hilles of Grangebean are, are most easie to be trauelled, named broad Albin, and that is to say, the highest part of Scotland: and the highest part of broad Albin, is called Drunnalbin, that is, the backe of Scot∣land, so tearmed, not altogether without cause: for forth of that backe, waters do runne into both the Seas, some vnto the North, and some vnto the South. Forth of Locherne, the wa∣ter of Erne runneth North-east, and entreth into Tay, vnder Sainct-Iohnstoun three miles. The countrey that lieth on each side of this water, taking the name from it, is called in the ancient Scottish language, Straitherne. Straith, of olde, in that tongue, was called a countrey lying along a water side. Betwixt the hilles of this countrey and Forth, lieth Teth, taking the name from the water of Teth, running through the middest thereof. The hilles called Ochels, march with Teth, which for the most part,A fertill soile. (as also the ground, lying at the foot of them) are accounted to be of the Stewardrie of Straitherne. The rest of that countrey to Forth (through ambition) is diuided in sundry Iurisdictions, as in Clackmannan-shire, Culros-shire, and Kinros-shire, from which all the countrey that lies betwixt Forth and Tay, Eastward, like a wedge in a narrow point of the Sea, is called by one name, Fyfe, abundant within the selfe in all things necessarie to the vse of man. It is broadest where Lochleuin diuideth it: from thence it becommeth narrow, vn∣till it come to the towne of Carraill. There is but one water to make account of, in all Fyfe, named Leuin. There are manie prety townes vpon the coast in three sides of Fyfe. The towne of Saint Andrewes, for the study of good learning. The towne of Cowper standeth almost in the middest of Fyfe, which is the Sherifes seat for administration of iustice. Vpon the march betwixt it and Stratherne, standeth Abirnethy, of olde the chiefe Citie of the Pights. Neere it, Erne runneth into Tay. The water of Tay commeth forth of Loch-tay, in Broad∣albin. The Loch is foure & twenty miles of length. Tay is the greatest riuer in Scotland, which turning course at the hilles of Grangebean, ioynes with Atholl, a fertile countrey, situate in the very wildernesse of the same mountaines: at the foot
whereof there is a part of Atholl, lying plaine, named the Blair,Atholl- which word signifies a ground proper for wood. Vnder Atholl, vpon the South side of Tay, stands the Towne Caledon, which onely retaines the ancient name, commonly called Dunkeld,Dunkeld. that is, a knoll full of Nut-trees. The Nut-trees growing in that vnmanured ground, and coue∣ring the earth, with the shaddow of the boughs thereof, haue giuen the name, both to the towne, and people. Caledones indeed, or Caledonij, were sometime one of the most renowmed people of Brittaine, and made the one halfe of the kingdome of Pights, whom Ammianus Marcellinus diui∣deth into Caledones, and Vecturiones, of whome at this day, scarcely doth remaine any memoriall of Name. Twelue miles vnder Dunkeld, in the same right side of the riuer of Tay,Gowrie. stands Saint Iohnestone: vpon the North side of the water, Eastward from Atholl, lies Gowrie, a firtill ground for corne, and vnder it againe, betwixt Tay, and Esk, lies An∣gusse, or as the ancient Scots call it,Angusse. Eencia. Some men also are of opinion that it was named Horrestia, or according to the English Phrase,This towne is now called by all men in the Vulgar tongue, Downdee. Forrestia. In Angusse are the Townes of Cowper, and Deidoun (the gift of God, as Boetius, to gra∣tifie his countrey, ambiciously names it) but I trust, the ancient name of the towne was Taidunum, from the word Dun, called the Taw, or Knoll, that stands vpon Tai: at the foot whereof this towne is builded. Fourteene miles North from Tai, right by the Sea side, standes Abirbrothock', otherwise named Abrinca: from thence yee may perfitly see the Redde head a farre off. South-east cuts Angusse euen in the middest, and North-east diuides it from the Maernis. The Maernis for the most part is a plaine ground, till it passe For∣doun, and Dunnotter, the Earle Marshels Castle, and come to the hilles of Grangebean, which begin there to decrease and end in the Sea. North, from the Maernis, is the mouth of the water of Deuá, or Deé, commonly named, and about a mile from Deé Northward, the mouth of the water of Done. At the mouth of Deè standes Abirdene,Abirdene. renowmed for the salmond fishings thereof: and at the mouth of Doné, the Bishops
seat,Abirdene, an vniuersity. flou∣rishing in all kinde of artes. and common schooles flourishing in all kinde of science of liberall artes. I finde in some olde monuments, that the Towne neerest to the South, was called Abirdee, but now, both the one Towne and the other, is called Abirdene, deui∣sed onely to the words old and new, as new Abirdene, and old Abirdene. At this narrow point, lying betwixt these wa∣ters, the countrey of Mar beginnes,Marre. growing alwaies wider and wider, till it be 60 miles in length, & come to Badzenoch. The countrey of Badzenoch,Badzenoch. hath as it were a backe, running out through the midst of it, which spouts forth waters into both the seas.Habre. Habre marcheth with Badzenoch, tending by little and little towards the Deucalidon sea: a Countrey as aboundant of commodities both by sea and land, as any Countrey within Scotland is. First, it is good for Corne, and store: the shaddowes of the Woods, the riuers and the springs, make it very pleasant: and it hath also great plenty of fishes, as any Countrey within Scotland: for besides the aboundance of fresh water fishes, produced by a great number of waters, the sea runnes within the countrey, in a long Chan∣nell, and being narrow at the mouth, the water kept in betwixt two high bankes, and spreading wide inward, makes the forme of a stanke or rather of a Loch, from which it hath gotten the name Abre, by the Countrey men, that is in their language, A place where ships may lie as sure as in a Hauen. The same name is giuen to all the Countrey that lies round about: such as speake the English tongue, name both the Creeke of the sea, and the countrey, Lochabre, but altoge∣ther without reason, and indecently. These three Countries, Habre,The broadnesse of Scotland. Buquhan. Badzenoch, and Marre, comprehend the breadth of Scotland, betwixt the two seas. Next vnto Marre, North∣ward lies Buquhan, deuided from Marre by the water of Dune. This Countrey runnes farthest in the Germane Sea, of all the Countries of Scotland; fertill in store, and increase of the ground, and in it selfe, sufficient to satisfy for all o∣ther commodities necessary for the Countrey. There is abun∣dance of Salmond fish taken in all the waters thereof, ex∣cept Rattry, wherein to this houre, was neuer seene any Salmond. Vpon the coast of Buquhan, there is a caue, the
nature whereof is not to be forgotten. From the crowne of the Caue,A strange. thing. there drops downe water, which water, vpon the instant, is turned into little round stones. If the Caue were not from time to time cleansed by mans labour, it would in short space be filled to the head. The stone that is ingende∣red of this water, is of nature halfe stone, halfe Ice, fresh and ne∣uer growing solide, as the Marble doth. When I was in Tollosse, about the yeere of God, 1544. I vnderstood by credible men, that there was a Caue, into the Pireneé mounts, neere vnto the place of their habitation, like vnto this Caue in all things.Boyne & En∣zeé. Boyne and Enzeé lie from Bu∣quhan, Northward to Spey, which deuides them from Mur∣ray. Spey springs forth of the North-side of the mountaines of Badzenoch, whereof we haue made mention; and not farre from the spring thereof is a Loch, forth of the which, comes the water of Lute, running into the West sea. By report, there was at the mouth of this water, a good Towne, named Innerlu∣ther, from the name of the water. Surely, if we will consi∣der the nature of the people that dwell thereabouts, the commodity of sailing and portage by sea, this is very proper for an Hauen. The ancient Kings allured by these commodities, some∣time dwelt there, in the Castle of Enone, which Castle, many at this time (sinisterly informed) suppose to be Dunstaffage: for the ruines and signes of Dunstaffage, euen to this day may be seene in Lorne. There are some small Countries cast in betwixt Buquhan and the Westsea, which (hauing no notable thing worthy of memory within them) we ouerpasse.Murray. Murray lies betwixt Spey and Naes, sometime named, as some suppose, Verar. The Germane sea running betwixt these two waters backeward, makes the shire narrow, and yet for the quantity, it is wealthy in corne and store, and is the first country of Scotland for plea∣sure and commodities of fruitfull trees. There are two townes in it, Elgin, vpon the water of Loxi, keeping at this day the an∣cient name; and Innernes, vpon the water of Naes. Naes comes forth of a Loch 34 miles of length,A Loch of a strange nature. named Loch-naes. The water of Naes is almost alwaies warme, and at no time so cold
that it freezeth: yea, in the most cold time of winter, broken yce falling in it, is dissolued, by the heat thereof. West from Lochnaes, there lies eight miles of continent ground: and that small peece is the onely impediment that the seas ioine not, and make the remanent of Scotland an Iland: for all the land that lies betwixt the strait and the Deucalidon sea, is cutted by creeks and Loches of salt water running into the land. The countrey that lies by North Naes, and these straits, is com∣monly diuided in foure Prouinces, Nauern, or, as the common people name it, Stranauerne, from the water of Narn. From the mouth of Naes, where it enters into the Germane sea,Rosse: the des∣criptiō thereof. North, lies Rosse, shooting into the sea, in great promonto∣ries or heads, as the word it selfe expresseth: For Rosse in Scottish, is called, An head. The countrey of Rosse is of grea∣ter length, then breadth, extended from the Germaine to the Deucalidon sea, where it riseth in craggy and wilde hilles, and yet in the plaine fieldes thereof, there is as great fertility of Corne, as in any other part of Scotland. There is in Rosse, pleasant dales with waters, and Loches full of fishes, specially Loch-broome. It is broad at the Deucalidon sea, and growes narrow by little and little, turning South-ward. From the o∣ther shore, the Germane sea (winning the selfe an entry betwixt high Clints) runnes within the land in a wide bosome, and makes an healthfull port and sure refuge against all tempests and stormes: The entry of it is easie, and within it, is a very sure Hauen, against all iniuries of sea, and a Hauen for great Nauies of ships. Nauarne.Next vnto Rosse North-ward: is Nauarn, so named, from the water of Nauarn, which the common people (following the custome of their countrey speech) calleth, Stranauerne. Rosse-marches with Stranauerne at the South. The Deucali∣don sea, at the West and North, runnes about it, and at the East it ioines with Caithnes.Sotherland. Sotherland, is so cast in amongst these countries, that it is neighbour to them all, and marches with euery one of them at some part. At the West, it hath Stranauerne: at the East, Rosse: and at the North, Caithnes, ly∣ing ouer against it. The Countrey people, in respect of the nature of the ground, are more giuen to store then to Corne.
There is no singular thing in it that I know,Hilles of white Marble. except the hilles of white Marble: a rare woonder in cold countries, and seruing for no purpose, because that ouer-great delicacie, the curious caruer of such things, is not entered in that country. Caithnes,Caithnes. where it marches with Stranauerne, is the fur∣thest North countrey of all Scotland. And those two Coun∣tries draw the breadth of Scotland into a narrow front. In them are three promontories or heads: the highest whereof, is in Nauernia, named by Ptolomie, Orcas, or Taruidum. The other two, not altogether so hie, are in Caithnes, Veruedrum, now named Hoya; and Berubrum, vntruely by Boetius called Dume, now commonly called Dunnesbey, or by some, Dun∣cans-bey. Of this word (as appeareth, some letters taken a∣way) the word Dunsbey is come. At the foot of the hill, there is a prety creeke, which they that trauell from Orknay by sea, vse for an hauen. Creeke is commonly called a Bay. This Creeke then being named by such as dwelt thereabout Dun∣cans-bey or Dunnachis-bey, the common people ioyning both the words in one, haue (in their fashion) made the word Dunsbey. In this Country Ptolomie places Carnauij, of which names, there remaine yet some signes: for the Earle of Caithnes chiefe Castle is named Gernigo. It appeares, that the people named by Ptolomie, Cornauij, were called by the Britaynes, Kernici: for indeed, not onely in this Countrey, but also in the furthest place of this Ile, that is in Cornewales, he places the people, named Cornauij, and they that speake the Britayne tong, call the same people, Kernici. It may be, that he should not iudge amisse, that should esteeme Cornewales to be spoken for Kernice-wales, taking that name from the Frenchmen, called Kernici. It appeareth likewise, that some signes of this name, although obscure, remained in the mid∣dest of the Ile: For Beda writes, that the beginning of Seue∣rus wall, was not far from the Abbay of Kebercurnike; but in these places now, there is no appearance of any Abbay. Yet there is in that part, a Castle of Dowglasses, ruinous and halfe decaied, named Abircorne. Whether one of these words, or both, be corruptly driuen for Kernici, I leaue the Reader to iudge.
Of the Iles of Scotland ingenerall. NOw resteth it to speake somewhat of the Iles, the part of all the Brittaine History, inuolued in greatest errours. We will leaue the most ancient writers, of whom we haue no certaintie, and follow that which men of our owne time, more truely and clearely haue written.The desdi∣uided. They diuide all the Iles, (which, as it were, crowne Scotland) in three classes or ranks, the West Iles, Orkenay Iles, and Shetland Iles. They call them West, that lie in the Deucalidon sea, from Ireland al∣most to Orknay, vpon the West side of Scotland. They that either in our Fathers daies or ours, haue written any thing of Brittayne, call these Iles Hebrides, (a new name indeede) whereof they bring neither ground, nor euidence from the an∣cient writers. Some writers haue placed Aebudae, Aemode, or Acmode, in that part of that Sea: But so diuersly, that they scarcely a∣gree, either in the number, the situation, or names. Strabo (to begin at him, as most auncient) perchance may be pardoned, for that in his time, that part of the world was not sufficiently explored, and he therefore hath but followed the vncertaine brute. Mela reckoneth seuen Aemodae; Martianus Capella also many Acmodae; Ptolomeus and Solinus fiue Aebudae. Plini∣us seuen Acmodae and thirtie Aebudae. We will retaine the name that is most frequent and common amongst the an∣cients, and call all the West Iles Aebudae, and shew their situ∣ation, the nature of euery one of them, and commodities ther∣of, out of recent authors, that haue lately written, as most cer∣taine. First, we will follow Donald Munro, a man both godly and diligent, who trauelled all these Iles vpon his feet, and saw them perfectly with his eies. They lie scattered into the Deucalidon sea,The numbers of the Scottish Iles are 300 Iles and aboue. to the number of 300. and aboue. Of olde, the Kings of Scotland kept these Iles in their owne possession, vntill the time of Donald, brother to King Malcome the 3. who gaue them to the king of Norway, vpon condition, that he should assist him, in vsurping of the kingdome of Scotland,
against law and reason. The Danes and Norway people kept possession of them for the space of 160. yeeres: and then King Alexander the third, ouercomming the Danes and Norway men in a great battell, thrust them out of the Iles: yet after∣ward they attempted to recouer their libertie, partly, trusting to their owne strength; and partly, mooued by sedidions in the maine land of this Countrey, creating Kings of themselues, as not long agoe, Iohn (of the house of Clandonald) did vsurpe the name of King, as others had done before. In food, raiment, and all things pertaining to their familie, they vse the ancient frugalitie of the Scots. Their bankets are hunting and fishing.The maner of their bankets. They seeth their flesh in the ripe, or else in the skinne of the beast, filling the same full of water. Now and then in hunting, they straine out the blood,Their drinke. and eate the flesh raw. Their drinke is the broth of sodden flesh. They loue very well the drinke made of whey, and kept certaine yeeres, drinking the same at feasts: It is na∣med by them, Blandium. The most part of them drinke wa∣ter. Their custome is to make their bread of Oates and Barly, (which are the onely kinds of graine that grow in those parts:) Experience (with time) hath taught them to make it in such sort, that it is not vnpleasant to eate. They take a little of it in the morning, and so passing to the hunting, or any other bu∣sinesse, content themselues therewith, without any other kinde of meat, till euen. They delight in marled clothes,Their attire, coloured gar∣ments. specially, that haue long stripes of sundrie colours: They loue chiefly purple and blew. Their predecessors vsed short mantles, or plaids of diuers co∣lours, sundry waies deuided: and amongst some, the same cu∣stome is obserued to this day: but for the most part now, they are browne, most neere to the colour of the Hadder: to the effect, when they lie amongst the Hadder, the bright colour of their plaids shall not bewray them: with the which, rather coloured, then clad, they suffer the most cruell tempests that blowe in the open field, in such sort, that vnder a wrythe of Snow,Their maner of lodging. they sleepe sound. In their houses also, they lie vpon the ground, laying betwixt them and it, Brakens, or Hadder, the rootes thereof downe, and the tops vp, so prettily laid
together, that they are as soft as feather-beds, and much more wholsome: for the tops themselues are drie of nature, where∣by it dries the weake humours, & restores againe the strength of the sinewes troubled before, and that so euidently, that they, who at euening go to rest sore and wearie, rise in the mor∣ning whole and able. As none of these people care for fea∣ther-beds and bedding, so take they greatest pleasure in rude∣nesse and hardnesse. If for their owne commoditie, or vpon necessitie, they trauell to any other Countrey, they reiect the feather-beds and bedding of their Hoste. They wrap them∣selues in their owne plaids, so taking their rest: carefull in∣deed, lest that barbarous delicacie of the maine Land (as they tearme it) corrupt their naturall and Country hardnesse. Their armour in time of war.Their armour wherewith they couer their bodies in time of warre, is an Iron Bonnet, and an Habbergion, side, almost euen to their heeles. Their weapons against their enemies, are bowes and arrowes. The arrowes are for the most part hooked, with a barble on either side, which once entered with∣in the body, cannot be drawne forth againe, vnlesse the wound be made wider. Some of them fight with broad swords and axes. In place of a drum, they vse a bag-pipe. They de∣light much in musicke, but chiefly in Harps and Clairschoes of their owne fashion. The strings of the Clairschoes are made of brasse-wire, and the strings of the Harps, of sinewes: which strings, they strike either with their nailes, growing long; or else with an Instrument appointed for that vse. They take great pleasure to decke their Harps and Clairschoes with sil∣uer and precious stones: and poore ones, that cannot attaine heereunto, decke them with Christall. They sing verses pretti∣ly compound, containing (for the most part) praises of valiant men. There is not almost any other argu∣ment, whereof their rimes entreat. They speake the auncient French language, altered a little.
THE ILES LYING ABOVT Scotland, that speake the ancient lan∣guage, called the VVest Iles, are these that follow. THe first of them all, is the Ile of Man, vntruely by some men named Mon: by the ancients called Dubonia, by Paulus Orosius, Menenia, or rather Maenante, and in the old countrey speech, Manium. Before this time, there was a Towne in it, named Sodora, wherein the Bishop of the Iles had his seat. It lies almost midway betwixt Ireland and Cum∣bir, a Countrey of England, and Galloway, a Countrey of Scotland, 24 miles in length, and 18 in breadth. Next vnto Man, is Ailsay, into the Firth of Clyde: an hard high craig on all sides, except at an entrie. It is neuer occupied by any man, but that at sometimes there come a great number of Boats there to fish keeling. There are many Conies and Sea∣fowles in it, specially of that kinde, which wee call Solayne-Geese. It hath Carrik vpon the North-east, Ireland vpon the North-west almost, and Kyntyre vpon the South-east. Foure and twentie miles from Ailsay, lies Arrane, almost direct North, 24 miles of length, and 16 of breadth. All the whole Iland riseth in high and wilde mountaines. It is manured onely vpon the sea side. Where the ground is lowest, the sea runnes in, and makes a well large Creeke into it: the entries whereof are closed by the Iland Molas, the hilles rising on all sides, and breaking the rage of the windes, in such sort, that within is a very sure hauen for shippes: and in the waters, which are alwaies calme, such abundance of fish, that if there be more taken than the Countrey people thinke should serue them for a day, they cast them in againe into the sea, as it were in a stanke. Not farre from Arrane lies the little Ile Flada, fer∣till of Conies. Farther in it, is situate the Ile of Bute, within the Firth of Clyde, eight miles of length, and foure in breadth: distant from Arrane, as is said, eight miles South-east, and from Argyle South-west, little more than halfe a mile from Cunnynghame, which lies by-East of it, sixe miles. It is a low
Countrey, commodious enough for Corne and store: In it is a towne of the same name,An ancient Castle. and therein is the olde Castell of Rosa. There is another Castell in the middest of it, named Cames, in their owne language, in Greeke Kamcos: that is, verie crooked. The Ile Mernoca, a mile of length, and halfe a mile of bredth, lies lowe South-westward, well manured and fertill for the quantitie. Within the Firth of Clyde, lies little Cambra, and great Cambra, not farre distant one from ano∣ther. Great Cambra is fertill of Corne, and little Cambra of fallow Deere. From the Mule of Kyntyre Littia, more then a mile, is Porticosa auona, getting that name from the creeke of Walter, that kept the Danes Nauie there, at what time they had the Iles in their handes. From the same Mule North-west, ouer against the coast of Ireland, lies Rachuda: and from Kyntyre foure miles, the little Ile Caraia: and not farre from thence, Gigaia, sixe miles of length, and a mile and a halfe of bredth.Iura. Twelue miles from Gigaia, lies Iura, foure and twentie miles of length. The shoreside of Iura is well ma∣nured, and the inward part of the Countrey is cled with wood, full of Deere of sundry kinds. Some thinke that this Ile was named of olde, Dera, which worde in the Gothicke tongue signifieth a Deere. Two miles from Iura, lies Scarba, in length, from the East to the West, foure miles, and a mile in bredth: in few places occupied. The tide of the sea betwixt this Ile and Iura, is so violent, that it is not possible to passe it, either by saile or aire, except at certaine times. At the backe of this Ile, are many vnwoorthie little Ilands scattered heere and there. Ballach, or Genistaria, Gearastilla, Longaia, the 2. Fidlais, the 3. Barbais, distinguished by their owne pro∣per names, Culbremna, Dunum, Coilp, Cuparia, Beluahua, Vi∣kerana, Vitulina, Lumga, Seila, Scana. These three last Iles are indifferent fertill of corne and store, and pertaine to the Earles of Argyle. Next vnto them is Sklata: so named, from a Sklait quarre that is in it. Then Naguisoga and Eisdalfa, and Sken∣nia, and that which is named Thiana, from an herbe hurtfull to the cornes,Lutea. called Guld, not vnlike to the herbe Lutea, but that it is somewhat more waterish coloured. Vderga, and the kings Iland: then Duffa, that is, blacke: and the Iland of the Church,
and Triaracha, and then the Iland Ardua, Hunlis, Viridi, and Ericca. Item, Arboraria, Capraia, Cunicularia, and it, that is named the Iland of Idle-men: and Abridica, and Lismora, wherein sometime was the Bishops feate of Argyle: It is eight miles of length, and two in breadth. In this Iland, besides the commodities that it hath common with the rest, there are Mynes of mettalles. Then Ouilia, the Iland Traiecte, the Iland Garna (that is sharpe) the Iland of the stane. Gressa, and the great Iland, Ardiescara, Musadilla, and Bernera, sometime called the holie Girth, notable by the tree Taxus, which growes in it.Taxus, a tree not vnlike to the Fir-tree, but the fruit thereof is venemous. Molochasgia, Drinacha, full of thornes and Bourtree, ouer-couered with the ruines of old houses. Wrichtoun, fertill of wood. Item, Ransa, Kernera. The grea∣test Iland, next vnto Iura, westward, is Yla, 24. miles of length, and sixteene of bredth, extended from the South, to the North, aboundant in store, Cornea, Deere and Lead. There is a fresh water in it, called Laia, and a creeke of salt water, and therein are many Ilands: In it also, is a fresh water Loch, wherein stands the Iland, named Fulnigania, sometime the chiefe seate of all the Iles-men. There the Gouernour of the Iles, vsurping the name of a King, was wont to dwell. Neere vnto this Iland, and somewat lesse then it, is the round I∣land, taking the name from Counsell: for therein was the Iustice seate, and fourteene of the most woorthy of the Coun∣trey, did minister Iustice vnto all the rest, continually, and intreated of the waightie affaires of the Realme, in coun∣sell, whose great equitie and discretion kept peace both at home and abroade, and with peace, was the companion of peace, aboundance of all things. Betwixt Ila and Iura, lies a little Iland, taking the name from a Cairne of stones. At the South-side of Ila, doe lie these Ilands: Colurna, Muluo∣is, Osuna, Brigidana, Corskera, the lowe Iland, Imersga, Be∣athia, Texa, Ouicularia, Noasiga, Vinarda, Caua, Tarsheria. The great Iland Auchnarra,Iland like a man. the Iland made like a man, the Iland of Iohn Slakbadis. At the west corner of Ila, lies Ouersa, where the sea is most tempestuous, and at certaine houres vn∣nauigable. The Marchants Iland. And Southwest-ward from it,Iland of Wea∣uers. Vsabrasta, Tanasta, and Nefa. The Weauers Iland. Eight
miles from Ila, somewhat towards the North, lies Ornansa. Next vnto it, the Swines Iland. Halfe a mile from Ornan∣sa, Colnansa. North from Colnansa, lies the Mule, twelue miles distant from Ila. This Ile is foure and twentie miles of length, and as much in bredth, vnpleasant indeed, but not vn∣fruitfull of Cornes. There are many woods in it, many heardes of Deere, and a good hauen for shippes: There are in it two waters, entring into the Sea, ouer against the Dowe Iland: and there are two waters, well spred of Salmond fish, and some strippes not altogether emptie thereof. There are also two Loches in it, and in euerie one of the Loches an Iland, and in euerie Iland a towre. The sea running into this Iland at foure sundrie parts, makes foure salt-water Loches therein, all foure abounding in Herring. To the North-west lies Calumba∣ria, or the Dowe Iland: to the South-est, Era: both the one and the other profitable for Bestiall, for Cornes, and for fish∣ings. From this Iland, two miles, lies the Iland of Sanct-colme, two miles of length, and more then a mile of bredth, fertill of all things, that that part of the heauen vseth to produce: Renowmed by the auncient monuments of that countrey, but most esteemed for the sincere holinesse and discipline of Sanct-colme. There were in this Iland, two Abbies, one of Monkes, another of graie Fryars: a Court, (or as it is tear∣med at this time) a parish Church, with many Chappelles, builded of the liberalitie of the Kings of Scotland, and gouer∣nours of the Iles. When as the English men had taken Eubonia, and therein the auncient seate of the Bishops of the Iles, they placed their seate into the old Cloister of Sanct∣colme. There is as yet remaining amongst the old ruines, a buriall place, or Church-yard, common to all the Noble families of the West Iles, wherein there are three tombes, higher then the rest, distant euerie one from another a little space, and three little houses situated to the East, builded se∣uerally vpon the three tombes: vpon the west parts where∣of, there are stones grauen, expressing whose tombes these were,Buriall places of the Kings of Scotland. which stand in the midst, bearing this title: The tombs of the Kings of Scotland. It is said there were 48. Kings of Scotland buried there. The tombe vpon the right side,
hath this inscription:Kings of Ireland. The Tombes of the Kings of Ireland. It is recorded, that there were foure Kings of Ireland buried there. It, that is vpon the left side, hath this inscription: The Tombes of the Kings of Norway.Kings of Norway. The report is, that there were eight Kings of that Nation buried there. The no∣table houses of the Iles, haue their Tombes in the rest of the Church-yard, euery one seuerally by themselues. There are about this Iland, and neere vnto it, sixe little Ilands, not vn∣fruitfull, giuen by the auncient Kings of Scotland, and go∣uernours of the Iles, to the Abbey of Sanct-Colme. Soa is a very profitable ground for sheepe, albeit the chiefe commo∣ditie of it consists in sea-fowles that build therein, specially of their egges. Next vnto it, is the Ile of Wemen. Then Ru∣dana. Neere vnto it, Bernira: and from that, Skennia, halfe a mile distant from the Mule. It hath a Priest of the owne, but the most part of the parishioners dwell in Mule. The sea sides of it abound in Connies. Fiue miles hence, lieth Frosa: all these Iles are subiect to the Monkes of Saint Colmes Abbey. Two miles from Frosa, lieth Vilua, fiue miles of length, fruit∣full for the quantitie of Corne and store. It hath a commodi∣ous Hauen for gallies or boates. Vpon the South side of it, lieth Toluansa, the ground whereof is not vnfruitfull. There is a wood of Nut-trees in it. About three hundred paces from this Iland, lieth Gomatra, two miles long, and one mile broad, extended from the North to the South. From Gomatra foure miles Southward, lies 2. Staffae, the one and the other full of Hauening places. Foure miles South-east from Staffa, lie two Ilands, named Kerim∣burgae, the more and the lesse, enuironed with such shore, high, and furious tide, that by their owne naturall defence, (suppor∣ted somewhat by the industrie of man) they are altogether inuincible. One mile from them, lies an Iland, whereof the whole earth almost is blacke, growne together of rotten wood and mosse. The people make peates of it for their fire: where-from it is called Monadrum: for that kinde of earth, which in the English language is called Mosse, in the Irish is called Monadrum. Next vnto this Ile, lieth Longa, 2. miles of length, and Bacha halfe as much. From Bacha 6.
miles lies Tiria, eight miles in length, and three in breadth. Most fertill of all the Ilandes, in all things necessarie for the sustentation of man. It aboundeth in store of Cornes, fishings, and Sea-fowles. In this Iland, there is a fresh-water Loch, and therein an olde Castle. It hath also an hauen not incom∣modious for boates. From this Iland two miles, lies Sunna, and from Sunna as farre lieth Colla, twelue miles of length, and two miles of bredth, a fertill Iland. Not farre from it, is Calfa, almost all full of wood. And then two Ilands, named meekle Viridis, and little Viridis. Item, other two of the same names. Ouer against the Mules head, and not farre from it, lie two Ilandes, named Glassae, and then Ardan-eidir, that is, the high Iland of the rider. Then Luparia, or the Wolfe Iland: and after it a great Ile, lying North from the Iland Col∣la, extended East and West. Then Ruma, sixteene miles in length, and sixe in bredth, rising high in strait hilles, full of woods, and scrogges, and for that cause, it is inhabited in very fewe places. The Sea-fowles laie their egges heere and there, in the ground thereof. In the middest of the spring time, when the egges are laide, any man that pleaseth may take of them. In the high rockes thereof, the Sea-guse, whereof we spake before, are taken in aboundance. From this Iland, foure miles North-east-ward,Horse-Iland. Swine-Iland. lies the Horse Iland; and from it halfe a mile, the Swine Iland, for the quantitie fruitefull ynough in all things necessarie. The Falcon buildeth in it. It hath also an hauen. Not farre from it, lies Canna and Egga, little Ilands, fertill ynough. In Egga are Solan-geese. Soabrit∣tella, more profitable for hunting, then for any other commo∣ditie necessarie for man. From this Iland the Ile of Skye, greatest of all the Ilands that are about Scotland, lies North and South, 40. miles in length, and eight miles broad in some places, and in other places 12. miles, rising in hilles, in sundrie places full of woods and pastorage. The ground thereof fertill in corne and store: and besides all other kindes of beastiall, fruitfull of Mares, for breeding of horse. It hath fiue great riuers, rich of Salmond, and many little waters, not altoge∣ther bare thereof. The sea running into the land on all sides, make many salt-waters, three principall, and 13. others,
all rich in herring. There is in it a fresh-water Loch, and fiue Castles. The Ile, in the old Scottish tongue, is called Scia∣nacha, that is, winged: because the heads, betwixt the which the Sea runneth into the land, spreadeth out like winges: but by common custome of speech, it is called Skie, that is, a wing. About the Skie, lie little Ilands, scattered heere and there. Oronsa, fertill in corne and store. Cunicularia, full of bushes and Connies. Paba, infamous for throate-cutting. For that in the woods thereof, robbers lie in ambushments, to trap them that passe that way .8. miles South-west from it lies Scalpa, which, (besides sundry other commodities) hath woods full of troopes of Deere. Betwixt the mouth of Zoch∣carron and Raorsa, lies Crulinga, seuen miles of length, and two of breadth: there is a sure hauen in it for ships. There are in it also, woods of Bucke, and Deere in them. Halfe a mile from Crulinga, is Rona, full of wood, and Hadder. There is an hauen in the innermost Loch thereof, perillous for robbery, to them that passe that way, be∣cause it is a meete place to hide ambushments in. In the mouth of the same Loch, is an Iland of the same name, cal∣led for shortnesse, Ger-loch. From Rona sixe miles North∣ward, lies Flada: two miles from Flada, Euilmena. Vpon the south side of Skie, lies Oronsa: and a mile from it Knia, Pabra, and great Bina: and then fiue little vnworthy Ilands. Next vnto them is, Isa, fertill in cornes. Beside it, is Ouia, then Askerma, and Lindella .8. miles from Skie southward, lies Linga, and Gigarmena, Benera, Megala, Paua, Flada, Scarpa Veruecum, Sandara, Vatersa: Which, besides ma∣ny other commodities, hath a hauen, commodious for a num∣ber of great ships, whereinto fishermen of all countries about, conuene certaine times of the yeere ordinarily. These last nine Ilands, are subiect to the Bishop of the Iles. 2. miles from Vatersa, is Barra, running from the North-west, to the south-east, 7. miles in length, fruitfull of cornes, and pro∣fitable for fish. There runneth into it, a Loch, with a nar∣row throat, growing round and wide within. In it there is an inch, and in the inch a strong Castle. Vpon the North-side of Barra, there riseth an hill, full of hearbes from the
foot to the head, vpon the top whereof, is a fresh water well. The spring that runneth from this well, to the next sea,A strange kind of fish. carries with it little things, like as they were quicke, but hauing the shape of no beast, which appeare (although ob∣scurely) in some respect, to represent the fish, that we call commonly, Cockles. The people that dwell there, call that part of the shore, whereunto these things are carried, The great sandes: Because, that when the sea ebbes, there ap∣peareth nothing but drie sandes, the space of a mile. Out of these sandes, the people digge out great Cocles, which the neighbours about iudge either to grow (as it were) of that seede, that the springs doe bring from the well, or else indeed, to grow in that sea. Betwixt Barra, and Wist, lie these little Ilands following: Oronsa, Onia, Hakerseta, Garnlanga, Fla∣da, great Buya, little Buya, Haya, Hell saea, Gygaia, Lingaia, Foraia, Fudaia, Eriscaia. From these Ilands, Vistus lies Northward, 34 miles of length, and 6 miles of bredth. The tide of the sea, running into two places of this Ile, causeth it to appeare three Ilands: but when the tide is out, it becom∣meth all one Iland. In it are many fresh water loches, spe∣cially one, three miles long. The sea hath worne in vpon the land, and made it selfe a passage to this Loch, and can ne∣uer be holden out, albeit the inhabitants haue made a wall of sixty foote broad, to that effect. The water entreth in a∣mongst the stones, that are builded vp together, and leaues behinde it, at the ebbe, many sea-fishes. There is a fish in it, like to the Salmond in all things, except, that with the white womb, it hath a blacke backe, and wanteth skailes. Item, in this Iland are innumerable fresh-water loches. There is in it caues couered ouer with Hadder, that are very dennes for knaues. In it are fiue churches. 8 miles West, from it lies Helsther Vetularum, so named, (as I beleeue) because it appertaineth to the Nunnes of the Ile of Ione. A little fur∣ther North, riseth Haneskera: about this Iland, at certaine times of the yeere, are many Sealches, they are taken by the countrey-men. South-west, almost sixty miles from Ha∣neskera, lies Hirta, fertill in corne and store, specially in sheepe, which are greater then the sheepe of any the other
Ilands: The Inhabitants thereof are rude in all kinde of craft, and most rude in Religion. After the Summer Solstice, which is about the seuenteenth day of Iune, the Lord of the Iland sendeth his Chamberlaine to gather his dueties, and with him a Priest,A barbarous people. who baptizeth all the children that are borne the yeere preceeding: And if it chance the Priest not to come, then euery man baptizeth his owne childe. The tenants pay to their Lordes, certaine number of Sealches, of Reisted Wedders, and Sea-fowles. The whole Iland passeth not one mile in length, and as much in bredth. There is no part of it, that can be seene by any of the other Ilands, except three hilles, which are vpon the coast thereof, and may be seene from high places of some other Ilands. In these hilles are very faire sheepe, but scarsely may any man get to them for the violence of the tide. Now let vs returne to Wistas. From the North point thereof, is the Iland Velaia, one mile of bredth, and twise as long. Betwixt this point, and the Iland Harea, lie these Ilands following, little of quantitie, but not vnfruitfull: Soa, Stroma, Pabaia, Barneraia, Emsaia, Keligira, Little Saga, Great Saga, Harmodra, Scarua, Grialinga, Cillinsa, Hea, Hoia, Little Soa, Great Soa, Isa, Little Seuna, Great Seuna, Taransa, Slegana, Tuemen. Aboue Horea, is Scarpa, and halfe a mile towards the West, Equinoctiall from the Lewis, lie seuen little Ilands, which some name Flananae, some holy places of girth and refuge, rising vp in hilles that are full of hearbs, but vnlaboured of any man. There is neuer almost one foure-footed beast in them, except wilde sheepe, which are taken by hunters, but they serue of no purpose for eating, because in stead of flesh, they haue a kinde of fatnesse: and if there be any flesh vpon them, it is so vnplea∣sant, that no man (vnlesse he be very sore oppressed with ex∣treme hunger) will taste of it. Further North, in the same ranke, lies Garn Ellan: that is, the hard Ile. Lamba, Flada, Kellasa, Little Barnera, Great Bar∣nera, Kirta, Little Bina, Great Bina, Vexaia, Pabaia, Great Si∣grama, Cunicularia, so named from the plentie of Conies that are there, Little Sigrama: The Iland of the Pigmeis. In this I∣land is a church,Iland of Pig∣meis. wherin the Pigmeis were buried (as they that
are neighbours to the Iland, beleeue.) Sundrie strangers dig∣ging deepely in the ground, sometimes haue found, and yet to this day doe finde verie little round heads, and other little bones of mans bodie, which seemes to approue the trueth, and apparance of the common brute. In the North-east side of the Iland Leogus, there are two Loches running foorth of the sea, named the North and South Loches, wherein at all times of the yeere, there is abundance of fish for all men that list to take them. From the same side of the Loch, somewhat more Southerly, lies Fabilla, Adams Iland, the Lambe Iland, Item Hulmetia,Adams Iland. Viccoilla, Hanarera, Laxa, Era, the Dow Iland, Tora, Iffurta, Sealpa, Flada, Senta: At the East side whereof, there is a passage vnder the earth, vaulted aboue a flight shoot of length, into the which little boates may either saile or rowe, for eschewing of the violent tide, raging with great noice and danger of them that saile betwixt the Iland and the head that is next vnto it. Somewhat Eastward, lies an Iland, named Old Castle, a roome strong of nature, and sufficient enough to nourish the inhabitants in cornes, fish, and egges of Sea-fowles that build in it. At that side where Lochbrien enters, is situate the Iland Eu, all full of woods onely meet to couer Theeues, who lie in wait for passengers comming that way. More Nor∣therlie, lies the Iland Grumorta, and it is likewise full of woods, and haunted by throat-cutters. The Iland, named the Priests Iland, lies that same way, profitable for pastourage of sheepe, and full of Sea-fowles. Next vnto it is Afulla. Neighbour to Afulla, is great Habrera: then little Habrera, and neere vnto it,Horse-Ile. the Horse-Ile: and besides that againe, the Iland Marta Ika. These last mentioned Ilandes, lie all before the entrie of Lochbrien, and from them Northward, lie Haray and Lewis, 16 miles of length, and 16 of bredth. These three make an Iland, which is not diuided by any hauen or port of the Sea, but by the seuerall Lordships of the heritours thereof. The South part, is commonly named Haray: In it sometime was the Abbey named Roadilla, builded by Maccleude Hareis. It is a Countrey fertill enough in Cornes, but yet the increase commeth rather of digging, and deluing, than by earing
with the plough. There is good pastourage for sheepe in it, chiefly a high hill ouer-couered with grasse, to the verie top. Master Donald Monro, a learned and godly man, sayth, that when he was there, he saw sheepe (as olde as that kinde of Be∣stiall vseth to be) feeding masterlesse, perteining peculiarlie to no man, the commoditie whereof is the greater, for that there is neither Woolfe, Foxe, or Serpent seene there: albeit that betwixt that part, and Lewis, there be great woods full of Deere, but they are of stature low, and not great of bodie. In that part also of the Iland, is a water, well stored of Salmond fishes. Vpon the North side of it, it is well manured vpon the sea side. There are in it foure Churches, one Castle, seuen great running waters, and twelue lesse, all (for their quantities) plen∣tifull of Salmond fish. The sea enters within the land in di∣uers parts of the Iland, making sundrie salt water Loches, all plentifull of Herring. There is in it great commoditie of sheepe, which feed at their pleasure vpon the hadder, and a∣mongst the bushes and craigs. The Inhabitants gather them together euery yeere once, either within some narrow roome, or else within some flaik foldes, and there conforme to the an∣cient custome of the Countrey, they plucke off the wooll of them. The most part of the hie land hereof, is moory ground: the superfice whereof is blacke, congealed together by long pro∣gresse of time, of mosse and rotten wood, to the thicknesse of a foot, or thereabouts: the vpper scruffe is cast in long thicke turffes, dried at the Sunne, and so wonne to make fire of, and burnt in stead of wood. The next yeere after, they mucke the bare ground, where the scruffe was taken away, with sea ware, and sowe Barley vpon it. In this Iland is such abundance of Whales taken,Whales. that (as aged men report) the Priests will get of small and great toge∣ther, 27 Whales for their tenth. There is also in this Iland, a great Caue, wherein the sea at a low water abides two faddome high, and at a full sea, it is more than foure faddome deepe: people of all sorts and ages sit vpon the rockes thereof, with hooke and line, taking innumerable multitude of all kinde of fishes. South-east from Lewis, almost threescore miles,
there is a little Iland lowe and plaine, well manured, named Rona, the Inhabitants thereof, are rude men, and almost with∣out religion. The Lord of the ground limits certeine num∣ber of households to occupie it, appointing for euery house∣holde, few or many sheepe, according to his pleasure, where∣on they may easily liue and pay him his rent. Whatsoeuer rests at the yeeres end, more than their necessary sustentation, they send the same yeerely to Lewis to their master. The rent for the most part which they pay,A happie peo∣ple. is barlie meale, sewed vp in sheepe-skinnes in great quantitie, (amongst them growes no store of any other kinde of graine.) Mutton, and so many sea-fowles dried at the Sunne, as they themselues leaue vneaten at the yeeres end, are sent to their master. And in case, at any time the number of persons increase in their houses, they giue all that exceed the ordinary number, to their master; so that in my opinion, they are the onely people in the world that want no∣thing, but hath all things for themselues in abundance, vncor∣rupt with lecherie or auarice, and are indued with innocencie and quietnesse of minde (which other people with great trauell seeke out by the institutions and precepts of Philosophie) purchast to them by ignorance of vice, so that they appeare to want nothing of the highest felicitie that may be, except on∣ly, that they are ignorant of the commoditie of their owne condition. A miracle.There is in this Iland, a Chappell, dedicated to Saint Ro∣nan: wherein (as aged men report) there is alwayes a Spade, wherewith, when as any is dead, they finde the place of his graue marked. In it, besides diuers kindes of fishings, there are many Whales taken. Sixteene miles West from this Iland, lies Suilkeraia, a mile in length, but in it growes no kinde of hearbe, no not so much as Hadder: There is only blacke crag∣gie hilles in it, and some of them couered with blacke mosse. Sea-fowles lay their egges in sundrie places thereof, and doe hatch. When they are neere their flight, the inhabitants of Le∣ogus, next neighbours vnto it, saile thither, and remaine there eight daies, or thereabout, to take and gather the fowles, dry∣ing them at the winde, and load their boates with the dried flesh and feathers thereof. In that Iland is seene a rare kinde of
fowle,A strange kinde of Fowle, haunting in the Ile of Suilke∣raia. vnknowen to other countries, named Colca, little lesse in quantity, then a Goose. These fowles come there euery yeere in the Spring time, hatch and nourish their young ones, till they be able to liue by themselues. About that same very time, they cast their fethers, and become starke naked of all their body, and then they get themselues to the sea, and are neuer seene againe, till the next Spring. This farther is notable in them: their feathers haue no stalke, as other fowles feathers haue, but they are all couered with a light feather, like vnto Doun, wherein is no kinde of hardnesse. The Iles of Orkenay in the North of Scotland. Now follow the Iles of Orkenay, lying scattered, partly in the Deucalidon sea, partly in the Germaine seas, towards the North parts of Scotland. The ancient writers, and the late writers, both agree sufficiently vpon their name; but yet ne∣uer man (so farre as I know) hath giuen any reason of the same, neither yet is it sufficiently knowen, who were the first posses∣sors thereof. All men notwithstanding, alledge their originall to be from Germany, but of which countrey they are discen∣ded, none hath expressed: Vnlesse we list to coniecture from their speech they sometime spake, and yet speake the ancient language of the Gothes. Some are of opinion, that they were Pights, chiefely perswaded heereunto, through their deuision by the sea named Perth, and Firth from Caithnes, who like∣wise suppose, that the Pights were of their originall Saxons, mooued heereunto by the verse of Claudian, taken out of his 7. Panegericke: Maduerunt Saxone fuso Orcades, incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule, Scotorum cumulos fleuit glacialis Ierne. But these mens errors may be easily confuted, partly by Beda, an English Saxon himselfe, who affirmes, that God was praised in seuen sundry languages amongst the Britaines: and that the Pights language was one of them, may well ap∣peare; for if that at that time the Pights had spoken Saxon, (which was then the vncorrupted speech of the Englishmen) hee would then haue made no diuision betwixt the Sax∣ons, and the Pights language: and partie also confuted by
Claudian himselfe, who in the very same verses, disertly noteth the Pights, a seuerall people from the Saxons, affirming, the Countrey of the one nation to be Orknay, and the Countrey of the other, Thule: from which Country soeuer they be de∣scended, at this day, their language differs both from the Scot∣tish and English tongues, but not much differs from the Gothes. A healthfull countrey.The common people to this day, are very carefull to keepe the ancient frugality of their Predecessors, and in that respect they continue in good health for the most part, both in minde and body, so that few die of sicknesse, but all for age. The ignorance of delicacie, is more profitable to them, for preser∣uation of their health, then the Art of medicine, and diligence of Mediciners is to others. The same their frugality, is a great helpe to their beauty and quantity of stature. There is small increase of Cornes amōgst them, except of Oates and Barley, whereof they make both breade and drinke. They haue suf∣ficient store of quicke goods, Neat, Seepe and Goates, and thereby great plenty of milke, cheese and butter. They haue innumerable sea Fowles: whereof (and of fish, for the most part) they make their common food. There is no venemous beast in Orknay,No venemous beast in Ork∣nay. Their Horse. nor none that is euill fauoured to looke vpon. They haue little Nagges, little worth in appearance, but more able & mettelled for any turne, then men can beleeue. There is no kinde of tree, no not so much as a sprig in Orknay, except Hadder: The cause heereof, is not so much in the aire and ground, as in the sloth of the Inhabitants. This may be easily prooued by roots of trees that are taken out of the ground, in sundry parts of the Ile. When Wine comes there in ships forth of strange countries, they geedily swallow it, till they be drunken. S. Magnus Bicker.They haue an old Cup amongst them, which (to the effect their drunkenesse may haue the greater authority) they say did appertaine to Saint Magnus, the first man that brought the Christian Religion into that countrey. This Cup exceeds farre the common quantity of other Cups, so as it appeares to haue beene kept since the banquet of the Lapithes. By it they trie their Bishop first, when he comes amongst them. Hee
that drinkes out the whole cuppe at one draught, (which is seldome seene) is by them extolled to the skies; for heereof, as from a blyth presage, they conceiue with themselues, in∣crease in their goods, the yeeres following. Heereupon, we may easily coniecture, that the frugalitie whereof I speake, proceeded not so much from reason, and care to bee frugall, as from pouertie and scarcitie. And the same necessitie (that was Mother of this frugalitie at the beginning.) kept her daughter long after amongst the ofspring of that Ile, till such time, as the countries lying neere vnto it, (Luxurie increa∣sing) being corrupted, the auncient discipline by little and lit∣tle deformed, they likewise gaue themselues to deceitfull plea∣sures. Their traffique also with Pirats, was a great spurre to the decaie of their temperancie. The Pyrats fearing to fre∣quent the company of them that dwelt in the continent land, got fresh water foorth of the Iles, made exchaunge with the inhabitants thereof, giuing them wines, and other sleight mar∣chandise for fresh riuers, or taking the same vpon slight pri∣ces from the people: who being a small number without armes, and lying so wide one from another, in a tempestu∣ous Sea, staying and impeding their incurrence for mutuall defence, and finding themselues vnable to withstand those Pyrats, considering also their owne securitie, ioyned with ad∣uantage and pleasure, were contented, not altogether against their willes, to receiue them; at least, they opponed not them∣selues directly vnto them. The contagion of maners began not in the simple peo∣ple, but it did both begin and continued in the wealthie men, and Priestes. For the common sort at this day, keepe some remembrance of their accustomed moderation.Dangerous seas. The Orkenay sea is so tempestuous and raging, not onely in re∣spect of the violent windes, and aspect of the heauens; but al∣so in consideration of the contrarious tides, running head∣long together from the West Ocean, that the Vessels, (comming in anie strayt betwixt two landes) can neither by saile nor oare, once releeue themselues of raging tides, and whirling waues of the Seas. If any dare approach the strait, they are either violently brought backe into the sea,
by the rage thereof, broken vpon rockes, and driuen vpon skares, or else by the sworle of the seas, sunke in the waues thereof. These Straits may be passed at two times of the tyde, when the weather is calme, either at a deepe neep, or at a full sea. At these times, the great Ocean, offended with contenti∣ous tides (whose force raised huge contrary waues) sounds (as it were) the retreat, in such sort, that the surges of the seas, oft before raging, returne againe to their owne camps. Writers agree not vpon the number of these Iles of Orkenay. Plinius saies there be 40. Iles of them. Others thinke there is but 30. or thereabout. Paulus Orosius accounting them to be 33. in number, iudgeth the neerest the truth. Of these there be 13. inhabited, the remanent are reserued for nourishing of Cattell. There are also some little Ilands amongst them, of so nar∣row bounds, that scarcely (albeit they were laboured) are a∣ble to sustaine one or two labourers. Others are but either hard crags bare, or else crags couered with rotten Mosse. The greatest of the Orkenay Ilands, is named by many of the ancients, Pomona: At this day, it is called, The firme lande, for that it is of greater quantitie then any of the rest: It is 30. miles of length, sufficiently inhabited. It hath twelue Coun∣trey parish Churches,The ancient and new name of the chiefest Towne in Orkenay. and one Towne, named by the Danes (to whose Iurisdiction these Ilands were sometimes subiect) Cracomaca, but now the name being corrupt, it is called in Scottish Kirkwaa. In this towne there are two little Towers builded, not farre the one from the other: one of them appertaines to the King, the other to the Bishop. Betwixt these two towers, stands one Church, very magnifique for such a Countrey. Betwixt this Church and the towers on either side, are sundrie buil∣dings, which the Inhabitants name, The Kings towne, and the Bishops towne. The whole Iland runnes out in Promon∣tories or heads, betwixt which, the sea runnes in, and makes sure hauens for ships, and harbours for boats. In sixe sundrie places of this Ile,Mynes of Lead and Tynne. there are Mines of as good Lead and Tynne as is to be found in any part of Britayne. This Iland is distant from Caithnes 24. miles or thereabouts, deuided from thence
by the Pights sea, of whose nature we haue already spoken. In this sea are diuers Ilands scattered here and there, of whom Stroma for the quantitie, lying foure myles from Caithnes, is one, and that not vnfruitfull: but because it lies so neere to the continent land of Britaine, and that the Earles of Caith∣nes haue alwaies bene Masters and Lords thereof, it is not ac∣counted amongst the Iles of Orknay. From this Iland North∣ward, lies South Ranalsay, which is distant from Duncan-bey, (or rather Dunachis-bey) sixteene miles, and may be sailed with tide, although there bee no winde, in the space of two houres, the course of that Sea is so vehement. Ranalsay is fiue miles long, and hath a commodious hauen, named after Saint Margaret. From it, somewhat Eastward, there lie two little vnoccupied Ilands, meete for pastouring of cattell, called by the Orkenay men, in their originall language, Holmes; that is, plaine grassie ground vpon water sides. Toward the North, lies Burra; Westward lie three Ilands, euery one of them besides another; Suna, Flata, and Fara, and beyond them, Ho∣ia, and Walles, which some men thinke but one Iland, and o∣thers esteeme it two: for that at the time of the Equinoctials, the Spring tydes are verie great and high; and at the dead Neap, the sands are bare, ioyning them together at one straight throat, making one Iland of both: Yet when the tyde turnes and filles the straight againe, they appeare to be two Ilands. In these Iles are the highest hilles that are in all Orkenay. Hoia and Walles are ten miles of length, distant from Ra∣nalsay eight miles, and more then 20. miles from Dunkirk in Caithnes. By North of it, is the Ile Granisa, situate in a nar∣row Firth, betwixt Caithnes and Pomona. The West side of Pomona lookes to the West Sea directly: Into the which, so farre as men may see, there is neither Iland nor Craig. From the East point of Pomona, lies Cobesa; and vpon the North side, it is almost inuironed by the Iles adiacent thereunto. Si∣apinsa turning somwhat East, lies 2. miles from Kirkwaá, euen ouer against it, 6. miles of length. Right West from Siapinsa, are the two little Ilands, Garsa and Eglisa, 4. miles of length: In this Iland they say, Saint Magnus is buried. Next vnto it,
and somewhat neerer the continent land, is Rusa, 4. miles of length, and 3. miles of breadth in some places, well peopled. A little west-ward lies the little Iland Broca. Besides all these Iles, there is another band of Iles, lying to the North, the East-most whereof, is Stronza, & next it, Linga, fiue miles of length, and two of breadth: then sundrie Ilands, named Holmes. The Haá fiue miles of length, and two of breadth. By East of it, lies Fara: and North from Fara, Wastá, running out into the sea in many heads and promontories. Aboue Stronza, at the East end of Etha, lies Sanda, Northward, ten miles of length, and foure of bredth, where it is broadest. Sanda is most fertill of Corne, of all the Ilands of Orknay; but it hath no kinde of fire within it selfe; so the In-dwellers are compelled to make exchange of their victuals for Peits (a kinde of blacke Mosse; whereof, almost all the North-parts of Scotland make their fire) with their neighbours the Ethanes. Beyond Sanda, lies North Rannalsaá, two myles of length, and two of breadth. No man may passe it, but in the middest of Summer, and that, what time the sea is very calme. Vpon the South-side of Po∣mona, lies Rusa, sixe myles of length: and from it Eastward, Eglisa, wherein, as is reported, Saint Magnus is buried. From Eglisa South, Veragersa: and not farre from it, Westraá: from which, Hethland is distant 80. myles, and Papastronza lies 80. myles from Hethland. In the midway betwixt, lies Fara, that is, the faire Iland, standing in the sight of Orknay, and Hethland both: It riseth in three high promontories or heads, and shore craig round about, without any kind of entrance, ex∣cept at the South-east, where it growes a little lower, making a sure harborow for small boats. The In-dwellers thereof are ve∣ry poore: for the fishers that come out of England, Holland, and other Countries, neere vnto the great Ocean, yeerely to fish in these seas, in their passing by this Iland, they spoile, reife, and take away at their pleasures, whatsoeuer they finde in it. Next vnto this Iland, is the greatest Ile of all Hethland, which in respect of the quantitie, the In-dwellers name, The Mane-land, 16. miles of length. There are sundry promonto∣ries or heads in it, amongst which, there are onely two to make account of: the one long and small, runnes North: the other
broader, as in some part 16. miles, runnes Northeast. It is in∣habited for the most part vpon the sea-coast. Within the country, there is no kind of quicke beast, except the fowle fly∣ing. Of late the labourers attempted to manure farther within the Country then their predecessors were accustomed to doe, but they reported small aduantage for their paines. There is very good fishing round about the whole country, and so their commodity stands by the sea. From this Land 10. miles North∣ward lies Zeall, 20. miles of length, and eight miles of bredth, so wild a ground of nature, that no kind of beast will liue in it, except they that are bred in the same. They say that the Bremes Marchants come thither, and bring to them all for∣raine wares they need, in abundance. Betwixt this Iland and the maine land, lie these little Ilands: Linga, Orna, Bigga, Sanctferri: 2. miles North-ward from these, lies Vnsta, more then 20. miles of length, and sixe miles of bredth, a plaine country, pleasant to the eie, but it is compassed by a very tem∣pestuous sea. Via and Vra, are cast in betwixt Vnsta and Zeall. 2. Ilands, Skenna & Burna, lie Westward from Vnsta, Balta, Hunega, Fotlara, seuen miles long, and 7. miles Eastward from Vnsta, 8. miles from Zeall: ouer against the sea that deuides Zeal from Vnsta, lies Fotlara, more then 7. miles of length. There are diuers vnwoorthy Ilands lying vpon the Easside of the maine land: Mecla, the three Ilands of East Skennia, Chual∣sa, Nostvada, Brasa, and Musa. Vpon the West side lie West Shemniae, Roria, little Papa, Venneda, great Papa, Valla, Tron∣dra, Burra, great Haura, little Haura, and so many Holmes ly∣ing scattered amongst them. The Hethlandish men vse the same kind of food that the Orknay men vse,An Iland wher∣in no kinde of she-beast will liue 24 houres together, except Ky, Ewes, Co∣nies and such beasts, as may be eaten. but that they are somewhat more scarce in house-keeping. They are appareled after the Almaine fashion, and according to their substance, not vnseemely. Their commoditie consisteth in course cloth, which they sel to Norway men, in fish, oile, & butter. They fish in little cockboats, bought from the Norway men that make them. They salt some of the fish that they take, and some of them they dry at the winde. They sell those wares, and pay their Masters with the siluer thereof.
A MEMORIALL OF THE MOST rare and woonderfull things in Scotland. AMong many Commodities, that Scotland hath common with other Nations, it is not needfull to rehearse in this place, in respect of their particulars, declared at length before: It is beautified with some rare gifts in it selfe, wonderful to consider, which I haue thought good not to obscure (from the good Reader) as for example. In Orknay, besides the great store of sheepe that feede vpon the maine lande thereof, the Ewes are of such fecunditie, that at euery lambing time, they produce at least two, and ordinari∣ly three. There be neither veneme us or rauenous beastes bred there, nor doe liue there, although they be transported thither. In Schetland, the Iles called Thulae, at the time when the Sunne enters the Signe of Cancer, for the space of twenty daies, there appeares no night at all; and among the rocks thereof, growes the delectable Lambre, called Succinum: Where is also great resort of the beast called the Mertrik, the skins whereof are costly furrings. In Rosse, there be great Mountaines of Marble, and Ala∣baster. In the South of Scotland, specially in the Countries adia∣cent to England, there is a Dog of maruellous nature, called the Suth-hound; because, when as he is certified by wordes of Arte, spoken by his Master, what goods are stolne, whether Horse, sheepe, or Neat: immediatly, he addresseth him suthly to the sent, and followeth with great impetuositie, through all kind of ground and water, by as many ambages as the theeues haue vsed, till he attaine to their place of residence: By the be∣nefit of the which Dogge, the goods are recouered. But now of late, he is called by a new popular name, the Slouth-hound: Because, when as the people doe liue in slouth and idlenesse,
and neither by themselues, or by the office of a good Herd, or by the strength of a good house, they doe preserue their goods from the incursion of theeues and robbers: then haue they recourse to the Dogge, for reparation of their slouth. In the West, and North-west of Scotland, there is great repairing of a Fowle, called the Erne, of a marueilous nature, and the people are very curious and solist to catch him, whom thereafter they punze off his wings, that he shall not be able to flie againe. This Fowle is of a huge quantitie: and although he be of a rauenous nature, like to the kind of Haulks, and be of that same qualitie, gluttonous; neuerthelesse, the people doe giue him such sort of meate, as they thinke conuenient, and such a great quantitie at a time, that he liues contented with that portion, for the space of fourteene, sixteene, or twen∣tie daies, and some of them for the space of a Moneth. The people that doe so feed him, doe vse him for this intent: That they may be furnished with the feathers of his wings, when hee doth cast them, for the garnishing of their arrowes, ei∣ther when they are at warres, or at hunting: for these fea∣thers onely doe neuer receiue raine, or water, as others doe, but remaine alwaies of a durable estate, and vncorrup∣tible. In all the Moore-land, and Mosse-land of Scotland, doth resort the blacke Cocke, a fowle of a marueilous beautie, and marueilous bountie: for he is more delectable to eate, then a Capon, and of a greater quantitie, cled with three sorts of flesh, of diuers colours, and diuers tastes, but all delectable to the vse and nouriture of man. In the two Riuers of Deé and Done, besides the maruel∣lous plentie of Salmon fishes gotten there, there is also a mar∣ueilous kinde of shel-fish, called the Horse-mussell, of a great quantitie: wherein are ingendred innumerable faire, beauti∣full and delectable Pearles, conuenient for the pleasure of man, and profitable for the vse of Physicke; and some of them so faire and polished, that they bee equall to any mirrour of the world. And generally, by the prouidence of the Almightie God,
when dearth and scarcitie of victuals doe abound in the land, then the fishes are most plentifully taken for support of the people. In Galloway, the Loch, called Loch-myrton, although it be common to all fresh water to freeze in Winter, yet the one halfe of this Loch doth neuer freeze at any time. In the shire of Innernes: the Loch, called Loch-nes, and the riuer flowing from thence into the sea, doth neuer freeze: But by the contrary, in the coldest daies of Winter, the Loch and riuer are both seene to smoake and reeke, signifying vn∣to vs, that there is a Myne of Brimstone vnder it, of a hot qualitie. In Carrik, are Kyne, and Oxen, delicious to eate: but their fatnes is of a wonderfull temperature: that although the fatnes of all other comestable beasts, for the ordinarie vse of man, doe congeale with the cold aire: by the contrarie, the fatnesse of these beasts is perpetually liquid like oile. The wood and Parke of Commernauld, is replenished with Kyne and Oxen, and those at all times to this day, haue beene wilde, and all of them of such a perfect wonderfull whitenesse, that there was neuer among all the huge number there, so much as the smallest blacke spot found to be vpon one of their skinnes, horne, or clooue. In the Parke of Halyrud-house, are Foxes, and Hares, of a wonderfull whitenesse, in great number. In Coyle, now called Kyle, is a rock, of the height of twelue foot, and as much of bredth, called the Deafe Craig, For al∣though a man should crie neuer so loud, to his fellow, from the one side to the other, he is not heard, although he would make the noise of a gunne. In the countrey of Stratherne, a little aboue the old towne of the Pights, called Abirnethie, there is a maruellous Rocke, called the Rocke and stone, of a reasonable bignes, that if a man will push it with the least motion of his finger, it wil mooue ve∣rie lightly, but if he shall addresse his whole force, he profites nothing: which mooues many people to be wonderfull mer∣ry, when they consider such contrarietie. In Lennox, is a great Loch, called Loch-lowmond, being
of length 24. miles, in bredth eight miles, containing the number of thirtie Iles. In this Loche are obserued three woonderfull things: One is, fishes very delectable to eate, that haue no fynnes to mooue themselues withall, as other fishes doe. The second, tempestuous waues and surges of the water, perpetually raging without windes, and that in time of greatest calmes, in the faire pleasant time of Sum∣mer, when the aire is quiet. The third is, One of these Iles, that is not corroborate nor vnited to the ground, but hath beene perpetually loose: and although it be fertill of good grasse, and replenished with Neat; yet it moues by the waues of the water, and is transported sometimes towards one point, and otherwhiles toward another. In Argyle, is a stone found in diuers parts, the which laid vnder straw or stubble, doth consume them to fire, by the great heat that it collects there. In Buquhan, at the castle of Slains is a caue, from the top whereof distilles water, which within short time doth con∣geale to hard stones, white in colour. In this countrey are no Rottons seene at any time, although the land be wonder∣full fertill. In Lothien, within two miles of Edinburgh, Southward, is a wel-spring, called, Saint Katherins well, which flowes perpe∣tually with a kind of blacke fatnesse, aboue the water: where∣of Dioscorides makes mention. This fatnes is called Bitumen aquis supernatans. It is thought to proceed of a fat myne of Coale, which is frequent in all Lothien, and specially of a sort of coale, called vulgarly the Parret coale: For as soone as it is laid in the fire, it is so fat and gummy, that it renders an ex∣ceeding great light, dropping, frying, hissing, and making a great noise, with shedding and diuiding it selfe in the fire, and of that marueilous nature, that as soone as it is laide in a quicke fire, immediately it conceiues a great flame, which is not common to any other sort of coale. This fatnes; is of a marueilous vertue: That as the coale, whereof it proceeds, is sudden to conceiue fire and flame, so is this oile of a sudden operation, to heale al salt scabs and humours, that trouble the outward skin of man, wheresouer it be, frō the middle vp, as
commonly those of experience haue obserued. All scabbes in the head, and hands, are quickly healed by the benefit of this oile, and it renders a marueilous sweet smell. At Abirdene is a well, of marueilous good qualitie to dis∣solue the stone, to expell sand from the reines and bladder, and good for the collicke, being drunke in the Moneth of Iuly, and a few daies of August, little inferiour in vertue to the renowned water of the Spaw in Almanie. In the North seas of Scotland, are great clogges of timber found, in the which, are marueilously ingendred a sort of Geese, called Clayk-geese, and do hang by the beake, til they be of perfection; ofttimes found, and kept in admiration for their rare forme of generation. At Dumbartan, directly vnder the Castle, at the mouth of the riuer of Clyde, as it enters into the sea, there are a number of Claik-geese, blacke of colour, which in the night time do gather great quantitie of the crops of the grasse, growing vp∣on the land, and carry the same to the sea. Then they assem∣ble in a round, and with a wondrous curiositie, do offer eue∣ry one his owne portion to the Sea-floud, and there attend vpon the flowing of the tide, till the grasse be purified from the fresh taste, and turned to the salt: and lest any part thereof should escape, they labour to hold it in, with labour of their nebbes. Thereafter orderly euery fowle eates his portion. And this custome they obserue perpetually. They are verie fatte, and verie delicious to bee eaten. FINIS.
