18507.240 S118676 99853883 19282
February 8. Numb. 10. THE CONTINVATION OF OVR FORRAINE INTELLIGENCE, since the 3. of the last to this present. Conteining many remarkable passages, amongst the rest these following. A more exact Relation of the fearfull burning of the hill Soma nere Naples then the former, with the effects it hath wrought in that Citie vpon the publicke Harlots as well as other people. The adventure of the Imperiall Generall Pappenheim to relieue (or rather to ruine) the Citie Magdenburg, with the successe thereof, as much as we haue yet re∣ceived of Credit. The late proceeding of the King of Sweden forces in Wit∣tenburg, & what Townes he hath taken; his preparati∣on and mooving, to meet with, and to prevent the de∣signes of the Imperialists nere Erford, and elsewhere. The state of the French K. in Lorraine, & how he moues. The late arrivall and royall entertainment of Monsieur the Kings brother at Bruxsell. LONDON. Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicolas Bourne. 1632.
The Continuation of our Weekely NEWES. From Lyons the 3. of Ianuary, 1631. OVR King hath sent to Paris for his royall Or∣naments, either to hold his Entre at Nancy, or to visit his Majestie of Sweden. Some thinke it is for an Election of a Roman King. We thinke therefore his Majestie will not come to Paris againe, before he hath quite subdued the Dukedome of Lorraine. And it is certaine, that the Duke of Bavaria, Arch-bishop of Mentz, and other Ca∣tholique States, make earnest suite for assistance from his Ma∣jestie. And we thinke they will surely obtaine so much of him, that he will intercede with the King of Sweden to vse no hostilitie against the Catholiques, and if he will be indu∣ced thereunto, we shall in time heare. They be very busie in France in levying of Souldiers, and there be more commanded into Provence and Marselles, whence it appeareth, that the next Summer there will be some warre in Italy. From Regensburg the 4. Ditto. Many people retire themselues from the vpper Palatinate hither; for that the Elector of Saxon is aboue eight thou∣sand strong about Eger: And certaine Commissioners are ar∣rived here, who place divers Souldiers along the river of Da∣nuby, and make their Quarters as farre as Passau, which the Bavarian-Countrymen much dislike. And many vnmarried men are pressed to the warres.
In the Land beyond the river of Ens, divers Imperiall Com∣panies of foote and horse are alreadie inquartered, and more expected. Wherefore the Boores there are very vnruly, and it is to be feared a Rebellion will arise among them. Generall Tilly is returned from Amberg to Nordlingen, to gather his Souldiers, to what intent time will declare. From Leipsich the 5. Ditto. Coronell Bannier vsed great force before Magdenburg, but the besieged defend themselues valiantly, in hope that Pappenheim (who already is arrived at Wolfenbutle with fif∣teene hundred men, and hath taken out of the Garrisons here and there about eight thousand men) would without fayle relieue them. Hee is marched already with divers Regi∣ments towards Halberstadt. Wherefore the Duke of Weymar his Souldiers about Er∣ford doe rise to joyne themselues with Colonell Bannier. Also the Duke of Lunenberg and the Bishop of Bremen, ga∣ther their Souldiers together, to ioyne with the sayd Bannier to prevent Pappenheim. From Hamburg we vnderstand, that thereabout are arri∣ved divers thousands of Swedes, who take their quarters a∣bout the river Elbe, and dayly expect more, and then will passe ouer the Elbe to besiege Staaden, and Boxtehut; To which purpose the King of Denmarke hath gathered a great number of men, and the sayd Citties haue beene already de∣manded to surrender themselues. And so they intend to ridd the Bishoprick of Bremen, and land about the Weser, of the Imperialists. The Imperialists are not yet gone out of Wismar and Do∣mitz, the cause whereof is thought to be, that the Comissio∣ner they sent vnto Collonell Tieffenbach concerning their de∣parture is not yet returned. From Franckford the 6. of Ianuary. The King of Sweden is yet (as we vnderstand) at Mentz
giveth daily audience vnto those Princes, Earles, and Ambas∣sadors that be there with him. Those of Franckford haue obtained of the King not onely that they may retaine their old Imperiall priviledges and Iu∣risdiction. But also Proclamations haue beene published by the King, to let all men know, that all and every Merchant of what Religion or Nation soever they be, which desire to traffique thither, may with their Merchandize at the time when the Mart is kept, or whensoever they shall trade thi∣ther, passe and repasse without any molestation. And his Ma∣jestie hath thereupon given especiall charge to the Officers and Souldiers not to hinder the same. The spirituall Electors are yet levying Souldiers, and thrust themselues into the King of France his protection, and espe∣cially since there is a French Ambassadour with the King of Sweden, who requested that his Majestie would restore vn∣to the spirituall Electors and Princes their Lands againe, and much insisted vpon the alliance betweene his King and the Duke of Bavaria. But it seemes the King of Sweden doth not much regard it, and will neverthelesse not too soone re∣store those Countryes againe: And it may happen, that the King of Sweden in recompence of his expences will detaine them and others the longer, for the better securitie of the Pro∣testants. From Vienna the 7. Ditto. The Imperiall Army is now distributed into the hereditary possessions, although many complaints there haue bin made, yet all is referred vnto the Duke of Friedland; and most of the new levied Souldiers runne away, especially the Hunga∣rians, of which 16. Companies ranne away together at once, and haue done great hurt with pillaging in Moravia. From Leipsich the 7. Ditto. It is here reported, as if Colonell Pappenheim (who is about eight thousand strong) should haue brought into Magden∣burg
an hundred men foote and horse, and aboue three hun∣dred Waggons with provision, but no man will giue credit vnto it, because Colonell Bannier lay neere vnto it with di∣verse of his Regiments, and the Weymarish Souldiers who being about 6000. lay about Erford, marched towards Fran∣conia, to joyne themselues with him. Also the Landgraue of Hessen is arrived with his Army a∣bout the Weser to follow Pappenheim, and therefore it is thought, they will rather bring Pappenheim into the middle of them, then that hee should haue succoured Magden∣burg. From Franckford the 10 Ditto. The King of Sweden passed by this way yesterday towards Hanau to receiue his Queene (as is said) who is daily there expected, and hath not seene the King in 19. moneths. And the Swedes haue taken Germersheim, Cronweisen, Speier, and divers places more, they speake also of Heydelberg, but it is not beleeved. The Marshall of the field Horne hath blockt vp Schorndorfe in the Dukedome of Wirtemberg: and the Boores there are in Armes about 8000. strong, to hinder the threatned Invasion of Colonell Altringer. The French Forces are said to lie 7. miles from Strasburgh still, and we heare nothing of their marching. The Governour of Zaberne hath fortified himselfe strong∣ly, hath taken the Imperiall Souldiers into pay, that ran out of the Bishopricke of Mentz. From Naples, the 6. of Ianuary. Vpon Tuesday morning about one of the clocke, being the 16. of December, the Mountaine of Soma about 6. miles from Naples brake forth into a very strange and marveilous burning, wōderfully astonishing the Inhabitants round about; and continued with great violence for the space of two daies covering, or rather burning the neighboring Townes round about with ashes therof: many both men women & children burned, multitudes leaving their habitations, escaped onely with their liues, fleeing with their children to Naples for re∣fuge,
where indeed those of this Citie haue not wonted to extend their Charitie towards the distressed in such abundant measure. The horses, oxen, sheep, & other annimals left behind them, were all destroyed by the fires extremitie; the which evaporated forth most hideous noyse, much like Thunder, or the noyse of great Ordnance, which we of Naples heard as easily as if we had beene close by it. The force of this fire was such, that it sent forth pieces of the Mine weighing aboue an hundred weight two miles distant from the place. I spoke with them that out of curiositie went within 3. miles of the Mount, but such pieces fell neere vnto them, checking their hardinesse, that feare caused their retyre with great astonish∣ment. But that which hath administred most terror, was the con∣tinuance of Earthquakes ever since the Mount began to burne the most violent were the first two dayes, which happened once in a quarter of an houre, which so far affrighted the Ne∣apolitants, that they greatly feared the sinking of the City, or the falling downe of their houses vpon their heads. Many therefore fled out of the City into other remote places, the Viceroy purposing to doe the like was prevented, because not thought fit of the Collaterall. Many through feare sought out vacant places, where they might repose themselues in their clothes in the night season, others building sheds of boards to shelter themselues: for the space of two houres the Levant windes, that is the East, blew the smoake towards the City, which much obscured the ayre, and the streets almost an inch thicke with ashes which came from the Mount: and if the wind had continued, it would haue driven, or caused all the people to haue fled out of the City; but a Ponnent wind that is a West hapned, thanked be God it hath not much annoyed the City, but hath burnt vp a great part of the Country. The ashes I am credibly informed extending to Burletta, which is aboue 60. English miles from the place: since the first two dayes the Earthquakes are not so frequent, neither so violent, but do still continue. Evident are the demonstrations of their humiliation. It were incredible to relate the number of their
processions, for their great and numberlesse transgressions; and that by the people of every condition, in divers manners. Some by the Viceroy and Nobilitie were performed in most solemne manner; so also by the Cardinall on his bare feete, with other of the Clergie: great quantity of men most grie∣vously whipping themselues vp and downe in token of their humilitie. Many were the men also that in pennitentiall ha∣bits went bare footed in their processions: so in like manner women with their haire hanging loose about their eares; and of these the greatest part were whores, which for number are more then a good many, being estimated to bee aboue 40. thousand (some are of opinion many more) thirty thousand are registred, and pay the Gabella. Their processions were day and night, grieveous and dolefull were their cryes in ge∣nerall. By the commaund of the Viceroy all shops were shut in for foure dayes, and every one to devote themselues to fa∣sting, praying, and pious actions: and that if any should be found in the house of a whore, to forfeit 2000. Duckets, and the whore to be whipt about the City, & banished the King∣dome. Men not able to pay the penaltie, to be sent to the Gal∣lies; (as a thing most rare) the whores confesse themselues in great abundance, some retire into Monasteries, many con∣verted, and great hope of reformation expected. In fine the hill is much consumed, and continueth burning, the vent be∣ing much inlarged, and Earthquakes (God be thanked) ceased. From Regooza the 17. of December. The 17. of this present in the morning was found here in Regooza, and the Territories thereof, ashes which covered all the ground over halfe an inch thicke, and had a burning-sent, and that day continued darkish, with some small raine, and about two of the clocke in the after-noone began to darken more and more, so that about halfe an houre after two it was as darke as midnight, which made all the people for feare flie into the Churches, where they remained till somewhat past three, for then it began to cleere, and suddenly appeared light againe. As yet we doe not heare whether it hath beene so in other parts hereabouts.
Extract of a Letter written at Sultsbach the 12. of Ianuary. Generall Tilly arrived yesterday at Ambeg, accom∣panied by about 50. horses, hee came thither in his Coach from Newmarke. It is said there are following after him 2000. horse. With whom he intends to goe to Weyden. wherein there is already a great Garriso n thence to view the conveniency for forming therea∣bout of a Campe, and perhaps to visite the Saxonian forces that lye enquartered about Eger; To which end this very night the horse that lye hereabout have bin commanded to march towards Neustadt neare Weyden, to be mustered. Generall Gallas, who doth now command some Im∣periall forces in Bohemia, lyeth at this time with his forces about Plau, Daus, Cladra, Darhaw and Heyd which is but one dayes journey from Weyden. There∣fore the Saxonian forces have need to be watchfull and ready when these guests shall come to visite them. Among Tillyes forces, that lye in their winter quar∣ters in the Countrey called Ries and about Donawert, the plague beginnes to be very fierce. But yet we heare they are not so much affrighted thereby as they are onely by the name of the Swedes, of whose comming they cannot abide to heare. The Maiestrate of VVeyden having kept in their custodie the keyes of their gates (although they have an Imperiall Garrison with them) have beene forced to deliver the same up unto Collonell Linloch, who commands the said garrison; But because it was feared the inhabitants will take it ill and perhaps undertake to beate the said garrison out, the keyes were restored backe againe to the Maiestrate: But to assure the feare∣full garrison, the burgers and inhabitants are this ve∣ry day to deliver up their armes. From Mentz the last of December. I forgot in my last to tell you, that there was found in the Castle of Konigstein (which as I told you former∣ly
was last weeke surrendred to Land-grave VVilliam of Hessen) such store of all sorts of Victualls, Muniti∣ons & faire brasse pieces of Ordnance. That we cannot marvell enough that the garrison that was in it did de∣liver the same, since they had all manner of provisions of all necessaries both for mans sustenance and recrea∣tion, sufficient store for more then a whole yeare. On Christmas evening there arrived heere to the King, Palatine Augustus and Duke Adolph Frederic of Mec∣kelburg. And there are many other young Princes here Who for the most part take commissions to leavie forces for his said Maiesty. And verily the leavies doe very well goe on (as we understand from many brave and valorous Colonels) and there have also beene late∣ly given speciall Commissions unto some whom I may not as yet name here, to have generall Command over certaine forces this comming spring, at which time his Royall Maiesty hoping to bring into the field (be∣sides the army of the Elector of Saxen which is to consist aboue thirty thousand men) at the least three hundred Cornets and five hundred Ensignes, the en∣tertainment wherof you may thinke will amount to an exceeding, yea infinite expense: Seeing the Army which his Maiesty doth at this time maintaine, doth cost about 150. Millions of dollars a yeare. In Amsterdam 4. February, 1631. Letters from Cullen arriued this day, doe certifie us that Pappenheym the Emperors Generall had brought into Magdenburg 2. or 300. Wagons, and in marching out of the City againe, were encountred by the Com∣mander Bannier, who hath rooted them and taken the sayd Generall Papenheym Prisoner, upon which the Garrison which was within Magdenburg fled. But the truth hereof we must expect with the next. From Hamborough here arrived passengers yester∣day, who have not beene long from thence, which doe affirme, that before their departure from thence, they had certaine tydings, that the Garrison which was
within Magdenburg, were fled from thence, having left behind them but 4. pieces of Ordnance, that were serviceable, the rest they have nayled, and cast into the Elve. The King of Sweden was in MentZ, having beene with his Queene at Hanaw. We have tidings that the Bishop of Trier is agreed. From Antwerp. Monsieur the French Kings brother arrived at Brus¦sels on the 28. of Ianuary in the afternoone about 4. of the clocke, and was received with great magnifi∣cence, the Burgers went in their Armes about one league and a halfe to meete him. He made his entry on horse-backe, being cloathed in gray, and a buffe-coller. The troopes to receive him were of 3. sorts. The first were with Gentlemen with whom went the at∣tendants of Monsieur. The second consisted of the Marquis Mirabell, Mar∣quis Eyton. Marquis de Balanson, Prince of Braban∣son, Simey, and all the Nobility of the Court. In the third came Monsieur himselfe, accompanied by the Marquis de la Cruce,  Don Carlos Coloma, with some Nobility and her highnesse guard. From Leypsich the 15. of Ianuary, 1632. The Imperialists have quitted Magdenburg, but before their departure they did all the spoile they could, they pulled downe all the steeples, brake the windowes, and also the goodly Organs, and tooke away the pipes, set the roofe on fire but it would not burne. They also under-mined the bulworke cal∣led the Deck, they brake with a petardo, the Ducer and Sudenberger gates. Divers peeces of Ordnance which they could not take along with them, they nayled up, and cast some of them into the river Elbe. And now three Companies of Swedish Souldiers are put into the remnant of the Cittie. And while Papenheym withdrew himselfe to Wolfen∣buttle the Swedish Army followed him at the heeles.
And it is reported they have had already an encoun∣ter. And VVolfenbuttle they say is blockt up. The Countrey people on both sides are very much wasted, but seeing the passage of Lower Saxony unto the VVeser is free againe, the pooore people recover a∣gaine. In Bohemia the Souldiers dye apace, but daily sup∣plyes come hither againe. His highnesse the Duke of Saxony with two Dukes of Saxon Altenburg are heere, with many Officers more. But they will depart hence within these two dayes. From Franckford 21. Dito. His Maiesty of Sweden with his Royall Consort re∣turned safe hither from Gelhenhausen yesterday in the evening, and were received with peeces of Ordnance; His Maiesty is daily waited on by divers Princes and Ambassadors from great Potentates. Leypsich 18. Dito. This day were sent from hence tenne peeces of Ordnance to Torgaw, among which were foure halfe Canons, with tenne horses to each peece, and foure to each of the other, and many Wagons with munition, which were taken from Tilly. And it is reported, that on Thursday last the garrison of VVismar depar∣ted. And that Papenheim, Count VVolffe of Mansfelt are in VVolfenbutte. Laus Deo Franckford 25. January 1632. On Twesday last at night the Queene of Sweede came unto Hannaw where the King of Sweed met her and stayed two nights and so both marched forward towards Erfort and some say towards Bamberg who did take out of every Regiment certaine forces, and some out of this Citty to the value of 600. Men so that his Army will be that marcheth with the King some 25000. what should be the cause that hee mar∣ched away from us, is as it is reported that Pappenheim is with 10000. men marched and hath releeved Mag∣denburg
and that the Marquis Hammilton with Banier, were compelled to leave the siege, & to retire to some advantage and so Magdenburg was releeved, but some report since that the Marquis Hammilton with the Duke VVeymar and Banier hath beaten Papenheim but at large of this day the letters doth come; cer∣tain Crabats had an Enterprize of Prague but the D. of Saxe his forces having notice of it met them at the VVelssenberg and cut them off and tooke 4. Ancients and at Eger Coronell Merodes regiment did thinke to doe some enterprize but was beaten by the Duke of Saxe his forces before Eger, the forces of Tilly lye in the upper Palatinate sometime in one place some∣time in another place. Bobenhausen is with all accord taken in by the Count of Jsenberg, many French Ambassadors hath beene with the King of Sweed but what was the matter I know not, but it is spoken that the King of Sweed is gone against Bamberg because the Bishop did not keepe his accord with the King of Sweed. Newes is yesterday that Papenheim is beaten and hath lost all his baggage and that the King of Sweed is returning backe towards Hannaw againe. From Stetin the 30. of December. Both Wismar and DamitZ (as you know townes of great consequence in Meckelburg) are now delivered from the Imperialists, having beene delivered up this weeke. So that the forces that were imployed in the siege thereof may now be elsewhere imployed by the King of Sweden. A letter written at Prague the 25. of Decem∣ber, stil. vet. I would often haue written unto you, but that I know no letters could passe. Now understanding the posts are againe established, according to the former course, from hence to Dresden, I will againe returne to my wonted course and write unto you every week. And to make a beginning, you may be pleased to know,
That on the thirteenth of this present Moneth there arrived sevearll troopes of Crabats here before the gate called the gate of Wissenberg (or white-hill) and intended to surprise or take the Towne by force, whereupon three pieces of Ordnance (which is the to∣ken or warning of the enemies approach) being shot off. The Colonell Commander of the Towne, a Baron of Hofkirk, sent out some companies of horse which sell on the enemy, who quickly betooke himselfe to flight, leaving many dead and some prisoners behind them. The next day (the 14.) the enemy arrived a∣gaine in good earnest, having placed behind the Cra∣bats, about 1000. Musquetiers, and about 1000. Dra∣gons to flanke them. There the enemy approaching neare the Towne, found presently ready to receive him. The two Companies of horse of Arnheyms his guard, and some other troopes, who had placed some Musquetiers into some low ground. Now the said two horse Companies of Arnheym having met with the e∣nemy, turned quickly backe and fled, and the enemy pursuing them eagerly, passe neare the place, where the Musquetiers lying hidden, saluted them so suddenly, that a great many tumbled downe from their horses, and the rest began to flye backe; Whereupon the ene∣my with a reasonable Army appeared on the high ground, and made shew as if he intended to take the Towne by force. Then our forces were brought back into the Towne, and all things prepared for defence. Every one taking his appointed places both in the new Sconces and in the fortifications, and the Governour of the little Towne, being a Count of Solms caused two field pieces to be placed upon a high house in a Gar∣den, whereby he did so trouble some troupes of the e∣nemy that came neare; that seeing all was to with∣stand him, he made againe his retreat. Now when we saw that he was turning backe, our horse being ready
to fall out upon the enemies Reere, then presently the Iesuites began to ring the bels of their Church. Where∣upon the enemy had a mind to come againe on, but our Ordnance doing great harme amongst him, he wēt quite away; And the Governours and Magistrates ta∣king all possible and speedy paines to know the reason of the Iesuites ringing, they found out that the Iesu∣ites had had an intelligence and conspiracy with the enemy. Whereupon their Colledge being visited, there was found great provision of munition and of Armes, for many hundred men, which were ready to bee used both by the Iesuites themselves and others their friends, who endeavoured to make some troubles and would have made a great uprore, (had the enemy got∣ten one gate or any entry into Prague) to favour his designe, and to helpe to kill those within the Towne. Thus God having delivered us, and discovered their treason, there was presently on the very same day pub∣lished a prohibition that no Bell at all should more bee rung in the three Townes of Prague, and that none should be suffered to goe out or to come in, untill fur∣ther order. On the 15. of this, there were put certaine compa∣nies of souldiers, as for Garrison into the two Colled∣ges of the Iesuites in Prague, the one whereof is built in the old Towne, and the other in the little Towne. On the sixeteenth the Magistrates visited the sayd Colledge, and found many warlike provisions and Instruments. Whereupon it was consulted and con∣cluded they should bee sent out of the Towne yet that Evening: And indeed there were already divers Coaches and Waggons ready before their Col∣ledge, for the transport of those irreverend Fa∣thers and Traytors which I saw my selfe. —
But it was delayed untill the next morning. And so On the 17 very early executed, and all Iesuites sent away, so that now we are rid of that plague. Their Colledge of the little Town is now given unto and in the possession of the Carmelites, who dwelled before in the Dutch Church, given to them soone after the battell of Prague, and the Iesuites Colledge of old Prague sell to the share of the Franciscan Fryers, who are very well content of it. Thursday last the Lord of Hofkirch caused the first Sermon to be preached againe in the Dutch Church of the old Towne, and after Sermon his Lordship and ma∣ny Noblemen, Officers and great multitude of people received the Communion. The foresaid Count of Solms, being a very provident and wise man, caused the yce of the River of Muda to be broken up, that there is no passage neyther for root nor for horse, he hath also caused some Ordnance to be placed upon the White Tower, which he hath caused to be mended, whereby we hope to withstand the enemy, and keepe the Towne. The Boores are very resolute in the Country, and they discover and search out all such as are affected to∣wards the enemy, some they Dill, some they take Pri∣soners and bring them to be examined. Yesterday they brought a Prisoner who had tyed certaine Letters un∣der his privy parts, which Letters I know not what they contained, but the carrier is to be hangd. Now we receive newes, that the Imperialists en∣deavouring to take Brandes have beene well beaten for their labour by our Garrison that lyes there, con∣sisting onely of three hundred Musquetiers of the yel∣low Regiment. Thus much for this time, the next Weeke I hope I shall send you yet better newes, but I wish to know whether or no you receive my Letters FINIS.
