2051 S109031 99844681 9515
Two very lerned Sermons of M. Beza, togither with a short sum of the sacrament of the Lordes Supper: Wherevnto is added a trea∣tise of the substance of the Lords Supper, wherin is breflie and soundlie discussed the pinci∣pall points in controuer∣sie, concerning that question. By T. W. 2. CORINTH. 13.5. Prooue your selues vvhether ye are in the faith: Examine your selues. Knovv ye not your ovvne selues, hovv that Iesus Christ is in you, except ye be re∣probats? AT LONDON Printed by Robert Walde-graue, for T. Man, and T. Gubbins. Anno. 1588.
TO THE RIGHT honorable and verie ver∣tuous ladie, Brigit, countesse of Bedford: and to the right worshipfull and his verie good freends, sir CHARLES MORISINES knight, and the ladie DOROTHIE MORISINES his wife, T. W. vvisheth togither vvith all outvvard abu∣dance of vvorldlie blessings the continuall comfort of a good conscience heere, and the eternall saluation of their soules at the last through Christ. THe consideration of the christian fa∣uors, which you (right honorable, right worshipfull, & my verie deere freends) haue carried towards me, and the memorie of some benefits that I haue receiued from you, hath sundrie times so affected my heart, that I could not, but in the good remembrance therof, in some measure of vn∣feinednesse, as in respect of God, praise his holie name for those his mercies, and as in regard of you, with earnestnesse pray vnto him, for your prospe∣rous estates, and that in the best things especiallie, and as in consideration of my selfe, thinke vpon some good meane, wherby I might at the least shew my selfe, in some sort mindfull of, and thankefull for
the same. Whatsoeuer I write in this behalfe, I vt∣ter it (I humblie thanke God for it) not vaine glori∣ouslie to boast, before God or men, in anie thing I haue done, for I know & feele in my selfe, that (ouer and besides my grosse & greeuous iniquities) euen in the best seruices that euer I performed in pietie towards God, or in charitie towards his people, there was by reason of mine owne corruption, and the imperfections that through the same did cleue thervnto, matter sufficient inough, in truth to abase and to humble me indeed: neither yet as cunning∣lie to craue dailie and new kindnesses (a vice too common in this corrupt age) the Lord hauing bin pleased in that behalfe, to bestow vpon me more simplicitie, than by fawning flatterie to fetch from my freends, anie thing that might satisfie large af∣fections, or releeue present want. But to these ends I protest, and that in singlenesse of heart, haue I de∣clared the same, namelie that all my christian ac∣quaintance, and amongst others your honour and worships especiallie might be assured, that the good you haue doone me, though at the first it might seeme to be cast away, in as much as present testifi∣cation of my gratefull minde were not then prest and readie, hath not yet vtterlie beene lost, because now at the length God hath inabled me by some small meanes to declare the contrarie: and againe, that I my selfe feeling my selfe now and then, by Gods grace I doubt not (for as I know, so I freelie confesse, that in my flesh, that is to say, in my selfe, dwelleth nothing that is good) stirred vp to such holie duties, might receiue, not in the things as per∣formed by my self, but as they are graces of God, flowing from his goodnesse, and wrought by his word and spirit, both some comfort in the daies of
my great greefe and heuinesse of heart, and some incouragement to goodnesse also, when mine owne dulnesse and backwardnesse to the same, not onelie ariseth vp in me, but standeth against it, as with force and might, to stop and hinder me therein. In regard whereof also, I doo at this time humblie of∣fer and present vnto you (right honorable & right worshipfull) togither, first a sound discourse or two, which that learned man M. Beza wrote, and I long ago translated, and withall a short summe, that I my selfe penned heeretofore, and haue inlarged againe all of them touching that great question of the Lords supper. For that woorthie mans woorthie works, I dare protest and auer, that if the excellen∣cie, either of the man, or matter, or maner, may purchase a frutefull commendation, and procure fauorable acceptation (with them that feare God I meane, & loue his truth sincerelie) it shall not want either the one or the other. For as concerning the writer himselfe, he is one of the woonders & woor∣thies of the world at this day, a man of rare parts euerie maner of way (whatsoeuer some, either of ig∣norance in themselues, or pride of themselues, barke out against him to the contrarie) whether we respect sound knowledge and iudgement, in the toongs and trueth of God, or faithfull paines, and frutefull trauels in his ministerie and place. And as for the worke, it concerneth a great ground of our christian faith, and the same controuerted, not on∣lie betweene the superstitious papists and vs, in the question of transubstantiation, but with such also as in the common profession of Gods holie word and religion, we charitably take for our brethren, thogh otherwise in this point, ouershot as we say, & ouer∣seene also. The maner of handling is deepe & pro∣found,
and not shallow or meane, after the maner and dealing of other men, there being for the more full explication of the question, deducted and laid out, sundrie of the fundamentall points and prin∣ciples of our christian faith, and namelie touching the seuerall and distinct natures of God and man, and the personall vnion of them in our sauiour Christ. But for mine owne I mind not to say much, speciallie as in commendation therof. That which I thinke, I will plainelie expresse, and protest also, namelie that as nothing of mine, is in anie respect meet, to behold the light of this learned age, both by reason of mine owne wants & insufficiencie, and also by means of the great ripenesse of knowledge and iudgement, that God hath shed abrode into the hearts of manie men: so I confesse my selfe & my writings, much more vnwoorthie, either the same day to be named with that woorthie man of the world, or anie maner of way to be ioined with his. And yet if the church approoue that which I doo, and the godlie receiue some profit by it to spiritu∣all edification, I shall much reioice therin, not as in respect of that I haue doone (for I acknowledge my selfe to haue nothing saue that which I haue recei∣ued) but as in regard of the good effects, that it hath through Gods almightie and secret blessing, brought foorth in the hearts of them, that haue bin or shalbe acquainted therewith: in which treatise, I haue speciallie laboured two things. First in the daies of so great blindnesse and ignorance, amongst the multitude and common sort of people, as now preuaileth, to instruct the simple as much as I could in the sound knowledge of these most holie myste∣ries, that so neither with the idle and vnskilfull con∣ceits of their owne heads, nor with the superstiti∣ous
and erronious opinions of other men concer∣ning the same, cast abrode into the world as baits to catch them, they might be deceiued, and carried away into vntruth, as if it were with a violent tem∣pest & whirlwind. And secondlie, that in the midst of so great and generall carelesnesse, of fitting and preparing men for such woorthie graces, as be ex∣hibited and offered there (howsoeuer a common corruption that way, hath almost carried all away) I might at the least, by reaching them my weake hand and feeble arme, if not altogither pull some out of that puddle, and so bring them to more com∣fortable and sanctified vse of these pledges of Gods grace, and their faith in the same, yet let them be∣hold my loue and sound affection for the effecting thereof to my vttermost. How I haue pursued these points, and atteined that I aimed at, let the godlie iudge, to whose good censures, I doo willinglie sub∣mit my selfe, & all things that shall come from me praieng charitable construction in that I haue doone, and brotherlie admonition if anie thing I haue failed. How it shall preuaile, either with ma∣nie or anie I know not: the gratious issue and bles∣sing thereof I leaue to the Lord, who if our sinnes hinder not, standing betweene him & vs, as a huge and high wall, can and will no doubt make it effec∣tuall in the minds of manie, to their spirituall good. But if your honor (good madame) and you (right worshipfull and my verie good freends) togither with them that depend vpon you, and belong vnto you, may reape christian instruction, and holy com∣fort thereby, and hauing faith & a good conscience in all things, may by this and other holie meanes gratiouslie grow, and mightilie continue, with the increaces of God, euen vnto the fruition of eternall
life at the last through Christ, I shall haue that, which I greatlie wish & desire, and shall thinke my poore paines well satisfied & answered, in the good that shall light vpon them, whom I doo (as dutie al∣so requireth) vnfeinedlie both reuerence and loue in Iesus Christ. Thus humblie praieng pardon of my boldnesse for this dedication, and earnestlie crauing acceptation of my simple trauels, accor∣ding to that accustomed courtesie that you are woont to shew to them, that come to shroud themselues vnder you, I doo in the most dutifull maner that I may or can for this present time end. At London the sixt of this Februarie: 1587. Your honors and vvorships alvvaies duti∣full and bounden in Christ Iesus T.W. the Lordes vnvvoorthie seruant.
THE FIRST HOMILIE, made the seuenth daie of Aprill, in the yeere 1574. I Being about to speake of the Lords supper, will begin with the words of our sauior out of the seuenteenth chapter of the gospell after Iohn.Iohn. 17.3. This is (saith the Lord Iesus) life euerlasting, that they know thee to be the onelie true & verie God,Two things prin¦cipally to be ob∣serued in the text. and him whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ. Out of these words therefore we vnderstand or gather two things: The first is, that our saluation  hangeth vpon the certeine knowledge of the true and very God, who is also the one and onelie God. The other is, that this  knowledge was for our saluation at the last made manifest vnto vs, in the person of his sonne,The knowledge of God without Christ, is no∣thing to sal∣uation. so that he that perceiueth somewhat of God, or knoweth him with∣out Christ, perceiueth or knoweth no∣thing at all to saluation. Wherevpon also this necessarilie followeth, that if we once perceiue the person & office of Christ (for these two things must be ioined togither) we doo withall vnderstand the true and
onelie way of eternall life. And forasmuch as the controuersie tou∣ching the Lords supper must be directed to this end or marke, this must also be con∣fessed, that the controuersies sprong vp & arisen touching these points cannot be ta∣ken away or ended, neither can we vnder∣stand or perceiue what we should truelie & rightly determine concerning the lords supper, except we begin with these things, which must needs be knowne, touching Iesus Christ. Therefore before we come to intreat of the matter it selfe, that is to say, of the supper of the Lord, we wil shew what we ought by the word of GOD to beleeue concerning Christ.Sound know∣ledge of Chri∣stes person and offices, will o∣uerthrow ma∣nie heresies. Certeinelie the thing it selfe will declare, that that foundation or groundworke being once laid, it will come to passe, that manie er∣rors will of their owne accord, without a∣nie other helpe, fall downe togither and vanish away: for it is certeine and mani∣fest, that manie questions tossed to & fro, and handled touching this point, haue sprong from hence,Ignorance and hypocisie, two great meanes to mainteine error. because that some, which do so stiflie defend this their opini∣ons, either haue not vnderstood, or els dis∣sembled, what we ought to iudge and be∣leeue
touching Christ. Wherefore some points being first put downe, we will af∣terwards by this rule examine diuerse, yea, repugnant & contrarie opinions tou∣ching the Lords supper, and will affirme such as are agreeable to these stedfast and vnmooueable principles, to be true, and such others as shall swarue from them, to be false. In Christ we haue, I say,Two thinges cheeflie to be considered in Christ. speciallie to consider two things: his person, and his office. By the word person we vnder∣stand  or meane Christ himselfe.His person: of which he spea∣keth in this homilie. And his office we call that duetie or charge which the father laid vpon him, to saue vs, which thing he himselfe did most perfectlie and  plentifullie performe.His office: of which he spea∣keth in the next homilie. Now in the first place we must speake of Christes per∣son, which we must of necessitie deter∣mine to be such a one, that he was fullie and throughlie able to indure and fulfill that duetie: for vnlesse it be certeine that Christ was such a one, as was able to accomplish all things necessarie, meet and apperteining to his charge, we shall in vaine reason or dispute concerning his office.In Christes per∣son two things. In Christ therefore there are to be considered these two things, to wit, the
natures whereof he consisteth,The whole per∣son it selfe. and the ve∣rie person it selfe, compacted as a man  would say,The two na∣tures wherof it consisteth. First he shew∣eth what we must vnder∣stand by na∣tures in Christ. of these natures. By the na∣tures we vnderstand not naturall power as when we saie, this is the nature of a man, of a beast, of a plant, of this or that thing, neither formall power (for so they should be two persons, of which Christ should consist) but these two substances wherof Christs person consisteth, & is as it were compacted.A similitude. As for example, if we say that man is made of two natures, the one spirituall, which is the nature of the soule, the other bodilie, which is the nature of the body:Eutyches affir∣med, that Christ had but one na∣ture, that is to say, diuine or of God, like as hee was but one per¦son. Hee was a∣bout the yeere 450, as some think. His error was condemned in the Ephesine councell. Nestorius dee∣med our sauior to be God. Hee was as some sup∣pose, about the yeere 419. so we also say and affirme, that Christ consisteth of two natures, of which one is the Godhead, and the other is the manhood. By the way I will speake this thing, that we are constreined to vse new spee∣ches, that we may auoid new errors, or els old ones new polished and trimmed, with which manie men at this daie do intangle & snare themselues: for, as in proper place heerafter we will shew, there haue risen & sprong vp within our remembrance cer∣teine men, who renewing partlie the error of Eutyches, & partlie of Nestorius, haue
in stead of the word Godhead, brought in diuinitie, and therfore we are inforced to distinguish Godhead from diuinitie. And verilie Paule spake not rashlie where hee saith that the fulnes of the godhead dwel∣leth in Christ, where he vseth also,Colloss. 2.9. not the word , that is diuinitie, but , that is deitie or Godhead:The Gretians do in their termes more fitlie ex∣presse religion than the La∣tinists. for the Greti∣ans, I know not by what meane, do much better and more effectuallie expresse these things than the Latins doo, as also in this argument, or matter, I would more glad∣lie & willingly for plainnesse sake say and vse , that is hominitas, if it be lawfull to speake so in Latine, or as you would say, mans nature, or the verie state and condition of mans nature, rather than humanitie or manhood, Then we perceiue & vnderstand, that in Christes person, there are two substan∣ces, to wit, the Godhead and the manhood,Athanasius. as we say. So speaketh Athanasius in that famous confession of his, saieng that he was consubstantiall, that is, of the selfe same substance with the father, and as he himselfe expoundeth it, God of the sub∣stance of the father, and man of the sub∣stance of his mother, that is, of the same
substance that we are. Afterwards the church vsed the word ,Synodus Chal∣cedonensis. that is na∣ture. We confesse, saith the Chalcedon synod, that the sonne consisteth of two na∣tures. Neither in deed was the terme na∣ture vnaduisedlie vsed, or rashlie taken vp, albeit it if we would narrowlie consider the propertie of the word, the word , that is nature, dooth not agree to the diuinitie, for it is deriued or commeth , that is,The reasons moouing the fathers to vse the word, Na∣ture. to be borne or sprong vp, which agreeth well to a thing created, but not to God himselfe, the creator. Where∣fore this seemeth to be the reason, which led and mooued the fathers to vse this word, because they reasoned and disputed against Eutyches, by whome not onelie the verie natures themselues, but also the proprieties of the natures were confoun∣ded and shuffled togither. Now because Eutyches did mainteine and defend both these errors, and the word , dooth be∣side the substance comprehend and set out the proprieties also, by which proprieties, that nature is defined, and made to differ from others, therefore it seemeth that the fathers vsed the word nature. In summe, let vs resolue vpon this, and set it downe
as an vndoubted truth, that when we say, Christ consisteth of two natures, we mean his deitie and humanitie, that is his God∣head, and mans nature. Let vs now come to the word Person.Touching the terme person. The later writers haue called that per∣son, which the former called , and the Latine writers haue reteined and kept in vse this word person. Now a∣mongst diuines, and in their writings  that is substance, and , that is person, are distinguished after this sort:Substance and person distin∣guished. vnder the word ; or  in the plurall number, are meant the per∣sons which are in the cōmon essence or be∣ing, hauing the proprietie ioined therevn∣to, whereby one  a person is se∣parated or distinguished from the other, and by the word , that is substance, God or the Godhead it selfe is signified and meant, but the Father, the sonne, and the Holie spirit, are called , that is persons. Neither was it rashlie or vnaduisedlie doone, that the church hath vsed the name of person,Boetius. which Boêtius hath defined thus, saieng that it is ye com∣municate propertie of a reasonable sub∣stāce, because many did throgh very great
error, freelie & indifferentlie vse these two words , that is person, & , for one and the selfe same thing. So the Latine writers for  or person, v∣sed and said substance, euen as the logiti∣ans are woont so to call it: wherfore that this doubtfulnesse might be auoided, the word  began to be vsed. Now let vs speake more plainlie what we call person, or meane by that name, when we intreat of Christ, whether that, which is as it were compounded, of the Godhead taking, and of the flesh taken, so that, if it might be lawfull for vs to diuide Christ into his parts, one part of his per∣son should be his Godhead, and the other part his manhood?Christes man∣hood cannot properlie be called a per∣son, and the cause therof. Not so at anie hand, for Christ is not said or called a person pro∣perlie in respect of his humanitie or man∣hood, but of his diuine nature onelie, and yet that not to be separated from his man∣hood. This is the cause or reason thereof: If Christes humane nature had beene, be∣fore it was taken of the diuine nature: that is to say, of the word, there should then be an vnton of two persons, and not of two natures, and therfore Christ should be a person compact of two persons, wher∣vpon
would insue manie absurd, vnprofi∣table, yea altogither wicked & vngodlie matters, whereof nowe there is neyther time nor place to speake. Therefore thus it must be determined, that the diuine nature tooke on it the humane nature, for∣ming and fashioning it: and euen whiles it was formed and fashioned, to haue ta∣ken it vnto it selfe, that is to saie, that Christes humane nature was neuer ex∣tant, or had beeing, but in the Godhead: wherfore the humane nature in Christ,Christ as hee is God, is a person, & his godhead is a nature, as al∣so his manhood. is not a person, but the humanitie subsisteth, and hath his being in this person of the word, and therfore Christ is not either in imagination or in deede, a double person, but one person consisting of two natures. For the word is both a nature & a person, but the manhood is not of it selfe, anie o∣ther thing than a nature, which (as they speake in the scholes) is become a person,There is but one sonne of God, as there is but one Christ. and is vpholden in the godhead taking it vnto it selfe, so that now there are not two sonnes, to wit, one eternall and naturall, or of the substance and being of the father, and another created and adopted, but that onelie eternall sonne of GOD, sustaining and vpholding the nature vnited to him∣self,
so that also there are not two Christs, but one onelie, God and man together, from the time that he knitte or vnited to himselfe the nature which he tooke. Now we learne what we may call the person of Christ,What the per∣son of Christ is. to wit, the son of God manifested in the flesh. Let vs come nowe to the word vnion: for vniting is that whereby these two na∣tures, to wit, the godhead or the person of the word, and the humanitie or manhood are coupled together. The Grecians call this ,What vnion or vniting is. that is, the coupling or ioy∣ning together of two thinges or more, in such sort, that of those many things com∣myng together, some one certaine thing is compounded or made.There are diuers sorts of vniting. And there are di∣uers kinds of vnitings: for sometimes na∣ture  is vnited with the forme or shape:  sometime an accident with the subiect: &  sometime parts are vnited and knit vnto parts, to establish or make a whole mat∣ter.Vniting, and v∣nion, or vnitie differ much. Wherefore vniting is one thing, and vnitie or onenesse (as a man might saye) is an other thing. For one or onenesse is not a number, neither dooth it necessari∣ly presuppose a number except in things compounded, but is the beginning of a
number. Therefore we hold, that there is in christ, a vnitie or onenesse indeede of the person, and an vniting of the na∣tures. These words are diligently to be mar∣ked, & so much the more, bicause ye neglect thereof bringeth forth great confusions & troubles in these disputations & matters. Certainely, , that is, vniting, and , that is, vnitie, or onenesse, are al∣togither diuers matters. For in the my∣sterie of the Trinitie, there is vnitie or onenesse of the essence, and a Trinitie in the persons. Againe, on the other side, there is in Christ an vniting of the na∣tures, and an vnitie or onenesse of the person. Wherefore the Fathers saide well, that in the diuinitie, there is not an other thing, and an other thing, that is to say,In the godhead there is but one simple being. two thinges (for in the diuinitie there is but one onely and most simple essence or being) but an other and an other meaning persons. For the Father is one, an other is the Son, and the Holie-ghost is an other. The reason is, because when we say another, we mean the person: when wee saye an other thing, wee meane the nature. Wherefore there is not an other
thing in the diuinity, for so there should be multiplication or multitude of Gods. In Christ on the other side, there is an o∣ther thing,In Christ there is two natures, but not two persons. and an other thing (because the godhead is an other thing than the manhood) and not an other, and an other, bicause Christ is but one subsistence or be∣ing, consisting not of two persons, but of mans nature being taken, which hath his subsisting and being in the diuine nature. Let vs nowe come to a more full and large declaration of the word vnion, or v∣niting. This kinde and maner of vnion or vniting,Errors cannot be wel confū∣ted, til the per∣sonall vnion bee well knowne. is called personall: vppon the true definition of which personall vnion dependeth the confutation of most great errors, wherewith too manie at this pre∣sent are sicke and infected, as we shall wel perceiue, when we shall come to the mat∣ter it selfe: wherefore wee must describe the personall vnion out of the verie worde of God.Isaiah. 7.14. Matth. 1.23. First Isaiah saieth, that this our sauiour is Immanuell, that is, God with vs.Iohn. 1.14. Iohn expounding the fulfilling of this prophecie, saith, that the word became, or was made flesh. Nowe because a thing may be said to be made manie waies, that manner of being made is declared by the
Apostle, in the epistle to the Hebrewes,Hebr. 2.1. when hee saith, that the sonne tooke the seed of Abraham. Therefore the word ta∣king, openeth and declareth this saieng of Iohn: And the word was made flesh, and both these laid togither doo also de∣clare, how Christ is God with vs: and all these things laid or ioined togither doo shew and determine what the personall v∣nion is. They which haue not interpre∣ted that place of Iohn,Three errors by misinterpreting the words of Iohn. out of the place in the epistle to the Hebrues, haue fallen in∣to diuerse errors: for some haue expoun∣ded it thus, the word was made flesh, be∣cause  the word was in sted of the soule vn∣to the bodie taken, that is to say, that as the soule ioined with the bodie shapeth or fashioneth the man: so the person of the sonne tooke vnto it that bodie, that by that meanes he might become Christ. So that they depriued Christ of a humane soule, & in the sted thereof did substitute the God∣head.Apollinaris taught that the sonne of God tooke onelie the bodie of a man, and not a reaso∣nable soule. Tripartit. hist. lib. 5. cap. 44. & lib. 9. cap. 3. Basil. epist. 74. August. lib. & Hier lib. 9. He was about the yeere 380. But beside that this opinion of A∣pollinaris is by almost infinit plaine testimonies of scripture refuted, this also necessarilie foloweth, that except the word had taken the soule vnto it,
likewise our soules should of necessitie be lost, bicause that onlie shal be saued which Christ restored in his own person, neither could Christ properlie haue suffered (that I may let slippe many other most absurd points) seeing that the soule properlie is  troubled and afflicted. Others haue framed and deuised for true flesh, a ghost or fantasie, and to that purpose haue wre∣sted and writhen the worde similitude or likenes,Roman. 8.3. in these wordes of Paule, God sending his own son in the similitude of sinful flesh, &c: whom the old fathers cal∣led .They had a double name, Docitae, or Do∣cetae, and sprung indeede (as some suppose) from Simon Magus, who helde, that Christ came not in the flesh, but that hee was Christ. They held as the Marcionites did, that Christ suffered in a fantasie or ghost: See homil. 2. following. If these mens opiniōs were true, christ shold not be in verie deede Iesus, or a Sauiour, as indeed one that had not bin born or had  suffered for vs. There are othersome, who forsaking these errors, do notwithstāding fall into others, no lesse absurde and dete∣stable, bicause (as the Poet saieth) while fooles auoid some vices or faults, they ru into others.Nestorius, whose heresie what it was is opened before. For Nestorius interpreted these wordes, the word became flesh after this manner, that is to saie, the godhead of the Sonne of God did most plentifullie
and fullie powre foorth, the power and force therof into that flesh which it tooke.The absurditie of the former interpretation. Which interpretation if it be true, Christ is not God, but diuine, or as you woulde say, god-like or heauenlie, and though he be the most excellent amongest saints and holie ones, yet hee is not to be worship∣ped, neither to be accounted as a Saui∣our. Whereas notwithstanding Paule at∣tributeth vnto Christ,Coloss. 2.. not the fulnesse of the diuinitie, but the fulnesse of the deitie or godhead, and to be both GOD and man (which is a proper title to our sa∣uiour Christ) is far different from this, to be one that beareth or carrieth God. So that Nestorius maketh Christ God, not by the vnion of the very hypostasis or per∣son of the word, but accounts him as most diuine, onely by the presence, comming, & force, or by the effusion or spreding abrode of gifts: and beside that, loosing, or destroy∣ing Christs person, he maketh him a mere or only man, he placeth also the person in his flesh a manhood: whereas on the other side, the fleshe taken is sustained and vp∣holden, in, and by, the godhead taking it.Eutyches here∣sie confuted. Eutyches falling into the contrarie
error thought that by these words,Three most grosse errors flowing from Eutyches his heresie. the word was made or became flesh, this was meant that the person or hypostasis of the word was changed into flesh, and for the v∣niting of the natures, he substituted or e∣stablished the abolishing of the Godhead, that is to say, darknesse for light: in which  matter he was most foulie deceiued, for beside that the Godhead is vnchangable, it would follow, if that were true which  Eutyches affirmeth, that the word ceased to be God, so soone as it was made or be∣came flesh, because that that which was changed ceased to be that which it was: as when Moses rod was changed into a serpent it ceased to be a rod,Exod. 4.2. and began to be a serpent,Aristotle. euen as Aristotle teacheth, that by the depriuing or taking away of one forme, another is brought in. But if  the abolishing or taking away be denied, that a mingling a mixture may be esta∣blished, whether it be of the natures them∣selues, it is of the Godhead and the man∣hood, or of the properties of either nature, then will insue that, which is more ab∣surd than the former, to wit, that Christ is neither God nor man, but a certeine third thing compacted of both, as the
drinke called Mulsum, made of wine and honie sodden together, is neither wine nor honie alone, but a certaine matter compounded or made of them both: and what can be imagined more woonderfull and monstrous than these errors?The right inter∣pretation of some words pro∣fitable to con∣fute sundrie errours. But all these errours, are both most shortlie and also most soundlie confuted, if the worde of assuming or taking, bee rightlie ex∣pounded: that is, by the comparing or conferring of other places of the Scrip∣ture. Wherefore declare at the length will some saie,The personall vnion what it is. what is the hypostati∣call or personall vnion in Christ? It is the taking of mans nature, which is susteined or vpholden of the diuine nature, that is to say, such a taking or vniting, that there proceedeth or commeth out of that vniting, but one subsistence or being onelie, in which subsistence, that diuine nature, that is to saie, the per∣son of the worde beareth swaie, or ruleth. I repeate this againe: The hypostati∣call or personall vnion is that, from which reboundeth or proceedeth our hypostasies or person: for the more plaine manifesting and declaring whereof the fathers haue vsed the similitude of the bodie and the
soule,Athanasius. Athanasius, who was a most con∣stant defender and stout maintainer of this truth, being chiefly the author there∣of.A similitude. Wherefore as a certaine soule, beeing ioyned to a certain bodie, maketh one cer∣taine person, as Peter, Paule, Iohn. So that eternall worde of the Father, tooke vnto it that flesh of the virgine, that is to saye, made the same so proper vnto it selfe, that from hence commeth and pro∣ceedeth that person, whiche is called Christ. It appeareth plainelie vnto vs, out of the wordes of Christ in the tenth chapiter of the gospel according to Iohn,Iohn. 10.18. that we must needes consider this mystery or sectet after this sort. Christ there saith, I haue power to lay downe my soule or life, and to take it againe. For necessary is it that Christ shoulde so speake, either secretlie in respect of his bodie,The place of Iohn 10. ex∣pounded: which cannot be vn∣derstood either of the or in re∣spect of his soule, or else in respect of his bodie and soule together, or else distinct∣ly and plainely in respect of his godhead. Christ coulde not so saye in respect of the bodie considered by it selfe,Bodie alone because the body is not said to laie downe a soule or to take it againe, because so excellent an ac∣tion cannot be attributed to an instrumēt
that which is rather subiect to the soule.or Soule alon But is it in respect of the soule it self con∣sidered by it selfe? No indeede: for then Christ shoulde rather haue saide: I haue power to lay downe my selfe a soule, and to take vp againe my selfe a soule. Verily in the resurrection, the soule is not taken vp againe, but the bodie: therefore these words cannot be ascribed to Christ, either in respect of his bodie onelie, or in respect of his soule onely:or of them both togither, What then is it in re∣spect of them both together? No, rather necessarie is it that wee referre it to some third thing, which may be saide to laie downe, and to take vp his soule. Where∣fore Christ so spake according to his dei∣tie: and when hee saieth,but of the god∣head. that he hath po∣wer to laie downe his life, and to take it againe, he dooth againe open that myste∣rie or secret which wee handle. For the verie natures indeede so ioyned together, are in suche sorte sette out, that not two things, but one alone is established, and that without confusion, yet so that the one nature beareth rule. And it is meete to be marked that Christ saieth: I haue power to laie downe, not euery soule, but mine owne. Wherefore this cannot so be
taken, nor referred to this end, that God should be the lord of all being things, but he sheweth, that that soule of his which he would lay down & take again, was other∣wise his soule, than other mens soules are theirs. How then is it Christes soule will some men say? Verily by personall vnion. The scripture saith that God dwelleth in vs,Iohn. 4.12. and yet we beleeue and confes, that he dwelleth not in his saints, by his vnion or vniting:1. Corinth. 6.19. For our bodies are so the tēples of the holy ghost, that yet they make not one subsistēce or being with the holy ghost sith that the sanctified party is seuerally & by himselfe a certaine thing, & so likewise the holy ghost, to wit, god eternall. So a wicked spirit, and some one possessed with ye same wicked spirit, are ioined togither, & yet the vncleane spirite is not in man, as the soule is in the bodie. For the wicked spirit remaineth by it self, a certain thing much like as the ghest is in his inne: and againe, the possessed with the wicked spi∣rit, is so become the inne or lodging place of the wicked spirite, that yet the ghest is another from him. As for vs we affirme, the person of the word, or son of God so to dwell in that manhood that he hath taken
vnto him, that hee hath vnited himselfe thereto by a personall vnion: so I say, that the nature taken or assumed, being sustai∣ned and vpheld in the nature taking or as∣suming, maketh yet notwithstanding but one person, which is the eternall worde of God. Hereupon it foloweth that there are not two sonnes of God, much lesse two Christs, one, the son of Marie, the other, the son of God,Matth. 1.21.23 but one Immanuel and sa∣uior onelie. And this is the very true de∣scription of the personall vnion, as wil yet much more plainelie appeare, if we com∣pare with this truth touching the personal vnion:Sundrie sorts of errors. the descriptions that are partlie felt from the olde heresies, and partlie a∣new deuised by the fresh furbushing of the aforesaid heresies. First, there are some that feare not openly to say, that the habi∣tation or dwelling of God in Christ, is not otherwise to be considered in Christ, or that he doth no otherwise dwell in him, than in other men, yea than in other crea∣tures.Iacobus Andre∣as assertion, and the same con∣futed. Iacobus Andreas in those his The∣sis or propositions, by which he blowed to the field, or bade the battel, wrote the same euen in so many words, as you would saie, to wit, that the habitation or dwelling of
the son of God in Christ is not otherwise to be considered than in all other creaturs whatsoeuer, as in respect of his essentiall habitation or dwelling, for God is euerie where. If a man demaund what shall be the difference of the personall vnion: this shall be their answeare, that it con∣sisteth herein, that into all other things the godhead hath powred forth some pro∣perties or qualities, but into Christes hu∣manity or manhoode hee hath powred all properties. A wonderfull thing, that af∣ter that these opinions haue nowe a long while since bin tossed, and by the solemne and most iust iudgements of Christes church, condemned and confounded by so many darts, as haue come from heauen it selfe, against the authors and fautors of these vngodlie blasphemies, a maruellous thing, I say, that there should now spring vp some, as dare be bolde, both by worde and writing, to maintaine and defend the same, and that with so great reioicing and commendation of most vnskilfull men: for who is he vnles hee be altogither blinde, that seeth not, that if the word be no other wise present in christ, thā in many things, (that is to say, beingly, presently, power∣fully
as in schools they were woont to say) that then Christs person is destroied,His heresie is declared be∣fore. as Nestorius taught? And that if wee grant an effusion or powring forth of all the pro∣prieties of the godhead into the flesh assu∣med or taken, that then the other part of the vngodlie assertion of Eutyches,Concerning him and his heresie, see before. shall be erceted and set vp? A wonderful wound indeed flowing from such diuers matters, to wit, the seperating of the naturs on the one side, & the effusion or powring forth of the properties of the one nature into the other, on the other side, & first in our memo¦ry & time most impudently fried, and most vnskilfully by our vbiquitaries defended. But let vs, I pray you, somwhat more narrowlie looke into the matter, that we may see what it meaneth. This I say; that if the personall vnion be to be defined and determined by the effusion or powring foorth of all properties, that then this,Hee ouerthrow∣eth the error by absurdities in∣suming vpon it. The first absur∣ditie. which of al things is most false & vngodly will follow therevpon, to wit, that God is in some sorte personallie vnited vnto all things created. Why so? Because the effusiō or powring forth of all, & some pro∣perties alone, doo not differ genere, as they say, that is, in the general or cōmon kind,
but according to more or lesse only: wher∣fore either Christ was not otherwise God than any other thing, though perhaps hee were somewhat more perfect than other things, or else other things were diuine and god-like, but Christs flesh most diuine and god-like.The second absurditie. Againe, if the definition of the personall vnion were true, it woulde followe therevpon, that the three persons wer vnited, to that flesh that was assumed or taken, for the essentiall proprietie of the verie godhead it selfe, are common to the three persons in one & the self-same essence or being: therfore to be infinite, almigh∣ty, knowing al things, present euery wher &c: (as they themselues now speak) be not proprieties, either of the father or of the son, or of the holy ghost, but onely of that alone, and altogither singular godhead. Wherevpon it foloweth, that if we grant that definition of the personall vnion, that then the 3 persons of the godhead were in∣carnat,They were so called, bicause they affirmed that God the father suffered. Isiodor. Orig. libr. 8. The third absurditie. & tooke flesh vpon them, and so we shall proceede further than the patropassi∣an heretiks. Moreouer, by this means the godhead it self shold be spoiled of his most essential proprieties, euē this I say which are most proper therto, or which do belōg
vnto the same, after the fourth maner or sort, as the logicians speake, that is to say, doo belong vnto the whole Godhead alone vnto the Godhead, and alwaies vnto the same: for verilie, if they be in deed com∣municated vnto the nature of man that was assured or taken, then I say they doo now cease to be proper to the Godhead, vnlesse we minde to make these termes, proper & common, all one. But the Lord speaketh otherwise in the prophet saieng: I will not giue my glorie vnto another.Isaiah. 48.11. The fourth ab∣surditie. What more? Him whome these men in the first part of their Nestorian opinion, had made of him that was God & man to∣gither in one person, but one that carried or bare God, these now in another part of their Eutychian opinion & conceit, trans∣forme him I say and his flesh (hauing in deed all the properties of the Godhead without exception powred into the same) into the Godhead it selfe. But now, if there nothing happen to God, or there be no accident in him, as indeed there is not, for whatsoeuer is in him, is substance and not accidents, as they speake in schooles, How were the properties (by which he is distinguished from things created) indeed
powred foorth into the flesh assumed and taken, but that also mans nature should be changed into a certeine Godhead that is made or created?He procureth an obiection. But if these men will denie (as sometimes I see them by the power of trueth it selfe constreined to denie) that the monstrous presence euerie where (for whose cause onelie (whatsoeuer they faine) they propound vnto vs that monster of vbiquitie, to be esteemed and reuerenced) dooth not cleaue vnto Chri∣stes flesh as to his proper subiect, or that it is not accidents, but onlie as accidents, then I say, who seeth not what monstrous things these are, to ascribe vnto the flesh a reall presence euerie where in it selfe, though not of it selfe, the subiect whereof should yet notwithstanding, not be the flesh it selfe, but the Godhead, which God∣head for all that, should no otherwise be present to the flesh, than to all other things whatsoeuer? And whereof will these men be ashamed, who are so farre off from be∣ing ashamed of these matters, that yet they dare obiect this against vs, that we exact points of diuinitie and religion to be handled according to the rules of phi∣losophie?The fift absur∣ditie. Certeinelie, if so be it that
the personall vnion must be defined and determined, not by the vnion of the verie person of the word, with flesh assumed or taken, into one and the selfe same subsi∣stence or being, yet without anie reall v∣nion, either of the natures themselues or of the essentiall properties wherwith they are indued, but by the vniuersall effusion or powring foorth of powerfull graces from the nature assuming or taking, into the nature assumed or taken (which mon∣strous opinion fet from the filthie & stinc∣king puddles, both of Nestorius & Euty∣ches also, and twise sod Brentius, Suinde∣linus, Illyrichus, and these other goodlie fellowes doo propound and deliuer vnto the churches of Christ) I say that whe∣ther they will yea or no, this must needs follow vpon it, that Christ is neither God nor man, much lesse GOD and man togither,Chimaera is a monster hauing three heads, one like a lion, ano∣ther like a gote, & the third like a dragon. but a certeine Chimaera or mon∣ster made of most grosse confusion and dis∣cord. Yea, and what meaneth this, that they themselues are of necessitie constrei∣ned to except some things, after that they haue affirmed that all things are pow∣red foorth.The sixt absur∣ditie. For these things verilie to be without beginning to be of him∣selfe
&c. Cannot be attributed to a crea∣ture, but they may be personallie vnited, and are in deed personallie vnited, because that must be true which Christ, himselfe saith:Iohn. 8.58. Before Abraham was, I am. And this is true, because that he that after so manie ages passed from the beginning of the world was made, or became the sonne of Mary,Iohn. 1.1. euen he I say, is that word which was in the beginning, not so much for his full effusion or powring foorth of power∣full graces, as for the bodilie vnion or vni∣ting of the Godhead it himselfe in the per∣son of the word: wherefore, if we will be∣leeue these men, this sonne of the virgine Marie shall not be eternall, because there was not powred into the flesh assumed or taken, that same being without begin∣ning, whereof he cannot be partaker, euen as they themselues confesse, who are other∣wise large sheders abrode, or rather euer∣ters and ouerthrowers of all properties. They being thus driuen from hense, euen as it were out of some hold or fortresse of their owne, at the last they retire hither, or haue this starting hole,Another obie∣ction answered or rather error confuted. to say forsooth, that the personall vnion consisteth heerin, that the word dooth nothing, but with the
manhoood and by the manhood, as the soule dooth nothing, but with the bodie or by the bodie.Peripatelians were subtle phi∣losophers of A∣ristotles sect & opinion, who had their names of disputing walking. I will leaue this to the Pe∣ripatelians to be reasons of, whether it be true, that the soule ioined to the bodie doth nothing of it selfe, for there are not diuers wanting, that doo stiflie and stoutlie denie the same. But I affirme, that that defini∣tion of the personall vnion, cannot stand. I grant therefore, that from the time the eternall word tooke flesh vnto him, that it did not at anie time doo anie thing with∣out the flesh, the reason is, because this v∣nion is perpetuall: and yet for al that, it dooth not heerevpon follow, that whatsoe∣uer the worde did, he did it by the flesh. Though it be granted, I say, that the word did nothing being separated from the flesh, because that that flesh which it once tooke it neuer laid downe, yet it followeth not, that whatsoeuer the word did, it did it by the fleshe, which thing may bee shewed, by most assured and manifest examples.The first ex∣ample. Christ raised vppe himselfe by his owne diuine power, who also had said of him∣selfe:Iohn. 10.18. I haue power to lay downe my soule or life, and to take it againe. Did therefore the Godhead, through the flesh
accomplish and performe that worke? I suppose no man will say so.The second ex∣ample. Iohn. 1.48. Matth. 9.4. When Christ beheld Nathaniell absent, did he see him with his bodilie eies? And when with∣out the disclosing of anie other man, he saw the thoughts of his aduersaries, did he this by anie sharpnesse of mans minde or vnderstanding? No verilie. Where∣fore he saw all these things as he was God, and not with minde or bodie, and yet he saw them not without man, because he being God is man also.The third ex∣ample. Matth. 8.13. Iohn. 9.6.7, &c. When he healed the Centurians seruant being absent, did he that as when he healed that blind man being present, putting his hand to him, and making the claie? No in deed. For he wrought this latter, by his hands moo∣ued through the flesh, that is to say, vsing the instrument of flesh assumed or taken, whereas he healed the other by the onelie power of his Godhead. And yet he was not free from flesh, I confesse it. He hea∣led him therefore with the flesh, but not through flesh. Wherefore in this fel∣low-working togither of the Godhead, & the nature assumed or taken, the personall vnion is not deposed or ouerthrowne, but established rather. Beside though I should
grant the antecedent or first proposition,He granteth the aduersaries that which they speake, and yet they gaine no∣thing by it. to witte, that the worde dooth nothing but with and by the manhood, yet that would not follow therevpon that they imagine. For though the artificer or handicrafts man doo nothing but by his instrument or toole,An apt simili∣tude. yet for all that the artificer and his toole are not vnited into one subsistence or being: this is my meaning, that that it dooth or worketh, is not therefore vnited with that, by which he dooth or worketh, for the dooer, and the instrument of doing are two seuerall and distinct things. So the smith or carpenter is not vnited with his hammer or mallet.Iohn. 1.3. Hebr. 1.1. The father crea∣ted all things through the sonne, as the holie scripture witnesseth. Now because the father created all things through the sonne, shall it therevpon follow, that the father and the sonne are personallie vni∣ted togither? No verilie: For they are, and that in deed distinct persons, Wher∣fore neither in the effusion or powring out of powerfull graces, nor in the com∣municating of their powerfull working togither, can the personall vnion be well described. Let that rather remaine sure, that I haue said, to wit, that that
vnion may rightlie be called personall,Personall vnion, what it is. by which it commeth to passe, that one person of two natures (the natures & properties of either nature remaining safe & sound) becommeth one subsistence or being: of which two natures one, that is to say, the nature assumed or taken, hath his being in the assuming or taking nature, because if either of them did subsist or had it being of it selfe, they should be two persons. Moreouer, before we take in hand to han∣dle the matter it selfe, we must also de∣clare, how from this personall vnion insu∣eth that which the old writers and fathers were woont to call communicating of the properties: for if both the natures them∣selues and the properties thereof doo re∣maine safe and sound, then there remai∣neth likewise vnto either nature these pro∣per attributes or things ascribed vnto them: and therefore it should seeme, that it cannot be attributed to one nature, which is proper and peculiar to the other. And yet the scripture so speaketh, as when it saith that God suffered,Acts. 20.28. yea and we our selues are taught so to speake, in the apo∣stles symbole or creed, when we say: I be∣leeue in Iesus Christ, the onlie sonne of
God, who was conceiued, borne, suffe∣red, cruified, buried, &c.Certeine rules are to be obser∣ued for the right vnderstanding of the commu∣nicating of pro∣prieties. That we may well know and vnderstand this matter, we must earne to distinguish the things attribu to either nature. If we will speake perlie and truelie, we say that things attributed to either of the natures, must most properlie and in deed be attri∣buted to be same.The first rule. And this is the first rule. Wherefore we affirme that Christ, as in respect of his Godhead, is the eter∣nall sonne of God, is infinite, is euerie where, is eternall, is the creator of all things, cannot die, is inuisible, &c. All which things are truelie and properlie at∣tributed t that nature of the son of God which is vited to flesh. Now these things are proper to his humane nature or man∣hood, that it had a beginning, that it was conceiued by the Holie ghost, that it suffe∣red, and at the last rose againe. Now from whence commeth this difference? Verilie from this, that the natures re∣maine safe, sound, and vnconfounded, least if in the personall vnion they were con∣founded, that which were spoken of ones nature should be attributed to the other. And the second rule is this.The second rule Certeine
things are attributed to, or spoken of Christ, according to his person and not as in respect of his natures, tha is to say, such thinges in deede as respct the per∣son, and are attributed to his ad person, which cannot yet be spoken suerallie of either of his natures: as for example, if I say Christ is the mediator: tht word me∣diator, neither to the Godhed by it selfe nor to the manhood by it sele, or apart from the Godhead, but to that whole per∣son of Christ, for he is a mediator accor∣ding to either nature: and hese things attributed togither to Christ, are perso∣nall, that is to say, respect his whole per∣son, which vnlesse we confesse we shall fall into the heresie of Nestorius and his par∣takers. And yet in the meane while this & such like, are so the works of the whole person,Leo. One sort of he∣retiks had both these names, be∣cause they held that Christ had but one will, & one nature, and not two wils, or two natures an∣swering to his two natures. that notwithstanding either of the natures doth distinctlie bring with it his proper & peculiar worke to this common deed of redemption, mediation, &c. as Leo teacheth in that his famous and woorthie epistle, which also we must know and be∣leeue, least we should fall into that other heresie of the Monothits or Monophy∣sits. And yet the kno is not vntied, nor
the mater dispatched. Therefore we are principalie to marke yet a certeine other maner o speech touching Christ, which as it is tue in respect of the whole per∣son,These darcke termes are ex∣pounded after∣wards by the author himselfe. denminated either of the concrets: so it cannt without great impietie be at∣tributed  either of the natures, conside∣red by themselues, or in the abstract: as for example, when we say, God (to wit, the word  sonne) redeemed the church by his blod: so we doo rightlie beleeue and say, tht God suffered and died,Acts. 20.28. which that vngodie man Nestorius denied. For vnlesse God had beene he that suffered for vs, his sufering could not haue brought saluation vnto vs. Wherefore we say that God was rne, suffered, dead, and rose againe. And againe on the other side we say, that the sonne of man was in heauen, when he spae on the earth with Nicode∣mus.Iohn. 3.13. And his we affirme euen by this rule following, to wit,The third rule. that whatsoeuer words or termes, are proper to either of the natures, that is to say, the Godhead or the manhood, they may be changed in the concret, but not in the abstract.Abstract, and what he mea∣neth thereby. But some man will say, What is it that you call the abstract? We call the very forme
it selfe, being by thought seuere from the matter, an abstract: as for example, If I doo in my mind comprehend, no some iust man or other, but some iustice or righte∣ousnesse of a man: which also hath place in other predications. Iustic therefore or righteousnesse shall be a crteine ab∣stract, that is to say, a thing csidered by it selfe, and not in the subiect, or particu∣lar partie wherein it is.Concret, and what he mea∣neth therby. And he concret shall be the matter or man hiselfe, as a iust man, to wit, he that is ndued with that iustice or righteousnes. S in Christ, we consider in the abstract to natures, the manhood and the Godhea, but in the concret we comprehend him God & man. Therefore let Godhead and anhood be the abstracts, and God and an the con∣crets. And then I say, that the thinges attributed to the humanitie nay be attri∣buted to God, or spoken of im, though they cannot be attributed to the Godhead, or spoken thereof: and on th other side I affirme, that such things as be proper to the Godhead may be attributed to man, though not to the manhood. Wherefore this proposition is true: This man is God, or this: The eternall word of the
father is man: but these are vngodlie and blasphemous: the Godhead is the man∣hood, or the manhood is the Godhead. So we must say and beleeue God, that is to say, the sonne was borne of the virgine, suffered, dead, &c. but not the Godhead: for he in deed that is God suffered, but not his Godhead.1. Pet. 3 18. Therefore when Peter saith that Christ suffered, he added in the flesh. So Paule, Rom. 1.Rom. 1.4. He was mightilie de∣clared to be the son of God according to the spirit. The cause of this predica∣tion or speech in the abstract, is the verie personall vnion it selfe, to wit, because that that subsistence or being, or that person Christ, is by the figure Synecdoche,That is  put for the whole. so de∣nominated of either of his natures. Wher∣fore, whether he be called man, he is yet notwithstanding vnderstood to be God, or whether he be called God, he is like wise vnderstood to be man. But when wee speake of the natures themselues, to wit, either the manhood or the Godhead, by these abstracted names ther is nothing els signified or meant but the seuerall natures in and by themselues. And least these ma∣ner of speeches might seeme to anie man darke and strange,He preuenteth an obiection. as though christian re∣ligion
were conteined in certeine hiddē mysteries and secrets far remooued from common vse & vnderstanding, whereas ra∣ther on the other side, the Holie ghost in∣structing the church, touching these most darke & hidden matters, hath kept a most grosse (as you would say) and common ma∣mer of teaching.Theodoretus. Two similitudes to explaine the point by. Theodoret doth rightlie and trulie tell vs, that euen the common people are hardlie accustomed to speake a∣nie otherwise: for if Peter speake, who would not rather say that Peter speaketh, than say that Peters bodie or toong spea∣keth? and yet notwithstanding, neither dooth Peters minde, nor his foot nor anie other member speake, but his toong or mouth. But because these things haue euen personallie growne vp (as it were) togi∣ther, and are come into one subsistence or being, that is truelie in the concret attri∣buted to, and spoken of the whole, which if it were vttered of the parts of the whole considered seuerallie, and by themselues, should be falslie spoken. What more? By reason of this personall vnion, though now it be dissolued through death, Peter shalbe said to haue died and sat at Rome,
whose soule yet notwithstanding, neither s dead, neither anie where placed vpon he earth. So when I say, the eternall onne of God died, I consider and meane him as he is whole Christ, although I de∣nominate him after one of his natures, to wit, his mortall or humane nature. So againe I say: This man forgiueth sinnes, and yet not as he is man of himselfe (for it belongeth onelie to God to forgiue sinnes) but because he is God and man in one person togither.Marke. 2.7. And this is the manner of speaking which the ancient diuines haue called the communicating of proprieties,Communica∣ting of proprie∣ties, and what it is. which some do not rightlie distinguish from ma∣king common, and other some disputing whether it be reall yea or no, haue be∣wraied most grosse ignorance. And this may easilie be decided and determined by the vnmoouable foundations abouesaid, if we haue not a contentious spirit, where∣vnto if we should not yeeld, doubtlesse the old sophisters and naturall philosophers, if they were aliue at this day, wold laugh vs to scorne.Religion allow∣eth no falshood. Diuinitie & christian religion admitteth no false matter or point: there∣fore that trope or maner of spech touching
the communicating of the proprieties, is altogither true in the concret, that is in Christs person, being weighed, as if some whole thing should be considered iointlie and togither, neither was it woont other∣wise to be vsed in the church. But in the abstract, that is in the appellatiue or com∣mon name, or name whereby either of the natures be called, it can neuer be vsed without vngodlinesse, much lesse can it be taken for true, that the proprieties of the Godhead may be spoken of the manhood, or the proprieties of the manhood spoken of the Godhead. And these be the points, which we being about to speake of the Lords supper, haue thought needfull to be propounded and deliuered, that therefore remaining behind, may be the better vn∣derstood, of which we will, by Gods grace, speake at large in the next reading or lecture.
THE SECOND HOMILIE, or Sermon, made the eight of Aprill. 1574. THis is the sum of the thinges that wee spake in the former Sermon, to wit,The summe of the former Ser∣mon, consisting of foure parti∣cular points. that 1 al the knowledge of our saluation,  did depend of the knowlege of Christ: and that wee 2 had in Christ, principally two  things to be considered, that is to saye, such as did concerne the knowledge of his person, and such also as did concerne the knowledge of his offices. We haue heard, 3 that vnder the name or worde of person,  there was meant Christ himselfe: further, that that person consisted of two natures, that is, the godhead & the manhoode, both of these being so vnited and ioyned toge∣ther, that the very natures themselues, & their properties also remaining sound and vnconfounded, Christ by that meanes is become, but one subsistence or being. For wee haue alreadie affirmed, the godhead so to haue assumed and taken the manhood vnto it, that they are not now two persōs, but two natures: of which two natures, the one, that is to say, the nature assumed
or taken, is sustained and vpheld, or (as I may so say) made a persō, with the nature assuming, that is to say, the godhead: from  4 this wee proceeded, to speake of suche things, as were attributed to, or spoken of either of the natures, or the whole person: and wee affirmed, that they were so to be vsed, as that we alwaies preserued the v∣nion of the person, and continuallie auoi∣ded the confounding of the natures. For seeing these two natures,Synodus Chal∣cedonensis. are as the Sy∣node of Chalcedon saieth, vndiuidedlie, vnseparablie, and vnconfoundedlie coup∣led together in the personall vnion: ne∣cessarie is it, that either of these natures, should haue their owne proper thinges at∣tributed vnto them, and therfore, not com∣municated vnto others. Wherfore some things attributed to the godhead, and som¦things also attributed vnto the manhood, were so proper and peculiar to the God∣head, and the manhoode, that those that were attributed to the one, coulde not be spoken of the other without great impie∣tie and vngodlinesse. Notwithstanding, by reason of the personal vnion (excepting alwaies that which is attributed to the whole person, and belongeth to both na∣tures,
as when Christ is called the media∣tor, and such like) such things as are pro∣per to the godhead, and therefore as wee haue said can neuer be spoken of the man∣hoode) are yet notwithstanding attribu∣ted to Christ as man: and againe, suche things as are proper to man, are spoken, and that rightlie of God, but neuer, or at no hand of the godhead. The reason is, because that the subsistence or being is denominated euen in the concret of one of the natures onelie. So by the Sonne of GOD, wee doo many times vnder∣stand,1. Timoth. 3.16. not onely the godhead of the sonne by it selfe, but Christ manifested in the fleshe. And by the GOD of glorie wee meane GOD become or made man: and like wise by sonne of man, we meane man assumed or taken of the eternall son of God. Whereby it commeth to passe, that by reason of that personall vnion, some thinges in the concret, may bee saide of the whole person, which yet notwith∣standing in the abstracte,1. Corinth. 2.8. doo agree to one of the natures onelie. So Saint Paule affyrmeth, that the GOD of glorie was crucified, which proposition
is not true touching whole Christ,One and the selfe-same pro∣position true and vntrue in seuerall senses. that is to say, if wee regarde or consider Christ, as some whole matter, consisting of some particulars: but not true, if wee vnder∣stand it of all or euery thing belonging to Christ, that is to saye, if wee seuerally and distinctlye consider his seuerall na∣tures, because the name of the GOD of glorie, dooth in the abstract agree or be∣long, to the onelie godhead. Wherefore this proposition is true in the sense as be∣fore, whereas otherwise it is a wicked and an vngodlie thing to say, that the godhead was crucified. Likewise in the creede of the Apostles,Symbol. Apost. we say, that wee beleeue in Iesus Christ the onely Sonne of God, conceiued, borne, suffered, &c: all which are truely and christianly spoken. And why so? Because that by the name of the Sonne of God in the councell, we meane not God, the word, by himselfe alone, but GOD manifested in the flesh. So the Sonne of man talking with Nicodemus on earth was in heauen:Iohn. 3.13. the reason is, because he that is man, is God also: and yet the manhoode of christ was at that time no where else,Actes 1.11. but on earth, euen as nowe also christs flesh being taken vp intoMatth. 28.20.
heauen, and therefore absent from vs, that Sonne of man, is yet notwithstanding present with vs, because the same christ is that true GOD,Isaiah 66.1. Actes 7.48. whome neither hea∣uen nor earth can containe. Wherefore, as these propositions are false, the God∣head is the manhoode, or the manhoode is the godhead: so these are true: This man is God, and GOD, the worde, is man. Nowe then, if man be truely saide to be God, by reason of the personall vni∣on, it followeth therevppon, that thinges attributed to the manhoode may rightlie be attributed to GOD: and on the other side, that things attributed to the God∣head may rightly be attributed to, or spo∣ken of christ, man. But let vs now come to ye other part of the knowledge that con∣cerneth our saluation, that is, to christes office. This office is declared in his name:Matth. 1.21. for he is Iesus, that is to say, a Sauiour, because God the father hath therefore gi∣uen him vnto vs, that hee might saue vs, to wit, from our sinnes. Now hee saueth vs, by iustifieng vs, because eternall life, doth of necessitie agree with iustice or righteousnes. Wherefore hee giueth vs life, in giuing vs righteousnesse, and
that of his meere and onely grace, through the power and effectuall working of his holie spirit:One and the selfe-same pow∣er of God, ap∣peareth in mans creation and mans restituti∣on, sauing that this latter, in my iudgement, and before men (though not be∣fore God) seeme to be the more excellent and hard worke. for euen that very selfe-same power of God, which laide it selfe open in the creation of man, must of necessity ma∣nifest it selfe also in restoring of man. This is it that I meane: as God the father did freelie through his sonne, togi∣ther with his almightie power, which is the holie-ghost, create man: so the selfe-same god, dooth by sauing iustifie, and by iustifieng saue man, through his owne sin fallen from grace, and yet made againe, or anewe, as it were, through his sonne, in the powerfull working of the holie spirit. For the holy-ghost worketh in vs that in∣strument which we cal faith, by which on∣ly we lay hold of christ after that we know him. Neither is this faith some simple or bare accident, but a habit, as they call it in the schooles, truelie grafted in vs, not by nature, but by gods meere and free grace. But remember, I pray you, that by laying holde of Christ, I vnderstand the apprehension or taking holde euen of Christ himselfe.Two things principallie to be considered in Christ. For wee must consider two things in Christ, that is to saie, hee himselfe, god and man, and such things
as bee in him.A fit similitude. For example (though it may be I confes, that the similitude shall not agree in all points) if in a casket or boxe I set before a man, treasure, he that will haue the treasure hidden or shutte vp therein, must of necessitie take the cas∣ket or boxe it selfe:Coloss. 2.3. euen so there are in Christ, all those treasures of wisedome and vnderstanding: yea (and to speake all in fewe wordes) all those things, which are necessarily required to our saluation. Wherefore wee must of necessitie haue him, that so we may obtaine those things that are in him, and by the meanes of them eternall life. But tell vs, by what instrument wee doo take holde of him, as it were, by a certaine hand, that hee may wholie become ours, and wee his? Ve∣rilie by faith. Nowe the holie-ghost is hee, who going about to woorke in vs, this excellent instrument of faith, vseth for that purpose, the preachyng of the outwarde worde,Roman. 10.17. by which worde hee a∣lone properlye woorketh inuisiblye in vs. But that we may the better vnderstand this point, lette vs a little compare this naturall instrument of Faith, to witte,
the outward worde with that supernatu∣rall instrument, that is, the spirite. Light of nature may somewhat helpe vs to ob∣taine naturall things, but it can nothing further vs in the vnder∣standing and beleeuing of heuenly things.The doctor or teacher by speaking, tea∣cheth his scholers that which he speaketh. For speech is the instrument and meane, whereby we lay open the meaning of our mindes one of vs to an other, by vnder∣standing whereof, they to whome wee speake, become skilfull in those thinges that wee speake: euen so it pleaseth God to vse his word written and preached, that so hee might teach vs the knowledge of saluation, yet the way and order in both of these is maruellously diuers, if not alto∣gether contrary. For whereas our minde by a certaine ingendred and natural pow∣er, is apt to conceiue & vnderstand world∣lie things (yea, and though it be true, that some men are more apte to learne than o∣thersome, yet all men generallie, are in∣dued with facultie and power, to vnder∣stand those points, either by bookes, or the mouth of their teacher) when wee come to the true knowledge of God, and that his heuenlie secret touching our saluatiō, God must of necessitie vse a far other po∣wer, in framing and disposing our minds, that so our eares beeing purged, and our
harts also, we may in our vnderstanding comprehend these matters, and hauing comprehended them approoue of them, yea consent vnto them, and stay our selues vpon them, or else we shall neuer attaine thereto. And this is that same inuisible working power of the holie-ghost, which graueth into our heartes that which the minde perceiueth or vnderstandeth: other∣wise the pastors and techers might speak to deafe people, as it doth by too too com∣mon examples appeare at this day. Ther∣fore the Apostle saieth,1. Corinth. 1.23. that the gospell is an offense or stumbling blocke to the Iewes, and that it seemeth foolishnesse vnto the Gentiles. And in another place, that it is to some,2. Corinth. 2.16. the sauor of life vnto life, and to other-some, the sauor of death vnto death. But to whome is it the sa∣uor of life vnto life? Euen vnto suche as so perceiue and receiue it, that they ad∣mit, and submit themselues thereto. And yet it can not be vnderstood and receiued, vnlesse the holie-ghost doo by his power∣full grace alter and change vs. Wher∣fore to them then it must bee the sauor of death vnto death that doo refuse it, and cast it farre from them. Neither is God,
or the gospell it selfe, cause of this neglect or contempt, but the verye corrupt na∣ture of man:1. Corinth. 2.14. for the naturall manne per∣ceiueth not the thinges of the spirite of God. But to come to the matter: that word of GOD that soundeth into our eares, is an instrument ordained and directed by the Holie-ghost to teach vs, that so wee maye vnderstande suche thinges as are needefull to bee vnderstoode for saluati∣on, and may by true faith applie vnto our selues suche thinges as wee vnderstoode, and haue yeelded vnto.The word by it selfe. And this speeche of GOD talking so with vs, is some∣times naked, as it were, and simple, and sometimes againe, is so decked and trim∣med, as it were, with other things, that euen the matter it selfe, by reason of the rites and orders,The worde with the sacraments annexed therto. annected to the speech, seemeth after a sort, not to be spoken, but to be doone. Examples of the naked or bare speech, are these infinite promises of the gospell: as when wee heare this, GOD so loued the worlde that hee gaue his onelie begotten Sonne,Iohn. 3.16. that whosoeuer beleeueth in him shoulde not perishe, but haue eternall life. So
we reade, and daily heare in the church, the writings of the Prophets & Apostles, hauing exhortations, reprehensions, and comforts adioyned to the same, according as good sheepheards, do their duetie, pub∣likely and priuately. And yet there are sometimes ioyned to this word of GOD some signes, with certaine rites and or∣ders, that so the speeche may not onelie beate orders, but also the thinges that are looked vppon may come to our sight. And these are those thinges that the La∣tine writers call sacraments:August. cont. Faust. Memictiae lib. 19 cap. 16. & ha∣bit. tom. 6. col. 349. and there∣fore Augustine also called them visible words. This verilye is certaine, that euen the most auntient Latine diuines did in∣terprete that Greeke worde, Mysterie, by the Latine word Sacrament, and that not onelie in places where mention is made, of the rites and orders of the Sa∣craments of the church, as of Baptisme and the Lords supper, but generally wher the question is of suche thinges as are of themselues close & secret, and far remoued from common vse.Ephes. 1.. So the calling of the Gentiles which the Apostle nameth a mysterie, is of the olde Latine interpreter
turned,1. Timoth. 3.16. sacrament. And our whole salua∣tion, is the sacrament of godlinesse with him: and the coniunction of Christ, & his church, & not the marriage of man & wife, as commonlie thorough ignorance menne haue supposed, is with him a sacrament likewise,Ephes. 5.32. Apocal. 17.7. yea & in the reuelation he men∣tioneth the sacrament of that vncleane harlot, and the beast that carried hir. To be short, nothing is more common a∣mongest the Latine diuines, or commeth more often in their writings, than this worde, sacrament. And yet the Latine church hath in a more secret and narrowe signification taken and vnderstoode this terme,Sacrament, how it is vsed amon∣gest vs. sacrament, namelie, for the signes and rites, which God hath adioyned to his promises, that so hee might the more fully seale vp in our hearts, the saluation that he hath reuealed vnto vs. And yet no other certainetie, so farre as I knowe, or can remember is this worde, mysterie, in the Apostles writings, vsed in that sense or signification. Verilie, the name or word, sacrament, it selfe is amongest the Latinists of ma∣ny significations: for which doubtfulnesse of the worde, we that nowe come in the
last age of the worlde doo sustaine manye and great smartes. The Apostle calleth circumcision, a signe and a state:Roman. 4 11. and (to speake plainely, as the matter it selfe re∣quireth) though I doo not willinglie de∣part from wordes in vse, least one in∣conuenience and mischiefe might be hea∣ped vppon an other, yet I hadde leiffer that the Latin authours and writers, had still kept Paules worde. But that we may at the length come to the purpose,What the lords supper is. let that rite or order of the Lordes supper bee a signe giuen vs from GOD, whereby hee will haue testified and sealed vp vnto vs, the communicati∣on or partaking of the bodie and bloud of Christ. But because euery thing that is vsed, in, and about this holie banquet, is not of one sort, maner, order, and respect, we are therefore to marke, that euen this worde, sacrament,The word Sa∣crament, in the narrow signifi∣cation taken three waies. and that in this more narrowe signification, is of the olde La∣tine diuines taken three manner of ways. For sometimes they vnderstand by sacra∣ments, the verie whole action, in which respect both baptisme and the Lords sup∣per it selfe also, are called sacraments, that is to say, mystical actions or outward
rites, which doo represent to our vnder∣standing some other certaine thing. Som∣times againe not the whole action it selfe, but that which is vsed in that action, is so  termed, as in baptisme the water it selfe, & the sprinckling or laying it on the party baptized: and in the Lords supper, bread & wine, with the rites and orders that christ  himselfe ordained. And this againe, by a double manner of speech, for sometimes vnder this worde, there are meant onely the outward signes, as when Augustine affirmeth,August. that the wicked do eate Christ, as in respect of the sacrament. And som∣times it is vsed for the signes, ioyned with the very thing it selfe signified, as when Irenaeus saith,Irenaeus. that the sacrament consi∣steth of two things, one heauenlie, and the other earthlie: for hee calleth the hea∣uenlie thing the body and bloud of christ, and the earthlie, the bread and the wine: and all that together hee nameth, the sa∣crament. And this much concerning the word it selfe, or the name sacrament. Let vs now at the length come to the matter. Sith nowe therefore, that euerie sa∣crament is a signe, wee must needes put the word Sacrament in the predicament
of relation or relatiues, as the logicians call them, that is, amongst such things as haue mutuall respectes one of them to an other. And sith relation must needes be, amongest sundrie thinges which haue mutuall respect one of them to an other, wee must therefore of necessitie confesse, that in the sacraments there is a signe, and the thing signified. Neyther when I deli∣uer these 2 parts, which indeed do meete, or wherof in truth al sacraments do con∣sist, do I shut out the word.August. Let the worde (saith Augustine) come vnto the element, and it shal become a sacrament. I do not therefore exclude or shut out the worde, which is, as it were, the life & soule of ei∣ther of the parts, and to which the sacra∣ments themselues, as wee haue saide be∣fore, are adioyned as seales. And thus farre foorth, euen they agree with vs, which otherwise doo most of all dissent from vs. Wherefore lette vs nowe see, which bee those signes, and which bee those thinges signified: for in this point we doo not all agree. Wee call water the signe in Baptisme, and the thing signifi∣ed we call Christs bloud, by the washing whereof (we hauing obtained forgiuenes
of sinnes, and being mortified in our flesh) we are saued. But concerning baptisme I will not nowe say anie more. In the supper cer∣tainelie there are two signes, or rather, signes of two sortes. For some of them are certaine materiall and substantiall signes: as for example, the bread and wine, other-some are actions and sacramentall rites, which are not for all that vaine or superfluous acts, but haue there certaine sacramentall consideratton and respect, from the Lordes institution, of whiche point wee will speake heereafter. I say then that in the Lordes supper, these are outward, materiall, visible, and as you would say palpable signes, that God hath annected vnto his word, euen the bread and wine. This the Papistes denie, as who (af∣ter that they haue confessed, that the sa∣craments doo consist, of a signe, and a thing signified) doo yet notwithstanding afterwardes take the bare accidents of bread and wine, as, coulour, forme, and such like, for the signes themselues: for they maintaine, that in the Lords supper there remaineth not, the substāce of bread
and wine, but that that vanisheth away, & that there cōmeth in the place thereof, the substance of the Lords bodie and bloud. Therefore in their iudgement, the signes shall be the accidents. And which I be∣seech you? Forsooth whitenesse, roundnes, and rednesse, if they consecrate red wine, which accidents they doo by a new name call kind, shew, or forme.Augustine. But as Augu∣stine rightlie teacheth: Vnlesse there were a certeine analogie, proportion, and agree∣ment betweene the things signified, & the signes themselues, they could not be coun∣ted sacraments. Now betweene accidents & substances there is no agreement, there∣fore the sacraments, as they call them, shal not be sacraments: for it behooueth the signes so to agree with the things signifi∣ed, that they may represent to mēs minds that which they signifie. I will speake somewhat more plainelie.A similitude. If admoni∣shing some one, I would haue him with his eies to behold, and with his mind to cō∣ceiue a man, I will not set before him the image of a horsse, or of an oxe, to looke vp∣on, because that outward shape or forme of an horsse, or of an oxe, cannot beget in his mind the conceit, portrature, or image of
a man, although all these things, that is to say, man, horsse, oxe, &c. are referred to one generall word or terme, to wit, liuing creature: much lesse then shall the shape of an herbe, or forme of an horsse, bring to my minde and memorie, the forme or shape of a man: and least of all others shall those accidents which are void of all substance, as whitenesse, rednesse, round∣nesse, &c. call to my remembrance things that in deed are, to wit, the bodie & bloud of Christ.In that papists, make the acci∣dents of the e∣lements the signes of the sa∣craments, there followeth three absurdities therevpon. But it was the Lords purpose in his supper, to offer vnto our mindes and thoughts the verie food of our soules, that is to say, Christes bodie deliuered to death for vs, and his bloud shed for the forgiuenes of our sinnes, betweene which  and those accidents, there is no proporti∣on and agreement, whereas yet notwith∣standing bread and wine, the verie food of our bodies in deed, doo most fitlie euen set before our verie eies almost, that same spirituall nourishment that we must haue from him. And sith no man can be fed by accidents, how can such accidents then represent  that same eternall food? Furthermore, though by the meanes of some accidents,
materiall things may be set before our eies, yet all accidents doo not belong to, or agree with euerie matter: for manie both white and round things may be be∣held, which shall not for all that represent a bodie: and who hath told them that the bread which Christ brake and gaue vnto his disciples, was white or round, in such sort as they bake it and make it? There∣fore the true signes of Christes bodie and bloud, are the verie bread, and the verie wine, which thing the apostle declareth,1. Corinth. 10.16 saieng: The bread which we breake, is the communion or partaking of the bodie of Christ: and the cup that we blesse is the partaking of the bloud of Christ. And that same consubstantiati∣on or transubstantiation, is a filthie for∣gerie and deuise of satan. Now let vs come to the thing signi∣fied: and first wee will declare,Enemies to truth are of two sorts, that is, ig∣norant and ma∣licious. what manner and kinde of signification this is that wee speake of. For this is ob∣iected against vs, partlie by some that know not what is deliuered and taught in our churches, and partlie by other some that doo maliciouslie slander vs, that wee saie wee set out to be beheld
in the sacraments, as it were a vaine pic∣ture, or a certeine dead image, that maie stir vp in vs the remembraunce of Christ, when yet notwithstanding we are woont euerie where to beat vpon this point, that by the sacraments Christ is not signified vnto vs (as when we beholde Cesars i∣mage & picture we are woont to remem∣ber Cesar) and nothing beside: for in the signes, hauing the word adioined vnto them, we teach Christ and all his benefits to be so represented to vs and our mindes, that he, togither with all his graces is gi∣uen to vs to be inioied of vs, and in deed to be participated, but yet after a spiritu∣all maner, and by faith. Wherefore this action is not vaine, neither are the signes, and the very rites thereof naked & emptie matters, sith that which is signified, is both most truelie offered vnto vs by God himselfe, and most effectuallie receiued of such as beleeue. This kind of significati∣on Bernard well declareth, by the simili∣tude of a ring which the bridegrome deli∣uereth vnto the betrothed bride, to the end that so she may not onelie thinke vpon the bridegrome deliuering it, but that by this pledge of promise he might after a sort de∣liuer
himselfe ouer vnto hir also. And ther∣fore Christ did not onelie say:Matth. 26.2. This is my bodie, but also he added, Take ye, and eat ye.Mainteiners of the truth char∣ged to be defa∣cers of the sa∣craments. Ye see brethren what we thinke and hold touching these mysteries: also what iniurie is offered vs, when men say, that we doo euacuat & disanull the sacraments, and transforme them into certeine vaine spectakles and shewes of Christ that is absent.Other mens ma∣lice must not hinder vs from speaking truth. Let vs notwithstanding as plain∣lie as possible we can declare, what that is which is so in outward signes, set before our minde to be looked into, that yet not∣withstanding it is a faithfull and belee∣uing soule trulie exhibited and offered, to be partaken by faith. And what is that I say? Truelie the bodie and bloud of the Lord. But who teacheth vs this, or so in∣structeth vs? Euen Gods owne sonne: for he saith: This (that is to say,Matth. 26.26.28. This bread) is my bodie. And this (that is to say, This wine conteined in this cup) is my bloud. By the way, I will put you in minde of one thing,Contention a∣bout wordes though it be not alwaies good, yet when it may cleere the truth, it may well be vsed. least anie man might be offended because I say not This is my bloud, in the masculine gender, but This is my bloud, in the neuter gender, refer∣ring it either to the wine, which is the
neuter gender in Latine; or to the cuppe, conteining the wine, which in Greeke is the neuter gender also: for though I loue not to striue about words, yet this point is well woorthie the marking. Certein∣lie he that saith: Hic est sanguis meus, in the masculine gender, that is, This is my bloud, dooth point to, or shew foorth no∣thing but his bloud. But it is certeine, that as before Christ did not propound his bodie vnto his disciples without bread, so euen in this other part when Christ said so, he would not set his bloud before his disciples without wine. Therefore this Greeke Pronoune  being of the neuter gender, must needs be referred to the signe (that is to say , the cup, which is therefore expreslie put downe in Paule) concerning which, or of which, the bloud it selfe may be spoken: where∣vpon this ariseth, that the Greeke Pro∣noune , this, cannot declare anie o∣ther matter or thing than this, that is to say, this thing or matter, which I hold in my hāds, to wit, the wine that is cōtained in this cup, which indeed cānot be expres∣sed by this word, Hic, a Pronoune of the
masculine gender, as the meanest Gram∣marians may well and easilie perceiue.Christes verie bodie & bloud is the matter o thing signified in the Lords supper. But to returne to the matter: By these thinges you may perceiue, what we vn∣derstand by the name or word of the thing it selfe, or by the terme trueth, sacramen∣tallie sigifined, namelie the bodie & bloud of the Lord Iesus. Wherefore first of all we dissent from  the anabaptists,In the matter of the supper we agree not, either with the Anabaptists or sacramentaries. who in sted of the matter of the sacrament signified, doo put downe I knowe not what shadow or figuratiue thing, as though it were some warlike cognizance, pledge, or watch-word, by which christians might be discerned from such as be no christians. Next we dissent from them likewise, Or with such as vnderstand it onelie, concer∣ning Christes merits sunde∣red from Christ himselfe. who for the matter of the Sacrament, established Christes force and power, as also his merites, but yet seuered from Christ himselfe. For Christ said not this is the merit of my bodie,Luke. 22.19.20. which is deliuered for you, but This is my bo∣die, and this is my bloud: neither is it without cause definitiuelie before hand added, which is deliuered for you, and which is shed for you. So that it could not more plainelie haue beene said, that
verie Christ himselfe (whose bodie was giuen for vs, and whose bloud was shed for vs) is truelie and verilie giuen vs in the supper, to be the food of eternal life to vs. And therfore the matter of that sacra∣ment is in deed that verie bodie which he offered vp for vs on the crosse, and that bloud which he shed for the forgiuenesse of our sinnes: so far off are we from dee∣ming or thinking of some figuratiue or ty∣picall bodie, or some allegoricall bloud, as certeine most fond men (who doo not in∣deed well vnderstand their owne wordes, minde, and opinion) are not ashamed to speake and write of vs, that we so holde. Now I come to the third point of this discourse: for first I haue spoken of the signes, and secondlie of the things signi∣fied.Two sorts of people that in the sacrament of the supper haue erred in and about the right coniun∣ction of the signes, and the thing signified. Now we are to see in the third place, what is the knitting or ioining togither of the signes, and the thinges signified, wherein for the most part consisteth the whole determination of all this controuer∣sie touching the sacraments. The papists haue altered the ioining togither of the signes, and the thing signified, into a trans∣mutation or change one of them into ano∣ther: than which, what can be more ab∣surd?
For certeinlie, if the bread and the wine be in deede changed into the bodie and bloud of Christ, as they affirme, then we cannot chuse but affirme also, that this is not to ioine the signes with the thinges signified, but to change the signes into the thinges themselues, or else the signes vanishing away or perishing, to put the thinges themselues in their roome. But let these men go, as who in deed deserue not anie confutation, their assertions be so absurd and blockish. There are others, at  this present no lesse hard & sharpe against vs, than the verie papistes themselues, who will haue the thing signified, that is to say, the verie bodie of Christ so to be ioined with or vnder, or in the bread, that in that verie place where that bread is, there must also be the bodie of Christ: which in like sort is to be vnderstood al∣so, touching the wine and the bloud of Christ. If a man then should demand, where is the verie bodie & bloud of Christ in the action of the supper:A grosse absur∣ditie or two fol∣lowing consub∣stantiation. if wee will answere according to their opinion, we must say, that it is truelie and in deed in our hands, and in our mouth, and therfore certeinelie, vnlesse it presentlie vanish a∣way,
within this bodie of ours, with, in, or vnder the verie signes of the bread & the wine, being eaten and drunken. Now we will shew, and that by reasons not fet from humane philosophie (as our aduersaries vntrulie say we vse such) but from the ve∣rie word of God it selfe,Two things to be handled: viz. the confutation of the aduersa∣ries, & the main∣tenance of the truth. that this consub∣stantiation (as we may trulie call it) is no lesse absurd and erronious than tran∣substantiation, as also that that communi∣on or partaking, which out of the pure word of God we propound and teach in our churches, is a most secret and diuine matter. Wherefore our iudgement is quite & cleane contrarie to either of those opinions before rehearsed. To begin, we hold that such things as are spoken of the sacraments, must be vnderstood sacra∣mentallie. For what I pray you is or can be more vpright than to haue all thinges spoken, rightlie vnderstood and perceiued, as the nature of that matter will beare, whereof there is question?A similitude or two, explaning the point he hath in hand. Certeinelie such thinges as the lawiers speake tou∣ching the law, must be vnderstood euen as they are vsed in that verie science of the law: and we must needs giue the selfe same iudgement of all things and arts
whatsoeuer. Such thinges therefore, as are taught and deliuered touching the sacraments, must be sacramentallie vn∣derstood. What manner of coniunction then is the coniunction or knitting togi∣ther of the signe and the thing sacramen∣tallie signified? Verilie it is sacramen∣tall. The signes therfore, and the things are ioined togither by that relation or re∣spect, which is betweene the signes and the thinges signified: which yet once a∣gaine, I doo most plainelie declare after this maner. When we heare some man speaking vnto vs in the toong we vnderstand, the words that come to our eares and strike them, doo verie liuelie represent that vnto our mindes for the expressing and signifi∣cation whereof they were vsed.Another simi∣litude. For ex∣ample: as soone as we heare the word Rome, presentlie wee thinke vpon that citie. If a man name Cesar or the empe∣rour, Cesar or the emperour presenlie commeth to our memorie. The reason whereof verilie is that, that is well deli∣uered and taught in schooles: to wit, such thinges as are in the voice or words are signes of the affections, that are
in the soule or minde. There is the selfe same consideration to be had of the sacra∣ments: for the sacraments are nothing else, but visible words, that is, represen∣ting, through our eies vnto our mindes, things signified, as words heard, doo by our eares conuey vnderstanding to our minds likewise. Therfore these visible sa∣craments of bread & wine bring to passe, that when I see and receiue that bread, and that wine ioined with the word of God, I doo withall conceiue in my mind, and vnderstand, that bodie that was giuen for me, and that bloud that was shed for me, as though I were led or carried euen vnto the thing it selfe being present. And because I am commanded not onelie to looke vpon these signes with mine eies, but also to take them,Math. 26.26.27. eat them, drinke them, therefore dooth the faithfull minde euen lay hold of, and applie vnto himselfe those things so signefied, as they are deli∣uered and offered. Touching which point we will largelie discourse in the fourth place, to wit, when we shall come to han∣dle this question, how both the signes and the thinges signified are receiued of vs: whereas now we onelie dispute or speake
touching the sacramentall coniunction of the signes themselues,Two errours mainteined by the aduersaries. with the thing sig∣nified. Such as are not content with this sacramentall coniunction, fall into a dou∣ble errour, not onelie that they doo in a  a great and grosse errour verilie establish a real vnion of the signes with the things signified, of which we haue spoken before: but also they further adde this, that euen  in that verie place wheresoeuer the signes are offered to such as come to commu∣nicate, there is present the flesh and the bloud of Christ, that is to say, they would haue vs confesse that euen his verie hu∣manitie or manhood is in deed present there, and is to be receiued or taken by bodily instruments. As for vs, we affirme that Christ in respect of his manhood,The substance of that we are to know or be∣leeue, touching the coniunction of the signes with the things signified in the Lords supper. e∣uen as when he was vpon the earth, was no where else, but in that verie place where he was conuersant, so now he is not anie where else, but aboue all hea∣uens, into which he ascended: and that therefore he is not now togither with the signes offered to the bodie, but togither with the signes truelie deliuered and gi∣uen to the beleeuing soule, euen as by the word we heare it, and by the signe we see
it. Now it remaineth that we doo by some reasons fet from the word of GOD well wey and consider whether they or we swarue from the truth. The first reason. Rom. 1.3. Rom. 9.5. Galath. 4.4. Philip. 2.7. Hebr. 2.16. Iohn. 16.7.28. Matth. 28.20. Acts. 1.9.The holie scripture witnesseth, that the sonne of God did personallie take vn∣to himselfe a true and verie bodie. The selfe same scripture dooth attribute vnto the flesh of our sauiour Christ assumed, and that both before and after the glorifi∣cation thereof, such things as doo plaine∣lie prooue the truth of a naturall bodie, as that he came, that he went away, that he was sometimes present, and sometimes absent. These things then doo of necessi∣tie follow the trueth of Christes bodie, which if a man take from it, he must also needs take away the truth of the manhood of Christ, and so come at the length to the heresie of the Marcionits or Dokits.Marcionits or Dokits, they were called Marcionits of one Marcion, whose principall error was this, that Christ did not ap∣peare indeed, and suffer indeed, &c. vpon the crosse, but in phan∣tasie or ghostlike apparition. Concerning Dokitiae see ho∣mil. 1. before going. Tertullian wrote most lear∣nedlie against this Marcion. But these things are manifestlie taken away, by their opinion, who say that Christes flesh is now also and that in deed and verilie pre∣sent, both into the heauens, into which he ascended, and in the earth likewise, and that also in all
places, in which that bread and that wine is deliuered or giuen to such as come to receiue it. I will say nothing of them that are not ashamed to affirme that Chri∣stes flesh euen from the verie first mo∣ment of the personall vnion, was togither and in deed present, both in the crib, and in the heauen, yea euerie where present. To this first of all they answere:The aduersaries obiection. that Christes bodie cannot without great wic∣kednesse, be made subiect to the law of nature, for that bodie that was taken into the vnitie of the person, hath recei∣ued farre other vnmeasurable giftes and graces. But heere I beseech you wey well what we answer:The answer. We confesse that there is great regard to be had of that same grace and gift of the personall vnion, by which wee cannot but confesse that the manhood of our sauior Christ was so high∣ly exalted, that onelie the Deitie or God∣head excepted (according to which he is euen greater than himselfe) it hath attei∣ned and gotten a name, which is aboue all names, that is to saye,Philip. 2.9.10. that all things created are subiected vnto the same, yet for all that, that followeth not heerevpon,
which these men coldlie suppose, or fondly imagine: for this is the question now be∣tweene vs, whether Christes manhood do in deed place it selfe euerie where, or in manie places togither at one time, to be receiued with our hands and mouth, and not what it hath obteined from another, or in respect of the other nature, to which it is personallie vnited: but rather whether this proprietie (which in deed is proper to the Godhead alone) be in the manhood, to wit, to be euerie where, or in diuers places at one and the selfe same season.Schoole men faile manie times in terms, but now and then hit the matter. And this is that matter which the schoolemen haue by a barbarous word, if you respect terms, but not by an vnfit word, if men will wey the matter, called by the name of habitual grace. Now this difference being alrea∣die put downe, which skarslie anie vn∣lesse they be altogither most contentious, will denie, we say, that such doo in deed e∣uacuat Christ, or make him of no force, as denie Christes flesh,Though Christ man, be not e∣uerie where, yet Christ God and man is e∣uerie where. as in respect of ano∣ther, that is to say, not in it selfe, but ac∣cording as it is ioined to another, to wit, so farre foorth, as it is personallie vnited with the person of the word, to be true∣lie and in deed euerie where: much lesse
will wee denie him to be present in that place, wheresoeuer in the worlde his sup∣per is administred. For whie should wee denie, that concerning christs flesh, which in a certaine measure hath place in al bo∣dies: yea, euen there where som one whole thing, is become or made one, after an o∣ther sort, than by personall vnion.A similitude. A tree or a house is many times saide to be in a riuer, whereas yet notwithstanding the vpper part, either of the one or of the o∣ther, appearing aboue the water or riuer, and being considered in it selfe, is indeed in the aire, and not in the water: in like sort, I am said to sit in this seat or chaire, whereas yet notwithstanding, I sit, but in one part of my bodie onelie. Likewise I am saide to speake, whereas onelie the tongue, considered, in, and by it selfe, speaketh. The reason and trueth of these speeches dependeth vpon this, that a tree, a house, a man, &c: is one selfe-same whole thing, compacted and made of his seueral partes. For otherwise that coulde not be truely affirmed or saide, of two things in deede separated and sundered one of them from an other.Application of the similitude. So a man may truely af∣firme whole christ to be euerie where, and
therfore much more with the bread in the supper, and yet no otherwise, but so farre foorth as Christ is considered, as some one whole substance and beeing, and so also as the proprieties of the natures bee not by this meanes confounded. But the whole of Christe, that is to saye, euerye thing belonging to Christ, can not ther∣fore for all that, bee sayde to bee anye where else, than to bee conuersant in one place, at one and the selfe-same time: for that can no more be spoken of Christs hu∣manitie in it selfe (vnlesse wee will with Eutyches and Brentius,Eutyches. Brentius. confounde the proprieties of either nature) than this my hande can bee saide to sitte, or these my feete may be said to speake. If there be any that vnderstande not these things, I beseech them to learne to vnderstande the same, and to haue more regarde and consideration, both of themselues, and of others, throgh whose sides, they would, if they could destroy the truth it selfe. He turneth that vpon the aduer∣saries which they obiected a∣gainst the truth.To come to the point. They doo not spotle the manhoode of Christ, of that his infinite maiestie, who teach that fleshe of his to be the flesh of the Sonne of God, but they rather that transfourme and
chaunge him who is God and man in one person, and make him but to beare or ca∣ry, God or the godhead: neither yet do they spoile ye manhood of his maiestie, or bring him backe vnto the state and condition of other men, which according to the grace that they call habituall (that is to saye, cleauing to the verie flesh of Christ, as, if it were to his peculiar subiect or mat∣ter wherevnto it shoulde sticke) doo ac∣knowledge it to bee vnspeakablye more high and excellent than all other thinges whatsoeuer wythout exception (excepting onely the godhead of the worde, according to which he himselfe is greater than him∣selfe, as we said before) but they indeede bring it to nothing, or into some image or signe in their owne conceipts at the least, who, while they goe about to attri∣bute supernaturall thinges vnto him, at∣tributing yet notwithstanding vnnatural things to him, or thinges against nature, do of necessity destroy and ouerthrowe, e∣uen mans nature it selfe: for that ceaseth to be humane, which hauing lost the es∣sentiall proprieties thereof, must needes cease to be ye which before it was. But we wil incounter with thē by an other reson.
If this verilie be to diminish Christs glorie, and to debase his maiestie, to af∣firme, that hee can not indeede be at one time in manie places, howe much more then must this be the debasing of hym, to say, that hee was mortall, yea, that hee did indeede die? And yet wee see, that this is that, which the Apostle alleageth for the commendation of the most excel∣lent loue that the Sonne of GOD carri∣ed towardes vs,Rom. 5, 6, 7, 8, &c Philip. 2.8. which was yet so muche the more great and excellent, by howe much he did the more debase himselfe. Nowe then, if the reall taking of all in∣firmities vppon himselfe (sinne onelie ex∣cepted) hath taken nothing at al from his glorie,Hebr, 4.15. or impaired and lessened the same, how much lesse hath this doone it, that he hath for euer taken, together with verie flesh, the verie proprieties of flesh, and that vnchangeably, and without confounding? But they obiect further,Another ob∣iection. The answeare thereto. that they meane not to abolish those proprieties. Thē they must needes attribute contrarie thinges, to one and the self-same subiect, & that al∣together in one and the self-same respect, to wit, to be circumscribed and tied to a place, which is the naturall propertie of
an instrumentall body,The aduersaries absurditie aswel against reason as religion. and yet notwith∣standing, at one and the self-same time to be both in heuen, and in innumerable pla∣ces, or else, euerye where, if you will, in earth: and so one and the selfe-same flesh shall haue a quantity sette it, and also bee without quantitie, that is to say, shal be both a bodie, and not a bodie. And what is this else, I pray you, but to make eue∣ry thing of anie thing, as wee commonlie say? but let vs heare what they do yet fur∣ther obiect.The third ob∣iection. They will haue that time that went before the glorofieng of our sa∣uior Christs flesh, to be distinguished from that time, in which that his fleshe was re∣ceiued vp into glorie. We grant it:An answeare thereto taken from a double absurditie. but withall we say, that if this reall coniunc∣tion of the flesh with the bread, doo depend of the glorification of Christes fleshe, it  can haue no place, in that first institution of the supper, because this fleshe was  not as then glorified, but rather most nie to debasing & humbling. Besides this flesh is offred vnto vs at this present to be par∣taken by vs, not as glorious or glorified,The transfigu∣ration of Christ mentioned, Math. 17.2.3. &c feareth not the aduersaries, but (that I may so speake) euen, as it were, hanging vppon the crosse. Against this exception, they oppose and set the mi∣racle
of Christes transfiguration. But what agreement is there betwixt these two things? For of a truth, nothing vnna∣turall or against nature fel out in ye trans∣figuration, neither was there any thing there done, that did destroy or ouerthrowe the essential proprieties of christs flesh: e∣uen as righteous men shal not therfore or then cease to be very men, when they shall shine as the sun,Daniel. 12.3. or brightnes of the firma∣ment or stars. But to be euery where, or in many places at one time, is a property so cōtrary to al things created (as which are indeed finite) that it belongeth onely vnto the godhead alone, because that alone is infinite. To conclude, we do in one worde as it were,Glorification, and wherein it standeth. answeare thus. Glorification tooke not from Christs body a corporal or bodilie nature (that is to say, quantity or circumscriptiblenes) but it abolished the infirmitie & weaknes therof, which weak∣nes he for a time tooke vppon him. Nowe by the worde infirmity or weaknesse, wee meane not any essential proprietie in chri∣stes flesh, but that onely which sin brought into mans nature, yet altogether without the spot or taint of sin, as it was in christ. This is that I meane: where Christs flesh
is saide to bee infirme and weake, before the glorification of it, that is not spoken in respect of the Godhead: to the which hee alwayes hath bin, is, and shall be inferior: but in consideration of that great glory, into which afterwards that his flesh was exalted, yet so that there must alwayes re∣maine safe and sound (as I haue said here∣tofore) those proprieties, of which the very truth of the body it selfe consisteth: amon∣gest which, quantity, and therfore circum∣scriptiblenes obtaineth so excellent & no∣table a place,Cyrillus. that Cyrill feareth not to af∣firme, that God hymself could not possibly bee euery where, if hee were partaker of quantity.They affirme Christes bodie to be euery where. He calleth them so, because they set themselues against nature and reason. Iohn. 20.27. Therfore these mē I mean both Vbiquitaries and Antiphisitae, hauing opēly denied the quantity of Christs flesh, must either gette them to Eutyches his tents, and take part with hym: or if out of the words of Christ (who after hys re∣surrection, willeth some to beholde & feele him) they wil prooue, that he hath not put off the quantity of hys fleshe, then they must shewe vs, that Christes fleshe, ac∣cordyng to the quantity thereof, can be at one tyme euerye where, or in manye places, whych euen the godhead it selfe,
if it haue quantitie, can not perfourme, as Cyrill openly and truly writeth, whose authoritie otherwise, these men doo most especiallie abuse: for this reall presence of Christ in the sacrament of the altar: yea, they must prooue, that the Angelles lied, when they saide:Matth. 28.6. Hee is risen, hee is not heere. For whatsoeuer distinction they may vse, if wee can shewe a place where Christes flesh is not, then wee are sure it can not be euery where: and if it can not bee euerye where, then neither can the whole flesh it selfe be at one time, and to∣gether in manie places. Hence also it may appeare,Brentius and his followers. howe absurde and vnreaso∣nable Brentius his opinion is, and those that followe him,Philip. 2.6, 7. who attribute these wordes of the Apostle, The forme of God, and the forme of a seruant, to the onely humanitie or manhood of Christ in it selfe. For they vnderstand by the forme of God, that their owne forgerie and de∣uise of all maiestie, and all presence, as they call it, with which, as they saye, the flesh of Christ was verily in it selfe indu∣ed from the very first moment of the per∣sonall vnion, which it pleased him for a time not to make manifest: and this is it
they meane by the worde, humbling and abasing. And the forme of a seruant they call that state and condition,He confuteth Brentius, and such as main∣taine him, as v∣surpe the place of the Philippi∣ans, or rather falsely interpre∣ting it. in which it pleased him to remain, so often as he wold not vse the forme of God. Very well saide surelie: if a man wil attribute to one sub∣iect or matter, two essentiall forms, what shall he els doe, but confound one and two together, and make them both one? And what is that else, but to bee mad outright? Then it remaineth, that by this worde or terme, forme, these men vnderstand, ney∣ther the godhead it selfe, nor the manhood, but a diuers conditiō and state of this his manhood, as which inwardly, & in it selfe, was beautified and adorned, with all the powerfull graces & effects of the godhead powred into the same, and yet that he did not alwaies manifest and disclose them. But if this be true,Two absurdities or errours. we must learn to de∣fine the personal vnion, not by the effusion  or powring foorth of effectual graces, but of vertues rather. Moreouer, vnderstand as large an effusion and powring foorth  of giftes and graces into the flesh, as pos∣sibly a man can, I woulde faine see, or heare some that coulde tell me, how it shal not be a most open blasphemie for a man
to affirme, that the manhoode may by a∣ny meanes, wythout robberie be made e∣quall to the godhead? What shall become of that sentence so often repeated in the ancient Fathers and olde writers, to wit, that the Sonne as in respect of his fleshe, is lesse than the Father, and inferiour vn∣to him, yea, and therefore lesse than him∣selfe, and inferiour vnto him selfe, be∣cause hee is, as in respect of his godhead coequall with his Father? Wherefore that interpretation is to bee refused as false, yea, as wholie and altogether sa∣uoring of the heresie of Eutyches.An other obiec∣tion of the ad∣uersaries. They alleadge yet this also: The place (saye they) is not of the substaunce of a bodie: and that therefore the substaunce of the body is not abolished, though place bee taken away from it. The answeare.Certainely it would greeue me to the heart, to beholde the maintainers of con∣substantiation, to bee so driuen to their shiftes, that by propounding such absurde things, they should giue themselues ouer to be scorned of the most popish and grose maintainers of Transubstantiation (vp∣on whose foundation, yet notwithstanding they builde vp their owne conceipts:) sa∣uing
that I see, euen those very defenders of Transubstantiation themselues (who haue bin broght vp with the teats of that most filthie sowe Sarbona) to be so thrust to the wall in this point,The name of a college in Paris, where the po∣pish diuines are maintained. that they suppo∣sed, that with this dirt, the truth might be so dawbed ouer,He very nota∣bly correcteth himselfe. that it shoulde not lie open to euery mans eie and sight. What woonderfull impudencie and shamelesnes is this (beare wyth me brethren, and par∣don me, O yee hearers this my most iust sorrow and greefe) for men to deale so so∣phistically and subtilly in Gods church, which is the schoole-house of trueth?The worde Bo∣die in authors referred to two predicaments, to wit substance and quantitie, but yet in diuers respects. Any man indued with reason can hardly be ig∣norant of this, that this worde bodie is somtimes referred to substance, and some∣times to quantity. Therefore a bodie is sometimes called, a corporall or bodilie substaunce, consisting of matter, forme, and substaunce: and sometimes it is cal∣led that which consisteth of three dimen∣sions or mesurings, to wit, length, bredth, and depth. So in this question somtimes wee consider Christs bodie, as that same materiall, substantiall, visible, and palpa∣ble thing, which Christ tooke vnto him for our sake: and after this sorte verilie
quantitie, as it is an accident, is not parte of that substaunce. And sometimes againe, wee vse this worde bodie, that so, that which is defined, by that three-fold quantitie, may be the better distinguish∣ed and knowne,The aduersaries must either con∣clude against reason, or else yeelde to the trueth. from that which is with∣out quantitie. And after this manner ve∣rily, these men must either prooue, that the definition dooth not declare the sub∣stance of these thinges which are defined: or else they must with vs confesse, that a bodie is nothing else, but that verye three-folde quantitie continue, as they call it, that is to say, such a quantitie, as whose parts are ioined together in a com∣mon terme. If this be once taken away, it can∣not be denied, but that of necessitie christs true and very bodie must perishe, whether wee consider it, as it is glorified, or as it is set in weaknesse: yea, Christ himselfe shall be accused of lieng, who proueth the truth of his flesh euen after his resurrecti∣on, by those inseparable accidents, that is to say, his corporall or bodily quantity. He passeth to an other dis∣course touching the word Place.Hitherto wee haue spoken of the bodie, nowe let vs see what may be saide touch∣ing the place. What if out of Augustines
plaine and euident woordes wee shoulde saye: Take from bodies space of places,Augustine. they shall be no where: and because they shall be no where, they shall not bee at all? What will they say to this? That is true in other bodies will they say, but in Christs bodie not so, or, it agreeth not thereto. But I answeare, that it dooth most fitlie agree to Christes body, of the absence of which from the earth, Augu∣stine dooth most properlie reason in that Epistle. And truly, if it were true, that christs body were in diuerse respectes different from ours, then he could not be of the selfe same substaunce with vs, and like vnto vs in all things (sinne onely excepted.Hebr. 4.15. He explaneth the question.) I will adde yet somewhat more, that the matter may appeare more plaine, though by that which hath beene saide, it be eui∣dent enough. When wee affirme, that a place can not be sundered or taken from a body, that is, from that thing, which consisteth of three dimensions or measu∣surings before mentioned (which thing the maintainers of consubstantiation do, whē they flee to those same starting holes of his omnipotencie or almightie power,
which heereafter wee will God willing discouer) wee meane not by this woorde place,The word place considered af∣ter two sortes. some peculiar space, which by and by may be altered and changed, as when Christ departing from one place went to an other: for after this sorte this or that place is so euidēt to the body, that by most light & easy motion, one being remoued or taken away, another succedeth: but we cal a place that same condition or state, of a true & very instrumentall body wherby it necessarily followeth, that whersoeuer the thing it selfe is, it must be circumscribed in that place, or tied therto, neither can it, while it is there be in any other place. This accident, though it be not the verie substance of the body, as in respect that ye bodie it self is a substance, yet verilie as it is a quantity it formeth & frameth the body, and it is an inseparable accident of the body, aswell as of the substance. So that there is no man (I suppose) but hee vnderstandeth how vaine and sophisticall that exception is. But (say they) Christs body walked vpon the waters: therefore they do not presently take away the truth of Christes body,An other obiec∣tion with the answere therto. Math. 14.25, &c. that attribute vnto it an extraordinary condition, or such a state
as can not be declared. And who (I pray you) denieth this, or any part of it? The question is not, whether Christ as in res∣pect of his flesh, and that in the time of his infirmitye and weaknes also, coulde accomplish many things ouer and beside the ordinary lawes of mans nature. But this is the question,The state of the question in con∣trouersie. whether this doctrine concerning the reall presence of Christes very fleshe in many, or all places at once, can stand wyth the truth of Christs flesh, whether wee consider it, after or before the glorification thereof. Now we stoutly and safely deny that Christs fleshe at any tyme, can be in ma∣ny, or in all places at once, and wee saye, that it can not by anye necessary or fitte consequence bee gathered, either from this hys walkyng vppon the waters, or in that hee entered into the place where hys disciples were, the dores being shut, or in that hee arose againe, the stone of the Sepulchre or Toombe,Iohn. 20.19. Math. 28.2. Certain reasons alledged for proofe of his as∣sertion. not beeing remooued or rolled awaye by mannes handes. And of thys wee haue sundrye reasons: for firste these myracles seeme rather to bee doone, in the waters them∣selues, made harde and firme, not one∣lie
vnder Christs feete, but vnder Peters also, than in Christs owne bodie, the like whereof also is to bee saide touching the wall and sepulchre,Matth. 14.29. the heape or weight  whereof did sodainely yeeld vnto the body of the creator. Moreouer, though we shold grant that they were to be seene in the ve∣ry body of Christ, yet doth not the with∣holding of a bodily weight, or the with∣drawing of it for a time, or else this thin∣nesse, as a man woulde say, of a bodilie heape, either abolish a bodie it selfe (sith it dooth at any hand, take away the quan∣titie of a body) or implie contradiction, as they are woont to say in the schooles.  But we affirme, that a true and very bo∣die, can neither want quantity or circum∣scriptiblenesse, but it shal cease to be a bo∣die, neither can it be at once in one place, as circumscribed, and in an other place, as not circumscribed, but that we must of necessitie conclude, both that it is a bodie, and that it is not a bodie, which are as∣sertions meerelie contrarie. The summe of all these thinges is this, or tendeth to this ende: namelie, that this opinion of the reall consubstantiation of Christes flesh with bread and wine, is most false
and vntrue, as by meanes whereof the trueth of Christes fleshe is vtterlie abo∣lished. Now againe,The second rea∣son against con∣substantiation. See the first before, pag. 65. euen by this most weightie argument following, may this forgerie and deuise be confuted, namelie because it plainlie and wholie standeth vp against the analogie and proportion of faith, so little need, or iust cause haue the defendors thereof, to call vs backe to the power and force of faith.Acts. 1.11. Marke. 16.19. The scripture witnesseth in manie places, that Christes flesh ascended vp aboue the heauens, and that there also at this day it remaineth, we may not therefore seeke for it in earth: otherwise it should not be an ascending, but a vanishing away for the time. Cer∣teinlie,A generall rule no man can trulie be said to come or go vp thither, where he now was, or to go away, descend, or be absent from the place where he remaineth. Looke there∣fore in how manie places these things are spoken of Christ, according to his flesh, and that without anie figuratiue kinde of speech by so manie most strong and inuin∣cible testimonies, there is confirmed vnto vs the true taking away of the bodie of Christ from vs, and also that reall dotage of the presence of Christes flesh vpon the
earth, yt is to say, thys opinion which the Dokits & Marcionits mainteine suffici∣entlie confuted.Of these see be∣fore, pag. 70. As for that that they vrge against vs,An obiection answered. saieng: How absurd is that, that Christes flesh is now in heauen and no where else? It is easilie answered, that we speake no otherwise than Peter,Acts. 3.21. Acts. 1.11. yea than the angels themselues haue spoken. And though they say further, that by this meanes we shut vp Christ, as it were in a prison, where as yet notwithstanding the right hand of God (that is to say, his hea∣uenlie power and authoritie) whereat he sitteth is euerie where. What for all this? Answer vs this, and tell vs whether that being on the earth, & absent from heauen (for he had not ascended thither where he was then present) or whether that being in the virgins wombe, or wrapped vp in swadling clothes, lieng in the crib, he was shut vp in prison? Yea sith euerie bodie is conteined in his owne place, yea & things without bodies, are yet notwithstanding included in the proprietie of their nature (for onelie the Godhead is infinit) what can follow else of this their most absurd argument and reason,Absurditie in reason, by the aduersaries argument. than that all things are full of prisons and prisoners? And
though we should say, that vnder ye termes of sitting at the right hand,Philip. 2.9. there is meant the verie selfe same thing which the apo∣stle simplie and without trope saith, that Christ (to wit as he is man) hath receiued, that is to say, a name aboue all names, yet it should be no lesse fond and absurd, ther∣vpon to gather and conclude the presence of Christes flesh in euerie place,A similitude. that if we would affirme that the bodie of some king is as large and wide, as the bounds of his kingdome are brode. But say they,Another obie∣ction answered. Christ being present gouerneth all things. We answer, that is true, as he is God, and yet the person of Christ is not for al that rent in sunder or diuided. For euen Christ man, being euerie where the Lord, is pre∣sent also euerie where, much more in the supper,In what respect Christ is pre∣sent euerie where. howbeit not as in respect of the manhood it selfe but as in regard of ano∣ther, that is to say, as he is one person, not in himselfe as in regard of his manhood, but in the verie nature of the Godhead it selfe, of which the humanitie was so assu∣med, that it is one subsistence or being to∣gither with it, as a little while ago we declared. Therefore the man Christ is in deed present, to wit, as he the selfe
same is Christ God, and yet the manhood of Christ is not now in anie other place than in heauen.The third obie∣ction answered. Ephes. 4.10. But it is yet further ob∣iected, that Christ went vp into heauen to fulfill all things. I grant it: wherevpon also I gather, that hee fulfilled not all things, till he ascended, and that therefore the definition of the personall vnion taken from habituall grace, as they call it (of which we haue said some what before) is false and fond. Yea, I gather this further, that if he did truelie and in deed ascend, that that his flesh was not in heauen be∣fore he ascended thither, & that it ceaseth to be on the earth, after that he ascended from thense into heauen. But say they, he ascended to fulfill or fill all things:The same obie∣ction vrged, yet answered. ther∣fore he filleth all things. We answer that he performed that, for which he ascended, that is to say, he filled or fulfilled ye whole mysterie of our saluation, which the pro∣phets foretold, and the full state whereof (as in respect of that for the performance of which Christ came into the world) is finished by Christs ascension, as it had the beginning of it from his comming into the earth. But if we had rather refer these words (which also we may do) to the frute
that followed his ascension into heauen (by which, not as a seruant, but as a sonne he tooke vpon him, and entered into the kingdome and gouernment) then we shall perceiue, that he therefore ascended,Iohn. 14.2 that sending downe the Holie ghost, he might bestow vpon his church all necessarie gifts, for he ascended that he might euen lade men with his graces,Ephes. 4.8. and heape vp benefits, blessings, and gifts vpon them, which seeing the apostle himselfe spea∣keth euen in so manie words as it were, what man in his right wit would beleeue them, that will transfer that to the verie person of Christ, which is spoken of the of∣fice of his kingdome, and the mightie and effectuall power thereof.The fourth ob∣iection answe∣red. Luke. 24.31. But they yet further say, he was taken out of their sight, or he vanished away from it. I grant it, but if from hense they may gather, this their presence in all places, or in manie places, or that which they call maiestie euerie where (it is woonderfull and piti∣full to behold, what monstrous opinions in a verie short space haue sprong vp) why may not we affirme the same likewise touching Philip?Acts. 8.39.40. for he suddenlie did so banish out of the Eunuches eies & sight,
that he was found afterward at Azolus. And what was woont sometimes to be tide the prophets themselues, appeareth by the example of Elias his disciples.2. Kings. 2 3. The fift obie∣ction. Acts. 7.35.36. An other place they obiect Stephan saw Christ, therefore he was on the earth. I denie that, for he being on earth, saw him set in heauen, as the holie historie decla∣reth. And to what purpose I pray you, should he see him in heauen, if he be at his side, on the earth? So that this miracle is to be considered, not in the verie bodie of Christ, but in Stephans eies. Neither did that rite and ceremonie of the church, vsed from all antiquitie, whereby men with a loud voice were admonished to haue their hearts lifted vpward, saieng: Lift vp your hearts,The vse of these words: Lift vp your hearts, in the celebrati∣on of the sup∣per. tend to any other end, but to cause men to mount vp to heauen. For to what purpose should that saieng, Lift vp, be vsed, if wee had that in our mouths and in our hands which we seeke for?The sixt obie∣ction answered. 1. Corinth. 15.8. Acts. 9, 4.5. &c. August. in psal. 54. Againe: Christ was seene of Paule as he went to Damascus. Augustine shall answer this for vs. He writing vpon the fourth and fift psalmes, saith: The head that was in heauen, cried alowd for the bodie that was in the earth. Much like
vnto this forme,Acts. 22.17. is that which they yet ob∣iect, namelie that Paule saw the Lord, when he praid in the temple: therfore the Lord was in the verie temple, we confesse that he saw him, but in a vision or trance. It was therfore a spirituall vision, neither belongeth it anie whit at all to this pre∣sent matter in hand: and yet though we say it was a spirituall vision, we meane not that Paule saw any false or forged thing. Hitherto also we must refer other words of the same apostle, seeming o tend to the same end, for they may receiue the same answer likewise.The last shift of the aduersaries fullie answered. They run at the last to ye same starting hole or shift (which I call by that name, as in respect of them that doo abuse it) of the almightie power of Christ. And when we set against them this sure ground, that God cannot per∣forme somethings, then they throw out a∣gainst vs bitter outcries, as though that we were manifestlie and altogither blas∣phemous and euill men. For mine owne part I would require this one thing of them,The authors re∣quest to the ad∣uersaries, stan∣ding vpon two parts. that they would with an vpright mind suffer such as amongst vs shall an∣swer them, and that they would not be ca∣ried so friuolouslie, yet weaklie (the Lord
knoweth) against such, as whose life (God be thanked for it) freeth them from all suspition of blasphemie.The first reason. If euerie one denie the power of God that saith there is something which God cannot doo, then they certeinelie were blasphemers, that said, God deceiued, God lied, and that he could not die. Yea but they will say, that in as much as these things are not of anie part of his power, but rather imbecilities and wants, this is not to make GOD weake or feeble, but most mightie rather. And this certeinelie is the same, that long ago amongst others,Theodoretus. Theodoret did an∣swere the Eutychian heretiks, who defen∣ded this verie selfe same doctrine, by the verie selfe same reason. Let vs stay heere then a while, and as we say in the pro∣uerbe, pitch our staffe for a season. It is without all controuersie or doubt, that God, who at the first made all things of nothing, is able vtterlie to turn all things vp side downe, yea euen with his verie becke or breath to abolish and destroy them all: and yet for all that he cannot effect or bring to passe this, that that which hath beene should not be,Certeine things that God can∣not doo. or that some one thing should be and not be, at
one & the selfe same time, or that it should at one and the selfe same time, be such a thing, and not such a thing. The reason is because of two contradictorie speeches, one of them must of necessitie be false:Numbers. 23.19. but sith he is God in deed, he cannot lie, and therefore he cannot either will or do such things as are contradictorie contrary one of them to another. Wherefore he shall conuince GOD of lieng and himselfe of follie, woosoeuer he be, that will cloke and couer Gods almightie power with this deuise, by which Christes bodie is circum∣scriptible, and yet it shall in deed togither be present in manie places at once (which properlie belongeth to that onelie infinit nature) whereby also this is forged & fra∣med, to wit, that the bodie is finite and in∣finite, great and not great, yea a bodie and not a bodie.The second reason. And this I dare aduouch fur∣ther: Whatsoeuer God would once haue without exception, to be vnchangeable, that cannot be changed by him, much lesse can it be abolished or doone away: the reason is, because God cannot depart from himselfe, or be contrarie or vnlike vnto himselfe. And I make this without all doubt or controuersie, euen that such is
Christes bodie, namelie, that it hath al∣waies beene, & must of necessitie for euer be a verie or true bodie, and therefore also circumscriptible and tied to a place.The third rea∣son. Yea, this I say further, that God cannot be cre∣ated by God, nor that a thing created can be turned into God: for if there were ma∣nie gods, he could not be God, to whō ano∣ther created wer equall, neither could that created god (so called abusiuelie) be God, because that to be God, & to haue a begin∣ning of time or in time, are merelie cōtra∣dictorie things or speeches.The conclusion of this point. Christs flesh therfore could not become the Godhead, & therfore could it not be indued with ye in∣communicable proprieties of ye Godhead, that is to say, with such proprieties belon∣ging to the Godhead, as cannot be cōmu∣nicated to any other, but ye Godhead alone, amongst which, this, to be infinit, & to be wholie & at one time euerie where, is not reckoned in the last place. Is this I pray you to deny Gods almightie power? or do we in this follow ye vngodlines of ye blas∣phemous felow Plinie?Plinius, and his errors. for he denieth that God is able to bestow immortalitie vpon mortall people, or to call backe again such as are dead: which is not only falslie, but
wickedly spoken also. The selfe same par∣tie denieth that God is able to kill him∣selfe, or to bring to passe,Truth may be propounded by some, though they perhaps doo not well vnderstand the cause thereof. that he that hath liued, and is now dead should not haue li∣ued then when he liued, or that twise ten should not be twentie. And heer in howso∣euer he fel fouly in the former, he hath not missed the truth, but rightlie denied these things to be in God: onelie heerein he did most beastlie slip,The cause why God cannot do some things, is not so much want of power in him, as be∣cause he can∣not or will not be found con∣trarie to his nature. that not knowing or be∣leeuing the nature of God, he would haue these things to be arguments and proofs of Gods imbecilitie and weaknesse, wher∣as contrariwise, we know and beleeue, that he cannot therefore doo these things, because he himselfe cannot perish, nor lie, nor be changed. But loe we are now at the length come to them, who seeme most equall and vp∣right aboue all other, who also auoiding all other forgeries and deuises, doo stay themselues onelie vpon these wordes of Christs: This is my bodie,Such answered as vrge the bare words: This is my bodie. and This cup is my bloud: we must say they beleeue Christes wordes though he speake neuer so new and vnaccustomed matters, yea though he speake things that our flesh and sences cannot beleeue. We grant all this.
But what if they seeme not agreeable to the truth, and the analogie or proportion of faith? Verilie they are to be beleeued indeed, seeing that the sonne of God is the truth it selfe, & yet these things or points must be so expounded,Two rules meet to be obserued in expounding such places, as seeme contra∣rie to truth. that they may alto∣gither agree with the 1 rest of the places of holie scripture, and the cheefe 2 groūds or heads of christian religion: for whatso∣euer doth dissent, though it be neuer so lit∣tle from these rules, must of necessitie be false and vnsound. Now we haue heere∣tofore at large declared and prooued, that such and so corrupt is that interpretation which establisheth either transubstantia∣tion, or a reall consubstantiation, of the signes and the things signified.Two christian frutes arising by expounding the words of the supper sa∣cramentallie. But on the other side if we grant a sacramentall being of the thing signified (which as it is true in other sacraments, so also in this mystery) then we shall preserue 1 the truth of Christes flesh, and vphold 2 the analogie and proportion of faith. Wherefore this interpretation is to be admitted & recei∣ued, as true, and well agreeing with right and sound doctrine.An obiection answered. But say they, there is no place heere for a trope or figure: yea the verie plaine word is simplie to be ob∣serued.
But who I beseech you hath gi∣uen you this rule speciallie, sith this is most manifest, yea and so vsuall also, that when they speake of sacraments (which also are themselues figures) they speake figuratiuelie. Neither thinke I that anie man can skarslie bring foorth or allege an example of a contrarie speech. You must therefore allege a cause, or render a rea∣son, why that which is of force in other sa∣craments shuld not likewise be of strēgth and power in this sacrament, or speech touching the same. But let vs some what more nighlie looke into the matter, and well wey all and euerie of the words of institution. First I demand, what the thing is pointed at, or painted out by this Pronoune demonstratiue, Hoc, that is,The Pronounce Hoc, that is This, expoun∣ded. This. The papists answer, that it is an identicall proposition, that is,The popish opi∣nion declared and confuted. that one and the selfe same thing speaketh of it selfe, and that therfore nothing is shewed forth, but euen the verie bodie it selfe: as if a man should say: This thing is my bodie. But we say, that of necessitie that must be demonstrated & shewed, which he hauing taken & broken, did deliuer vnto his disci∣ples, to wit, bread: which thing also the a∣postle
hath declared when hee said: The bread which we breake.1. Corinth. 10.16 Is it not the cō∣municating of the bodie of Christ? And the word (rup) added in the other member or part of the institution of the supper, doth plainlie prooue to all men that are not vt∣terlie contentious, that this word (this) is as much, as if Christ shuld say this bread. And heere I confesse there is no trope at all, the reason is because it was needfull for vs to haue the signe properlie & fitlie declared, that we might not be deceiued. But our aduersaries (among whom also a trope is almost as odious as an heresie) be∣ing demanded,Vbiquitaries, or consubstantia∣tors, and thier opinions decla∣red & confuted. What answer they? Veri∣lie that vnder this Pronoune Hoc, that is, This, there is set out vnto vs, both ye bread and the bodie also, that is to say, both the signe & the thing signified,Their opinion is contrarie being in verie  deed & essentiallie vnited togither, as they say.To scripture, But (as erewhile I said) 1 Paule v∣seth the onelie word bread, and certeine it  is, that that was shewed, whiche Christe took & brake.To the nature of Christs body. Shall 2 we say, that he took and brake his owne bodie? Certeinelie if they will so affirme, this reall coniuncti∣on  of the signes & the thing signified,To their owne opinions. shall 3 not depend vpon the words of instituti∣on,
seeing that euen before that Christ tooke it and brake it, it was not bread on∣lie, but his bodie also. Wherefore they must of necessity confes, that these words: This is my bodie, & these againe: This bread is my bodie, meane and signifie all one thing: which not onlie all the ancient fathers do affirme, in innumerable places.Luther. Brentius. but Luther in manie places, and Brentius also, both in his booke called Syntagma, and in his catechisme likewise,Seluerieus. Eberus. yea Selue∣ricus & Eberus, doo as it were in so many words testifie also this truth. If yet not∣withstanding they will haue euen the bo∣die vnited to the bread, to be shewed out thereby. I answer they must of necessitie then admit the trope or figure Synecdo∣che, and that therefore the institution of Christ, or the words of the institution, can not be vnderstood without a trope or fi∣gure.He proueth the aduersaries to fall into that which they dislike in o∣thers. And what man that is in his right wits shall they persuade, that the word bo∣die can at one & the selfe same time be spo∣ken of the bread & of the bodie without an other Synedoche also. And this you see what they haue gained, who thinke it, and publish it in others to be a horrible heresie by a trope or figure to vnderstand ye words
of the supper, wheras they themselues are inforced and found out, to make a double trope or figure. Now let vs come to the word Est,The word Est, is expounded. that is to say, Is. Seeing that whatsoeuer is, is not after one sort (for to be, hath place in all the predicaments) when these men from hense gather thus, or doo after this sort expound these words.  This bread is Christs bodie, therfore it is essentiallie Christes bodie, doo they not I beseech you speake as if they should say:  This is a liuing creature: therfore it is a man? And againe, doo they reason lesse fondlie, when they gather thus: This bread is Christs bodie, therfore this bread is Christs bodie, not absent but present? Now, whereas they say, that the word bo∣die, because it is a substance, cannot be o∣therwise spoken or vttered, than substan∣tiallie, I say they should haue left this to the papists, who are therefore inforced to bring in their transubstantiation of the bread, because they say, that things sunde∣red or separated one of them from another, could not be spoken one of another (& that therfore also this propositiō was false, the bread is the bodie) except they granted ei∣ther that ye bread it selfe became nothing,
or by changing were tourned into a sub∣stance of another sort, to wit,Vbiquitaries, in vrging the bae letter, as absurd as Papists at the least. the substance of his body. Therfore these men alone do keep or vrge, & that most fondlie, the bare worde or letter. But these men of whom I now speake, though in outward shewe and speech, they refuse all tropes and fi∣gures, in the exposition of these words of the institution, doo yet notwithstanding ouer and besides the two tropes aboue mentioned, that is to say,The aduersaries by power of trueth constrai∣ned to fall into three tropes in the exposition of a fewe words though other∣wise the name be odious to them. the figure Sy∣necdoche diuersly vsed in deede bring in an other, and that same very strange and woonderfull: when they will haue this speech: this bread is my bodie, to signifie and meane as much, as if Christ shoulde haue saide: my bodie is verily present, wyth, or in, or vnder this bread. Concer∣ning which, this is my minde, that whoso∣euer hee is that vseth this last forme or manner of speaking dooth not shew, what the bodie it selfe is, but rather declareth where the body is, and therefore vseth the worde (is) not in the predicament of substance, but in the predicament of Site as they call it. Nowe I come to speake of that worde Body.The word Body handled. The thing that about this matter
is laide vnto our charge,The aduersaries charge. is this, that in∣stead of the true bodie of Christ, deliue∣red to death for vs, wee substitute and place, I can not tell what typicall or fi∣guratiue, or as it pleaseth them to call it, fantasticall bodie, when wee affirme that the bodie is spoken of the bread, not that the bread is the very bodie it selfe, but because it is as a signe and pledge of that true body of his, which was giuen for vs. The answere thereto.But is this to ascribe vnto Christ, a fained body, as these men slaunder vs? Or is it not rather rightly to declare and shew in what sense, that true and onelie bodie may bee saide or spoken of the bread, to wit, not as it is bread, but in as much as it is a sacrament of that his bodie? Ther∣fore all these interpretations following, which that stincking slanderer Illyricus tosseth too and fro,Illyricus and his slaunders. as if they were contrary one of them to an other, that is to saye: This bread sacramentally signifieth, or sacramentallye is Christes bodie: or a∣gaine: This bread is the sacrament of Christes bodie, doo in deede and trueth, and altogether expresse but one and the selfe-same iudgement and matter.
Now that the worde bodie is in many places vsed, by all the old right beleeuing writers, for the verie signe of the bodie,All the auntient Fathers vse the worde bodie, for the signe of the bodie. our aduersaries must of necessitie whe∣ther they will or no, confesse, sith that they feare not to affirme, that Christes bodye is made, broken, consumed, and why shoulde it not bee so likewise, when it is saide, to enter into the mouth? To be short, what strife and stubbornenesse is this of theirs? They dare not denie the bread to be the sacrament of Christes bo∣dy: and why then will they not allowe of this interpretation? Heere is the reason forsooth, because they woulde haue it called the Sacrament of the bodie pre∣sent. Then ye controuersie shal not be,The state of the controuersie or question, is not about the inter∣pretation of the wordes of insti∣tution, but a∣bout the pre∣sence of Christs bodie. yet tou∣ching the interpretation and meaning of these wordes of the institution, in which there is no mention at all, neither of pre∣sence nor absence, but herein onelie shall they consist, whether that bodie (of which that bread is saide to be the Sacrament) be absent or present: which controuersie, I can not so much as suppose howe these men should determine out of these wordes This is my bodie.
The second part of the Lords supper, to wit, the institution of the cup, and what is meant thereby.Hitherto wee haue spoken of the first part of the Lords supper, to wit, the bread: but now let vs come to the other part, to wit, the cuppe. But tell vs (I pray you) what wee must vnderstande by the woord cup? Verily, by their confession, euen that which is contained in the cuppe, that is to say, the wine, and yet ouer and be∣sides that, the bloud of Christ, as they will needes haue it. The former of these I grant, to wit, that by the cuppe should be meant, the wine contained in the cup: but the latter I denie, to wit, that that wine should be in substance the very bloud of Christ, and this I do deny standing vp∣on the reasons, which I haue before spo∣ken and alleaged. But howsoeuer it be, whether there be meant therby this wine alone, or together with the wine, euen the bloud it selfe: yet needes must these deadly enimies of tropes and figures ac∣knowledge one figure here, to wit, a Me∣tonomia, of the thing containing for the thing contained, yea, and that same verie trope of the same figure Synecdoche, (which wee haue spoken of before) wher∣by it commeth to passe, that the wine and the bloud are saide to be the bloud.
Now then let them tel me how,See for the proofe of this Genesis 17.9. with∣out a crope or figure, that shall be counted the couenant it selfe, by meanes whereof, the couenant is established? And yet this further I would gladly demaund of them, if the bare word or letter being so precise∣ly obserued, that reall consubstantiation must of necessity ensue, how it can be that this should not followe likewise, that the signes beeing not onely distincted, but in very deede and truth separated and sunde∣red also the body it selfe shoulde not like∣wise in deede bee separated and sunde∣red from the bloud?Consubstantia∣tion erronious, and al that is obiected for i most weake. I many times think∣ing, and that earnestly of this one matter, to wit, why diuers did so greatly vrge this same rule Consubstantiation, euen as if it were the principall point of all our re∣ligion: of a truth, nothing could come in∣to my minde but that which was most ea∣sie to be confuted. As for ye that they say,An obiection. that vnles Christs very body and his very bloud be beleeued to be so present, that it may be receiued with the hands and with the mouth, or else the bread and the wine, shall be but emptie and void signes, I say it is of no force. In good sooth, suppose yee that yee speake the trueth? Belike
then all the sacraments that the Fathers had,The answeare ken from an absurditie. before that Christs flesh was indeede created were voide, and of no force. Their Sacraments (saith Augustine) were in signes diuers, but in matter equall. But in what matter were they equall? Euen in Christ, the only matter of the sacraments: for that same spirituall word, that is, (as the selfe-same writer vpon the 77.August. in psa. 77 psalme expoundeth it) signifieng some spirituall thing, was Christ; & they did eat the same meat that we eat,1. Corint. 10.2.3. and did drinke the same drinke, to wit, Christ that was to be born, as we eat and drinke Christ alredy borne, who is a spirituall meat and drinke. How vntrue therefore is it that the signes are of no force, except the thing signified, be∣ing in deede also present bee coupled and ioyned with the signe?2 A second reson, standing vpon comparison of the element of baptisme, with the elements of the supper. Yea shall we say, that the water of Baptisme, is an idle signe? & yet I neuer hard of any man that would say, that the bloud of Christ was indeede consubstantiated together wyth the wine. But against this they replie saieng: the reason or cause of that is, be∣cause the Lord saide not, that that water was his bloud. Let vs grant that, and yet in the meane while wee haue gained this,
that ye sacrament is not abolished, or made of no force, though the signe bee in one place, and the thing signified thereby bee in an other, so that both of them be truly offered and giuen. And this much, or hi∣therto haue we spoken of this third point, that is to say, of the sacramentall coniunc∣tion or ioyning of the signe with the thing signified. Now the summe of this true and right beleeuing iudgement is this, to wit,The summe of that which hath bin saide, touch∣ing the sacra∣mental coniun∣ction of the sig and the thing signified. that that is a sacramentall coniunction, wher∣by it commeth to passe, that through gods ordinance, that which is signified by the signes vsed, though nowe it be neuer so farre from vs (I meane Christ himselfe, as in respect of his flesh) is yet notwith∣standing, through the power of the holie ghost, but yet in suche a spirituall sorte and manner, as wee shall declare heereaf∣ter, as truely and verily offered vnto vs, and giuen vs, to be enioyed of vs as verily as the signes themselues are looked vpon wyth the eies, touched with the handes and receiued and perceiued also wyth the mouth. But let vs now come at the length,The fourth or last part of this discourse. to the fourth or last question and points, to
wit, what manner of taking or receiuing there is, both of the signs themselues, and of the thing signified. Concerning the ta∣king or receiuing of the signs, there is no controuersie or doubt made of it,A syllogisme. but that it is naturall and outward, because it is manifestly and plainely perfourmed of all them that come vnto it, by bodily instru∣ments and meanes.The maior. But as for the things signified, to wit, that very flesh of Christ, and that very bloud of his, they are so re∣ceiued and taken, euen as they are present and offered.The minor. But they are present and of∣fered also, to our mind and faith, because they are nowe (as wee haue saide) not on earth,The conclusion. but in heauen: and therefore they can not bee taken or receiued otherwise than by our minds and faith.Augustine. Augustine also speaking well and rightly touching this point, after this manner: Why pre∣porest thou thy mouth and bellie? This foode belongeth not to the bellie, but to the minde: Beleeue and thou hast eaten: Wherevpon also this likewise followeth, that all that come to the Lordes table (as the same Augustine saith) receue the body of the lord,Augustine. that is to say, the sacrament of the Lordes body, to wit, the bread vsed at
may be one, euen as thou and I are one And in one worde, as you would say to finish the matter: if onelie the mem∣bers of Christ are to be saued, then they must needes confesse, that wee are tho∣rowe faith truelye grafted into Christ, and that euen before wee come to the supper: in so muche as, no manne can rightlye and orderlye come to the supper, which is not nowe already, both in bap∣tisme, and in the worde,That followeth not, that the aduersaries fantasie. become a mem∣ber of Christe, and therefore is vnited with Christe him selfe. And yet it doo∣eth not heerevppon followe, that the institution of the Supper is superfluous, by which wee doo not indeede at the first pushe, but yet notwithstanding in pro∣cesse of time, doo growe vppe more and more in Christ. For him that wee doo al∣readye possesse, must wee yet still dayly seeke: and the more in number or strength that the obiectes of our faith, so muche the more meete is, that that meane mea∣sure of faith that wee haue, beeing stir∣red vppe in vs, it shoulde become so muche the more effectuall and power∣full. For else what doo these men gather
which wee may not, euen from the very first institution and celebration of the Lords supper, as safly collect against the repetition or often administration of the same?A reason of the assertion. For certainely if we conclude, that the Lords supper is therfore superfluous, because we receiue nothing therein, but that which wee receiued before, in the worde and baptisme, then this also will followe therevppon, that it is altogether vnprofitable, to repaire the second or third time to the Lords supper, seeing that hee that commeth thither the seconde or sun∣dry times, receiueth nothing more than that very selfe-same thing, which before hee had laide holde of and receiued, than when he came first thereto.The second ob¦iection, with the answere therto. But they say, there is giuen to all that come thither, not bread alone, but that bread which is the sacrament: otherwise Christs words shold be frustrate saying: This is my bodie. I grant all this, and yet I deny the conse∣quēce. Both things, that is, the signe, and the thing signified,As man stan∣deth of two parts: so accor∣dingly two things are offe∣red in the sup∣per. is giuen or offered to all: therefore all receiue both. This han∣geth not together: for two things are of∣fered, one to the body, the other to the minde: the one is to bee taken holde of by
the meane of the body, either to life or to death: the other is to bee apprehended by faith, and yet but to life onelie. Is it a∣ny maruell then that two thinges beeing to bee receiued by seuerall instrumentes and meanes, though perhappes they bee both offered in one action, as they saye, the one of them should be receiued, by eue∣ry one that bringeth the common instru∣ment of the body: and the other apprehen∣ded but of them alone that bring wyth them that same spirituall and onelie fit instrument to apprehend Christ by? No verilye. And yet heere againe I pray you marke, howe great the strength of trueth is. Those that contend so stiffely, and that also wythout any profit to the church about vnwoorthie communicants (for to what ende shoulde wee trauaile so muche about them?A distinction voide of reason and religion.) Doo notwithstanding di∣stinguish, betweene such vnworthie per∣sons as liue not christianlie enough, or o∣therwise are not sufficiently prepared for receiuing of the supper (yet so as they feare not to affirme, that euen they also eate Christes fleshe, though it be to their destruction vnlesse they repent) and such
as are altogether the wicked and vnbelee∣uers, who receiue nothing but the bare signes. But if that same reall Consubstan∣tiation which they fantasie bee true, then this will ensue therevpon, that not onelie all reasonable creatures without excepti∣on, receuing the signs, but the very beasts (let there bee reuerence in hearing this that I nowe say,A warie, but yet withall, a most necessarie cau∣tion. and let not any manne take it, as though I spake blasphemou∣sly) eating that bread and drinking that wine, shall haue receiued also the flesh and the bloud of Christ.An obiection answered. But they except fur∣ther against this truth, that the vnworthy are saide to be guiltie of the Lordes body and bloud. Wee graunt that too, Is it because they did vnwoorthily receiue the body and bloud?1. Corinth. 11.27 No in deede: But be∣cause they did eate vnwoorthily of that bread, and drincke vnwoorthilye of that cuppe:1. Cor. 11.28, 29. or, because they discerned not the Lordes body, for that same vnwoorthie vsing and receiuing of the holy signes or pledges redoundeth vnto the contempt of the thing signified and offered,A fit similitude. euen as he may iustly be accounted guiltie of some crime: yea, of treason if you will against
the Emperoures Maiestie, that in con∣tempt or reprochfullye dooth violate the Emperours picture or image. Wee see then, that the wicked are become guiltye of the body and bloud of Christe, not that they haue receiued them (vnlesse a man will take the body for the signe of the bo∣dye, which is oftentimes vsed in the an∣tient Fathers) but because they haue tho∣rowe their vnbeleefe reiected or refu∣sed them. For Christ him selfe can ne∣uer be sundered from that his quickening power,Christ and his graces are ne∣uer sundered. wherefore looke of whom soeuer hee is receiued (nowe indeede hee is re∣ceiued onely of the beleeuers) they must of necessitye bee deliuered from eternall death,Iohn. 5.24. as he himself plainelie beareth wit∣nesse. Nowe whereas these men except a∣gainst this trueth,An obiection shortlie answe∣red. that christ is deliuered to some for iudgement, and that thorowe the very fault of the hearers. We grant that also, but yet so, & in respect as Christ is thorowe their vnbeleefe refused, and cast from them, and not receiued of them by faith. Lastly, whereas these men suppose,The last obiec∣tion, with the answere therto. that Christ him selfe can not bee truely par∣taken,
vnlesse hee be indeede apprehended both by the handes and mouth also,The last obiecti¦on, with the aun∣sweare thereto. and that therefore we holde a communicating not of Christ himselfe, but of his effica∣cie and power, let vs a little consider this falshoode, and weigh this slaunder. First therefore we must knowe, that when we remoue a bodily eating, that so wee may establishe a spirituall and mysticall eat∣ing: that both these must bee vnderstoode not of the thing it selfe which is commu∣nicated or partaken, but of the maner of communicating or partaking. For nei∣ther did Christ himselfe say:Luke 22.19. This is the merite or benefite of my death: but this is that my body, which is giuen for you: neyther doo wee suppose, that Christ himselfe can be lesse vnskilfully separated from his efficacie,A similitude. when the question is of Spirituall nourishement, than if a manne woulde denie, that we had neede to eate bread it selfe, and drincke wine it selfe, that so afterwardes wee might drawe or fetch bodily nourishment from the same. But wee saye and affirme, that this manner of communicating or partaking, is not bodilie, neither yet that it can be
perfourmed by bodilie instruments, or meanes, but altogether spirituall and mysticall, as which is performed by faith alone, which faith imbraceth that matter,Faith alone im∣braceth the words and sa∣craments & all the graces offe∣red vs therein. that is offered vnto vs in the word and sa∣craments. But if they will denie that this can be performed, because of such a great distance of places, let them then cease at the last to accuse vs of vngodlinesse, as though we would either denie Gods al∣mightie power, or giue sentence touching this mysterie, by the rules of worldlie phi∣losophie. And yet we will not denie, but that this obiection may then haue some place,If absurdities or errors be yeel∣ded vnto, then they will be in∣finit, & no mea∣sure of them. if by communicating or partaking we vnderstand a reall applieng or mix∣ture of Christes bodie with ours, whether it be of the whole with the whole, or of the parts with the parts, that so the church might in deed be a bodie, as it were soul∣dered and glewed togither of innumera∣ble bodies of beleeuers, being indeed mol∣ten togither as it were with Christes bo∣die. But fie vpon this monster, and let vs learne alwaies to driue it far from vs: for who perceiueth not that the bodie arising or flowing from this felowship or commu∣nicating and belonging altogether to a
spirituall life, is mysticall? Wherfore we are truelie, but yet after a spirituall sort and mysticallie, become one with Christ himselfe through faith, that so from him there may flow into vs true life.A similitude. And e∣uen as these our members being natural∣lie ioined with the soule, doo receiue from it sence and moouing: so should we after a spirituall and vndeclarable maner (for great is the mysterie of that spirituall ma∣riage, that is betweene Christ and his church,Ephes. 5.32. as the apostle largelie and lowd∣lie declareth) liue in Christ, being ledde and gouerned by his spirit, and he againe manifest and declare his powerfull wor∣king in vs. Now tell me, is this the abo∣lishing of that partaking that wee haue with Christ himselfe, or doo we not ra∣ther make it a diuine and heauenlie par∣taking? But if with these men we would make it a cōmunicating with the mouth, then this partaking or communicating should be no woonderful or excellent mat∣ter.We cannot ap∣prooue of a bo∣dilie communi∣cating or parta∣king with the mouth, because that were to spoile our faith, and rob God of his almightie power & truth. For what I pray you is more natu∣rall and vsuall, than if anie thing that is in deed present, be deliuered vs to eat, we take it in our hands, and swallow it down thorow our mouth? But that we, though
as now poore wretches we be placed on the earth, & not els where, should notwith∣standing, truelie and in deed become the verie members of the flesh and bloud of Christ himselfe, who now according to his flesh remaineth in heauen, and no where else, and should fetch from thence the verie iuice in deed of eternall life, not∣withstanding that woonderfull great di∣stance of place that is betweene him and vs, this I say passeth all mans vnderstan∣ding, and is a most euident testimonie both of Gods truth, and also of his almigh∣tie power. And let this suffice also for answer to these slanderers, who crie out, that wee transforme this holie mysterie into an i∣maginarie ghost or conceit, in that we do attribute all this wholie to our mindes & faith:If the aduersa∣ries conclusion be true, then there will insue therevpon two grosse errors. for if they doo trulie conclude this against vs, what remaineth then but that we affirme likewise the baptisme of chri∣stians to be a certeine vaine fantasie or apparition, and their saluation also to be  in imagination, and not in truth,Two similitudes conteining in them arguments from the lesse to the more. who die before they can come to be present at, or partakers of the Lords supper? Now if naturall vnderstanding it selfe and appre∣hension
be so powerfull and effectuall, that we being holpē by these faculties become skilfull in so manie things, shall not faith that excellent gift of the Holie ghost, worke this in vs, that wee shall through faith trulie and in deed apprehend & take hold of that verie thing, which God offe∣reth vs, to be receiued by faith, though it  be neuer so far remooued from vs? And sith by the heat of the sun, though it be ne∣uer so far distant from vs, the whole world is after a sort quickened and made liuelie and strong, shall not Christ be able, though his flesh and his bloud remaine in heauen, so to become in deed our mysticall head, that he may powre into vs the iuice of e∣ternall life?The conclusion of all. But of these matters wee haue spoken thus far. My purpose was (brethren) largelie to discourse of these points, because of the slanders of certeine ilwillers, that so by this meanes, the true and sound doctrine of our churches, being made knowne, none of them that repaire to this church shuld refuse our assemblies, speciallie the holie supper which we mind God willing, within few daies to admi∣nister, but rather that we should euery one of vs religiouslie celebrate this holie ban∣ket,
earnestlie intreating the Lord to re∣streine troublesome spirits, to confirme right beleeuers,A godlie praier. and (to be short) to grant vs all this grace, that being of one minde in him, we may in this world lead an in∣nocent and vnblamable life, and at the last be receiued into eternall life and blessed∣nesse, by our Lord Iesus Christ: to whom with the Father, and the Holie ghost, be all praise, and glorie for euer and euer: So be it.
A SHORT SVMME OF sound doctrine, touching the matter of the Sacrament of the Lords supper. We haue to con∣sider in Christ our onely Mediatour,Foure things to be speciallie re∣garded in Christ, especiallie fowre things, that is to saie: 1 Christes person. 2 His office. 3 The gift  gra∣ces which we re∣ceiue from him. 4 Lastlie, by what meanes wee are made partakers of those gifts. 1 Concerning Christes person. Christ consi∣sting of two na∣tures, is yet but one person.WE teach & affirme, that Christ dooth consist of two natures, the one the nature of God, the other the nature of man, making yet notwithstanding but one person of both natures: and that so also as the proprieties both in the na∣ture of God, and also of man, remaine safe and sound, and are rightlie distinguished one of them from another.Wherein the glorification of Christes bodie standeth. And though we confesse the mans nature of Christ to be glorified, and that in the cheefest de∣gree
one, and that no lesse truelie and straitlie than the members are ioined to a naturall body, but yet in that maner, and after that sort, which we will heereafter declare. Neither do they please, satisfie, or content vs, wherfore this our ioining with Christ vnto that great mysterie of his incarnati∣on: for this is a generall communicating or partaking of his nature with ours: but heere we intreat of a particular or peculi∣ar coniunction, by which it commeth to passe,Ephes. 4.13. that his church and congregation groweth vp togither with him. And we affirme this coniunction and ioining of vs togither, to be the welspring of all the be∣nefits which afterwards are conueied o∣uer from Christ vnto vs:Matth. 3.17. Iohn. 17.11. for seeing that the father is well pleased in him alone, it is meet that we be truelie made one with him, that in him also we may please the father. Hense then insueth another sort of giftes and graces, that is to say,Christ and his graces cannot be sundered. such as when we haue Christ giuen vs, are thē in and with him also bestowed vpon vs.Two sorts of graces in Christ. Of which there are likewise two speciall sorts: First, the imputation or accoūting  vnto vs of Christs holinesse, righteousnes, & obedience, that so in him we may be the
righteousnes of God, through the forgiue∣nesse  of our sinnes. Secondlie a spirituall life it selfe, flowing vnto vs his members, from the flesh of Christ God and man, by the force and power whereof we are new borne, and nourished into euerlasting life, euen as by meat and drinke this fraile life is fostred and mainteined in vs. 4 How Christ togither with his gifts and graces may be receiued of vs. THat we receiue Christ togither with all his gifts and graces,What the Ho∣lie ghost is. this must be attributed, as we freelie confesse, to the free working of the Holie spirit alone, which is the essentiall power of the fa∣ther and the sonne:1. Cor. 2.13.14. for he alone maketh vs meet to vnderstand these things which are of God, yea and that in such sort, that we doo not onelie confesse all Gods pro∣mises generallie to be true,What faith is. but also eue∣rie one of vs in our hearts doo certeinelie persuade our selues that these promises doo belong vnto vs,Rom. 8.15. Galath. 4.6. and therefore may with boldnesse crie Abba, O father. This same most excellent worke of the Holie ghost we call faith,Ephes. 2.8. which is the free gift of GOD, alotted speciallie to the elect,
and is as in respect of vs, the onelie fit and meet instrument to perceiue Christ by, and to receiue all his graces. There∣fore we teach with Paule,Rom. 3.28. that we are iu∣stified and saued by faith alone: we mea∣ning thereby nothing else but this, that by that onelie instrument of faith, wee lay holde vpon all thinges necessarie to saluation, to wit, Christ with all his giftes. Furthermore, the Holie ghost, to the end that this faith may be begot∣ten in vs by his secret power, as also for the fostering and strengthening there∣of, after that it is wrought, dooth vse likewise outward meanes (because wee consist of a rude and grosse nature) to wit, the worde written and preached,The outward meanes of faith. which hee by his power maketh effectu∣all in vs, that so he may worke in vs these thinges of which wee haue before spoken.The word consi∣dred two waies, to wit, as it is preached with∣out the sacra∣ments, and as the sacraments are annexed thereto. And this word sometime is sim∣ple, and by it selfe or alone, as you would saye, not accompanied with other, of whiche sort is the dailie preaching of the same woorde. And sometimes a∣gaine it hath visible signes ioyned to it, togither with certeine ceremonies: which signes the Greekes call mysteries,
and the Latines sacraments: for God ve∣rilie regarding our weaknesse, went to as∣sure vs of that his goodwill towards vs, not by the eares onelie, but also by other sences, and so more and more to establish and seale vnto vs our coniunction with Christ his sonne. These things being put downe, and these ground-works and foun∣tions laid, it shalbe an easie matter to ga∣ther our mind touching the questions fol∣lowing, which respect or concerne the matter of the sacrament. Q 1 Wherfore and to what purpose are sacraments ordeined? Sacraments or∣deined to three ends.A First, that we might so much ye more  effectuallie possesse Christ himselfe. Se∣condlie,  that look how much ye more strait our growing vp with Christ himselfe is, so much more and more should that life of Christ bee deriued and conueied ouer vn∣to vs, with other his gifts and graces.  Thirdlie, that we might so much ye more effectuallie remember, that holie loue, which ought to be of force amongst such as are members of the same bodie, and to which loue we by solemne protestation bind our selues as it were.
Q 2 From whense floweth that force of the sacraments? A Wholie and altogither from the wor∣king of the Holie ghust,The force of the sacraments is from the Ho∣lie ghost onelie. and not from the signes, otherwise than as by these outward obiects, the inward sences are mooued. And the Holie ghost vsing those meanes & aids for our infirmities sake, dooth make these motions effectuall and powerfull, in what measure, and at what time soeuer it pleaseth him. Q 3 Which is the formall cause of the sacraments? A The ordinance of God conteined in his word,The formall cause of the sacraments. and set out or declared by his mi∣nister, according to his commandement, and not the bare pronunciation of those same words, nor any force lieng hid in the words themselues. Q 4 What is the power of this formall cause? A That the signes not in their verie nature or substance,The elements are changed i the sacrament, but that is in re∣spect of vse one∣lie, and not of substance. but as in respect of their vse onelie should be changed, & that so long as the action whervnto they serue, is of force or in hand. For in the holy my∣steries we esteeme not water, as water simplie, or bread as bread alone, or wine
as wine onelie, but as certeine signes, and true pledges of those thinges which the Lord, though in another manner in deed (as we shall by and by declare) yet notwithstanding most certeinlie and tru∣lie dooth giue vnto vs, that is to say, of Christ himselfe, with all his giftes and graces. The matter of the sacraments is two fold.Q 5 What is the matter of the sacra∣ments? The outward matter are the elements.A The outward matter we count the signes themselues, to wit, water in bap∣tisme, bread and wine in the Lords sup∣per, togither with the ceremonies ordei∣ned by Christ, as his word testifieth, which also themselues doo truelie signifie matters of great weight, and altogither heauenlie. We haue alreadie often times said,Christ and his graces are the inward matter. that not that onelie is termed of vs, the inward matter, or matter it selfe of the sacrament, whatsoeuer is deriued to vs from Christ, but principallie Christ himselfe, with whom it is meet that we be made one, before we can draw or fetch anie thing from him.Baptisme what it signifieth. And in deed in baptisme there is set out vnto vs the true and verie bloud of the Lord, as a lauer or founteine, with which bloud being wa∣shed,
we are more and more ingrafted in∣to Christ, and buried with him.The supper what it signi∣fieth. And in the supper, the bodie and bloud of the same Christ is giuen to vs, and that in seuerall signes, as our true meat, and true drinke into life euerlasting.Christ offered in the word and in the sacra∣ments, but yet in two respects more liuelie & plainlie in the sacraments. There is then one inward matter of the word alone, or by it selfe, and the sacraments also, annected thereto, that is to say, Christ himselfe, with all his benefits, to the partaking whereof we are called. But notwithstan∣ding some difference there is, to wit, ac∣cording to more and lesse, as they vsuallie say in schooles. First,The first diffe∣rence. because that when the sacraments are ioined to the simple word or word alone, then it necessarilie followeth, that there is a more plentifull declaration of Gods good will towards vs, and looke by how much there are more obiects in number, and they like∣wise more euident, by so much the more vehementlie or earnestlie they doo mooue and stirre vs vp, or at leastwise ought so to doo. Secondlie,The second difference. because although the worde alone propounded generallie vn∣to all, bee afterwardes by the power of faith, applied vnto euerie particular faithfull person: yet this is not there
so plainelie and particularlie expressed, as in the sacraments in which Christ is verilie offered particularlie and seuerallie to euerie one: wherby it commeth to passe that euerie particular beleeuer is after a certeine maner put into the possession of Christ himselfe. Q 6 How is the matter ioined with the signes? The signes and the things signi∣fied are ioined sacramentallie.A By a sacramentall maner which see∣ing it is proper & peculiar to them alone, must be declared by a proper definition, & such a one as is fit for that purpose, we therefore define or determine, that the sa∣cramentall maner of ioining the matter with the signes,Why it is called a spirituall con∣iunction. is spirituall: by which e∣pitheton or word, we conceiue no imagi∣ned or feined thing, but principally meane that it specially dependeth of the power of the Holie ghost, as we haue alreadie said in the declaration of the formall cause. Moreouer, by that meanes we shut out all grosse and naturall maner of ioining:A similitude. for as we know that the signs are vpon earth, & not else where, which thing also no man can or will denie: so also we hold and con∣clude, that the matter it selfe, that is to say, Christ himselfe, according to his
flesh, is contained in heauen, and not in a∣nye other place, as wee gather out of the Scriptures,Luke 24.51. Actes 3.21. Roman. 8.34. Coloss. 3.1. and all the Fathers of right faith and sound iudgement. And yet wee doubt not but that the signes are ioyned with the matter, that is to say, in that re∣spect, or so farre foorth as God, dooth not onlie, as it were a far off shew, the signs of the bodie and bloud of Christ: but beside the very signes, doth also truely giue vn∣to vs Christ himselfe, to be enioyed and possessed of vs. Whereby also it commeth to passe, that in this respect aboue men∣tioned, these things may be truely saide to be ioyned together, although by spaces of places they are separated far and wide asunder. Notwithstanding we holde, that this coniunction is true and certaine,The sacramen∣tall coniunction is true and sure. in so much as, that therefore the name of the thing it selfe, that is, I saye, the body and bloud is indeede figuratiuely, but yet ve∣ry significantly and plainely giuen to the very signes, to wit, vnto the bread and the wine. Secondly, to the ende wee maye more fully declare this sacramentall ma∣ner of ioyning the matter with the signe, wee adde, that it is significatiue, not as though God did onely signifie vnto vs in
the Sacramentes,What is called a significatiue coniunction. the body and bloud of hys Sonne, and also his Sonne hym∣selfe (for no doubt but that also hee dooth truelie giue him vnto vs) but wee doo it to this ende, least anye man shoulde thinke the matter to bee so coupled with the signes, that Christs flesh also shoulde nowe be present in earth, though it were after a certaine inuisible and incompre∣hensible maner. We say therefore, that Christes bodie and bloud, is by so great a space absent from the signes, euen as the earth it selfe,Curiositie to be auoided, speci∣allie in things we are not skil∣led in. is distant from the most high Heauens, or from the seate of the blessed (touching which wee minde not at any time ouer curiously to dispute or dis∣course) and into which we knowe and be∣leeue that Christ ascended, that so in all our behalfes, and for vs indeede, he might obtaine and get that same immortal inhe∣ritance. Notwithstanding we separat not the thing from the signs, either as in res∣pect of God, who truely offereth both the one and the other,Things must be so ioyned that neither they nor other must be confounded or iumbled to∣gether. or as in respect of the faithfull, who truelie and indeede receiue both. But we note the difference of place in the coniunction of the thing, and the signes, that the trueth of Christes fleshe,
and of his ascension, may be preserued safe and sounde: neither yet do we for al that, by any meanes make void the Lords sup∣per it selfe. Q 7 What is to be thought of these manner of speeches: The bodie of the Lord is in, or with, or vnder the bread, or nigh vnto the bread, and of all, or any other that be of the like sort? A As yet wee feare to vse these, or suche like manner of speaches, because they seeme to take awaye the distaunce of places,Two causes why these kindes of speeches are not to be allow∣ed. which wee necessarilie establishe and allowe: or else they vpholde the v∣biquitie of Christes bodie, which we maie  not graunt at any hand, although we con∣fesse,  that besides the signes, the thing it selfe is offered vs of GOD, and by the faithfull truely receiued, but after that maner which we will declare in the tenth question. Notwithstanding it shold seeme,A christian yeelding, for peace sake, but yet with good cautions and exceptions. that these termes (which are vnder) for concordes sake may be admitted, but not vnlesse a plaine and manifest interpreta∣tion be ioyned withall: to wit, that these particles are so to bee vnderstoode, not as though Christs flesh shoulde be placed vppon earth, but that we may knowe, that
besides the signes themselues which are vppon the earth, Christ himselfe whiche is in heauen, is truely giuen vnto vs, as the signes on earth doo beare witnes. Q 8 What ought we to iudge of this manner of sayeng, Christ is present in the supper, corporallie, reallie, substan∣tiallie? A For the selfe-same cause before al∣leadged, wee doo not vse these formes of speech neither:Hard speeches with some qua∣lifications and interpretations may be tollera∣ted for a time. notwithstanding it should seeme, that they also might bee tollerated or borne withal, so that we adde the inter∣pretation following, to witte, that these things doo not pertaine to that manner of coniunction, wherby the thing is ioyned with the signes, but serue rather to ex∣presse and declare the matter it selfe, that is to say, that so wee may vnderstand, that by the action of the supper, there is esta∣blished and confirmed in vs, not onlie the vertue and power of Christ, but chiefly, our very growing vp with christ himself, from which we haue affirmed the same to flowe,This is the lawe of righteousnes; to haue that doone to our selues that we woulde do to others. euen as it were, from a fountaine, because afterwardes wee fetch from him, both true life, and also all thinges neces∣sarie to saluation. Neither would I iudge
it to be refused, that a like interpretation may againe be ioyned to this our manner of speaking, that Christ is spirituallie in the supper, least any man shoulde thinke that we separate Christs power from the very flesh of Christ, or imagine vnto him a speciall bodie. Q 9 What is to bee iudged of this manner of sayeng: That Christ is pre∣sent in the supper, and is distributed al∣so, by an incomprehensible manner, or after a sorte, that can not bee vnder∣stoode? A We vse this manner of speech, but yet in a far other sense and meaning than some are woonte.A corrupt inter∣pretation. For (vnlesse peraduen∣ture wee be deceiued) they seeme to take this saying after this sort, as though by a certaine diuine and heauenlie power, by reason also of the personall vnion of the flesh with the godhead Christs flesh should be really at one time and together, both in heauen and in earth. But, though we neither deny the omnipotencie of GOD: neither the true coniunction of the thing,A true interpre∣tation. with the signes, and of the faithfull with Christ himselfe, we do yet notwithstand∣ing, by reason of the truth of Christs flesh,
and his ascension likewise plainly affirme that the body of Christ is nowe verily ab∣sent from the world,Actes 3.21. & shal remaine absent vntill he come to iudge the quick and the dead. Neuertheles we confes, this myste∣rie of god to be incomprehēsible & beyond our vnderstanding:Faith ioyneth things together that be as farre asunder as hea∣uen and earth. whereby it falleth out, that that which is, and remaineth in hea∣uen, & not els-where, that so we may draw life and saluation from him, who is trulie offered vnto vs, and in deede communica∣ted of vs. For albeit wee knowe, first, that the Holie-ghost, that is to say, gods power doth worke this,The power of the spirite, and of the force of faith. and then that as in regarde of our selues, all this is to be receiued of vs, by the onelye instrument or meane of faith: yet the power of the spirit, and the force of faith, doo exceede all our vnderstanding: whereby it com∣meth to passe also, that euen this whole action is verie properly called, a mysterie or secret, as the Greeks vsed to terme it. Q 10 How is the matter or thing of the Sacrament communicated or par∣taken of vs? A The matter of the Sacrament, that is to say, Christ himselfe, is receiued of vs, by a spirituall manner, thorow faith.
And wee call that a Spirituall manner of receiuing or communicating,Spirituall recei∣uing what it is. not onelie in which Christ his spirite is communi∣cated with vs, but also, that which is not earthlie or naturall, but dependeth of the incomprehensible power of the Holie-ghost, by which most straight bond in∣deede the members are more and more ioyned wyth their head. For we exclude and shutte out, all powring abroade and mingling of substaunces, and also all fitnesse of ioyning together of naturall partes, and yet can holde and mainine a true growing vppe of the faithfull with Christ, which can not bee hindered by a∣nie distaunce of places: for our faith clea∣ueth vnto the worde of God, who indeede performeth that which he promiseth. Q 11 In what sense are these speeches (To eate the Lords body, and to drinke his bloud, and other such like) to be ad∣mitted? A We say,Eating and drin¦king referred to Christs bodie and bloud must be figuratiuelie vnderstoode. that these manner of spee∣ches do also belōg to that communicating or partaking, whereby wee laye holde of Christ, euen in the simple word, or in the worde it selfe alone: yea, wee affirme, that they are verye effectuall and significant,
but so, that the wordes of eating and drin∣king, when they are spoken of the taking of the body and bloud of Christ, are no lesse figuratiuely to be vnderstoode, than if a man should attribute to faith a mouth and teeth.Two causes why the holie-ghost vseth borrowed speeches. The first. Now we alleadge two chiefe cau∣ses why the holy-ghost speaketh after that manner: one cause is, that hee may shew, how strait our coniunction with christ is, by the meanes of faith: for nothing more groweth vp and increaseth with vs, than meate and drinke, without which no man caasse ouer his time, or spend this life: he other cause (which also properly hath place in the Sacraments) is,The second. that by this way and meanes it may be declared, how true the Lorde is in deliuering the matter it selfe, which he promiseth by signes, as it were, by certaine pledges giuen: for thereby it commeth to passe, that though the onely signes are taken wyth the hand, and receiued wyth the mouth, yet that also which beside the signes, is truely of∣fered, and by faith onely spiritually recei∣ued, is said to be taken, eaten, drunken, &c: And for this cause we acknowledge,Why we vse not the fathers phrases in the upper. that the holie Fathers haue vsed manie other forms of speaking, not vnlike these, which
wee notwithstanding will not at this day heedelesly vse, but suppose rather, that the same are to be mitigated by some profita∣ble and fitte interpretations, and the ra∣ther, bicause of many errors spread abrode by Sathan, and many controuersies al∣so by this occasion stirred vp in the church of God. Q 12 How are these wordes: This is my bodie, and this is my bloud, to bee expounded? A Euen after this maner: This,The wordes of the institution expounded par∣ticularlie, and, as it were, one af∣ter an other. that is to say, this bread & this wine, is, to wit, sacramentally for not whatsoeuer is anie thing, is by one onely way a thing. Nowe the question is heere, concerning the Sa∣craments. And wee plainly say sacramen∣tally, bicause the Lorde did indeede offer, not bare bread and wine only, but the true signes of his bodie and bloud, neither one∣ly these signes, but besides them also, his body and bloud to be enioyed & possessed of vs, euen into euerlasting life, which life e∣uerlasting also we drawe from him being communicated vnto vs.Luke 22.19, 20. My body and my bloud, that is, not an imagined bodie or fained bloud, but that selfe-same body which was giuē for vs, and that self-same
bloud whiche was shead for vs, of both which wee are indeede by faith made par∣takers, as the signes doo truely witnes. Q 13 What do the wicked or vnbe∣leeers receiue? The institution of the supper dependeth vp∣on Gods trueth.A We hold and teach, & that by an a∣greeing iudgement and holy consent, that the institution of the sacrament doth hang vpon the trueth of God, & therefore that in the very action of the Lords supper right∣lie administred, the bread is alwayes a true signe of the Lords body, and the wine a true signe of the Lords bloud, to whom∣soeuer they be offered or giuen.A bad conclusi∣on iustlie reuer∣ted and cast vp∣on the aduersa∣ries themselues. Nowe, whereas some would thervpon gather and inferre, that al do receiue the whole sacra∣ment, we can at no hand grant it, for this consequence or reason is not of force. God doth offer it to all, therefore al receiue it. But rather on the contrary side, we gather and reason thus: God dooth in the Sacra∣ment offer two things, and that indeede as verilie and trullie the one, as the other, but both are to be receiued by meanes and instruments altogether diuers and diffe∣rent: that is to say, the outward signs are to be receiued bodily, and the thing it selfe spiritually by faith. Therefore because
euery man bringeth his mouth,The reason why some receiue woorthilie, o∣ther some vn∣worthilie. al receiue the outward signes, some indeede worthi∣lie, and othersome vnwoorthilie: but be∣cause the faithful & beleeuers onelie bring the mouth of faith, therefore the faith all only receiue the matter it selfe, & therfor also life euerlasting. And the vnbeleeuers eate and drink iudgement to them selues, because they discerne not, that is to saye,1. Corinth. 11.2 despise and reiect the Lords bodie offered them, neyther haue they any regard ther∣of. Wherefore this their condemnation proceedeth not, of the bodie and bloud of the Lorde vnworthily receiued (for seeing that they are not receiued but by faith, they are neuer receiued vnwoorthily, nei∣ther can they indeede bee otherwise than liuelie and quickening things) but of the body and bloud of the Lord,From whence the condemna∣tion of the wic∣ked floweth, in that they do vnwoorthily eate at the Lords table. therefore con∣temned and reiected, because in this acti∣on, neither the bread should be duely consi∣dred as bread, but as a pledge of the lords body, nor the wine regarded onely as the wine, but as a sure pledge of the Lordes bloud. Therfore hence it commeth to pas,To receiue without faith, i to receiue vn∣worthilie. that whosoeuer hee be that receiueth this bread and wine vnworthily, that is to say, without faith, doth despise, not the bread,
and the wine, but the body & bloud of the Lord in those pledges, & is therfore guilty of the body & bloud of the Lord,A reason why all receiue not Christ in the supper. which hee receiued not, but which he had in conside∣ration or due regard of for Christ doth not icken or cause to liue, al them to whom he is offered, whether this be doone in the word alone, or in the sacraments, but hee doth indeed quickē al them of whom he is receiued, bicause he cannot bee receiued of any other but of the faithfull only & as for those of whom he is dispised, he doth iudge them al,Two sayings of the auncient fa∣thers very cha∣ritably inter∣preted. so far off is it, that hee is of them receiued. Notwithstanding, for some of the fathers sakes, & the reuerence we carie  them, me thinke that this saying (the body  of Christ is of euery one receiued) might be born withall: & this also, that of ye faith∣full it is receiued worthily to life, & of the vnfaithfull vnworthily to iudgement: but yet for all ye, we must of necessitie ad such an interpretation, as may shew this thing to be true, that is, so far forth, as the name of the thing signified, that is, of the bodye, is transferred or attributed to the signes themselues: & so farre forth also, as by this speech they may be properly or fitly shew∣ed foorth, not what euery one receiueth,
but what the Lorde of his owne goodnes offereth to euery one. The conclusion.The conclusion, consisting first of a wish, which hath two parts. This is the summe of al those things, which are taught in our churches and con∣gregations,  concerning the matter of the sacrament, so far forth as I could euer ob∣serue, gather, or learne. And the thing wee wish and desire is that, that men would so prouide for the churches peace and quiet∣nes, that al manner of speeches not vsed in Scripture might bee auoided, so farre  foorth as coulde be. And againe, that if for doctrines sake, or the teaching of o∣thers, any thing shall be thought good to be changed, that then all ambiguitte and doubtfulnes might be remoued and taken away.Secondly, of a promise, which also hath two partes. But if any thing in this doctrine deliuered can be shewed or prooued, not to be agreable to Gods word, we are readie,  not onely to be taught and instructed, but  also to thanke (as there is good cause) such as shall teach vs, that so at the length wee may wholie, and altogither thinke one thing in the Lorde, which (GOD is our witnes) we doo with al our heart day and night earnestlye desire of his mercifull goodnes. .
The substance of the Lords supper, shortlie and soundlie sette forth, for the instruction and com∣fort of all true christian Readers. TO cleare, yea, to void al the controuersies, that frō time to time haue crept into the church of Christ, concerning the matter of the lords supper, these three circumstances are meete especially to bee considered. 1. Corinth. 11.231 First, who ordained it, to wit, Iesus Christ our lord and sauior, which tendeth to two especiall ends: first, to prooue his eternall deitie or godhead, because it be∣longeth to God alone, and none other, to institute and ordaine holie signes and Sa∣craments in his church, whereof also it should seeme there is very great and good reason, both in as much as the Church it selfe is,1. Timoth. 3.15. the house of the liuing God, and his peculiar inheritance: and also because it belongeth to him alone, to giue that vir∣tue & strength vnto elements of common and vncleane by sin, to becom purified and holy thorow grace: secondly, it seemeth to
teach vs, to haue a more reuerent regarde to come to the sound knowledge and reli∣gious vse thereof, not onelie because hee being God, and the ordainer therof, hath all power in his owne handes, to punishe the prophane contemners and abusers of the same, but also because hee, of whome wee haue that that we haue, not onely as in consideration of our name, Christian, but also as in respect of all other both spi∣rituall and bodily graces, hath instituted the same for his own glorie and our good. 2 Secondly,Matth. 26.26. we are to consider when it was instituted, to wit, before his death and suffering, and that immediatelye af∣ter hee hadde with his disciples eaten the passeouer, by which we may see the Lorde Iesus had as great eare for vs, as for the fathers, before his being and manifestati∣on in the flesh: prouiding also thereby, not only for our forgetfulnesse, that we might haue the continuall remembraunce of his death & passion before our eies,1. Corint. 11.26. vntill his comming againe, but for our instruction also, this being plaine to vs, in that circū∣stance of tyme, that forasmuch as ye bread was broken in the supper before his bodie was crucified on ye crosse, that bread could
not be that same naturall body, that was crucified on the crosse, &c: as Papistes grossely imagine and maintaine, the rea∣son is, because these things that differ in time, can not bee saide in all respectes, yea, hardlye in anye respecte to bee the same. 3 Thirdly, wherfore it was ordained, to wit, to strengthen our faith in the truth of Gods promises, by which wee may see, that wee are dull and owe of hearte to beleeue (whatsoeuer the Pelagians & the pride of our owne minds would perswade vs to the contrarie) GOD prouiding for the curing of this disease in vs,Luke 24 25. not onely his word preached, but visible signes and seales also by which though the outward sences may be satisfied, the Lord yet not∣withstanding speaketh to our soules and consciences, the Lorde likewise institu∣ting the same, as effectuall meanes to putte vs in remembraunce, by reason of our forgetfulnesse of Iesus Christ being absent, as also of his death and passion, and of the fruites and profites wee reape thereby. Nowe a remembraunce of a thing it coulde not bee, if the thing it selfe were present. And all these three
points are prooued out of 1. Corinth. 11.23.24. In the second place, the deepe and due  consideration of these three circumstances folowing, will serue much for the cleering of this question also, touching the Lords supper. 1 First, which be the signes in the sacra∣ment, to wit, the visible elements of bread and wine, which haue that strength and force in them, not of themselues, & in their owne nature, for then all bread and wine should haue the like, neither yet because they be vsed by men in the administration and participation of the supper, for if that were true, manie things then should haue the like power and effect: but in respect of the Lords institution, who in deed hath dedicated and appointed them to those ho∣lie vses, and who alone hath power to or∣deine holie signes or sacraments, and to giue them that effect & propertie, as hath beene plainelie declared before. 2 Secondlie, what be the things signi∣fied thereby, to wit, the blessed bodie of Christ crucified, and his pretious bloud, shed for the benefit and good of all those, that by a liuelie and stedfast faith, doo ap∣prehend
and take hold of him, and all his merits: for no doubt but it was the Lords purpose, both in the elements and the vse of the same, to direct our faith to these thinges in him, which in trueth were in him, and which (such was his good plea∣sure towardes vs miserable wretches) should be set out vnto vs in the sacra∣ment, otherwise the Lord Iesus should haue dallied with vs, and that in matters of no small importance, from the which as we stedfastly beleeue, he was vtterly free, so the least thought of such a conceit and dotage, should not so much as once enter into vs. 3 Thirdlie the analogie, proportion and agreement, which is betweene the signes, and the things signified, the Lord no doubt choosing such elementes as might most aptlie and fitlie expresse the things signi∣fied and sealed by the same: for otherwise, if we had had bare signes alone, without holie things signified in and by the same, as our faith had no whit at all beene pro∣uided for, because it being spirituall and inward, is not, nor cannot be nourished with outward and corporall thinges, so wee might easilie haue beene carried a∣way
into idolatrie or superstition at the least, whilest we directed our imaginati∣on (for I dare not call it faith) to visible and externall elements, or doted in our fantasie and vnderstanding vppon crea∣tures, which what hurt it might haue doone, though wee feele not by our owne experience (God be thanked therefore) yet wee may behold and see the same in the lamentable and pitifull spectacle of manie blind and superstitious ones in the world. Now the analogie and proportion be∣tweene the signes and the things signified in the Lords supper, may easilie be redu∣ced and brought into three especiall heads or points. 1 First, that as verilie as that bread is broken before our bodily eies in the admi∣nistration of the Lords supper, and the wine powred out, and diffused or spred a∣brode in the sight of vs all, speciallie whilest that manie are made partakers of the same, so verile doo we or ought we by the eie of faith to behold Christ wounded for our transgressions,Isaiah. 53.5. & broken for our iniquities, as Isaiah saith, and his blessed body crucified, and his bloud shed vpon the
crosse for manie,Matth. 26.26, 27.28. 1. Cor. 11.24.25.26. for the remission of sinnes, the one being no more certeinelie performed in bodilie action and presence of the people than the other, is trulie and faithfullie accomplished in spirit & truth. 2 Secondlie, that as bread hath this property, through Gods blessing giuen it, to feed and strengthen our naturall bo∣dies in this life?Psal. 104.15. so his bodie being repre∣sented effectuallie vnto vs by that bread, and apprehended & applied vnto our selues by faith, hath the selfe same propertie tou∣ching our soules, to strengthen and to nou∣rish them spirituallie,Psal. 104.15. Iudg. 9.13. euen to eternall life. And euen as the wine dooth comfort & make mans heart glad, as appeareth by sundrie scriptures: so our full ioy and spi∣rituall comfort, is to be found in none o∣ther but in him alone. And (to ioine these two togither, of which we haue spoken se∣uerallie) this we must know and beleeue further, that as our bodily diet is then ful whole and perfect, as it were, when it con∣sisteth of these two things, to wit, bread and wine or drinke: so we are to know and beleeue, that the fulnesse and perfecti∣on of all spirituall nourishment, is to be found in Christ alone, and no where else,
whilest that he is become, as well the drinke as the meat of our soule, not onelie in this double signe helping our infirmity, but also teaching vs to seeke the heauenly refection and nourishment of our soules, fullie and wholy in him, and no where els, whervnto also he himselfe in some sort al∣ludeth. Matth. 11.28.Iohn. 6 35. Iohn. 7.37.38. and in other places of scripture. 3 Thirdlie, that euen as in our know∣ledge, the bread appointed for the Lords supper, is made of manie graines of corne, and the wine likewise it selfe of sundrie and seuerall grapes, and yet all maketh but one bread, & one wine: so all the faith∣full should be instructed thereby, that how soeuer they be seuerall & distinct persons one of them from another, euen as the se∣uerall members in mans bodie are, that yet they all compacted togither, make but one bodie in Christ, the onelie head there∣of,Rom. 12.4.5. 1. Cor. 10.16.17. as the apostle plainlie prooueth in sun∣drie places of his epistles, by which also they are admonished to refer all that they doo to the glory of their head and capteine Christ, and to the mutuall comfort and sustentation one of another. Out of all that hitherto hath beene spo∣ken
or said, I would pray the godlie and well affected reader, diligently to obserue and note these three things following. 1 First, that though it be most true, that euen by the ministerie of the Gospell preached, we haue Christ with all his be∣nefits offered vnto vs, and doo by faith wrought in our harts, by the ministerie of the same word, and working of his spirit, take hold of him & all his graces, of which also S. Paule speaketh to the Galachians saieng,Galath. 3.1. that Christ was described in their sight, and crucified amongst them, that yet all this notwithstanding, we haue him more plainelie and plentifullie set foorth vnto vs in the vse of the supper, whilest that we by faith feeding on him, that is the bread of life which came downe from heauen,Iohn. 6.51. are by that meanes become bone of his bones,Ephes. 5.30. and flesh of his flesh, and after a sort made one with him,Iohn. 17.21.22. euen as the father and he are one: which I speake not to the debasing of the word, as though the sacraments were more woor∣thie and excellent, or to the diuiding of Christ, for as in respect of his substance, he is but one, both in the word and the sa∣craments, but as in respect of vs, and for
our weakenesse sake, we hauing more of our sences satisfied in and by the vse of the elements of the Lords supper, as for ex∣ample, our sight, our tast, our feeling, yea and our hearing also, whilest that in the deliuerie and partaking thereof, Christes death is preached vnto vs, than we haue in the word which is directed onelie to the eare or hearing. 2 Secondlie, that this holie sacrament dooth not onelie direct our faith to the death and passion of our sauiour Christ, which was performed for vs and all the faithfull manie hundered yeeres agone, as the one,Hebr. 9.28. Hebr. 10.14. and the onelie sacrifice for sinne, neuer to be reiterated, be∣cause that thereby he being the onelie high priest and eternall sacrificer, hath consecrated for euer all them that are sanctified: but also, yea cheeflie, and especiallie, to the gracious frutes and effectes that wee receiue thereby, as the forgiuenesse of sinnes, our reconciliati∣on to GOD, the death of iniquitie in vs, the assured pledge of eternall life, and such like: all which are liuelie set foorth and preached vnto vs in the same, to the ende that wee maye by faith
in a strong persuasion of Gods goodnesse towards vs in Christ, be made partakers thereof. For otherwise, if we had but Christes death onelie, and nothing else, it would be little auailable to vs: for what would it haue profited vs that he had died, if by his death he had not brought life and immortality to light?2. Tim. 1.10. but for asmuch as his death, and the effects and frutes fol∣lowing the same, and flowing from it, can not be sundered, we therefore stedfastlie beleeue, that the faithfull are neuer parta∣kers of the one alone, but that also they are partakers of the other likewise. 3 Thirdlie, that wee must certeinelie know, and stedfastlie beleeue that though this holie sacrament doo speciallie and cheeflie direct vs to Christ, his death, me∣rits, obedience, and the frutes thereof, yet notwithstanding also, it doth sensiblie and plainelie instruct vs in the speciall duties of that sound and sincere loue, which in Christ, and for Christ, we as the mem∣bers of that bodie, whereof he is the only head,Ephes. 1.22. & 5.23. ought vnfeinedlie to carrie and ac∣complish one of vs towardes another, not onelie as profitable and necessarie for the parties to whome such dueties are perfor∣med,
whilest in the daies of their distresse we releeue them by our wealth, or com∣fort and councell them by our wit, which are things that God hath giuen vs euen to the same end, but comfortable also to our selues, whilest by that as by a bage or cognizance we are knowne both to o∣thers and our selues to be Christes dis∣ciples in deed,Iohn. 13.35. and haue sealed vp in our hearts the free pardon, and full forgiue∣nes of all our sinnes,Luke. 7.47. Iohn. 3.14. and an assured pledge also, that we are translated out of dark∣nesse into light, without the which all we haue in this life, and therefore the sacra∣ments also could tend but to our greater condemnation. In the third place, for the cleering of  this controuersie or question of the Lords supper, we must haue a watchfull eie to Satans subtleties, who painfully labou∣reth in this point, as in all other pointes of Christian religion also, by extremities to drawe vs into all corruption. Nowe the extremities that in time heeretofore haue burst foorth, and are yet euen to this day, in manie places, stoutlie and stiflie mainteined, are especiallie three. 1 The first is, that of the sacramenta∣ries,
who hold and defend, that Christ in his supper hath left vs nothing saue the bare and naked signes of his death and passion. But the trueth is, that we are so farre off from allowing this conceit and opinion, whatsoeuer our aduersaries bab∣ble and prate to the contrarie, that wee feare not openlie, and in the sunne light to affirme, that besides the signes them∣selues, yea and euen togither with the signes, wee and all true christians haue the thinges themselues signified, not one∣lie truelie and effectuallie exhibited vn∣to vs, but giuen vs also, and bestowed vpon vs, because it is most certeine, that our Sauiour Christ,Iohn. 14.6. who is the trueth it selfe, and cannot lie, dooth in deede and assuredlie accomplish vnto vs, all the promises which hee made vs, and meant to seale vnto vs, by the vse of the signes in the sacrament, that so we might become partakers euen of his verie sub∣stance, and grow vp also with him into one life and being. And though this can∣not be comprehended by the eie of mans reason and vnderstanding, no more than manie other things in our christian religi∣on, yet we cannot choose but know and
confesse that this is sensiblie set foorth vnto vs in the vse and participation of the supper, by seuerall meanes and instru∣ments, some of them being outward, as the elements in the sacrament, and some inward, as the spirituall grace represented thereby: for we are not angels, but men,Eccle. 12.7. consisting as the scripture teacheth vs, of bodie and soule: and therefore the Lord, by the vse of his word and sacraments, hath prouided for both parts, as the word for our eares,Rom. 10.17. and our eares for hearing of the same, that so faith might be wrought in our hearts, and the elements in the sa∣crament for our tast, sight, feeling, &c: and yet our soules to be nourished and fed, not with anie or all of these outward things (for how cā outward & corruptible things nourish inward & immortall substances?) but onelie with the spirituall graces, not onelie offered, but giuen also vnto vs ther∣in: and this likewise to be wrought in vs (though our sauiour be in heauen in re∣spect of his bodie,Acts. 3.21. Psalm. 39.12. & we heere as pilgrims & strangers on the earth) by the wonder∣full & vnsearchable working of his holie spirit in vs, and by the meanes of a liuelie & assured faith, both which being knit to∣gither,
doo easilie ioine togither thinges that be as farre asunder, in respect of di∣stance of place, as one end of the earth is from the other, and as farre asunder, as heauen and earth themselues are: or else how could we either beleeue the holie ca∣tholike church, and feele the communion of saints, seeing it commonlie falleth out, that the members of that holie fellow∣shippe are sundered one of them from an∣other, in respect of great distance of place? or be assured that Christes righte∣ousnesse is become ours, seeing he is in the heauen, and wee on the earth, if by faith we did not take holde of the same, and applie it vnto our selues. Besides, if men should imbrace this sacramentarie opinion, what were it but to euert, as the trueth of Christes promises, so the cer∣teinetie and assurednesse of his word, who in plaine termes calleth this holie sacra∣ment his bodie? Wherfore be it far from vs to approoue of anie such dotage, as de∣faceth the trueth of the word, derogateth from Christe, and vtterlie destroieth our owne faith, than which what can be more horrible to heare, or fearefull to thinke. 2 The second extremitie is that of con∣substantiation,
some affirming that there is deliuered to the people, & they receiue, togither with the substance of bread, the verie substance of Christes verie naturall bodie, so that there is (as it were) an in∣termingling or mixture of both the sub∣stances, in the action of the supper. But this opinion is iustlie to be disliked and reprooued, not onelie because of the absur∣dities which it hath common, with the he∣resie of transubstantiation (whereof we will speake in the next place) but also be∣cause it is quite and cleane contrarie to common sence & reason, confounding and iumbling togither two seuerall & distinct substances, and making the lesse, to wit, the substance of the bread, to comprehend the greater, that is, Christes humane bo∣die, yea euen his verie Godhead, heauen and earth is not able to conteine. Be∣sides it dooth vtterlie take away an essen∣tiall propertie of Christes bodie,Isaiah. 66.1. Acts. 7.49.17.21. for if Christ in respect of his humanitie, be like vnto vs in all things, sinne onelie excep∣ted,Hebr. 4.15. and we know by the light of reason & vnderstanding, that God hath bestowed vpon vs, yea by verie experience, that our bodies are circumscriptible, and tied to a
place, it must needs follow, that Christ in respect of his manhood, or Christ as he is man, is and must be tied to a place, and not be in euery place, as he must needs be, if these mens assertions be true, which is nothing els in deed, but vtterlie to destroy Christs body, which also I prooue against them thus: Whosoeuer taketh away the essentiall propertie of anie thing, taketh away also the verie thing it selfe. This proposition is prooued by this marime in logike: If the definition of a thing, which cheeflie consisteth of the essentiall proper∣tie of the thing, be taken away, then the thing it selfe also defined falleth away? as for example: If reasonable liuing crea∣ture, which is the definition of a man be taken away, what shall become of man? or where shall he appeare, which is the thing defined? whereof also there is good rea∣son, because the essentiall propertie is it that constituteth or maketh the thing. Hi∣therto the maior proposition, as we say in schooles, with the proofs thereof. Now foloweth the minor or second proposition: But these men take away the essentiall propertie of a thing, to wit, of a bodie which is to be circumscriptible or tied to
a place, which is in deed an essentiall propertie of the bodie of man, and there∣fore of Christes bodie as hee is man, whilest they will haue him, as he is man, in sundrie places at one time. If anie man will denie this, it may easilie be prooued both by their owne writinges in sundrie places, and also by the defini∣tion of a bodie, which is a quantitie that may be diuided according to the threefold measuring receiued amongest men, that is, length, breadth, and thickenesse, and likewise by the description of a place, which is defined to be a nighnesse or tou∣ching of the thing conteining and the thing conteined. The conclusion therfore is, that in taking away place from the bodie of Christ (which they doo, whilest they place it in euerie place, whereas in the nature thereof, it can be but in one place at one time) they doo vtterlie de∣stroie the bodie or humanitie of Christ, or at the least confound it so with the God∣head, as Eutyches did, that they make a confusion (whereas in all trueth and vprightnesse, there shoulde remaine a distinction of the proprieties of either nature in his blessed person. But of
this inough in this place, because it is somewhat philosophicall, and because also in the next section we shall haue occasion to deale with the like. 3 The third extremitie, is that of tran∣substantiation, mainteined altogither by the Romish catholiks, as they will be cal∣led, who hold that the bread and wine (the substance thereof vanishing away, and no∣thing being left but the accidents or qua∣lities thereof, as in the bread, roundnesse, whitenesse, &c: and in the wine rednesse, moisture, &c:) are changed, and that by the power of certeine words spoken by the preest (as they name him) ouer the ele∣ments, they are turned into the verie na∣turall bodie and bloud of our sauior. Con∣cerning this point and the branches ther∣of, I minde to speake, both more particu∣larlie, and more fullie, because it is one of the popish opinions, that greatlie at this present troubleth the christian world, and namelie our flourishing isle of England, and also because in the daies of persecuti∣on heeretofore, both within this land and elswhere, it hath beene the common knife that the wicked haue vsed, to cut the throtes of the godlie withall, & as it were
the hatchet to chop off their heads. It may be, that in this my poore trauel some may be conuerted, from falshood to truth, and so be saued in the day of Christ: or, if that gratious effect followe not in the ad∣uersaries, yet I hope the friendes and lo∣uers of truth, shall by this meanes be som∣what staied, that they be not caried away with certaine inticing and inchaunting wordes, in the mouths of some seducing spirites, whom Antichrist Satans eldest sonne hath thrust into the worlde, to per∣uert men from the truth and obedience of God. 1 First, for the name of Transubstan∣tiation, I feare not to affirme, that it is verye newe and neuer heard of, before the days of pope Innocent the third, who was about the yeare of our Lorde, 1205, much lesse was it confirmed as an article of faith, before the Councell of Laterane, which was kept and holden in his dayes. And though wee might by authoritie of good historiographers, make it yet some∣what more new, namely, that it was not ratified as an article of religion, till the Councell kept at Constance, a citie so na∣med in Germanie, in the dayes of Pope
Iohn the 23, which was about the yere of our Lord,Garan. in sinu. Concilio Har∣ding in confut. Apolog. 1415. Yet to gratifie them, wee wil grant it, to be as old, as the councel of Lateran in Rome, held in the yere 1215, thā the which also their own writers will not prescribe further. But alas what get they hereby, namely, that this their dotage and dreame of transubstantiation, at the least, in the name of it, hath not so manie gray haires on the head, or yeares on the backe of it, as they would beare the world in hand it hath, for, as by computation it may appeare, it is but 300 & do yeres old. Neither wil that shift serue, that they flee to here, to wit, that though the terme were not till then, yet the matter was before. A verie likelie thing forsooth, as though the fathers of the Greeke and Latin chur∣ches, so well skilled in those seuerall lan∣guages, had not bin able aswel to haue de∣liuered the word as the matter. In points of greater consequence than this by farre, they hadde their peculiar and significant words, as trinitie, harmonously, hyposta∣sis, and such like, and yet in this they must faile forsooth, to the end, that the glorie of new inuention or forgerie rather may bee ascribed to some other. But to conclude
his point: If papists vnder a false cloke of oueltie, will not spare to reiect, not onely olde, but good and true things also, then much more may we, and that vppon good ground refuse this fantasie, not onelie be∣cause it is new, but also bicause it is false, as shal (god willing) hereafter more fullie appeare. 2 Howbeit, that there is a chaunge, no man of sound iudgement, I thinke, dooth, or will denie, but that is not in respect of the nature of the thinges themselues: for the elements of bread and wine remaine in their owne proper & peculiar substance, wherof not only al men may be sufficient witnesses, but almost all the senses of e∣uery man, as sight, taste, feeling, &c: but this mutation is made in regarde of the vse and ende wherevnto they are applied, because that they are by the Lordes owne institution and appointment, separated from the common vse, yea, & as it were frō common bread and wine, and applied, not onlie to a holy vse, whilest they are vsed in holie assemblies, wyth sanctified and religious mindes, but dedicated also to holie endes, that is to saye, to ratifie and confirme our Faith in the trueth of
Gods promises, and to be sure seales and pledges to our consciences, of holy things, to wit, of christs body and bloud, and of the effects and fruits, that by his death & pas∣sion wee receiue. But that this chaunge shoulde be wrought, by any words, as they say, of consecration, I am so farre off from allowing it as true, that I am verily per∣suaded, that they speake they knowe not what, because it is not yet resolued, not onely amongst the doctors of their side, as Bessarian, Biel, Bonauenture, Catharin, Durand, Scotus, and others, which be the words of cōsecratiō, or with which words Christ, and the priest by his example, ma∣keth the bread Christs body, but because a pope himselfe (who hath the fulnes of all knowledge in his breast, and cannot erre, if all bee true that they affirme) I meane Pope Innocent the third,Innocent. de sa∣r. altar. myster. lib. 4. cap. 6. a great fauou∣rer and furtherer of such fantasies, coulde not well tell how to resolue it, as appear∣eth by his writings. Yea, in ascribing mutation and change of things, to a forme of wordes vttered by the mouth of a mor∣tall man, they blasphemoussy robbe God of that glorie which is due vnto him a∣lone:Psalm. 148.5. For to him onelie it belongeth to
speake the woorde, and to haue thinges made, and giue it to an other, to whom it at no hand appertaineth. And if words be so strong in the one Sacrament, as to turne bread into Christes body, and wine into his bloud, what reason is there, that the wordes of institution, vttered by the same person, I meane the priest, with in∣tent also to consecrat, it shold not alter the element of water in the other sacrament, to wit, of Baptisme, and be so strong and powerfull, as to make the same, the very true and naturall bloud of our Sauiour Christ? But let them say what they will. For mine owne parte, I rest resolute in this, that this assertion, and their whole action in consecration sauoureth verye stronglie of a magicall incantation, and I am so muche the more confirmed in this, because the Papistes reioycing, as inchaunters and sorcerers doo, in theyr odde numbers, haue added one woorde, that is to saye (enim) which is not in the Greeke or Latine textes,Missali Roman ex decreto con∣cil. Trident. re∣stitutum, & Pij. quinti iussu edi∣tum, pa. 23. col.  to the wordes of institution, sayeng: Hoc est enim cor∣pus meum, as may appeare in their mis∣fall or masse booke, and that not their old ones onelie, but in one newlie furbished,
by the decree of the councel of Trent, and published abroad to beholde the light, like an vntimelie birth, by the authoritie and commandement of Pope Pius the fift. 3 And as the noueltie of this fained fantasie of transubstantiation, is a brand good enough, to worke the discredit there∣of, euen as though it had beene bored tho∣row the eare, or worne a paper for forge∣rie and deceit, so the grosse and palpable absurdities which follow the same opini∣on, are sufficient, and strong enough of themselues, to make it out of credit with all persons, indued with holie wisedome and right vnderstanding, and to cause thē to esteeme of it, not onely as a thing false and eronious, but very vngodlie and blas∣phemous also. To reckon vp all, or large∣lie to discourse vppon the particulars, neither is it my purpose, neither is it al∣most possible, so fertile a soile, is this point in falshoode, and yet I minde to touch some, and that in suche sorte also, as the vanitie and falshoode of this greate corruption, may thereby easilie appeare, to all suche as will not be wilfully blin∣ded, or stoppe their eies and eares, at the brightnes and sound of truth. At the least,
my hope and persuasion is, that though I preuaile not either with the malicious blinde, or simple ignorant, yet I shall con∣firme and strengthen my brethren, who to∣gether with me, as in many other pointes of our christian religion, so in this, haue embraced the truth of God to our cōforts. 1 First, I saye, that this assertion of Transubstantiation, or reall presence of Christes naturall bodie, dooth vtterlie o∣uerthrowe and destroy the nature of a sa∣crament, which, as all men knowe and confesse, must euer consist of two partes, to wit, of visible elements, and inuisible graces: the trueth whereof appeareth not onely by the generall consent of all men, as before is alleadged, but also by the particular viewe of all the Sacramentes mentioned in the olde or newe testament. But this trueth is not onely defaced, and laid euen wyth the ground, but swalowed vp also, and, as it were, broght to nothing, if so be it, that the nature and substance of the elements, bee either chaunged, or va∣nish awaie, in this matter of the lords sup∣per, as some affirme and hold, & the things represented by ye same come in their place. The reason wherof is plaine and euident,
to witte, that the one parte of the Sacra∣ment, namely, the visible signe, is then and there absent. And therefore it must of necessitie followe, that not onelie the nature of a Sacrament is destroyed, but by consequent also the Sacrament it self, because the nature of a thing being taken away, the thing it selfe can not stand or continue, for the nature is it, whereof the thing it selfe consisteth. Yea this also falleth out vpon it, that those men that in the pride and vanitie of their owne hearts inlarge the number of Sacraments, aboue them that christ hath left vnto his church, publishing to the worlde, that there are seauen, where indeede there are but two. In the true and naturall vse of the worde Sacrament, are founde, not onelie to bee clippers of the Lordes coine, but vtter de∣facers of his holie ordinaunce, in taking from the Churche (whatsoeuer they pre∣tend to the contrarie) one of those that Christ hath left to the same, for the com∣forte thereof: beeing founde likewise by this meanes, not onelie presumptuous against Christ, but iniurious also to the people, in spoiling them of so great con∣solation. So fruitfull in vngodlinesse is
the euill weede of corrupt doctrine. In∣deede if the signe of the sacrament, and the thing signified by the same, were thinges contrary, they might haue some shew of reason, for this vnmeasurable affection, but forasmuch as wee all knowe them to be, not things contrary, but diuers, no doubt, but they not onely may, but do ve∣ry well stand together, the one of them beeing so farre, from destroying or defa∣cing of an other, that they in a most lo∣uing consent agree and concurre together to the setting foorth of Gods glorie, and the spirituall good and comforte of hys children. Wherefore, I saye, it can∣not be auoided, but that they doe very ill, that do thus malapertlie disioyne and put in sunder such things, as God hath most wiselie ioyned and glewed as it were fast together. 2 Secondlie, I affirme, that this doc∣trine is woonderfullie iniurious vnto the glorified bodie of our Sauiour, not onely whilest it fetcheth him from heauen the place of all such blessednesse, as can not be conceiued, much lesse spoken of, into the earth, the place of all vnspeakeable mise∣serie and wretchednesse, which yet is not
all, this circumstaunce further aggraua∣ting the error of this vniust assertion, that they make the blessed body of Christ, our Lord and god, subiect to the call of a mor∣tall and miserable creature (the priest I meane, as they name him) as though if he bade go, it should go, or if he commaunded it to come, it shoulde come, &c: But also whilest it maketh it, to be rent and torne in peeces, not only with the teeth of good mē, a matter which our nature abhorreth, both in respect of ye rawnes of it, & also in respect of the substāce of it, for we are not Anthropophagi, that is, eaters of mans flesh, but euen with the teeth of the wic∣ked and vngodlie also, which euen for this cause, if there were no more, is most vn∣true and false, because that then they shold liue for euer,Iohn 6.54. in as muche as all that eate his fleshe and drincke his bloude, haue this promise, that they haue eternall life. And yet these wicked menne cease not heere, but proceede to further impie∣tie, some of the chiefest among them af∣firming (though in deede others are not so resolute in it, by whyche also wee may see, that there is not so muche vni∣tie or consent amongest Popishe diuines
and doctors, as they pretend) that mice, rattes, dogges, hogges, and other vnrea∣sonable creatures, falling vpon consecra∣ted hostes, and deuouring the same doo vndoubtedlie eate the blessed bodie of our Sauiour. And if they staied heere, their sinne were somewhat lesse, but this is not all the mischiefe that falleth out in this behalfe: for whereas in trueth and christian religion, the bodie of our Saui∣our Christ is now immortall, and in im∣mortall glorie, as Gods worde, and the articles of our Beleefe agreeing wyth the same doo plainelye teache vs, these menne subiect it to putrefaction, corrup∣tion, and wormes, by reason of the long reseruation thereof, and at the last, to con∣suming in the fire (a fact of most horrible crueltie, if it were Christes flesh, but no maruaile though they deale so wyth him, when they handle hys Saints as hardelie as that commeth vnto, which thing ex∣perience of all ages dooth sufficientlye prooue) because it maye not otherwise bee made awaye (as they themselues con∣fesse) if it be once taken wyth hoarinesse, mouldines, or such like. If any man doubt of the truth and certaintie of these points
obiected against them, lette hym but reade their owne workes, and hee shall see the matter sufficientlie cleared. Yea, I suppose, that the verye aduersaries themselues will not growe so shamelesse, as to denie that which with a full mouth, and in the open Sunne light, hath beene published by the best of their side. And if they woulde or shoulde, yet wee haue the liues, and the leaues, the wordes and the workes, in sentence and sense, for man∣ner and matter to charge them wythall, and to throwe this dung into their fa∣ces. 3 Thirdly, I say, that by consequent it dooth most cursedly confounde (if not vtterlie subuert and ouerthrowe) the hu∣manitie of our Sauiour, with his God∣head, whilest that which indeede and all trueth, is proper and peculiar to the eternall Deitie onely: for example, to be euerie where, which can not agree to a∣nie but to GOD alone, as both reason and religion will sufficiently perswade, if wee will giue eare vnto the same, is yet notwythstanding, most blasphemouslye attributed and ascribed to his manhoode, which (as hath beene already shewed be∣fore)
and shall more plainelie, if GOD will, be prooued heereafter, is, and must of necessitie, since the time of his moste glorious ascension into Heauen, and sit∣ting at the right hande of the maiestie of GOD his Father, the very onelie seate and throne, as it were, of his bodilie resi∣dence, bee circumscriptible and tied to a place. As for that which they are woont vsuallie to obiect, for the impeachement of this trueth, and the establishement of their owne errour, beeing taken from the glorification of our Sauiours bodie, is easily beaten backe and aunsweared, as which indeede, if it bee well weigh∣ed, is not onelie vntrue, as in respect of it selfe: because, though glorification im∣plie a most excellent and heauenlie estate, dooth not yet for all that destroye the es∣sentiall properties of bodies glorified, but most absurde and false also, as in regard of vs. For if the glorification of Christs bodie, haue remooued or taken awaye that essentiall propertie, to witte, that it shoulde truelie, and indeede, bee tied vnto a place, then the like shall bee per∣fourmed, and the same effect followe, in all the glorified bodies of the faithfull
after the resurrection, because our Saui∣our hath not onelie glorified his owne bo∣die for himselfe, hee rising therein a migh∣tie conquerour ouer death and hell, and nowe triumphantlie ruling and raigning in the heauens in all maiestie, but for our sakes also hath atchieued that greate honour, wee hauing from him this assu∣red promise in his worde,Philip. 3.21. that God shal chaunge our base and vile bodies, that they may bee fashioned like vnto his glorious bodie, according vnto the mightie working, whereby hee is able to subdue all things vnto himselfe. But to saye, that our bodies glorified after the rising againe of the same in the generall day of iudgement shall be euery where, a rashe and vncertaine, yea, a beastlie and blasphemous assertion, because it ascri∣beth that vnto vs, which is proper and peculiar onelie to GOD: for vnto hym alone it perteineth to fill, heauen, earth, and all places, alwayes, and at one tyme, as infinite places of Scripture doo plainelie prooue, therefore this opi∣nion also, concerning Christes glorified bodie, beeing euerie where, or in infi∣nite places at one time, must of necessitie
be suche likewise. 4 Fourthlie, it dooth directlye de∣stroy, and, as it were, at one blowe blotte out, and deface, all those Arti∣cles of our moste pretious Faith, and Christian religion, whych doo concerne Christes assured ascension into Heauen, hys maiesticall sitting at the right hande of the Father, and his glorious comming agayne from thence, together wyth that infinite number of moste playne places of GODS holie woorde, that out of the writinges of the Prophetes and A∣postles, may bee drawen for the proofe of those moste comfortable and necessarie pointes. To deale wyth euerye one of these by themselues shortely, and in fewe woordes: I woulde faine knowe if our Sauiour Christ be here vpon earth, in res∣pect of his bodilye power and presence, howe hee can iustlie, as in regarde of the same hys bodye, bee sayde to haue as∣cended into Heauen? Or let them tel vs, if hee remaine wyth vs in hys flesh, how hee can bee truelye saide in hys man∣hoode, to sitte at the right hande of hys Father in Heauen? Or howe it can bee in religion or reason affirmed, that our
Sauiour shall come from Heauen, with great power and glorie to iudge the quick and the dead, seeing he is here on earth al∣ready. The Scripture telleth vs for his ascension,Actes 1.9. that in the sight and behold∣ing of the blessed Apostles, yea whiles they looked stedfastly towards heauen, he was taken vp. Let them shew so much for his bodilie abode vpon earth, and proue it by such substantiall witnesse, and wee are readie to yeelde. Besides, we knowe by the worde, and therefore beleeue it, that as he was seene go into heauen,Actes 1.10. so shall he come againe: but hee was seene to ascend thither bodilie, and therefore so shall hee returne from thence againe. I suppose they will not saye, that our Sa∣uiour had two bodies, one that hee tooke wyth him, an other that hee left heere, for that were to make him altogether monstrous, and men scrupulous, none knowing in whether of them hee perfour∣med the work of their redemption. And to saye that that one blessed bodie of his was diuided, is as absurde and erronious, be∣cause it can not be so, but that the whole bodie it selfe must be impaired and man∣gled, at the least, if not destroyed and so
the woorke of saluation ouerthrowne. To stand vpon anie naked interpretation touching the right hand of God, will not serue their turne: for there being nothing meant thereby in this article of our be∣leefe, but the great glorie that is in hea∣uen prepared for the saints, and that most excellent blessednesse that belongeth to them, whereof our sauior Christ was in a most full measure made by his ascention into heauen, as in respect of his humanity absolute partaker, what could they gaine▪ Doo they imagine that it would heervpon insue, that Christ should be euerie where, and by consequent on earth? but they are deceiued: for why doo they not as well consider the word sitting, which implieth locall residence in a place? or doo they not know and beleeue that heauen it selfe is not euerie where, but locall rather? or will they not see, that without warrant of the word (yea contrarie to the same, which in sundrie places opposeth heauen and earth one of them against another) or sence of humane iudgement, they iumble and con∣found them togither? Reason will lead vs to this, that none can be said to goe vp into the place where he is, or to come
downe from it, when he remaineth there. And though wee minde not to subiect our sauior, speciallie as in respect of his eter∣nall Godhead to humane sence, yet by the same we may and ought to be ledde, not to destroy the essentiall properties of his manhood. Now then, whether shall wee beleeue this trueth of the Lord, or mens fantasies that go about to peruert our per∣suasions, and deceiue our vnderstandings? Let men of the worlde deeme what they lust, this is the truth that God hath sanc∣tified vnto vs in his word, and I doo sted∣fastlie beleeue it in my heart, and will throgh Gods goodnesse and strength al∣waies, confesse the same with my mouth, that from the very time of Christes ascen∣sion into Heauen,Acts. 3.2. The Heauens must conteine his naturall bodie vntill the time that all things be restored, that is euen to the worlds end. 5 Fiftlie, I say that this opinion dooth vniustlie depriue vs of all such spirituall graces and comforts for our consciences, as God the father in his sonne Christ, by sending the Holie ghost the third person in the deitie, hath not onelie promised, but in good time wil performe and bestow vp∣on
the whole church generallie and euerie sound particular member of the same: yea if we wey it well we shall finde, that it is the ruine and bane of the church it selfe, both in the whole bodie of it, and in the se∣uerall parts. Our sauior himselfe in most plaine and expresse terms faith:Iohn. 16.7. I tel you the truth: it is expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not away the com∣forter will not come vnto you, but if I depart I will send him vnto you. Hee that knoweth anie thing of truth, is well acquainted with this, that generallie all the word, but most especiallie the comfor∣table promises conteined in the same, be as it were, the life and soule of the church it selfe. The veritie and certeintie wher∣of, though it lie in Christ,1. Cor. 1.20. because in him al Gods promises are yea and amen, yet the particular applications of the same, to our owne harts, must come from the pow∣erfull working of the holie spirit. But how shall we come to the effectuall feeling of these, if the force of the spirit be not shed abrode into our hearts? or how can the holie spirit be called the pledge of Gods promises,Ephes. 1.13. and the earnest penie of our ad∣option and saluation, if that promise of
our sauior Christ be not accomplished? or how can we find comfort against the feare of death? or peace in our consciences a∣gainst the sight of sinne, and iudgement due vnto vs for the same without this? Of a truth, the remembrance of our dissoluti∣on, and departure hense (this being remoo∣ued) shall be greeuous, and the horrour of hell, the iust punishment of our iniquitie will be readie euery houre to ouerwhelme vs. Wee need not stand long vpon this point: either this must be true, that wee haue the Holie ghost, in most abundant measure, by the bodilie absence of our sa∣uior Christ, giuen to the church, as before is said and proued, and so a spirituall sup∣plie bestowed vpon vs for a bodiely want, that being more excellent than this, be∣cause the apostle saith, that hensefoorth we know no man after the flesh,2. Corinth. 5.16. yea though we had knowne Christ after the flesh, yet now henseforth know we him no more: or else if Christ be heere bodi∣lie present, the Holy ghost is not yet come, nor the apostles indued with miraculous graces, nor the fulnesse of the Gentils ga∣thered in, nor the comfort and peace of the church prouided for: all which are feare∣full
to thinke vpon, but much more horri∣ble to feele, and in deed are quite & cleane contrarie to the truth of the word: and if we had no more but onlie the second chap∣ter of the Acts of the apostles, it were suf∣ficient to ouerthrow the same. 6 Sixtlie, this assertion dooth not onelie closelie, but openlie accuse Christ himselfe of manifest lieng & vntrueth, who as both the prophets and apostles doo beare wit∣nesse, did no sinne,Isaiah. 53.9. 1. Peter. 2.22. neither was there any guile found in his mouth. He himselfe hath plainlie told vs: The poore ye haue alwaies with you,Marke. 14.7. and when yee will ye may doo them good, but me yee shall not haue alwaies. And againe elswhere:Iohn. 14.2. I go to prepare a place for you. If this be not blasphemie, to doo what we can to taint him with falshood, that is both truth it selfe, and the author of all truth, I know not what is blasphemie. And yet this ini∣quitie staieth not heere, for it depriueth vs first of the comfort of the forgiuenesse of sinnes, because if our sauiour haue beene tainted with anie manner of, iniquitie though neuer so small, he cannot be a price and ransome for sin, because he that must recommit sinners to God, must of necessi∣tie
be free from transgression. Secondlie, it dooth (as it were) violentlie take and pull from vs, the hope that we haue of the heauenlie inheritance. For why hath our sauior Christ sundred himselfe for a space from vs, as in respect of his bodilie pre∣sence, not yet leauing vs comfortlesse (for he hath giuen vs his spirit to supplie (as it were) his absence) but to the end that we might heereafter in time to come most comfortablie enioye him, bothe in bodie and soule for euermore? Dooth not hee himselfe say:Iohn. 16.16. Yet a little while and yee shall not see me: and againe, a little while and ye shall see me, for I go to my father? And in another place: Though I go to prepare a place for you,Iohn. 14, 3. yet will I come againe, and receiue you vnto my selfe, that where I am there may yee be also. And yet all this notwithstanding, superstitious and brainesicke people, dare with open mouth affirme, that we haue him continuallie with vs here vpon earth, and that not in respect of his spirituall power and presence onelie, wherevnto we our selues most gladlie yeeld (as a verie principall comfort vnto vs, in the daies of all our distresses) because in that respect,
as God eternall with his father, we be∣leeue that he filleth all places, both in hea∣uen and in earth, and is said to be with the beleeuers euen vnto the end of the world,Matth. 3.20. but as in respect of his corporall and bodilie presence also, than the which nothing vndoubtedlie can be more false and absurd, as hath beene sufficientlie shewed alreadie, and plainelie prooued before. Now hauing waded thus farre in the trueth and certeinetie of the matter it selfe, wee might safelie shut vp and con∣clude this point, but that there remaine sundrie of the aduersaries obiections to be answered: wherin I cannot but let the godlie reader vnderstand, that I minde not to answer either all of them, or manie of them, because the most in trueth be fri∣uolous and vaine, and it would be ouer tedious to wade into such idle and vnpro∣fitable matter. Three there are in deede, which because they seeme to be of speci∣all strength and ordinarie vse, I can not let passe. Two of them are taken from the words of the text of holie scripture, and the third from the omnipotencie and almightie power of our sauiour Christ:
which though they be common things in deed, and such as might as easilie be reiec∣ted as obiected, because the controuersie is not touching the plaine wordes of the text, and the almightie power of Christ, as God (for be it far from vs to be so absurd, as to draw things of such euidency and ex∣cellencie into question, but we striue ra∣ther, as for the true sence & naturall mea∣ning of the wordes, so for the veritie of Christes person, and the essentiall proper∣ties of either his distincted natures) yet we cannot, but both for the strengthening of them that be weake and ignorant in the same, as also for the discharge of our conscience before God and man, but in a word or two, as it were, make a short, but withal a sound, sufficient, and true answer I hope, to euery one of these three seueral∣lie, and by themselues. 1 The first place obiected is these words of our sauiour, in the gospell after Iohn: Except ye eat the flesh of the sonne of man,Iohn. 6.13. and drinke his bloud, ye haue no life in you. Weerevnto I answer: first that neither these words. neither the rest of the chapter, can in anie probabilitie or shew of reason, properlie be vnderstood of
the Lords supper. And if we had no more for it but this, yet were this sufficient, be∣cause at that time, the supper it selfe was not instituted and ordeined, but a long while after, as in the euangelists writings dooth plainelie appeare: but must rather be referred to our spirituall communica∣ting or partaking with Christ, by the meanes of a liuelie and stedfast faith, ap∣prehending the word generallie, and ap∣plieng particularlie vnto our selues, all the gracious and sweet promises that the Lord hath made and offered vnto vs there∣in, which may plainelie appeare to be most true, partlie because he persisteth by a con∣tinuall thread of speech (as it were) in the metaphor of bread or meat, mentioned be∣fore vers. 26.27. vsing also for that pur∣pose, as euerie man may easilie perceiue, sundrie borrowed speeches, agreeing well to the circumstance of the matter where∣in he was to deale, which he would not, or needed not to haue doone, if he had meane so groslie or carnallie, as these men fanta∣sie: and partlie because he speaketh so of∣ten, not of eating onelie, but also of be∣leeuing, as verse. 35.40. which can not be properlie attributed to anie outward
or materiall thing, such as the bodie and flesh of Christ then was and is, but to in∣ward and spirituall matters, which as it may be gathered by sundrie places of ho∣lie scripture,Rom. 8.24. the apostle affirming, that hope that is seene is no hope: for how can a man hope for that which hee seeth?2. Cor. 5.7. and that we walke by faith, and not by sight,Hebr. 11.1. yea and that faith it selfe is the ground of things which are hoped for, and the euidence of thinges which are not seene: so also may it be prooued euen by the verie nature of faith, which being a spirituall and inward qualitie gi∣uen vs of God,Philip. 1.29. Iohn. 4.24. who is nothing else but spirit & trueth, and wrought in vs by spi∣rituall meanes, as the word & sacraments outwardlie, and the Holie ghost inwardly in our hearts, must also of necessitie be di∣rected to spirituall & inward things. But let vs for reasoning sake grant that the place were to be vnderstood of the holie supper, yet doth it not for all that establish anie grosse and carnall eating of the na∣turall flesh or bodie of our sauiour Christ, because if that were so, then had not our sauiour sufficientlie answered the Caper∣natts or Iewes of Capernaum, who
vainelie dreaming and doting of such a grosse and carnall manducation or eating,Iohn 6.52. said: How can this man giue vs his flesh? meaning thereby that it was alto∣gither impossible and vnnaturall, both in respect of himselfe, and in regard of them also, because it was seldome or neuer heard of except it were amongst the An∣thropophagi, that men did willinglie giue their flesh to be food vnto others, or that others did eat the same, but had ra∣ther yeelded vnto them in that their con∣ceipt, which besides that it conteineth an errour in religion and nature, as before hath beene shewed, is quite and cleane contrarie to the purpose of Christ in that place, and closelie accuseth him, as though either in ignorance he could not, or in an euill minde he would not haue instructed them in their blindnesse, all which are horrible to heare, blasphemous to speake, and beastlie to thinke. Besides, if that corrupt sence should be allowed, marke what a Sea of absurdities woulde insue therevpon. As first in what a miserable estate shoulde wee leaue the holie Fa∣thers of the olde couenaunts, who were longe before the time of Christes ta∣king
our flesh vpon him, & therefore could not eat it, and so by consequent could not be saued.Matth. 8.11. And yet our sauiour in plaine termes affirmeth, that they were in the kingdome of heauen. And S. Paule al∣so saith,1. Cor. 20.3.4. that they did all eat the same spi∣rituall meat that wee doo, and did all drinke the same spirituall drinke that we doo: which word spirituall would be marked as directlie opposite to grosse, car∣nall, or bodilie eating, plainelie also proo∣uing that betwixt their sacraments and ours there was no difference at all, as in respect of substance and effect, sauing only that theirs were in time before ours, euen as they themselues also were, and institu∣ted in other outward elements than ours. Secondlie in what a miserable case & con∣dition should we put poore infants, speci∣allie of the beleeuers, if they should be ta∣ken away by death before that cōming to the yeers of discretion, they could commu∣nicat or partake in that holie sacrament. One of these two grosse absurdities must needs follow therevpon, yea & be granted also, vnlesse men wilbe stifnecked in error, to wit, either that infants must haue the holie communion ministred vnto them,
which thing in deed Augustine did once fantasticallie imagine, as appeareth by manie places of his works, notwithstand∣ing all that papists say to cleere him ther∣of. But S. Paule is flatlie against it, who will haue none admitted thereto,1. Corinth. 11.28. 2. Corinth. 13. but such as can examine & trie themselues, whe∣ther they be in the faith or no, which in∣fants cannot doo, as all men may plainlie perceiue, not onlie because they want rea∣son, as in the practise therof, but speciallie because they be void of faith, which ordi∣narilie & commonlie is bestowed vpon the faithfull,Rom. 10.17. by hearing the woord prea∣ched, as the apostle saith: or els that with out it, they are all condēned already, which is verie absurd & beastlie, not onlie because it tieth grace, yea the grace of saluation to the sacrament, by the worke wrought, than the which what can be more vnresonable? for so good and bad hauing the outward signe, shall also haue the thing it selfe, to wit, eternall life, but also because it aboli∣sheth, as Gods eternall election, whereby he hath chosen those that be his in Christ, to life euerlasting, before the foundations of the world were laied, so his gratious and continuall couenant made to vs, that
he will be a louing God and mercifull fa∣ther to vs and to our seed for euer,Genesis. 17.7. by which couenant also we are assured euen of his good will and fauor towards vs in Christ. By all this we may see, that euen for the auoiding of these absurdities, and manie such like, the place of the sixt of Iohn can at no hand he vnderstood either of the sacrament or of the carnall eating of Christes bodie in the same, or of anie such grosse thing whatsoeuer, but of the apprehension or laieng holde of him, to∣gither with the particular application of him to our selues by the hand or instru∣ment of faith, who euen for that purpose is propounded and set foorth vnto vs, by the ministerie of his word and Gospell, or (if the aduersaries will needs haue it so) offered vnto vs in the vse of the supper, because that though the thinges bee di∣uerse, representing him vnto vs, as the word and sacraments, yet there is in that respect but one meane giuen vs, to take holde of him by (euen as he himselfe is but one Christ, that in these sundrie things is exhibited vnto vs) and that is that great grace and gift of faith, which we must vse in in the word and sacraments, as men
doo in the apprehending of Christes righ∣teousnesse: which righteousnesse of his, though it be not essentiallie dwelling in vs, yet it is effectuallie made ours, whilest we apprehend and lay holde of it by a sound and sure faith, applieng the same also vnto our owne hearts: and euen in like sort is Christ God and man, togither withall his merits, not onelie offered, but laid holde of in the word and sacraments, yea and comfortablie felt likewise to the spirituall sustentaion and nourishment of our soules, whereof also this is a good rea∣son, that of like thinges, there is alwaies, and so should be continuallie a like consi∣deration. The second place obiected, is that sen∣tence reported by the three euangelists,  Matthew, Marke, and Luke, and Saint Paule himselfe also, reciting the instituti∣on of the supper, which our sauior Christ vsed, saieng: This is my bodie:Matth. 26.26. Marke. 14.22. Luke. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24. which they vrge in the letter after this sort. Hath not Christ said it in plaine termes? and shall not I beleeue it, though that my car∣nall vnderstanding can not conceiue the same? To all which I answer, first that the question is not of the bare woordes
or letter, for we as well as they confes the same, and what man hath there beene that euer doubted thereof? yea what heretike e∣uer was there, that would not, or did not allege the letter of the text, for the maine∣tenance & vpholding of his heresie or er∣ror? but of the true sence and right mea∣ning thereof, which whether they or we haue & gaine, shall I hope appeare anon, to the vpright reader. Secondlie, we confesse also, that we are bound to beleeue all such things as are cōprehended in gods word, yea though our sensuall reason cannot in deed comprehend the same: for be it farre from vs, to labor to bring the incomprehē∣sible truth of the eternall maiestie within the strait bounds and limits of mans vn∣derstanding, no though he were regenera∣ted, and had receiued a great measure of the graces of Gods holie spirit: and yet in such sort must we beleeue them all, & that to such ends also, as the lord himselfe hath appointed, at no hand stretching thē fur∣ther, than the Lord would haue vs, for that is to be wise in our owne eies, & to make our selues more sharpe sighted than God, nor yet restreining them to narrower pur∣poses than the Lord hath laied them out
for, for that were, at the least, great vn∣faithfulnesse, both towards the Lord him∣selfe, and men also, neither yet failing in the allegation of them, either in the mat∣ter, maner, or ende, for if wee do so, we doo nothing else therby, but heape vp iust con∣demnation against our owne soules, but reuerently receiuing them, and faithfully alleadging them in that iuste measure, weight, and proportion, that the Lorde himselfe hath left them vnto vs, euen as his onlie lawful and currant coine, which we can not clip, imbase, or impaire anie manner of waye, without high treason a∣gainst his eternall maiestie. Nowe con∣cerning the wordes, and the plainenesse of them, I say, that other wordes, both in the old and new Testament, are as plaine as they, which yet notwithstanding must be otherwise interpreted, than the woords themselues seeme to import, or else, not onelye absurdities in reason, but errors in religion will insue therevpon. For ex∣ample in the booke of Exodus, the paschal lambe, with the ceremonies belonging thereto, is called, The Lords passeouer:Exod. 12.11. whereas nowe we knowe, and no manne can choose but confesse, that it was not
the Lordes passeouer in deede, but sig¦nified and sette out the same rather. For the Lordes passeouer was his ouer-pas∣sing or passing by the Israelites houses, marked wyth the bloud of the Lambe, to the Egyptians, there to destroy the first borne. So likewise in the newe Testa∣ment,Iohn 15.5. Christ sayth of hym selfe, I am the vine, than the which what can bee more plaine? And yet wee acknowledge wyth our mouthes, and beleeue in our heartes, that Christ was no naturall vine, but rather that hee calleth himselfe so, in a certaine resemblaunce, because looke what propertie the fruit of the vine hath in respect of our bodies, to witte, to comforte menne, and to make them glad heartes, the same hath Christ and the fruites of his grace receiued by Fayth, in respect of our soules, namelie, to re∣plenishe our heartes wyth all Spirituall ioye and gladnesse, both of this life, and of the life to come. And as the braunches of the vine, haue nothing of themselues, but all that they haue, they haue it from the vine it selfe, so none whosoeuer they be can bring foorth fruit, but by abiding in him, and beeing made fruitefull tho∣row
hys grace. And euen in like man∣ner is the bread of the Lordes Supper called hys bodie, because (as wee haue saide before) looke what proper and pecu∣liar office, the bread hath or yeeldeth to our naturall bodies, namely, to nourish and strengthen the same, the like dooth Iesus Christes bodie broken, taken hold of by Faith, Spirituallie communicate vnto our soules, namelie, it feedeth and strengtheneth them, to the assured hope and feeling of eternall life. And this ma∣ner of speech, attributing that to the signe which is proper and peculiar to the thing signified, is very vsuall in the Scripture, as a man meanely conuersant in the same may plainelie perceiue: the cause where∣of, is, the straight analogy, proportion, & a∣greement, which is between ye signe, & the thing signified, and not anie other respect of consubstantiation, transubstantiation, or any such like fantasticall dotage. Be∣sides all these thinges, the very circum∣staunces of time, place, person, and man∣ner of dooing, doo sufficientlie sette out the vanitie and vntrueth of this grosse interpretation. For this Sacrament beeing instituted by Christ him selfe a
little before his death, in the presence o the Apostles (who had all their senses sa¦tisfied, in the beholding, hearing, and fee¦ling of the naturall bodie of our Sauiour Christ) in the visible elements of bread and wine, he himselfe sitting at the tabl with them, and not onely in their hearing speaking these woordes, but also in their sight and presence actuallie breaking the bread, it coulde not be that that bread offered vnto them, as the pledge of his bo¦die, shoulde be his naturall bodie or bodie of flesh: vnlesse you will saye, that Christ had two bodies, one sitting at the Table, instituting the action of the Supper, and administring the same in his own person, and an other borne in his handes, and de∣liuered vnto the Apostles, than the which what can be, not onely more absurde and blasphemous, in respect of our Sauiour Christ himselfe, he being by this means made a monster, and not become man, but also more vnprofitable or vncertain to vs, as which might iustly prouoke vs to dout whether of his bodies were crucified for our transgressions? And thus as wee doo, for good causes before specified, as you see reiect this grose sense, so for the instructi∣on
of the ignoraunt, and strengthening of the weake, we wil in a fewe lines putte downe the true meaning of these wordes. For the better performaunce whereof I woulde haue this to bee noted in the first place, which I am sure also no man of soūd iudgement can well deny, that all woords and sayings whatsoeuer, must be expoun∣ded, according to the subiect, argument, or matter whereof they intreat: and ther∣fore these woordes also, speaking particu∣larly of the Lordes supper, must of neces∣sitie be vnderstoode of the Sacrament of the bodie and bloud of our Sauior Christ, exhibited vnto vs in that supper. Other∣wise wee must saye, that Christ spake of one thing, and meant an other, which as it might be iniurious to our selues, wee not knowing which way to take Christes wordes, so shoulde it accuse him for want of plaine dealing, which dotage differeth not muche from blasphemie against his person. Secondlie, I would haue this to be remembred, that seeing all, one and o∣ther, both we, and our aduersaries, confes these woordes to be spoken of the Sacra∣ment, wee must not gather that the word bodie is otherwise attributed to the bread
than the nature and qualitie (as a manne would say) of sacraments wil beare: for thē if we should grant that, wee might easilie destroy and ouerthrow al the sacraments, that either haue bene or are in the Church of God, because in this behalfe or respect there is a like proportion to bee obserued in one, as in al, and if one be defaced in re∣spect of a wrong sense, the rest can hardly or not at all stande vpright. For sith the scripture speaking of Sacraments, vseth one ordinarie and common kinde of speach to them all, what reason can there be she∣wed, that the words in one sacrament be∣ing vnderstoode so, the selfe-same wordes shoulde not haue the selfe-same sense and meaning in other? Thirdly, that this is the nature of all sacraments, that the ele∣ments and rites vsed in the same, be true and effectuall, not signes onelie, but testi∣monies and pledges also of those thinges, for the signifieng and subiecting of which vnto our senses, they were ordayned, o∣therwise the nature of a sacrament should be ouerthrowen, which consisteth of an outwarde and visible element, and of an inward and inuisible grace, and wee spoiled of our faith, which is not, ne ought
not to bee occupied about those grosse and earthlie matters, but vpon spirituall and heauenly things only. And yet when I vse this word (signe) I woulde not bee taken as though I meant, that they are bare, vaine, or vnprofitable signes, such as pain∣ters commonly vse to make, but euen thus far forth effectuall, that it is no more true & certaine, that we see the same wyth our eies, touch them wyth our handes re∣ceue them with our mouths and eat them, than that it is also as true & certaine, that the Lord exhibiteth and offereth vnto vs, yea, and giueth vs also, whatsoeuer they represent vnto vs, that is, the very bodie and bloud of our sauior Christ & the fruits & effects flowing from the same, to be the spiritual food of our soules, to the full pos∣session of eternall life. These rules being thus then obserued, I gather & put downe this true and holie sense of these wordes: This is my bodie, that is to say, that the bread which Christ tooke, blessed, brake, and gaue vnto his disciples, appointing the same to bee vsed, as the element of this action, and to bee continued in hys Church, in such forme and sort as he did institute it, vntill his comming againe,
is sacramentally and spiritually, beeing receiued and eaten by faith, a sure signe, and an effectuall pledge, that Christs bo∣dy is become the spirituall foode of our soules. And I vse these woordes, sacra∣mentally and spiritually, that thereby I might meete with their grosse slaunder, who, when they heare of a sign, and a thing signified, saye, that wee doo euacuate and make of no force the Lordes supper. No, wee are so farre off from holding any such conclusion, that wee knowe, beleeue, and confesse, that the faithfull and duelie pre∣pared communicants, doo besides the out∣ward signes and elements truelye receiue by the meane of faith, after a spirituall sort, that which is represented by the out∣ward elements, to wit, whole Christ, with all his giftes and graces. And yet for the dooing of this, we do not pull Christes bo∣die out of heauen, or else imagine either Transubstantiation, or any such like de∣uise, but onely thinke vpon and beleeue, the sacramentall coniunction of the signe, and the thing signified, for those thinges can not stand with the trueth of Christes manhoode, as hath beene before shewed, neither indeede are they necessarie to sal∣uation,
because that to the ende, we may be made partakers of christ, it is not of ne∣cessitie required, that his bodie shoulde be really present vppon earth, but it rather behooueth vs, by the power of the Holie ghost, and thorowe faith, to mount vppe into heauen, and there to lay hold of him, that wee may sit with him in the heauen∣lie places, which in this life can not bee perfourmed in anye other sorte, than in a spirituall maner, and thorow faith, which faith is begotten and confirmed in vs by the holie-ghost, wherevnto hee vseth as instrumentes, the preachyng of Gods worde, and the administration and par∣ticipation of the Sacraments, by which all our senses, are euen as it were, prouo∣ked and pressed, wholie to possesse Christ himselfe. So that you see I doo figura∣tiuely expounde these woordes, and not grosselie, wherevnto I am drawne also, partlie by the very dealing of the Papists themselues, who doo not, either in the wine of the supper, the other part of this Sacrament, eyther in Baptisme, the o∣ther Sacrament of the church (which two alone God hath giuen vnto it) acknow∣ledge anie such grosse Transubstantiati∣on
of in our corruption, we hardly conceiuing it now in our regeneration & newe birth, so coulde it not haue bin performed in the godhead alone. Not that I meane, that GOD was not able to haue forgiuen the sinnes of his people, and to haue released them from condemnation, and restored them to euerlasting life, but that GOD could not by suffering, because his essence and nature, is altogither impassible, haue suffered anye thing for our redemption. Wherefore, for as much as, the question betweene the Transubstantiators and vs, is not nowe, of the presence of Christes deitie in the Sacrament, but of the pre∣sence of his humane body, we say, and flat∣ly affirme it also, that if we shoulde grant this, yet could it no whit at all preiudice vs, neither coulde they gaine their cause thereby, for vnlesse they can proue Christ, as he is man, to be omnipotent, and euery where (which thing they shall neuer bee able to doo) they haue saide as much, as if they had saide nothing at all. But let vs for reasoning sake graunt them this muche, that Christ as hee is man, were omnipotent, euen as GOD the Father, or hee himselfe in respect of his Godhead
is: Dooth it therefore followe, that be∣cause hee can doo euerie thing, hee there∣fore either will doo the same, or indeede dooth it? I suppose verilye, no. For be∣sides that, in Schooles it is commonlie saide, a posse ad esse, the consequence or reason is not good, which were suffici∣ent aunsweare to this friuolous and vaine obiection, mannes reason in the blind∣nesse and corruption of it, beeing endu∣ed wyth strength and force enough to aunsweare the same: besides this, I say, wee that are truelie taught of GOD, both by his worde and spirite, do knowe, that though wee beleeue, that the Lorde can doo whatsoeuer pleaseth him both in heauen and in earth, which serueth won∣derfully to magnifie hys almightie pow∣er in the exceeding excellencie thereof, and greatlie to strengthen our weake faith, in the dayes of our calamities and distresses, yet notwythstanding we firmelie beleeue, that hee will not onelie doo nothing, but that hee can not doo anie thing in regarde of vs, contrarie vnto that will of his, that hee hath reuealed for vs in his word. For euen as a manne of might on earth, hauing giuen foorth hys speache of assu∣rance
in the woorde of a Prince or Chri∣stian, though perhappes to one farre infe∣riour to himselfe, is yet notwythstanding tied thereby, not as in respect of his pow∣er, for that remaineth as greate after as before, but as in regarde of his credite, and the persons to whome hee hath by his woorde after a sorte, as it were bounde himselfe: so is it wyth the Lord to vs∣ward. And the reason of this is, not the abridgement or shortening of his power, (for be it farre from mortall men, to pre∣sume in any thing, though neuer so litle, to restrain the eternal power of the immor∣tall God) but because his will and power (I meane of the same, as they are reuea∣led to vs by his woorde, and particularlie by his promises made vnto vs therin con∣cerning the same) be in respect of vs, so conioyned and knit together, that looke whatsoeuer hee will doo, that hee can doo, and looke whatsoeuer he can do, that hee will doo. Oh howe vnreasonable is this, that wee will giue earthlie Potentates leaue, because of their high callings and excellent wisedome, that wee suppose to bee in them nowe and then, to hedge in the boundes of their power and authori∣tie,
by their woordes at their owne plea∣sure, and will not graunt or yeelde so muche to the Almightie? Surelie there is very great and good reason to the contra∣rie, for as for menne, by reason of the blindenesse and ignorauncie of their owne heartes they can not well tell when it is good, either to straiten or enlarge them∣selues, whereas GOD, by reason of the fulnesse of goodnesse that is in him can not choose but doo good, whether he inlarge or abridge himselfe. But to make all this plaine, by one or two examples in steade of manie, we are all perswaded, that God can not drowne the worlde anie more, wyth the waters of an vniuersall floud, because wee knowe by his woorde he will not, for the more certaine and assured sealing vppe of the same in our heartes, and not for anie discredite vnto hym, or shortening of hys arme and power, hee hath not onelie geuen vs his comforta∣ble and sweete woorde of promise, but hath sette his bowe in the cloudes,Gen. 9.12, 13, &c to bee a moste effectuall pledge of the same vnto vs. Agayne, wee all doo knowe and beleeue, that though GOD, in respect both of hymselfe, and his almighty
power, with whome all thinges, yea, the most hardest, are possible, can if he would saue all men, yet we feare not to saye and affirme, that in respect of vs hee can not saue all menne, because wee knowe by his reuealed will in his woorde, that hee will not saue them all. For some, as well for the manifestation of hys iustice and iudgement against all vngodlinesse, must bee the vesselles ordayned for de∣struction, as well as others also for the declaration of his mercie, in sauing whom hee will, vesselles of saluation and eter∣nall life. And euen the like maie we con∣clude, touching this matter of the Sup∣per, namelie, that though wee were per∣swaded or shoulde graunt, agaynst all trueth and reason, that Christ, as hee is GOD might doo what hee woulde, or as hee is man, might bee euery where, yet because hee hath reuealed the contra∣rye in his woorde, and namelie, that hee will haue hys bodye to bee circumscripti∣ble and tied to a place, to wit, Heauen, yea, which is more, to a certaine place in heauen (for though Christ as in respect of hys eternall Godhead, fill Heauen and earth, and the heuen of heuens is not able
to conteine him, yet in respect of his hu∣mane bodie, though it be glorified, he is & must be conteined in some part of the hea∣uens) that therefore it can be no iniury at all to him, neither any debasing of his om∣nipotent power, to say that now he cannot be bodilie in the sacrament, much lesse bo∣dilie in so manie sacraments, as be cele∣brated and ministred in so sundrie and in∣finit places at one time, no more than it is to God the father, in saieng that now he cannot drowne the world, or saue the re∣probat, as hath beene before declared. Thus much I thinke sufficient and i∣nough to all these obiections, being wil∣ling heere to finish this present short trea∣tise, sauing that I haue thought good in this place to adde (euen as a chalenge to the aduerse partie, and as matter of neces∣sarie instruction, to such as either be sim∣plie ignorant (for as for the malicious blinde, it is almost impossible to reclame them) or doo alreadie in some measure see the truth) these three points following. 1 First, that I am readie in all holy loue largelie to answer anie thing that christi∣anlie shall be further obiected concerning this question: I say christianlie obiected:
for if anie shall either curiouslie or capti∣ouslie propound anie thing, I thinke it most conuenient, rather to leaue such in their owne follie for a season, till it shall please God, at some one time or other, e∣uen extraordinarilie as it were, to make them to see the same, if it shall so please him, than to spend time, and to trauell in fatisfieng of their vaine curiosities. 2 Secondlie, that though this point of transubstantiation, brought in by papists, be great and grosse concerning the mat∣ter of the supper, yet that they faile not a∣lone heerein, which might perhaps make their heresie lesse heinous, but holde manie moe errors concerning that point, some of them as palpable, if not more grosse and blasphemous than this, and some of them lesse. To pursue them all, and in a large sort, I minde not at this present, because it hath beene alreadie performed by men of great excellencie, & the Lord may heer∣after giue a more fit occasion, & yet I will rehearse & touch a few, desiring the godlie reader, with all holie wisdome, to consider both of them, and the rest of that sort. 1 First, in that they make it a sacrifice propitiatorie (as they call it) for the quicke
nd the dead: by which they doo not one∣ie scorne God, & deride men, whilest they make men beleeue, that God will be plea∣ed with such odde deuises, and that his ustice shall be answered with the works f our owne inuention, causing vs also o thinke that sinne is no heinous thing hat can be expiated and doone away by he offering vp a poore thinne cake, as hough that spirituall and innumerable offenses might be taken away with bodi∣ie exercises, and that not of a holie and innocent man, but manie times of one of the woorst amongst the people: but vtter∣lie also euacuat by that means, and make of no force the eternall preesthood and sa∣crifice of our sauiour Christ, which consi∣steth speciallie in this, that he hath once for all vpon the altar of the crosse, offered vp himselfe vnto God the father, a full and sufficient sacrifice for the sinnes of the people, as the apostle plainelie proo∣ueth in manie places of his Epistle to the Hebrues. But no maruell that they should annihilat and deface Christes offi∣ces, which destroy his natures, and by consequent his whole person also (as these men doo by confounding the proprieties
of either nature, as hath beene before de¦clared) yea and ouerthrow all their own religion: for if the sacrifice of the mass (as they call it) will doo away all sinne what neede wee regard praier to dead saints, auricular confession, the popes su¦premacie, and a thousand more such abho∣minations, seeing that by setting a soul preest on worke, they may haue full for∣giuenes? and why should we esteeme par∣dons, indulgences, and such like trash and trumperie? nay rather, why should they not liue as they lust, not onlie as epicures, but as brute beasts, seeing he may be assu∣red for mony, that that which another per∣formeth for him, shall be auailable both to bodie and soule, and that to eternall salua∣tion: but fie vpon all such beastlie & blas∣phemous dotages. 2 Secondlie, there is but a little lesse leauen in that matter that they hold of vn∣comitancie, by which they haue not onelie spoiled the people of the vse of the cuppe, which both by Christes owne institution, & by his expresse commandement, saieng: Drinke ye all of this, doth in all truth and vprightnes belong vnto them, and by con∣sequent also robbed them of the frutes &
effects of his bloud, as the forgiuenesse of their sinnes, and their full reconcilement to almightie God: but also accused our auior Christ of follie and rashnesse, insti∣uting more signes in the sacrament of his supper, than he needed. And all this they aue done vnder this shadow, that because o bodie is without bloud, and they haue efore (presupposing that the bread is tur∣ed into the bodie, as in deed if men will resuppose, either vnpossible or vntrue hings, euerie thing will follow of it) ea∣en the bodie, therefore must it needs fol∣ow, that they haue drunke also his bloud. Tell vs I pray you, why might not we as ell say, respecting alwaies the sacramēt, hat when men haue drunke of the cuppe, hey haue eaten his flesh? for if the par∣aking of the one include the other, or if hole Christ, as they say, be in euery part f the visible elements, then why doo not en receiuing the wine, as well receiue e bodie as the bloud? or why may not we y, that eating is drinking, or drinking is ting? or why doo not they themselues minister it in the element of wine oue∣e, as well as in the bread alone? or why ay not we, euen beating them with their
owne assertions, of an vnbloudie sacrifice, and of the reall presence of Christes natu∣rall bodie in the same, say and affirme that the bodie may be there without the bloud or the bloud without the bodie? for if the sacrifice conteine the naturall and fleshi bodie of our sauior, and yet of it selfe it is vnbloudie, we see no reason why we may not saflie conclude, that the bodie is ther without bloud? But I know not whethe heerin I should blame thē for their beast¦linesse, or reprooue them for their pride that dare thus presumptuouslie alter th Lords very ordinance and institution. 3 Thirdlie their adoration is as corrup and filthie, whilest they cause men t commit grosse and palpable idolatrie, i falling downe before a peece of bread (what doo I say? I know not whether I may call it by that name or no, for it ma be disputed of, whether their masse ca be bread) and worshipping a wafer cake the worke of mens hands. And if it wer a foule fault in the Gentils, to turne th glorie of the incorruptible God, int the similitude of the image of a co¦ruptible man,Rom. 1.23. and of birds, and four footed beasts, and of creeping thinge
all which notwithstanding had life in thē, and were in deed the creatures of GOD, what must it be in the papists, who trans∣forme his wonderfull maiesty into a mus∣tie or whory cake, which though it be kept but a small while, is yet notwithstanding subiect to putrifaction and wormes? But suppose it were Christes body, as they say it is, yet I affirme, that they may not ad∣ore Christes bodie alone, yea and that they cannot worship the same of it selfe, with∣out horrible idolatrie, wherof also the rea∣son is plaine and euident, namelie because it is a creature, to which it is not lawfull to giue that honor that is due vnto the creator alone, because he being ielous o∣uer his owne glory, will not haue it giuen to anie other. For though it be true, that Christ as he is god, is to be worshipped as his father: yea & Christ God & man in one person is to be adored, yet we cannot with∣out great sin, and greeuous offense against God & his word, worship the humanity or manhood of our sauior Christ onlie. And if they will say, as I my selfe haue heard some of thē ignorantly affirme, yt if Christ God & man may be worshipped, therefore christ also as he is mā may be worshipped:
I answer, that besides, it is a fallacie or deceit in reasoning, called in schooles Fal∣lacia diuisionis, it is a flat contrarie to the truth of christian religion, which teacheth vs, that many things may be spoken of the person of our sauior Christ, which can not rightlie or truelie be said of either nature, and the reason is, because as the vnitie of the person must be maineteined & vpheld, so must godlie men haue an especiall re∣gard, that they confound not the seuerall proprieties of either nature. To make this plaine by a point or two. A man may saflie say, that Christ God and man in one person was crucified on the crosse, & died for our sinnes, whereof also this is the ve∣rie true and sufficient reason, because in his whole person he performed the worke of our redemption, and not in either of the natures alone, or by it selfe: but nowe if heerevpon a man should say and conclude, therfore Christ God was crucified for our sinnes, besides that he should vtter an er∣rour or heresie in christian religion, hee should speake blasphemie against God, whose nature (as we haue said heertofore) is altogither impossible. Likewise a man may saflie say and affirme, that the virgin
Marie was the mother of our Sauiour Christ, as hee is God and man in one per∣son: the reason is, because that euen from the verie moment of his blessed concepti∣on in the wombe of the virgine, the God∣head and the manhood,Romans. 9.5. were inseperablie ioyned and knit togeather in that one per∣son Iesus Christ, who is God ouer all, to be blessed for euer and euer. But if here∣vpon a man would inferre, therefore she is or may bee called the mother of God, be∣sides that hee shoulde speake against the groundes and principles of sounde faith, which teacheth vs, that as christ in respect of his manhood was without father, so in respect of his godhead he was without mo∣ther, he shold speak very proudly of flesh & bloud, and very basely of God, as though that the creature, were in time before the creator, or God could not bee without the helpe of pore and weake women. 4 To deale with the reseruation, cir∣cumgestation, or carieng it about, and with many other odde toies of their own inuen∣tion, and largely lay out the inconuenien∣ces therof, would require some proper and fit discourse for that purpose, but I wil re∣serue it til another time, making hast now
to handle that, which shalbe as the last, so in my iudgement, not the least profitable part of this treatie, and that is, how a man should drawe neere vnto such reuerent mi∣steries, to gods glory, and his owne good, and howe hee may best come, to reape and receiue fruite and comforte by the same, speciallie sith it pleaseth God, to offer to him such excellent graces therby, wherein I mind not to deal largely, because, as you see thorowe all this discourse, I professe breuitie and shortnes, and to deale fully & perfectlie I can not, both by reason of the excellencie of the thinges to bee handled, and also by meane of the maime, that wee find in our knowledg in this life, in which we know in part,1. Corinth 13.9. and prophecie in part, as the Apostle sayth. And yet not to saye somewhat, sith the Lord hath made me to feele somewhat, were not onelie to deface the graces that God in the riches of his mercie, hath bestowed vpon me poore and miserable wretch yt I am, but to defraude my good brethren, and the people of God, of some eyther profitable instruction, or sweete comfort, that the Lord hath beene pleased to acquaint mee withall: wherein setting Gods glorie, chieflie before mine
eies, and the good of his children, I will, trusting in the multitude of his mercies assaye, to vtter that little, that I my selfe in some measure feele in this matter. The thinges, that euerie man, is princi∣pallie to deale in, concerning this poynt, may, in my minde, bee well reduced, into three short heads or titles. Frst, because no manne is to doo a  thyng without deepe consideration be∣fore hande of the matter hee taketh in hande, wee are to see what hee is to perfourme, before the communicatyng or receauing of this Sacrament, and this I will call in one terme, preparation. Secondlie, because in the action and ex∣ecution  of euery good and lawfull thing, a man is to haue his mind wholy bent and set vpon the same, we are to weigh, what he is to do or thinke vpon, in the time, and at the verie instant of receiuing, and this I will name meditation. Thirdly, because there is no good thing  so wel done, but ye pleasure or profit in time afterward, may therby redound to the doer yea because ther is nothing so wel done by men, but yt by reason of the imperfection of mans nature, som thing must stil be added,
we are to looke what he is to do, after the time of receiuing, and this I will call ac∣tion or practise. Preparation which is the first, respec∣teth either God or man. Now that which concerneth God, is comprehended vnder sound knowledge, true faith, & vnfeigned repentance, as that which concerneth man is comprised vnder sincere loue. And I call them sound, true, vnfeigned, and sincere, & yet not perfect, because perfection proper∣lie signifieng that, vnto which nothing can be added, can not be found in man, during this natural life of his. And this I speake, partlie to stoppe the mouthes of such as dream of a perfection in this life, to grosse an error to bee largelye confuted, because Gods word is most plaine in that behalfe, & the manifold imperfections, of those that would seeme most perfect, do plentifullie improue the same: and partly, as in a com∣fortable sort to teach vs, that our imper∣fections should not hinder vs, from draw∣ing nigh thereto, (so that we do not foster and feed our selues in them) seeing that o∣therwise the sacrament should stand vs in no steed, if we were not vnperfect, because it is a holie helpe, and singular succour or∣deined
by God him selfe, against our natu∣rall infirmitie and weakenes. 1 By knowledge I vnderstand not anie humaine sciences, or worldly faculties, or a meane insight into the groundes of chri∣stian religion, but an assured vnderstan∣ding, as of the most materiall pointes of our faith, (for example, of the vnitie of the godhead, of the Trinitie in the persons, of the names, nature, person and offices of our sauiour &c.) so specially of this point of the Lordes supper it selfe, (for bee it farre from vs, to knowe others, and to bee igno∣rant in that whereof wee are to bee parta∣kers) we keeping our selues farre off and free, from all erronious opinions, either of Transubstantiation, consubstantiation, or any such like, either besides or against the will of God, reuealed in his word: which as it must onely be the direction of all our actions, so must it alwaies bee the rule of our religion alone. And this sound know∣ledge of the groundes and principles of christian religion, and that in such sort as god hath reuealed thē vnto vs in his word, must of necesity go before al other things, both because it is as a man would say, the foundation to the house, & the roote to the
tree, and also because if wee know not the good will and pleasure of our GOD, we can neuer either beleeue or doo the same: for euen as in worldlie matters, if men bee set about the thinges, they haue no skill in, they knowe not where to begin, or howe to proceede, or when to make an ende, so in spirituall thinges, they are much more blinde and backwarde, for in outwarde thinges of this life, men may somewhat bee holpen, by the light of rea∣son, and the liuelines of their owne witte, but in the matters of God, the more they rely or leane vpon that, the further off they are from atteining the trueth, because the Apostle telleth vs, that the naturall man perceiueth not the things of the spirit of God,1. Corinth. 2.14. for they are foolishnes vnto him, neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned.Roman. 8.7. And in another place: the wisdome of the flesh is enmi∣tie against God, for it is not subiect to the law of God, neither indeed can be. 2 By faith I meane, not only a generall beliefe, of all the canonicall books of ye old & new testament, or a grounded knowledg alone, of the points & principles of christi∣an religion, & the truth thereof, for many
wicked men proceede so farre, and the A∣postle Iames telleth vs,Iames 2.19. that the diuels beleeue and tremble, but an assured per∣swasion, and particular application, as of al these things whatsoeuer, that the Lord hath reuealed in his worde, so speciallie of his promises contained in the same, con∣cerning either this life, or the life to come (for though our faith do generally respect the whole word, yet is it most specially di∣rected to the promises that god hath made vs in Christ,2. Corinth. 1.20. in whome all the promises of God are, yea and amen) euerie par∣ticular person beeing fullie assured, and certainelie perswaded of this, that as the Lorde hath doone and promised the same, to, and for others, so hath hee doone and promised it, particularlie, to, and for him∣selfe. So that we may plainely perceiue, that this faith is necessarie, to euery one that shall communicate, both because that otherwise they being on the earth, can not take hold of Christ in heauen, and stedfast∣ly apply him and all his merites to them∣selues, that so he may become the spiritu∣all foode of their soules, norishing them in the most certaine hope of eternall saluati∣on (for faith is it by which alone, they may
appropriate vnto them selues particularlie, Christ Iesus and all his graces, to the as∣sured feelyng of the free pardon and full forgiuenesse of all their sinnes on the one side, and the imputation of Christs righ∣teousnesse on the other side) and also that thereby, they may bee fullie certified in their owne consciences, that that which they doe, either in the administration or participation of that holy action, or Sa∣crament of the Lordes bodie and bloud, is acceptable before GOD, and profita∣ble to them selues, because without fayth it is impossible to please hym,Hebrues. 11.6. Roman. 14.23. and agayne: Whatsoeuer is not of faith, that selfe same is sinne: which proper∣ties indeede, or effectes rather, if a man surelye haue, they shall make his fayth to differ, from all the vaine imaginations and swimming conceipts, of diuels and wicked men whatsoeuer. 3 By repentaunce I vnderstande, a holie alteration and chaunge of oure mindes (for good reason is there, that where sinne begynneth, from thence also shoulde proceede our conuersion or tur∣nyng to GOD) consisting of a sin∣cere hatred of all our former sinnes and
iniquities whatsoeuer both generall and particular, and of a sounde loue, of all righteousnesse and well-dooing, both ge∣nerall and particular: all which must in vs proceede from the right reuerence and louing feare, of the maiestie of almightie God in our heartes, which holie affecti∣on dooth euerye daye by little and little worke in vs, the forsaking of our selues, and the subduing of the sinfull lustes and affections of our owne flesh, to the end we may wholie resigne and giue ouer our selues, to be guided and gouerned by the spirite of God, in the sincere seruice and worship of his maiestie, and in the Chri∣stian performaunce of the holie dueties of charitie one of vs towardes an other, wee our selues, not onelie standing vppe and striuing against our generall iniquities, but also against our particular sinnes, yea against these speciall transgressions, that most preuaile in vs against the good will of our God: whereby no doubt God shall be greatly glorified, whilest hee maketh his mightie power to appeare, in streng∣thening our woonderfull weakenesse, a∣gainst some particular wickednesse, and wee our selues shall reape comforte, assu∣ring
our selues of this, that hee that hath strengthened vs against some one sinne, will also assiste vs against other, and so make the good woorkes that he hath be∣gunne in vs,Philip. 1.6. perfect, euen vntill the day of Christ. So that hereby wee may see, that he which feeleth himselfe truelie and vnfainedlie changed, in the affections of his minde, for his former iniquities, not onelie loathing his sinnes, but euen him∣selfe for his sinnes sake, and carrieth with him this holy purpose, neuer, thorow gods assistaunce to committe the same, or anie suche like against GOD or men, maie, not onely be assured of his vnfained repen∣taunce, and so by consequent of the for∣giuenesse of his sinnes, but also wyth boldenesse, and yet notwythstanding with reuerence in respect of GOD, and with humblenesse of minde, in respect of hym∣selfe, may drawe neere to the partaking of those holie mysteries. 4 By loue, which is the thing that con∣cerneth men, I doo not onelie vnderstand, the vnfained pardoning and forgiuing of others, that haue anie manner of waie trespassed agaynst vs, but also sound re∣conciliation after offences committed,
one of vs towardes an other, yea I meane further by loue, which properlie is an in∣ward affection of the heart, the sincere and outwarde testifieng of the same by woordes, deedes, countenaunces, and other meanes, as the Lorde shall geue occasion, and our abilitie serue to expresse the same, and that not vnto our friendes onelie,Matth. 5.46, 47. (for what great thing doo wee if wee loue them that loue vs? But gene∣rallie to all men, though vnto some in greater measure,Galat. 6.10. as to the housholde of faith, our wiues, children, and pa∣rents, &c: and to some in lesse measure, as to those that bee yet wythout, and bee somewhat further off by nature and kin∣red, yea, and to our ennemies also, which is somewhat more▪ against which, because wee doo whollie striue while wee are in the corruption of oure nature, and bee woonderfullye backeward to the same, euen then when GOD hath in some measure aduaunced our regeneration in vs, there lieng lurking wythin vs the cinders of Hatred and Dis-like, rea∣dye to breake foorthe into a flame, as occasion and matter shall bee ministred, wee shall doo verye well to gather as
many reasons to induce vs to the practise thereof, as possibly wee can, that so by them, as it were by strong cordes, wee may be drawen and tied, as a man would say, to the execution of the same. First therefore wee haue GOD in sundry pla∣ces of his woorde, layeng that duetie vppon vs,Matth. 5.44. Luke 6.27, 24. To loue them that hate vs, to blesse them that cursse vs, and to pray for them that persecute vs. Secondlie, wee haue his owne example concurring wyth hys commaundement, hee practi∣sing the same to vs, that hee would haue vs to doo to others, namelie, louing vs, when wee were and are his ennimies.Roman. 5.10. Matth. 5.45. 1. Iohn 4.10. Thirdlye, wee haue the example of our Sauiour Christe, cloathed with one na∣ture accomplishing the same, praying al∣so to the Father to forgiue them,Luke 23.34. that putte him to death. And least anie man shoulde thinke, that that which Christe did in this case, woulde not bee perfour∣med in and by them, eyther by reason of Christes singular excellencie, or the diffi∣cultie and impossibilitie of the thing it selfe, the Lorde hath in the fourth place, for the ouercomming of that temptation, sette before vs sundrie of his seruaunts,
who beeing men like vnto vs, in all res∣pects,Actes 7.6 haue yet notwythstanding in the dayes of their flesh doone the same, as we see particularlie in Stephan. Fiftlie, the verye Sacrament it selfe, and the e∣lements in the same leade vs thereto,1. Corinth. 10.17 For wee that are manie are one bread and one bodie, because wee are all parta∣kers of one bread at the Lordes boorde, euen as that bread wee eate of there, is made of manie graines, and yet maketh but one loafe. Lastlie, our owne good shoulde carrie vs forward to this, because thereby wee prouide well for our selues, that so wee might feele the forgiuenesse of our sinnes before GOD, our Sauiour telling vs in plaine wordes,Matth. 6.14. That if wee doo forgiue men their trespasses, our heauenlie Father wil also forgiue vs. And though it bee true, that wee can and doo greatlie aggrauate other mens sinnes a∣gainst vs, as for example, hee hath taken away my good name, he hath spoiled me of my goodes, hee hath killed my father, husband, children, and a thousand suche like: and what hainous offences be these? Yet if GOD woulde geue vs grace, vprightlie to looke into our owne sinnes,
committed eyther agaynst other men, or Gods owne maiestie, wee shall finde, that wee haue good cause offered, to be ready to remitte: For if men offend vs, wee doo in as great points offend others. And though that were not true, yet wee can∣not denie, but that wee doo more high∣lie displease Almightie GOD than men can, or doo displease vs, and that not onelie in the notoriousnesse of our sinnes, but euen in a dailie and continuall course of iniquitie, and in an infinite multitude of transgressions also. What a fearefull thing will this bee in our owne heartes, that wee woulde gladlie haue God mer∣cifull vnto vs, in forgiuing most gree∣uous and innumerable transgressions, and wee will not remitte small offences, and sinnes seldome tymes committed? By this wee doo nothing else but cast awaie the sure seale and earnest pennie, as it were, that our sinnes are forgiuen vs be∣fore GOD, and refuse a certaine pledge, that our praiers and all other good things that come from vs, are in Christes obe∣dience accepted in his sight, yea, and moste iniuriouslie treade vnder our filthie feete, Gods worde, Gods example, Gods
sacraments, and many other tokens of his grace, and lastlie, pull vpon vs a fear∣ful vengeance from God, to be manifested in this life, and in the life to come. And therefore I beseeche all the godlie, that haue care of their saluation, to looke hee∣dilie to this point. Meditation, which is the second thing,  and is to be vsed speciallie in the tyme of the celebration of the Lordes Supper, consisteth chieflie in these points, to wit, in regarding the outwarde elementes of the Lordes Supper, that is to saye, the breade and the wine, and in conside∣ring the rites vsed, in, and aboute the same, as the breaking of the Breade and the pouring foorth of the Wine, and so forth. For though the outward things are not the matters that wee shoulde stand vppon, yet, because by them, it plea∣seth the Lorde, as it were, by the hand, to leade vs vnto right excellent thinges, namelie, by them to sette foorth vnto our Soules, the crucifieng of Christes bodie, the sheading of his bloude, and so foorth, and all for our transgressions, that therefore they shoulde not bee sleightlie passed ouer, wythout verye deepe and
due consideration of the same. And then because wee must not stay below on the earth, nor be busied in beholding of earth∣lie things onelie, but must by faith rise vp to heauen as it were, there to behold the a∣bundant riches of Gods spirituall graces, offered and giuen to the faithfull, in, with, & by the outward elements, we are throgh∣lie to wey what great mercies the Lord setteth before vs, in that holie and spiritu∣all banket, which though partlie for the woorthinesse of the giuer, and partlie also for the excellencie of themselues, as also by the want and weakenesse of our blinde and dull vnderstanding, they cannot be sufficiently conceiued, much lesse vttered, may yet in my mind be brought into these foure points following, as most materiall and principall. 1 God setteth before our eies in that ho∣lie action, first Christes death and passion, togither with the benefits & effects which we reape thereby, and namelie the remissi∣on and full forgiuenesse of all our sinnes, togither with the imputation of Christes righteousnesse vnto vs, and the assured pos∣session of eternall life: for we doo no more verilie behold the bread broken, and the
wine poured foorth in our bodily sight and presence, than wee do or ought by the eie of our faith, to beholde the bodie of Christ crucified, and his bloud shead vppon the crosse, for the forgiuenesse of our sinnes: neither are wee more fullie or particular∣lie put in possession of the bread and wine, when wee haue eaten and druncke the same, than wee are of Christ and all his merits, then when by a liuelie and sted∣fast faith we lay hold of him, and the most excellent graces, that in him are offered vnto vs, applieng them all particularly to our own souls, which yet that they might be more effectually pledged vppe in vs, it pleased the Lord to appoint, not onlie that the bread should be broken, and the wine poured foorth, but that euery one of vs, should seuerallie by him selfe, and for him selfe, take it, eate it, and drincke it, &c: that so wee might bee in the more full and assured possession of hym and his gra∣ces. 2 Secondlie, the Lorde pledgeth out vnto vs therby, that ful and spirituall nou∣rishement, that through Christ we haue, both in the outward and inward man, e∣uen to the hope and fruition of eternall
life: for euen as verilie, as that bread and wine dooth seeme to strengthen our out-ward manne: so euen as verilie, yea more verilye by much, dooth Christe and is graces nourishe our soules: yea I saye more verilie, because that though some part of the bread and wine wee receiue, bee turned into our healthfull and profi∣table nourishment, and is become as it were part of our substaunce, yet some of it also passeth thorowe the panch into the priuie, but Christe remaineth alwaies a most holie and sound nutriment vnto our soules, no parte of him vanishing awaye, but hauing rather this effecte in vs, that hee is not onely turned into our substance, as the bodilie elements are in respect of our outward man, but rather wholie tur∣ning vs, as a man would say, into his most holie and blessed substance, he being not onelye a plentifull, but a pleasaunt nou∣rishment also, bringing alwaies with him that effect to our soules, that the out∣warde elements doo to our bodies, name∣lie giuing them all spirituall strength, and inwarde comfort,Iohn. 15.5. because without him, we haue nothing, nor can doo a∣nie thing.
3 Thirdlie, by this meanes the Lorde propoundeth vnto vs, the mysticall vnion that is betwixt Christ and his church, we and hee making but one bodie of his holie congregation, hee being the head there∣of, and we the particular members: by which also, as we are instructed, in our holie dueties towardes him, we attemp∣ting nothing that may tend to the preiu∣dice, hurte, or griefe of our holie head, but endeuouring euerye thing that maye be good and acceptable before him, so we comfortablie conceiue the great and con∣tinuall care hee hath for vs, hee perfor∣ming more effectuallie by much, the duety of headship vnto his spirituall bodie the church, than a naturall head, dooth, or can to a naturall bodie, namelie, not onelie in deuising for the good thereof, both in generall and in particular, but also in yeeldyng sence and moouyng vnto the whole bodie, and euerie seuerall mem∣ber thereof, yea, quickening the same, and geuing together wyth the vnderstan∣ding of heauenlie care and conscience, yea, some measure of strength and po∣wer to walke therein,Ephes. 3.12. so that He dwel∣lyng in oure heartes by Fayth, wee
are therby not onelie become members of his bodie, of his flesh, and of his bloud, but also he maketh vs zealous, prepared, and frutefull in euerie good worke, both to∣wards the Lord, and one of vs towards an other. 4 Fourthlie and lastlie, the Lord deli∣uereth vnto vs in the vse of his supper, that holie vnitie and agreement, both outward and inward, of bodie and mind, that is and ought to be knowne, felt and continued a∣mongst all the members of his church, whatsoeuer, or wheresoeuer they be. For euen as the bread that we are partakers of, is made of many graines, & yet maketh but one loafe, as we see, & as the wine that we drinke at the Lords table, is made of manie grapes, and yet maketh but one wine: so all the faithfull people, not onlie of one place & parish, but dispersed through out the whole earth (notwithstanding that some through the riches of Gods mercies haue atteined more graces than other some) make in deed but one holie bodie of the church. Neither doth our being of se∣uerall members one of vs to another, anie more hinder our growth in this same spi∣rituall fellowship, than the varietie of mē∣bers
in a naturall body hindereth the con∣stituting and making of the whole bodie it selfe, nay rather, as we may well per∣ceiue, it furthereth the same: for as the whole cannot be said to be whole but in respect of all the parts whereof it consi∣steth, no more can this whole or holie bo∣die of the church, & euerie particular con∣gregation throughout the world, concur∣ring to the establishing thereof: and yet so notwithstanding, that the name church may as rightlie be attributed to euerie se∣uerall societie of the faithfull, as the word earth to euerie part of the earth, or to speake of the elements of the supper, the word bread, and the word wine, to euerie part of the bread & wine vsed in the same. The third and last thing, is that which  I called before, action, and is to be perfor∣med, as generallie all the daies of our life, so particularlie and speciallie after the re∣ceiuing of the Lords supper. And though this come in the last place, yet is it not a matter of the least importance, nay rather it is of such great weight, that the former without it, be little auailable: for euen as in all humane sciences, knowlege, though it be neuer so exquisit, is without action &
practise commonlie counted but a vaine conceit, so in spirituall vnderstanding, that is muche more true, because if a man knowe neuer so muche of Gods mercies, and meditate neuer so deeply in the same, yet if that by the same he be not lead, as it were, by the hand, both humbly to praise God for them, and hartily praie vnto him, for the continuance and increase of them, with grace to embrace them, and to vse them well, it is to himselfe and others as if it were nothing. Now this matter that we call action consisteth: 1 First, in earnest praier vnto God, not onelie for a cleare sight of the graces offe∣red, bicause we are blind to perceue them, but also for a liuely and continuall feeling of the same, because we doo easilie choake and smother them vp, yea, for the plentiful fructifieng of the word of God, and his sa∣craments in our heartes, because wee our selues bee barren and ill ground, and can hardlie bring foorth good fruit, though we haue haue very much cost and labor besto∣wed vpon vs. And this duetie must be per∣formed, not for the time present alone, as whilest we are in the publike exercises, or for the day of communicating onelie, re∣turning
afterwards as filthie swine to our former wallow, or vncleane dogges to our vomite againe: for alas what will that a∣uaile vs, but to a more fearefull iudge∣ment, and iust condemnation, because wee continue in sin, & abuse the meanes of our sanctification and purging, but euen for the whole race and course of our liues, that as there is no day nor houre of a day going ouer our heades, wherein wee stand not in neede of some blessing from the Lorde, so there should few times escape vs, wherein we would not do to God this duty, that we beleeue to be acceptable to him, bicause he hath commanded it, and so profitable vnto our selues, bicause it reacheth vnto euerie part and period, or state of our whole life. 2 Secondly, in humble thankesgiuing, as for all the vnestimable riches and trea∣sures of grace and goodnesse generallie: which it pleaseth him in his Church, and namelie by the vse of his word and sacra∣ments, not onelie to offer, but also to be∣stow vpon his people, so specially for the death and obedience of hys Sonne, the blessing of all blessings, that is to saye, the most excellent blessing, the Lord be∣stowing thereby vppon vs all graces both
bodilie & spirituallie: bodilie, as the sanc∣tification of all his creatures vnto vs, which otherwise we continuing in our sinnes (as we must needs haue doone, if Christ had not died for vs) should haue bin vncleane vnto vs: and spirituall, as the forgiuenesse of our sins, the imputation of Christes righteousnesse (which we must of necessitie beleeue, because otherwise God may as well-condemne vs for want of righteousnesse, as for our notorious transgressions) and manie such other par∣ticulars before recited. And that we may be the better prouoked to this great dutie of thankfulnes, it shall be good for vs, not onelie to alot vnto our selues sometime in euerie day, wherin we will take a view so far foorth as we can, of all the graces of God both generall and particular, bestow∣ed vpon our selues & others, but also deep∣lie to consider, first the person that giueth the same, who is the Lord of heauen and earth, mercifull no doubt euen vnto thou∣sands of generations, to them that loue him, and keepe his commandements: se∣condlie the excellencie of the things be∣stowed, which besides that they are bodily and spirituall, temporal and eternall, arise
to such a huge number, in the seueral sorts and great varietie of them that are not a∣ble to thinke of them, or anie one of them, according to their woorthinesse, muche lesse to account or number them: and thirdlie to consider our selues receiuing them, to whome the Lorde freelie and of his owne goodnesse, giueth these great mercies, not onelie when wee had not de∣serued the least of them, but euen then when euery one of vs, had deserued eter∣nall death and condemnation to be poured foorth vpon vs and ours. 3 And lastlie in care and conscience of a most holie and christian conuersation, that seeing wee are in the holie Supper made partakers by faith of Christs death and resurrection, and that wee fullie per∣swade our selues by the truth of the word,Roman. 4.25. that he did not onlie die for our sinnes, and rise for our righteousnesse, but also performed that excellent and great worke to teach vs,Roman. 6.1. Coloss. 3.1. by his death to die to vn∣godlinesse, and by his resurrection to rise vp to that holinesse, that may bee acceptable before God, profitable to our brethren, and comfortable to our selues, wee hauing by that meanes, and to that
end our spiritual life and being from him, that therefore we should liue soberlie, righteouslie,Titus. 2.12. and godlie in this present euill world, and that in the sound affecti∣ons of our harts before God, and in words and deeds before men, that when it shall please him to finish the daies of our wea∣risome pilgrimage, we stedfastlie looking for that blessed hope, and full-fruition of e∣ternall life, may be glorified with him in eternall blessednes: which thing the Lord grant vs, euen for his crucified Christes sake, to whom, with the Father, and the Holie ghost, three persons and one eter∣nall God, be giuen all honor praise, power & glorie, both of vs and of all people, euen now and at all times for euer and euer: So be it. .
TO THE READER. AT the motion and request of sundrie my deere friends in the Lord, I haue thought good to put downe these two praiers following, not thereby minding, either to tie anie person to the vse of these onelie (for they may accor∣ding to their seuerall necessities, conceiue some other of their owne, or practise some bet∣ter forme alredie set foorth, by men of greater gifts or feeling) nor yet so to busie their minds, and to occupie their heads, as that they should be imploied in these, when the publike praiers and exercises of the church, performed by the ministers, are in hand (for be it farre from vs, when the minister (Gods mouth) speaketh from the Lord to vs, or when he as our mouth, speaketh to the Lord for vs, to haue either our hearts or our mouthes occupied about any other thing, than the reuerend hearing and consenting vnto, of such things as hee vtte∣reth.) But that aiding the infirmitie of our brethren, such as haue not the gift to conceiue praier, and shall thinke this fit for themselues, might haue a forme to exercise themselues in, both before they repaire to the publike ex∣ercises of the church, and also after the celebration and partaking of these reuerend mysteries shall be finished.
A PRAIER TO BE SAID BEFORE a man repaire to the partaking of the Lords supper. O Eternall God, and most mercifull father, I thy poore and vnwoorthie seruant doo humblie beseech thee in Iesus Christ thy deere sons name, and for his sake, gratiouslie through his death and obedience, to pardon and forgiue me all my sinnes whatsoeuer, which at anie time, by thought, word, or deed, I haue, through negligence, ignorance, or knowledge, committed against thy diuine maiestie, or anie other. And because both by reason of the curssed corruption of mine owne nature, and the infinit multitude of my sinnes also, I am slow & dull of heart to beleeue, seale vp in my soule I pray thee O Lord, this great benefit of the free pardon & full forgiuenesse of all my sinnes, by the assured testi∣monie of thy blessed spirit, bearing record vnto my spirit that I am thy childe, and by vnfeined parddo∣ning and forgiuing of others, which anie maner of way haue offended against me. Yea make the death and resurrection of thy sonne so powerfull & effec∣tuall in me, that I may not onelie feele and finde in the same, the forgiuenesse of all my sinnes, both ge∣nerall and particular, and the hope of eternall sal∣uation, but also that I may be instructed thereby, all the daies of my life, more and more to die vnto sin, and dailie more & more to liue vnto righteousnes of life and holie conuersation. And forasmuch as through thy goodnesse, I haue purposed this day to communicat, in the vse of thy blessed word and sa∣craments, I beseech thee (good father) to pearse mine eares, to prepare my heart, yea and so to di∣rect all the parts and powers of my body and soule, that I may not onelie reuerentlie and profitablie
hearken to thy voice, speaking vnto me out of thy word, laboring all the daies of my life to conforme my selfe to the knowledge, faith, and obedience of the same, but also that I may assuredlie be made partaker of the frutes and effects of the death and passion of thy deere sonne, which it pleaseth thee in that holie sacrament, to offer vnto me. To this end and purpose I beseech thee to grant, that I be not carried away in the contemplation and considera∣tion of the earthly and corruptible things, obiected therein to my sences, but that my faith may be set vp & raised to the spirituall beholding, assured fee∣ling, and full fruition of these graces, which it plea∣seth thee by the same to offer vnto me. Giue me grace (good Lord) to bring with me a stedfast faith in the truth of thy promises, that by it, as by an eie, I may looke vpon, and by the same, as by a hand, I may apprehend Iesus Christ thy sonne, sitting at thy right hand, to be my onelie and continuall iusti∣fier, sanctifier and redeemer. Grant me grace also to bring with me, as an earnest hatred of all my for∣mer euils whatsoeuer, so a sincere loue of all righ∣teousnesse and well dooing, that I by the power of thy spirit, crucifieng the old man, with the lusts and concupiscences therof, speciallie such as beare the greatest sway in me, may be strengthened in the new man, dailie to thinke, speake, and doo those things which may be acceptable and well pleasing in thy godlie presence. And I beseech thee further, to giue me grace to bring with me, sound & sincere loue towards all men, yea euen towards mine eni∣mies, that I may not onelie forget and forgiue all the iniuries & wrongs that they haue deuised, said or doone against me, but also pray earnestlie vnto thy maiestie for them, and purchase and procure
