21000 99855017 20487
A Souldiers VVishe to Britons welfare: or a Dis∣course, fit to be read of all Gentlemen and Souldiers. Written by a Captaine of experience. Imprinted at London for Ieffrey Chorlton, and are to be sold at the great North dore of Saint Paules. 1604.
TO THE MOST WORTHY, the most vertuous and godly Prince Henry, by the grace of God, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwell, Earle of Chester, and heire appa∣rant of the Realmes of England, Scot∣land, France and Ireland. MOst worthy & most renowned Prince, there is nothing more pleasing to a spi∣rit endued with knowledge, then Truth when she is most bare and naked. The pure Corall needes no colou∣ring, and a good cause it selfe bringeth credit, it needeth not the help of Art. The deceitful Phisitian giueth plea∣sant Syriopes, to make his poyson to goe downe the smoo∣ther, and the sweet songs of Calipso, were but subtill snares to Vlisses. An oylie mouth may haue a gaulding minde, and it seemeth vnto me, that these professors of Eloquence are to be suspected, and their straining of words and sentences (as it were to set them on the Teynter) doth shewethe little plaine dealing that is within them. Yet I would not seeme to take the Penne out of his hand that doth write of Eloquēce, for that were as if a man shuld labour to take the lightning from Iupiter, or to seeke to be∣reaue the fire of his heate. And Art (I know) is the Pilot in the sea of wit: Art is the sword to conquere Ignorance: and Art is the sole directer when the worlde would erre. But yet to vse superflu∣ous Eoquence, in a matter of sufficient excellency, is a grea∣ter shew of a pregnant wit, then of a perfect wisedome. Now sithens my abilitie serueth to no better purpose, then to set foorth in this kind of writing those experiments which 40. yeares training in the warres hath taught me, I haue not vndertaken as a subtill Logitian, for I neuer lear∣ned those places from whence arguments are drawne. Those haue need of artificial speeches, who with pleasing words do go about to couer dishonest deeds.
The matters by me handled, I haue set downe plainly, I haue neither florished them with Art, nor smoothed them with Flattery. I haue grasped at abuse: yet vnder generalities, not aiming at any one particularly, that hath not a guiltie conscience to accuse himselfe, I haue winked at somewhat, least I might seeme curious, and haue pretermitted necessities, in that they require matter passing my reach: neither doe I seeke heerein the praise of mine owne wit, but to declare the loue I beare to my Countrie, and the dutifull zeale I tender, (and withal humblenes I here present) to your excellēt highnes. If my vnlettered diligence be gratiously accepted, I nei∣ther feare the spightfull eye of Enuie, neither yet the cen∣sure of any others in those things, which I haue onely con∣secrated to your gratious vewe. I acknowldge mine owne vnworthinesse, and I confesse my little skill and abilitie to performe, but it is a gratious acceptance, that incourageth me, for I assure my selfe, that a magnificent and princely minde cannot want in him that is descended from so magnificent and princely rege∣nie: Alexander disdained not to be praised by a Mllr, and your grace (I hope) will accept the simple gilt of a soullier. The subiect is not altogether vnnecessarie to be conside∣red of, for it concerneth the affaires of warre, a knowledge behouefull for the greatest Monarch, when a King is not so much renowned for his crowne, as for his courage and skill in the knowledge of armes. For although all the giftes of Fortune are to be despised in respect of learning, yet in a Prince, there is nothing so glori∣ous as to be called a great Captaine, or a worthy souldier. Accept them (gratious Prince) as the earnest penny of a faithfull heart, accept them and protect them from the malitious interpretour, accept them (with all humblenesse I beseech it) for his sake, that with all loue and dutie will daily pray, that as you are knowne to be descended from a most royall and princely progenie, and to be the vndoubt∣full heire of your worthie fathers Crowne and Scepter, so you may growe in renowne & honour equall to your aun∣cestors, & may succeed your royall parents in their vertues. Your Graces in all denoted dutie and
TO THE KINDE AND curteous Reader. CVrteous Reader (if thou be curteous indeed) it is so much the better for me, for then I know my lines wil passe with∣out reproofe: If thou be curious I care not, for Nature hath done much for me, she hath ginē me shoulders, though not with Atlas able to beare the hea∣uens yet with Marcus Cato, able to endure any burthen that itus Graechius is able to loade me with. To auoyd Idlenesse, I haue betaken me to write, and to make my selfe sociable with the multitude, I haue mingled matters of importance, with matters of small regarde: I know this is the humorous age, and although to reade ouer fewe things aduisedcy, prositeth, yet to runne through ma∣ny things (though slightly) delighteth, and a man that can but tattle of this and that (though to little purpose) shall haue audience. I know some wil say, that he which wil aduenture to speake of many matters, may rather be tearmed venturous then learned: but I answere with that great Captain Ma∣rius, who speaking before the people of Rome, said, If my words be not wel set together, I care not: so long as I know my meaning to be good and honest.
Then let Maenius finde fault, and let Boldunus ea∣uil, all is one to me, I will but turne the Buckle of my gir∣dell a litle behind me, and then let any Iestmonger of them all, runne at me with his strongest inuention, and he shall neuer hit me, whre he shall be able to hurt me. I will wade no farther in mine owne praise, because I was neuer beholding to mine owne tongue: but as I know there are some that are too quicke of sight, so there be some others that wil winke if they see a fault: I reuerence him, and do wish with all my heart, that this second incounter betweene Captaine Skill and Captaine Pill, might be as pleasing vnto him, as I hope it wil be profitable to some o∣thers, that shall peruse & ouer looke it, with aduised iudg∣ment. Barnabie Riche.
CAPTAINE PILL in his humorous fit. CAPTAINE SKIL in his temperate iudgement. Pill. CAptaine Skill, and although in a late con∣ference had betwéene vs, I vndertooke to speake of Robin Hood, when indeede I had neuer shot in his vowe, and presu∣med to dispute of martiall matters, be∣fore I had séene an enemies Tent: yet now hauing a little bottered my experi∣ence by some few yeares trayning in the warres, and haue had continuance in sauerall seruices, as well offensiue as de∣fensiue, being now thus happily encountered, and time with opportunitie so well be fitting the purpose, let me obtaine that by a kinde intreaty, that I know I cannot merit by any de∣sert, I come not to contend, nor to maintaine any eauiles, my desires is to learne, and although before I knew how to bus∣kle on an Armour, I presumed of as much skill as might haue beséemed the great Captaine of Cartliage, yet now experience hath taught me to know, that indeed: I knowe nothing. And by this  continuance that I haue had in the Canpe, I haue noted those absurdisies in the Militia of these times, that I thinke may be easily spoken of, but not so quickly amended:
giue me leaue to relate them as they shall hit into my memo∣rie, and let me intreate your opinion what you allowe, and what you mislike. Skill. Captaine Pill, the time that you tell me you haue spent in the campe, hath not bene ill imployed, for that I per∣ceius you haue profited much: I sée it hath inlightened your vn∣derstanding to know your owne imperfections, and there can∣not be a more learned ignorance, then for a man to confesse his owne ignorance: now for the Militia of these times which you say is so confounded with absurdities, I beleeue it to be true, but he that should thinke to amend it by finding faulte, might do as Apelles prentise, who drawing of a picture, séeking to mende the nose, marred the chéeke: you and I may talke of many abuses, as it were by the way of communication, but I dare not attribut any such singularity to my self as to giue any censure, yet vpon the request you haue made, of any thing it shall like you to demaunde, I am contented to aduenture my opinion, but not to set-downe precepts. Pill. Why then Captaine Skill I will procéede: but here now I should kéepe a gods Decorum, especially in Method, but that is looked for from Schollers, and not from Soldiers, and I haue learned the further off from art, the more Souldierlike: then mount you vp my thoughts, yet raise your selues with reuerence, so as you neither do Minerua wrong, nor care what Momus can obiect. Now before I speake of defects, I will first beginne with warre it selfe, that I thinke cannot be managed but with dis∣order, whose best fruites are so inormious, that it hath béene had inquestion, and many times disputed on, whether warre may be approued to be either good or lawfull, before the seats and Maiestie of God? Skill. I take those men that wil moue such doubts, to be vt∣terly ignorant aswell in the history of the Scriptures, as in the state of a happy Common-wealth, for he that taught Dauid to sing, Blossed be the Lord my strength, which teacheth my hands to make warre, and my fingers to fight, had  willed Moyses long before to make warre vpon the Media∣nites, & that by an expresse commandement, and Abraham the
father of the faithful, made no scruple to enter into armes him∣selfe and his houshold to recouer his brother Lot. Pill. But some will say the ruines and spoiles committed in the warres are to be lamented, and the cities that are sackt, spoyld, and left desolate, can best witnesse the fruite. Skill. Sée Saul, first annointed King, appointed to leade the children of Israel, the spirite of God commeth vpon him, he Prophesieth amongst the Sars, and after all this, behold him againe vtterly forsaken of God, but for reseruing a part of the praye that he had taken from the Amalichites. Pill. But what excuse for the great effusion of bloud? or is it not a horrour to thinke of the murthers & slaughters made by men vpon men in the furie and heat of warre? Skill. I will referre this to the noble Iosua, who being in the pursuite of his enemies, and fearing that the day had bene too short, commaunded the Sunne to neglect his accustomed course, and to stay her selfe in the middle of the heauen, till he had performed his slaughter to the full. Pill. Why then to spoile and kill an enemy we sée the war∣rant is good, but there be some that will make difficulties, and then they will distinguish betwéene ambitious warre, & warre that is but defensiue, and almost they will admit of no warre at all to be lawfull. Skil. Warre is to be vndertaken but to the end to haue peace, and for matters in clayme, in defence of libertie, and such other like, aswell the lawes of nature as the lawes of na∣tions doth admit it. For these distinctions I will leaue them to Diuines, but warre is euermore attended on by Sword, Fyre, Famine, and Murther: the sinnes of the people is it that giueth the first Al∣larum, and vnsheatheth the souldiers sword, and warre hauing once displayed his Banner, it is the iustice of the cause that ap∣prooueth it eyther to be good or bad. But yet the obtaining of a victory is not a sure confirma∣tion of this right & equity, for when the children of Israel were gathered together in Silo, to punish the shamefull sodometry of the tribe of Beniamin, they lost in two seueral battells 40000.
men: notwithstanding they had a iust cause, and fought both the times by the appointment and commaundement of God. By warre to subdue a forraine foe, the conquest is glorious, but in ciuill warre there is nothing more miserable then vic∣torie. The practise and knowledge of Armes, hath euer béene carefully indeuoured in all ages, and in euery well gouerned Common-wealth, when by it Empires haue béene attained, Kingdomes inlarged, the straights of Pontus hath béene ope∣ned, and the inclosures of the Alpes broken vp. By it Princes are protected, Iustice is maintained, good lawes preserued, and the Common-wealth defended. Great is the knowledge of Armes therefore, and there is no∣thing more necessary, immediatly after the knowledge of God, then to knowe how to mannage our martiall causes, and as in euery action it is odious is erre, so in warres it is most daungerous of all other, because that one mistaking is ynough to ouerthrowe a whole Armie, whereon might de∣pend the wracke of a Common-wealth, and the losse of a Princes Crowne. Warre and the Soule communicates in this, that both of them are in their simple natures hardly found out, but are du∣ly defined by their effects. Nothing waxeth young in this world but warre, neyther hath arte euer sought out a subiect more ambiguous, for with the Camelion it changeth according to the obiect, and like an impossible infinit in nature, carrieth his euents beyond the reache of coniecture. In the heauens it worketh harmony, on the earth peace, it is the hand of desteny to inforce chaunge, the scourge of God to punish sinnes, the true adamant that draweth courage vnto it, and a Basilique to feare that dyes to behold it: It is oyle in the stomacke that hath disgested poyson, as a medecine to a body that is choaked vp with corrupt humours, as a Fyre to the mettall that wants refining, as exercise to the body growne pursie with ydlenesse, it is the Theater wheron Nobilitie was
borne to shew himselfe, a glasse wherein policie espieth his in∣firmities, the worst and best that euer Fortune could promise her fauourites. The surfits of peace first quickened it, and tyrany that gaue it sucke, perished in cherishing it. It began in heauen, in the rebellion of Lucifer, it presumed vpon Paradise, betwéene the first man, and the Angell, in Shinare ambition made Nymrod embrace it: Neare Sodom affection caused Abraham to entertaine it: Sithens in the world it hath béene the Key of alterations, the disposer and spoyler of Monarchies, the founder of obscurities, the worker of miracles. There is nothing so intire, that it hath not separated, nei∣ther so dissolued that it could not reconcile. Peace vnto it, is as Castor and Pollax in a storme, a hope of safetie, warre vnto peace, as a motion to rest, the meanes to produce it. It fauoureth not the multitude of men, but respects the value, and suffers valour sometimes to perish in the armes of a fearefull multitude: it is the scourge of securitie, the plague of timerites, the end of hatreds, and the beginning of discon∣tents. It fauoureth iniustice, and oppresseth innocents, it strikes as God willes, workes as sinne warpes it: briefly, a miserable necessitie in nature, and a necessary corrector of times infirmitie. Pill. Why, then by this description and by the rest, what I haue noted, I perceiue that it is good to be a skilfull warriour, but ill againe to bée a great warre louer. Well Menelanus, I may commend thy valour, but neuer thy wit, that wouldst make a continuance often yeares warre, but to recouer a strumpet. Skill. Ten yéeres war could not be cōtinued but with ten yeres woe, yet this blessednes of peace that is so much desired, doth especially consist in the knowledge of warre. Pill. Why, then the feates of warre are not to be neg∣lected, though in the midst of the most happie peace.
Skill. When is the storme more rather to be prouided for, but whylest the weather is faire, neyther is there a more dangerous thing then in the time of peace to neglect the know∣ledge of Armes, for when that care is set aside, both Prince and People are left as a pray for euery oppressour, and is an inducement for him to attempte, that otherwise would bée glad to combine. Pill. I can tell you Captaine Skill, this doctrine will be reputed flat heresie: what in the time of peace to prouide for warre, & to spend money when they see no danger? I can tell you our peace-mongers cānot abide it, nay they will not heare the name of warre so much as spoken of, till they haue newes that the Beacons be on fire about their eares. Skill. I might spend a long time in deliuering presidents, how manie inconueniences haue bene incurr'd where they haue neglected this preparation, and omitting all the rest, let Salomon giue vs light, who though he were promised a pea∣ceable gouernment by God himselfe, and had this addition to be called Rex pacificus, yet he furnished his Garrisons with more warlike prouisions then euer his father Dauid had done before him, notwithstanding he was still turmoyled and euery day bued in the warres, for if preparation be neglected till the warres begin, either it commeth too late and out of season, or it heapeth together such confusion with making haste, as it prooueth vnprofitable, and the proceedings will be but flowe, the execution slender, and the wants intollerable. Pill. Preparation then is alwayes to be in readinesse, but doth not this readines consist aswell in training men, & making them skilfull & ready in Military knowledgs, as in preparing all other habiliments & necessaries appertaining to the wars? Skill. Yong souldiors vnprouided and sleightly trayned, are not to be drawen into the field against an Armie exercized and beaten with long practise, for vnexperimented men are fit∣ter to furnish a funeral then to sight a fielde: as little safetie is to be hoped for in small and vnequall numbers, which do ra∣ther séed then end the warres, & do rather increase charge then win Honor: small cōpanies are shut vp without doing good to
themselues or hurt to their enemies, & as they are little feared of their enemies, so they are lesse esteemed by their friends. Where there is a mighty Army in the field, what City or Towne, Country or Prouince, wil not be glad to curry fauor, and willing to redeeme their good will? To conclude, a féeble Armie is euer despised aswell by friends as fues, but an able Army that is prepared and mana∣ged as it ought, will soone bring an enemie to yeelde eyther by victorie or composition. Pill. Then they are a little mistaken that doo thinke be∣cause they are able on the sodaine to furnish a Muster rowle with infinite numbers of names, that therefore they can as quickly supplie the field with an able company of Soldiours: and there must be a like preparation of mony as of men, for monie is tearmed to be the sinewes of warre, and is of such importance in the Campe, that though a man haue plentie of Souldiers to follow him, and store of Munition to serue him, yet waiting mony to make paye, a man may say as Flami∣nius did by Philopomines, that he had the handes and legge of warre, but he wanted the belly. The Prince therfore that will leuie an Army, must learne with Theseus not to enter the Labyrinthe without a Clue, he must be prouided with sufficient Treasure, for the want wherof many Armies haue bene forced to dissolue. Skill. And there is no preparation exactly to be set downe what might suffice, for warres haue neyther stint nor set boundes. Pill. And the preparation is not so vncertaine, but it is as hard to be attained vnto, for though Arithmetick can quickly cypher downe a whole myllion of Treasure, yet all the rest of the Liberall Sciences are not so prodigall to bring it in to∣gether. Skill. And yet I thinke there is more disorder in the issu∣ing of the treasure when it is prepared, then there is trauell in the aftaining to it, and that if there were a good order executed in the expending, neither the charge would be so great, nor the expences so burthensome, as I know they haue beene.
Pill. Captaine Skill, I am not ignorant what reportes haue gone, how Princes haue bene porloined by cheatting of∣ficers, but our discourse is now of preparation, and by what meanes money might be prepared for the expence of warre. Skill. It would bee a tedious matter to set downe the means that hath bin practised more then ordinary) how to get mony onely for the supplie of warres, for besides Rents, Re∣uenues, Impositions, Taxes, Subsidies, penalties, Lones, Conflcations & such other like, there hath bene great summe raysed for the pryde and excesse both of men and women, from their garded garments, their coloured silkes, their gold & sil∣uer lace, their Plate more then necessarie, their Iewells, their Coaches, and such other superfluities. The fraudulent dealing of Officers hath bene sometimes examined and brought in question, & infinite summes hath bene by that meanes gathered together, & brought to the treasurie. Pill. He that should aduise these presidents to be followed here in England, perhaps might offend more thē a good many, and yet me thinks there were some reason to induce, that those that haue robbed others of theyr money by fraulent and de∣ceitfull meanes, should be vsed like Sponges, that when they haue drunke theyr fill, are then fit to be pressed. But now whilest I thinke of it, I will tell you what ad∣uise a plaine country fellow did sometimes giue to Gentleman of good sorte, and one that had a great & a gainefull office fréely giuen him by a gratious Prince, which gentleman being ap∣pointed to borow mony for his Soueraigne vpon priuy seales, comming into a part of the country where the men of best abi∣litie in the shire (by a former appointment were repayred vn∣to him, to whom this gentleman in a briefe discourse told them how many occasions their Soueraigne had to imploy mony, and was therfore driuen so make bolde amongst his good sub¦iects to borow for a time till it might be repayed againe. One amongst the rest (being no lesse plaine then wealthy) answered againe after this sort, if not directly in the same ma∣ner, yet I am sure not farre from the matter. I pray God blesse our Soueraigne (said he,) and séeing
there is such néede of money as your maistership hath spoken of: for my part I am not onely willing to lend this proportion that is demaunded, but if his Maiestie would follow my fur∣ther aduice, I could teach him such a tricke, that he should haue money comming in euery day, little or much, and it would come trowling in such sort, as I warrant there would not be so great neede to borrowe of subiects, as now of late time there hath beene. If you haue such a tricke (answered the Gentleman) you might merit much; and there is no doubt, but it would be very grariously taken by your Soueraigne, in making it knowne. I can do it (said the other) and I will tell you what it is: and if his Highnesse could but make shift to buy your Maister∣ships office, and thrée or foure others that I could name, and keepe them in his owne hands, your worship knowes he née∣ded to want no money, but it would still be comming in, his cofers I warrant would neuer be emptie. The conclusion was, I thinke this honest meaning man had but small thankes for his counsell, for those were no times for men to iest with Officers. Skill. Besides money, there are many other prouisions to be cared for: as Armour, Weapon, Munition, and infinite of other furnitures, that are all to bee prouided afore hand. But the necessitie of victuall (in the time of seruice) are of no lesse importance then the necessitie of money, without the meanes of which, there is neither meane to conquer, nor hope to liue. Ualiant mindes, wil oppose themselues against the Pike, will aduenture vpon the Musquet-shot, or runne vpon the Cannon, but I did neuer know any man so hardy, that would yeeld himselfe to encounter with Famine. Where victuals therefore are not conueniently prouided for, the greatest mindes are terrified and ouercome without stroke: and a hungry Army can neither obserue Discipline, nor performe any great enterprise. Pill. I haue knowne especiall seruices neglected, yea, and ouerthrowne, & but onely for this want of victuall, but I
will not speake of particulars, because in finding a fault, I know not whome I should offend, whether those of superiour authoritie, that might haue commanded, or those that were but inferiour Officers that should haue prouided: but this is to be cōsidered, yt for the expeditiō of war, such Cōmanders, & Offi∣cers should be made choice of yt had iudgement aswel to consi∣der of y• pursuit of an enterprise, as to looke into the beginning. Skill. For the expedition of warre, it will neuer be ac∣complished with any hope of good successe, but by the vse of two instruments, Election and Discipline, the one in chusing, the o∣ther in framing when they are chosen. Pill. But there is great error in Election, and it is com∣mitted in two maners, either thinking that he which is noble shuld likewise be vertuous, or for particular affection, perhaps in the behalfe of some one from whom the party would expect the like fauour againe: now if wars were to be waged against enemies, which would not take aduantage of errors and neg∣ligences, a Prince might chuse more for fauour thē for néede. Skill. And for Election that was wnt to be frée, and of an byright iudgement, it is now become a slaue to opinion, to that opinion that is both blind, lame, particular, and selfe con∣ceited, and yet hath preuailed so farre, that we want but one o∣ther Erasmus to dyefie opinion, as one hath already writ in the prayse of Folly. Where opinion beareth sway, she ruleth like a God, she maketh fooles to bée reputed wise, Cowardes to bée calle couragious, and silly ignorant asses, to be admired for the martiall skill. She sendeth Captaines to conduct, Officers to direct, that are fitter themselues to be trained, then to haue commaund. Opinion sendeth men to the warre corrupted with vices, where they oppose themselues against all order & Disciplin, they robbe, they spoyle, they sweare, they wagger, they quar∣rell, they eate, they drinke, they fight, they saint, they flye, they are couragious in spoyle, and cowardes in fight, they are curious in spéech, and carelesse of reputation, there is nei∣ther glory in their victory, nor dishonour in their flight.
Where opinion mannageth the affaires of warre, with∣out the assistance of Iudgement and Skil, the danger is great, but the expences are intollerable. Pill. This election which you do here speake of (as I perceiue) doth not so much concerne the ordinary Souldiour, as it doth respect the appointment of Generals, Captains, Cō∣manders, and all other Offices that are to direct and mannage the warre, in whole worth and vertue it consisteth either to make the Souldier more or lesse profitable for seruice, and it belongeth to their prouidence and care to make him able or disable to serue. Skill. This well chusing of Officers is the most especi∣al thing to be obserued by those that are desirous to accomplish by warre: Amongst the rest, the place of the Generall hauing the first superioritie, if in his electiō there be not the like regard and circumspection had to his skill and worthinesse, there may be chosen an instrument of all disorder, when by his vnskilful∣nesse in martiall gouernment, there may arise so many euils, so many mischiefs, destructions, and confusions, as it may be cal∣led a much greater plague, then that which ariseth by the most infected ayre. Pill. The olde prouerbe is, Such Carpenters, such chips, such Saints, such Relikes: and I beléeue (indéed) where a Ge∣nerall is chosen vnskilfull, he lightly draweth about him Cap∣taines and other Officers, as vnskilfull as himselfe, and then where the blind leades the blind, if they should performe any great enterprise, it might well be registred amongst other mi∣racles of wonder. But I will not take vpon me in this place, to say how many abuses hath béene committed in the election of Captaines, and other Officers of the warre, I will leaue them till another occasion, and will here first speake of the choyce of the Generall himselfe, on whose skill and worthines (immediatly after the permission of God) the warre may bée said to be happy, or infortunate. Since then the hope of winning or loosing doth so much depend in the Generall, by doing, or not doing his dutie, mée thinkes an Armie would bée much better mannaged
vnder the conduct of two or thrée Generalls, and the Prince might hope of better successe in those seruices where he had seuerall to commaund, and not to trust ouermuch to one. Skill. I will alwaies preferre the gouernment of one, because it is a gouernment most agréeable to nature: and if without presumption we may compare small marters with infinite, it is most agréeing to the example of the Almightie himselfe, who being but one God alone, gouerneth and ruleth vniuersally altogether: From hence it like wise séemeth meete, that the people of one Nation, should bee gouerned by one Prince. Pill. But it happeneth many times, that in matters of doubt, there is not so much safetie in the opinion of one, as in the aduisement of many, because affection, or passion, either through anger, or through spight, or through lust, or by some o∣ther turbulent occasion, sooner entereth into the minde of one alone, then into a multitude. Skill. But I say againe it is an easier matter to finde one alone to be good and wise, then to finde a great many: I could inferre presidents, but by former experience it hath bene found, that it is better for those that be good and honest, to liue vnder the gouernment of one Prince, though he should be se∣uere and halfe a tyrant, then to liue in those regiments where there are as many Kings, as there be Officers in authoritie: where there is more daunger in displeasing of a great man, then there is safetie in seruing of a Soueraigne. Blessed say I, is that Regiment where the mightie op∣pressors are gouerned by one vertuous Prince, and not where the vertuous Prince is ouerruled by many great oppressors. And as there is nothing more noysome so good subiects, then to haue many Kings in one dominion, so there is nothing more pernitious for a Prince, then to make seuerall Generals in one Army of equall principalitie: For where there are se∣uerall Commaunders of equall power and authoritie, if there be not contention for preheminence and superioritie, yet bée re that the desire of glory will breake the necke of amitie be∣twéen thē: & wher honor is to be atchieued, the valorous mind
cannot endure to haue any sharers that shall diuide or partici∣pate with him in that glorious bootie. Pill. But these contentions are euermore incident a∣mongst the ambitious, and ambition is commonly an atten∣dant to those great persons that are descended of Honorable li∣nages: but Nobilitie in these dayes (for the most parte) haue layed aside the practise of Armes, she endeuoureth not (as she hath done) the déedes of Chiualry, wherby she is growen vt∣terly vnable to serue her Country, as in times past she hath bene: our ancestors made themselues noble by their Uertues, but now Nobilitie is best knowen by hir scuhins, she is be∣come a seruant to pleasure, and hath geuen her self to idlenesse. Nobility in times past hath bene followed by Souldiers, but now she is haunted by flatterers: she hath countenaneed wise men, but now she suffereth her selfe to be seduced by those of little witte. Skill. The wings of true Nobility to make her flie high, are the déedes of Chiualry, and being inlightened by martiall skill, maketh her to shine more cléere and light. I know not any thing so certaine that carryeth with it a greater Maiestie, then for Nobilitie to make noble defence a∣gainst such as compound the miseries of Ciuill warres, and to be great leaders against forraine Inuaders. Pill. True Nobilite loueth glory, abiect Nobility loueth wealth: true Nobilitie scorneth that fortune that is vnaccom∣panied with Uertue, and seeketh out that danger which is at∣tended by Honour: she desireth not to séeme but to be Noble, and rather to be a Lion amongst Hartes, then to be a Hart a∣mongst Lions. Nobilitie consisteth not in titles borowed from our proge∣nitors, but is extinguished in him that onely hath wit to kéep mony, and no hart to win Honor: it is a title to a good man of great excellencie, but not to a wicked man of great infamie. To conclude, true Honour onely leaneth to this, to de∣serue by noble deedes, to endeuour for her Countries good, to cherish the well deseruing of the Ualiant, to banish Fooles and Flatterers, to liue an excellent life, and not to shame nor
shunne an honourable death. Skill. Then who so fit to commaund an Army, as he that is Noble? and the Art military is the principall profession for Nobilitie: as for all other qualities, they are but as ornaments to garnish the first: no not the studie of Sciences and learning it self, are but as complements to this glorious study of armes: As one demaunding of his friend whether he would rather wish to be Achylles or Homer, was answered; Tell me thou thy selfe whether thou wouldest rather to be a Captaine or a Trumpeter? but for him that is Noble, what tytle so honou∣rable as to be called a great Souldier, vnlesse we care not to shewe our selues like vnto those that in learning will seeme to be men of warre amongst the ignorant, but amongst Souldi∣ers, can but shewe themselues to be learned. Pill. But where Nobilitie by her owne contemning this honorable profession, haue thereby made her selfe vnable to command, is not he then to be reputed noble & honorable both, who for the good of his country refuseth no danger, but is con∣tented to hazard himself to the death, only to attain experience? What are we to looke after birth or parentage, when we see many times, persons that are but of a base degree, to be yet in∣uested with most high & noble gifts of Nature? Skill. These are to be commended and so receiue their re∣ward, but vnfitting yet to beare this rule of an absolute Com∣mander: for where Noblemen are inflamed with the desire of glory and renowne, those of meaner parentage do more desire to exceed in wealth then in worship; for they haue neither true taste nor feeling of honor & renowne, but are rather inclined to a couetous humor (which is the roote of all Impietie) and lea∣deth them many times to neglect goldē glory for gripple gain. Then who is so dull of vnderstanding, but would be enfla∣med with the loue of Vertue, and would thinke himselfe most happy & blessed, to be gouerned by the wisdome & vertue of no∣ble personages, whose desire is to haue the rule & gouernment of others, only for this consideration, that they might in their Office & gouernment, shew forth magnificent bountifulnesse, & impact such vertues vnto others, as with which their owne mindes are fraught & singularly furnished.
Pill. But now it is to be vnderstood, that euery stocke and lynage is set forth and beautifled by Vertue, and Vertue not beautified and set forth by lynage. Skill. Yet Noblenesse hath euer bene honored by all men, because it standeth with reason that good should spring of good, and Vertue is most often succeeding in Noble blood: and the worthinesse of honorable ancestors craueth a reuerend regard to be had in their posteritie, where he that is but of meane or simple parentage, must endure much to aduance his reputati∣on, and cannot raise his estimation but with that tediousnesse of time, which the Noble by birth shall attaine vnto in a mo∣ment: and the innovle may be sometimes inticed to Vertue, but not by the allurement of Vertue it selfe, but are rather pro∣uoked vnto it by dread, or by compulsion, or sometimes per∣haps in hope of preferment: and where Vertue is thus darke∣ned with a wauering hope & a faint courage, it is brought low, and but créepeth by the ground, where the vertue of true No∣blenesse (indeed) being pure and vndefiled, doth swiftly raise it selfe on high, and doth with confidence mount vp to the highest heauens. Pill. I acknowledge that Nobilitie which as on a chiefe pillar is staied vpon Vertue: but where that pillar of Vertue is shaken and ouerthrowne, there Nobilitie it selfe must likewise fall to the ground: And I do further truly confesse, that he can do nothing gallantly, valiantly, or forceably, whose minde is not kindeled and inflamed with honourable desire. Thus giuing Nobilitie her due, I preferre the Noble to be most worthy of this great commaund, knowing that the bare tytle is more effectuall to draw a reuerent regard, and to en∣force a more dutifull obedience in an Army, then the largest Commission. A Prince may deuise to graunt to him that is but newly crept vp from a meane reputation or a slender account: And because I haue here spoken of a Commission, here now ariseth a doubt, whether it be behouefull for a Prince, for the benefit of his owne seruice, to prescribe a Commission to his Lieutenant or Generall, so tying him within certaine limits, that he may not passe the bounds of his commandment, what∣soeuer occasion might be taken for the benefit of seruice.
Skill. For the answere of this doubt, it is first to be con∣sidered, that when a Prince will bridle his Generall by such a-Commission, it is necessary that he furnish him with all maner of prouisions so aboundantly that he shall not want: for other∣wise, what seruice is to be expected where they are first pinched in theyr prouisions, and after bound so fast by their Commissi∣ons, that they shall not be able to helpe themselues? Next, it is as behoouefull for that Prince that will tye his Generall to straight limits, that he doo likewise very circum∣spectly instruct and direct him in those seruices he hath to per∣forme, which is almost impossible for him to doo: for how should men that are ignorant themselues in the affaires of warre, prescribe their Generalls what they should do, or what they should not doo? or how should those that are absent, giue prescriptions to him that is and must be in present view, and not bereaue him of those aduantages that the varietie of times and occasions may offer? Some Princes and States that haue bene suspitious of their Captaines, haue brideled them by straight Commissions, other some againe, that hauing had respect to the dangers of times, yet foreseeing the inconueniences that might ensue by ouermuch pairing their Generalls authoritie, haue in theyr Commissions left this (proviso) That they should proceede according to the variety of time and occasions, notwith∣standing any restraint in them contained. Pill. But whether a Generall that is thus tyed, may not sometime vse his owne discretion vpon occasion, as opportu∣nitie may offer? Skill. The seueritie of Manlius Torquatus might suf∣fice to discourage any man to stand in this conceit, who spa∣red not the life of his own sonne, but for fighting with an ene∣mie contrary to his commandment, notwithstanding he ob∣tained the victorie. But the Almighty himselfe preferreth obedience to be bet∣ter then sacrifice, and it is more fit by executing the commande∣ment of a Prince to shew obedience, then by exceeding their bounds to shew contempt.
For this cause the Souldier was worthily commended, who hauing already aduanced his weapon to haue taken the life of an enemie, that was vnder his mercy, whilest his arme was yet lifted vp to haue giuen the deadly stroke, the Trum∣pet sounded a retraite, wherewith the Souldier staying his blowe, let his enemie thus escape: this being espied, it was demaunded of him, why he let slip so great an aduantage; he answered, I bolde it farre more honourable to obey my Cap∣taine, then to kill mine enemy. Pill. He that had a compleate Army of such Souldiers, might worke wonders: but some wil say, that when occasion is offered to a Generall for the benefit of his Prince, he ought not so icely to stand vpon the prescript of his Commission, as to neglect the benefit and fortune presented vnto him, when there is no Prince so prouident who is able to foresee euery ac∣cident that may happen: he is therefore to be reputed neither for wise nor valiant, that wil stand so much vpon his Commis∣sion as to neglect any occasion that may bring aduancement to the honour and profit of his maister. Skill. It is a daungerous thing for him that shall swarue from the Commaundement of a Prince, trusting more to his owne iudgement, then in his whom of reason he ought to o∣bey, because if his imagination do faile him, and his enter∣prise conclude but with ill successe, he runneth into the penal∣tie of disobedience, without any hope of excuse or pardon. But admit that his purpose be well effected, and brought to a good passe according to his desire, he may then thanke his fortune more then his wit, and this is all that he hath to trust vnto. The Romanes in the prime of their greatnes, were not only strict in punishing these offences, but they were as seuere to punish with shame and ignomy, their Generalls and prin∣cipall Commaunders (without any respect of their greatnes) that by shamefull practises had sought to vanquish and by dis∣honourable meanes had obtained victories vpon their ene∣mies: neither could I  Pius so escape with his drunken conquest, but that in stead of a glorious tryumphe which he
required, he was repaied with a shamefull death, and a flaun∣derous Epitaphe, which he deserued. Pill. But had they not in those dayes the practise of vile and villainous deceit, as to bereaue an enemy of his life by poyson, or by some sodam stab or stroake with a weapon, or to hire a murderer secretly so do some shameful office or executiō? These haue bene the policies of late times, and these prac∣tises haue bene especially approued. Skill. By these meanes Fabritius would net win, he not only refused a conquest offered vnto him by that traytor Ti∣mocliares, but he likewise detected and accused his treason to the King his maister: neither would Camillus receiue the Schoole-maisters offer, though he might there by haue subdu∣ed the Phylistiens: no they thought it a matter of great Im∣pietie, of an honest quarel to make an vniust conquest, neither would they admit of any practise wherein was founde either fraude or deceit, although it seemed neuer so profitable. Pill. The Discipline of that age was much to be wondred at, yet more to be honoured: but was there the like respect vsed to those of ordinary account, I meane to priuate Captaines, and other Officers and Ministers of the waites? Skill. There was no respect of persons; nor bearing with abuses, no not when whole Colonies had transgressed their Military orders, but they were deciated, and euery tenth person executed as they tell out by lot. Pill. And he that feareth the effect, must séeke to anoyd the cause: and they that were so seuere in punishing offen∣ders, would not themselues be the Instruments to drawe on affence: I meane in the Election of Captaines and Officers in their warres: I thinke it was done with such care and cir∣cumspection as they would not admit of the vnworthy, or the vnable. A Captaine in those dayes could not buy a company for mony, nor be admitted to charge by bryving, sometimes by making himselfe Pencionary, paying a yearely slipend, which must be exacted either from the Prince or Souldier, or from hath.
I thinke my Lorde nor my Ladies Letter could not then haue preferred a man that was unworthy & of no experience; neither do I beleeue that a Uictualer could then haue crept in∣to an Office though a whole hundred of Angels should haue made intercession for him: nor a Prouant Maister, whose Of∣fice was to prouide apparell for Souldiers, could not haue purchased an Office for money, nor be suffered to powle and pill the poore Souldier euen to his very shirt. Skill. In those times such Captaines and Officers were chosen as the places had need of, not such as had more need of the places, they were not then admitted to exact their owne greatnesse by the ruines of the Prince, nor to make their own gaine by the spoyle of the Souldier, the publique treasure that was to be imployed for the payment of Souldiers, they would not suffer to be purloyned by deceiuing Officers, the victual∣lers, Prouant Maisters, Officers of the Musters, and other Accountants were not onely looked vnto, but they were like∣wise looked into; if any of them had bene sound vnworthy, or had bene taken tardy in a trip, he was sure to be dismist and punished according to the qualitie of their crime, they neuer stood in doubt to displease my Lord his maister that had com∣mended him; they then bent all their indeuours to serue that Prince or State that gaue them pay, and not that Lorde or Maister that preferred them to their places. Pill. One speciall meane that a shifting Captaine hath to deceiue his prince, is in his number, to take pay for a whole company when he hath not balfe: if his conscience wil farther stretch to exact and cheate vpon his poore Souldiers, he hath many base and vngodly shifts to performe it, but it were a pit∣teous thing, that any mans greatnesss should boulster out such abuse, or that because a scraping Captaine should be knowne to be a Fauourite to this or that Noble man, therefore there should no man dare to crosse him in the camp, least his friends should crosse them againe in the Court. For these Officers before spoken of, they may deceiue both Prince and Souldier by many more meanes, and of far grea∣ter
summes then the Captaines can do: and it is like enough that in times past there hath bene some such Officers, and it is as likely that some others that should haue bene Controw∣lers of the offence, hath bene partakers and haue had interest in the gaine. Skill But these were lamentable times when Souldiers by these means might stand more in doubt to be rodly r Captaines, then to be hurt by their enemies, and miserable might that warre be called, where more may perish by the fraudelent demeanure of shifting Officers, then otherwise slaine by the enemies sword. It is not enough therfore that Generals themselues should be elected and chosen with great foresight and care, but it is as much be houefull that priuate Captains & all other Officers put in authoritie either to rule or to prouide, should be chosen with the like regard and circumspection. Pill. There is nothing of more importance then the choo∣sing of good Officers, whether in peace or warre: but espcial∣ly where poore Honestie is so put to silence that he dares not speake, as many times his mouth hath bene  Bry∣bery and Flattery, two shrewd enemies:  Hercules con∣tra duos. Skill. Corruptions hath bene from the beginning & will continue, but where Bellona rings the Allarum Bell, abuses wil there multiply: but Captaine Pill learne this of me, what is vertue in one is vice in an other, it is not for men of our coat to finde any faults, and although the world be rather inclined to dispraise what is amisse, then to commend of that is well done, yet he liueth in better quiet that speaketh but what he should, then he that blabbeth all that is true: what should men of our profession haue to do with Bribery & Flattery? the time hath bin you had bin better to haue spoken against preaching: do you not know, he that wil sacrifice to Thraso, Gnato must be his priest? and be there not many great personages, who al∣though they can discerne of a Flatterer, and do knowe them∣selues to be palpably flattered, yet they loue him that flatte∣reth fastest, and wil hate him that should tel him the truth?
Pill. Augustus that good Emprrour of Rome, was ne∣uer angry with accusers because he thought it necessary, that where many abuses did flourish, that it should be therefore be∣hooefull for euery man to speake his mind freely: But the Po∣lititian, he that hath but Mammon for his God, and Machi∣uill for his ghostly Father, he cannot away with these finde∣faults: A gauld Iade will kick, and a guilty conscience is afraid of rubbing, and these be they that do rather seeke to couer faults then to mend faults: these Polititians that be called the sharpest and the quickest witted men, what be their policies, or where∣vnto do they apply their quicknesse of wit, but to couer their naughtinesse? If they haue a little good amongst a great deale of ill, they thinke that little good to be vtterly lost, that hath not the eyes of the world to witnesse it, and to giue it applause, so that if they doe any good, it is but to the end to be séene, and to be praysed by men, for in secret they will do nothing: if they for∣beare to do euill, it is for feare the world should know it, and were that feare taken away, they would sticke at nothing. I thinke there is not a more mischieuous creature in the world, then is a man, if he be both wise and wicked, for where the wit is bribed by a licentious will there Honesty is forced to play banckrout, and it is but a rude kinde of honesty, that re∣straineth men from doing ill, but for feare of a popular re∣port. But I cannot altogether blame the carelesnesse of the world, in that it is become so sparing of good indeuours, when there is neither reward for well doing, nor recompence for good desert: nor so much as a Memorandum for the most honou∣rable enterprises, bow worthily so euer performed, vnlesse per∣haps a little commendations in a Bal adior if a man be fauored by a Play maker, he may sometimes be Canonized on a stage: But Uertue, thou art driuen into a narrow scantling, that haste no better recompence, then what thou canst draw from vice it selfe: It is no wonder though so fewe do looke out after thee, for thou art growne poore, and who would follow a begger? Skill. As the prompt and ready wit imployed in bad pur∣poses, is most hurtfull; so it is necessary that euery capring wit,
shadowed with a little pretended care, should intermeddle with matters of state, nor should busie it selfe in those affaires that should not publikely be brought in question. Pill. As I am not ignorant that the State nor policy, are not to be medled withall by euery man, so it is a pitious thing, that vnder this prescript, Quod supra nos, nihil ad nos, and for that it is and hath beene a receiued opinion, That all truths are not to be spoken, that therefore a man must not indeuour his countries good, nor speake these truthes that might con∣cerne the glory of God, the seruice of a Prince, and the benefit of a Common-wealth, or whether these prescriptions before spoken of, should so restraine a man from doing his dutie to his Soueraigne, that he should not informe those abuses commit∣ted, whether in the Campe, or in the Court: or because the cor∣ruptions of some great personage, might thereby be detected, his good meaning therefore should not onely bee ill construed, but his honest indeuours vtterly disgraced, and himselfe repu∣ted a busie bodie, that is too forward in meddling with matters so farre aboue his reach. Skill. The prayse of well doing, consisteth chiefly in two points, whereof the one is in choosing out an end, that our purpose is directed vnto, that is good indeede: the other she knowledge to finde out apt and meete meanes, whereby to bring it to this expected good end, thus appointed and inten∣ded. Now he that pretendeth but to reueale those thinges that may be beneficiall for his Prince or Countrey, his purpose is honest, and is directed to a very good end, and in such a case, hee is not to neglect any thing that may tend to so soueraigne a good, but is rather to aduenture himselfe for the safe∣tie of either: yea, although it should fall out to his great reproach. Pill. Then ten times happy may that Common-wealth be reputed, where the eares of the Soueraigne Prince are o∣pen to the informations of honest and dutifull subiects, not one∣ly in hearing matters that might giue light to his owne af∣faires, but with like gracious regard to heare and consider of
she priuate and particular complaints of poore oppressed su∣tors, where Innocency is oppressed by Enuy, where simplicitie is intrapped by subtiltie, where truth is suppressed by authori∣tie: for a Prince that heareth the complaintes of his wronged subiects, is like a Cristall streame, wherein all may drinke that are drye. Skill. If the blessednesse of a Common-wealth doth consist in the clemency of the Prince, vnder what Clymat might we séeke for a more happy Regiment then this of our owne natiue soyle? what age hath euer affoorded a more prince∣ly gouernment, then that of our late deceased most gracious and godly Elizabeth? whose magnificence filled the world with wonder, whose Maiesticall greatnesse was sought vnto by the Princes of forraine Nations, who thought themselues best se∣cured, when they had entered league and confederacy with her: whole greatest enemies did yet admire her heroicall ver∣tues, whose royall person was frō time to time protected by the Almightie arme of God, from tho traines and traps of Trai∣tors, that daily pursued her, not for her stanes, but for her sin∣ceritie and loue to the pure worship of God: they hated her indeede, but not for any faultes or offences of her owne, but for her zeale to that glorious Gospell, that giueth light and life to those that doth embrace it: they sought her destruction, but not for her abhominations, but because shée detested theirs. Sée here againe the wonderfull goodnesse of God, and his mercie towardes this Realme, at that very instant of her Maiesties death, when there was nothing looked after but for confusion, no hope expected but effusion and shed∣ding of blood: See then, I say, his blessing redoubled, a gracious and a mightie Prince established in peace, not a sword drawne, though the enemies of the glorious Gos∣pell of Christ, had then intended the execution of their fu∣ry. If I should now take vpon mee to expresse the worthi∣nesse of this renowned King, thus inthroned by the
hand of the Almightie, I might imitate the Painters of Greece, who taking vpon them the portraiture of Iupiter, were euery day mending, but could neuer finish it: and being demaunded why they had begun what they could not end, they answered, in that we shewe him to be Iupiter, whom euerie one may begin, but neuer any man be able to perfect. If any man be yet desirous to make a more ample suruey of his vertues, let him but reade those lines by himselfe, he hath left to posteritie, and he shall finde by the excellency of the fruites, how much England is made happie by so glorious a free. God blesse the stocke and branches altogether, and send them long to flourish, from generation to generation, in the highest-tipe of honour, and Princely Maiestie. Pill. Amen say I, and withall humblenesse I beseech it: and that God that rules the heartes of Princes, put in his roy∣al heart the care and safetie of himselfe, for his owne and Eng∣lands good. God keepe him still from the godlesse, and the God maker, the Atheist, and the Papist; the one neuer loueth but in policie, the other is still practising for his Pope: and it is a hard matter in these dayes to distinguish Humilitie from Flattery, their words and smiles are the one so like the other. But Captaine Skill you haue already taught me not to meddle with the affaires of Princes, and I learnd it long ago, by the fable of the Foxe and the Wolfe: and although it be but a fable, it is yet worth the repeating, because there is contained in it good admonition. The Foxe and the Wolfe passing by the Lions Denne, were desirous to sée what he was doing: and the Foxe verie subtilly but a little peeping in, told the Wolfe that the Lion was asléepe: the Wolfe taking courage to take a better view, was no sooner entered, but the Lion immediately caught him in his clawes, and demaunding of him what was his pretence, the Wolfe fearefully made answere, that vnderstanding by the Foxe his Maiestie was asleepe, he thought without offence, hee might surury both his person and his lodging: to whome the Lion roughly replyed.
Doest thou thinke that a Lion thy Prince and Gouernour can sleepe, though he sometimes winke, or darest thou enquire whether he winke or wake? thou shalt know to thy griefe, that neither the wilinesse of the Foxe, nor the soolish pride of the Wolfe, ought to enquire whether the Lion be asléep or awake, at home or abroad dead or aliue, this alone is sufficient for you to know, that he is a Lion, but not where he is, nor what he is doing. Skill. The like caueat was giuen by Apelles, when Alexander on a time comming to his shop, would néedes take vpon him to paint. Apelles placing him at his backe, and ten∣ding his owne worke, would not so much as cast an eye to sée what Alexander did, which being perceiued by Alexander, he demaunded of Apelles why he did not otherwhiles ouer∣looke his handy-worke, to sée wherein he had erred and done a∣misse? to whome Apelles said, it is not for Apelles to inquire what Alexander hath done, and therefore did I set your Ma∣iestie at my backe, that I might not so much as glance with mine eye to sée a Kings worke, and yet that you looking ouer my head, might see mine, for Apelles shadowes are to bée séene by Alexander, but not Alexanders by Apelles. So ought we to frame our selues in all our actions, as though the King were still standing ouer to behold our doing, but not for vs to looke and enquire what the King doth be∣hinde vs, or to take vpon vs to reforme his errours, or mista∣kings. Pill. It is no wonder then, though Princes do but sel∣dome times correct and amend their errours, when there is no man so hardy that dare reprehend them, or that dare let them vnderstand when they ouerslip. The counsel therefore of Demetrius is to be commended, who exhorted Ptolomy to reade many bookes pertaining to gouernment, for that there he should finde many things which his subiects durst not tell him. Skill. There is no man that willingly giueth eare to him which doth freely and liberally tell him his faults or imperfecti∣ons, but when a man hath both meanes and will, and a good
occasion to doe it to his Prince, let it be performed with great reuerence and modestie, that the Prince may perceiue no lesse loue towards him, then a will to discouer vnto him the error which he commiteth: for otherwise it is not lawful by reproach∣full speeches to publish the faultes or til dooinges of a Prince, neyther is it possible for a man to behaue himselfe too re∣uerently towardes him, though it bee reported that when Aristippus could not bée heard of Dionisius, hée threwe himselfe downe at his féete, saying, the faulte is not mine though I committe Idolatrye, but the Kings whoe hath his eares in his féete: yet say I, euerye one is to re∣uerence and obey his Prince with all humblenesse of dutie, for that the honoure is not giuen to him but to God him∣selfe, whose Minister he is. Pill. And yet all mens eyes are still attendant vp∣pon his demeaner, and his dooinges are examined as wel in the Countrie as in the Courte, and the actions of the most mightiest Monarches are manie symes censured in the meanest cottage. Skill. The vigilancie of the people is so much the more, because the life of the Prince is a ring leader to the mul∣titude, vpon whose example either of good or ill, the people are still depending, for example is the readiest waye to instruct: and therefore it is trulie saide, Such Prince such subiectes: if the Prince bee good himselfe, hee will likewise make o∣thers good that are about him, and there is not a greater testimonie of the goodnesse of a Prince, then to sée the goodnesse of those that doe attend his person. Pill. But are there not manie Presidents left in re∣cord of Princes, which of their owne dispositions haue bene most graciously and vertuously inclined, and haue yet bene corrupted by those that were nyghest about them: sometime vnder the pretence of policie and profit, they haue bene led into errours: otherwhiles their eares haue béene abused by those that had no other meanes to make themselues gratious in the eyes of their Prince, but by féeding him with matters perhaps more profitable to the purse,
then healthfull to the soule. Some other againe by sée∣king to blindefolde the Princes eyes, that they shoulde not looke into the affayres of the meaner sorte of the subiectes, nor so much as to take knowledge or to re∣ceiue anye Complayntes of the oppressed, haue thereby kept the Prince in ignorance, and made themselues wise. Howe manie Princes againe that haue bene of great Renowne, of rare vertue, and of excellent wyt, hath yet beene led with lycentious libertye, drawne in by these inticers of pleasure and delyght? these sullen slaues that can créepe, croutch, lye, fawne and flatter for a fa∣uoure, that can watch, wright, dissemble, and con∣spyre to please a Prince: these haue béene the plague soares of manie common wealthes, that haue often ruinated Kingdomes, and ouerthrowne Estates. Skill. The fauoure of a Prince is highlye e∣stéemed amongst men, and yet béeing dulye considered of, it is but a poysoned bayte that induceth manye daungers: for besides a wearisome life, and the miserable serui∣tude that belongeth to Courting; so a man must be ve∣rie respectiue in pleasing of his Prince, although sometimes but with worldly vanities. These seruauntes of ambition, doe manye tymes thrust themselues into infinite perrilles, especially when they become so familyar that their Princes will imparte vnto them their secretes: But hée that knoweth the secretes of Princes, hée is chary of it, hée shutteth his mouth, and feareth least it should escape him: but is it disclosed, the vndiscréet man doth publishe it, and perhappes the wise man is blamed for it, and the least suspition is now enough to ruinate him, that before might haue slept in his Princes bosome. I will therefore commende the Poet Philippides, who being demaunded by King Lisimachus, what fa∣uour hée might doe vnto him for that e loued him, made this answere to the King, that your Maiestie would ne∣uer impart vnto me any of your secrets.
By this it might séeme, that in the loue or hatred of a Prince there is almost a like daunger: I therefore thinke it not  to followe the table of the earthen vessell, which in no wise wold hold any cōpany with y• brazen vessell, for feare of knocks: and it may easily be thought, that in the company of a Prince, a man cannot vtter his minde fréely, nor doe any thing contra∣ry to his pleasure, but if he doe, he shall be no friend of Cae∣sars. Pill. Fire warmeth those that stand aloofe, and burneth him that créepeth too nigh: I loue the Court, but (vnder correcti∣on be it spoken) I haue thought it a fitter place for Paris then for Hector. Skill. Captaine Pill, the Campe is better befitting a Souldier then the Court, and I thinke your experience and mine doth rather serue to speake of Souldiers, then to iudge of Courtiers: and I wonder how from our first matter of dis∣course we are hit into this veine, that I wish wée might let be, and returne ouer to some other sext. that our skill will better ferue to discourse on. Pill. I hope our honest meaning will not be imputed to presumption, and I haue the rather aduentured the matter vpon this occasion, the mittigation of warre now hoped for, and a blessed peace expected, by a most gracious and happie go∣uernment, hath giuen Souldiers a time of truce, that they may lay by their Armes, and indeuour to what their wits in any o∣ther commendable exercise: And we may a little take this ad∣uantage in our discourse, and not so to tye our selues to martial matter, but that vpon occasion we may a little digresse, like a cunning gamester when he is at Hazard, will sometimes leaue the Maine to play vpon the Bye: And I would not be thought to be of so furious a humor as y• firy spirited Gentleman Sol∣dier, that hitting amongst pleasant company, was requested by a Gentlewoman to dance, but he with a disdainfull looke, tolde her that he tooke no pleasure in so vaine delights: the Gentle∣woman requested him againe, to say wherein his pleasure did especially consist, and hée bending his browes and loo∣king with a strne countenance, tolde her his felicitie was,
Armed in the field to encounter his enemies. The Gentle∣woman smiling at the folly of our vaine-glorious Martialist, made this answere. Now God be thanked there is yet no néed of your seruice, for our turritories and confines are happily blessed with peace, and therefore I could wish that you were wel besmeared ouer with oyle, and so hanged vp in some faire Armory till we haue néed of your helpe: for it were great pit∣tie that a man of your courage should be cankered and eaten with rust now in this peaceable time. I would be sory to receiue such a frump, neither wil I stand so much vpon my martiall points, as though I could do no∣thing but speake of fighting of fields. I wil therfore speak or do anything as occasion shall serue: in the time of warre, I can listen to the Drum, but in the time of Peace, a Tabret and a Pipe are merry about a May-Pole: and although I be ill made to daunce, yet I wil rumble on a∣mongst the rest, I had rather they should finde fault with my cunning, then to repute me to be disdainfull. And now we haue taken this little breath, let vs (in Gods name) martch backe againe to the Campe from whence we came, where we haue left our Generall not so fully complete as is requisite: for it is not enough for him that shal command an Army to be nobly borne, but he must be likewise fortified with those gifts that are no lesse to be attained vnto by educa∣tion as by nature. And as I remember, Cato prescribeth thrée special vertues to be had in a Generall, that is to say, Experi∣ence, Policie, and Valiance: and the Antiquitie would neuer admit of him for a Commander, that was either insuf∣ficient in skil, or openly detected of vice. Swearing bréedeth hatefulnesse to all honest eares, Coue∣tousnesse extorteth both of Prince and Souldier, Pride brin∣geth with it disdain: and Cato being Censurer to make choice of a Generall in the Panonian warres, openly disgraced and dismissed Publius, because he had séene him walke the stréetes of Rome perfumed. Skill. To this Experience, Policie & Valiance prescribed by Cato, we wil adde two others, namely, Iustice & Mercy.
Amongst the rest, Iustice is the foremost and first to be preferred, for it is the foundation of Eternall Fame, without the which there is nothing can deserue to be praised or com∣mended: and Iustice in a Generall towards his Souldiers, is the key of his Discipline, the enterance to confirme their loue that serue him, and a curbe to restraine their misdemea∣nures that would offend him. Againe, the force of commaunding is the consent of them that obey: and this consent springeth by estimation, she which by no one meane is more exactly squared out then by the exe∣cution of Iustice: for when the Souldier shall perceiue that he shall be suffered neither to do nor take wrong, it so confirmeth him with such feare and loue towards his Commaunder, that he wil refuse no enterprise though he should be willed (as Sci∣pio saide) to cast himselfe headlong from the height of a Rocke. Pill. Iustice hath bene reputed to be the Twin-sister of Mercy, and to vse too much seueritie, is not the readiest way to winne, especially amongst Souldiers. Skill. An vncontrowled Army, that is not curbed & man∣naged by Iustice, is like a brain-sicke Iade without a bridle, more noysome and corrupt then is a body without a soule: but yet to holde a meane, is the salte and soule of euery vertue: neither is there any thing more nigher to Iniustice then is the asperite and rygor of Iustice. The warres are therefore to be prosecuted with as great Iustice as strength, and as the Iustice of the cause is first to be approued, so with like equitie and right, the warres must be maintained. A righteous and a iust cause addeth encrease of courage, it inciteth to Valiance, and it doth so concytate and strengthen the mindes of men, that they may aduenture their lines with the greater boldnesse, when they know that whether they liue or dye, they may do both in the seruice and feare of God. Pill. And is not this obseruation of Iustice as well to be kept with enemies, against whome we are Armed, and haue entered hostilitie, as with adherents and friends, whom we may commaund and ouerrule?
Skill. The example vsed by Camillus vpon the Schoole-maister may suffice for the matter, that was more effectuall to subdue the Phalatians, then was the might or force of the Ro∣mane Armie, neither was there any thing that made the Ro∣mane Common-wealth, so glorious and triumphant, as these vertues of Iustice, Clemency and Loyalty, which they alwaies vsed to their very enemies. Pill. The warres then were performed with as great honour as they are now with trechery, and the Campe might then haue bene reputed for a Schoole of honour, iustice, obedi∣ence, dutie, and loyaltie: but now it is become a denne of de∣ceit, trechery, robbery, blasphemy, & all maner of other impiety. And as this obseruation of Iustice is of great excellencie, and is a blessing powred downe from the heauens, so the effect of it, is but in maintaining of right, and doing no wrong: A les∣son of no great importance to be learned and carried away, though not so easily kept. But now for this Militarie Experi∣ence, that is behoouefull for a Generall or Captaine, how is this to be attained vnto? for this is not to be learned by pre∣cepts, but it is to be taught by time, not to be comprehended but by continuall practise, it is bought with gray haires, grie∣uous woundes, and great daungers: If I be not therefore de∣ceiued, he that should commaund, should first learne to obey, and he ought to be a man of tride and knowne Experience, that should haue so many mens liues depending on his skill. Skill. There is no occupation, be it neuer so simple, neither is there any profession, how slender so euer in account, but it craueth both practise and Experience, and at the least a full apprentyship of seuen yeres, before a man may be thought worthy to be imployed in his Facultie. If then in these meane and pettie causes, the attainment of skill is not to be apprehen∣ded, but by such continuance of time and practise, how many yeares were then behoouefull, or what processe of time might be thought sufficient, for him that should be perfected in marti∣all Experience in the knowledge whereof, there was neuer a∣ny man yet so complete and exact, but he was still euery day to learne: yea, though he had serued full out seuen aprentizeships.
Onely the knowledge of the Art Military, she older it is worne out with yeares, the yonger it waxeth, and the farther off to be attained and comprehended. The want then of this Experience, bréedeth the want of courage, when the suddainnesse of peril is more terrible then the daunger it selfe, and by how much it happeneth to a mul∣titude, by so much the matter seemes more desperate: for when their mindes are once possessed with feare, there is no place left for confidence, but turning all their hopes into doubtes, they surrender themselues without consideration, not whither aduise and counsaile should direct them, but whither their di∣stracted fortunes wil conduct them. Thus Ignorance begetteth feare, feare engendreth doubt, doubt leadeth to desperation, and desperation bringeth to de∣struction. But it is Experience that confirmeth mens minds in the vertue of Valiance, maketh them to be resolute, and truly magnanimious. Occasions themselues do rather giue counsalles to men, then men to occasiōs, when occasions many times wil affoord more helpe in warre, then Uertue, but it is Experience that must take opportunitie when occasion doth offer. And Reason it selfe must many times giue place to neces∣sitie (especially in matters of warre) in that it seldome suffereth a man to make choyce of time: Againe, the fitnesse of place is to be considered, which many times yéeldeth more aduantage then the vertue of Force, but stil it is Experience that must discerne of altogether. So that we may wel conclude Experience to be the first, the second, and the third meane whereby to obtaine in warre. Pill. O how many Turft-Taffita Captaines haue we in these dayes, that perhaps haue made a Caales Voyage, or haue bene a moneth or two in the lowe Countries, or in Ire∣land, or haue had the conducting of Souldiers to the waters side, or hath bene a trainer or a Muster-maister (as they call him) in the shire: yet if they had but learned to double their ranckes on the right hand, and sometimes to runne away on
the left, and can speake a little of the newe Discipline, they will discourse of greater exploytes then euer was per∣formed before Troy. They will speake of conducting of Armies: howe to imbattell them, when to shake off skirmishe, howe to fight with aduantage, where to imploye horse-men, when the shotte shall giue theire vollyes, how to incounter with the push at the pike, when it is time to charge, when to retyre: you shall heare them fight a field and giue an ouer-throwe, and all by imagination. You shall heare those sometimes that will ingrosse the actions of a whole Armie, and will attribute so much to their owne value, that it were a hard matter to beléeue them with∣out a stedfast faith. With these toyes they haue deceiued men of reasona∣ble wit, though of little vnderstandng: and sometimes when they haue hit into the presence of some Nobleman that was ignorant of martial matters, they haue so amazed his sen∣ces with these errogating erplycations, that his super excée∣ding courage, shall not onely be admyred and wondred at, but his martiall skill and Experience, shall be ratified and commended by Nobility it selfe. It is enough for him that can but robbe a printed cloath of a historie, a booke of a discourse, a foole of a fashion, if bée can sweare Sblood and Sownes, take a pipe of Ta∣bacco, and bring my Ladies letter to my Lord, it is Ex∣perience enough, and he shall be prefererd before another that hath serued twenty yeares in the Campe. Skill. God blesse me, my Countrey and friendes, from his direction that hath no better Experience then what hée hath atteyned vnto at the fetching home of a Maye-pole, at a Midsomer sighte, or from a trayning at Miende-Greene: neither is it a Ladies letter, nor a Noble mans fauoure, nor at the least, thrée or foure yeares trayning, that can make a man fit to commande in a well gouerned warre.
Pill. How should we now distinwish of that honestie which is persect and absolute (indeed) from that false and pre∣tended colour of honestic, that is but counterfe it and falsly sur∣mised, or of that policy, that should be an ornament of honour to a Captaine or General worthilie renowned, from that craft & subtiltie that is now shrowded & cleaked vnder the titles of wit or policie, which are no other then fraud and deceipt? and then if Plutarche speaketh true, there is no fraude without iniurie. Skill. I commend policie so it be legitimate, first be∣gotten by wit, and fostered vp by honestie? and there is a cer∣taine honest sobtilty which passeth vnder the name of policy, as to make attempt against a common enemie, a robber, a spoiler, a rebel, a traitor, in such a case it importeth nothing in respect of Iustice, whether he be assailed openly or intrapped by am∣bush, or by any other practise wherein faith and honour may bee preferued, and Iustice nothing violated: this policie hath beene of great commaunde amongst Soul∣diers, and good reason too, when in the action of warre, it is vtter for the field then Force. Pill. Policie without sorce, is like a workman without sooles. Skill. And sorce without conduct and still, may well charge an enemie, but sridome win honour. I know Force to be requisite, but where it beares more swie then vnderstanding, it runnes to confusion, and to destruction in the end. Force that is not assisted by aduice, is like a horse withotout a rider, of it osone selfe, it destroicih it selfe▪ and Force and furie, without Discipline & Order, are caūly vanquished and ouer∣throwne by Policie. The strength of vnderstanding is therefore more availcable in the day of battell, then is the strength of vnskilfull men, and more fields haue bene lose for want of pollicie, then for want of strength: for where force strueth for execution, policie is he that prepareth the meane. To daunte an enemie by Force is the Souldiers praise,
but to intrap him by policie is the Captaines honour: & more glory for a Captaine to be seared of a wise enemie for his poli∣cie, then to be praifed by a foolish Citizen, rather for the forces that follow him then for any wit in his head. Skill. Besides Stragemus that are euerie dap inauated and deuised as occasions doe arise, so there are manie pre∣ceptes politiquely prescribed, that me thinkes in this place wouldr partlie bee remembred, because they are behoue∣ful for cuerie Captaine to obserue: amongst the rest, whe∣ther it may stande with policie, that those enterprises vn∣dertaken with indiscretion, or against reason, should es∣cape vnreprooued, though they conclude with some good or lucky successe. Skill. Reason veholdeth some purposed ende, whe∣ther it directeth euerie action, and hee that vndertaketh with Iudgement and discret on, if bee bring his affaires to a good and happie successe, it will be imputed to his vertue: but if to any ill issue, it will be attributed to the malice of his fortune: and the antiquitie punished nothing with more seueritie, then those enterprises attempted a∣gainst commaundement, or vndertaken againste Reason: but as they punished those victories that were attained by lewde and foolish hardinesse, so misfortune diminished not his reputation, that attempted with discretion, neither attributing coboardlinesse to ill successe, nor Maliance to good fortune. Pill. A Captaine then ought warilie to examine the ende of his dristes, before he giues them course, for he that enterpriseth rashlie not considering of the issue, shal repent him of his rollie when it is past remedie. Skill. When a Captaine hath to deale with an enemie, whom he knoweth o be a man of iudgement and skill, so long as he shal find him to proceede in his affaires with reason,
so long it may be beléeued, there is nothing dene extraordina∣rliy, otherwise then with a due course, according to Iudgemēt and martiall skill, but when attempts are made as it were a∣gainst the haire, and enterprises put in practise, that are deuoid of Reason: A wise Commaunder in those cases ought to be the more vigilent and wary, and to thinke that such offers are ne∣uer made, but vpon some hidden purpose. Pill. To be ouerlight of beliefe, argueth a lightnesse of wit, and those that are ouermuch creailous, may be reputed to be men of the first Impression: to make account of an enemy so farre forth as is néedefull, is the part of a wise Captaine, but so to feare him, as to be afraid to encounter him, argueth the want of Courage, and there is no greater signe to loose, then when a man is perswaded, not to be able to win. Skil. To make small account of an enemy, is a daun∣gerous matter, and many honourable enterprises hath béene entercepted, where an enemie hath beene thought so féeble and weake, that they haue rather despised him, then made any ac∣count of ought he could do: but a wise Captaine will neuer so lightly regard an enemy, for if he be olde, his wisedome and Experience is to be feared, but if he be rong, and therewithall either heady or rash beware of his fortune, for according to the olde prouerbe, Fortune doth not onely fauour Fooles, but is likewise helping to those that bee bolde and hardy. And in daungers where there be many eyes to beholde, you shall sée some whose hearts are already almost dead, yet pricked with shame, or intised onely by company, they will goe forwardes (as it were) blindfold, and do their du∣tie. Pill. Machiuill thinketh it no policie for a Prince to be aduised in his martiall causes, by such a Councell as are alto∣gether addicted to warre, or too much inclined to peace, but miserable is that warre, say I, where Couetousnesse doth ei∣ther commaund or giue counsell, or hath any interest at all ei∣ther with Officer or Souldier. Skill. There is nothing more rather to ouerthrowe an Army, then where the Captaine or Souldier are more dest∣rous
ofspoyle, then careful of honour: And couetousnesse is the cause of many great euilles, for as it hindereth victory before the fight, so againe after the fight it plucketh the glory of an o∣uerthrow out of the victors hands, making him of a Conque∣ror, to become conquered. Pill. There is not a more pernitious euill, then that of Couetousnesse: and a couetous wretch, as well in the time of peace, as in the time of warre, is detested and abhorred, and by how much he is aduanced to greatnesse, either by his owne wealth, or by authoritie, by so much the more hee is cursed by the people, and vengeance daily denounced against him, by as many as hath to deale with him. Skill. Conetousnesse is the Curre that deuoureth his owne Acteon, the Ball of Hipomines, to hinder the course of Atlanta, the Charibdis that swalloweth vp al honest meanes whereby the multitude should maintaine life: The Scraping Brier that scratcheth the wooll from the silly Shéepe, when it commeth but to seeke shelter, the Canker that fretteth the Common-wealth, eating and deuouring the gettings of the poore. It is Couetousnesse that poisoneth the eares of Princes, and teacheth them to neglect and set aside all iust and honou∣rable dealing: It is Couetousnesse that holdeth nothing vn∣lawfull that bringeth in gaine: It is Couetousnesse that maketh no conscience in gathering of Golde, nor in spilling of bloud. Pill. It is Couetousnesse, that was neuer cherished by vertue, nor beloued of God, and as Couetousnesse is a most hatefull vice in him that should commaund an Army, so I cannot admit of him, that from a bare and néedie estate should be aduanced to that dignitie of a Generall, because his pouertie would be a spurre to pricke him forwardes to exact from those, that Nobilitie inuested with Honour, would otherwise cherish and maintaine, though to his owne ex∣pence. Skill. Here is yet to bée remembred, how much digressing
from martiall Policie: for a Prince to affy himselfe on such confedcrates, as are dull and flow in helping: or to seeke as∣sisttance from friendes that are farre off, who by reason of the distance of place, cannot giue such speedy succours as necessitie may require. And no lesse daungerous againe to be serued by Souldi∣ers, that are to encounter with an enemie, who is like wise ser∣ued with Souldiers of the same Nation, considering how hard a matter it is to bring Souldiers of one Nation, so any in∣counter, the one against the other. Pill. We should not neede to looke out farre for presi∣dents, for he that hath beene well acquainted with the ser∣uices of Ireland, will quickly set downe, probatum est. Skill. But that expertence is better in a medicine, then in a malady. Pill. And it is strange to see how many water-casting Phisitians hath taken vpon them to looke into the diseased e∣state of that Realme of Ireland, and how they haue pretendes not onely to knowe the nature of the sicknesse it selfe, that doth oppresse it but also from whence the cause hath had proceeding, and how it might be cured. And be that hath beene in Ireland, and but of one months continuance in the Countrey, would set downe precepts of reformation, and prescribe plats and meanes how the people might haue beene reduced to a dutifull and louing obedi∣ence. But plat what, and how they could, the Irish haue from time to time continued their rebellions: and within the com∣passe of our owne memories, that Countrey hath consumed many worthy and gallant Gentlemen, and spent cur late gra∣cious Queene, infinite summes of Ireasure: and notwith∣standing that the base and beggerly Irish (I meane those of the rebellious sorte) had no meanes to maintaine a warre a∣gainst so mightie a Princesse, no Artillery, no Prouision, no Storethouses with Munitions, no Shipping to transport, no Mint to make pay, nor any maner of other helpe, either to le∣uy new forces, or to supply their olde with conuenient necessa∣ries
for an Army, yet they haue borne out their rebellion; from time to time, sometimes for seuen or eight yeares toge∣ther, and but with a little One-meale and Butter: In the meane time there were Polititians, that of my conscience) did not so much as thinke of God, nor neuer meant to let him knowe, nor make him priuy to their deuises, and yet would say, they durst vndertake to haue reformed Ireland with the very industry of wit. Skill. The policies of men are vaine, and those po∣licies that hath not their originall from that diuine and soue∣raigne Policie, deriued from the word of God, is both vaine, and foolish: and it is no lesse fond, to beleeue that a people should be confirmed to the dutie and obedience of their Prince, that are not first reduced to the true knowledge and seruice of their God. And what reformation may be expected in that Coun∣trey, that doth swarme with Ieuites, Semmaries, Massing-Priestes, and other like Ministers of Antichrist, the protested enemies to all those Princes that do maintaine and vpholde the pure word of God. But this is more strange then all the rest, that there should be any hope at all to reforme a people, that from their verie infancy haue beene trayned vp vnder Schoole-maisters, who not only instructed and  them in the disciplines of the Popes Church, and as they grow in yeares, caused them to vow and protest obedience and subiection to his holinesse: but also would perswade and inioyne them by exhortations, from time to time, to hate, conteniue, and delpise their Prince, that they would say, was but an Heriticke, accur∣sed and excommunicated from the Communion of the Ca∣tholike Church; and when they grew of age to take an oath, they sware them vpon the holy Masse Booke, truly and honest∣ly to obserue the promises. This hath béene the vse of Ireland in times past, and I am sure hath béene as conuersant and generall throughout the whole Realme, as there were either Schoole-masters to teach, or Schollers to be taught.
Pill. Is it possible that the lenitie of so grations a So∣ueraigne, as she that swayed the sword so many yeares, with such mildnesse and mercie, shoulde yet be requited with such distoyaltie? Skill. Her Maiestie thought that in being gratious, she might thereby haue wonne their heartes to a more louing and willing obedience, and to this ende to drawe them to a dutifull regarde, what did she neglect that was eyther befit∣ting a Prince to grant, or behoouefull for subiects to receiue, but that she liberally bestowed amongst thē, what pardoning, what protecting, and what mittigating of offences that were committed against hir, and how many Gentlemen of that countries byrth, were continually returned from hir Maie∣sties Court, back againe into Ireland, laden with giftes and presermentes, who after they had passed and possessed their grants, would not after come in place to say Amen, where shey heard hir Maiestie praied for. Pill. Yet some will say there is not a readier meane whereby to drawe subiects to a sctled loue, then this bountifull and gratious clemency vsed by the Prince. Skill. He that handleth the Nettle most tenderly, it stingeth most bitterly, and although men be made all of one mettall, yet they are not all cast in one mould. The nature of the Irish are to be considered, that for the greatest part are inclined to crueltie, to theft, to robbery, to trea∣son, to deceipt, and such other. Now to incounter these with gentlenes and curtesie, were to set a Sheep, to incounter with the Wolse, the Lambe, with the Lyon, the milde with the mercilesse, and therefore to a peo∣ple thus disposed, close crueltie is more apt to reforme, then o∣pen clemencie. Pill. But they complaine of too much crueltie vsed by our Nation, especially now in these late warres: they say they are exacted, robbed and spoiled, & maimed no lesse by the soul∣dier that should defend them, then by the rankest rebell that is most readie to oppresse them. Skill. Seditious estates, with their owne deuises, false
friends with their owne swords, and rebellious Commons by their owne snates, drawes on their owne ouerthrowes. Do the Irish complaine of crueltie, and of the exactions of the Souldier? do they not knowe that Souldiers in the time of warre will spoyle, and that it is the fruites of warre to waste and spoyle? and I thinke ordained by the Almightie himselfe, as a scourge vpon the people, to make them to feele and knowe their sinnes. But it is good to see vice, to finde fault with vice, to see sinne, to reproue sinne, and to see imperfection, to beare wit∣nesse of the same imperfection in another. Could they now but consider, that it is their owne misde∣meaners that draweth on these warres, by their entertaining of Iesuites, Seminaries, Fryers, and Massing-Priests, their receiuing of them into their houses, relieuing and maintaining of them against the proceedings of the Prince, and so thinke of their owne disloyaltie and disobedience, in harbouring those that are the very fire-brandes of rebellions, the stirrers vp of commotions, the very instruments of sedition, to seduce and set subiects in Armes against their Soueraigne: if they could duly consider of this, some of them would rather blush, then complaine, and might rather looke for a due deserued punish∣ment for their disloyaltie and contempt, then hope to be relie∣ued in that which cannot be redressed, till they reforme them∣selues to an vntamed subiection, and a more dutifull loue and obedience to their Prince. Pill. I haue heard that in the beginning of Sir William Druries gouernment of that Countrey which was some 25. yeres sithens, or there abouts) the whole Garison of ye Realme was not aboue 400. foote, and 200. horse, (besides the wardes of some fewe Castles) the Countrey could not then be greatly oppressed by Souldiers: and I haue heard it further reported, that if one thousand of our Nation had beene drawne altoge∣ther into a strength, that all the rebels of Ireland durst not to haue incountered them in any indifferent ground. The case is altered howsoeuer it happeneth, and it should séeme that either the Irish are become more hardie, or we haue
lost our wonted Courage, for nowe of late wée haue béene driuen to imploye farre greater numbers, and all little enough so farre as I can perceiue, and sometimes with the leaste to performe but what were requisite. Skill. It would séeme that our progenatours many yeares agoe, stood in some feare of that which is now come to passe, and knowing the inclinatiō of the Irish, how readie they were to runne into rebellion, and how desirous to shake off the Eng∣lish gouernment, to preuent those meanes that might further their rebellious pretences, they established certain decrées, cō∣ming them by act of Parliament, amongst manie other that were instituted for that purpose, it was ordeined that no man of the Irish birth should haue charge or custodie of anie Castle or place fortefied belonging to the Prince: nor that anie Cap∣taine should reteine aboue thrée Irish men at the most in his companie of one hundred and these to be admitted but as sptes or guides to passe through the countrey. There were manie other lawes made, prohibi∣ting the Irish from certaine principall offices, and in like ma∣ner prohibiting the English from marrying festering & combi∣ning with the Irish. Whilst these prohibitions were carefully obserued in the countrie, they were not able to raise anie great rebellion, but that might haue bene suppressed with a small number of men, and with no great charge to the Prince. But after these good constitutions were neglected, and that euerie Captaine was at libertie to reteine as he listed, and for his owne gaine to conuert his companie that should haue bene all English into three parts and more of the Irish, and when whole companies of the Irish were erected, I will not say the mest of them sent from the rebels themselues, but of purpose to betray, but by this meanes the whole rable of rascals were armed, trained, disciplined, and made apt and fit for any rebel∣lion: and by these meanes the number of the rebels dailie in∣creased, that were still armed and weaponed at the Princes charge.
I wil not speake of the seueral reasons and practises frō time to time by them performed, but this is not to be forgotten, that the Irish themselues finding how slily they had deceiued vs in hoping of any assistance in their seruice, would merily de∣maund, When it was euer heard on, that one Wolfe would pray vpon another. Pill. Will you giue me leaue Captaine Skill, but to deliuer a matter of my knowledge? There is an olde Irish practise, that since I haue known Ireland, hath cost our late gracious Quéene more money then would well haue serued to haue conquered three Irelands: and this ariseth likewise by the ouermuch trust and confidence that is had in the Irish: and it is the shoote Anker that they all trust vnto, for when all hopes do faile them, this they are sure will neuer deceiue. The matter is, when they haue plaid the fraitors, and haue stood out in open rebellion, and that they haue beene pur∣sued with great expence of treasure, and haue béene brought (as it were) to the last gaspe, not longer able to endure, then to take breath, and to supply themselues againe with their further practises they pretend humilitie, and they will make choyce of some speciall man sometimes perhaps of some great Councel∣lor of that Realme, or of some other great Commaunder of that part of the countrey, where themselues are abiding: but such a one they will still make choyce on, as they will bée sure shall be well be friended, as well at the Councell Table of Ire∣land, as otherwise in the Court of England: To him they will pretend great submission. They will desire him to be a meane for a pardon, they will make great offers and protestations of their future fideli∣tie, they will say they will deserue, and they will put in pled∣ges for securitie: perhaps they will giue their Procurador, a score of Beeues, or a brace of faire Horse. This Councellor, or Commaunder, or whosoeuer looking into his owne lands, & seeing them euery day wasted (or at the least in danger to be spoiled) by this traitor y• now eraueth his assistāce, is glad to imbrace his frēdship, together with his sute,
and howsoeuer he thinketh the Rebell wil holde promise with the Prince, he is sure in the meane time his tenants and himselfe shal be spared from spoile. Héere he calleth to minde againe how acceptable a péece of seruice it is accounted to bring in a Traytor, how much it will redounde to his reputation, when it shal be reported what a notable rebell hee hath brought in, how highlie it shall aduance his credit, and how his friends in the Courte of England shall reioyce and glorifie his seruice, con men∣ding it to the eares of his Soueraigne Prince, whome they haue made beleeue what a sparing it shoulde bee as well of monie as of manie mens liues, that the Traytor shoulde thus be receiued to giue the matter the better grace, they wil tell what wonderful seruice by his meanes might after bee performed, and how manye ill disposed per∣sons will bee dismaied and terrifyed vpon his comming in. There is no opportunitie left, nor no labour be spared till a pardon be purchased, which being once attained, the Traitor is brought in, and where in his action of rebellion, he was able to furnish the field, with foure hundred, six hundred, or a thou∣sand traitors, he is not now able to serue his Prince with six true men: but he serueth his purpose, and watching his time, goeth out againe, and wil after be thrée times more chargeable then he was before. These be no nouelties, nor no rare and dainty matters to be found, when there be an infinit number of presidents, that might be inferd; how our gratious Quene by this means haue bene abused. Skill. There is no néede to conceale these things in secret, because they are alreadie too openlie knowne, many other matters there be concerning the former affaires in that Coun∣trie, that are rather priuatly to be considered of, then publiquely discoursed, the which because they are not for me to looke into, I wil therefore leaue them to those that are quicker sighted. Pill. By this I perceiue, it is better for wayfaring men to to tread those tracts alreadie troden out to their hands, then to séeke vnknowne waies, that may perhaps sometime lead them
astray, or at the least, lead them the farthest way about: for if those presidents by you rehearsed, left by predecessours, had bene as carefully obserued, as they were wisely prescribed, the rebellious sort of the Irish, had not bene so wel inabled to haue maintained their rebellions: and now I see how that which was attributed to the execeding wisdome, policy, & va∣liance of the Irish, might rather be imputed to our ouersight, when they strengthened themselues rather by our fferance, then by their owne wit and worthinesse. Skill. For the wisdome and policy that hath bene noted in the Irish I must not speake of, & the best commendations that I can giue is this: they haue bene beholding to their En∣glish friends, it is not the Irish, but the English with the Irish hearts that hath vndone Ireland: let the rest passe, and let vs render him his due that hath merited more honour than my pen can expresse: the noble Earle, the now Lord-lieutenant of Ireland, whose wisdome ioyned with magnanimitie, hath not onely repulsed the Spaniard, and freed that estate from Spanish practises, but hath likewise so qualified & quieted the desperate condition of that decaied Common-wealth (al∣most past hope of recouerie, that he hath thereby aduanced his honour to posteritie, in farre greater measure then I am able to set downe: I can therefore but wishe all happinesse to himselfe, and good successe to his honourable procée∣dings. And now to speake a little of that Ualiance so imputed to the Irish, when doe they shew it, or where doe they performe it but in a Bogge: in a pace, or in some other ground of aduan∣tage, where they are sure our horsemen shal neither charge nor chace them, and where, if our footmen doe presse them with good conduct, they can retire themselues by their fast footemanship without any danger. This is it that maketh them hardy, but vppon an equall ground that yeeldeth no other aduantage then the vertue and valiance of him that doth commaunde, and where horsemen and footemen may doe their indeuors and be brought to serue, the Irish are as timerous as any other nation: neither is there
a people in any place where I haue bene, that will sooner trust to their héeles then they. Pill. It may be the Irish are the more ready to runne, knowing their owne dexteritie and abilitie to performe it: but let vs leaue Ireland, and speake of Valiance truly what it is, as we haue alreadie done with Iustice, Experience, and Poli∣cie, and how it is or may bée behouefull for a Generall or Captaine. Skill. Valiance is a vertue without the which our liues are of small value, but the same being destitute of Iustice, is hurtfull to the good: If Temperance doe not moderate hir, she will turne into rage, and being not guided by Experience and Skill, wil labour out of reason. Pill. Some will not hold him to be Valiant, that is not too venterous, and they wil account of him to be but a dastard, that is not desperate. Skil. True Valiance (indéed) is many times counterseited, sometimes for feare of punishment, sometimes vpon wrath, sometimes vpon ignorance not foreseing pertill, wil runne on as a blind man in a daungerous passage. Aristotle would in no wise admit that Diomides should be accounted either Valiant or wise, for that when the Crakes were put to flight, he remained alone, and aduentured him∣selfe against the Force of Hector, which he did rather to sake the vaine praise of the people, because he would not be accoun∣ted a runne away, then for the true and soueraigne good, where∣in consisteth the end of vertue. The like hée iudged of Hector himselfe, who many times beholding his wife and other women vppon the walles of Troy, would more boldly and couragiously aduenture him∣selfe, rather fearing some brute those women might haue rai∣sed sounding to his dishonour, then otherwise he did respect the Iustice of his cause, or the generall good of the City so distressed by the Gréekes. Héere is now a matter worthy the noting, that Aristo∣tle being but a Heathen, would not admitte of this vaine oftentation, and as he had not the true knowledge of God, so
he could not looke into the soueraigntie of vertue with a right respect: for those great Philosophers, that were accounted the wise men of the worlde, who onely but for the winde of the world, could despise and contemne the vanities of the worlde, they that could weepe when they were borne laugh when they tid, and all that they might appeare to be constant, but to whom, euen to this vnconstant world. Now for those that are better instructed in the knowledge of God, they are to aime their actions at an other mark, they must looke after the substance & not after the shadow, they may wel consider that true christian valiance neuer opposeth it self with∣out the feare of God, it neuer fighteth for vaine glory, nor gree∣die desire, but for equity and iustice, & for the cōmon & generall good: it neuer aduentureth rashly or vnaduisedly against reasō, but with iudgement & deepe foresight; for courage without con∣science, is like the Pharises fast, and he that wil fight desperatly without Experience, may wel be called an angrie foole, but neuer a valiant foole. Pill. I neuer heard a foole reputed to be valiant, & yet I haue knowne some not greatly ouerburthened with wit, that were rash & hardy enough: but I perceiue ye euerie bold bayard is not valiant, & how that courage which is forward to danger with∣out iudgement, may rather beare the name of lewd hardines, then of manlinesse. Skill. Plutarche maketh the distinction, for he saieth, that all valiant men are hardie, but all hardie men are not vali∣ant, as those that wil oppose themselues into perill, sometimes without iudgement. To conclude, he cannot be said to be Valiaunt, that is not strengthened by the goodnesse of this cause, and fortified againe by his owne skill and knowledge: but he that is thus armed, he sheweth himselfe resolute, and without feare in the middest of the greatest perriles: yea in the verie daunger of death it selfe: and although he be at any time oppressed with an impossibility of bring victorious, yet to shunne and eschew desperation, he betaketh himself to patience, which so mightily defendeth him, yt with great difficultie he may be ouercōe, but neuer cōquered.
Pill. Patience is but a drie plaister, but it is a tried medicine, for it armeth men to the proofe against al the assaults of Fortune: and I thinke that courage which at the point of death it selfe, sheweth no discontentment, nor signe, nor shewe of griefe, may well be imputed to constancy, and why not to Valiance? Skill. Those whome Fortune hath throwne downe, being spoyled and bereaued of solace and contentment, if in ex∣treame desperation they make light account of death, there is in them yet a certaine assurance of dastardly Cowardise, be∣cause they hasten their dying day, not so much for shewing their Constancy, as for auoyding of miserie, as may thus bee expressed. In Fortunes high disgrace, each wight may death disdaine, But he most valiant is, that can in wretched state remaine. Pill. By this now it doth appeare, that although Vali∣ance be a speciall ornament for a Captaine, yet it marcheth but in the Rereward, preferring the other two before him as more woorthy, I meane Experience and Policie: and I sée it is not ynough for the valiant man, to doe what he can, but hée must likewise take héede, that he attempt nothing, but what he ought: and therefore without Experience, he should runne in∣to many errours, and wanting Policy, hee should likewise want meanes to execute: but I wonder what Souldiers haue to doe with Mercy, which you say is required in a Generall? I remember the Germanes will needs haue it confirmed, that there are thrée notable fooles in the world. The first, an ho∣nest Dice-player: the second, a mercifull Souldier: the third, I thinke be a Vintner, that will sell wine without water. But for a Souldier that must be tied to Experience, Policie, and Valiance, and all but to reuenge, what hath he to doe with Mercy? or how can Mercie and Reuenge draw both in one yoke? Skill. As Iustice without temporance is reputed cruel∣tie, so Magnanimitie without Mercy, is accounted Tyranny.
This goddes is milde, gentle, & gratious, and there is nothing wherein mortall men may so néerely resemble the diuine na∣ture, as in shewing of mercie, and in giuing of life and safetie: to shew comyseration to the distressed, who in their sorowes haue no other recourse then to sighes & sobbes which ascende vnto the presence of God, where they are most fauourably receiued: and what can men doe to shewe themselues more like Gods vpon the earth, then in bestowing of this blessing, to giue pardon and life? Pill. But this is fitter for Magistrates héere at home, and to such as should receiue the petitions and complaintes of the poore, but what is this to souldiers whē they are in the field in the presence of their enemies? Skil. The incounter then must be pursued with courage, but the victorie must be vsed with mercie. The Lacedemonians vsed before they entered battell, to make solemne sacrifice to the Muses, to the end they might by them attaine, aswell how to vse victorie gentilly, as of Mars to become victors manfullie: and Mercie carries not that grace and comelinesse in anie other person, as it doth in a mightie Conquerour, or a great Commander, because they haue more occasion to vse and exercise it, and it manifesteth it selfe most of all, where it hath most matter to worke vpon. Pill. Pittie without equitie is plaine partialitie, and Mercie out of time & season, or leaning ouermuch to lenitie, hath more reemblance to foolish Pittie. But Policie sometimes excludeth both Mercie and Pitie, as the Greeks who after the destruction of Troy, slue Astia∣nax the sonne of Hector, fearing if he had liued he might haue sought reuenge. It must therefore be a great vertue, and especially in a Cap∣taine to be both mercifull and wise together. Skill. Mercie is then a speciall ornament if vsed in reason, and as the pleasure of Reuenge, doth sudainlie passe & vanish away, so the contentment of Mercie doth for euermore indure. Alexander was more famed for the clemencie he vsed to his enemies, then by all the victories he otherwise obtai∣ned: neither did hée repent him of the pardon he gaue to
Diomides (though a tyrant) nor Marcus Antonius of the fa∣uour he shewed to the great King Herod. It is a common thing to pardon light and small offences, but to remit faults of great importance, belongeth onely to the magnificent minde: and as much impossible for a noble hart to be cruell, as it is for a cruell hart to be couragious. A mercifull and a milde authoritie, bringeth that to passe, which a violent force is not able to o: and a gentle intreaty is many times of greater efficacie, then an Imperious com∣maund. Mercie doth not only make men more honest, but more assu∣red: and there is neither Sentinel nor Corpes de Guard, plan∣ted in euery quarter, may be so safe a defence, as the good will and loue, that is obtained by Mercy: for Squad roue may be corrupted by force or fraude, but this Castle is vnpregnable, and néedeth no other fortification: it carries with it such a swéetnesse and content, and it drawes after it mens affecti∣ons in such sort, that a kingdome is better preserued by it, then by an Armie. Pill. Then we may haue the lesse néede of Souldiers now at this present: but yet as we haue already spoken of the Generall himselfe, and of those things appertaining to his place, so let vs now speake something of the ordinarie Souldi∣er, and of his reputation, what it is, or should be. Now if you please Captaine Skill, to make definition of a Souldier, and how he should be accomplished, being in that prime and full perfection as he ought, I will aduenture my selfe to say what they are, and to what condition they are growne vnto now at this present. Skill. Then to speake of a Souldier as I would haue him, I will spend a great deale of spirit, amongst the good spi∣rits of these times, not of that spirit that makes a winter billowe to breake vpon it selfe, but of that spirite which like a Martyrs fire, burnes vp a bodie to quicken many spi∣rits. I make my tongue mine eyes Oracle, I chalenge time to
be my tongues instance; I will speake of pure loue in weake o∣ratory: I will shew, though not a Philosopher to define, yet a Souldier to execute. Then what inferre I, but this: I will speake of a Souldi∣er, shall I search him as Diogenes did a man with a Candle at noone day? no, I will finde him with Scipio, with a sworde at midnight: I will define him as I proue him▪ describe him as I wish him, and wish him such in his life, as I would be in my death. Execution craues hazard, and they that attempt much, expect resist: resist attaines an opposite, an opposite ouer-throwe. To make a Uictor tryumph, is to inferre a Conque∣red: to be conquered and not dye, is to bée disgraced and yet liue: to conquer and not dye, is to buy Eternitie with little price. Out of these conclusions chose I a Souldier, as the Stoicks do their Wise men, in that (as they vainly imagine) can no wayes erre. I knowe him to be created to execute honourably, and to be prepared for death: since he liueth still marching forth to seeke it: to hate subiection more then he feareth death, and so coniecture the honour of his calling, by the consequence of that he vndertaketh. For what is the effect of a Souldiers life? to vndertake the defence of Religion, to fight for his Prince, to withstand the hazards of his Countrey, to repulie those that would depresse the same to protect his friende and family. It followeth then, that as none but the Uestall Uirgins were suffered to kindle the sacret fire, neither any other ad∣mitted to sacrifice to Iupiter, but such as were his Priests, and were honoured for puritie of life: so none should be admitted to the honour or title of a Souldier, except his Conscience were answerable to his cause, and his life as honest, as the quartell he vndertaketh is waightie and good. I account not him for a Souldier, that like a Naza∣ret
weares long lockes, that can sweare, swash and swagger, and is more noted for the brandings he brought from the Ses∣sions, then for the woundes he receiued in the warres. The Souldier I define and séeke, must accustome him∣selfe to enquire with the Spratans, not how many the enemies be, but where they be. His life must be deuout, his behauiour modest, his diet temperate, his most hated enemy, shamefull flight, his greatest study, to learne Agis, that he is vnworthy to gouerne many, that hath not often and sundry times fought against many. Such in my iudgement should Souldiers be, but such (as Ciceros Orator) are easily defined, but seldome found. Pill. And where would you seeke for him? what in Newgate? Skill. No, I am afraid of my purse. Pill. Will you then fetch him from Bride well? Skill. That were to buy a horse out of Smithfield. Pill. How then, will you drawe him out of an Ale∣house? Skill. Mine Hostesse would chide for the reckoning. Pill. Would you rake him vp as he passeth through the stréeles? Skill. That were iust to make cleane the Channell, and to carry out the filth. In tunes past, he that had a Crabtrée looke, a sewre countenance, and a hard fauoured visage, they would say it was a good Souldiers face: But now, they do not choose him so much for his il-fauoured looke, as they do for his il-fauou∣red conditions. But for him, that from a Psalme of mercy, is made a main∣tainer of Iustice, and that is redéemed from the whip, to fight for his Prince, or that is but raked vp in the streetes, to vnder∣take for his Countries defence, what policie this is, let some Philosopher decide, for my little wit is too slender to coniec∣ture. Pill. Let me now speake truly of Souldiers what they : I thinke of all Occupations they be the men of the best
conscience, for they neuer rise nor fall with the Market, but let corne be cheape or deare, their pay is still eight pence a day: let the dayes be short or long, faire or fowle, hote or colde, they kéepe their price, eight pence a day, no more then they had ma∣ny yeares agoe, when they might haue bought more for the eight pence, then they can do now for their eighteene. Againe, the Souldiers in these dayes, do neuer put out their money for vsurie, they neuer purchase lands nor liuings out of their neighbours hands: you shall not finde him in the Marchants bookes for any great summes, and yet if it be but for a matter of a thousand pounds, a Souldiers word is as good as his band. This honest demeanure of theirs, doth so priuiledge them, that after the warres ended, when they returne into their Countrey, it is in their owne choyce, whether they will begge or steale: if he cannot procure to be one of the Knights of Win∣sor, he may easily compasse to be whipt about the streetes at Westminster. Now of all Occupations, I would not wish my friendes to bind their sonnes Apprentises to the Soldiers trade in these dayes, and yet the profession hath bene accounted honourable, and it may well retaine the honour still, for any thing that I know: but there is no gaine, nor great commoditie bolonging to the Occupation. Perhaps yet a man that hath honestly serued, at his re∣turne home, may get some worshipfull Gentlemans counte∣nance, or a Noble man may now and then vouchsafe him a nodde, or a fauourable looke: And it is a goodly matter that same, and very acceptably receiued of many: but for my part I had rather haue a Lambes Purtinance, then such a Coun∣tenance: for the one may serue to fil the belly, and for the other, it may well feede a foole, but I am sure it will neuer make him fat. I thinke in times past, it was as rich a bootie to get some Noble mans countenance, as it was for Scoggin to get the Bishops Blessing, that being once attained, they were both scarce worth a couple of pence.
Skill. But yet Captaine Pill I would not haue you to blas∣pheme Souldiers, nor to let slip such speeches as might séeme in a sort to depraue Nobilitie. Pill. I pittie the Souldier, and I reuerence and extoll ho∣nourable Nobilitie: you may say I speake plainlie, but I pro∣tell I meane honestly, though my wordes be not imbrodered with high moralitie: I care not, if my speeches be plaine and true, they so much the more resemble their Syre: and for children to be like the parents, besides the Mid wise will giue it a blessing, so it is a signe they be legittimate: defects I know they cannot want, that in the procreation were bred and borne before their time: for as I was conceiued of them in an instant, so I was deliuered againe in a moment: and these abortiue brats, that are thus hastilie brought into the world, though they seldome prooue to haue anie great vi∣gor or strength, yet I hope being rightlie considered of, these will prooue to bée of as honest and plaine dealing as their father. Pill. Plaine dealing is a Souldiours best method, but you haue declaimed the Souldiours profession: and what Knowledge, Art, or Science is it, that you would now pre∣ferre before it? Pill. Marrie I say the Taylors, and of mine ho∣nestie foole that I am so sweare) it my censure were demanded who I thought to be the wisest men now in these later times, I would say they were Taylors: if anie man came in with his Quare, my Qui should be, because they make vs all fooles, Id est, they blesse vs tuerie day with a new bebbe, with a new stick, with a new cut, with a new garde, and they can deuise euerie day a new fashion for a foole. Skill. Me thinkes (Captaine Pill) you haue dealt in your discourse as the woman, who going about to cure a blemish in one of her eies, applied so manie plaisters til she put them both out: and you seeming all this while but to salue some infirmities that haue latelie crept in amongst souldier, haue at an instant so dashed them & their profession with such
discretion as we haue hither to spent many wordes I thinke to little purpose. Pill. Wordes are but a windie chaffer, that are still chopt and changed, because they are good cheape, and I thinke if they were but of very little worth, we should be as sparing of them as we be of our good deedes. Words are like Scoggins sleeuelesse men, that he still im∣ployed about sléeuelesse arrands: And we send words of many moe messages, then we meane to performe: words when they be spoken, are as they are taken, and my purpose hath not bene to quarrell with Souldiers: neither do I think them to be more worthy of blame, then a great many of others, that would bee reputed faultieste: But seeing I am entred into a speaking vaine giue me leaue yet once again, a little to digresse from our martiall matters, and let me spend a little breath but for mine own exercise, to speake of something, it makes no matter what. Skill. Speake what you list I will giue you the hearing, and yet still to chop from one matter to another, some will say is no good Decorum. Pill. It makes no matter for that, let them say so still, for I meane not (indéed) to follow any certain order or rule of appoin∣ted precepts, though I know curious heads will stande vpon Method: yet it is enough for souldiors if they can preferre mat∣ter▪ Schollers will looke after rethoricall discourse, we content our selues with bare and naked truth. I knowe there be manie of so quick a wit, and so liue∣lie a spitit, that they will doe wrong vnto nature, yea and to God himself, & they haue found out so many subtil subtilties, that are yet made more subtill, by the meanes of subtill han∣deling, that but with a little myst of knowledge, they will per∣uert, and deface knowledge it selfe: then they are so fortified and garded with such store of distinctions, defnitions, conclu∣sions, propositions, so manie paraphrases, so manie circumlo∣cutions, so manie translations, so many figures, and such a ma∣rie of other starting holes, as I think Vulcans Net that snar∣led Mars himselfe, were not able to hold them.
then what am I, whose knowledge is but ignorance, whose wit is but dull, whose minde is inwured in a durtie prison of a sensuall bodie: how would I then take vpon me (amongst the frisking wits of these our daies) to discourse of humours, to speak of fancies, and to set downe the dispositions of the foolish nultitude? If Heraclitus were now liuing, and should take a suruey of this straight of times, I wonder with what countenance he would looke vpon vs? I verilie thinke that where he wept but by fits to sée the infirmitie of those times wherein he liued, de would now shead continuall teares without stinting, to see the vnhappinesse of the time now present. And I doubt againe, that if we had another Democri∣tes amongst vs in England, to looke vpon the conuersation of all sortes of people, I wonder whether he woulde laugh for ioy in contemplating our happinesse, still squared out by the pro∣uidence of godly Princes, or laugh to scorne the practises of the vngodlie, that are still platting and practising their owne infelicitie? Some will say the world runnes on whéeles, and it may be it hath done so in times past: but I say now it goes on crou∣rhes, it is become Bis puer, it is waxen olde, decrepit and lame: A limping worlde God knowes, and nothing but halting be∣twéen neighbour and neighbour, betwéen friend and friend, betwéen brother, and brother, and sometimes halting downe∣right betwéen? the father and the childe. Our auncesteurs alas, they were but plaine dealing men, they had not the mineing complements now in vse, they knew not a Fantastick from a foole, and they were better ac∣quainted with a Shooing-horne, then they were with a Set∣ting-stick. But now I will not giue a groate for his conceipt that cannot make an Owle an Hawke, a Iack Napes a Shéepe, an old Mil-horse, a Palfrey for a man of honour, if he cannot work wit like wax, forme it into anie impression: if he cannot poulder it, perfume it, and season it to please fancies: if he can∣not Anothomize and Martyr it: and if néed require, if he can∣not
draw wit into a Quintessence. Yet there be some others, so vnapt and dull, that it might be beléeued that Nature had brought them into the world but in a despite and mockerie: yet, if the Cowe-pasture be flored with milch kine, and that there be a Téeme or two of Oxen to plow the land, some store of Hogges on the backside, and that the wit will but serue to keepe them out of the corne, and to know when it is a good season to sowe Barlie, you shall see such a Magnisico, when he causes to a Market-Towne, will take more state vpon him, then he that solde a groates-worth of wit, in a  worth of paper. Now he that should heare but one of these Hoglings at as∣semblies and méetings, how they will calculate of dearth and plentie, and for Corne, Cattell, butter, Chéese, and such other like, they will tell you this yeare, what price it will beare the next: if a great frost or a snowe doth sometimes happen more then ordinarie, they will by & by prognosticate of dearth: or if it doe but raine one houre too much, or halfe an houre too little, the next market day they wil raise the price of corne by twelue pence in a bushell. If these men did but knowe their owne vnworthinesse, I think they would change their simplicitie to desperation, and would conuert their pange of drowsie ignorance, to a quoti∣dian fit of frenzie. I must yet confesse they showe great modestie, that leauing the studie of wisdome to their friends, do drawe the whole con∣tentment from a little durt and drosse. It would be tedious for me to deliuer the diuersitie in the dispositions of men: we sée one readie to die for the loue of a woman: another will set his wife to sale: one would that eue∣rie man should liue of his owne: some other are so much incli∣ned to Pitharoras sect, that they would haue all things to be in common amongst friends: one will boast with Thraso, ano∣ther will flatter with Gnato: another to make Iohn his sonne a gentleman, will himselfe lye like a mizer all the daies of his life: but I think that be to verifie the prouerb, Happie, is the child, whose father goes to the diuell.
What a numberlesse companie of hunts-men are there in the world, that doe follow this chace of hunting after wealth, assisted onely by this hope, to make their sonnes gentlemen, and how easie a matter is it to be a gentleman in these daies, when there be so manie seruile practises to draw in wealth, and euerie rich man may stand vpon his genterie. We may now put a sir-reuerence, when we speake of ho∣nestie when Briberie, Vsurie, Periurie, and euerie other ini∣quitie are honest mens trades. And I thinke if Hell were a place of returne, and that there were anie hope of gold or gaine there so bée gotten, more tryple headed dogges then one would not be able to de∣fend the entrie. Our auncestors hunted after honour, but we after wealth: they left themselues famed to posteritie by vertueus indeuoer: & we desire to leaue some Memorandum to after ages of our being, but not for anie good déedes: but as he that fired the Temple of Diana, to be inrowled with perpetuall infantie. Some, to leaue themselues renowned to future times, doe build stately houses, the toppes eleuated to the cloudes, which they haue set vp as  of their glorie, ot are the ensignes of vanitie, and the monuments of miserable iniquitie. To this colledge doe they also appertaine, who by their life daies doe seriously inact with what pmpe and glorie their fu∣neralls shal be performed, and are more famed for a sumptions tombe erected after their death, then for anie good deede perfor∣med all the daies of their life. Same others, for leauing there Erecutors to giue pennis ole atter they are dead, doe hope for that deede of charitie, not onelie to be commended to posteritie, but also to obtaine a Quietus est, for all his former extortions, exactions, & opressi∣ons, whatsoeuer. Skil. Captaine Pill, were it not good for you now to take a little breath, and to think it better for a man to reforme his owne faults, then to take exceptions at other mens. Pill. I know there is not a more daungerous enterprise,
then for a man to looke into the sinnes of the mighty Gyants of the world: and I say againe, we perish, if we search out their euill, that wil wallow in wickednesse, and yet wil not be con∣trowled. It is now fortie yeares agoe since I was twentie yeares olde, in this meane time, I haue had some respect to ob∣serue which way the winde hath blowne, but I could neuer learne where bare and naked Truth had cloathed Honesly in a furd gowne, nor where Wit that had indeuoured to reproue Folly could get so much as a liuerie cloake for his better coun∣tenance. Skill Honestie, that is of a reprehending humour, that wil be snarring at the vngodlie, shal bgge his bread, and he that cannot dissemble with wicked men, alas, how can he liue in the world? not by his honestie, nor by kis wi: and as for learning, he that hath but the gift of flatterie, he shal be a∣ble to confound all other knowledge, and to runne through the great affaires of the world: it is more auailable then six of the seauen liberall Sciences. Pill. Why should the learned sort then aduenture to giue the worlde new eyes, to sée into those thinges beyond the common sence of men? or why shoulde those that be watchfull, awaken the dull and blockish spirit, with sinne so lde asleepe, that it cannot discerne the beautie of the soule? or why should they that mooues the Spheares with wit, and pu∣rifies the suddie sences of the sensuall world, impart their pure to these regardlesse times? You happie wights that haue made the worlde drun∣ken with the pleasant Nector of your rare inuentions, hoorde vp your golden gaine within your sacred breastes, let worlds bearing sses breathe and féede on chaffe, vntée your busie thoughts from farther soyle, and rest your wearied Muse from this prentiship of paines, why should you talke and tice yourselues to igge the mine of wit, when abiect boun∣tie will not leuell out the labour of one happie line? Skill. The trauell of wit findeth out and layeth open the verie secrets of nature, & where wil & knowledge do meete, the
Graces sit installed in the brest, the Muses sléeps in the bosom, Art pencils out his secrets, and Wonder buildes his monu∣ments in the excellencie of his skill. The broiles of bloodie warre leaueth nothing vndeuoured: yet must it leaue Knowledge, Art, and Science behind vntou∣ched: for Warre cannot take anie spoile from Vertue, & when all things are cut away with the Sickle of Time, Knowledge florisheth so high, that Time cannot reach it. The pennes of the learned wil pearce a Souldiers coret, and by abasing or concealing the most haughtie exploites of the Magnanimious, they wil eclips his glorie, or leaue him to obliuion: and againe, but with a drop or two of inke, they can exalt and magnifie their friendes and fauourours (although sometimes aboue the truth) that they will leade them famed and renowned to posteritie. And who is ignorant of the true glorie that hath béene stored vp by the learned in the treasure-house of Letters? Pill. It should then appeare (Captaine Skill) that Knowledge, Art, and Science, are much more precious then profitable, if not, why liues the learned in such perpetual want? Skill. Because the worlde loues fooles, and scornes the wise. Pill. Indéede a foole may sometimes sit aboue the fault, where he that is wise shall scant bée permitted at the ne∣ther end of the table: but when shal Artes preuaile and flou∣rish then? Skill. When Kings become Philosophers againe. Pill. That time is come, and God be thanked that hath sent it in time: and now I perceiue what it was, that Aristi∣nus being asked why so few Princes in his time, did extend their liberalitie in such sparing sort to the learned, made an∣swer, because their consciences did accuse them how vnwor∣thie they were, of those praises which the learned were accus∣tomed to giue to Princes that were trulis vertuous, neither could they discerne of the excellencie of Artes, that were them∣selues so vtterly ignorant.
But now if the goodnesse of a Prince may promise a grati∣ous consideration to the wel deseruing: England is made hap∣py in him, whose name is alreadie consecrated to immortalitie, whose Magnificence equalled with Vertue, is able with Cae∣ser, with one hand to holde the Speare in the rest, and with the other to hold the pen: whose Imperiall seate is no lesse re∣nowned by Mars, then beautified by the Muses. I could wade farther, but it were better for me to con∣ceiue in silence, then not being able to vtter, might seeme in∣disreete. I will therefore héere stay my selfe, and will yet once a∣gaine conuert my speeches to speake of Martiall matter: but first Captaine Skill, for as much as you haue alreadie defined of a Souldiour, what he should be in the prime of his perfecti∣on, if we could now finds the cause from whence it springeth, that they are so farre degenerated from this so honourable a condition, we might then with the Phisitian, first by re∣moouing the cause, bée able the more easilie to cure the sicknesse. Skill. The propogation of Souldiers with vs héere in England (thus lately growne to this basterdlie kinde) are e∣speciallie misbegotten in their verie first choice: for in times of imploiment, when Souldiers are to be leuied and prepared, the election is made of Rogues, Runnagates, Drunkards, and all sorts of Uagabonds and disordered persons, such as are fit∣ter to garnish a prison, then to furnish a Campe: And the au∣thoritie of these appointments are committed to sillie Consta∣bles, or perhaps sometimes, to some Iustice of peace, as sillie and ignorant as he that is most simple: and these doe thinks they haue performed a verie wise piece of seruice, when they heue rid the countrie of this scumme of idle loiterers. Pill. It was my fortune not manie yeares sithence to passe along the stréets, where I sawe a companie of townes men, that were weaponed with olde rustie bills, who were ha∣ling and pulling of a fellow by the head and the shoulders (I had thought to some place of execution) and demanding of one of the companie what affence the fellow had cōmitted: I was
answered, shal it was an idle Rogue that had bene a  about the countrey, & they had pressed him for a Souldier. But I pray (said I) doth your Commission warrant you to presse Rogues, to serue for Souldiers? With this demaund, the Constable of the Warde began to grow very hote and angry, and he tolde me flatly, he was not ignorant how farre his Commission did extend: and as for these Rogues, Wagabonds, and other like excremens of the Common-wealth, he thought it a happie riddance to purge the Countrey of that infection and by sencing them to the warrs, to kéeps honester men at home in their places. I durst not render any rough reply to the Constable, least he should complaine that I went about to  to the execution of his Office: but in a curteous owner I asked of him, that if the place where he dwelt were so , that an enemie were ready to approch, to moke spoyle and hauek of their lines and goods, and to make a pray of the Citie or Towne wherein he dwelt, whether would he and the rest of the inhabitants his neighbours, retaine such men as they had pressed for the seruice of their Prince, to fight in their defence, and to repose themselues in the trust of their seruice? In saith sir no (quoth Maister Constable) for we would sooner commit them all to prh, then to put weapons into their hands, that would be more readie to take the spoyle of vs, then to hurt our enemies. Then I perceiue Maister Constable (said I) you can quickly conceiue of the good or ill that concerneth your selues, but you cannot so easily discerne of the generall good, that doth as nearely concerne your Prince and Countrey: but God blesse the place you dwell in from any such distresse as we haue spoken of, and God defend, that either the souernigne dignitie of our gratious Prince or the honour of our Countrey, should euer depend in the fidelitie or seruice of that rascall rabble, thus raked vp and sent to the warres. The Constable presently chops me vp this answere: Sir, I perceiue by the sound of your words, you are a fauorite to Captaines, and I thinke you could be contented, that to serue
the expedition of these times, we should take vp honest house∣holders, men that are of wealth and abilitie to liue at home, such as your Captaines might chop and chaunge, and make marchandise of, sometimes by retaile, sometimes by the great, (as men vse to buy Oxen in Smithfield) a whole company bought and solde together, not to him that was of best experi∣ence, but to him that would giue most money? But sir, God defend that any man of honest reputation shuld come in place to be extorted, where deside the exartions of ctuallers, they shal be infected with vnholesome and vnseasonable prouisions, oppressed by the Proant Maister, cheated and purloyned by so many scraping Officers, as it would but bréede anger to be spoken of. Let me tell you therefore in secret, that we haue learnd of Scoggin long agoe, to seeke out sleeuelesse men, to send of sleeuelesse arraos. When the warres shall be reformed, and reduced to a more honourable course, we will endeuour our selues to de out men of better worth, in the meane time, these may serue, as best besitting the Discipline of this age. This open mouhed Constable put me to a Non plus, I would faiue haue replied, but I wist not what, and for want of better matter, I me a little ouer him with Blurt Maister Constable. I  not stand vpon olde principles, what obseruation hath beene vsed by our auncestors, in the choyce of Souldiers, what regard was had to the abilitie of his bodie, to the hone∣stie of his minde to the place of his birth, and to what trade he had béene  vp in: these matters & perceiue by the Cō∣stable, are not now in request: for in those dayes Souldiers were chosen for their vertue, but now for their vice: in that choice there was comfort, but in this there is neither honour, prot, safetie, nor hope of good successe. Skill. Unhappy may those wares be called where men are but sēt as it were to ye slaughter, too wek in nūec, vnfurnisht, vnprouided, vnpaid, & euery way wrged & discouraged: for this vsage, & these seruices, rogues, rūnagat & pesāts are ye first
men to be sent: but where Princes do meane to haue their ho∣nours maintained, their Countrey defended, or their estates and persons secured, they must looke to another choyce, for in the choyce of the Souldier, consisteth the strength of the warre: and who is more fit to fight for his Countrey, then the man of most approued honesty, that hath care of his reputation, and is ashamed of villany? But what successe may be hoped for by those warres that are supplied by men altogether Irreligious prophane, wicked, vngracious, such as God hath not promised to blesse, but hath denounced against them his malediction and curse? O wit neglecting times, that cannot looke into this apparant ill, and cannot discerne afore hand of the inconuenience that may suc∣céede. Wée first presse Rogues, Drunkards, and such other ill disposed persons, which being once pressed, must be kept with continuall guard, perhaps in Bridewell, or other like places, for running away: What a heauy burthen then to the Common-wealth to Arme and appoint them fit for the field? thē being de∣liuered to their Captaines & Conductors, they are transported to the place of Rende vous, with as good a will, as a Beare is brought to the stake, and the time that they should spend in the practise of their weapons, they practise nothing but how to run away: so that before one moneth be fully ended, he that can shewe fiftie for his hundred, is worthy to passe the Musters for an able company. How Generals and great Commaunders were by these meanes abused by their Muster Rowles, where they might finde for euery thousand mē, at the least two thousand names: the Commissaries, and other Officers of the Musters, (that were not corrupted by the scraping Captaine) can well y∣nough report: But how Princes and estates were deceiued of their pay, I may slightly passe, because (as it should appeare) the matter was but slenderly regarded: and how the Common-wealth likewise was continually charged with the leuying of supplies, that ran away againe as fast as they were sent: the matter deserueth no great consideration, when both
citis and countrie did pay so dearely for it: as they deserued no better, that would make no better choyce. Thus through the simplicitie of a Constable, the Prin∣ces seruice was abused, the manners and Disciplines of the auncient Militia corrupted, and the name and estimation of the noble Souldier vtterly despised. But héere is the maine mischiefe, if necessitie should in∣force to fight, what hope to confirme those fellowes with a setled resolution, to incoter a warlike enemie, when they are so readie to runne away, before euer they durst to looke foe in the face? Will you perswade them to fight for the honour of their Countrie? why they neuer know what honestie ment: what then, to defend their lands and liuings, why they haue nothing to loose, and lesse to care for: will you presse them with shame for being reputed Cowards? but they will neuer blush, that are not onely past shame, but also past grace; why then what lawe to enioyne them, what loue to induce them, or what gods to coiurs them? I will leaue the rest to those that are (indéede) inducious and able to discerne: but forasmuch as the souldier is the arme and strength of the warre, it shal not be altogether incon∣uenient, brieflie to touch and slippe euer what consideration former times haue had in their election and choyce. The holie Scriptures themselues doth furnish vs with manie examples tending to this purpose, as when the whole Hoste of the children of Israel were vtterlie dismaied, for the multitude of their enemies, the Lord commanded Gedeon, to muster such to incounter them, as were most faithful, & doub∣ted nothing of his promises made vnto them, which were but thrée hundred in number, and were chosen by the lapping of water. And who is so sillie as not to think, but that the antiquitie of Musters, is no lesse auncient then the antiquitie of Warres, neither hath their bene any errour more seuerely punished, then those abuses in the Training and Mustering of Soul∣diers.
This chopping and changing is but a late practise, and she Musters in times past, were euermore taken in the presence of men of iudgement, grauitie and wit: and amongst the Ro∣manes, they were committed to prison, their goods confiscats and solde, that would not personallie appeare and answer to their names at any time of Musters when they were called: and to conclude, I thinke he doth but ill deserue so enioy any benefit in his country, that wil refuse to fight for the libertie and safetie of his countrie. Pill. I may say Amen: but he that should preach this doc∣trine, perhaps might offend the better sort of his parishoners: but now I perceiue they be not all Souldiers that runs vp and downe the country a begging vnder Souldiers Pasports, but according to the prouerbe, Catte after kind: so these I perceiue wil follow their former function, first from a Rogue to a Soldi∣er, and from a Souldier again to a Rogue, it must néedes be a wel formed Campe that is framed of such stuffe. I wonder now what Discipline might be prescribed to con∣taine these fellowes in order in the time of Warre, that could neuer be brought to obserue order nor onestie in the time of Peace: yet there is nothing more necessarie then order, especi∣ally in Warre, without the which all runs to confusion: but for my selfe, I think I were best to speake of order, as he that came from Church, who could say, There was a verie good sermon: and yet could neither remember the text, nor any other word that the Preacher had spoken: so say I, order is good, (if it be decent:) but many doth vse it, as they doe vse the new fashion, that doe neuer thinks themselues to be in fashion, till they be quite out of all fashion. Skill. The auncient orders and maners left vnto vs by the great Captaines of former ages are omitted, sometimes by corruptions, sometimes by necessitie, and many times innouated by Captaines, who to shewe themselues as wise as womens Taylors, can deuise euerie day a new fashion. This order that we speake of, is to be obserued in the field, in the Towne, in the Campe, in marching, in fighting, in char∣ging, in refyring.
In like maner, whether to offend or defend, there is nothing of more importance then order, when by the neglect thereof, great and mightie armies haue perished. In the beginning, before they knew any maner of forme, or order of aray, the victorie was euermore caried away by the stronger part: but fithens they haue learned to order them∣selues into Rankes, and to fight in good aray, the conquest now is not so proper to the strength of men, as it is to this experi∣mented order: neither is there any multitude (being once bro∣ken and disordered) that are able to abide a farre inferior num∣ber, that shal assaile them with order and skill. This order therefore is to be obserued, first in distributing their whole forces into Companies, into Regiments, into Squadrons: and it is a pleasing thing, because an Armie con∣sisting of many partes, may with the more ease be diuided and martialled  for seruice, as occasion and néede shall require. Prouided alwaies, y• the order that is to be obserued in fight, hath euermore relatiō to the weapōs then in vse, for the altera∣tion of weapons, doth necessarily inforce the alteratiō of order. Pill. That must néedes stand with reason: but yet there be some not knowing this, that wil figure forth such formes of Battells, as (I think) were vsed in Alexanders time, and were fitter for the incounters of that age, then for the seruice of the time present, & this antiquitie they inferre as a matter of great importance whereby to priuiledge thē: but héere by they doe so much the more be wray their ignorāce, for those orders then in vse, would be altogether out of season, or to verie little purpose. But there is a second Parodox which is now lately crept out of a budget, that doth all to be pepper this opinion, and will in no wise endure that the alteration of weapon should likewise enforce the alteration of order, and hath inferred no lesse then 30. imputations verie wisely obiected against the moderns Captaines of this age as he calleth them, for digressing from the disciplines and orders vsed by the auncient Captaines (I think he meanes in the time of King Arthur) amongst the Greekes and Romanes. Skil. Captain Pill, I know frō out of what books those imputa∣tiōs were first drawne, &  vpō what splene y• collectiōs were
gathered, neither am I ignorant what it was that made the Author to conceale his Paradoxes, and would not suffer them to be published in print so long as he liued, and now he is de∣ceased, it were no humanitie to cauil with men that are in their graues: he is dead, and therefore let him rest, and God send vs that be liuing a little more wit, then to beleeue al which that second Paradox would seeme to intimate. But as from the beginning, the hatred and malice of men one towards another hath continually increased, so with this rage and furie, they haue not failed from time to time, to practise new inuentions whereby to kill and murther, and to this purpose they haue till deuised weapons, euerie one of more aduantage then other. At the first before weapons were knowne, they avenged themselues with teeth and naile, after they began to fight with staues and clubbes, then they found out the forging both of weapons and armours, and from age to age, new inuentions of swordes, Iauelins, billes, pikes, and other manual weayons were found out and practised by sundrie men at seueral times, entertaining stil those weapons in vse, which they sound to be of greatest force and most aduantage. Thus by péece meals they likewise inuented sundrie parcels of armour, where with they armed men: then they fel to ar∣ming of Chariots, Eliphants: And Horses were likewise ar∣med and barded till within these few yeares. Continuance of time brought in Long bowes, Cros∣bowes, Slings, Brakes, Darts, and such other like, and now of late we haue changed them all for the Caliuer and Musket. Those formes and proportions that were vsed when they had no other incounters but with manuall and short weapons (and that the hope of victorie consisted in the vigor and strength of mens armes, and in his skil that could bring most handes to fight) would be now to little purpose, when the mightiest troupes and squadrons may be so discomfited with the furie of shotte, that they shal neuer be able to strike one stroke. We haue therefore left those formes & battels that were then vsed, and haue retained an order perfected by time, and bet∣tered by Experience.
For our ancient English weapon the Long-bow, I am sure there be manie that would gladlie maintaine the excellency of them: but for asmuch as in the first discourse betweene vs, we haue sufficiently delated of their greatest effects, we may there∣fore let thē yas, yet for my part I could wish they were but half so effectual as some ignorāt men would willingly perswade. Pill. I think there is nothing wherein Fortune is more variable then in the actions of Warre, for as there is no setled forme or Discipline which is not chopped & changed in euerie age, so in field incounters, there is no hope nor certaintie, which is not quashed againe in euerie moment: and there∣fore Princes doe in nothing more deceiue themselues, then when they doe refuse a reasonable composition when it is offered, and relie in the hope and hazarde of a Bat∣tell. Skill. It were good that Princes (with iustice and equi∣tie) could kéepe their owne, rather then by tyrannie to incroach of others: but in the time of Warre to neglect the prosecution of seruice by Parlies, by taking of Truces, and delaying of time, it is cloaked vnder the plausible pretence of Policie, which they cal the winning of time, when in truth they do loose both time and opportunitie. And who be these Polititians that doth perswade it, but Ig∣norance, Fearefulnes, Conetousnes, and many times it is in∣duced by Treason it selfe. Under the colour of treatie of Peace, manie practises of ho∣stilitie hath bene performed: and what greater errour may be committed, then to suffer an enemie to buie his owne aduantage but with a few flattering words, and then to laugh vs to scorne for our follie. This olde Canticle, Da pacem in diebus nostris, hath some∣times bene too much imbraced, and the bare motion and sound of Peace, is so swéete and pleasing to the feareful and faint har∣ted, that to patch and péece it vp, they neglect and set as all occasions, giuing an enemie those aduantages, that many times are not to be redeemed. And what conditions so dishonorable and base, but the
coueious minded man (for sparing of mony) will surrender vn∣to, and all to conclude a Peace more deabtful and daungerous then the bloodiest Warre. I will not say but in the time of Parlies, perswasion may doe much, but it is best then to perswade, when there is force to commaund: for in the time of Parlies and Treaties of peace, the Conquerour and he that is of greatest power, doth rather giue then receiue conditions. I acknowledge, assured peace, is euermore to be imbraced: but these coloured treaties and bad assurances, are both daun∣gerous and vnprofitable, and Princes haue incurred by them great losse, both of time and experience. This dallying out the time of seruice with deluding Par∣lies, hath béene holden by timerous people to be verie poli∣tique, but if Miserie be reputed for Policie, and sparing out of season be called good husbandrie, I say still they are ill spa∣red pence, that doth afterwardes cost a great many of poundes. I must not speake of the delaies of our times, but if it be true, that the wit is best that is dearest paid for, we might in this age bée wise and warie both, and learne to looke better to the market, least after this, we buie our owne follie at as deare a rate, as wée haue alreadie purcha∣sed wit. Pill. I know not how to value wit, nor what price it hath borne in times past: but if it hath bene so dearely bought, me thinkes they should haue done well to haue spared some parte of the charge to haue paied poore Souldiers, that (God knowes) haue manie times wanted both paie and meanes whereby to maintaine themselues in anie able sorte to serue. Skill. As the Warres cannot bée performed without Souldiers, so Souldiers cannot bée contained without pay: for where there is want of pay, there must néedes be but a scambling warre, manie disorders committed, and as many opportunities pretermitted. Pill. For want of pay, the Souldier cannot bée kept
from scraping, aswell from friendes as fees: it likewise brée∣deth mutinies and all maner of disorders, and Souldiers vn∣paid, will make but a slowe march, maintaine but a faint fight, and it makes them so weake of bodie, and féeble of courage, that one thousand of Souldiers that were dulie paid, and well prouided for, would be more profitable in the day of battell, then flue thousand of such steruelings that are almost samished aforehand, and for want of necessaries, are brought so lowe, that they are neither able to indure fight, nor yet able to runne away. Skill. The want of mony in the time of Warre, bréedeth in a Generall disgrace, in a Souldier contempt, in the enemie occasion of treason, in the confederate, a will to reuolt. The Romans (amongst others) maintained their Monar∣thies by these meanes, they indeuoured nothing more, then to reward good desert: nor sought any thing lesse, then to defraude their souldiers of their pay: in peace they prouided them priui∣ledges, at home they allowed them colonies to dwell in; and in the waine of the Empire, so carefull were Monaches to requite them, that their elections did hang in their choice, and their fortunes, on their swords: that as one studied to be liberall, so the other stroue to be loyall. Pill) To maintaine this pay, your opinion is (as I per∣ceiue by yeur former spieches) that we haue not so much neede of mony, as we haue of good orders, to sée them first set downe, and then well executed. Skill. I say so still: and I adde thus much farther, that if in times past, the corruptions of all sorts of officers had bene ex∣amined in time, great summes of mony might haue bene spa∣red to pay souldiers, that was worse imployed, and more vn∣profitably spent. Pill. I know not in this case what I should iudge: but for these thirty or fortie yeares I haue bene a little ac∣quainted with the warres of seuerall Countries, and I neuer knew but in euery place they still complained for want of pay: but to say the truth, our English nation, more then
all she rest haue euer found themselues most agréeued, as  against the pinching & prowling of Captaines, as against the cheating and shifting of officers: but is it not possible for Princes and Estates to finde a remedie for these inconueni∣ences? Skill. Not possible, so long as their is brying and selling of companies, nor so long as offices are to be bought and solde for mony. I dare not take vpon me to aduise Princes whom they should trust in these causes, but with reuerence and vnder correction, I wil say a little whome they should not trust, and of whome they ought to beware. Then first let them take héede to the Irreligions, & againe, of him that is couetous: but if they doe wish good successe to their owne affaires, let them beware how they trust him that wil buy his office, and wil giue mony to attaine his place. I protest I haue not spoken any thing particularly, where∣by to detect or impeach any person in priuate, but onely in com∣misseration of the poore Souldiers, who by these disorders haue bene miserablie wronged. And as the pay that hath bene thus spent, might haue bene a great deale better spared: so there is nothing more hurt∣ful to the procéedings of Warre, then too much miserie and pin∣ching, where the spending of mony (and but in necessary sort) shall be more respected, then either the losse of honour, or the hazard of a Kingdome. Pill. And it might be tearmed to be but a thréed-bare War, where besides an ordinarie pay, there is not likewise an extraordinary recompence, whereby to gratifie desert. Skill. Where well doing is not regarded, there dutie is many times neglected: and although the law doe inforce some, and necessitie prick forwards others to the seruice of their countrie, yet Rewarde and Recompence are more effectuall to induce a noble courage, then any other meane: for men hard∣ly entertaine hazard where there is no hope, and great mindes that wil aspire to great aduentures, must be recompenced with great rewardes.
But would you haue examples, how good desert hath bene aduāced? looke into the holy scriptures, sée the noble Caleb pro∣mised his reward by Gods owne mouth, for his great courage and constancie amongst the children of Israel, and Caleb him∣selfe bestowed his faire daughter Achsah vpon Othniell his brothers sonne, for taking the Citie Cariath. Dauid in like maner receiued great riches of Saul, for kil∣ling Goliath: but the Romanes amongst the rest, to stirre vp mens mindes to martiall prowes, besides bountifull and libe∣rall rewardes, they inuented glorious triumphes, whereby he that deserued Fame, might for euer after be eternized. In those daies honours and the highest places were rewards for valiant men, and good desert was recompenced with great preferment: now there is no reward but for villanie, for betray∣ing of a Towne, for poisoning of a Prince, for practising of treason, or for some other like conspiracie. Now for him that liues within the compasse of an honest life, they think his wit wil afforde him no better: & as there is no re∣ward for the couragious, so there is no punishmēt for ye coward. In diebus illis, after victories obtained & troubles ouer-past, then began the Souldiers glorie, for then good deserts were e∣uer recompenced: so that the end of the war, was the beginning of the souldiers felicitie, but now the end of the warre is the be∣gining of his beggery, and an almes is the best recompence for the best desert. When Glorie was the reward of Vertue, men would then contend who should most excéede in Vertue, but now sithence that hope hath bene quenched, they sriue who should be most insolent, for where Glorie is taken from Vertue, there Ver∣tue is likewise taken from men. Pill. There is yet a comfort left to those that haue honestlie serued the Countrie, when they may say that there best recom∣pence is, the testimony of a good conscience, and the content∣ment of an honest minde. Skill. The testimonie of a good conscience is better then a thousand witnesses, and he that hath a contented minde, hath greater treasure then Fortune is able to depriue: for what ad∣uersitie can check him that is armed with contentment?
Pill. Contentment is the marke we all shoote at, but who could euer hit it? Salomon sought seriously after it, but he could not finde it: the wise men of the world, haue hunted after it in the world, and although they haue sometimes had it in chase, baiting themselues with a present satisfaction for a time, yet our affections are so variable, that more changeable then the Moone, we erect euerie day a new choyee, loathing that to mor∣row, that we liked of to day. Skill. Where then shall we séeke for that soueraigne con∣tentment by vs so much desired? if not in this world, why then by a fract more excellent and diuine then Reason it selfe is able to reach vnto. Pill. There are yet many reasons whereby to maintaine that soueraigntie of contentment, which to those that are earth∣ly minded may séeme vnpleasant, but to a soule once setled in contemplation, they are the ministers of méere Diuinitie. Skill. Who liueth heere in that content, liues happilie, for he sequesters his wandering thoughts from the vanitie e the world, and so tampers all his spirits, that he wholie resignes himselfe to meditation. O precious freedome of the minde that thus funes his fan∣cies on the Lydian Harpe he may with Theseus take hold on the Clue, that leadeth from the Babyinth of worldly vanities, for he so frees himselfe from the sreakes of fortune, that as the seaman with his Iacobs staffe, doth count the ascending and descending of the Sunne so he beholds al the choaking chances of the ambitious world, sometimes climing vp, againe decli∣ning downe. If his meanes will not serue to mount, so he cannot lightly fall, for Flatterie cānot blast him with his breath, nor Aspolike Enuie flinges him not asléepe: héere the Traitors armed hand affrightes him not, nor Sinon sugered teares are able to de∣ceiue: but Magnitude with a perfect courage of a constant minde attends and waites on him, and thus retirde from all his worldly cares, he reapes the fruite of swéete and quiet rest. Pill. O happie he that leuels out his life by this line, for a soule thus armed with this coate-armour, is able to wade through al the strreames of trouble, & firing his anker hope in the inuio∣late
constancie of a minde thus setled, what can dismay or affright him? Death it selfe is héere despised, and although the verie name be bidrous and terrible to fooles, beating in the eares of the idle and slouthfull, yee heere it cannot hurt. But what obiect I Death, or why should I speake of a buri∣all, shall we doubt of that which is naturall, and for the which we were borne? O how vnfortunate might he be accoūsed that is loath to returne to his countrie of rest. Skill. Then to winde vp our conclusion, and to make an end of our conference at this time, I will speake a little of life and death as they should be esteemed: for if we could dulie con∣sider of the good that cōmeth vnto vs by death it would appeare that the whole Tragedie of the euils of this life is there fini∣shed, and that the sting of Death, is but the beginning of life. Pill. Your conclusion wil be both apt, and to a very good pur∣pose: but first I will conclude with many thankes for this your vndeserued curtesie: and because I will not longer interrupt you, I will now rest attentiue. Skill. Since life is the race, wherein we striue to obtaine honour, and death is the tearme whereby our honours are crowned, I will speake of life as it should be confirmed to ver∣tue, and of death as the true gate of felicitie. Life saieth the Philosopher is but a borrowed dreame of pleasure, wherein we apprchend all things incertainly, by rea∣son of the swist and irrecouerable chaunges thereof. It is a race wherein the wicked man seeketh to ouerthrowe the good, and the good man that standeth on his feete, will not helpe the good man that fieth on the ground. It is a vision of delight that vanisheth in imagination, a warfare of vncertaintie, and a way to death. In life there is no distinction either of greatnes or abiectnes, for the begger in life, hath as great interest as the King. It is only the way wherein we walk crowned with honour to our graue, or buried wt infamies to séeke out eternall death. Wretched is that life, which hath but a time to liue, and that in death, a life without the which death had not béene. Briefly to expresse how abiect a thing life is, let that saying
of Philip of Macedon serue to confirme y• same, who finding a fit place to incampe in, but vnfit to allowe his beasts of bur∣then any other: How miserable (saith he) is our life, who are inforced to bestow the best opportunities of the same to the seruice of Asses? It is like a Pageant or Stage, whereon all sortes shew thēselues, that chalengeth nothing frō eternitie, but the fruits of good imploimēts. The hazard of life is determined by y• iu∣stice of y• cause, & it is neuer more happy, thē whē lost worthily. The shortnesse thereof is redeemed by the vse, for Life well imploied is a preuention of Death. As for Death, what is it but a blessed necessitie to the good man, and a fearefull enemie to the euill? There is nothing more certaine to flesh & blood, thē Death, & nothing more fearful to fooles, then to thinke they must die, when it is but a passage to a better life: And how happy is that death, which leadeth to that life, which is not subiect to death? It is a seperation from an vncertaine to an assured estate, a retrail wherein Honour liueth, and obscuritie sléepeth: A Harbinger, assigning rest without payment, A Gate, to that felicitie the soule longeth for. For which cause Aeschilus calleth it the remedy of worldly sorrow, wherein we escape that which life feared, and winne that, which a quickning faith hopeth for. Since therefore, Life is but a sum of money put out to vse, and our iudgements and honours are assigned vs, as we im∣ploy the same, & death is but the fire to try our deseris, whe∣ther they were born to obscuritie, or reserued for eternitie, let Souldiers liue so, as when the casualties of warre shall allot them death, they may be held good stewards of this betrusted and vncertain treasure, that like good children being nourished in all dutie, by their mother the Common-wealth, they may dye with cōstancy in the defence therof: that as earst the Spar∣tan womē, so their mothers may say in their deaths, We bare them for their country, and we haue happily lost them for their country. Or rather thus with Critias, He rather plea∣seth me more that he died a death, both worthy his friends and country, thē that he should haue liued a life vnworthy both his friends and country.
