22965 S117670 99852881 18234
images left to right, top to bottom: Judas's betrayal; Jesus brought before Pilate; Peter; Mary; Mary washing Jesus's feet, Jesus praying in Gethsemane Mat. 26. 14. Mat: 27: 2. Luke: 22. 62. Iohn. 20. 11. Luke. 7: 38. Luke. 32: 42. ST PETERS COMPLAINE Mary Magdal teares Wth other workes of the author R: S: LONDON Printed for W: Barrett 1620.
TO THE RIGHT HONO∣RABLE, RICHARD Earle of Dorcet, &c. My Lord, THe entertain∣ment, which this worke, in the seuerall parts thereof hath formerly found with men of exact iudgment, may be a sufficient testimonie, that it is not (now) offered vnto your Lordship for that it stands in need of protectiō (the vsuall apologie of euery triuiall Pamphletter,) much
lesse to emendicate any o∣thers suffrages, beyond the knowne worth thereof: the onely reason of this present boldnesse, and my excuse for thus presuming to re∣commend it to your Ho∣norable hands, being, that as the Author thereof had long since dedicated some peeces of the whole to sun∣drie particular branches of that noble stocke and familie (whereof your Lordship is, & long may you be a strong and flourishing arme!) so now my selfe hauing first collected these dismembred parcels into one body, and published them in an entire edition; I held it a kind of sacriledge to defraud your noble name of the right which you may so iustly
challenge thereunto, which by the Sunshine of your fa∣uour shall be as it were re∣animated; and He encoura∣ged to further endeuours, who in the meane time is At your Lordships seruice, W. BARRET.
THE AVTHOR TO HIS LOVING COVSIN. POets by abu∣sing their ta∣lent, and ma∣king the follies and faynings of Loue, the cu∣stomarie subiect of their base endeuours, haue so discredited this facultie, that a Poet, a Lo∣uer, and a Lyer, are by many reckoned but three words of one signification. But the vanity of men cannot counterpoise the authoritie of God, who deliue∣ring many parts of Scripture in verse, and by his Apostle wil∣ling vs to exercise our deuotion in Hymnes and spirituall Son∣nets, warranteth the Art to be
good, and the vse allowable. And therfore not onely among the Heathen, whose Gods were chiefly canonized by their Poets, and their Paynim Diui∣nitie oracled in verse: but euen in the Old and New Testament, it hath bene vsed by men of greatest pietie, in matters of most deuotion. Christ himselfe by making an Hymne the con∣clusion of his last Supper, and the prologue to the first Pa∣geant of his passion, gaue his Spouse a methode to imitate, as in the office of the Church it appeareth; and to all men a pat∣terne to know the true vse of this measured and footed style. But the Diuell as he affecteth Deitie, and seeketh to haue all the complements of Diuine honour applyed to his seruice, so hath he among the rest possessed also most Poets with his idle fancies. For in lieu of solemne and deuout
matter, to which in dutie they owe their abilities, they now busie themselues in expressing such passions, as onely serue for testimonies to how vnworthy affections they haue wedded their wils. And because the best course to let them see the errour of their workes, is to weaue a new webbe in their owne Loome, I haue here layd a few course threeds together, to in∣uite some skilfuller wits to go forward in the same, or to begin some finer peece, wherein it may be seene how well verse and vertue sute together. Blame me not (good Cousin) though I send you a blame-worthie present: in which the most that can commend it, is the good will of the writer; neither Art nor Inuention giuing it any credit. If in me this be a fault, you cannot be faultlesse that did importune mee to commit it, and therefore you must beare
part of the penance, when it shall please sharpe censures to impose it. In the meane time with many good wishes I send you these few Ditties: adde you the Tunes, and let the Meane, I pray you, be still a part in all your Musicke.
THE AVTHOR to the Reader. DEare eye that doest peruse my Muses style, With easie censure deeme of my delight: Giue sobrest countnance leaue, sometime to smile, And grauest wits to take a breathing flight. Of mirth to make a trade, may be a crime, But tyred spirits for mirth must haue a time. The loftie Eagle soares not still aboue, High flights will force her from the wing to stoope, And studious thoughts at times men must remoue, Lest by excesse before their time they droope.
In courser studies tis a sweet repose, With Poets pleasing vaine, to temper Prose. Profane conceits and faining fits I flie, Such lawlesse stuffe doth lawlesse speeches fit: With Dauid, verse to Ʋertue I apply, Whose measure best with measurd words doth fit: It is the sweetest note that man can sing, When grace in Ʋertues key tunes Natures string.
RVRSVS AD EVNDEM. DEare eye that daynest to let fall a looke, On these sad memories of PETERS plaints: Muse not to see some mud in cleerest Brooke. They once were brittle mould, that now are Saints. Their weakenesse is no warrant to offend, Learne in their faults, what in thine owne to mend. If Equities euen-hand the ballance held, Where PETERS sinnes and ours were made the weights: Ounce for his dramme, pound for his ounce we yeeld, His Ship would grone to feele some sinners freights. So ripe is vice, so greene is vertues bud: The world doth waxe
in ill, but wane in good. This makes my mourning Muse, resolue in teares, This theames my heauy penne, to plaine in prose, CHRISTS Thorne is sharpe no head his Garland weares: Still finest wits are stilling VENVS Rose, In Paynim toyes the sweetest veines are spent: To Christian workes, few haue their Talents lent. Licence my single penne to seeke a Pheere, You heauenly sparkes of wit, shew natiue light: Cloud not with misty loues your Orient cleere, Sweet flights you shoote, learne once to leuell right. Fouour my wish, well-wishing workes no ill: I moue the Sute, the grant rests in your will.
SAINT PETERS COMPLAINT. LAnch foorth, my soule, into a maine of teares, Full fraught with griefe, the trafficke of thy minde: Torne sailes will serue, thoughts rent with guilty feares: Giue care the sterne, vse sighs in lieu of winde: Remorse, thy Pilot: thy misdeed, thy Card: Torment thy Hauen, shipwracke thy best reward. Shunne not the shelfe of most deserued shame: Sticke in the sands of agonizing dread: Content thee to be stormes and billowes game; Diuorc't from grace,
thy soule to penance wed: Fly not from forreine euils, fly from the heart: Worse then the worst of euils, is that thou art. Giue vent vnto the vapours of thy brest, That thicken in the brimmes of cloudy eyes: Where sinne was hatcht, let teares now wash the nest, Where life was lost, recouer life with cryes. Thy trespasse foule, let not thy teares be few. Baptize thy spotted soule in weeping dew. Fly mournfull plaints, the Ecchoes of my ruth; Whose screeches in my frighted conscience ring: Sob out my sorrowes, fruits of mine vntruth: Report the smart of sinnes infernall sting.
Tell hearts that languish in the soriest plight, There is on earth a farre more sory wight. A sory wight, the obiect of disgrace, The Monument of feare, the Map of shame, The mirror of mishap, the staine of place, The scorne of time, the infamy of fame, An excrement of earth, to heauen hatefull, Iniurious to man, to God ingratefull. Ambitious heads, dreame you of Fortunes pride: Fill Volumes with your forged goddesse praise, You Fansies drudges, plung'd in follies tide: Deuote your fabling wits to louers layes: Be you, O sharpest
griefes that euer wrong, Text to my thoughts, Theame to my playning tong. Sad subiect of my sinne hath stoard my minde, With euerlasting matter of complaint: My threnes an endlesse Alphabet do finde, Beyond the pangs which Ieremy doth paint. That eyes with errors may iust measure keepe, Most teares I wish, that haue most cause to weepe. All weeping eyes resigne your teares to me: A sea will scantly rince my ordur'd soule: Huge horrors in high tides must drowned be: Of euery teare my crime exacteth tole. These staines are deepe: few drops take out no such:
Euen salue with sore: and most is not too much. I fear'd with life to die; by death to liue: I left my guide, now left, and leauing God. To breathe in blisse, I fear'd my breath to giue: I fear'd for heauenly raigne, an earthly rod. These feares I fear'd, feares feeling no mishaps: O fond, O faint, O false, O faulty lapse! How can I liue that thus my life deni'd? What can I hope, that lost my hope in feare? What trust to one, that truth it selfe defi'd? What good in him that did his God forsweare? O sinne of sinnes! of euils the very worst: O matchlesse wretch!
O caytiffe most accurst! Vaine in my vaunts, I vowd, if friends had fail'd, Alone Christs hardest fortunes to abide. Giant in talke; like dwarfe in triall quaild; Excelling none, but in vntruth and pride. Such distance is betweene high words and deeds. In proofe, the greatest vanter seldome speeds. Ah rashnesse, hasty rise to murdering leape, Lauish in vowing, blind in seeing what: Soone sowing shames that long remorse must reape: Nursing with teares that ouer-sight begat; Scout of repentance, harbinger of blame, Treason to wisedome, mother of ill name.
The borne-blind begger, for receiued sight, Fast in his faith and loue, to Christ remain'd, He stooped to no feare, he fear'd no might, No change his choice; no threats his truth distain'd. One wonder wrought him in his duty sure: I, after thousands, did my Lord abiure. Could seruile feare of rendring Natures due, Which growth in yeares was shortly like to claime, So thrall my loue, that I should thus eschue A vowed death, and misse so faire an ayme? Die, die, disloyall wretch, thy life detest: For sauing thine, thou hast forsworne the best. Ah life, sweet drop,
drownd in a sea of sowres, A flying good, posting to doubtfull end, Still losing months and yeares, to gaine new howres: Faine, time to haue, and spare, yet forc't to spend: Thy growth, decrease, a moment all thou hast: That gone, ere knowne: the rest, to come, or past. Ah life, the maze of countlesse straying wayes, Open to erring steps, and strew'd with baits, To winde weake senses into endlesse strayes, Aloofe from vertues rough vnbeaten straits; A flower, a play, a blast, a shade, a dreame, A liuing death, a neuer turning streame. And could I rate so high a life so base?
Did feare with loue cast so vneuen account, That for this goale I should runne Iudas race, And Caiphas rage in cruelty surmount? Yet they esteemed thirty pence his price. I, worse then both, for nought deny'd him thrice. The mother Sea, from ouerflowing deepe, Sends forth her issue by deuided veines: Yet backe her off-spring to their mother creeps, To pay their purest streames with added gaines; But I, that drunke the drops of heauenly flud, Bemyr'd the giuer with returning mud. Is this the haruest of his sowing toile? Did Christ manure
thy heart, to breed him briers? Or doth it neede this vnaccustom'd soyle, With hellish dung to fertile heauens desires? No, no, the Marle that periuries doth yeeld, May spoile a good, not fat a barren field. Was this for best deserts, the duest meede? Are highest worths well wag'd with spitefull hire? Are stoutest vowes repeal'd in greatest neede? Should frendship, at the first affront, retire? Blush, crauen sot, lurke in eternall night: Crouch in the darkest Caues from loathed light. Ah wretch, why was I nam'd sonne of a Doue, Whose speeches voided spite, and breathed gall?
No kinne I am vnto the bird of loue: My stony name much better sutes my fall, My othes were stones; my cruell tongue the sling: My God, the marke, at which my spite did fling. Were all the Iewish tyrannies too few To glut thy hungry lookes with his disgrace: That thou more hatefull tyrannies must shew, And spot thy poyson in thy Makers face? Didst thou to spare his foes put vp thy sword, To brandish now thy tongue against thy Lord? Ah tongue, that didst his praise and God-head sound, How wert thou stain'd with such detesting words, That euery word
was to his heart a wound, And launc't him deeper then a thousand swords? What rage of man, yea what infernall Sprite, Could haue disgorg'd more loathsome dregs of spite? Why did the yeelding Sea, like Marble way, Support a wretch more wauering then the waues? Whom doubt did plonge, why did the waters stay? Vnkind, in kindnesse, murthering while it saues? O that this tongue had then beene fishes food, And I deuour'd before this cursing mood! There surges, depths, and Seas vnfirme by kinde, Rough gusts, and distance both from ship and shoare, Were titles to excuse my staggering mind;
Stout feet might falter on that liquid floare: But heere no Seas, no Blasts, no Billowes were: A puffe of womans wind bred all my feare. O Coward troupes, farre better arm'd then harted? Whom angrie words, whom blowes could not prouoke: Whom though I taught how sore my weapon smarted, Yet none repaide me with a wounding stroke. O no: that stroke could but one moity kill: I was reseru'd both halfes at once to spill. Ah, whither was forgotten loue exil'd? Where did rhe truth of pledged promise sleepe? What in my thoughts begat this vgly child, That could through rented
soule thus fiercely creepe? O Viper, feare their death by whom thou liuest, All good thy ruines wrecke, all euils thou giuest. Threats threw me not, torments I none assayd: My fray, with shades: conceites did make me yeeld, Wounding my thoughts with feares selfely dismayd, I neither fought nor lost, I gaue the field: Infamous foyle: a Maidens easie breath Did blow me downe, and blast my soule to death. Titles I make vntruths: am I a rocke, That with so soft a gale was ouerthrowne? Am I fit Pastor for the faithfull Flocke, To guide their soules, that murdred thus mine owne?
A rocke of ruine, not a rest to stay, A Pastor, not to feed, but to betray. Fidelity was flowne, when feare was hatched, Incompatible brood in vertues nest: Courage can lesse with Cowardise be matched, Prowesse nor loue lodg'd in diuided brest; O Adams Child, cast by a silly Eue, Heire to thy Fathers foyles, and borne to grieue. In Thabors ioyes I eager was to dwell, An earnest friend while pleasures light did shine: But when eclipsed glory prostrate fell, These zealous heates to sleepe I did resigne; And now, my mouth
hath thrice his name defil'd, That cry'd so loude three dwellings there to build. When Christ attending the distressefull hower, With his surcharged breast did blesse the ground, Prostrate in pangs, rayning a bleeding shower, Me, like my selfe, a drowsie friend he found; Thrice in his care, sleepe clos'd by carelesse eye, Presage how him my tongue should thrice deny. Parting from Christ, my fainting force declin'd, With lingring foot I followed him aloofe, Base feare out of my heart his loue vnshrin'd, Huge in high words, but impotent in proofe; My vaunts did seeme hatcht vnder Sampsons locks,
Yet womans words did giue me murdering knocks. So farre luke warme desires in crazie loue, Farre off in neede with feeble foot they traine; In tides they swim, low ebbes they scorne to proue, They seeke their friends delights, but shun their paine, Hire of an hireling minde is earned shame: Take now thy due: beare thy begotten blame. Ah, coole remisnesse, vertues quartaine feuer, Pyning of loue, consumption of grace: Old in the cradle, languor dying euer. Soules wilfull famine, sinnes soft stealing pace, The vndermining euill of zealous thought, Seeming to bring
no harmes till all be brought. O portresse of the doore of my disgrace; Whose tongue vnlockt the truth of vowed minde; Whose words, from Cowards heart, did courage chase, And let in death-full feares my soule to blind: O hadst thou beene the portresse to my toombe, When thou wert portresse to that cursed roome. Yet loue was loth to part; feare, loth to die: Stay, danger, life, did counterpleade their causes: I fauouring stay, and life bad danger flie: But danger did except against these clauses: Yet stay, and liue, I would, and danger shunne: And lost my selfe, while I my verdict wonne.
I stayd, yet did my staying farthest part: I liu'd; but so, that sauing life, I lost it: Danger I shunn'd, but to my sorer smart: I gained nought, but deeper dammage crost it. What danger, distance, death is worse then this, That runnes from God and spoyles his soule of blisse? O Iohn, my guide into this earthly hell, Too well acquainted in so ill a Court, (Where rayling mouthes with blasphemies did swell, With tainted breath infecting all resort) Why didst thou leade me to this hell of euils, To shew my selfe a Fiend among the Deuils? Euill president,
the tide that wafts to vice. Dumme-Orator, that wooes with silent deeds, Writing in workes lessons of ill aduice, The doing tale that eye in practice reeds: Taster of ioyes: to vnacquainted hunger: With leauen of the old, seasoning the yonger. It seemes no fault to do that all haue done: The number of offenders hide the sinne: Coach drawne with many horse, doth easely runne, Soone followeth one where multitudes begin. O, had I in that Court much stronger bin; Or not so strong as first to enter in! Sharpe was the weather in that stormy place,
Best suting hearts benum'd with hellish frost. Whose crusted malice could admit no grace, Where coales are kindled to the warmers cost, Where feare my thoughts canded with ycie cold: Heate, did my tongue to periuries vnfold. O hatefull fire (ah that I neuer saw it) Too hard my heart was frozen for thy force. Farre hotter flames it did require to thaw it, Thy hell-resembling heate did freeze it worse. O that I rather had congeal'd to yce, Then bought thy warmth at such a damning price! O wakefull bird, proclaimer of the day, Whose piercing note
doth daunt the Lions rage: Thy crowing did my selfe to me bewray, My frights, and brutish, heates it did asswage. But ô, in this alone, vnhappy Cocke, That thou to count my foyles wert made the clocke. O bird, the iust rebuker of my crime, The faithfull waker of my sleeping feares: Be now the daily clocke to strike the time, When stinted eyes shall pay their taske of teares, Vpbraid mine eares with thine accusing crow, To make me rue that first it made me know. O milde reuenger of aspiring Pride, Thou canst dismount high thoughts to low effects:
Thou mad'st a Cocke me for my fault to chide, My lofty boasts this lowly bird corrects. Well might a Cocke correct me with a crowe, Whom hennish cackling first did ouerthrowe. Weake weapons did Goliahs fumes abate, Whose storming rage did thunder threats in vaine: His body huge, harnest with massie plate, Yet Dauids stone brought death into his braine. With staffe and sling as to a dog he came: And with contempt did boasting furie tame. Yet Dauid had with Beare and Lion fought, His skilfull might excus'd Goliahs foile: The death is eas'd
that worthy hand hath wrought: Some honour liues in honorable spoile; But I, on whom all infamies must light, Was hist to death with words of womans spight. Small gnats enforst th'Egyptian King to stoupe, Yet they in swarmes and arm'd with piercing stings: Smart, noyse, annoyance, made his courage droupe, No small incombrance such small vermine brings: I quaild at words that neither bit nor stong, And those deliuerd from a womans tong. Ah feare, abortiue impe of drouping minde: Selfe ouerthrowe; false friend; roote of remorse: Sighted, in seeing euils; in shunning blinde:
Foyld without field; by fancie not by force; Ague of valour; phrensie of the wise; True honours staine; loues frost; the mint of lies. Can vertue, wisedome, strength by women spild In Dauids, Salomons, and Sampsons falls, With semblance of excuse my errour guild, Or lend a marble glosse to muddy walls? O no, their fault had shew of some pretence, No veyle can hide the shame of my offence. The blaze of beauties beames allur'd their lookes: Their lookes, by seeing oft, conceiued loue: Loue, by effecting, swallowed pleasures hookes: Thus beauty, loue,
and pleasure them did moue. These Syrens sugred tunes rockt them asleepe: Inough to damne, yet not to damne so deepe. But gracious features dazled not mine eyes, Two homely Droyles were authors of my death: Not loue, but feare, my senses did surprize: Not feare of force, but feare of womans breath. And those vnarm'd, ill grac'd, despis'd, vnknowne: So base a blast my truth hath ouerthrowne. O women, woe to men: traps for their falls, Still actors in all Tragicall mischances: Earths necessary euils, captiuing thralls, Now murdering with your tongues, now with your glances
Parents of life, and loue: spoylers of both, The theeues of hearts: false, do you loue or loth. In time, O Lord, thine eyes with mine did meete, In them I read the ruines of my fall. Their cheering rayes that made misfortune sweet, Into my guilty thoughts powrd flouds of gall: Their heauenly lookes, that blest where they beheld, Darts of disdaine, and angrie checks did yeeld. O sacred eyes, the springs of liuing light, The earthly heauens where Angels ioy to dwell, How could you deigne to view my deathfull plight, Or let your heauenly beames looke on my hell? But those vnspotted
eyes encountred mine, As spotlesse Sunne doth on the dunghill shine. Sweet volumes stor'd with learning fit for Saints, Where blisfull quires imparadize their mindes, Wherein eternall study neuer faints, Still finding all, yet seeking all it findes: How endlesse is your labyrinth of blisse, Where to be lost the sweetest finding is? Ah wretch, how oft haue I sweet lessons read, In those deare eyes the registers of truth? How oft haue I my hungry wishes fed, And in their happy ioyes redrest my ruth? Ah that they now are Heralds of disdaine,
That erst were euer pitiers of my paine! You flames diuine that sparkle out your heates, And kindle pleasing fires in mortall hearts: You Nectar'd Aumbries of soule feeding meates, You gracefull quiuers of loues dearest darts: You did vouchsafe to warme, to wound, to feast, My cold, my stony, my now famisht breast. The matchlesse eyes, matcht onely each by other, Were pleas'd on my ill matched eyes to glance: The eye of liquid pearle, the purest mother, Broch't teares in mine to weepe for my mischance; The cabinets of grace vnlockt their treasure, And did to my
misdeed their mercies measure. These blazing Comets, lightning flames of loue, Made me their warming influence to know; My frozen heart their sacred force did proue, Which at their lookes did yeeld like melting snow: They did not ioyes in former plentie carue: Yet sweet are crums where pined thoughts do starue. O liuing mirrours, seeing whom you shew, Which equall shadowes worths with shadowed things, Yea make things nobler then in natiue hew, By being shap't in those life-giuing springs; Much more my image in those eyes were grac't, Then in my selfe, whom sinne and shame defac't.
All-seeing eyes, more worth then all you see, Of which one is the others onely price: I worthlesse am, direct your beames on me, With quickning vertue cure my killing vice. By seeing things, you make things worth the sight, You seeing, salue, and being seene delight. O Pooles of Hesebon, the baths of grace, Where happy spirits dine in sweet desires: Where Saints delight to glasse their glorious face, VVhose bankes make Eccho to the Angels quires, An Eccho sweeter in the sole rebound, Then Angels musicke in the fullest sound. O eyes, whose glances
are a silent speech, In cipherd words high mysteries disclosing: Which with a looe all Sciences can teach, Whose texts to faithfull hearts need little glosing: Witnesse vnworthy I, who in a looke Learn'd more by rote, then all the Scribes by booke. Though malice still possest their hardned minds: I, though too hard, learn'd softnesse in thine eye, Which yron knots of stubburne will vnbinds, Offring them loue, that loue with loue will buy: This did I learne, yet they could not discerne it; But wo, that I had now such need to learne it. O Sunnes, all but your selues in light excelling,
Whose presence day, whose absence causeth night, Whose neighbour course brings Sommer, cold expelling, Whose distant periods freeze away delight. Ah, that I lost your bright and fostering beames, To plonge my soule in these congealed streames! O gracious Spheres where loue the Center is, A natiue place for our selfe-loaden soules; The compasse loue, a cope that none can misse, The motion, loue that round about vs roules: O Spheres of loue, whose Center, cope, and motion, Is loue of vs, loue that inuites deuotion. O little worlds, the summes of all the best, Where glory, heauen,
God, sunne, all vertues, starres; Where fire a loue that next to heauen doth rest, Ayre, light of life, that no distemper marres; The water grace, whose seas, whose springs, whose showers Cloth natures earth with euerlasting flowers. What mixtures these sweet Elements do yel'd, Let happy worldlings of those worlds expound, But simples are by compounds farre exceld, Both sute a place, where all best things abound. And if a banisht wretch ghesse not amisse: All but one compound frame of perfect blisse. I, out-cast from these worlds, exiled rome, Poore Saint, from heauen, from fire cold Salamander:
Lost fish; from those sweet waters kindly home, From land of life, stray'd Pilgrime still I wander. I know the cause: these worlds had neuer hell, In which my faults haue best deseru'd to dwell. O Bethlem cesterns, Dauids most desire, From which my sinnes like fierce Philistims keepe, To fetch your drops what Champion should I hire, That I therein my withered heart may steepe? I would not shead them like that holy King, His were but types, these are the figured thing. O Turtle twinnes all bath'd in Virgins milke, Vpon the margine of full flowing banks: Whose gracefull plume
surmounts the finest silke, Whose sight enamoureth heauens most happy ranks, Could I forsweare this heauenly payre of Doues, That cag'd in care for me were groning loues! Twise Moses wand did strike the stubburne Rocke, Ere stony veines would yeeld their chrystall bloud: Thy eies, one looke seru'd as an onely knocke, To make mine heart gush out a weeping floud: Wherein my sinnes as fishes spawne their frie, To shew their inward shames, and then to die. But ô, how long demurre I on his eyes, Whose looke did pierce my heart with healing wound? Launcing impostum'd sore of periur'd lyes,
Which these two issues of mine yes haue found: Where runne it must, till death the issues stop, And penall life hath purg'd the finall drop. Like solest Swan that swims in silent deepe, And neuer sings but obsequies of death, Sigh out thy plaints, and sole in secret weepe, In suing pardon, spend thy periur'd breath; Attire thy soule in sorrowes mourning weed, And at thine eyes let guilty conscience bleed. Still in the Limbecke of thy dolefull brest These bitter fruits that from thy sinnes do grow, For fuell, selfe accusing thoughts be best, Vse feare as fire;
the coales let penance blow; And seeke none other quintessence but teares, That eyes may shead what entred at thine eares. Come sorrowing teares, the off-spring of my griefe, Scant not your Parent of a needfull ayde; In you I rest, the hope of wisht reliefe, By you my sinfull debts must be defrayd: Your power preuailes, your sacrifice is gratefull, By loue obtaining life to men most hatefull. Come good effects of ill-deseruing cause; Ill gotten impes, yet vertuously brought forth: Selfe-blaming probates, of infringed Lawes, Yet blamed faults redeeming with your worth;
The signes of shame in you each eye may reade. Yet while you guilty proue, you pitty pleade. O beames of mercy beate on sorrowes Clowd, Proue suppling showers vpon my parched ground: Bring forth the fruit to your due seruice vow'd, Let good desires with like deserts be crown'd, Water yong blooming vertues tender flowre, Sinne did all grace of riper growth deuoure. Weepe Balme and Myrrhe, you sweet Arabian trees, With purest gummes perfume and pearle your ryne: Shead on your hony drops, you busie Bees, I, barraine plant, must weepe vnpleasant bryne: Hornets I hyue,
salt drops their labour plyes, Suckt out of sinne, and shed by showring eyes. If Dauid night by night did bathe his bed, Esteeming longest dayes too short to moue: Inconsolable teares, if Anna shed, Who in her sonne her solace had forgone, Then I to dayes, and weekes, to moneths and yeeres, Do owe the hourely rent of stintlesse teares. If loue, if losse, if fault, if spotted fame, If danger, death, if wrath or wreck of weale, Entitle eyes true heyres to earned blame, That due remorse in such euents conceale, That want of teares might well enrole my name,
As chiefest Saint in Calendar of shame. Loue, where I lou'd, was due, and best deseru'd, No loue could ayme at more loue-worthy mark No loue more lou'd then mine of him I seru'd, Large vse he gaue, a flame for euery sparke. This loue I lost, this losse a life must rue, Yea life is short to pay the ruth is due. I lost all that I had, and had the most, The most that will can wish, or wit deuise: I least perform'd, that did most vainely boast. I staynd my fame in most infamous wise. What danger then, death, wrath, or wreck can moue More pregnant cause of teares then this I proue?
If Adam sought a veyle to scarfe his sinne, Taught by his fall to feare a scourging hand, If men shall wish that hils should wrap them in, When crimes in finall doome come to be scand, What Mount, what Caue, what Center can conceale My monstrous fact, which euen the birds reueale? Come shame, the liuery of offending minde, The vgly shroud that ouer-shadoweth blame: The mulct, at which foule faults are iustly fin'd, The dampe of sinne, the common sluce of fame, By which impostum'd tongues their humours purge, Light shame on me, I best deseru'd the scourge. Cains murdring hand
imbrude in brothers bloud, More mercy then my impious tongue may craue: He kild a riuall with pretence of good, In hope Gods doubled loue alone to haue: But feare so spoyld my vanquisht thoughts of loue, That periur'd oathes my spitefull hate did proue. Poore Agar from her pheere inforc't to flie, Wandring in Barsabian wildes alone: Doubting her child through helplesse drought would dye, Laid it aloofe, and set her downe to moue. The heauens with prayers, her lap with teares she fild: A mothers loue in losse is hardly stild. But Agar now bequeath thy teares to me,
Feares, not effects, did set a-floate thine eyes: But wretch I feele more then was feard of thee. Ah not my Sonne, my soule it is that dies: It dies for drought, yet hath a spring in sight, Worthy to die, that would not liue and might. Faire Absoloms foule faults compar'd with mine, Are brightest sands, to mud of Sodome Lakes; High aymes, yong spirits, birth of royall line, Made him play false, where Kingdoms were the stakes, He gaz'd on golden hopes, whose lustre winnes, Sometime the grauest wits to grieuous sinnes. But I, whose crime cuts off the least excuse, A Kingdome lost,
but hop't no mite of gaine, My highest marke, was but the worthlesse vse Of some few lingring howers of longer paine; Vngratefull child, his Parent he pursude, I, Gyants warre with God himselfe renude. Ioy, infant Saints; whom in the tender flower, A happy storme did free from feare of sinne, Long is their life that die in blisfull hower, Ioyfull such ends as endlesse ioyes begin. Too long they liue, that liue till they be nought: Life sau'd by sinne, base purchase dearely bought. This lot was mine, your fate was not so fearce, Whom spotlesse death in Cradle rockt asleepe,
Sweet Roses mixt with Lillies strew'd your hearce, Death Virgine white in Martyrs red did steepe. Your downy heads both Pearles and Rubies crown'd, My hoary locks did female feares confound. You bleating Ewes; that wayle this woluish spoyle Of sucking Lambs new bought with bitter throwes, T'inbalme your babes your eyes distill their oyle, Each heart to tombe her child wide rupture showes; Rue not their death whom death did but reuiue: Yeeld ruth to me that liu'd to die aliue. With easie losse sharpe wrecks did he eschew, That Sindonlesse aside did naked slip: Once naked grace
no outward garment knew, Rich are his robes whom sinne did neuer strip, I rich in vaunts, displaid prides fairest flags, Disrob'd of grace, am wrapt in Adams rags. When traytor to the sonne, in Mothers eyes, I shall present my humble sute for grace; What blush can paint the shame that will arise, Or write my inward feeling in my face? Might she the sorrow with the sinner see, Though I despisde, my griefe might pitied be. But ah, how can her eares my speech endure, Or sent my breath still reeking hellish steeme? Can mother like, what did the Sonne abiure,
Or heart deflowr'd, a Virgins loue redeeme? The Mother nothing loues that Sonne doth loath. Ah loathsome wretch, detested of them both! O sister Nymphes, the sweet renowned paire, That blesse Bethania bounds with your abode: Shall I infect that sanctified ayre, Or staine those steps where Iesus breath'd and trode? No: let your prayers perfume that sweetned place; Turne me with Tygers to the wildest chase. Could I reuiued Lazarus behold, The third of that sweet Trinity of Saints; Would not abstonisht dread, my senses hold? Ah yes my heart
euen with his naming faints; I seeme to see a messenger from hell, That my prepared torments comes to tell O Iohn, O Iames, we made a triple cord, Of three most louing and best louing friends: My rotten twist was broken with a word, Fit now to fuell fire among the Fiends; It is not euer true, though often spoken, That triple twisted cord is hardly broken. The dispossed Diuels that out I threw, In IESVS name, now impiously forsworne, Triumph to see me caged in their mew, Trampling my ruines with contempt and scorne;
My periuries were musicke to their dance, And now they heape disdaines on my mischance. Our Rocke (say they) is riuen, O welcome howre! Our Eagles wings are clipt that wrought so hie: Our thundring Cloud made noise, but cast no showre, He prostrate lies that would haue seal'd the skie, In womans tongue our runner found a rub, Our Cedar now is shrunke into a shrub. These scornefull words vpraid my inward thought, Proofes of their damned prompters neighbours voice: Such vgly guests still wait vpon the nought. Fiends swarme to soules that swarue from vertues choice, For breach of plighted truth,
this true I try; Ah, that my deed thus gaue my word the lie. Once, and but once, too deare a once to twice it, A heauen, in earth, Saints, neere my selfe I saw; Sweet was the sight, but sweeter loues did spice it, But sights and loues did my misdeed withdraw. From heauen and Saints, to hell and Deuils estrang'd, Those sights to frights, those loues to hates are chang'd. Christ, as my God, was templed in my thought, As man, he lent mine eyes their dearest light, But sinne his temple hath to ruine brought: And now, he lightneth terrour from his sight: Now of my late vnconsecrate desires,
Profaned wretch, I taste the earned hires. Ah sinne, the nothing that doth all things file; Out-cast from heauen, earths curse, the cause of hell: Parent of death, author of our exile, The wrecke of soules, the wares that Fiends do sell, That men to monsters: Angels turne to Deuils: Wrong of all rights; selfe ruine; roote of euils. A thing most done, yet more then God can do: Daily new done, yet neuer done amisse; Friended of all; yet vnto all a foe, Seeming an heauen, yet banishing from blisse: Serued with toyle, yet paying nought but paine: Mans deepest losse,
though false, esteemed gaine. Shot, without noise; wound without present smart: First seeming light; prouing in fine a lode, Entring with ease, not easily wonne to part, Farre in effects from that the showes abode; Endorc't with hope, subscribed with dispaire; Vgly in death, though life did faine it faire. O forfeiture of heauen! eternall debt, A moments ioy; ending in endlesse fires; Our natures scum; the worlds entangling Net: Night of our thoughts; death of all good desires. Worse then all this: worse then all tongues can say, Which man could owe, but onely God defray.
This fawning Viper, dum till he had wounded, With many mouthes doth now vpbraid my harmes: My sight was veild till I my selfe confounded, Then did I see the disinchanted charmes. Then could I cut th' Anatomy of sinne, And search with Linxes eyes what lay within. Bewitching euill, that hides death in deceits, Still borrowing lying shapes to maske thy face, Now know I the deciphring of thy sleights, A cunning dearely bought with losse of grace; Thy sugred poyson now hath wrought so well, That thou hast made me to my selfe an hell. My eye reades mournfull
lessons to my heart, My heart doth to my thought the griefe expound, My thought the same doth to my tongue impart, My tongue the message in the eares doth sound; My eares backe to my heart their sorrowes send, Thus circling griefes runne round without an end. My guilty eye still seemes to see my sinne, All things Characters are to spell my fall, What eye doth reade without, heart rues within, What heart doth rue, to pensiue thought is gall, Which when the thought would by the tongue digest, The eare conueyes it backe into the breast. Thus gripes in all my parts do neuer faile,
Whose onely league is now in bartring paines, What I ingrosse, they traffique by retaile, Making each others miseries their gaines; All bound for euer, prentices to care, Whilst I in shop of shame trade sorrowes ware, Pleasd with displeasing lot I seeke no change, I wealthiest am, when richest in remorse; To fetch my ware no Seas nor Lands I range. For customers to buy I nothing force. My home bred goods at home are bought and sold, And still in me my interest I hold. My comfort now is comfortlesse to liue, In Orphan state
deuoted to mishap: Rent from the roote, that sweetest fruit did giue, I scorn'd to graffe in stock, of meaner sap. No iuyce can ioy me but of Iesses flower, Whose heauenly roote hath true reuiuing power. At sorrowes doore I knockt, they crau'd my name: I answered: One, vnworthy to be knowne. What one, say they? One worthiest of blame. But who? A wretch, not Gods, nor yet his owne. A man? O no, a beast; much worse: What creature? A rocke: How cald? the rocke of scandale, Peter. From whence? From Caiphas house: Ah dwell you there? Sinnes farme I rented there, but now would leaue it:
What rent? My soule; What gaine? Vnrest, and feare. Deare purchase. Ah too deare, will you receiue it? What shall we giue? Fit teares, and times to plaine me. Come in, say they; thus griefes did entertaine me. With them I rest true prisoner in their Iayle, Chayn'd in the yron linkes of basest thrall, Till grace vouchsafing captiue soule to bayle, In wonted See degraded loues install. Dayes passe in plaints; the night without repose, I wake, to sleepe, I sleepe in waking woes. Sleepe deaths ally, obliuion of teares, Silence of passiions, balme of angry sore, Suspence of loues,
security of feares, Wraths lenitiue, hearts ease, stormes calmest shore, Senses and soules repriuall from all cumbers, Benumming sense of ill, with quiet slumbers. Not such my sleepe, but whisperer of dreames, Creating strange Chymeras fayning frights: Of day discourses giuing fansie theames, To make dum shewes with worlds of anticke sights, Casting true griefes in fansies forged mold, Brokenly telling tales rightly fore-told. This sleepe most fitly suiteth sorrowes bed, Sorrow, the smart of euill, Sinnes eldest child: Best, when vnkind in killing whom it bred,
A racke for guilty thoughts, a bit for wild. The scourge that whips, the salue that cures offence: Sorrow, my bed, and home, while life hath sence. Here solitarie Muses nurse my griefes, In silent lonenesse burying worldly noise, Attentiue to rebukes, deafe to reliefes, Pensiue to foster cares, carelesse of ioyes; Ruing lifes losse vnder deaths dreary roofes, Solemnizing my funerall behoofes. A selfe content the shrowd, my soule the corse, The Beere an humble hope, the herse-clorh, feare; The mourners thoughts, in blacks of deepe remorse, The herse, grace, pitie,
loue and mercy beare. My eares, my dole, the Priest a zealous will: Penance the tombe, and dolefull sighes the knill. Christ, health of feuer'd soule, heauen of the mind, Force of the feeble, nurse of infant loues, Guide to the wandring foote, light to the blind, Whom weeping windes, repentant sorrow moues. Father in care; mother in tender heart, Reuiue and saue me, slaine with sinfull dart. If King Manasses sunke in depth of sinne, With plaints and teares recouered grace and Crowne: A worthlesse worme some mild regard may winne, And lowly creepe, where flying threw it downe.
A poore desire I haue to mend my ill, I should, I would, I dare not say, I will. I dare not say, I will; but wish I may, My pride is checkt, high words the speaker spilt: My good, ô Lord, thy gift, thy strength my stay: Giue what thou bidst, and then bid what thou wilt. Worke with me what of me thou doest request, Then will I dare the most, and vow the best. Prone looke, crost armes, bent knee, and contrite heart, Deepe sighs, thicke sobs, dew'd eyes, and postrate prayers, Most humbly beg release of earned smart, And sauing shrowd in mercies sweet repaires. If iustice should
my wrongs with rigor wage, Feares, would dispaires; ruth, breed a hopelesse rage. Lazar at pitties gate I vlcered lye, Crauing the reffuse crums of childrens plate: My sores I lay in view to mercies eye, My rags beare witnesse of my poore estate; The wormes of conscience that within me swarme, Proue that my plaints are lesse then is my harme. With mildnesse, Iesu, measure mine offence; Let true remorse thy due reuenge abate; Let teares appease when trespasse doth incense: Let pitty temper thy deserued hate. Let grace forgiue, let loue forget my fall,
With feare I craue, with hope I humbly call. Redeeme my lapse with ransome of thy loue, Trauerse th' inditement, rigors doome suspend: Let frailty fauour, sorrowes succour moue. Be thou thy selfe, though changeling I offend: Tender my suite, cleanse this defiled denne, Cancell my debts, sweet Iesu, say Amen. The end of S. Peters Complaint.
MARIE MAG∣dalens blush. THe signes of shame that staine my blushing face, Rise from the feeling of my rauing fits: Whose ioy annoy, whose guerdon is disgrace: Whose solace flies, whose sorrow neuer flits: Bad seed I sow'd, worse fruit is now my gaine, Soone dying mirth begat long liuing paine. Now pleasure ebbes, reuenge begins to flow, One day doth wreake the wrath that many wrought: Remorse doth teach my guilty thoughts to know How cheape I sold, what Christ so dearely bought. Faults long vnfelt doth conscience now bewray,
All ghostly dynts that Grace at me did dart, Like stubborne rocke I forced to recoyle; To other flights an ayme I made mine heart, Whose wounds then welcome, now haue wrought my foyle. Wo worth the bow, wo worth the Archers might. That draue such Arrowes to the marke so right. To pull them out, to leaue them in, is death; One to this world; one to the world to come: Wounds may I weare, and draw a doubtfull breath: But then my wounds will worke a dreadfull doome. And for a world, whose pleasures passe away, I lose a world, whose ioyes are past decay. O sense, ô soule,
ô had, ô hoped blisse, You woo, you weane, you draw, you driue me backe. Your crosse encountring like their combat is, That neuer end but with some deadly wracke. When sense doth winne, the soule doth lose the field, And present haps make future hopes to yeeld. O heauen, lament, sense robbeth thee of Saints, Lament, O soules, sense spoyleth you of Grace: Yet sense doth scarce deserue these hard complaints. Loue is the thiefe, sense but the entring place, Yet graunt I must, sense is not free from sinne, For thiefe he is, that thiefe admitteth in.
MARY MAGDALENS complaint at Christs death. SIth my life from life is parted: Death, come take thy portion, Who suruiues, when life is murdred, Liues by meere extortion. All that liue, and not in God, Couch their life in deaths abod. Silly starres must needs leaue shining, When the Sunne is shaddowed. Borowed streams refraine their running, When head-springs are hindered. One that liues by others breath, Dyeth also by his death. O true Life, since thou hast left me, Mortall life is tedious, Death it is to liue without thee, Death of all most odious. Turne againe, or take me to thee, Let me dye, or liue thou in me.
Where the truth once was and is not, Shadowes are but vanity: Shewing want, that helpe they cannot, Signes, not salue of misery. Painted meat no hunger feeds, Dying life each death exceeds. With my loue, my life was nestled In the summe of happinesse; From my loue, my life is wrested To a world of heauinesse. O, let loue my life remoue, Sith I liue not where I loue. O my soule, what did vnloose thee From the sweet captiuity? God, not I, did still possesse thee: His, not mine thy liberty. O, too happy thrall thou wart, When thy prison was his heart. Spitefull speare that break'st this prison, Seat of all felicity, Working this, with double treason, Loues, and liues deliuery: Though my life thou drau'st away, Maugre thee my loue shall stay.
Times go by turnes. THE lopped tree in time may grow againe, Most naked plants renew both fruit and flowre: The sorriest wight may finde release of paine, The driest soyle sucke in some moystning showre. Times go by turnes, and chances change by course, From foule to faire: from better hap to worse. The sea of Fortune doth not euer flow, She drawes her fauours to the lowest ebbe; Her tides haue equall times to come and go, Her Loome doth weaue the fine and coursest webbe; No ioy so great, but runneth to an end: No hap so hard, but may in fine amend.
Not alwaies Fall of leafe, nor euer Spring, No endlesse night, nor yet eternall day: The saddest Birds a season finde to sing, The roughest storme a calme may soone allay. Thus with succeeding turnes God tempereth all: That man may hope to rise, yet feare to fall. A chance may winne that by mischance was lost, That net that holds no great, takes little fish; In some things all, in all things none are crost: Few all they need, but none haue all they wish. Vnmingled ioyes heere to no man befall: Who least, hath some, who most, hath neuer all.
LOOKE HOME. REtyred thoughts enioy their owne delights, As beauty doth in selfe-beholding eye: Mans mind a mirrour is of heauenly sights, Abriefe wherein all maruels summed lye: Of fairest formes, and sweetest shapes the store, Most gracefull all, yet thought may grace them more. The minde a creature is, yet can create, To Natures patterns adding higher skill: Of finest works, wit better could the state, If force of wit had equall power of will. Deuice of man in working hath no end: What thought can thinke, another thought can mend.
Mans soule of endlesse beauties image is, Drawne by the worke of endlesse skill and might; This skilfull might gaue many sparks of blisse, And to discerne this blisse, a natiue light, To frame Gods image as his worths requir'd, His might, his skill, his word, and will conspir'd. All that he had, his Image should present, All that it should present, he could afford; To that he could afford, his will was bent, His will was followed with performing word. Let this suffice, by this conceiue the rest, He should, he could, he would, he did the best,
Fortunes falshood. IN worldly merriments lurketh much misery: Sly Fortunes subtilties, in bayts of happinesse, Shrowd hookes; that swallowed (without recouery) Murder the innocent with mortall heauinesse. She sootheth appetites with pleasing vanities, Till they be conquered with cloaked tyranny: Then, changing countenance, with open enmities, Shee triumphs ouer them, scorning their slauery. With fawning flattery Deaths doore she openeth, Alluring passingers
to bloudy destiny: In offers bountifull, in proofe she beggereth; Mens ruines registring her false felicity. Her hopes are fastned in blisse that vanisheth, Her smart inherited with sure possession, Constant in cruelty, she neuer altereth, But from one violence, to more oppression. To those that follow her, fauours are measured As easie premisses to hard conclusions; With bitter corrosiues her ioyes are seasoned; Her highest benifits are but illusions. Her way's a labyrinth of wandring passages: Fooles common pilgrimage,
to cursed deities: Whose fond deuotion and iole menages, Are wag'd with wearinesse in fruitlesse drudgeries. Blinde, in her fauorites foolish election, Chn is er Arer a giuing dignity: He choyse of visions, shws most discretion, Sith th, the vertuous might wrest from piety. To humble suppliants, tyrant most obstinate: She suters answereth with contrarieties. Proud with petition, vntaught to mitigate Rigor with clemencie in hardest cruelties. Like Tygre fugitiue from the Ambitious, Like weeping Crocodile
to scornefull enemies, Suing for amitie where she is odious, But to her followers forswearing curtesies. No winde so changeable, no sea so wauering, As giddie Fortune in reeling varieties; Now mad, now mercifull, now fierce, now fauouring: In all things mutable, but mutabilities.
Scorne not the least. VVHere wards are weake, and foes incountring strong, Where mightier do assault then do defend, The feebler part puts vp enforced wrong, And silent sees, that speech could not amend; Yet higher powers must thinke, though they repine, When Sunne is set, the little starres will shine. While Pike doth range, the silly Tench doth fly, And crouch in priuy creekes, with smaller fish: Yet Pikes are caught when little fish go by, These fleete aflote, while those do fill the dish; There is a time euen for the wormes to creepe, And sucke the deaw while all their foes do sleepe.
The Marline cannot euer soare on high, Nor greedy Grey-houn still pursue the chase: The tender Larke will finde a time to fly, And fearefull Hate to runne a quiet race. He that high growth on Cedars did bestow, Gaue also lowly Mushrumps leaue to grow. In Hamans pompe poore Mardocheus wept, Yet God did turne his fate vpon his foe, The Lazar pinde, while Diues feast was kept, Yet he to heauen, to hell did Diues go. We trample grasse, and prize the flowers of May, Yet grasse is greene, when flowers do fade away.
The Natiuitie of Christ. BEhold, the Father is his daughters sonne: The bird that built the nest, is hatcht therein: The old of yeares, an howre hath not out-runne: Eternall life, to liue doth now beginne. The Word is du, the mirth of heauen doth weepe, Might feeble is, and force doth faintly creepe. O dying soules, behold your liuing spring; O dazled eyes, behold your Sunne of grace; Dull eares, attend what word this Word doth bring, Vp, heauy hearts, with ioy your ioy embrace: From death, from darke, from deafnesse, from dispaires, This life, this light, this Word, this ioy repaires.
Gift better then himselfe, God doth not know: Gift better then his God, no man can see; This gift doth here the giuer giuen bestow, Gift to this gift let each receiuer be. God is my gift, himselfe he freely gaue me. Gods gift am I, and none but God shall haue me. Man altered was by sinne from man to beast: Beasts food is hay, hay is all mortall flesh, Now God is flesh, and lyes in Manger prest As hay, the brutest sinner to refresh: O happy field wherein this fodder grew, Whose taste doth vs from beasts to men renew.
Christs Childhood. TIll twelue yeares age, how Christ his childhood spent, All earthly pens vnworthy were to write, Such acts to mortall eyes he did present, Whose worth, not men, but Angels must recite. No natures blots, no childish faults defilde, Where grace was guide, and God did play the child In springing locks, lay couched hoary wit, In semblance yong, a graue and ancient port, In lowly lookes, high maiesty did sit: In tender tongue, sound sence of sagest sort,
Nature imparted all that she could teach, And God suppli'd, where Nature could not reach. His mirth of modest meane a mirrour was, His sadnesse, tempered with a milde aspect; His eye to try each action was a glasse, Whose lookes did good approue, and bad correct. His Natures gifts, his grace, his word and deed, Well shewed that all did from a God proceed.
A Childe my Choice. LEt folly praise that fancie loues: I praise and loue that child, Whose heart no thought, whose tongue no word, whose hand no deed defil'd. I praise him most, I loue him best, all praise and loue is his; While him I loue, in him I liue, and cannot liue amisse. Loues sweetest marke, laudes highest Theame; mans most desired light; To loue him life, to leaue him, death; to liue in him, delight. He mine by gift, I his by debt, thus each to other's due: First friend he was, best friend he is,
all times will trie him true. Though yong yet wise, though small yet strong, though man, yet God he is, As wise, he knowes, as strong, he can, as God he loues to blisse: His knowledge rules, his strength defends, his loue doth cherish all, His birth our ioy, his life our light, his death our end of thrall. Alas, he weepes, he sighs, he pants, yet do his Angels sing: Out of his teares, his sighes and throbs, doth bud a ioyfull Spring. Almightie Babe, whose tender armes, can force all foes to fly, Correct my faults, protect my life, direct me when I die.
Content and rich. I Dwell in Graces Court, Enrich with Vertues rights, Faith guides my wit, Loue leades my will, Hope all my minde delights. In lowly vales I mount To pleasures highest pitch: My silly shroud true Honour brings, My poore estate is rich. My conscience is my Crowne, Contented thoughts, my rest, My heart is happy in it selfe, My blisse is in my breast. Enough, I reckon wealth, A meane, the surest lot, That lyes too high for base contempt, Too low, for Enuies shot. My wishes are but few,
All easie to fulfill: I make the limits of my power, The bounds vnto my will. I haue no hopes but one, Which is of heauenly raigne: Effects attaind, or not desir'd, All lower hopes refrain. I feele no care of coyne, Well-doing is my wealth, My mind to me an Empire is, While grace affoordeth health. I clyp high-climing thoughts, The wings of swelling pride, Their fall is worst, that from the height Of greater honour slide. Sith sayles of largest size The storme doth soonest teare, I beare so low and small a sayle As freeth me from feare. I wrastle not with rage, While furies flame doth burne, It is in vaine to stop the streame,
Vntill the tide doth turne. But when the flame is out, And ebbing wrath doth end, I turne a late enraged foe Into a quiet friend. And taught with often proofe, A tempered calme I finde To be most solace to it selfe. Best cure for angrie minde. Spare dyet is my fare, My clothes more fit then fine, I know, I feede, and clothe a foe, That pamp'red, would repine. I enuie not their hap Whom fauour doth aduance; I take no pleasure in their paine That haue lesse happie chance. To rise by others fall, I deeme a losing gaine; All states with others ruines built, To ruine runne amaine.
No change of Fortunes calmes Can cast my comforts downe: When Fortune smiles, I smile to thinke how quickly she will frowne. And when in froward moode, She proou'd an angrie so, Small gaine I found to let her come, Lesse losse to let her go.
Losse in delayes. SHun delayes, they breed remorse, Take thy time while time doth serue thee, Creeping Snayles haue weakest force, Flie their fault, lest thou repent thee. Good is best, when soonest wrought, Lingring labours come to nought. Hoyse vp sayle while gale doth last, Tide and winde stay no mans pleasure; Seeke not time, when time is past, Sober speed is Wisedomes leisure: After-wits are dearely bought, Let thy fore-wit guide thy thought. Time weares all his locks before, Take thou hold vpon his forehead, When he flies, he turnes no more, And behind his scalpe is naked. Workes adiourn'd haue many stayes, Long demurres breed new delayes.
Seeke thy salue while sore is greene, Festered wounds aske deeper launcing; After-cures are seldome seene, Often sought, scarce euer chancing. Time and place giues best aduice, Out of season, out of price. Crush the Serpent in the head, Breake ill egges ere they be hatched: Kill bad Chickins in the tread; Fligge, they hardly can be catched, In the rising stifle ill, Lest it grow against thy will. Drops do pierce the stubburne Flint, Not by force, but often falling, Custome kils with feeble dint, More by vse, then strength preuailing, Single sands haue little waight, Many make a drowning fraight. Tender twigs are bent with ease, Aged trees do breake with bending, Yong desires make little prease, Growth doth make them past amending. Happie man that soone doth knocke Babels Babes against the rocke.
Loue seruile Lot. LOue Mistresse is of many minds, Yet few know whom they serue, They reckon least how little Loue Their seruice doth deserue. The will she robbeth from the wit, The sense from reasons lore, Shee is delightfull in the ryne, Corrupted in the core. She shrowdeth vice in Ʋertues veile, Pretending good in ill, She offereth ioy, affoordeth griefe, A kisse where she doth kill. A hony showre raines from her lips, Sweet lights shine in her face. She hath the blush of Virgine mind, The minde of Vipers race. She makes thee seeke, yet feare to find,
To find, but none enioy; In many frownes some gliding smiles She yeelds to more annoy. She wooes thee to come neare her fire, Yet doth she draw it from thee. Farre off she makes thy heart to fry, And yet to freeze within thee. She letteth fall some luring baits For fooles to gather vp: Too sweet, too sowre, to euerie tast She tempereth her cup. Soft soules she binds in tender twist, Small Flyes in spinners webbe, She sets aflote some luring streames, But makes them soone to ebbe. Her watrie eyes haue burning force: Her flouds and flames conspire: Teares kindle sparkes, sobs fuell are: And sighs do blow her fire. May neuer was the Month of loue, For May is full of flowers, But rather Aprill wet by kind, For loue is full of showers.
Like Tyrant cruell wounds she giues, Like Surgeon salue she lends: But salue and sore haue equall force, For death is both their ends. With soothing words, enthralled soules She chaines in seruile bands, Her eye in silence hath a speech, Which eye best vnderstands. Her little sweet hath many sowres, Short hap immortall harmes, Her louing lookes, are murdrings darts, Her songs bewitching charmes. Like Winter Rose, and Sommer Ice, Her ioyes are still vntimely, Before her hope, behind remorse, Faire first, in fine vnseemely. Moodes, passions, fancies, iealous fits Attend vpon her traine, She yeeldeth rest without repose, A Heauen in hellish paine. Her house is sloth, her doore deceit, And slipperie hope her staires,
Ʋnbashfull boldnesse bids her guests, And euerie vice repaires. Her dyet is of such delights, As please till they be past, But then the poyson kils the heart, That did entice the taste. Her sleepe in sinne, doth end in wrath, Remorse rings her awake, Death cals her vp, shame driues her out, Despaires her vpshot make. Plow not the Seas, sow not the sands, Leaue off your idle paine, Seeke other mistresse for your mindes, Loues seruice is in vaine.
Life is but Losse. BY force I liue, in will I wish to dye, In plaint I passe the length of lingring dayes, Free would my soule from mortall bodie fly, And tread the tracke of Deaths desired wayes; Life is but losse, where death is deemed gaine, And lothed pleasures breed displeasing paine. Who would not dye, to kill all murdering greeues? Or who would liue in neuer-dying feares? Who would not wish his treasure safe from Theeues, And quit his heart from pangs, his eyes from teares? Death parteth but two euer fighting foes,
Whose ciuill strife doth worke our endlesse woes. Life is a wandring course to doubtfull rest, As oft a cursed rise to damning leape; As happie race to winne a heauenly crest, None being sure, what finall fruits to reape. And who can like in such a life to dwell, Whose wayes are strait to Heauen, but wide to Hell? Come cruell death, why lingrest thou so long? What doth withhold thy dint from fatall stroke? Now prest I am: alas, thou doest me wrong, To let me liue more anger to prouoke: Thy right is bad, when thou hast stopt my breath, Why should'd thou stay,
to worke my bouble death? If Sauls attempt in falling on his blade, As lawfull were, as ethe to put in vre: If Sampsons leaue, a common Law were made, Of Abels lot if all that would were sure: Then cruell death, thou should'st the Tyrant play With none but such as wished for delay. Where life is lou'd, thou readie art to kill, And to abridge with sodaine pangs their ioy, Where life is loath'd, thou wilt not worke their will, But dost adiourne their death to their annoy. To some thou art a fierce vnbidden guest: But those that craue thy helpe thou helpest least.
Auant oh viper, I thy spite defie, There is a God that ouer-rules thy force, Who can thy weapons to his will apply, And shorten or prolong our brittle course: I on his mercie, not thy might relye, To him I liue, for him I hope to dye.
I dye aliue. O Life what lets thee from a quicke decease? O death what drawes thee from a present prey? My feast is done, my soule would be at ease, My grace is said, O Death, come take away. I liue, but such a life as euer dyes: I dye, but such a death, as neuer ends, My death to end my dying life denies, And life my liuing death no whit amends. Thus still I dye, yet still I do reuiue, My liuing death
by dying life is fed: Grace more then Nature keepes my heart aliue, Whose idle hopes and vaine desires are dead. Not where I breathe, but where I loue, I liue, Not where I loue, but where I am, I dye: The life I wish, must future glorie giue, The deaths I feele, in present dangers lye.
What ioy to liue? I Wage no warre, yet peace I none enioy, I hope, I feare, I frye in freezing cold, I mourne in mirth, still prostrate in annoy, I all the World imbrace, yet nothing hold. All wealth is want where chiefest wishes faile, Yea life is loath'd, where loue may not preuaile. For that I loue, I long, but that I lacke; That others loue, I loath, and that I haue: All worldly fraights to me are deadly wracke, Men, present hap, I, future hopes do craue.
They louing where they liue, long life require, To liue where best I loue, death I desire. Here loue is lent for loue of filthie gaine, Most friends befriend themselues with friendships shew: Here, plentie, perill, want, doth breed disdaine, Cares common are, ioyes faultie, short and few. Here Honour enuide, meannesse is despis'd, Sinne deemed solace, Vertue little pris'd. Here beauty is a baite, that swallowed choakes, A treasure sought still to the owners harmes: A light that eyes to murdring sights prouokes, A grace that soules inchants with mortall charmes. A luring ayme
to Cupids fierie flights, A balefull blisse that damnes where it delights. O who would liue, so many deaths to trie, Where will doth wish that wisedome doth reproue? Where Nature craues that grace must needs denie, Where sense doth like, that reason cannot loue, Where best in shew, in finall proofe is worst, Where pleasures vp-shot is to dye accurst.
Lifes death, Loues life. VVHo liues in loue, loues least to liue, And long delayes doth rue, If him he loue by whom he liues, To whom all loue is due. Who for our loue did choose to liue, And was content to dye; Who lou'd our loue more then his life, And loue with life did buy. Let vs in life, yea with our life Requite his liuing loue, For best we liue, when least we liue. If loue our life remoue. Where loue is hote, life hatefull is, Their grounds do not agree, Loue where it loues, life where it liues, Desireth most to be. And sith loue is not where it liues,
Nor liueth where it loues, Loue hateth life, that holds it backe, And death it best approues. For seldome is he wonne in life, Whom loue doth most desire: If wonne by loue, yet not enioyd, Till mortall life expire. Life out of earth, hath not aboade, In earth loue hath no place, Loue setled hath her ioyes in Heau'n, In earth life all her grace. Mourne therefore no true louers death, Life onely him annoyes. And when he taketh leaue of life, Then loue begins his ioyes.
At home in Heauen. FAire soule, how long shall veiles thy graces shrowd? How long shall this exile with-hold thy right? When will thy Sunne disperse this mortall cloud, And giue thy glories scope to blaze their light? O that a starre more fit for Angels eyes, Should pine in earth, not shine aboue the skies! This ghostly beautie offered force to God, It chain'd him in the linkes of tender loue, It wonne his will with man to make abode:
It staid his sword, and did his wrath remoue; It made the rigor of his Iustice yeeld, And crowned mercie Empresse of the field. This lull'd our heauenly Sampson fast asleepe, And laid him in our feeble Natures lap; This made him vnder mortall load to creepe, And in our flesh his God-head to inwrap; This made him soiourne with vs in exile, And not disdaine our titles in his stile. This brough him from the ranks of heau'nly Quires, Into the vale of teares, and cursed soyle; From flowers of grace into a world of bryers, From life to death,
from blisse to balefull toyle. This made him wander in our Pilgrim weed, And taste our torments, to releeue our need. O soule, do not thy noble thoughts abase, To lose thy loue in any mortall wight: Content thine eye at home with natiue grace, Sith God himselfe is rauisht with thy sight. If on thy beautie God enamoured be, Base is thy loue of any lesse then he. Giue not assent to muddie minded skill, That deemes the feature of a pleasing face, To be the sweetest baite to lure the will, Not valuing right the worth of ghostly grace.
Let God and Angels censure winne beliefe, That of all beauties iudge our selues the chiefe. Queene Hester was of rare and peerlesse hiew, And Iudith once for beautie bare the vaunt, But he that could our soules endowments view, Would soone to soules the Crowne of beauty graunt. O soule, out of thy selfe seeke God alone: Grace more then thine, but Gods, the world hath none,
Lewd Loue is losse. MIsdeeming eye that stoopeth to the lure Of mortall worths, not worth so worthie Loue, All beautie's base, all graces are impure, That do thy erring thought from God remoue. Sparkes to the fire, the beames yeeld to the Sunne, All grace to God, from whom all graces runne. If picture moue, more should the patterne please: No shadow can with shadowed things compare, And fairest shapes whereon our loues do seaze, But silly signes of Gods high beauties are.
Go, staruing sense, feed thou on earthly mast, True loue in Heau'n, seeke thou thy sweet repast. Gleane not in barren soyle these off all eares, Sith reape thou maist whole haruests of delight. Base ioyes with griefes, bad hopes do end in feares, Lewd loue with losse, euill peace with deadly fight: Gods loue alone doth end with endlesse ease, Whose ioyes in hope, whose hope concludes in peace: Let not the luring traine of fancies trap, Or gracious features proofes of Natures skill, Lull reasons force asleepe in errours lap, Or draw thy wit to bent of wanton will, The fairest flowers
haue not the sweetest smell, A seeming Heauen proues oft a damning Hell. Selfe-pleasing soules that play with beauties bait, In shining shrowd may swallow fatall hooke, Where eager sight, on semblant faire doth wait, A locke it proues that first was but a looke: The fish with ease into the Net doth glide, But to get out, the way is not so wide. So long the Fly doth dally with the flame, Vntill his singed wings do force his fall: So long the eye doth follow Fancies game, Till loue hath left the heart in heauie thrall; Soone may the minde be cast in Cupids Iayle,
But hard it is imprisoned thoughts to bayle. O lothe that loue, whose finall ayme is lust, Moth of the mind, eclipse of reasons light, The graue of grace, the mole of Natures rust, The wrack of wit, the wrong of euerie right; In summe, an euill, whose harmes no tongue can tell, In which to liue is death, to dye is Hell.
Loues Garden griefe. VAine loues auaunt, infamous is your pleasure, Your ioy deceit, Your iewels, iests, and worthlesse trash your treasure, Fooles common bait. Your pallace is a prison that allureth To sweet mishap, and rest that paine procureth. Your Garden griefe, hedg'd in with thornes of Enuie, And stakes of strife, Your Allies errour, grauelled with iealousie, And cares of life. Your bankes are seates enwrapt with shades of sadnesse, Your Arbours breed
rough fits of raging madnesse. Your beds are sowne with seeds of all iniquitie, And poys'ning weeds: Whose stalkes ill thoughts, whose leaues words full of vanitie, Whose fruit misdeeds. Whose sap is sinne, whose force and operation, To banish grace, and worke the soules damnation. Your trees are dismall plants of pyning corrosiues, Whose root is ruth, Whose barke is bale, whose timber stubburne fantasies, Whose pith vntruth. On which in lieu of birds whose voyce delighteth, Of guiltie conscience screeching note affrighteth. Your coolest Sommer gales are scadling sighings, Your showres are teares.
Your sweetest smell the stench of sinfull liuing. Your fauours feares; Your Gardener Satan, all you reape is miserie: Your gaine remorse, and losse of all felicitie.
From Fortunes reach. LEt fickle Fortune runne her blindest race: I setled haue an vnremoued mind: I scorne to be the game of Fancies chase, Or vane to shew the change of euery wind: Light giddie humours stinted to no rest, Still change their choyce, yet neuer chuse the best. My choice was guided by foresightfull heed, It was auerred with approuing will, It shall be followed with performing deed: And seal'd with vow, till death the chuser kill, Yea death, though finall date of vaine desires, Ends not my choice, which with no time expires.
To beauties fading blisse I am no thrall; I burie not my thoughts in mettall Mines, I ayme not at such fame, as feareth fall, I seeke and finde a light that euer-shines: Whose glorious beames display such heauenly sights, As yeeld my soule a summe of all delights. My light to loue, my loue to life doth guide To life that liues by loue, and loueth light: By loue to one, to whom all loues are tyed By duest debt, and neuer equall right. Eyes light, hearts loue, soules truest life he is, Consorting in three ioyes, one perfect blisse.
A FANCY TVRNED to a Sinners Complaint. HE that his mirth hath lost, Whose comfort is to rue, Whose hope is fallen, whose faith is cras'd, Whose trust is found vntrue. If he haue held them deare, And cannot ceasse to mone; Come, let him take his place by me, He shall not rue alone. But if the smallest sweete Be mixt with all his sowre; If in the day, the moneth, the yeare, He feele one lightning howre: Then rest he with himselfe, He is no mate for me; Whose time in teares, whose race in ruth, Whose life a death must be. Yet not the wished death, That feeles no paine or lacke: That making free the better part, Is onely Natures wracke.
O no, that were too well, My death is of the minde; That alwaies yeeld, extreamest pangs, Yet threatens worse behinde. As one that liues in shew, And inwardly doth dye: Whose knowledge is a bloudy field, Where Vertue slaine doth lye. Whose heart the Altar is, And hoast, a God to moue: From whom my ill doth feare reuenge, His good doth promise loue. My Fansies are like thornes, In which I go by night; My frighted wits are like an hoast, That force hath put to flight. My sense is passions spye, My thoughts like ruines old, Which shew how faire the building was, While grace did it vphold. And still before mine eyes, My mortall fall they lay;
Whom grace and vertue once aduanc't, Now sinne hath cast away. O thoughts, no thoughts but wounds, Sometime the Seate of ioy, Sometime the store of quiet rest, But now of all annoy. I sow'd the soyle of peace, My blisse was in the spring; And day by day the fruit I eate, That Vertues tree did bring. To Nettles now my corne, My field is turn'd to flint; Where I a heauy haruest reape, Of cares that neuer stint. The peace▪ the rest, the life, That I enioyd of yore, Were happy lot, but by their losse, My smart doth sting the more. So to vnhappy men, The best frames to the worst: O time, ô place where thus I fell, Deare then, but now accurst.
In was, stands my delight, In is, and shall my wo, My horrour fastned in the yea, My hope hangs in the no. Vnworthy of reliefe, That craued is too late; Too late I finde, (I finde too well) Too well, stood my estate. Behold, such is the end, That pleasure doth procure, Of nothing else but care and plaint. Can she the minde assure. Forsaken first by grace, By pleasure now forgotten, Her paine I feele, but graces wage Haue others from me gotten. Then grace, where is the ioy, That makes thy torments sweet? Where is the cause, that many thought Their deaths through thee but meet? Where thy disdaine of sinne, Thy secret sweet delight;
Thy sparkes of blisse, thy heauenly ioyes, That shined erst so bright? O that they were not lost, Or I could it excuse; O that a dreame of fained losse, My iudgement did abuse. Or fraile inconstant flesh, Soone trapt in euery ginne; Soone wrought thus to betray thy soule, And plonge thy selfe in sinne. Yet hate I but the fault, And not the faulty one. Ne can I rid from me the mate, That forceth me to moane: To moane a sinners case, Then which, was neuer worse; In Prince or poore, in yong, or old, In blest, or full of curse. Yet Gods must I remaine; By death, by wrong, by shame, I cannot blot out of my heart, That grace writ in his name:
I cannot set at nought, Whom I haue held so deere: I cannot make him seeme afarre, That is in deed so neere. Not that I looke hence-forth For loue that earst I found; Sith that I brake my plighted truth, To build on fickle ground. Yet that shall neuer faile, Which my faith bare in hand: I gaue my vow, my vow gaue me, Both vow and gift shall stand. But since that I haue sinn'd, And scourge none is too ill; I yeeld me captiue to my curse, My hard fate to fulfill. The solitary Wood, My City shall become, The darkest dennes shall be my Lodge, In which I rest or come. A sandy plot my boord, The wormes my feast shall be,
Where-with my carkasse shall be fed, Ʋntill they feed on me. My teares shall be my wine, My bed a craggy Rocke; My harmony the Serpents hisse, The screeching Owle my clocke. My exercise remorse, And dolefull sinners layes, My booke remembrance of my crimes, And faults of former dayes. My walke the path of plaint, My prospect into hell; Where Iudas and his cursed crue In endlesse paines do dwell. And though I seeme to vse The faining Poets stile, To figure forth my carefull plight, My fall and my exile: Yet is my griefe not fain'd, Wherein I starue and pine, Who feeles the most, shall thinke it least, If his compare with mine.
Dauids Peccaui. IN Eaues, sole Sparrow sits not more alone, Nor mourning Pellican in Desart wilde, Then silly I, that solitary mone, From highest hopes to hardest hap exilde: Sometime (ô blissefull time) was vertues meede, Ayme to my thoughts, guide to my word and deede. But feares are now my Pheeres, griefe my delight, My teares my drinke, my famisht thoughts, my bread; Day full of dumps, Nurse of vnrest the night, My garments gyues, a bloudy field my bed,
My sleepe is rather death, then deaths allye, Yet kill'd with murd'ring pangs, I cannot dye. This is the chance of my ill changed choyse, To pleasant tunes succeeds a playning voice, The dolefull eccho of my wayling minde: Which taught to know the worth of vertues ioyes, Doth hate it selfe for louing fancies toyes. If wiles of wit had ouer-raught my will, Or subtile traines misled my steppes awry, My foyle had found excuse in want of skill, Ill deed I might, though not ill doome deny: But wit and will must now confesse with shame, Both deede and doome
to haue deserued blame. I Fansie deem'd fit guide to leade my way, And as I deem'd, I did pursue the tracke; Wit lost his ayme, and will was Fansies prey, The Rebels wan, the Rulers went to wracke: But now sith Fansie did with folly end, Wit bought with losse, Will taught by wit, will mend.
Sinnes heauie load. O Lord, my sinnes do ouer-charge thy brest, The poyse thereof doth force thy knees to bow; Yea flat thou fallest with my faults opprest, And bloudie sweat runs trickling from thy brow: But had they not to Earth thus pressed thee, Much more they would in Hell haue pestred me. This Globe of Earth doth thy one finger prop, The world thou do'st within thy hand embrace; Yet all this waight, of sweat drew not a drop, Ne made thee bow, much lesse fall on thy face:
But now thou hast a load so heauie found, That makes thee bow, yea fall flat to the ground. O sinne, how huge and heauie is thy waight! That waighest more then all the world beside. Of which when Christ hath taken in his fraight, The poyse thereof his flesh could not abide. Alas, if God himselfe sinke vnder sinne, What will become of man that dyes therein? First, flat thou fell'st, when earth did thee receiue, In closet pure of Maries virgine breast; And now thou fall'st, of earth to take thy leaue, Thou kissest it as cause of thy vnrest: O louing Lord,
that so doest loue thy fo, As thus to kisse the ground where he doth go. Thou minded in thy heauen our earth to weare, Do'st prostrate now thy heauen, our earth to blisse; As God, to earth thou often wert seuere: As man, thou call'st a peace with bleeding kisse. For as of soules thou common Father art, So is she Mother of mans other part. She shortly was to drinke thy dearest bloud, And yeeld the soule a way to Satans caue; She shortly was thy corse in tombe to shrowd, And with them all thy Deitie to haue: Now then in me thou ioyntly yeeldest all,
That seuerally to earth should shortly fall. O prostrate Christ, erect my crooked mind: Lord, let thy fall my flight from Earth obtaine; Or if I needs must still in Earth be shrin'd, Then Lord, on Earth come fall yet once againe: And either yeeld in Earth with me to lye, Or else with thee to take me to the skie.
Iosephs Amazement. WHen Christ by growth disclosed his descent, Into the pure receipt of Maries breast; Poore Ioseph, stranger yet to Gods intent, With doubts of iealous thoughts was sore opprest: And wrought with diuers fits of feare and loue, He neither can her free, nor faulty proue. Now since the wakefull spy of iealous minde, By strong coniectures deemeth her defil'd; But loue in doome of things best loued blinde, Thinkes rather sense deceiu'd, then her with child:
Yet proofes so pregnant were, that no pretence, Could cloake a thing so cleare and plaine to sense. Then Ioseph daunted with a deadly wound, Let loose the reines of vndeserued griefe; His heart did throb, his eyes in teares were drownd, His life a losse, death seem'd his best reliefe: The pleasing rellish of his former loue, In gaulish thoughts to bitter tast doth proue. One foot he often setteth out of dore, But t'other loath vncertaine wayes to tread; He takes his fardell for his needfull store, He casts his Inne where first he meanes to bed: But still ere he
can frame his feet to go, Loue winneth time, till all conclude in no. Sometimes griefe adding force, he doth depart, He will against his will keepe on his pase: But straight remorse so rackes his raging heart, That hasting thoughts yeeld to a pawsing pase: Then mightie reasons presse him to remaine, She whom he flyes doth winne him home againe. But when his thought by sight of his aboad, Presents the signe of misesteemed shame, Repenting euery step that backe he troad, Teares done, the guide, the tong, the feet do blame. Thus warring with himselfe, a field he fights,
Where euery wound vpon the giuer lights. And was (quoth he) my loue so lightly pris'd, Or was our sacred league so soone forgot? Could vowes be void, could vertues be despis'd; Could such a spouse, be stain'd with such a spot? O wretched Ioseph, that hath liu'd so long, Of faithfull loue to reape so grieuous wrong! Could such a worme breed in so sweet a Wood? Could in so chast demeanure lurke vntruth? Could vice lye hid where Vertues image stood? Where hoarie sagenesse graced tender youth? Where can affiance rest, to rest secure? In vertues fairest seat,
faith is not sure. All proofes did promise hope a pledge of grace, Whose good might haue repay'd the deepest ill; Sweet signes of purest thoughts in Saintly face, Assur'd the eye of her vnstained will. Yet in this seeming lustre, seeme to lye Such crimes, for which the Law condemnes to dye. But Iosephs word shall neuer worke her wo, I wish her leaue to liue, not doome to dye; Though Fortune mine, yet am I not her fo, She to her selfe lesse louing is then I. The most I will, the least I can is this, Sith none may salue, to shun that is amisse.
Exile my home, the wildes shall be my walke, Complaint my ioy, my Musicke mourning layes; With pensiue griefes in silence will I talke: Sad thoughts shall be my guides in sorrowes wayes. This course best sutes the care of carelesse minde, That seekes to lose, what most it ioy'd to finde. Like stocked tree whose branches all do fade, Whose leaues do fall, and perisht fruit decay; Like hearbe that growes in cold and barren shade, Where darknesse driues all quickning heat away; So dye must I, cut from my root of ioy, And throwne in darkest shades of deepe annoy. But who can flye
from that his heart doth feele? What change of place can change implanted paine? Remouing, moues no hardnesse from the steele. Sicke hearts, that shift no fits, shift roomes in vaine: Where thought can see, what helpes the closed eye? Where heart pursues, what gaines the foot to fly? Yet did I tread a maze of doubtfull end; I go, I come, she drawes, she driues away, She wounds, she heales, she doth both marre and mend, She makes me seeke, and shun, depart, and stay: She is a friend to loue, a fo to lothe, And in suspence I hang betweene them both.
New Prince, new Pompe. BEhold a silly tender Babe, In freezing Winter night, In homely Manger trembling lies; Alas a piteous sight: The Innes are full, no man will yeeld This little Pilgrime bed; But forc't he is with silly beasts, In Crib to shrowd his head. Despise him not for lying there, First what he is enquire: An orient pearle is often found In depth of dirtie mire. Waigh not his Crib, his woodden dish, Nor beasts that by him feed: Waigh not his Mothers poore attire, Nor Iosephs simple weed. This Stable is a Princes Court, The Crib his chaire of State: The Beasts are parcell of his Pompe, The wooden dish his plate. The persons in that poore attire,
His royall liueries weare, The Prince himselfe is come from heauen, This pompe is prized there. With ioy approach, O Christian wight, Do homage to thy King; And highly praise his humble Pompe, Which he from Heauen doth bring.
The burning Babe. AS I in hoarie Winters night, stood shiuering in the snow, Surpris'd I was with sudden heat, which made my heart to glow; And lifting vp a fearefull eye, to view what fire was neare, A prettie Babe all burning bright, did in the ayre appeare; Who, scorched with excessiue heate, such flouds of teares did shed, As though his flouds should quench his flames, which with his teares were bred: Alas, (quoth he) but newly borne, in fierie heates I frie, Yet none approach to warme their hearts or feele my fire but I; My faultlesse breast the fornace is, the fuell wounding thornes: Loue is the fire, and sighes the smoake,
the ashes shames and scornes; The fuell Iustice layeth on, and mercie blowes the coales, The mettall in this Fornace wrought, are mens defiled soules: For which, as now on fire I am, to worke them to their good, So will I melt into a bath, to wash them in my blood. With this he vanisht out of sight, and swiftly shronke away, And straight I called vnto mind, that it was Christmasse day.
New Heauen, new Warre. COme to your heauen, you heauenly Quires, Earth hath the heauen of your desires: Remoue your dwelling to your God, A stall is now his best abode; Sith men their homage do deny, Come Angels all, their fault supply. His chilling cold doth heat require, Come Seraphins in lieu of fire; This little Arke no couer hath, Let Cherubs wings his body swathe: Come Raphael, this Babe must eate, Prouide our little Toby meate. Let Gabriel be now his groome; That first tooke vp his earthly roome; Let Michael stand in his defence, Whom loue hath linkt to feeble sense: Let graces rocke when he doth cry, Let Angels sing his lullaby.
The same you saw in heauenly seate, Is he that now suckes Maries teate, Agnize your King a mortall wight, His borrowed weed lets not your sight Come kisse the manger where he lyes, That is your blisse aboue the skies. This little Babe, so few dayes old, Is come to rifle Sathans fold; All hell doth at his presence quake, Though he himself for cold do shake: For in this weake vnarmed wise, The gates of hell he will surprise. With teares he fights & wins the field, His naked breast stands for a shield; His battering shot are babish cryes, His arrowes, lookes of weeping eyes, His Martiall Ensignes, cold and need, And feeble flesh, his warriers Steed. His Campe is pitched in astall, His bulwarke but a broken wall: The Crib his trench, hay-stalkes his stakes, Of Shepheards he his Muster makes; And thus as sure his fo to wound,
The Angels trumps alarum sound. My soule, with Christ ioyne thou in fight, Sticke to the tents, that he hath dight; Within his crib is surest ward, This little Babe will be thy guard: If thou wilt foyle thy foes with ioy, Then flit not from the heauenly Boy. FINIS.
Moeoniae. OR, CERTAINE EXCELLENT POEMS AND SPIRITVAL Hymnes: composed by R.S. printer's or publisher's device .AN CHO RA. SPEI. LONDON. Printed for W. Barret.
The Virgine Maries conception. OVR second Eue puts on her mortall shrowd, Earth breeds a heauen, for Gods new dwelling place, Now riseth vp Elias little cloud That growing, shall distill the showre of grace: Her being now begins, who ere she end, Shall bring our good that shall our ill amend. Both Grace and Nature did their force vnite, To make this babe the summe of all their best, Our most, her least, our million, but her mite: She was at easiest rate
worth all the rest: What grace to men or Angels God did part, Was all vnited in this infants heart. Foure onely wights, bred without fault are nam'd, And all the rest conceiued were in sinne; Without both man and wife was Adam fram'd, Of man, but not of wife did Eue beginne: Wife without touch of man Christs mother was, Of man and wife this babe was borne in grace.
Her Natiuitie. IOy in the rising of our Orient starre, That shall bring forth the Sunne that lent her light, Ioy in the peace that shall conclude our warre, And soone rebate the edge of Sathans spight. Load-starre of all inclos'd in worldly waues, The care and compasse that from ship-wracke saues: The patriarkes and Prophets were the flowers, Which time by course of ages did distill, And call'd into his little clowd the showers, Whose gracious drops the world with ioy shall fill, Whose moisture suppleth
euery soule with grace, And bringeth life to Adams dying race. For God on earth she is the royall throne, The chosen cloth to make his mortall weede, The quarry to cut out our corner stone, Soile full of fruite, yet free from mortall seede, For heauenly flowre she is the Iessa rod, The child of man, the parent of a god.
Her Spousals. WIfe did she liue, yet virgine did she dye, Vntoucht of man, yet mother of a sonne, To saue her selfe and child from fatall lie, To end the web whereof the thred was spon, In marriage knots to Ioseph she was tide, Vnwonted workes with wonted wiles to hide. God lent his Paradise to Iosephs care, Wherein he was to plant the tree of life: His sonne, of Iosephs child the title bare: Iust cause to make
the mother Iosephs wife. O blessed man betroth'd to such a spouse, More blest to liue with such a child in house. No carnall loue this sacred league procur'd, All vaine delights were farre from their assent, Though both themselues in wedlocke bands assur'd, Yet chast by vow they seald their chast intent. Thus had the Virgins, wiues, and widows crowne, And by chaste child-birth doubled their renowne.
The virgins salutation. SPell Eua backe, and Aue shall you finde; The first began, the last reuerst our harmes; An Angels Aue disinchants the charmes, Death first by womans weaknesse entred in, In womans vertue life doth now begin. O Virgins breast, the heauens to thee incline, In thee they ioy, and soueraigne they agnize; Too meane their glorie is to match with thine, Whose chast receit God more then heauen did prize, Haile fairest heauen,
that heauen and earth do blisse, Where vertues starre, Gods Sunne of iustice is, With haughty mind to godhead man aspired, And was by pride from place of pleasure chac'de, With louing mind our manhood God desired, And vs by loue in greater pleasure plac'de, Man labouring to ascend procur'd our fall, God yeelding to descend cut off our thrall.
The Visitation. PRoclaimed Queene and mother of a God, The light of earth, the soueraigne of Saints, With Pilgrime foote, vp tyring hils she trod, And heauenly stile with handmaids toile acquaints: Her youth to age, her selfe to sicke she lends, Her heart to God, to neighbour hand she bends. A prince she is, and mightier prince doth beare, Yet pompe of princely traine she would not haue, But doubtlesse heauenly Quires attendant were, Her child from harme her selfe from fall to saue: Word to the voice,
song to the tune she brings, The voice her word, the tune her ditty sings. Eternall lights inclosed in her breast, Shot out such piercing beames of burning loue, That when her voice her cosins eares possest, The force thereof did force her babe to moue, With secret signes the children greet each other, But open praise each leaueth to his mother.
His Circumcision. THe head is launc't to worke the bodies cure, With angrie salue it smarts to heale our wound: To faultlesse Sonne from all offences pure, The faulty vassals scourges do redound. The Iudge is cast the guiltie to acquit, The Sunne defac'd to lend the starre his light, The vine of life distilleth drops of grace: Our rocke giues issue to an heauenly spring, Teares from his eyes, bloud runnes from wounding place, Which showers to heauen of ioy an haruest bring. This sacred deaw
let Angels gather vp: Such dainty drops best fit their nectar'd cup: With weeping eyes his mother rewd his smart, If bloud from him, teares came from her as fast, The knife that cut his flesh did pierce her heart, The paine that Iesus felt did Marie taste, His life and hers hung by one fatall twist, No blow that hit the Sonne the mother mist.
The Epiphanie. TO blaze the rising of this glorious Sunne A glittering starre appeareth in the East, Whose sight to pilgrims toile three sages wun, To feeke the light they long had in request: And by this starre to nobler starre they pace, Whose armes did their desired sinne embrace: Stall was the skie wherein those planets shinde, And want the cloud that did eclipse their rayes, Yet through this cloud their light did passage finde, And pierc'd these sages hearts by secret wayes, Which made them know
the ruler of the skies, By infant tongue and lookes of babish eyes: Heauen at her light, earth blusheth at her pride, And of their pompe these peeres ashamed be, Their crownes, their robes, their traines they set aside, When Gods poore cottage, clouts, and crew they see. All glorious things their glorie now despise, Sith God Contempt duth more then Glorie prise, Three gifts they bring, three gifts they beare away; For incense, mirrhe, and gold, faith, hope, and loue; And with their gifts the giuers heart do stay: Their mind from Christ, no parting can remoue, His humble state, his stall, his poore retinew They fancy more then all their rich reuenew.
The Presentation. TO be redeem'd the worlds redeemer brought, Two silly turtle doues for ransome paies: O wares with empires worthie to be bought! This easie rate doth sound, not drowne thy praise, For sith no price can to thy worth amount, A doue, yea loue, due price thou doest account. Old Simeon, cheape pennie worth and sweet, Obtaind when thee in armes he did imbrace, His weeping eyes thy smiling lookes did meet, Thy loue his heart,
thy kisses blest his face. O eyes, O heart, meane sights and loues auoide, Base not your selues, your best you haue enioyde: O virgine pure thou dost those doues present, As due to law, not as an equall price; To buy such ware thou wouldst thy selfe haue spent, The world to reach his worth could not suffice. If God were to be bought, not worldly pelfe, But thou wert fittest price next God himselfe.
The flight into Egypt ALas, our day is forst to flie by night, Light without light, and Sunne by silent shade; O nature blush, that suffrest such a wight, That in thy Sunne thy darke eclipse hast made Day to his eyes, light to his steps denie, That hates the light which graceth euerie eye. Sunne being fled, the starres do lose their light, And shining beames in bloudy streames they drench. A cruell storme of Herods mortall spight, Their liues and lights with bloudy showers do quench: The tyrant to be sure
of murdring one, For feare of sparing him doth pardon none. O blessed babes, first flowers of Christian spring, though vntimely cropt raire garlands frame; With open throats and silent mouthes you sing, His praise, whom age permits you not to name. Your tunes are teares, your instruments are swords, Your dittie death, and bloud in lieu of words.
Christs returne out of Egypt. WHen death and hell their right in Herod claime, Christ from exile returnes to natiue soile: There, with his life more deepely death to maime, Then death did life by all the infants spoile. He shewed the parents that the babes did mone, That all their liues were lesse then his alone. But hearing Herods sonne to haue the crowne, The impious of-spring of a bloudy sire; To Nazareth (of heauen beloued) towne, Flowre to a flowre he fitly doth retire. For he is a flower,
and in a flower he bred, And from a thorne now to a flowre he fled. And well deseru'd this flowre his fruite to view, Where he inuested was in mortall weed, Where first into a tender bud he grew, In virgine branch vnstaind with mortall seed. Young flowre, with flowers, in flower well may he be: Ripe fruit he must with thornes hang on a tree.
Christs bloudy sweat. FAt soile, full spring, sweet oliue, grape of blisse, That yeelds, that streames, that powers, that dost distill: Vntild, vndrawne, vnstampt, vntoucht of presse, Deare fruite, cleare brookes, faire oyle, sweet wine at will: Thus Christ vnforst, preuents in shedding bloud: The whips, the thornes, the naile, the speare, and roode. He Pellicans, he Phenix fate doth proue, Whom flames consume when streames enforce to dye. How burneth bloud, how bleedeth burning loue? Can one in flame, and streame both bathe and frie? How would he ioyne a Phenix fiery paines, In foinring Pellicans still bleeding vaines?
Christs sleeping friends. VVHen Christ with care and pangs of death opprest, From frighted flesh a bloody sweat did raine, And full of feare without repose or rest: Did watch and pray in agonie and paine, Three sundrie times he his disciples findes With heauie eyes, with dull and heauy minds; With milde rebuke he warned them to wake, Yet sleepe did still their drowsie senses hold: As when the Sunne the brightest shew doth make, In darkest shrowds the night birds them infold. His foes did watch.
to worke their cruell spight, His drowsie friends slept in his hardest night. As Ionas sayled once from Ioppaes shoare, A boystrous tempest in the aire did broile, The waues did rage, the thundring heau'ns did roare, The stormes, the rocks, the lightnings threatned spoile, The ship was billowes game and chances pray, Yet carelesse Ionas mute and slumbring lay: So now though Iudas like a blustring gust, Do stirre the furious sea of Iewish ire, Though storming troopes in quarrels most vniust, Against the barke of all our blisse conspire, Yet these disciples sleeping lie secure, As though their wonted calme did still endure.
So Ionas once his heauy limmes to rest, Did shrowd himselfe in iuy pleasant shade: But lo, while him an heauy sleepe opprest, His shadowy bowre, to withered stalke did fade; A cankered worme did gnaw the root away, And brought the glorious branches to decay. O gracious plant, O tree of heauenly spring, The paragon for leafe, for fruite and flower, How sweete a shadow did thy branches bring, To shrowd those soules that chose thee for their bower? But now while they with Ionas fall asleepe, To spoile their plant an enuious worme doth creepe. Awake you slumbring wights, lift vp your eyes, Marke Iudas how
to teare your root he striues. Alas the glory of your arbour dies, Arise and guard the comfort of your liues. No Ionas iuy, no Zacheus tree, Were to the world so great a losse as hee.
The virgine Mary to Christ on the Crosse. WHat mist hath dimd that glori∣ous face? what seas of griefe my Sun doth tosse? The golden raies of heauenly grace, lie now eclipsed on the crosse: Iesus my loue, my sonne, my God, behold thy mother washt in teares: Thy bloudy wounds be made a rod, to chasten these my latter yeares. You cruell Iewes come worke your ire, vpon this worthlesse flesh of mine: And kindle not eternall fire, by wounding him which is diuine. Thou messenger that didst impart his first descent into my wombe, Come helpe me now to cleaue my heart, that there I may my sonne intombe. You Angels all that present were to shew his birth with harmonie,
Why are you not now readie here to make a mourning symphony? The cause I know you waile alone, and shed your teares in secrecie, Lest I should moued be to mone, by force of heauie companie. But waile my soule, thy comfort dies, my wofull wombe lament thy fruit, My heart giue teares vnto mine eyes, let sorrow string my heauie lute.
An holy Hymne. PRaise, O Sion, praise thy Sauiour, Praise thy captaine, & thy pastour, With hymnes and solemne harmony. What power affords performe indeed, His workes all praises farre exceede: No praise can reach his dignity. A speciall theame of praise is read, A liuing and life giuing bread Is on this day exhibited Within the Supper of our Lord, To twelue disciples at his bord, As doubtlesse twas deliuered. Let our praise be lou'd and free, Full of ioy and decent glee, With minds and voices melody. For now solemnize we that day, Which doth with ioy to vs display,
The secret of this mystery, At this boord of our new ruler, Of old law, and Pascall order, The ancient right abolisheth: Old decrees, by new annil'd. Shadowes are in truth fulfil'd, Day former darknesse finisheth. That at supper Christ performed, To be done he straightly charged, For his eternall memorie. Guided by his sacred orders, Bread and wine vpon our alters, To sauing host we sanctifie. Christians are by faith assured, That by faith flesh is receiued, And Christ his bloud most precious: That no wit no sense conceiueth, Firme and grounded faith beleeueth, In strange effects not curious. As staffe of bread thy heart sustaines, And chearefull wine thy strength regaines, By power and vertue naturall: So doth this consecrated food,
Them symbole of Christ flesh & bloud, By vertue supernaturall. The ruines of thy soule repaire, Banish sinne, horrour, and despaire, And feed faith, by faith receiued: Angels bread made Pilgrims feeding, Truely bread for childrens eating, To dogs not to be offered: Sign'd by Isack on the altar, By the Lambe and pascall Supper, And in the Manna figured. Iesu food and feeder of vs Here with mercie feed and friend vs, Then graunt in heauen felicitie. Lord of all whom here thou feedest, Fellow heires, guests with thy dearest, Make vs in thy heauenly citie.
S. Peters afflicted mind. IF that the sicke may grone, Or Orphane mourne his losse: If wounded wretch may rue his harmes Or caitife shew his crosse: If heart consum'd with care, May vtter signe; of paine, Then may my breast be sorrowes home And tongue with cause complaine. My maladie is sinne, And languor of the mind, My body but a lazars couch, Wherein my soule is pinde. The care of heauenly kinde Is dead to my reliefe, Forlorne and left like orphan child; With sighes I feed my griefe. My wounds with mortall smart, My dying soule torment, And prisoner to mine owne mishaps, My follies I repent. My heart is but the haunt Where all dislikes do keepe: And who can blame so lost a wretch, Though teares of bloud he weepe?
S. Peters remorse. REmorse vpbraids my faults, Selfe blaming conscience cries, Sin claimes the hoast of hūbled thoughts, And streames of weeping eyes. Let penance Lord preuaile, Let sorrow sue release, Let loue be vmpier in my cause, And passe the doome of peace. If doome go by desert, My least desert is death, That robs from soule immortall ioyes, From body mortall breath. But in so high a God, So base a wormes annoy, Can adde no praise vnto thy power, No blisse vnto thy ioy. Well may I frie in flames, Due fuell to hell-fire, But on a wretch to wreake thy wrath, Can not be worth thine ire. Yet sith so vile a worme
Hath wrought his greatest spite, Of highest treason well thou maist, In rigor him indite. But mercy may relent And temper iustice rod, For mercy doth as much belong, As iustice to a God. If former time or place More right to mercy winne, Thou first wert author of my selfe, Then vmpier of my sinne. Did mercy spin the thread, To weaue in iustice loome, Wert thou a father to conclude, With dreadfull Iudges doome, It is a small reliefe To say I was thy child, If as an ill deseruing foe From grace I am exilde. I was, I had, I could, All words importing want: They are but dust of dead supplies, Where needfull helpes are scant. Once to haue beene in blisse That hardly can returne, Doth not bewray from whence I fell, And wherefore now I mourne.
All thoughts of passed hopes Increase my present crosse: Like ruines of decayed ioyes, They still vpbraid my losse. O milde and mighty Lord, Amend that is amisse: My sinne my sore, thy loue my salue, Thy cure my comfort is. Confirme thy former deeds, Reforme that is defild: I was, I am, I will remaine, Thy charge, thy choise, thy child.
Man to the wound in Christs side. O Pleasant sport, ô place of rest, O royal rift, ô worthy wound, Come harbour me a weary guest, That in the world no case haue found. I lie lamenting at thy gate, Yet dare I not aduenture in: I beare with me a troublous mate, And combred am with heape of sinne: Discharge me of this heauy load, That easier passage I may find, Within this bowre to make aboad, And in this glorious tombe be shrin'd. Here must I liue, here must I die, Here would I vtter all my griefe: Here would I all those paines descrie, Which here did meet for my reliefe. Here would I view that bloudy sore, Which dint of spitefull speare did breed:
The bloudy wounds laid there in store Would force a stony heart to bleed. Here is the spring of trickling teares, The mirrour of all mourning wights, With dolefull tunes, for dumpish eares, And solemne shewes for sorrowed sights. O happie soule that flies so hie, As to attaine this sacred caue: Lord send me wings that I may flie, And in this harbour quiet haue.
Vpon the Image of death. BEfore my face the picture hangs, That daily should put me in mind, Of those cold names and bitter pangs, That shortly I am like to find: But yet alas, full little I Do thinke hereon that I must die. I often looke vpon a face Most vgly, grisly, bare, and thinne, I often view the hollow place, Where eyes and nose had somtimes bin: I see the bones acrosse that lie: Yet little thinke that I must die. I reade the Labell vnderneath, That telleth me whereto I must: I see the sentence eke that saith, Remember man thou art dust: But yet alas but seldome I, Do thinke indeed that I must die. Continually at my beds head,
An hearse doth hang which doth me tell, That I ere morning may be dead, Though now I feele my selfe ful well: But yet alas, for all this I Haue little mind that I must die. The gowne which I do vse to weare, The knife wherewith I cut my meate, And eke that old and ancient chaire, Which is my onely vsuall seate: All these do tell me, I must die, And yet my life amend not I. My ancestors are turnd to clay, And many of my mates are gone, My yongers daily drop away, And can I thinke to scape alone? No, no, I know that I must die, And yet my life amend not I. Not Salomon for all his wit, Nor Sampson though he were so strong, No king nor person euer yet Could scape, but death laid him along: Wherefore I know that I must die, And yet my life amend not I. Though all the East did quake to heare, Of Alexanders dreadfull name, And all the West did likewise feare, To heare of Iulius Caesars fame,
Yet both by death in dust now lie, Who then can scape, but he must die? If none can scape deaths dreadfull dart, If rich and poore his becke obey, If strong, if wise, if all do smart, then I to scape shall haue no way. Oh grant me grace O God that I, My life may mend, sith I must die.
A vale of teares. A Vale there is, enwrapt with dreadfull shades, Which thicke of mourning pines shrowds from the Sunne, Where hanging cliffes yeeld short and dumpish glades, And snowy flouds with broken streames do runne, Where eye-roome is from rocke to cloudie skie, From thence to dales which stormy ruines shrowd, Then to the crushed waters frothie frie, Which tumbleth from the tops where snow is show'd; Where eares of other sound can haue no choice, But various blustring of the stubburne wind, In trees, in caues,
in straits with diuers noise, Which now doth hisse, now howle, now roare by kind: Where waters wrastle with encountring stones, That breake their streames, and turne them into foame, The hollow clouds ful fraught with thundering groanes, With hideous thumps discharge their pregnant wombe. And in the horror of this fearefull quier, Consists the musicke of this dolefull place: All pleasant birds their tunes from thence retire, Where none but heauy notes haue any grace. Resort there is of none but pilgrime wights, That passe with trembling foote and panting heart, With terrour cast in cold and shuddring frights, And all the place to terror fram'd by art:
Yet natures worke it is of arte vntoucht, So strait indeed, so vast vnto the eye, With such disordred order strangely coucht, And so with pleasing horror low and hie, That who it viewes must needs remaine agast, Much at the worke, more at the makers might, And muse how Nature such a plot could cast, Where nothing seemed wrong, yet nothing right: A place for mated minds, an onely bower, Where euerie thing doth sooth a dumpish mood. Earth lies forlorne, the cloudie skie doth lower, The wind here weepes, her sighes, her cries aloud: The strugling floud betweene the marble grones, Then roaring beates
vpon the craggie sides, A little off amidst the pibble stones, With bubling streames a purling noise it glides. The pines thicke set, high growne, and euer greene, Still cloath the place with shade and mourning vaile, Here gaping cliffes, there mosse growne plaine is seene; Here hope doth spring, and there againe doth quaile. Huge massie stones that hang by tickle stay, Still threaten foule, and seeme to hang in feare: Some withered trees asham'd of their decay, Beset with greene, and forc'd gray coates to weare. Here christall springs crept out of secret vaine, Straite findes some enuious hole that hides their graine. Here seared tufts lament the wants of g ace,
There thunder wracke giues terror to the place. All pangs and heauie passions here may find A thousand motiues suting to their griefes, To feed the sorrowes of their troubled mind, And chase away dame pleasures vaine reliefes. To plaining thoughts this vale a rest may be, To which from worldly toyes they may retire, Where sorrow springs from water, stone, and tree, Where euerie thing with mourners doth conspire. Sit here my soule, mourne streames of teares aflote, Here all thy sinfull foyles alone recount; Of solemne tunes make thou the dolefulst note, That to thy ditties dolor may amount. When Eccho doth repeate
thy painefull cries, Thinke that the very stones thy sinnes bewray, And now accuse thee with their sad replies, As heauen and earth shall in the latter day: Let former faults be fuell of the fire, For griefe in Limbeck e of thy heart to still Thy pensiue thoughts, and dumps of thy desire, And vapour teares vp to thy eyes at will. Let teares to tunes, and paines to plaints be prest, And let this be the burthen to thy song, Come deepe remorse, possesse my sinfull breast: Delights adue I harboured you too long.
The prodigall childs soule-wracke. DIsankerd from a blisfull shore, and lancht into the maine of cares, Grewne rich in vice, in vertue poore, from freedome falne in fatall snares: I found my selfe on euerie side enwrapped in the waues of wo, And tossed with a toilesome tide, could to no port for refuge go. The wrastling winds with raging blasts still hold me in a cruell chace: They breake my anchors, saile, and masts, permitting no reposing place. The boistrous seas with swelling flouds, on euerie side did worke their spight, Heauen ouercast with stormy clouds denide the Planets guiding light. The hellish furies lay in wait, to winne my soule into their power, To make me bite at euery baite, wherein my bane I might deuoure.
Thus heauen and hell, thus sea and land, thus stormes and tempests did conspire, With iust reuenge of scourging hand, to witnesse Gods deserued ire. I plonged in this heauie plight, found in my faults iust cause to feare: My darknesse taught to know my light, the losse thereof enforced teares. I felt my inward bleeding sores, my festred wounds began to smart, Stept far within deaths fatall dores, the pangs thereof went neare my heart. I cried truce: I craued peace, a league with death I would conclude, But vaine it was to sue release, subdue I must or be subdude. Death and deceit had picht their snares, and out their wonted proofes in vre, To sinke me in despairing cares, or make me stoope to pleasures lure: They sought by their bewitching charmes, so to enchant my erring sense, That whē they sought my greatest harmes, I might neglect my best defence. My dazled eyes could take no view, no heed of their deceiuing shifts, So often did they alter hew,
and practise new deuised drifts: With Syrens songs they fed mine eares, till luld asleepe on errors lap, I found their tunes turnd into teares, and short delights to long mishap. For I enticed to their lore, and soothed with their idle toyes, Was trained to their prison doore, the end of all such flying ioyes: Where chaind in sinne I lay in thrall, next to the dungeon of despaire, Till mercy rais'd me from my fall, and grace my ruines did repaire.
Mans ciuill warre. MY houering thoghts wold fly to heauē and quiet nestle in the skie, Faine would my ship in vertues shore without remoue at anchor lie: But mounted thoughts are hailed downe with heauie poise of mortall load, And blustring stormes denie my ship in vertues hauen a sure aboad. When inward eye to heauenly sights doth draw my longing hearts desire, The world with guesses of delights, would to her pearch my thoughts retire. Fond fancie traines to pleasures lure, though reason stiffely do repine. Though reason woo me to the Saint, yet sense would win me to the shrine: Where wisedome loathes, there fancy loues and ouer rules the captiue will. Foes senses, and to vertues lore, they draw the wit their wish to fill. Need craues consent of soule to sense,
yet diuers bents breeds ciuill fray, Hard hap where halues must disagree, or trust of halues the whole betray. O cruell fight, where fighting friend with loue doth kill a fauoring foe. Where peace with sense is warre with God and selfe delight the seed of wo, Dame pleasures drugges are steept in sin, their sugred taste doth breed annoy. O fickle sense beware her ginne, sell not thy soule for brittle ioy.
Seeke flowers of heauen. SO eare vp my soule vnto thy rest, cast off this loathsome load: Long is the date of thy exile, too long the strickt abode. Grace not on worldly withered weed, it fitteth not thy taste; The flowers of euerlasting spring, do grow for thy repast. Their leaues are staind in beauties die, and blazed with their beames; Their stalks enameld with delight, and limbde with glorious gleames. Life giuing iuice of liuing loue, their sugred veines doth fill, And watred with eternall showers, they nectard drops distill. These flowers do spring from fertile soile, though from vnmanur'd field, Most glittering gold in lieu of glebe, these fragrant flowers do yeeld: Whose soueraigne sent surpassing sense, so rauisheth the mind, That worldly weeds needs must he loath, that can these flowers find. FINIS.
MARIE MAGDALENS FVNERALL TEARES. Ieremie Chap. 6. verse. 26. Luctum vnigeniti fac tibi planctum amarum. printer's or publisher's device .AN CHO RA. SPEI. LONDON. Printed for W. Barret.
To the worshipfull and vertuous Gentlewoman, Mistresse D.A. YOur Vertuous requests, to which your de∣serts gaue the force of a com∣mandement, won me to satisfie your deuotion, in penning some little discourse of the blessed Mary Magdalene. And a∣mong other glorious examples of this Saints life, I haue made choice of her Funerall Teares, in which as she most vttered the great vehemencie of her feruent loue to Christ, so hath she giuen therein largest scope to dilate vpon the same: a
theame pleasing I hope vnto your selfe, and fittest for this time. For as passion, and espe∣cially this of loue, is in these dayes the chiefe commander of most mens actions, and the Idol to which both tongues and pennes do sacrifice their ill be∣stowed labours: so is there no∣thing now more needfull to be intreated, than how to direct these humours vnto their due courses, and to draw this floud of affections into the right cha∣nel. Passions I allow, and loues I approue, onely I would wish that men would alter their ob∣iect, and better their intent. For passions being sequels of our nature, and allotted vnto vs as the handmaides of rea∣son, there can be no doubt, but that as their authour is good, and their end godly; so their
vse tempered in the meane, implyeth no offence. Loue is but the infancie of true charitie, yet sucking Natures teat, and swathed in her bands, which then groweth to perfection, when faith besides naturall motiues, proposeth higher and nobler grounds of amitie. Ha∣tred and anger are the neces∣sarie officers of prowesse and iustice, courage being cold and dull, and Iustice in due reuenge slacke and carelesse, where hate of the fault doth not make it o∣dious, and anger setteth not an edge on the sword that puni∣sheth or preuenteth wrongs. Desire and hope are the parents of diligence and industrie, the nurses of perseuerance and con¦stancie, the seedes of valour & magnanimitie, the death of sloath, and the breath of all
vertue. Feare and dislikes are the scoutes of discretion, the harbingers of wisedome and pollicie, killing idle repentance in the cradle, and curbing rashnesse with deliberation. Audacitie is the armour of strength, and the guide of glo∣rie, breaking the Ice to the har∣dest exployts, and crowning valour with honorable victo∣rie. Sorrow is the sister of mer∣cie, and a waker of compassion, weeping with others teares, & grieued with their harmes. It is both the salue and smart of sinne, curing that which it chastiseth with true remorse, & preuenting need of new cure with the detestation of the dis∣ease. Despaire of the successe, is a bitte against euill attempts, and the hearse of idle hopes,
ending endlesse things in their first motion, to begin. True ioy is the rest and reward of ver∣tue, seasoning difficulties with delight, and giuing a present assay of future happinesse. Fi∣nally, there is no passion but hath a seruiceable vse either in pursuite of good, or auoidance of euill, and they are all benefits of God, and helpes of nature, so long as they are kept vnder vertues correction. But as too much of the best is euill, and excesse in vertue, vice; so passions let loose with∣out limits, are imperfections, nothing being good that wan∣teth measure. And as the sea is vnfit for trafficke, not onely when the windes are too boy∣sterous, but also when they are too still, and a middle gale and motion of the waues serueth
best the saylers purpose; So nei∣ther too stormy nor too calme a mind giueth Vertue the first course, but a middle temper be∣tweene them both, in which the welordered passiōs are wrought to prosecute, not suffered to per∣uert any vertuous endeuour. Such were the passions of this holy Saint, which were not guides to reason, but atten∣dants vpon it, and commanded by such a loue as could neuer exceede, because the thing lo∣ued was of infinite perfection. And if her weaknesse of faith, (an infirmitie then common to all Christs disciples) did suffer her vnderstanding to be decei∣ued, yet was her will so setled in a most sincere and perfect loue, that it led all her passions with the same byas, recompen∣cing the want of beliefe, with
the strange effects of an excel∣lent charitie. This loue and these passions are the subiect of this discourse, which though it reach not to the dignitie of Maries deserts, yet shall I think my indeuours well appayd, if it may but woo some skilfuller pennes from vnworthy labors, either to supply in this matter my want of ability, or in other of like pietie, (whereof the Scripture is full) to exercise their happier talents. I know that none can expresse a passion that he feeleth not, neither doth the penne deliuer but what it copieth out of the minde. And therefore the finest wits are now giuen to write passionate discourses, I would wish them to make choise of such passions, as it neither should be shame to vtter, nor sinne to feele.
But whether my wishes in this behalfe take effect or not, I reape at the least this reward of my paines, that I haue shewed my desire to answer your cur∣tesie, and set forth the due praises of this glorious Saint: Your louing friend, R.S.
To the Reader. MAny, suiting their labours to the popu∣lar vaine, and gui∣ded by the gale of vulgar breath, haue diuulged diuerse patheticall dis∣courses, in which if they had shewed as much care to profit, as they haue done desire to please, their workes would much more haue honored their names, and auailed the Rea∣der. But it is a iust complaint a∣mong the better sort of persons, that the finest wits lose themselues in the vainest follies, spilling much Art in some idle fancie, and lea∣uing their workes as witnesses how long they haue beene in trauaile, to be in fine deliuered of a fable. And sure it is a thing greatly to be la∣mented, that men of so high conceit,
should so much abase their habili∣ties, that when they haue racked them to the vttermost endeuour, all the praise that they reape of their employment, consisteth in this, that they haue wisely told a foolish tale, and carried a long lye very smooth∣ly to the end. Yet this inconuenience might find some excuse, if the drift of their discourse leuelled at any vertuous marke. For infables are often figured morall truths, and that couertly vttered to a common good, which without a maske would not find so free a passage. But when the substance of the worke hath neither truth nor probability; nor the purport thereof tendeth to any honest end, the writer is rather to be pitied than praised, and his bookes fitter for the fire than for the presse. This common ouersight more haue obserued, than endeuo∣red to salue, euery one being able to reprooue, none willing to redresse such faults, authorised especially by generall custome. And though if
necessitie (the lawlesse patron of en∣forced actions) had not more pre∣uailed than choise, this worke of so different a subiect from the vsuall vaine, should haue bene no eye-sore to those that are pleased with worse matters. Yet sith the copies thereof flew fo fast, and so false abroad, that it was in danger to come corrupted to the print, it seemed a lesse euill to let it fly to common view in the natiue plume, and with the owne wings, than disguised in a coat of a bastard feather, or cast off from the fast of such a corrector, as might hapily haue perished the sound, and imped in some sicke and sory fea∣thers of his owne fansies. It may be that curteous skill will reckon this, though course in respect of o∣thers exquisite labours, not vnfit to entertaine wel-tempered hu∣mours, both with pleasure and pro∣fite, the ground thereef being in Scripture, and the forme of enlar∣ging it, an imitation of the ancient Doctors, in the same and other
points of like tenour. This commo∣dity at the least it will carry with it, that the Reader may learne to loue without improofe of puritie, and teach his thoughts either to temper passion in the meane, or to giue the bridle onely where the excesse can∣not be faulty. Let the worke defend it selfe, and euery one passe his cen∣sure as he seeth cause. Many Carps are expected when curious eyes come a fishing. But the care is al∣ready taken, and patience wayteth at the cable, ready to take away, when that dish is serued in, and to make roome for others to set on the desired fruit. R.S.
MARIE MAGDA∣LENS FVNERAL TEARES. AMongst other mourneful acci∣dents of the pas∣sion of Christ, that loue pre∣senteth it selfe vnto my memory, with which the blessed Marie Magdalene louing our Lord more than her selfe, followed him in his iour∣ney to his death, attending vpon him when his disciples fled and being more willing to dye with him, than they to liue without him. But not finding the fauour to accompany him in death, and loathing after him to re∣maine in life, the fire of her true
affection enflamed her heart, and her enflamed heart resol∣ued into vncessant teares, so that burning and bathing be∣tweene loue and griefe, she led a life euer dying and felt a death neuer ending. And when he by whom she liued was dead, and she for whom he dyed enfor∣cedly left aliue, she praised the dead more than the liuing: and hauing lost that light of her life, she desired to dwell in darke∣nesse, & in the shadow of death, choosing Christs Tombe for her best home, and his coarse for her chiefe comfort. For Mary (as the Euangelist saith) Stood without at the Tombe weeping. But alas how vnfortunate is this woman, to whom neither life will affoord a desired fare∣well, nor death allow any wish∣ed welcome? She hath abando∣ned the liuing, and chosen the company of the dead; and now it seemeth that euen the dead
haue forsaken her, sith the coarse she seeketh is taken away from her. And this was the cause that loue induced her to stand, and sorrow enforced her to weepe. Her eye was watchfull to seeke whom her heart most longed to enioy, and her foot in a readi∣nesse to runne, if her eye should chance to espy him. And there∣fore she standeth to be still stir∣ring, prest to watch euery way, and prepared to go whither any hope should call her. But she wept because she had such oc∣casion of standing: and that which moued her to watch, was the motiue of her teares. For as she watched to finde whom she had lost, so she wept for hauing lost whom she loued, her poore eyes being troubled at once with two contrarie offices, both to be cleare in sight the better to seeke him, and yet cloudy with teares for missing the sight of him.
Yet was not this the entrance but the increase of her griefe, not the beginning, but the re∣newing of her moane. For first she mourned for the departing of his soule out of his body, and now she lamented the taking of his body out of the graue, being punished with two wreckes of her onely welfare, both full of miserie, but the last without all comfort. The first originall of her sorrow grew, because she could not enioy him aliue: yet this sorrow had some solace, for that she hoped to haue enioyed him dead. But when she considered that his life was already lost, and now not so much as his body could be found she was wholly daun∣ted with dismay, sith this vnhap∣pinesse admitted no helpe. She doubted lest the loue of her maister (the onely portion that her fortune had left her) would soone languish in her cold
breast, if it neither had his words to kindle it, nor his presence to cherish it, nor so much as his dead ashes to rake it vp. She had prepared her spices, and proui∣ded her oyntments, to pay him the last tribute of externall du∣ties. And though Ioseph and Ni∣codemus had already bestowed an hundreth pounds of Mirrhe and Aloes, which was in quan∣tity sufficient, in quality of the best, and as well applyed as art and deuotion could deuise: yet such was her loue, that she would haue thought any quan∣titie too little, except hers had bene added; the best in qualitie too meane, except hers were with it; and no diligence in ap∣plying it enough, except her seruice were in it. Not that she was sharpe in censuring that which others had done, but be∣cause loue made her so desirous to do all her selfe, that though all had bene done that she could
deuise, and as well as she could wish, yet vnlesse she were an actor it would not suffice, sith loue is as eager to be vttered in effects, as it is zealous in true affection. She came therefore now meaning to enbalme his corps, as she had before annoin∣ted his feet, and to preserue the reliques of his body, as the onely remnant of all her blisse. And as in the spring of her felicitie she had washed his feet with her teares, bewayling vnto him the death of her owne soule: so now she came in the depth of her miserie, to shed them afresh for the death of his body. But when she saw the graue open, and the bodie taken out, the labour of enbalming was preuented, but the cause of her weeping in∣creased, and he that was wan∣ting to her obsequies, was not wanting to her teares; and though she found not whom to annoynt, yet found she whom
to lament. And not without cause did Marie complaine, finding her first anguish doubled with a se∣cond griefe, and being surchar∣ged with two most violent sor∣rowes in one afflicted heart. For hauing setled her whole affecti∣on vpon Christ, and summed all her desires and wishes into the loue of his goodnesse, as nothing could equall his worthes: so was there not in the whole world, either a greater benefit for her to enioy than himselfe, or any grea∣ter dammage possible than his losse. The murdering in his owne death, the life of all liues, left a generall death in all liuing crea∣tures, and his decease not onely disrobed our nature of her most royall ornaments, but impoue∣rished the world of all highest perfections. What maruell therefore though her vehement loue to so louely a Lord, being
after the wrecke of his life, now also depriued of his dead body, feele as bitter pangs for his losse, as before it tasted ioyes in his presence, and open as large an issue to teares of sorrow, as euer heretofore to teares of content∣ment? And though teares were rather oyle than water to her flame, apter to nourish than di∣minish her griefe: yet now being plonged in the depth of paine, she yeelded her selfe captiue to all discomfort, carrying an ouer∣throwne mind in a more enfee∣bled body, and still busie in de∣uising, but euer doubtfull in de∣fining what she might best do. For what could a silly woman do but weepe, that floating in a sea of cares, found neither eare to heare her, nor tongue to direct her, nor hand to helpe her, nor heart to pittie her in her deso∣late case? True it is, that Peter and Iohn came with her to the Tombe, and to make triall of
her report were both within it: but as they were speedy in com∣ming, and diligent in searching, so were they as quicke to de∣part, and fearefull of farther see∣king. And alas, what gained she by their comming, but two wit∣nesses of her losse, two dismay∣ers of her hope, and two pat∣ternes of a new despaire? Loue moued them to come, but their loue was soone conquered, with such feare, that it suffered them not to stay. But Mary, hoping in despaire, and perseuering in hope, stood without feare, be∣cause she now thought nothing left that ought to be feared. For she hath lost her maister, to whom she was so entirely deuo∣ted, that he was the totall of her loues, the height of her hopes, and the vttermost of her feares, and therefore besides him, she could neither loue other crea∣ture, hope for other comfort, nor feare other losse. The worst she
could feare, was the death of her body, and that shee ra∣ther desired than feared, sith shee had alreadie lost the life of her soule, with∣out which anie other life would be a death, and with which any other death would haue bene a delight. But now she thought it better to dye than to liue, because she might hap∣pily dying find, whom not dying she looked not to enioy, and not enioying she had little will to liue. For now she loued nothing in her life, but her loue to Christ: and if any thing did make her willing to liue, it was onely the vnwillingnesse that his Image should dye with her, whose like∣nesse loue had limited in her heart, and treasured vp in her sweetest memories. And had she not feared to breake the table, and to breake open the closet, to which she had entrusted this last relique of her lost happinesse,
the violence of griefe, would haue melted her heart into in∣ward bleeding teares, and blot∣ted her remembrance with a fatall obliuion. And yet neuer∣thelesse, she is now in so imper∣fect a sort aliue, that it is pro∣ued true in her, that Loue is as strong as death. For what could death haue done more in Mary than loue did? Her wits were astonied, and all her senses so amazed, that in the end finding she did not know, seeing she could not discerne, hearing she perceiued not, and more than all this, she was not there where she was, for she was wholly where her maister was; more where she loued than where she liued, and lesse in her selfe than in his body, which notwithstan∣ding, where it was she could not imagine. For she sought, & as yet she found not, and there∣fore stood at the Tombe wee∣ping for it, being now altoge∣ther
giuen to mourning, and driuen to misery. But ô Mary, by whose coun∣saile, vpon what hope, or with what heart, couldest thou stand alone, when the Disciples were departed? Thou wert there once before they came, thou turnedst againe at their comming, and yet thou stayest when they are gone. Alas that thy Lord is not in the Tombe, thine owne eyes haue often seene, the Disciples hands haue felt, the empty Syn∣don doth auouch, and cannot all this winne thee to beleeue it? No no, thou wouldest rather condemne thine owne eyes of errour, and both their eyes and hands of deceit, yea, rather sus∣pect all testimonies for vntrue, than not looke whom thou hast lost, euen there, where by no diligence he could be found. When thou thinkest of other places, and canst not imagine any so likely as this, thou seekest
againe in this, and though ne∣uer so often sought, it must be an haunt for hope. For when things dearely affected are lost, loues natures is, neuer to be weary of searching euen the of∣tenest searched corners, being more willing to thinke that all the senses are mistaken, than to yeeld that hope should quaile. Yet now sith it is so euident, that he is taken away, what should moue thee to remaine here where the perill is appa∣rent, and no profit likely? Can the wit of one (and she a wo∣man) wholly possessed with pas∣sion, haue more light to discerne danger, than two wits of two men, and both principall fauo∣rits of the parent of all wise∣dome? Or if (notwithstanding the danger) there had bene iust cause to encounter it, were not two together, being both to Christ sworne champions, each to other affected friends,
and to all his enemies pro∣fessed foes, more likely to haue preuailed, than one fe∣minine heart, timorous by kind, and already amazed with this dreadfull accident? But alas, why do I vrge her with reason, whose reason is al∣tered into loue, & that iudgeth it folly to follow such reason, as should any way impaire her loue? Her thoughts were arre∣sted by euery thread of Christs Sindon, and she was captiue to so many prisons, as the tombe had memories of her lost master: Loue being her Iaylor in them all, and nothing able to ransome her, but the recouery of her Lord. What maruaile then though the Apostles examples drew her not away, whom so violent a loue enforced to re∣maine, which prescribing lawes both to wit and will, is guided by no other law but it selfe? She could not thinke of any feare,
nor stand in feare of any force. Loue armed her against all ha∣zards, and being already woun∣ded wtih the greatest griefe, she had no leisure to remember any lesser euill. Yea she had forgot∣ten all things, and her selfe a∣mong all things, onely mind∣full of him whom she loued aboue all things. And yet her loue, by reason of her losse, drow∣ned both her mind and memory so deepe in sorrow, and so bu∣sied her wits in the conceit of his absence, that all remem∣brance of his former promises, was diuerted with the throng of present discomforts, and she seemed to haue forgotten also him besides whom she remembred nothing. For doubt∣lesse had she remembred him as shee should, shee would not haue now thought the tombe a fit place to seeke him, neither would she mourne for him as dead, and remoued by others force, but ioy in him as reuiued, and risen by his own power. For he had often fore∣told both the manner of his death, and the day of his Resur∣rection. But alas, let her heaui∣nesse excuse her, and the vnwon∣tednesse of the miracle pleade her pardon, sith dread & amaze∣ment hath dulled her senses, distempered her thoughts, dis∣couraged her hopes, awaked her passions, and left her no other liberty but onely to weepe. She wept therefore, being onely able to weepe. And as she was weeping, she stouped downe and looked into the Monument, and she saw two Angels in white, sitting one at the head, and another at the feet, where the body of Iesus had bene layd. They said vnto her, Woman why weepest thou? Iohn 20. O Mary, thy good hap excee∣deth thy hope, and where thy last sorrow was bred, thy first succour springeth. Thou diddest
seeke but one, and thou hast found two. A dead body was thy errand, and thou hast light vpon two aliue. Thy weeping was for a man, and thy teares haue obtained Angels. Suppresse now thy sadnesse, and refresh thy heart with this good for∣tune. These Angels inuite thee to a parley, they seeme to take pitty of thy case, and it may be, they haue some happy tidings to tell thee. Thou hast hitherto sought in vaine, as one either vn∣seene, or vnknowne, or at the least vnregarded, sith the party thou seekest, neither tendereth thy teares, nor answereth thy cryes, nor relenteth with thy la∣mentings. Either he doth not heare, or he will not helpe: he hath paraduenture left to loue thee, and is loth to yeeld thee reliefe, and therefore take such comfort as thou findest, sith thou art not so lucky, as to finde that which thou couldest wish Re∣member
what they are, where they sit, from whence they come, and to whom they speake. They are Angels of peace, nei∣ther sent without cause, nor seene but of fauour. They sit in the tombe, to shew that they are no strangers to thy losse. They come from heauen, from whence all happy news descen∣deth. They speake to thy selfe, as though they had some speciall embassage to deliuer vnto thee. Aske them therefore of thy ma∣ster, for they are likeliest to re∣turne thee a desired answer. Thou knewest him too well, to thinke that hell hath deuoured him: thou hast long sought, and hast not found him on earth, and what place so fit for him as to be in heauen? Aske therefore of those Angels that came newly from thence, and it may be, their report will highly please thee. Or if thou art resolued to con∣tinue thy seeking, who can bet∣ter
helpe thee, than they that are as swift as thy thought, as faith∣full as thine owne heart, and as louing to thy Lord as thou thy felfe? Take therefore thy good hap, lest it be taken away from thee, and content thee with An∣gels, sith thy master hath giuen thee ouer. But alas, what meaneth this change, and how happeneth this strange alteration? The time hath bene that fewer teares would haue wrought greater effect, shorter seeking haue sooner found, and lesse paine haue procured more pittie. The time hath bene that thy annoin∣ting his feet, was accepted and praysed, thy washing them with teares highly cōmended, & thy wiping thē with thy haire, most curteously construed. How then doth it now fall out, that hauing brought thy sweet oyles to an∣noint his whole body, hauing shed as many teares, as would
haue washed more than his feet, and hauing not onely thy haire, but thy heart ready to serue him, he is not moued with all these duties, so much as once to afford thee his fight? Is it not he that reclaimed thee from thy wan∣dring courses, that dispossessed thee of thy damned Inhabitants; and from the wilds of sinne, re∣couered thee into the fold and family of his flock? Was not thy house his home, his loue thy life, thy selfe his disciple? Did not he defend thee against the Pha∣risie, pleade for thee against Iu∣das, and excuse thee to thy sister? In summe, was not he thy Pa∣tron and Protector in all thy ne∣cessities? O good Iesu, what hath thus estranged thee from her? Thou hast heretofore so pitied her teares, that seeing them, thou couldest not refraine thine. In one of her greatest agonies, for loue of her that so much loued
thee, thou didst recall her dead brother to life, turning her com∣plaint into vnexpected content∣ment. And we know that thou doest not vse to alter course without cause, nor to chastise without desert. Thou art the first that inuitest, and the last that forsakest▪ neuer leauing but first left; and euer offering, till thou art refused. How then hath she forfeited thy fauour? or with what trespasse hath she earned thy ill will? That she neuer left to loue thee, her heart will de∣pose, her hand will subscribe, her tongue will protest, her teares will testifie, and her see∣king doth assure. And alas, is her particular case so farre from ex∣ample, that thou shouldest rather alter thy nature, than she better her Fortune, and be to her as thou art to no other? For our parts since thy last shew of li∣king towards her, we haue found no other fault in her, but that she
was the earliest vp to seeke thee, readiest to annoint thee, and when she saw that thou wert re∣moued, she forthwith did weepe for thee, and presently went for helpe to finde thee. And where∣as those two that she brought, being lesse carefull of thee than fearefull of themselues, when they had seene what she had said, sodainely shrunke away, behold she still stayeth, she still seeketh, she still weepeth. If this be a fault, we cannot deny but this she doth, and to this she perswadeth; yea, this she nei∣ther meaneth to amend, nor re∣questeth thee to forgiue: if ther∣fore thou reckonest this as pu∣nishable, punished she must be, sith no excuse hath effect where the fact pleadeth guiltie. But if this import not any offence but a true affection, and be rather a good desire than an euill desert, why art thou so hard a Iudge to so soft a creature, requiting her
loue with thy losse, and suspen∣ding her hopes in this vnhappi∣nesse? Are not those thy words; I loue those that loue me, and who watcheth early for me shall find me? why then doth not this woman find thee, that was vp so early to watch for thee? Why doest thou not with like repay her, that be∣stoweth vpon thee her whole loue, sith thy word is her war∣rant, and thy promise her due debt? Art thou lesse moued with these teares that she sheddeth for thee her onely Master, than thou wert with those that she shed before thee for her deceas∣sed brother? Or doth her loue to thy seruant more please thee than her loue to thy selfe? Our loue to others must not be to them, but to thee in them. For he loueth thee so much the lesse, that loueh any thing with thee. If therefore she then deserued well for louing thee in another, she deserued better now, for
louing thee in thy selfe: and if indeed thou louest those that loue thee, make thy word good to her that is so farre in loue with thee. Of thy selfe thou hast said, that thou art The way, the truth, and the life. If then thou art a way easie to find and neuer erring, how doth she misse thee? If a life giuing life and neuer en∣ding, why is she ready to dye for thee? If a true promising truth and neuer failing, how is she be∣reaued of thee? For if what thy tongue did speake, thy truth will auerre, she will neuer aske more to make her most happy. Re∣member that thou saidst to her sister, that Mary had chosen the best part which should not be taken from her. That she chose the best par is out of question, sith she made choise of nothing but only of thee But how can it be veri∣fied, that this part shal not be ta∣ken from her, sith thou that art this part art already taken away? If she could haue kept thee, she
would not haue lost thee: and had it bene in her power, as it was in her will, she would neuer haue parted from thee: and might she now be restored to thy presence, she would trie all fortunes rather than for go thee. Sith therefore she seeketh no∣thing but what she chose, and the losse of her choise is the only cause of her combat, either vouchsafe thou to keep this best part that she chose in her, or I see not how it can be true, that it shall not be taken from her. But thy meaning haply was, that though it be taken from her eyes, yet it should neuer be ta∣ken from her heart; & it may be thy inward presence supplyeth thine outward absence: yet I can hardly thinke, but that if Mary had thee within her, she could feele it, and if she felt it, she would neuer seeke thee. Thou art too hot a fire to be in her bo∣some and not to burne her, and
thy light is too great, to leaue her mind in this darknesse if it shined in her. In true louers eue∣ry part is an eye, and euery thought a looke, and therefore so sweet an obiect among so many eyes, and in so great a light, could neuer lye so hidden but loue would espy it. No, no, if Mary had thee, her innocent heart (neuer taught to dissem∣ble) could not make complaint the out-side of a concealed com∣fort, neither would she turne her thoughts to pasture in a dead mans Tombe, if at home she might bid them to so heauenly a banquet. Her loue would not haue a thought to spare, nor a minute to spend in any other action, than in enioying of thee, whom she knew too well, to a∣bridge the least part of her from so high an happinesse. For her thirst of thy presence was so ex∣ceeding, and the sea of thy ioyes so well able to afford her a full
draught, that though euery par∣cell in her should take in a whole tide of thy delights, she would thinke them too few to quiet her desires. Yea doubtlesse, if she had thee within her, she would not enuie the fortune of the richest Empresse, yea she would more reioyce to be thy Tombe in earth, than a throne in heauen, and disdaine to be a Saint if she were worthy to be but thy shrine. But paraduenture it is now with her mind, as it was with the Apostles eyes; and as they seeing thee walke vpon the Sea took thee for a Ghost, so she see∣ing thee in her hart, deemeth thee but a fancy, being yet better ac∣quainted with thy bodily shape than with thy spirituall power. But ô Mary, it seemeth too strange, that he whom thou see∣kest, and for whom thou wee∣pest, should thus giue thee ouer to these painefull fits, if in thee
he did not see a cause for which he will not be seene of thee. Still thy plaint, and stint thy weeping, for I doubt there is some tres∣passe in thy teares, & some sinne in thy sorrow. Doest thou not remember his words to thee and to other women, when he said: Daughters of Ierusalem weepe not for me, but weepe for your selues and for your children? What mea∣nest thou then to continue this course? Doth he sorbid thy teares, and wilt thou not for∣beare them? Is it no fault to in∣fringe his will, or is not that his will that his words do import? The fault must be mended, ere the penance be released, and therefore either ceasse to weepe, or neuer hope to finde. But I know this Logicke little plea∣seth thee, and I might as soone win thee to forbeare liuing as to leaue weeping. Thou wilt say, that though he forbad thee to weepe for him,
yet he left thee free, to weepe for thy selfe, and sith thy loue hath made thee one with him, thou weepest but for thy selfe when thou weepest for him. But I answer thee againe, that be∣cause he is one with thee, and thy weeping for him hath bene forbidden thee, thou canst not weepe for thy selfe, but his words wil condemne thee. For if thou & he are one, for which so∣euer thou weepest it is all one, & therefore sith for him thou maist not weepe, forbeare all weeping left it should offend. Yea but (saist thou) to barre me from weeping, is to abridge me of li∣berty, and restraint of liberty is a penaltie; and euery penaltie sup∣poseth some offence: but an of∣fence it is not to weepe for my selfe, for he would neuer com∣mande it, if it were not lawfull to do it. The fault therefore must be; in being one with him, that maketh the weeping for my
selfe, a weeping also for him. And if this be a fault, I will neuer amend it; and let them that thinke it so, do penance for it: for my part, sith I haue lost my mirth, I will make much of my sorrow, and sith I haue no ioy but in teares, I may lawfully shed them. Neither thinke I his former word, a warrant against his latter deed. And what need had he to weepe vpon the Crosse, but for our example, which if it were good for him to giue, it cannot be euill for me to follow? No, no, it is not my weeping that causeth my losse, sith a world of eyes, and a sea of teares, could not worthily be∣waile the misse of such a mai∣ster. Yet, since neither thy seeking findeth, nor thy weeping pre∣uaileth, satisfie thy selfe with the sight of Angels. Demaund the cause of their comming, and the reason of thy Lords remoue,
and sith they first offer thee oc∣casion of parley, be not thou too dainty of thy discourse. It may be they can calme thy stormes, and quiet thy vnrest, and there∣fore conceale not from them thy sore, lest thou lose the benefit of their emplaister. But nothing can moue Mary to admit com∣fort or entertaine any company: for to one alone, and for euer she hath vowed her selfe, and ex∣cept it be to him, she will nei∣ther lend her eare long to o∣thers, nor borrow others helpe, lest by the seeking to allay her smart, she should lessen her loue. But drawing into her mind all pensiue conceits, she museth and pineth in a consuming languor, taking comfort in nothing but in being comfortlesse. Alas, (saith she) small is the light that a starre can yeeld when the Sunne is downe, and a sorry exchange to go gather the crums after the losse of an
heauenly repast. My eyes are not vsed to see by the glimse of a sparke: and in seeking the Sunne it is either needlesse or bootlesse to borrow the light of a candle, sith either it must bewray it selfe with the selfe light, or no other light can euer discouer it. If they come to disburden me of my heauinesse, their comming will be burdensome vnto me, and they will load me more while they labour my reliefe. They cannot perswade me, that my maister is not lost, for my owne eyes will disproue them. They can lesse tell me where he may be found, for they would not be so simple to be so long from him: or if they can for∣beare him, surely they do not know him, whom none can truly know, and liue long with∣out him. All their demurres would be tedious, and discourses irksome. Impaire my loue they might, but appay it they could
not, to which he that first accep∣ted the debt is the onely pay∣ment. They either want power, will, or leaue to tell me my de∣sire, or at the first word they would haue done it, sith Angels are not vsed to idle speeches, and to me all talke is idle that doth not tell me of my maister. They know not where he is, and ther∣fore they are come to the place where he last was, making the Tombe their heauen, and the remembrance of his presence the food of their felicitie. What∣soeuer they could tell me, if they told me not of him, and what∣soeuer they could tell me of him, if they told me not where he were, both their telling and my hearing were but a wasting of time. I neither came to see them, nor desire to heare them. I came not to see Angels, but him that made both me and Angels, and to whom I owe more than both to men and
Angels. And to thee I appeale, ô most louing Lord, whether my affli∣cted heart doth not truly defray the tribute of an vndeuided loue. To thee I appeale, whether I haue ioyned any partner with thee, in the small possession of my poore selfe. And I would to God I were as, priuie where thy body is, as thou art, who is onely Lord and owner of my soule. But alas sweet Iesu, where thou wert thou art not, & where thou art I know not: wretched is the case that I am in, and yet how to better it I cannot ima∣gine. Alas ô my onely desire, why hast thou left me wauering in these vncertainties, and in how wild a maze wander my doubtful & perplexed thoughts? If I stay here where he is not, I shall neuer finde him. If I go fur∣ther to seeke, I know not whi∣ther. To leaue the Tombe is a death, and to stand helplesse by
it an vncurable disease, so that all my comfort is now conclu∣ded in this, that I am free to chuse whether I will stay with∣out helpe, or go without hope, that is in effect, with what tor∣ment I will end my life. And yet euen this were too happy a choise for so vnhappy a creature. If I might be chuser of mine owne death, ô how quickly should that choise be made, and how willingly would I runne to that execution? I would be nai∣led to the same crosse, with the same nailes, & in the same place: my heart should be wounded with his speare, my head with his thornes, my body with his whippes: Finally, I would taste all his torments, and tread all his embrued and bloudie steps. But ô ambitious thoughts, why gaze you vpon so high a fe∣licitie? why thinke you of so glorious a death, that are priuie to so infamous a life? Death alas
I deserue, yea not one but infi∣nite deaths. But so sweete a death, seasoned with so many comforts, the very instruments whereof were able to raise the deadest corps, and depure the most defiled soule, were too small a scourge for my great of∣fences. And therefore I am left to feele so many deaths as I liue houres, and to passe as many pangs as I haue thoughts of my losse, which are as many as there are minutes, and as violent as if they were all in euery one. But sith I can neither die as he died, nor liue where he lyeth dead, I I will liue out my liuing death by his graue, and dye on my dy∣ing life by his sweete Tombe. Better is it after losse of his bo∣dy to looke to his Sepulcher, than after the losse of the one, to leaue the other to be destroyed. No, no, though I haue bene rob∣bed of the Saint, I will at the least haue care of the shrine,
which though it be spoiled of the most soueraigne hoast, yet shall it be the Altar where I will daily sacrifice my heart, and of∣fer vp my teares. Here will I euer leade, yea here do I meane to end my wret∣ched life, that I may at the least be buried by the Tombe of my Lord, and take my iron sleepe neare this couch of stone which his presence hath made the place of sweetest repose. It may be also that this empty Syndon lyeth here to no vse, and this Tombe being open without any in it, may giue occasion to some mercifull heart, that shall first light vpon my vnburied bo∣dy, to wrap me in his shroud, and to interre me in this Tombe. O too fortunate lot, for so vnfortunate a woman to craue: no: no: I do not craue it. For alas, I dare not, yet if such an ouer-sight should be committed, I do now before-hand, forgiue that
sinner, and were it no more pre∣sumption to wish it aliue, than to suffer it dead, if I knew the party that should first passe by me, I would woo him with my teares, and hire him with my prayers, to blesse me with this felicity. And though I dare not wish any to do it, yet this (with∣out offence) I may say to all, that I loue this Syndon aboue all clothes in the world, and this Tombe I esteeme more than any Princes monument: yea, and I thinke that coarse highly fauo∣red, that shall succeed my Lord in it: and for my part, as I meane that the ground where I stand shall be my death-bed; so am I not of Iacobs mind, to haue my body buried farre from the place where it dyeth, but euen in the next and readiest graue, and that as soone as my breath faileth, sith delayes are bootlesse where death hath won posses∣sion.
But alas, I dare not say any more, let my body take such fortune as befalleth it: my soule at the least shall dwell in this sweet Paradise, and from this brittle case of flesh and bloud, passe presently into the glori∣ous Tombe of God and man. It is now enwrapped in a masse of corruption, it shall then enioy a place of high perfection: where it is now it is more by force than by choise, and like a repi∣ning prisoner in a loathed gaile: but there in a little roome it should find perfect rest, and in the prison of death, the liberty of a ioyfull life. O sweet Tombe of my swee∣test Lord, while I liue I will stay by thee, when I die, I will cleaue vnto thee: neither aliue nor dead, will I euer be drawne from thee. Thou art the Altar of mer∣cie, the temple of truth, the sanctuary of safeie, the graue of death, and the cradle of eternall
life. O heauen of my eclipsed Sunne, receiue vnto thee this silly starre that hath now also lost all wished light. O Whale that hast swallowed my onely Ionas, swallow also me, more worthy to be thy prey, sith I, and not he, was the cause of this bloudie tempest. O Cesterne of my innocent Ioseph, take me in∣to thy drie bottome, sith I, and not he gaue iust cause of offence to my enraged brethren. But alas, in what cloud hast thou hidden the light of our way? Vpon what shore hast thou cast vp the Preacher of all truth? or to what Ismaelite hast thou yeelded the purueiour of our life? Oh vnhappy me, why did I not before thinke of that which I now aske? Why did I leaue him when I had him, thus to lament him now that I haue lost him? If I had watched with perseuerance, either none would haue taken
him, or they should haue taken me with him. But through too much pre∣cisenesse in keeping the Law, I haue lost the Law-maker; and by being too scrupulous in ob∣seruing his ceremonies, I am proued irreligious in losing him selfe, sith I should rather haue re∣mained with the truth, than for∣saken it to solemnize the figure. The Sabboth could not haue bene prophaned in standing by his coarse, by which the propha∣ned things are sanctified, and whose touch doth not defile the cleane, but cleanseth the most defiled. But when it was time to stay, I departed: when it was too late to helpe, I returned: and now I repent my folly, when it cannot be amended. But let my heart dissolue into sighes, mine eyes melt in teares, and my desolate soule languish in dislikes: yea, let all that I am and haue, endure
the deserued punishment, that if he were incensed with my fault, he may be appeased with my pe∣nance, and returne vpon the a∣mendment that fled from the offence. Thus when her timorous con∣science had indited her of so great an omission, and her tongue enforced the euidence with these bitter accusations, Loue, that was now the onely vmpire in all her causes, con∣demned her eyes to a fresh showre of teares, her breast to a new storme of sighes, and her soule, to be perpetuall prisoner to restlesse sorrowes. But ô Mary, thou deceiuest thy selfe in thy owne desires, and it well appeareth, that excesse of griefe, hath bred in thee a defect of due prouidence. And woul∣dest thou indeed haue thy wishes come to passe, and thy words fulfilled? Tell me then, I pray thee, if thy heart were dis∣solued,
where wouldest thou harbour thy Lord? what woul∣dest thou offer him? how woul∣dest thou loue him? Thine eyes haue lost him, thy hands cannot feele him, thy feet cannot follow him: and if it be at all in thee, it is thy heart that hath him, and wouldest thou now haue that dissolued, from thence also to exile him? And if thine eyes were melted, thy soule in langour, and thy senses decay∣ed, how wouldest thou see him, if he did appeare? how shouldest thou heare him, if he did speake? how couldest thou know him, though he were there present? Thou thinkest haply that he loued thee so well, that if thy heart were spent for his loue, he would either lend his own heart vnto thee, or create a new heart in thee, better than that which thy sorrow tooke from thee. It may be thou imaginest that if thy soule would giue place, his
soule wanting now a bodie, would enter into thine, with sup∣ply of all thy senses, and release of thy sorrowes. O Mary, thou diddest not marke what thy maister was wont to say, when he told thee, that the third day he should rise againe. For if thou hadst heard him, or at the least vnderstood him, thou wouldest not thinke, but that he now vsed both his heart and soule in the life of his owne body. And therefore re∣paire to the Angels, and enquire more of them, lest the Lord be displeased, that comming from him, thou wilt not entertaine them. But Mary, whose deuotions were all fixed vpon a nobler Saint, and that had so straightly bound her thoughts to his only affection, that she rather desired to vnknow whom she knew al∣ready, than to burthen her mind with the knowledge of new ac∣quaintance,
could not make her will, long since possessed with the highest loue, stoope to the acceptance of meaner friend∣ships. And for this, though she did not scornefully reiect, yet did she with humilitie refuse the Angels company, thinking it no discourtesie to take her selfe from them, for to giue her selfe more wholly to her Lord, to whom both she and they were wholly deuoted, & ought most loue and greatest duty. Sorrow also being now the onely inter∣preter of all that sense, deliuered to her vnderstanding, made her conster their demand in a more doubtfull than true meaning. If (saith she) they came to ease my affliction, they could not be ignorant of the cause: and if they were not ignorant of it, they would neuer aske it, why then did they say, Woman why weepest thou? If their question did import
a prohibition, the necessitie of the occasion doth countermand their counsaile, and fitter it were they should weepe with me, than I in not weeping obey them. If the Sunne were asha∣med to shew his brightnesse, when the father of lights was darkned with such disgrace: if the heauens discolouring their beauties, suted themselues to their makers fortune: if the whole frame of nature were al∣most dissolued to see the author of nature so vnhaturally abused: why may not Angels, that best knew the indignitie of the case, make vp a part in this lamenta∣ble consort? And especially now, that by the losse of his body, the cause of weeping is increased, and yet the number of mour∣ners lessened: sith the Apostles are fled, all his friends afraid, and poore I left alone to supply the teares of all creatures? O who will giue water to my head, and a
fountaine of teares vnto mine eyes, that I may weepe day and night, and neuer ceasse weeping? O my onely Lord, thy griefe was the greatest that euer was in man, and my griefe as great as euer happened to woman: for my loue hath carued me no small portion of thine, thy losse hath redoubled the torment of my owne, and all creatures seeme to haue made ouer to me theirs, leauing me as the vicegerent of all their sorrow. Sorrow with me at the least ô thou Tombe, and thaw into teares you har∣dest stones. The time is now come, that you are licensed to cry, and bound to recompence the silence of your Lords Dis∣ciples, of whom he himselfe sayd to the Pharises, that if they held their peace, the very stones should cry for them. Now there∣fore sith feare hath locked vp their lips, and sadnesse made them mute, let the stones cry out
against the murd erers of my Lord, and bewray the robbers of his sacred body. And I feare that were it well knowne who hath taken him away, there is no stone so stony, but should haue cause to lament. It was doubtlesse the spite of some malicious Pharisee or bloudy Scribe, that not conten∣ted with those torments that he suffered in life (of which euery one to any other would haue bene a tyrannicall death) hath now stolen away his dead bo∣dy, to practise vpon it some sa∣uage cruelty, and to glut their pitilesse eyes and brutish hearts with the vnnaturall vsage of his helplesse corps. O yee rocks and stones, if euer you must cry out, now it is high time, sith the light, the life, and the Lord of the world is thus darkned, mas∣sacred, and outragiously mis∣used. Doth not his tongue, whose
truth is infallible, and whose word omnipotent, commanding both winds and seas, and neuer disobeyed of the most sensible creatures, promise to arme the world, and make the whole earth to fight against the sens∣lesse persons, in defence of the iust? And who more iust than the Lord of iustice? who more senslesse than his barbarous murtherers, whose insatiable thirst of his innocent bloud, could not be staunched with their cruell butchering him at his death, vnlesse they proceeded further in this hellish impiety to his dead body. Why then do not all creatures ad∣dresse themselues to reuenge so iust a quarrell, vpon so senslesse wretches, left of all reason, for∣saken of humanitie, and berea∣ued of all feeling both of God and man? O Mary, why doest thou thus torment thy self with these
tragicall surmises? Doest thou thinke that the Angels would sit still, if their maister were not well? Did they serue him after his fasting, and would they de∣spise him after his deceasse? Did they comfort him before he was apprehended, and would not defend him when he was dead? If in the garden he might haue had twelue. Legions of them, is his power so quite dead with his body, that he could not now command them? Was there an Angell found to helpe Daniel to his dinner, to saue Toby from the fish, yea and to defend Ba∣laams poore beast from his mai∣sters rage: and is the Lord of Angels of so little reckoning, that if his body stood in need, neuer an Angell would defend it? Thou seest two here pre∣sent to honour his Tombe, and how much more carefull would they be to do homage to his person? Beleeue not Mary that
they would smile, if thou had∣dest such occasion to weepe. They would not so gloriously shine in white, if a blacke and mourning weede did better be∣come them, or were a fitter liue∣ry for thy maister to giue, or them to weare. Yeeld not more to thy vncertaine feare and de∣ceiued loue, than to their assured knowledge, and neuer erring charitie. Can a materiall eye see more than an heauenly spirit, or the glimmering of the twi-light giue better aime than the beams of their eternall Sunne? Would they (thinkest thou) waite vpon the winding sheete, while the coarse were abused, or be here for thy comfort, if their Lord did need their seruice? No, no, he was neither any theeues booty, nor Pharisees pray; nei∣ther are the Angels so carelesse of him, as thy suspition presu∣meth. And if their presence and demeanour cannot alter thy
conceit, looke vpon the clothes and they will teach thee thine errour, and cleare thee of thy doubt. Would any▪ thiefe, thinkest thou, haue bene so religious, as to haue stolen the body, and left the clothes? yea, would he haue bene so venturous, as to haue stayed the vnshrowding of the coarse, the well ordering of the sheets, and folding vp the nap∣kins? Thou knowest that the Mirrhe maketh linnen cleaue as fast as pitch or glue: and was a thiefe at so much leisure, as to dissolue the Myrrhe and vn∣cloath the dead? what did the watch while the scales were broken, the Tombe opened, the body vnfolded, all other things ordered as now thou seest? And if all this cannot yet perswade thee, beleeue at the least thy owne experience. When thy maister was stripped at the crosse, thou knowest that his
onely garment being congealed to his goarie backe, came not off without many parts of his skin, & doubtlesse would haue torne off many more, if he had bene annointed with Myrrhe: Looke then into the sheete, whether there remaine any parcell of skin, or any one haire of his head: and sith there is none to be found, beleeue some better issue of thy maisters absence than thy feare suggesteth. A guiltie conscience doubteth want of time, and therefore dis∣patcheth hastily. It is in hazard to be discouered, and therefore practiseth in darknesse and se∣cresie. It euer worketh in ex∣treame feare, and therefore hath no leisure to place things or∣derly. But to vnwrap so mangled a body, out of Mirrhed cloathes without tearing of any skinne, or leauing on any Mirrhe, is a thing either to man impossible, or not possible to be done with
such speed, without light or helpe, and with so good order. Assure thy selfe therefore, that if either of malice, or by fraud the coarse had bene remoued, the linnen and myrrhe should neuer haue bene left; and neither could the Angels looke so chearefully, nor the clothes lye so orderly, but to import some happier ac∣cident than thou conceiuest. But to free thee more from feare, consider these words of the An∣gels, Woman why weepest thou? For what do they signifie, but as much in effect as if they had said: Where Angels reioyce, it agreeth not that a woman shold weepe, and where heauenly eyes are witnesses of ioy, no mortall eye should controll them with testimonies of sorrow? With more than a manly courage thou diddest before my comming, arme thy feet to runne among swords, thy armes to remoue huge loades, thy body to en∣dure
all Tyrants rage, and thy soule to be sundred with violent tortures: and art thou now so much a Woman that thou canst not command thine eyes to for∣beare teares? If thou wert a true Disciple, so many proofes would perswade thee, but now thy in∣credulous humour maketh thee vnworthy of that stile, and we can affoord thee no better title, than a Woman, and there∣fore ô Woman, and too much a Woman, why weepest thou? If there were here any coarse, we might thinke that sorrow for the dead enforced thy teares: but now that thou findest it a place of the liuing, why doest thou here stand weeping for the dead? Is our presence so discomfor∣table that thou shouldest weepe to behold vs? or is it the course of thy kindnesse with teares to entertaine vs? If they be teates of loue to testifie thy good will,
as thy loue is acknowledged, so let these signes be suppressed. If they be teares of anger to de∣nounce thy displeasure, they should not here haue bene shed where all anger was buried but none deserued. If they be teares of sorrow and duties to the dead, they are bestowed in vaine where the dead is reuiued. If they be teares of ioy stilled from the flowers of thy good for∣tune, fewer of these would suf∣fice, and fitter were other tokens to expresse thy contentment. And therefore O Woman, why doest thou weepe? would our eyes be so drie, if such eye-streames were behouefull? Yea, would not the heauens raine teares if thy supposals were truths? Did not Angels alwaies in their visi∣ble semblances represent their Lords inuisible pleasures, sha∣dowing their shapes in the drift of his intentions? When God was incensed they brandished
swords: when he was appeased, they sheathed them in scab∣bards: when he would defend, they resembled souldiers, when he would terrifie they tooke terrible formes, and when he would comfort, they carried mirth in their eyes, sweetnesse in their countenance, mildnesse in their words, fauour, grace and comelinesse in their whole presence. Why then doest thou weepe, seeing vs to reioyce? Doest thou imagine vs to dege∣nerate from our nature, or to forget any dutie, whose state is neither subiect to change, nor capable of the least offence? Art thou more priuie to the coun∣saile of our eternall God, than we that are daily attendants at his throne of glory? O woman, deeme not amisse against so ap∣parent euidence, and at our re∣quest exchange thy sorrow for our ioy. But ô glorious Angels, why
do ye moue her to ioy, if you know why she weepeth? Alas, she weepeth for the losse of him without whom all ioy is to her but matter of new griefe. While he liued, euery place where she found him, was to her a Paradise▪ euery season wherein he was enioyed, a perpetuall spring, e∣uery exercise wherein he was serued, a speciall felicitie: the ground whereon he went, see∣med to yeeld her sweeter foo∣ting: the ayre wherein he brea∣thed, became to her spirit of life, being once sanctified in his sa∣cred breast. In summe, his pre∣sence brought with it an heauen of delights, and his departure seemed to leaue an eclipse in all things. And yet euen the places that he had once honored with the accesse of his person, were to her so many sweet Pilgri∣mages, which in his absence she vsed as chappels and altars, to offer vp her prayers, feeling in
them long after, the vertue of his former presence. And there∣fore to feed her with conie∣ctures of his well being, is but to strengthen her feare of his euill, and the alledging of likelihoods by those that know the certain∣tie, importeth the cause to be so lamentable, that they are vnwil∣ling it should be knowne. Your obscure glancing at the truth, is no sufficient acquittance of her griefe, neither cā she out of these disioyned ghests spell the words that must be the conclusion of her complaint. Tell her then di∣rectly what is become of her Lord, if you meane to deliuer her out of these dumpes, sith what else soeuer you say of him, doth but draw more hu∣mours to her sore, and rather anger it than any way asswage it. Yet hearken ô Mary, and con∣sider their speeches. Thinke what answer thou wilt giue them, sith they presse thee with
so strong perswasion. But I doubt that thy wits are smothe∣red with too thicke a mist, to admit these vnknowne beames of their pale light. Thou art so wholy inherited by the bloudy tragedie of thy slaughtered Lord, and his death and dead body hath gotten so absolute a conquest ouer all thy powers, that neither thy sense can dis∣cerne, nor thy minde conceiue any other obiect than his mur∣dered coarse. Thy eyes seeme to tell thee that euery thing inuiteth thee to weepe, carrying such out∣ward shew, as though all that thou seest were attyred in sor∣row to solemnize with generall consent the funerall of the mai∣ster. Thy teares perswade thee that all sounds and voyces are tuned with mournfull notes, and that the Eccho of thine owne wailings, is the cry of the very stones and trees, as though (the
cause of thy teares being so vnu∣suall) God to the rocks and woods, had inspired a feeling of thine and their common losse. And therefore it soundeth to thee as a strange question, to aske thee why thou weepest, sith all that thou seest and hearest, seemeth to induce thee, yea, to enforce thee to weepe. If thou seest any thing that beareth colour of mirth, it is vnto thee like the rich spoiles of a vanquished kingdome, in the eye of a captiue Prince, which puts him in mind what he had, not what he hath, and are but vpbraidings of his losse, and whetstones of sharper sorrow. Whatsoeuer thou hearest that moueth delight, it presenteth the misse of thy maisters speeches, which as they were the onely Harmony that thy eares affected, so they being now stopped with a deathfull silence, all other words and tunes of comfort are
to thee but an Israelites musicke vpon Babylons bancks, memo∣ries of a lost felicitie, and proofes of a present vnhappinesse. And though loue increaseth the con∣ceit of thy losse, which endea∣reth the meanest things, and doubleth the estimate of things that are precious: yet thy faith teaching thee the infinite dig∣nitie of thy Maister, and thy vn∣derstanding being no dull scho∣ler to learne so well liked a les∣son, it fell out to be the bitterest part of thy miserie, that thou diddest so well know how infi∣nite the losse was that made thee miserable. This is the cause that those very Angels, in whom all things make remonstrance of triumph and solace, are vnto thee occa∣sions of new griefe. For their gracious and louely countenan∣ces, remember thee, that thou hast lost the beauty of the world, and the highest marke of true
loues ambition. Their sweet lookes and amiable features tell thee, that the heauen of thy eyes which was the reuerend Maiesty of thy Masters face, once shined with farre more pleasing graces, but is now disfigured with the dreadfull formes of death. In summe, they were to thee, like the glistering sparkes of a bro∣ken Diamond, and like pictures of dead and decayed beauties, signes, not salues of thy calami∣ty, memorials, not medicines of thy misfortune. Thy eyes were too well acquainted with the truth, to accept a supply of sha∣dowes: and as comelinesse, com∣fort and glory, were neuer in any other so truely at home and so perfectly in their prime, as in the person and speeches of thy Lord: so cannot thy thoughts but be like strangers in any for∣raine delight. For in them all thou seest no more but some scattered crums, and hungrie
morsels of thy late plentifull banquets, and findest a dim re∣flexion of thy former light, which like a flash of lightning, in a close and stormie night, serueth thee but to see thy pre∣sent infelicitie, and the better to know the horrour of the ensu∣ing darknesse. Thou thinkest therefore thy selfe blamelesse, both in wee∣ping for thy losse, and in refu∣sing other comfort: Yet in com∣mon courtesie affoord these An∣gels an answer, sith their chari∣tie visiting thee, deserueth much more, and thou (if not too vn∣gratefull) canst allow them no lesse. Alas (saith she) what needeth my answer, where the miserie it selfe speaketh, and the losse is manifest? My eyes haue answe∣red them with teares, my breast with sighes, and my heart with throbs, what need I also punish my tongue, or wound my soule,
with a new rehearsall of so do le∣full a mischance? They haue taken away, O vnfortunate word, they haue taken away my Lord. O afflicted woman; why thin∣kest thou this word so vnfortu∣nate? It may be the Angels haue taken him, more solemnely to entombe him: and sith earth hath done her last homage, haply the Quires of heauen are also descended to defray vnto him their funerall duties. It may be that the Centurion and the rest, that did acknow∣ledge him on the crosse to be the Sonne of God, haue bene touched with remorse, and goa∣red with pricke of conscience, and being desirous to satisfie for their haynous offence, haue now taken him, more honorably to interre him, and by their seruice to his body sought forgiuenesse, and sued the pardon of their guiltie soules. Peraduenture some secret dis∣ciples,
haue wrought this ex∣ploit, and maugre the watch ta∣ken him from hence, with due honour to preserue him in some better place, and therefore being yet vncertaine who hath him, there is no such cause to lament, sith the greater probabilities, march on the better side. Why doest thou call sorrow before it commeth, which without cal∣ling commeth on thee too fast? yea, why doest thou create sor∣row where it is not, sith thou hast true sorrow enough, though imagined sorrowes helpe not? It is folly to suppose the worst where the best may be hoped for: and euerie mishap bringeth griefe enough with it, though we with our feares do not go first to meet it. Quiet then thy selfe till time try out the truth, and it may be thy feare will proue greater than thy misfor∣tune. But I know thy loue is little
helped with this lesson: for the more it loueth, the more it fea∣reth: and the more desirous to enioy, the more doubtfull it is to lose. It neither hath measure in hopes, nor meane in feares: hoping the best vpon the least surmises, and fearing the worst vpon the weakest grounds. And yet both fearing and hoping at one time, neither feare with-hol∣deth hope from the highest at∣tempts nor hope can strengthen feare against the smallest suspi∣tions: but maugre all feares, loues hopes will mount to the highest pitch, and maugre all hopes, loues feares will stoupe to the lowest downe-come. To bid thee therefore hope, is not to forbid thee to feare, and though it may be for the best, that thy Lord is taken from thee, yet sith it may also be for the worst, that will neuer con∣tent thee. Thou thinkest, hope doth
enough to keepe thy heart from breaking, & feare little enough to force thee to no more than weeping, sith it is as likely that he hath bene taken away vpon hatred by his enemies, as vpon loue by his friends. For hitherto (sayest thou) his friends haue all failed him, and his foes preuailed against him; and as they would not defend him aliue, are lesse likely to re∣gard him dead, so they that thought one life too little to take from him, are not vnlikely after death to wrecke new rage vpon him. And though this doubt were not, yet whosoeuer hath taken him, hath wronged me, in not acquainting me with it: for to take away mine without my cō∣sent, can neither be offered with out iniurie, nor suffered without sorrow. And as for Iesus, he was my Iesus, my Lord, and my Mai∣ster. He was mine because he was
giuen vnto me, & borne for me: he was the author of my being, and so my father; he was the worker of my well doing, and therefore my Sauiour; he was the price of my ransome, and thereby my Redeemer: he was my Lord to command me, my maister to instruct me, my pastor to feede me. He was mine, be∣cause his loue was mine, and when he gaue me his loue, he gaue me himselfe, sith loue is no gift except the giuer be giuen with it, yea it is no loue, vnlesse it be as liberall of that it is, as of that it hath. Finally, if the meate be mine that I eate, the life mine wherewith I liue, or he mine, all whose life, labours, and death were mine, then dare I boldly say that Iesus is mine, sith on his body I feed, by his loue I liue, and to my good without any neede of his owne, hath he li∣ued, laboured, and dyed. And therefore though his Disciples,
though the Centurion, yea though the Angels haue taken him, they haue done me wrong, in defeating me of my right, sith I neuer meane to resigne my in∣terest. But what if he hath taken a∣way himselfe, wilt thou also lay iniustice to his charge? Though he be thine, yet thine to com∣mand, not to obey; thy Lord to dispose of thee, and not to be by thee disposed: and therefore, as it is no reason that the seruant should be maister of his maisters secrets, so might he, and perad∣uenture so hath he, remoued without acquainting thee whi∣ther, reuiuing himselfe with the same power with which he rai∣sed thy dead brother, and ful∣filling the words that he often vttered of his resurrection. It may be thou wilt say, that a gift once giuen, cannot be reuoked, and therefore though it were before in his choise, not to giue
himselfe vnto thee, yet the deed of gift being once made, he can∣not be taken from thee, neither can the donor dispose of his gift without the possessors priuity. And sith this is a rule in the law of nature, thou maist imagine it a breach of equine, and an im∣peachment of thy right, to con∣uey himselfe away without thy consent. But to this I will answer thee with thine owne ground. For if he be thine by being giuen thee once: thou art his by as many gifts, as dayes, and there∣fore he being absolute owner of thee, is likewise full owner of whatsoeuer is thine: and conse∣quently because he is thine, he is also his owne, and so nothing lyable vnto thee, for taking him selfe from thee. Yea, but he is my Lord (sayest thou) and in this respect, bound to keepe me, at the least bound not to kill me: and sith killing
is nothing but a seuring of life from the body, he being the chiefe life both of my soule and bodie, cannot possibly go from me, but he must with a double death kill me. And there∣fore he being my Lord, and bound to protect his seruant, it is against all lawes that I should be thus forsaken. But ô cruell tongue, why pleadest thou thus against him, whose case I feare me is so piti∣full, that it might rather moue all tongues to pleade for him, being peraduenture in their hands, whose vumercifull hearts make themselues merry with his miserie, and build the triumphs of their impious victorie vpon the dolefull ruines of his disgra∣ced glorie? And now (ô griefe) because I know not where he is. I cannot imagine how to helpe, for they haue taken him away, and I know not where they haue put him.
Alas Mary, why doest thou consume thy felfe with these cares? His father knoweth, and he will helpe him. The Angels know, and they will guard him. His owne soule knoweth, and that will assist him. And what neede then is there, that thou silly woman shouldest know it, that canst no way profit him? But I feele in what vaine thy pulse beateth, and by thy desire I discouer thy disease. Though both heauen and earth did know it, and the whole world had notice of it, yet except thou also wert made priuie vnro it, thy woes would be as great, and thy teares as many. That others see the Sunne, doth not lighten thy darknesse, neither can others eating satisfie thy hunger. The more there be that know of him, the greater is thy sorrow, that among so many thou art not thought worthy to be one. And the more there be that may
helpe him, the move it grieueth thee that thy poore helpe is not accepted among them. Though thy knowiedge needeth not, thy loue doth desire it, and though it auaile not, thy desire wil seeke it. If all know it, thou wouldest know it with all: if no other, thou wouldest know it alone, and from whom soeuer it be concealed, it must be no secret to thee. Though the knowledge would discomfort thee, yet know it thou wilt, yea though it would kill thee, thou couldest not forbeare it. Thy Lord to thy loue is like drinke to the thirstie, which if they cannot haue, they die for drouth, being long without it they pine away with longing. And as men in extremitie of thirst are still dreaming of foun∣taines, brookes, and springs, be∣ing neuer able to haue other thought, or to vtter other word but of drinke and moisture: so
louers in the vehemencie of their passion, can neither thinke nor speake but of that they loue, and if that be once missing, eue∣ry part is both an eye to watch, and an eare to listen, what hope or newes may be had. If it be good, they die till they heare it, though bad yet they cannot liue without it. Of the good, they hope that it is the very best; and of the euill, they feare it to be the worst: and yet though neuer so good they pine till it be told, and be it neuer so euill, they are importunate to know it. And when they once know it, they can neither beare the ioy nor brooke the sorrow, but as well the one as the other is e∣nough to kill them. And this, ô Mary, I guesse to be the cause why the Angels would not tell thee thy Lords estate. For if it had beene to thy liking, thou wouldest haue died for ioy, if otherwise thou woul∣dest
haue sunke downe for sor∣row. And therefore they leaue this newes for him to deliuer, whose word if it giue thee a wound, is also a salue to cure it, though neuer so deadly. But alas afflicted soule, why doth it so deepely grieue thee, that thou knowest not where he is? Thou canst not better him if he be well, thou canst as little succour him if he be ill: and sith thou fearest that he is rather ill than well, why shouldest thou know it, so to end thy hopes in mishap, and thy great feares in farre greater sorrowes? Alas, to aske thee why, is in a manner to aske one halfe starued why he is hungrie. For as thy Lord is the food of thy thoughts, the reliefe of thy wishes, the onely repast of all thy desires: so is thy loue a continuall hunger, and his ab¦sence vnto thee an extreame famine. And therefore no mar∣uell though thou art so gree∣dy
to heare, yea to deuoure any, be it neuer so bitter notice of him, sith thy hunger is most vio∣lent, and nothing but he able to content it. And albeit the hea∣ring of his harmes should worke the same in thy mind, that vn∣wholsome meat worketh in a sick stomacke: yet if it once con∣cerne him that thou louest, thy hungrie loue could not temper it selfe from it, though after with many wringing gripes, it did a long and vnpleasant pe∣nance. But why doth thy sorrow quest so much vpon the place where he is? were it not enough for thee to know who had him, but that thou must also know in what place he is bestowed? A worse place than a graue no man will offer, and many farre better many titles will allow: and therefore thou maist boldly thinke, that wheresoeuer he be, he is in a place fitter for him
than where he was. Thy sister Martha confessed him to be the Sonne of God, and with her confession agreed thy beliefe. And what place more conueni∣ent for the sonne, than to be with his Father, the businesse for which he hath bene so long from him, being now fully fini∣shed? If he be the Messias, as thou diddest once beleeue, it was said of him, That he should ascend on high, and leade our captiuitie cap∣tiue. And what is this height, but heauen? what our captiuitie but death? Death therefore is become his captiue, and it is like that with the spoyles there∣of, he is ascended in triumph to eternall life. But if thou canst not lift thy minde to so fauourable a beliefe, yet maiest thou very well sup∣pose that he is in Paradise. For if he came to repaire Adams ru∣ines, and to be the common pa∣rent of our redemption, as Adam
was of our originall infection: reason seemeth to require, that hauing endured all his life the penaltie of Adams exile, he should after death re-enter pos∣session of that inheritance which Adam lost: that the same place that was the neast where sinne was first hatched, may be now the child-bed of grace and mer∣cy. And if sorrow at the crosse did not make thee as deafe, as at the Tombe it maketh thee for∣getfull, thou diddest in confir∣mation hereof heare himselfe say to one of the theeues, that the same day he should be with him in Paradise. And if it be reason that no shadow should be more priuiledged than the body, no figure in more account than the figured truth, why shouldest thou beleeue that Eli∣as and Enoch haue bene in Para∣dise these many ages, & that he whō they but as tipes resembled, should be excluded from thence?
He excelled them in life, surpas∣sed them in miracles, he was farre beyond them in dignitie: why then should not his place be farre aboue, or at the least e∣quall with theirs, sith their pre∣rogatiues were so farre inferiour vnto his? And yet if the basenesse and misery of his passion haue layd him so low in thy conceit, that thou thinkest Paradise too high a place to be likely to haue him: the very lowest roome that any reason can assigne him, cannot be meaner than the bosome of Abraham. And sith God in his life did so often acknowledge him for his Sonne, it seemeth the slenderest preheminence that he can giue him aboue other men, that being his holy one, he should not in his body see corruption, but be free among the dead, repo∣sing both in body and soule, where other Saints are in soule onely. Let not therefore the
place where he is trouble thee, sith it cannot be worse than his graue, and infinite coniectures make probability that it cannot but be better. But suppose that he were yet remaining on earth, and taken by others out of his Tombe, what would it auaile thee to know where he were? If he be with such as loue and honour him, they will be as warie to keepe him, as they are loth he should be lost: and therefore will either often change, or ne∣uer confesse the place, knowing secresie to be the surest locke to defend so great a treasure. If those haue taken him, that ma∣lice and maligne him, thou maist well iudge him past thy recoue∣rie, when he is once in posses∣sion of so cruell owners. Thou wouldest haply make sale of thy liuing, and seeke him by ransome. But it is not likely they would sell him to be
honoured, that bought him to be murthered. If price would not serue, thou wouldest fall to prayer. But how can prayer soften such flinty hearts? And if they scorned so many teares offered for his life, as little will they regard thy in∣treatie for his coarse. If neither price nor prayer would preuaile, thou wouldest attempt it by force. But alas silly souldier, thy armes are too weake to manage weapons, and the issue of thy affault, would be the losse of thy selfe. If no other way would helpe, thou wouldest purloine him by stealth, and thinke thy selfe hap∣pie in contriuing such a theft. O Mary, thou art deceiued, for malice will haue many locks: and to steale him from a thiefe, that could steale him from the watch, requireth more cunning in the Art, than thy want of practise can affoord thee.
Yet if these be the causes that thou enquired of the place, thou shewest the force of thy rare affection, and deseruest the Lawrell of a perfect louer. But to feele more of their sweetnesse, I will poune these spices, and dwell a while in the peruse of thy resolute seruour. And first, can thy loue enrich thee when thy goods are gone, or a dead coarse repay the value of thy ransome? Because he had neither bed to be borne in, nor graue to be buried in, wilt thou therefore rather be poore with him, than rich without him? Againe, if thou hadst to sue to some cruell Scribe or Phari∣sie, that is, to an heart boyling in rancor, with an heart burning in loue, for a thing of him aboue all things detested, of thee aboue all things desired: as his enemie to whom thou suest, and his friend for whom thou intrearest: canst thou thinke it possible for
this sute to speede? Could thy loue repaire thee from his rage, or such a tyrant stoupe to a wo∣mans teares? Thirdly, if thy Lord might be recouered by violence, art thou so armed in compleat loue, that thou thinkest it sufficient har∣nesse? or doth thy loue indue thee with such a Iudiths spirit, or lend thee such Sampsons locks, that thou canst breake open huge gates, or foyle whole ar∣mies? Is thy loue so sure a shield, that no blow can breake it, or so sharpe a dint, that no force can withstand it? Can it thus al∣ter sexe, change nature, and ex∣ceede all Art? But of all other courses woul∣dest thou aduenture a theft to obtaine thy desire? A good deed must be well done, and a worke of mercy without breach of iu∣stice. It were a sinne to steale prophane treasure, but to steale an annointed Prophet, can be no
lesse than sacriledge. And what greater staine to thy Lord, to his doctrine, and to thy selfe, than to see thee his Disciple publikely executed for an open theft? O Mary, vnlesse thy loue haue better warrant than common sense, I can hardly see how such designements can be approued. Approued (saith she,) I would to God the execution were as easie as the proofe, and I should not long bewaile my vnfortu∣nate losse. To others it seemeth ill to preferre loue before riches, but to loue it seemeth worse to pre∣ferre any thing before it selfe. Cloath him with plates of siluer that shiuereth for cold, or fill his purse with treasure that pineth with hunger, & see whether the plates will warme him, or the treasure feede him. No, no, he will giue vs all his plates for a woollen garment, and all his
money for a meales meate. Eue∣ry supply fitteth not with euery neede, and the loue of so sweete a Lord hath no correspondence in worldly wealth. Without him I were poore, though Empresse of the world. With him I were rich though I had nothing else. They that haue most are accoun∣ted richest and they thought to haue most, that haue all they de∣sire: and therefore as in him a∣lone is the vttermost of my de∣sires, so he alone is the summe of all my substance. It were too happy an exchange, to haue God for goods, and too rich a pouertie to enioy the onely treasure of the world. If I were so fortunate a begger, I would disdaine Salomons wealth, and my loue being so highly enri∣ched, my life should neuer com∣plaine of want. And if all I am worth would not reach to his ransome, what should hinder to seeke him by
intreaty? Though I were to sue to the gaeatest Tyrant, yet the equitie of my sute is more than halfe a graunt. If many drops soften the hardest stones, why should not many teares supple the most stony hearts? What an∣ger so fiery that may not be quenched with eye-water; sith a weeping suppliant ebateth the edge of more than a Lyons furie? My sute it selfe would sue for me, and so dolefull a coarse would quicken pitty in the most yron hearts. But suppose that by touching a ranckled sore, my touch should anger it, and my petition at the first incense him that heard it: he would percase reuile me in words, and the his owne iniurie would recoyle with remorse, and be vnto me a patron to proceede in my re∣quest. And if he should accom∣panie his words with blowes, and his blowes with wounds, it may be my stripes would
smart in his guiltie minde, and his conscience bleed in my blee∣ding wounds, and my innocent bloud so entender his Adamant heart, that his owne inward fee∣lings would pleade my cause, and peraduenture obtaine my sute. But if through extremity of spite he should happen to kil me, his offence might easily redound to my felicitie. For he would be as carefull to hide whom he had vniustly murthered, as him whom hee had felloniously stolen: and so it is like that he would hide me in the same place where he had layd my Lord. And as he hated vs both for one cause, him for challenging, and me for acknowledging that he was the Messias: so would he vse vs both after one manner. And thus what comfort my body wanted, my soule should enioy, in seeing a part of my selfe part∣ner of my Maisters misery: with
whom to be miserable, I reckon an higher fortune, than without him to be most happy. And if no other meane would serue to recouer him but force, I see no reason why it might not very well become me. None will barre me from defending my life, which the least worme in the right nature hath leaue to preserue. And sith he is to me so deare a life, that without him all life is death, nature authori∣seth my feeble forces, to employ their vttermost in so necessary an attempt. Necessitie addeth abilitie, and loue doubleth ne∣cessitie, and it often happeneth that nature armed with loue, and pressed with neede, excee∣deth it selfe in might, and sur∣mounteth all hope in successe. And as the equitie of the cause doth breath courage into the defenders, making them the mote willing to fight, and the lesse vnwilling to dye so guiltie
consciences are euer timorous, still starting with sodaine frightts, and afraid of their own suspitions, ready to yeeld before the assault, vpon distresse of their cause, and despaire of their de∣fence. Sith therefore to rescue an innocent, to recouer a right, & to redresse so deepe a wrong, is so iust a quarrell: nature will enable me, loue encourage me, grace confirme me, and the iudge of all iustice fight in my behalfe. And if it seeme vnfitting to my sexe in talke, much more in practise to deale with materiall affaires: yet when such a cause happeneth as neuer had patterne, such effects must follow as are without example. There was neuer any body of a God but one, neither such a body stolne but now, neuer such a stealth vnreuenged but this. Sith there∣fore the Angels neglect it; and men forge, O Iudith lend me
thy prowesse, for I am bound to regard it. But suppose that my force were vnable to winne him by an open enterprise, what scruple should keepe me from seeking him by secret meanes? yea and by plaine stealth, it will be thought a sinne, and condemned for a theft. O sweet sinne, why was not I the first that did com∣mit thee? Why did I suffer any other sinner to preuent me? For stealing from God his honour I was called a sinner, and vnder that title was spread my infamie. But for stealing God from a false owner, I was not worthy to be called a sinner, because it had bene too high a glory. If this be so great a sinne, and so haynous a theft, let others make choise of what titles they will, but for my part I would refuse to be an Angell, I would not wish to be a Saint, I would ne∣uer be esteemed either iust or
true, and I should be best con∣tented if I might but liue and die such a sinner, and be con∣demned for such a theft. When I heard my Lord make so com∣fortable a promise to the theefe vpon the Crosse, that he should that day be with him in Para∣dise, I had halfe an enuie at that theeues good fortune, & wished my selfe in the theefes place, so I might haue enioyed the fruit of his promise. But if I could be so happy a theefe, as to commit this theft, if that wish had taken effect, I would now vnwish it againe, and scorne to be any o∣ther theefe than my selfe, sith my booty could make me hap∣pier than any other theefes fe∣licitie. And what though my fellonie should be called in question, in what respect should I need to feare? They would say, that I loued him too well; but that were soone disproued, sith where the worthinesse is infi∣nite,
no loue can be enough. They would obiect that I stole anothers goods: and as for that, many sure titles of my interest would auerre him to be mine, and his dead coarse would ra∣ther speak than witnesses should faile to depose so certaine a truth. And if I had not a speciall right vnto him, what should moue me to venture my life for him? No no, if I were so happy a fellon, I should feare no tem∣porall arraignment: I should ra∣ther feare that the Angels would cite me to my answere; for pre∣uenting them in the theft, sith not the highest Seraphin in hea∣uen, but would deem it a higher stile than his owne, to be the theefe that had committed so glorious a robberie. But alas, thus stand I now de∣uising what I would do, if I knew any thing of him, and in the meane time I neither know who hath him, nor where they
haue bestowed him, and still I am forced to dwell in this an∣swer, that they haue taken away my Lord, and I know not where they haue put him. While Mary thus lost her selfe in a Labyrinth of doubts, watering her words with teares, and warming them with sighes, seeing the Angels with a kinde of reuerence rise, as though they had done honour to one behind her: She turned backe, and she saw Iesus standing, but that it was Iesus she knew not. O Mary, is it possible that thou hast forgotten Iesus? Faith hath written him in thy vnder∣standing, loue in thy will, both feare and hope in thy memory: and how can all these Registers be so cancelled, that so plainely seeing, thou shouldest not know the contents? For him onely thou tirest thy feet, thou ben∣dest thy knees, thou wringest thy handes. For him thy heart
throbbeth, thy breast sigheth, thy tongue complaineth. For him thine eye weepeth, thy thought sorroweth, thy whole body fainteth, and thy soule langui∣sheth. In summe, there is no part in thee, but is busie about him, and notwithstanding all this, hast thou now forgotten him? His countenance auoucheth it, his voice assureth it, his wounds witnesse it, thine owne eyes be∣hold it, and doest thou not yet beleeue that this is Iesus? Are thy sharpe seeing eyes become so weake sighted, that they are dazeled with the Sunne, and blinded with the light? But there is such a shower of teares betweene thee and him, and thine eyes are so dimmed with weeping for him, that though thou seest the shape of a man, yet thou canst not dis∣cerne him. Thy eares also are still so possessed with the dolefull Eccho of his last speeches,
which want of breath made him vtter in a dying voice, that the force and loudnesse of his liuing words, maketh thee ima∣gine it the voyce of a stranger: and therefore as he seemeth vn∣to thee so like a stranger, he as∣keth this question of thee, O wo∣man why weepest thou, whom see∣kest thou? O desire of the heart, and one∣ly ioy of her soule, why deman∣dest thou why she weepeth, or for whom she seeketh? But a while since she saw thee her onely hope hanging on a tree, with thy head full of thornes, thy eyes full of teares, thy eares full of blasphemies, thy mouth full of gall thy whole person mangled and disfigured, and doest thou aske her why she weepeth? Scarce three dayes pas∣sed, she beheld thy armes and legges racked with violent puls, thy hands and feete boared with nayles, thy side wounded with
a speare, thy whole bodie torne with stripes, and goared in blood, and doest thou her onely griefe, aske her why she wee∣peth? She beheld thee vpon the Crosse with many teares, and most lamentable cryes, yeelding vp her ghost, that is, thy owne ghost, and alas asketh thou why she weepeth? And now to make vp her miserie, hauing but one hope aliue, which was, that for a small reliefe of her other afflicti∣ons, she might haue annointed thy body; that hope is also dead, since thy body is remoued and she now standeth hopelesse of all helpe, and demandest thou why she weepeth▪ and for whom she seeketh? Full well thou knowest, that thee onely she de∣sireth, thee onely she loueth, all things beside thee she contm∣neth, and canst thou finde in thy heart to aske her whom she seeketh? To what end ô sweet Lord, doest thou thus suspend
her longings, prolong her de∣sires, and martyr her with these tedious delayes? Thou onely art the fortresse of her faint faith, the anker of her wauering hope, the very center of her vehement loue: to thee she trusteth, vpon thee she relyeth, and of her selfe she wholly despaireth. She is so earnest in seeking thee that she can neither seeke nor thinke any other thing: and all her wits are so busied in musing vpon thee, that they draw all attention from her senses, wherewith they should discerne thee. Being therefore so attentiue to that she thinketh, what maruell though she marke not whom she seeth: and sith thou hast so perfect notice of her thought and she so little power to disco∣uer thee by sense, why deman∣dest thou for whom she seeketh, or why she weepeth? Doest thou looke that she should answere, for thee I seeke, or for thee I
weepe? vnlesse thou wilt vnbend her thoughts, that her eyes may fully see thee: or while thou wilt be concealed, doest thou expect that she should be able to know thee? But, ô Mary, not without cause doth he aske thee this question. Thou wouldest haue him aliue, and yet thou weepest because thou doest not find him dead. Thou art some that he is not here, and for this very cause thou shouldest rather be glad. For if he were dead I it is most likely he should be here; but not being here, it is a signe that he is aliue. He reioyceth to be out of his graue, and thou weepest because he is not in it. He will not lie any where, and thou sor∣rowest for not knowing where he lyeth. Alas, why be wailest thou his glory, and iniurest the reuiuing of his body as the rob∣bery of his coarse? He being a∣liue, for what dead man mour∣nest
thou, and he being present, whose absence doest thou la∣ment? But she taking him to be a Gardener said vnto him, O Lord, if thou hast carried him from hence, tell me where thou hast layd him, and I will take him away. O wonderfull effects of Ma∣ries loue, if loue be a languor, how liueth she by it? If loue be her life, how dyeth she in it? If it bereaued her of sense, how did she see the Angels? If it quicke∣ned her of sense, why knew she not Iesus? Doest thou seeke for one, whom when thou hast found thou knowest not? or if thou dost know him when thou findest him, why doest thou seek when thou hast him? Behold Iesus is come, and the partie whom thou seekest, is he that talketh with thee, ô Mary call vp thy wits, and open thine eyes. Hath thy Lord liued so long laboured so much died with such paine, and shed such
showers of bloud, to come to no higher preferment, than to be a Gardener? And hast thou be∣stowed such cost, so much sor∣row, and so many teares, for no better man than a silly Garde∣ner? Alas, is the sorry Garden the best inheritance that thy loue can affoord him, or a Gar∣deners office the highest digni∣tie that thou wilt allow him? It had bene better he had liued to haue bene Lord of thy Castle, than with his death so dearely to haue bought so small a pur∣chase. But thy mistaking, hath in it a further mysterie. Thou thin∣kest not amisse, though thy sight be deceiued. For as our first Fa∣ther, in the state of grace and innocencie, was placed in the Garden of pleasure, and the first office allotted him was to be a Gardener: so the first man that euer was in glorie, appeareth first in a Garden, and presenteth himselfe in a Gardeners like∣nesse,
that the beginnings of glorie might resemble the en∣trance of innocencie and grace. And as the Gardener was the fall of mankinde, the parent of sinne, and authour of death, so is this Gardener the raiser of our ruines, the ransome of our of∣fences; and the restorer of life. In a Garden Adam was decei∣ued and taken captiue by the deuill. In a Garden Christ was betrayed and taken prisoner by the Iewes. In a Garden Adam was condemned to earne his bread with the sweat of his browes. And after a free gift of the bread of Angels in the last Supper, in a Garden Chrid did earne it vs with a bloudy sweate of his whole body. By disobe∣dient eating the fruite of a tree, our right to that Garden was by Adam forfeited, and by the obedient death of Christ vpon a tree a farre better right is now recouered. When Adam had
sinned in the Garden of pleasure, he was there apparelled in dead beasts skinnes, that his garment might betoken his graue, and his liuery of death agree with his condemnation to die. And now to defray the debt of that sinne, in this Garden Christ lay cld in the dead mans shrowd, and buried in his Tombe, that as our harmes began, so they might end; and such places and meanes as were the premises to our miserie; might be also the conclusions of our misfortune. For this did Christ in the Can∣ticles, inuite vs to an heauenly banquet after he was come into this Garden, and had reaped his myrrhe, and his spice, to fore∣warne vs of the ioy that after this haruest should presently en∣sue, namely when hauing sowed in this Garden a body, the mor∣talitie whereof was signified by those spices, he now reaped the same, neither capable of death,
nor subiect to corruption. For this also was Mary permitted to mistake, that we might be informed of the mysterie, and see how aptly the course of our redemption did answer the pro∣cesse of our condemnation. But though he be the Gar∣dener that hath planted the tree of grace, and restored vs to the vse and eating of the fruites of life. Though it be he that soweth his giftes in our soules, quickening in vs the seeds of vertue, and rooting out of vs the weedes of sinne: yet is he neuerthelesse the same Iesus he was, and the borrowed presence of a meane laborer neither alte∣reth his person, nor diminisheth his right to his diuine titles. Why then canst thou not as well see what in truth he is, as what in shew he seemeth? but because thou seest more than thou diddest beleeue, and fin∣dest more thrn thy faith serueth
thee to seek: and for this though thy loue was worthy to see him, yet thy faith was vnworthy to know him. Thou diddest seeke for him as dead, and therefore doest not know him seeing him aliue; and because thou beleeuest not of him as he is, thou doest onely see him as he seemeth to be. I cannot say thou art faultlesse, sith thou art so lame in thy be∣leefe▪ but thy fault deserueth fa∣uour, because thy charitie is so great: and therefore ô mercifull Iesu, giue me leaue to excuse whom thou art minded to for∣giue. She thought to haue found thee as she left thee, and she sought thee as she did last see thee, being so ouercome with sorow for thy death, that she had neither roome nor respite in her minde for any hope of thy life: and being so deepely interred in the griefe of thy buriall that she
could not raise her thoughts to any conceit of thy resurrecti∣on. For in the graue where Ioseph buried thy body, Mary toge∣ther with it entombed her soule, and so straightly combined it with thy coarse, that she could with more ease sunder her soule from her owne body that liueth by it, than from thy dead body, with which her loue did burie it: for it is more thine and in thee, than her owne or in her selfe; and therefore in seeking thy body, she seeketh her owne soule, as with the losse of the one, she also lost the other. What maruell then though sense faile, when the soule is lost, sith the lanterne must needes be darke when the light is out? Restore vnto her therfore her soule that lieth imprisoned in thy body, and she will soone both re∣couer her sense, and discouer her errour. For alas it is no errour yt
proceedeth of any will to erre, and it riseth as much of vehe∣mencie or affection, as of default in faith. Regard not the errour of a woman, but the loue of a Disciple, which supplyeth in it selfe what in faith it wanteth. O Lord (saith she) If thou hast carri∣ed him hence, tell me where thou hast laide him, and I will take him away. O how learned is her igno∣rance, and how skilfull her er∣rour? She charged not the An∣gels with thy remouing, nor see∣med to mistrust them for carry∣ing thee away, as though that her loue had taught her yt their helpe was needlesse, where the thing remoued was remouer of it selfe. She did not request them to enforme her where thou wert layd, as if she had reserued that question for thy selfe to answer. But now he iudgeth thee so likely to be the authour of her losse, that halfe supposing thee
guilty, she sueth a recouerie, and desireth thee to tell her where the body is, as almost fully per∣swaded that thou art as priuie to the place, as well acquainted with the action. So that if she be not altogether right, she is not very much wrong, and she erreth with such ayme, that she very little misseth the truth. Tell her therefore ô Lord, what thou hast done with thy selfe, sith it is fittest for thy owne speech to vtter that which was onely pos∣sible for thy owne power to per∣forme. But ô Mary, sithens thou art so desirous to know where thy Iesus is, why doest thou not name him when thou askest for him? Thou saidest to the Angels that they had taken away thy Lord, and now the second time thou askest for him. Are thy thoughts so visible, as at thy onely presence to be seene; or so generall, that they possesse all
when they are once in thee? When thou speakest of him, what him doest thou meane, or how can a stranger vnderstand thee when thou talkest of thy Lord? Hath the world no other Lords but thine? or is the de∣manding by no other name but (him) a sufficient notice for whom thou demandest? But such is the nature of thy loue, thou iudgest that no other should be entitled a Lord, sith the whole world is too little for thy Lords possession, and that those few creatures that are, cannot chuse but know him, sith all the creatures of the world are too few to serue him. And as his worthinesse can appay all loues, and his onely loue con∣tent all hearts, so thou deemest him to be so well worthy to be owner of all thoughts, that no thought in thy conceit, can be well bestowed vpon any other. Yet thy speeches seeme more
sudden than sound, and more peremptory, than well ponde∣red. Why doest thou say so reso∣lutely without any further cir∣cumstance, that if this Gardener haue taken him, thou wilt take him from him? If he had him by right, in taking him away thou shouldst do him wrong. If thou supposest he wrongfully tooke him, thou layest theft to his charge: and howsoeuer it be thou either condemnest thy selfe for an vsurper, or him for a thiefe. And is this an effect of thy zealous loue, first to abase him from a God to a Gardener, and now to degrade him from a Gardener to a thiefe? Thou shouldest also haue considered whether he tooke him vpon loue or malice. If it were for loue, thou maiest assure thy selfe that he will be as wary to keepe, as he was venturous to get him, and therefore thy pol∣licie was weake in saying, thou
wouldest take him away before thou knewest where he was, sith none is so simple to bewray their treasure to a knowne thiefe. If he tooke him of ma∣lice, thy offer to recouer him is an open defiance, sith malice is as obstinate in defending as vio∣lent in offering wrong, and he that would be cruell against thy maisters dead body, is likely to be more furious against his li∣uing Disciples. But thy loue had no leisure to cast so many doubts. Thy teares were Interpreters of thy words, and thy innocent meaning was written in thy dolefull counte∣nance. Thine eyes were rather pleaders for pitty than Heraulds of wrath, and thy whole person presented such a patterne of thy extreame anguish, that no man from thy presence could take in any other impression. And therefore what thy words wan∣ted, thy action supplied, and
what his eare might mistake his eye did vnderstand. It might be also that what he wrought in thy heart, was con∣cealed from thy sight, and haply his voice and demeanour did import such compassion of thy case, that he seemed as willing to affoord as thou desirest to haue his helpe. And so presu∣ming by his behauiour, that thy suite should not suffer repulse, the tenour of thy request doth but argue thy hope of a graunt. But what is the reason that in all thy speeches, which since the misse of thy maister thou hast vttered, (where they haue put him) is alwayes a part? So thou saydest to the Apostles, the same to the Angels, and now thou doest repeate it to this supposed Garderner: very sweete must this word be in thy heart, that is so often in thy mouth, & it would neuet be so ready in thy tongue, if it were not very fresh in thy
memory. But what maruaile though it tast so sweete, that was first seasoned in thy maisters mouth? which as it was the treasury of truth, the fountaine of life, and the onely quire of the most per∣fect Harmonie, so whatsoeuer it deliuered, thine eare deuoured, and thy heart locked vp. And now that thou wantest himselfe, thou hast no other comfort but his words, which thou deemest so much the more effectuall to perswade, in that they tooke their force from so heauenly a speaker. His sweetenesse there∣fore it is that maketh this word so sweete, and for loue of him thou repeatest it so often, be∣cause he in the like case said of thy brother, Where haue you put him? O how much doest thou affect his person, that findest so sweete a feeling in his phrase! How much desirest thou to see his countenance, that with so
great desire pronouncest his wordes? And how willingly wouldest thou licke his sacred feete, that so willingly vtterest his shortest speeches? But what meanest thou to make so absolute a promise, and so boldly to say, I will take him a∣way? Ioseph was afraid, and durst not take downe his body from the Crosse but by night, yea and then also not without Pilats warrant, but thou neither stayest vntill night, nor regardest Pilate, but stoutly promisest that thou thy selfe wilt take him away. What if he be in the pallace of the high Priest, and some such maid as made Saint Peter denie his maister do begin to questi∣on with thee, wilt thou then stand to these words, I will take him away? Is thy courage so high aboue kinde, thy strength so farre beyond thy sexe, & thy loue so much without measure, yt thou neither doest remember
that all women are weake, not that thy selfe art but a woman? Thou exemptest no place, thou preferrest no person, thou spea∣kest without feare, thou promi∣sest without condition, thou makest no exception: as though nothing were impossible that thy loue suggesteth. But as the darknesse could not fright thee from setting forth before day, nor the watch feare thee from comming to the Tombe: as thou diddest resolue to breake open the seales though with danger of thy life, and to remoue the stone from the graues mouth, though thy force could not serue thee: so what maruaile though thy loue being now more incensed with the fresh wound of thy losse, it resolue vpon any though neuer so hard aduentures? Loue is not ruled with rea∣son, but with loue. It neither re∣gardeth what can be, nor what
shall be done, but onely what it selfe desireth to do. No difficulty can stay it, no impossibility ap∣pall it. Loue is title iust enough and Armour strong enough for all assaults, and it selfe a reward of all labours. It asketh no re∣compence, it respecteth no com∣moditie. Loues fruites are loues effects, and the gaines the paines. It considereth behoofe more than benefit, and what in dutie it should, not what indeed it can. But how can nature be so maistered with affection, that thou canst take such delight and carry such loue to a dead coarse? The mother how tenderly so∣euer she loued her child aliue, yet she cannot chuse but loath him dead. The most louing Spouse cannot endure the pre∣sence of her deceassed husband, and whose embracements were delightsome in life, are euer most hatefull after death. Yea
this is the nature of all, but prin∣cipally of women, that the very conceit, much more the sight of the departed striketh into them so fearefull and vgly impressi∣ons, and stirreth in them so great horrour, that notwithstanding the most vehement loue, they thinke long vntill the house is ridde of their very dearest friends, when they are once at∣tyred in deaths vnlouely liueries. How then canst thou endure to take vp his coarse in thy hands, and to carry it thou knowest not thy selfe how farre, being especially torne and mangled, and consequently the more likely in so long time to be tain∣ted? Thy sister was vnwilling that the graue of her owne brother should be opened, and yet he was shrowded in sheets, embal∣med with spices, and died an or∣dinarie death, without any wound, bruse or other harme,
that might hasten his corrup∣tion. But this coarse hath neither shrowd nor spice, sith these are to be seene in the tombe, and there is not a part in his body but had some helpe to further it to decay; and art thou not a∣fraid to see him, yea to touch him, yea to embrace and carry him naked in thine armes? If thou haddest remembred Gods promise, that His holy one should not see corruption: If thou haddest beleeued that his God-head remaining with his bodie, could haue preserued it from perishing, thy faith had bene more worthy of praise, but thy loue lesse worthy of admiration, sith the more corruptible thou diddest conceiue him, the more combers thou diddest determine to ouercome, and the greater was thy loue in being able to conquer them. But thou woul∣dest haue thought thy oynt∣ments rather harmes than helpes,
if thou hadst bene setled in that beleefe, and for so heauenly a coarse embalmed with God, all earthly spices would haue see∣med a disgrace. If likewise thou haddest firmely trusted vpon his resurrection, I should maruaile at thy constant designement, sith all hazards in taking him should haue bene with vsurie repaide, if lying in thy lappe, thou migh∣test haue seene him reuiued, and his disfigured and dead body beautified in thine armes with a diuine maiestie. If thou haddest hoped so good fortune to thy waterie eyes, that they might haue bene first cleared with the beames of his desired light, or that his eyes might haue blessed thee with the first fruites of his glorious lookes: If thou haddest imagined any likelihood to haue made hap∣pie thy dying heart with ta∣king in the first gaspes of his li∣uing breath, or to haue heard
the first words of his pleasing voice: Finally if thou haddest thought to haue seene his iniu∣ries turned to honours, the markes of his miserie to orna∣ments of glorie, and the depth of thy heauinesse to such an height of felicity, whatsoeuer thou haddest done to obtaine him had bene but a mite for a million, and too slender a price for so soueraigne a peniworth. But hauing no such hopes to vphold thee, and so many mo∣tiues to plonge thee in despaire, how could thy loue be so migh∣ty, as neither to feele a womans feare of so deformed a coarse, nor to thinke the weight of the burthen too heauy for thy feeble armes, nor to be amated with a world of dangers that this at∣tempt did carry with it? But affection cannot feare whom it affecteth, loue feeleth no load of him it loueth, neither can true frendship be frighted
from rescuing so affied a friend. What meanest thou then, ô comfort of her life, to leaue so constant a wel-willer so long vn∣comforted, and to punish her so much, that so well deserueth pardon? Dally no longer with so knowne a loue, which so ma∣ny trials auouch most true. And sith she is nothing but what it pleaseth thee, let her tast the be∣nefit of being onely thine. She did not follow the tide of thy better fortune to shift saile when the streame did alter course. She began not to loue thee in thy life to leaue thee af∣ter death: Neither was she such a guest at thy table that meant to be a stranger in thy necessi∣tie. She left thee not in thy low∣est ebbe, she reuolted not from thy last extremitie: In thy life she serued thee with her goods: in thy death she departed not from the Crosse: after death she came to dwell with thee at thy
graue. Why then doest thou not say with Naomi? Blessed be she of our Lord, because what courtesie she afforded to the quicke, she hath also continued towards the dead. A thing so much the more to be esteemed in that it is most rare. Do not sweete Lord any lon∣ger delay her. Behold she hath attended thee these three dayes, and she hath not what to eate, nor wherewith to foster her fa∣mished soule, vnlesse thou by discouering thy selfe doest mi∣nister vnto her the bread of thy body, and feede her with the food that hath in it all taste of sweetnesse. If therefore thou wilt not haue her to faint in the way, refresh her with that which her hunger requireth. For sure∣ly she cannot long enioy the life of her soule. But feare not Mary, for thy teares will obtaine. They are to o mighty oratours to let any suit fall, and though they plea∣ded
at the most rigorous barre, yet haue they so perswading a silence, & so conquering a com∣plaint, that by yeelding they o∣uercome, and by intreating they command. They tie the tongues of all accusers, and soften the ri∣gour of the seuerest Iudge. Yea they winne the inuincible, and binde the omnipotent. When they seeme most pitifull, they haue great power, and be∣ing most forsaken they are more victorious. Repentant eyes are the Cellers of Angels, and penitent teares their sweetest wines; which the sauour of life perfumeth, the taste of grace sweeteneth, and the purest co∣lours of returning innocencie highly beautifieth. This deaw of deuotion neuer faileth, but the Sunne of iustice draweth it vp, and vpon what face soeuer it droppeth, it maketh it amiable in Gods eye. For this water hath thy heart bene long a limbecke,
sometimes distilling it out of the weedes of thy owne offen∣ces with the fire of true contri∣tion. Sometimes out of the flowers of spirituall comforts, with the flames of contempla∣tion, and now out of the bitter hearbes of thy maisters miseries, with the heat of a tender com∣passion. This water hath better graced thy lookes, than thy former alluring glances. It hath setled worthier beauties in thy face, than all thy artificiall pain∣tings. Yea this onely water hath quenched Gods anger, quali∣fied his iustice, recouered his mercy, merited his loue purcha∣sed his pardon, and brought forth the spring of all thy fa∣uours. Thy teares were the procters for thy brothers life, the inuiters of those Angels for thy comfort, and the suters that shall be rewarded with the first sight of thy reuiued Sauiour. Rewarded they shall be, but not
refrained, altered in their cause, but their course continued. Hea∣uen would weepe at the losse of so precious a water, and earth lament the absence of so fruit∣full showers. No, no, the Angels must still bath themselues in the pure streames of thine eyes, and thy face shall still be set with this liquid pearle, that as out of thy teares, were stroken the first sparkes of thy Lords loue, so thy teares may be the oyle to nou∣rish and feede his fame. Till death dam vp the springs, they shall neuer ceasse running: and then shall thy soule be ferried in them to the harbour of life, that as by them it was first pas∣sed from sinne to grace, so in them it may be wasted from grace to glorie. In the meane time reare vp thy fallen hopes, and gather confidence both of thy speedy comfort, and thy Lords well being Iesus saith vnto her, Marie,
She turning, saith vnto him: Rab∣boni. O louing maister, thou did∣dest onely deferre her consola∣tion, to increase it, that the de∣light of thy presence, might be so much the more welcome, in that through thy long absence it was with so little hope so much desired. Thou wert con∣tent she should lay out for thee so many sighes, teares and plaints, and diddest purposely adiourne the date of her pay∣ment, to requite the length of these delayes, with a larger loane of ioy. It may be she knew not her former happinesse, till she was weaned from it: nor had a right estimate in valuing the treasures with which thy pre∣sence did inrich her, vntill her extreame pouertie taught her their vnestimable rate. But now thou shewest by a sweete expe∣rience, that though she payde thee with the dearest water of
her eyes, with her best breath, and tenderest loue, yet small was the price that she bestowed in respect of the worth she recei∣ued. She sought thee dead, and imprisoned in a stonie gayle, and now she findeth thee both a∣liue, and at full libertie. She sought thee shrined in a shrowd, more like a leaper than thy selfe, left as the modell of the vtter∣most miserie, and the onely pat∣terne of the bitterest vnhappi∣nesse; and now she findeth thee inuested in the robes of glorie, the president of the highest, and both the owner and giuer of all felicitie. And as all this while she hath sought without finding, wept without comfort, and called without answers: so now thou diddest satisfie her seeking with thy comming, her teares with thy triumph, and all her cryes with this one word, Mary. For when she heard thee call her in
thy wonted manner, and with thy vsuall voice, her onely name issuing frō thy mouth, wrought so strange an alteration in her, as if she had bene wholly new made when she was onely na∣med. For whereas before the violence of her griefe had so be∣nummed her, that her body see∣med but the hearse of her dead heart, and the coffin of an vn∣liuing soule, and her whole pre∣sence but a representation of a double funerall, of thine and of her owne: now with this one word her senses are restored, her minde lightened, her heart quickened, and her soule reui∣ued. But what maruell though with one word he raise the dead spirits of his poore Disciple, that with a word made the world, and euen in this verie word sheweth an omnipotent power? Mary she was called as well
in her bad as in her reformed estate, and both her good and euill, was all of Maries wor∣king. And as Marie signifieth no lesse what she was, than what she is: so is this one word, by his vertue that speaketh it, a repeti∣tion of all her miseries, an Epi∣tome of his mercies, and a me∣morial of all her better fortunes. And therefore it layd so generall a discouerie of her selfe before her eyes, that it awaked her most forgotten sorrowes, and mustered together the whole multitude of her ioyes, and would haue left the issue of their mutinie very doubtfull, but that the presence and notice of her highest happinesse decided the quarrell, and gaue her ioyes the victory. For as he was her onely Sunne, whose going downe left nothing but a dumpish night of fearefull fansies, wherein no starre of hope shined, and the
brightest planets were chan∣ged into dismall signes: so the serenity of his countenance, and authority of his word, brought a calme and well tempered day, that chasing away all darknesse, and dispercing the clouds of melancholy, cured the lethargy and brake the dead sleepe of her astonied senses. She therefore rauished with his voice, and impatient of de∣layes, taketh his talke out of his mouth, and to his first and yet onely word answered but one other, calling him Rabboni, that is, Maister. And then suddaine ioy rowsing all other passions, she could no more proceede in her owne, than giue him leaue to go forward with his speech. Loue would haue spoken, but feare enforced silence. Hope frameth the words, but doubt melteth them in the passage: and when her inward conceites ser∣ued to come out, her voice
trembled, her tongue faltered, her breath failed. In fine, teares issued in liew of words, and deepe sighes in stead of long sentences, the eyes supplying the tongues default, and the heart pressing out the vnsillabled breath at once, which the con∣flict of her disagreeing passions would not suffer to be sorted in∣to the seuerall sounds of intelli∣gible speeches. For such is their estate that are sicke with a surfet of so∣daine ioy, for the attaining of a thing vehemently desired. For as desire is euer vshered by hope, and wayted on by feare, so is it credulous in entertaining con∣iectures, but hard in gronnding a firme beleefe. And though it be apt to admit the least shadow of wished comfort, yet the hot∣ter the desire is to haue it, the more perfect assurance it requi∣reth for it: which so long as it wanteth the first newes or ap∣parence
of that which is in re∣quest, is rather an alarum to sum∣mon vp all passions, than retreit to quiet the desire. For as hope presumeth the best, and inuiteth ioy to gratulate the good suc∣cesse: so feare suspecteth it too good to be true, and calleth vp sorrow to bewaile the vncer∣taintie. And while these enter∣change obiections and answers, sometimes feare falleth into de∣spaire, and hope riseth into re∣pining anger; and thus the skir∣mish stil continueth, til euidence of proofe conclude the contro∣uersie. Marie therefore though she suddainly answered vpon notice of his voice, yet because the no∣ueltie was so strange, his person so changed, his presence so vn∣expected, and so many miracles layd at once before her amazed eyes, she found a sedition in her thoughts; til more earnest viewing him exempted them
from all doubt. And then though words would haue broken out, and her heart sent into his duties that she ought him, yea, euery thought striuing to be first vtte∣red, and to haue the first roome in his gracious hearing, she was forced as an indifferent arbitrer among them, to seale them vp all vnder silence by suppressing speech, and to supply the want of words, with more significant actions. And therefore running to the haunt of her chiefest de∣lights, and falling at his sacred feete, she offered to bath them with teares of ioy, and to sancti∣fie her lippes with kissing his once grieuous but now most glorious wounds. She stayed not for any more words, being now made blessed with the Word himselfe, thin∣king it a greater benefit at once to feede all her wishes, in the homage, honour, and embracing
of his feete, then in the often hearing of his lesse comfor∣table talke. For as the nature of loue co∣ueteth not onely to be vnited, but if it were possible wholly transformed out of it selfe into the thing it loueth: so doth it most affect that which most v∣niteth, and preferreth the least coniunction before any distant cōtentment. And therfore to see him did not suffice her; to heare him did not quiet her; to speake with him was not enough for her; and except she might touch him, nothing could please her. But though she humbly fell downe at his feete to kisse them, yet Christ did forbid her, saying: Do not touch me, for I am not yet ascended to my Father. O Iesu, what mysterie is in this? Being dead in sinne, she touched thy mortall feete that were to dye for her sake, and be∣ing now aliue in grace, may she
not touch thy glorious feete, that are no lesse for her benefit reuiued? She was once admitted to annoint thy head, and is she now vnworthy of accesse to thy feete? Doest thou now com¦mand her from that for which thou wert wont to commend her, and by praysing the deed didst moue her often to do it? Sith other women shall touch thee, why hath she a repulse? yea sith she her selfe shall touch thee hereafter, why is she now re¦iected? What meanest thou, O Lord, by thus debarring her of so desired a duty? and sith among all thy Disciples thou hast vouchsafed her such a prero∣gatiue, as to honour her eyes with thy first sight, and her eares with thy first wods▪ why de∣niest thou the priuiledge of thy first embracing? If the multitude of her teares haue won that fa∣uour for her eyes, and her lon∣ging to heare thee, so great a re∣compence
to her eares, why doest thou not admit her hands to touch, and her mouth to kisse thy holy feete, sith the one with many plaints, and the other with their readinesse to all seruices, seemed to haue earned no lesse reward? But notwithstanding all this, thou preuentest the effect of her offer, with forbidding her to touch thee, as if thou haddest said: O Mary, know the difference betweene a glorious and a mor∣tall body, betweene the condi∣tion of a momentary and of an eternall life. For sith the immor∣talitie of the body and the glory both of body and soule are the endowments of an heauenly in∣habitant, and the rights of ano∣ther world, thinke not this fa∣uour to seeme here ordinarie, nor leaue to touch me a com∣mon thing. It were not so great a wonder to see the starres fall from their
Spheares, and the Sunne forsake Heauen, and to come within the reach of a mortall arme, as for me that am not onely a Citi∣zen, but the Soueraigne of Saints, and the Sunne whose beames are the Angels blisse, to shew my selfe visible to the Pil∣grims of this world, and to dis∣play eternall beauties to corrup∣tible eyes. Though I be not yet ascended to my Father, I shall shortly ascend, and therefore measure not thy demeanour to∣wards me by the place where I am, but by that which is due vnto me: and then thou wilt rather with reuerence fall down a farre off, than with such fami∣liaritie presume to touch me. Doest thou not beleeue my for∣mer promises? Hast thou not a constant proofe by my present words? Are not thine eyes and eares sufficient testimonies, but that thou must also haue thy hands and face witnesses of my presence? Touch me not, ô Mary, for if I do deceiue thy sight, or delude thy hearing, I can as easily beguile thy hand, and frustrate thy feeling. Or if I be true in any one, beleeue me in all, and embrace me first in a firme faith, and then thou shalt touch me with more worthy hands. It is now necessarie to weane thee from the comfort of my externall presence, that thou mayst learne to lodge me in the secrets of thy heart, and teach thy thoughts to supply the of∣fices of outward senses. For in this visible shape I am not here long to be seene, being shortly to ascend vnto my Father: but what thine eye then seeth not, thy heart shall feele, and my si∣lent parley will find audience in thy inward eare. Yet if thou fea∣rest lest my ascending should be so sudden, that if thou doest not now take thy leaue of my feete with thy humble kisses & louing
teares, thou shalt neuer find the like oportunitie againe, licence frō thee that needlesse suspition. I am not yet ascended vnto my Father, & for al such duties, there will be a more conuenient time. But now go about that which re∣quireth more hast, and run to my brethren & informe them what I say, That I will go before them in∣to Galilee, there shall they see me. Mary therefore preferring her Lords will before her owne wish, yet sorrie that her will was worthy of no better euent, departed from him like an hun∣grie Infant pulled from a full teate, or a thirstie Hart chased from a sweete fountaine. She iudged her selfe but an vnluckie messenger of most ioyfull ti∣dings, being banished from her maisters presence, to carrie newes of his resurrection. Alas (saith she) and cannot others be happy without my vnhappi∣nesse? or cannot their gaines
come in, but through my losse? Must the dawning of their day, be the euening of mine, and my soule robbed of such a treasure to enrich their eares? O my heart returne thou to enioy him: why goest thou with me that am en∣forced to go from him? In me thou art but in prison, and in him is thy onely Paradise I haue buried thee long enough in former sorrowes, and yet now when thou wert halfe reuiued, I am constrained to carrie thee from the spring of life. Alas, go seeke to better thy life in some more happy breast, sith I, euill deseruing creature, am nothing different from that I was, but in hauing taken a taste of the highest delight, that the know∣ledge and want of it might drowne me in the deepest mi∣serie. Thus dutie leading, and loue with-holding her, she goeth as fast backward in thought, as
forward in pace, readie eftsoones to faint for griefe, but that a firme hope to see him againe, did support her weakenesse. She often turned towards the Tombe to breathe, deeming the very ayre that came from the place where he stood, to haue taken vertue of his presence, and to haue in it a refreshing force aboue the course of nature. Sometimes she forgetteth her selfe, and loue carrieth her in a golden distraction, making her to imagine that her Lord is pre∣sent, and then she seemeth to demand him questions, and to heare his answers: she dreameth that his feete are in her folded armes, and that he giueth her soule a full repast of his com∣forts. But alas when she cometh to herselfe, and findeth it but an illusion, she is so much the more sorrie, in that the onely imagi∣nation being so delightfull, she was not worthy to enioy the
thing it selfe. And when she passeth by those places where her Maister had bene: O stones (saith she) how much more hap∣py are you than I, most wretched caitiffe, sith to you was not de∣nied the touch of those blessed feete, whereof my euill deserts haue now made me vnworthy? Alas what crime haue I of late committed, that hath thus cancelled mee out of his good conceit, and estranged mee from his accustomed curtesie? Had I but a lease of his loue for terme of his life? or did my interest in his feete ex∣pire with his deceasse? In them with my teares I writ my first supplication for mercie, which I pointed with sighes, folded vp in my haire, and humbly sealed with the impression of my lips. They were the dores of my first entrance into his fauour, by which I was graciously enter∣tained in his, heart, and admitted
to do homage vnto his head, while it was yet a mortall mir∣rour of immortall maiestie, an earthly seat of an heauenly wise∣dome, containing in man a Gods felicitie. But alas, I must be contented to beare a lower saile, and to take downe my desires to farre meaner hopes, sith former fa∣uours are now too high markes for me to ayme at. O mine eyes, why are you so ambitious of heauenly honours? He is now too bright a Sunne for so weake a sight: your lookes are limited to meaner light; you are the eyes of a Bat, and not of an Eagle; you must humble your selues to the twilight of inferi∣our things, and measure your sights by your slender substance. Gaze not too much vpon the blaze of eternitie, lest you lose your selues in too much selfe delight, and being too curious in sifting his maiestie, you be in
the end oppressed with his glo∣rie. No, no, sith I am reiected from his feete, how can I other∣wise presume, but that my want of faith hath dislodged me out of his heart, and throwne me out of all possession of his minde and memorie. Yet why should I stoope to so base a feare? when want of faith was aggrieued with want of all goodnesse, he disdained not to accept me for one of his number: and shall I now thinke that he will for my faint beleefe so rigorously aban∣don me? And is the sinceritie of my loue, wherein he hath no partner, of so slender account, that it may not hope for some little sparke of his wonted mer∣cie? I will not wrong him with so vniust a suspition, sith his ap∣pearing improueth it, his words ouerthrow it, his countenance doth disswade it, why then should I sucke so much sorrow out of so vaine a surmise?
Thus Maries trauelling fan∣sies, making long voyages in this short iourney, and wauering betweene the ioy of her vision, and the griefe of her deniall en∣tertained her in the way, and held her parley with such dis∣courses as are incident vnto minds, in which neither hope is full maister of the field, nor feare hath receiued an vtter o∣uerthrow. But as she was in this perplexed manner, now falling, now rising in her owne vncer∣tainties, she findeth on the way the other holy woman that first came with her to the graue, whom the Angels had now as∣sured of Christs resurection. And as they passed all for∣wards towards the Disciples: Behold Iesus met them saying, All haile. But they came neere, and tooke hold of his feete, and worship∣ped him. Then Iesus said vnto them, Feare not: Go l my brethren that they go into Gallilee, there
they shall see me. O Lord how profound are thy iudgements, and vnsearch∣able thy counsels? Doth her sorrow sit so neare thy heart, or thy repulse rebound with such regret by seeing her wounded loue bleede so fast at her eyes, that thy late refusall must so soone be requited with so free a graunt? Is it thy pitty, or her change, which cannot allow that she should any longer fast from her earnest longing? But ô most milde Phisition, well knowest thou that thy sharp corrosiue with bitter smart angred her tender wound, which being rather caused by vnwit∣ting ignorance than wilfull er∣rour, was as soone cured as knowne. And therefore thou quickely applyest a sweete le∣nitiue to asswage her paine, that she might acknowledge her forbidding, rather a fatherly checke to her vnsetled faith,
than an austere reiecting her for her fault: and therefore thou admittest her to kisse thy feete, the two conduits of grace, and seales of our redemption, renew∣ing her a Charter of thy vnchan∣ged loue, and accepting of her the vowed sacrifice of her sancti∣fied soule. And thus gracious Lord hast thou finished her seares, assured her hopes, fulfilled her desires, satisfied her loues, stinted her teares, perfected her ioyes, and made the period of her expiring griefes, the preamble to her now entring, and neuer ending pleasures. O how mercifull a Father thou art to left Orphanes, how easie a Iudge to repentant sin∣ners, and how faithfull a friend to sincere louers! It is vndoub∣tedly true, that thou neuer lea∣uest those that loue thee, and thou louest such as rest their affiance in thee. They shall finde
thee liberall aboue desert, and bountifull beyond hope: a mea∣sure of thy gifts, not by their merits but thine owne mercie. O Christian soule, take Mary for thy mirrour, follow her af∣fection, that like effects may fol∣low thine. Learne ô sinfull man of this once a sinfull woman; that sinners may finde Christ if their sinnes be amended. Learne that whom sinne loseth, loue recouereth, whom faintnesse of faith chaseth away, firmnesse of hope recalleth; and that which no other mortall force, fauour or pollicie can compasse, the continued teares of a constant loue are able to attaine. Learne of Mary, for Christ to feare no encounters▪ out of Christ to de∣sire no comforts, and with the loue of Christ to ouer-rule the loue of all things Rse early in the morning of thy good mo¦tions, and let them not sleepe in sloth, when diligence may per∣forme
them. Runne with re∣pentance to thy sinfull heart which should haue bene the Temple, but through thy fault was no better than a Tombe for Christ, sith hauing in thee no life to feele him, he seemed vnto thee as if he had bene dead. Role away the stone of thy former hardnesse, remoue all thy heauy loads that oppresse thee in sinne, and looke into thy soule, whether thou canst there find the Lord. If he be not with∣in thee, stand weeping without, and seeke him in other crea∣tures, sith being present in all, he may be found in any. Let faith be thine eye hope thy guide, and loue thy light. Seeke him and not his: for himselfe, and not for his gifts. If thy faith haue found him in a cloud, let thy hope seeke to him. If hope haue led thee to see him, let loue seek further into him. To moue in thee a desire to finde, his goods
are precious: and when he is found, to keepe thee in a desire to seeke, his treasures are infinit. Absent, he must be sought to be had; being had, he must be sought to be more enioyed. Seeke him truly, and no other for him. Seeke him purely, and no other thing with him. Seeke him onely, and nothing besides him. And if at the first search he appeare not, thinke it not much to perseuer in teares, and to continue thy seeking. Stand vpon the earth, trending vnder thee all earthly vanities, and touching them with no more than the soles of thy feete, that is with the lowest and least part of thy affection. To looke the better in the Tombe, bow downe thy neeke to the yoke of humilitie, and stoupe from loftie and proude conceits, that with humbled and lowly lookes thou mayest finde whom swelling and haughtie thoughts haue driuen
away. A submitted soule soonest winneth his returne, and the deeper it sinketh in a selfe con∣tempt, the higher it climeth in his highest fauours. And if thou perceiuest in the Tombe of thy heart the presence of his two first Messengers, that is, at the feete, sorrow for the bad that is past, and at the head desire to a better that is to come, enter∣taine them with sighes, and wel∣come them with penitent teares: yet reckoning them but as her∣bingers of thy Lord, ceasse not thy seeking till thou findest himselfe. And if he vouchsafe thee his glorious sight, offering himselfe to thy inward eyes, pre∣sume not of thy selfe to be able to know him, but as his vnwor∣thy suppliant prostrate thy peti∣tions vnto him▪ that thou maist truely discerne him, and faith∣fully serue him. Thus preparing thee with diligence, comming with speed, standing with high
lifted hopes, and stooping with inclined heart, if with Mary thou crauest no other solace of Iesus but Iesus himselfe, he will answere thy teares with his pre∣sence, and assure thee of his pre∣sence with his owne words, that hauing seene him thy selfe, thou maiest make him knowne to o∣thers: saying with Mary, I haue seene our Lord, and these things he said vnto me. LAVS DEO. FINIS.
THE TRIVMPHS OVER DEATH: OR A Consolatorie Epistle, for afflicted minds in the effects of dying friends. First written for the consolation of one: but now published for the gene∣rall good of all, by R. S. printer's or publisher's device .AN CHO RA. SPEI. LONDON. Printed for W. Barret.
To the Worship∣full M. Richard Sackuile, Edward Sackuile, Cicilie Sack∣uile, and Anne Sackuile, the hopefull issues of the honorable Gentleman maister Robert Sackuile Esquire. MOst lines do not the best conceit containe, Few words well coucht may comprehend much matter: Then, as to vse the first is counted vaine, So is't praise-worthy to conceit the latter. The grauest wits that most graue works expect. The qualitie, not quantitie respect. The smallest sparke
will cast a burning heate, Base cottages may harbour things of worth: Then though this volume be, nor gay, nor great, Which vnder your Protection I set forth: Do not with coy disdainefull ouersight Deny to reade this well meant orphans mite. And since his father in his infancie Prouided patrons to protect his heire: But now by Deaths none-sparing crueltie, Is turn'd an orphan to the open ayre: I, his vnworthy foster-sire haue darde, To make you Patronizer of this warde. You glorying issues of that glorious dame,
Whose life is made the subiect of deaths will: To you, succeeding hopes of mothers fame, I dedicate this fruite of South wels quill: He for your vnkles comfort first it writ, I for your consolation priat and send you it. Then daine in kindnesse to accept the worke, Which be in kndnesse writ, I send to you: The which till now clouded, obscure did lurke; But now opposed to ech Readers view, May yeeld commodious fruite to euerie wight, That feeles his conscience prickt by Parcaes spight. But if in ought I haue presumptuous bene, My pardon-crauing pen
implores your fauour: If any fault in print be past vnseene To let it passe, the Printer is the crauer, So shall he thanke you, and I by duty bound, Pray, that in you may all good gifts abound. S. W.
The Authour to the Reader. IF the Athenians erected an altar to an vnknowne god, supposing he would be pleased with their deuo∣tion, though they were ignorant of his name: better may I presume that my labour may be gratefull, being deuoted to such men, whose names I know, and whose fame I haue heard, though vnacquainted with their persons. I intended this comfort to him whom a lamenting sort hath left most comfortlesse, by him to his friends, who haue equall portions in this sorrow. But I think the Philosophers rule will be heere verified, that it shall be last in exe∣cution, which was first designed, and
he shall last enioy the effect, which was first owner of the cause. Thus let Chance be our rule since Choice may not, and into which of your hands it shall fortune, much honour and happinesse may it carry with it, and leaue in their hearts as much ioy, as it found sorrow. Where I borrow the person of an Historie, as well touching the dead, as the yet suruiuing, I build vpon report of of such Authours, whose hoarie heades challenge credit, and whose eyes and eares were witnesses of their words. To craue pardon for my paine were to slander a friendly office, and to wrong their curtesies, whom Nobilitie neuer taught to answer affection with anger, or to wage dutie with dislike: and there∣fore I humbly present vnto them with as many good wishes, as good will can measure from the best mea∣ning mind, that hath a willingnesse rather to offoord, then to offer due seruice, were not the meane as worthlesse as the mind is willing. R. S.
The Triumphs ouer Death: OR, A Consolatorie Epistle for troubled minds, in the affects of dying friends. IF it be a bles∣sing of the ver∣tuous to mourn it is the reward of this, to be comforted; and he that pronounced the one, promised the other. I doubt not, but that Spirit, whose nature is Loue, and whose name Com∣forter, as he knowes the cause of our griefe, so hath he salued it with supplies of grace, powring into your wound no lesse oyle of mercy then wine of iustice;
yet sith courtesie oweth com∣passion as a dutie to the afflicted, and nature hath ingrafted a de∣sire to finde it, I thought good to shew you by proofe, that you carry not your cares alone, though the loade that lieth on others can little lighten your burthen: her deceasse can not but sit nearer your heart, whom you had taken so deepe into a most tender affection. That which dieth to our loue, being alwayes aliue to our sorrow, you would haue bene kind to a lesse louing sister: yet finding in her so many worths to be loued, your loue wrought more ear∣nestly vpon so sweete a subiect, which now being taken from you, I presume your griefe is no lesse then your loue was; the one of these being euer the measure of the other: the Scripture mo∣ueth vs to bring forth our teares on the dead, a thing not offen∣ding grace, and a right to reason.
For to be without remorse in the death of friends, is neither incident nor conuenient to the nature of man, hauing too much affinitie to a sauage temper, and ouerthrowing the ground of all piety, which is a mutuall sym∣pathie in each of others mise∣ries: but as not to feele sorrow in sorrowfull chances, is to want sense, so, not to beare it with moderation, is to want vnder∣standing, the one brutish, the other effeminate: and he hath cast his account best, that hath brought his summe to the meane. It is no lesse fault to ex∣ceede in sorrow, then to passe the limits of competent mirth, sith excesse in either is a disor∣der in passion, though that sor∣row of curtesie be lesse blamed of men, because, if it be a fault, it is also a punishment, at once causing and tasting torments. It is no good signe in the sicke to be senslesse in his paines, as bad
it is to be vnusually sensitiue, be∣ing both either herbingers or attendants of death. Let sadnes, sith it is a due to the dead, testifie a feeling of pitty, not any pang of passion, and bewray rather a tender then a deiected minde. Mourne, as that your friends may finde you a liuing brother, all men a discreet mourner, ma∣king sorrow a signell, not a su∣periour of reason: some are so obstinate in their owne will, that euen time the naturall re∣medy of the most violent ago∣nies, cannot by any delayes as∣swage their griefe: they enter∣taine their sorrow with solitary muses, and feede their sighes and teares; they pine their bodies, and draw all pensiue considera∣tion to their minds, nursing their heauinesse with a melancholy humour, as though they had vowed themselues to sadnesse, vnwilling it should end till it had ended them, wherein their
folly sometimes findeth a ready effect; that being true which Sa∣lomon obserued,Pro 1.25 that as a moath the garment, and a worme the wood, so doth sadnesse perswade the heart. But this impotent softnes fitteth not sober mindes. We must not make a liues pro∣fession of a seuen nights duety, nor vnder colour of kindnesse to other; be vnnaturall to our selues: if some in their passion ioyned their thoughts into such labyrinths, that neither wit knoweth, nor will careth how long, or how farre they wander in them, it discouereth their weakenesse, but discerneth our meditation. It is (for the most) the fault, not of all, but of the silliest women, who next to the funerall of their friends, deeme it a second widowhood, to force their teares, and make it their happinesse, to seeme most vn∣happy, as though they had onely bene left aliue, to be a perpetuall
map of dead folkes misfortunes: but this is, to arme an enemie against our selues, and to yeeld Reason prisoner to Passion, put∣ting the sword in the rebelles hand, when we are least able to withstand his treason. Sorrow once setled, is not lightly remo∣ued, easily winning, but not so easily surrendring possession; and where it is not excluded in time, it challengeth a place by prescription. The Scripture war∣neth vs, not to giue our hearts to sadnesse, yea rather, to reiect it as a thing not beneficiall to the dead, yea preiudiciall to our selues;Eccles. 38. Ecclesiasticus alloweth but seuen dayes to mourning, iudging moderation in plaint to be a sufficient testimony in good will, and a needefull office of wisedome. Much sorrow for the dead, is either the child of selfe-loue, or of rash iudgement. If we should shead our teares for o∣thers death, as a meane to our
contentment, we shew but our owne wound perfit louers of our selues: if we lament their de∣ceasse as their hard destinie, we attache them of euill deseruing, with too peremtory a censure, as though their life had bene an arise, and their death a leape in∣to small perdition; for otherwise a good departure craueth small condoling, being but a har∣bour from stormes, and an en∣trance vnto felicitie. But you know your sister too well to in∣curre any blame in these re∣spects. And experience of her life hath stored your thoughts with notice of so rare vertues, as might sooner make her memo∣rie all enforcement to ioy, then any inducement to sorrow▪ and moue you to esteeme her last duties, rather the triumph of her victory, then the farewels of her deceasse. She was by birth, se∣cond to none, but vnto the first in the realme, yet she measured
onely greatnesse by goodnesse, making Nobilitie but the mir∣rour of vertue; as able to shew things worthy to be seene, as apte to draw many eyes to be∣holde it, she suted her behauiour to her birth, and enobled her birth with her piety, leauing her house more beholding to her for hauing honored it with the glorie of her vertues, then she was to it for the titles of her de∣gree. She was high minded in nothing, but in aspiring to per∣fection, and in the disdaine of vice; in other things couering her greatnesse with humilitie a∣mong her inferiors, and shew∣ing it with curtesie among her peeres. Of the carriage of her selfe, and her sober goument may be a sufficient testimony, that enuy her selfe was dumbe in her dispraise, finding in her much to re at, but nought to reprooue. The clearenesse of her honour I neede not to men∣tion,
she hauing alwaies armed it with such modestie as taught the most vntemperate tongues to be silent in her presence, and answered their eyes with scorne and contempt, that did but seeme to make her an ayme to passion; yea, and in this behalfe, as almost in all orhers, she hath the most honorable & knowen Ladies of the land, so common and knowen witnesses, that those that least loued her reli∣gion, were in loue with her de∣meanour, deliuering their opi∣nions in open prayses. How mildly she accepted the checke of fortune fallen vpon her with∣out desert, experience hath bene a most manifest proofe, the temper of her mind being so easie, that she found little diffi∣cultie in taking downe her thoughts to a meane degree, which true honour, not pride hath raised to the former height. Her faithfulnesse & loue where
she foūd true friendship, is writ∣ten with teares in many eyes, and will be longer registred in gratefull memories of diuers that haue tried her in that kind, auowing her for secrecie, wise∣dome, and constancie, to be a miracle in that sexe: yea when she found least kindnesse in o∣thers, she neuer lost it in her selfe, more willingly suffering then offering wrong, and often weeping for their mishaps, whom though lesse louing her, she could not but affect. Of the innocencie of her life, this gene∣rall each one can auerre, that as she was gratefull many wayes, and memorable for vertues, so was she free from all blemish of any vice, vsing, to her power, the best meanes to keepe continu∣ally an vndefiled conscience: her attire was euer such as might both satisfie a curious eye, and yet beare witnesse of a sober minde, neither singular, nor
vaine, but such as her peeres of best report vsed: her tongue was very little acquainted with oathes, vnlesse either duty or distrust did enforce them: and surely they were needelesse to those that knew her, to whom the truth of her words could not iustly be suspected; much lesse was she noted of any vnfitting talke, which as it was euer hate∣full to her eares, so did it neuer defile her breath. Of feeding she was very measureable, rather too sparing, than too liberall a diet: so religious for obseruing of fasts, that neuer in her sicke∣nesse she could hardly be wonne to breake them: and if our soules be possessed in our patience, surely her soule was truely her owne, whose rocke though often stricken with the rod of aduersity. neuer yeelded any more then to giue issue of eye streames: and though these through the tendernesse
of her nature, and aptnesse of her sexe, were the customarie tri∣butes that her loue payed, more to her friends then her owne misfortunes, yet were they not accompanied with distempered words, or ill seeming actions, reason neuer forgetting de∣cencie, though remembring pity. Her deuotions she daily ob∣serued, offering the daily sacri∣fice of an innocent heart, and stinting her felfe to her times of prayer, which she performed with so religious a care, as well shewed that she knew how high a Maiestie she serued. I neede not write how dutifully she dis∣charged all the behoofes of a most louing wife, since that was the commonest theame of her praise: yet this may be said with∣out improofe to any, that who∣soeuer in this behalfe may be counted her equall, none can iustly be thought her superiour. Where she owed, she paied du∣tie,
where she found she returned curtesie; wheresoeuer she was knowen, she deserued amitie; desirous of the best, yet disdai∣ning none but euill companie: she was readier to requite bene∣fits then reuenge wrongs, more grieued then angrie with vn∣kindnesse of friends, when ei∣ther mistaking or misreport oc∣casioned any breaches: for if their words carry credite, it en∣tred deepest into her thoughts, they haue acquitted her from all spice of malice, not onely against her friends, whose dislikes were but a retire to slip further into friendship, but euen her greatest enemies, to whom if she had bene a iudge as she was a sup∣pliant▪ I assuredly thinke she would haue redressed, but not reuenged her wrongs In summe, she was an honour to her prede∣cessors, a light to her age, and a patterne to her posteritie; nei∣ther was her conclusion diffe∣rent
from her premises, or her death from her life, she shewed no dismay, being warned of her danger, carrying in her consci∣ence, the safe conduct of inno∣cencie. But hauing sent her de∣sires to heauen before with a milde countenance, and a most calme minde, in more hope then feare, she expected her owne passage, she commended both her duty and good will to all her friends, and cleared her heart from all grudge towards her e∣nemies, wishing true happinesse to them both, as best became so soft and gentle a mind, in which anger neuer stayed, but as an vn∣welcome stranger: She made o∣pen profession that she did die true to her religion, true to her husband, true to God and the world: she enioyed her iudge∣ment as long as she breathed, her body earnestly offering her last deuotions, supplying in thought what faintnesse suffered
not her tongue to vtter: in the end, when her glasse was runne out, and death began to chal∣lenge his interest, some labou∣ring with too late remedies to hinder the deliuery of her sweet soule, she desired them eftsoones to let her go to God; and her hopes calling her to eternall kingdomes, as one rather fallen asleepe, then dyieg, she most happily tooke her leaue of all mortall miseries. Such was the life, such was the death of your dearest sister, both so full of true comfort, that this surely of her vertues may be a sufficient leni∣tiue to your bitterest griefes. For you are not (I hope) in the number of those that reckon it a part of their paine to heare of their best remedies, thinking the rehearsall of your dead friends praises an vpbraiding of their losse: but sith the obliuion of her vertuues were iniurious to her, let not the mention of
her person be offensiue vnto you, and be not you grieued with her death, with which she is best pleased. So blessed a death is rather to be wished of vs, then pitied in her, whose soule tri∣umpheth with God, whose ver∣tue still breatheth in the mouths of infinite praises and liueth in the memories of all, to whom either experience made her knowne, or fame was not enui∣ous to conceale her deserts. She was a iewell, that both God and you desired to enioy; he to her assured benefit without selfe in∣terest, you for allowable re∣spects, yet employing her re∣straint among certaine hazards and most vncertaine hopes. Be then vmpire in your owne cause, whether your wishes or Gods will importeth more loue, the one, the adornement of her exile, the other, her returne into a most blessed countrey. And sith it pleased God in this loue to be
your riuall, let your discretion decide the doubt, whom in due should carry the suite, the prero∣gatiue being but a right to the one: for nature and grace being the motiues of both your loues, she had the best litle in them▪ that was authour of them: and she, if worthy to be beloued of either, as she was of both, could not but preferre him to the dea∣rest portion of her deepest af∣fection: let him with good leaue gather the grape of his owne vine, and plucke the fruite of his owne planting, and thinke so curious workes euer safest in the artificers hand, who is like∣liest to loue them, and best able to preserue them. She did there∣fore her duty in dying willingly: and if you will do yours, you must be willing with her death, sith to repine at her liking, is dis∣curtesie at Gods, an impiety, both vnfitting for your appro∣ued vertue; she being in place
where no griefe can annoy her, she hath little neede, or lesse ioy of your sorrow; neither can she allow in her friends, that she would loathe in her selfe, loue neuer affecting likenesse: if she had bene euill, she had not de∣serued our teares: being good, she cannot desire them, nothing being lesse to the likenesse of goodnesse; than to see it selfe any cause of vniust disquiet or trouble to the innocent. Would Saul haue thought it friendship, to haue wept for his fortune, in hauing found a kingdome,1. Sam. 17. by seeking of cattell? or Dauid ac∣count it a curtesie, to haue sor∣rowed at his successe, that from following sheepe, came to foyle a giant, and to receiue in fine, a royall crowne for his victorie? why then should her lot be la∣mented, whom higher fauour hath raised from the dust to sit with princes of Gods people,Psal. 112 if security had bene giuen, that
a longer life should still haue bene guided by vertue, and fol∣lowed with good fortune, you might pretend some cause to complaine of her deceasse. But if different effects should haue crossed your hopes (processe of time being the parent of strange alterations) then had death bene friendlier then your selfe: and sith it hung in suspence which of the two would haue happened, let vs allow God so much dis∣cretion, as to thinke him the fittest arbitrator in decision of the doubt: her foundations of happinesse were in the holy hills,Psal 86. and God sawe it fittest for her building to be but low in the vale of teares: & better it was it should be soone taken downe, then by rising too high, to haue oppressed her soule with the ruines. Thinke it no iniurie that she is now taken from you, but a fauour, that she was lent you so long, and shew no vnwilling∣nesse
to restore God his owne, sith hitherto you haue payed no vsurie for it. Consider not how much longer you might haue enioyed her, but how much soo∣ner you might haue lost her: and sith she was held vpon cur∣tesie, not by any couenant, take our soueraigne right for a suffi∣cient reason of her death; our life is but lent; a good, to make thereof during the loane, our best commodity. It is due debt to a more certaine owner than our selues, and therefore so long as we haue it, we receiue a bene∣fite, when we are depriued of it, we haue no wrong: we are ten∣nants at will of this clayie farme, not for tearme of yeares; when we are warned out, we must be ready to remoue, hauing no o∣ther title but the owners plea∣sure: it is but an Inne, not an home: we came but to baite, not to dwell, and the condition of our entrance was in fine to de∣part.
If this departure be grie∣uous, it is also common, this to day to me, to morrow to thee; and the case equally afflicting all, leaues none any cause to complaine of iniurious vsage. Natures debt is sooner ex∣acted of some than of other, yet is there no fault in the creditor that exacteth but his owne, but in the greedinesse of our eager hopes, either repining that their wishes faile, or willingly forget∣ting their mortalitie, whom they are vnwilling by experi∣ence to see mortall▪ yet the ge∣nerall tide wafteth all passen∣gers to the same shore, some sooner, some later, but all at the last: and we must settle our minds, to take our course as it commeth, neuer fearing a thing so necessary, yet euer expecting a thing so vncertaine. It seemeth that God purposely concealed the time of our death, leauing vs resolued betweene feare and
hope of longer continuance. Cut off vnripe cares, lest with the notice and pensiuenesse of our diuorce from the world, we should lose the comfort of needfull contentments, and be∣fore our dying day, languish away with expectation of death. Some are taken in their first steppe into this life, receiuing in one, their welcome and fare∣well, as though they had bene borne, onely to be buried, and to take their pasport in this hourely middle of their course; the good, to preuent change, the bad, to shorten their impietie. Some liue till they be weary of life, to giue proofe of their good hap, that had a kindlier passage, yet though the date be diuers, the debt is all one, equally to be answered of all as their time ex∣pireth:Psal. 88. for who is the man shall liue and not see death? sith we all dye, and like water slide vpon the earth. In Paradice we recei∣ued
the sentence of Death,Gen. 5. and here, as prisoners, we are kept in ward, tarying but our times till the Gaoler call vs to our execu∣tion. Whom hath any vertue eternized▪ or desert commended to posterity, that hath not mour∣ned in life, and bene mourned after death, no assurance of ioy being sealed without some teares? Euen the blessed Virgin the mother of God, was thrown downe as deepe in temporall miseries, as she was aduanced high in spirituall honours, none amongst all mortall creatures finding in life more proofe then she of her mortalitie. For, ha∣uing the noblest sonne that e∣uer woman was mother of, not onely aboue the condition of men, but aboue the glorie of Angels, being her sonne onely, without temporall Father, and thereby the loue of both parents doubled in her breast, being her onely Sonne without other
issue, and so her loue of all chil∣dren finished in him. Yea, he being God, and she the nearest creature to Gods perfections, yet no prerogatiue, either quit∣ted her from mourning, or him from dying: and though they surmounted the highest An∣gels in all other preheminences, yet were they equall with the meanest men in the sentence of Death. And howbeit the blessed Virgine being the patterne of Christian mourners, so tempered her anguish, that there was nei∣ther any thing vndone that might be exacted of a mother, nor any thing done that might be misliked in so perfect a ma∣tron; yet by this we may ghesse with what curtesies death is likely to friend vs, that durst cause so bloudy funerals in so heauenly a stocke, not exemp∣ting him from the law of dying, that was the authour of life, and soone after to honour his tri∣umphs
with ruines and spoile of death. Seeing therefore that Death spareth none, let vs spare our teares for better vses, being but an idoll sacrifice to this deafe and implacable executio∣ner. And for this, not long to be continued, where they can neuer profit, Nature did pro∣mise vs a weeping life, exacting teares for custome at our first entrance, and for suting our whole course in this dolefull beginning. Therefore they must be vsed with measure, that must be vsed so often: and so many causes of weeping lying yet in the debt, sith we cannot end our teares, let vs at the least re∣serue them: if sorrow cannot be shunned, let it be taken in time of neede, sith otherwise be∣ing both troublesome and fruit∣lesse, it is a double miserie, or an open folly. We moisten not the ground with precious waters, they were stilled to nobler ends,
either by their fruits to delight our senses, or by their operation, to preserue our healths. Our teares are water of too high a price to be prodigally powred in the dust of any graues. If they be teares of loue, they perfume our prayers, making them odour of sweetnesse, fit to be offered on the Altar before the throne of God: if teares of contrition, they are water of life to the dying and corrupting soules,Apoc. 8. they may purchase fauour, and repeale the sentence till it be executed,3 King. 26. as the example of Eze∣chias doth testifie, but when the punishment is past, and the ver∣dict performed in effect, their pleading is in vaine,2 Kin 8.11. as Dauid taught vs when his child was dead, saying, that he was likelier to go to it, than it, by his wee∣ping, to returne to him. Learne therefore to giue sorrow no long dominion ouer you. Wher∣fore the wise should rather
marke, than expect an end. Meet it not when it commeth, do not inuite it when it is absent: when you feele it, do not force it, sith the bruite creatures, which (Na∣ture, seldome erring in her course, guideth in the meane) haue but a short, though vehe∣ment sense of their losses. You should bury the sharpnesse of your griefe, with the course, and rest contented with a kind, yet a milde compassion, neither lesse than decent for you, nor more than agreeable to your nature & iudgement. Your much hea∣uinesse would renew a multi∣tude of griefes, and your eyes would be springs to many streames, adding to the memory of the dead, a new occasion of plaint by your owne discomfort. The motion of your heart mea∣sureth the beating of many pul∣ses, which in any distemper of your quiet with the like stroke will soone bewray themselues
sicke of your disease: your for∣tune though hard, yet is it noto∣rious, and though moued in mishap, and set in an vnworthy lanterne, yet your owne light shineth farre, and maketh you markeable: euery one will bend an attentiue eye vpon you, ob∣seruing how you ward this blow of temptation, and whe∣ther your patience be a shield of proofe, or easily entred with these violent strokes. It is com∣monly expected, that so high thoughts which haue already climed ouer the hardest dan∣gers, should not now stoupe to any vulgar or female com∣plaints. Great personages, whose estate draweth vpon them many eyes, as they cannot but be themselues, so may not they vse the libertie of meaner estates, the lawes of Nobilitie not al∣lowing them to direct their deeds by their desires, but to li∣mit their desires to that which
is decent. Nobility is an ayme for lower degrees to leuell at markes of higher perfection, and like state∣ly windowes in the Northeast roomes of politicke and ciuill buildings, to let in such light, and lie open to such prospects, as may affoord their inferiours both to finde meanes and moti∣ons to Heroicall vertues. If you should determine to dwell euer in sorrow, it were a wrong to your wisedome, and counter∣manded by your qualitie. If euer you mind to surceasse it, no time fitter than the present, sith the same reasons that hereafter might moue you, are now as much in force. Yeld to Wise∣dome that which you must yeeld to Time: be beholding to your selfe, not to Time for the victory; make it a voluntary worke of discretion that will o∣therwise be a necessary worke of delay. We thinke it not e∣nough
to haue our owne mea∣sure brim full with euill, vnlesse we make it runne ouer with others miseries, taking their misfortunes as our punishments, and executing forreine penal∣ties vpon our selues. Yea dis∣quiet mindes being euer bel∣lowes to their owne flames, mistake oft times others good for ill, their follie making it a true scourge to them, how∣soeuer it seemed twas to others a benefit. Iacob out of Iosephs absence sucked such surmises, as he made his heart a prey to his agonies, whereas that that bu∣ried him in his owne melancho∣lies, raised Ioseph to his highest happinesse. If Mary Magdalen said, and supposed she could haue suncke no deeper in griefe, than she had already plunged her selfe; and yet, that which she i∣magined the vttermost of euils proued in conclusion, the very blisse of her wishes; the like
may be your errour, if you cum∣ber your minde with thinking vpon her death, which could neuer be discharged from cares, till death set his hand to her ac∣quittance, nor receiue the char∣ter of an eternall being, till her soule were presented at the sea∣ling. I loath to rubbe the scarre of a deeper wound, for feare of renewing a dead discomfort; yet if you will fauour your owne re∣medies, the maisterie ouer that griefe that springs from the roote, may learne you to quali∣fie this that buddeth from the branch. Let not her losses moue you that are acquainted with greater of your owne, and taught by experience to know how vn∣certaine then change is for whō vnconstant fortune throw∣eth the dice. If she want the wonted titles, her part is now ended, and they were due but vpon the stage: her losse therein is but a wracke of wounds, in
which she is but euen with the height of Princes, surpassing both her selfe in them, and the new honours of heauenly stile. If she haue left her children, it was her wish, they should repay her absence with vsury; yet had she sent her first fruits before her as pledges of her owne com∣ming. And now may we say that the Sparrow hath found an home, and the Turtle doue a neast, where she may lay her yonglings, enioying some, and expecting the rest. If she be ta∣ken from her friends, she is also deliuered from her enemies, in hope hereafter to enioy the first, out of feare of euer being trou∣bled with the latter. If she be cut off in her youth, no age is vn∣ripe for a good death; and ha∣uing ended her taske, though neuer so short yet she hath liued out her full time. Old age is ve∣nerable, not long, to be measu∣red by increase of vertues, not by
number of yeares: for grauity cō∣sisteth in wisedom,Sap. 4. and an vnspot∣ted life is the ripenesse of the per∣fectest age. If she were in possi∣bilitie of preferment, she could hardly haue mounted higher, than from whence she was throwne: hauing bene brused with the first, she had little will to clime for a second fall. We might hitherto truly haue said, this is that Naomi,Ruth. 1. she being to her end enriched with many out∣ward and more inward graces. But, whether hereafter shee would haue bid vs not to call her Naomi, that is, faire, but Ma∣ra, that signifieth bitter, it is vn∣certaine, sith she might haue fal∣len into the widdows felicitie, that so changed her name to the likenesse of her lot. Insomuch that she is freed from more mi∣series then she suffered losses, and more fortunate by not desiring, then she would be by enioying fortunes fauour; which if it be
not counted a follie to loue, yet it is a true happinesse, not to need: we may rather thinke that Death was prouided against her imminent harmes, then enuious of any future prosperities: the times being great with so many broyles, that when they once fall in labour, we shall thinke their condition securest whom ab∣sence hath exempted, both from feeling the bitter throwes, and beholding the monstrous issue that they are likely to bring forth. The more you tender her, the more temperate should be your griefe, sith seeing you vpon going, she did but step before you into the next world, to which she thought you to be∣long more than to this, which hath already giuen you the most vngratefull congee. They that are vpon remouing, send their furniture before them; and you still standing vpon your depar∣ture, what ornament could you
rather wish in your future abode, then this that did euer please you? God thither sendeth your Adamants, whither he would draw your heart, and casteth your anchors where your thoughts should lie at roade, that seeing your loue taken out of the world, and your hopes disanchored from the stormie shoare, you might settle your desires where God seemeth to require them. If you would haue wished her life for an example to your house, assure your selfe she hath left her friends so in∣herited with her vertues, and so perfect patternes of her best part, that who knoweth the surui∣uours, may see the deceassed, and shall finde little difference, but in the number, which before was greater▪ but not better, vn∣lesse it were in one repetition of the same goodnesse: wherefore set your selfe at rest in the ordi∣nance of God, whose works are
perfect, and whose wisedome is infinite. The termes of our life are like the seasons of the yeare, some for sowing, some for growing, and some for reaping; in this onely different, that as the heauens keepe their prescribed periods, so the succession of times haue their appointed chan∣ges. But in the seasons of our life, which are not the law of neces∣sarie causes, some are reaped in the seed, some in the blade, some in the vnripe eares, all in the end; this haruest depending vpon the Reapers will. Death is too ordi∣nary a thing to seeme any no∣uelty, being a familiar guest in euery house; and sith his com∣ming is expected, and his errand vnknowne, neither his presence should be feared, nor his effects lamented. What wonder is it to see fuell burned, spice-pouned, or snow melted? And as little feare it is to see those dead that were borne vpon condition once
to dye. She was such a compound as was once to be resolued vnto her simples, which is now per∣formed, her soule being giuen to God, and her body resorted into her first elements. It could not dislike you, to see your friend remoued out of a ruinous house, & the house it self destroy∣ed and pulled down, if you knew it were to build it in a state∣lier forme, and to turne the inha∣bitant with more ioy into a fairer lodging. Let then your sisters soule depart without griefe, let her body also be altred into dust: withdraw your eyes from the ruine of this cottage, and cast them vpon the maiestie of the second building, which Saint Paul saith shall be incorrup∣tible, glorious, strange, spirituall, and immortall. Night and sleepe are perpetuall mirrours, figuring in their darknesse, silence, shut∣ting vp of senses, the finall end of our mortall bodies: and for this
some haue entituled sleepe the eldest brother of Death: but with no lesse conuenience it might be called one of Deaths tenants, neare vnto him in affinity of condition, yet farre inferiour in right, being but tennant for a time, of that Death is the inhe∣ritance: for, by vertue of the conueyance made vnto him in Paradice, that dust we were, and to dust we must returne; he hath hitherto shewed his seigniory ouer all, exacting of vs, not onely the yearely, but hourely reue∣rence of time, which euer by minuts we defray vnto him: so that our very life is not onely a memory, but a part of our death, sith the longer we haue liued the lesse we haue to liue. What is the daily lessning of our life, but a continuall dying? and there∣fore none is more grieued with the running out of the last sand in an houre glasse the with all the rest so should not the end of
ye last houre trouble vs any more, thē of so many that went before, sith that did but finish the course, that all the rest were still ending: not the quantity but the quality commendeth our life; the ordinary gaine of long li∣uers, being onely a great bur∣then of sinne. For as in teares, so in life, the value is not esteemed by the length, but by the fruit & goodnesse, which often is more in the least than in the longest. What your sister wanted in con∣tinuance, she supplyed in speed; and as with her needle she wrought more in a day than ma∣ny Ladies in a yeare, hauing both excellent skill, and no lesse delight in working: so with her diligence, doubling her ende∣uours, she wonne more vertue in halfe than others in a whole life. Her death to time was her birth to eternitie, the losse of this world an exchange of a better, one endowment that she
had being impaired, but many farre greater added to the store. Mardocheus house was too ob∣scure a dwelling for so gracious an Hester, shrowding royall parts in the mantle of a meane estate, and shadowing immortall benefits vnder earthly veiles. It was fitter, yt she being a summe of so rare perfections, and so well worthy a spouse of our hea∣uenly Ahashuerus, should be car∣ried to his court from her for∣mer abode, there to be inuested in glorie, and to enioy both place and preheminence answe∣rable to her worthinesse: her loue would haue bene lesse able to haue borne your death, then your constancy to brooke hers, and therefore God mercifully closed her eyes before they were punished with so grieuous a sight, taking out to you but a new lesson of patience out of your old booke, in which, long study hath made you perfect.
Though your hearts were equal∣ly ballanced with a mutuall and most entire affection, and the doubt insoluble, which of you loued most; yet Death finding her weaker, though not the wea∣ker vessell, layd his weight in her ballance, to bring her soonest to her rest. Let your mind there∣fore consent to that which your tongue daily craueth, that Gods will may be done, as well here in earth of her mortall body, as in that little heauen of her purest soule, sith his will is the best measure of all euents. There is in this world continuall enter∣change of pleasing and greeting accidents, still keeping their suc∣cession of times and ouertaking each other in their seuerall cour∣ses. No picture can be all drawne of the brightest colours, nor an harmonie consorted onely of trebbles: shadowes are need∣full in expressing of proportions, and the base is a principall part
in perfect musicke: the condition of our exile here alloweth no vn∣mingled ioy, our whole life is temperate betweene sweete and sower and we must all looke for a mixture of both. The wise so wish: better that they still thinke of worse, accepting the one if it come with liking, and bearing the other without impatience, being so much maisters of each others fortunes, that neither shall worke them to excesse. The dwarfe groweth not on the highest hill, nor the tall man lo∣seth not his height in the lowest valley. And as a base minde, though most at ease, will be de∣iected, so a resolute vertue in the deepest distresse is most impreg∣nable. They euermore most per∣fectly enioy their comforts, that least feare their contraries: for a desire to enioy, carieth with it a feare to lose; and both desire and feare are enemies to quiet possession, making men rather
owners of Gods benefits, then tenants at his will. The cause of our troubles are, that our misfor∣tunes hap, either to vnwitting or vnwilling minds. Foresight pre∣uenteth the one, necessity the o∣ther: for he taketh away the smart of present euills that atten∣deth their comming, and is not amated with any crosse, that is armed against all. Where neces∣sitie worketh without our con∣sent, the effect should neuer greatly afflict vs, griefe being bootlesse, where it cannot helpe, needlesse where there was no fault. God casteth the dice, and giueth vs our chance; the most we can do, is to take the poynt that the cast will affoord vs, not grudging so much that it is no better, as comforting our selues it is no worse. If men should lay all their euils together, to be af∣terwards by equall portions de∣uided among them, most men would rather take that they
brought, then stand to the diui∣sion; yet such is the partial iudge∣ment of selfe loue, that euery man iudgeth his selfe-misery too great, fearing if he can find some circumstance to increase it, and making it intollerable, by thought to induce it. When Mo∣ses threw his rod from him, it became a serpent, ready to sting, and affrighted him, insomuch as it made him to flie, but being quietly taken vp, it was a rod a∣gaine, seruiceable for his vse, no way hurtfull. The crosse of Christ, and rod of euery tribula∣tion feeming to threaten stin∣ging and terrour to those that shunne and eschue it, but they that mildly take it vp and em∣brace it with patience, may say with Dauid, thy rod and thy staffe haue bene my comfort.Psal. 12. In this, affliction resembleth the Crocadile; flie, it pursueth and frighteth; followed, it flieth and feareth, a shame to the constant,
a tyrant to the timorous. Soft mindes that thinke onely vpon delights, admit no other consi∣deration: but in soothing things become so effeminate, as that they are apt to bleed with eue∣ry sharpe impression. But he that vseth his thoughts with expecta∣tion of troubles, making their trauell through all hazards, and apposing his resolution against the sharpest encounters, findeth in the proofe facilitie of pa∣tience, and easeth the loade of most heauy combers. We must haue temporall things in vse, but eternall in wish, that in the one neither delight exceede (in that we haue no desire in that we want:) and in the other our most delight is here in desire, and our whole desire is hereafter to en∣ioy. They straighten too much their ioyes, that draw them into the reach and compasse of their senses, as if it were no facilitie where no sense is witnesse,
whereas if we exclude our passed and future contentments, plea∣sant pleasures haue so fickle as∣surance, that either as forestalled before their arriuall, or interrup∣ted before their end, or ended before they are well begun, the repetition of former comforts, and the expectation of after hopes, is euer a reliefe vnto a vertuous mind, whereas others, not suffering their life to con∣tinue in the conueniences of that which was and shall be deuided, this day from yesterday and to morrow, and by forgetting all, and forecasting nothing abridge their whole life into the mo∣ment of present time. Enioy your sister in her former vertues, en∣ioy her also in her future mee∣ting, being both titles of more certaine delights, than her casu∣all life could euer haue warran∣ted. If we will thinke of her deth, let it be as a warning to prouide vs, sith that what happe∣neth
to one, may happen to ano∣ther: yea, none can escape, that is common to all. It may be, that blow that hither, was meant to some of vs; and this missing was but a proofe to take better aime in the next stroke. If we were diligent in thinking of our own, we should haue little leisure to bewaile others death. When the souldier in skirmish seeth his next fellow slaine, he thinketh more time to looke to himselfe, then to stand mourning an hap∣lesse mischance, knowing the hand which sped so neare a neighbour, cannot be farre from his owne head. But we in this behalfe are much like the silly birds, that seeing one sticke in the lime bush, striuing to get a∣way, with a kind of natiue pitty are drawen to go to it, and to rush themselues into the same misfortune; euen so many for their friends deceasse by musing on their lot, wittingly surfet of
too much sorrow, that some∣times they make mourning their last deceasse. But slippe not you into this toyle, that hath ta∣ken none but weake affections; hold not your eyes alwayes vpon your hardest happes, neither be you still occupied in counting your losses. There are fairer parts in your body than scarres, better eye-markes in your fortune than a sisters losse. You might haply find more comfort left, than you would willingly lose; but that you haue already resigned the solaces of life, and shunned all comforts into the hopes of hea∣uen; yet sith there is some diffe∣rence betweene a purpose and proofe, intending and perfor∣ming, a subdued enemy being euer ready to rebell when he findeth mighty helpes to make a party, it is good to strengthen reason against the violence of Nature that in this and like cases will renew her assaults. It was
a forcible remedie that he vsed to withstand the conceit of a most lamentable occurrent, who hauing in one ship lost his chil∣dren and substance, and hardly escaped himselfe from drow∣ning, went presently into an hospitall of lazars, where fin∣ding in a little roome many ex∣amples of great miseries, he made the smart of others sores a lenitiue to his owne wound. For besides that, as lownesse and pouerty was common to them, they had also many combers pri∣uate to themselues, some wan∣ting their senses, some their wits, other their limmes, but all their health: in which consideration he eased his minde, that Fortune had not giuen him the greatest fall. If God had put you to Abra∣hams triall, commanding you to sacrifice the hope of your poste∣ritie, and to be to your onely sonne an authour of death, as you were to him of life: If you
had bene tied in the straights of Iepthaes bitter deuotions, em∣bruing his sword in his owne daughters bloud, and ending the triumphs ouer his enemies, with the voluntary funerals of his only ofspring: yet, sith both their liues & their labours had bene Gods vndeniable debt, your vertues ought to haue obeyed, maugre all encounters of carnall affe∣ction. And how much more in this case should you encline your loue to Gods liking, in which he hath receiued a lesse part of his owne, and that by the vsuall easiest course of natures lawes? Let God strippe you to the skinne, yea to the soule, so he stay with you himselfe▪ let his reproach be your honour, his po∣uerty your riches, and he, in lieu of all other friends. Thinke him enough for this world, that must be all your possession for a whole eternity. Let others ease their carefullnesse with borrowed
pleasures, not bred out of the true roote, but begged of exter∣nall helpes. They shall still carry vnquiet mindes, easily altered with euery accident, sith they labour not for any change in their inward distempers, but by forgetting them for a time by outward pastimes. Innocencie is the onely mother of true mirth, and a soule that is owner of God, will quietly beare with all other wants nothing being able to empouerish it but voluntary losses. Beare not therefore with her losses, for she is won for euer, but with the momentary absence of your most happy sister; yea it cannot iustly be called an ab∣sence, many thoughts being dai∣ly in parley with her, onely mens eyes and eares vnworthy to en∣ioy so sweete an obiect, haue re∣signed their interest, and inte∣rested this treasure in their harts, being the fittest shrines for so pure a Saint, whom, as none did
know but did loue, so none can now remember but with deuo∣tion. Men may behold her with shame of their former life, seeing one of the weaker sexe honor her weaknesse with such a traine of perfections. Ladies may admire her, as a glorie to their degree, in whom honour was portraied in her full likenesse, grace hauing perfected Natures first draught with all the due colours of an absolute vertue. All women ac∣cept her as a patterne to imitate her gifts and her good parts▪ ha∣uing bene so manifested, that e∣uen they that can teach the finest stitches, may themselues take new workes out of this Sampler. Who then could drinke any sor∣row out of so cleare a Fountaine, or bewaile the estate of so happy a creature, to whom, as to be her selfe was her praise; so to be as she is, was her highest blisse? You still floate in a trou∣blesome sea, and you find it by
experience a sea of dangers: how then can it pitty you to see your sister on shoare, and so safely lan∣ded in so blisfull an harbour? Sith your Iudith hath wrought the glorious exploite against her ghostly enemies,Iud. 15. for the accom∣plishing whereof she came into the dangerous campe & warfare of this life; you may well giue her leaue to looke home to her Bethulia, to solemnize her tri∣umph with the spoiles of her victorie. Yea, you should rather haue wished to haue bene Por∣ter to let her in, than mourne to see her safe returned. For so appa∣rent hazards, she carried an hea∣uenly treasure in an earthly ves∣sell,2. Cor. 4. which was too weake a treasurie for so high riches: sinne creeping in at the window of our senses, and often picking the locks of the strongest hearts. And for this it was layd vp in a surer, to the which the heauens are walles, and the Angels kee∣pers.
She was a pure fish, but yet swimming in muddy streames: it was now time to draw her to shoare, and to employ the in∣wards of her vertues to medici∣nable vses, that layd on the coals of due consideration, they may draw from our thoughts, the Diuels suggestions, and appli∣ed to their eyes,Tob. 6. which are blin∣ded with the dung of flying va∣nities, the slime of their former vanities may fall off, and leaue them able to behold the cleare light. The base shell of a mortall body was vnfit for so precious a Margarite,Mat. 13. and the Ieweller that came into this world to seeke good pearles, and gaue, not only all he had, but himselfe also, to buy them, thought now high time to bring her vnto his bar∣gaine, finding her growne to a Margarites full perfection. She stood vpon too low a ground to take view of her Sauiours most desired countenance, and forsa∣king
the earth with Zacheus,Luk. 9. she climed vp into the tree of life, there to giue her soule a full re∣past of her beauties. She departed with Iepthaes daughter from her fathers house, but to passe some moneths in wandring about the mountaines of this troublesome world, which being now expi∣red, she was after her pilgrimage, by couenant, to returne to be offered vnto God in a gratefull sacrifice, and to ascend out of this desart like a stemme of per∣fume out of burned spices. Let not therefore the crowne of her vertue be the foile of her con∣stancie, nor the end of her com∣bers a renewing of yours. But sith God was well pleased to call her, she not displeased to go, and you the third twist to make a triple cord, saying, Our Lord gaue, and our Lord tooke away, as it hath pleased our Lord, so hath it fallen out: the name of our Lord be blessed.
Clara ducum soboles, superis noua sedibus hospes, Clausit in offenso tramite pura diem Dotibus ornauit, superauit moribus ortum, Omnibus vna prior, par fuit vna sibi: Lux genus ingenio generi lux inclita virtus, Virtutisque fuit mens generosa decus. Mors muta at properata dies orbémque relinquit, Prolem matre verum coniuge flore genus, Occidit à se alium tulit hic occasus in ortum, Viuat, ad occiduas non reditura vices. OF Howards stemme a glorious branch is dead, Sweete lights eclipsed were at her decease: In Buckhurst line she gracious issue spread, She heau'n with two, with foure did earth increase: Fame, honour, grace, gaue ayre vnto her breath, Rest glory, ioyes, were sequels of her death. Death aymde too high,
he hit too choise a wight, Renown'd for birth, for life, for liuely parts, He kild her cares, he brought her worths to light, He robd our eyes, but hath enricht our hearts: Lot let out of her Arke a Noyes Doue, But many hearts were Arkes vnto her loue. Grace, Nature, Fortune, did in her conspire, To shew a proofe of their vnited skill: Sly Fortune euer false did soone retire, But double Grace supplied false Fortunes ill. And though she raught not to Fortunes pitch, In Grace and Vertue few were found so rich. Heauen of this heauenly Pearle is now possest,
In whose lustre was the blaze of honours light: Whose substance pure, of euery good the best, Whose price the crowne of highest right, Whose praise to be her selfe, whose greatest blisse, To liue, to loue, to be where now she is. FINIS.
SHORT RVLES OF Good life. by R. S. printer's or publisher's device .AN CHO RA. SPEI. LONDON. Printed for W. Barret.
TO MY DEARE AFFECTED FRIEND M. D. S. Gentleman. AS there is a method and order to be ob∣serued in all artes, for the practitioners more fa∣cile attayning the effects of his endeuours: so is there no lesse vniformity to be propounded in ayming at the true course of vertue: the rules whereof, albeit they are directorie to the sum of all happinesse, yet do worldly courser studies entertaine far more followers, whose erring iudgements (entangled with dull ignorance) cannot rightly preferre vertue, nor effectually censure vice. For what cleare
sighted iudgement will rely e∣ternall affaires vpon the gli∣ding slippernesse and running streame of this vncertaine life? or who (but one of distempered wits) would offer to dissemble with the Amightie decipherer of all thoughts, in pretending vertue, and pursuing vanitie? It is a most seruile disposition that will yeeld the prerogatiue of the soule vnto the body, and giue flesh and bloud libertie to determine the course of this life, which are in manner but the barke and rinde of a man, being that the soule is the so∣ueraigne part, ordained to an high end of so peerelesse digni∣tie, and such estimate, that not all the gold and treasure of the world, nor anything in heauen of lesse worth then the bloud and life of Almighty God, was
able to buy it. Let vs not then iniuriously depriue our soules of the due in∣terest of grace and vertue, but account this vaine world with the wares thereof sutable to the shop of idle Marchandise, vnto which we haue already beene too long customers, the trafficke being toile, the wealth trash, the gaine miserie, and the whole contents thereof detriments in grace, pietie, and vertue. Yours in firme affection R. S.
To the Christian Reader. IF vertue by thy guide, True comfort is thy path, And thou secure from erring steps, That leade to vengeance wrath. Not widest open dore, Nor spacious wayes she goes, To straight and narrow gate and way, She cals, she leades, she shewes. She cals, the fewest come, She leades the humble sprited, She shewes them rest at rases end, Soules rest to heauen inuited. Tis she that offers most, Tis she that most refuse, Tis she preuēts the broad way plagues, Which most do wilfull chuse.
Do chuse the wide, the broad, The left hand way and gate: These vice applauds, these vertue loaths And teacheth hers to hate. Her wayes are pleasant wayes, Vpon the right hand side, And heauenly happie is that soule, Takes vertue for her guide. R. S.
A Preparatiue to prayer. WHen thou doest talke with God, by prayer I meane, Lift vp pure hands, lay downe all lusts desires: Fixe thoughts on heauen, present a conscience cleane. Such holy balme to mercies throne aspires. Confesse faults guilt, craue pardon for thy sinne: Tread holy pathes, call grace to guide therein. It is the spirit with reuerence must obey, Our makers will to practise what he taught. Make not the flesh thy counsell when thou pray, Tis enemie to euery vertuous thought.
It is the foe we daily feed and cloath: It is the prison that the soule doth loath. Euen as Elias mounting to the skie, Did cast his mantle to the earth behind: So when the heart presents the prayer on high, Exclude the world from traffique with the mind, Lips neare to God, and ranging heart within, Is but vaine babling, and conuerts to sinne. Like Abraham ascending vp the hill, To sacrifice, his seruants left below, That he might act the great commanders will: Without impeach to his obedient blow. Euen so the soule
remote from earthly things, Should mount saluations shelter, mercies wings. The effects of prayer. THe Sunne by prayer did ceasse his course and staid: The hungrie Lions fawnd vpon their pray: A walled passage through the sea it made, From furious fire it banisht heate away: It shut the heauens three yeares from giuing raine, It opened heauens, and clouds powrd downe againe, Ensamples of our Sauiour. OVr Sauiour (patterne of true holinesse) Continuall praide, vs by ensample teaching.
When he was baptized in the wildernesse, In working miracles and in his preaching. Vpon the mount▪ in garden grones of death, At his last Supper at his parting breath. O fortresse of the faithfull, sure defence, In which doth Christians cognizance consist: Their victorie their triumph comes from thence, So forcible, hell gates cannot resist: A thing whereby both Angels, clouds, and starres, At mans request fight Gods reuengefull wars. Nothing more gratefull in the Highest eyes, Nothing more firme in danger to protect vs, Nothing more forcible
to pierce the skies, And not depart till mercy do respect vs, And as the soule, life to the body giues, So prayer reuiues the soule, by prayer it liues. R. S.
Of the Foundations of vertuous and godly life. The first Foundation. THe first Founda∣tion of a vertuous life is often and se∣riously to consider for what end and purpose I was created, and what Gods designement was, when he made me of nothing▪ and that not to haue a being onely, as a stone, nor with a bare kinde of life, or growing as a plante or tree, nor a power of sence or fee∣ling onely as a brute beast, but a creature to his owne likenesse, endued with reason and vnder∣standing▪ also why he now pre∣serueth me in this health, state
and calling. Finally, why he re∣deemed me with his owne bloud, bestowed so infinite be∣nefits vpon me, and still conti∣nueth his mercy towards me. The end of mans creation. THe end of my being thus made, redeemed, preser∣ued, and so much benefited by God, is this and no other, that I should in this life serue him with my whole body, soule, and substance, and with what else soeuer is mine, and in the next life enioy him for euer in hea∣uen. Rules that follow of this Foundation. I Was made of nothing by God, and receiued bodie and soule from him, and therefore am
I onely his, not mine owne: nei∣ther can I so binde or giue my selfe to any creature, but that I ought more to serue, loue and obey God then any creature in this world. Secondly, I commit a kind of theft, and do God great wrong, so often as I employ any part of my body or soule to any other end then to his seruice, for which onely I was created. Thirdly, for this I do liue, and for no other end but for this do all creatures serue me: and when I turne the least thing whereof God hath giuen me the vse or possessing to any other end then the seruice of God, I do God wrong and abuse his creatures. The second Foundation. SEeing I was made to serue God in this life, and to enioy him in the next, the seruice of God,
and the saluation of mine owne soule, is the most weightie and important businesse, and the most necessarie matter wherein I must imploy my body, mind, time and labour: and all other affaires are so farre forth to be esteemed of me waightie or light, as they more or lesse tend to the furtherance of this prin∣cipall and most earnest businesse: for what auaileth it a man to gaine the whole world, and lose his owne soule? Rules that follow of this Foundation. FIrst what diligence, labour or cost, I would employ in any other temporall matter of cre∣dite, liuing or life, all that I am bound to employ in the seruice of God, and the saluation of my soule, and so much more as the waight of my soule passeth all o∣ther
things. Secondly, I ought to thinke the seruice of God and saluation of my soule, my principall busi∣nesse in this world, and to make it my ordinary study and chiefe occupation, and day and night to keepe my mind so fixed vpon it, that in euery action I still haue it before mine eyes, as the onely marke I shoot at. The third Foundation. I Cannot serue God in this world, nor go about to enioy him in the next, but that Gods enemies and mine owne will re∣pine and seeke to hinder me, which enemies are three: the world, the flesh, and the Diuell. Wherefore I must resolue my selfe, and set it downe as a thing vndoubted; that my whole life must be as a continuall combat with these aduersaries, whom I
must assure my selfe to lie houre∣ly in waite for me to seeke their aduantage, and that their malice is so vnplacable, and their hatred against me so rooted in them, that I must neuer looke to haue one houre secure from their as∣saults, but that they will from time to time, so long as there is breath in my body, still labour to make me forsake and offend God, allure me to their seruice, and draw me to my damnation. Rules following of this Foundation. I Must prepare my body and minde to all patience, and thinke it no newes to be temp∣ted, but a point annexed necessa∣rily to my profession, and there∣fore neuer must I be wearied with the continuance, nor dismaied with the difficultie, considering the malice and wickednesse of
mine aduersaries, and my pro∣fessed enmity with them. Secondly, I must alwayes stand vpon my guard, and be very watchfull in euery action, seeing that whatsoeuer I do, they will seeke to peruert it, and make it offensiue to God, euen my very best endeuours. Thirdly, I must neuer looke to be free from some trouble or other, but knowing my selfe to be a perpetuall warfare, I must rather comfort my sel e with hope of a glorious crowne for my victories, then of any long or assured peace with my enemies. The fourth Foundation. THe thing which these ene∣mies endeuour to draw me to, is sinne and offence to God, which is so odious, hatefull, and abhominable, yt God doth more detest and dislike it, then he did
the cruell vsage, the wounds, the torments, and the death it selfe, that for vs he suffered of the Iewes, and it maketh our soules more vglie then the plague, le∣prosie, or any other filthie dis∣ease doth the body. Rules following this Foun∣dation. SO carefull as I would be not to wound, torment, or mur∣ther Christ, so carefull must I be not to commit any mortall sinne against him, yea and so much more seeing that he hateth sinne more then death, hauing volun∣tarily fuffered the one, and yet neuer committed the other. Secondly, when I am tempted with any sinne, let me examine my selfe, whether I would buy the fulfilling of mine owne ap∣petite with being a Leaper, or full of the plague, or with death
presently to ensue after it. If not, then much lesse ought I to buy it with the leprosie, losse, and death of my soule, which is of farre more worth then my body. The fift Foundation. BEing Gods creature made to serue him in this life, my body, soule, and goods, and all things any way pertaining vnto me, are but lent, or onely let me for this end; and I am onely a Bailife, Tenant, or officer, to de∣maund or gouerne these things to his best seruice, and therefore when the time of my steward∣ship is expired, I shall be summo∣ned by death to appeare before my Landlord, who with most rigorous iustice, will demand ac∣count of euery thing and crea∣ture of his that hath bene to my vse, yea of all that I haue recei∣ued, promised, omitted, commit∣ted,
lost, and robbed, and as I can then discharge this account, so shall I be either crowned in eternall ioy, or condemned to perpetuall damnation. Rules following of this Foundation. FIrst I must vse all things in this life as another bodies goods, for which I must be ac∣countable to the vttermost far∣thing. Secondly, the more I haue, the greater and harder will be mine account of the good vse there∣of, and therefore the more warie ought I to be in disposing of it. Thirdly, let me often consider what bodily, ghostly, and exter∣nall gifts of God I haue recei∣ued, what in baptisme and at o∣ther times I haue promised, how profitable and necessarie good works I haue omitted, how ma∣ny
grieuous and hainous sinnes I haue committed, how often I haue lost the grace of God, and my right to heauen. Finally, how much honour, and how many soules I haue robbed from God. And these things being well perused, let me seeke to make that recompence & satisfaction for them, which I would wish to haue made when death shall summon me before my heauenly Iudge, to giue a most strict ac∣count of them. The fruite of these Founda∣tions consisteth in the often con∣sidering of them, as most neces∣sarie points, and as it were, the very first principles of good life, vpon the vnderstanding and practising whereof dependeth my progresse in vertue: and therefore I must very often read them, and examine my selfe whe∣ther my mind and actions be an∣swerable vnto them.
How we ought to be affected towards God. First of the consideration of Gods presence. THese Foundations being laid, it behooueth me fur∣ther to descend to the no∣tice of my dutie to God, my neighbour, and my selfe. And first concerning my dutie vnto God, a very fit meane I can vse to please him is to beare alway in mind his presence: for sure it is that as God, he is euery where in substance, power, and pre∣sence: as in him I liue, moue and am, as the Scripture saith, be∣cause he worketh with me in all my deeds, thoughts and words, in so much that as the beame of the Sunne, the heate of the fier
or the wetnesse of the water, so depend I of God; and should he but withdraw himselfe from me one moment, I should forth with turne into nothing, and there∣fore it is a very forcible meanes for my good, to do all things as if I did see God visibly working with me in euery action, as in truth he doth, and knowing that what words, thoughts, or deeds soeuer passe me, and what part of my bodie or mind soeuer I vse, Gods concourse and helpe ther∣unto is more then mine owne, I must be afraid to vse them in any such thing, wherein I might offend him, but rather seeke to do all things, so that they be worthy of his presence, helpe, and assistance in them: and if I can get a custome or habite to remember still the presence and assistance of God▪ (as by vse easi∣ly I may) I shall with due regard, reuerence, & consideration, ab∣staine from such behauiour as I
thinke may be any way offensiue vnto him: I shall also get a great facilitie in turning my mind and heart to him, and in talking of∣ten with him by prayers which are the fuell of deuotion. Other Affections that we ought to haue vnto God. SEcondly, I must endeuour to to kindle in my selfe these af∣fections towards God. The first Affection. FIrst, of a sincere and tender loue of him, as the fountaine of all beautie and felicity: of which loue I may ghesse by these signes: By often thinking and an earnest desire of God: by sorrow of his absence, and con∣tentment in consideration of his presence: By my diligence in per∣forming
without delay or tedi∣ousnesse, that which pleaseth best my Sauiour, and by finding such comfort in doing it, that it grie∣ueth me, when for things of lesse value and goodnesse, I am enfor∣ced to deferre it. By withdrawing all disordred loue from all creatures, and espe∣cially my selfe, and by louing nothing but in God, and for God: By seeking to increase this loue by consideration of Gods goodnesse, and his daily benefit: By taking delight in Gods ser∣uice, or things tending thereun∣to, not because I finde content∣ment in it, but because it is to Gods glorie, to the which I would haue all things addressed. By taking tribulations, or troubles of body or minde pati∣ently, yea and with ioy, knowing that they come by Gods permis∣sion, and thinking them as fa∣uours, which he affoordeth to his dearest friends.
The second Affection. THe second affection, is a reuerent and dutifull feare of God, which I may gather by these signes: If when I remember the presence and maiestie of God, I frame both my body and minde to reuerence and honour him with all humility and decen∣cy, fearing lest by any vnseeme∣ly and light behauiour I should seeme to be contemptuous and carelesse of my dutie towards him. If I finde great feare to do any thing that may displease God, not onely mortally, but e∣uen venially, and be withall y wtchfull to auoide the least of∣fnce▪ lest ny frailtie (which is great) should draw me to it; and so to farther inconuenience: If I feare to be banished from him or forsaken for my sinnes, and endeuour▪ what I may to pre∣ferre his loue and fauour to∣wards me.
The third Affection. THe third affection is zeale of Gods honour, and desire that he should be duely serued, and obeyed of all his creatures, of which I may iudge by these signes. First, if I finde a griefe in my selfe, and am heartily fory when I see or heare of other folkes faults, or thinke on mine owne, considering how by them a base and wretched creature dishono∣reth and displeaseth his Creator, in steade of him seruing his pro∣fessed enemies, the flesh, the world and the diuell. The second signe is an earnest desire to helpe my neighbour, or mine owne soule out of sinne by praying for this effect, and re∣fusing no conuenient labour to accomplish the same, so that my Lord God be no more, or at least wise offended then before.
The fourth Affection. THE fourth affection is to endeuour as neare as I can to take occasion of euery thing that I heare, see, or thinke of, to praise God: as if the things were good, then to praise God that he gaue grace to do them: and if the things were euill, to thanke God, that either he preserued me or others from them, or at least hath not suffered me to continue still in them, or to be in his wrath condemned for them. Also I must consider, and with my in∣ward eye see God in euery crea∣ture, how he worketh in all things to my benefit, and weigh how in all creatures both within and without me, he sheweth his presence by keeping them in their being, and course of nature, for without him they would pre∣sently turne to nothing; and I must assure my selfe, that in all this he hath as well regard to my
good as to others, and therefore all creatures must be (as it were) bookes to me, to reade therein the loue, presence, prouidence, and fatherly care that God hath ouer me. The fift Affection. THe fift affection is, to con∣sider, that I being a Chri∣stian, not onely my faith and all my actions proper thereunto, ought to be different from the erronious opinions, sectes and actions of infidels, but euen mine ordinary actions of eating, drinking, playing, working, and such like, ought to haue a marke and badge of Christianitie, and some difference from the like things done by heathens: and this marke which maketh Chri∣stian and good works, is a right and sincere intention, which in euery principall action I ought
to procure, so that it be done to the honour, glorie, and seruice of God; and agreeable to the rule of Christian duty, with that measure, temperance, and cir∣cumstance that faith requires, perswading my selfe, that as well in these actions done in this sort, as in others that carry more shew of pietie, God may be ser∣ued and honoured, and therefore should it be a great negligence and carelesnesse in me for want of directing my intention (which by vse is easily gotten) to lose so many great vertues, as by these ordinarie actions I might daily and hourely gaine. The sixt Affection. THe sixt affection is a perfect resignation of my selfe into Gods hands, with a full desire that he should vse me as were most to his glorie, whether it
were to my temporall comfort or no, and to be as ready to serue him in miserie, need, and afflicti∣on, as in prosperity and pleasure, thinking it my chiefest delight, to be vsed as God will, and to haue his pleasure and prouidence fully accomplished in me, which is the end for which I was crea∣ted, and for which I do liue. To attaine this resignation, it is a very fit way to debate and dis∣course with my selfe, what thing there is could happen vnto me, though neuer so much against my liking, which if it should fall out would trouble me, or make me lose that indifferencie which I ought to haue in most willing∣ly yeelding my selfe to whatsoe∣uer God shall lay vpon me: and if I find any thing which I thinke I should not well digest, nor ac∣cept with due patience, let me endeuour to ouercome my selfe in it, and by prayer and medita∣tion seeke to winne the difficulty
thereof, that there may be no∣thing which I could not wil∣lingly accept at Gods hands, how contrary soeuer it were to my inclination, to which these considerations may helpe me. First the end I ayme at, is Gods glory in this world, and his reward in the next: and there∣fore knowing that nothing but my voluntary sinne can barre me from this end, what need I much care by what meanes God will haue me to attaine it? for the meanes can last but a little, and the end endureth for euer, and is so much the more comfortable, in that it hath bene atchiued with discomfortable toyles. Secondly, God loueth me more then I loue my self, & is so wise that he seeth what is fittest for me, all present and future cir∣cumstances considered: he is so mightie that what his wisedome and loue shall conclude for my good his power can put it in exe∣cution,
and therfore let me yeeld my selfe rather to his prouidence then to mine owne desires. Thirdly, whatsoeuer moueth me to feare or dislike any thing, which I could not frame my minde to beare, God seeth it far better then I, yea and all other secret and vnknowne hazards annexed to that thing. If there∣fore he knowing all these things, will neuerthelesse let it happen vnto me; I must assure my selfe that it proceedeth from loue, and is for my greater good, and that he hauing laid a heauy bur∣then vpon weake forces, will by his grace supply all my wants, feares and frailties. The seuenth Affection. THe seuenth affection is gra∣titude and thankefulnesse, which I ought to finde in my selfe towards God, and the fee∣ling
an earnest desire to do any thing that might counteruaile, or in part answer the excessiue loue that God hath, and doth hourely bestow vpon me, and to let no little good that I receiue, though neuer so ordinary, passe without thankes to him, who e∣uen in the least things is con∣tent to serue me: and finally to make God my repose, and his re∣membrance my comfort, and to loath all earthly things, as base and vnpleasant in comparison of him. Of my duty towards my neighbour. AFter knowledge of my du∣tie towards God, I must consider my duty towards my neighbour, and the manner how to demeane and behaue my selfe in company and conuersation First I must procure to remem∣ber,
that my externall behaui∣our, my gate, my gesture, my countenance, and my outward actions, be done with grauitie, modestie, and all decencie, that I be not light, vaine, or too la∣uish in mirth, nor too austere, nor too much inclined to sadnesse, but with temperate modestie ra∣ther composed to mirth then to melancholie. Which externall composition is necessary both for edifying our neighbour, who being vnable to iudge or enter into our thoughts, iudgeth of e∣uery one according to that whereof his sense is witnesse. And next in respect of God, who being euery where present, re∣quireth in vs behauiour worthy of his sight and company: and lastly, in respect of our owne soule, this care of externall de∣cencie being an approued meanes to auoide infinite sinnes. Of externall composition there be three chiefe pointes.
First the care of our countenance, gate, and gesture: Secondly, of our voyce and speech: Thirdly, of our apparell and other adhe∣rents. In countenance I must auoide an vnstayed kind of varietie and often change, keeping as neare as I may, one setled tenour ther∣of, rather bent to smiling then heauinesse, and free from frow∣ning, and such like vnseemely distemper: neither ought I to alter countenance, but when rea∣sonable and iust cause moueth me to shew either mirth, sorrow, dislike, or compassion, or some other modest or temperate af∣fection. My gate ought to be graue, neither too swift, nor too slow, but with a meane and sober pace: my gesture must be decent, free from affection or singula∣ritie, and from all shew of inward disquietnesse or vnordered pas∣sion, which though I cannot
chuse but sometimes feele, yet it is good (as much as I may) to conceale it, because outward signes do feede the inward distemper and bewray to others my imperfections, to my discre∣dite and their euill ensample. My voyce neither ought to be very loud, nor my laughter so vehement, as to be heard afarre off, both seemely and modest; for excesse in the voice, and immo∣derate loudnesse, are alwayes certaine signes of passion, and therefore ought not to be vsed but vpon some extraordinary necessitie. My speech ought not to be so much as to make me be noted for talkatiue: yea it is good to be rather sparing in words, and readier to heare then to speake: but when occasion forceth vnto much talke, I must speake deliberatly without rash∣nesse or leuitie, auoiding ouer many ieasts, especially bitter taunts, and sharpe words: I must
also take heed of affected speech, and impertinent ceremonies, vsing such affability, and con∣uenient complements as com∣mon ciuility and vsuall curtesie requireth. Mine apparell must be free from lightnesse, or more gaudinesse then fitteth mine age, company, or calling; it must be decent and comely, not too o∣pen, nor with any vnusuall or new fashioned dresses, that other graue persons of my qualitie and calling (that are well thought of) do not vse: it must be hand∣some and cleane, and as much as may be, without singularity, that therein the stayednesse and seemely estate of my soule may be perceiued. Alwayes when I am to go to any company, either of my dwelling place or stran∣gers, I ought to forecast their disposition, and what talke or ac∣tion is likely to be tendred vnto me by their presence. If I feare any detracting speeches let me
arme my selfe, not to seeme to approue them, yea rather to dis∣like them, and indeuour to turne their talke into some other mat∣ter, and so in all vnlawfull kind of speech whatsoeuer. Finally, let this for conuersa∣tion be my chiefe rule, alwayes to foresee and prouide my selfe against the occasions yt by euery companie are likely to be offe∣red me, & in the beginning to di∣rect mine intention, to talke ei∣ther for dispatch of necessary bu∣sines, (if there be any) or for main∣taining mutual loue and charitie, if it be merrie or ordinary talke. This foresight of occasions, and faults likely to be commit∣ted, is the principall remedy a∣gainst all sinne, and therefore es∣pecially to be noted and vsed. To conclude, the vertues neces∣sarie in conuersation are, mo∣destie, decencie, curtesie, affabi∣litie, meeknesse, and ciuilitie, shew of compassion to others
miseries, and of ioy at their wel∣fare, and of readinesse to pleasure all, and vnwillingnesse to dis∣please any: the want of any of these where occasion requireth, maketh it more faultie. The vices chiefly to be auoy∣ded, are pride, disdainefulnesse, rudenesse, frowardnesse, light∣nesse, too much familiaritie, churlishnesse, and offensiue spee∣ches. Of my duty towards my selfe. THe last point is to consider my duty towards my selfe, and the care I ought to haue of mine owne particular: first I must procure that which before is mentioned, in all my actions to haue a badge of Christianity, that is, a pure and sincere af∣fection, and intention, not see∣king in any thing mine owne
delights, pleasure, and content∣ment, more then may stand with the honour and glory of God, re∣membring that I am to serue him, and not my selfe, more then is necessary to inable me for his better seruice, I being his more then mine owne. Secondly, I must procure to foresee in euery action (at least in all the principall) to fore-arme my selfe against those occasions of sinne that shall be offered in them: and where it lyeth not in my power to auoide the occa∣sion of any great sinne, the more danger there is: and the greater the sinne is that I am in danger of, so much the more preparation must I vse to resist it, & the more earnestly aske for Gods grace. Thirdly, I must haue care of my senses, as the meanes and en∣trance of temptations, to which it is a principall helpe, not to be easily drawne with euery noise or fancy, to moue my head or
eyes, without there be good cause, nor to be sodaine in mo∣tion; and going hither and thi∣ther without deliberation I must also remember well that the eye is neuer satisfied with seeing, nor the eare with hearing nouelties; and therefore must I needs bridle the vnmeasurable appetite of both these senses, by breaking off mine owne desires in that be∣halfe. Fourthly, because confusion, and an vnsetled kind of life is the cause of many sinnes and an ene∣mie to all vertue, I must set down with my selfe some certaine or∣der in spending my time, allot∣ting in euery howe of the day some certaine thing to be done in the same, and to haue times in the morning, euening, and after-noone, deuoted vnto some good and godly exercise, which I must (though not by vow) bind my selfe vnto, when things of worldly affaires call me from
them: also to keepe due times of rising, meales, and going to bed, and all other necessary times the obseruation whereof is the most necessarie for a regular and ver∣tuous kind of life. Fiftly, it is a most necessarie rule of good life, not onely to keepe order in my spirituall and temporall actions, but also to perseuere and continue in one order, hauing once set it downe with found aduice: for the na∣ture of man being apt to change, we are giuen still to nouelties, seeking new waies to perfection, and confirming or habituating our selues in none. Wherefore (except necessitie, charitie, or greater spirituall good do re∣quire) I must not flit from one exercise to another, but first plant a good platforme with mature aduice, and then resolue and ful∣ly determine to continue in the same. Sixtly, I must not mber my
mind with many spirituall or ex∣ternall exercises at once, nor la∣bour my selfe too much at the first, for my force being distra∣cted to many offices, is the lesse able to performe any of them, and is easily ouerlaboured with∣out profit: wherefore I must not thinke to get all vertues at once, or cut off all imperfections to∣gether, but hauing a generall re∣solution to get vertue, and leaue all vice, beginne with some one, endeuouring to breake my selfe of some one fault whereto I am most inclined, and procuring to get the contrarie vertue; for the care of auoyding one offence, will make me take heed of all the rest. Seuenthly, mans nature being so corrupt, that without conti∣nuall violence and force, it can∣not attaine to vertue, or leaue vice, whereunto it is much incli∣ned, I must assure my selfe that care and watchfulnesse is euer
necessary, and because I am apt to fall, I must often renew my good purposes, knowing that I neuer can go on in vertue without falling, and therefore I must euery morning thinke with my selfe that hitherto I haue done nothing, and that by Gods grace that day I will be∣ginne afresh, as though it were the first day that euer I began to do any good thing. Eightly, I must not make small account of little sinnes, nor be carelesse in committing them, but alwayes carrie the mind that I would not offend God willingly, euen in the least sinne, for any thing: and I must neuer thinke any thing little, wherewith so high a Maiestie is offended: for he that careth not to commit little sinnes, giueth the diuell a great aduantage to draw him into greater.
Rules in sicknesse. IF my sicknesse be great, I shall not neede to force my selfe beyond my strength vnto a∣ny vocall prayers, more then in the morning dutifully to com∣mend my selfe vnto God, with the Lords prayer, and the con∣fession of Christian faith, or if I cannot well say so much, now and then I must call vpon God with short prayers: as, Lord Iesus saue me, Lord strengthen me, Lord graunt me patience, and such like, In sicknesse when I can beare it, it will be good sometimes to haue part of some good booke read vnto me, but not ouermuch, for feare of hurting my health. As in health I ought to be obe∣dient to my superiours, and by diligent obseruation shew my duty towards God: so in sick∣nesse I must be contented to be ruled by the Phisitions, and such as haue care of me in things be∣longing
to my bodily health: and I must perswade my selfe, that in that time I haue one chiefe rule to obserue in being patient and tractable, which in such a case doth counteruaile the valour of all my vsuall exer∣cises. I must also assure my selfe that I do God good seruice when I do any necessary thing and take any conuenient recreation that may further my health. I must take heede of being  or froward, which sick∣nesse for the most part doth cause, thinking that how much paine soeuer I suffer, Christ suf∣fered farre more for my sake, and farre more had I suffered ng since in hell, if God had dealt with me according to my deserts. It is good also to haue my will and testament in a readinesse, before I fall into any extremitie of sicknesse, that a certaine order be set downe for all temporall matters, that I be
not combred with them when it standeth me most vpon to looke to my soule. Of the care of seruants. I Must see that they lie not out in the nights, but that I may know what becommeth of them: I must not keepe such in my house as are swearers, liers, gamesters, or such as are giuen to any notorious vice, vnlesse there be great likelihood and certaine hope of their amend∣ment. I must procure by what meanes conueniently I may, that they haue necessary instruction in matters appertaining to the saluation of their soules. I must take speciall heed of any secret meetings, messages, or more then ordinary liking betweene the men and women of my fa∣milie: I must see that the men haue no haunt of women to their
chambers, lest lewdnesse be cloa∣ked vnder some other pretence: I must haue great regard that my chiefest officers and men of most account be trustie persons, of good life and example, because the rest will follow as they shall leade them. I must seeke as much as may be, that my seruants be not idle, nor suffered to vse any great gaming, for by the one they shall fall into lewde life, and by the other into swearing, vnthriftinesse, robbing, and such vices: I must see that they haue their wages at due times, lest for want they fall into bad courses. When they do not their duties, I must rebuke them agreeable to the qualitie of their fault, and not winke at great matters, lest they waxe carelesse and bold to do the like offences againe, yet must my rebukes be tempe∣red with grauitie and mildnesse.
Of the care of Children. I Must thinke that my Children so long as they are vnder age, and in my power or custodie, ought to be kept as my selfe, I hauing in this time to answer for them. I must take heed that they come not amongst such seruants as are like to teach them to sweare, or any other vice, and I must giue speciall warning that none do it. I must set honest and sound persons to gouerne them, that may also teach them vertue and good∣nesse, yet not trusting too much to my seruants care, but that I my selfe haue a speciall eye ouer them, and take an account what they do. I must vse them to de∣uotion by little and little, not cloying them with too much at once, but rather seeking to make them take a delight in it. I must instruct them in the points of faith, and true religion, and
teach them the Lords prayer, the Creede and the ten Commande∣ments. I must keepe them al∣wayes occupied in some profita∣ble things, allotting them accor∣ding to their age, more or lesse time of recreation. I must often∣times remember vnto them the passions and sufferings of Christ for sinne, with the benefit of his death and glorious resurrection. I must breake them from their wills, and punish them as they deserue: yet remembring also that they are yong, and not kee∣ping them in too much sub∣iection, which may breed in them base and seruile minds, and make their loue lesse towards me: and I neuer ought to beate any child in mine anger. I must procure that they be taught such exercises and qualities, as are fit for those of their degree, and yet haue chiefe care that good and honest persons be about them. I must not vse them to vaine
dresses, and costly apparell, but rather often shew them the va∣nitie thereof, yet must they not be too straite kept in that, or a∣ny other thing, which they are afterward to haue, lest the being too much barred from it make them more eager to haue it, when they come to enioy it at their owne will: I must vse them to giue almes, to make much of the poore, and to vse reuerence to aged persons and spirituall men: I must vse them to reade good bookes, such as are fittest for their capacitie, and see them kept from vaine bookes of loue, and such like idle discour∣ses, that do peruert the minds of youth oftentimes for all their ensuing time after: I must hear∣ten them as they grow in yeares, to suffer aduersity, and to digest griefe, especially in Gods cause, and a good quarrell, telling them the examples of others, and how good a thing patience
and costancie is. When they are fit to go to schoole, I must procure that they haue discret and calme teachers, such as are not cholerike, hastie, or curst, lest they take dislike and tediousnesse in learning; for they must be rather wonne vnto it by praise and emulation of others, then by bayting and stripes: I must see that they be taught such ciuilitie, curtesie, and comple∣ments, as their degree and the time requireth, and frame them as much as may be, to be gentle, humble, and affable, euen to the meanest, rebuking them for an∣gry and sharpe words, or dis∣dainefull behauiour, euen to their inferiors: I must not suffer the boyes and girles to be much together, especially out of sight, after eight or nine yeares of age, lest they fall to vnhappinesse: Likewise my daughters must not be amongst the men, nor my sonnes amongst the women.
When they come to such age that they must of force be in many companies, I must procure some sound and honest persons to be for the most part with them, to enforme me of their courses. I must make them in any wise to beware of lewd conuer∣sation, which is the ouerthrow of youth, and therefore cause this point to be beaten into them by good and zealous men. I must neuer assure or marrie them, vntill they be of sufficient age to make their owne choise, and frame their liking: neither force them to any match, lest they curse me all their liues after, as it often happeneth. An order how to spend euery day. IN time of health houres of going to bed and rising, may be either nine and fiue, or ten
and sixe, or according to the strength or weaknesse of euery mans body, so they be certaine. After I am vp, for a good pretty space, it is good not to talke, but at the least for halfe a quarter of an houre to busie my minde in prayer and meditation, and then afterwards to talke if neede re∣quire, because my businesse with God being greater then with a∣ny man, it is fit that he should be first talked with of matters con∣cerning my soule, and then o∣thers of worldly things. I must procure to go eately and handsome in my attire, agreea∣ble to my calling, and to auoide all kind of vndecencie, which breedeth dislike, and contempt, and doth rather offend then please God. When I am ready, I must go to my prayers appointed, and before I set my selfe to pray, I must call to minde what I pro∣mised to do for any at that time,
of what other necessary businesse I haue then to dispatch, and I must keepe touch in my words in the least things, cutting off oc∣casions of being interrupted, as neare as I may. In prayer I must consider the presence of God, not speaking vnto him carelesse∣ly or negligently, but thinke a few prayers well said, better and more acceptable, then many hastily shuffled ouer: and I must not omit to remember the ioyes of heauen, the paines of Hell, mine owne death, and the death of Christ for me. After prayer I must go about some exercise of worke agreeable to my facul∣tie and vocation, such as may be of some profit, hauing an espe∣ciall respect aboue all things to sequester idlenesse, the parent of all vice. When I go to dinner, I must thinke and consider for what end I am to eate, which i to helpe and strengthen nature, and to make my selfe able to
serue my Creator and feeder, not to content mine owne appe∣tite: I must learne my little chil∣dren (if I haue any) to say some godly grace, or at the least per∣forme that duty of thanksgiuing my selfe. When I am set, before I lay hand to my trencher, I may pause a while, and desire God to giue me temperance and mindfulnesse of his presence. At meales I must neither be too curious or doubtfull of what I eate, neither precise in the quantitie, finenesse or course∣nesse of the meat, but of that which God hath sent, take a competent meale, measurable to my neede, and not hurtfull to my health. After dinner I must thanke God for his gifts, re∣membring the end why he hath fed me is, that I should be the better able to serue him, I must also thinke that many haue wan∣ted that sufficiency which I haue had, and would be glad to ac∣cept
of my leauings, and there∣fore I ought to haue care and regard to the poore, procuring something for them, and some∣times seeing them serued my selfe, considering Christ in their persons. If I haue strangers, I may keepe them companie, and talke friendly and merily with them as occasion shall serue, di∣recting my behauiour agreeable to vertuous conuersation: and hauing this intention in my talke, that amitie and loue may be maintained, and all breach and vnkindnesse auoided. I must if time and place will permit me, be alwayes doing some profita∣ble thing, to auoide sloth, dire∣cting mine intention in all mine exercises, to this end, that I may auoide idlenesse and tempta∣tions, bestowing my time in good sort to Gods glory. After dinner I must call to mind whe∣ther I haue any promise to per∣forme, or any other businesse to
do that is not ordinary, that I nei∣ther forget the thing, nor time appointed for it. It is good for me sometimes to go about the roomes of the house to see that they be kept cleane and hand∣some, thinking that God is de∣lighted with cleanenesse both bodily and ghostly, & detesteth sluttishnesse, as a thing which he permitteth for a punishment of sinne, and one of the scourges of hell. A little before supper it will be good to reade part of some godly booke, procuring to take some benefit by it, and con∣tinuing in one booke till I haue read it ouer, and then beginne a new. I must by watchfulnesse a∣uoide all offence to God, leauing him in one exercise to serue him in another, as he appointeth me occasions. When I sit downe to supper, I must remember what my intention ought to be, and to take the same course which is prescribed for dinner. After
supper I may talke as occasion shall serue, or employ my time in reading of a godly booke. Towards the houre of my going to bed, I must examine my selfe, first whether my promises and appointments concerning ex∣traordinary businesse be perfor∣med, or if I haue forgotten any necessary thing, I must take or∣der to remember it, that I forget it not the second time. This done, I must examine my consci∣ence concerning the thoughts, words, and deeds of that day; and especially touching the pur∣poses that I haue made in the morning, and how I haue ob∣serued my godly determination, and what faults I haue commit∣ted of any moment. After I haue examined my conscience, and said my prayers, it is good to ab∣staine from talke that night (vn∣lesse some iust occasion require the contrary) that my minde may be free from idle thoughts
when I go to sleepe. Of Temptations. FIrst I must learne to know when I am tempted, for if I can find my temptation, I may reckon it halfe ouercome: for if I haue feare of God, or care of my soule, I cannot but arme my selfe earnestly to resist, knowing that temptation pro∣ceedeth from an enemie, to whom I haue resolued by Gods grace, neuer to consent, what miserie or trouble soeuer I en∣dure. How to know temptations and good motion. IT is alwayes a spirituall desola∣tion originall and proceeding from the diuell, when it darke∣neth and disquieteth the minde,
awaketh and stirreth vp our passions, when it draweth to ex∣ternall and earthly solaces, lea∣uing in the minde a tediousnesse and vnwillingnesse to prayer and other workes of deuotion. Also when it diminisheth our af∣fiance and taust in God, and driueth to a dispaire in Gods mercy, or perseuering in his ser∣uice, making it seeme an irke∣some and impossible thing, and mouing vs to forsake it: and when I finde my selfe troubled in this sort, I must assure my selfe without all doubt, that I am then tempted by the Diuell, and therefore arme my selfe to resist him by doing that which those temptations disswade me from. On the other side, comfort which is caused by Gods Spirit, is knowne by these signes: It in∣censeth the minde by a quiet and calme motion to the loue of God, without any inclination to any creatures loue more then
for Gods only glory, and it bree∣deth a kind of inward light and brightnesse, wherby for the time the mind seeth after a most ef∣fectuall sort, the necessity, profit, and true comfort that is in Gods seruice, conceiuing a contempt and dislike of worldly delights, and tasting that which is the greatest felicitie in this life, that is, so assured contentment in be∣ing in Gods grace, and seeking to please him, yt it then iudgeth no contentment in the world like or comparable vnto it, as in truth there is none. Also true spirituall comfort bringeth a de∣light and desire to thinke of the benefits of God, the ioyes of heauen, the comfort of medita∣tion, and talking with God. Finally, it confirmeth our faith, quickeneth our hope, and increaseth charitie, funishing the minde with a sweete tast of ioy, quiet and free from all com∣bers. Sometimes the diuell trans∣formeth
himselfe into an Angell of light, and at the first when he knoweth our good desires and purposes, he seemeth to sooth vs in them, and to set vs forward towards the performance there∣of, but in the end he seemeth to draw vs to his byas, and by corrupting our intention, or by peruerting the manner, time, or other circumstance of the due execution, maketh the whole action worthlesse and faultie, though otherwise vertuous in it selfe. There must be great heede taken in the beginning, middle and end of our thoughts: for when either at the first or at the last it tendeth to apparent sinne, or withdraweth from the grea∣ter good, or tendeth to courses of lesse pietie, or more danger then we are in, or if it disquiet the minde, bereauing it of the wonted calme and loue of ver∣tue, it is a signe that the Diuell
was beginner of it, whose pro∣pertie is to hinder good, and withdraw vs to euill. When in any suggestion I find the serpent by his sting, that is, Satan by the wicked end he moueth me vn∣to, it is good to vntwist and re∣uerse his motion, and to looke backward euen vnto the begin∣ning, and to marke what plau∣sible colour he first pretended, that the next time I may the bet∣ter spie his cunning and subtill dealings and drifts. How to behaue our selues in time of temptation. IN the time of my desolation, and disquiet of mind, I must not enter into any delibera∣tion, or go about to alter any thing concerning the state of my soule, or purposed course of life, but pereuer in my former reso∣lutions made in time of my good
and quiet estate, wherein I was free from passion, and better able to iudge of things conueni∣ent for my good: yet may I, and ought to resolue vpon such helps as are fit to resist and repell my discontented thoughts, (so they be not preiudiciall to my former purposes) as prayer, repentance, and confession of my sinnes, with such like remedies. In temptations and troubles of mind, I must remember that a∣fore time I haue had the like, and they haue in the end passed, lea∣uing me very glad and ioyfull when I haue resisted them, and sorrowfull when I yeelded too much vnto them, and therefore I must thinke that these also must passe after a while, and I shall feele the like ioy in hauing resisted and ouercome them: and in the meane time I must with patience endure the com∣ber and trouble of them, assu∣ring my selfe that God there∣with
is highly pleased, and the enemie most effectually subdu∣ed. Neither the multitude, con∣tinuance, nor badnesse of any thought must breed any scruple or disquiet in me: for not to haue them is not in my power, but onely not to consent vnto them: and so long as with deliberation I haue not consented, nor wil∣lingly, or with delight stayed in them, I haue not sinned any more then if I had onely had them in a dreame: If before I had euill thoughts, I had a reso∣lute mind neuer to yeeld to any mortall sin, and afterward when I remember my selfe, and marke that I was in a bad thought, I still finde the same resolution, it is a signe that in the time of my distraction and bad imagination, I did not willingly consent or offend in them; neither is it like but my mind being so well af∣fected, I should haue easily re∣membred dirctly and without
doubt, if I had yeelded farther then I ought. Desolations are permitted of God for three cau∣ses: First for a punishment of our sinnes, remisnesse and coldnesse in Gods seruice. Secondly, to trie whether we be true ser∣uants of God, or onely hirelings that are willing to labour no longer then they receiue the hire and stipend of present com∣fort. Thirdly, to ascertaine vs, that it passeth the reach and compasse of our ability, either to attaine or to maintaine in vs the feruour of deuotion, the inten∣siue loue of God, the abundance of godly teares, and other spiri∣tuall graces and comforts, which we must acknowledge to pro∣ceed from Gods meere libera∣lity, not of our owne force or desert. It is good while I feele the sweetnesse of Gods visitation and presence, to fortifie my selfe against the desolations that will ensue, and remembring those
that are past, to thinke that all troubles will as well passe as comforts, and that our whole life is but a continuall succession and mixture of sorrow and ioy, the one alwayes ouertaking the other, and neither of them con∣tinuing long together: and ther∣fore I must settle my minde in a kind of indefferencie vnto them both, as it shall please God to send them. First, to know it is a thing comming from my mortall ene∣mie, and tendeth to my eternall destruction. To looke for temp∣tations before hand, and not to thinke them nouelties, but ne∣cessary sequels of our hostilitie with the diuell, with whom we must neuer be friends. To resist them stoutly at the first, and to crush the serpent in the head, for nothing maketh the diuell to become so furious and violent, or to redouble his suggestions, as to perceiue the
soule dismayed with his tempta∣tions, or not expecting (by the confidence in Gods helpe and mercy) an assured victorie. To beare patiently the multitude and continuance of them, assu∣ring my selfe that they will haue an end ere long. To thinke on the ioy I shall haue for not consenting vnto them, and the crowne of glory that I shall enioy. To remember how often I haue bene as grie∣uously annoyed with the like, and yet by Gods helpe haue giuen the diuell the foile. Not to striue with vncleane tempta∣tions, but to turne my mind to thinke of other matters, and to change place or worke, or to finde some way to put me out of those fantasies. To resist vices by practising and doing acts of the contrary vertues. To arme my selfe before hand, by getting those vertues that are opposit to such vices as I am most inclined
vnto: for in those doth the diuell alwayes seeke his aduantage to ouerthrow me. In my extreamest troubles to humble my selfe in the sight of Almightie God, acknowledging mine owne weakenesse; and wholly relying vpon his helpe most earnestly in word and heart call for his assistance, firmely trusting in his mercy, yea and offering my selfe (so as he forsake me not) to suffer these and all o∣ther whatsoeuer it shall please God to permit, euen so long as he shall thinke good to inflict them, for of all other things this most ouercometh the Diuell, when he seeth we turne his euill motions and troubles to so glo∣rious and great a victorie. A prayer in temptation. O Mercifull Iesu, the onely re∣fuge of desolate and affli∣cted
soules: O Iesu that hast made me and redeemed me, in whom all things are possible vnto me, and without whom I am able to do nothing: thou seest who I am, that here prostrate my pray∣ers, and poure out my heart vnto thee. What I would haue, and what is fit for me thou knowest. My soule is buried in flesh and bloud, and would faine be dis∣solued and come vnto thee. I am vrged against my will, and vio∣lently drawne to thinke that which from my heart I detest, and to haue in mind the poyson and bane of my soule. O Lord thou knowest my mould and making, for thy hands haue fra∣med me, and with flesh and skin thou hast cloathed me. And lo this flesh which thou hast giuen me, draweth me to my ruine, and fighteth against the spirit: If thou helpe not (ô gracious aide) I am ouercome and vanqui∣shed. If thou forsakest me I must
needs faint, with all discourage∣ment. Why doest thou set me contrary vnto thee, and makest me grieuous and a burthen to my selfe? Didst thou create me to cast me away? Didst thou re∣deeme me to damne me for e∣uer? It had bene good for me ne∣uer to haue bene borne, if I were borne to perish. Oh most merci∣full father, where are thy old and wonted mercies? where is thy gracious sweetnesse and loue? How long shall mine enemies reioyce ouer me, and humble my life vpon earth, and place me in darknesse like the dead of the world? What am I ô Lord that thou settest me to fight alone a∣gainst so mightie, subtill, and cruell enemies, that neuer ceasse to bid me a perpetuall battaile? O Lord why doest thou shew thy might against a leafe, that is tossed with euery winde, and persecutest a drie stubble? Wilt thou therefore damne the work
of thy hands? Wilt thou throw me from thy face, and take thy holy spirit from me? Alas ô Lord whither shall I go from thy face? or whither shall I fly from thy spirit? whither shall I flie from thee incensed, but to thee ap∣peased? whither from thee as iust, but vnto thee as mercifull? Do with me Lord that which is good in thine eyes, for thou wilt do all things in righteous iudge∣ment: onely remember that I am flesh and bloud, fraile of my selfe and impotent to resist. Shew thy selfe a Sauiour vnto me, and either take away mine enemies, or graunt me such a supplie of thy grace to enable my defects, that without wound or fault▪ by thee and with thee, I may ouer∣come them, sweet Iesus. Amen. A godly deuout prayer. O Gracious Lord, and sweete Sauiour, giue me a pure in¦tention,
a cleane heart, and a re∣gard to thy glory in all my acti∣ons: Possesse my mind with thy presence, and rauish it with thy loue, that my delight may be to be imbraced in the armes of thy protection. Be thou light vnto mine eyes, musicke to mine ears, sweetnesse to my tast, and con∣tentment to my heart. O Iesu I giue thee my body, my soule, my substance, my fame, my friends, my libertie and life, dispose of me and all that is mine, as shall be most to thy glory: I am not mine, but thine, therefore claime me as thy right, keepe me as thy charge, loue me as thy child, fight for me when I am assaulted, heale me when I am wounded, reuiue me when I am spiritually killed, receiue me when I flie, and let me neuer be quite con∣founded: giue me patience in trouble, humility in comfort, constancie in temptations, and victorie against my ghostly ene∣mies:
graunt me good Father modestie in countenance, graui∣tie in my behauiour, delibera∣tion in my speeches, puritie in my thoughts, and righteousnesse in mine actions. Be my sunshine in the day, my foode at the table, my repose in the night, my clo∣thing in nakednesse, and my suc∣cour in all needes. Let thy bloud runne in my minde as a water of life, to cleanse the filth of my sinnes, and to bring forth the fruite of life euerlasting. Stay mine inclinations from beating downe my soule: bridle mine ap∣petites with thy grace, and quench in me the fire of all vn∣lawfull desires. Make my will pliable to thy pleasure, and re∣signed wholly to thy prouidence, and graunt me perfect content¦ment in that which thou allot∣test: Strengthen me against occa∣sions of sinne, and make me sted∣fast in not yeelding to euill, yea rather to die then to offend thee.
Lord make me ready to pleasure all, loth to offend any, louing to my friends, and charitable to mine enemies. Forsake me not lest I perish: leaue me not to mine owne weakenesse, lest I fall without recouerie. Graunt me an earnest desire to amend my faults, to renew my good purpo∣ses, and to performe my good intentions. Make me humble to my superiours, friendly to my e∣quals, charitable to my inferiors, and carefull to yeeld due respect to all sortes. Lastly, graunt me sorrow for my sinnes, thankful∣nesse for thy benefits, feare of thy iudgements, loue of thy mercies, and mindfulnesse of thy pre∣sence. Amen.
Considerations to settle the mind in the course of Vertue. THe first consideration: How waightie a thing the businesse of mans soule is. Whosoeuer being desirous to take due care of his soule, com∣mencing a spirituall course, must consider that he hath taken such a businesse in hand, that for im∣portance, necessity and profit, summoneth all other traffickes and affaires of the world, yea, and to which onely all other bu∣sinesse ought to be addressed, for herein our menage is about the saluation of our soule, our chiefe iewell and treasure, of which if in the short passage of our brittle and vncertaine life we take not the due care that we ought for a whole eternity after, we shall euermore repent and be sorrie for it, and yet neuer haue the
like oportunitie againe to helpe it. Secondly, the better to con∣ceiue the moment and waight of this businesse, let vs consider what men vse to do for their bo∣dily health: for we see they make so principall a reckoning of it, they spare no cost, nor toyle, nor leaue any thing vnattempted that may auaile them to attaine it. They suffer themselues to be launced, wounded, pined, burnt with red hot irons, besides di∣uerse other extreame torments onely for this end. How much greater miseries ought we to en∣dure? how much greater paines and diligence ought we to em∣ploy for this health of our soule, which is to suruiue when the bo∣dy is dead, rotten, and deuoured with wormes? And to suruiue in such sort, that it must be perpetu∣ally tormented in hell with in∣tollerable torments, or enioy endlesse felicitie in heauen: And
therefore of how much greater worth and waight we thinke the soule, and the eternall saluation or damnation thereof, then the momentarie health or sicknesse of our bodies, so much greater account and esteeme ought we to make of the businesse of our soule, then of any other worldly or bodily affaire whatsoeuer. For what auaileth it a man (saith Christ) to gaine the whole world, and make wracke of his soule? If therefore we keepe di∣uers men for diuers offices about our bodie, and many thousands do liue by seruing and prouiding things for euery part thereof: If we spend so much time in fee∣ding, refreshing, and reposing the same: If the greatest portion of our reuenewes (be they neuer so large) be consumed in the meates, pompe, sports, and plea∣sures thereof, how much more ought we to seeke as many helpes, seruices and purueyers
for our soule, for whose onely sake our bodie was giuen, and of whose good the welfare of the body onely proceedeth? Thirdly, the necessitie and poise of this care of our soule may be gathe∣red of this, that all other matters are intreated with men, or some other creatures, but this businesse of our soule with God himselfe, who, by how much he is nobler & worthier then any of his crea∣tures, so much more is the weight of this matter, and cannot be dealt with any without him: and so much more diligence ought there to be employed therein, especially in this time wherein God is still ready to fur∣ther our endeuours in this be∣halfe, whereas when time is ex∣pired, condemne he may for our negligence, or reward vs for our carefulnesse, but not helpe vs any more to alter the state of our soule, be it neuer so miserable. Fourthly, we may gather how
materiall and important this matter is, by the life of Christ and his Saints, who withdraw∣ing themselues from all other worldly affaires, thought it work enough to attend to this busi∣nesse of the soule: and whosoe∣uer at this day are honoured in Gods Church, they are honoured onely in this, that they haue with a glorious conclusion happily and constantly, accomplished this businesse to Gods glorie and their owne saluation: and who so considereth the intollerable tormts of Martyrs, the paine∣full agonies, conflicts, rough stormes, and troubles of all Gods Saints, and doth remem∣ber withall, that they vnder∣tooke them for no other respect, but onely for the better bringing this businesse of their soule to an end, it will soone appeare how waighty a thing and how preci∣ous the saluation of the soule is, which they did thinke nothing
too deare bought with all the miseries, sorrowes and paines that this world could affoord. Let vs also consider that whatso∣euer moued them to such care and earnestnesse in this behalfe, hath no lesse place in vs doubt∣lesse then in them, seeing that our soule is as deare bought, as much worth, and created to as great glorie as theirs: the danger of our saluation rather more, then any way lesse then theirs. God hath as much right in vs as in th, and we as many titles of bond and dutie to serue him as they. Finally we are assaulted by the same enemies, enuironed with the like hazardes, and sub∣iect to as many, yea more occa∣sions of sinne, and allurements to damnation then they. Who therefore seeth not that we are in euery respect to account the care of our soules as important and necessarie to vs as euer it hath bene to any? Wherefore let
not the wise man glory in his wise∣dome, nor the strong man in his might, nor the rich man in his ri∣ches, saith God by his Prophet Ieremie 9. But let him that glori∣eth, glorie in this, that he knoweth me, for I am the onely Lord that worketh mercy, iudgement, and iu∣stice vpon the earth, and these things please me, saith the Lord. As who would say, it is follie and vanitie to glotie and reioyce in any o∣ther thing then in the know∣ledge and seruice of God, and procuring mercy and mild iudge∣ment for our soules.
The second Considera∣tion. How we ought to arme our minds against temptations that happen when we seeke earnestly to serue God. FIrst, seeing this businesse of our soule is of so great mo∣ment, he that earnestly go∣eth about the same must offer himselfe vp vnto God, and be most ready to endure constantly all the dangers, combers and dif∣ficulties that shall happen, and resolue neuer by Gods grace to be dismayed and beaten backe from his purpose by any trouble or encounter whatsoeuer, know∣ing that glorious and honorable enterprises can neuer be atchie∣ued without many contradicti∣ons. Wherefore let him per∣swade himselfe that when he hath setled his mind seriously to
follow this businesse, Hell it selfe, and all the enemies of God and mans soule will conspire against him: The flesh to allure him to delights of the senses, and to re∣call to the vomit of his abando∣ned pleasures: The world to en∣tice him with pompes and vani∣ties, with ministring occasion of sinne, and prouoking by euill examples: Yea, if that will not serue, by terrifying him with per∣secutions, extortions, obloquies, slanders, and torments, and with all kinde of disgrace. Finally, the diuell (a professed enemie to all that take care of their soules) will seeke to intrap him with a thousand traines, passions, and subtill temptations, leauing no∣thing that he thinketh may re∣moue a man from these ende∣uours, tending to his saluation. Secondly, the case standing thus, let that saying of Scripture come to our mind: My sonne comming to the seruice of God,
stand in iustice and feare, and pre∣pare thy soule vnto temptation. Wherefore he that entreth into the way of life, must remember that he is not come to a play, pastime, or pleasure, but to a con∣tinuall rough battaile and fight, against most vnplacable ene∣mies. And let him resolue him∣selfe, neuer in this world to look for quiet and peace, no not so much as for any truce for a mo∣ment of time, but arme himselfe for a perpetuall combat, and ra∣ther thinke of a multitude of happie victories (which by Gods grace he may attaine) then of any repose or quietnesse from the rage and assaults of his ene∣mies. Let him see and peruse the patterne of his Captaines course, who from his birth to his death was in a restlesse battaile, perse∣cuted in his swathling cloutes by Herod, annoyed the rest of his infancy by banishment, wan∣dring and neede: In the flower
of his age, slandered, hated, pur∣sued, whipped, crucified, and most barbarously misused. In the same sort were all his Apostles, and all his principall souldiers handled: for whom he loueth he chastiseth, and proueth like gold in the fornace. And therefore no man must thinke it a new thing to be tempted and trou∣bled when he once runneth a vertuous course, contrary to the liking of his enemies. For, The Disciple is not aboue his maister, nor the seruant aboue his Lord: who as we see had the same intreaty. Thirdly, lest we should be a∣gaste and discouraged at the ex∣pectation and feare of so many discomforts, and the vncessant malice of so spitefull enemies, let vs remember the words of Elizeus, That more stand with vs then against vs. Against the cor∣ruption of nature we haue grace. Against the Diuell we haue God, who will neuer suffer vs to be
tempted aboue our force and strength: Against the power of hell we haue the prayers of the faithfull: Against the miseries of the body we haue the spirituall comfort of the minde, which God allotteth in such measure as our necessity requireth: and if there were nothing else, this were enough to make troubles welcome in this case, for that thereby we purchase an inesti∣mable glory (for a short passing combat) the comfort whereof neither eye hath seene, eare hath heard, nor any heart conceiued. And on the other side, by the same we auoide other intollera∣ble and eternall torments of hell, the least whereof passeth all those that can be suffered in the world, and therefore is our change most happie, that by the paine of a short life, auoide the misery of an eternall death, and deserue the vnspeakeable happi∣nesse of the life euerlasting. For
this cause (saith Saint Iames) Thinke you it all ioy my brethren, when you shall fall into diuerse temp∣tations, knowing that the triall of your faith worketh patience, and patience hath a perfect worke, that you may be perfect and entire, failing in nothing. The third Considera∣tion. Of the watchfulnesse and attention required in the care of our soule. SEeing this waightie affaire of our soules health, is hem∣med in and beset with so manifest perils and troubles, it standeth vs vpon most watch∣fully to take heede to euery thought, word, and deed, that passeth, lest through the number and subtilties of enemies traines, we be often entrapped: for it is hard to touch pitch and not be
defiled, to liue in flesh a spirituall life, to conuerse in the world without worldly affections. Wherefore as a Legate that is to deliuer his embassage before a great presence of Peeres and Nobles, hath not onely regard to his matter, but also to his words, voyee, and actions, that all be sutable to his message: so we hauing to worke this exploit of our soule before God and all the court of heauen, and also be∣fore the eyes of those that lay waite to take vs in any trippe, ought to be very warie, euen in our least thoughts and deeds, for feare lest we offend the pre∣sence of God, and giue occasion of triumph and victorie vnto our deadly foes. And for this saith the Scripture: Keepe thy selfe very watchfully. Secondly, to attaine this di∣ligent and attentiue care in all our actions: let vs consider what men vse to do that carry great
treasure by places haunted with theeues, how warily they looke to their way, how often they turne about them; how many times they prepare themselues, sometimes to fight, and other whiles to runne away. Likewise how warily he walketh, and how carefull he is neuer to stum∣ble nor fall that carieth in each hand a thinne glasse of precious liquour, through stony and rough places: and when we haue marked these mens carefulnesse in these inferior matters, let vs remember that much more re∣spect is necessarie in vs, whose treasure is more precious then any worldly iewels, and yet do we carrie it in earthen and fraile vessels, in the middest of so many theeues as there are passions and disordered appetites in vs, as there are Diuels in waite for vs, and as there are stumbling stones and occasions of sinne set round about vs to procure this
attention: the most effectuall helpes are these. First to thinke how carefull we should be to do all things well, if this present day were the last that euer we should liue in this world (as peraduenture it may be) and that at the end thereof we were to be conuen∣ted before a most seuere and ri∣gorous Iudge, who according to the desert of that dayes acti∣ons, should passe the sentence of life or death vpon vs. Secondly, to remember that God is in his owne substance, power, and true presence in eue∣ry place, and seeth both our out∣ward and inward actions more then we our selues, and therefore let vs seeke in euery thing so to behaue our selues, that we feare not to haue God a witnesse and beholder of all that we do, thinke, or say, and let vs aske him grace to do nothing vnwor∣thie his fight.
Thirdly, we must consider the carelesnesse of our life past, re∣membring how often we haue fought against God with his owne weapons, and abused the force that he hath affoorded, in euery part of our body and minde: and therefore as Saint Paul warneth, As we haue exhi∣bited our members to serue vnclean∣nesse and iniquitie, so let vs now ex∣hibite our members to serue iustice vnto sanctification. Fourthly, to procure this at∣tention, it is good oftentimes in the day when we ate about our ordinary actions, to vse godly prayers, and some verses out of the Psalmes, with petition vnto God for his grace, aide and as∣sistance: for such godly exercises are fewell of deuotion, causes of attention, foode of the soule, preparatiues against temptati∣ons, and assured helpes to attaine any vertues. Therefore it is good to vse them in lieu of sightes, and
in the beginning of euery chiefe action, directing therein our in∣tention and action, to Gods glory and seruice, and our owne foules good health and fafetie. The last Consideration. Of the necessitie of perseuerance in continuing watchfull ouer our selues. FIrst seeing the summe and complement of all vertue consisteth in the continu∣ance and progresse of it, perseue∣rance of all other things is most necessarie in this businesse, to the better attaining whereof these considerations may preuaile. First to consider by whose in∣stinct and motion I beganne to take speciall care of my soule, and I shall finde that being a thing contrary to the inclina∣tion of flesh and bloud, and a∣boue
the reach of nature, to re∣solue vpon so painefull and wa∣rie a course, in hope of a reward and ioy that faith doth promise, that I say, God onely and no o∣ther was the Authour and moo∣uer of my heart vnto it, and therefore vnlesse I meane di∣rectly to resist God, and runne a contrary course to that which he prescribeth, I must resolue my selfe to perseuer vnto the end, in that which I haue happily be∣gun. Secondly, the end of this en∣terprise was to serue God, to be∣waile my former sinnes, and to worke by Gods helpe the sal∣uation of mine owne soule: and when I resolued vpon these meanes I was free from passion, and as well able to chuse things conuenient as I could at any o∣ther time, and wholly bent to do that thing which was for my greatest good. Wherefore see∣ing I can neuer aime at a better
end, nor be in better plight to make a sounder choise, my surest way is to perseuer still in my resolution to the end, neuer al∣tering my designment vnlesse it be to further my course. Thirdly, I must consider who is that, that would make me for∣sake it: for if God moued me vnto it, doubtlesse it is the Di∣uell would moue me from it, for God cannot be contrary to him∣selfe, neither vseth he to alter our minds, but onely from euill to good, or from good to better: therefore vnlesse I meane to yeeld willingly to the Diuell, and to follow mine enemies counsell to mine owne perdition, I must perseuer vnto the end: for with what pretext soeuer the Diuell seeketh to couer his motion, sure it is that his drift is to draw me from God and goodnesse, and to damne my soule: for how can he intend any thing for my good, that beareth me such a
cankred malice, that he careth not to increase his owne paine, so that he may worke me any spirituall, yea or corporall harme. Fourthly, I must print that say∣ing of Christ in my minde: He that perseuereth vnto the end shall be saued: for not he that begin∣neth, nor he that continueth for a moneth, or a yeare, or a short time, but onely he that perseue∣reth vnto the end of his life shall be saued. Wherfore the same cause that moued me to beginne, ought also to moue me to continue, that the reward and crowne of my good resolution be not cut off by any want of perseuerance. Let not the cries of mine enemies moue me: let me with Saint Paul say, The world is crucified to me, and I to the world: And with Da∣uid, It is good for me to cleane vnto God. Finally, let me imitate the ensample of Christ, that perseue∣red
on the crosse vnto death for my sake, though often called vpon to come downe. Fiftly, I must consider that in what state so euer of grace, or merit of damnation I beginne the next life, I must and shall vndoubtedly perseuer in it ac∣cording to the words of Salo∣mon: Wheresoeuer the tree falleth there shall it be, whether it be to∣wards South or North, that is, to∣wards heauen or hell: for both the paine of this continueth for e∣uer, and the ioy of the other is also euerlasting. If therefore I will perseuer in heauen, let me perseuer in the way that leadeth vnto it, and neuer forsake the painefulnesse of it vnto the iourneyes end. The passions of this life are not condigne and comparable to the future glorie: and it is extreame follie for auoiding a short and transitorie paine, to hazard the losse of euerlasting ioy, and put
my selfe in perill of perpetuall bondage, in sarre more extreame and endlesse torments. The sinners perseuer still in wicked∣nesse, and seruice of the Diuell. The worldlings perseuer in pur∣suing vanities, and following the world, yea and that with most seruile toile, and base drudgerie, and not without many bodily and ghostly harmes: how much more ought a true seruant of God perseuer in Gods seruice, and not seeme by forsaking him in the way, to condemne him for a worse maister then the world or the Diuell, whom many thou∣sands serue to the end, to their owne damnation. Let me re∣member that the first Angell for want of perseuerance became a diuell. Adam for want of the same was thrust out of Paradise, and Iudas of an Apostle became a prey of hell. Finally, there be many thousands in hell fire bur∣ning, that beganne very good
courses, and for a time went for∣ward in the same, and yet in the end, for want of perseuerance were damned for euer. What good a soule lo∣seth by mortall sinne THe grace of the holy Ghost. The friendship and familiari∣tie with God. All morall vertues infused, and gifts of Gods Spirit. The inheritance of the kingdome of heauen. The portion of Gods children, and patronage of his fatherly pro∣uidence, which he hath ouer the iust. The peace and quietnesse of a good and quiet conscience. Many comforts and visitations of the holy Ghost. The fruite and merits of Christs death and passion.
What misery the soule gaineth by mortall sinne. COndemnation to eternall paine. To be quite cancelled out of the booke of life. To become of the child of God the thrall of the diuell. To be changed from the temple of the holy Ghost into a denne of theeues, a nest of vipers, and a sinke of all corruption. How a Soule is prepa∣red to iustification by degrees. Faith setteth be∣fore one eyes God as a iust Iudge. Angrie with the bad. Mercifull to the re∣pentant. Of this faith by the gift of Gods Spirit, a∣riseth a feare by con∣sideration of Gods iustice. and Our own sinnes.
This feare is com∣forted by hope grounded in Gods mercie, and the Merits of Christ. Of this hope a∣riseth loue and charity to Christ for Louing vs without desert, Redeeming vs with so many torments. Of this loue followeth sorrow for offending Christ, of whom we haue bene so mer∣cifully Created, Redeemed, Sanctified, Called to by Faith. Of this sorrow ariseth a full purpose to auoid all sinne, which God aboue all things detesteth. The diuell aboue all things desireth. Aboue all things hurteth the soule. A short Meditation of mans miseries. VVHat was I O Lord? what am I? what shall I be? I was nothing, I am now nothing worth, and am
in hazard to be worse then no∣thing: I was conceiued in origi∣nall sinne: I am now full of actu∣all sinne: I may hereafter feele the eternall smart of sinne: I was in my mother a lothsome sub∣stance: I am in the world a sacke of corruption: I shall be in my graue a prey of vermine. When I was nothing, I was without hope to be saued, or feare to be damned, I am now in a doubt∣full hope of the one, and in a manifest danger of the other. I shall be either happie by the successe of my hope, or most mi∣serable by the effect of my dan∣ger. I was so that I could not then be damned: I am so that I can scarce be saued: what I haue bene I know (to wit) a wretched sinner: what I am I cannot say, being vncertaine of Gods grace: what I shall be I am ignorant of, being doubtfull of my perseue∣rance. O Lord erect my former weaknesse, correct my present
sinfulnesse: direct my future frailtie from passed euill to pre∣sent good, and from present good to future glorie, sweete Iesus. A deuout prayer to desire pardon and remission of our sinnes. O Most mightie Lord and Creator of all things, when I thinke with my selfe how grieuously I haue of∣fended thine infinite Maiestie with my sinnes, I wonder at mine owne follie: when I consider what a louing and bountifull father I haue forsaken, I accurse mine ingratitude: when I behold how I am fallen from such a noble libertie into such a misera∣ble bondage, I condemne my selfe for an inconstant foole, and know not what other thing I may set before mine eyes, but onely hell and damnation for
so much as thy iustice (from which I cannot flie) putteth a great tetror into my conscience: but contrariwise when I consi∣der thy great mercie, which (as the Prophet witnesseth) excee∣deth all thy workes, then do I feele forthwith a fresh and plea∣sant aire of hope, to refresh and strengthen againe my weake and sorrowfull soule. Wherefore should I then dispaire to obtaine pardon of him who hath so often times in the holy Scriptures in∣uited sinners to repentance, say∣ing▪ I desire not the death of a sin∣ner, but that he should liue and be conuerted. Moreouer, thine onely begotten Sonne, our sweete Sa∣uiour Iesus Christ hath reuealed vnto vs by many parables, how ready and willing thou art to graunt pardon vnto all such as are penitent for their sinnes. This he signifieth vnto vs by the Iewell lost, and found againe. By the strayed sheepe brought
home againe vpon the shep∣heards shouldiers: and much more by the comparison of the prodigall sonne, whose liuely image I do acknowledge in my selfe, for I am he that hath most vniustly forsaken thee, my louing father, and haue riotously con∣sumed my substance, and by o∣beying the appetites of my flesh, haue disobeyed thy commande∣ments, and by breaking of them, haue fallen into the most filthie prison of sinne, being brought to extreame miserie, out of which I know none other that can helpe me, but onely thou my Al∣mighty God, whom I haue for∣saken. Receiue therefore (O Lord) mercifully the humble, that desireth pardon of thee, whom thou hast so patiently looked for, euen vntill this pre∣sent houre. Alas I am not worthy to lift vp mine eyes vnto thee, nor once to call thee father, but for so much as thou art a true fa∣ther
in deed, may it please thee to view me with thy fatherly compassionate eyes, for thy one∣ly sight is powerfull to raise the dead, and it is that which cau∣seth all those that wander out of the way to returne againe to themselues. For this repentance and sorrow for my sinnes I had not had, if thou hadst not beheld me with thy mercies eye. When I went wandring afarre off from thee, thou didst looke downe e∣uen from heauen vpon me, and didst open mine eyes that I might see my selfe, and take a view how full fraught I was with infinite sinnes, and euen at this instant thou commest to receiue me againe, giuing me knowledge and mindfulnesse of mine innocencie which I haue lost. I do not request thy most sweete embracings and kisses: nor the rich garment that was wont to cloth me: neither yet the ring of mine ancient digni∣tie:
I sue not to be receiued a∣gaine into the state and dignitie of thy sonnes: but thou shalt do very much for me, in case it may please thee to number me a∣mongest thy bondslaues, and so to marke me with thy signe, and to fetter me with thy chaines, that I may neuer after runne a∣way from thee. Againe, it shall neuer grieue me to be in this life one of the most abiect slaues in thy house, so that I may neuer be separated from thee. Suffer me not gracious Lord to runne the erring steps that I haue formerly done: for thou didst consecrate me for thy temple, and I made my selfe an habitation for the Diuell: Thou gauest me armour, and didst bind me to be thy true knight, and I haue gone traiterously to thy e∣nemies side, vsing thine owne weapons against thee; thou didst espouse my soule vnto thee in perpetuall charitie, and I haue
proued disloyall, following the loue of vanities more then thy truth, and esteemed a creature, more then the Creator. But now Lord incline thee vnto me, I be∣seech thee O father of mercy, graunting me the fauour of thine onely begotten Sonne, and the remedie of his most grieuous passion and death: graunt me also thy holy spirit, that it may cleanse my heart, and confirme it in thy grace any fauour, that through mine ignorance I do neuer runne againe into my late banishment, from whence thy louing kind∣nesse hath called me backe, but that I may continue in thy obe∣dience, euen from this present houre of my repentance vnto the last houre of my transitorie life. To thee O my Lord be per∣petuall glorie, honour, power, and dominion, world without end.
OF THE THREE SORTS OF MEN, ALL DIVERSLY affected in things concer∣ning God. Men are either OPEN WICKED, Licentious and prophane liuers, professed ene∣mies of the Law of the Lord, Iob 21.14.15. These are borne but after the flesh, there∣fore sauour they onely the things of the flesh, and remaine as they are by nature, childrē of wrath, Ioh. 3.6. 1. Cor. 2.16. Ephe. 2.3.
These are nei∣ther chosen of God, nor called; being neither of the Church, nor in the same, Psal 11.5. Reu. 22.14. 1. Cor. 5.12. In these sinne daily increaseth inwardly and out¦wardly, till righ∣teousnesse in thē be vtterly extinct Psal. 36.1.2.3.4. To these the law if it be sent, cometh in tables of stone, (for such is the nature of hearts;) but they receiue it not; the tables are broken be∣fore they come at them, for these dance (as it were) about the golden calfe of their owne impietie,
know not what is become of Mo∣ses, they breake and violate all. Exod. 32. Yet vn¦to such the Law is giuen, and li∣eth vpon them as a curse and condemnation. 1. Tim. 1.9. Deut. 27.15, 26. These keepe not the Law, nei∣ther are they kept by the Law, but breake forth into all sinne and wickednesse. Iob 24.13, &c. Psal. 73.8, 9. These hate the Law, and pro∣fesse their ha∣tred. Psal. 2.3. Iob 22.17. These are na∣ked, yet without shame: though all men see their
filthinesse, they hide it not. Ier. 6.15. and 8.12. These call not vpon God. Psal 14.4. These accusto∣med to do euill, neither change hemselues nor heir actions. Ier. 13.23. These are stran∣gers, not children or yet seruants n the houshold f faith. Ephes. 2.12. Psal. 58, 3. These go not out o meete the ridegroome; either come to e wedding ough they be uited, Mat. 22.5. These are rknesse, both
before God and the world Pro 4.19. These, though sicke vnto death, yet (like the mad man possessed of diuels, Mar. 5 2 3 &c. which raued, and felt not nor dicerned his owne miserie,) they seeke no re∣medie for their disease. Prouerb. 14.16. & 23.34 35. These do the euill which they loue and would do. Iob 20 12.13 Prou 2.14. These expect no saluation, ei∣ther by them∣selues or by any other. Isa. 22.13. These die by Moses sword, as
the Idolaters. Exod 32. the Ma∣dianites, Numb. 31. the Amorites, Sihon, Ogh, and the like. These both shall perish, and be pu¦nished with euerlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord; their portion shall be with the diuels in the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the se∣cond death. Mat. 25.30.41. & 24.51. Iob 13.16. 2. Thes. 1.8.9. Reue. 20.10.13.15. The wicked shall turne into hell. Psal. 9.17. The reioycing of the wicked is short; the ioy of Hypocrites is but a moment. Iob 20.5.
HYPOCRITES, Outwardly relgi∣ous, but inwardly wicked, hating Gods Law, and the true righte∣ousnesse, Isay 29.13. Mic. 3.11. These seeme to be renewed, and born againe of the Spirit, they are in∣lightned & boast of heauenly grace: yet continue they stil in their old na∣turall corruption, vnwashed from their filthinesse. Heb. 6 4. Isa. 65.5. Ioh. 8 41.22. Pro. 30.12.
These are called, but not chosen; are in the Church for a while, but not of it, Mat. 22.14. 1. Ioh. 2.19. In these, righ∣teousnesse increa∣seth outwardly, but sin liueth in∣wardly, and a∣boundeth, Isa. 1.11 &c. Ier. 3.4.5. To these God giueth the stonie tables, and they receiue them; but Moses face so shi∣neth, that they cannot looke vpon him, vnlesse he veile his counte∣nance. They out∣wardly keepe the law, & rest there∣in, they also teach others to keepe it, yet are themselues
transgressors of it; the inward power and end thereof, they can∣not see. Exod. 34.29, 30, &c. 2. Cor. 3.13, 14. Rom. 2.17, 22, 23, &c. These, though they keepe not the Law, yet are kept by the Law, and restrained by ter∣rour thereof, from open wickednesse. Math. 23.13.16.23.25. These hate the Law, but professe to loue it. Psal. 78.36, 37. These ashamed of their nakednes, couer it with fig-leaues, or spiders
webs of their own externall righte∣ousnesse Isa. 59.5.6. These crie but God heareth them not. Isa. 1.15. These change their words and workes, but not themselues. Gen. 4.3. & 28.8.9. Hos. 7.16. These are in the house, but as ser∣uants, not as chil∣dren. Iohn 8.35.36. Galat. 4.22. &c. These go with their lampes, but without oile; they come to the feast, but want the wed¦ding garment. Mat. 25 3. & 22.11.1. These are light before the world,
but darknesse be∣fore God. Mat. 6.2 5.16. Isa. 58.2.3.8 These▪ though they see and know their sicknesse, yet like to King Asa, they seeke not the Lord in their disease, but to the Physi∣tians, or with salues and medi∣cines of their own making, thinke to cure themselues. 2. Chro. 16 12. Ioh 5.40. Hos. 5.13. These do not the euill which they loue, but the good which they loue not, Nū. 14.2.4.40 These expect sal∣uation by them¦selues, and their owne righteousnes Rō. 10, 3. Ier. 2.35. These vnder Moses conduct
perish by Gods hand in the desert, and come not into the Land of pro∣mise. These both shall perish, and be pu¦nished with euerlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord; their portion shall be with the diuels in the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the se∣cond death. Mat. 25.30.41. & 24.51. Iob 13.16. 2. Thes. 1.8.9. Reue. 20.10.13.15. The Hypocrites hope shall perish Iob 8.13. The reioycing of the wicked is short; the ioy of Hypocrites is but a moment. Iob 20.5.
SAINTS, that rightly beleeue and obey Gods word, with their vtmost power; the friends of the Lord. Psal. 119.3.5 10.11. &c. These are borne anew, not of bloud, nor of the will of the flesh, or of man, but of God: therefore they sauour the things of God, & mind heauenly things, being children of Wise∣dome, Ioh. 6.13. & 3.3. Luke 7.35.
These are cal∣led and chosen of God; are both in & of the Church, and so continue. Ephes. 1.4. &c. Iob 17.9. In these, sinne dieth and righte∣ousnesse reuiueth daily, both in∣wardly and out∣wardly. Rom. 6.2, 3, 4, &c. To these the law is not giuen, or it lyeth not () on them, 1. Tim. 1.9. for they haue the Gospell, the Law and Mini∣sterie of the Spi∣rit, and Gods word is written in fleshly tables of their hearts, within and with∣out, by the finger
of God: and they all behold as in a mirrour, the glorie of the Lord with open face, and are changed into the same image frō glorie to glorie, as by the Spirit of the Lord. 2. Cor 33.18. Eze. 11 19 Heb 8.10. These are the right keepers of the Law in spirit, which sometime also were kept of the Law, til Faith came. Psal. 119.33, 34. Gal. 3.23, 25. These loue the Law, and pro∣fesse their loue. Psalme 119.97. Rom. 7.22. These haue their nakednesse couered of Christ, and by
the garments of his righteousnes. Reuel. 3.18. and 16.15. These call vpon God, and he an∣swereth them, Ier. 29.12.13. These change both their acti∣ons and them∣selues; or rather are changed of the Lord, Rom. 12.2. These are no more strangers but children of Gods familie, wherein they a∣bide for euer. Gal. 4.28. 1. Ioh 3 These go to meete the bride∣groom with oyle in their lamps: & are arrayed with the wedding robe. Mat. 25.4. These are light, both before God
and the world E∣phes. 5.8. Mat. .16. Phil. 2.15. These see their sinnes, and feele thēselues woun∣ded by those fie∣rie serpents; but lift vp their eyes to the serpent of brasse; they seek to Christ onely, the Physitian of their soules. Nū∣bers 21.8 9. Ioh. 3.14 15. These loue good and desire to do it, yet do the e∣uill which they hate. Rom. 7.15. These expect saluation onely by Christs righ∣teousnesse, not by themselues. Phil. 3.9. Rō. 3 24.28. These after Moses death, are
brought by Iesus into the rest of Canaan: the rest that remaineth for the people of God. Heb. 4.8.9. These shall en∣ter into the ioy of their Lord; shall liue and reigne with him in hea∣uen, and with his holy Angels for euermore Amen. Mat. 25.21.34.46 The Saints shall be preser∣ued for euer. Psal. 37.28. And men shall say, Verily there is fruite for the righteous; doubt¦lesse there is a God that iudgeth in the earth. Psal. 58.11.
A prayer vnto God the Father. THou that rulest in the high∣est, reignest for euer, & one∣ly canst do all things, God the gouernor of heauen and earth, at whose becke all creatures trem∣ble, and the pillars of heauen shake. O heauenly God, perfect workman and Potter, I wretch made out of clay, or rather of fil∣thy mudde, with feare and trem∣bling come before the throne of thy maiestie. I acknowledge and confesse my wickednesse, I know that I am nothing, yea that I am meere abomination and horror in thy sight, if thy grace and mer∣cie do faile me: without thee I thinke no goodnesse, without thee I do no good thing: with∣out thee I am a contemptible creeping worme. I cannot be saued without thine assistance, my saluation de∣pendeth
on thy hands. I giue thee thanks, O God, and in espe∣ciall for this, for that thou hast giuen me that knowledge, that I may see and know that I am no∣thing, & vnable to do any thing without thee. Thou art the Pot∣ter, I the clay: such as thou wilt haue me be, such canst thou forme and fashion me: if thou makest me blessed, thou shewest thy mercy and grace: if thou castest me into perdition, thou shewest thy iustice, and executest thy iudgement: neither is it my duty to contradict thee, why, or for what reason thou doest it. For thou hast mercy vpon him whō thou louest: these things I medi∣tate with my selfe, ô Lord, and I feare thy iudgements. Since therefore, all my safetie and saluation dependeth on thee, and consisteth in thy hand and power, and sith thou hast shewed thy selfe a mercifull and long-suffering God to the whole
world: and hast testified the same indeed, in that thou wouldest thy onely Sonne Iesus Christ the in∣nocent, should die for our of∣fences, and expiate our sinnes with his bloud on the Crosse. Fi∣nally, since thou hast taught vs in all our perturbations to call vpon thee, and aske thy grace and mer∣cy, for that thou wilt giue vs all things which we shall aske in the name of thy Sonne: I come vnto thee, being drosse and a lumpe of day, O mercifull and celestiall Potter, beseeching thee most humbly, that thou wilt vse thy mercie, and make of this vnwor∣thy matter, a vessell of eternall glorie. Vouchsafe also of thy meere grace, to fixe my mind on perfect faith, assured hope, and chaste and holy loue, that being iustified by these thy gifts, I may become vpright, perfect, good and holy, according to thy good will, both in the midst, and end of my life, as also at the latter
day of iudgement. O mercifull Father, grant me pardon of all my sinnes: through the death of thy beloued Sonne Iesus Christ, make me to please thee alone: grant me to be thy gratefull sonne & heire, increase in me that iustice whatsoeuer, which is giuen me, and granted from heauen, that I may conti∣nue and end my life in the same: increase in me that faith which thou hast giuen me: kindle my loue of thee, and make it more apparent, that by thy helpe, and the presence of thy grace, and the accomplishment of thy holy wil, I may obtaine euerlasting life which thou hast promised vs, to the end I may praise thee, and giue thee thankes in thy king∣dome▪ for euer and euer. Amen. A Prayer to God the Sonne. O Thou maker and redeemer of mankind, Iesus Christ,
who saidest, I am the way, the truth, and the life: the way in do∣ctrine, precept and examples: the truth in promises: the life in re∣ward: I pray thee by thy vn∣speakable charitie, wherewith thou daignest to imploy thy selfe wholly for our saluation, suffer me neuer to wander from thee who art the way: neither euer to distrust in thy promises, who art the truth, and performest what∣soeuer thou doest promise: nei∣ther to repose or relie on any o∣ther thing, because thou art eter∣nall life, than which, there is no∣thing more to be desired, neither in heauen nor in earth. By thee haue we learned the true and ready way to eternall saluation, lest we should wander any lon∣ger in the Labyrinthes of this life. Thou didst teach vs exactly how to beleeue, what to do, what to hope, and in whom we ought to rest: by thee we haue learned how vnhappie we were
borne through our first father Adam, by thee we haue learned that there is no hope of salua∣tion, except by faith in thee. Thou hast taught vs that thou art the onely light that shinest to all men in the desart of this wolrd, cōducting them through the night of their minds, from the Egyptian darknesse, to that blessed Land which thou promi∣sest vnto the meeke, and such as follow thy humility. For in vs was nothing but vtter darknesse, who neither could see our cala∣mity, neither know from whence to seeke the remedie of our mi∣sery: thou daignedst to enter into the world, vouchsafedst to take vpon thee our nature, that thy doctrine might disperse the cloud of our ignorance: that by thy precepts thou mightst direct our feete in the way of peace: by the examples of thy life thou didst limit out a path for vs to immortality: and beating it with
thy steps, thou madest it of a te∣dious and rough, an easie and beaten way. So becamest thou vnto vs a way, that knoweth no errour, in which lest we should be wearied, thy bounty with great & assured promises, vouch∣safed to assure vs: for who could be wearied, that thinketh how in following thy footsteps there is an heritage of eternall life pre∣pared for him? Therefore whilst we are in this iourney, thou wouldest in stead of a staffe be an assured hope vnto vs whereby we might be sustained. Neither was thy goodnesse cōtented herewith, but acknow∣ledging the frailty of our na∣tures, in the meane space with the comfort of the holy Spirit thou repairest our courages, to the end that we may more wil∣lingly run vnto thee. And as thou being made a way vnto vs driuest away all errour, so becoming our truth, thou takest away al distrust.
Finally, being made life vnto vs, thou giuest heate vnto those that are dead in sinne, a life through thy holy Spirit which quickeneth all things, vntill all mortality laid aside, in the resur∣rection we may alwaies liue with thee and in thee, by reason that thou art vnto vs all in all things: For it is eternall life to know the Father, and the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, to be one true God. Wherefore I beseech thee, O most mercifull Father, to increase faith in me who am thy vnwor∣thie seruant, lest at any time I wauer in thy celestiall doctrine: increase obedience in me, lest I swerue from thy precepts, in∣crease constancy, that walking in thy waies, I neither be allured by the inticements of Satan, nor de∣iected by his terrors: but that I may perseuere in thee who art rhe true way, to my liues end. Increase my faith, that possessed of thy promises, I may neuer
waxe slow in the study of godli∣nesse: but forgetting those things I haue left behind me, I may alwaies striue and endeuour for more perfection. Increase thy grace in me, that daily more and more being mor∣tified my selfe: I may liue and be incouraged by thy holy Spirit, fearing nothing but thee, than whom there is nothing more a∣miable, glorying in none but in thee, who art the true glorie of all the Saints, wishing nothing but thee, than whom there is no∣thing better: desiring nothing but thee, who art full and perfect felicitie, with the Father and the holy Ghost, world without end. Amen. A prayer to God the holy Ghost. HOly Spirit, our Aduocate who on Whitsunday didst descend vpon thy Apostles, filling
their bosomes with charitie, grace, and wisedome: I pray thee by that thy vnspeakable mercie and liberalitie, that thou wilt vouchsafe to fill the secrets of my soule with thy grace, and water my inward heart with the vn∣speakable sweetnesse of thy loue: Come holy Ghost, & from hea∣uen send a beame of thy light. Come thou Father of the poore, come thou giuer of gifts, come thou light of hearts, come thou gracious comforter, thou sweete guest of my soule, my pleasant refresher. Come thou Physition of those that faint, come thou purger of eies, come thou strēgth of the fraile, come thou remedie of sinnes, come thou doctor of the humble, come thou destroyer of the proud, come thou excel∣lent ornament of all vertues: come thou onely saluation of the dying. Come my God, & adorne a bed for thee, in which I may worthily entertaine thee, with
all thy riches and mercies: fill me with the gifts of thy wisdome, il∣luminate me with the benefit of vnderstanding, gouerne me with the gift of counsell, confirme me with the gift of fortitude, instruct me with the gift of science, wound me with the gift of pie∣tie, and pierce my heart with the gift of thy holy feare. O sweet louer of cleane hearts, burne & inflame all my bowels with the sweete fire of thy loue, that being inflamed, they may be carried & rauished into thee, who art the center and finall end of all my good: ô sweete louer of oly soules, since thou art not ig∣norant that I can do nothing of my selfe nor by my selfe, stretch out thy fauorable hand ouer me, & grant yt I may forsake my selfe, & flie vnto thee: mortifie, extin∣guish and dissolue in me whatso∣euer is displeasant vnto thee, that in all things thou mayest con∣forme me vnto thy will, that my
life hereafter may be a perfect sacrifice in thy sight, or rather an offering which may wholly be consumed in the fire of thy loue. O who shall giue me the grace, that I may at least attaine this chiefe good? Looke vpon me, ô Lord, looke vpon me, and see here this thy poore creature: my soule sighing after thee day and night, how she thirsteth after God: when shall I come and ap∣peare before the presence of thy grace? When shall I enter into that admirable place of thy Ta∣bernacle that I may attaine th house of my God? When wi thou fill me with the light of th countenance? When shall I b satiate with the presence of thy glory? When shall I by th meanes be deliuered from a temptations? and when shall ouercome this frailty of my mo¦talitie? O eternall fountaine o light, bring me backe againe  the Abysse of eternall goodnesse
by whom I am created, that ere I may know thee, euen as I am knowne of thee, and may so loue thee, as I am loued by thee, that I may see and enioy thee in the societie of all the elect, euen as thou also hast seene me from euer∣lasting, Amen. FINIS.
