23781 99838411 2787
The Olde, Old, very Olde Man or Thomas Par, the Sonne of Iohn Parr of Winnington in the Parish of Alberbury; In the County of Shropshire who was Borne in 1483 in The Raigne of King Edward the 4th and is now liuing in The strand, being aged 152 yeares and odd Monethes 1635 Hee dyed Nouember the 15th And is now buryed in Westminster: 1635.
The Olde, Old, Very Olde Man: OR The Age and long Life of Thomas Par, The Sonne of Iohn Parr of Winnington in the Parish of Alberbury; in the Country of Salopp, (or Shropshire) who was Borne in the Raigne of King Edward the 4th. and is now living in the Strand, being aged 152. yeares and odd Monethes. His Manner of Life and Conversation is so long a Pilgrimage; his Marriages, and his bringing up to London about the end of September last. 1635. Written by IOHN TAYLOR. LONDON, Printed for Henry Gosson, 1635.
TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTIE PRINCE. CHARLES, By the Grace of God, King of great Britaine, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. OF Subjects (my dread Liege) 'tis manifest, You have the old'st, the greatest, & the least; That for an Old, a Great, and Little man, No kingdom (sure) compare with Britain can; One, for his extraordinary stature, Guards well your gates, & by instinct of Nature (As hee is strong) is Loyall, True, and Iust, Fit, and most able, for his Charge and Trust. The other's small and well composed feature Deserves the Title of a Pretty Creature: And doth (or may) retaine as good a mind As Greater men, and be as well inclin'd:
Hee may be great in spir't, though small in sight, Whilst all his best of service, is Delight. The Old'st, your Subject is; but for my use, I make him here, the Subject of my Muse: And as his Aged Person gain'd the grace, That where his Soveraign was, to be in place, And kisse your Royall Hand; I humbly crave, His Lives Discription may Acceptance have. And as your Majesty hath oft before Look'd on my Poems; Pray reade this one more. Your Majesties most Humble Subject and Servant, IOHN TAYLOR.
THE OCCASION OF this Old Man's being brought out of Shropshiere to London. AS it is impossible for the Sun to be without light, or fire to have no heate; so is it un∣deniable that true Honour is as inseparably addicted to Vertue, as the Steele to the Load-stone; and without great violence neither the one or the other can be sundred. Which manifestly appeares, in the conveying out of the Countrey, of this poore ancient Man (Monument I may say, and almost Mi∣racle of Nature.) For the Right Honora∣ble, Thomas Earle of Arundell and Surrey, Earle Marshall of England, &c. being lately in Shropshiere to visit some Lands and Maners which his Lordship holds
in that County, or, for some other occa∣sions of Importance, which caused his Lordship to be there. The Report of this Aged Man was certified to his Ho∣nour; who hearing of so remarkable a Piece of Antiquity, his Lordship was pleased to see him, and in his Innated No∣ble and Christian Piety, hee tooke him into his charitable tuition and prote∣ction; Commanding that a Litter and two Horses (for the more easie carriage of a man so enfeebled and worne with Age) to be provided for him; Also, that a Daughter-in-Law of his (named Lu∣cye) should likewise attend him, and have a Horse for her owne riding with him; And (to cheere up the Old Man, and make him merry) there was an An∣tique-fac'd-fellow, called Iacke, or Iohn the Foole, with a high and mighty no Beard, that had also a Horse for his ca∣riage. These all were to be brought out of the Countrey to London, by easie Iour∣neyes; the Charges being allowed by his
Lordship, and likewise one of his Ho∣nours owne Servants, named Brian Kel∣ley, to ride on horseback with them, and to attend and defray all manner of Rec∣konings and Expences; all which was done accordingly, as followeth. Winnington is a Hamlet in the Parish of Alberbury, neere a place called the Welsh Poole, eight miles from Shrewsbury, from whence hee was carried to Wim, a Towne of the Earles aforesaid; and the next day to Shefnall, (a Mannour House of his Lordships) where they likewise staied one night; from Shefnall they came to Woolverhampton, and the next day to Brimicham, from thence to Coventry; and although Master Kelley had much to do to keepe the people off that pressed upon him in all places where hee came, yet at Coventry hee was most opprest: for they came in such multitudes to see the Olde Man, that those that defended him, were almost quite tyred and spent, and the aged man in danger to have bin stife∣led;
and in a word, the rabble were so unruly, that Bryan was in doubt hee should bring his Charge no further; (so greedy are the Vulgar to hearken to, or gaze after novelties.) The trouble being over, the next day they past to Daventry, to stony Stratford, to Redburn, and so to London, where he is well entertain'd and accomodated with all things, having all the aforesaid Attendants, at the sole Charge and Cost of his Lordship. One Remarkable Passage of the Old mans Pollicie must not bee omitted or for∣gotten, which is thus. His three Leases of 63. yeares being expired, hee tooke his last Lease of his Landlord (one Master Iohn Porter) for his Life, with which Lease, hee hath li∣ved more then 50. yeares (as is further hereafter declared;) but this Old Man would (for his wives sake) renew his Lease for yeares, which his Landlord
would not consent unto; wherefore old Parr, (having beene long blind) sitting in his chaire by the fire, his wife look'd out of the window, and perceiv'd Master Edward Porter, the Son of his Landlord, to come towards their house, which she told her husband, saying, Husband, our young Land-lord is comming hither: Is he so, said old Parr; I prethee wife lay a Pin on the ground neere my foot, or at my right toe; which, she did; and when yong Master Porter (yet forty yeares old) was come into the house, after salutations between them, the Old Man said, Wife, is not that a Pin which lyes at my foot? Truly husband, quoth she, it is a Pin in∣deed, so she tooke up the Pin, and Master Porter was halfe in a maze that the Old Man had recovered his sight againe; but it was quickly found to be a witty con∣ceit, therby to have them to suppose him to be more lively than hee was, because hee hop'd to have his Lease renew'd for his wives sake, as aforesaid.
Hee hath had two Children by his first wife, a Son and a Daughter, the Boyes name was Iohn, and lived but ten weekes; the Girle was named Ioan, and shee lived but three weekes. So that it appeares hee hath out-lived the most part of the people that are living neere there, three times over.
The very Old Man: OR, The Life of Thomas Parr. AN Old man's twice a child (the proverb saies) And many old men nere saw halfe his daies Of whom I write; for he at first had life, When Yorke and Lancasters Domestique strife In her owne bloud had factious England drench'd, Vntill sweet Peace those civil flames had quench'd. When as fourth Edwards Raigne to end drew nigh, Iohn Parr (a man that liv'd by Husbandry) Begot this Thomas Parr, and borne was Hee The yeare of fourteen hundred, eighty three.
And as his Fathers Living and his Trade, Was Plough, and Cart, Sithe, Sickle, Bill, and Spade; The Harrow, Mattock, Flayle, Rake, Fork, & Goad, And Whip, and how to Load, and to Vnload; Old Tom hath shew'd himselfe the Son of Iohn, And from his Fathers function hath not gone. A Digression. YEt I have read of as meane Pedigrees, That have attain'd to Noble dignities Agathocles, a Potters Son, and yet The Kingdome of Sicilia hee did get. Great Tamberlaine, a Scythian Shepherd was, Yet (in his time) all Princes did surpasse. First Ptolomey(the King of AEgypts Land) A poore mans Son of Alexanders Band. Dioclesian, Emperour, was a Scriveners Son, And Proba from a Gard'ner th' Empire won. Pertinax was a Bondmans Son, and wan The Empire; So did Valentinian, Who was the off-spring of a Rope-maker, And Maximinus of a Mule-driver.
And if I on the truth doe rightly glance, Hugh Capet was a Butcher, King of France. By this I have digrest, I have exprest Promotion comes not from the East or West. To the Matter. SO much for that, now to my Theame againe: This Thomas Parr hath liv'd th' expired Raigne Of ten great Kings and Queenes, th' eleventh now sways The Scepter, (blest by th' ancient of all days.) Hee hath surviv'd the Edwards, fourth and fift; And the third Richard, who made many a shift To place the Crowne on his Ambitious head; The seventh & eighth brave Henries both are dead, Sixt Edward, Mary, Phillip, Elsabeth, And blest remembred Iames, all these by death Have changed life, and almost' leven yeares since The happy raigne of Charles our gracious Prince, Tom Parr hath liv'd, as by Record appeares Nine Monthes, one hundred fifty, and two yeares. Amongst the Learn'd, 'tis held in generall That every seventh yeare's Climactericall,
And dang'rous to mans life, and that they be Most perillous, at th' Age of sixty three, Which is, nine Climactericals; but this Man Of whom I write, (since first his life began) Hath liv'd of Climactericals such plenty, That he hath almost out-liv'd two and twenty. For by Records, and true Certificate, From Shropshiere late, Relations doth relate, That Hee liv'd 17 yeares with Iohn his Father, And 18 with a Master, which I gather To be full thirty five; his Sires decease Left him foure yeares Possession of a Lease; Which past, Lewis Porter Gentleman, did then For twenty one yeares grant his Lease agen: That Lease expir'd, the Son of Lew's call'd Iohn, Let him the like Lease, and that time being gone, Then Hugh, the Son of Iohn (last nam'd before) For one and twenty yeares, sold one Lease more. And lastly, he hath held from Iohn, Hugh's Son, A Lease for's life these fifty yeares, out-run: And till old Thomas Parr, to Earth againe Returne, the last Lease must his owne remaine.
Thus having shew'd th'extension of his Age, I'le shew some Actions of his Pilgrimage. His Marriage. A Tedious time a Batchelour hee tarried, Full eightie yeares of age before he married: His Continence, to question Ple nor call, Mans frailtie's weake, and oft doth slip and fall. No doubt but hee in fourscore yeares might find In Salop's Countie, females faire and kind: But what have I to doe with that; let passe, At th' age aforesaid hee first married was To Iane, Iohn Taylors Daughter; and 'tis said; That she (before he had her) was a Mayd. With her he liv'd yeares three times ten and two, And then she dy'd (as all good wives will doe.) She dead, he ten yeares did a Widdower stay; Then once more ventred in the Wedlock way: And in affection to his first wife Iane, Hee tooke another of that name againe; (With whom he now doth live) she was a widow To one nam'd Anthony (and surnam'd Adda) She was (as by report it doth appeare) Of Gillsels Parish, in Mountgom'ry-Shiere, The Daughter of Iohn Lloyde (corruptly Flood)
Of ancient house, and gentle Cambrian Blood. Digression. BVt hold, I had forgot, in's first wives Time, Hee frayly, fouly, fell into a Crime, Which richer, poorer, older men, and younger, More base, more noble, weaker men, and stronger Have falne into. The Cytherean, or the Paphaean game, That thundring Iupiter did oft inflame; Most cruell cut-throat Mars layd by his Armes, And was a slave to Loves Inchanting charmes, And many a Pagan god, and semi-god, The common road of lustfull love hath trod: For from the Emp'rour to the russet Clowne, All states, each sex, from Cottage to the Crowne, Have in all Ages' since the first Creation, Bin folyd, & overthrown with Loves temptation: So was old Thomas, for he chanc'd to spy A Beauty, and Love entred at his eye, Whose pow'rfull motion drew on sweet consent, Consent drew Action, Action drew Content, But when the period of those joyes were past, Those sweet delights were sourely sauc'd at last. The flesh retaines, what in the Bone is bred,
And one Colts tooth was then in old Toms head, It may be he was guld as some have bin, And suffred punishment for others sinne; For pleasures like a Trap, a grin, or snare, Or (like a painted harlot) seemes most faire; But when she goes away, and takes her leave, No ugly Beast so foule a shape can have. Faire Katherin Milton, was this Beauty bright, (Faire like an Angell, but in weight too light) Whose fervent feature did inflame so far The Ardent fervour of old Thomas Parr, That for Lawes satisfaction, 'twas thought meet, He should be purg'd, by standing in a Sheet, Which aged (He) one hundred and five yeare, In Alberbury's Parish Church did weare. Should All that so offend, such Pennance doe, Oh, what a price would Linnen rise unto, All would be turn'd to sheets, our shirts & smocks Our Table linnen, very Porters Frocks Would hardly scape trans-forming, but all's one, He suffred, and his Punishment is done. Another Passage more of his Life. BVt to proceed, more serious in Relation, He is a Wonder, worthy Admiration,
Hee's in these times fill'd with Iniquity) No Antiquary, but Antiquity; For his Longeuity's of such extent, That hee's a living mortall Monument. And as high Towres, (that seeme the sky to shoul∣der) By eating Time, consume away, and molder, Vntill at last in piece meale they doe fall; Till they are buried in their Ruines All: So this Old Man, his limbs their strength have left, His teeth all gone, (but one) his sight bereft, His sinewes shrunk, his blood most chill and cold, Small solace, Imperfections manifold: Yet still his sp'rits possesse his mortall Trunk, Nor are his senses in his ruines shrunk, But that his Hearing's quicke, his stomacke good, Hee'l feed well, sleep well, well disgest his food. Hee will speake heartily, laugh, and be merry; Drinke Ale, and now and then a cup of Sherry; Loves Company, and Vnderstanding talke, And (on both sides held up) will sometimes walk. And though old Age his face with wrinckles fill, He hath been handsome, and is comely still, Well fac'd, and though his Beard not oft corrected, Yet neare it growes, not like a Beard neglected
From head to heele, his body hath all over, A Quick-set, Thick-set nat'rall hairy cover. And thus (as my dull weake Invention can) I have Annatomiz'd this poore Old Man. Though Age be incident to most transgressing, Yet Time well spent, makes Age to be a blessing. And if our studies would but daign to look, And seriously to ponder Natures Booke, We there may read, that Man, the noblest Creature, By ryot and excesse doth murder Nature. This man nere fed on deare compounded dishes, Of Metamorphos'd beasts, fruits, fowls, and fishes, The earth, and ayre, the boundlesse Ocean Were never rak'd nor sorrag'd for this Man; Nor ever did Physician to (his coast) Send purging Physick through his guts in post: In all his lifetime he was never knowne, That drinking others healths, he lost his owne, The Dutch, the French, the Greek, and Spanish Grape, Vpon his reason never made a Rape; For Ryot, is for Troy an Annagram; And Ryot wasted Troy, with sword and flame: And surely that which will a Kingdome spill, Hath much more power one silly man to kill,
Whilst sensuality the Pallat pleases, The body's fill'd with surfets, and diseases; By Ryot (more than War) men slaughtred be, From which confusion this Old Man is free. He once was catch'd in the Venerall Sin, And (being punish'd) did experience win, That carefull feare his Conscience so did strike, He never would againe attempt the like. Which to our understandings may expresse Mens dayes are shortned through lasciviousnesse, And that a competent contenting Dyet Makes men live long, and soundly sleepe in quiet. Mistake me not, I speake not to debar Good fare of all sorts; for all Creatures are Made for mans use, and may by Man be us'd, Not by voratious Gluttony abus'd. For hee that dares to scandall or deprave Good hous-keeping; Oh hang up such a Knave; Rather commend (what is not to be found) Then injure that wch makes the world renownd. Bounty hath got a spice of Lethargie, And liberall noble Hospitallity Lyes in consumption, almost pin'd to death, And Charity benum'd, neere out of Breath.
May Englands few good hous-keepers be blest With endlesse Glory, and eternall Rest; And may their Goods, Lands, and their hapy Seed With heav'ns best Blessings multiply and breed. 'Tis madnesse to build heigh with stone and lime, Great houses, that may seeme the Clouds to clime, With spacious Halls, large Galleries, brave roomes, Fit to receive a King, Peeres, Squires and Groomes; Amongst which rooms, the devill hath put a Witch in, And made a small Tobacco-box the Kitchin, For Covetousnesse the Mint of Mischiefe is, And Christian Bounty the High-way to Blisse To weare a Farm in shoo-strings, edg'd with gold, And spangled Garters worth a Coppy hold A hose and dublet; which a Lordship cost, A gawdy cloake (three Manours price almost) A Beaver, Band, and Feather for the head, (Priz'd at the Churches tythe, the poor mans bread) For which the Wearers are fear'd, and abhorr'd Like Ieroboams golden Calves ador'd This double, treble a god man, I woe, Knowes and remembers when these things were Good wholsome labour was his exercise, Down wth the Lamb, & with the Lark would rise,
In myre and toyling sweat hee spent the day, And (to his Teame) he whistled Time away; The Cock his night Clock, and till day was done, His Watch, and chiefe Sun-Diall, was the Sun. Hee was of old Pithagoras opinion, That green cheese was most wholsom (with an o∣nion) Course, Mesclin Bread, and for his daily swigg, Milke, Butter-milk, and Water, Whay, and Whigg; Sometimes Metheglin, and by fortune happie, He sometimes sip'd a Cup of Ale most nappie, Syder, or Perry, when her did repaire T'a Whitson Ale, Wake, Wedding, or a Faire, Or when in Christmas time he was a Guest At his good, Land-lords house amongst the rest Else hee had little leasure Time to waste, Or (at the Ale house) huffe-cap Ale to taste. Nor did hee ever hunt a Taverne Fox, Ne're knew a Coach, Tobacco, or the Pox, His Phisicke was good Butter, which the soyle Of Salop yeelds, more sweet than Candy oyle, And Garlick hee esteem'd above the rate Of Venice-Triacle, or best Mithridate. Hee entertain'd no Gowt, no Ache he felt; The ayre was good, and temp'rat where he dwelt,
Whilst Mavisses, and sweet tongu'd Nightingales Did chant him Roundelayes, and Madigals. Thus living within bounds of Natures Lawes, Of his long lasting life may be some cause. For though th' almighty all mans daies do measure, And doth dispose of life and death at pleasure, Yet Nature being wrong'd, mans dayes and date May be abridg'd, and God may tollerate. But had the Father of this Thomas Parr, His Grand-father, and his Great grand-father, Had their lives threds so long a length been spun, They (by succession) might from Sire to Son Have been unwritten Chronicles, and by Tradition shew Times mutabillity. Then Parr might say he heard his Father well, Say that his Grand-fire heard his Father tell The death of famous Edward the Confessor, (Harrold) and William Conq'rour his successor; How his Son Robert wan Ierusalem, Ore-came the Sarazens, and Conquer'd them: How Rufus raign'd, and's Brother Henry next, And how usurping Stev'n this Kingdome vext: How Mawd the Empress (the first Henries daughter) To gaine her Right, fill'd England full of slaughter:
Of second Henry's Rosamond the faire, Of Richard Cuer-de-lyon, his brave heire, King Iohn, and of the foule suspition Of Arthurs death, Iohns elder Brothers Son. Of the third Henries long raigne (sixty yeares) The Barons wars, the losse of wrangling Peeres, How Long-shanks did the Scots & French convince, Tam'd Wales, and made his haples son their Prince. How second Edward was Carnarvon call'd, Beaten by Scots, and by his Queen inthrall'd. How the third Edward, fifty yeares did raigne, And t' honor'd Garters Order did ordaine. Next how the second Richard liv'd and dy'd, And how fourth Henries faction did divide The Realme with civill (most uncivill) war Twixt long contending Yorke and Lancaster. How fift Henry swayd, and how his son Sixt Henry, a sad Pilgrimage did run. Then of fourth Edward, and faire Mistrisse Shore, King Edwards Concubine Lord Hastings (—) Then how fift Edward, murthered with a trick Of the third Richard; and then how that Dick Was by seventh Henries slaine at Bosworth field; How he and's son th' eighth Henry, here did wield
The Scepter; how sixt Edward swayd, How Mary rul'd, and how that royall Mayd Elizabeth did Governe (best of Dames) And Phenix-like expir'd, and how just Iames (Another Phenix) from her Ashes claimes The right of Britaines Scepter, as his owne, But (changing for a better) left the Crowne Where now 'tis, with King Charles, and may it be With him, and his most blest Posterity Till time shall end; be they on Earth renown'd, And after with Eternity be crown'd. Thus had Parr had good breeding, (without rea∣ding) Hee from his sire, and Grand sires sire proceeding, By word of mouth might tell most famous things Done in the Raigns of all those Queens and Kings. But hee in Husbandry hath bin brought up, And nere did taste the Helliconian cup, He nere knew History, nor in mind did keepe Ought, but the price of Corne, Hay, Kine, or Sheep. Day found him work, and Night allowd him rest. Nor did Affaires of Stae his braine molest. His high'st Ambition was, A tree to lop, Or at the furthest to a May-poles top, His Recreation, and his Mirths discourse
Hath been the Pyper, and the Hobby-horse. And in this simple sort, hee hath with paine, From Childhood liv'd to bee a Child againe. 'Tis strange, a man that is in yeares so growne Should not be rich, but to the world 'tis knowne, That hee that's borne in any Land, or Nation, Vnder a Twelve-pence Planet's Domination, (By working of that Planets influence) Shall never live to be worth thirteene pence. Whereby (although his Learning cannot show it) Hee's rich enough to be (like mee) a Poet. But er'e I doe conclude, I will relate Of reverend Age's Honourable state; Where shall a young man good Instructions have, But from the Ancient, from Experience grave? Roboam, (Sonne and Heire to Solomon) Rejecting ancient Counsell, was undone Almost; for ten of twelve Tribes fell To Ieroboam King of Israel. And all wise Princes, and great Potentates Select and chuse Old men, as Magistrates, Whose Wisedome, and whose reverend Aspect, Knowes how and when to punish or protect. The Patriarkes long lives before the Flood,
Were given them (as 'tis rightly understood) To store and multiply by procreations, That people should inhabit and breed Nations. That th' Ancients their Posterities might show The secrets Deepe, of Nature how to know To scale the skie with learn'd Astronomy, And found the Oceans deepe profundity; But chiefly how to serve, and to obey God, who made them out of slime and clay; Should men live now, as long as they did then, The Earth could not sustaine the Breed of Men. Each man had many wives, which Bigamie, Was such increase to their Posterity, That one old man might see before he dy'd, That his owne only off-spring had supply'd And Peopled Kingdomes. But now so brittle's the estate of man, That (in Comparison) his life's a span. Yet since the Flood it may be proved plaine, That many did a longer life retaine, Than him I write of; for Arpachshad liv'd Foure hundred thirty eight, Shelah surviv'd Foure hundred thirty three yeares, Eber more, For he liv'd twice two hundred sixty foure.
Two hundred yeares Terah was alive, And Abr'ham liv'd one hundred seventy five. Before Iob's Troubles, holy writ relates, His sons and daughters were at marriage states, And after his restoring, 'tis most cleare, That he surviv'd one hundred forty yeare. Iohn Buttadeus (if report be true) Is his name that is stil'd, The Wandring Iew, 'Tis said, he saw our Saviour dye; and how He was a man then, and is living now; Whereof Relations you (that will) may reade; But pardon me, 'tis no part of my Creed. Vpon a Germanes Age, 'tis written thus, That one Iohannes de Temporibus Was Armour-bearer to brave Charlemaigne, And that unto the age he did attaine Of yeares three hundred sixty one, and then Old Iohn of Times return'd to Earth agen. And Noble Nestor, at the siege of Troy, Had liv'd three hundred yeares both Man and boy. Sir Walter Rawleigh (a most learned Knight) Doth of an Irish Countesse, Desmond write, Of seven score yeares of Age, he with her spake: The Lord Saint Albanes doth more mention make
That she was Married in Fourth Edwards raigne, Thrice shed her Teeth, which three times came a∣gaine. The High-land Scots and the Wilde-Irish are Long liv'd with Labour, hard, and temperate fare. Amongst the Barbarous Indians some live strong And lusty, neere two hundred winters long? So as I said before my Verse now sayes By wronging Nature, men cut off their dayes. Therefore (as Times are) He I now write on, The age of all in Britane hath out gone; All those that were alive when he had Birth, Are turn'd againe unto their mother earth, If any of them live, and doe replye, I will be sorry, and confesse I lye. For had he bin a Marchant, then perhaps Stormes, Thunderclaps, or feare of Afterclaps, Sands, Rocks, or Roving Pyrats, Gusts and stormes Had made him (long ere this) the food of worms, Had he a Mercer, or a Silk-man bin, And trusted much in hope great game to win. And late and early striv'd to get or save His Gray head long ere now had been i'th Grave. Or had he been a Iudge or Magistrate, Or of Great Counsell in Affaires of state
Then dayes important businesse, and nights cares Had long ere this, Interr'd his hoary haires: But as I writ before, no cares opprest him, Nor ever did Affaires of State molest him. Some may object, that they will not believe His Age to be so much, for none can give Account thereof, Time being past so far, And at his Birth there was no Register. The Register was ninty seven yeares since Giv'n by th' eight Henry (that Illustrious Prince) Th' yeare fifteene hundred fourty wanting twaine And in the thirtieth yeare of that Kings raigne; So old Parr now, was almost an old man, Neere sixty ere the Register began. I' have writ as much as Reason can require, How Times did passe, how's Leases did expire; And Gentlemen o'th County did Relate T'our gacious King by Their Certificate His age, & how time wth gray haires hath crownd him And so I leave him older than I found him. FINIS.
