25067 99853287 18659
TWO HISTORIES OF IRELAND. The one written by Edmund Campion, the other by Meredith Hanmer Dr of Divinity. DUBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers. M.DC.XXXIII.
els-where these Histories doe affoord to the knowledge of former times, and the good use which may be made of them by any who have leisure, desire, and ability to erect and polish a lasting structure of our Irish affaires, I am em∣bouldned to present them to your Lordships patronage, whose government I beseech the Almighty so to blesse; that it may bee a long happines to this land. Your Lordships ever humbly at comman∣dement. IAMES WARE.
THE PREFACE TO THE SVBSEQVENT HISTORIES. WHat varietie of choyse matter the affaires of this Kingdome doe affoord to an Historian, especially since the middle of the raigne of King Henry the VIII. any one that is but meanely versed in our Histories can testifie: But if we consider how little hath hetherto bin pub∣lished, wee cannot but blame the slownes of our learned men, who have (for by-respects) forborne to take paines in so worthy a subject. England hath had the happines that some parts of her Historie have bin lately excellently performed, by the right honorable Francis late Viscount St. Alban, the right Reve∣rend Francis Lo: Bishop of Hereford, the most lear∣ned William Camden and others. Some will here∣after, I hope, doe the like for Ireland: In the meane while we are to accept of these tastes, the one left un∣to us by Edmund Campion, and the other by Do∣ctor Hanmer, who died (of the plague at Dublin in the yeare M.DC.IIII.) before he had finished his
intended worke: out of whose collections, what now beareth his name hath bin preserved by our most Reverend and excellently learned Primate. Other helpes (to passe by those which are already divulged) may be plentifully had by him who will undertake this taske, out of the auncient and moderne recordes, both in this Kingdome and in England, as also out of diverse manuscript Annales and Chartularies, which are yet extant among us, besides those authors of En∣glish birth, as Iohn VVallingford a Monke of St Alban, Thomas Wike a Canon of Osney, and o∣thers, (which I have seene) in that excellent library and treasury of MSS. antiquities, gathered by Sir Robert Cotton knight and Baronett deceased, who doe onely obiter touch upon our affaires. An intenti∣on there was not long since by Sir Iames Ley knight then Lord chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench in Ire∣land, (afterwards Lord high Treasurer of England and Earle of Marleburgh) to have published some of our country writers in this kinde, for which end hee caused to be transcribed and made fit for the Presse, the Annales of Iohn Clynne a Friar minor of Kil∣kenny, (who lived in the time of King Edw. the 3.) the Annales of the Priory of S. Iohn the Evange∣list of Kilkenny, and the Annales of Multifernan, Rosse and Clonmell, &c. But his weighty occasions did afterwards divert his purpose. The copies are yet preserved, and I hope ere long with other Annales and fragments of the same nature will be divulged. Wee come now to the Authors in hand.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE ROBERT DUDLEY, Baron of Denbigh, Earle of Leicester, Knight of the noble Order of the gar∣ter, and S. Michaels, Master of the Queenes Maje∣sties horse, and one of her Privy Councell, high Chauncellour of the Vniversity of Oxford, my singular good Lord. THat my travaile into Ireland, might seeme nei∣ther causlesse, nor fruitlesse, I have thought it ex∣pedient, being one member of your Lordships honorable charge to yeeld you this poore book, as an accompt of my poore voyage, happily not the last, nor the most beautifull present that is intended to your Honour by me, but surely more full of unsavoury toyle for the time, then any plot of worke that ever I attempted, which I write, not of vanity to commend my diligence, but of necessitie to excuse mine imperfection. For whereas it is well knowne to the learned in this land, how late it was ere I could meet with Gerald of Wales, the onely Author that ministreth some indif∣ferent furniture to this Chronicle, and with what search I have beene driven to piece out the rest by helpe of forreine Writers (incidently touching this Realme) by a number of briefe extracts of rolles, records and scattered papers. These things (I say) considered, I trust this little volume shall seeme great enough in such barren shift, & my defect in penning the same shalbe imputed partly to my haste, who must needes have ended all before I should leave the land, and am now e∣ven upon point of my departure. So as to handle and lay these
things together, I had not in all the space of ten weekes. Such as it is, I addresse and bequeath it to your good Lordship, for two causes. First that by the patronage of this Booke you may be induced to weigh the estate and become a patron to this noble Realme, which claimeth kindred of your eldest auncestors, and loveth entirely your noble vertues: The fame whereof is now carried by those strangers that have felt them into many forraine countryes that never saw your person. Secondly because there is none that knoweth mee familiarly, but he knoweth vvithall how many vvayes I have beene be∣holding to your Lordship. The regard of your deserts and of my duty hath easily wonne at my hands this testimony of a thankefull minde. I might be thought ambitious, if I should recount in particular the times & places of your severall cur∣tesies to mee. How often at Oxford, how often at the Court, how at Rycot, how at Windsore, how by letters, hovv by reportes, you have not ceased to further with advice and to countenance with authority, the hope and expectation of mee a single Student. Therefore in summe it shall suffice mee to acknowledge the generall heape of your bounties, and for them all to serve your honour frankely, at least wise with a true heart: Let every man esteeme in your state and fortune, the thing that best contenteth and feedeth his admiration; But surely to a judgement setled and rectified, these outward felicities which the world gazeth on, are there, and therefore to be denied, praiseable when they lodge those inward qua∣lities of the minde, which (saving for suspition of flattery) I was about to say are planted in your breast. Thirteene yeares to have lived in the eye and speciall credit of a Prince, yet ne∣ver during all that space to have abused this ability to any mans harme, to be enriched with no mans overthrow, to be kindled neither with grudge nor emulation, to benefit an infinite resort of dayly sutors, to let downe your calling to the neede of meane subjects, to retaine so lowly a stomacke, such a facility, so milde a nature in so high a vocation, to un∣dertake the tuition of learning and learned men. These are indeede the kirnels for the which the shell of your nobilitie
seemeth faire and sightly; This is the sap, for whose preserva∣tion the barke of your noble tree is tendered. This is the sub∣stance which maketh you worthy of these Ornaments wherevvith you are attyred, and in respect of these good gifts as I for my part have ever bin desirous to discover an offici∣ous and dutifull minde towards your Lordship, so will I ne∣ver cease to betake the uttermost of my power and skill to your service, nor to begge of Almighty God your plentifull increase in godlines, wisedome and prosperity. Fare you well: From Dublin 27. May, 1571. Your Lordships hum∣bly to commaund. EDMUND CAMPION.
To the loving Reader. AT my times of leisure from ordinary stu∣dies, I have since my first arrivall hither, enquired out antiquityes of the land, wherein being holpen by diverse friendly Gentlemen, I have given th'adventure to frame a Story, which I bring from the ve∣ry first originall untill th'end of this last yeare 1570. I follow these Authors, Giraldus Cambrensis, who devideth his worke into two parts, from the first (which is stuffed with much impertinent matter) I borrow so much as serveth the turne directly, the second which containeth two bookes, and discour∣seth the conquest of Henry Fitz Empresse, I abridge into one Chap∣ter: where Cambrensis endeth, there beginneth a nameles Author, who in certaine short notes containeth a Chronologie untill the year of Christ 1370. From thence to Henry the Eight, because nothing is extant orderly written, and the same is time beyond any mans memory, I scamble forward with such records as could be sought up, and am enforced to be the briefer. From Henry th'eight hitherto, I tooke instructions by mouth, whatsoever I bring besides these helpes, either mine owne observation hath found it, or some friend hath en∣formed me, or common opinion hath received it, or I reade it in a pamphlet, or if the Author be worthy the naming I quote him in the margent. Scottish Histories I used these twaine, famous in their times, Iohn Major, and Hector Boethius. For English, wherein the state of Ireland is oft implyed, because I am not in place to ex∣amine the auncient, I have credited these late writers, Fabian, Po∣lidore, Cooper, Hall, Grafton, and Stowe: diligent and thankes-worthy collectors. Touching the rest of all sorts, from whose bookes I picke matter to my purpose, they are mentioned as they fall in
ure, which here I list not to reckon, being loath to fill the page with a ranke of empty names. Irish Chronicles, although they be reported to be full fraught of lewde examples, idle tales, and genealogies: Et quicquid Graecia mendax audet in historiâ, yet concerning the state of that wilde people specified before the conquest. I am perswa∣ded that with choice and judgment, I might have sucked thence some better store of matter, and gladly would have sought them, had I found an interpreter, or understood their tongue. th' one so rare, that scarcely five in five hundred can skill thereof, th'other so hard, that it asketh continuance in the Land, of more yeares then I had moneths to spare about this busines, my speciall meaning was to ga∣ther so much as I thought the civill subjects could bee content to reade, and withall to give a light to the learned Antiquaries of this Countrey birth, who may hereafter at good leisure supply the want of this foundation, and pollish the stone rough hewed to their hand. Notwithstanding as naked and simple as it is, it could never have growne to any proportion in such post-haste, except I had entred in∣to such familiar societie, and daylie table-talke with the worshipfull Esquire Iames Stanihurst, Recorder of Dublin. VVho beside all curtesie of Hospitality, and a thousand loving turnes not heere to be recited, both by word and written monuments, and by the benefit of his owne Library, nourished most effectually mine endeavour. It remaineth that I request my Countrymen to bend their good liking to my goodwill, and the English of Ireland to favour the memory of their noble auncestors, both twaine to deliver me from all undue and wrong suspitions, howsoever the priviledge of an history hath tempe∣red mine inke with sweet or sowre ingredients. Verily as touching the affaires and persons heere deciphered, how little cause I have with any blind and corrupt affection, either wayes to be miscarryed, themselves know best that heere be noted yet living, and other by enquiring may conjecture. Farewell. From Droghedah the 9. of Iune. 1571.
CAMPIONS HISTORIE OF IRELAND. The First Booke. CAP. I. The Site and speciall parts of Ireland. IRELAND lieth a-loofe in the West Ocean,This Booke in∣cludeth the first part of Cambrensis, devided by him into 3, di∣stinctions. Which was de∣livered me, by Iames Stani∣hurst. and is deemed by the later Survey, to be in length well-nigh three hundred miles north & south: broad from East to West one hundred and twentie. In pro∣portion it resembleth an egge, blunt and plaine on the sides, not reach∣ing forth to Sea, in nookes and elbowes of Land, as Brit∣taine doth. Long since it was devided into foure regions, Leinster East, Connaght West, Vlster North, Mounster South,Lagenia. Conatia. Hultonia. Momonia. Medi. and into a fift plot defalked from every fourth part, lying to∣gether in the heart of the Realme, called thereof Media, Meath. Each of these five (where they are framable to civility, and answere the writts of the Crowne,) be sundred into shires and counties, after this manner.
Leinster.In Leinster lye the counties of Dublin, Kildare, Weix∣ford, Catherlagh, Kilkenny, King & Queenes coūties, these two lately so named by Parliament in the raignes of Phi∣lip and Mary,An. Philip & Mar. 3o. & 4o. having Shire-townes accordant, Philipstown and Marryborrow. Septes, Irish of name planted in these quarters, they rec∣kon,Irish families taken out of S. Henry Sidneys collections. the Birnes, Tooles, Cauanaghes, which is the nation of Macmurrow, Omores, Oconnores, Odempsyes, Odun. Dublinum.Citties of best account, Dyvelin: the beauty and eye of Ireland, fast by a goodly river which Cambrensis calleth Avenlifius.Lib. fl. Ptolomy Libnius, they call the Lyffie. The seat hereof is in many respects comfortable, but lesse frequen∣ted of marchant strangers, because of the bard haven. Kil∣dare hath Kildare and the Naass. Weixford hath Weixford and Ross. Kilkenny hath Kilkenny the best dry towne in Ireland on the Southside of the river Suirus,Suir fl. also Callan and Thomastowne. Meath.Meath is devided into East and West Meath, and the counties of Longford. Here dwelleth ancient Irish families (sometime Princes & Potentates) Omalaghlen,Irish families. Mac-Coghlan Obrien, Omulloy, Omadden, Macgoghigan, the Fox. This whole part, and the veyne of Finegale in Leinster, are best im∣ployed with husbandry, and taken to be the richest soyles in Ireland. Connaght. Galvia.Connaght hath as yet but the county Clare, the town of Athenry: & Galway, a proper neat city at the sea side. Here∣in Turlogh More Oconner was a peere, & parted the whole betwixt his two Sonnes, Cahal, and Bryen Oconnor. In it are now cheife Irish,Irish fam. Ororicke▪ Breni Oreli, Breni Oruarke, Ocon∣nor Sligo, Odoude, Ohara, Macphilippin, Mac-dermot, Oconnor-donn, Oconnor-Roe, the O-kellies, Macglomore, of Langues, L. Bermingham, Omaly, Mac-william Euter, Oflaherty, Clanri∣carde. Vlster.Vlster wherin Oneale & Odonil are cheife Irish, contayneth the coūties, Louth, Down, Antrim, one moity of Droghdah
(for the rest is in Meath) cheife town of Louth Dundalk, of Down, Down, & Carlingford, of Droghdagh, Drogh∣daghe, of Antrim, Cnockfergus called also Cragfergus. This part is dissevered from Meath and Leinster by the river Boandus, which breaketh out beside Logh-foyle,Boyn. fl. Lacus oilus. a bogg betweene Ardmagh, and S. Patrickes Purgatorie. Cambrensis reputeth the bogge at 30. miles in length,Dist. 1. and halfe so much in breadth, and the same once firme Land, to have beene suddenly ouerflowen, for the bestiall incest committed there, unfit to be told. In Mounster lye the counties of Waterford, Limericke,Mounster. Cork, counties Pallatine of Tipperary, Kerry, and exempt from priviledge the Crosse of Tipperarie. Waterford hath Dongarvon, and Waterford full of traffique with England, France, and Spaine, by meanes of their excellent good Haven. Limericke hath Kilmallocke lately sackt by Iames Fitz Morice, and the Citie Limiricum, coasting on the sea, hard upon the river Shannon, whereby are most notably seve∣red Mounster and Connaght.Shanon. fl. Corke hath Kinsale, Yowghall, and the Cittie Corke, Tipperary hath Tipperary, Clonmell, Fidderstown,Irish families. Cas∣sell. Mounster was of old time devided into East-Moun∣ster, Ormond, West-Mounster, Desmond, South-Monster, Thomond. Here dwell Obrenes, Macnemarraes, Mack-ma∣ownes, and one sept of the Offlherties. In these quarters lyeth the Countryes of O-Carroll, O-Magher, the white Knight, Mac-Ibrine, O-Gaunaghe. Waterford contayneth the Powers, and Deces. Corke the Barries Lands, Imokillie, Carbarrie,
Maccarty-more, Maccarty-reagh, L. Roches lands, Osuli∣van, Muscry, L. Courcy, and diverse more, some of Irish blood, some degenerate and become Irish. Limericke hath in it the Knight of the valley, VVilliam Burcke, Mac-Ibrine Ara, part of the white Knights Lands, Cosmay, Obrenes, and upon the edge of Kerrie the greene knight, aliàs the knight of Kerrie. Leinster butteth upon England, Mounster and Con∣naght upon France and Spaine, Vlster upon the Scottish Ilands (which face with Hebrides) scattered between both realmes; wherein at this day, the Irish Scot Successour of the old Scythian Pict or Redshancke dwelleth. Bishops in Ire∣land. Bern. in vita Malach. An. 1148.The spirituall Iurisdiction is ordered into 4. Provinces whereof the primacy was euer given (in reverence toward Saint Patricke their Apostle) to the Archbishoppe of Ard∣magha, now called Ardmagh, which custome was since confirmed by Eugenius the 3. who sent withall 3. other pre∣lates to be placed, one at Dublin, one at Cashell, & the last at Tuam. To these are suffraganes in right 29. and all they inferiour to the Primate of Ardmaghe:Province of Ardmagh. under his province are the Bishopprickes of Meath, Derry, Ardagh, Kilmore, Clogher, Downe, Coner, Clonmacknoes, Rapho, and Dromore. Dublin. an. 1212. S. Pat. booke of Re∣corde▪Vnder Dublin (whereunto Innocentius 3. united Glande∣lagh) are the Bishop of Elphine, Kildare, Ferne, Ossorie and Laighlein. Cashell.Vnder Cashell are B. of Waterford, Lysmore, Corke, & Clone, Rosse, Ardigh, Limericke, Emely, Killalo, Ardferte. Tuam.Vnder Tuam the B. of Kilmaco, Olfine, Anaghdoune, Clonfert, Mayo. In this recount some diversities have happened by reason of personall and reall union of the Seas and for other alterations. An old distinctiō there is of Ireland into Irish & English pales,English pale. for whē the Irish had raised cōtinual tumults against
the English planted heere with the Conquest. At last they coursed them into a narrow circuite of certaine shires in Leinster, which the English did choose as the fattest soyle, most defensible, their proper right, and most open to receive helpe from England. Hereupon it was termed their pale, as whereout they durst not peepe. But now both within this pale, uncivill Irish and some rebells doe dwell, and without it, Countreyes and cities English are well go∣verned. CAP. II. The temporall Nobility. BY conference with certaine gentlemen, atten∣dants upon Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Deputie, (who excelleth in that knowledge) I tooke notice of the most noble English families in Ireland, which heere ensue with their surnames as they stand at this present. Gerald Fitz Gerald Earle of Kildare, this house was of the nobilitie of Florence, came thence to Normandie, and so with earle Strangbow his kinsman, (whose Armes hee giveth) into Wales, neere of bloud to Rice ap Griffin Prince of Wales, by Vesta the mother of Morice Fitz Gerald, and Robert Fitz Stephens: with the said Earle it removed into Ireland, one of the speciall conquerors thereof.Flatsbury. One record that I have seene, nameth a Geraldine the first Earle of Kil∣dare, in anno 1289. But another saith, there dyed a Geraldine the fourth Earle of Kildare in anno 1316. the family is tou∣ched in the sonnet of Surrey, made upon Kildares sister, now Lady Clinton. From Tuscane came my Ladyes worthy race, Faire Florence was sometime her ancient seate, The westerne Isle whose pleasant shore doth face, Wilde Cambres cliffes did give her lively heate.
His eldest sonne Lord Gerald, Baron of Ophalye, I reade the Geraldine Lord of Ophalye, in anno 1270. Sir Thomas Butler, Earle of Ormond and Ossorye: the Butlers were ancient English Gentlemen, preferred to the Earledome of Ormond in the first of Edward the 3. Anno 1327. which fell upon heires generall,Stowe. lastly upon Sir Tho∣mas Butler Earle of Wilshire, after whose disfavour it rever∣sed to the name of Pierce Butler, whom little before King H. 8. had created Earle of Ossorye. Theo. Butler was Lord of the Carricke.Flatsbury. An. 1205. And Earle of Tipperarie 1300. or sooner: the Latine History calleth him Dominum de Pincer∣na, the English Le Bottiller, whereby it appeareth that hee had some such honour about the Prince, his very surname is Becket, who was advanced by H. le 2. in recompence of the injurie done to Thomas of Canterburie their kinsman. His eldest sonne Lord Butler, Viscount Thurles. Gerald Fitz Gerald, Earle of Desmond, Morice Fitz Tho∣mas a Geraldine, was created Earle of Desmond the same yeare: soone after that the Butler became Earle of Or∣mond. The Irish say, that the elder house of the Geraldines was made Earle of Desmond, though Kildare be the more ancient Earle. His eldest sonne L. Fitz Gerald of Desmond, Baron of Inshycoin. Sir Richard Burcke, Earle of Clanriccard, a braunch of the English family, de Burge Lord Burgh, who were noble men before their arrivall into Ireland. His eldest sonne Vlioke Burghe Baron of Donkeline. Conegher Obrene, Earle of Tumond: the name of Earle given to Murroughe Obrene for terme of life, and after to Do∣noghe Obrene, An. 5. Edw. 6. now confirmed to the heires male. His eldest sonne Lo. Obrene, Baron of Ibrecane. Mac Cartimore, Earle of Clarcar, created An. 1565. His eldest sonne Lo: Baron of Valentia. Viscount Barrie.
Viscount Roohe. Preston, Viscount of Gormanston, whereunto is lately annexed the Barony of Lounders, their auncestour Preston, then cheife Baron of the Exchequer, was made Knight in the field by Lionell Duke of Clarence, Lieutenant of Ire∣land. Eustace alias Powere, Viscount of Baltinglasse, Lord of Kilkullen, to him and his heires male An. H. 8.33. Their an∣cestour Robert le Powere was sent into Ireland with commission, and in his Off-spring hath rested heere since An. 1175. Powere alias Eustace is written Baron of Domvile An. 1317. Sir Richard Butler, Viscount Mongaret, to him and his heires males An. Edw. 6.5. Viscount Deces. Lord Bermingham, Baron of Athenrye, now degenerate and become meere Irish, against whom his auncestors ser∣ved valiantly in An. 1300. Sir Richard Bermingham was Lord of Athenrye. 1316.Baron of Ary. Baron of Ar∣digh. Iohn Bermingham Baron de Atrio dei, Anno 1318. Mac Morice alias Fitz Gerald, Baron of Kerye. Lord Courcye a poore man, not very Irish, the auncient descent of the Courcyes planted in Ireland with the Con∣quest. Lord Flemmynge Baron of Slane, Simon Flemmynge was Baron of Slane in Anno 1370. Plonket, Baron of Killyne: this family came in with the Danes, whereof they have as yet speciall monuments. Nugent, Baron of Delvin. Saint Laurence, Baron of Hothe. Plonket, Baron of Doonesawny. Barnewall, Baron of Trimleston: they came from little Brittaine, where they are at this day a great surname, upon their first arrivall they wonne great possessions at Beirnha∣ven, where at length by conspiracie of the Irish, they were all slaine, except one yong man, who then studied the com∣mon
Lawes in England, who returning, dwelt at Drom∣naghe besides Divelin, and his heires are there at this day: from thence a second brother remooved to Sirestone, and so to Trimlestone, and married the Lady Bruns, who cau∣sed him to be made Baron. This writeth the Lord of Donsany. Edward Butler, Baron of Donboyne, given to Edmund Butler esquire, and his heires males, An. 33. H. 8. Fitz Patricke, Baron of upper Ossory, given to Barnabie Mac Gilpatricke, and his heires males, An. 33. H. 8. Donnate Clonnaghe Mac Gilpatricke, was a peerelesse war∣riour in Anno 1219. Plonket Baron of Louthe, to Sir Christopher Plonket and his heires males, An. 33. H. 8. This Barony was an Earle∣dome in An. 1316. appertaining to Bermingham. Oneale, Baron of Dongannon, to whom the Earledome of Terone was entayled by gift of H. 8. Powere, Baron of Curraghmore. Mac Suretan Lord Deseret, whom Sir Henry Sidney cal∣led Iordan de Exeter. This was Lord in the time of Lionell Duke of Clarence, An. 1361. now very wilde Irish. Murroghe Obrene, Baron of Insickeyne, to him and his heires males, An. 35. H. 8. Mac Costilaghe, L Nangle, whom Sir Henry Sidney called de Angulo, now very Irish. Mac William Burcke, Lord of eighter Connaght, now ve∣ry Irish. Baronets.Seintleger, Baronet of Slemarge, meere Irish. Den, Baronet of Pormanston, waxing Irish. Fitz Gerald, Baronet of Burnchurch. Welleslye, Baronet of Narraghe. Husee, Baronet of Galtrim. S. Michell, Baronet of Reban. Marwarde, Baronet of Scryne. Nangle, Baronet of the Navan.
English gentlemen of longest continuance in Ireland are the race of those which at this day, either in great povertie,Gentlemen most ancient in Ireland of En∣glish bloud. or perill, doe keepe the properties of their auncestors lands in Vlster, being then companions to Courcy the conquerour and Earle of that part. These are the Savages, Iordanes, Fitz Symonds, Chamberlaines, Russels, Bensons, Audleyes, Whites, Fitz Vrsulyes, now degenerate, & called in Irish, Mac Mahon the Beares sonne. CAP. III. Nature of the soyle, and other incidents. THe soyle is low and waterish, & includeth di∣verse little Ilands, invironed with bogges and marishes: Highest hilles have standing pooles in their toppe, Inhabitants (especially new come) are subiect to distillations, rhumes and flixes, for remedy whereof they use an ordinary drinke of Aqua∣vitae, so qualified in the making, that it dryeth more,Aquavitae, and in∣flameth lesse, then other hote confections. The aire is whol∣some, not altogether so cleare and subtle as ours of England.Camb. part. 1. Of Bees good store, no vineyards,Io. Bohem. lib. 3 c. 26. Munst. lib. 1. contrary to the opinion of some writers, who both in this and other errours tou∣ching the land, may easily be excused, as those that wrote of hearesay. Cambrensis in his time,Dist. 3. complaineth that Ireland had excesse of wood, and very little champaigne ground, but now the English pale is too naked: Turffe and Sea-coales is their most fuell: it is stored of kyne, of excellent horses, & hawkes, of fish and fowle. They are not without wolves, and grey-hounds to hunt them, bigger of bone and limme then a colt. Their kyne, as also their cattle, and commonly what els soever the Countrey ingendreth (except man) is much lesse in quantity then ours of England. Sheepe few, and those bearing course fleeces, whereof they spinne no∣table
rugge mantle. The country is very fruitefull both of corne and grasse, the grasse for default of Husbandrie (not for the cause alleaged in Polychronicon,lib. 12.32.) groweth so ranke in the north parts, that oft times it rotteth their Kyne. Eagles are well knowne to breed heere, but neither so bigge nor so many as Bookes tell. Cambrensis reporteth of his owne knowledge,Barnacles. and I heare it averred by credi∣ble persons, that Barnacles, thousands at once, are noted a∣long the shoares to hang by the beakes, about the edges of putrified timber, shippes, oares, anchor-holdes, and such like: which in processe taking lively heate of the Sunne, become water-foules, and at their time of ripenesse either fall into the sea, or fly abroad into the ayre. Aeneas Sylvius (that after was Pope Pius the second) writeth himselfe,Anseres arborei to have perceaved the like experiment in Scotland, where he learned the truth hereof, to be found in the Ilands Orchades. Horses they have of pace easie, in running won∣derfull swift. Therefore they make of them great store, as wherein at times of need they repose a great peice of safe∣tie.Volat. lib. 3. de grege. This broode, Raphael Volateranus saith, to have come at first from Arturia the country of Spaine, betweene Gal∣licea and Portugall, whereof they were called Asturcones a name now properly applyed to the Spanish Iennet. I heard it verified by Honourable to Honourable, that a Nobleman (offered and was refused) for one such horse, an hundred kyne, five pound Lands, & an Airy of Hawks yearely during seven yeares. In the plaine of Kildare stood that monstrous heape of stones brought thither by Gy∣ants from Affrique and removed thence to the plaine of Sarisbury at the instance of Aurel. Ambrose King of Brit∣taine.Camb. dist. 1. No venemous creping beast is brought forth or nourished, or can live here, being sent in, and therefore the spider of Ireland is well knowne, not to be venemous. Onely because a frogge was found living, in the Mea∣dowes of Waterford,lib. 1. Anglor. hist. cap. 1. somewhat before the conquest, they construed it to import their overthrowe. S. Bede writeth
that Serpents conveyed hither did presently die being tou∣ched with smell of the land; and that whatsoever came hence was then of Soveraigne vertue against poyson. He exemplifieth in certaine men stung with Adders, who dranke in water the scrapings of Bookes that had beene of Ireland, and were cured. Generally it is observed, the further West the lesse an∣noyance of pestilent creatures. The want whereof is to Ireland so peculiar, that whereas it lay long in questi∣on, to whether Realme,Ile of Man. (Brittaine or Ireland) the Ile of Man should pertaine, the said controversie was decided, that forsomuch as venemous beasts were knowne to breed therein, it could not be counted a naturall peice of Ireland. Neither is this propertie to be ascribed to S. Patrickes blessing (as they commonly hold) but to the originall bles∣sing of God who gave such nature to the situation and soyle from the beginning. And though I doubt not, but it fared the better in many respects for that holy mans prayer, yet had it this condition notified hundred of yeares ere he was borne. CAP. IIII. Of the Irish tongue and the name Hibernia, Ireland. I Finde it solemnely avouched in some of their pamphlets, that Gathelus,Gathelus. Simon Brecke. and after him Simon Brecke, divised their language out of all other tongues then extant in the world. But consi∣dering the course of enterchanging and blending speeches together, not by invention of Arte, but by use of talke, I am rather led to beleeve (seeing Ireland was inhabited within one yeare after the devision of the tongues) that Bastolenus a braunch of Iapheth who first seased upon Ire∣land,
brought hither the same kinde of Speech, some one of the seventie two Languages,Epiph. cont. he∣ros. l. . tom. 1. that to his family befell at the dissolution of Babell, unto whom suc∣ceeded the Scithians, Grecians, Aegyptians, Spaniards, Danes: of all which this tongue must needes have bor∣rowed part, but specially retaining the steps of Spanish then spoken in Granado, as from their mightiest aunce∣stors.Munst. l. 2. Since then to Henry Fitz Empresse the Conquerour, no such invasion happened them, as whereby they might be driven to infect their native language, untouched in manner for the space of 1700. yeares after the arrivall of Hiberius.Irish tongue. The tongue is sharpe and sententious, offe∣reth great occasion to quicke apothegmes and proper al∣lusions, wherefore their common Iesters, Bards, and Ry∣mers, are said to delight passingly those that conceive the grace and propriety of the tongue. But the true Irish in∣deede differeth somuch from that they commonly speake, that scarce one among five score, can either write, read, or understand it. Therefore it is prescribed among certaine their Poets, and other Students of Antiquitie. Hibernia.Touching the name Ibernia, the learned are not yet a∣greed. Some write it Hibernia, and suppose that the stran∣gers finding it in an odde end of the world, wet and fro∣sty, tooke it at the first for a very cold country, and accor∣dingly named it, as to say, the winter land: Another bring∣eth a guesse of Irlamal,Irlamale Fab. part. . cap. 32. of whom because I read nothing, I neither build upon that conjecture, nor controll it. Third∣ly,Hiberus. they fetch it from Hiberus the Spaniard. Most credibly it is held that the Spaniards their founders for devotion to∣ward Spaine, called then Iberia, and the rather for that themselves had dwelled besides the famous river Iberus, named this land Iberia,in Cign. cant. (for so Iohn Leland, and many for∣raine Chroniclers write it,) or Ibernia, adding the letter n. for difference sake, there being a rich Citty which Ptolome recounteth called then Ibernis,Pliny writeth it Iuuernia. Ibernis. Iuerland. Iland. & from Ibernia proceedeth Iberland or Iuerland, from Iuerland by contraction Ire∣land
for so much as in corruption of common talke, wee finde that v, with his vowell, are easily lost and suppres∣sed. So wee say ere for ever, ore for over, ene for even, nere for never, shoole for shovell, dile for divell. At the same time it was also named Scotia in reverence of Scota, the wife of Gathelus, auncient Capitaine of those Iberians, that flitted from Spaine into Ireland. And the said Scota was olde grandame to Hiberus and Hirimon, after the Scottish Chronicles, who in any wise will have their Countrymen derived from the Irish,Io. Ma. Sco. l. 1. c. 9. and not from the Brittaines. CAP. V. Dispositions of the People. THE People are thus inclined; religious franke, amorous, irefull, sufferable, of paines infinite, very glorious, many sorcerers, ex∣cellent horsemen, delighted with Warres, great almes-givers, passing in hospitalitie: the lewder sort both Clarkes and Lay-men, are sensuall and loose to leachery above measure. The same being vertuously bred up or reformed, are such mirrours of holinesse and austeritie, that other Nations retaine but a shewe or shadow of devotion in comparison of them. As for abstinence and fasting which these dayes make so dangerous, this is to them a familiar kinde of chastise∣ment: In which vertue and diverse other, how farre the best excell, so farre in gluttonie and other hatefull crimes the vitious they are worse then too badde. They fol∣low the dead corpes to the grave with howlings and barbarous out-cryes, pittyfull in apparance, whereof
grew (as I suppose) the Proverbe, to weepe Irish. The uplandish are lightly abused to believe and avouche idle miracles and revelations vaine and childish, greedy of prayse they bee, and fearefull of dishonour. And to this end they esteeme their Poets who write Irish learned∣ly, and penne their sonnetts heroicall, for the which they are bountifully rewarded. But if they send out libells in disprayse, thereof the Gentlemen, especially the meere I∣rish, stand in great awe. They love tenderly their foster children, and bequeathe to them a childes portion, where∣by they nourish sure friendshippe, so beneficiall every way, that commonly five hundreth kyne and better are given in reward to winne a noble mans childe to foster. They are sharpe-witted, lovers of learning, capable of a∣ny studie whereunto they bend themselves, constant in travaile, adventerous, intractable, kinde-hearted, secret in displeasure. Hitherto the Irish of both sortes meere, and English, are affected much indifferently, saving that in these, by good order, and breaking the same, vertues are farre more pregnant. In those others, by licentious and evill custome, the same faults are more extreame and odious, I say, by licentious and evill custome, for that there is daylie tryall of good natures among them. How soone they bee reclaymed, and to what rare gifts of grace and wisedome, they doe and have aspired. Againe, the very English of birth, conversant with the brutish sort of that people, become degenerate in short space, and are quite altered into the worst ranke of Irish Rogues, such a force hath education to make or marre. It is further to bee knowne, that the simple Irish are utterly ano∣ther people then our Englishe in Ireland, whome they call despitefully boddai Sassoni's, and boddai Ghalt, that is, English and Saxon churles, because of their En∣glish auncestors planted heere with the Conquest, and si∣thence with descent hath lasted now 400. yeares. Of this
people therefore severally by themselves I must intreate. Yet none otherwise then as they stand unfiled, and serve their accustomed humours, with whom I joyne all such as either by living neere them, or by liking their trade are transformed into them. CAP. VI. Of the meere Irish. TOuching the meere Irish, I am to advertise my Reader, that hee impute not to them the faults of their Auncestors, which heere I have noted for two causes. First, that when the same are reade in Cambrensis, Solinus, or others, he confounds not the times, but may be able distinctly to consider their manners, then different from these dayes. Secondly, that it may appeare how much Ireland is beholding to God for suffering them to be conquered, whereby many of these enormities were cu∣red, and more might be, would themselves be plyable. In some corners of the land they used a damnable supersti∣tion,Old customes of the Irish. leaving the right armes of their Infants males unchriste∣ned (as they tearmed it) to the intent it might give a more ungracious and deadly blow. I found a fragment of an Epistle, wherein a vertuous Monke declareth,Epistle of an Irish Monke. that to him (travailing in Vlster) came a grave Gentleman about Easter, desirous to be confessed and howseled, who in all his life time had never yet received the blessed Sacrament. When he had said his minde, the Priest demaunded him, whether he were faultlesse in the sinne of Homicide? Hee answered, that hee never wist the mat∣ter to bee haynous before, but being instructed there∣of, hee confessed the murther of five, the rest hee
left wounded, so as he knew not whether they lived or no. Then was he taught that both the one, and the other were execrable, and verie meekelie humbled himselfe to re∣pentance. Solinus writeth that they woonted (because they would seeme Terrible and Martiall,) to embrue their faces in the bloude of their Enemyes slaine. Strabo the famous Geographer, who flourished under Augustus and Tiberius Caesar, more then fifteene hundred yeares agoe, telleth (without asseveration) that the Irish were great Gluttons, eaters of mans flesh: and counted it Ho∣nourable for Parents deceased, to bee eaten up of their Children, and that in open sight they medled with their Wiues, Mothers, and Daughters: which is the lesse incredible, considering what Saint Hierome avoucheth of the Scots their Of-spring and Allies, and what all Histo∣ries doe witnesse of the Scithians their auncient founders. See Strabo lib. 4. Geograph. Although since the time of Saint Patricke, Christia∣nitie was never extinct in Ireland, yet the governement being hayled into contrarie factions, the Nobilitie law∣lesse, the multitude willfull, it came to passe that Reli∣gion waxed with the temporall common sort cold and feeble, untill the Conquest did settle it, especiallie in cases of restrainte and Discipline. The Honourable state of Marriage they much abused, either in con∣tracts, unlawfull meetings, the Leviticall and Canoni∣call degrees of prohibition, or in divorcementes at plea∣sure, or in ommitting Sacramentall solemnities, or in retayning either Concubines or Harlots for Wiues. Yea even at this day, where the Cleargie is fainte, they can bee content to Marrie for a yeare and a day of probation, and at the yeares end, to returne her home uppon any light quarrells, if the Gentlewo∣mans friendes bee weake and unable to avenge the inju∣rie.
Never heard I of so many dispensations for Mar∣riage, as those men shewe, I pray God graunt they bee all authentique and buylded uppon sufficient war∣rant. Covenant and Indent with them never so warilie, never so preciselie, yet they have beene founde faithlesse and perjured. Where they are joyned in colour of su∣rest Amitie, there they intended to kill. This ceremo∣ne reporteth Cambrensis. The parties to bee coupled in League, meete at Church, become God-septes, or Alies, beare each other on his backe certaine paces in a Ring, kisse together holy reliquees, take blessing of the Bishoppe, offer each to other a droppe of his owne bloude, and drinke it up betweene them: Even in the doing hereof, they practise mutuall destructi∣on. They have beene used in solemne controversies, to pro∣test and sweare by Saint Patrickes Staffe, called Bachal esu, which oath, because upon breach thereof heavy plagues en∣sued them, they feared more to breake, then if they had sworne by the holy Evangelist. In Vlter thus they used to Crowne their King, a white cow was brought forth, which the King must kill, and seeth in water whole, and bathe himselfe therein starke naked, then sitting in the same Caldron, his people about him, toge∣ther with them, he must eat the flesh, and drinke the broath, wherein he sitteth, without cuppe or dish or use of his hand. So much of their old Customes. Now a few words of their trade at this present. Cleare men they are of Skinne and hue, but of themsel∣ves carelesse and bestiall. Their Women are well fauoured, cleare coloured, faire handed, bigge and large, suffered from their infancie to grow at will, nothing curious of their fea∣ture and proportion of body. Their infants of the meaner sort, are neither swadled, nor lapped in Linnen, but foulded up starke naked into a Blankett till they can goe, and then if they
get a piece of rugge to cover them, they are well sped. Linnen shirts the rich doe weare for wantonnes and bravery, with wide hanging sleeves playted, thirtie yards are little enough for one of them. They have now left their Saffron, and learne to wash their shirts, foure or five times in a yeare. Proud they are of long crisped glibbes, and doe nourish the same with all their cunning: to crop the front thereof they take it for a no∣table peece of villany▪ Shamrotes, Water-cresses, Rootes, and other hearbes they feede upon: Oatemale and Butter they cramme together. They drinke Whey, Milke, and Beefe broth, Flesh they devoure without bread, corne such as they have they keepe for their horses. In haste and hunger they squese out the blood of raw flesh, and aske no more dressing thereto, the rest boyleth in their stomackes with Aquavitae, which they swill in after such a surfeite, by quarts & pottles. Their kyne they let blood which growen to a jelly they bake and over-spread with Butter, and so eate it in lumpes. One office in the house of great men is a tale-teller, who bringeth his Lord on sleepe, with tales vaine and frivolous, whereunto the number give sooth and credence. So light they are in beleeving whatsoever is with any countenance of gra∣vitie affirmed by their Superiours, whom they esteeme and honour, that a lewd Prelate within these few yeares needy of money, was able to perswade his parish: That S. Patricke in striving with S. Peter to let an Irish Galloglass into Hea∣ven, had his head broken with the keyes, for whose releife he obtained a Collation. Without either precepts or observation of congruity they speake Latine like a vulgar language, learned in their com∣mon Schooles of Leach-craft and Law, whereat they begin Children, and hold on sixteene or twentie yeares conning by roate the Aphorismes of Hypocrates, and the Civill Instituti∣ons, and a few other parings of those two faculties. I have seene them where they kept Schoole, ten in some one Cham∣ber, groveling upon couches of straw, their Bookes at their noses, themselves lying flatte prostate, and so to chaunte out their lessons by peece-meale, being the most part lustie fel∣lowes
of twenty five yeares and upwards. Other Lawyers they have, liable to certaine families which after the custome of the country determine and judge causes. These consider of wrongs offered and received among their neighbours, be it murder, or fellony, or trespasse, all is redee∣med by composition, (except the grudge of parties seeke re∣venge:) and the time they have to spare from spoyling and proyning, they lightly bestow in parling about such matters. The Breighoon (so they call this kind of Lawyer) sitteth him downe on a banke, the Lords and Gentlemen at variance round about him, and then they proceede. They honour devoute Fryars and Pilgrimes, suffer them to passe quietly, spare them and their mansions, whatsoever out∣rage they shew to the country besides them. To robbe and prey their enemies, they deeme it none offence, nor seeke any meanes to recover their losse, but even to watch them the like turne. But if neighbours and friends send their Cators to purloyne one another, such Actions are judged by the Breighoones aforesaid. Toward the living they are noysome and malicious, the same being dead they labour to avenge eagerly and fiercely. They love and trust their Foster Brethren more then their owne. Turlogh Leinagh Oneale that now usurpeth, is said to repose in them his greatest surety. Strumpets are there too vile and abominable to write of, which not onely without feare, but also without remorse doe advance themselves in numbring what noblemen have had liking to their bodies. Hee that can bring most of his name into the field, base or other, triumpheth exceedingly. For increase of which name, they allow themselves not one∣ly whoores, but also choise & store of whoores. One I heard named which hath (as he calleth them) more then ten wiues, in twentie places. There is among them a brother-hood of Carrowes that professe to play at Cards all the yeare long, and make it their onely occupation. They play away Mantle and all to the bare skinne, and then trusse themselves in strawe or in leaves,
they waite for passengers in the high way, invite them to a game upon the greene, and aske no more but companions to hold them sport, for default of other stuffe they pawne portions of their glibbe, the nailes of their fingers and toes, their privie members; which they lose or redeeme at the curtesie of the winner. Where they fancie and favour, they are wonderfull kinde, they exchange by commutation of wares for the most part, and have utterly no coyne stirring in any great Lords houses. Some of them be richly plated: their Ladies are trimmed ra∣ther with massie Iewels, then with garish apparell, it is coun∣ted a beautie in them to be tall, round and fat. The inheritance descendeth not to the Sonne, but to the Brother, Nephew, or Cousin germaine eldest and most vali∣ant: for the Childe being oftentimes left in nonage or other∣wise young and unskillfull, were never able to defend his pa∣trimonie, being his no longer then he can hold it by force of armes. But by that time he grow to a competent age, and have buryed an Vncle or two, he also taketh his turne, and leaveth it in like order to his Posterity. This custome breed∣eth among them continuall Warres and treasons. CAP. VII. The most auncient Inhabitants of Ireland. In praefat. l. 1. dec. 1.THe honourable Historian Titus Livius, yeeldeth certaine priviledge to antiquitie, and will have it held excused, if percase for advancement of their Citties, they straine a point of truth, and de∣rive a first foundation from one or other, of their supposed Gods: wherefore though I can no lesse doe then reject a fable concerning the arrivall of Noes Neece into this Island, yet this kinde of forgery being somewhat universall, seeing eve∣ry Chronicler paineth himselfe, to fetch his reckoning with the farthest let him hardly be pardoned, who led by relation of his elders, committed first to writing so dull a tale. As for
the multitude of writers that agree thereon, they are in effect but one writer, seeing the latest ever borrowed of the for∣mer, and they all of Cambrensis, who affirmeth it not, but one∣ly alleadgeth the received opinion of Irish Histories, yea ra∣ther in the foote of that Chapter, he seemeth to mistrust it, and posteth it over to the credit of his authors: so then if the greatest weight hereof doe consist in Irish antiquities, which the learned here confesse to be stuffed with such implements, notoriously felt to be vaine and frivolous, I trust I shall not seeme contentious, nor singular in damning such a fable, not onely false, but also impossible. Thus they say, In the yeare of the world, 1536. The Patriarch Noe began to preach ven∣gance upon the people for their accursed lives, to builde his Arke, o enforme his kindred and speciall friends severally, that within few yeares the earth should be sunke in waters, if they amended not. This did he before the generall flood one hundred and twentie yeares, when every man foreslept the monitiō,Cesara▪ onely a Neece of his named Cesara misdoubting the worst, and hearing her Vncle prophesie that all should be drowned for sinne, determined with her adherents, to seeke adventures into some forraine Island, perswaded that if shee might happely finde a Countrie never yet inhabited, and so with sinne undefiled, the generall sentence of Gods anger should there take no place. Whereupon she furnished a navy, and fled into Ireland, with three men, Bithi, Laigria, Fin∣tan, and fifty women, left unto her after many shipwrackes. The shore where she landed, & where she lyeth entombed, is at this day called Navicularum littus. The very stones where∣in the memorie hereof hath beene preserved from the vio∣lence of waters, were said to be seene of some. Within forty dayes after her footing in Ireland, the deluge prevailed uni∣versally, and all this coast was cast away.An. Dom. 1656 Now to ommit that part of this device, which is too flat, and ridiculous, if we consider that before the flood, no part of the Earth was knowen, nor touched beside Syria,Rab. Isaac. in Gen. 5. where the first age dwel∣led, that sailing was then utterly unheard of in the world, the first vessell being by Gods owne direction wrought, that she
might have sped at home, would she repent with more ease and surety, that Iapheth with the Hebrewes, and Iason with the Greekes, were the first pilots: that the Records hereof gra∣ven in stone, is but a borrowed invention from Iosephus. These things I say considered, it wilbe no hard matter to de∣scry the falshood, wherin I would be more exquisite, were it worth my labour. We need not so ambitiously runne to Ce∣sara, to begge a forged evidence, seeing without her helpe, Ireland must be confessed to have been knowne and peopled with the same kinred, even with the first Ilands of the world. For within three hundred yeares after the generall Floud, im∣mediately after the confusion of tongues, when Iapheth and his posterity, imboldened by the example of Noe, adventured by ship into divers West Ilands, there was in his retinew one of his progeny,Anno mundi 1957. after the best authors, which make 300. yeares, and not 100, betweene Noes floud and Ba∣bel. Bastolenus. Clem. recogn. l. 4. Bastolenus, who conceiving stomack and cou∣rage at the late successe of Nemrodus, Ninus his kinsman (then newly intruded upon the Monarch of Assyria) & wandred so farre West, intending to rule without compeeres, till For∣tune cast him and his people upon the coast of Ireland. There he settled with his three sonnes, Languinus, Salanus, Ruthur∣gus, active and stout gentlemen, who searching the Land through & through, left their owne names by three notable places, Languini stagnum, mons Salangi, since named S. Domi∣nicks hill, and Ruthurgi stagnum. Of Bastolenus is little remem∣bred, save that in short space with many hands working at once, he plained a great part of the Country, then overgrown with woods and thickets. This posterity kept the Land un∣der the government of these three sonnes & their off-spring, about 300. yeares. Together with Bastolenus, arrived in Ire∣land certaine godlesse people of the stocke of Nemrod, wor∣thily tearmed a gyant,Giants first in Ireland. as one that in bodily shape exceeded proportion, & used his strength to winne soveraigntie, & to oppresse the vveake vvith rapine and violence: That linage (Chams breed) grevv to great numbers, & alvvay bethought them of getting mastery, vvheresoever they tarryed. One cause vvas their bodily force ansvvereable to their hugenesse of quantity:Clem recognit. l. 4. another the example of Cham Zoroastes, that magi∣tian,
and Nemrodus, Ninus his Nephew, which two in them∣selves and their progenies, were renowned throughout the world, as victorious Princes over two mighty Kingdomes Aegypt and Assyria. Thirdly they maligned the blessings be∣stowed upon Sem and Iapheth, counting it necessary for them∣selves, to stirre, and prevent Dominions, lest the curse of sla∣very prophesied by Noe should light upon them, as notwith∣standing it did at last.Gen. 9. Thus irked, they began to kicke at their Governours, and taking head, set up a King of their owne faction, nourishing the same, and annoying the Subjects incessantlie, the successe on both sides was variable, quarrels increased, the enemie caught handfast, & every day bred a new skirmish. It seemed intolerable, & very necessity cōpelled them to try their whole force in one Battle, either utterly to weede out the Gyants, or to die free. Peace therefore concluded among themselves, for any private grudge hitherto maintayned, all sorts brake truce and amity with the Gyants, and straited them up so, that from all corners of the land, they must needes assemble into one field and fight for the better, maynelie they tugged certaine houres, but in conclusion the lawfull Kings prevay∣led, the miscreants done to death. See now the mockery of Fortune, Victors they were, and promised themselves a secu∣rity: Anger & insolencie over-turned all, for what with spoi∣ling the dead carcases, what with murthering the remaynder of that generation, man, woman, and childe, in all parts of the Realme, vouchsafing them no buryall, but casting them out like a sort of dead dogges,Anno mundi 2257. there ensued through the stench of those carryons such a mortall pestilence, infecting not onely the places where they lay, but the ayre round about by conta∣gion, that beside those few which by sea returned home∣ward, few escaped alive, and heereby hangeth a tale, From this plague (say the Irish) was preserved Ruanus the Gyant, who from time to time kept true record of their histories,Ruanus, who is of some thought to be Fin Macoole. else utterly done away by sundry casualties of death, warre, spoyle, fire, forraine victories, and he (forsooth) continued till the yeare of Christ 430. and told S. Patrick all the newes of
the country requiring of him to bee baptized, and so died, when he had lived no more but two thousand and forty one yeares: which is above twice the age of Methusalem. Had it beene my chaunce in Ireland,Gen. 5. to meete & conferre with this noble Antiquarie, hee might have eased me of much travell. These things I note for no other purpose, but that the simple stumbling upon such blinde legends should be warned to esteeme them as they are, idle fantasies, wherewith some of their Poets, dallyed at the first, and after through error and rudenes it was taken up for a sad matter. CAP. VIII. The severall Inhabitants of Ireland since Bastolenus. OF an infinite number of Gyants slaine, certaine hid families lurked and escaped the common mischiefe, whom at length penury constrayned to forsake their dennes, and to pilfer for meate, when they perceived the murraine of men and beasts, and that none gave them resistance, they waxed hardie, & search∣ing the land, found it wel-nigh desolate, wherefore they har∣boured themselves in the clearest coast: and easily subduing the poore soules remaining, revived their blood, and became Lords of the whole Iland 60. yeares. Gen. 10.Among the Sonnes of Iapheth, Genesis recounteth Magog who had now planted his people in Scithia within Tanaris, from whom at this day the Turkes are descended. They hea∣ring the hard happe of their fathers lyne, cast out by the col∣laterall braunches of Cham, the late King of the Bactrians, their odious neighbours,Anno Mundi 17. sent into Ireland Nemodus with his foure sonnes,Nemodus. Starius, Gerbavel, Amimus, Fergusius, captaines o∣ver a faire company, who passing by Greece and there taking up such as would seeke fortunes, finally landed here, held the country, multiplyed, but not without continuall warre upon
the Gyants aforesaid, who in th'end vanquished and chased them thence againe into Greece, after 216. yeares, from Anno mundi 2533. from which time untill the comming of Dela his sonnes, the Gyants possessed it peaceably without for∣reine invasion. But themselves being disordered, and measu∣ring all things by might, seditiously vexed each other, nor were they ever able to frame a common-wealth. That espyed five brethren, sonnes to Dela the Grecian,Ann. mundi 2714. no∣torious Pilots, named Gaudius, Genandius, Sagandius, Ruthera∣gius, Slanius, the posterity of Nemodus expulsed successors,The sonnes of Dela. who fortified their navyes, and finding the Countrey but weake, wanne it entirely, rooted out the old enemy, divided the Iland into five parts, & in each of them severally raigned, for better contentation of all sides, they agreed to fixe a meare stone in in the middle point of Ireland, to which stone every of their Kingdomes should extend, and be partakers of the commo∣dities then chiefly found in that soile. These are also supposed to have invented the distribution of shires into Cantredes,Cantredes. e∣very Cantrede or Barony, conteining an hundred Towne∣ships, wherewith the name and use of hundreds, well knowne in England, might seeme to accord. Variance for the chiefty set the foure brethren at a lovve ebbe, and then Slanius perched over them all, encroached eve∣ry vvay round about the middle stone certaine miles for pro∣vision and furniture of his ovvne houshold, vvhich plott in time obtained the name of one generall part, and novv maketh up the fift, Media.Meth. Meth it vvas called either for moytie of Cantredes, being but sixteene, vvhereas the rest comprised thirty tvvo apeece, or for the site thereof in the navell of Ireland. This hee assigned to the Mo∣narch a surplus over and above his Inheritance, vvhich not∣vvithstanding grevv to a severall Kingdome, and allovved thereof certaine parts by composition. Not long after dyed Slanius, & vvas buryed in a mountaine of Meth that carri∣eth his name. Thirty yeares the Monarchy vvas possessed in this order, but shortly the Princes ovving fealty, beganne to stomack the Intrusion of Slanius, & vvhen he vvas once rid,
they disdained his successour, whereupon ensued everlasting Battels. The Monarchy was laide downe, then fell they at de∣bate for the land of Meth, which strife could never be appea∣sed. In the necke of those troubles came over a new army of Scithians, who claymed also from Nemodus their fore-father, and they tooke parts, and made parts, set all in uproare with sword,Ann. mundi 2800. and havocke. To be short, they spent themselves one upon another so fiercely and furiously, that now they recko∣ned not what nation or what souldiour they received in, to keepe up or beate downe a side. By which occasion the Brit∣taines also put in a foot, who discovering the state of the land to their Princes,Brennus. opened a gappe for Brennus the brother of Belinus, to direct his course thither vvith the same Navy vvhich he had furnished to serve Signimius then King of Ly∣ons amid the Galles in France. But Brennus took small effect. Before him also divers Kings of Brittaine had scope in Ire∣land. Insomuch that Gurguntius the sonne of Beline, repu∣ted the same by lineall descent among his ovvne Domini∣ons. Notvvithstanding they never injoyed it longer then they could keepe possession perforce, and often vvere they repelled and vvearyed vvith seeking after it, as vvherein they found small fruite, and blovves enough. Lastly came the Spaniards from Biscaye, conducted by foure Captaines, of vvhose arryvall before I speake, I must re∣peate their originall somevvhat farther, and so give a light to the assoyling of a controversie, that is, vvhether the Irish came from Aegypt, or from Spaine. It shall appeare they came from both.
CAP. IX. The arrivall of the Spaniards, then called Iberians, into Ireland. IN the yeare of the World 2436. after the uni∣versall floud 780. while the children of Israell served in Aegypt, Gathelus the sonne of Neale,Hector. Both. l. 1. Hist. Scot. a great Lord in Greece, was upon disfavour exiled the Country with a number of his faction, adherents, and friends. The young Greeke being very wise, valiant and well spoken,Ioh. Major. de gestis Scot. lib. 1. cap. 9. got honourable entertainement with Pharao surna∣med Amaenophis king of Aegypt, and in short space reached to such a credit that he espoused the Kings base Daughter Scota, whereof the Scotts are thought to be named. This match bred to the King some tumult,Gathelus. and to the young Gentle-man much envy,Exod. 14. wherefore assoone as the foresaid Amaenophis was drowned in the Red Sea, the Princes of Aegypt so vexed Gathelus and his wife, that they were faine to buske them, withall their traine into Europe, and came first to Lusitania, where diverse of his people tyred with travaile, would needs abide, he builded there the city of Brigantia, called afterwards Novium, now Compostella.Hector. Boeth. lib. 1. The remnant passed with him into Ireland, where the Barbarians highly honoured him, for his cunning in all languages, who also greatly perfected and beautified the Irish tongue, taught them letters, sought up their antiquities, practised their youth in martiall feates, after his Greeke and Aegyptian manner. Finally so well he pleased them that to gratifie such a Benefactour, they were content to name the Iland after him Gathelia, and after his wife Sco∣tia. Truely that Scotia is the auncient appellation of Ireland, all Chroniclers agree, as it shalbe more plaine, when wee touch the Scottish pedigree. A brute there is in Ireland but uncertainelie fathered, that in remembrance of Pharao, their good lord, the Kerne pitching his Dart, cryeth of courage faro, faro; but the learned thinke that to bee taken from the Spaniard, who in his Ioco dicano ex∣claymeth
fabo, fabo. The people left in the coast of Spaine, founded the city of Bayon, now part of Gascoigne, and replenished all the shore towards Africk,Ann. mundi 2642. and the edges of Portugall, Castile, Galaecia, towardes the sea Cantabricum, well nigh 200. yeares, after which time some of them began to minde another travaile, because they were pestered with Inhabitants, and whether they ever sped to Ireland, it is unknowne, at the leastwise in the raigne of Gurguntius the Brittaine, then chiefe Lord of Bayon, foure brethren Spaniards, whereof two are noted, Hiberus and Hirimon,Hiberus and Hirimon. not the sonnes of Gathelus (as writeth Boethius) but his off-spring, understanding that divers Western Ilands were empty, desirous to live in ease and elbovv-room, sayled Westvvard vvith a great retinue of men,The head Captaine was Bartholmew, as many Au∣thors affirme. vvomen and babes, hovering long about the Ilands Orchades in 60. great ships, untill by good hap they met vvith Gurguntius, then re∣turning from the conquest of Denmarke,Fab. part. 2. vvho had refused to pay him the tribute, vvhich Belinus his father vvan, him they besought (considering their vvant of victuals,Grafton. p. 60. unable any longer to dvvell in their ships, accumbred vvith carriage of vvomen & children) to direct & further them to some place of habitation, proffering to become his liege people to hold the same of him & his heires for ever. The King advising himselfe, remembred vvith vvhat difficultie he kept the Irish in subjection, & conceived hope that these strangers vvould endeavor either to stub out that unruly generation, or to nur∣ture them.Ann. mundi 392. & so taking their oathes and hostages, he mann'd their ships, stored thē vvith victuall & munition, & seated thē in Ireland. Thus had the Brittaines an elder right to the Re∣alme of Ireland, then by the conquest of Henry the 2. vvhich title they never surceased to claime, & somtimes prevailed, as in the dayes of King Arthur, to vvhom the Irish Princes ag∣nized their tribute and apparance, made at his Parliament in urbe Legionū, vvhich I take to be Westchester, called of old Car∣leon, as divers other citties vvere, vvherein the Romanes pla∣ced the legions. Again the Kings of Britain vvere thē Lords of the place vvhence this people came, so as their vvinnings must
have beene the Kings Dominion. To all this when their owne free assent, the dedition of other Princes, lawfull conquest and prescription is adjoyned, it forceth an invincible title. But to prosecute our purpose, Those Iberians being substantially ayded of Gurguntius, en∣joyed the Lands, bestowed themselves foure brethren into foure parts thereof, untill their pride and ambition armed two against other two, Hiberus and his brother against Hi∣rimon and his. In this conflict Hirimon slew Hiberus, and raigned quietly. At this time the countrey was first named I∣bernia, as I have declared in the third Chapter. The King to avoyde obloquie and slaunder, purged himselfe to his sub∣jects, that neither maliciously nor contentiously, but for his necessary defence and safeguard he had borne armes against his brother. And to witnesse how farre he was from desire to rule alone, he nominated speciall Captaines to be Kings under him of their severall Countryes, reserving to himselfe but one fourth part, and the portion of Meth allotted to the Monarchie for the better maintenance of his part. These afterward clambered into five Kingdomes incom∣patible, Leinster, Connaght, Vlster,Severall King∣domes in Ire∣land. Mounster in two por∣tions, and sometimes to more by usurpations and compo∣sitions. but ever one was elected the Monarch over all. An hundred and thirtie chiefe Kings are reckoned of this Nation from Hirimon to Laigirus the sonne of Nealus mag∣nus, in whose time the blessed Bishop Patricius converted them to Christianity.
CAP. X. The comming of the Picts into Ireland.An. Dom▪ 120. Bed. l. 1. c. 1.NOW lived the Irish in tollerable order under their sundry Kings, and applyed themselves to peace and gathering of wealth, when sud∣dainely Rodericke a Red-shank of Scythia fled thither with a small company of Galleyes, and winde-driven in compassing round about the British coast,Picts. were happely blowne ashore into Ireland. These are the Picts, a people from their cradle dissentious, land-leapers, mercilesse, sowre and hardy, being presented to the King, they craved Interpreters,Ioh. Maior▪ de gest. Scot▪ l. 1. c. 10. which granted, Roderick their Chieftaine uttered for him and his, the request in this manner. The words of Roderick King of Picts.Not as degenerate from the courage of our auncestors, but inclining our selves to the bent and swaye of fortune, we are become suppliants to Ireland, that never before have hum∣bled our selves to any, Looke Sir King, eye us well, It is not light prowesse that hath caused these valiant bodies to stoop. Scithians we are, and the Picts of Scithia, great substance of glory lodgeth in these two names, what shall I tell of the ci∣vill Tumult that hath made us leave our home? or rippe up old Historyes to make strangers bemoane us? Let our vas∣sailes and children discourse it at large and leysure, if perhaps you vouchsafe us any leysure in the Land: To which effect and purpose your infinite necessities pray your favours. A King of a King, Men of Men, Princes can consider how neere it concerneth their honour and surety to proppe up the state of a King defaced by Treason, and men will remember no∣thing better beseemeth the nature of man, then to feele by compassion the griefes of men. Admit we beseech you these scattered reliques of Scithia, If your Realmes bee narrow, we are not many▪ If the soyle be barren, we are born
to hardnesse. If you live in peace, we are your subjects. If you warre, we are your Souldiours. We aske no kingdome, no wealth, no triumph in Ireland. We have brought our selves, and left these casualtyes with the enemie. Howsoever it like you to esteeme of us, we shall easily learne to like it, when we call to minde, not what we have beene, but what we are. Great consultations was had upon this request,The Answer. and many things debated too and fro. In the end they were answered, that their antiquities layde forcible arguments, wherefore it could not be expedient to accept the Scithians into Ireland, that mingling of natiōs in a Realme breedeth quarrels reme∣dilesse, that Ireland finding scarcity rather of roome then of people, that those few inferred amongst a many might quick∣ly disturbe and put the whole out of joynt. But quoth they, though wee may not dwell together yet shall you finde us your very good neighbours and friends. Not farre hence ly∣eth the Iland of Brittaine, in the north thereof: your manhood and polycies shall winne you scope enough, our Capitaines shall conduct you the way, our strength shall helpe to settle you, addresse your shippes and hye you thither. With this perswasion they shaped course towards the north of Brittaine, now called Scotland,Iohn Stow. where contrary to all expe∣ctation Marius the King awayted their comming, and gave them there a sharpe battle, wherein Rodericke was slaine, with diverse of his band. Them which remained and ap∣pealed to mercy, he licensed to inhabite the uttermost bor∣ders of Scotland: Wives they wanted to encrease their Issue, and because the Brittaines scorned to match their daughters with such a froward and beggerly people, the Picts continu∣ed their first acquaintance with the Irish and by entreaty ob∣tained wives from them, conditionally that if the Crowne should happe to fall in question they should then yeeld thus much prerogative to the woman as of the female blood roy∣all, rather then of the male to choose their Prince, which Co∣venant, saith S. Bede, the Picts are well knowne to keepe at this day.Bede lived an. Dom. 70. But long afore this time the Scottish Chronicles mention
the arrivall of Almaine Picts into the marches now of Eng∣land and Scotland, vvith vvhom certaine Irish called then al∣so Scotts joyned against the Brittaines,Anno Mundi 577. ante Christum 330. devising to erect a kingdome there, aswell to fortify themselves as to gratifie the Irish, who detracting their obedience lately promised to Gur∣guntius, practised all they might to abridge the kingdome of the Brittaines. First therefore came from Ireland, Fergusius the sonne of Ferchardus, a man very famous for his skill in blaso∣ning of armes. Himselfe bare the Red Lyon rampant in a golden field.Ioh. Major. lib. 2. cap. 1. There was in Ireland a monument of Marble fashioned like a Throne, which Simon Brecke a companion to Hiberus and his brethren found in the journey, & because he deemed the finding thereof to be ominous to some King∣dome, he brought it along with him, and layde it up in the country for a Iewell. This marble Fergusius obtained to∣wards the prospering of his voyage, and in Scotland he left it, which they used many yeares after in Coronation of their King at Scona. But Fergusius though he be scored in the row of Kings, for one, and the first, yet he held himselfe there ob∣scurely, sundry times beat backe into Ireland, where he was finallie drowned by misfortune within the Creeke of Knockfergus. That Fergusius encountred with Coilus the Brittaine and slew him, as writeth the Scotts, it is impossible except they mistake the name of Coilus for Calius, with whom indeede the age of Fergusius might well meete, and the rather for that in the first yeare of his raigne, the Picts entred, and then Fergusius immediately after them, 330. yeares ere Christ was borne. Now Coilus raigned in the yeare of our Lord, 124. about which time befell the second arrivall of the Picts in Brittaine, so it seemeth they mistake by a slight error, Coilus for Calius, and the second arrivall of the Picts, for the former. This confusion of Histories is learnedly noted by Cooper in his generall collection of Chronicles.
CAP. XI. How the Irish setled themselves in Scotland. REturne wee now to the course of our Historie,An. Dom. 160. Ioh Major. l. 1. cap. 11. Bed. l 1. c. 1. while the Picts were bestowed in the north of Brittaine and waxed populous, the Irish made sundry arrands over to visite their Daughters, Ne∣phewes, and kindred. In often comming and going, they no∣ted waste places, and little Ilands not replenished, but rather neglected and suffered to grow wilde. Hereof in Ireland they advertised their Prince, namely Reuther or Rheuda,Rheuda. who be∣ing the Issue of Fergusius, bethought himselfe of his interest to certaine peeces of land beside the nation of the Picts. Hee therefore well appointed, partly by composition, and some deale perforce stepped into those hamlets which no man oc∣cupied, & proceeded hansomely to reare his kingdome. By little and little he edged forward, and got betweene the Picts and Brittaines on this side the Scottish banke, which he pos∣sessed but a season. The place was thereof named Rheudis∣dale, now Riddesdale, (asmuch to say, as the part of Rheuda) for dahal in their language, signifieth part. In those quarters after sundry conflicts with the borderers, hee was by them slaine, but the kingdome lasted in his successours still, and the tvvo nations the Picts and the Irish lovingly suffered each o∣ther to thrive. The Scotts caught up the Islands & the Fron∣tiers. The Picts dwelt in the middle: Soone after the peace betweene them, vvent suspitions & the diversities of people, place, custome, language, vvith the memorie of old grudges stirred up such inward jealousies and hate, that it seemed they were easie to kindle, & as in such factions, there never want∣eth drifte to drive a tumult, so it happened that certaine of the Nobilitie of the Scotts resciant next them had with some difficultie, received out of Greece a Molossian Hound,Ioh. Maior. de gest. Scot. l. 5▪ c. 15. which breede both in swiftnesse of foote, and in svveetnesse of ope∣ning, vvas reputed peerelesse.
This Hound, a willfull Gentleman, a Pict stole home, and therewith gratified his Prince, glad of the novelty, and little thoughtfull of the displeasure.Lucan. li. 5. Contrarywise the Irish, wood for anger at this dishonour, and injury, assembled in poste haste under Eugenius their King, and after brawling, fell to spoyle, and so to blowes; whereof parts and stomackes be∣ing even,An. Dom. 28. the fortune was variable. In this division they scambled out a few yeares, untill the malice of Carassus a Brit∣taine forced a quietnesse betweene them to abuse their helpe against th'Empire. But hee was shortly slaine by Alectus the Romane Captaine, and hereupon the old sore waxed rawe: To heape the mischiefe, a Brittish Lord named Maximus, a∣spiring to the kingdome, sent an ambassadge to Ethodius king of Picts, pleading with him a league of friendship, utterly to expulse the Irish Scot: conditioning withall their assistance to chase the Romanes out of Brittaine, which was concluded, and by this confederacie, after many lamentable skirmishes, the Irish were betrayed, Eugenius the King, Ethai his brother, and Ericus his nephew, and also the residue, such as could e∣scape the enemies sword, fled thence, some into Norway, some into Ireland their first home. An. Dom. 353.Maximus watching his time, despairing of the Brittish Kingdome, and espying the Picts tyred vvith continuall vvarres, turned his povver upon them, and brought them to such an exigent, that they had no readier shift then to crave helpe from Ireland,To. Maior. li. 2. c. 1. and so by degrees vvhen some private per∣sons, nourishers of the quarrell, vvere out-vvorne, the matter of malice vvas qualified, and the remnant of the Irish Scots, vvith their friends and off-spring called home to their dvvel∣ling, after their first banishment, 43. yeares expired. From this time forvvard the amity vvaxed steddy, and the Irish under Fergusius the second their King vvan such credit,An. Dom. 398. that finally the nation of Picts vvere afflicted by the Brit∣taines, then the Scots incroched into the heart of the Realme, and became the mightier and more populous, of vvhom the Countrey vvas ever since under one Generall name called Scotland.
Thus you see the Scotts a lively, stirring, ancient,An. Dom. 423· & victo∣rious people, are mixed first of Brittaines, (though the Chro∣nicles dissemble it) whom Brutus planted there with Albana∣ctus: Secondly, of Picts: Thirdly and chiefly, of the Irish, which after this time left the name of Scott, for those in Brit∣taine, and delighted rather to be called Irish. Then came up the distinction of Scotia major for Ireland, and Scotia minor for the Scotts in Brittaine. But most effectually (as saith Cambrensis) the Scotts pre∣vayled under the guiding of six valiant Gentlemen,Distinct. 3. Sonnes to Muridus King of Vlster, who in the time that Neale the great enjoyed the monarchy of Ireland, going to succour their countrymen there, at last also tooke up for themselves no lit∣tle portions of ground, which their posterity kept in Cambren∣sis time, the yeare of Christ 1200. who treateth their exploits more largely in his Topography of Ireland. Ever since then, they were utterly named and esteemed Scotts:Ioh Major. l. 1. cap. 10. The nation of the Picts driven into corners, albeit the most parts & the out Isles retaine at this day a people mungrell betwixt both, cal∣led Redshanks. The Scotts write that their King Gregorius,Pol. l. 1. Angl. hist. in an. Dom. 875. invaded Ireland as his lawfull inheritance, and the same conquered, who lieth buried in one of their out-Iles, called Iona, beautified with the Sepultures of Scot∣tish Kings, where the Irish tongue is their native language, & therefore they call the submission of the Irish to Henry the 2. a defection from Scotland, which neverthelesse they recke, ne regard not, but willfully did forgoe it, as reaping lesse then they expended, and unable to defray the growing charge, which cost considered little better then nothing, say they, the King of England winneth by keeping of Ireland. Yet in the late governement of S. Henry Sidney, Vlster being conveyed by discent, & act of Parliament to the Crowne, which Earle∣dome was in the time of Edward the third reckoned at thirty one thousand markes yearely, the same being but one fift part of Ireland, It seemeth that if this right be well prosecuted that Ireland might pay it selfe of necessaries, and yeeld sufficient benefit to the Princes Coffers.
CAP. XII. The conversion of the Irish to Christianity. An. Dom. 42.ABout this time, Holy Church being stayed in peace, enriched with possessions, supported with authority, many noble Clearkes flourishing in diverse Realmes, the Holy Doctor Augustine yet in life:Nicephor. l. 14· cap. 40· Plat. in Caele∣stin. 1. Theodosius the second, suppressing Idols in all the Em∣pyre: Celestinus 1. Bishop of Rome, conferred with his cleargy touching the instruction specially of the vvestern parts, wher∣in the faith of Christ was hitherto, either not planted, or by persecution extinct, or by corruption of Hereticks defaced: of them all, no country was more lamented then Ireland, which partly for distance from the heart of Christendome, partly for their infinite rudenesse, had yet received no fruit of true Religion. In that assembly was Palladius Arch-Deacon of Rome, a good Priest and well learned, who profered his charitable travaile towards the conversion of any those lands, whither he should be by them directed and appointed. The Pope knowing the sufficiency of the man, did consecrate Pal∣ladius a Bishop,Vita S. Patricij. authorized his journey, furnished his wants, associated to him, diverse religious persons, delivered him the Holy Bible, with great solemnities, and certaine monuments of Peter and Paul, whereat diverse miracles had beene shew∣ed. He arryved in the North of Ireland, whence he escaped hardly with his life, into the Ilands adjoyning, there preach∣ing and converting many, erecting monasteries, and ensueing his vocation so painefully, that the onely report of his holy∣nesse and cunning, excited the Scotts (late christened, but abi∣ding in scisme, and committing the function of Bishoppes to single Preists,) to call him thither, whereunto he assented, upon the Popes answere, and leaving his Disciples in the Isle, became the speciall apostle of Scotland, where he spent the residue of his time, with more fruite then among the Irish. Hereunto Celestinus condiscended the easier,Ioh. Major. l. . cap, 2. Prosp. Aquit. in Chroni. for that in the
very point of Palladius his departure, Patricius attended at Rome to bee sent with leave and benediction into Ireland. In which attempt hee found such joyfull successe, so farre different from their accustomed frowardnesse, that a man would weene the Realme had beene reserved for him. And because it pleased God to worke to the Land such an universall benefite by the meanes of this holy Patriarch, I take it convenient to set downe briefly here his course of life, after the most approoved Chronicles that I could finde. Patricius was borne in the marches of England and Scot∣land, in a sea towne called then Taburnia,The life of S. Patrick. whose father Calphrune (as writeth Ioseline) was a Deacon and a Priests sonne, his mother Conches was sister to S. Martin,Ioselin. of Fur∣ness. the fa∣mous Bishoppe of Toures in France. The childe was from his cradle brought up in the Faith, and much given to devotion. Novv vvere the Irish through the helpe of the Scots and Picts, arch-pirats of the narrovv seas, and used to sacke litle vveake villages scattered along the shore, and for vvant of other prey, to bring the Inhabitants home Captives, vvith others also vvas taken this Patricius,Ex Epist. Pa∣tricij. a ladde of six∣teene yeares olde, being then a student of secular learning,An. Dom. 386. and became the Villaine of an Irish Lord called Mackbiam, from vvhom after sixe yeares hee redeemed himselfe vvith a peece of gold vvhich hee found in a clod of earth, nevvly turned up by the svvyne hee kept the time of his Banish∣ment (as affliction commonly maketh men religious.) This vvith the regard of his former education, printed in him such remorse and humility, that being from thenceforth utterly vveaned from the vvorld, hee betooke himselfe to contemplation, ever lamenting the lacke of grace and truth in that Land, vvherefore not despairing, but that in continuance, some good might bee vvrought upon them, hee learned their tongue perfectly, and alluring one companion vvith him for his exercises, he departed thence into France, ever casting backe his eye to the conversion of Ireland, vvhose babes yet unborn, seemed to him in his dream
(from out their mothers vvombes) to call for Christendome. In this purpose he sought out Martinus his Vncle, by vvhose meanes the yong man entred under the government of Ger∣manus then Bishop of Antisiodore, vvhose scholler and fa∣miliar he vvas forty yeares, bestovving all that time in prayer and study of eloquence and holy Scriptures. Then at the age of threescore and two yeares, being renowned through the Latine Church for his wisdome, vertue, and skill, hee came home to Rome, recommended with letters from the French Bishops,An Dom· 430. to Pope Celestine, to whom he uttered his full mind, and the secret vow which long since he had conceived tou∣ching Ireland. The Pope invested him Archbishop and Pri∣mate of the whole Iland, blessed him, commaunded publique prayer and fasting, brought him and his disciples onward on the voyage. Therefore in the tvventie third yeare of The∣odosius the younger, which was the yeare of our Lord 430. Patricke landed in Ireland: and because he spake the tongue plentifully, being a reverent personage, he tooke holy Bible, adding thereto diverse miracles in the Name & vertue of IE∣SUS whom he preached: many listened unto him, namely such as in the late entertainement of Palladius and Albius the Irish Bishops his Disciples, had some little feeling in the Go∣spell. In continuance, hee wanne the better part of that Kingdome, except Laigirus himselfe sonne of Neale the great Monarch, who (notvvithstanding hee relyed no∣thing to the Gospell yet) because hee stopped not the course thereof, nor forbid any that list to embrace it, the Bishop denounced to him a curse from God, according∣ly tempered vvith mercy and judgement, that during his life hee should bee victorious, but after him, nei∣ther the Kingdome should stand, nor his linage inhe∣rite. Thence hee journeyed vvith a great number of his Disciples and friends to Conill Lord of Connaght, (vvho honourably reputed him, and vvith all his people vvas converted) and then sent him to Logan his Brother, King of Leinster, vvhom hee likevvise persvvaded. In Mounster he vvas highly honoured of the Earle of Daris, vvho gave him
a dwelling in the East angle of Ardmagh, called Secta, where hee erected many Celles and Monasteries, replenished with votarious men and women. Thirty yeares continu∣ally hee travailed in preaching through the Land, ever lea∣ving behinde him Bishops and Priests, whose learning and holinesse by the speciall grace of God shortly repai∣red the faith so begunne, other thirty yeares hee spent in his Province of Ardmagh among his ghostly bre∣thren, in visitation of those religious Houses, which by his meanes were founded, so hee lived in the whole one hundred twentie two yeares,An. Dom. 492. and lyeth buryed in Downe. CAP. XIII. Of Saint Patrickes Purgatory. EVery History of Ireland that I have seene, maketh one severall title De mirabilibus Hi∣berniae, and therein with long processe trea∣teth of severall Ilands, some full of Angels, some full of devils, some for male only, some for female, some where poore may live, some where none can dye: finally such effects of waters, stones, trees, and trinkets, that a man would vveene them to be but heedlesse and uncertaine tales by their complexion. Verily, being inquisitive of these matters, I could finde no one of them soothed by such persons upon whose relation I am disposed to venture. Onely the place behinde Ardmagh called S. Patricks Purgatory, because it is knovvne and con∣fessed, and because I vvould be discharged of my Readers ex∣pectation, who perhaps vvith the name of S. Patricke look∣eth to bee informed thereof, I can bee content to put so much in vvriting, as Bookes and reports affirme vvith most likelyhood. Tvvo things I muse at, that neither the time nor the author
of so strange erection was preserved. Concerning the time one Record putteth it in Anno Domini 302. which is 128. yeares before S. Patricke converted Ireland, and sixty sixe yeares before his birth. Againe Cambrensis who maketh curi∣ous recitall of wonders in the land, never uttereth word of this Purgatory; & though a negative authority be not invin∣cible, yet considering the propertie of that man, and what a sort of trifles he taketh paine to justifie, it may serve for a ve∣hement suspition, that the place was then either not found, or not miraculous. Concerning the Author, very few there are that referre it to this Patricke their Apostle, but rather to an Abbot of the same name, whom I marvaile I finde not in the mighty bigge volume of their Saints: Notwithstanding these Originalls might bee either lost or altered, but the thing it selfe being extant, must needes have had a beginning, where∣of possibly there are monuments in that Church, or in the I∣rish tongue to me unwitting. Therefore I hold him unwise that will utterly mistrust the principall, because the circumstances vary; or condemne the vvhole, because he could not reach to the undoubted truth of some part. If any man bee so delicate, that not a jote thereof vvill sinke into his head, vvho shall con∣troule him? neither hee nor vvee are bound to believe any story besides that vvhich is delivered us from the Scri∣ptures, and the consent of Gods Church. Let the discreet Rea∣der judge of it. This I learne, that the holy Abbot Patricius secundus, not the Bishop their Apostle, laboured the conversion of the people of Vlster, vvhich being novv Christians, could yet at no hand be vvonne to renounce their olde sensuality, cruel∣ty,Polichro l. 1. ca. 35. Trevis. ibid. murthers, extortion. And vvhen he much inforced the life to come, they replyed unto him vvith contempt, that unlesse they savv proofes of these Ioyes and paines hee preached, they vvould never leese possession of the pleasures in hand, for hope or dread of things to come they vvist not vvhen. At their importunacie hee besought God, vvere it his good pleasure to give out some evident token
of the maters they required: finally by the special direction of God he found in the north edge of Vlster a desolate angle hemmed in round, & in the mids thereof a pit, where he rea∣red a Church, closed the same with a wall, bestowed there∣in Canons regular, at the East end of this Church yarde, a doore leadeth into a closet of stone, which they call the Pur∣gatory, because devout people have resorted thither for pen∣nance, and reported at their returne, strange visions of paine and blisse appearing to them. They used to continue therein foure & twenty houres, which doing one while with ghost∣ly meditations, and another while a dreadfull conscience of their deserts, they saw as they say, a plaine resembling of their owne faults and vertues, with the horror and comfort there∣to belonging, that one so terrible, the other so joyous, that they verily deeme themselves for the time to have sight of heaven and hell. The revelations of men that went in (Saint Patricke yet living) are kept vvritten vvithin the saide Ab∣bey. When any person is disposed to enter (for the doore is ever sparred) he repaireth first for advice to the Archbishop, vvho casteth all perils, and dissvvadeth him, because they say diverse never came backe againe, but if the party be resolute, he recommendeth him to the Pryor, vvho in like manner fa∣vourably exhorteth him not to hazard such a danger, if not∣vvithstanding he finde the party fully bent, he conducteth him to this Church, enjoyneth him to begin vvith prayer, fast and vigill o 15. dayes, so long together as in discretion can be endured. This time expired, if he yet persevere in his former purpose, the vvhole Convent accompanieth him vvith so∣lemne procession and benediction to the mouth of the cave, vvhere they let him in, & so barre up the doore till the mor∣rovv, & then vvith like ceremonies they avvaite his returne, & reduce him to the Church. If he be seene no more, they fast & pray 15. dayes after. Touching the credit of those matters, I see no cause but a Christian man assuring himself that there is both hel & heaven, may vvithout vanity upon sufficient in∣formation, be persuaded that it might please God at somtime for considerations to his infinit vvisdome knovvn to reveale
by miracles the vision of Ioyes & paines eternal, but that alto∣gether in such sort, & so ordinarily, & to such persons, and by such meanes as the common fame & some records therof doe utter, I neither believe, nor wish to be regarded. It appeares by Trevisa in his additions to Polichronicon, that a superstitious o∣pinion of this Purgatory was then conceived, which he dis∣proveth. And a man of indifferent judgement may soone su∣spect that in the drift and strength of Imagination, a contem∣plative person would happely suppose the sight of many strange things which he never saw. Since writing hereof I met with a Priest, who told mee that he had gone the same pilgrimage, and affirmed the order of the premisses: But that he for his owne part saw no sight in the world, save onely fearefull dreames when he chanced to nod, and those he saith were exceeding horrible: further he added, that the faste is ra∣ted more or lesse, according to the quality of the penitent, and that the place seemed to him scarcely able to receive sixe per∣sons. CAP. XIIII. The Irish Saints. THough my search thereof in this my haste out of the land be very cumbersome, yet being loath to neglect the memory of Gods friends, more glorious to a Realme then all the victories and triumphs of the world, I thinke it good to furnish out this chapter with some extracts touching the Saints of Ireland, namely those that are most notable, mentioned by authors of good credit.Distinct, 3.6. Brigid. Colum. Cambrensis telleth, that in S. Patricks time flouri∣shed S. Bride the virgin, and S. Columbe in Doune, where their bodies soone after the conquest, and also S. Patrickes body were found, Sir Iohn Courcye being then President of Vlster. In vievving of the sepulture hee testifieth to have seene three principall jevvells, vvhich vvere then translated as ho∣nourable monuments vvorthie to be preserved.
Of S. Columbe it is doubted, whether he lived in that age.Ex Vitis san∣ctorum Hiber∣niae. Bri∣gide was base Daughter of Dubtachus a Captaine in Leinster, who perceiving the Mother with child, sold her secretly, fea∣ring the jealousy of his wife, to a Irish Poet, reserving to him∣selfe, the fruite of her wombe, she was there delivered of this Brigide, whom the Poet trained up in letters, and so convey∣ed her home to her father.An. Dom. 439. The Damosell was schooled in the faith by S. Patricke, preaching then in those parts, she be∣came so religious, and so ripe in judgement,An Dom. 48. that not onely the multitude, but a whole synode of Bishoppes assembled by Dublin, used her advice in weighty causes, and highly estee∣med her. One fact of hers being yet a childe, made her fa∣mous. The King of Leinster had given to Dubtachus in to∣ken of singular affection, for his good service, a rich sword. Now it befell, that the maiden visiting her sicke neighbours, diversly distressed for hunger, (her father being a sterne man, his Lady a shrewe) she saw none other helpe to releive these wretched people, but to part the Iewels of that idle sword a∣mong them. This matter was haynously taken, and came to the Kings eares, who (comming shortly after to a Banquet in her fathers house) demaunded the Girle, not yet nine yeares old, how she durst presume to deface the gift of a King, shee answered, that it was bestowed upon a better King, then hee was, whom (quoth she) finding in such extremity, I would have given all my father hath, and all that thou hast, yea your selves and all, were yee in my power to give, rather then Christ should starve. At convenient age she professed virginity, and allured o∣ther noble Virgins to her fellowship, with whom she lived in her owne Monastery, untill the yeare of our Lord 500. and was buried at Downe, in the Tombe of S. Patricke, what Cambrensis reporteth of his own knowledge and sight, I will be bold to adde hereunto. Among her reliques, was found a concordance of the 4. Evangelists, seeming to bee written with no mortall hand, beautified with mysticall pictures in the margent, whose co∣lours and workemanship, at the first blush were darke and
unpleasant, but in the view wonderful liuely and artificiall. Senanus first a Souldiour,Senanus. succeeded S. Patricke in the See of Ardmagh,An. Dom. 493. when he had beene certaine yeares a minor and do∣ctour to the Campe.Brendan. Brendan Abbot at the age of ten yeares, was of such incomparable holinesse, and thereto so wise and lettered, that his parents thinking themselves to have wonne the most notable fruite, that could ensue their marriage, by mutuall consent professed continencie. Hee flourished in the time of S. Bride, lived familiarly with Ercus the Bishop, and Finan the Abbot. Madoc alias Edan of noble parentage, taken prisoner with the King of Temore,An. Dom 456. Edan, or Ma∣doc. and kept in his court with diverse yong∣men his schoole-fellowes, openly adjured the King to suffer him and them to depart and serve God, as they were accusto∣med, which being now sundred and distrayned of libertie they had partly discontinued, immediately they were dismis∣sed: he died Bishop of Fernes, and laide the foundation of that Burrogh.Molingus. Molingus the successor of S. Madoc being Bishop tooke himselfe to voluntary labour, & with his owne hands, drived a running spring to his Monastery, enduring that tra∣vaile dayly after prayer and study,Fintan. eight yeares together. Fin∣tan the Abbot was had in such veneration, that whereas Colm King of Leinster, kept prisoner Cormak the Kings sonne of Kensill: He went boldly with 12. of his Disciples through the presse of the Souldiours, and in sight of the King, rescued the young Prince, for the Irish in no wayes are outragious a∣gainst holy men. I remember, Cambrensis writeth himselfe, merrily to have objected to Morris then Archbishop of Ca∣shell, that Ireland in so many hundred yeares had not brought forth one Martyr. The Bishop answered pleasantly, (but alluding to the late murther of Thomas of Canter∣bury,) Our people (quoth he) notwithstanding their other e∣normities yet have ever more spared the bloode of Saints, marry now we are delivered to such a nation, that is well ac∣quainted with making Martyrs, henceforwards I trust this complaint shall cease. Malachias·Malachias was borne in Ardmagh of noble parents,An. Dom. 1014 che∣rished
in vertue by example of his Mother, and trayned up in learning, even yet a very babe, he vvas oft-times espied to steale from his companions to pray in secret, so grave & mo∣dest, that of himselfe he choosed alwayes the most severe and rigorous Schoolemasters, and refused an excellent Clerke, on∣ly because he saw him, somewhat lightly demeaned at game. In the beginning of his youth hee yeelded himselfe the Dis∣ciple of Imarius, an old recluse,Bernard. in vi∣ta Malach. whose austerity of conversati∣on, the whole towne admired. There he became a Deacon, and at twenty five yeares a Priest. The Archbishop for the fame and opinion of his worthinesse, made him his Coadju∣tor, in the which office he reformed superstitions and revived the strength of religion, specially the uniformitie of their Church service, wherein before time they jarred.Banchor. The famous monastery of Banchor he reedified, of the patrimony & lega∣cies by his Vncle left him. The same Monastery was of old time, first governed by Congellus, and then proceeded Colum∣banus, the father of many religious houses in France. Banchor had beene so stored with Moncks, that no houre of day nor night they ceased, but some company or other was in conti∣nuall succession at divine service. Of which brethren there were in one day murthred 900. and the place spoyled, whose possessions conveyed to Malachias by his Vncle, hee restored forthwith, and bettered the foundation. At the age of thirtie yeares, he was by Canonicall election forced to accept the Bishopricke of Conereth, a people of all the Irish then most savage and bestiall, whom he with inestimable toyle re∣claymed. In the meane while died Celsus Archbishop of Ardmagh, to whom succeeded Malachias, at the age of thirty eight years. But ere this wel-nigh the space of 200. yeares together, a pe∣stilent custome had crept into the country, that the Metropo∣litanes See, was inferred upon meere lay persons of the blood royall in manner by inheritance, wherefore Nigellus the next of kindred animated by the partiality of some Princes, & get∣ting into his custody the Bible and Staffe, and other Orna∣ments of S. Patricke (whereunto the eares of the common
people tyed the prelacy) came to the Pallace, with a bande of Souldiours to have slaine the Bishop. When all the people wept and howled, for his perill, he alone stepped into the bo∣some of his enemies, demaunding their purpose. The very Tyrants letting fall their weapons in stead of the murder conspired, fell to reverence him and departed friends. Three yeares he sate in the primacy, rather to discontinue the hor∣rible corruption before used, then with intent to abide there: and their error having disanulled the abuse, he procured Ge∣lasius to be his Successor, and returned to his former Bishop∣ricke of Downe. For to Downe was then annexed Coner. But Malachias understanding that in times past, they were se∣verall, sundred them againe, and preferred another to the Dio∣cesse of Coner, desirous rather to discharge his cure, then to enlarge the fruites, while he preached, a woman fell at his feete, and besought his prayer, for that she had gone now with childe fifteene moneths and twenty dayes, nor could by any meanes be delivered, which done, the newes of her deli∣very was reported before the assembly brake up. Hee threat∣ned vengance to a Captaine, unlesse he would turne away the Concubine he kept, the same being also his brothers Con∣cubine. The Captaine tooke it disdainefully, and within one houre, was slaine by a conspiracy of women, whose Daugh∣ters and servants he had defiled. There dwelt in Lismore a notable Clerke, of conversation upright, but corrupt in judge∣ment of religion, this fellow advancing his doctrine, offered disputation to the Bishop, before the multitude, when he was forced to silence with the waight of truth, yet he cavelled maliciously, that not the cause nor learning, but the counte∣nance and credit of Malachias had wonne the victory. To whom the Bishop answered, our Lord compell thee, even maugre thine owne willfullnesse to acknowledge thine er∣rors. At these words the Clerke and intending to fly the sight of men, was prevented with a mortall infirmity, and beseech∣ing the Bishop of his peace and communion, died immediat∣ly, reconciled to God and holy Church. Being demaunded of his Brethren, the Moncks of Banchor, where and when hee
would wish to dye, and be buryed, if it lay in his choyse, hee answered: If in Ireland, beside the body of S. Patricke: If be∣yond the seas, at Clarivall, where S. Bernard was then famous and in the feast of All Soules. He cast in his minde, within a few dayes to sue to Eugenius the third, for the increase of the number of Metropolitanes, which request, was shortly after sped, and in this voyage he rested at Clarivall, and there di∣verse times, openly foretold that his yeare of departing was come: accordingly when he had taken leave of S. Bernard and the brethren, descended from his chamber to Church, and re∣ceived the rites of a christian man, he returned to his lodging, and dyed on All Soules day, in the yeare of his age fifty foure,1148. so mildely and peaceably that it seemed rather a sleepe, then a death. There his obsequies was solemnized and miracles wrought at his tombe, and from thence his body was tran∣slated to Ardmagh, in the yeare 1192. Malchus, though borne Irish, yet he spent most part of his time in the monastery of Winchester, in England, from thence assumpted Bishop of Lismore, him also remembreth S. Bernard upon occasion. A lunaticke childe he cured in Bi∣shopping him. This miracle was through the world seene and confessed of many hundreds. There happened the same time, a discord betweene the King of Mounster, and his Bro∣ther,King of Moun∣ster. wherein the King was overmatched and fled into Eng∣land, visited Malchus in his Abbey, and would at no hand be said nay, but so long as it should please God to afflict him, he would live there under his governement, and ensue his con∣versation, he contented himselfe with a poore Cell, used day∣ly a cold bathe to represse the wantonnesse of his flesh, dieted himselfe with none other fare, then bread, water and salt, pas∣sed dayes and nights in sobbing and remorse of sinne. At length the Kings and Nobles of Ireland began to stomacke the usurper, vanquished him, called home the good King to his right, who with many perswasions of Malchus and Mala∣chias could scarcely be gotten to forsake ghostly company, & trade of life.
CAP. XV. The most noble events in Ireland, betweene the time of Saint Patricke, and the conquest under Henry the 2. 586.IN the yeare of Christ 586. the people of Norway were Lordes and victours of the Ilandes in the West Ocean called Orchades, and great scowrers of the seas: A nation desperate in attempting the conquest of other Realmes: as being sure to finde warmer dwelling any where, then at their owne home. These fel∣lowes lighted into Ireland by this meanes,Careticus K. of Brittaine. Careticus King of Brittaine (odious to his subjects) fell with them at civill warre. Ioyfull was the newes hereof to the Saxons, who then in the six severall kingdomes, possessed the Iland sundry wayes, so they laide together their force, & associated to them Gurmondus, a Rover out of Norway, who having a navy still in a readinesse, and an army thereafter furnished, holpe the Saxons, to hunt the Brittaines into the marches of Wales, builded the towne of Gormond-chester, and then having hol∣pen the Saxons, made a voyage into Ireland where he sped but meanely, and therefore the Irish account not this for any of their conquests, as some of their antiquities have informed me. The same Gurmondus finding hard successe, did but build a few slight castles and trenches in the frontiers, and then lea∣ving the land, got him home into France, where he was fi∣nally slaine, him our Chonicles name King of Ireland. But the Irish affirme that before Turgesius no Easterlings obtai∣ned a Kingdome.Turgesius. Here Cambrensis to salve the contradiction, thinketh Gurmundus to have conquered the land by Turgesi∣us his Deputy, sent thither at his provision, which answere breedeth a contrariety more incurable, for himself numbreth betweene Laigirius King of Ireland, in an. 430. and edlemi∣dius whom Turgesius vanquished, Monarches 33. and yeares 400. so that Turgesius lived in an. 830. and could not possibly
deale with Gurmondus, who joyned with the Saxons against Careticu in Anno 586. This knot might be untwyned with more facility. Gurmondus made much of that little he caught, and wrote himselfe King, which Title our Histories doe al∣low him, because he opened a gappe, enjoyed it for a while, and brake a way for his Countreymen. Turgesius brought this attempt to perfection, and in these respects each of them may be called first King and Conqueror. Secondly therefore Turgesius with his Normans,10▪ assaulted Ireland, sustained losse and many overthrowes, but in the end fastening his power to the sea coasts, and receiving in his friends at will, he subdued the land through and through, ever as he went building up Castles and fortresses, vvherevvith the Irish had not beene yet acquainted, for hi∣therto they knevv no fence, but vvoods or bogges, or strokes. Turgesius bridled the Kings, and avved them so, that vvithout interruption he raigned thirty yeares, cryed havocke & spoile vvhere any vvealth vvas heaped, spared neither Lay nor Cler∣gy, nor Church, nor Chappell, but very insolently abused his victory. O-malaghlien king of Meth, vvas in some trust vvith the Tyrant, his onely Daughter Turgesius craved for his con∣cubine. The father having a present vvitt, and vvatching some subtle oportunities, Saving your fancie, my Lord, quoth hee, there are diverse Ladies of my bloud svvee∣ter bed-fellovves for a king, then that brovvne girle; and then he began to count neeces and cousins a number forsooth, en∣dovved vvith angell-like beauties, painted so lively vvith his Tale, that the Tyrant doted already upon them ere hee savv them: But ever he doubted, lest O-malaghlien extolled them to exempt his ovvne, and the vvise father cloaked his drift vvith modestie in ansvveres, and lingering his graunt to enflame the leachers folly, as hee that vvould any thing to bee suspected rather then his thought indeed. And at the last vvhen the other tooke his delay somevvhat unkinde∣ly, and bade his Queene speake to him. If I said (quoth hee) that vvith my very goodvvill my sole daughter should bee sent to you to bee deflovvred, your high vvisedome
would guesse I did but faine and flatter, and yet if ten daugh∣ters were deerer unto me then your good pleasure and con∣tentation, by whose bounty, both she & I, and we all are sup∣ported, I were unworthie the secret friendship, wherein it lyeth in you to use mee. As for the wench, it will in part seeme honourable to bee asked to the bed of such a Prince, seeing Queenes have not sticked to come from farre, and prostrate their bodies to noble Conquerours, in hope of issue by them, and howsoever it bee taken, time will redeeme it. But such a friend as you are to mee and mine, neither I nor mine shall live to see, and I purpose not to offend your amity with saving a greater mater then twen∣ty maiden-heads, seeing fathers have not sticked to yeeld their owne wives to quench the loves and lustes of their sonnes. Therefore I am thus agreed, name you the day and place, se∣ver your selfe from the open eye of your Court, conferre with those that have a curious insight and skill in beauties, I will send you my daughter, and with her the choice of twelve or sixteene gentlewomen, the meanest whereof may bee an Empresse in comparison, when all are before you, make your game at will, and then if my childe shall please your fancie, shee is not too good to be at your commandement: Onely my request is, that if any other presume upon your leavings, your Majestie will remember whose fathers childe shee is. This liberall proffer was accepted of him, whose desire was insatiable, with many faire promises and thankes. To bee short, the same day O-malaghlien attired Prince-like his owne Daughter, and with her sixteene beauti∣full striplings, which presented to the King in his pri∣vy Chamber, accompanied onely with certaine wantons of the Nobility, drew foorth from under their woman-like garments, their skeanes, and valiantly bestirred themselves,Turgesius murdered. stabbing first the Tyrant, next the youth present that prepared but small resistance, surely sitt mates to supply the office they tooke in hand, of Paris, not of He∣ctor.
Out flew the fame thereof into all quarters of Ireland, and the Princes nothing dull to catche holde of such ad∣vantage, vvith one assent, rose ready to pursue their li∣berty. All Meth and Leinster vvere soone gathered to O-malaghlien, the father of this practise, vvho lightly leapt to horse, and commaunding their forvvardnesse in so naturall a quarrell, sayde, Lordings and friendes,The words of O-malaghlien, King of Meth. this case neither admitteth delay, nor asketh policie, heart and haste is all in all, vvhile the feate is young and strong, that of our enemies some sleepe, some sorrovv, some curse, some consult, all dismayed, let us anticipate their furye, dismember their force, cut off their flight, occupie their places of refuge and succour. It is no ma∣stery to plucke their feathers, but their neckes, nor to chase them in, but to rovvse them out, to vveede them, not to rake them; nor to treade them dovvne, but to digge them up. This lesson the Tyrant himselfe hath taught mee, I once demaunded him in a parable, by vvhat good husbandry the Land might bee ridde of cer∣taine Crovves that annoyed it, hee advised to vvatche vvhere they bred, and to fire the nestes about their eares. Goe vvee then upon these Cormorants that shrovvde themselves in our possessions, and let us destroy them so, that neither nest, nor roote, nor seede, nor stalke, nor stubbe may remaine of this ungracious generation. Scarce had he spoken the vvord, but vvith great shovvtes and clamours, they extolled the King as patron of their lives and families, assured both courage and expedition, joyned their confederates, and vvith a running campe, svvept every corner of the Land, razed the castles to the ground, & chased the strangers before them, slevv all that abode the battaile, re∣covered each man his ovvne precinct and former state of go∣vernment. The Irish delivered of slavery, fell to their old vo∣mit in persecuting one another, & having lately defaced their fortified castles & tovvns, as coverts to the enemy; al sides lay novv more open in harmes vvay. This considered, the Prin∣ces that in the late rule of Turgesius espied some towardnesse
to wealth and ease, began to discourse the madnesse of their fathers, who could not see the use of that vvhich their ene∣mies abused, they began to loathe their unquietnesse, to wish either lesse discord, or more strength in every mans dominion to cast out the danger of naked Territoryes, as ready to call in the enemy, as the contrary was to shrowd them, faine vvould they mend, and they vvist not hovv. The former subjection though it seemed intollerable, yet they felt therein a grovving to peace, fruits of merchandize, rest & surety; for it fared di∣versly tvvixt those Easterlings, & these Irish: they knevv hovv to thrive, might they get some commodious soyle. These had all the commodities of the soile, & reckoned them not. While the Princes & Potentates pavvsed in this good mood, certain marchants out of Norvvay, called Ostomanni, Easterlings, be∣cause they lay East in respect of us, though they are indeede properly Normans, & partly Saxons, obtained licence safely to land & utter their vvares. By exchanging of vvares & mo∣ney, finding the Normans civill and tractable, delighted also vvith gay conceipts, vvhich they never esteemed needfull un∣till they savv them, they entred into a desire of traffique vvith other nations, to allure marchants, they licensed the strangers aforesaid to build, if they vvere disposed, Haven-Tovvnes, vvhich vvas done.Waterford. Limericke. Dublin. Amellanus founded Waterford; Sitaricus, Limericke; Inorus, Dublin, more at leisure by others. Then were repaired by helpe and counsell of these men, castles, forts, steeples, and Churches every-where. Thus are the Irish blended also in the blood of the Normans, who from thence∣forth continually flocked hither, did the Inhabitants great pleasure, lived obediently, till wealth made them wanton and rebellious. But they could not possibly have held out, had not the conquest ensuing determined both their contentions. The meane while they waxed Lords of Havens and Bur-Townes, housed their souldiours, and oftentimes skirmished tooke their fortune, crept no higher, onely a memory is left of their field in Clantarfe,1050. al. 1014. where diverse noble Irish men were slayne, that lye buryed before the Crosse of Kil∣maynam.
And it is to be noted, that these are the Danes, which people (then Pagans) wasted England, and after that, France. From whence they came againe into England with VVilliam the Conquerour. So that Ostomani, Normans,Guil. de Nan∣giac. Polid l. 8. Angl. hist. Easterlings, Danes, and Norway-men are in effect the same, and as it appeareth by conference of times and Chro∣nicles, much about one time or season, vexed the French men, subdued the English, and multiplyed in Ireland. But in the yeare of CHRIST 1095. perceiving great en∣vy to lurke in the distinction of Easterlings and Irishe utterly west, and because they were simply Northerne,An. Dom. 900. not Easterne, and because they magnified themselves in the late conquest of their Countreymen, who from Normandy flourished now in the Realme of England, they would in any wise bee called and counted Nor∣mans.Flatsbury. Long before this time, as ye have heard, Ireland vvas bestowed into tvvo principall Kingdomes,An. Dom. 94. and sometime into more, whereof one was ever elected Monarch, whom they tearme in their Histories, maximum regem, or without addition, regem Hiberniae. The rest were written Reguli or Reges by limitation, as the King of Leinster, of Connaght, of Vlster, of Mounster, of Meth. To the Monarch besides his allowance of ground, and titles of Honours, and other priviledges in Iurisdiction, was graunted a negative in the nomination of Bishops at every vacation. The Cleargy and Laity of the Diocesse, recommended him to their King, the King to their Monarch, the Monarch to the Archbishop of Canterbury, for that as yet the Metropoli∣tanes of Ireland had not receaved their palles: In this sort was nominated to the Bishopricke of Divelin, then voide Anno 1074. (at the petition of Godericus King of Leinster, by sufferance of the cleargy & people there, with the consent of Terdilvachus the Monarch) a learned prelate called Patricius: whō the blessed archbishop Lanfrancus consecrated at S. Pauls Church in London, & swore him to the obedience after the maner of his antecessors.112▪ Christian Bishop of Lismore
Legate to Eugenius 3. summoned a Provinciall Councell in Ireland, wherein were authorized foure Metropolitan See, Ardmagh, Dublin, Cashell, & Tuam: Bishops thereof being Gelasius, Gregorius, Donatus, Edanus; for hitherto, though they yeelded a primacy to the Bishop of Ardmagh, in reverence of Saint Patricke, yet was it partly voluntary, and ratified rather by custome, then by sufficient decree: neither did that Arch-Bishop take upon him to invest other Bishops, but sent them to Canterbury (as I said before) which henceforth they did not. Namely the next Bishop S. Laurence, sometimes Abbot of S. Kevynes in Glan∣dilagh,1162, was ordered and installed at home by Gelasius Primate of Ardmagh.
THE SECOND BOOKE OF CAMPION'S HISTORY OF IRELAND. CAP. I. The conquest of Ireland by Henry the second, King of England, commonly called Henry Fitz Empresse. DErmot Mac Murrough,1167. King of Lein∣ster, halt and leacherous,This Chapter concludeth the 1. and 2. booke Cambrens de conquest Hi∣berniae: delive∣red unto me by Francis Agrd. vowed dis∣honestly to serve his lust on the beau∣tifull Queene of Meath, and in the absence of her husband, allured the woman so farre, that she condiscen∣ded to be stolne away. This disho∣nourable wrong to avenge, O-Rorick the King her husband, besought assi∣stance of Rodericke Oconor, King of Connaght, at that season the generall Monarch of all Ireland. The subjects of Leinster detesting the quarrell, and long ere this time hating their Prince, left him desolate in his greatest neede, so as with much difficulty he caught his boate, and fled over for succour to Henry the 2. King of England, then warring upon the French∣men, within his Dukedome of Aquitaine. Somewhat before this season sate in the See of Rome,Polichron. Plat. in Ad. 4. Io. Stell. in Chr▪ Adrianus 4. an English man borne, who having in his youth taken a painefull pil∣grimage into Norway, and reduced the whole Iland unto
Christianity, learned distinctly the state of Ireland, and how their countrymen which dayly repaired thither,Iohn Stow. being them∣selves the most part infidels, meeting with a people there, wilde and furious, were like very shortly (but if God found remedy) to deface religion: for though Christ were beleeved and taught, yet the multitude eft soone, grew to a shamelesse kinde of liberty, making no more of necessary points of Do∣ctrine, then served their loose humour. Besides these occasi∣ons Henry the 2. builded upon the Popes favour, his borne subject, had sent Ambassadours to Rome, in the first yeare of his raigne, asking leaue to attempt the conquest of Ireland. Adrian trusting and requiring a diligent reformation of the premisses, graunted his Bull, which Alexander his Successour confirmed, and ratified upon the same conditions. Now when Dermot was come in the very necke of these consulta∣tions, and put up his complaint, wherein he preferred the in∣terest of his Crowne, and craved a restitution of some peece of his lands, the matter did seeme not all untowardly broa∣ched, Henry having his hands full with the French, because Mac Murrough urged all possible haste, could not personaly in∣tend that offer, but sent him honourably garded into Eng∣land, with letters patents bearing this Tenour. HENRY the second, King of England, Duke of Nor∣mandy and Aquitaine,The Kings letter. Earle of Angiow. To all our true sub∣jects, English, Normans, Welchmen, Scotts, and to all nations within our Dominions whatsoever. Greeting. Witt yee that the Bearer hereof, Dermot Mac Murrough King of Leinster, we have received into the soveraigne protection of our Grace and bounty, wherefore who so of you all our loving subjects will extend towards him, your ayde for his restoring, as to our trusty and welbeloved, know yee that he is thereto au∣thorized by these presents, and shall deserve at our hands high favour in so doing. With these letters and many gay additions of his owne, he arrived at Bristow, where he fell at conference with Richard Strongbow,Lo. Strongbow al. Chepstowe. Earle of Pembroke, with whom he covenanted, the delivery of his onely daughter and heire unto marriage,
and so the remainder of his Kingdome: If the said Earle would recover him his home. That day were planted in Wales two gentlemen, Robert Fitz Stephens, and Maurice Fitz Gerald, brethren of a Mother, allyed to Rice ap Griffin,Fitz Stephens. Fitz Gerald. then Prince of Wales, whose Grand-father was surnamed Rice the great. Fitz Stephens had beene high Constable there under the King, and for executing rigour upon the Princes servants, was with him detained prisoner three yeares, ne would in any wise pay ransome or accept the liberty promised him, but if the conditions were loyall to the Crowne, and to his person no dis-worship. Lastly by the mediation of David Bishop of S. Davids, the third brother; and of Fitz Gerald, and at the instance of Mac Murrough whom the Prince entertai∣ned in that distresse, Fitz Stephens was conditionaly delive∣red, that he and his brother Maurice, should the next spring, while Strongbow provided his army, assist the Irish out-cast, who in consideration thereof assured them an estate for ever in the towne of Weixford, and two Cantreds adjoyning. Thus much firmely concluded on all sides, the King stale secretly home, and wintered closely among the Cleargie of Fernes. According to covenant came Fitz Stephens, with 30. Knights of his blood, 60. Squiers, & 300. footemen Archers, to whom at his landing, Dermot sent in aid his base sonne Duvelnaldus, and five hundred speares. The towne and sub∣urbes of Weixford marched forth against him: But when they saw Souldiours in array, diversly dighted and weapo∣ned, furnished with artillery, barbed horses and harnesse, they retyred to their walles and strengthned them, burning the villages thereabouts, and all the provision they could not car∣ry. The assault lasted 3. dayes, in the 4. certaine Bishops re∣sciant there, tooke up the variance, pacified the Townesmen to their King, and procured the rendring of the Towne. Der∣mot having tryed the valiantnes of the Welchmen, immeadi∣ately kept his touch, and gave possession of Weixford with the appurtenances aforesaid, to Fitz Stephens and his brother. After successe of these matters, they leavyed to the number
of 3000. Souldiours, and devised to vexe the Lords of Vpper Ossory, who had beene to the King of all other most cruell and injurious. Them they compelled to deliver Trewage and sweare fealty. Rodericke the monarch appalled at these newes, reared up all the Kings, in defence of the land, verily supposing that all would to wrecke, were it not prevented. And first they dire∣cted courteous messages and gifts to Fitz Stephens, moving him to depart the land quietly, and not to molest them with∣out cause. To whom he answered, that much he wondred at the folly of those Princes, who to satisfie their choller had opened such a gappe to their owne prejudice, as though the subjects whom they had schooled, to breake allyance to∣wards the King of Leinster, would not be as ready by this example to learne to withstand the King of Connaght, for his owne part, though hee might with better reason invade strangers, then they could expell their neighbours and their peere, yet would they suffer the King to reenter his right, they should not finde him stiffe, nor untractable, otherwise they should well feele that the Bryttons wanted neither abilitie, nor truth, to maintaine their word. Rodericke perceived it was no boote to spurne, and there∣fore bethought himselfe of composition upon agreement, they resolved thus. Conditions of peace.Inprimis, that Mac Murrough swearing afresh his obedience to the Monarch, should quietly, repossesse the parts of Lein∣ster, which Rodericke with-held by suspensation. Secondly, that for ensurance thereof, he should pledge his dearest base sonne Cnothurn, to whom Rodericke promised his daughter, if this peace were found effectuall. Thirdly, that being rested in his kingdome, he should dis∣charge the Welch army, nor should henceforwards call them over in defence. About this time, Donatus the good King of Ergall, foun∣ded the Abbey of Mellyfont, which is the eldest that I finde recorded since the Danes arrivall, except S. Mary Abbey, be∣sides Divelin, erected in an. 948.
The meane while was landed at Weixford, Maurice Fitz Gerald with his provision, ten Knights, thirty Squiers, and an hundred Bowmen, hereupon Dermot and the two Bre∣thren, set their force against Divelin, which being the cheife Citty of his Realme, refused to yeeld, when Divelin and the country about it vvas recover'd, there befell hostility between Rodericke, and Duvenaldus Prince of Limericke, vvhom Der∣mot his father holpe in field, foyled the enemy, and then vvith∣drevv his obedience from the Monarch. Shamefull was Ro∣derickes flight, and Dermot insinuated into the favour of his people, began to recount the confederates of his first misfor∣tune, and consulted with the two Captaines for the invasion of Connaght, finding them prest, he wrote over to the Earle Strongbow, renewed their covenants, prayed his helpe. Richard Earle Strongbow (whose auncestors came in vvith the Con∣quest, but commonly of the King and his successors dis∣favoured) having read the letters, he passed to King Henry, be∣sought him either to answere him his rightfull heritage, vvhich other men occupied, or to licence him else vvhere in uncouth lands, to seeke his fortune. The King halfe in derisi∣on bad him on in the name of God, even as farre as his feete could beare him. The Earle dissembling to perceive the hol∣lovvnes of the king, furnished his Cousin Reymond le Grose,Reymond le Grose. Nephevv to the brethren aforesaid, vvith ten Knights, and 70. Bovvmen, himselfe ensued vvith about 200. Knights, and 1000. lusty Welchmen, tryed Souldiours, shortly they vvanne the Citty of Waterford, and then immediately Mac Murrough accomplished his convention, gave to the Earle in marriage his daughter Eve, with the succession of his Kingdome. When Waterford was gotten, and Leinster pacified, and the Princes of Ossory tamed, and a chosen band ever in garrison, Mac Murrough became so terrible, that none durst encounter him. The Cleargy assembled themselves at Ardmagh, and with one accord did protest that for all their sinnes, and especially for the Turkish kinde of Tyrany which they used in buying and selling, and with vile slaveries oppressing the bodies of the English, (whom their pyrats tooke) their land was like
to be translated to that nation, whose captives they handled so cruelly. To appease in part, the indignation of God, they decreed, that all English, wheresoever in hold within the realme, should forthwith be loosed, Further, if it pleased God to scourge them, it should be meekely suffered, as farre beneath the debt of their deserts. King Henry, though he was well apayed that the Earle should be from him, yet he liked no deale, his growing in Ireland to such power, as percase in time to come, with his faction in Wales, then living under a Prince of their owne, he might be able to face the Crowne of England. An edict was therefore drawne, whereby all subjects were charged upon their perill, to reverte into Eng∣land by a day, and a caveat annexed, that upon paine of death, none should presume to passe over without a nevv warrant, nor ship over any wares, money, munition, or victuals into Ireland. 110.Thus had the Irish a breathing space, and would perhaps have picked greater benefits thereby,Divelin assaul∣ted  the Normans. had not the Normans beene in their top immediately after. Great force they laide to Divelin, but vvere valiantly repelled, and their Captaine Hasculphus taken prisoner,Hasculphus the Norman. who being calmely intreated, be∣gan to overview himselfe, and to imagine that the Citizens durst not use him extreamely, & once in open audience brake forth his unseasonable courage, in these wordes. Take this (quoth he) but for hansell, the game is to come: which heard they delayed him no longer, but pusht him downe on a blocke, and swapped off his head. Strongbow perceiving the Kings jealously not yet allayed, having wel-nigh spent his army in defence of diverse good townes,1171. impugned by Rodericke and the Irish, left sufficient warde till his returne: and met the King at Gloucester. To whom he writeth, declaring the envy that lurked in his pre∣ferment, yeelded the tittle of all his winnings, craved good countenance with his grace, contented himselfe with any portion whatsoever his Majesty should relinquish: a finall quietnesse was driven betweene them, Dublin with th'ap∣purtenances, and all port townes of Leinster, & all fortresses
reserved to the King. The Earle should enjoy with good leave whatsoever he had gotten beside. This yeare dyed Mac Murrow, and the Abbey de Castro Dei was foun∣ded. Soone after the King with five hundred Knights with ar∣chers and horsemen many more tooke shore at Waterford,1172. Regni sui 17. Aetatis 41. and was such a terrour to the Irish, that incontinently all Mounster submitted themselves to his peace. There the men of Wexford to feede the surmises of Henry conceived against the gentlemen, betrayed their Lord Fitz Stephens, and him de∣livered to the King. The King to gratifie them, for a while tremely chained and hampered the prisoner, quarrelling with him, notwithstanding the inhibition he had pro∣ceeded in atchieving the conquest of Ireland, but shortly hee enlarged him, and ratified the grants of Wexford above-men∣tioned. These Princes of the South sware fidelity and tribute to Henry. Dermot Carye King of Corke, Donald Obrene king of Limericke, Donald and Omalaghlien, puissant Lords of Ossory, and in briefe, all the states of Mounster, from thence hee journeyed to Dublin, where in like manner all the Captaines of Leinster, and Ororicke king of Meth, and Rodericke Oconor, king of Connaght, and of all Ireland for himselfe, and the whole Iland, humbly recognized his soveraignety: finally, no man there was of name in the land (except them of Vlster) but they to him bowed and sware obeysance. All which he feasted royally with a din∣ner of Cranes flesh, a fowle till then utterly abhorred of the Irish. Merlin had prophesied, that five should meete, and the sixt should scourge them.Merlines Pro∣phecy. This sixt they now construed to be Henry, in whom the five pettie Kingdomes were united. Of the same conquest prophesied their foure notable Saints, Patricke, Brachon, Colme,Irish Prophets. Fab. part 7. c. 237. and Mo∣ling. The King not unmindfull of his charge, enjoyned by the Popes Adrian and Alexander, entred into a refor∣mation
of the Church: and mooved the famous Bishop of Lismore,Pol Virg lib. 13 Angl. Hist. Synode of Ca∣shell- Saint Christian, their Legate, to call a Sy∣node at Cashell, wherein they defined Eight Articles. 1. First, that their people should abandon unlawfull con∣tracts of their cousins and allyes, and observe the Canons of Matrimonie. 2. That their Infants should be primestened of the Priests hand at the Church dore, and then baptized in the font of their mother Church. 3. That all faithfull duely pay their Tithes. 4. That holy Church be for ever quit of those cursed ex∣actions of diet and harborow whereunto they had beene ac∣customably strayned foure seasons in the yeare, and else a∣gainst right. 5. That the fine levyed for manslaughter, be not borne by the Clearkes, and kinsmen to the malefactour, but if he were accessary or faulty to the deed doing. 6. That the sicke doe his Testament to be made or read in the presence of credible persons. 7. That the funerals of the dead be devoutly and solemn∣ly kept. 8. That forasmuch as GOD hath universally delive∣red them into the government of the English, they should in all points, rights, and ceremonies, accord with the Church of England. To these things Gelasius Primate of Ardmagh, because he was old and impotent, gave his consent at Divelin in the pre∣sence of the King, he died two yeares after, so aged, that his sustenance was the milke of a white Cow, which he carried with him wheresoever he travelled. This yeere the Abbey de fonte vivo was founded. While all went well in Ireland, newes came that Henry the sonne (whom his father had for good purpose crowned King of England) was misledde to intrude upon the actuall possession of the Crowne in his fathers life-time, which stirre to appease, the King left the custody of Ireland with Hugh de Lacy, to whom he gave Meth in fee, with Fitz
Stephens, Fitz Gerald, and Philip de Bruise, and diverse others,King Henry returneth into England. and sayled into England. In absence of King Henry, Ororick King of Meth, surna∣med Monoculus, required conference and parley with Hugh de Lacy, in which communication the King had trayterously murdered Lacy, had not Fitz Gerald rescued him. Then stept out an ambushment of the Irish, but Griffin a Gentleman of the bloud royall in Wales, flighted the Kyrneghes,Ororick with one eye. and slevv O∣rorick. The English perceived such practices daylie sought and attempted, tooke from the Irish as farre as they durst, all trust of government, fenced themselves vvith garrisons, made Captaines, Keepers and Constables, vvheresoever they vvanne the better. But King Henry vvas so affrighted vvith his sonnes rebellion, and grevv into such envye both at home and abroad for the death of Thomas late Archbishop of Canterbury, that he had no vvill to mind his proceedings in Ireland. Ever his jealousie increased tovvardes the Earle Strongbow, vvhom he supposed easie to bee carryed avvay vvith any light occasion of tumult.Earle Strong∣bow. The Earle vvas a man of great birth, but not of great port until this good marriage be∣fell him, & knovving himselfe neither to be brooked in sight, nor trusted out of sight, kept still one certaine rate in all his doings, bare but lovve saile, fed no quarrells, shunned all su∣spicious conference. While they stood thus in a mammaring, and Letters ctme daylie over, hovv faintly the States and Princes of Ireland performed obedience; for except in Leinster, all other parts retayned still their auncient kinde of govern∣ment, and did onely acknovvledge Tribute. It vvas thought expedient by Henryes Counsellours, to discharge his minde of that care, and seeing there vvas trouble on all sides, and all could not bee intended one vvay, they determined to venture the custody of Ireland to Strong∣bow, being likely for his ovvne vvealth and assurance, to procure all possible meanes of bridling and annoying the Irish.
No sooner vvas the Earle landed with his Commission Lord Warden of Ireland,Strongbow Lord Warden of Ireland. but Donald King of Limericke met him at the vantage, and coursed him within the walls of Waterford, whereof hearing the residue their mates were a∣nimated, so that up they start in every corner, tagge and ragge to expell the English. It went hardly, then the Earle remembred himselfe of his cousin Lord Reymond, left behinde him in Wales a suitor to Basil his sister, whose marriage nothing stopped but the Earles consent. Now therefore hee writeth lovingly to the Wooer, and upon condition that hee came speedily to succour him, hee yeelded the Lady and all else at plea∣sure. Reymond in his first entry brake into Divelin, mar∣ryed his Wife in compleate Armour, and the very next daye sprang foorth, whipped the Rebells, quieted Leinster. Pol. Virg. lib. 13 Angl. Hist.Also the Cleargy having lately perused the Popes Bull, wherein hee entitleth Henry Lord of Ireland, and under straight paynes commaundeth alleagiance unto him, busi∣ly repressed the fury of their Countreymen. And forso∣much as immediatly after Christianity planted there, the whole Iland had with one consent given themselves not on∣ly into the spirituall, but also into the temporall jurisdiction of the See of Rome, which temporall right the two Bishops Adrian and Alexander had freely derived into King Henry, as by their publique instruments read in their counsell at Cashell appeareth, they denounced curse and excommunica∣tion to any that would maliciously gainsay or frustrate the same. When these boyles were rocked asleepe and husht for a time, the familiars of Strongbow greatly fore-thought them of the credit and rule committed to Reymond, whom in con∣clusion they procured home againe vvhen he had served their turne at neede. The meane vvhile dyed Strongbow, as some say, betrayed and vvounded, he lyeth buryed in the Body of Christ Church in Divelin,1175. Flatsbury. leaving behinde him one onely daughter Isabel, marryed after 14. yeares to VVilliam Earle
marshall. Closely they concealed Strongbowes death, untill they had compassed from the King another Governour af∣ter their owne tooth. For ever they dreaded, that Reymond being in the Princes eye, and friended in the Court, would catch his oportunity, and wynde himselfe (might he get an inkling in time of the Earles death) into the succession of his office, which even then waxed sweet and savoury. Coodgel∣lors of this drift, stopped messengers, intercepted letters, hasted on their own course. Basil the wife of Reymond,Basil the wife of Reymond le Grose. more dutiful to her husband, then naturall to her brother, continued still in Ireland sicke, but having privy knowledge of those newes, ere the breath was quite out of the Earles body, payned her selfe to disturbe this whole array. And whereas shee knew well her letters should bee searched, and her owne servants stayed, shee let it be delivered at all a very venture to one of the maryners, and therein draweth a long processe of her af∣fayres and houshold, but in the middle shuffles in a few lines of her meaning, under these tearmes: To all my affli∣ctions is added now lately the tooth-ake, so that except that one master-tooth had fallen (which I send you for a to∣ken) I weene I were better out of my life. Now was the tooth tipped with golde, and burnished feately like a pre∣sent, which Reymond wist well to bee none of hers, and therefore quickly smelled the construction, lingred not for Letters Pattents, but stept over presently,Reymond Lord Protectour of Ireland. and made his packe, and was elected by the Kings Agents there, Lord Protectour of Ireland, till the Kings pleasure were further knowne: During his authority flourished the Ge∣raldines, but shortly after they quayled againe, under the government of VVilliam Fitz Aldelin, with him was joy∣ned in commission the valiant Knight Iohn de Courcy, conque∣rour, and Earle of Vlster,Vlster conque∣red. which hitherto the King had not obtained. That yeare was founded the Abbey of Crockesden,1176. by Bertramus de Verdon. To establish the conquest of Vlster, and other victo∣ries of the parts of Ireland before enjoyed,1177. Alexander
the third sent his Cardinall Vivianus, vvho declareth the Title that Henry held of the Pope, the reservation of the Peter-pence, the indignation of GOD and holy Church a∣gainst the rebells, who beeing themselves contemners and breakers of Canons Ecclesiasticall, yet for maintenance of their unruly stomackes, had found the meanes to make Churches their barnes, bestowing therein both corne and pulse, that the victuallers and purveyors of the Princes campe should not dare to require the sale thereof for pe∣rill of sacriledge. Therefore hee licenseth Officers in this behalfe soberly and discreetely to convent such per∣sons, as made the Church a Sanctuary for their Corne, and in neede to take thereof at reasonable prices. Little good did Fitz Aldelin, and lesse vvas like to doe, because hee delighted to crosse his Peeres, and vvas of them stopped in his course of government. Hugh de Lacye vvas made Protector generall over the Land.Hugh Lacye Protectour. But Miles Cogan, Philip de Bruise, Fitz Stephens, Power, and diverse other more preferred to severall coun∣treyes under him. This Lacye builded a sort of castles and forts through∣out all Leinster and Meth, and the next sixe yeares con∣tinually devout gentlemen erected sundry Abbeyes, as the Abbey of Roseglasse,Flatbury. 1178. of Donbrothy by Hervy a Welch∣man, one of the speciall conquerours of Ireland, vvho himself after that,1179. entred into religion in Trinity Priory at Canter∣bury,1180. The Abbeyes of Geripont, and Choro Benedicti, the Abbey de lege Dei, vvith repayring of many Chappels, Chauncells,1182. Bell-houses, High-vvayes, and Bridges. Then dyed Saint Laurence Archbishop of Divelin, to vvhom succeeded Iohn Comyn an Englishman, brought up in the Abbey of Evesham,S. Patrickes Church in Di∣velin founded. Founder of Saint Patrickes in Di∣velin, vvhich vvas before that time a Parish Church, & novv by the said Archbishop endovved vvith Prebends, Viccars, Clearkes, Chorists, and many notable possessions for their maintenance, vvhereout from time to time have proceeded Clergy-men of greatest learning & reputation in the Diocese.
Divers contentions were raised betwixt Christs Church and it, for antiquity, wherein they of S. Patrickes, are (no doubt) inferiour, as shall appeare.Infra cap. 4 They are both written Cathedrall Churches, and both are the Bishops Chapiter, in vvhose ele∣ction they both ought to convent within the Church of the blessed Trinity, called Christs Church, which in all records hath the preheminency of place. The party that disturbeth this order of election, forfeiteth by deede to th'Archbishop of Divelin, 200. pounds.S. Patrickes booke of re∣cordes. This foundation was much enriched by King Iohn. The same yeare died the yong King Henry, reconciled to his father, but preparing warre against his brother Richard Duke of Aquitain: soon after also deceased Ieffry his other son, Duke of Brittaine. Thus were left Richard, his inheritour, and Iohn afterwards Earle of Glocester, heretofore surnamed without land, to whom the father conveyed all his interest and Lord∣ship of Ireland, sent him thither honourably accompanied, being then but twelue yeares old, and with him in speciall trust, Giraldus Cambrensis Clerke,Girald. Camb. a diligent searcher of the an∣tiquities of Ireland, surely well learned, and in those dayes counted Eloquent. About the young Earle were servants and counsellours,Ioh. Lord of Ireland. three sorts, first Normans, great quaffers, lourdens, proud, belly swaines, fed with extortion and bribery; to whom hee most relyed: secondly, the English brought with him, meetly bold: Thirdly, the English found in the land, whom being best worthy and most forward in all good services, hee least regarded, hereof sprang parties and disdaine, and to the knights that hardiest were and readiest of courage no small discomfort, to the enemies a spurre. With the brute of his arrivall at Waterford, the Kings of Thomond, Desmond and Connaght, put themselves in the bravest manner they could, to meete him and to submit their countries to his Grace, before them came the Irish Franklyns with rich presents, (and as they are very kind hearted where they list to shew obedience,) made unto the Childe, their Lord, the most joy and gladnesse that might be, and though
rudely, yet lovingly, and after the custome of their country, offred to kisse him, with such familiarity as they used towards their Princes at home. Two of the Guard, Normans, pick-thankes, shooke and tare the Clownes by the glibs & beards unmannerly, and churlishly thrust them out of the presence, whom they should have instructed curteously, & born with. The Irish thus rejected, went against the fore-named Kings, opened the rebukes and villanyes done to them, for their meekenes, that their Lord whom they thought to honour, was but a Boy, peevish and insolent, governed by a sort of flatterers, younglings and prowlers: That sithence to them that buxome were and tractable, such despite and dishonour (that terme they have borrowed of the Spaniards) was prof∣fered so soone, little good should the states of Ireland looke for in continuance, when the English had once yoked and penned them in their clouches. This report lightly alienated the mindes of those Princes, not yet very resolute, and turned them home with great oathes and leagues, entred among themselves, caused also the mightiest Captaines elsewhere to sticke together, while their lives lasted, and for no manner earthly thing to slacke the de∣fence of their auncient liberties. Immediately walked abroad mutinyes of broyle & com∣motion, so that the young Earle and his army, were content to commit the tryall thereof, to Lacy, Bruise, Courcy, Fitz Ge∣rald, and the rest, himselfe departing away the same yeare he came, and leaving the Realme a great deale worse bestedde then he found it. From the Conquest hitherto Giraldus Cambrensis, and from hence to the yeare 1370. I am specially holpen by certaine briefe extracts, whose author is namelesse, and therefore I quote him by the name of Philip Flatsbury who wrote them,In these notes I used the con∣ference of 3. coppies, much different, sent me, the one by my Lord of Trimlestone, another from M Agard, the third from M. Stanyhurst. and enriched them with collections of his owne, for Ge∣rald the father of the Earle of Kildare then being. An. 1517. Lacy the rather for these whisperings, did erect and edifie a number of Castles, well and substantially, provided in con∣venient places, one at Derwath, vvhere diverse Irish prayed to
be set on worke, for hyre. Sundry times came Lacy to quic∣ken his labourers, full glad to see them fall in ure with any such exercise, wherein, might they once be grounded & taste the svvetenesse of a true mans life, he thought it no small to∣ken of reformation to be hoped, for which cause he visited them often, and merrily would command his Gentlemen to give the labourers example in taking paines, to take their in∣struments in hand, and to worke a season, the poore soules looking on and resting. But this game ended Tragically, while each man was busie to try his cunning: some lading, some plaistering, some heaving, some carving; the Generall also himselfe, digging with a pykeaxe, a desperate villaine of them, he whose toole the Generall used, espying both his hands occupied and his body, with all force inclining to the blow, watched his stoope, and clove his head with an axe,Lacy murde∣red. little esteeming the torments that ensued.1189. This Lacy was con∣querour of Meth, his body the two Archbishops, Iohn of Di∣velin and Mathew of Cashell,Monast. de be∣atitudine. buryed in the monastery of of Becktye, his head in S. Thomas abbey at Divelin. The next yeare, was builded the abbey of Ines in Vlster,1187. and soone after, the abbeyes of Iugo Dei, and of Comer,1198. 1199. 1▪ and then the abbey of Knockmoy, or de Colle victoriae, by Cathel Cron∣derg King of Connaght. CAP. II. The Titles of the Crowne of England to every part of Ireland, and to the whole diverse wayes. I Will begin with the pedigree of VVilliam Earle marshall, for thereupon depend many recordes in Ireland, and the Queenes right to Leinster. VValter Fitz Richard, who came from Norman∣dy, with VVilliam Conquerour, died Lord Strongbow of Strigule alias Chepstow without issue, to whom succeeded his sisters sonne Gilbert, who was created the first Earle of
Pembroke, & had issue Richard the inheritour of Leinster, by a covenant & marriage of Eva the sole daughter of Mac Mur∣rough King of Leinster. This Richard conveyed to Henry the second all his title, and held of him the Lordship of Leinster in foure counties, Weixford, Catherlagh, Ossory, and Kildare. Richard left issue, a daughter Isabel, married to VVilliam Earle marshall of England, now Earle of Pembroke, Lord Strong∣bow, and Lord of Leinster. VVilliam had issue five sonnes, who died without issue, when every of them, except the youngest, had successively possessed their fathers lands, and five daughters, Maude, oane, Isabel, Sibil, and Eve, among whom the patrimony was parted in an. 31. H. 3. Of these daughters bestowed in marriage, are descended many noble houses, as the Mortimers, Bruises, Clares, &c. borne subjects to the Crowne of England, paying ever to the King his dutyes reserved. Title to Meth.Hugh de Lacy Conquerour of Meth, had issue VValter de Lacy, who held the same of King Iohn, paying a fine of foure thousand marks sterling, and hence beganne all the severall claimes there at this day, with allegiance sworne and done by their auncestours. Title to Moun∣ster.At the very first arrivall of Henry the second, the Princes of Mounster came universally, and did homage voluntarily, and acknowledged to him and his heires, duties and payes for ever. Title to Vlster, & Connaght.Iohn de Courcy Conquerour and Earle of Vlster, dyed with∣out issue, King Iohn Lord of Ireland, gave the Earledome to Hugh de Lacy, who had issue, VValter and Hugh, dead with∣out issue,Burke Earle of Vlster and Connaght. and one daughter married to Reymond Burke Con∣querour and Lord of Connaght. Connaght descended to diverse heires, owing service to the Prince, but Vlster is returned by devolution to the speci∣all inheritance and revenues of the Crowne of England, in this manner The said De Burgo, had issue Richard, who had issue Iohn, who had issue VVilliam, who was slaine without issue, and a Daughter Elizabeth intytled to thirty thousand marks yearely, by the Earledome of Vlster, whom Edward
the 3. gave in marriage to Leonel his second sonne, Duke of Clarence, who had issue a daughter Philippe, marryed to Ed∣mund Mortymer, who had issue Edmund, Anne, Elinor. Edmund and Elinor died without issue, Anne was married to Richard, Earle of Cambridge, sonne to Edmund of Laugley Duke of Yorke, fift sonne to Edward the third, which said Richard had issue Richard Plantagenet, father to Edward the fourth, father to Elizabeth wife to Henry the seventh, and mother to Henry the eight, father to Mary, Edward the sixt, and Elizabeth. Severall claimes to the Land of Ireland. 1. First that the Irish (for of the rest there is no question) were subjects to the the Crowne of Brittaine, before they set foote in Ireland. Thus it appeareth. They dwelt on that side of Spaine, whereof Bayon was then cheife imperiall Ci∣tie, and the same then in possession and obedience to Gurgun∣tius 376. yeares ere Christ was borne, as it was to his succes∣sours many a day after, namely to Henry, the which as I finde noted in certaine precepts of governement, dedicated by Iames Young, to Iames Butler Earle of Ormond, then Lieutenant of Ireland. an. 1416. From this coast and Citty, now part of Gascoigne came the fleete of those Iberians, who in 60. ships met Gurguntius on the sea, returning from the conquest of Denmarke, to whom they yeelded oath and service, sued for dwelling, were by him conducted and planted in Ireland, and became his leige people. 2. Mac Gil-murrow King of Ireland, with all his petty Princes, Lordes, and Captaines, summoned to King Arthurs court held in Carlion, an. 519. did accordingly their homage, and attended all the while his great feast and assembly lasted. 3. The Monarch of Ireland and all other, both reges and reguli for them and for theirs for ever, betooke themselves to Henry the second in an. Dom. 1172. namely those of the south, whiles he lay at Waterford, Dermot King of Corke, which is the nation of Mac Cartyes, at Cashell, Donald King of Lim∣ricke,
which is the nation of the Obrenes, Donald King of Ossory, Mac Shaghlen King of Ophaly, at Divelin did the like, Okeruell King of Vriell, Ororicke king of Meth, Rodericke King of all Ireland, and of Connaght. This did they with consents and shoutes of their people: and king Henry returned with∣out any Battle given. Onely Vlster remained which Iohn de Courcy soone after conquered, and Oneale Captaine of all the Irish there, came to Dublin to Richard the 2. in an. 1399. And freely bound himselfe by oath and great summes of money, to be true to the crowne of England. 4. The same time Obrene of Thomond, Oconor of Con∣naght, Arthur Mac Murrow of Leinster, and all the Irish Lords which had beene somewhat disordered, renewed their obe∣dience. 5. When Ireland first received Christendome they gave themselves into the jurisdiction both spirituall & temporall, of the See of Rome. The temporall Lordship, Pope Adrian conferred upon Henry the second, and hee gave the same to Iohn his younger sonne, afterwards King of England, and so it returned home to the Crowne. 6. Alexander the 3. confirmed the gift of Adrian as in both their Charters is expressed at large. 7. Vivian the legate on the Popes behalfe doth accurse and excommunicate all those that flitte from the obeysance of the Kings of England. 8. The cleargy twice assembled, once at Cashell, secondly at Ardmagh, plainely determined the conquest to be lawfull, and threatned all people, under paine of Gods, and holy Churches indignation, to accept the English kings for their Lords, from time to time. 9. It would aske a volume to recite the names of such Irish Princes, who since the conquest have continually upon occa∣sions, revolts or petitions, sworne truth and faith to the kings of England, from time to time, received honours, wages, fees, pardons, and petitions. And thus I thinke no reasonable man will doubt of a right so old, so continued, so ratified, so many wayes confessed.
CAP. III. Richard the first, and King Iohn. BY occasion of Lacyes mishap, Iohn Courcye,119. and Hugh de Lacye the younger, with all their assi∣stants, did streight execution upon the Rebells, and preventing every mischiefe ere it fell, stayed the Realme from uproares. Thus they continued lovingly, and lived in wealth and honour all the dayes of Richard the first, untill the first yeare of King Iohns raigne. Henry the second had issue male, VVilliam, Henry, Richard,1199· Ieffrey, and Iohn. VVilliam, Henry, and Richard dyed without issue. Ieffrey Earle of Brittaine dyed before his father, and left issue two daughters, and an after-borne son called Arthur,Sow▪ Graton. Arthrus. Psthumas. whose title to the Crowne, as being the undoubted lyne of the elder brother, Philip King of France, and certaine Lords of England and Ireland stoutly justified: Him had King Iohn taken prisoner in Normandy, and dispatched, if the same be true, with his owne hands at Roane. Of this barbarous cruel∣ty all mens eares were full, and Courcye either of zeale or par∣tiality, spake bloudy words against it, which meane his un∣dermyners caught, and did not onely heave him out of cre∣dite, but also got commission to attach his body, and to send him into England. The Earle mistrusted his part, and kept aloofe,120. till Hugh de Lacye Lord Iustice, vvas faine to levye men in armes, and to invade Vlster. Thence hee vvas often put to flight,Iohn Courcye. vvhereupon hee proclaymed Courcye Tray∣tour, and hyred sundry gentlemen vvith revvards, to bring him in quicke or dead, so long hee vvooed the matter, that Courcyes ovvne Captaines vvere inveygled to betray their Lord. Therefore upon good Friday, vvhen the Earle did off his armour, and in secret meditations visi∣ted religious places bare-footed, they layde for him, tooke
him as a rebell,104. and shipped him into England the next way, where he was adjudged to perpetuall prison: Sentleger ad∣deth in his collections that Lacy payd the Traytors their mo∣ney, and then immediatly hanged them. This Courcye translated the Church and Prebendaryes of the Trinity in Downe, to an Abbey of black Monks brought thither from Chester, and the same did hallow to S. Patricke, for which alteration of the name of God to his servant, hee deemed himselfe justly punished. Not long after (as say the Irish) certaine French knights came to King Iohns Court, and one of them asked the com∣bat for tryal of the Dutchy of Normandy. It was not thought expedient to jeopard the title upon one mans lucke, yet the challenge they determined to answere: some friend put them in minde of the Earle imprisoned, a Warriour of noble courage, and in pitch of body like a gyant. King Iohn demaunded Courcye whether hee would bee content to fight in his quarrell: Not for thee (said the Earle) whose person I esteeme not worthy the adventure of my bloud, but for the Crowne and dignity of the Realme, wherein many a good man liveth against thy will. The words were haply ta∣ken without dudgen, as proceeding from stomack, and from one counted more plaine then wise. Courcye therefore being cherished to the field, and refresh∣ed with dyet, fed so wonderfully after his hard keeping, that the French Challenger tooke him for a monster, and privily stale into Spaine. Then was the Earle inlarged, and crossed the seas tovvardes Ireland, fifteene times, evermore beaten back to the shoare, vvent thence into France to change the coast, and there dyed: after vvhose decease vvithout heires of his body, the Earledome of Vlster vvas en∣tirely bestovved upon Hugh de Lacye for his good ser∣vice.Hugh de Lacy Earle of Vlster. In Ireland remained one of the Courcyes, Lord of Rathen∣ny and Kilbarrock, vvhom as a spye of all their practises, and an informer thereof to the King, VValter and Hugh the sonnes of Hugh had slaine, and great seditions raysed,
bearing themselves after the decease of their father for Governours out of checke.King Iohn en∣treth Ireland the second time. Anno 1210. Stow. To settle the Realme of Ire∣land, King Iohn brought thither a maine Armye, ba∣nished the Lacyes, subdued the remanents, tooke pled∣ges, punished malefactours, established the execution of English Lawes, coyned money of like value currant ster∣ling in both Realmes. The two Lacyes repentant of their fol∣lyes and tyrannies, fled into France, dispoyled of sumptu∣ous apparell, and unknowne, meekely they served in Saint Taurines Abbey, as gardners, untill the Abbot by their countenance and behaviour, beganne to smell their estates, and pressed them so farre, that they detected their offen∣ces, and the due desert of much harder chastisement, eft∣soone beseeching the Abbot to keepe their counsells, who commending their humilities, yet advising them to laye holde upon their Princes favour, if it might be had, labou∣red the King his familiar and godsip earnestly for their pardons and obtained it. Each of them were fined, VValter at 4000. and Hugh at 2500. markes, and restored him to the Lordship of Meth, this to the Earledome of Vlster: King Iohn made his Vice-ge∣rent, and returned home, subdued the Welchmen, met with Pandulphus the Legate of Innocentius the third, who came to release him of the sentence wherein he stood excommunicate for his spoyle and extortion of Church goods, to whom be∣ing the Popes Atturney, hee made a personall surrender of both his Realmes in way of submission, and after his assoyle∣ment, received them againe: some adde that he gave away his Kingdome to the See of Rome, for him and his successours, recognizing, to holde the same of the Popes in fee,Polid. lib. 15. paying yearely therefore one thousand markes, and in them three hundred for Ireland. Blundus sayth, Centum pro utro{que} auri mar∣chas. Sir Thomas Moore, a man in that calling & office likely to sound the matter to the depth, writeth precisely, that neither any such writing the Pope can shew, nor were it effectuall if he could. How farre foorth,In the suppli∣cation of soule▪ and with what limitation a Prince may or may not addict his Realme feodary
to another, Iohn Maior a Scottish Chronicler, and a Sorbo∣nist, not unlearned, partly scanneth, who thinketh 300. marks for Ireland a very hard pennyworth. The instrument which our English Chronicle rehearseth,Fabian. might haply be motioned and drawne, and then dye unratified, although the copy of that record continue: But certaine it is, that his successours ne∣ver payde it, and thereto assenteth Iohn Bale in his Apology a∣gainst vowes. To Iohn Comin Founder of S. Patrickes Church, succeeded Henry Lounders in the Archbishops See of Divelin,1212. who builded the kings Castle there, being Lord Chiefe Iustice of Ireland, him they nicknamed (as the Irish doe commonly give additions to their Governours in respect of some fact or qualitie) Scorch villaine,Henry Scorch∣bill Lord Iu∣stice. and Burnebill, because hee requi∣red to peruse the writings of his Tenants, colourably preten∣ding to learne the kinde of each mans severall tenure, and burned the same before their faces, causing them either to re∣new their estates, or to holde at will. In the fourth yeare of King Iohns raigne, was founded the Abbey of Dowske, in the sixt, the Abbey of Wethny in the Countie of Limericke, by Theobald le Butler, Lord of the Carricke, and in the twelfth, Richard Tute builded the Monastery of Gra∣nard. CAP. IIII. Henry the third, and Edward the first. 228.AFter the death of Lownders, Henry the third (infor∣med of the Truth and good service done by the Ge∣raldines ever since their first arryvall in the Coun∣trey) made Morrice Fitz Gerald the sonne of Morrice aforesaid Lord Iustice.Morice Fitz Gerald, Lord Iustice. To him sent Edward the Prince, surnamed Longshanke, for assistance and power of men against the Welch Re∣bells, who leaving Warders in the Castle of Sligaghe, by him lately founded, together with Phelim Oconnor,
and a lusty band of souldiours met the king at Chepstovv, returned victoriously, and by this meanes increased favour, & streightway they tvvo joyning vvith Cormack mac Dermot, Mac Rory, made a noble hosting upon Odonill the Irish ene∣my that invaded and grieved the Kings subjects of Vlster, when Lacy was once dead. Odonill being vanquished, the Lord Iustice forced pledges and Trowages of Oneale, to keepe the Kings peace, and diverse other exploytes did hee during his time of government, which in particular rehearseth Flatsbury in his notes collected for Gerald Fitz Gerald, Earle of Kildare, Anno 1517. To him succeeded in office Sir Iohn Fitz Geffrey knight,124. 1259· 1260. 1261. Geffrey Allan de la Zowche, whom Earle Warren slevv, to Zowch, Stephen de longa spata, who slevv Oneale in the streets of Down, and there dyed. Him followed William Den, in whose time Mac Cartye played the devill in Desmond, and to Den, Richard Capell, who envyed the Geraldines, and was of them taken prisoner, together with Theobald le Butler, and Miles Co∣gan. The king tooke up the variance, and discharged Den, preferring David Barrye to his roome,1267· 126. 1270. who ta∣med the insolencie of Morrice Fitz Morrice, cousin ger∣mane to Fitz Grald: upon Barrye came Vfford, upon Vfford, Iames Audeley, who dyed of a fall from his horse in Thomond: and then for the time Fitz Mor∣rice governed, till the king sent over Sir Ieffrey de Ge∣nevill, newly returned in pilgrimage from the Holy Se∣pulture: Him called home againe Edward the first, in the fourth yeare of his raigne, and sent in his stead Ro∣bert Vfford the second time, who made his Vice-ge∣rent, Fryar Fulborne, Bishop of Waterford, and resumed his charge at his next arryvall into Ireland. At this time the citty of Divelin was miserably wa∣sted with fire,1280. Divelin fired. and the Bell-house of Christs Church utterly defaced, which the citizens before they repayred their private harmes jointly came to succor, & collections made to redresse the ruines of that ancient building first begun by the Danes,Records of Christ Church.
as I finde in a monument of that foundation, continued by Sitricus; Prince of Divelin, at the motion of Donate, then Bi∣shop, & dedicated to the Blessed Trinity, finished by Richard Earle Strangbow, Fitz Stephens, and S. Laurence the Archbi∣shop,It was first a Priory and Ca∣nons, now Deane and Chapiter▪ and his foure successors, Iohn of Evesham, Henry Scorch∣bill, Lord Iustice, & Lucas, and lastly by Iohn de S. Paul, which worke at the decay by fire, and since, many devout citizens of Divelin have beautified. The same Strongbowes Tombe spoyled by fall of the roofe, Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy, restoreth at this present, who hath also given a sightly countenance to the Quire, by doing cost upon the Earle of Kildares Chappell,Cap. Randolfe, over against the which he hath left a monument of Captain Randolfe, late Co∣lonell of Vlster, Valiantly dead in that service, Iohn Samford Archbishop of Divelin Lord Iustice, VVilliam Vescy Lord Iu∣stice, who pursued Omalaghlin king of Meth, that soone after was slaine. 87.The Souldan of Babylon determined to vexe the Christians cities of the East▪ Tripolis, Tyrus, Berinthus, Sidon, Ptolemais, now parts of Turky, vvhom to redeeme, & vvith their helpes to get againe the Holy Land, Edward the first had foure yeeres past obtained by licence of Marin the fourth, and by confir∣mation o Honorius his successor,Blundus lib. . the vvhole tenth of all eccle∣siastical revenues in Ireland for 7. yeares, vvhereafter follovved a fifteene of the Temporalty: And the same yeere Iohn Baliol Earle of Galvvay, founded Baliol Colledge in Oxford, made his homage to King Edward for his Kingdome of Scotland, and to the Lord Iustice for his Earledome of Ireland. 1281.Vescey vvas a sterne man, and full of courage, but rashe and impudent of his tongue: he convented before him, Iohn Earle of Kildare, & charged him vvith riots & vagaryes un∣seasonable, for that he ranged vvith his men abroad, & prey∣ed upon privat enemies inordinatly, for malice & grudge, not for advancement of the publique vveale: vvhom the Earle as impatient as the other,1294. ansvvered thus: By your honour and mine, my Lord, & by king Edwards hand, you vvould if you durst, appeach me in plaine tearmes of elony: for vvhereas
I have the title, and you the fleece of Kildare, I wot well how great an eye sore I am in your sight, who if I could bee han∣somely trussed up for a fellon, then might my young Master your sonne, become a Gentleman: Iustice, Gentleman (quoth he) thou proud Earle, the Vescyes were gentlemen, before Kil∣dare was an Earledome, and before the Welch bankrupt thy Cousin feathered his Nest in Leinster. But seeing thou darest me, I will surely breake thy heart, and with that word he cal∣led the Earle a notorious theefe & murderer. Then followed clattering of swords by Souldiours on both parties, untill ei∣ther side appeased his owne, and the Lord Iustice leaving his Lieutenant VVilliam Hay, sped over to the King, whom im∣mediately followed the Earle, & as fast as Vescey charged Kil∣dare with fellony, no lesse did Kildare appeach the Iustice of high treason, and in tryall thereof he asked the Combate. But when the listes royall were provided, Vescey was slipt away into France, and so disherited of all his lands in the county of Kildare, which were bestowed upon the Earle of Kildare and his heires for ever. The Earle waxed insolent upon this successe, and squa∣red with diverse Nobles English and Irish of the Land, hee took prisoner, Richard Earle of Vlster, and him detained un∣till the Parliament then assembled at Kilkenny, commanded his delivery, and for that unrulinesse, disseised the Geraldines of the Castle of Sligagh, and of all his lands in Connaght. VVilliam Doddingale Lord Iustice.1294. This yere for the defence of Wales, and commodity of Passengers, to and from Ireland, the King did coast upon the Isle of Anglisey, called the mo∣ther of Wales, and builded there the castle de bello marisco, or Bewmarishe. Thomas Fitz Morice Lord Iustice. Iohn VVogan Lord Iustice pacified the former strife,Bewmarishe. 126. be∣tweene Vlster and Kildare, and all the Geraldines, with their associats, together with Theobald Lord Butler, gathered strength of men, and met the kings army before Edinburgh, wan the Citty, slew 25. thousand Scots, hampred Iohn Baliol king of the Scots, in such sort,1299▪ that glad and faine was he to renew his homage.
CAP. V. Edward the second. 1307.THomas Fitz Morice Lord Iustice. I will begin this Chapter with the modestie of a good Clerke, Richard Havering who five yeares by dispensation had received the fruites and revenues of the Bishopricke of Divelin, and long might have done, had he beene so disposed. But now feeling in sleep a waight upon his stomacke, heavyer to his weening then any masse of mettall, whereof to be released he vowed in his dreame, all that ever he could make in this world: Suddainely the next morne, resigned the custodium of the Bishopricke, and contented himselfe with other ecclesiasticall cures inci∣dent to his vocation.Templers. 1. The same yeare was the bane of the Templers in Ireland, to whom succeeded the Knights of the Rhodes. This profession began at Ierusalem, by certaine Gentlemen that kept their abode next to the Temple there, who till the Councell of Creetz increased not above the number of nine.Ty. l. 12. c. 7. But thenceforth in little more then fiftie yeares, being enriched by contribution of all Christian Re∣almes, every where their houses were erected and endowed bountifully: they grew to 300. Knights of the order and into inferiour brethren innumerable. But with ease and wealth they declined now to such intollerable deformities of life and other superstitious errors,Gauin hist. Gal. l. 7. nothing lesse regarding then the purpose of this their foundation, that the generall Councell assembled at Vienna,Tom. 3 Con. disanulled the same for ever. And there∣upon as in other countries so in Ireland, they confessed the publicke fame of their enormities, and themselves culpable, their persons they yeelded to perpetuall pennance, their lands were given (though with some difficulty) to the Knights of S. Iohns hospitall at Ierusalem, who since then for recovering the Iland of Rhodes from the Saracens,Plat. in Clem. 5 chargeth them with treason against the Christians. became famous, and multiplied much more honourably then did the Templers.
Of this latter foundation was the priory of S. Iohns at Kilmay∣nam besides Divelin.1309. Iohn Decer Major of Divelin builded the high Pype there,Iohn Decer. and the Bridge over the Liffy, toward S. Wolstans, and a cha∣pell of our Lady at the Fryar minors, where he lyeth buried, repaired the Church of the Fryars preachers, and every friday tabled the Fryars at his owne costs. In absence of VVogan, Sr VVilliam Burcke was Lord War∣den of Ireland, to whom King Edward recōmended Pierce of Gavestone the disquieter of all the nobility in England,Pierce of Ga∣vestone. Sow. a com∣panion to the King in vice, bolstered up by the King so pe∣remptorily against the will of his Councell, that whereas the said Pierce was by them exiled, Edward sent him now into Ireland with much honour and many Iewels, assigning him the commodities royall of that Realme, which bred some bickering betweene the Earle of Vlster Sir Richard Burke, and Gavestone, who notwithstanding bought the hearts of the Souldiours with his liberality, subdued Obrene, edified sundry Castles, cawswayes, and bridges, but within three yeares he retyred from Flaunders, into England, where the nobles besieged him at Scarborough and smit off his head. Iohn VVogan Lord Iustice, summoned a Parliament at Kil∣kenny, where wholesome lawes were ordained,1311. but never executed: There fell the Bishops in argument about their Iu∣risdictions and in especiall the Archbishop of Divelin forbad the Primate of Ardmagh to lift up his crosyer within the pro∣vince of Leinster. In ratifying of which priviledge I have seene the coppy of Pope Honorius Bull exemplified among the re∣cordes of S. Patricks Church, shortly after Rowland Ioyce, then Primate, stale by night in his pontificals from Howth to the priory of Gracedieu, where the Archbishops servants met him, and violently chased him out of all the diocesse. This Archbishop was named Iohn Aleeke, after whose death were elected in scisme & division of sides, two successours, Thorne∣burgh Lord Chancellor, and Bignore Treasurer of Ireland. The Chancellor to strengthen his election, hastily went to sea, and perished by shipwracke, the other submitting his
cause to the processe of law tarryed at home, and sped. Theobald de Verdon Lord Iustice. Sixe thousand Scots fighting men, under the conduct of Edward Bruise brother to Robert King of Scotland,1313. 1314. also the Earle Murray, Iohn Menteith, Iohn Steward, and others landed in the north of Ireland, ioyned with the Irish, and conquered Vlster, gave the Englishmen three notable overthrowes, crowned the said Bruise King of Ireland, burned Churches and Abbeyes, with all the people found therein, men, women, and children. Then was Sir Edmund Butler chosen Lord Iustice,1315. who combined the Earle of Vlster, and the Geraldines in friendship, himselfe with Sir Iohn Mandevill, and preserved the rest of the Realme. In the necke of these troubles, arose foure Princes of Con∣naght, to impaire and scatter the English force. But then the Burckes and the Berninghams discomfited and slew the num∣ber of eleaven thousand besides Athenry. To Sir Richard Berningham belonged a lusty young swayne,Iohn Hussee. Iohn Hussee, whom his Lord commanded to take a view of the dead car∣casses about the walles, and bring him word whether Okelly his mortall foe were slaine among them. Hussee passed forth with one man to turne up and peruse the bodies. All this marked Okelly, who lurking in a bush thereby, being of old time well acquainted with the valiantnes & truth of Hussee, sore longed to traine him from his Captaine, and presuming now upon this opportunity,The wordes of Okelly. disclosed himself & said▪ Hussee, thou seest I am at all points armed, and have my Esquire, a manly man, besides me, thou art thin and thy page a young∣ling so that if I loved not thee for thine owne sake, I might betray thee for thy Masters. But come and serve me at my request, & I promise thee by S. Patrickes staffe, to make thee a Lord in Connaght, of more ground, then thy Master hath in Ireland. When these wordes waighed him nothing, his owne man (a stout lubber) began to reprove him, for not relenting to so rich a proffer, assured him with an oath, whereupon hee proffered to gage his soule for perfor∣mance. Now had Hussee three enemies, and first he tur∣ned to his owne knave, and him he slew, next hee raught to
Okellyes Squire a great rappe under the pit of his eare, which overthrew him▪ Thirdly he bestirred himselfe so nimbly that ere any helpe could be hoped for, he had also slaine Okelly, and perceiving breath in the Squire, he drawed him up againe, & forced him, upon a truncheon to beare his Lords head into the high towne, which presented to Bermingham, and the cir∣cumstances declared, he dubbed Hussee Knight and him ad∣vaunced to many preferments, whose family became after∣wards Barons of Galtrime. While the Scots were thus mat∣ched, Robert de Bruise King of Scots, tooke shore at Cragser∣gus, to assist his brother, whose Souldiours committed sacri∣ledge and impiety, against Monasteries, Tombes, Altars, Vir∣gins, robbed Churches of all their plate and ornaments. They of Vlster, sent to the Lord Iustice pittifull supplication, for aide in this misery, who delivered them the Kings power and standerd, wherewith under pretence to expell the Scots, they raunged through the country with more grievance and vexa∣tion to the subjects, then did the strangers. Le Bruise procee∣ded and spoyled Cashell, and wheresoever he lighted upon the Butlers lands, those hee burned and destroyed unmerci∣fully. By this time had the Lord Iustice,1317. and Thomas Fitz Iohn Earle of Kildare, Richard de Clare, and Arnold de Powere,This is of some called the first Earle of Kil∣dare· Baron of Donoile, furnished and armed thirty thousand men ready to set forward. Then came newes that VVilliam de Burgo the Earles brother was taken by the Scots, whereof the Irish of Vlster imboldened with the presence of the Sco∣tish Army, and with the late discomfiture which Earle Ri∣chard Burcke sustained at Coynes, denyed their alleagiance openly, and conspired in the behalfe of Edward le Bruise, whom they proclaimed King. The Lord Iustice had assem∣bled such force against them, under the leading of the Geral∣dines and Poweres, that each of them was thought sufficient, by himselfe to winne the field. But suddainely the two Cap∣taines, and their adherents squared, so as no good conclusion might be inferred: Roger Mortimer, trusting by their discenti∣on to imbeazell a victory,Mortimer· culled out fifteene thousand Soul∣diours, and met the Scots at Kenles, where he was shamefully
foyled, his men (as folke supposed) willfully forsaking him, and bearing false hearts. Vp start the Irish of Mounster at these newes, the Ocooles, Obrines, and Omores, and wasted with fire and sword from Arkloe to Leix; with them coped the Lord Iustice and made a great slaughter, fourescore of their heads were set upon Divelin Castle. Edward Bruise raigneth in Vlster.The meane while Edward Bruise raigned in Vlster, held his courts, pronounced his enemies traytors, abandoned the English blood, exhorted the Irish of Leinster to doe the like, whereupon Donald the sonne of Arthur Mac Morrow,Donald sonne of Arthur Mac Murrowe. a slip of the royall family, displayed his banner within two miles of Divelin, but him Traherone tooke prisoner, sent him to the castle of Dublin, whence he escaped, slyding downe from the Turret, by a cord that one Adam Maugle brought him. The said Maugle was drawne and hanged. 1317.Roger Mortimer Lord Iustice pacified the displeasure, be∣tweene Richard Earle of Vlster, and the Nobles that had put the said Earle under surety, misdeeming him of certaine riots cōmitted against the kings subjects, wherby the Scots caught strength and courage, whose ravening, caused such horrible scarcity in Vlster, that the Souldiours which in the yeare be∣fore abused the Kings authority, to purvey themselves of wanton fare, surfeited with flesh and aquavitae all the Lent long, prolled and pilled insatiably without neede, and with∣out regard of poore people, whose onely provision they de∣voured:Famine hor∣rible. Those (I say) now living in slavery under Le Bruise, starved for hunger, when they had first experienced many la∣mentable shifts, as in scratching the dead bodyes out of their graves, in whose skulls they boyled the same flesh, and fed thereof. Mortymer went over to the King indebted to the Ci∣tizens of Divelin for his viands, a thousand poundes, where∣of he payde not one smulkin, and many a bitter curse carried with him to the sea. 1318.VVilliam Archbishop of Cashell Lord Chancellor was left Lord Warden of Ireland, in whose time Bermingham afore∣said being generall of the field, and under him Captains, Tute, Verdon, Tripton, Sutton, Cusacke and Manpas, led forth the Kings
power against Edward Bruise, pitching by Dundalke, the Pri∣mate of Ardmagh personally accompanying our souldiours, blessing their enterprise, and assoyling them all, ere ever they began to encounter.The Scots van∣quished. In this conflict the Scots were vanquish∣ed full & whole, 2000. slaine, & Manpas that pressed into the throng to meet with Bruise, was found in the search, dead, co∣vering the dead body of Bruise. Thus dissolved the Scottish Kingdome in Ireland, and Bermingham sending his head to the King, received in recompence the Earledome of Lowth, and to his heires for ever the Barony of Ardee, and Athenry. Alexander Bigmore, Archbishop of Divelin,An. 1320. sued to Pope Iohn the 21. (so I reckon, omitting the scismaticke and dame Ioane) for priviledge of an Vniversitie to bee ordained in Di∣velin, which tooke effect,Vniversity at Dublin. and the first three Doctors of Divi∣nity the said Bishop did create, VVilliam Hardit a Fryar prea∣cher, Henry Coggy a Fryar minor, Fryar Edmund Kermerdin, & one Doctor of the Canon law, VVilliam Rodiard Deane of S. Patricks, Chancellour of the said Vniversity, who kept their termes & commencements solemnely, neither was the same ever disfranchised, but onely through variety of time discon∣tinued, and now since the subversion of monasteries, utterly extinct, vvherin the Divines vvere cherished, and open exer∣cise maintained. A motion vvas made in this last Parliament to erect it againe, contributions layde together, Sir Henry Sid∣ney then Lord Deputy, proffered 20. pound lands, & one hun∣dred pounds in money, others follovved after their abilities & devotions, the name devised Master Acworth, Plantolinum of Plantagenet and Bullyne. But vvhile they disputed of a conve∣nient place for it, and of other circumstances, they let fall the principall. Thomas Fitz Iohn, Earle of Kildare, Lord Iustice, to vvhom succeeded Bermingham Earle of Lourh,1321. and to him Sir Iohn Darcy. At this time lived in the Diocesse of Ossorye, the Lady Alice Kettle, vvhom the Bishop ascited to purge the fame of inchaunting and Witch-craft objected to her, and to Petronilla, and Basill her complices.Alice Kettle a Sorceresse. They charged her mightily to have carnall conference vvith a
spirit called Robin Artison, to whom shee sacrifized in the high way nine redde Cockes, and nine Peacockes eyes, shee swept the streetes of Kilkenny betweene compleere and twilight, raking all the filth towards the doores of her sonne VVilliam Outlawe, murmuring these wordes, To the house of VVilliam my sonne, hye all the wealth of Kilkenny towne. At the first conviction they abjured and accepted pennance, but were very shortly found in relapse, and then Petronilla was burned at Kilkenny, the other twayne could not be had: shee at the houre of her death, accused the said VVilliam as privy to their sorceryes, whom the Bishop helde in durance nine weekes, forbidding his keepers to eate or drink with him, or to speake with him more then once in the day, by pro∣curement of Arnold le Power, then Senischall of Kilkenny hee was delivered, & corrupted the Senischall to vexe the Bishop, which he did, thrusting him into prison for three moneths. In ryfling the closet of Alice, they found a wafer of Sacra∣mentall bread, having the devils name stamped thereon, in stead of IESUS, and a pype of oyntment, wherewith shee greased a staffe, whereon shee ambled through thicke and thinne, when and how shee listed. This businesse trou∣bled all the Cleargy of Ireland, the rather for that the Lady was supported by Noble men: and lastly, convey∣ed into England, since which time no man wotteth what became of her. CAP. VI. Edward the third, and Richard the second. 137.SCarcely vvas this businesse ended, but another devill possessed another franticke gentleman of the nation of the O-tooles in Leinster, named Adam Duffe,Adam Duffe· vvho denyed obstinately the In∣carnation of Christ, the Trinity of persons in unity of the God-head, the resurrection of the flesh. Hee called the Holy Scripture, a fable; the blessed Virgin, a vvhore; the See Apostolick, erroneous; for vvhich assertions
he was burned in Hogging greene besides Divelin. Roger Outlaw, Prior of S Iohns of Ierusalem at Kilmainam,12. became Lord Iustice. Great variance arising betvveene the Ge∣raldines, Butlers, and Berminghams on the one side, and the Powers and Burkes on the other side, for tearming the Earle of Kildare a Rymer. The Lord Iustice summoned a Parlia∣ment to accord them, wherein he himselfe was faine to cleare the slaunder of heresie fathered upon him by Richard Ledred, Bishop of Ossory. The Bishoppe had given a declaration a∣gainst Arnold le Power, convented and convict in his consisto∣ry of certaine hereticall opinions; but because the beginning of Powers accusations concerned the Iustices kinsman, and the Bishop was mistrusted to prosecute his owne wrong, and the person of the man, rather then the fault, a day was limited for the justifying of the bill, the party being apprehended and re∣spited thereunto. This dealing, the Bishop (who durst not stirre out of Kilkenny, to prosecute his accusation) reputed partiall; and when by meanes thereof the matter hanged in suspence, hee infamed the said Prior, as an abbettour and fa∣vourer of Arnolds heresie. The Prior submitted himselfe to the tryall, and three severall Proclamations were cryed in Court, that any man might lawfully come in and indict,The Lord Iu∣stice cleared of a slander· ac∣cuse or say evidence against the Iustice: none came: then pas∣sed the Councell a decree, commanding to appeare at Dive∣lin, all Bishops, Abbots, Pryors, the Majors of Divelin, Corke, Limericke, Waterford, Droghedah, the Sheriffes, Knights, and Senischalls of every shire. Out of them all they sorted sixe Inquisitours, which in secrecie examined the Bi∣shoppes and persons aforesaid one by one, who with universall consent deposed for the Pryor, that to their judge∣ments hee was a zealous and faithfull childe of the Ca∣tholique Church. The meane while deceased le Power priso∣ner in the Castle, and because he stood unpurged, long he laye unburyed. Sir Iohn Darcye Lord Iustice. The Irish of Leinster made insurrections,1229. so did Magoghi∣gan in Meth, and Obrien in Mounster, whom VVilliam Earle
of Vlster, and Iames of Ormond vanquished. In which sturre, VVilliam Bermingham, a warriour incomparable, was found halting, and was condemned to dye by Roger Outlawe, Pryor of Kilmainam,Bermingham hanged. then Lieutenant to the Lord Iu∣stice, and so hanged was hee, a Knight among thousands odde and singular. So outragious were the Leinster Irish that in one Church they burned 80. innocent soules, asking no more but the life of their Priest then at Masse, whom they notwithstanding sticked with their savelins, spurned the blessed Sacrament, and wasted all with fire, neither for∣ced they the Popes interdiction, nor any censures ecclesia∣sticall denounced against them: But maliciously persevered in that fury, till the Citizens of Weixford tamed them, slevv foure hundred in one skirmish, the rest flying, vvere all dren∣ched in the vvater of Slane. 1335·Thomas Burgh Treasurer and Lieutenant of Ireland, vvhile Darcy Lord Iustice pursued the murtherers of VVilliam Bourk Earle of Vlster, a young gentleman of tvventy yeares olde, vvhom the seditions of Maundevill murdered besides Crag∣fergus. And vvhen hee had scourged those Traytours, he en∣tred Scotland vvith an army and might have possessed the Ilands besides, had they bene vvorth the keeping, into vvhich Ilands besides him and Sussex the late Lieutenant of Ireland no Governour ever yet adventured.Darcye and Sussex. 1337.Sir Iohn Carleton Lord Iustice, vvith vvhom came his brother Thomas Bishop of Hereford, Lord Chauncellor, and Iohn Rice Treasurer, and tvvo hundred Welchmen souldiours. The Bi∣shop became Lord Iustice,1338. in vvhose time all the Irish of Ire∣land vvere at defiance vvith the English, but vvere shortly calmed by the Earles of Kildare and Desmond. Sir Iohn Darcy by the Kings Letters Patents Lord Iustice of Ireland during life, in the fourteenth yeare of Edward the third, vvhich king abused by some corrupt informers, called in under his signet royall,1340. fraunchises, and liberties, and graunts vvhatsoever his predecessours had ratified to the Realme of Ireland, and to every person thereof. This revoca∣tion vvas taken very displeasantly.
The English of birth,The first no∣table dissenti∣on of the En∣glish in Ire∣land. and the English of bloud falling to vvords, and divided in factions about it. The Irish laye wayting for the contention, so as the Realme was even upon point to give over all and rebell. For remedy the Iustice began a Parliament at Divelin, whereto the nobles refused to make apparance, & assembled themselves quietly without distur∣bance at Kilkenny, where they with the Commons agreed u∣pon certaine questions to be demaunded of the King by way of supplication, by which questions they partly signified their griefes: Those in effect were, 1. How a Realme of warre might be governed by one, both unskilfull and unable in all warlike service. 2. How an officer under the king that entred very poore, might in one yeare grow to more excessive wealth, then men of great patrimony in many yeares. 3. How it happened seeing they all were called Lords of their owne, that the Lord of them all was not a penny the ri∣cher for them. The Prince of this repining was Morice Earle of Desmond, whom Vfford the now Lord Iustice in paine of forfeiture of all his lands commaunded to the Parliament at Dublin,1345. and there put him under arrest, delivered him by main prise of the tvvo Earles Vlster & Ormond, & of 28. knights & squiers: All vvhich, except the Earles & tvvo knights, lost their inheritāce by rigour of the said Vfford, because Desmond had escaped. Therefore at the decease of the Lord Iustice, vvhich ensu∣ed the next yeare, Bonfires and gavvdes vvere solemnized in all the Land: his Lady vvas a miserable sott, and led him to extortion and bribery, much he clipped the prerogatives of the Church, and vvas so hated, that even in the sight of the country, he vvas robbed vvithout rescue, by MacCarty, not∣vvithstanding he gathered povver, and dispersed the rebelli∣ons of Vlster. Robert Darcy Lord Iustice, chosen by the Councell,1346. untill the Kings charter came to Sir Iohn Fitz Morrice, vvho inlar∣ged Fitz Thomas Earle of Kildare, left in holde by Vfford, Fitz Morrice vvas deposed, and Sir VValter Bermingham
elected, who procured safe conduct for Desmond to pleade his right before the King, where he was liberally intreated & allowed towards his expences there twenty shillings a day at the Princes charge, in consideration of which curtesie to his kinsman, the Earle of Kildare, accompanyed with diverse Lords, Knights, and chosen horsemen, served the King at Cal∣lice, a towne thought impregnable, and returned after the winning thereof in great pompe and jollity. Iohn Archer of Kilmainam, Lieutenant to the Lord Iustice, to whom succeeded Baron Carew,1348. Bar. Carew. after Carew followed Sir Thomas Rokesby knight. 1350.This yeare dyed Kemvricke Shereman, sometimes Major of Divelin,Sherman Ma∣jor of Divelin. a Benefactour to every Church and religious house twenty miles round about the citty: his legacies to poore and others, besides the liberality shewed in his life time, a∣mounted to 3000. marks: with such plenty were our fathers blessed, that cheerefully gave of their true winnings to need∣full purposes, whereas our time that gaineth excessively, and whineth at every farthing to be spent on the poore, is yet op∣pressed vvith scarcity and beggery. Sir Robert Sa∣vage.The same time dvvelled in Vlster Sir Robert Savage, a vvealthie Knight, vvho the rather to preserve his ovvne, beganne to vvall & fortifie his Mannour houses, vvith castles and pyles against the Irish enemy, exhorting his heire Sir Henry Savage, to intend that Worke so beneficiall for himselfe and his posterity. Father (quoth he) I remem∣ber the Proverbe, better a Castle of bones, then of stones, vvhere strength and courage of valiant men are to helpe us. Never vvill I, by the grace of God, cumber my selfe vvith dead vvalls, my fort shall be vvheresoever young blouds be stirring, and vvhere I finde roome to fight. The father in a fume let lye the building, and forsvvore it. But yet the vvant thereof, and such like, hath beene the decaye asvvell of the Savages, as of all the Englishe Gentlemen in Vlster, as the lacke of vvalled townes is also the principall occasion of the rudenesse and wilde∣nesse in other partes of Ireland. This Savage having pre∣pared
an army against the Irish, allowed to every Souldiour before he buckled with the enemy, a mighty draught of A∣quavitae, Wine, or old Ale, and killed in provision for their re∣turne, beeffes, venison, and foule great plenty, which diverse of his Captains misliked, & considering the successe of warre to be uncertaine, esteemed it better pollicy to poyson the cates or to doe them away, then to cherish a sort of Catives with princely foode: If ought should happen to themselves in this adventure of so few, against so many. Hereat smyled the Gentleman and said: Tush yee are too full of envy, this world is but an Inne whereunto you have no speciall inte∣rest, but are onely tennants at the will of the Lord. If it please him to commaund us from it, as it were from our lodging, & to set other good fellowes in our roomes, what hurt shall it be for us to leave them some meate for their suppers, let them hardly winne it, and weare it, If they enter our dwel∣lings, good manners would no lesse but to welcome them, with such fare as the country breedeth, and with all my heart much good may it doe them: Notwithstanding I presume so farre upon your noble courage, that verily my minde giveth me, that wee shall returne at night, and banquet our selves with our owne store, and so they did, having slaine 3000. Irishmen. Morrice Fitz Thomas Earle of Desmond,1356. Lord Iustice du∣ring life, whom followed Sir Thomas Rokesbye a knight, sin∣cere and upright of conscience, who being controlled for suf∣fering himselfe to be served in wooden Cuppes; Answered, these homely Cuppes and dishes pay truely for that they con∣taine, I had rather drinke out of wood, and pay gold and sil∣ver, then drinke out of gold, and make wooden payment. Almericus de Sancto Amando, Iames Butler Earle of Ormond,1357. and Morrice Fitz Thomas Earle of Kildare,1359. Iustices of Ireland by turnes. To this last, the Kings letters appointed in yearely fee, for his office 500. pounds,1360. with promise that the said go∣vernour should finde twenty great horse to the field, and should bee the tvventieth man in going out against the ene∣my, vvhich allovvance and conditions at these dayes, I thinke vvere ordinary.
1361.Leonell the third sonne of Edward the third Duke of Cla∣rence,Leonell Duke of Clarence. and in the right of his wife, Earle of Vlster, Lord Lieute∣nant of Ireland. He published an inhibition, to all of Irish birth, that none of them should approach his army, nor be imployed in service of the warres. Obrene he vanquished sud∣dainely, but no man wist how, an hundred of his principall Souldiours in garrison were missed, whose dispatch, that se∣ditious decree was thought to have procured, wherefore hee advised himselfe and united the people, shewing alike father∣ly care towards them all, and ever after prospered, Knights he created these Gentlemen, the worthiest then in Chivalry, and at this day continuing in great worship, Preston, now the house of Gormanstowne, Holywood, Talbot, Cusacke, Delahide, Patricke, Robert and Iohn de Fraxinis. The exchequer he re∣moved to Catherlagh, and bestowed in furnishing that towne 500. pounds. Gerald Fitz Morice Earle of Desmond, Lord Iustice, untill the comming of VVilliam de VVindsore,1367. 1369. 1377. Lieutenant to the King, then in the last yeare of Edward the third ruling the re∣alme, under the name of Lord Governour, and keeper of Ire∣land. ¶ At the yeare 1370. all the Notes written by Flatsbury doe end, and from hence to this day, nothing is extant orderly gathered, the rest I have collected out of sundry monuments, authorityes, and pamphlets. During the raigne of Richard the second, Lieutenants and Iustices of Ireland,Recordes of th'exchequer fought up by M. Iohn Tho∣mas remem∣brancer. Iohn Stow. Records of excheq. an. 9. Rich. 2. are specially recorded, the two Mortimers, Edmund and Roger Earles of March, Phillip Courtney the kings cousin, Iames Earle of Ormond, and Robert Vere Earle of Ox∣ford, Marquesse of Divelin, and Lord Chamberlaine, who was created Duke of Ireland by Parliament, and was credi∣ted with the whole Dominion of the Realme by graunt for tearme of life,1385. nothing paying therefore, passing all writs, all offices, as Chancellor, Treasurer, Chiefe Iustice, Admirall, his owne Lieutenant, and other inferiour charges under his own Teste. 1394.The meane while King Richard afflicted impatiently
with the decease of Queene Anne his wife, nor able without many teares to behold his pallaces, and chambers of Estate, which represented unto him the solace past, and doubled his sorrow, sought some occasion of businesse and visited Ire∣land, where diverse Lords and Princes of Vlster renewed their homage, and he placing Roger Mortimer his Lieutenant, returned quietly, but within foure yeares after, informed of the trayterous death of Mortimer, whom he loved entire∣ly, and being wonderfull eager in hastening the revenge thereof upon the Irish, he journeyed thither the second time, levied infinite subsidies of money, by penall exactions, and with his absence as also with those injuries,1399▪ fed the hatred and opportunity of conspiratours at home, for Henry Duke of Lancaster, intercepted the Kingdome, whose sonne with the Duke of Glocesters sonne, King Richard shut up in the Castle of Trim, and then shipped course into England, tooke land at Milford Haven, found his defence so weake and un∣sure, that to avoide further inconvenience and perill of him∣selfe and his friends, he condiscended to resigne the Crowne. CAP. VII. The house of Lancaster, Henry the fourth, Henry the fift, Henry the sixt. ALexander Bishop of Meth, Lieutenant of Ireland, under Thomas Lancaster the Kings brother,1329. Recordes of Exch. so was also the worshipfull Knight Sir Stephen Scroope, whom for his violence and extortion be∣fore used, in the same office under King Richard, the common voyce and out-cry of poore people damned.Iames Young in precepts of governement to the Earle of Ormond cap. 5 This report hea∣ring the Lady his wife, she would in no wise assent to live in his company there, but if he sware a solemne oath on the Bible, that wittingly he should wrong no Christian creature in the land, that duely and truely he should see payment made for all expences, and hereof, she said, she had made a vow to Christ so deliberately, that unlesse it were on his part firmely
promised, she could not without perill of her soule goe with him: her husband assented, and accomplished her boone effe∣ctually, recovered a good opinion, schooled his Caters, enrich∣ed the country, continued a plentifull house, remissions of great fines, remedyes for persons endamaged to the Prince, pardons of lands and lives he granted so charitably and dis∣creetely, that his name was never uttered among them, with∣out many blessings and prayers, and so cheerefully they ser∣ved him against the Irish, that in one day he spoyled Arthur Mac Murrough, brent his country, restored O-Carrol to the towne of Callane, with-held by VValter Burke, slew a mul∣titude of Kerneghes, and quieted Leinster. Not long before, the Major of Divelin Iohn Drake,1402. with his band out of the Citty, had slaine of the same Irish Outlawes 400. In this Kings raigne the inhabitants of the county & towne of Corke,Records of Chist-Church in Divelin. being tyred with perpetuall oppressions of their Irish borderers, complained themselves in a generall writing, directed to the Lord of Rutheland and Corke, the Kings De∣puty, and to the Councell of the Realme, then assembled at Divelin, which Letter because it openeth the decay of those partes, and the state of the Realme in times past, I have thought good to enter here as it was delivered me, by Francis Agard Esquire, one of her Majesties privy Councell in Ire∣land. A letter from Corke coppied out of an old Record bea∣ring no date.It may please your wisedomes, to have pittie of us the Kings poore subjects, within the county of Corke, or else we be cast away for ever, for where there was in this countie these Lords by name, besides Knights, Esquiers, Gentlemen, and Yeoman, to a great number, that might dispend yearelie 800. pounds, 600. pounds, 400. pounds, 200. pounds, 100. pounds, 100. markes, 20. pounds, 20. markes, 10. pounds, some more, some lesse, to a great number, besides these Lords fol∣lowing. First the Lord Marquesse Caro his yearely revenues was, besides Dorzey Hauen and other Creekes, 2200. pounds sterling. The Lord Barnevale of Bearehaven, his yearely revenues
was, beside Bearehaven and other Creekes, 1600. pounds sterling. The Lord Vggan of the great Castle, his yearely revenues was, besides havens and creekes, 1300. pounds sterling. The Lord Balram of Emforte, his yearely revenues was, besides havens and creekes, 1300. pounds sterling. The Lord Courcy of Kilbretton his yearely revenues, be∣sides havens and creekes, 1500. pounds sterling. The Lord Mandevil of Barrenstelly his yearely revenues, besides havens and creekes, 1200. pounds sterling. The Lord Arundell of the strand his yearely revenues, be∣sides havens and creekes, 1500. pounds sterling. The Lord Baron of the Guard his yearely revenues, be∣sides havens and creekes, 1100. pounds sterling. The Lord Sleynie of Baltimore his yearely revenue, be∣sides havens and creekes, 800 pounds sterling. The Lord Roche of Poole-castle his yearely revenue, be∣sides havens and creekes, 1000. pounds sterling. The Kings Majesty hath the Lands of the late young Bar∣ry by forfeiture, the yearely revenue whereof, besides two ri∣vers and creekes, and all other casualties is, 1800. pounds sterling. And at the end of this Parliament Your Lordship with the Kings most noble Councell may come to Corke, and call before you all these Lords and other Irish men, and binde them in paine of losse of life, lands and goods, that never any of them doe make warre upon another, without licence or cōmandement of you my Lord Deputy, & the Kings Coun∣cell, for the utter destruction of these parts, is that onely cause, and once all the Irish men, and the Kings enemies were dri∣ven into a great valley, called Glanehought, betwixt two great mountaines, called Maccorte or the leprous Iland, and their they lived long and many yeares, with their white meat till at the last these English Lords fell at variance among themselves, and then the weakest part tooke certaine Irish men to take his part, and so vanquished his enemy, and thus fell the English Lords at variance among themselves, till the
Irish men were stronger then they, and drave them away and now have the whole country under them, but that the Lord Roche, the Lord Courcy, and the Lord Barry onely re∣maine, with the least part of their auncestors possessions, and young Barry is there upon the Kings portion, paying his Grace never a penny Rent. Wherefore we the Kings poore subjects, of the Citty of Corke, Kinsale, and Yowghall, desire your Lordship to send hither two good Iustices, to see this matter ordered, and some English Captaines, with twenty English men that may be Captaines over us all, and we will rise with them to redresse these enormities, all at our owne costs. And if you doe not, we be all cast away, and then fare∣well Mounster for ever. And if you will not come nor send, we will send over to our Liege Lord, the King, and com∣plaine on you all. Thus farre the letter. And at this day the Citty of Corke is so encumbred with unquiet neighbours of great power, that they are forced to watch their gates continually, to keepe them shut at service times, at meales, from sunne set, to sunne arising; nor suffer any stranger to enter there with his weapon, but to leave the same at a lodge appointed. They walke out for recreation at seasons, with strength of men furnished, they match in wed∣locke among themselves, so that welnigh the whole citty is allyed together. It is to be hoped that the late sent over Lord President of Mounster, Sir Iohn Parrot, who hath chosen the same place to abide in, as having greatest neede of a Gover∣nour resident, would ease the inhabitants of this feare, and scourge the Irish Outlawes that annoy the whole region of Mounster. An. 1408.Henry the 4. in the 10. yeare of his raigne, gave the Sword to the Citty of Divelin, which Citty was first governed, as appeareth by their auncient seale,Register of Majors. called, Signum propositurae, by a Provost, and in the 14. yeare of H. the 3. by a Major, & two Bayliffes, which Bayliffes were changed into Sheriffes, by Charter of Edward the 6. an. 1547. This Majorality both for state and charge of that office, and for the bountifull hospita∣lity exceedeth any Citty in England, except London.
While Henry the 5. reigned,Recordes of Exch. I finde lieutenants and deputyes of Ireland specially remembred, Iohn Talbott of Hollamshire Lord of Furnyvall. Thomas de Lancaster, Senischa of Eng∣land, and Stephen le Scroope his Deputy, Iohn Duke of Bedford then also Lord Keeper of England, and the noble Earle of Ormond. Sir Iames Butler,1421. whose grandsire was Iames surnamed the chast,The chaste Earle of Or∣mond. for that of all vices hee most abhorred the sinne of the flesh, and in subduing of the same gave notable example. In the red Moore of Athye (the sun almost lodged in the West, and miraculously standing still in his epicycle the space of three houres till the feat was accomplished,Iames Yong. and no pit in that bogge annoying either horse or man on his part) he vanqui∣shed Omore and his terrible Army with a few of his owne, and with the like number Arthur Mac Murrough, at whose might and puissance, all Leinster trembled.In the transla∣tion of Cam∣brensis. c. 7. To the imitati∣on of this mans worthinesse, the compiler of certaine pre∣cepts touching the rule of a Common-wealth, exciteth his Lord the said Earle in diverse places of that Worke incident∣ly, eftsoones putting him in minde that the Irish beene false by kinde, that it were expedient, and a worke of Charity to execute upon them (willfull and malicious transgres∣sours) the Kings Lawes somewhat sharpely,Prec of govern¦ment. c 27. That O∣dempsye being winked at a while, abused that small time of sufferance, to the injury of the Earle of Kildare, in∣truding unjustly upon the Castle of Ley, from whence the said Deputy had justly expelled him, and put the Earle in possession thereof,ca. 2. that notvvithstanding their oathes and pledges, yet they are no longer true then they feele themselves the vveaker. This Deputye tamed the Obriens, the Burckes,ca. 41. Mac-banons, Ogaghnraghte, Manus Mac Mahowne, all the Captaines of Thomond, and all this in three moneths. The Cleargye of Divelin tvvice every vveeke in so∣lemne procession praying for his good successe against these disordered persons, vvhich novv in every quar∣ter of Ireland, had degenerated to their olde trade
of life, and repyned at the English. Lieutenants & their deputyes▪ Records of exhquer.Lieutenants to Henry the sixt over the Realme of Ireland were Edmund Earle of Marche, and Iames Earle of Ormond his Deputy,An. 7. An. 1. Iohn Sutton Knight, Lord Dudley, and Sir Thomas Strange, his Deputy Sir Thomas Standley, and Sir Christopher Plonket his Deputy Lyon Lord Welles, and the Earle of Or∣mond his Deputy, Iames Earle of Ormond, the Kings Lieute∣nant by himselfe,An. 20. An. 22. An. 26. Iohn Earle of Shrewesbury, and the Archbi∣shop of Divelin, Lord Iustice in his absence. Richard Plantaginet, Duke of Yorke, father of Edward the fourth,An. 27▪ and Earle of Vlster, had the office of Lieutenant by let∣ters Patents,Richard Duke of Yorke. during the space of ten yeares, who deputed un∣der him at severall times, the Baron of Delvin, Roland Fitz Eustace knight, Iames Earle of Ormond, and Thomas Fitz Mor∣rice Earle of Kildare. To this Richard then resciant in Dive∣lin, was borne within the castle there, his second son George, Duke of Clarence, afterwards drowned in a butt of Malm∣sey:Records of Christ-church. his god fathers at the font were the Earles of Ormond and Desmond. Whether the commotion of Iacke Cade an Irish-man borne, naming himselfe Mortimer, and so clayming cousinage to diverse noble houses,1450. Io. Ma. l. 6▪ c. 16 proceeded from this crew, it is uncer∣taine: surely the Duke was thereof vehemently mistrusted, & immediatly began his tumults, which because our English histories discourse at large, I omit as impertinent. Those broyles being couched for a time, Richard held him∣selfe in Ireland, being lately by Parliament ordained Prote∣ctor of the Realme of England, leaving his agent in the Court his brother the Earle of Salisbury Lord Chauncellour, to whom he declared by letters, the trouble then toward in Ire∣land,1458. which letter exemplified by Sir Henry Sidney, Lord De∣puty, a great searcher and preserver of Antiquities, as it came to my hands, I thinke it convenient here to set downe.
To the right worshipfull and with all my heart entirely beloved brother, the Earle of Shrewesbury. RIght worshipfull and with all my heart entirely beloved Brother, I commend mee unto you as heartily as I can.The Letter. And like it you to wit, that sith I wrote last unto the King our soveraigne Lord his Highnes, the Irish enemy, that is to say, Magoghigan, and with him three or foure Irish Cap∣taines, associate with a great fellowship of English rebells, notwithstanding, that they were within the King our Sove∣raigne Lord his power, of great malice, and against all truth, have maligned against their legiance, and vengeably have brent a great towne of mine inheritance, in Meth, called Ra∣more, and other villages thereabouts, and murdered and brent both men, women and children, without mercy. The which enemies be yet assembled in woods and forts, way∣ting to doe the hurt and grievance to the Kings subjects that they can thinke or imagine, for which cause I write at this time unto the Kings Highnes, and beseech his good grace for to hasten my payment for this land, according to his letters of vvarrant, novv late directed unto the Treasurer of England, to the intent I may vvage men in sufficient number, for to resist the malice of the same enemyes, and punish them in such vvyse, that other vvhich vvould doe the same, for lacke of resistance in time, may take ex∣ample; for doubtlesse, but if my payment bee had in all haste, for to have men of vvarre in defence and safe∣guard of this Land, my povver cannot stretch to keepe it in the Kings obeysance. And very necessity vvill com∣pell mee to come into England to live there, upon my poore livelode, for I had lever bee dead, then any in∣convenience should fall thereunto in my default; for it shall never bee chronicled, nor remaine in scripture, by the grace of God, that Ireland vvas lost by my negli∣gence. And therefore I beseech you right vvorshipfull
brother, that you will hold to your hands instantly, that my payment may bee had at this time, in eschuing all inconveni∣ences, for I have example in other places, more pitty it is for to dread shame, and for to acquite my truth unto the Kings Highnes, as my dutie is. And this I pray and exhort you good brother, to shew unto his good grace, and that you will be so good, that this language may be enacted at this present Par∣liament for my excuse in time to come, and that you will bee good to my servant Roger Roe the bearer hereof, and to mine other servants in such things as they shall pursue unto the kings Highnes: And to give full faith and credence unto the report of the said Roger, touching the said maters Right wor∣shipfull, and with all my heart entirely beloved brother, our blessed Lord God preserve and keepe you in all honour, pro∣sperous estate and felicity, and graunt you right good life and long. Written at Divelin the 15. of Iune. Your faithfull true brother, Richard Yorke. Of such power was Magoghigan in those dayes, who as he wan and kept it by the sword, so now he liveth but a meane Captaine, yeelding his winnings to the stronger. This is the misery of lawlesse people, resembling the wydenesse of the rude vvorld, vvherein every man vvas richer or poorer then other, as he vvas in might and violence more or lesse en∣abled. Heere beganne factions of the nobility in Ireland, favou∣ring diverse sides that strived for the Crovvne of England, for Richard in those tenne yeares of government, excee∣dingly tyed unto him the hearts of the noblemen and gentle∣men in this land, vvhereof diverse vvere scattered and slaine vvith him at Waterford, as the contrary part vvas also the next yeare by Edward Earle of Marche,1459. the Dukes brother, at Mortimers crosse in Wales, in vvhich meane time the Irish vvaxed hardye, and usurped the English Countreyes in∣sufficiently defended,1460. as they had done by like oportunity
in the latter end of Richard the second. These two seasons did set them so a-floate, that henceforwards they could never be cast out from their forcible possessions, holding by plaine wrong all Vlster, and by certaine Irish Tenures, no little por∣tions of Mounster and Connaght, left in Meth and Leinster, where the civill subjects of English bloud did ever most pre∣vaile. CAP. VIII. Edward the fourth, and Edward his sonne. Richard the third, & Henry the seventh.Ann Reg 1. THomas Fitz Morice Earle of Kildare,Ann. D. 1460. Lord Iustice untill the third yeare of Edward the fourth, since which time the Duke of Clarence aforesaid,Duke of Cla∣rence Lieute∣nant, and his Deputies. 4· bro∣ther to the King, had the office of Lieutenant, while he lived, and made his Deputies in sundry courses, Tho∣mas Earle of Desmond, Iohn Tiptoft,An. Reg. . An. Reg. 7. An. 10. An. 18. Earle of Worcester the Kings cozen, Thomas Earle of Kildare, Henry Lord Graye. Great was the credit of the Geraldines, ever when the house of Yorke prospered, and likewise the Butlers thryved under the bloud of Lancaster, for which cause the Earle of Desmond remained many yeares Deputy to George Duke of Clarence his god-brother, but when he had spoken certaine disdainfull words against the late marryage of King Edward with the Lady Elizabeth Gray, the said Lady being now Queene, caused his trade of life, (after the Irish manner, contrary to sundry old statutes enacted in that behalfe) to be sifted & ex∣amined by Iohn Earle of Worcester his successour. Of which treasons he was attaint and condemned, and for the same be∣headed at Droghedah.1467. Iames the father of this Thomas of Desmond, being suffered and not controuled,Patrick Sein∣leger in his col∣lections. during the government of Richard Duke of Yorke his godsip: and of Thomas Earle of Kildare his kinsman put upon the Kings subjects within the Countyes of Waterford, Corke, Kerry,
and Limericke the Irish impositions of Coyne and Lyverie, Cartings, carriages, loadings, cosherings, bonnaght, and such like, which customes are the very nurse and teat of all Irish enormities, and extort from the poore tennants everlasting Sesse, allowance of meate and money, their bodies and goods in service, so that their horses and their Galloglashes lye still upon the Farmers, eate them out, begger the Coun∣trey, foster a sort of idle vagabonds, ready to rebell if their Lord commaund them, ever nusseled in stealth and robbe∣ryes. These evill presidents given by the Father, the sonne did exercise being Lord Deputy, to whome the refor∣mation of that disorder especially belonged, notwithstan∣ding the same fault being winked at in others, and with such rigour avenged in him, it was manifestly taken for a quarrell sought and picked. 1469.Two yeares after, the said Earle of Worcester lost his head, while Henry the 6. taken out of the towre, was set up againe, and King Edward proclaymed Vsurper, and then was Kildare enlarged, whom being likewise at∣tainte, they thought also to have ridde, and shortly both the Earles of Kildare and Desmond were restored to their bloud by Parliament. 1470.Sir Rowland Eustace, Knight, sometimes Treasurer, and Lord Chauncellour,Flatsbury. and lastly, Lord Deputye of Ireland, founded Saint Frauncis Abbey besides Kilkullen bridge. 1481.Edward, a yeare before his death, honoured his yonger son Richard the infant, Duke of Yorke, with the title of Lieutenant over this Land. But his unnaturall Vnkle Richard the Third,Edw. 5. Rich 3. when hee had murdered the childe, and the elder brother called Edward the 5. He then preferred to that Office his ovvne sonne Edward, vvhose Deputy was Gerald Earle of Kildare, and bare that office a vvhile in Henry the 7. his dayes. To whom came the vvylie Priest,Henr. 7. Sir Richard Symonds, & pre∣sented a lad his scholler, named Lambert, vvhom he fained to be the son of George Duke of Clarence, lately escaped the tovvre of Londō. And the child could his pedegree so readily,
and had learned of the Priest such princely behaviour, that he lightly moved the said Earle, and many Nobles of Ireland tendering the Seed Royall of Richard Plantagenet, and George his sonne, as also maligning the advancement of the house of Lancaster, in Henry the seventh, either to thinke or make the world weene, they thought verily this childe to bee Edward Earle of Warwicke, the Duke of Clarences lawfull Sonne. And although King Henry more then halfe marred their sport, in shewing the right Earle through all the streetes of London, yet the Lady Margaret Dutchesse of Burgoine, sister to Edward the fourth, Iohn de la Poole her Nephew, the Lord Lovel, Sir Thomas Broughton Knight, and diverse other Cap∣taines of this conspiracy devised to abuse the colour of this young Earles name, for preferring their purpose, which if it came to good, they agreed to depose Lambert, and to erect the very Earle indeed now prisoner in the towre, for whose quar∣rell had they pretended to fight, they deemed it likely hee should have beene made away: Wherefore it was blazed in Ireland, that the King to mocke his subjects, had schooled a Boy to take upon him the Earle of Warwickes name, and had shewed him about London to blinde the eyes of simple folkes, and to defeate the lawfull Inheritour of the good Duke of Clarence, their countryman and Protectour during his life, to whose linage they also derived a title of the Crowne. In all haste they assembled at Divelin, and there in Christ-Church they Crowned this Idoll, honouring him with titles imperiall, feasting and triumphing, rearing migh∣ty shoutes and cryes, carrying him from thence, to the Kings Castle upon tall mens shoulders, that he might be seene and noted, as he was surely an honourable Boy to looke upon. Thereupon ensued the Battle of Stoke, wherein Lambert and his Master were taken, but never executed, the Earle of Lin∣colne, the Lord Lovel, Martine Swarte, the Almaigne Captaine, and Morice Fitz Thomas Captaine of the Irish, were slaine, and all their power discomfited. Iasper Duke of Bedford and Earle of Penbroke,1490. Lieute∣nant, and VValter Archbishop of Divelin his Deputy. In this
time befell another like illusion of Ireland, procured from the Dutchesse aforesaid, and certaine Nobles of England, whereby was exalted as rightfull King of England, and un∣doubted Earle of Vlster, the counterfeit Richard Duke of Yorke preserved from King Richards cruelty, as his adhe∣rents faced the matter downe, and with this maygame lord, named indeede Peter (in scorne Perkin) VVarbecke, flattered themselves many yeares. Then was Sir Edward Poynings Knight, sent over Lord Deputy,1494. with commission to apprehend his principall part∣ners in Ireland, amongst whom was named Gerald Fitz Ge∣rald Earle of Kildare, whose purgation the King (notwith∣standing diverse avouching the contrary) did accept. After much adoe Perkin taken, confessed under his owne hand∣writing the course of all his proceedings, whereof so much as concerneth Ireland,an. Hen. 7.14. I have heere borrowed out of Halles Chronicles. Perkins confes∣sion.I being borne in Flaunders, in the towne of Turney, put my selfe in service with a Britton, called Pregent Meno, the which brought me with him into Ireland, and when wee were there arrived in the towne of Corke, they of the towne (because I was arrayed with some cloathes of silke of my said Masters) threeped upon me, that I should be the Duke of Clarences sonne, that was before time at Divelin, and foras∣much as I denyed it, there was brought unto me the Holy Evangelists and the Crosse, by the Major of the towne, cal∣led Iohn Lewellin, and there I tooke my oath that I was not the said Dukes sonne, nor none of his blood. After this came to me an English man whose name was Stephen Poytowe, vvith one Iohn VValter, and svvare to me, that they knevv well that I vvas King Richards Bastard sonne, to whom I an∣swered vvith like oathes that I vvas not. And then they ad∣vised me not to be affraide, but that I should take it upon me boldly: And if I vvould so doe, they vvould assist me with all their povver, against the King of England, and not onely they, but they vvere assured that the Earles of Desmond and Kil∣dare, should doe the same, for they passed not vvhat part they
tooke, so they might be avenged upon the King of England. And so against my will they made me to learne English, and taught me what I should doe and say: and after this, they cal∣led me Richard Duke of Yorke, second sonne to Edward the fourth, because King Richards Bastard sonne was in the hands of the King of England: And upon this, the said Iohn VValter, and Stephen Poytowe, Iohn Tyler, Hubbert Burgh, with many others, as the foresaid Earles, entred into this false quar∣rell, and within short time after the French King sent ambas∣sadours into Ireland, whose names were Lyot, Lucas, and Ste∣phen Frayn, and thence I went into Fraunce, and from thence into Flanders, and from Flanders againe into Ireland, and from Ireland into Scotland, and so into England. Thus was Perkins bragge twighted,1499. from a milpost to a pudding pricke, and hanged was he the next yeare after. Then in the yeare 1501. King Henry made Lieutenant of Ireland, his second sonne Henry as then Duke of Yorke,1501. who afterwards raigned. To him was appointed Deputy,Recordes of Christ-Church the a∣foresaid Gerald Earle of Kildare,1504. who accompanied with Iohn Blacke Major of Divelin, warred upon VVilliam de Bur∣go, O-Brien, and Mac Nemarra, Occarrol, and the greatest power of Irish men, that had beene seene together since the conquest, under the hill of Knoctoe, in English the hill of Axes, sixe miles from Galway, and two miles from Ballinclare, de Bur∣goes mannor towne. Mac VVilliam and his Complices were there taken, his Souldiours that escaped the sword were pur∣sued, flying five miles, great slaughter done, and many Cap∣taines gotten, not one English man killed. The Earle at his returne was created knight of the Noble Order, and flouri∣shed all his life long, of whom I shall bee occasioned to say somewhat in the next Chapter.
CAP. IX. Henry the eight. 1513. From hence∣forward I hav followed the relation of the wiest and most indffe¦rent persons that I could acquaint my selfe withall in Ireland.GErald Fitz Gerald Earle of Kildare a mighty made man, full of honour and courage, who had beene Lord Deputy and Lord Iustice of Ireland thirtie foure yeares, deceased the third of September, and lyeth buri∣ed in Christs Church in Divelin. Betweene him and Iames Butler Earle of Ormond, their owne jealousies fed with en∣vy and ambition, kindled with certaine lewd factions, abbet∣tors of either side: ever since the ninth yeare of Henry the se∣venth, when Iames of Ormond with a great army of Irish men, camping in S. Thomas Court at Divelin, seemed to face the countenance and power of the Deputy:Register of Majors. these occasions I say fostered a mallice betwixt them and their posterityes, many yeares after incurable, causes of much ruffle and un∣quietnes in the Realme, untill the confusion of the one house, and nonage of the other, discontinued their quarrels, which except their Inheritours have the grace to put up, and to love unfainedly, as Gerald and Thomas doe now, may hap to turne their countryes to little good, and themselves to lesse. Ormond was nothing inferiour to the other in stomacke, and in reach of pollicy farre beyond him; Kildare was in go∣vernement a milde man, to his enemies intractable, to the Irish such a scourge, that rather for despite of him then for fa∣vour of any part, they relyed upon the Butlers, came in under his protection, served at his call, performed by starts, as their manner is, the duty of good subjects. Ormond was secret and drifty, of much moderation in speech, dangerous of every little wrinkle that touched his re∣putation. Kildare was open and passionable, in his moode desperate, both of word and deede, of the English welbelo∣ved, a good lusticier, a warriour incomparable, towards the Nobles that he favoured not somewhat headlong and unru∣lie, being charged before Henry the seventh, for burning the
Church at Cashell, and many witnesses prepared to avouch against him, the truth of that article, he suddainely confessed the fact, to the great wondering and detestation of the Coun∣cell, when it was looked how he would justifie the matter, By Iesus (quoth he) I would never have done it, had it not beene told me that the Archbishop was within. And be∣cause the Archbishop was one of his busiest accusers there present, merrily laught the King at the plainenesse of the man, to see him alleadge that intent for excuse, which most of all did aggravate his fault. The last article against him they con∣ceived in these tearmes, finally all Ireland cannot rule this Earle: No (quoth the King) then in good faith shall this Earle rule all Ireland. Thus was the accusation turned to a jest, the Earle returned Lord Deputy, shortly after created Knight of the Garter and so died. Marvell not if this successe were a corrosive to the adverse party, which the longer it held aloofe and bit the bridle, the more eagerly it followed his course, ha∣ving once the sway and roome at will, as you may perceive hereafter. Gerald Fitz Gerald sonne of the aforesaid Earle of Kildare,1516. Gerald Earle of Kildare. and Lord Deputy, who chased the nation of the Tooles, bat∣tered Ocarrols Castles, awed all the Irish of the land more & more. A Gentleman valiant and well spoken, yet in his lat∣ter time overtaken with vehement suspition of sundry Trea∣sons. He of good meaning to unite the families, matched his Sister Margaret Fitz Gerald, with Pierce Butler Earle of Osso∣ry, whom he also holpe to recover the Earledome of Or∣mond, whereinto after the decease of Iames, a Bastard brother had intruded. Seven yeares together Kildare kept in credit and authori∣ty, notwithstanding the pushes given against him by secret heavers, enviers of his fortune, and nourishers of the old grudge, who fett him up to the Court of England by com∣mission, and caused him there to be opposed with diverse in∣terrogatories, touching the Earle of Desmond his Cousin, a notorious traytor, as they said. He left in his roome Morice Fitz Thomas Lord Iustice. After whom came over Lord
Lieutenant,1521. Thomas Howard Earle of Surrey, Grandfather to this Duke of Norfolke, accompanied with 200. of the Kings guarde. While he sate at Dinner in the Castle of Divelin, hee heard newes that Oneale with a mighty army was even in the mouth of the borders, ready to invade: Immediately men were levyed by the Major, and the next morrow joyning them to his band, the Lieutenant marched as farre as the wa∣ter of Slane, where having intelligence of Oneales recoyle, hee dismissed the footemen, and pursued Omore with his horse∣men, which Omore was said to lurke within certaine miles. That espied a Gunner of Omore, and watching by a wood side discharged his peece at the very face of the Deputy, strake the visard of his helmet, and pierced no further (as God would.) This did he in manner recklesse what became of himselfe, so he might amaze them for a time, breake the swiftnesse of their following, and advantage the flight of his Captaine, which thing he wanne with the price of his owne blood, for the Souldiours would no further, till they had searched all the corners of that wood, verily suspecting some ambush thereabout, and in severall knots ferretted out this Gunner, whom Fitz VVilliams and Bedlowe of the Roche were faine to mangle and hewe in peeces; because the wretch would never yeeld. 1523.In the meane while defiance proclaimed with Fraunce & Scotland both at once, moved the King to returne Surrey out of Ireland, that he might employ him in those services, his prowesse, integrity, good nature and course of governement, the country much commendeth, and honoureth the name and family to this day. Pierce Butler Earle of Ossory Lord Deputy, Kildare atten∣ding the Kings pleasure for his dispatch, recovered favour at the instance of the Duke of Suffolke whose daughter,154. Dame Elizabeth Graye he espoused royally, and so departed home. Now there was a great partaker of all the Deputies Coun∣cell, one Robert Talbot of Belgard whom the Geraldines hated deadly, him they surmized to keepe a Kalender of all their doings and to stirre the coales that incensed brother against
brother. In which fury, Iames Fitz Gerald meeting the said Gentleman besides Ballimore, slew him even there;Talbot of Bel∣gard slaine. jour∣neying to keepe his Christmasse with the Deputy. With this despitefull murder both sides brake out into open rage, and especially the Countesse of Ossory, Kildares sister, a rare woman, and able for wisedome to rule a Realme, had not her stomacke over-rul'd her selfe. Heere beganne intimation of new Treasons passing to and fro, with complaints and replyes. But Suffolke had wrought the canvas so fast in his sonne in lawes behalfe, that hee was suffered to rest at home, and onely Commissioners directed thither with Authority to examine the roote of their griefes, where∣in if they found Kildare but even tollerably purged, their instructions was to depose the plaintiffe, and to sweare the other Lord Deputy. The Commissioners were, Sir Raphe Egerton, a Cheshire Knight, Anthony Fitzherbert, second Iustice of the Common-pleas, and Iames Denton, Deane of Lichfield, who huddeled up those accusations as they thought good, and suddenly tooke the sword from the Earle of Ossory, sware the Geraldine Lord Deputy, before whom Con Oneale bare the sword that day. Concerning the murtherer whom they might have hanged, they brought him prisoner into England, presented him to Cardinall VVolsey, who vvas said to hate Kildares bloud: And the Cardinall intending his execution vvith more dishonour to the name, caused him to be ledde about London streetes manacled and haltered, vvhich asked so long time, that the Deane of Lichfield stepped to the King, and got the Gentle∣man his pardon. This untimely shift inflamed the Cardinall, and ripened the malice hitherto not so ranke, and therefore hereafter Osso∣ry brought evident proofes of the Deputies disorder, that hee vvilfully vvinked at the Earle of Desmond, vvhom hee should have attached by the Kings letters, that he curryed acquaintance and friendship vvith meere Irish enemyes, that he had armed them against him being the Kings Deputy, that he hanged and hevved rashly good subiects, vvhom hee
mistrusted to leave to the Butlers friendship. Yet againe therefore was Kildare commaunded to appeare, which he did, leaving in his roome Fitz Gerald of Leixlip, whom they shortly deprived,1527 and chose the Baron of Delvin, whom O-Connor tooke prisoner, and there the Earle of Osso∣ry to shew his ability of service, brought to Divelin an army of Irish-men, having Captaines over them Oconnor, Omore and O-Carroll, and at S. Mary Abbey, was chosen Deputie by the Kings Councell. In which office (being himselfe, save onely in feates of Armes, a simple gentleman) he bare out his honour, and the charge of governement, very worthily, through the singular wisedome of his Countesse,The Countesse of Ossory. a Lady of such port, that all E∣states of the Realme couched unto her, so politique, that no∣thing was thought substantially debated without her advice, manlike and tall of stature, very rich and bountifull, a bitter enemy, the onely meane at those dayes whereby her Hus∣bands Countrey was reclaymed from the sluttish and un∣cleane Irish custome to the English habite, bedding, house∣keeping, and civility. But to those vertues vvas yoked such a selfe-liking, and such a Majesty above the tenure of a subiect, that for en∣surance thereof shee sticked not to abuse her husbands honour against her brothers follye. Notvvithstanding I learne not that shee practised his undoing, (vvhich ensued, and vvas to her undoubtedly, great heavinesse, as upon vvhom both the blemish thereof, and the sustenance of that vvhole family depended after,) but that shee by indirect meanes vvrought her Brother out of credite to advance her husband, the common voyce, and the thing it selfe speak∣eth. All this vvhile abode the Earle of Kildare at the Court, and vvith much adoe found shift to bee called before the Lords, to ansvvere solemnely. They sate upon him diversely affectioned, and especially the Cardinall, Lord Chauncellour, disliked his cause, comforted his accusers, and enforced the Articles obiected, and vvhat else soever
could be gathered thereof in these words. I wot well, my Lord,The Cardinals accusation a¦gainst the Earle of Kildare. that I am not the meetest man at this Board to charge you with these treasons, because it hath plea∣sed some of your pew-fellowes to report, that I am a profes∣sed enemie to all Nobilitie, and namely to the Geraldines, but seeing every curst boy can say asmuch when he is controlled, and seeing these points are so vveightie, that they should not be dissembled of us, and so apparant, that they cannot be de∣nyed of you. I must have leave, notwithstanding your stale slaunder, to be the mouth of these honorable persons at this time, and to trumpe your Treasons in your way, howsoever you take me. First, you remember how the lewde Earle your kinsman,Treasons layde to the Earle. who passeth not whom he serve, might he change his Master, sent his confederates with letters of credence to Frauncis the French King, and having but cold comfort there, to Charles the Emperour, proffering the helpe of Mounster and Con∣naght towards the conquest of Ireland, if either of them vvould helpe to vvinne it from our King. Hovv many letters? vvhat precepts? vvhat messages? vvhat threats have been sent you to apprehend him? and yet not done: vvhy so? forsooth I could not catch him: Nay nay, Earle, forsooth you vvould not nighly vvatch him. If he be justly suspected, vvhy are you partiall in so great a charge? If not, vvhy are you fearefull to have him tryed? Yea Sir, it vvil be svvorne & deposed to your face, that for feare of meeting him, you have vvinked, vvilfully shunned his sight, altered your course, vvarned his friends, stopped both eyes and eares against his detectors, and vvhen∣soever you tooke upon you to hunt him out, then vvas hee sure before-hand to bee out of your vvalke: surely this juggling and false-play, little became either an honest man, called to such honour, or a Nobleman put in such trust. Had you lost but a Covv, or a Garron of your ovvne, tvvo hundred Kyrneghes vvould have come at your vvhistle, to rescue the prey from the utter∣most edge of Vlster: All the Irish in Ireland must have given you the vvay. But in pursuing so vveightie
a mater as this, mercifull God, hovv nice, how dangerous, how wayward have you bin? One while he is from home, another while he keepeth home, sometimes fled, sometimes in the borders where you dare not venture: I wish, my Lord, there be shrewde bugges in the borders for the Earle of Kildare to feare: The Earle, nay, the King of Kildare, for when you are disposed, you reigne more like then rule in the Land: where you are malicious, the truest subjects stand for Irish enemies; where you are pleased, the Irish enemie stands for a dutifull subject: hearts and hands, lives and lands are all at your curte∣sie, who fawneth not thereon, hee cannot rest within your smell, and your smell is so ranke, that you tracke them out at pleasure. Whilest the Cardinall was speaking, the Earle chafed and changed colour, & sundry proffers made to answer every sen∣tence as it came, at last he broke out, and interrupted him thus. My Lord Chauncellour, I beseech you pardon me, I am short witted, and you I perceive intend a long tale. If you pro∣ceede in this order, halfe my purgation wilbe lost for lacke of carryage: I have no schoole trickes, nor art of memory, except you heare me while I remember your words, your second processe vvill hammer out the former. The Lords associate, vvho for the most part tenderly lo∣ved him, and knevv the Cardinals manner of termes so loth∣some, as vvhervvith they vvere tyred many yeares agoe, hum∣bly besought his grace to charge him directly vvith particu∣lars, and to dvvell in some one matter, till it vvere examined through. That granted. Kildares reply to the Cardi∣nals oration.It is good reason (quoth the Earle) that your Grace beare the mouth of this chamber. But my Lord, those mouthes that put this tale into your mouth, are very vvide mouths, such in∣deed as have gaped long for my vvreck, & novv at length for vvant of better stuff, are fain to fill their mouths vvith smoak. What my cousin Desmond hath compassed, as I knovv not, so I beshrevv his naked heart for holding out so long. If hee can bee taken by my agents that presently wayte for him,
then have my adversaryes betrayed their malice, and this heape of haynous wordes shall resemble a man of strawe, that seemeth at a blush to carry some proportion, but when it is felt and poysed, discovereth a vanity, serving onely to fray crowes, and I trust your Honours will see the proofe hereof and mine innocencie testified in this behalfe by the thing it selfe within these few dayes. But goe to, sup∣pose hee never bee had, what is Kildare to blame for it, more then my good brother of Ossory, who not∣withstanding his high promises, having also the Kings power, is glad to take egges for his money, and bring him in at leysure. Cannot the Earle of Desmond shift, but I must be of counsell? cannot hee bee hid, except I winke? If hee bee close, am I his mate? If he be frien∣ded, am I a Traytour? This is a doughty kinde of accu∣sation, which they urge against mee, vvherein they are stabled and myred at my first denyall; You vvould not see him, say they, vvho made them so familiar vvith mine eye-sight? or vvhen vvas the Earle vvithin my E∣quinas? or vvho stood by vvhen I let him slip, or vvhere are the tokens of my vvilfull hood-vvinking? Oh, but you sent him vvord to bevvare of you; Who vvas the messenger? vvhere are the letters? convince my negative: See hovv loosely this idle reason hangeth, Desmond is not ta∣ken, vvell, vvee are in fault: vvhy? because you are: vvho proves it? no body. What conjectures? so it seemeth. To vvhom? to your enemies vvho tolde it them? What other ground? none. Will they svveare it? they vvill svveare it. My Lords, then belike they knovv it, if they knovv it, either they have my hand to shevv, or can bring forth the messen∣ger, or vvere present at a conference, or privy to Desmond, or some body bevvrayed it to them, or themselves vvere my carryers or vice-gerents therein, vvhich of these parts vvill they choose, I knovv them too vvell to reckon my selfe con∣vict by their bare vvords or headlesse heare-sayes, or franticke oathes, my letter vvere soone read, vvere any such vvryting extant, my servaunts and friends are ready to bee sifted.
Of my cousin Desmond they may lye lewdly, since no man can heere well tell the contrary. Touching my selfe, I never noted in them either so much wit, or so much faith, that I could have gaged upon their silence the life of a good hound, much lesse mine owne, I doubt not may it please your Ho∣nours to oppose them, how they came to knowledge of these matters which they are so ready to depose, but you shall finde their tongues chayned to another mans trencher, and as it were, Knights of the Post, suborned to say, sweare and stare the uttermost they can, as those that passe not what they say, nor with what face they say it, so they say no truth. But of a∣nother thing it grieveth me, that your good grace, whom I take to bee wise and sharpe, and who of your owne blessed disposition wish me well, should bee so farre gone in credi∣ting those corrupt informers, that abuse the ignorance of their state and countrey to my perill. Little knovv you my Lord, hovv necessary it is not onely for the governour, but also for every Nobleman in Ireland, to hamper his vincible neighbors at discretion, vvherein if they vvayted for processe of Law, and had not these lives and lands you speake of vvithin their reach, they might hap to loose their ovvne lives and lands vvithout Lavv. You heare of a case as it vvere in a dreame, and feele not the smart that vexeth us. In England there is not a meane subject that dare extend his hand to fillip a Peere of the Realme. In Ireland, except the Lord have cunning to his strength, and strength to save his ovvne, and suf∣ficient authoritie to racke theeves and varletts vvhen they stirre, hee shall finde them svvarme so fast, that it vvill bee too late to call for Iustice. If you vvill have our service take effect, you must not tye us alvvayes to the Iudiciall proceedings, vvherevvith your Realme, thanked bee God, is inured. As touching my Kingdome (my Lord) I vvould you and I had exchanged Kingdomes but for one moneth, I vvould trust to gather up more crummes in that space, then tvvice the revenues of my poore Earledome; but you are vvell and vvarme, and so hold you, and upbraide not me
with such an odious storme. I sleepe on a cabbin, when you lye soft in your bed of downe, I serve under the cope of hea∣ven, when you are served under a Canopy, I drinke water out of a skull, when you drinke wine out of golden Cuppes▪ my courser is trained to the field, when your Iennet is taught to amble, when you are begraced and belorded, and crowched and kneeled unto, then I finde small grace with our Irish borderers, except I cut them off by the knees. At these girds the Councell would have smiled if they durst, but each man bitt his lippe, and held his countenance, for howsoever some of them inclined to the Butler, they all ha∣ted the Cardinall: A man undoubtedly borne to honour,Cardinall Woolsey. I thinke some Princes Bastard, no Butchers sonne, exceeding wise, faire spoken, high minded, full of revenge, vicious of his body, lofty to his enemies, were they never so bigge, to those that accepted and sought his friendship wonderfull courte∣ous, a ripe Schooleman, thrall to affections, brought a bed with flattery, insatiable to get, & more princelike in bestow∣ing: as appeareth by his two Colledges at Ipswich, and at Oxenford, th'one suppressed with his fall, th'other unfini∣shed and yet as it lieth an house of Students (considering all appurtenances) incomparable, through Christendome, whereof Henry the eight is now called Founder, because hee let it stand. He held and enjoyed at once the Bishopricks of Yorke, Durham, and Winchester, the dignities of Lord Car∣dinall, Legate, and Chancellour: The Abbey of S. Albans, di∣verse Prioryes, sundry fat Benefices in Commendam: A great preferrer of his servants, advauncer of learning, stoute in every quarrell, never happy till his overthrow. Therein he shewed such moderation, and ended so patiently, that the houre of his death did him more honour then all the pompe of life passed. The Cardinall perceived that Kildare was no Babe, and rose in a fume from the Councell table, committed the Earle, deferred the matter till more direct probations came out of Ireland. After many meetinges and objections wittily refelled,
they pressed him sore with a trayterous errant, sent by his daughter the Lady of Slane, to all his brethren, to Oneale, Ocon∣nor, and their adherents, wherein he exhorted them to warre upon the Earle of Ossory then Deputy, which they accompli∣shed, making a wretched conspiracy against the English of Ireland, and many a bloody skirmish. Of this Treason he was found guilty, and reprived in the Towre a long time, the Gentleman betooke himselfe to God and the King, was heartily loved of the Lieutenant, pit∣tied in all the Court, and standing in so hard a case altered l∣tle his accustomed hue, comforted other Noblemen, prisoners with him, dissembling his owne sorrow. One night when the Lieutenant and he, for disport were playing at slide-groat, suddainely commeth from the Cardinall a mandat to execute Kildare on the morrow. The Earle marking the Lieutenants deepe sigh, in reading the bill; By Saint Bride, quoth he, there is some mad game in that scrolle, but fall how it will, this throw is for a huddle; when the worst was told him, now I pray thee, quoth he, doe no more but learne assuredly from the Kings owne mouth, whether his Grace be witting there∣to or not. Sore doubted the Lieutenant to displease the Car∣dinall, yet of very pure devotion to his friend, he posteth to the King at midnight, and said his errant, (for all houres of the day or night, the Lieutenant hath accesse to the Prince upon occasions.) King Henry controwling the sawcynesse of the Priest, those were his tearmes, gave him his Signet in to∣ken of countermand, which when the Cardinall had seene, he begun to breake into unseasonable words with the Lieu∣tenant, which he was loath to heare, and so he left him fret∣ting:1528. 150. Thus broke up the storme for a time, and the next yeare VVolsey was cast out of favour, & within few yeares Sir VVil∣liam Skevington sent over Deputy, who brought vvith him the Earle pardoned, and rid from all his troubles. Who vvould not thinke but these lessons should have schooled so vvise a man, and vvarned him rather by experience of adversities past, to cure old sores, then for joy of this present fortune, to minde seditious drifts to come. The second yeare of Ske∣vingtons
governement, there chaunced an uproare among the Merchants and their Apprentices, in Divelin, which hard and scant the Deputy and Major both, could appease. Then was also great stirre about the Kings divorce,1532. who hearing the frowardnes of Ireland under Skevington, and thinking it ex∣pedient in so fickle a world to have a sure poste there, made Kildare his Deputy,1533 the Primate of Ardmagh Lord Chancel∣lor, and Sir Iames Butler Lord Treasurer. But Kildare revi∣ving the old quarrels, fell to prosecute the Earle of Ossory, ex∣cited Oneale to invade his country, his Broher Iohn Fitz Ge∣rald to spoyle the country of Vriell and Kilkenny, being him∣selfe at the doing of part, namely in robbing the towne, and killing the Kings subjects.1534. The next yeare going against O-Carrol he was pittifull hurt with a Gun in the thigh, so that he never after enjoyed his limmes, nor delivered his wordes in good plight, otherwise like enough to have beene longer forborne, in consideration of his many noble qualities, great good service, and the state of those times. Straight wayes complaints were addressed to the King of these enormities, & that in the most haynous manner could be devised, where∣upon he was againe commaunded by sharpe letters to repaire into Englād, & to leave such a substitute,1535. for whose govermēt he would undertake at his perill to answere: He left his heire the Lord Thomas Fitz Gerald, and ere he went, furnished his owne pyles, forts, and castles, with the Kings artillery & mu∣nition, taken forth of Divelin. Being examined before the Councell, he staggered in his answere, either for conscience of the fact, or for the infirmity of his late mame: Wherefore a false muttering flew abroad that his execution was intended. That rumour helped forward Skevingtons friends and ser∣vants, who sticked not to write into Ireland secret letters, that the Earle their Masters enemy (so they tooke him, because he got the governement over his head,) was cut shorter, and now they trusted to see their Master againe in his Lordship, whereafter they sore longed as crowes doe for carryon. Such a letter came to the hands of a simple Priest, no perfect En∣glish man, who for haste hurled it among other papers in
the Chimneyes end of his chamber, meaning to peruse it bet∣ter at more leisure: The same very night a Gentleman retai∣ning to Lord Thomas (then Lord Deputy under his father) tooke up his lodging, with the Priest, and raught in the mor∣ning for some paper to drawe on his straite hosen, and as the devill would he hit upon the letter, bare it away in the heele of his his hose, no earthly thing misdeeming, at night againe he found the paper unfretted, and musing thereof began to pore on the writing, which notified the Earles death. To horsbacke got he in all haste, and spreading about the coun∣try these unthrifty tydings, Lord Thomas the Deputy rash and youthfull, immediately confedered himselfe with Oneale, and O-Connor, with his Vnkles and Fathers friends, namely, Iohn, Oliver, Edward Fitz Gerald, Iames and Iohn Delahide, VVelch parson of Loughseudy, Burnel of Balgriffen, Rorcks a pirat of the seas, Bath of Dullardston, Feild of Buske, with others, and their adherents guarded, he rideth on S. Barnabyes day to S. Mary Abbey where the Councell sate, and when they looked he should take his place, and rose to give it him, hee charged them to sit still, and stood before them and then spake. The words of Lord Thomas.Howsoever injuriously we be handled and forced to de∣fend our selves in armes, when neither our service nor our good meaning towards our Princes crowne availeth, yet say not hereafter but in this open hostility, which wee professe heere and proclaime, we have shewed our selves no villaines nor churles, but warriours and Gentlemen. This Sword of estate is yours and not mine, I received it with an oath, and have used it to your benefit, I should offend mine honour, if I turned the same to your annoyance, now have I neede of mine owne sword, which I dare trust, as for this common sword, it flattereth me with a golden scabberd, but hath in it a pestilent edge, already bathed in the Geraldines blood, and whetted it selfe in hope of a destruction: save your selves from us, as from your open enemies. I am none of Henryes Deputy, I am his foe, I have more minde to conquere, then to governe, to meete him in the field, then to serve him in office, If all the hearts of England and Ireland that have cause thereto, vvould
joyne in this quarrell (as I trust they will) then should he be a by-word (as I trust he shall) for his heresie, lechery, and ty∣ranny, wherein the age to come may skore him among the auncient Princes, of most abhominable and hatefull memo∣rie. With that he rendred up the sword, and flang away like a Bedlam, adding to his shamefull Oration many other slande∣rous and foule termes, which for regard of the Kings posteri∣tie, I have no minde to utter. They concluded, first to murther all of the English birth in Ireland, and sent an ambassador to Paulus the 3, called Mac Granell, archdeacon of Kelles, and rejected thence to Charles the fift, whose Aunt Queene Katherine the King had lately cast off, with much indignation of all the Spaniards, him hee thought eith to be kindled, and craved assistance to conquer the land, which he promised to hold under him, & his heires for ever. The meane while he forced an oath upon Gentle∣men of every shire to ayde him, camped within the pale, rea∣red a great army of English, Irish, and Scots, invaded the Earle of Ossory, and Iames his sonne Lord Butler, who having in∣telligence thereof, prevented his fury and kept those parts in order. When the Butlers had stopped his rage in Mounster, he fell to parlyes and treatyes with them, sent them diverse messen∣gers and letters, whereby he covenanted to devide with them halfe the Kingdome, would they assist his enterprise, Iames Lord Treasurer, in whom for their youth and acquaintance he most affied, and often accumbred with such temptations, finally returned his brokers with letters. Taking pen in hand to write you my resolute answere,The letter of Iames Lord Butler, and Lo. Treasurer: to Lord Thomas· I muse in the very first line, by what name to call you, my Lord, or my Cousin, seeing your notorious treason hath di∣stayned your honour, and your desperate lewdnes shamed your kindred, your are so liberall in parting stakes with mee, that a man would weene you had no right to the game, so importunate in craving my company, as if you would per∣swade me to hang with you for good fellowship. And thinke you that Iames is so mad to gape for gudgens, or so un∣gratious
to sell his truth for a peece of Ireland, were it so, (as it cannot be) that the Chickens you reckon were both hatch∣ed and feathered, yet be thou sure I had rather in this quarrell die thine enemy, then live thy partner: for the kindnes you proffer mee, and good love in the end of your letter, the best way I can I purpose to requite, that is, in advising you though you have fetched your feaze, yet to looke well ere you leape over. Ignorance and error, and a certaine opinion of duty hath carried you unawares to this folly, not yet so ranke, but it may be cured. The King is a vessell of bounty and mercy, your words against his Majesty shall not bee counted malicious, but rather balked out for heat and impotency, except your selfe by heaping offences, discover a mischievous and willfull meaning. Farewell. Nettled with this round answere, forth he passed to in∣crease his power, offered violence to very few, except that one despitous murther at Tartaine, the twenty five of Iuly, where in a morning earely he caused to be brought before him, the honourable Prelate Doctour Allen, Archbishop of Divelin, and Lord Chancellor, who being a reverent perso∣nage, feeble for age and sicknesse, kneeling at his feete in his shirte and mantle, bequeathing his soule to God, his body to the Traytors mercy, the wretched young man commaunded there to be brained like an oxe.Doctour Allen Archbishop of Divelin and L. Chancellor murdered. The place is ever since hedged in, overgrowne and unfrequented, in detestation of the fact. The people have observed that all the accessaries thereof, be∣ing after pardoned for rebellion, ended miserably. Allen had beene in service with Cardinall VVolsey, of deepe judgement; in the Cannon law, the onely match of Stephen Gardener an∣other of VVolseyes Chaplaines, for avoyding of which emu∣lation he was preferred in Ireland, rough and rigorous in Iu∣stice, hated of the Geraldines for his Masters sake, & his owne, as he that crossed them diverse times, and much troubled both the father and sonne in their governements, nor unlike to have promoted their accusations. All this while the Kings army was looked for, and no suc∣cour came to the rebels, which greatly quayled them, being of
themselves, though stored with souldiours, yet unfurni∣shed with any sufficient munition to stand in a maine battell. Moreover the number of wise Gentlemen did not greatly in∣cline to his purpose. And therefore when he besieged the Ci∣ty of Divelin, the most part of those arrowes which were shot over the walles, were unheaded, and little or nothing af∣frayed them. That espied the citizens, and gathering the faint∣nes of his souldiours thereby, blazed abroad upon the walles triumphant newes, that the Kings Army was arryved, and as it had beene so indeed, suddenly rushed out of their gates up∣pon the Rebels, who at the first sight of armed men, weening no lesse but the truth was so, otherwise assured that the Citty would never dare to incounter them, gave ground, forsooke their Captaines, dispersed and scattered into diverse corners, and never after met together. A little before this time dyed the Earle of Kildare in the towre of London for thought and paine.Iohn Stow. Sir VVilliam Ske∣vington (whom the Irish men call the gunner, because hee was preferred from that office of the Kings Master-gunner to governe them, and that they can full evill brooke to be ruled of any that is but meanely borne) brought over an Army, and with him Leonard Gray, a younger sonne to the Mar∣quesse Dorset, Lord Marshall. To whom Fitz Gerald yeel∣ded, and vvas sent into England, vvhere hee vvith his Vncles, and other principalls of the conspiracy, vvere aftervvards dravvne, hanged and quartered at Tiburne. Soone after vvas the house of the Geraldines attaynted by Parliament, and all of the name busily trayned out for feare of nevv commotions. But Thomas Leurus,Yong Fitz Ge∣rald preserved. late Bishop of Kil∣dare, schoole-master to a younger brother, Gerald Fitz Gerald, the Earle that novv liveth, secretly stale avvay vvith the childe, first into Scotland, then into France, and misdoubting the French, into Italy, vvhere Cardinall Pole his neere kinsman preserved him, till the raigne of Edward the sixt, vvith vvhom hee entred into high fa∣vour, and obtayned of him his olde Inheritance of Mei∣nothe.
Lastly, by meanes of the said Cardinall, and Sir Anthony Browne, Lord Mountague, whose sister hee marryed (a wo∣man worthy of such a brother) Queene Mary (Founder and restorer of many Noble houses) repealed his attainder, and set him in his fathers Earledome, wherein since that time he hath shewed himselfe sundry wayes officious and service∣able towards his Common-wealth, and the Crowne of Eng∣land, beside other good qualities of honour and curtesie, they repute him heere for the best horseman in these parts of Chri∣stendome. With this escape of yong Fitz Gerald, the Lord Leo∣nard Gray his Vncle on the mothers side was held suspect, & the same was one speciall article urged against him when hee lost his head,1542. Anno 1542. Hall. An. H 8. 32. & 34.Sir VVilliam Skevington, a vvorthy Governour, and among all vertues very just of his vvord, deceased Lord Deputy at Kilmaynam,1537. & the Lord Leonard Gray succeeded him. Oneale and Odonill colourably required a parley vvith the Deputy, but in the vvay as they rode, they burned the Navan, and the tovvne of Ardee. Wherefore the Deputy vvith the helpe of the Maior of Divelin Iames Fitz Symonds, and the Maior of Droghedagh, and the English pale met them, flighted them, slevv 400. of their trayne, and there the Maior of Divelin for notable service in that journey,Sir ames Fitz-Simons Maior of Divelin. vvas knighted. Sir Anthony Seintleger Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputy. He summoned a Parliament, vvherein the Geraldines vvere attainted,1542. Abbeyes suppressed, the King named supreme head and King of Ireland, because he recognized no longer to hold it of the Pope. At this Parliament appeared Irish Lords Mac Gilpatricke, Lord Barry, Mac Cartimore, O-Brene, and diverse more, vvhom follovved Con Oneale, submitting himselfe to the Kings Deputy, and after to the King himselfe, vvho retur∣ned him richly plated,Con Oneale Earle of Ty∣rone. created him Earle of Tyrone, his base sonne Matthew Oneale Baron of Donganon. As for Shane O∣neale the onely sonne of his body mulier begotten, hee vvas then little esteemed and of no proofe. The same time Iames Earle of Desmond came to the King, and vvas of him both Princely entertained and revvarded.
CAP. X. Edward the 6. Mary, and Elizabeth. BEfore the decease of Henry the 8. Seintleger was twice in England, leaving at both times Sir VVilliam Brabason Lord Iustice. In his se∣cond returne An. 1546. Sir Edward Belling∣ham, Captaine generall, landed at Waterford, and skowred the coast, where Omore and Ocomore used to prey. This yeare the city of Divelin obtained a Charter for two Sheriffes in stead of Bayliffes.154. The Geraldines Out-lawes were taken and executed, Bellingham appointed Lord Deputye, erected a Mint within the Castle of Divelin, which quickely wearyed them for want of fuell. Andrew Brereton with 300. horse∣men, and 40. footemen, inhabited the North as farre as Lecale, where hee with 35. horsemen gave the charge upon 240. Scotts, that from the out Islandes came to succour the Irish, and wasted the Countrey. In one yeare hee cleered those quarters, that the Kings subiects might passe in peace. Sir Frauncis Bryan the Kings Mynion was left Lord Iustice, vvhile Bellingham repayred into England, vvhere he dyed a man made up by service in the vvarres, by continuall toyle therein diseased and feebled,Sir Edward Bellingham. but of courage a lyon to his dying day, true as steele, as farre from flattery as from hearing flatterers, an exceeding fervent Protestant, very zealous and carefull in tendring the vvealth of Ireland, vvherein the coun∣trey giveth him the praise over all his predecessours and suc∣cessours vvithin memory, he spent his vvhole allovvance in hospitality, calling the same, his deare Masters meate, none of his ovvne cost. Letters commendatory offered him by the Councell, vvhen Brian had vvrought his trouble before the
nobility of England hee rejected as vaine and superfluous, professing, that if of his owne innocencie he could not up∣hold him, hee would never seeke other shift, then Credo resurrectionem mortuorum, for (quoth he) well they may kill mee, but they shall never conquer mee. Sowre he was, and thundering in words, indeed very temperate, applyed him∣selfe altogether to severity, Lordlinesse, and terrour, Brian dy∣ed within sixe weekes, and Brabason became Lord Iustice, till Saintleger the fourth time was sent over Deputye. To him crept Mac Cartye, that had lately roved and de∣nyed his obedience, with an halter about his necke, and got his pardon. Vpon Saintleger came Sir Iames Croftes, of whose bounty and honourable dealing towards them, they yeeld at this day a generall good report. Crofts tarryed in office two yeares, and left Sir Thomas Cusack (who dyed five houres before the writing heereof, and Gerald Ailmer, while they both were coursing Oneale from Dundalke. Queene Mary.Queene Mary established in her Crowne, committed her government once more to Saintleger, whom sundry Noble∣men pelted and lifted at, till they shouldered him quite out of all credite.1553. He to be counted forward and plyable to the taste of King Edward the sixt his raigne,Sir Anthony Seintleger. rymed against the Reall Presence for his pastime, and let the papers fall where Cour∣tiers might light thereon, vvho greatly magnified the pith and conveyance of that noble sonnet But the originall of his own hand-vvriting, had the same firmely (though contrary to his ovvne Iudgement) vvandering in so many hands, that his ad∣versary caught it, and tripped it in his vvay: the spot vvhereof he could never vvipe out. Thus vvas he removed, a discreete Gentleman, very studious of the State of Ireland, enriched, stout enough, vvithout gall. While the Deputy staggered uncertaine of continuance, the Tooles, and the Cavenaghes vvaxed cockish in the Coun∣tie of Divelin, rangeing in flockes of seven or eight score, on vvhom set forth the Marshall and the Sheriffes of Divelin, Buckley and Gygen, vvith the citties helpe, and over-layde
them in sudden skirmishes, of which, threescore were execu∣ted for example. Thomas Earle of Sussex, Lord Deputy,1554. with whom came his Brother in law Sir Henry Sidney, Treasurer. This Deputy,Earle of Sussex. to the inestimable benefite of the Realme, brought under obedience the disordered countreyes of Leix, Slew∣marge, Ofalie, Irrye, and Glinmalire, then late possessed by the Oconnore, Omores, Odempsyes, and other Irish rebels. Hee molested Iames Mac Conell the Scottish Islander, that in those dayes joyned with the Irish, and disquieted Vlster. In which voyage Divelin assisted the Governour with a faire compa∣ny, conducted by Iohn Vsher, Sheriffe, and Patrick Buckley. He held a Parliament, wherein it was made high Treason to re∣taine Scots for souldiours, and fellony to contract with them matrimony.1557. At his returne from England (in which time Sir Henry Sidney vvas Lord Iustice) hee pursued the Scots to their Ilands, and there entred, did them much skathe, vvanne himselfe full great commendation of hardinesse, sayled backe vvith the glory of that adventure, vvherein (I trovv) tvvo more of his matches are not remembred, nor read. With the nevves of Maryes death, hee crossed the seas againe into England, leaving Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Iustice, and yet againe the next yeare leaving Sir VVilliam Fitzwilliams Lord Iustice, then returned he Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,Queene Eliza∣beth. by Proclamation reformed and aba∣ted their base Coyne, being as yet perfect in all the pro∣portions, measures, allayes and values thereof, as by min∣tanor, tooke vvith him souldiours out of Divelin, victu∣alled for sixe vveekes at that citties charge,1560. under the leading of Petaboghe Sheriffe, and joyning him to his povver, vvent upon Shane Oneale, the Irish enemy of greatest force then living. Thereupon Shane hyed him into England, the Lieutenant after him, Fitz VVilliams Lord Iustice, till Sus∣sex sped his businesse, and came backe the next and last time of his departure.Sir Nic. Arnold Sir Nicholas Arnold directed thither vvith Commission, tarryed behinde him Lord Iustice, and too short a vvhile as the country speaketh, vvho testifieth his
upright and reasonable provision of household cates, the ab∣uses whereof with sesse and souldiours, doe so impove∣rish and alienate the needie Farmors from us, that they say they might as easily beare the Irish oppressions of Conies & Cuddies, from which we pretend to deliver them. Arnold for his better successe in government, linked him∣selfe entirely with Gerald Earle of Kildare, who likewise en∣deavoured to support the same with all diligence, being au∣thorized to straine the rebells at his discretion, wherefore hee disposed himselfe to serve, and presented the Gover∣nour many times with a number of principall Out-lawes heades. The Earle of Sussex.In the meane while Sussex became Lord President of the North of England, a spare man of body, but sound & health∣full, brought up with Stephen Gardiner, passing valiant, a deep reacher, very zealous in friendship, quicke in resolution of ex∣tremities in the field, wonderfull patient, able to tyre ten soul∣diours, learned and languaged, ever doing with his penne, of utterance sharpe and sententious, wary, busie, painefull, and speedie, meeter to rule, then to be over-ruled. Sir Henry Sidney, Knight of the Garter, Lord Presi∣dent of Wales, and Lord Deputie of Ireland. Hee found the Realme distempered vvith Oneales rebellion, and the same did extinguish, vvhereof before I speake, I must looke backe a little into certaine yeares past, and lay together the circumstance of this lamentable tumult. Of all the Irish Princes, though none vvas then comparable to Oneale for antiquity and noblenesse of bloud, yet had the same endured sundry varieties and vexations, untill the divi∣on began in England of the tvvo royall families, Yorke and Lancaster, at vvhich time the English Lords of Ireland, either for zeale, or for kinred and affection transporting their force thither to vphold a side, the meere Irish vvaxed insolent, and chiefly Oneale incroched upon the full possession of Vlster,Oneales rebel∣lion. a∣biding so uncontrolled, till Shane Oneale fearing the puissance of Henry 8. exhibited to him a voluntary submissiō, surrendred all titles of honour, received at his hands the Earledome of
Ter-owen, commonly called Tirone, to be held of the King of English forme and tenure: Armes he gave the bloody hand a terrible cognizance. This Oneale had two sonnes, Matthew a bastard, and Shane legitimate, but because Matthew was a lusty horseman, welbeloved, and a tryed Souldiour, Shane but a Boy, and not of much hope, the father obtained the Barony of Donganon, and the remainder of his Earledome to Mat∣thew. When Shane and his foster brethren grew to yeares, they considered of the injury and tyranny, done by policie of the base Oneale, with rearing hue and cry at the side of a Castle where he lay that night, when the Gentleman ran suddainely forth to answere the cry, as the custome is, they betrayed and murdered him. The father not utterly discontent with his dispatch, when he saw the proofe of his lawfull sonne and heire, thenceforward fancied Shane Oneale, put him in trust with all, himselfe being but a Cripple, notwithstanding that Matthew left issue male which liveth, to whom the inheri∣tance appertained, yet after his fathers decease, Shane was re∣puted for the rightfull Oneale, tooke it, kept it, challenged su∣periority over the Irish Lords of Vlster, warred also upon the English part, subdued Oreyly, imprisoned Odonil, his wife, and his sonne, enriched himselfe with all Odonils forts, castles, and plate, by way of ransome, detained pledges of obedience, the wife (whom he carnally abused) and the Childe, fortified a strong Iland in Tyrone, which he named spitefully, Foogh-ni-Gall, that is, the hate of English men, whom he so detested, that he hanged a Souldiour for eating English bisket, another by the feete mistrusted for a spy, another Captaine of the Gal∣loglaghes he slew with torture. After this usurpation and ty∣ranny, hee was yet perswaded by Melchior Husse sent unto him from Gerald Earle of Kildare, to reconcile himselfe to good order, and to remember the honourable estate where∣in King Henry placed his father, which monition he accep∣ted, besought his protection, and made a voyage into Eng∣land, where the Courtiers noteing his haughtines and barba∣rity devised his stile thus. Oneale the great, Cousin to S. Pa∣tricke, friend to the Queene of England, enemy to all the
world besides. Thence he sped home againe, gratiously dealt with, used Civility, expelled the Scots out of all Vlster, where they intended a conquest, wounded and tooke prisoner, Cap∣taine Iames Mac Conill their Chieftaine, whereof the said Iames deceased: ordered the North so properly, that if any subject could approve the losse of money or goods within his pre∣cinct, he would assuredly either force the robber to restituti∣on, or of his owne cost redeeme the harme to the loosers con∣tentation. Sitting at meate, before he put one morsell into his mouth, he used to slice a portion above the dayly almes, and send it namely to some begger at his gate, saying, it was meete to serve Christ first: But the Lords of Vlster, and elsewhere, whom he yoked and spoiled at pleasure, abhorring his pride and extortion, craved assistance of the Deputy, for redresse thereof: Oneale advertised, increaseth his rage, disturbeth and driveth out Mac Gwire, the plantiffe, burneth the Metropoli∣tane Church of Ardmagh, because no English army might lodge therein, for which sacriledge the Primate accursed him, besiegeth Dundalke, practiseth to call strangers into the land for ayde, as appeareth by those letters which Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy intercepted, occupieth all the North of Ireland, being 100. myles broad, 120. long. Then addressed he plau∣sible letters to the Potentates of Mounster, exhorting them to rebell, that the force of England at once might bee dismem∣bred. This message the Deputy prevented, stayed the country, abridged him of that hope, and then proclaimed him Tray∣tor. An Irish Iester standing by, and hearing Oneale denoun∣ced with addition of a new name, traytor: Except (quoth he) traytor be a more honourable title then Oneale, he shall never take it upon him, by my consent. While the Deputy was absent in England, the towne of Droghedagh was in hazard to be taken by the Rebels, which to preserve,1566. at the motion of the Lady Sidney, then abiding in Droghedagh, came Master Sarsfield then Major of Divelin, with a chosen band of goodly young men Citizens, and brake the rage of the enemies. The Deputy returning made him Knight, and finding it now high time utterly to weede
and roote out the Traytor, he furnished a substantiall army, and with the readines thereof hartened the Irish, whom O∣neale had impoverished, cut off his adherents, and all accesse of succour, chased him and his into corners, spent him, cast him into such despaire, that he consulted with his Secretary Neale Mac Connor,Oneale van∣quished. to present himselfe unknowne and dis∣guised to the Deputy, with an halter about his necke, begging his pardon. Ere you doe so (quoth his Clarke) let us prove an extreame shift, and there he perswaded him to joyne with the Scots, whom he had lately banished: of whom, should he be refused or finde inconvenience, at any time, submission to the Deputy might then be used, when all faileth. Shane knew himselfe odious to the Scots, especially to them whom he thought to lincke with the brother and kindred of Iames Mac Conill,Mac Conil the Islander. yet in those hard oddes hee devised rather to assay their friendship, then to grate upon mercy, which so oft and so intollerably he had abused. Mac Conill whom Shane overthrew left two brethren, and a Sister, whereof one Suarly Torwy remained with Oneale, en∣tertayned after his brothers death. The other was Alexander Oge, who with 600. Scots incamped now in Clanebov. The woman was Agnes Ilye, whose husband Shane slew in the said discomfiture, Agnes had a sonne Mac Gillye Aspucke, who betrayed Oneale to avenge his Fathers and Vncles quarrell. At the first meeting, (for thither he came accompanied with Torwy and his Secretary, and 50. horsemen) the Captaines made him great cheere, and fell to quaffing, but Aspucke min∣ding to enter into his purpose, there openly challenged his Secretary, as the Author of a dishonourable report, that Mac Conils wife did offer to forsake her country and friends, and to marry with Shane Oneale her husbands destruction; Mary (quoth the Secretary) if thine Aunt were Queen of Scotland, it might beseeme her full well, to seeke such a marriage. To this brawle Oneale gave eare, upheld his man, advaunced his owne degree: The comparison bred a fray betweene their Souldiours; Out sprang Aspucke, and beat Oneales man, and then suddainely brought his band upon them in the tent,
where the Souldiours with their slaughter-knives, killed the Secretary and Shane Oneale,Oneale mur∣dered. mangled him cruelly, lapped him in an old Irish shirte, and tumbled him into a pit, within an old Chappell hard by whose head foure dayes after, Captaine Pierce cut off and met therewith the Deputy, who sent it be∣fore him staked on a pole, to the Castle of Divelin, where it now standeth. It is thought that Tirlagh who now usurpeth the name of Oneale, practised this devise with Agnes, Alexan∣der, and Torwy, when he perceived Shane discouraged, and not able to hold out. Thus the wretched man ended, who might have lived like a Prince, had he not quenched the sparkes of grace that appeared in him, with arrogancy and contempt against his Prince. The Butlers rebellion.The next Tumult in Ireland proceeded of the folly, especi∣ally of Sir Edmund Butler, Pierce and Edward his Brethren, who being unable in law, to maintaine his title to certaine landes, whereof he held possession, whereunto Sir Peter Ca∣rew laide very direct and manifest claime, (for Carew is an an∣cient Barons house in Ireland) confedered with Iames Fitz Morice of the south, and others, began commotion, more dan∣gerous to the Realme then the late stirre of Oneale, such was their opportunity of place, the rebels so friended, their num∣ber so furnished, that the Deputy passing forth against them in haste, requisite with such shift as the suddaine mischiefe asked, was thought to have put his person in great adven∣ture, but in conclusion he wanne by that journey, great mar∣tiall honour, started them from hole to hole, and ransackt e∣very veine of the land, so as the Butlers craving protection, shortly recoyled, and stand now at the Queenes mercy. To appease the country, & reforme the lewdnes of his Brethren, Thomas Earle of Ormond came from the Court of England home, and in quieting the said broyles, shewed also for his part, a right good peece of service, worthy to be remembred. After this ensued a Parliament, the particulars whereof, are expressed in the acts lately drawne, to be published in Print, somewhat before the last session, a seditious libell intituled,
Tom Troth, (let fall in the streetes of Divelin) nipped by name diverse honourable and worshipfull of the Realme, & certaine officers of the Deputyes houshold, for greeving the land with impositions of Cesse, whereupon followed a pro∣clamation, bearing date the twenty eight of Ianuary, which if it may bee executed in all points, would cut off many such murmures, and leave a blessed memory of the Governour that devised it.12. Decembris 1570. The day of prorogation when the Knights and Burgesses of the Cominalty resorted to the Lordes of the upper house, much good matter was there uttered betweene the Deputy and the Speaker, whereof comming home to my lodging I tooke notes, and here I will deliver them, as neere as I can call them to minde, in the same words and sentences, that I heard them. First the Speaker Iames Stanihurst an Es∣quire of worship, Recorder of Divelin, and for the Citty Bur∣gesse at that present, began thus. Rather of custome and dutyfull humility,The oration of James Stani∣hurst Speaker of the Parlia∣ment. then for doubt of your honourable disposition, (so well knowne to us all, and to every of us in private, that it little needeth my praise) we are to request your Lordship in the behalfe of our selves, and our countryes, whom we represent in this Parliament, to accept our service and endeavour in driving these conclusi∣ons, where by to the uttermost of our skill we have intended without injury, the Crowne to enrich, treasons to chastise, to better the state, traffique to further, learning to cherish, and in briefe, to maintaine with our best advice those benefits, which the Prince hath inferred upon this Realme by you, and you with your sword and wisedome have performed. An ordinary suite it is, in the end of such assemblies to crave exe∣cutions of law, for it sufficeth not, to keepe a statute tanquam inclusum in tabulis, as a thing shut up in parchment rolles, but law must speake and walke abroad, to the comfort and be∣hoofe of good subjects: Otherwise, vve shall resemble the folly of him, that once in every houre saluted his gold, never using it, but onely bad it lye still and couch. Of the necessity thereof, I cannot say so much as your Lordship conceiveth,
and I desire not to discourse a matter generally felt and con∣fessed. In particular the zeale which I have to the reformati∣on of this Realme, and to breede in the rudest of our people, resolute English hearts, moveth me to pray your Lordships helping hand for the practise, namely of one statute which is for the erecting of Grammer Schooles, within every diocesse, the stipends to be levied in such proportion, as in the late act hath beene devised, whereunto the royall assent is already granted, and yet the point in no forwardnes, nor in none is like to be, except by some good meanes, the onset be given & freshly followed, surely might one generation sippe a little of this liquor, and so bee induced to long for more, both our country men that live obeysant, would ensue with a courage the fruites of peace, whereby good learning is supported, and our unquiet neighbours would finde such sweetenesse in the taste thereof, as it should bee a ready way to reclaime them. In mine experience, who have not yet seene much more then forty yeares, I am able to say that our Realme is at this day an halfe deale more civill then it was, since noble men and wor∣shipfull, with others of ability, have used to send their sonnes into England to the Law, to Vniversities, or to Schooles. Now when the same Schooles shall bee brought home to their doores, that all that will may repaire unto them, I doubt not, considering the numbers brought up beyond the Seas, and the good already done in those few places, where lear∣ning is professed, but this addition discreetly made, will fo∣ster a young frye, likely to prove good members of this com∣mon wealth, and desirous to traine their children the same way. Neither were it a small helpe to the assurance of the Crowne of England, when Babes from their Craddles should be inured under learned Schoole-masters, with a pure English tongue, habite, fashion, discipline; and in time utterly forget the affinity of their unbroken borderers, who possibly might be wonne by this example, or at the least wise loose the opportunity, which novv they have, to infect others▪ And seeing our hap is not yet, to plant an Vniversity here at home, which attempt can never bee remembred without many
thankes to your good Lordship for your bountifull offer, me seemeth it is the more expedient to enter so farre forth as our commission reacheth, and to hope for the rest: I have said e∣nough, especially to a learned governour, to whom an inck∣ling were sufficient in such a plausible and needfull motion. It resteth that wee pray your Lordship to folde up whatsoe∣ver squarings or diversities of Iudgements, wise men have heere uttered in our often meetings, and by the sequele of all our doings to measure the good meaning of every severall person. When the Speaker had done, the Deputy having a rich and plentifull kinde of utterance, meere naturall, but not without judgement, answered at length, as he that knew no end of his good, the points whereof, as I can remember, were these. In good faith, M. Speaker, I cannot lesse doe, but recorde and testifie the readines, travaile and good service of you all,The Lord De∣puties answer. and namely of your selfe, who in the whole course of this Parliament, & now lastly in this charitable request for tray∣ning your youth, have confirmed the opinion which my selfe and the generall voyce long since retained of your rare ver∣tues, devotion, wisedome, learning, and modestie, so as the case cannot be misdoubted that is preferred by such a Pro∣ctor, the substance whereof toucheth you my Lords spirituall and temporall, & you the knights and worshipfull of every Shire, to you belongeth the quickening of this godly statute, which heere againe I recommend unto you, & will not let to enquire after your diligence therein from time to time, & the most effectuall order that may be for this purpose, shall assu∣redly be taken in place convenient. Shew your selves forvvard and franke in advancing the honour, wealth, ease and credit of your countryes, envy not to your posterity the same path that your selves have troden, and namely you that flourish at this day in the light & eye of your cōmon-wealth. Had your opi∣nions matched with mine, concerning the Vniversity which M. Speaker remembreth, no doubt the name and reputation thereof would have bin a spurre to these erections, as nurses
for babes to suck in, till they might repaire thither to be wai∣ned: But I trust your consents therein are only suspended for a time, and that so much good labour shall not be utterly lost and frustrate: What though certaine imperfections cannot as yet be salved? What though the summe arise not to make a muster of Colledges at the first day? What though the place be not also commodious? What though other circumstances inferre a feeble and rawe foundation? These are indeede ob∣jections of the multitude, whose backewardnesse bree∣deth an unnecessary stoppe in this our purpose. But your wisedomes can easily consider that time must ripen a weake beginning, that other Vniversities began with lesse, that all experience telleth us so, shall wee be so curi∣ous or so testy that nothing will please us, but all in all, all absolute, all excellent, all furnished, all beautified, all forti∣fied in the prime and infancie thereof. I remember a tale of Apuleius asse, who being indifferently placed betweene two bottles of haye, because he could not reach them both at once, forbare them both. Let us not so doe, but content our selves by little and little to bee fedde as the case requireth. The rest of your Bills debated and passed by your wise∣domes in this Parliament, I must confesse, they are as you say, beneficiall to the Queene my Mistris, and to her Crowne, but how? Verily as the Husband-man soweth his seede, and reapeth much more then he layde downe, so whatsoever this benefite amounteth unto, it returneth to your selves in a circle, heere it groweth, heere it is eaten, heere it multiplyeth, heere it is spent, they have their due, the Prince is bettered, you are qui∣eted, Iustice executed, malefactours terrifyed. Were they never so deare collopps of your owne flesh and bloud, I see not how you could either have coloured their offence, or qualifyed their punishment, the one so no∣torious, that it cannot be dissembled, the other so ordinary, that course of law prescribeth it. Therefore as you have well done, so you have done but your duties, allowed an inch to receive an ell, abridged your owne foes, avenged your own
Injuryes, condemned your owne oppressors. And yet this du∣ty being on your parts, so cheerefully and painfully, so loving∣ly and advisedly performed, deserveth great thankes, and shall finde it too, If I bee the man, either in office able to consider you, or out of office in place to friend you. I am to depart in∣to England shortly, lay your heads together, and article the points, whereby this Realme may be furthered, use mee ei∣ther as a mouth to speake for you, or an eye to direct you, or as a hand to under-prop you, aut consilio, aut auxilio. Besides, the generall care vvhich I ought to have for you all, as your governour, and yoked together under one obedience, English blouds, and English hearts, I am linked to you as to my conti∣nuall acquaintance these many yeares, hither I came in my spring, heere I have spent my summer, I returne in the fall of the leafe, now is the time, intimate your defects in demaunds, or what else soever may content you, and see whether I will tender your common-wealth. I meane not the pretended common-wealth, seditiously promoted in Tom Loodles ryme, but some good and substantiall matter worth the hearing, which upright and equall men will indeede e∣steeme. As for his complaint of Cesse and Imposition, it savoureth either hatefull malice, or childish folly, malice if he would decay the garrison that preserveth the Realme, folly if he thinke the Realme can be preserved vvithout a gar∣rison, vvherin I will shew you my fancie by the vvay, perhaps out of all order, but I pray beare vvith mee, I take matters as they come next to hand, I can not skill of vvritten tales. Many a good-fellovv talkes of Robin Hoode, that never drevv in his Bovv, and many an idle head is full of Proclamations, and conceiveth certaine farre fetches, able in his vveening to vvield a Realme. But let me see vvhich of them all can justi∣fie, that Ireland may spare the Army they kicke so much a∣gainst. Are your enemyes more tractable then they have beene? Are they fevver? Are you by your selves of force to match them? If you bee, then vvere England starke madde, to disburse tvventie or thirtie thousand pounds a yeare, for none other purpose but to vexe and grieve you:
that were like the husband who gelded himselfe to anger his wife. You must not thinke wee love you so evill, nay rather thinke truely wee tender your quietnesse and preser∣vation, as a nation derived from our auncestours, ingraffed and incorporate into one body with us, disturbed with a sort of barbarous people, odious to God and man, that lappe your bloud as greedily as ours. The abuse of souldiours, their horse, boyes, and harlots, the Legerdemaine of Cap∣taines, chequerelles, the purloyning of Cessors & Constables, the number of freedomes holding onely by concordatum, the annoyance and hurt which the poore farmer endureth, as I know them to be intollerable, so I know them to be redres∣sed with the first detection, whose complaint hath not been heard? whose enormity vvinked at? what can you aske more? would you have souldiours nothing insolent, nothing sensu∣all, nothing greedy, no quarrellers? so wish I, but scarce hope for it, vvould you hazard a misery certaine, extreame, and in∣curable, to avoyde a trouble casuall, transitory, and remedi∣lesse? so vvould not I, if you can prove a garrison needlesse, I undertake to ease you thereof, If you neede it, they must bee fedde, finde another vvay then this, to provide for them vi∣ctuall, that carryeth asmuch readinesse to service, and more contentation to your selves, and I assure you mine assistance to set it forvvard. But the Brokers of this libell are vvont to reason, Why should not vvee live vvithout an Army as vvell as in England? Why cannot our Noble-men of might in every border, our tenants and servaunts vvith∣stand the Irish next them, as vvell as the Northerne Lordes and Inhabitants of Riddesdale and Tiddesdale, and those about the Scottish banke resist the Scotts, fa∣cing and pilfering as fast as our enemyes. Very good, vvhat saye they then to Fraunce, vvhich is no vvor∣ser governed then England, and hath an Armye. Ita∣ly notvvithstanding as vvell ordered as Fraunce vvith∣out an Army? Spaine asvvell as either of them both, and continually keepes an Armye? I tell you, these are daungerous and hollovve kindes of Arguments,
which are deduced ab exemplo, by example of other Realmes. Many subtile diversities, many varieties of circumstance, many exceptions alter the case, and make it utterly desperate. Touching Scotland it is well knowne, they were never the men whom England neede to feare: They are but a corner cut out, and easily tamed when they waxe outragious. Your foes lie in the bosome of your Countryes; more in number, richer of ground, desperate theeves, ever at an inch, unpossible to be severed from you without any fence, beside your owne valiantnes, and the helpe of our Souldiours. England is quiet within it selfe, thoroughly peopled on that side of Scotland, which most requireth it, guarded with an army, otherwise the Lords and Gentlemen, and lusty Yeoman, that dwell on a row are ready to maister their private vagaries. From all forraine invasions walled with the wide Ocean. Were there such a Sea betwixt you and the Irish, or were they shut up in an odde end of the land, or had they no such opportunityes of bogges and woods as they have, or were they Lords of the lesser part of Ireland, or were they severed into handfuls, not able to annoy whole towneships and Baronies as they doe, the comparison were somewhat like, but alacke it fareth not so with you, you are beset round, your townes be feeble, the land empty, the commons bare, every county by it selfe cannot save it selfe. Take away the terrour and feare of our Bande, which increaseth your strength, many an Irish Lord would be set agog that novv is full lovvly, and holdeth in his hornes, and the open enemy vvould scovvre your quarters that novv dares not venture lest he pay for his passage. Consi∣der me the effect of an Army vvrought in these fevv yeares, for doubt vvhereof you are nothing so oft nor so lamentably pelted at, as your auncestors vvere, vvhich of them durst be stored vvith coyne, knovving the rebells teeth vvatered there∣at, and himselfe not able to hold him out? vvhich of them had leisure to build, to lye soft and vvarme, to take his ease in his ovvne home? vvhich of them vvere plated, or jevvelled, or attyred themselves, their vivves and children sumptuously, after their calling as you doe now? If your bagges bee full
vvhere theirs were lancke, if you dwell neatly where they dwelled homely, if you sleep on featherbeds where they slept on couches, if you be sumptuous where they vvere skant, you have the more cause to honour that Scepter, that so directeth you, and to love the warrant that procureth you this quietnes, the mother of all your wealth and prosperity. Therefore to conclude where I began, weigh well the sicke and wounded parts of your common wealth, cure the roote, regard the foundation, the principall pillars, the sum∣mer posts, the stone walles, as for the roofe and the tyles, if yee repaire them onely, and suffer the ground worke to perish, a tempest of weather, a flovve will shake your building. Of some such good and substantiall reformation I would ad∣vise you friendly to consult, and you shall finde me as willing to preferre the generall welfare of you all, as I have beene de∣sirous to benefit every singular person of you, that hath in any lawfull suite attempted me. ¶ These last words gave Sidney to the Realme, as it were for a farewell, and thenceforvvards looked for Sir VVilliam Fitz VVilliams his brother in law, a politicke and stout gentleman, now Lord Iustice, and for Sir Iohn Perrot Lord president of Mounster, to be settled there, before his departure. He was ho∣nored at the point of his going, with such recourse, pompe, musicke, shewes & enterludes, as no man remēbreth the like. He tooke ship towards England at the key of Divelin, in Lent follovving,Sir Henry Sid∣ney, Lord De¦puty faileth into England. 25. Mar. 1571. accōpanied to sea with the Estates & Worshipfull of Ireland, vvith innumerable harty prayers, & vvith that vvish of his returne, vvhereof but fevv Governours in these last 60. yeares, have held possession. The man vvas surely much loved of them, from his first office of Treasurer in the 2. yeare of Queen Mary, stately vvithout disdaine, familiar vvithout con∣tempt, very continent & chast of body, no more then enough liberall, learned in many languages, & a great lover of learning perfect in blazoning of armes, skilfull of antiquities, of vvit fresh and lively, in consultations very Temperate, in utterance happy, vvhich his experience and vvisedome hath made arti∣ficiall, a preferrer of many, a father to his servants, both in warre and peace of commendable courage. FINIS.
Faults escaped. PAge 2. line 19. countie· p. 6. l. 24. Inchequin. l. 26. de Burgo. l. 28. Vlick. 29. Thomond. & 34. Clancar. p. 7. l. 7. Killeene. l. 32. Donsany. & 35. Beare-haven. p. 8. l. 4. Brune. l. 19. Doceter or D'exeter. l. 22. Inchequin. & l. 29. Thomastowne. p. 12. l. 12. Hiberus▪ p. 21. in the argons for Dom▪ reade, mundi. p. 22. l. 17. monarchy. p. 30. l. 25. after purpose, reade, our. p. 38. l. 36. for Mounster r. Vlster. p. 46. l. 33. after Clerke, adde, astonished. p. 61. l. 12. extreame∣ly. p. 65. l 7. coadiutors. l. 30. Aldem. p. 77. l. 13. after Knight, adde, 10. p. 82. l. 15. Birminghame. p. 84. l. 2. for Moun∣ster r. Leinster. l. 3. O-Tooles, O-Birnes, l. 37. Maupas. p. 85. l. 11. Bignore. p. 87. in the margent, 1329. p. 90. l. 9. after Archr, adde, Prior. l. 12. Kenwrick. p. 93. in marg. l. 2. 1399. p. 96. l. 32. prapofita. p. 101. l. 5. least. p. 105. l. 21. crosse out the first and. p. 118. l. 15. Rowks. p. 123. l. 8. O Connor, p. 136. l. 9. cheque▪ rolles. The lesser faults are as easily a∣mended as found out by the Reader.
THE CHRONICLE OF IRELAND: COLLECTED BY MEREDITH HANMER, Doctor of Diuinity. The second part. THree hundred yeeres after the flood,Bartholanus in Ireland. one Bartho∣lanus the sonne of Sera, with his three sonnes, Languinus, Salanus, and Ruthurugus, and their wives of the posterity of Iaphet, are said to have arrived in this Island. This opinion followeth Giraldus Cambrensis, and him followeth Poly∣chronicon; and my selfe, not meaning to swarve from the common opinion, thought good to acquaint the posterity therewith. With this Bartholanus, as their Captaine, came many of that line, and multiplied exceedingly for the space of 300 yeeres, to the number of 9000 fighting men. Little is remembred of Barthola∣nus, saving that with many hands he rid and made plaine a great part of the Country, making paces thorow woods and thickets; and that his sonnes left doubtfull remembrances of their names; the first to Languinus Poole, the second to mount Salanga (since named Saint Dominicks hill) and the third to Ruthurugus his Poole. At the same time, according to the common saying, Where God
hath his Church, the Devill hath his Chappell, many of the cursed seed of Cham arrived also in this Island,Oceanus inva∣deth Ireland. with their Captaine Oceanus, the sonne of Cham, called of some Mena, of Moses, Mitzraim. First he was in the yeere of the world 1802, the second Commander of Ae∣gypt, planted Colonies along the river Nilus, and after hee had reigned there 7 yeeres, he endevoured by navigation to subdue unto his Empire many parts of the world. Thus waxing strong and mighty upon the seas, hee prevailed much, and travelled farre; hee came to these North parts of the world, landed many of his followers, and in remembrance of his voyage, left his name upon the seas which wash these lands, which of him is yet called the Ocean sea. After his departure hence his cursed line multiplied not so much in number as in all mischiefe and rebellion, they set up a King of their owne, they opposed themselves against the posterity of Iaphet; they were great in strength, and huge of stature, and attempted great mat∣ters after the example of Cham or Zoroastres the Magician, and Nim∣rod grandfather to Ninus: they repined at the blessings bestowed up∣on Sem ad Iaphet, thinking it necessary to withstand and prevent all lawfull rule and dominion, lest the curse of slavery prophecied by Noah should light upon them, as at length it did. Many bickerings and skirmishes were amongst them, the successe was variable on both sides, betweene the lawfull governours and these usurpers, so much to the griefe of them that coveted to live in peace under their rightfull Princes, that they determined with the chance of one generall battell either wholly to subdue those rebellious miscreants and tyrannous Gi∣ants, or else to end their lives in freedome, and so to be rid of farther misery. They assemble together, they gather their forces out of all parts of the land, and comming to joyne battell with the Giants, af∣ter they had fought fiercely together for the space of certaine houres, the victory inclined to the rightfull part, so that the lawfull Kings prevailing against this cursed brood, great slaughter was made upon the whole sort of that pestiferous generation, and the Kings meaning to deliver themselues of all dangers in time to come, used their happy victory with great cruelty, which turned to their owne confusion. For they spared neither man, woman, nor child that came in their way, for more despite and fuller satisfaction of their determinate re∣venge, neither vouchsafed they to bury the carkasses of their slaine e∣nemies,Victory with cruelty turneth to the hurt of the conquerors but cast them out like a sort of dead dogs, whereof (through stinke of the same) such an infective pestilence insued in all places throughout the Island by corruption of the ayre, that few escaped with life,A grievous in∣fection. except those that got them away by sea; yea the infection was so great of those cursed carkasses of Cham his posterity, that the dogs and wolves died thereof. And here ended the whole race of Bartholanus and his of-spring, and the Country (excepting a few silly soules scattered in remote places) was unpeopled.
And here commeth in a tale yet in great request among the Irish, how that one Ruanus a Giant, fearing this mortality, fled into a cave,Of Ruanus: and continued there till nature forced him to come forth for food and nourishment, so hungry was hee that every thing was meat that came to his mouth: hee covering his face with mosse and grasse, fled to the farthest parts of the land into the winde to avoid the infection, and so for a long time hauing taking the advantage of the ayre, esca∣ped death. He is said to have lived two thousand and one and forty yeeres (which is more then twice the age of Methushelah) vnto the time (forsooth) of Saint Patrick, to whom hee discoursed at large (say they) of all the accidents of former times. In the end he was of Saint Patrick baptized, and died after the birth of our Saviour, in the yeere 432, and lyeth buried at Loghry in Ormund, where there is a Church dedicated to his name, and he is numbred among the Con∣fessors of Ireland. And to second this fable with two precedent lies, the which I should haue begun withall in the front of this History (as all Irish An∣tiquaries doe) but that I would not abuse the reader, being purposed beginning and ending to deliuer the truth, I read as followeth: Whereas in the yeere of the world 1525,Of Cesara and Fintan. Noah began to admo∣nish the people of vengeance to come by a generall deluge for the wickednesse and detestable sinne of man, and continued his admoni∣tion 120 yeeres, building an Arke for the safegard of himselfe and his family; one Cesara (say they) according vnto others Cesarea, a Neece of Noah, (when others seemed to neglect this forewarning) rigging a navy, committed her selfe with her adherents to the seas to seeke adventures, and to avoid the plagues that were to fall; there ar∣rived in Ireland, with her three men, Bithi, Laigria, and Fintan, and fifty women; within forty dayes after her arrivall the universall flood came upon them and those parts, as well as upon the rest of the world, and drowned them all, in which perplexity of minde and imminent danger beholding the waves overwhelming all things before their eyes, Fintan is said to have beene transformed into a Salmon, and to have swoome all the time of the deluge about Vlster, and after the fall of the water recovering his former shape, to have lived longer then Adam, and to have delivered strange things to the posterity, so that of him the common speech riseth; If I had lived Fintans yeeres I could say much. But to let these fables passe: The next plantation after Bartholanus (as it is recorded amongst the collections of Irish antiquities) is this in effect, that Magog the sonne of Iaphet planted Colonies in Scythia neere the river of Tanais, from whence about the yeere of the world two thousand three hundred and seventeene,Anno mundi 2317 Neme∣dus and his foure sonnes arrive. one Nemedus with his foure sonnes Starius, Garbaneles, Anvinus, and Fergusius, Captains over great companies of armed men, were sent into this Island now
called Ireland. And passing by Graecia tooke with them such volun∣taries as were willing to adventure with them, they landed, inhabited the Country, and multiplied exceedingly, although not without continuall warres which they held with the Giants of Chams posteri∣ty for the space of two hundred yeeres and odde. In the end the Gi∣ants prevailing, chased them out of the land, so that they retired into Scythia, and some to Greece. This was about the yeere after the crea∣tion 2333, from which time the Giants kept possession of the land without forraigne invasion for many yeeres, but yet in all that space their mindes not being set upon any goodnesse, but altogether upon mischiefe, they made no good lawes, framed no common wealth, they obeyed no Magistrate, but fell at variance amongst themselues, measu∣ring all things by might, and seditiously vexed each other. In the yeere of the world 2416, and after the universall flood 750 yeeres (as the Scottish History declareth) one Gathelus the sonne of Nealus a Grecian,Arrivall of Ga∣thelus the Greek. upon displeasure for sundry rodes made into Ma∣cedonia and Achaia, being exiled and banished his countrey, with a great number of his adherents and complices, went into Aegypt in the dayes of Moses, where he found favour in the sight of King Pha∣raoh, insomuch that he married with Scota his daughter, continued there about 93 yeeres, and multiplied exceedingly. Iohannes Major Scotus calleth the verity of this History in question, de hac prima profectione de Graecia & Aegypto figmentum reor: I am of opi∣nion (saith hee) that this first going out of Greece and Aegypt is but fayned: yet let us goe forward. When Gathelus understood that the land was shortly for the wickednesse of the people to suffer great plagues, he prepared a fleet, shipped Grecians and Aegyptians, hoi∣sed up saile, and came upon the coast of Numidia, now called Barbary, thence they were put back, to sea they went, and came to the coast of Spaine now called Portingall (as they say) since that time of him called Port-gathell. The inhabitants of the place resisted them, gave them a sore battell, and in the end after parlie, Gathelus was intreated, and by them directed to take his voyage into Galitia, which eftsoones he did. There in a short time they waxed so populous, that the coun∣trey could not sustaine them: whereupon Gathelus called a Coun∣cell, and being resolved what to doe, tooke a great number of them with him to sea, and arrived in Ireland, and there grew into such esti∣mation with the barbarous people, that for knowledge especially in all languages (having travelled many Countreys, as is afore mentio∣ned) he was highly honoured. For he not only enriched and beauti∣fied the Irish tongue, but also, as is said, taught them letters, sought up their antiquities, and trained their youth in warlike exercises, after the manner of the Grecians and Aegyptians from whence he descen∣ded. Note here (gentle reader) before I wade further into this Hi∣story three contrary opinions of this Gathelus the sonne of Nealus:
The Scottish Historiographers say, it was 750 yeeres after the flood. Thomas Walsingham Monke of S. Albons, writeth it was 1000 yeeres and odde after the delivery of the children of Israel out of Aegypt (which must be anno mundi 3455, to wit, one 1000 yeeres after the former computation) calling him a noble man of Scythia whom the Aegyptians banished out of Aegypt. Iohn Harding, a great Antiqua∣ry (that knew best in his time the state of Scotland) delivereth, that Gathelus and Scota came to these parts after the birth of Christ, in anno 75. This I give as a caveat, referring unto the discreet reader the dissonance that I finde in the observation of times, to bee considered of, promising to lay downe faithfully euery thing as I finde the same, as shall appeare in that which followeth. And now to the history where we left. It is said that this Gathelus of his wife Scota comman∣ded that his followers Grecians and Aegyptians should be called Sco∣ti, that is, Scottishmen. And Hector Boëtius in the History of Scot∣land sticketh not to write, that upon his marriage with Scota, the foresaid commandement was published, and that his followers in Ae∣gypt, Barbary, Portingall, Galitia, and over Spaine, were called Sco∣ti. But how true that is, it may appeare by the Roman Histories (which haue noted the accidents of those times) in all which there is no mention of the Scots before the time of Constantius the Empe∣rour (which was about the yeere of Christ 310 who lyeth buried at York, and was father to Constantine the great. Paulus lovius writeth, Scotland tooke that name upon the comming of a forraine and no great ancient nation. No Latine writer before Marcellinus in Iulian the Emperours time (which was about the yeere 362) remembreth the Scots: neither doth it well appeare out of what Country the Scots first came into Albion, when as by the Annals not only of English, but of Scottish Antiquities varying among themselues, great obscurity is brought among doubtfull things. Some bring their originall from Ireland, others from Dania, Cimbrica, Chersonesus, and the Ilands of Gothland and Norwey; neither wanted there some which were of opinion, they came from Spaine, deriving the name of Scottishmen from Moses himselfe, and the Aegyptians, as Hector Boë∣tius the Scottish Chronicler; yet Hector himselfe preventing as it were the like objection, confesseth that in the third yeere of Adrian the Emperor (which was after the birth of Christ about 122 yeeres) the name of Scots was not knowne unto the Romans.Scot. Hist. lib. 4▪ In short time after the retinue of Gathelus searched the North-east and North-west Ilands, and entred the Land which now is cal∣led Scotland, so also called (as the Scotish will have it) of Scota.Hector Boet. in descript. regni Scotia. Et lib.  histor. Scot. But many grave writers have stumbled at the certainty of this story, yet I finde for certaine, that Ireland was called Scotia maior, and the o∣ther Scotia minor, and oftentimes confusedly the one taken for the o∣ther, and the words to be of no great antiquity. Capgrave in the life
of Saint Columbanus saith;Iohannes Cap∣grave in vita Sancti Colum. Idem in vita Sancti Fiacrij. Ireland of old was called Scotland, from whence the Scottish nation inhabiting Albania (next vnto great Bri∣taine) now called Scotland tooke their originall. Fiacrius an Hermite being asked of a Bishop in France what hee was, among other things answered; Ireland the Iland of Scots is the native soile of mee and my parents. It also appeareth by Orosius, Claudian, Isidore, Hubaldus, Beda, the English Legend, the Martyrologe secundum usum Sarum, Marianus, Ionas in vita Sancti Columbani, Aimoinus, Caesarius, &c. that Ireland and Scotland were usually taken one for the other. But before I goe any further, I thinke it not amisse to say som what to this word Scotus or Scottus, the which Hector Boëtius carrieth a∣way as derived of Scota, and as thing granted. There came to this Countrey of Ireland at three severall times, before Gathelus, great Commanders of Scythia (as I have said before) of the posterity of Iaphet, planted themselues, divided the land with great troubles, and when they were at the worst, alwayes they left a remnant of their nation behinde them. Beda every where calleth them not Scotos, but Scottos; so that I finde in the word a double alteration, y turned into o, and th into tt. Also in low Germany they call the Scythians and Scottish, Schotten. Nennius the Britain writeth, Scythae Hiberniam ob∣tinuerunt, the Scythians gat Ireland. King Alfredus translating the hi∣story of Orosius into the Saxon tongue, termeth the Scots, Scyttan: The borderers upon Scotland, cal them to this day, Skyttes and Skets. Walsingham writeth, Of the country called Sicia (alias Scythia) wee haue Scita, Sciticus, Scoticus, Scotus and Scotia. Ranulphus Monke of Chester, writeth, as Sir Iohn Trevisa the Priest in old English laid it downe; Scotts bene called as it were Scytes, for they came out of Scy∣tia. Matthew Monk of Westminster, saith, Ex Pictis & Hibernen∣sibus, Scoti originem habuerunt, quasi ex diversis nationibus compacti; Scot enim illud dicitur quòd ex diversis rebus in unum acervum con∣gregatur, deinde verò terra illa quae prius Albania dicebatur à Scotis Scotia nuncupatur, (anno gratiae 77.) Of Pictes and Irish the Scots had their originall, as it were compacted of divers nations; for that is called Scot which of divers things is gathered into one heap, afterwards that Land which was first called Albania of the Scots is called Sco∣tia. Beda Ang. hist. lib. 1. cap. 1.And Beda writeth that the Country now called Scotland was in∣habited by Pictes that were Scythians; againe, In processe of time (saith he) Britaine besides Britaines and Pictes receiued a third nation that is of Scots upon the side of the Pictes. Volat geograph. lib. 3. Io. Maior de gest. Scot. l. 1. c. 4. De rebus Hiber. lib. 1.Of the same opinion is Volateran and Iohannes Major Scotus, al∣though Hector Boëtius dissemble it. Richard Stanihurst the great Philosopher and Antiquary of Ireland, writeth, A quo primum ini∣tio Scotiae nomen fit tractum, nondum plane perspectum video, &c. Of what first originall the word Scotia is drawne, I haue not yet found out.
And touching the truth of the History of Gathelus and Scota, hee saith; To the end the worthinesse of so great a mariage delivered unto the posterity should florish, all these Grecians call themselues Scots; and Ireland where they first seated themselues, Scotiam. But all this as a vaine fable George Buchanan, and before him Humfrey Lloide have quite reiected, and if Hector Boëtius bee not the chiefe forger of this hi∣story, or rather vaine fable, yet he hath besprinckled (after his manner) the whole discourse with lies. With great ambition hath that silly wri∣ter labored to advance the glory of his nation, in the which endeauour, hee hath little regarded the honour of his Country and his owne credit. For he hath purchased this amongst the learned, that where as he would seeme to write all for the loue of the truth, they will beleeue in a manner nothing to be true which he wrote: For to what purpose should he com∣mend to the posterity the acts of his ancestors with such maiesty of words, that they have quailed the Spaniard; vanquished the Irish with their only austere countenance, triumphed as often as pleased themselves over the bordering Britaines; where they pitched foot, subiected all as furious victors; that thou maist think the Scottish not so much to have invaded forraigne Countryes, as to have removed to their proper pos∣sessions. These fabulous dreames happely may move admiration to some old wives, applause to some Abderas, and laughter to the discreete rea∣der. The Scotish had as other nations tofore (though now famous) base beginning, dusked and obscured with some barbarous rudenesse, and this had beene more discretion to confesse, then to vaunt or crake among the ignorant, with boast of their fained doings. Thus farre Stani∣hurst: And now (with Hector Boëtius his leave) as the followers of Ga∣thelus and his wife Scota in Egypt, Greece, Barbary, Portugall, Gali∣tia, and over all Spaine, were not called Scoti (as before is remem∣bred) no more were they termed in Ireland and Scotland, but cor∣ruptly of Scytae, Scoti, comming originlly out of Scythia. And it were more honour in mine opinion for these nations, to derive their originall from Scythia then from Egypt, for two causes; first for that the Scythians are more ancient then the Egyptians, as Trogus, Vo∣lateran, and Marianus Scotus do write; secondly for that the Scythi∣ans come of Iaphet that was blessed, and the Egyptians of Cham that was accursed, but in this case leaving every man to his owne choice; I will returne the History. In the antiquities of Ireland it is generally receiued that Gathelus (of whom I spake before) gave the Irishmen the language, which of him they call Gaodhealgh in British Gwidhealaec, that is, a language compounded of many tongues, and so it may well be; for by reason of his great trauell he had skill in many tongues. Although, as they say, he were a Grecian borne, yet I finde no Greek in the Irish tongue▪ yet for their comming from Spaine, which they so much urge, Io∣hannes
Major Scotus forsooth hath found one Spanish word,Io. Maior. hist. Scot. lib. 1. c. 9. bona di∣es, in Irish vennoka die; to which I answere, una hirundo non facit ver; but indifferently to examine the matter, wee finde that diversity of times, alteration of government, invasion of strangers, planting of new Colonies, and conversing with forraigne nations doe alter lan∣guages. The Hebrewes by reason of their peregrination and captivi∣ties do smach of the Chaldees, Syriack, and Arabick tongues. The Slavonian tongue,Laur. Surius ver. in orbe gest. ud annum. 1501 as Surius and others record, without exception, at this day is the most dispersed language upon the earth; for the Mus∣covites, Ruthenes, Russians, Dalmatians, Bosnenses, Croatians, Istri∣ans, Carnians, Carniolanians, Carinthians, Stirians, Maesians, Servi∣ans, Bulgarians, with other nations reaching to Constantinople, as Bohemians, Lusatians, Silesians, Moravians, Polonians, Circasians, Quinquemontanians, even unto Pontus, and the remnant of Vandals, beyond the river Albis, through Germany, into the North, have the language, and yet we have neither their characters, nor ancient Annals extant. Saint Ierome borne in Strido in the confines of Dal∣matia and Pannonia, is said to have translated the Bible into the Sla∣von tongue, but whether it be in that language extant, let him report that knoweth it. Gothi, Hypogothi, Gepidi, Vandali, Hunni, Alani, though they vary in name, yet they vse one language, saith Paulus Diaconus. The Italian, Spanish, and French tongues are compoun∣ded of the Latine. The German (high and low country) Saxon, Scot∣tish and English have great affinity. Northwales, Southwales, Corn∣wall, and little Britaine in France, as Cambrensis and Sir Io. Price have learnedly discoursed; but the Irish (excepting the Red shanks and the Scottish of the haye londe) have affinity with no tongue (as I can learne) more then with the British language. Many reasons there are (gentle reader) to induce thee to bee of that opinion; first of all according unto the first command, the Cel∣ticke tongue was of force in all these Northerne parts. Bodinus wri∣teth,Bodinus. Pausanias: that the British and Celtick language was all one. Pausanias the Grecian maketh mention how the Celts in their language called a horse Marc, and three horses Trimarc, the which the Welshman u∣seth to this day with a gutturall alteration, Margh and Treemargh. Also Camden the learned Antiquary of this our age, is of this opini∣on (remembring the story of Gurguntius, and the infinite number of British words in ure among the Irish, the which he termeth, infinitam vim Britannicarum dictionum) that the Britaines first peopled this land. And although of a long time (by reason of troubles and alte∣rations) the speech grew wholly out of vse; yet afterwards in successe of time it was revived. Secondly the British and Irish oft matched together, so that there grew among them great alliance and affinity, to the furtherance of the language. Mare King of Cornwall anno 459 married with Label Isode that built Isodes Chappell (or Chappell-I∣sode)
and Isodes Tower in Dublin, shee was the King of Irelands daughter. Edwal ap Meiric Prince of Wales in the time of Edelred, anno 992 married in Ireland. Iago ap Edwal Prince of Wales in the time of Cnute, anno 1031 married in Ireland. In the time of Edward the Confessor, Conan the sonne of Iago Prince of Wales married with Ranulph daughter of Alfred King of Dublin, anno 1041. In the time of William Rufus, Arnulph Earle of Pembroke married with the daughter of Marogh King of Ireland anno 1101; at the same time Magnus the sonne of Herald married with another daughter of the said King. In the time of Henry the first and King Steuen lived Grif∣fith ap Conan Prince of Wales, that was wont to brag of three things, that his mother was an Irishwoman, his grandmother an Irishwo∣man, and that hee himselfe was borne, and of a child brought vp in Ireland. In the time of Henry the second. Biryd the sonne of Owen Gwyneth Prince of Wales, being Lord of Cloghran in Ireland, begat his sonne Howel upon an Irish Gentlewoman. In the same Kings raigne Richard Strangbow Earle of Pembroke, married with Eva the daughter of Dermotte Mac Morrogh King of Leinster. Thirdly, when there was any trouble in Ireland, they fled to Wales; when they had any warres or rebellion there, they came for refuge and aide into Ireland: hereof came the shaking of hands, Brother Brannagh, Brother Erinagh. In the life of Henry the third, it is written, that when Othobon the Popes Legate came to Oxford, and soiourned at Osney Abbey, among other schollers, some for one cause, some for another, that were there, a poore Irish scholler (Matthew Paris calleth him Capellanum Hibernensem) drew neere unto the kitchin dresser, and praid for some releefe; the cook took a ladell full of hot liquor and threw it in his face; a Welch scholler standing by tooke his bow, and shot the cook through with an arrow (Stow writeth that the cook was the Legates brother) the hurly burly was great, the schollers came together in armes (and as it is said, one Odo of Kilkenny was their ensigne bearer) the Cardinals men were well beaten, the Cardi∣nall himselfe to save his life fled secretly at a posterne gate to the King, made a grievous complaint, and craved the aide of armed men to fetch off his men, and thereof arose great troubles; but to proceed. Dermotte Mac Morogh King of Leinster, being banished out of his country, had aide out of Wales. Conan the sonne of Iago, Griffith ap Conan, Rees ap Tewder, Owen the sonne of Cadogan, Kadwalader the sonne of Griffith ap Conan, Marlgon ap David, Princes of Wales; Algar Earle of Chester, Arnulph Earle of Pembroke, Magnus the sonne of Herald, William de Bruse Lord of Breknock, with his wife and children, in extremity, tooke Ireland for their refuge, where they found favor and kindnesse to their own hearts desire, as in the British Chronicles published by Caradoc of Sancarban, Cambrensis, Hum∣frey Lloid, and Doctor Powel, doth more plainly appeare. These two
nations conversed much one with another; Sir Tristram one of the Knights of the round Table, came to Ireland. Morogh brother to the King of Ireland (whom Caxton calleth Morhaus) was one of King Arthurs Knights. Merlin the Welch Prophet came twice to Ire∣land, and in Ofaby there is a Chappell bearing his name: the oc∣casion of his first comming was this. There was a noble man of Ire∣land which had a suit unto the King of England, with whom Merlin was great, to whom he said, Merlin, if thou wilt effect my sute, come to Ireland, and I will give thee as much land as thou shalt see round about thee: it was done; after his arrivall, Merlin demanded his pro∣mise, the noble man put him into a cellar, where was a grate, and with∣out a bawne, with an high wall, looke out (saith the Irish man) the Welch Prophet could not see a quoits cast from him, and thus was he deceived, having left his spirit of prophecy at home. But to our purpose. Fourthly, the first conquerors in Henry the seconds times, that brake the ice into this land, were Welch men, whose names and seates to this day are fresh in memory. Rees ap Tewder Prince of Southwales had a daughter called Nesta, who by King Henry the first had issue, Henry, and he had issue Meiler Fitz Henry and Robart; she was afterwards married to Stephan, and he had issue, Robart Fitz Stephan, and his issue were Radulph and Mereduk; shee had a third husband, Giraldus Steward of Pembroke, whose mother was Gladys the daughter of Rywall ap Conyn, this Girald had issue by her, Mau∣rice Fitz Gerald, William Fitz Gerald, and David Bishop of Mene∣via, now called Saint Davids: Maurice Fitz Gerald had issue, Willi∣am, Girald, Alexander, and Nesta a daughter, wife to Harvey de Monte Marisco; William Fitz Gerald had issue (by Ellen sister to Earle Richard Strongbow) Reimund and Griffin, of these descend all the Geraldins in Ireland. A neece (a sister say others) of Robart Fitz Ste∣phans and Maurice Fitz Gerald married with one Barry, and hee by her had issue, Robart Barry, Philip Barry, Walter Barry, and Girald Barry (otherwise called Giraldus Cambrensis the great Antiquary) of these descend all the Barries in Ireland. There came with them and after them out of Wales, the Prendergastes, Welches, Whites, Goughes, and Williams, now called Mac William of the North. The Irish Chroniclers, as David Curren, Nicolas Maguize (both som∣times Bishop of Leighlin) and others, call them Brittones, Wallones, and Wallenses. It is a name the Saxons gave them; though they were the true natives of Britaine, yet they called them Welshmen, that is,Camb. descrip. Brit. cap. 7. strangers, as more at large is to bee seen in Cambrensis. These gave Welsh names to places, which continue to this day; in the Dioces of Leighlin there is a town called villa Wallicorū, the town of Welsh∣men. Carreg & Craig in the British or Welsh tongue is a ston, or rock, and of the Britaines, Carregfergus, Carreggmont-Griffin, Carregg in
Shurie, Carriggwaspani, and Craigwading have their names. Like∣wise Llis in British is a Court or Palace, of that in Ireland you have Lismore, Lisfenyn, Lislofty, Lismakery. Glan and Glyn are British words, of them have you Glangibbon, Glandeboy, Glan Reynald, Glyn∣burry, Glyndelory, Glynmolowra, &c. Inis an Iland, is British and I∣rish, of which kind are Inissircan, Inisshoven, Inisdiok, Inissuag, Inis∣corthie, and the like. Rath a moat or round trench (whereof there are many in Ireland made by the Danes) if Beda had not said that it was a Saxon word, I would have said it had been British, and how many names of places are compounded with it in Ireland, were too long to rehearse. I will here give Stanihurst leave to conclude, Omnes insulae locos et lucos Wallici nominis gloria implevit; the renowne of the Welsh name (saith he) hath filled all the wayes and woods of the Iland. The British words among them are infinite, the which, as I think, the Irish have taken hold of, and have caused to vary little from their speech, for example. British, Bara Bread. Irish, Ran Br. Diod Drink. Ir. Diogh Br. Tan Fire. Ir. Tine Br: Drus a Doore. Ir. Dyrrus Br: Ithyn Firres. Ir. Ityn Br. Mawn Turfe. Ir. Mon Br. Gaver a Goat. Ir. Gawr Br. Mawr Great. Ir. More Br. Myn a Kydde. Ir. Mynan Br. Ty a House in both. Ir. Br. Scadan a Herring. Ir. Scadan Br. Carregg in both a Rock. Ir. Br. Teer land or ground. Ir. Tyr Br. Sidan in both Silke. Ir.
Br. Kos in both a leg or foot. Ir. Br. Sane a paire of hose or stockins. Ir. Fessane Br. Losky in both burning or burnt. Ir. Br. Berw and Berwy in both sod. Ir. Br. Glan in both a like. Ir. Glyn   Duffrey in both alike.   Duffrin Br. Mah a sonne. Ir. Mac Br. Cuanid wood. Ir. Cunnogh Br. Knaie nuts Ir. Knoe Br. Kwyr wax Ir. Kwyragh Br. Cantref an hundred townes Ir. Cantrud Eng. Cantred Br. Avon a river. Ir. Owen   Moil in both bald.   Mantagh in both toothlesse. And thus much of the Irish language occasioned by the history of Gathelus and Scota; now to the history, from whence I feare mee I have too long digressed. The hard successe of Nemedus before spoken of, and the departure of Gathelus (as hath beene said) to the North∣east Ilands, and North parts of Britaine, now called Scotland, moved five brethren, the sonnes of one Dela of the posterity of Nemedus, be∣ing valiant men, and skilfull in the Art of Navigation, to make ready a great fleet, and to attempt the conquest of this Iland. These were, as I presently said, of the posterity of Nemedus, and were named, Gan∣dius, Gennadius, Sagandus, Rutheranius or Rutheragus, and Slanius, of whom Slane hath the denomination; when they had made prepa∣ration,Five sonnes of Dela arrive in Ireland, anno mundi 2535. assembled forces, and set all in a readinesse, they hoised up saile, and in short time arrived in Ireland, about the yeere of the world 2535. After their arrivall, and view had of the land, they found the pu∣issance of the Chamesite Giants sore weakned through their owne civill dissention, so that with more ease then they looked for, they at∣chieved
their purpose, wanne the whole country, utterly destroyed and rooted out that wicked generation (enemies to God and man) but spared as many as they found of Iaphets line, divided the Iland into five parts, and in each of them they severally reigned.First division of Ireland. This was the first division of Ireland, the discourse whereof I will referre to another place. Furthermore for the satisfaction of all parties, and perfect league to be had among these brethren, and their posterity, they con∣cluded to fix a meare stone in the middle point of Ireland, to the which each of their kingdomes should reach, so as they might in e∣quality partake of the commodities found in that Iland. Of these al∣so it is said, that they invented the distribution of Shires into Can∣treds, every Cantred or Barony to containe one hundred townships: but of this in another place. When they had for a certaine space sea∣ted themselves (say the Irish Antiquaries) and found warmth and wealth about them, every one began to looke big, and grow ambiti∣ous, so that in processe of time, desire of Soverainty set the five bre∣thren at variance, which in the end tended to their destruction. In this civill dissention it is written, that Slanius the yongest through the aid of some old inhabitants, got the upper hand, brought his foure brethren to a low estate, attributed unto himselfe the title of supreme honour over them, and encroched round about the middle stone and fixed meare aforesaid, for the space of certaine miles; which plot in time, obtained the priviledge and name of one entire plot, or part, and maketh up the number of five parts, into the which Ireland is com∣monly divided, and is called Meth, in Latine Media,Meth why so called. and of some Mi∣dia, taking that name (as some haue guessed) for that in respect of the other parts, it contained but the moity of Cantreds, that is, six∣teene, where each of the other contained thirty and two; or else for that it lieth in the midst of the land. These encrochments Slanius annexed to his inheritance and Mo∣narchy, which Monarchy continued thus, the space of thirty yeeres, and then Slanius departed this life, and was buried in a mountaine of Meth, that beareth hitherto the name after him. After his decease the Princes that before were subiect unto him, began to gather heart, sto∣mached the matter, and denied their obedience to his successour: whereupon ensued continuall warre amongst them, and especially a∣bout the land of Meth, which strife of long time could not bee ap∣peased, yet in the space of thirty yeeres aforesaid, of these brethren and their successors there were nine Kings. In the neck of all these mischiefes and hurly burlies (say the Irish antiquities) there came a fleet of Scythians upon the coast, landed their men in Ireland, made claime to the land,Invasion of Scythians. by a title of right which they pretended from their forefather Nemedus (of whom mention is made before) so that by partaking with the one side and the other, all was in an uproare, ha∣vock was made on each side with fire and sword in most miserable
manner. They spent themselves in pursuing one another with such outrage, that they cared not what nation, or what souldier they re∣ceived to their aid, to hold up, or beat downe a side. Both the one and the other sent for aid into the Ilands now called England and Scot∣land, Orchades, Hebrides, &c. and acquainted forrainers with their state so farre, that they could never after be rid of them, to wit, the Britaines, till in the end they yeelded unto them the upper hand, as by conquests, in processe of the history, shall appeare. Note (gentle reader) how that hitherto,Anno mundi 2828 that is, the yeere of the world 2828, and before the birth of Christ 1142, these North parts of the world, as England, Scotland, Ireland, with other Iles, were possessed, comman∣ded, and inhabited by the posterity of Iaphet and Cham, the sonnes of Noah, without any speciall name given to the lands, or to the Com∣manders of them, otherwise then Samothei, Celtae, Oceanes, Neptu∣nists, and Albions, although I have hitherto used the names now in ure (for the plainer delivery of the history) as if they had beene knowne before; neither were any called Scots as Hector Boëtius would have it. After the times of the former troubles which happened in Ireland upon the landing of the Scythians, I finde nothing of Ireland till the dayes of Gurguntius (the sonne of Belinus) who began his raine, ac∣cording to the ordinary account anno mundi 3580,Anno mundi 3580 and reigned 19 yeeres over Britaine. This King after his victory atchieved in Den∣mark (for his tribute which they there had refused to pay him) retur∣ning back toward Britaine, met by the Iles of Orkeney, with a navy of thirthy ships (Stanyhurst saith 60) with men and women,Gurguntius meeteth with Bartholin, Hi∣ber and Her∣mon. whose Generall was called Bartholin or Partholin; in Ponticus Virunius Partolom; in Flores Historiarum, Partholaim; in Gualter Oxoniensis, Bartholome; in Fabian, Harding, Grafton, and Caxton, Irlamal; of whom they thinke the country to be called Ireland. Gurguntius de∣manded of them what they were, and the occasion of their travell, their answer was, they were Spaniards, and had long beene on the seas, seeking to finde some favourable Prince, to assigne them a place of habitation, for that their country was so populous, that it could not containe them, (others write that for some disordered parts they were banished their country) and where they found favour, they would become subiects, and hold of him as their soveraigne Lord. In this fleet with the Governor of Baion, their Generall (before named) there were foure brethren of noble birth, the sonnes of Milesius (o∣thers say, Miletus, and others Milo) the two chiefe of which were cal∣led Hiberus and Hermon. And beside the former differences in the parents name, Dowling writeth in his Irish collections, that they were the sonnes of Iubal; Hector Boëtius avoucheth they were the sonnes of Gathelus and Scota; Stanihurst affirmeth that Scota was great or old grand-dame to Hiber and Hermon, others write they were of the
posteritie of Gathelus and Scota, whereas Gathelus (if there were any such) was a Grecian, and Scota an Egyptian, Hiber and Hermon, Spaniards: see (gentle Reader) how these reports hang together. Gurguntius being aduised by his Councell,Gurguntius gi∣veth Ireland to them. pittying their necessi∣tie and wandring estate, granted them the Iland now called Ireland, to inhabite, and that they should become tributaries to him and his successors, the Kings of Britaine for ever. For hee called to minde that the inhabitants were an unruly people, and thought by this meanes to subdue them, and quietly to enioy his tribute; for it see∣meth that the Britaines made claime to Ireland, to which effect I reade in the Booke of Houth, that Gurguntius came into Ireland, and that the land many a yeare paid him truage,Booke of Houth. and to other Kings of Britaine after him; but as oft as they put foote in the land, they got more knocks then pence, saith an Irish Chronicler. The King of Bri∣taine hastening homeward, gave them Pilots, and safe conductors for their arivall and possession of the land. Hiberus and Hermon after their arivall,Hiber and Her∣mon divide Ireland into two parts. by the assent of all their associates, divided the land betweene them; the North to Hiber, and the South to Hermon. But ambition, the mother of mischiefe, would not long suffer them to enioy peace, but rent their hearts with fierie dissention, inflamed their mindes to desire one Soueraigne and abso∣lute commander over the whole land; they gather forces, they mu∣ster their men, they put on Armes, and to battaile they goe, in which field Hiberus was slaine, (though Hector Boetius write,One brother killeth ano∣ther. The second Monarch of Ireland. that he went into Spaine to succeed his father) and Hermon became Monarch of all Ireland. Hermon being thus sole ruler and governour, to avoid the murmure of his people, and the euill opinion (in a manner) of all men conceiued against him, and peaceably to governe the land, fell to purge himselfe, and caused the occasion of the warres to be proclai∣med, that he bore armes against his naturall brother, not of malice or desire of soveraigntie, but in defence of his owne person, and safety of his people; and for proofe, that his heart was farre from desire to rule alone, he appointed certaine Captaines, as Kings, to command under him certaine Countries, reserving unto himselfe, one fourth part, and the Country of Meth annexed to the Monarchie, for the better maintenance of his princely estate. By this meanes, this Realme of Ireland in processe of time,Ireland divi∣ded into five kingdomes▪ grew to five kingdomes; the first Leinster, on the East side or quarter, called in Latine Lagenia, and in Irish, Cuige-Laghen. The second, Conaght, on the west side of the kingdome, called in Latine Connacia, and in Irish, Cuige-Chonoght. The third, Vlster, which is the North part of Ireland, named in Latine, Vltonia, and in Irish, Cuigh-Vlladh. The fourth, Mounster, South and South-west, in Latine, Momonia, and in the country speech, Cuige Mughan. The fift and last, a plotte de∣falked from these parts, called Meth, comprising (as they are now
called) as well East-Meth as West-Meth, in Latine, Midia, or Me∣dia,Divers divisi∣ons in Ireland. in Irish, Mhidhe. And here must not bee forgotten, that there hath beene in these kingdomes great change and alteration by usur∣ping and compounding among themselves, and by dividing of Coun∣tries, as we finde Mounster was into two parts, and since have beene there great Earles, deriving their names of Mounster, Ormond in Irish, Oirther Mughane, Desmond, in Irish, Deasmughain, and Tho∣mond in Irish, Tuathmughain, the which an Italian comming into Ireland, meruailed at, when he inquired what great men dwelled in the land, for he understood Ormond, to bee orbis mundi, the round world; Desmond, decem mundi, ten worlds; Thomond, duo mundi, two worlds, profecto, said he, Valdè gloriósi tituli, assuredly these are very glorious titles. So were there also in processe of time, diuers o∣ther lesser kingdomes, as by the processe of the historie will very well appeare. And here for this time leaving to discourse farther of the Irish kingdomes, I conclude with this one remembrance, that from time to time there was one chosen to be chiefe soveraigne Mo∣narch ouer them all;A Monarch alwaies in Ire∣land. and the number of Monarchs from Hermon to Laogirius, the sonne of Nealus Magnus, that is, great Neale) in whose time S. Patricke converted them to Christianitie, amounteth to an hundred thirty and one. Ireland called Hibernia.And now backe againe to the historie where we left. It is said that of Hiber or Hiberus, (who was slaine, as hath aboue beene recorded) Ireland was called Hibernia; certaine it is with the concordance of most and the best antiquaries, that the land was not called Hibernia, neither right Spaniard arived here before the daies of Gurguntius. Divers writers haue diversly delivered the originall name of the land,Divers names of Ireland. some corruptly, some poetically, some etymologically. Ierna, Iuver∣nia, Ibernia, Overnia, Vernia, Iris; of the Britaines, Ywerdhon, of the Irish themselues Erin, and tooke that name of Fin Erin, (of whom at large in the booke of Houth) of the Saxons and English it is called Ireland, that is, the land of Erin. All these names originally grew of Hiberus the Spaniard, or in remembrance of Iberus the se∣cond King of Spaine; who was the sonne of Tuball, the fift sonne of Iaphet. Annius Viterbiensis writeth, that of this King, the river is called Iberus amnis, Spaine Iberia, and the inhabitants about the ri∣ver,Stainhurst de reh. Hib. pa. 17. Iberi. This land of Ireland hath also beene called Scotia Major, (Scotland the greater) after the birth of Christ, but that came of corrupting the word Scytha, as I said before. Lastly, it hath beene called Banno of the Poets or Bardes of the land: Stanihurst thinketh it was so called of the Banne, a river in the County of Weixford, the place is now called Bagganbun, where the Britaines vpon the con∣quest arived, and thereof is the rime, At the creeke of Bagganbun, Ireland was ylost and wonne.
But for this ancient name Banno,Camden in Hebernia. and other the like which the Po∣ets of Ireland haue in use, I referre the courteous reader to learned Camden, in his treatise of Ireland, about the beginning. Lanquet in his collections of antiquities,Lanquet ad Annum 3652. noteth that the Scottish historiographers about the yeere of the world, 3652. beginne their histories at Fergus, the sonne of Ferquhard, King of Ireland, that he should come with great power out of Ireland, to their aide against the Pictes, and that they fauoured him so much, that they chose him King, and that hee raigned ouer them in Scotland 25. yeeres,Anno mundi, 36521 and how that in his raigne he slue Coile, King of Britaine, at what time by generall consent, there was no Scottish man then commanding in Albania, no Pict at that time seene in Britaine or Ireland, nor Coile King of Britaine in many yeares after. I am of Lanquets opinion, thus he writeth, These histories of the Scots, as they set them forth, bee full of errors, and agree with none other historians. Notwithstanding this Item may not stoppe the course of the historie, and therefore whether he came out of Ireland, (as we here take it) or out of Denmarke, (as some haue thought) well he might be King of Albania, for so was it then called, and not Scotland, and so from him I will terme them Kings of Albania, untill I finde the name Scoti knowne amongst for∣raigne writers. This Fergus (saith Buchanan) hauing orderly disposed of his af∣faires in Albania,Fergusius. Buchanan. went into Ireland to pacifie and quiet troubles there risen, and hoising saile for his returne into Albania, he and all his company were cast away in a tempest vpon the rockes at a place of him now called in the British and Irish tongues Karregfergus, or Craigfregus (corruptly in English, Knockfergus.) It is written that he advanced in his banner, a red Lyon Rampant, with his taile folden toward his backe, as it were moved with anger,Armes of Fer∣gusius. the which his suc∣cessors since have used. After this his infortunate decease, there rose great strife about the succession, his two sonnes, Ferlegus and Mainus were young, and many exceptions were made against them, in the end, the two sonnes were put beside, and the eldest of the sept (after the Irish Tanistrie) tooke place, which fell upon Feritharis an Irish man, brother to Fergus. And this Tanistrie continued (saith Bucha∣nan) unto Kenathus 3. during the raigne of fourescore Kings.Tanistrie of Ireland used in Scotland. But I must leave them, and follow onely what concerneth Irish businesse. About the yeere of the world, saith Lanquet,Anno mundi, 3750. 3750. and odde (not allowing as he protested before, but following the Scottish histories, one Reuthar, commander of the invaders in Albania,Reuthar. (now called Scotland) was vexed with civill warres, and by the Britaines, bani∣shed into Ireland, where he lived twelve yeeres: See more of him in Hector Boetius, and Buchanan. The 9. King Albaniensium Scotorum, (so Stanihurst calleth them) was Iosina Thereus,Iosina Thereus. and is the next that seemeth to haue any right or interest in the Irish historie. This man
was bred and brought up in Ireland, and favoured the nation (saith Bale) above all others;Io. Bale cent. 14. he sought peace of all men, honoured Chi∣rurgions, Physitians and Druydes of Ireland; raigned 24. yeeres, and so ended his dayes. The next that concerneth our purpose, is Gillus the usurper, who through much treason,Gillus. and many murthers, aspiring to the Crowne of Albania, and deservedly falling into the hatred and mislike of all his subjects, was at length forced by his Nobles, (who rose in Armes against him) to take a fisher-boate and flee into Ireland, where hee was promised aide; but to prevent further mischiefe, one Cadall is ap∣pointed generall of an Armie, to pursue the tyrant into Ireland, and meeting him in the field, drove Gillus to flee. When the Irish men had forsaken him, he hid himselfe in a denne, invironed with woods and bogs, where shortly after, an Irish Kerne, for reward, found him out, cut off his head, and brought it to Cadall, after he had tyrannized three yeeres. He was the thirteenth King of Albania. In the time of Augustus Caesar, a little before the birth of our Sa∣viour,Fridelenus the Dane taketh Dublin. Fridelenus King of Denmarke, puffed vp with pride, through some fortunate successes, arrived in Ireland, laid siege to the Citie of Dublin, and finding it not so easie a matter to atchieue, fell to policie; he caught certaine Swallowes that bred in the Citie, tyed fire to their wings, who flying to their nests, fired the houses; while the Citizens endevoured to quence the fire, the Danes entred the Citie, and wnne it. The King of Leinster after this, gathered forces, and gave the Danes battaile, in which, many fell on both sides; Fredelnus seeing the enemy increase, and his armie decrease, fled the land, and retired into his country.Frotho King of Denmarke. Alb. Krant. Dan. lib. 1. cap. 32. Saxo Gr. hist. Dan. lib. 5. His sonne Frotho, the third of that name, King of Danes (so Albertus Krantzius, and Saxo Grammaticus record) wan∣tonly assailed the Britaines, (lustrans magis insulam quam subigens) rather taking a view of the Iland, then subduing it, afterward relin∣quishing that course, put foot in Ireland. The historiographers of that side, report hardly of the land, and the inhabitants thereof, and in fine they write, when Cepo the Irish King was overthrowne and put to flight, his brother Kervill (saith Saxo, I take it to be O Carroll) offered tribute, wherewith the Danes being pacified, returned to their Country. This Frotho peopled the Orchades with Danes, and ap∣pointed Revillus their commander. Whilst this Frotho King of Danes was Monarch of Ireland, the light of the world,IESVS CHRIST is borne. Claudius. Arviragus. Flor. histor. the comfort of all Christians, IESVS CHRIST the sonne of GOD was borne in the flesh. About the 44. yeere after the incarnation of our Lord, (Claudius the Emperour having appeased the troubles of Britaine by the aide of Arviragus, (as Mathew Westmonasteriensis saith) subdued Or∣chades, Hebrides, Thule, and all the Ocean Ilands, among the
which, Ireland is reckoned,Beda eccles. hist. Angl. lib. 1. c. 3. Eutropius re∣rum Rom. lib. 8. the which Beda and Eutropius haue like∣wise remembred. But Fabian, Grafton, Holinshed, and Ponticus Viru∣nius say further, that he sent certaine legions of Knights into Ireland to subdue the same; what successe they had, is not recorded, a legion consisting of 6666. (as ancient Writers record) no doubt they per∣formed some great exploit.Camden pa. 557 Learned Camden writeth of the Brigan∣tes (the inhabitants of Yorkeshire, Lancashire,Brigantes. the Bishopricke of Durham, Westmerland and Cumberland were so called) how that in the time of Claudius (as I take it) many of them went to end their dayes in Ireland, and of old were called the Brigantes of Ireland. His words are these, Quod verò Florianus Del Campo Hispanus, nostros Brigantes, &c. Whereas Florianus Del-Campo the Spaniard,Florianus del Campo. hath somewhat arrogantly derived our Brigantes from Spaine into Ireland, and thence into Britaine, being aided by no other conjecture, but that he found in his Country of Spaine, the Citie Brigantia; I feare mee hee hath fouly deceived himselfe. For if the like cause have not given ours and the Brigantes of Ireland the same name, I had rather be of opinion with my most learned friend Thomas Savill, namely, that certaine Bri∣gantes and other nations of Britaine also, even from the comming of the Romans into Britaine, departed into Ireland, some for quietnesse sake, and to liue at ease, some for that their eyes should not be infected with the sight of the Roman dominion, and last of all others, lest in their lat∣ter age they should willingly seeme to lose the libertie which from nature they had received in their youth. And that Claudius the Emperour, first of any Romane tooke the Brigantes in hand, and subjected them to his Empire and command: Seneca sheweth in these his verses. ........ Ille Britannos Vltra noli littora ponti, & caeruleosSeneca. Scuta Brigantes, dare Romulaeis colla catenis Iussit, ......... The Britaines farre from knowne seas, and Brigantes Bucklers blue, The Roman Claude to Roman becke did bring, and rebels slue. Claudius hauing effected all his affaires, (as formerly hath been de∣livered) returned to Rome: then saith Gualter Oxon. Omnia regna Arvirago tradidit, he delivered all these kingdomes to Arviragus. He committed them al to his charge, saith Ponticus Virunius.Arviragus. In Mat∣thew Westmonsteriensis I reade, regimen insulare Arvirago cessit, the command of the Ilands fell to Arviragus. Harding hath delivered it in verse.
Orchades Isles in the meane time he conquered, In which he infeoffed the King, and him preferred. About this time, Frotho the fourth of that name, King of Danes, (some 30. yeeres after the former invasion,Saxo Gram. hist. Dan. lib. 6. Albertus Krantz. Dan. lib. 1. Frotho 4. saith mine Author) sent great power of Giants out of Denmarke, under the leading of bloudy Haco, and the great challenger and huge monster Starcuterus, to in∣vade Ireland. The occasion was as followeth: Starcuterus (before mentioned) being borne farre in the East by reason of shipwracke, ha∣ving lost both his ship and fellowes, was cast upon the coast of Den∣marke, and hearing of the fame of Frotho, came to his Court. This Giant was greatly admired for stature and strength of body. Frotho commanded a great navie to be in a readinesse, with all manner of ne∣cessary provision, made him an arch-pirate, and turned him to the Sea to seeke adventures.Haco and Star∣cuterus in Ireland. They touched many lands, and fought with many Giants, at length (saith mine Author) that no Country, though never so remote, should bee freed from the smart of Danish forces, they arived in Ireland. Huglet, King of Ireland, gave them battaile, in the which, Huglet was slaine, and all the Irish put to flight. And yet mine Author, though a Dane, highly commendeth two Irish Lords, Segathus and Suibdanus, the one wounded Haco, the other gave Starcuterus such a blow, that he stood a great while amazed, and had beene slaine,Dufflania or Dublin ran∣sacked by them had he not beene rescued. The battaile being ended, the Danes tooke (Dufflinian) Dublin, ransacked it, and found great store of treasure, and some of them remained in the land, the rest re∣turned to Denmarke, Starcuterus went into forraigne countries to combat with Giants. Of the com∣ming of the Pictes or Scy∣thians into these parts.In the time of Arviragus before mentioned, I finde the greatest probability of the first comming of the Pictes out of Scythia, first into Ireland, secondly, into Albania, now called Scotland, and lastly, into the North of England. And whereas before (page 3.) I made menti∣on of the arivall of Scythians, Nemedus and his foure sonnes, and af∣ter them of five brethren of their posteritie, and the third time of ano∣ther fleete of Scythians that arived in Ireland; and that also by many antiquities it appeareth that the Scots be Scythians, and came out of those parts whence these Pictes brake forth; I purpose now to make a more full discourse of that businesse. Camden modestly confesseth he knoweth not when they came first into these parts, neither doe I mislike with his conjecture, that they should be old Britaines, who painted themselves, to shew more ter∣rible against the Romanes: yet we must confesse, that there are many nations of severall names in Scythia, and Polychronicon, together with Rastall, saith, that the Gothes and Pictes be one nation. The ety∣mologie I finde in the storie of the Gothes: Scythia in the Gothicke
tongue, signifieth a skilfull archer.Io. Magnus Goth. Hist. lib. 1 cap. 27. Beda eccles. hist. gentis Aug. lib. 1 cap. 1. And these Pictes brought with them the use of darts, which the Irish retaine to this day. But I come to Beda, who goeth plaine to worke. When the Britaines (saith hee) had possessed the greatest part of the Isle, beginning at the South, it hap∣pened that a nation of Pictes out of Scythia, with long shippes, (yet not many) entred the Ocean, the winde driving them about, beyond all the coast of Brittaine, they came into Ireland, and arived in the North, and finding there the nation of Scots, desired of them to grant them a dwel∣ling place amongst them, but they could not obtaine it, &c. The Scots made answere that the Iland could not hold them both, but wee can give you (said they) good counsaile what you may doe. We know ano∣ther Island not farre from ours, reaching to the East, the which we are wont oft to discerne in cleare dayes; if you will goe thither, you may make it your dwelling place, or if any withstand you, take vs for your aide. And so the Pictes sayling into Britaine, began to inhabite the North parts of the Iland, for the Britaines held the South.Pictes saile into Britaine. And when the Pictes had no wives, and sought them of the Scots, they were gran∣ted them, onely upon this condition, that when the title of Soveraigntie became doubtfull, they should choose them a King rather of the Femi∣nine bloud royall, then of the Masculine,They obtaine wives of the Scots. the which unto this day is ob∣served amongst the Pictes. And in processe of time, Britaine after the Britaines and Picts, received that third nation of the Scots upon that part, where the Pictes had their habitation,Scots under Reuda saile out of Ireland into Britaine. who issuing out of Ireland with their Captaine Reuda, either by loue or by the sword, have wonne peculiarly unto themselves those seats which they hold unto this day, and of this their captaine they are called Dalreudin, for in their lan∣guage, (Dal) signifieth apart. And here I cannot but meruaile at Hector Boetius and Buchanan, what confusion they bring into the historie,Hect. Boet. Scot. hist. lib. 4. without regard of the truth, they name Beda, they call Reuda, Reuther, and say that he was the sixt King of Albania, and that the Britaines made him flee into Ireland, and that in the end he was restored to his kingdome againe; which can no way agree with the words of reverend Beda, whose credit we may not impeach, for he saith, they were Scythians, and wanted a dwelling place, and beganne to inhabit the North parts of the Iland. If Reuda were King of Albania, no thanke to the Irish men to direct him thither. But let us goe on with the Pictes. I finde in Lanquet that the Pictes were rebellious,Anno Dom. 53. an. 9: of Arvi∣ragus, Anno. Domini 53. And Polycronicon affircteth, as Beda wrote before, that they came to the North of Ireland in Vespasians time. Stow saith it was in Anno 73. Matthew the Monke of Westminster, in Anno 75. and 76. Leslaeus and Bozius write that Reuda came about the yeere 360. which is very doubtfull, and that then the Pictes wan∣ting wives, desired of the Britaines that they might march with their nation, their suit being denied, they went to the Irish, who granted
them wives upon the condition in Beda before rehearsed And far∣ther, Giraldus Cambrensis, Polycronicon and Grafton concurring, doe say, that Scotland was first called Albania of Albanactus, se∣condly, Pictlandia, of the Pictes; thirdly, Hibernia, Ireland, because of the alliance or affinitie in marriage betweene the Pictes and Irish; last of all, Scotland or Scythians land. And hereof it commeth to passe, that Ireland is called Scotland, and Scotland Ireland, the Irish Scots,Polychron lib 1. cap. 1. cap. 37. and the Scots Irish, as one hath largely collected; and the di∣stinction of Scotia Major, and Scotia Minor. Io. Harding Chronig. Mewinus.Harding hath an historie out of Mewinus a Brittish Chronicler, (Harding lived in the time of Henry the fift and sixt, and in the daies of Edward the fourth,) which if it be true, all that is formerly spo∣ken of Gathelus and Scota his wife, by the Scottish and Irish Chro∣niclers, is of small credit; namely, how that Gathelus and Scota came into these North parts, together with the Pictes, Anno Domini 75. his words are these, speaking of the King of Britaine. Then to the Peights left alive, he gave Catenesse To dwell upon, and have in heritage; Which wedded were with Irish as I gesse, Of which after Scots came on that linage, For Scots be to say their language A collection of many into one, Of which the Scots were called so anone: But Mewinus the Bryton Chronicler Flor. hist. Mewinus was also called Melkinus. Io. Bale cent. 1: cap. 57. wrote his life. The stone Regall of Scotland.Saith in his Chronicle otherwise, That Gadelus and Scota in the yeere Of Christ, seventie and five by assise, At Stone inhabite as might suffice: And of her name, the country round about, Scotland she cald that time without doubt. This Scota was, as Mewin saith the sage, Daughter and bastard of King Pharao that day, Whom Gadele wedded, and in his old age Vnto a land he went, where he inhabited ay, Which yet of his name is called Gadelway; And with the Peights he came into Albanie The yeere of Christ aforesaid openlie, &c. Pol. lib. 1. cap. 58Polycronicon and Cambrensis accord with Harding in this point, that the King gave the Pictes a place to dwell in, which is now cal∣led Galleway.Ponticus Viru∣nius. And saith Ponticus Virunius, it was desert and waste, where none dwelled in many dayes before. The credit of Harding is
great, and he that list to know farther of him, let him reade Bale, Bi∣shop of Ossorie, who wrote his life.Io. Bale. Script. Brytan. centur. 8 I will now neither confirme nor confute, but acquainte the reader with such antiquities as I finde, and in a word, to adde something unto that which went before, of the time of the Pictes comming in∣to these North, and North-west parts. Florilegus writeth it was Anno Domini 77. Functius and Polydore, Anno Dom. 87. To recon∣cile the dissonance, what every one saith may stand for truth, for they came in severall companies, and at severall times, some into Ireland, some into Albania, and some into England.Scotland for Albania from hence forward I will from hencefor∣ward leave writing the kingdome of Albania, and write the king∣dome of Scotland. Anno Dom. 73. began Marius the sonne of Arviragus to raigne in Britaine,Anno Dom. 73. (Humfrey Lloide calleth him Meurig) who after his trou∣blesome warres, for nine yeeres space against the Picts and Scots, en∣ded with the helpe of Iulius Agricola, is said to have aspired towards Ireland, and to have placed garrisons on the coast; and to the end he might performe some exploite there, entertained an Irish Prince that was driven out of his country by civill dissention for his conductor. I finde no issue recorded of this businesse. In the 15. yeeres civill warres which ensued vpon the death of Lucius, the sonne of Coile, King of Britaine, it is reported,Galf. Mon. that Ful∣genius called the Ilanders, Albanians, Pictes, and Irish men to his aide, against whom, Severus the Emperour comming from Rome, gave them battaile neere unto Yorke, where Severus and a Prince of Ireland were slaine, and Fulgenius deadly wounded; the Emperour Severus and the Irish Prince, lye buried at Yorke. In the antiquities of Ireland, I finde that about the dayes of Con∣stantine the great,Booke of Houth. Anno Dom. 310 The history of Realmond, King of Vlster. who beganne his raigne anno Dom. 310.) one Re∣almond King of Vlster, fell in love with a Lady of Leinster, who had beene wife to the King of Connaught, a woman (they say) of meane stature, but of singular beautie; when many Princes and Lords of Ireland laboured to winne her fauour, her answer was, that none should enjoy her loue, but a Champion that by Marshall prowesse had prevailed in forraigne countries, quitted himselfe like a man, wonne the Garland, and brought tribute with him to his native soile. Realmond being overcome with the love of this Lady, hoised up saile and went for France, where he encounrted with a Champion, and wonne a Garland called Civica. Afterward comming to great Britain, hee challenged the Duke of Cornewall, and got of him a tribute,Duke of Cornewall. Castreus the Gyant thence he went into Scotland, and encountred with Gyant Castreus, and prevailed; (such was the manner of winning honour and dignity by marshall feates in those daies, saith Saxo Grammaticus) last of all he came backe to Ireland, and acquainted his love,Sax. Gram. hist. Dan. lib. 7. the Lady he for∣merly sought for, with his travaile, his dangerous adventures, and
his good successe, and now having prevailed abroad, hee doubted not at home in regard of his kingdome, his kindred and valour, but to obtaine her fauour. Shee being made throughly acquainted with his affaires abroad and at home, gave many a sigh in his absence, fea∣ring some mischance might come to him, and wishing she had not so peremptorily answered him; but he no sooner came in place, but she relented from her former hardnesse, and with all speed the solemnity of marriage was performed. But the match was disdained by others, insomuch that he was hated of the Princes and Nobilitie of Ireland, who had formerly affected the Lady, whereof grew mutinies, con∣tentions, and at last open warre, and hee finding himselfe weake, in comparison of his enemies, was forced to flee into Denmarke, where hee found favour and great aide of worthy Souldiers which came with him into Ireland,The Danes come to Ireland. where he and his generation, together with the Danes and their posteritie, effected many notable acts, and con∣tinued many yeeres. The Danes of the lyne of Fin Eryn, that came out of Denmarke, were these,The genealo∣gie of Fin Erin, or Fin Mac Coyll. David the Kings sonne who had to his sonne borne in Ireland, Deure Dove, who had foure sonnes, Covrry, Boyskene, Fy∣agh, and Oghe; Boyskene had a sonne called Garreneslo, and Con-Caghmore was his sonne; Con had a sonne named Ferrelogh, and he had a sonne called Trenmore, this Trenmore had to his sonne, Coylle Negoe, and he had a sonne called Fin-Fa, alias Fin Mac Coylle and he had a sonne caled Oshen, and he had a sonne called Osker. This Oshen lived in Anno Dom. 432. in the dayes of Saint Patricke, unto whom he made relation of many things before going, and was by him bap∣tized, being of the age of seven score yeeres. For proofe of this histo∣rie, I finde in Saxo Grammaticus that wrote the historie of the Danes, that Fin and Finni were a great sept there, hardy, stalworth men, gi∣ven to preying, and burning of towne and country, and happly the Irish conversing with them,Eric or Erin what it signifi∣eth. did learne those parts of them) and that the name of Eric was of the royall bloud among them; so Fin Erin turning c. into n. was a great commander there, and conducted into Ireland many Danes.Erin or Ireland of whom so called. And happly, Ireland of old, because of his great command, and his posteritie, might after him be called Erin: this is but my conceit, happly others can say more thereof. These Danes increased and multiplied exceedingly, and became great Com∣manders and Captaines over the whole land, and tooke vpon them the defence thereof against all forraigne invasion. In processe of time fell out the battaile of Fentra in Mounster, valiantly fought by the Irish and Danes, whereof the Irish Chroniclers make great accompt; it was fought chiefly in Mounster, by the Princes and power of Ire∣land, with the aide of the Danes, and generation of Fin Mac Coylle, and Fin Eryn, in which field, they say, all the forraigne enemies that came out of Scotland, Cornewall, Normandie, Germany, Spaine
and Denmarke it selfe, were overthrowne. The occasion was as fol∣loweth. Many Gyants and worthy Champions there were in those daies in Ireland, of Irish and Danish birth, hired by them for their defence;Occasions of the battaile of Fentra. these trauelling into forraine countries, fought many combats, and got yeerely tribute unto their country, as the manner then was among such challengers. For this they were generally envied, and a day was appointed by the invaders to arrive together in Ireland to ouer-runne the country, and roote out the whole nation. The first company to the number of thirtie thousand, landed at the Derrie,Strangers in∣tend the utter subversion of the Irish nati∣on. where Con∣kedagh one of the Princes of the North, being prepared for them, by a sleight, set their shipping on fire, and met with them in a place where they were all overthrowne, so that with their Armes, those among the Irish that formerly wanted, were furnished and made fit for the warres. The second company of this combination came to Lambay, landed their men at the Follesse of Skerries, set their men in battaile array, and marched to a place now called Cnoc-nagean, that is the hill of dead mens heads, where Dermotte Lamhdhearg King of Leinster met them, fought a cruell battaile with equall fortune for the space of foure daies;A strange bat∣taile if it be true. the Irish by reason of the spoile and victory got at the former battaile, were mightily encouraged, and also the milke and fresh meate which the country yeelded them, and the strangers wanted, made them the more able to fight; to be short, the strangers were overthrowne, and thirty sixe thousand of them slaine, whose Armes furnished Ireland throughly to encounter with the rest of the combination. The third company came to Fentra in Mounster, where the forces of Ireland being gathered together, kept them from landing the space of seven dayes, with the slaughter of many on both sides, so that the sea-shore at sundry times was died redde with the bloud of the slaine karkasses, untill that one Gillemore, sonne to the King of Thomond,Gillemore of Thomond re∣volteth. (being male-content for that he was remoued from the voward of the battaile to the rere) revolted, and by night stole to the enemie, and directed them where they should safely land their men, which accor∣dingly came to passe, so that the Irish knew it not untill the strangers had set their owne shippes on fire: hee withall brought the invaders to such advantage of ground, that they refreshed themselues for ten dayes without any annoyance from the Irish, and afterward when they came to skirmish, did himselfe divers times fight valiantly, im∣bruing his hands in the bloud of his owne naturall countrimen. At last it fell out after some bickering, that hee called for water to wash his hands that were all full of the bloud of his countrymen, which was left stand after he had therein washed, and soone after calling for a cup of wine, was answered that there stood a bowle of wine upon the table; he forgetting that he had formerly washed therein, dranke
it up, insomuch, that the standers by said; What fellow is this, more like a brute beast then a man, that drinketh his owne bloud, and eateth his owne flesh? Gillemore hearing this, tooke it to heart, notwithstan∣ding dissembling his griefe and anger,Gillemore re∣turneth. the next night conveyed him∣selfe away, and submitting himselfe to his father, delivered unto him the state of the strangers, which turned to their great disadvantage and hinderance. Shortly after, the day of battaile was appointed, where the stran∣gers were overthrowne,The battaile of Fentra. and (as they say) seven score thousand men slaine. The Irish had supplies and extraordinary meanes at home, the strangers could not come by it; the Irish plaid with them at all ad∣vantages, the woods and the bogs defended them as occasion ser∣ved. This battaile with the preambles and circumstances, continued one whole yeere, the strangers had no shipping to flee unto for suc∣cour, the ground was unknowne unto them, their lodging and fare was cold, hard, and scant, so as their hardinesse could not hold out, their end was lamentable, and the honour was bequeathed to the Irish nation. The Princes of Ireland having thus with great successe foiled their enemies, delivered their people from utter overthrow, and quieted the land, rested themselves a while. Afterward, partly for recompence of good service, and partly for safegard of the land, appointed the Danes (whom they had formerly hired, who also un∣to that time had served them truely) over the whole land to prevent forraigne invasion, forewarned by the field of Fentra and the former attempts; these Commanders with their particular places of com∣mand, I thought good to impart to the courteous reader. The severall garrisons of the Danes.Osker Mac Oshen Mac Fin with his Souldiers kept the haven of Dublin. Fian Mac Fenrasse kept the Winde-gates. Wony Etagh Mac Cas Foule kept Wicklo. Creyon Mac Wony kept Arcklow. Eye Onagh Mac Kellenkas kept Weixford. Dono Mac Kayder kept Rosse. Fellum Mac Eye Keyge kept Dungarvan. Bresell Mac Eydow kept O Keylle. Gaero Mac Doheyere kept Corke. Ollen Aye Nyarg Mac Bressell kept Kynsale. Collo Mac Keilt kept Dingle Koysse. Con Keor Mac Bren Mac Foyll kept Fentra. Osker Mac Cromkeyn kept Trallie. Don Dowe Mac Reymowre being a King over the sept of Fin Mac Koyle kept Lymnagh, that is, Limericke. Eye Boge Mac Fin kept Inyskagh. Coll Kroytt kept Corke Vaysken:
Eye Mac Sroy kept Canborne. Eye clone Drylinge kept Donrys Oveyragh. Bressell Mac Eye Begge kept Galloway▪ Deyre Dovenagh Magher Morne, kept Inysbresyn. Eye O row Mac Fin kept Kleere. Collow Daver kept small Iland. Enos Dayrk kept Koymaghtbe. Enos Maygh Ercoipie kept Galley. Feartagh Mac Ferolagh kept Moyc. Low Magh Mac Karbren kept Sligo. Smerger Drought kept Bondroys: Keyll Croagh Kede Gonagh O Navnyd, Assero▪ Brasell Mac Doyer kept Donagall. Mogh Small Mac Smoyll kept Fanyd. Eey Mac Kehow kept Loughfoyle. Darawryd Rowrer kept Bonban. Sperenagh Claw kept Knockfergus. Magh love kept Ardolloe. Donogh Mac Dermotte Evne, kept Ardglas. Art Oge Mac Morne kept Dondorme. Eye Mac Carra Meyke Morne kept Carlingford. Flaas Fere Leyfroke Greffey Fin Mac Koyll, kept Don dalke. Rey ne Roysklaygh Mac Fin Mac Koyll kept Drogheda. Shealvagh Mac Dermotte Doyn kept Gormanston. Covuloe Mac Wowdyrge kept Irelands eye. Derlleys Mac Dovgar kept Howth. These were the chiefe Commanders by direction from Fin Mac Koyll,Beacons ap∣pointed in Ireland by Fin Mac Koill. who tooke farther order that Beacons should be set up in sun∣dry places of the land, where in time of danger they might have direction for reliefe, and draw to a head for their defence; which or∣der continued unto the field of Kaghcaro, otherwise called Ardkagh or Ardkath, the occasion whereof was as followeth. In the time of Karbre Lifeacher, Monarch of Ireland, the Danish Captaines with their bands and garrisons,Karbre Lifea∣cher Monarch of Ireland. waxed insolent and outra∣gious, they weighed not what Prince or people said, they grew strong and rich, not caring what they did: they brought vp fond cu∣stomes of their owne devising, oppressing the people, and disdaining the gentle admonitions of the Kings and Nobilitie of the land. A∣mong themselves they decreed, that no Maid should marry without their license, that none should hunt the Hare, Otter, Foxe, Wolfe, Marterne or Deare,The insolent devices of the Danes. but should pay them what they pleased to rate it at, and that none should use any other pastime without their privi∣tie. The Kings and Nobilitie of the land called a Parliament, ende∣vouring to reforme these abuses, charging them to surcease from their
outrages, or to leave the land. The Danes answered, that they came in with the sword, held by the sword, and with the sword they would be driven away. The day of battaile was appointed to be fought at Amaghery Ongallin, now called Margallin in Westmeath, though the field be called Ardkagh, which is by interpretation, a set field. The Danes sent to Denmarke, intimating their griefe and lamenta∣ble estate, craving aide of the King, and that he would be pleased to send his sonne to be their Generall, who (according to their request) shortly after landed with tenne thousand stalworth souldiers (so the old phrase runneth) and they comming together, made up twenty and eight thousand, and seven hundred. The Kings of Ireland with their forces were threescore and five thousand.Forces of the Irish and Danes. The Danes or Nor∣wegians being valiant and venterous, hastened to the battaile at the day appointed. The Kings in like sort with their forces hearing that their enemies approched, set themselves in battaile array, and came to a place where they all kissed the ground, readie to dye one with another, and gave (after their manner) such a crie, as if heauen and earth met together, and therewith somewhat amazed their ene∣mies,Garrestowne. The marshal∣ling of the Danes at the battaile of Ardkath. so that the place to this day is called Balle-Nangartha, in En∣glish, Garrestowne. The strangers placed themselves on the South-west side of the hill, that the forces of the Kings being on the other side, somewhat be∣neath them, might not easilie discrie their Armie; they appointed their worst men for their Rereward, that seeing the Voward valiant∣ly encountring and prevailing, they might thereby be the more en∣couraged. They placed their rascals on their jades, nagges and labou∣ring garrons, on the top of an hill, where at this day is a little Mote in remembrance thereof, giuing them in charge, that when the forces of the land espied them, and drew neere, they should retire to the maine battaile for refuge and succour; they hoped by these meanes, that the Kings when they saw so great a company flee, would breake their order and array to pursue them, and so lay themselves open to utter ouerthrow; and then was their intent to have made the King of Denmarkes sonne, King of the land, and to have enioyed the Realme to them and their posteritie for euer. The Kings of Ireland being seven in number, tracing a while on the top of an hill (which therefore was called after that,Hol-trase. Order of the Kings of Ire∣land at the▪ field of Ard∣kath. the hill of Trase, now Hol-trase) divided themselves into two battailes. Gillemore, O Connor Dunnes, sonne of Connaght (one that had stood out in rebel∣lion against the Kings untill that time) had in the Voward the lea∣ding of the light footmen, whereof they made least account; he ther∣by to winne their favours,Dermot Lamh∣dhearg King of Leinster. and they to hazard him first. Dermotte Lamhdhearg, King of Leinster had the charge of the horsemen; their bonnys were double armed, well appointed, active and venturous souldiers. Dermot being well mounted, got him to an advantage of
ground, and turned him to the armie with this speech. My friends and fellowes in Armes,The King of Leinsters speech. whose great valour hath been oft tryed; understand (I beseech you) the cause of this battaile. Whereas heretofore we have sought out these, and hired them in our warres for our defence and good of our country, against our forraine enemies, to be at our service and command, they have committed all manner of outrage against vs, and extortion upon the people of this land; they abused our wives, ravished our widowes, defloured our daughters and maidens; their meat, their drinke, their bedding, will not content them, but they must have money for eating, drinking and sleeping. Where they should have beene our true and dutifull serui∣tors, they disdained the Princes of the land, and made the people their villaines. By maintaining of them, wee made our country men idle and unapt for the warres, by inriching of them we have begge∣red our selves, and now see the villany of these verlates, our provisi∣on, our furniture, our Armes, and forces of our native soile, they bend against us, and not onely this, but they have drawn to their pre∣sent aide, afresh, both Danes and Norwegians. Wherefore plucke up your hearts, quitte your selues like men, our cause is good, wee fight for our selves, our wives and children, and the libertie of our country; if we lose, we are lost for euer, and our children become bondslaues, and our country subiect to these bloudy rascall strangers. He had no sooner ended his speech, but they all kissed the ground, and gave a terrible shout, that the woods about them rang thereat. On the other side, one Osker Mac Oshen, experienced in the warres, and bold of speech, craved of the Danes and Norweyes libertie to speake, and began as followeth. My masters and fellowes,Osker Mac O∣shen his speech. the cause of this our assemblie is knowne unto you; it is to maintaine that which we honourably wonne in the field, and was granted our ancestors and their posteritie, the which we have in writing to shew, under the hands and seales of the ance∣stors of these faithlesse Kings and Princes that be in Armes against us. There is no haven, creeke or port in Ireland, but that our prede∣cessors and we tooke the charge of them, since our first arrivall here out of Denmarke, and valiantly defended the maugre the beards of all forraigne enemies. We fought many a battaile for them, wee wanne them tributes, and procured them discharge of tributes, the which forraigne champions in combats had obtained of them, and now for recompence, they endevour eyther to banish us the land, or put us to the sword. Will yee understand what they are, surely a people that keepe no promise with us, therefore we doubt not but the better to speed: and excepting a few of their Princes and Gentlemen that are valiant men indeed, and daily exercised in feats of Armes, the rest are but pesants, poore and needy slaues, bare arst, bare legd, and bare footed, and of small strength. For Armes, they weare a skull, a
sword by their side hanging in a Wyth that compasseth their middle, and a Target; other some have darts; the best thing in them is, they are swift of foot, & I hope we shal speedily have the experience of that when we see them run away. Their good meate & best drink we took, and made them fast, their treasure we tooke to furnish us in apparell and Armes, and left them unfurnished and bare, their bedding wee had, and made them lye on the ground, their wives, widdowes and maides were at our command to keepe us warme in the night, and we gave them leave to lye among their swine. The best soile we tooke to our selves,Fabian part 6. cap. 198. wri∣teth that the Danes did the like in Eng∣land. and gave them mountaines and bogges: alas poore sillie fellowes, these be they that now take Armes against us. Where∣fore faint not, be of good courage, and we shall prevaile; let us winne vantage of ground, and get the side of the hill, and bogge against them, that their horses prevaile not, and once master them, we shall quickly over-runne the pesants; now last, kisse one another, in token that you will live and die one with another. The battaile of Ardkath.His words being ended, they marched forward with Pipes, Cor∣nets, and Trumpets sounding. Their chiefe armes were Skeynes, Speares, Darts, Slings, and Sparthes, (which we call Galloglas Axes:) they sent their boyes and varlets, as they had formerly determined, to the top of the hill. The King of Leinster that had the leading of the horsemen, no sooner espied them, but (contrary to the plot laid downe upon the hill of Trase) put spurres to his horse, and with a loud voyce said, follow me, they were straight upon their backes that fled, so that the Danes had no leisure to receive them for their safe∣gard, but were driven to kill their owne before, as the Irish did be∣hinde. Immediately came the light foot under the leading of Gille∣more, and together with the horse, charged the voward of the Danes, so that the rascals of the Danes, and the light footmen of the Irish were slaine, with the death and hurt of many a Dane. Then came the great battaile of the Kings of Ireland in rescue of the horse, with a great and terrible noise, and gave a stout charge upon the enemie (that kept the ground, I meane the side of the hill) and fiercely bare them downe to the bottome, where they fought a cruell battell with equall fortune, almost the whole day, untill the King of Denmarkes sonne was slaine by the King of Leinster,The King of Leinster slai∣eth the King of Denmarke his sonne. The Danes overcome. whereupon the Danes fled, the Irish followed, and had the killing of them without resistance, till horse and man were weary, and the Danes in a manner all destroyed. Of the Irish were slaine (as I finde in the antiquities of the land) foure Kings, twenty five Kings sonnes, and of others, nineteene thousand, seven hundred and threescore, though others extenuate the matter. They say the horses went to their bellies in bloud, also the ayre with the stinke was infected, and thereof shortly after rose a grie∣vous plague, which cut off the wives, children, and servants of the Danes, and of many of the Irish that were slaine.
There was at this field, one Ferreis a Dane,Ferreis a Dane fell madde. a valiant souldier in the fight, but escaping with life, for very sorrow of the overthrow, and losse of his friends, fell madde, and kept company with wilde beasts to his dying day. Fin Mac Coile,Fin Mac Coile. one of the principall Captaines of the Danish sept, was in Rome at the time of this field; many things are reported of him worthy remembrance. His chiefe house was cal∣led Baragh-llys in Vlster; he was a man in his prosperitie of great command in Ireland, so that the Danes and Norweyans had through him great dealing and entercourse with Ireland, and Ireland with them. But yet (as it sometime falleth out among the deerest friends) many jarres and broiles and factions fell betweene them, and especi∣ally betweene the sept of Klan ne Morne, and Klan ne Boisken,The Danes disagree in Ireland. both which sides still relieved themselves out of Denmarke. The King of Denmarke at last hearing of the same of Fin Mac Coile, sent for him, and tooke such a liking to him, that he concluded to marry him unto his daughter. Fin went thither with three thousand souldiers: the King one day as they conversed together, asked after the manner of the death of his three sonnes, Comen, Law-ne-Meyd, and Feagh, who formerly went into Ireland to maintaine one of the factions; Dermot O Doyne, (one of Fins company) answered, trouble not thy selfe, O King, this is the hand that killed thy sonne Comen; one Osker said, this is the hand that killed thy sonne Law-ne-Meyd; Keyn Mac Fin also said, this is the hand that killed thy sonne Feagh. Herewith the King was wroth and said, Fin Mac Coile, thou and thy men are my prisoners; forthwith they drew their Skeynes, the Kings guard for feare fled, they tooke him prisoner, carried him aboord their shippes,Fin Mac Coile taketh the King of Denmarke prisoner. hoised up saile, and brought him to Ireland, so as the marriage was dasht, and the King driven to pay a ransome for his libertie, before he could get from them. This Fin Mac Coile also fought with a Gy∣ant that landed at Houth, and came to challenge combats for tribute,Overcommeth a Gyant. and by policie, not by strength, overcame him: his policie was this; he caused him in the night, (for the space of three nights) to be kept waking, and in the day time to be fought withall, and thereby wea∣kened his strength, and foiled the Gyant. Toward his end,Gorre burneth Fin Mac Coiles house. one Gorre an old man, after these former warres and troubles, came to his house (before spoken of) and boasted unto the Gentlewomen then present, of his feates in warre, and the combats he had fought, whereat they laughed; he being offended with them, sware in his anger that hee would burne them all, got old timber and straw, put it in the house, fired it, made fast the doores, and compassed about the house with men that none might escape. They cryed unto him out of their win∣dowes to save their lives, but he was inexorable, and could not bee drawne to any compassion, and when the house was readie to fall, he fled into Mounster, and there hid himselfe in a Cave. Fin Mac Coile came home from hunting, and beheld this wofull desolation,
how his Wife, his Maides, his old Souldiers, his Horses, his Grey∣hounds, his Plate and houshold stuffe, his Shields, Iackes, and Shirts of maile, and his instruments of Musicke, were consumed to ashes, made after Gorre into Mounster, where he found him, and after some skirmish of both sides, tooke him, and brought him to the place where he had committed this villany. Gorre when hee beheld the bones of them that were burned, laughed, and being asked why, his answer was, that hee laughed at them that formerly laughed at him. This wile Gorre being kept that night from execution, in the dead of the night stole away, and was found in a Cave, where by commandment of Fin Mac Coill, Hugh Gorre his owne sonne killed his father,He is killed by his own sonne. The end of Fin Mac Coill. and after became madde himselfe. And the end of Fin Mac Coill was, that he dyed a beggar and in great miserie. So farre out of the booke of Houth. Now to continue the storie. It is written of Maximus, who beganne his raigne in Britaine, Anno Dom. 387, that he tooke great displeasure against the Scots and Irish, for partaking with Conan, and upholding the faction be∣tweene him and Carodoch:W. Harrison in the descripti∣on of Brit. Georg. Buchan. veg. Scot. lib. 4. thus it is written; Maximus drave the Scots out of Britaine, and compelled them to get habitation in Ire∣land, the out Iles, and the North part of the maine, and finally divi∣ded their region betweene the Britaines and the Pictes. He denounced warre also against the Irish men, for receiving them into their land; but they craving peace, yeelded to subscribe, that from thenceforth they would not receive any Scot into their dominions. H. Boet. Scot. hist. lib. 6.Hector Boetius penneth this matter at large, that all the Scots were banished, and despersed themselves into the Hebrydes, Orchades, Norwey, Denmarke, and some into France and Italie. And where Maximus somewhat tendred their utter ruine and overthrow, and referred them to the Pictes for favour, the Pictes most cruelly gave sentence, that the Scots which fled not, should eate the Pictes sword, &c: And of Ireland he writeth, Vpon the first comming of this newes, all Ireland mourned and made great lamentation; and when they had deliberately examined the exiles, and understood all the accidents that befell them in Albion, they appointed certaine dayes for a parley, sum∣moned from East to West, all the Princes of the land to meete their Mo∣narch at the certaine day and place prefixed,Irish consult how to helpe the Scots a∣gainst the Ro∣mans. to consult how and by what meanes the Roman forces might be resisted, and the kingdome of Albi∣on restored to their allies and cousins the Scots. When they could de∣vise no remedie (for they feared the power of the Romanes) they thought good to put up all iniuries, and to intreate for peace. To this purpose they sent Ambassadors to Maximus the Romane Captaine, who at the first sharpely rebuked them, for that they had sent aide into Albion a∣gainst the Romanes their confederates and favourites, and in especiall, seeing that unto that day, Ireland of all the kingdomes of the world, felt little smart of the Romane sword. In the end he received them into
favour, and granted them peace upon these conditions.Conditions of peace between the Romans and Irish. That they should thenceforth receive no enemies of the Romanes into the Realme of Ire∣land, neither any that gave aide against the Romanes, and that no re∣bell of the Irish under pretence of marchandize, should thenceforth set foot in Albion. These conditions of peace being concluded, the Irish were quiet, and trode not upon Scottish soile. So farre Boetius. Not long after this (according to Ponticus Virunius) Guanius,Ponticus Viru∣nius lib. 4. King of Hunnes, and Melga King of Pictes having long hulled here and there, and roved upon the seas, were by Gratianus (after their inva∣ding of Britaine and Scotland, in the absence of Maximus) over∣throwne, and driven out of the kingdome, and forced to flee for re∣fuge into Ireland: soule weather followed these two Kings, and Ire∣land gave them hard entertainement at the first. Notwithstanding I finde, that this Guanius and Melga, after the death of this Gratianus, (who usurped the kingdome of Britaine for the space of foure yeeres upon the death of Maximus, who had slaine Gratianus the Empe∣rour) prepared againe for Britaine, and brought with them the exiled Scots with Irish and Ilanders for their aide. But to proceed. Thomas Cooper, who afterwards was Bishop of Winchester, spea∣king of the returne of the Scots from exile (in his continuing of the Chronicle of Lanquet) maketh the same to be Anno Dom. 423. and withall delivereth his conceit,Tho. Cooper. that the Scots about this time came first out of Ireland into that country, which of them was called Scot∣land. If he had referred it to a further yeere, namely when the sixe sonnes of Muredus King of Vlster came to Scotland, haply it would have carried some probabilitie: but to say that it was the first com∣ming of the Scots into Scotland, I doe no more like of it,Rerum Scot. lib. 5. then George Buchanan doth, neither doth it concurre with the antiquities prece∣dent or subsequent. Cambrensis and Stanihurst doe direct me in this course. Here I am to note, (saith Cambrensis) that in the time of Neall, Monarch of Ireland, the sixe sonnes of Muredus, King of Vlster,Cambrensis. with no small navie, possessed the North parts of Britaine, whence the nation issuing out of them, and by speciall name called Scottish to this day, inhabite that northerne angle; but upon what occasion they came hither, how and by what great treasons (rather then voyages) they ba∣nished the Pictes from those parts, a stout nation, farre passing them for armes and courage, I referre to our Topographie of Britaine.Stan. in appen∣dice. Stani∣hurst addeth; this inrode into Albania was a little before the com∣ming of Patricke. So that these Noble men of Ireland came into Scot∣land in the time of Neale, and Patricke came into Ireland in the time of Leigerius the sonne of Neale, as hereafter more at large shall ap∣peare. In the meane time we reade, how that (Anno 430. according to Functius) Celestinus Bishop of Rome sent Palladius into Scotland,Anno Dom. 430. Prosper in Chro. Palladius. who was the first that gave them Bishops, for unto that time, the
Churches without Bishops,Geo. Buchanan. ey Scot. lib. 5. were governed by Monkes, with lesse pride and outward pompe, but with greater sanctitie and meekenesse of spirit, &c. I make mention of him, for that (as our Irish Anony∣mus, and Iocelin doe write) he landed in the North parts of Ireland, where he hardly escaped with life,Iocelin in vita Sancti Patricij cap. 24. as it is reported, thence he went to the Ilands, where he did much good, lastly he came to Scotland, prea∣ched the Gospell, rooted out the Pelagian heresie, and consecrated them Bishops, &c. Christian faith in Ireland.At this time (as it is written in the life of Declanus) Christian reli∣gion first beganne, and tooke roote in Ireland, not as some have dreamed, by Saint Iames the Apostle, neither by Saint Patricke, whom they terme the Apostle of Ireland. The truth of the historie is as followeth. There was one Colmannus in Mounster, a reverend Priest,Colmannus and Dymna. The life of Saint Declanus. (and the first Christian which I finde upon record in Ireland) that baptized one Declanus, and delivered him to be brought up unto one Dymna a Christian schoolemaster, under whom he profited so much, that his fame was spread farre and nigh, so that upon good ad∣vice and counsaile, he travailed to Rome, where Celestinus the Pope consecrated him Bishop, where also he met with Albaeus a Bishop of Irish birth. In his returne from Rome, he mette with Patricke in Italie, conversed a while with him, and being inioyned by Celestinus, hastened to Ireland, and left Patricke that was bound for Rome. De∣clanus after his arrivall in Ireland, came among his owne sept (whom mine Author calleth Nandesi, and I take to be the ancient house of the Decies) not farre from Lismore,Familie of the Decies. and there preached the Gospell, and converted many to the Christian faith. Thither came unto him, (saith the Legend) seven holy men Mocellog, Beanus, Colmanus, La∣chuyn, Moby, Fyndlug and Caminanus▪ they builded them celles, conversed together, and planted the Christian faith over all Moun∣ster.Engus King of Mounster. He went to Engus the sonne Nafrygh, King of Mounster, whose Pallace was in Cassill, who gave him leave to preach, yet received not the faith; the reason of this favour (as I finde it) was for that En∣gus had married his mother, and had issue by her, Colman and Eo∣chard. Colman was by Saint Albaeus the Bishop baptized, and then received the Ecclesiasticall habite, Eochard raigned after his father King of Mounster. Saint Declanus took a second iourney to Rome, and was reverent∣ly entertained by David Bishop of Menevia; after the effecting of his businesse, he returned into Ireland, and arrived in a place called Ard-naciored, in Latine Altitudo ovium, now called Ardmore, the which soile the Lord of Nandesi gave him,Ard-naciored, i. Altitudo ovium, now Ardmore. where goodly buildings have beene, and as the record runneth, Civitas sancti Declani quae in eo loco posita est, vocatur Ardmore, id est, Altitudo magna. Farther in the same Legend I finde, Quatuor sanctissimi Episcopi, cum suis dis∣cipulis fuerunt in Hibernia, ante Patricium praedicantes in ea Christū,
scilicet, Albaeus, Declanus, Ybarus & Kyaranus (alias Keran),Albaeus, Decla∣nus, Ybarus, Keran. & hi plures ad Christum rete evangelico traxerunt, sed tamen sanctus Pa∣tricius Majores Hiberniae, & potentiores ad fidem convertit. In their time Patricke sent from Celestine Bishop of Rome came to Ireland whom these foure Bishops with their followers saluted, and seeing Patricke (after the humour of humorous people) more graced then themselves, jarred with him, they would not (forsooth) have any of forraigne nation to patronize the land. In the originall it is recorded: Ybarus nulla ratione consentire Sancto Patricio,Emulation. nunquam ei subditus esse voluit, nolebat enim Patronum Hiberniae de alia gente habere, & conflictus magnos inter se ipsos Ybarus & Patricius fecerunt. But af∣terward by much adoe, they were reconciled. See gentle reader the infirmitie of men, and emulation following the same. At Cassill they were reconciled by Engus King of Mounster, whom Patricke bapti∣zed, who after his baptisme, founded there the Cathedrall Church,Cassill Church is built and made mother-Church of Mounster. A Parliament. in the honour of Saint Patricke, made it the Metropolitane See of Mounster, and assigned Albaeus the first Bishop there. This King held there a Parliament of spirituall and temporall persons of his king∣dome, ratifying the premisses, pacifying all quarrels, and yeelding contentment to all sides, The Legend reporteth, in quo decretum est ut Albaeus secundus Patricius, & Patronus Mumeniae esset; & Decla∣nus secundus Patricius, & Patronus esset Nandeisi, & Nandeisi sua Di∣ocesis usque ad finem seculi esset. Postea sancti Episcopi salutantes & benedicentes regem Engusum, ad sua in osculo pacis, cum spirituali gau∣dio, ad opus Domini seminandum regressi sunt. Wherein it was decreed, that Albaeus should be a second Patricke and Patron of Mounster, and that Declanus should be a second Patricke and Patrone of Nandeisi, and that Nandeisi should be his Diocesse to the end of the world. After all, these holy Bishops saluted and blessed King Engus, and in the kisse of peace, with spirituall ioy, returned every one to his charge, to sow the worke of the Lord.A great pesti∣lence in Mounster. Immediately there insued a grievous plague over all Mounster, and especially at Cassill, which was the death of thou∣sands; the manner of it was this, first they had the yellow jaundies, then they fell downe for dead. King Engus lamented greatly the death of seven Nobles of Mounster, that were pledges with him at Cassill, and miscarried in this mortalitie. Not long after, Declanus en∣ded the way of all flesh, and lyeth buried at Ardmore. Albaeus,The life of Saint Albaeus. (as his owne Legend delivereth) the second Patrone of Mounster after Patricke the generall Patrone of Ireland was borne in Elyach, now called Ely O Caroll. His fathers name was Olnais, his mothers, Sandith, a maid servant in the house of King Cronanus,King Cronanus of Eliach. the Lord of Eliach was then called a King. Cronanus in his rage, bid his servants hang the whoore, and kill the childe; the servants loath to dispatch an innocent, tooke him out of his Pallace, and laid him un∣der the side of a rocke. One Lochanus the sonne of Lugyr passing by,
pittied the childe, tooke him to his horse, and set him to nurse among certaine Britaines, in the East part of Elyach. Palladius (saith the sto∣ry) passing from Rome toward Scotland, and travelling through Ire∣land, baptized him. The Britaines sent him into France, where hee was trayned up in Christian schooles, and brought up under Bishop Hilarius, who sent him to Rome, where he was consecrated Bishop, and remained one whole yeere and fiftie dayes, preaching and ex∣pounding holy Scripture, with great admiration. And saith the Le∣gend, there came unto him out of Ireland, fiftie grave and reverend men, of which number there were 12 Colmans, 12 Coenigeni, and 12 Fintans; the Bishop of Rome sent them backe into Ireland, they came to Dolomoir, where Sampson Bishop of that See gave them en∣tertainement.King Fintan baptized. There he baptized (saith the storie) King Fintan. After he had baptized and converted many unto the faith, and builded many Churches, and founded many Hospitals for lazers, he came to Ymleach,Ymleach or Emley. now called Emley, a Bishopricke, and in the Legend, ter∣med his owne Citie, fell sicke, and there left his bones. He conversed with Biga, (whom learned Camden calleth Bega) & Bretach Nunnes, and with Nessanus a great Antiquarie,Biga and Bre∣tach Nunnes. Nessanus the Antiquarie. The life of Saint Kyaranus or Keran. saith mine Author, whose an∣tiquities I never saw. Kyaranus or Keran, alias Piran, (another of the foure Bishops that lived in Ireland before Saint Patricke) commeth next to be spo∣ken of. Of him, Capgrave and the Martyrologe thus write, that hee was a Bishop and Confessour, and termed Sanctorum Hiberniae pri∣mogenitus. And yet I finde in Molanus, that one Saint Mansuetus, (Bishop of Tullum now called Tullense oppidū, a towne in Flanders) was of Irish birth, fellow Disciple with Saint Clement, under Saint Peter the blessed Apostle, not trayned up in Ireland in the Christian faith, but in forraigne countries, where he was both baptized, instru∣cted, and made Bishop, and where he now resteth. But to returne to Keran, he was borne in Ossorie, having to his father Domnell, (saith another, Lugnaeus, whereby I gather, there were two of that name) to his mother Wingella, famous for life, learning, and sanctitie, in the dayes of Saint Patricke. He lived in the Ile of Cleere some 30 yeeres, from thence he went to Rome, where hee met Saint Patricke, who came to Ireland 30. yeeres after Pyranus was of note; in Rome hee continued 15. yeeres, expounding holy Scripture with great admi∣ration, (as another saith 20. yeeres) there the Bishop of Rome con∣secrated him Bishop. He came to Ireland, and was the first Bishop of Ossorie, having his See at Keran in Elie O Carroll. Hee refreshed, (saith mine Author) Saint Patricke,Keran the first Bishop of Ossorie. and tenne Irish Kings for the space of three dayes, he confirmed Rhodanus in the faith, visited the Virgin Cota (with her Priest Geranus) whose cell was a rocke of the eas, not farre from the Citie of Cluan in Mounster. He was a man of an austere life, never ware woollen garment, but the fell of Wolves
and wilde beasts. As he came to his lodging, in time of Lent, and ha∣ving inquired what provision they had, answere being made, that they had but a pestle of Porke, he commanded it to be laid on the ta∣ble, one scornefully refused the dyet, he misliking with him, threatned him an ill end, which accordingly came to passe. When by the course of nature he saw his end approach, he called his friends unto him, and said: My welbeloved children and friends, God hath dispo∣sed that I should trauaile out of Ireland into Cornewall, and there ex∣pect the end of my dayes; I cannot withstand the will of God; I doe admonish you brethren, to uphold the place, with good workes and examples of life, for there shall come children of perdition and death among you, ye shall have mortalitie and warres, the Churches shall become waste and desolate, and the truth shall be turned into iniqui∣tie, faith shall not shine with good workes, the Pastors will looke to themselves more then to their flocke, feeding themselves more then their sheepe: last of all, I beseech you brethren, pray for me that my iourney may be prosperous, and that after my decease, I finde not my King and my God angry, but gentle and appeased, when I shall appeare before him. He tooke leave, came to Cornewall, and resteth some fifteene miles from Petrok-stow, 25. miles from Mousehole, where he is remembred for their Patron. Cambrnsis writeth,Itinerarium Cambriae. that in Caerdise in Wales, there is a Chappell called Saint Perans Chap∣pell, where King Henry the second in his returne from Ireland, repai∣red to heare divine service, as he hath remembred it in his Booke in∣tituled Itinerarium Cambriae. And thus much of Saint Keran or Saint Peran. Of Ybarus the fourth Bishop before Saint Patricke,The life of Saint Ybarus. I finde some discourse in the Legend of Abbanus the Abbot, how hee baptized him, and brought him up in learning, and how they went together to Rome, and after their returne, conversed in Ireland with Saint Pa∣tricke, as formerly in part hath beene delivered in the life of De∣clanus. This Abbanus is renowned in Ireland for building of Celles and religious houses; besides three Monasteries in Connaght,The life of Ab∣banus the Ab∣bot. he built in Mounster, Ceall Achard Conchun, alias, Kill Achard, where Saint Finan (whom he baptized) after his death was Abbot.Saint Finan. In the bor∣ders of Muskerry he builded the Nunnery of Husneach, and left it to Saint Gobnaid and her Virgins, another Monasterie also by Kilcullen. In Nandesi (as I take it now called the Decies,) by the towne of Briogoban, he founded Kill-na-Marban, and at the foot of the moun∣taine Crotte in Muskerie, the famous Monasterie called Cluain-Airdmobecoc, where Saint Becanus was Abbot,Saint Becanus. the which after∣ward, because of Becanus his lamentation in devout sort (as it is writ∣ten) for his sinnes, was called Ceall Nander, Cella lachrymarum, the cell of teares. He founded also Cluain Findglaise, & Cluain Conbrum,
and went into Ely, where he baptized and converted unto the faith, thousands, as the Legend reporteth, in a place afterward called Rath-Becain, in Latine, Atrium Becani, where Abbanus is recounted Pa∣tron. He builded a Monasterie upon the river Berba, called Ross-Mac-Treoin,Emenus the Abbot. where the Abbot Saint Emenus resteth; also in Meath, Ceall-Ailbe, and committed the charge thereof to the holy Nunne Segnith and her associates, and in the North part of that country, a Nunnery, Ceall Abbain, where he made an end of his course, and slept with his fathers. There was great strife for his corps, betweene the North and the South, the Lords of the country strove for it in Armes. The North pleaded, here hee first builded and made his a∣bode, the South answered, with us was he borne, with us hee most conversed, and we will have his corps, or else we will leave our car∣kasses in this place. The body was laid in a Cart, bruit beasts had the drawing of it, when both sides were in Armes, the silly beasts were frighted, and ranne away with the dead, and where he was bu∣ried, I have not found as yet. His Monkes howled, and kept a lamen∣table stirre;Civitas Ma∣garnoid. the record runneth thus. Populus civitatis Magarnoid in Australibus Laginensibus sic dicebat. Iste sanctus a Domino ad nos mis∣sus est, & per multos annos apud nos vixit, & monasteria multa et cel∣las in nostra regione edificavit, et ipse est noster Sanctus et venerabilis Pater, qui nostrā civitatem similiter construxit, qui post multa miracu∣la, apud nos, ad Dominum migravit, et per eum semper a Domino adjuvari speramus, et scitote, quod nos morti omnes prius trademus, an∣tequam revertamini, eo a nobis absente. Ad hanc vocemira principum et militum utrorumque arsit, surgentes in furorem magnum, conten∣dere et rixari conantes. Tunc verò monachi & clerici, quibus non li∣cebat bellare, seorsum exierunt, ululantes & flentes, & fusis lachrymis dicentes; heu heu Domine Deus, cur concedis tam maximam caedem, tantorū nobilium virorum, circa corpus famulitui, qui in sua vita mul∣ta bella prohibuit? He had familiaritie with Saint Beartanus an Ab∣bot, Brendanus, Molyng, Flannanus, Munnu, Gobban, and with Co∣lumba the reverend Priest. The life of Saint Patricke.Saint Patricke was sent into Ireland by Celestinus Bishop of Rome before named, five yeeres after Palladius was sent into Scotland. So writeth Iohannes Major Scotus, and Functius therein followeth him; but I thinke they are too forward in their computation, for hee came into Ireland,Anno Christi, 422. Iocel. in praef. ad vitam Patric. Anno 432. and for this beside Iohn Bale Bishop of Osso∣rie, I have warrant from Iocelin the Monke of Furnese, who wrote his life at the request of Thomas, Primate of Ardmagh, Malachias Bishop of Dune, and Sir Iohn de Courcy Earle of Vlster; and out of Sigeber∣tus and Iohn Clyn Guardian of the Fryers Minors in Kilkenny in his collections of Irish antiquities,Sigeb. ad an. 432. Iohannes Clyn Antiq. Hiber. who also saith, that he was 16. yeeres old when the Pirates brought him out of Britaine into Ireland, that he was sixe yeeres in servitude, that he was eighteene yeeres under
Saint Germane a Bishop in France, that he spent thirty and five yeeres in converting Ireland and other Ilands to the faith, that he bestowed thirty three yeeres in contemplation, and that hee died anno aetatis, one hundred twenty two. Bale writeth his life. Patricius surnamed Succetus Magonius,Iohn Bale Scrip. Britt. cent. 1. & 14. of most writers called Magnus for his excellent vertues, had in Britaine to his father one Calphurnius a Priest (the sonne of Ponticus a Priest, saith Iocelin) and to his mother one Conche of Pannonia (Concessa saith Probus) sister to Saint Martin (cosin saith Iocelin:) hee was brought up under godly tutors, when Maximus reigned, first under his uncle Martin, afterward under Germanus Bishop of Auxerre in Burgoyne, from thence he came to Italy, and so to Rome, where for his grave carriage and singular learning, descending of noble race, he got the name of a Senator, Patricius. His first name, saith Flori∣legus was Nannus, and in his consecration hee was called Patricius; Sigebertus and Stanihurst write, that in his baptisme hee was called Suchat or Suchar; of Saint German, Magonius; and of Celestinus, Pa∣tricius; the like saith Beda in his Martyrologe. Celestinus then Bishop of Rome sent him together with Segetius a Priest, anno 432 after Palladius the Grecian,Segetius sent with Saint Pa∣trick. unto the Scots and I∣rish, to defend them from the Pelagian heresie; he with a wonder∣full fervency of spirit preached the Gospell unto the Irish nation, travailing in the vineyard of the Lord the space of thirty nine yeeres, converted them unto the Lord with his great learning, and sanctity of life. Whereupon among other miracles (the which he is said to have wrought) upon the top of an hill, like a second Elias, he pray∣ed and fasted forty dayes and nights, in a vision hee received of Christ the Gospell, and a staffe, (an Hermit gave him the staffe saith Iocelin.) Hee destroyed the prophane temples of false gods, hee erected monuments of piety, builded Churches, ordained Ministers, releeued the poore, redeemed captives, healed the sick, delivered the possessed, raised sixty dead persons, baptized twelve thousand, if all be true which Vincentius, Antonius, and Capgrave report of him.Saint Patricks works. Out of the treasure of his pure heart, many Authors affirme, that he wrot in Latine these bookes. De antiquitate Avalonica lib. 1 Itenerarium Confessionis lib. 1 Odoeporicon Hiberniae lib. 1 Historia Hiberniae ex Ruano lib 1 De tribus habitaculis lib. 1 De futura electorū vita lib. 1 Abiectoria quaedam 366 lib. 1 Sermones quoque lib. 1 Probus lib. 2. of his life men∣tioneth it.Ad Cereticum tyrannum epist. 1
Ad Avaloniae incolas epist. 1 Ad Hibernenses Ecclesias epist. plur. Ad suos Britannos epist. plur. The manuscript Legend of Ireland reporteth, that Saint Patrick in his Epistles wrote his owne life. The Antiquaries report, that in his conflicts with the sages of the Gentiles, this Apostle of the Irish wrought no lesse miracles then of old Moses under Pharaoh, or Peter under Nero, and that he endured many dipleasures. In the end after his death, hee was buried neere the City of Dune, but the yeere a∣mong the Historiographers is not agreed upon;S. Patrick buri∣ed in Downe. yet in remembrance of him this distichon was made. Hi tres in Duno tumulo tumulantur in uno, Brigida, Patricius, atque Columba pius. Saint Patrick died first, Brigida six yeeres after him, and Columba many yeeres after her, yet were all three buried in one grave. What Bale hath formerly written, I find he hath gathered out of Vincentius, Antoninus,Authors that wrote of Saint Pacrick. Capgrave, Leland, Gildas, Giraldus Cambrensis, Bostonus Buriensis, and Florilegus; and all that Iocelin hath at large written, and what Legenda Plumbea, and the booke of Houth report, to avoid prolixity, and to shunne fabulous conceits, I omit. Now to the Irish Chroniclers. They deliver, that in his captivity in Ireland being sold to Mil∣cho King of Vlster (saith Iocelin) to Milach (saith Stanihurst) to Cuul∣cu (saith Florilegus) to Macbuaine saith the Irish Anonymus,Ioc. in vita Pa∣tricis cap. 12. and to reconcile them all, I take it that Milcho was called Milcho Macbuaine: he kept swine six yeeres; no disgrace unto him, for Marcellus Bishop of Rome (he that will not beleeue other writers, will credit the Mar∣tyrologe of Sarum) by the commandement of Maximian the tyrant, kept swine many yeeres. When Patricks six yeeres were expired, one of the swine turned up a clod, under the which lay so much mony as paid his ransome. When he came the second time, he landed at Carlingford, and inquired after Milcho whose captive hee had beene, who would not giue eare to his doctrine, but immediately after his death,Milcho his daughters are babtized. Laigerius Mo∣narch of Ire∣land, withstan∣deth S. Patr. his two daughters of one name, Emeria were baptized. Laigeri∣us▪ (in Iocelin, Leogarius) Monarch of Ireland, the son of Neale hark∣ning unto Magicians and Sooth-sayers, gave commandement, (toge∣ther with his brother Corbre) unto the Country, for the banishing of Saint Patrick, but Dichu and Rius (two brethren and great Com∣manders under him) received the faith, and Conil brother to Laige∣rius, who also himselfe shortly after grew indifferent, winking at them that did receive it, so that his Queene and his yonger brother received the faith, and his two daughters. And of Laigerius he thus
prophecied: because thou hast alwaies withstood my doctrine, and ceased not above measure to persecute me, and hast above all disdained to beleeve in him that made all things, thou art the childe of death. And whereas of right, thou with the rest,Saint Pat. pro∣phecie of the Monarch. yea before all thy confede∣rates, oughtest presently to enter into everlasting torments; yet inso∣much as thou meekely commest unto me, craving pardon, and like King Achab, humblest thy selfe before my God, the Lord will not forthwith bring upon thee the evill which thou hast deserved; not∣withstanding there shall none of thy seed after thee sit upon thy seat, but shall serve thy yonger brother that beleeveth in my God, and his seed after him for ever. As this holy man travailed in preaching the Gospell,Mocho Bishop of Dune. he met with a young man whose name was Mochaa or Mocho, keeping swine, in whose physiognomie hee perceived towardnesse and sparkles of grace; he taught him, baptized him, trayned him up in holy Scrip∣ture, made him Deacon, Priest, and Bishop of Dune where he lyeth buried. Clonsillan and Kellestowne, some five miles west of Dublin, have him for their Patron, where under an high rocke runneth a Spring called S. Mochon his Well. Next he baptized one Benignus, called also Stephanus, so Probus writeth, with his father, mother,Benignus or Ste∣phanus, succes∣sour to Saint Patricke. A Nunne (saith Iocelin) was in love with him, sent for him to her bed, but the signe of the Crosse made all well. Erchus or Her∣kus a Bishop. & fa∣milie, who proved so good a member in the Church of God, that he succeeded S. Patricke in Armagh; this Benignus, saith Capgrave, lyeth buried in Glastenburie. Saint Patricke also received into the faith, one Erchas, the sonne of Dega, saith Iocelin, whom he also made a Bishop. The Martyrologe of Sarum calleth him Herkus. At that time, one Pheg a Poet, and (saith Probus) Duptachus an Irish rymer or Poet in Lastgerius his Court, desired baptisme, and afterward all the dayes of his life, converted his vaine rymes into Chrihian Poems, and did much good thereby among the common people. Saint Patricke had brought with him into Ireland out of Italie, one Mac Cartyn, of Irish birth, so I reade in the martyrologe of Sarum,Ioc. cap. 49.51.53.68.69. & seq. Mac Carly. Saint Pa. sisters. and three sisters of his owne, which proved very fruitfull. Lupita (who lived a Virgin, and lyeth buried at Armagh) Trigridia and Darercha. Tigridia had seventeene sonnes, and five daughters; the men became Priests, Monkes, and Bishops; the daughters were made Nunnes: the Bishops were called Brochadius, Brochanus, Mogeno∣chus, and Lumianus. Darerca the yongest sister had two Bishops to her sonnes, Melrioch and Munis: the martyrologe of Sarum recko∣neth her children thus, Mele, Melk, Muncse, Bishops, Riok, Finian and Bolke Abbots. Where I thinke there is some errour, that Melri∣och in Iocelin is Mele, and Ryok in the maytyrologe. Of Lumianus I reade, that he baptized a Lord of the country,Lumianus Bi∣shop of Ahtrum. cal∣led Fedlemus, and his sonne Forkernus, whose mother was a Britain, his dwelling was at Ahtrum. There Lumianus by their meanes buil∣ded a Church some twenty five yeeres before the founding of
Armagh, the which he tooke for his Bishops See, and ordered Forker∣nus to succeed him there. The possessions (saith mine Author) which were first given to this Church, afterward by the donations of other Princes, fell to belong to Armagh. The holy man Patricke laboured still in the vineyard of the Lord;Conallus Lord of Connaght. he baptized Conallus, alias Conill, Lord of Connaught, brother to Laigerius, and his familie, who gave Patricke a country called Dompnac. Patricke, and builded for himselfe a dwelling place called Raith-Artair. After seven yeeres, this Conill sent him to his brother Logan (Cogan saith the Booke of Houth) King of Leinster, whom hee baptized, together with Amolgath (whom I take to be the ancestour of the house of O Malaghlin) a great Lord of a country, and his seven sonnes, (Florilegus saith they were seven Kings.) After this, this ho∣ly man comming out of Meth, and having passed over the water at Finglas, went up to a hill some mile from the village Athcled, now called Dublin. When he had viewed the place and soile adjoyning, he blessed the same,Saint Patricks prophecie of Dublin. and is said to have prophecied thus; This village is now but small, it will be great, it will be inlarged with wealth and worship, neither will it leave increasing untill it bee advanced to the seate of the Kingdome. In a while after, he came to the village, where the inhabitants hea∣ring of the wonders which the Lord wrought by his hands,Dublin belee∣veth and is baptized. went out to meete him with much ioy, and beleeved by his preaching, and were baptized. My Author addeth that upon complaint made unto him, how that they were annoyed with brackish waters, which of necessitie they were driven to use, he walked about the village, turned up cloddes, digged the earth and found a Spring, which is now cal∣led Saint Patrickes Well. Saint Patricks Well. Morguus of Castleknoke.From this village Athcled, hee went to Castleknok, where one Murguus dwelled and commanded those places, who hearing of Pa∣tricks comming, refused to give him entertainement, but sent him word that he was asleepe, in which sleepe (as the storie saith) he died, of which accident the common saying ariseth, Thou sleepest Murguus sleepe, applyed to those that sleepe heavily, or are given to overmuch sleepe. From Castleknok, he bent his course towards Mounster, and came to King Engus,Engus and Da∣ris receive Saint Pat. alias Oengus Mac Nafroic, who received him ioyful∣ly, and brought him to his Palace at Cassill, saith Iocelin; where also one Daris a great Lord in that country, shewed him much kindenesse. When he had baptized the King, and many thousands with him, he came to Vrmiunnan now called Ormond,Vrmiunnan or Ormond. where in like sort they re∣ceived the faith, and the inhabitants in remembrance of him builded a Church, and dedicated the same to his name. From Mounster (where he preached seaven yeeres) hee tooke his iourney backe to Vlster,King Eochu and his daugh∣ter baptized. and came to King Eochu, whom he baptized, & his daughter
Cumia, whom he made a Nunne, and committed her to the charge of the Nunne Cecubris (in the Nunnery of Drumdukain) whom Pa∣tricke first vailed of all the women in Ireland.Cecubris the first Nunne in Ireland. Also he baptized Olca∣nus, who went into France to studie, and upon his returne, rected schooles in Ireland, and had many schollers, whereof a great num∣ber were afterwards Bishops, he himselfe towards his end, became a Bishop, and ended his dayes in sanctitie. When Saint Patricke had baptized a second Conallus (a petite King) and his brother Fergus, he prophecied of Fedlemus the sonne of Fergus,King Conallus and Fergus baptized. and of Columba the sonne of Fedlemus, what a holy man hee should prove, as after hee did, and was the founder of an hundred Monasteries. Saint Patricke for all this travaile sailed into Britaine for coadiutors and fellow-labourers in this worke,Saint Pat. in Britaine. where he opposed himselfe both in publike and private against the Pelagians and other heretickes which disturbed the peace of the Church,Pelagians. and brought with him thirty learned men, whom afterward he consecrated Bishops. So that to this day in Britaine, (as in Anglesey, Bristoll, Exeter, and other places) there are Churches built in remembrance of him. He also con∣verted the Isle of Man to the faith,Isle of Man. and there is a Church which also beareth his name, and left them one Germanus to bee their Bishop, after whose death hee ordained for that place, Conidrius, Ronillus and Machaldus. Vpon his returne into Ireland, hee met with sixe of his Disciples, of Irish birth, that had beene Students beyond Seas, whom in the end he made Bishops; Lugacius, Columbanus, Meldanus, Lugadius, Cassanus, and Cheranus. Then he made (saith Iocelin) a se∣cond iourney unto Athcled now called Dublin; upon his comming, (which was about twentie yeeres after their conversion) and found them all given to idolatrie, and withall, one Alpinus a King with his Queene, and his retinue,Eocchiad and Dublinia raised from death. lamenting the death of Eocchiad their sonne & heire, and the drowning of their sole daughter Dublinia. Pa∣tricke preached, the people beleeved, the King hearing of him ho∣ped to reape some comfort; to bee short, (saith mine Author) the dead are raised to life, and Athcled ever after in remembrance of the Kings daughter Dublinia, was called Dublin.Dublin whence so called▪ Saint Pat. man∣ner of teaching Saint Patrickes manner was, first to Catechize, secondly to Bap∣tize, lastly to minister the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. When with the aide of the country, he builded Churches, hee would not name them after any Saints name, but Domnach the Church of the Lord. And when he had procured a Church to be builded in a place called Achad Fobuit, and consecrated his Disciple Sennachus, alias Seachuallus Bishop there, the humble sute of Senachus unto him was, that the Church should not be called after him, as the manner was, (saith mine Author) in many places among the Irish people.Iocelin c. 12. The onely doctrine Patricke read and expounded unto the people, was the foure Evangelists, conferred with the old Testament. Hee is
reported to have given many blessings, and to have denounced many curses. He had many Disciples, Kertennus, Winnocus, Winwallocus, likewise saith Molanus, Elberus, Ibarus, Connedus, Secundinus, Asicus, Fiechus, Sennachus, Olcanus, with many others which he made Bi∣shops. I finde mention also of Riochus that kept his Bookes and Pa∣pers, and of Rodanus that kept his Cattell, that hee made them Bi∣shops, and the world made them Saints. Ireland is greatly beholding unto him, for it is recorded that hee went up to the top of the Mount Hely (I take it to be a hill in Ely, O Carrols country) where he made three petitions unto Almighty God for the people of Ireland that had received the faith.Saint Patricks three petitions for Ireland. Flor. histor. Anton Chron. part 2. tit. 11. cap. 18. First, that every one might have grace to repent, though it were at the last houre. Secondly, that they might not be utterly destroyed by Infidels. Lastly, that no Irish man should live till the day of Iudgement; Quia delebitur per orationem sancti Patricij septem annis ante judicium; for it shall be destroyed by meanes of Saint Patrickes prayers, seaven yeeres before the comming of Christ to iudgement. Probus maketh mention of other Pe∣titions, which for that I hold them fabulous, I will not rehearse. He procured (as it is written of him) seaven hundred Churches to bee builded in Ireland,Saint Patricks workes and la∣bour in Ireland Iocelin cap. 187. ordained five thousand Ministers, consecrated three hundred and fifty Bishops, successively, understand, in his time. Darius (the Booke of Houth calleth him Dares, in Probus Dair) a Noble man,Ioc. cap. 164. and 198. affecting Patricke, and seeing him beare low saile, and shrowding himselfe with all humilitie in Vlster, drew him to dwell at Drumsailech, now called Armagh, and having used meanes there for the building of a Church, Patricke went to Rome, procured all confirmations necessary to his purpose, arrived againe in Ireland, and being of the age of 122. yeeres, ended his life in the time that Aureli∣us Ambrosius raigned in Britaine, and Forthkerrus was Monarch of Ireland, Brigida and Ethembria who then were accounted two holy women, shrowded him to his grave, when Thassach a Bishop had ministred the Sacrament. Probus writeth that the Britaines came with great forces,Strife for Saint Patricks body. attempting at severall times to fetch away his corps, and that the men of Vlster did withstand them. As for the purgatorie that is fathered upon him, I must referre the reader to the yeere of grace, 850. where he shall finde a second Patricke founder thereof. The life of Saint Brigide.In our Patricks time flourished many good Christians, renowned at this day, and as an Antiquarie and collector of antiquities, I desire the christian reader to accept of them as I finde them. And I will be∣ginne with Brigida that gave Saint Patricke his winding sheete, shee was borne (as Iohn Clyn writeth) anno 439. in Fochart not farre from Dondalke,Bernard in vita Malachiae. as Bernard deliuereth, she was the base daughter of one Duptacus, haply Laigerius his rymer before spoken of) a Noble man (saith Bale of the North parts, a Captaine of Leinster, saith the Book of Houth. Capgrave writeth, that her mother in wantonnesse having
conceived, and her belly being espied to be up, Duptacus his wife cau∣sed her to be turned out of doores; Duptacus to avoid the ialousie and disquietnesse of his wife, delivered her to a Poet or Bard, (a Ma∣gician saith Bale) who kept both Mother and Daughter, and trayned her up in such learning as he had skill in. Shee proved so singularly learned, and was in such account among all men, that a Synode of Bishops assembled by Dublin, used her advice in weightie causes,A Synode by Dublin. as I reade in the Booke of Houth. She became a Nunne, and wrought but one miracle, (saith Bale) that is, shee used meanes to purge a Bi∣shop, one Bronus or Bruno from fornication, when the fact was ma∣nifestly proved against him. In the authenticke manuscript Legend of Ireland, I finde that she kept most in Leinster, and builded a Cell for her abode under a goodly faire Oke, which afterwards grew to be a Monasterie of Virgins, called Cyll-dara, in Latine, Cella Quer∣cus, the Cell of the Oke, now Kildare, and saith mine Author,Kildare: ibique maxima civitas postea in honore beatissimae Brigidaecrevit, quae est ho∣die metropolis Laginensium. The first Bishop by her meanes was Con∣lianus, alias Conlaidus. Stanihurst reckoneth the succession of the See in this sort. Lony. Ivor. Conlie. Donatus. David. Magnus. Richard. Iohn. Symon. Nicolas. Walter. Richard. Thomas. Robart. Boniface. Madogg. William:Bishops of Kil∣dare. Galfride. Richard. Iames. Wale. Barret. Edmund Lane. Who flourished in the yeere, 1518. So farre Master Stanihurst: Hector Boetius putteth us in remembrance of the honour given her by Scots, Pictes, Irish and English nations,Scot. hist. lib. 9▪ and how that many Churches beare her name. The superstitious Irish in processe of time, found out a Bell called Clogg Brietta, Brigids Bell, whereunto, to de∣ceive the simple people, they attribute great vertue and holinesse, the which together with other toyes they carried about, not onely in Ireland, but also in England, and were by Act of Parliament in En∣gland, banished the land in Henry the fifts time. Cambrensis repor∣teth that the harmonie of the foure Evangelists (the worke of Saint Ierome) was caused by Brigid (most of it) to be written in letters of gold, and was as curious a worke (saith he) as ever I saw, and called Brigids Booke, the which was kept as a monument (saith Stanihurst) at Kildare. She deceased about the yeere 510. (another saith,Brigides death. anno 548.) and about the yeere 524. she was translated from the Hebrides into Dune,
and resteth by Saint Patrickes side, as formerly hath beene declared in his life. Ireland hath given her this Epitaph. Flos patriae, pietatis amans, virtutis alumna, Sidus Hibernorum, Brigida virgo fuit. In her Legend I finde mention of Ercus, a Bishop, the disciple of Saint Patricke, borne in Mounster, also of Saint Ruanus a Bishop, Saint Numidus, Saint Praecipuus, Saint Daria a Virgin, Saint Dar∣lugdach called a Virgin, and yet had a daughter that was baptized in the presence of Brigide.Saint Darlu∣dach. This Darlugdach was the second Nunne, and succeeded Brigide in Kildare, whose remembrance is celebrated the same day with her.Illand King of Leinster. Illand King of Leinster gave Brigide great ho∣nour, of him I read in her Legend, that hee was a most worthy Prince, and fortunate in all his affaires. Illand Rex Lageniae qui tri∣ginta bella in Hibernia vicit, octo certamina in Britannia, occidit En∣gusium regem Momoniae cum Ethna uxore, quos Patricius baptizavit: Illand King of Leinster, who wonne thirty battailes in Ireland, and eight combats in Britaine, slue Engusus King of Mounster, and Ethna his wife, whom Patricke had baptized. The life of Cae∣lius Sedulius.About this time lived Caelius Sedulius, whom Damianus à Goes, a Knight of Portingall challenged for a Spaniard. Bale writeth hee was a Scot, and Stanihurst that he was borne in Ireland. I will first lay downe what Bale hath, next what Stanihurst reporteth. Caelius Sedulius (saith Bale) by nation a Scot. by calling a Priest,Iohannes Bale Script. Brit. cent. 14. a man tray∣ned up in learning from his youth, cleaved as a diligent scholler unto Hildebert, the most learned Archbishop of Scots, as Tritemius delive∣reth. After the decease of his master, being desirous of farther know∣ledge, he tooke a painefull voyage in hand, travailed throughout Spain, France, Italie, Greece and Asia; last of all, after he had read in Achaia most learned lectures, to the great profit of many, hee came backe to Rome, where with great labour he distributed most abundantly in like sort the treasure of singular learning. Hee was a man exercised in holy Scripture, of a singular wit, excellently well seene in all manner of se∣cular literature, passing both for verse and prose, so that Gelasius, Bi∣shop of Rome, in the decrees, dist. 15. calleth him reverend Sedulius, and gave his workes no meane commendation. Patrius the disciple of Gregorius Magnus, and Remigius Antisiodorensis, in his commenta∣ry upon him of old have published his fame and renowne. Sedulius both in verse and prose hath published many workes, whereof in Boston of Burie, and Tritemius, I onely found these that follow. Vnto Mace∣donius the Priest, a singular worke, which he intituled The workes of Caelius Sedulius.Carmen paschale—lib. 4 Pascales quicun{que} dapes conviva requiris▪ Elegia vel exhorta∣torium ad fideles lib. 1 Cantemus socij Dom. cantemus honorem.
De signis & virtutibus—lib. 1 Domino meo charissimo. Gesta et miracula Christi—lib. 4 Expulerat quondam, &c: Superutroque testamento—lib. 2   In Psalmos Dividicos —lib. 1   Collectanea in Paulum—lib. 14 Antequam Apostolica verba. In Paulum ad Romanos—lib. 1 Sciendum est quod hoc. Ad Corinthios—lib. 2 Quod nomen suum proponit. Ad Galatas —lib. 1 Hoc est non ab humana▪ Ad Ephesios—lib. 1 Refere scriptura testante. Ad Philippenses—lib. 1 Metropoli Macedoniae cum. Ad Colossenses—lib. 1 Hac vice Apostolatus autor. Ad Thessalonicenses—lib. 2 Quod non dicit Apostolus. Ad Timotheum —lib. 2 Non secundum praesumptionem. Ad Titum Discipulum -lib. 1 Hanc epistolam scribit de Ad Philemonem —lib. 1 In carcere vel in catenis. Ad Hebraeos —lib. 1 Quoniam apud Haebraeorum. De factis Christi prosaice lib. 2   Ad Caesarem Theodosiū lib. 1 Romulidum ductor Clariss. Epist. ad diversos—lib. 1 Sedulius Scotigena dilect. In editionem Donati—lib. 1   In Prisciani volumen —lib. 1   Carmina diversi generis lib. 1   He published also cer∣taine Hymnes which the Church useth. 1 A solis ortus cardine Ad usque terrae limitem Christum canamus principem, &c. Hostis Herodes impie Christum venisse quid times? &c. 2 A solis ortus cardine Ad usque terrae limitem Christum canamus principem, &c. Hostis Herodes impie Christum venisse quid times? &c. He flourished in the yeere after the Incarnation, 450. under Theodo∣sius Iunior the Emperour, what time Fergusius the second raigned in Scotland after his miserable exile by the Romanes. Of this Author, Si∣gebertus and Bostonus write more. So farre Bale. Stanihurst pleadeth for Ireland, and writeth:R. Stan. prefa. ad lib. 1. de rb. Hib. Sedulius was not only of Irish birth, but also the light of all Ireland, neither will we suffer any longer so excellent a man out of his native soile contrary to all right to exile or wander, but he is rather to be restored to his former inheritance, as it were with a new solemnity of birth.Append. ad cap. 17· In another place hee seemeth to qualifie the matter (having already chalenged Damianus a Goes of iniurie) and to reconcile the dissonance of varying writers, that the Scottish is taken for the Irish, and the Irish for the Scottish; and to satisfie the reader, noteth the confusion, how that all the commenta∣ries of Sedulius upon the Epistles of Paul beginne, Sedulij Scoti Hiber∣nensis, &c. the Commentarie of Sedulius the Scot of Ireland. And to shut up this challenge of all sides, I finde that there was a second Se∣dulius, a man of no lesse fame and learning, and hee is said to bee a
Scottish man, therefore let Ireland being more antient then Scotland, take the first, and Scotland the last. The life of Fridelinus Via∣tor Io. Bale script. Britanic cent. 14.In the like sort (excepting the challenge) standeth Fridelinus Via∣tor, so called by reason of his great travaile; his stile is, Scotorum Hi∣bernicorum regis olim filius, the sonne sometime of the King of the Scots in Ireland, whom I couch among them of Irish birth, because of the ancient stile and distinction often used by Buchanan, Scoti Al∣banenses, and Scoti Hibernenses, the first he challengeth for Scotland, the second he referreth to Ireland, and therefore I accept of him as granted. He was a Kings sonne of Ireland, excellently studied in Phi∣losophie, earnestly addicted to the ecclesiasticall course of life, and to the end he might plant religion, and spreade abroad christianitie, enterprised a voyage farre from his native soile: This holy man first of all taught here and there throughout France, he came to Poi∣tiers, and became father of the Monkes of Saint Hilarie, and with the aide of King Clodovarus, erected a stately Monasterie, the like he did at Mosella in Flanders, upon the top of the mount Vosagius, at Ar∣gentine, Curia Rhetiorum, and elsewhere throughout Burgun∣die. Lastly, he came to Angia Seckingensis upon the Rhene, to the end he might there also build a Cell; after many godly Sermons and learned Interpretations, he is said to have written a Booke of exhor∣tations unto the sacred Virgins. He flourished in the yeere 495. and resteth in the Monasterie of Seckinge before spoken of. Saint Fekin.Ireland remembreth the feast of Saint Fekin, that hee was of the Kings bloud, and an Abbot, cured many of the flixe or fluxe, and dy∣ed thereof himselfe. The life of Saint ModwenMany things are written of Saint Modwen, (whom the Britaines call Mawdwen) the daughter of Naughtheus the Irish King, who heard Saint Patricke preach, and of her companions Orbila, Luge, Edith, Athea, Lazara, Sith (whom the Irish call Osith) Osmanna, and of Brigid spoken of before, whereof some began with Patricke, and ended with him, some began with him, and lived many yeeres after, (as Capgrave writeth in the life of Modwen) to the time of the Bishop Collumkill, (otherwise called Colme and Columba) and the Eremite, Abbot, or Bishop Kevin. Saint Sith the Virgin.Saint Modwen was a Nunne, lived 130. yeeres. The Irish, Scots, and English (in which countries she had travailed) strove for her corps, at length Columkill the Bishop gave sentence for England, where shee resteth at Andreisey▪ Bale writeth how that one Galfride, Abbot of Burton upon Trent, in the time of King Iohn, wrote the life and memorable acts of this Irish Virgin Modwen, unto the posterity, with great applause. Capgrave writeth the life of Saint Sith, (otherwise called Osith) that was brought up under Modwen, that she was a Kings daugh∣ter, and borne in England: Leppeloo the Carthusian, and other
forraigne Writers say little of her, saving that the Danes (being Hea∣thens) cut off her head, and that shee tooke her head in her armes, carried it uprightly three furlongs off, knockt at the Church doore, (being lockt) with her bloudy hands, and there fell downe.The reader is not bound to beleeve this. The Martyrologe of Sarum confoundeth Dorothy, and Saint Sith thus; the 15. of Ianuarie the feast of Saint Dorothie otherwise called Saint Sith, is kept in Ireland, who refused marriage, fled into a Monasterie, where the devill appeared unto her, and there mine Author left her. Of Osmanna the Virgin I finde little,Osmanna the Virgin. saving what Capgrave repor∣teth, that she was of the bloud royall in Ireland, and having infidels to her parents, fled into France, dwelled upon the banke of Loire, the river of Lions, and there in peace ended her dayes. I read that about this time one Tathe, the sonne of an Irish King,Tathe the Monke forsooke his fathers possessions, went to the Diocesse of Landaffe in Wales, and became a Monke, builded a Monasterie, and there left his bones. Gualterus Calenius, Archdeacon of Oxford; Caxton and others doe write, that Aurelius Ambrosius,The stones of Salisbury sent for into Ire∣land. after his valiant exploits and noble victories, went to a Monasterie neere Cair-caredoch, now cal∣led Salisburie, where through the treason of Hengist, (which the Bri∣taines call Toill y Killill Hirion, the treason of the long knives) the No∣bles and Princes of Britaine were slaine and buried, called his Coun∣cell, and demanded what monument were meete to be made there in remembrance of so many Nobles of the land there resting in the dust of the earth. Carpenters, Masons, Carvers, Ingravers, and Tombe-makers, being out of all places sent for, came thither, delivered their opinions, but concluded nothing. Then stepped forth a Bishop, which said; O King, if it may stand with your pleasure, there is one Merlin of Worcester, a Prophet, a searcher of Antiquities, a man of rare gifts, I wish his opinion in the matter. Merlin came, and being advised, said as followeth. Most Noble King, upon occasion offe∣red, I went lately into Ireland, and having ended my businesse, I was inquisitive of antiquities, and sight of monuments, where a∣mong other things, being brought to a mountaine of Kildare, I saw so rare a sight, in so rude a country, as might bee seene; there was a round row of huge stones, the which none of this age had so framed, neither could be, unlesse Art had mastered the common skill of man; send for them, and set them vp as they are there cou∣ched, and they will bee a monument whilst the world standeth. Hereat the King smiled and said; how shall we convey so great stones into Britaine, from so farre a countrey, and to what end? as though Britaine yeelded not as good stones to all purposes? Merlin replied, be not displeased O King, there is a hid mystery in those stones, they are medicinable, and as I was given to understand in Ireland, the Gyants of old dwelling in that land, procured them from the farthest
part of Affricke, and pitched them there, in them they bathed them∣selves, and were rid of their infirmities. The Britaines hearing this, were perswaded to send for them, the King appointed his brother Vter-Pendragon, with Merlin, and fifteene thousand men to effect the businesse. In a short time, they arrived in Ireland. Gillomer King of Leinster,Gillomer, King of Leinster. raised an Armie to resist them, and reviled the Britaines, saying, what fooles and asses are you? are the Irish better then the British stones? and turning himselfe to his Armie, said, come on, quit your selves like men, keepe your monuments, and defend your coun∣try. Vter-Pendragon seeing this, animated his company, they met, and manfully encountred in the end; Gillomer fled, and the Irish were discomfited. Vter-Pendragon marched on, they came by Mer∣lins direction to the place, and beholding the hugenesse of the stones, they wondred, yet they joyed that they had found them. To worke they went, some with Ropes, some with Wythes, some with Lad∣ders, and carried them away, brought them to Britaine, and pitched them in the Plaine of Salisburie, which place is now called Stone∣henge.Stonehenge. Beside this, there are divers monuments of Gyants in Ireland, as at Dundalke, Louth, Ardee, and on the hilles not farre from the Naas: the like Saxo Grammaticus reporteth of the Danes,In praefatione ad hist. Dan. a nation famous for Gyants, and mighty men, and this, saith he, the great and huge stones laid of old upon Caves and Tombes of the dead, doe declare. Io. Harding.About this time, Passent the sonne of Vortiger that fled into Ger∣many for aide, arrived in the North parts, Aurelius Ambrosius met him, and put him to flight; Passent came into Ireland, delivered his griefe unto Gillomer King of Leinster, craved him to extend his Princely favour toward him; Gillomer on the other side complained of the wrong done him by Vter-Pendragon and the Britaines, name∣ly, how they had slaine his subiects, wasted his country, and carried away his rare monuments, concluding that hee was willing of him∣selfe to be revenged of them, much more finding this opportunitie. Caxton saith, he came with fifteene thousand Irish to aide Passent a∣gainst the Britaines; the Armie was great, for with Passent came Ger∣mans, Irish and Saxons, and arrived at Menevia (now called Saint Davids) at which time Aurelius Ambrosius being sicke of poyson, (by the procurement of Passent) of which he died, Vter-Pendragon was appointed Generall of the field, met with the invaders, fought a bloudy battaile (where many fell on both sides) and in the end, slue Passent and Gillomer,Gillomer, King of Leinster, slaine at Saint Davids in Wales. and ouerthrew the Germans, Irish, and Saxons, and was crowned King of England. I doe finde in Antiquaries, together with Florilegus, Fabian, Cax∣ton, Holinshed, and Fleminge, (men of great iudgement) that the Pictes and Scots in the dayes of King Arthur (who succeeded his fa∣ther Vter-Pendragon) ioyned with the Saxons, and drew to their
aide, Gillomer, second of that name, King of Ireland, so that Arthur sent for Howell his sisters sonne, King of little Britaine in France, who came with fifteene thousand fighting men, and ioyning forces with Arthur, foyled the Pictes, Scots, and Saxons, vanquished the Irish King, and chaced him into Ireland, and the yeere following, viz. five hundred twenty and five, in revenge of the former aide, hee came into Ireland, offered King Gillomer battaile,Anno Dom. 25. hee then being Monarch of Ireland (as Caxton and the book of Houth record) assem∣bled the Princes and Nobles of the land; and it is said that King An∣guish came to the field with five thousand horse,Homage for Ireland. but Arthur constrai∣ned them to yeeld, and to acknowledge by doing their fealtie, to hold the Realme of Ireland of him. Whereof Harding saith, The somner next Arthur went to Ireland, With battaile sore forefoughten y conquered, And of the King, had homage of that land To hold of him, so was he of him feared; And also gate (as Chronicles have us lered) Denmarke, Friseland, Gtland and Norwey, Iseland, Groenland, the Isle of Man and Orkney. The booke of Houth recordeth, that anno Dom. 519. Arthur sum∣moned to a speciall feast of solemnitie of the round Table, Gillomer the Monarch of Ireland, and King Anguish, with the Princes and No∣bles of the land, where they continued during the whole time of the solemnitie. In which triumph it is recorded that Garret, King of Or∣keney, sonne to King Lotho, and nephew to Arthur, being one of King Arthurs Knights, together with his two brethren, performed most valiant exploits, encountred with Anguish, King of Ireland, Goranus King of Scotland, Cador, Duke of Cornewall, and with o∣ther Princes, and wanne great honour. This Anguish claimed tri∣bute from Marke, King of Cornewall, that formerly was wonne by combate,Marogh, one of K. Arthurs Knights▪ and sent Morogh (whom Caxton calleth Marhaus) the Queene of Leinsters brother, who was also one of King Arthurs Knights, to demand it; he was a valiant Gentleman, often tryed, and ever quitted himselfe with honour. The Frenchmen calleth him Le Morhoult d'Ireland;Rich. Robinson in his bookes of Armes and Archerie. and a Citizen of London thus blazoneth his Armes. In silver shield, on fesse of pee∣ces five throughout the same, He bare a Lyon Rampant red and arme greene, whose name Might seeme to signifie in truth, each mighty enterprise, A prey most fit for his courage, as is the Irish guise.
Marke, King of Cornewall denieth the tribute, offereth the com∣bate, and Sir Tristram undertaketh it for him. Morogh for himselfe pleaded that he was to encounter with none, unlesse he were a King or Queene, a Prince or Princesse sonne; the circumstances being con∣sidered and agreed upon, the combatants meete, and fiercly fight, the battaile was a long time doubtfull; in the end, Sir Tristram gave Sir Morogh with his sword, a sore blow, that a piece of the edge stucke in his scull, whereupon the combate ended, Morogh returned into Ireland, and shortly after died of the wound. This doth Caxton and the booke of Houth deliver at large.Caxton, and the booke of Houth. But I may not end thus with Sir Tristram, he also was sore wounded with a Speare, whose head was venomed, and could not be cured untill that by counsaile he repaired to the country where the venome had beene confected. Whereupon he came to Ireland, and to King Anguish his Court, and having great skill upon the Harpe, he recreated himselfe, delighted the house, and fell in loue with La Bell Isod the Kings daughter,Sir Tristram, & La Bell Isod. and she with him. In processe of time the Queene had learned that he had given her bro∣ther Morogh his deaths wound, and comparing the piece of the swords edge which was taken out of the skull, with his sword, found them to agree, and banished him the land. Not long after upon con∣ference had with Marke, King of Cornewall, of marriage, and com∣mending the beautie and vertues of La Bel Isod spoken of before, hee commeth to Ireland to intreate of marriage betweene King Marke and her. And having effected his purpose, taketh her with him to Cornewall,Marke, King of Cornewall married La Bell Isod. Iealousie. where Marke espoused her with great ioy and solemnity; but the old secret love betweene Tristram and her, had taken such impression in both, and so inflamed their hearts, that it could not easi∣ly be quenched, so that in processe of time, Marke espied it, and in his furious jealousie, slue him as he played upon the Harpe to recreate La Bel Isod; and thus as his love began with the Harpe, so it ended at the Harpe; it is recorded that Isod came to his grave and swouned. She was (saith mine Author) so faire a woman, that hardly who so beheld her, could not chuse but be enamoured with her. In Dublin upon the wall of the Citie, is a Castle called Isods towre, and not farre from Dublin, a Chappell with a Village named Chappell-Isod: the originall cause of the name I doe not finde, but it is coniectured, that her father King Anguish, that doted on her, builded them in remem∣brance of her, the one for her recreation, and the other for the good of her soule. The life of Congellus a Britaine.About the time that King Arthur raigned, lived many famous men of Irish birth, renowned for their great learning and sanctitie, and commended by divers Antiquaries, both at home and abroad to the posteritie. But before I come to speake of them, I must first make mention of Congellus a Britaine by birth, who builded the Monaste∣rie of Bangor, not farre from West-Chester, which was called the
Colledge of Christian Philosophers, and became the first Abbot thereof himselfe, in the dayes of King Arthur, anno Dom. 530. I make mention of him, because Bernard in the life of Malachias, repor∣teth this Colledge or Abbey which he built, to have beene the head or principall Abbey of all the Monasteries in Europe, the seminarie or bee-hive of many thousands of Monkes, after the Apostolike man∣ner, getting their living with the sweate of their browes, and the la∣bour of their owne hands. And the rather for that he had to his Dis∣ciples of Irish birth, Columbanus that travailed France, Germanie, and Italie, Breudan that furnished Ireland and Scotland with holy men, with Luanus and others, of whom I shall have occasion to speak in their places. This Congellus also (Bernard is mine Author) founded the Abbey of Benchor, alias Bangor, here in Vlster,Bangor in Vlster▪ where many sin∣gular learned men of Irish birth were trayned up, yea Britaines, Sax∣ons, and Scots also, and dispersed themselves farre and nigh, (as here∣after shall more plainely appeare) into forraigne countries, converted and confirmed thousands in the true faith. The which Abbey of Ben∣chor, was afterward destroyed by Pyrates, and nine hundred Monks slaine in one day, and so continued waste unto the time of Malachias Bishop of Armach, whereof I will speake hereafter. Yet in an ancient manuscript Legend of Ireland, I finde that this Congellus the Abbot was borne in Dail Naraid in Vlster,Congellus sup∣posed to be Irish. of honou∣rable Parents, and upon some displeasure conceived, forsooke his native soile, came to Mounster to Saint Fintan Abbot of Cluoyn Ednech at the foote of Mons Blandina, where he was ioyfully recei∣ved, who after long instruction, through the counsaile of Fintan, re∣turned to his native soile, and entred the Monasterie of Saint Kiaran in Cluayn Mac Noyse, where Bishop Lugidus gave him orders; and that in a while after, he founded the famous Abbey of Benchor in Vlster, in the country called Altitudo ultorum,Altitudo Vlto∣rum, now cal∣led the Arde to the East sea (as I reade in the life Mocoemog) containing three thousand Monkes, and that seven yeeres after, hee went into Britaine, and founded there a Monasterie that swarmed with Monkes, as formerly in part is delive∣red, whither out of all places by sea and land, they flocked unto him, for the same of learning which there was professed. He, when hee had setled his affaires there, returned into Ireland, and now resteth at his monasterie of Benchor. The fame of both Monasteries or Colledges of Christian Philosophers and famous men thither frequenting, and entercousing with domesticall and forraigne students, mee thinkes, should reconcile Britaine and Ireland now being in one, and breed an agreement among Antiquaries. Brendan, among others, was famous at this time, borne in Con∣naght, brought up under Hercus a Bishop,Brendans life. and directed by Barintus a Monke, he was excellently seene in the liberall sciences, and travai∣led into Britaine to the Abbey of Bangor, where hee learned the
monasticall rules of Congellus, from thence he went to Llancarvan and builded a Monasterie, became the father of three thousand Monkes that got their living with the labour of their hands, and sweate of their browes, left to oversee them Machutus and Molochus, travailed over Ireland and Scotland with other countries; after seven yeeres peregrination, he returned to Ireland, and became Bishop of Kerry, (of old called Kiaragi, but now Ardfertensis) where he ended his dayes, and lyeth buried at Cluenarca, otherwise called Luarcha. Yet in the life of Ruadanus, I finde hee was buried at Cluanferta. Other things that Capgrave, the martyrologe, and Bale have, I omit. When Saint Brendan was olde, Saint Fynbarry was a childe, hee is now the Patrone of the Cathedrall Church of Corke;Saint Fynbarry. his Legend runneth thus: There was a certaine King in Ireland, called Tegerna∣tus, who had to his handmaid, a very beautifull Damosell; this King gave charge throughout his dominion, that none should be so bold as to touch her, for it was supposed he kept her for his owne tooth. Yet (saith the Legend) one of his souldiers, whose name was Amor∣gen, (a blacke Smith) got her with childe, the which being brought to light, and the time of her travaile nigh approaching, Tegernatus commanded that Amorgen the father, the faire harlot the mother, (with her great bellie) should bee cast into the fire, and burned to ashes. But (saith the Legend) they were all miraculously deliuered, and the childe safely brought into the world. At his baptisme he was named Loanus, but in a while after, three religious men that had the charge of him (by reason of the beautie of his white lockes, and gra∣tious aspect) called him in Irish, Fuenbarrah, whom now wee call Fynbarry. He was brought up under Bishop Torpereus, the disciple of Gregorie, Bishop of Rome, and was conversant with Faturus, (another Legend calleth him Fyachna) a King in Ireland, who did alot him a certaine portion of land in his country. Bishop Torpereus gave him orders, after which he went (saith the Legend) into Alba∣nia now called Scotland, did much good there, and went from thence to Rome, and was consecrated Bishop in the time of Gregorie the first, then he returned to Ireland,Lee lu. landed on the South side of the river Lee, where one Edo a Noble man gave him a parcell of ground, where (with the aide of many good men) he built the old Citie of Corke, and the Cathedrall Church, annexing thereto a faire Church yard, wherein now standeth a watch Towre, builded by the Danes. The Legend speaketh of a priviledge granted to that Church-yard, which I take to have beene brought in through the covetousnesse of the Priests: That what faithfull soever being penitent, shall bee buried there, shall not after this life, feele the torments of hell; as if every faithfull penitent Christian were not freed from hell, wheresoever he be buried. But let us proceed: Torpereus Bishop of Cloan his Schoole∣master,
was the first man that was buried in that Church-yard. After this, Finbarry went to Calangus a reverend man, then Abbot of Clo∣ane, and concluded betweene themselves, that in the feare of God, they would both be buried in one place, and so indeed it fell out, for there Finbarry fell sicke, received the Sacrament at the hands of Ca∣langus, ended his dayes, and was brought to the Church-yard of old Corke, and there interred; shortly after, followed Calangus, and there Bishop Torperus the first Bishop of Cloane, Finbarry the first Bishop of Corke, and Calangus the first Abbot of Cloane, keepe to∣gether in the dust of the earth, waiting for the resurrection at the last day. The fabulous circumstances of the Legend I leave to old Wives and long winters nights; yet to satisfie the reader that I met with the Originall, I will lay down part of the Latine rithmes sung yeerely on his day, being the 25. of September, not worthy of translation into English, and here they follow. Infantis clari matremque patremque ligatumEx officio Sancti Finbarri. Ambo Rex quondam, flammis praeceperat uri; Interea mirum bellum gessere elementa, Ignis edax stupuit, non audens mandere ligna. Hic nondum genitus jam matris ventre moratus, O nova res! miris cepit clamare loquelis, Obstupuit rex, &c. Ad Christi verbum ducentes tres seniores Infantem secum nitidum, vultuque decorum, Dogmata ut sacra cunabulo disceret evo Contigit ut nimio, solis fervore sitiret; Tunc senibus quidam praeceperat ire ministrum Vt potum puero cerva deduceret almo Statim cerva petens vitulum lac fudit abundè Et potum, &c. Rex quondam retinens plenam turpedine prolem Luminis expertem natum, mutamque puellam Praeclarum Christi famulum iam rogitavit Vt natos miseros ditaret munere caro Illico respexit caecus, & muta locuta Ad natum regis caecum, mutamque puellam Fynbarry precibus salvavit conditor almus▪ Sanctus Fynbarrus quondam cum rege sedebat, Cumque salutabant laeti sese, vice versa, Audierant fletum tristem, magnumque lamentum: At rex confestim turbatus, heu mea, dixit, Regalis conjux nunc mortem gustat amaram. Tunc dixit Christi famulus, depone merorem, Namque potest dominus vitam donare defunctis.
Fynbarry precibus tunc foemina viva resurgit. Fynbarrus residens Rex atque sub arboris umbra: Tunc placuit Regi miracula cernere quaedam Auxiliante Deo Fynbarrus quae faciebat; Interea corylus gignebat tempore veris Maturos fructus, valdè largèque cadebant. Miratur corylum vernalem gignere fructum. With many such strange things with which I will no longer trouble the reader, nor keepe him from that which followeth. Now commeth in the confused name of Colme, Columba, Colum∣banus, Columkillus, and Colmannus; who all lived at one time, about the dayes of King Arthure, and were all of Irish birth, but are great∣ly mistaken by the Antiquaries. Columbanus.The first called Columbanus by Adamannus and Capgrave, in the life of Columba, was, as they write, Episcopus Laginensis, a Bishop of Leinster, but the Diocesse of which he was Bishop, I finde not na∣med. Columba.The second by Beda (whom, for authority and antiquitie, I reve∣rence) is called Columbanus presbiter & Abbas, Priest and Abbot, whom Capgraue calleth Columba, borne of Noble Parentage in Ire∣land. Adamannus who wrote his life, saith, his father hight Feidli∣myd, the sonne of Fergus, his mother Ethnea, and that the second yeere after the bloudie battaile of Cule-Dreibne, he came to Britaine in the time of Gildas sapiens,Battaile of Cule-Dreibne. and converted the Pictes. But before his departure out of Ireland, he founded a Monasterie (saith Beda) à copia roborum, in the Scottish tongue called Dearmagh. Capgrave termeth it Roboretum, the grove of Okes. In Britaine (saith Beda) he builded a Monasterie in the Iland called Hu, (Capgrave calleth it Iona) where he lyeth buried, ending his dayes at the age of 77. yeeres, whose death Aidanus King of Scots greatly lamented. Beda reporteth that some wrote of him, which work came not to his hands, and that in the observation of Easter he followed no other direction, then hee found in holy Scripture. Here (gentle reader) two scruples are to be removed from among our Irish Antiquaries; the first Beda dissolveth, namely that of him the name of Columkilli came in;Beda Ang▪ hist. lib. 5. cap. 10. Columba, now a dayes (saith he) of some men compounding Cella and Columba, is called Columcelli, and in Capgrave we reade Columkillius. The second scru∣ple is, where Beda writeth that he was buried in the Isle Hu, the An∣tiquaries of Ireland record his funerall to have beene at Downe, (as formerly I have written) in one Tombe with Patricke and Brigide; I hold both may be true, namely that he was buried in the Isle before spoken of, and being thence translated into Downe in Ireland, (as Brigide was before) now resteth therein one grave with Patricke and her.
The third Columbanus, otherwise called Columba, of Irish birth,3 Columba. was a most famous man of that time for learning and vertue, eterni∣zed in writing by Ionas an Abbot his disciple, also by Capgrave, Bale, Surius, Baronius, Lippeloo and Stanihurst. In his youth he was migh∣tily tempted with the feminine sex, nihil tam sanctum religione, (saith mine Author) amque custodia clausum, quod penetrare libido nequeat. He forsooke his native soile, went to Congellus, Abbot of Bangor, continued there many yeeres, and having formerly taken with him twelve of his country men, called twelve followers, hee went into France, and made them Cabanes, after the Irish manner, in stead of Monasteries. Many fabulous things are reported of Wolves, Beares, and Fowles of the ayre, that they had no power over him. When he had continued together with his followers, twenty yeeres in one place, he was banished thence, and being desirous to returne to Ire∣land, Clotarius sonne to Chilpericke staid him, yet he tooke his course into Italie, where Agilulphus King of Lombardie received him most honourably, and in Italie hee died, saith Beda in his Martyrologe, though Capgrave write it was in Almaine,Io. Capgrave. whose report of him I may not omit. He builded (saith he) certaine famous Monasteries in Almaine, into the which, (as it is said) they admit onely Irish men unto this day. He wrote (saith Lippeloo) a booke against the Arians. Bale reckoneth his other workes that he published. In psalterium commentar▪ lib. 1. Collationes ad Monachos lib. 1: De moribus monachorum metrice lib. 1. Haec praecepta legat. Epistolas ad Commilitones lib. 1. Monasteriorum methodos lib. 1. Adversus Theodoricum regem adulterum lib. 1 This Columbanus had many learned men of Irish birth,Columbanus his Irish disciples▪ Deicolus. Gallus. brought up under him. The Martyrologe of Sarum remembreth one Deico∣lus an Abbot. Capgrave and Walafridus Strabo commend one Gallus, whom Columbanus left behinde him in Almaine. And when Gunzo Duke of Suevia would have made him Bishop of Constance, he pre∣ferred one Iohn his Deacon and disciple, to the roomth, and kept the desert himselfe. Surius writeth, Italie glorieth of Columbanus, Almaine of Gallus, and Flanders of Kilianus. Hee wrote, as Bale re∣membreth, In electione Iohannis Orat. 1. Sempiternus & inaestimabilis Deus. Gubernandae ecclesiae formam lib. 1 Ionas likewise his disciple,Ionas a Monke is by Tritemius commended and recko∣ned among the great learned men of Ireland, who at the request of
certaine brethren, penned for the good of posteritie. Vitam Abbatis Columbani lib. 1 All are found among Be∣da his workes. Vitam Attalae Monachi lib. 1 All are found among Be∣da his workes. Vitam Eustachij Abbatis lib. 1 All are found among Be∣da his workes. Vitam Bertolfi Abbatis. All are found among Be∣da his workes. 4 Columb.There was a fourth Columbanus a Monke in Luxonium, countri∣man and kinsman to Columbanus going before, who dyed in his pre∣sence; so much I finde of him in Capgrave, and no more of him ei∣ther there or in any other. Colmannus and Colme.Colmannus I must referre to his place, and Colme I must leave to the vulgar and corrupted speech; yet in one Author I finde, that Colme is buried with Patricke and Brigide, which must be understood to be Columbanus spoken of before. About the latter dayes of Saint Martin, Bishop of Toures in France, Ninianus a Britaine (whom Beda worthily commendeth) comming from Rome, was made Bishop of Lyndsey, Lindesfernen∣sis, whom Aidus (otherwise called Aidanus and Aedanus) Finanus and Colmannus, all three of Irish birth, orderly succeeded in the dayes of King Arthur. About this time, Carthagus commonly called Mocudu, Mochudu and Mocodi was the first Bishop of Lismore,Saint Mochudu he descended of the sept of Fergusius, the most potent Prince of Vlster, whose of-spring were dispersed over Ireland, his father matched with the royall bloud of Mounster, he had to his Schoolemaster one Carthagus a Bishop. It is alledged in his Legend, (penes authorem sit fides) that it was prophe∣cied, he should become a great man, and build two cities; the first, Raithe (or Raichen) in Feraceall; the second, Lismore. This diversi∣tie of names comming upon accidents, is known unto them that have skill in the old Irish. It is remembred in his life, that in his youth, 30. Virgins were in love with him, and that hee prayed unto God, to turne their carnall into spirituall love, which was granted, yet (saith mine Author) to requite their former love, he builded them all Cells, and they dwelled in his parish, and conversed with him all the dayes of their lives. He had disciples that proved rare men, Mochue, Mo∣coemoge, Gobbanus, Sraphanus, Lazreaanus, Molva, Aidanus, Fia∣chus, Findeling, with others. He was compelled to forsake Raithen, and travailed west-ward, untill he came to the river Nem, now called Band more, falling from the mountaine Chua▪ and running into the sea, whereupon Lismore is builded, and given to Saint Mocodi. For the Lord of that country, Nandeisi Melochtrig, the son of Cokthacg, before witnesse, granted him that seate, to build both Church and Citie,The life of Saint Machu∣tus or Maclo∣vius. where he resteth, and whom one Molcolmog succeeded. Machutus otherwise called Maclovius, though Bale and Capgrave
call him a Britaine, yet I finde that he was borne in Ireland, and that he was the sonne of one Lovi, and therefore called Maclovy. Mola∣nus writeth, that he crossing the seas, and having good successe, led an Eremites life in Britaine, and was the disciple of Saint Brendan of Ireland. He accompanied with one Aaron, and kept with him in an Island of his name, (saith Molanus) called Aaron, but now I finde it in the North-west parts of Ireland,Iles of Aron. belonging to the Earle of Or∣mond, called the Isles of Aran. Lastly, he was made Bishop of Ale∣tha, and is honoured at Gemblacum in Flanders, where the Church (say they) is patronized by Saint Machutus, alias Maclovius, hee li∣ved (saith Bale) about the yeere 540. what time Arthur commanded Britaine.Io. Bale cent. 1. Kentegernus then also lived,Saint Kenteger∣nus. and now is remembred in Ireland and in Wales: the Martyrologe of Sarum reporteth, that his Mother wist not how, when, nor by whom he was gotten, yet was shee an holy woman, (saith mine Author) and much loved our Lady. She was cast downe headlong from a rocke (saith mine Author) into the sea, and tooke no hurt, then put into a Boate alone without Sayle or Oare, came into Ireland, and presently travailed with child. He became an Abbot of 965. Monkes, kept company with Saint David, and in the end was a Bishop. Ruadanus borne in Ireland, of Noble Parentage,Ruadanus his life. his father hight Byrra, of the of-spring of Dnach, but inhabited the West part of Leinster, of olde called Osraigie, but now Ossorie, whose sept is called Dnachs, in those parts unto this day▪ He left Ossorie, and hearing of the fame of Saint Fynnan, a wise and a learned man, dwelling in his owne towne, (so saith mine Author) commonly called Clonard, of Cluayn jarhaird in Meath, and confines of Leinster, resorted to him, who for the space of certaine yeeres, brought him up in sacred letters, gave him orders, and sent him to Muscraytrie in Mounster, where he was borne, where also he builded a Monasterie, which standeth to this day, and is maintained by the Lords of the soile. From thence he went to a place called Lothra, where he builded another Monaste∣rie, and lyeth there wayting the generall resurrection. Saint Brendan at the same time builded a Cell not farre from that place, called Tu∣lach Brenayd, that is, (saith mine Author) Collis Brendani, left Rua∣dan the charge thereof, tooke his blessing, and begun his travaile, as the Legends at large doe write. Ruadanus is said to have written these bookes in the Latine tongue. De miraculosa arbore lib. 1 De mirabili fontium in Hibernia natura lib. 1 Contra Diarmoyd regem lib. 1 Saint Faghua lived in the time of Finbarry,Saint Faghua his life. and founded a Mona∣sterie
upon the sea in the south part of Ireland, where he became Ab∣bot, the which seat grew to be a Citie, wherein a Cathedrall Church was builded, and patronized by Faghua. This towne of olde called Rossai Lithry, but now Roskarbry, hath beene walled about by a Lady of that country, but now according to the fruits of warre, a∣mong the Carties, O Driscales, and other septs, scarce can the old foundation be seene. There hath beene there of old (saith mine Au∣thor) magnum studium scholarium, a great Vniversitie, whereto re∣sorted all the South-west parts of Ireland for learnings sake. Saint Brendan Bishop of Kery, read publikely the liberall sciences in that schoole. Farther of Faghua or Faghuanus, mine Author recordeth, that he being sapiens & probus, a wise and a good man, by mishap fell blinde, and with many prayers, and salt teares, desired of God, resti∣tution of his sight, for the good of his Covent, and the Students brought up under him; a voyce he heard, (saith mine Author) goe get some of the breast milke of Broanus the artificers wife, wash thine eyes therewith, and thou shalt see. He went to a Prophetesse called Yta or Ytha, to learne how to come by this woman, and it fell out that this woman was her sister, hee found her out, washed his eyes, and recovered his sight; whether it be true or no, I know not, I report it as I finde it.Saint Yta the Abbatesse. This Saint Yta was an Abbatesse, whose originall was of Meth, but she was borne in Mounster. Saint Mocoei∣noge.Vpon the storie of Faghua dependeth the Legend of Mocoeinoge, interpreted in Latine, meus pulcher iuvenis, my beautifull young man, who proved learned, an Abbot and a Bishop, being the childe of those breasts that washed Faghua his eyes; many admirable things are re∣ported of him wherewith I will not trouble the reader. He conversed with Coemanus or Chemanus, Cannicus, Finianus Abbas, Colman a Bishop,Divers learned men. Daganus Abbot of Inbyr-dayle in Leinster, Mocobe his owne disciple, Illepius the disciple of Mocobe, Molna, Mofecta, Cunmi∣nus longus, the sonne of Fiachua, and Cronanne, who lyeth buried at Rosscre, Luctichernus and Lazerianus, with Yta, Patronesse of Huae Conaill, & her Abbot of Cluayn Mac Noys, & Abbot Engus, & Abbot Congallus, of Vlster, Mocoeinoge resteth in the county of Typperary, by a long foord in the way from Kilkenny to the Holy Crosse (as they cal it) where sometime was a Citie & a Monasterie called Liath, but now a Village bearing his name, Liath Mocoeinoge. He had in his life time much adoe with Coemanus, Bledin, Ronanus, Foelanus, Diarmoda, Sugbue, Lords of Ely, (now called Ely O Carroll) and with Falke Fland, King of Mounster, whose chiefe Pallace was in Cashell. Saint Coeinge∣nus.Saint Coeingenus shall next be spoken of, in Latine as much to say, as pulchrogenitus, he was ordered by Bishop Lugidus, & led an here∣meticall life in a Cell, in a place of old called Cluayn Duach, where he was borne and brought up. Now the place is called Gleand-daloch (saith mine Author) Vallis duorum stagnorum,Gleand-daloch. a valley of two pooles
or standing waters,Dymnach. where one Dymnach a Lord of the soile founded a Cathedrall Church, in the honour of Saint Coeingenus, ioyned ther∣unto a faire Church-yard, with other edifices, and divers buildings, the which in mine Author, legenda sancti Coeingeni) is termed civi∣tas de Glandelogh. In the life of Saint Patricke I finde, that hee pro∣phecied of two rare men, Albanus and Coeingenus, and that this should be a Bishop, and that one Molingus should succeed him; I finde this true in the See of Glandelogh. Coeingenus was a great lear∣ned man, and wrote these bookes. De Britannorum origine lib. 1 Bryto sive Brutus. De Hibero & Hermone lib. 1 Hyber & Hermon. Molva before mentioned in the life of Mocoeinoge,Saint Molva his life. (of his mother called Lugidus, but of his master, Congallus) was a great learned man, borne in Mounster, in Huafi, of the sept of Corcach. His father hight Carthach, alias Coche, his mother Sochla, that is, Large; hee was brought up under Congallus in Vlster, in his Abbey of Benchor, where he received orders, and was sent into his native soile of Moun∣ster, for the good of his country. Hee came to the schoole of Saint Finnian, in the confines of Leinster, and profited there very much,Saint Finnian his schoole. Luacha mons. Synna flu. from thence he went to mount Luacha in the South-west part of the river Synna, together with his disciples, and craved of Foelanus, Lord of that soile, license there to inhabite, who refused him, so that he went to his kindred in Osraigi, (now called Ossorie) who recei∣ved him ioyfully. In a while after, he went to mount Smoil, now cal∣led mos Blandina, where he cast his staffe,Mount Smoill and builded a Monasterie in a place called Rosse Bualead, by licence of Berachus Lord of that soile, (in Latine, Dux Laigy) where he decreed, saith the Legend, ut nulla mulier ibi semper intraret, that no woman should alwaies enter into it, which was, and may well be observed to this day, yea while the world endureth. In the same place was afterwards a famous citie builded, called Cluayn ferta Molua, in Latine, latibulum mirabile sancti Molvae, the secret habitation of Saint Molva. He conversed with Saint Flannanus, Molayssi, alias Molassus,Divers Bishops and learned men. Sethua Bishop of Saigir or Sagri, where it lyeth, I finde not, but by all likelyhood it should not be farre from Cluayn Ferta, with Moedog Archbishop of Leinster, Einenus Abbot of Rosse Mac Treoin in Kenselach, upon the river Berua, founded by the olde Saint Abbanus, with Daganus Abbot of Ardgabraine in Nandesi, called Achad Dagani,Berua fl. Saint Cronan in insu∣la Cree, Stellanus his disciple, Manchenus and Munnu, Abbot of Techmunnu in Kenselach in the South part of Leinster. Hee ended the way of all flesh, and resteth in the Monasterie of Cluayn Ferta, where one Lachtanus succeeded him. He is said to have wrought ma∣ny wonders, and if the reader laugh not, I will penne him one.
Molva in an evening walking among the cattell of his monasterie, heard a company of Wolves howling for their prey; hee was moved with pitty, called them to him, washed their feet, made them a feast, and gave them lodging. The Legend faith further, that they thence∣forth familiarly conversed with the Heard keepers, and chased away other Wolves and theeves. He wrote Regulas Monachorum, confirmed by Greg. 1. The life of Saint Munnu.Munnu spoken of in the former Legend, came of good parentage, of the house of Neill, his father was Tulchanus, his mother Fedelyr, he was brought up under Silell a learned man in the North of Ireland. Hee proved a singular learned man, and wrote a booke de pascate, which was in his time in question, he outlived Congallus and Colum∣ba, and conversed with Baithenus and Lazerianus, Abbot of Leigh∣lin, he dwelt a while in Ely, from thence hee went to Athcayn in Kinselach, and in Achad Liahtrom he builded a monasterie called Teach-Munnu, alias Thech-Munnu, where hee gave up the ghost, 12. of the Kalends of November, and yet the Martyrologes place him the sixt Kalend of the same moneth. In his storie I finde mention of a controversie betweene him and Lazerianus,Lazerianus. who builded a Mo∣nasterie, In stagno Hiberniae Dai ynis, in Latine, bovis insula, in the North part of Ireland, so it is written in the life of Aedanus; after∣wards he came to the river Berba (now called the Barrow) and there became Abbot of fifteene hundred Monkes. In their time, the old controversie about the observation of Easter, was vehemently urged of all sides; a great disputation and parlie was appointed in Campo Albo (saith mine Author) upon the Barrow. Munnu held the old, the other the new observation. To be short, Munnu gave this offer, brother Lazerianus (saith he) let us not spend time, neither trouble this people with this tedious question; choose for the tryall of the truth, one of these three things, take two bookes, one of the old, the other of the new Easter, cast them into the fire, looke which the fire saveth, let the truth rest there; or take two Monkes, one of thy side, another of mine,If they were as fa in those daies, as most of them pro∣ved after, there would have beene old fry∣ing. and cast them both into an house set on fire, he that commeth forth safe, let him carry the truth. Or let us goe to the grave of some holy Monke, and raise the dead, and stand to his sen∣tence, when we shall keepe Easter this yeere. Lazerianus refused his offers, and said, I will no longer contend with thee brother Munnu, for I know thy worthinesse and sanctitie is such, that if thou com∣mand the mount Margee over against us to remove to this Campus albus,Mount Margee and this ground to remove thither, I am of opinion it will bee so, thus they broke up and did nothing. Cannicus or Kennicus was borne in the North of Ireland (in Con∣naught as I gather) his father was called Lugaid Lechteag a Poet,Saint Kenny his life. his mother hight Maula or Mella, hee was trayned up in Britaine in the christian schoole of Docus, thence he went to Rome, and took orders
in Italie, returned into Ireland, preached the Gospell most zealously, and (saith his Legend) wrought many miracles. He conversed with great learned men, namely Eugenius, Bishop of Ardratha,Learned men. Baithenus and others. Adamannus in the life of Columba formerly spoken of, and the second of the name, writeth (wherby I gather the time of the learned men of that age) how that at one time, Cannicus, Congallus, Brendanus, Cormacus, and Fynbarry visited Columba, and were all present when he celebrated the divine mysterie. Colmanus the sonne of Feraid, Lord of Osraide or Ossragy, now called Ossorie, was Kan∣nicus his deare friend, who after he had received the faith, gave him many villages, where he builded Cels and Monasteries, but chiefely at Achadbo, where he resteth. When the time of his departure out of this sinfull world drew nigh, he sent for Fintan the Abbot, and re∣ceived at his hands the blessed Sacrament, and so departed the fift of the Ides of October. In remembrance of this Cannicus,Kilkenny. there is now a famous towne in Leinster called Kilkenny, parted into the English and Irish towne, with a small fresh or brooke that falleth into the Nure; the chiefe Lord under the King, is the Earle of Ormond and Ossorie; the En∣glish towne is governed by a Soveraigne, Bayliffes and Burgesses, the Irish towne is governed by the Bishop of Ossorie and his officers, and the Bishopricke of Ossorie, whose principall see was first in Ely, and called Sire Keran (as formerly I have written in the life of Keranus) afterward translated to Achadbo, is now setled in Kilkenny. The first founder of Saint Kennies Church there, was Hugh Mapilton, the fift Bishop of that See, after the conquest, about the yeer 1240. There was also about the same time, a Church builded over against the towne, upon the East side of the Nure, in the honour of Saint Maula the mother of Saint Kenny,Saint Kennies Church. whose memory is continued in that towne, by her plague that fell among them, and thus it was. There was a great plague in that towne, and such as died thereof being bound with Wythes upon the Beere, were buried in Saint Mau∣las Churchyard; after that the infection ceased,Saint Maula and her plague women and maides went thither to dance, and in stead of handkerchiefes and napkins to keepe them together in their round, it is said they tooke those Wythes to serve their purpose. It is generally received, (take it gentle reader as cheape as you finde it) that Maula was angry for propha∣ning her Church-yard, and with the Wythes infected the dancers so, that shortly after in Kilkenny, there died of the sicknesse, man, woman and childe. Aedanus (divers times before spoken of) was of honourable pa∣rentage, borne in Connaght, his father hight Sothna, his mother,Aedanus his life Ethne, of the sept of Amluygh, his companions were Molassus, alias Lazerianus, and Airedus, also he conversed much with Saint David, Bishop of Menevia, (now called Saint Davids) and is there called
Moedock; this David was his master. The martyrologe of Sarum cal∣leth him Maeldock; my Author yeeldeth the reason, writing how that his mother conceiving with childe of him, his father dreamed that he saw a starre fall from heaven upon his wife, the mother of this Aedanus, and therefore when he was borne, he was called in Latine, filius stellae, in Irish, Moedog, that is, the sonne of the starre. Master Fox writeth, that hee builded the Monasterie of Maibrose by the floud of Twide. David the holy man advised him to repaire to his native soile for the good of his country, after that hee had for a good space followed the Christian Britaines against the faithlesse Saxons. He came to Ireland to Anmyre,Anmyre, King of Connaght. King of Connaght, from thence to Leinster, and builded Monasteries in Kinselach and Cluayn More, what time Edus or Edanus,Edus or Edanus King of Con∣naght. the sonne of Anmyre King of Connaght, levied warre against Brandub King of Leinster, in which battaile, E∣dus and all his Nobilitie of Connaght were slaine, and Brandub be∣came Monarch of Ireland. After this he went to the North of Eng∣land,Brandub, King of Leinster, Monarch of Ireland. and was made Bishop of Lyndsey, Lyndesfernensis: Capgrave maketh two of one Aedanus, the one an Abbot, the other a Bishop, and to reconcile the dissonance, he was first an Abbot, afterwards a Bishop, so writeth Bale. Beda delivereth singular commendations of him, the which to avoid prolixitie I omit. After all this, hee returned to Leinster, to Brandub the Monarch, who upon speciall liking of his vertues, gave him a parcell of land, where he builded a Monaste∣rie; the place is called Ferna, now Fernes, where both Church and Monasterie are patronized (as they write) by Saint Moedog,Fernes. where afterwards both Brandub and Moedog were buried, whereof the words in the life of Aedanus, alias Moedog, are these. Magnas dedit rex oblationes Sancto Moedog, & agrum in quo vir Dei construxit monasterium quod dicitur Ferna, in quo Sanctus Moedog sepultus est, & rex Brandub, & genus ejus post eum ibi semper sepelitur. Et mag∣na civitas in honore sancti Moedog ibi crevit, quae eodem nomine voca∣tur Ferna. Deinde facta Synodo magnatum in terra Laginensium, de∣crevit Rex Brandub, & tam Laici quam Clerici, ut Archiepiscopatus omnium Laginensium, semper esset in sede & cathedra sancti Moedog, & tunc sanctus Moedog a multis catholicis consecratus est Archiepisco∣pus. The King gave many gifts to Saint Moedog, and a parcell of ground, where the man of God builded a Monasterie, called Ferna, where Saint Moedog is buried, and King Brandub, and his posteritie after him, is there continually buried. And a great Citie in the honour of Saint Moedog is there risen, the which by the same name is called Ferna.Ferne the Metropolitan See of Lein∣ster. Afterwards a Synode or Parliament of the Nobilitie of Lein∣ster being called together, King Brandub decreed together with the Laitie and Clergie, that the Archbishopricke of all Leinster should al∣waies be in the seate and chayre of Saint Moedog, and then Saint Moedog by many Catholikes was consecrated Archbishop. According
to which indeed in the Legend of Saint Molva he is called Archiepis∣copus Laginensium. David of Menevia being of great yeeres,King Brandubs death. desired to see him before his death; Moedog visited him, and returned into Ireland in a trou∣blesome time, namely when all Leinster was in Armes to revenge upon Saran (a Nobleman of Leinster) the death of King Brandub, whom he had traiterously murthered. This Brandub, the sonne of Eatach, of the progenie or sept of Enna, of whom Censelach hath o∣riginall, had a most honourable funerall, and was greatly lamented, and intombed in the Church-yard of Saint Moedog,Ferne, the bu∣riall place of the Kings of Leinster. in his Citie Fer∣na, where his progenie, the royall bloud of the Kings of Leinster is interred; after his death, Earle Saran (so mine Author calleth him) being tormented in conscience, came to the Kings tombe, lamented the horrible treason he had committed, and could finde no rest to his dying day. In the time of this Moedog, the three Kings of Tuomond,Warres against Leinster. Con∣naght, and Vlster, with an Armie of foure and twenty thousand men, came to Leinster, to revenge the death of Edus before spoken of. The King of Leinster called Moedog, and the Clergie, and commanded them all to pray while he fought, and, saith the storie, God gave the Leinster men the victory, and their enemies were overthrowne. It is remembred of this Aedanus, how that one comming unto him, and desiring him to assigne him a Confessor, his answer was; Thou needst no Confessor but God, who knoweth the secrets of thy heart, but if thou wilt have a witnesse of thy doings, goe to one Molva a lear∣ned man, who shall direct thee in thy course. And yet (gentle reader) I may not overslip one thing, the which Capgrave reporteth in the life of Aedanus or Aidanus, (or Moedog) namely,An Epistle from the Di∣vell. how that (for all the sanctitie of the Prelates in those dayes) Satan, with all the inter∣nall spirits, sent greeting, with great thankes, unto the Ecclesiasticall state upon earth, in dreadfull characters. For that they wanting no aide in their delights from hellish places, sent such a number of dam∣ned soules into the sulphureall pits, through their remisnesse in life, and slacknesse in preaching, as in former ages had not beene seene. Whosoever devised the course, it forceth not greatly, the matter might seeme odious if it contained no truth. Finnan in Wales, (as my Authors report) called Gwyn,Bishop Finan. was born at Ardez, he travelled forraigne countries, came to his native soile, was Bishop of Farne, saith Beda, baptized Penda King of Mercia,Capgrave. Martyrologe. con∣secrated Cedd, Bishop of East Saxons, and lyeth buried at Cuning∣ham in Scotland, called of the Britaines, Kilgwinin. There was al∣so one Finan an Abbot, borne in Mounster, sent by Saint Brendan to Smoir, now called Mons Blandina, to inhabite there,Abbot Finan. who came after∣wards to Corcodizbue, where hee was borne, builded Cels and Mo∣nasteries for religious men, contended with Falbe Fland, King of
Mounster.Finan of Clu∣ayn jarhaird. A third Finan there was, who was master of Ruadanus a great learned man, and dwelt at Cluayn jarhaird in Meath. Colmannus.Colmannus, whose life Bale writeth at large, was a godly learned man, borne in Ireland, the sonne of one Fiachra, of the bloud Royall, and highly commended of Beda, hee was brought up after the Apo∣stolike rules of Congellus, he succeeded Finan in the Bishopricke of Farne, alias, Linsey. In his time there was great stirre about the ob∣servation of Easter, when some alledged custome, and some urged the authoritie of Rome; he pleaded the Gospell both against this stir, and the like trouble that rose about the shaving of Priests crownes, the which he reiected (saith Beda) and seeing that he could not pre∣vaile,Beda. forsooke his Bishopricke, and went with certaine Scots and Sax∣ons into the Hebrydes, where he ended his dayes. Beda writeth, how that in the yeere 664. there fell strange acci∣dents upon the eclipse of the Sunne, (which was the third of May) in England and Ireland, and a great mortalitie in both lands, in the time of Finan and Colman the godly Bishops. Gentle reader, thou shalt heare himselfe speake. The plague pressed sore that Iland of Ire∣land, no lesse then England; there were then as that time, many of noble parentage, and likewise of the meane sort of English birth, in the dayes of Finan and Colman the Bishops, who leaving their native soile, had re∣paired thither, either for divine literature, or for more continencie of life, whereof some immediately gave themselves to monasticall conver∣sation, others frequenting the Cels, gave diligent eare to the lectures of the readers. All which the Scots (he meaneth the Irish men) with most willing minde daily relieved, and that freely, yeelding unto them bookes to reade, and masterly care without hire. Among these, there were two young men of great towardnesse, of the Nobles of England, Edelthun and Egbert: the first was brother to Edilhun, a man belo∣ved of God,Edelthun and Egbert. who formerly had visited Ireland for learnings sake, and being well instructed, returned into his country, was made Bishop of Lin∣disfarne, and for a long time governed the Church with great discreti∣on. These men being of the monasterie of Rathmelfig, and all their fel∣lowes, by the mortalitie, either cut off or dispersed abroad, were both vi∣sited with the sicknesse; and to make short, that which mine Author layeth downe at large, Edelthun died thereof, and Egbert lived untill he was fourescore and tenne yeeres old. So farre Beda. There was another Colmannus, otherwise called Colmanellus, an Abbot,Colmannus, or Colmanellus. of the sept of the Neilles, borne in Hoichle in Meth, what time the King of Leinster, with an huge armie wasted the North, he became first Abbot of Conor in Vlster, where the godly Bishop Mac Cnessey resteth. From thence he came to the place where he was born, and there (saith his Legend) he met with Eadus the sonne of Aimire∣ach,Eadus the sonne of King Aimireach. a King of Ireland, Edus Flan a Lord of that country, of the sept of the Neills, his kinsman, Saint Columba Cylle, and Saint Cannicus
the Abbot who received him ioyfully. Edus Flan gave him a parcell of land to build upon, and to inhabit, called Fyd Elo, afterwards cal∣led Colmans Elo, where hee founded a Monasterie, and now resteth himselfe. Carantocus, in the martyrologe Cartak,Carantocus or Cervagh. was the sonne of Keredi∣cus, a King of Ireland, a good Preacher, the Irish called him Ceruagh, his mother was a Britaine, and was delivered of him in Wales. Hee travailed over Ireland and Britaine; King Arthur is said to have ho∣noured him greatly, and gave him a parcell of land, where he builded a Church. In his latter dayes he came to Ireland, and died in a towne called after his name, Chervac: So much Capgrave. There was ano∣ther of that name, an Abbot in France, of whom Ionas maketh men∣tion in the life of Columbanus, but not of Irish birth. Now to intermit a while from speaking of these learned men; I finde that Aurelius Conanus, (who slue Constantine that succeeded King Arthur, and raigned in his stead thirty three yeeres) valiantly by force of Armes brought under his command, as Gualterus Oxoni∣ensis writeth, Norwey, Denmarke, Ireland, Island, Gothland,Ireland subiect to the King of England. the Orchades, and Ocean Ilands. I finde also that Malgo, the nephew of this Conanus, who (as it is in the English history) succeeded Vor∣tipore, vanquished the Irish Pictes, or Scots, which the Britaines called y Gwydhil Pictiard, which had over-runne the Isle of Man,Ile of Man▪ of them called, Tyr Mon, and slue Serigi their King with his owne hand at Llany Gwydhil, that is, the Irish Church at Holy-head; so write Sir Iohn Price Knight, and Humfry Lloyd in the description of Cambria. Florilegus saith, that he subdued sixe Ilands of the Ocean adioyning unto him, which Harding thus reckoneth. And conquered wholy the Isle of Orkenay, Ireland, Denmarke, Iselond and eke Norway, And Gotland also obeyed his royaltie, He was so wise, full of fortunitie. When Careticus was King of Britaine, who began his raigne,Anno Dom. 586 Anno Dom. 586. the Saxons intending to make a full conquest of the land, called to their aide, for a number of Pirates and sea rovers, that were mighty and strong, and scoured the Seas and the Ilands, whose Captaine was Gurmundus, one calleth him an African. Fabian wri∣teth, that he had two names, and was called Gurmundus,Gurmund and Afri∣canus; howsoever, I finde, that hee was the King of Norweys sonne, and for his successe in England, referre the reader to that historie; and for his behaviour in Ireland, I will acquaint the courteous reader with what I finde, in which the Writers no not agree. Cambrensis and Polycronicon followed bad presidents, and were deceived; Stani∣hurst stammereth, writing one thing in English, another thing in
Latine;Dowlinge and Grace. the best record I finde, is in Thadie Dowlinge, Chancellour of Leighlin, and Iames Grace of Kilkenny. They write that Gurmund was in Ireland, but no King or Conquerour, that with strong hand he entred Leinster like a raging Pyrate, prevailed for the time, and that the Princes of the land, not being able then to withstand his forces, yeelded unto the iniquitie of the time, and wincked at his rash enter∣prises. And whereas he gave forth his stile, King of England, they laughed at it, and he perceiving the wilinesse and ingeniositie of the people, and having small stomacke to continue among them, (by reason of many mishaps which befell him) left the land, and went for France to seeke adventures, where he ended his dayes. Further they write, that he had a sonne called Barchard, alias Burchared Mac Gur∣mond, whom his father made Duke of Leinster, and Baron of Mar∣gee.Duke of Lein∣ster and Baron of Margee. He was commonly called, O Gormagheyn; Hee builded Gur∣mund grange in Monte Margeo, with other memorable things for him and his posterity; hee is said to have beene the founder of the mother Church or priorie of old Leighlin, but I rather beleeve hee was a Benefactor or endower thereof in the time of Saint Eubanus the originall Patron; and that one Lazerianus a Bishop and Confessor, Anno 651. procured the perfection of the whole, as in the Leighlin records more at large doth appeare. Againe, it is recorded that Duke Burchard lyeth buried on the North side of the Chancell of that Cathedrall Church, over against the Treasurers stall, under a marble stone, as it was found for certaine, Anno 1589. by Thadie Dowlinge, Chancellour, and others, with this Epitaph. Hic jacet humatus Dux fundator Leniae (i. Leighlenie) En Gormondi Burchardus vir gratus Ecclesiae. Here lyeth interred Duke Burchard, the sonne of Gurmond, foun∣der of Leighlin, and a gratefull man to the Church. There are, saith mine Author, other remembrances of this in those parts, as Gurmunds-grove, and Gurmunds-foord, the which I over∣passe.Baron of Sliew Marrig. Mons Margeus, in Irish, Sliewe Marrig or Sliew Marighagha, (which is the mountaine reaching along by Leighlin to Butlers wood) wherin, as before I have touched; Gurmunds-grange standeth, was, as I haue learned, of old, granted to one called de Sancto Leode∣gario, by the name and honour of Baron de Marrighagha, but time and place have brought the name to degenerate and turne from En∣glish to Irish. Of late yeeres a Gentleman of the name, dwelling at Dunganstowne, neere Catherlagh, (affirming himselfe to be lineally descended from Baron Sentleger) made claime unto the same, but the successe I hearken not after, as impertinent to my purpose. Anno 587. Ireland hel∣peth the Bri∣taines.About the yeere 587. Athelfrid the Saxon King of Northumbers, so tyrannized over the Britaines, that they were faine to take Ireland
for their refuge, and Atdan, King of Scots pittying their state, raised forces to defend them, but could not prevaile, so great was the mise∣rie of the Britaines. Anno Dom. 635. was Cadwallin crowned King of Britaine; Cax∣ton and Florilegus write of cruell warres betweene Edwin, sonne un∣to Athelfrid, King of Northumbers, and Cadwallin;Ireland hel∣peth Cadwal∣lin. how that Ed∣win made him flee into Ireland, destroyed his land, cast downe his Castles, burnt his Mannors, and divided his land among his friends, and lastly, how that in a good while after, Cadwallin came upon him with forces out of Ireland, slue Edwin, and recovered all his posses∣sions. In the dayes of this Cadwallin, Kenevalcus,Agilbertus of Ireland, the first Bishop of Winchester. (otherwise called Cewalch) King of West Saxons, builded the Church of Winchester, made it a Bishops See, and the first Bishop he placed there, was one Agilbertus, who came out of Ireland, who in a short time after, was deposed, say some; Grafton with other writers record not the cause, but Beda writeth that he was offended, for that Kenelwalkus divided the Province into two, that he left the See, went into France, became Bishop of Paris, and there ended his dayes; and how that Kenelwal∣kus sent for him againe and againe, but his flat answer was, for that he had dealt with him so unkindely, he would never returne. I must here insert that which Cambrensis writeth of the antiquities of Brechinia or Breknoke in this sort;Brachanus, sonne of Hau∣laph, King of Ireland. there was of old of that coun∣try, which now is called Brecheinoc, a governour that was a man both mighty and Noble, whose name was Brachanus, of whom the country of Brecheinoc, (Brecknokshire) is so called, of whom one thing came un∣to me worthy the noting; the histories of Britaine doe testifie that he had foure and twenty daughters, that were all from their childhood brought up in the service of God, and happily ended their dayes in the holy pur∣pose they tooke upon them. Doctor Powell the great Antiquarie of Britaine, in his learned annotations upon him, explaineth the same thus. This Brachanus, (saith he) was the sonne of one Haulaph, King of Ireland, his mother was one Mercella, the daughter of Theoderike, the sonne of Tethphalt a petite King of Garthmarthrin, to wit, of the coun∣try which tooke the name of this Brachanus, and at this day is called Brechonia, or Brechinia, in British, Brechinoc, in English, Breknok. This Brachanus had to his daughter, one Tydvaell, the wife of Conge∣nus, the sonne of Cadell a petit King of Powis, and the mother of Broch∣mael, surnamed Scithroc, who slue Athelfred, alias Ethelfred, King of Northumberland, at the river of Deva (called of the Britaines, Doverdwy) and foyled his armie about the yeere of our Lord, 603. Here Breknoktowne, and Breknokshire have cause to glorie of Ire∣land, that gave them the name and honour which they hold to this day, and Ireland to glory of them that gave their Kings sonne Mar∣cella their Lady, and all that country in her right.
Beda eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 26.Also I cannot omit another thing of that age, the which Grafton reporteth of the Clergie; and I finde in Beda more reverently delive∣red, for that I have formerly spoken much of them, and shall have occasion to speake something hereafter, especially seeing Bedaes words are generall, to be understood as well of the one land, as of the other, if not rather of Ireland, considering what hath beene delive∣red heretofore.Grafton. In those dayes (saith Grafton) the Monkes and Clergie set all their mindes to serve God, and not the world, and were wholly gi∣ven to devotion, and not to filling of the panch, and pampering of the body, wherefore they were then had in great reverence and honour, so that they were then received with all worship. And as they went by the streetes and wayes,Priests of for∣mer ages: men that saw them, would runne to them, and de∣sire their blessings, and well was him then that might give unto them possessions, and to build them houses and Churches. But as they increa∣sed in riches of worldly treasure, so they decreased in heauenly treasure; as in the dayes of Aluredus some deale began, and sithen that time, hath sprung not all to the pleasure of God▪ Then they applyed nothing that was worldly, but gave themselves to preaching and teaching of the word of our Saviour Iesus Christ, and followed in life, the doctrine that they preached, giving good example to all men. And beside that, they were utterly void of covetousnesse, and received no possessions gladly, but were enforced thereunto. So farre Grafton. Anno Dom. 685. was Cadwallader crowned King of Britaines, that Ireland was subiect unto him, Harding testifieth, his words are, Cadwaladrus after him gan succeed, Both young and faire in florishing invent; That Cadwallader was called as I reade, Who of Britaine had all the Soveraigntie, Of English and Saxons in each country, Of Pightes, Irish, and Scots his under regence, As Soveraigne Lord, and most of excellence. For other things that concerne him, I referre the reader to the hi∣storie of England. He had two nephewes (his daughters sonnes) na∣med Ivr and Heuyr, who fled into Ireland saith Powell, and when they saw their time, came with forces against the Saxons, gave them three battailes, with many skirmishes and inrodes, yet in the end, were foiled, as in the proper historie more at large appeareth. And here ended the rule of the Britaines which had long continued. Saint Dympna the Virgin.I must now acquaint the reader with such as for learning and san∣ctitie were of note during this age, beginning at the yeere 600. Za∣charias Lippeloo, out of Petrus Cameracensis, writeth, that about this yeere 600. there was an heathenish and idolatrous King in Ireland,
who had one Dympna to his daughter, who secretly was baptized by one Gerebernus a Priest that travailed the land for such purposes. The daughter being sole heire, and her mother being now dead, the father was very carefull to see her well matched according to his de∣gree, and accordingly acquainted his dearest friends and counsellers with his intent and purpose, who likewise travailed carefully in the cause, but could not speed to the fathers contentment. As shee grew in yeeres, so she excelled in beautie, and the father being as wicked as she was good and faire, became enamoured of his owne daughter, and importunately offered her marriage. Shee at the first being ama∣zed at the motion, yet at length gathering spirit, desired respite for forty dayes, and withall desired that it would please him to adorne her with such attire, jewels and ornaments, as became a Kings daugh∣ter to weare, all which being granted, she privately sent for Gereber∣nus the Priest, and acquainted him with all the circumstances. The Priest advised her, that the safest way for her to avoid the incestuous King, was to avoid the land; shee immediately with the Priest, toge∣ther with her fathers Iester and his wife, tooke shipping, and arrived at Antverp. When they had rested there a while, and recreated them∣selves, they of devotion (saith mine Author) sought out among woods and desarts, a solitarie place to remaine; in this resolution they came to a poore village called Ghele, (Gela saith Molanus) and from thence they went to a thicket called Zammale, where they rid some small quantity of ground, made a Caban to hold them all foure, where they continued well some three moneths, praying and fasting. In the meane while the Irish King missing his daughter Dympna, lamented greatly, made great inquirie, and offered great rewards to know what became of her, and having gotten inkling of her course, hoised up saile after her, and landed at Antverp, immediately hee made search, and sent messengers with large offers about, if haply they might heare of her. At the length, by the coyne which they offered for reward, she was found out, for they said, there was a faire young woman, re∣maining in a solitary place, which had sent for reliefe for her selfe, and three persons more with the like coyne. The messengers were brought to the place, who knowing her ranne forthwith with newes to the King, and he with much ioy made haste to the Caban, and when he saw her, said; O my onely daughter Dympna, my love, my de∣light, and the ioy of my heart; what constrained thee to despise a regall dignity, to forsake thy native soile, to forget the naturall affection of a Childe toward her Parent, to flee from thy father a King, and to follow, as a childe, this old decrepit bald Priest, and so willingly to con∣descend to his unsavorie injunctions? hearken to mine advice, returne with me into Ireland, yeeld to thy fathers desire, and I will advance thee above all the Ladies in Ireland. Gerebernus the Priest, preventing the young Gentlewoman, turned him to the Irish King, and rebuked
him sharpely, denouncing him for a most wicked and abhominable person; then he turned him to the Gentlewoman, and charged her never to give eare to so lewd a man. With this the King and his company being mightily moved, commanded the Priest to be taken aside, and his head to be taken off his shoulders. Afterward the fa∣ther turned him to his daughter, O daughter, (saith he) why suf∣ferest thou mee thy father to bee thus vexed? why contemnest thou my love towards thee? yeeld, and thou shalt want nothing. Shee with a sterne countenance made answer, Thou infortunate tyrant, why goest thou about with deceitfull promises, to withdraw me from my set∣led purpose of shamefastnesse? I defie thee, and all thine. Thou cruell ty∣rant, why hast thou slaine the Lords Priest? shalt thou escape (thinkest thou) the iudgement of the Almighty? what torture thou wilt lay upon me, I weigh not: with this, the father being furiously moved, com∣manded his souldiers to cut off her head, and they being loath to doe it, he tooke the sword that hung by his side, and with his own hands strucke off her head, and with expedition returned into Ireland. Thus the Priest and Dympna died, of the Iester and his wife I reade no∣thing, belike they returned home againe. Molanus writeth, that many yeeres after, the bodies of Dympna and Gerebernus were sought ou, taken up, and solemnly enterred. The Irish in the County of Louth doe honour her; belike her father dwelt there. Saint Bertwin.Saint Bertwin, an Irish man, was brought up in the Monasterie of Othbell in England, from thence he went to Rome, where hee led a solitarie life the space of two yeeres; in his returne, he came to the For∣rest of Marlignia in Flanders, where he builded a Chappell; lastly, he was made Bishop of Molania, where he ended his dayes. Sigebert ad an. 651. writeth, Many out of Eng▪ or Scot. (he knew not well the coun∣tries) as strangers travailing in France, preached the word of God, and did much good,Hub Tho Com∣ment. de Tungris & Eburonibus. to wit, Etto, Bertwinus, Eloquius. This Bertwin ly∣eth buried nigh Namurcum (saith Molanus) of old called Namur, no∣vus murus, but now Namurra, so writeth Hubertus Thomas Leodius. Livinus.Livinus, borne in Ireland, and brought up in Scotland and En∣gland, under Benignus the Priest, and Augustine the first Bishop of the Saxons, by whom he was made Archbishop (saith Molanus) of the Scots, (saith Christianus Massaeus, of Ireland, saith Bale, Silvestris Scotiae,Molanus nat. Sanctori Belgij. Chron lib. 13. of the Ilanders and Red-shanckes) the which charge, after cer∣taine yeeres, he committed to Sylvanus his Arch-deacon, and gave himselfe to travaile, and tooke with him his three disciples, Saint Foillanus, Helias, and Kilian, and came to Gandavum. Of him, Chri∣stianus Massaeus writeth thus: In the yeere of our Lord, 631. Saint Livinus by nation a Scot, Archbishop of Ireland, came to Ganda∣vum, with three disciples, and remained there one moneth, from thence he went to Esca, preached Christ, and converted many, there some hard-hearted people slue him, when he was beheaded, hee rose
up, tooke with him his owne head, (beleeve it who list) and carried it to Houtthein, where the Angels had made a sepulchre for him. He is said (saith Bale) to have written a booke of Homilies, and in the yeere 1007. to have beene translated to Saint Bavons Church in Gandavum. There was another Livinus a French man, a Fryer mi∣norite, and slaine, as they say, about the yeere 1345. and of fame at this day in Flanders. Arbogastus borne in Ireland, a godly Preacher,Arbogastus. Anno 646. and a great Wri∣ter, was the second Bishop of Argentine, Anno 646. who also for his great wisedome, was taken by Dagobert King of France, to be of his Councell. He left behinde him for the good of the Church, a booke of Homilies. So much Bale out of Munster Molanus writeth, that about the yeere 647. some of the familie of Pipinus, the first Duke of Brabant, father of Saint Gertrude, sent for many Preachers out of Ire∣land and Scotland into Brabant, and the bordering regions, to plant the Christian religion among them,Fortanus. Vltanus. Egbertus. Wicbertus. Willibrodus. Fortanus and Vltanus are there named. Lippeloo saith, that about the yeere 696. Egbertus, Wicbertus and Willibrodus were famous learned men in Ireland, continued there a long time, afterwards dispersed themselves into farre countries, and with happinesse ended their dayes. Molanus hereof writeth farther thus.Saint Switberd. In the imperiall towne cal∣led Werda, the birth of Saint Switberd, (whom Beda calleth Suidber∣tus) the Bishop and Confessor is solemnized: who in the time of Pipinus, (the first Duke of Brabant) together with Saint Willibrod, preached soules health unto the nations thereabouts. This man, among other dis∣eases, was wont to cure the disease in the throate, called of the Physiti∣ans, the squinancie. He is termed the second of those Apostolike men which came out of England and Ireland to preach the Gospell unto the Frisians, Hollanders, and the nations about them Among whom, being as yet but a Priest, he converted many, chiefly the inhabitants of the great Village Duerstadt, the which now is the towne of Wic. He converted also the Citie Hagenstein, which now is a village ad∣ioyning unto Viana. And when as by the industrie of him and Wil∣librodus, the number of the faithfull daily increased, at the intreatie of the brethren in Trajectum and Friseland, both of them consented he should be consecrated Bishop. Whereupon Saint Switbert (whom Beda saith to have beene modest of life, and meeke in heart) went in∣to England, and was consecrated by Saint Willfride Bishop of Mer∣cia (Kent, saith Beda, had then no Bishop) in the yeere 695. But Saint Willibrode went unto Duke Pipinus, and having gotten leave of him, departed to Rome, where the yeere following, Pope Sergius consecrated him. And although Switbert, by reason of some small time, had the start of Willibrode, yet Willibrode went before him in dignitie, for he was the first Archbishop of Trajectum, and especial∣ly by Pope Sergius, consecrated Archbishop of Frisia, and directed
to that people. And (saith Beda) Sergius changed his name, and cal∣led him Clement, because (saith Molanus) hee consecrated him on Saint Clements Even. And he also writeth, that he was Archbishop of the nations now called Frisii, Transiselani, Trajectenses, Hollan∣di and Zelandi, whereas Switbert is not called Bishop of Trajectum, but fellow Bishop with Saint Willibrode. Yet he is by speciall name called the Apostle of Teisterbandia, Westfalia, and of the Boructua∣rians: for Marcellinus writeth, that hee converted the county of Teisterbandia, and together with it, in a manner, all Batua, and the greater part of the lower Friseland unto the faith. He also exceeding∣ly increased the number of the beleevers in the Church, at Trajectum; he founded many Churches, and dedicated the temples of Idols un∣to the honour of God. In the historie of Marcellinus, certaine places by especiall words are named; as in Zandwic, in the Ile of Tila, which at this day cannot be found in Arkell and Hoernaer villages of the Lordship of Gorcomia, in Schoenreford, (now called Schoenre∣woert) by Leerda, in Authensden, nigh Huesden in Wondrighen, (now called Worckum) in Aelborch, Giesen and Riiswijke between Worckum and Huesden, in Almkerk (which is the territorie of Alte∣nae) in Maelsem, Erkum and Avesaede in the Lordship of Buria, with many other places. In these countries hee hallowed Churches, continually praying with great devotion for the people which hee had converted, and with wholesome admonitions drawing them to the heavenly dwellings. He converted the Westfalians and Boructu∣arians, which at this day are thought to bee the people Markenses. Further, the renowned Duke Pipinus gave him Werda upon the ri∣ver of Rhene,Werda given to Saint Swit∣bert. for his good, and for the establishing of his principality: which place is elsewhere called the Iland of Saint Switbert, though now it be part of the continent or maine land. Pipinus gave him also great store of treasure, wherewith he builded there a Monasterie, and replenished the same with a great company of the servants of Christ. In the end, this Saint Switbert died in the yeere 717. and lyeth buri∣ed in the Monasterie of Werda-Caesaris which he had founded. Beda writeth, that Willibrode lived in his time, and went on the thirtieth and sixt yeere of his consecration, Archbishop of Friseland: Molanus delivereth his end, that namely he ended his dayes at We∣stervoert, and was buried at Elste in Gelderland; but of Egbert and Wigbert the Martyr (before mentioned) he reporteth out of Beda and Marcellinus,Beda lib. 5. cap. 10. that Wigbert was one of the companions of Egbert, and for the space of many yeeres, had led an Anchors life in Ireland, that he sailed into Friseland, and for the space of two whole yeeres, preached unto that nation, and to their King Radbodus, and seeing that he could doe no good among them, returned againe to Ireland. And when as Egbertus the servant of God, had sent the second time unto the Friselanders and Saxons, famous men for life and learning,
Acca, Willibaldus, Winiboldus, Lebuinus, Werenfridus, Marcellinus, Adalbertus, Ewaldus senior and junior, together with Willibrode, he sent the said Wigbert, who no sooner landed, but King Radod cau∣sed him cruelly to be tormented to death in Fosetes-land, an Iland in the confines of Friseland and Denmarke; for that the Christians of that place by his preaching of the Gospell, had destroyed there the Idoll groves of Iupiter and Fosta. There was a later Wigbertus, Patron of Hersweldia, remembred in the Martyrologe, whom I would have the reader take notice of, to avoid the confusion of times. And last of all, of Willibrode and Wil∣fram, there is a storie, how that Raboldus after long perswasion, see∣med willing to be baptized, and having one foot in the water, de∣manded where be the nobilitie of Frizeland, my Father, Grand-fa∣ther and kindred? Answer being made, that they were in hell, hee with-drew himselfe from baptisme, saying, I will goe after the grea∣test company, take your heaven to your selfe. Molanus when hee had at large written the lives of the foresaid learned men that came out of Ireland, he maketh in his Chronicle a recapitulation of them, the which will helpe the memorie of the rea∣der, therefore I thought good to lay it down. Egbert the second time essaied to convert Friseland and Saxonie, gathered together twelve Apostolicke men, Willibrode, Switbert, Acca, Wigbert, Wilibald, Wi∣nibold, Lebuinus, Ewaldus, surnamed the blacke, (in Irish, Duffe) Ewaldus the white, Werenfridus, Marcellinus and Adalbertus. 1 Saint Willibrod and Saint Switbert,Willibrode. by common consent of the bre∣thren, were elected and consecrated Bishops. Saint Willibrode was made Archbishop of Friseland, he received by the donation of Duke Pipinus, the Citie of Traiectum, with all thereunto appertaining. He founded in the territorie of Saint Thomas, a Colledge of regular Canons. In the towne of Rhen he is said to have found the body of Cunera, one of the eleven thousand Virgins. He travailed in preaching without Friseland; e had in Latharingia, two women disciples, Herlind and Relind, Nunnes of Maeseike, which now is of Leodium or Leege in Flanders. He converted the Hulstenses, Axellanos, Hasuenses, Birfletanos. At Trevires, in the Church of Saint Marie and Martyres, hee founded a Monasterie of Monkes Benedictines▪ At Epternacum among the Lux∣emburgs, he founded a famous Monasterie, wherein hee was buried, Anno 736. 2 Saint Switbert was consecrated in England,Switbert. and converted many in Traiectum, Holland, Gelderland, chiefely Wiic, Hagelsteyn, Alcma∣ria, Waterladia, Gerconium, Bomelia, Tiela, Huesda, Bura, Baua with other places. Hee is called the Apostle of Teisterbandia, Westfalia, and of the Boructuarians. He builded a Monasterie in Werda Caesaris, where he ended his dayes, Anno 710. 3 Acca went into England to the consecration of Saint Switbert, and
when Switbert returned, he became Bishop of Lindisfarne. Wigbert is said to be martyred in Fostilandia adjoyning upon Frise∣land by Radbodus King of Friseland, who also slue Saint Egelmund the Martyr. 5.6 Wilibaldus and Winiboldus being brethren, went to Aistadi∣um in Germanie. 7 Lebuinus converted the Transiselanians, and resteth among them in Daventria. 8.9 The two Ewaldes went to Nabia, preached Christ, and were martyred by the old Saxons. 10 Werenfridus converted many to the faith at Arnhemium in Westervaert, and at Neomagum in Elst. 11 Marcellinus preached 65. yeeres, chiefely in Trenta, Twenta, Ou∣denzeel and Daventria. 12 Adelbertus was the first Archdeacon of Traiectum, preached in Kenemaria, together with Engelmund an Englishman before spoken of, and lyeth buried at Velsen in Egmondan monasterie. He writeth farther of Wiron and Plechelinus, Bishops of Friseland, who came thither together with Otgerus a Deacon, out of these parts, and were entertained by Pipinus, Duke of Brabant. Fursaeus, Foi∣lanus, Vltanus.Many things are written by Beda, Capgrave, Surius, Baronius, Molanus, Lippeloo and others, of Fursaeus, Foilanus, (whom Beda calleth Fullanus) and Vltanus. They were three brethren, and the base sonnes of a King of Leinster, they flourished about the yeere sixe hundred fiftie and odde. Fursaeus is said to have had many visi∣ons and dreadfull conflicts with divels and infernall spirits. He prea∣ched unto the Irish, Scots, Britaines and Saxons; hee went into France, where he wrought many miracles, (saith Molanus) and be∣cause of the fame that went abroad of him, one Ercanaldus gave him at Latiniacum, a parcell of land to build a Monasterie, also hee gave him another piece of ground at Perona, sometime a towne in Flan∣ders, but now of France, and parcell of Gallia Comata, where he buil∣ded another Monasterie, and drew unto him, (saith mine Author) germanos fratres, Foilanus and Vltanus, and there ended the way of all flesh. They of Cambray doe honour him as a Bishop, not that hee was a Bishop, but an Apostle of certaine places. The mar∣tyrologe of Sarum reporteth, how that after his death, the angels and the deuils strove for his soule, how that the soule returned to the bo∣dy againe, and how that he lived afterwards. Here the Author is de∣ceived, for it was a trance that he was in, out of which after certaine conflicts, he came to himselfe againe, and finally in godly sort ended his dayes. I finde in the life of Mocoeinoge, that there was one Fur∣saeus a Bishop, but more ancient then this. Many other learned men of Irish birth, contemporane with Fursaeus.With Fursaeus there were at one and the selfe same time, many fa∣mous men of Irish birth, renowned for learning and sanctitie, which
gave themselves to travaile, and dispersed themselves to farre coun∣tries, as Foilanus and Vltanus (before mentioned) also Mombolus, Boetius, Eloquius, Adulgisius, Columbanus, Hetto, Helanus, Tresanus, Germanus, Veranus, Gobanus, Corbrican, Dicull, Fredegandus, Col∣manellus, Madelgarius, Algisius and others. After they had visited Rome, they came backe (saith Molanus) into France and Flanders, Fursaeus and Adelgisius into Perona, Foilanus and Vltanus into Pos∣sa, Eloquius and Algisius into Theoras, the reverend Priest Hetto, un∣to the lake adioyning unto Corbriolum, where he builded a Mona∣sterie called domus Petri. Further, saith Molanus, in the confines of the Attrebates, there is a Village called Buym, which hath a Church cal∣led Saint Hetto, whereupon is written, In hoc loco Hetto Hiberniensi∣um Episcopus mansionem habuit, in another place of the Church, Hic reposuit Hetto Hibernensis Episcopus reliquias de corpore sancti Cle∣mentis Papae & Martyris. In another place he writeth of Hetto, Go∣ban, and Corbrican, that they were three brethren, and in their re∣turne from Rome, died at Walciodorum, and lie buried at Fesca. Beda left but a bare mention of Goban and Dicull, onely this, that they were companions of Foilanus. Foilanus was slaine in a place in Flanders, called Carboriar.Foilanus. Saint Bernard writeth, that in the place where he was slaine, there is a Mo∣nasterie builded by the name of Saint Foilane ordinis praemonstraten∣sis, in the Diocesse of Cambray. Fredegand preached in Antverp, where now hee resteth,Fredegand. and is greatly honoured. Mombolus became an Abbot in the Monasterie of Fursaeus in France, a perceiving a conspiracie of his covent against him,Mombolus. forsook the place, and withdrew himselfe, together with a few of his compa∣ny, unto a place of old called Condrynus, upon the river Isara, where he led an hermites life, and ended his dayes. There was another of that name, a Saint of Burdeux, but not of Irish birth. Eloquius preached most painefully throughout France and Saxo∣nie,Eloquius. and being seated at Latiniecum in the Monasterie which Fursaeus had founded, perceived some treacherie practised against him, with∣drew himselfe (as formerly Mombolus had done) to a solitarie place called Grimacum, upon the rivers of Some and Isara, where he depar∣ted this life, afterwards his body was translated to Walciodorum in Flanders, and there he resteth. About this time, Saint Autbert, borne in Ireland,Saint Autbert. was Bishop of Cambray; he converted Hannonia, and is called the Apostle of Flan∣ders; of him Molanus writeth thus, Autbertus had beene for certaine yeeres, Hiberniae gubernator, governour of Ireland, (the which I take to be some ecclesiasticall charge) by which occasion, many singular good Preachers heretofore mentioned, came the more willingly out of Ire∣land unto us.
Trithemius reporteth of this time in this sort, There were many Monasteries of Irish men in Germanie, Herbipolis and other places, but when their zeale waxed cold, and that they fell to remisse and dissolute life, they were expulsed, and their habitation became waste and deso∣late. Saint Chilian.Saint Chilian (otherwise written Kilian) whom Bale calleth a Scot, Surius, Baronius, and Lippeloo, write that hee was an Irish man of Noble Parentage. Molanus writeth, in Hibernia regio sanguine pro∣creatus, that he was begotten in Ireland of royall bloud; another saith he was a Kings base sonne. This man became a Monke, went to Rome, together with Colman a Priest, and Totnan a Deacon of the same country birth, in the time of Conon, Bishop of Rome, about the yeere 687. to sue unto the Bishop there, that Ireland might be released of the curse that was denounced against the land, and the inhabitants thereof, for the Pelagian heresie. Molanus writeth, that he served in Saint Peters Church in Rome, eleven yeeres, but he was directed an∣other course, for he was consecrated Bishop of Herbipolis in the East parts of France, and together with his fellowes sent away. There they converted Gosbert a French Duke, which had married one Geila his brothers wife. It is Iohn Baptists case, he rebuked him for it, and shee hearing thereof, sent certaine lewd persons in the night, which mur∣thered them all three, and privily buried them, lest so horrible a fact should come to light; but God that will have no such villany concealed, brought it out, the tormentors became madde, and con∣fessed the whole. Beda in his Martyrologe reporteth, how that at Wir∣ciburge in Austria, the birth day of Kilian the Martyr, and his two companions, is solemnly kept the eight of Iuly. Saint Fiacre.Molanus saith, that in his travaile he met with Saint Fiacre, some∣time his fathers servant, but he following carefully his direction, staid not with him, but passed on in his iourney. This Saint Fiacre, (saith the Martyrologe) was base sonne of some King in Ireland, went into France, and became an heremite; there are small remembrances of him in Surius and Lippeloo, saving that for a womans sake which cal∣led him a Witch, Sorcerer, and Inchanter, hee commanded that no woman should put foot into his Cloister, and if any should doe so, he prayed that God would lay some plague upon her; to try this, a wo∣man sent her maide to take the ayre of the Cloyster, but she tooke no harme; upon a second tryall, a fairer then she presumed so farre, that her shinne, her knee, and her thigh, (saith mine Author) and some parts above, tooke swelling, and that went for a punishment. In an antient manuscript Legend of the life of Congellus or Congallus, I finde that Saint Fiacre returned into Ireland, and became Abbot of Airard in Leinster upon the river of Berba, now called the Barrow, in the Barony of Odrone, and that he went to the Abbey of Beanchor in Vlster to visite Congellus, at whose hands Congellus received the
Sacrament, and gave up the Ghost. There also it is further alledged, that this Fiacre builded a Monasterie in Leinster, in the honour of Saint Congellus. The martyrologe aforesaid, remembreth Saint Cataldus a Bishop, Saint Finan an Abbot, Saint Sacodine a Virgin,Saint Cataldus. Saint Finan. Saint Sacodine. who forsooke her husband, and entred religion, to have lived then: and how that In∣drake, a King of Ireland, forsooke his royaltie,King Indrake, Dominica. went to Rome with his sister Dominica, led a private life, and died beggers. Capgrave calleth him Indraktus, saying that he was a Kings sonne, and tooke with him, beside his sister, nine persons more. About this time, (saith Capgrave) one Muriardachus, Monarch of Ireland, together with his wife Sabina,Muriardachus Monarch of Ireland. lived in the true faith and feare of God, who being mighty and wise, commanded in good sort all the Princes of the land. In this his good successe and peaceable governement, he was envied, so that a petite King his neighbour, came upon him in the night, murthered him with his Queene, and all his familie, excepting one daughter, whose life hee saved for her beauties sake. This cruell tyrant after assaulted this faire Gentlewo∣man to his filthy lust, and when with faire perswasions he could not prevaile, at length by force he oppressed her, so that shee conceived and bare him a sonne, called at the time of his baptisme, Milluhoc, but afterwards, Cuthbert. This Cuthbert being borne (as my Author writeth) at Kilmacro∣drike, some three miles from Dublin,Saint Cuthbert. his mother tooke him to Scot∣land to her two brethren, Meldan and Eatan, that were Bishops.Meldan and Eatan Bishops, sonnes to the Monarch of Ireland. From thence hee went into the North parts of England, and was brought up among the holy Monkes of those dayes, in the Monaste∣rie of Mailros, under the Abbot Boisilius, whom he succeeded in the same Monasterie. Anno 651. And Anno 676. he went to the Ile Farne, which was uninhabited, and continued there nine yeeres, building, teaching and preaching, and (as Beda writing his life delivereth) wor∣king in harvest time with his owne hands. The fame of his vertues and holinesse went farre abroad, so that Egfride, King of the Nor∣thumbers, made him Bishop of Lindesfarne, to which dignitie hee was consecrated at Yorke by Theodorus the Archbishop, Anno 685. In his time,Anno 684. the aforesaid Egfride sent Brith with a great host into Ireland to be revenged of them, for that he was given to understand,Saxons in Ire∣land. they had aided his enemies against him; these Saxons over-ranne the land, killing, burning, and spoyling, they spared neither Church nor Monasterie, so writeth Beda. Berthus vastavit miserè gentē innoxā, & nationi Anglorum semper amicissimam:Beda eccles. hist. lib. 4. cap 26. Berthus pittifully spoiled this harmelesse people, who alwaies most kindely affected the English nation. Cuthbert reproved him for it, and the Ilanders cried unto the hea∣vens, and prayed God to avenge their cause. Beda reporteth farther,
how that he bent his forces afterwards against the Pictes and Scots, and would not be advised by Cuthbert and Egbert, and that his blou∣dy course had no good successe, and that then Egfride, the glory of the Saxons began to decay, the which Florilegus attributeth to the crie of the Irish, and the courage of the Pictes and Scots, and Bri∣taines. In his time, saith Carodoc, it rained bloud in Britaine and Ire∣land; the Milke likewise and the Butter, turned to the colour of bloud, and the Moone appeared all bloudie. Cuthbert, when he had beene Bishop two yeeres, forsooke his Bishopricke, and went to the Ile Farne, where hee led an hermites life, and left the world, Anno Dom. 687. It is written of him that he forbade his Monkes and Priests, the company of women, and that they should not come within any Cloyster, for that the devill appea∣red unto him in his Church in the shape of a woman most faire and beautifull. Yet I finde that he conversed much with Ebba and Verca, and with Elfleda, King Egfrides sister, and repaired oft to their Nun∣neries, did eate and drinke with them, and sent Elfleda a linnen or threed Girdle for a token, which tooke away a swelling and crampe that troubled her, and that he was shrouded in the winding sheete, which the Nunne Verca had sent him. Anno 875. Ardulphus, Bishop of Lindisfarne, fearing the incursion of the Danes, who destroyed Churches, and defaced Tombes, tooke the corps of Cuthbert, and attempted the transporting of it into Ireland, but the winde was a∣gainst them, and compelled them to land in England, then they brought it to Cuncacester, some sixe miles from Durham, where it rested some yeeres. Anno 925. (though Stow referre it to the yeere 995.) Aldunus (who was the first Bishop of Durham) preventing (as formerly Ardulphus did) the invasion of barbarcus people, remo∣ved it to a place full of bushes and thornes, now called Durham, and with the aide of Earle Vthred, builded a Church over it, where (now at length) it resteth. Edmund the second Bishop of Durham, enlarged the Church, and beautified the place of his buriall, and long after, were brought thither, the bodies of Balther and Bilfride, that had beene Anchors, Acca and Alkmundus that had beene Bishops, Eb∣ba the Nunne, and familiar of Cuthbert, Boisilus the Abbot his ma∣ster, King Oswine, and the bones of Beda that rested at Girwin, so wri∣teth Capgrave. He that will see farther of Cuthbert and his patrimo∣nie, (so called in the Bishopricke of Durham) of the endowments and grants given by Christian Princes, and of the reverend opinion held of the place, because of the sanctitie of Irish Cuthbert, let him repaire to learned Camdens Brigantes, the which for that they concerne the antiquities of England more then Ireland, I omit. Anno 701.Now to come to the 700. yeere of Christ. I will beginne with A∣damannus, who flourished Anno 701. as Florilegus writeth, in the time of Alfred, King of Northumbers, whom Beda highly commen∣deth,
and as it may be gathered and borrowed out of his workes, many things to furnish his historie of England. I finde of divers re∣ported, that he was in Ireland, and did much good. I take it he was of Irish birth, for I cannot finde the contrary. Bale summarily out of Beda and others, writeth in his life as followeth. Adamannus Co∣ludius, by profession a Monke, not vowed, but of the Apostolike order,Adamannus his life. and governour of that famous Monasterie, which of old, Columbanus the disciple of Congellus had founded in the Ile Hu, made himselfe a patterne of vertue to be followed of many; hee was a man studious and singularly well seene in holy Scripture, as Tritemius witnesseth, neither ignorant of prophane literature, wise and faire spoken; hee was for his life and conversation, renowned, and for opinion of sanctitie, recounted the father of many Monkes, so that hee travailed in a manner all the North regions of Britaine; he was a notable Preacher, instructing with heavenly admonitions, Irish, Scots, Pictes, and Anglosaxons. Hee wil∣lingly gave eare to all such as made report of any memorable acts of Pa∣lestina by their travaile, and of other places of the holy Land, with the site thereof, trusting thereby to attaine unto a better sight in the holy Scripture. Then it fell out (say the Chronographers) that one Arnul∣phus, a Bishop of France, comming from Ierusalem, and being winde-driven to that place, arrived there, and throughly enformed Adaman∣nus, the which he shortly after committed to writing, and dedicated unto Alfred, King of Northumbers, with these titles. De locis terrae sanctae lib. 1. De situ Ierusalem lib. 1. De paschate legitimo lib. 1. With certaine Epistles. So farre Bale. I have seene beside these, a Manuscript worke of his, of the life of Saint Columba in three bookes. About the yeere 740. saith Lippeloo, Gualafer Bishop of Dublin,Gualafer, Bi∣shop. Saint Rumold. Zachar. Lip. de vitis Sanct. tom. 3. was famous, who by his prayers obtained that Cecilia, wife to Da∣vid King of Scots, and daughter to the King of Sicilia, being bar∣ren, did conceive & beare a sonne called Rumoldus, who after the de∣cease of Gualafer, was made Bishop of that See, and consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and two other Prelates. He went in∣to England, afterwards to France, and came to Rome, Anno 752. in the time of Stephen 2. he resigned his Bishopricke, from thence hee went into Brabant, and by his prayers (saith mine Author) got one Eliza, wife to Earle Ado, of the age of 66. yeeres, to conceive. In the end he went to repaire an old Church, agreed with workemen, wrangled with them so, that they for one quarrell and other, and es∣pecially for that they held him to be rich, hoping to get some part of his wealth, knockt him in the head with a hatchet, and there lay
Saint Rumolde. Molanus in discreet sort examineth this historie, and delivereth that this Rumoldus tooke with him beyond the seas, one Saint Himelin, now Patron of Fenacum, the place in Dutch is Sijnte Himelijns Vissenaken, some said he was of his bloud, others some, that he was of his bloud and bone.Io. Molanus nat. Scotorum Belgi ex Martyrologo Mechlin. His words are these. Some suppose that Saint Rumold was the sonne of Erfinus King of Scots, after whom suc∣ceeded in the kingdome, the third and fourth sonne, Fergusius and A∣chaius, but the names of the first and second sonne are not extant. They adde happely unto the rest, that because he was the King of Scots his sonne, it stood him upon to forsake the Bishopricke of Dublin, when Solvathius that raigned betweene Fergusius and Achaius, warred against the Irish, and upon this occasion, he tooke his iourney to Rome, and at his returne, preached the Gospell at Mechlin. All which, by con∣ferring the times, would have some great probabilitie, unlesse the an∣tient Monuments and Records of Mechlin, had avouched him to have beene the sonne of one David a King, and to have beene brought forth in∣to the world, by the intercession and devout prayers of Gualafer, Bishop of Dublin, and of him baptized, whereby I gather, that he was the sonne of some King of Ireland. Neither is it any mervaile, though we reade not of this David, when as Saint Bernard witnesseth, that Ireland was not governed by one King, but by many; the orderly succession of which Kings, I suppose for the most part is now perished. If you urge that hee came of the Scottish bloud royall; I admit it, for it is so sung every where throughout the Diocesse of Mechlin, but that of old the Irish men were understood and comprehended under the name of Scots, by the life of Saint Patricke and elsewhere, is very manifest. To this purpose is that which Beda affirmeth, that Ireland is properly the country of the Scots, and Ionas also writeth in the entrance to Columbanus his life, how that the Scottish nation inhabit the Iland of the Irish. This Rumoldus died, Anno 775. and is honoured in Mechlin for their Patron. Virgilius soliva∣gus·Virgilius Solivagus, borne in Ireland, and descended of noble Pa∣rentage, in his yeeres of discretion, forsooke his native soile, and to∣gether with certaine companions of the same countrey birth, went into Germanie, where Anno 754. hee was made Abbot of Salis∣burge, by Odilo, Duke of Bavaria, and shortly after, Bishop of Iuva∣viens; the name of which Bishopricke, hee procured to bee changed, and called it the Bishops See of Salisburgh, where he builded a sump∣tuous Cathedrall Church, and was the first founder thereof. In his time, one Boniface an English man, and the Popes Legate in Germany, tooke upon him to rebaptize, contrary to the Canons of the Church, such as had beene (as hee thought) formerly not rightly baptized. Virgilius (having had conference with Sydonius, Archbishop of Ba∣varia) opposed himselfe against him. The matter came to hearing be∣fore Pope Zacharie, who gave sentence, that Virgilius was in the right, and Boniface his Legate (for all his great authority) in the
wrong opinion. Hee prudently governed his Church some thirty yeeres, and gave place to nature. So farre Bale, out of Gaspar Brus∣chius. Learned Camden alledgeth out of Rhegino, that in the time of Ca∣rolus magnus,Invasions of Norwegian and Danes. which must needs bee about the yeere 767. certaine Norwegians or Normans entred Ireland, and were repulsed, and fur∣ther of them I have not read: but in the British Chronicle of Caradoc Llancarvan, I finde that Anno 799. the Danes came into England, and destroyed a great part of Lindsey and Northumberland,Anno 799. over-ranne the most part of Ireland, and destroyed Rechreyn. The accidents of the eight hundreth yeere after Christ, now fol∣low. And first of all, Functius offereth occasion to write, how that Anno 820. Regnerus, King of Denmarke, invaded Britaine, and how that his prosperous successes in Britaine, Scotland, and the Orchades, puffed him up, and emboldned him so much, that he passed into Ire∣land, slue the King of the land, tooke the Citie of Dublin, where hee remained an whole yeere, and then returned to Denmarke. Next commeth Turgesius his time to bee examined, who was of Norwey, and came with great power of Esterlings into Ireland, van∣quished King Edlumding, or Edlimidus, or in Irish, Felim Mac Ed∣mund, and raigned thirty yeeres. Here (gentle reader) observe certain errours or escapes (whether of ignorance, wilfulnesse, or negligence, I know not) the which I finde betweene Cambrensis, Polychronicon, Fabian and others, touching Gurmund and Turgesius. First, that Gur∣mund and Turgesius should be one man, the end of them both by a generall consent of Writers, reproveth that; for Gurmund dyed in France, and Turgesius was slaine in Ireland. Secondly, (whereat Gi∣raldus marvaileth) how that the Antiquaries of England make men∣tion of Gurmund, but nothing of Turgesius, and that the Writers of Ireland speake of Turgesius, but little or nothing of Gurmund; so that Turgesius by reason of his raigne and continuance was knowne unto them, and Gurmund, if he were here, made small abode, (as I have for∣merly written) and therefore became a man unknowne. Thirdly, that Turgesius should be Gurmunds deputie in Ireland, or his brother (as I reade in Fabian) cannot possibly stand with the truth: for on all sides it is agreed, that Gurmund came to Britaine, and ioyned with the Saxons against Careticus, who began his raigne in Britaine, anno 586. but, as saith Cambrensis, Turgesius Captaine of the Norwegi∣ans, Danes or Esterlings, came to Ireland in the daies of Fedlimidius, which was 400. yeeres from the comming of the first Patricke into the land, in the which time there had raigned thirty three Kings or Monarchs; then this knot with facilitie may be untied,Turgesius came to Ireland, Anno 832. for Patricke came to Ireland (as I have formerly delivered) An. 432. adde 400. to it, then Turgesius came to Ireland, Anno 832. But forward with the history.
When these Norwegians or Esterlings had got footing in the land to their content, and planted themselves the space of thirty yeeres, they builded Castles, Fortes and Wardes, they cast up Tren∣ches, Bankes and Ditches for safegard and refuge. Toward the end of the terme before mentioned, Turgesius was enamoured on a faire Gentlewoman, the onely daughter of Omalaghlin, King of Meth, and desired her for his Concubine; he practised with the father for ob∣taining of his purpose, the father not willing to yeeld, nor daring to displease, resolved him thus: Appoint the day, the houre, and the place, and sequester your selfe from your Court and retinue, and I will send my daughter unto you with twelve or sixteene Gentlewo∣men, of the choice and beautifullest maidens of my country, and take your choice of them; if my daughter please you best, she is at your command. When the time appointed came, and the Lecher longed to satis∣fie his filthy lust, Omalaghlin attired his daughter in princely sort, and sent her to King Turgesius, with sixteene young men in womens attire, which had long Skeines under their Mantles. These young springals were faire, beautifull, effeminate, and amiable to look upon; they were brought to his chamber, and presented before him, he ta∣keth the Gentlewoman by the middle, and kisseth her, the Striplings out with their Skeines,Turgesius slaine and stabbed him, having the Lady in his armes, whereof he presently dyed, whilst they fell upon a few loose and dissolute persons that were about him, whom they killed every one. Omalaghlin that lay in ambush all this while with certaine horse∣men, (expecting the end of this exploit) reioyced greatly when hee saw his daughter and her company make so speedy a returne, and un∣derstanding that his practise was effected as he desired, sent Scoutes and Cursitors, Messengers and horses over the whole land, declaring what had happened. Immediately, Meth and all Leinster are in Armes, the Princes and Lords from euery place throughout Ire∣land, repaired to Omalaghlin, and being glad of liberty, reioyced with him at the destruction of Turgesius and his Guard. To make the sto∣ry short, (for they made short worke with it) they set upon the Nor∣wegians and Danes, killed them every mothers sonne that escaped not by flight, seized upon all their possessions, so as together with their lives, they lost all their lands and goods: and, saith the Irish Chronicle,Iacob. Grace. Thad. Douling. tunc cepit conquestus Hibernicorum, Then the Irish began to conquer. This Omalaghlin King of Meath, being in great trust, credite and favour with Turgesius (no man greater at that time) demanded of him (concealing the plot that lay hidden in his heart against the Norwe∣gians) by what meanes certaine ravenous and pestiferous fowle (hee meant the Norwegians) lately brought into the land, which greatly
annoyed the country, might be destroyed? Turgesius answered, if they breed, destroy their egges, birds, and nests; which answer, the Irish made good upon the Norwegians. Not long after (saith Cambrensis and Polychronicon) after what? They meane, after the murthering of Turgesius, and rooting out of all the Norwegians and Esterlings, there came againe out of Norway, and the Northerne Ilands, as remnants of the former nation, and whe∣ther they knew of themselves, or by relation of their Parents and Ance∣stours, the land to be fruitfull, & commodious; thither they came, not in warlike sort, but in peaceable manner, to use the trade of merchandise; when they had entred certaine Ports and Havens of Ireland, with the licence of the Princes of the land, they builded therein divers Cities. For the Irish nation, (they speake of that time) naturally given to idle∣nesse, would not sulcate the seas, neither give themselves to merchan∣dise, so that by one consent of the whole land, it was thought good, that some certaine nation, by whose industrie the commodities of other regi∣ons wanting in Ireland, might be hither transported, should be suffered to dwell in some parts of the land.Amelanus, Sita∣racus and Ivorus. Their Leaders and Captaines were three brethren, Amelanus, Sitaracus and Ivorus, when they had first builded three Cities, Dublin, Waterford, and Limericke; the command of Dublin fell to Amelanus, Waterford to Sitaracus, Lymericke to Ivorus, and from these by degrees, in processe of time, they gave them∣selves to build other Cities in Ireland. This nation (quae nunc Oasman∣nica gens vocatur) which now is called the Esterling nation, or East men, at their first comming, demeaned themselves toward the Kings of the land, in a most royall and peaceable mander, but when the num∣ber multiplied of their owne kinne, and they had fortified their Cities with wals and trenches, they began to revive the old hatred that was hid in their hearts, and obstinately to rebell. They were called Oostman∣ni of their corrupt Saxon tongue, as men of the East. Of these and the former Norwegians, the Irish tooke the use of the Sparthes, now called Galloglas axes. So farre Cambrensis verbatim, and Polychron in sub∣stance. Divers have diversly delivered their opinion, and misreckoned themselves in their computation of yeeres, when these Cities before spoken of were builded. Stanihurst in his description of Ireland, re∣ferreth it to the yeere 155. and that they were builded by Amelanus; in another place he alledgeth it was after Gurmundus his dayes, done in like sort by Amelanus. It is such an errour as I cannot well impute it to the Printer. Cambrensis and Polychronicon doe not lay down the yeere, but the time about the yeere: what beside is added, is but fan∣cie and conjecture, for their testimony is the ground of all. For where they write that these brethren came to Ireland after the death of Tur∣gesius, then it was after the yeere 862: wherein hee died, but how soone or how long after, there is no certaintie. That they builded
these Cities, I doe not beleeve, I had rather say with Stanihurst, that they reedified them, for those places were after a sort builded, and in∣habited many yeeres before their arrivall. I take it that as Merchants, they builded themselves dwelling houses, walled the townes, and made keyes to moore their shippes, neither doe I hold it that every one severally builded a Citie, but all three together with the aide of their country Merchants upon their arrivall in their safe Ports, buil∣ded and planted their country people, and rested not long, for the Irish fell upon them, and banished them out of the land, for their ri∣ches, pride, and rebellion. Patricke, the Abbot.In the yeere 850. lived Patricke the Abbot of Ireland, Abbot and Confessor. For there were two Patrickes, the first a very learned and godly man, the second a Abbot, and given to superstition, and foun∣der of the fabulous Purgatorie, which goeth in Ireland under the name of Saint Patrickes Purgatorie; so write Ranulphus, Monke of Chester, and Bale, Bishop of Ossory, though Stanihurst allow not of it, but attribute it to the first Patricke, and that without warrant. In his time there rose a great rebellion in Ireland, so that hee fled into Britaine, and lyeth buried in Glastenbury. The Martyrologe of Sarum reporteth, that in Ireland they keepe the feast of Patricke the Abbot, the 24. of August. Stanihurst to further his credite, delive∣reth that he wrote a booke of Homilies, and certaine Epistles dire∣cted to the Irish.Saint Patricks Purgatory. The sounder opinion is, (the which Stanihurst at unawares remembred out of Claudianus) that the place there, was in like sort as it is now in the time of Paganisme, and was long before Saint Patrickes dayes, And it seemeth to be after the manner of con∣cavities in the bowels of the earth, where the ayre entring naturally to avoid Vacuum, and the winde following, whisteleth and crieth like dolefull ghosts; the silly ignorant and simple people being deceived through perswasion of covetous Priests, that some soules and spirits doe penance there for their sinnes, call it a Purgatorie. And further we see by reason and daily experience in Miners, that if any be much under grownd, the dampnesse of the earth takes away their lively co∣lour, and makes them looke ghastly, and if they continue any long while there (the vitall spirits being barred of their usuall course) they are mightily tormented, cast into trances, and distracted, and being once delivered from the place, report things at randon of heaven and earth, beleeve them who list. Albertus Krantz Dan. lib. 2.Albertus Krantz, reckoning up reports given forth out of severall countries touching visions, apparitions, voyces, illusions, inserteth among them, Patrickes Purgatorie in Ireland, and concludeth, that they are to be accounted among old Wives fables.Ant. chron. p 2. tit. 11. cap. 1▪ Antoninus alledg∣eth Vincentius for his Author, how that in those dayes, the historie de fossae sancti Patricij of Saint Patrickes pit or ditch, was not of many allowed, the reason is alledged, for that it is there avouched, that the
soules in that Purgatorie, goe not straight to heaven, but into some terrestriall Paradice, whereas the received opinion is, (saith he) that there is no middle place betweene Purgatorie and the celestiall Para∣dice. In the time of Alphred, alias Alured, King of West Saxons, anno 872. as Fabian and Cooper have noted, there was a grievous maladie raigning among the people, called the euill ficus,Evill Ficus. which also tooke the King, so that (say mine Authors) an Irish maid came out of Ireland, called Modwen, whose Monasterie in time of rebellion,Modwen. was destroy∣ed, and cured the King. In recompence whereof, she had land given her in the North, whereon two Monasteries were founded, and now she resteth at Aundersey by Burloa. Polychronicon and Holinshead re∣port the historie, as if Alphred had gone into Ireland unto her. I al∣ledge this historie to put the reader in minde, how that formerly I have written of one Modwen, who lived immediately after Saint Pa∣tricke, and was of Irish birth, about 400. yeeres agoe▪ Were it not for the time, by many circumstances, they both should be one, but to re∣move all doubts, and to uphold the credite of antiquaries, I will say they were two, of one country birth, and now rest in one place▪ There was great amitie betweene Alphred or Alured before men∣tioned, and Gregory, King of Scots, in whose time,Anno 877. Anno 877. (Graf∣ton, Cooper, and Buchanan are mine Authors) great troubles and mi∣sery fell upon Ireland; the circumstances in briefe were these. The Citizens of Dublin found themselves grieved, and mightily wronged by the Scots of Galloway; that whereas certaine tall ships of theirs were wind-driven thither, the Scots fell upon them, rifled them, and thereof made a prey. In revenge whereof, the people of Dublin ga∣thered Irish forces, arrived there, and preyed the country. Gregory the King having intelligence thereof, hastened with his forces, to encounter with them; the Irish fearing the worse, got them with their pillage aboard their shippes, and hoised up sailes for Ireland: Gregory prepareth his navy, and shortly after arriveth in Ireland. The King at that time (saith Buchanan) was but a childe, whose name was Duncanus, or Donatus, or rather Dunachus;Brian and Cornelius. the Protectors or chiefe commanders of the land about the King, were Brian and Cornelius, who had drawne the land into two factions. The Irish hering of the comming of Gregory, fortified themselves upon the ri∣ver of the Band, but there the Scots overthrew them; Brian was slaine, and Cornelius put to flight. The Scots left them not so,Scots at the Band over∣throw the Irish. but pursued them, preyed the country without resistance, constrained the townes before them to yeeld, and hearing by the way that Cornelius gathe∣red all the forces of Ireland against them, made ready to ioyn battaile, in the which, Cornelius and all his forces were foiled, so that for a safeguard of his life, hee fled to Dublin, and his armie dispersed themselves abroad. Gregory followed him, laid siege to Dublin, and
by reason there were so many received within that fled from the field, they could not long indure the strength of the puissant King of Scots without,Dublin receive the Scots. Cormack, Bi∣shop of Dub∣lin. wherefore by generall consent of the Citizens, Cormacke, Bishop of Dublin, opened the gates, received the King of Scots, with∣out losse of any man of either side, or damage of goods. Immediately Gregory the King of Scots, went to his cousin Duncan the young King, saluted him, and delivered unto him that he came not for his kingdome, ne for gold nor silver, ne for commodities of his country, but onely to be revenged of them that had formerly injured his sub∣iects. And as for you, said he, cousin Duncan, I beare you no malice; without bloud I came into the Citie of Dublin, without bloud I will depart; recompence of the Citizens of Dublin I seeke none, the inha∣bitants betweene this and the Band have satisfied me and my people, let the Citizens pay it them againe, and make no more such rash at∣tempts into Scotland. With this they lovingly departed, and conti∣nued friends, to the great honour of the King of Scots. After this, Anno 897. poore Ireland had another scourge, for saith Caradoc Llancarvan in his British Chronicle,Anno 899. Strange wormes. and likewise Poli∣chronicon, this country was destroyed with strange wormes, having two teeth, so that there was neither corne nor grasse, nor food for man or beast, for all was consumed that was greene in the land, at the season of the yeere: The nine hundreth yeere followeth. Anno Dom. 900.The Saxons that divided Britaine (as formerly hath been declared) into many kingdomes, began now to grow weake in their estate; and the Danes that troubled in a manner all Christendome,Danes in Ire∣land. were falling to naught: yet Anno 905. saith the British Chronicle, the Danes en∣tred Ireland, preyed, spoyled, and fired the country, slue in the field, Garmot, (so he calleth him) alias Cormac, Monarch of Ireland, and the sonne of Cukeman, a man both godly and religious; and also Kyr∣valt, sonne of Morgan, King of Leinster. Then they roved round about England, hulling upon the seas, and landing where they espied advantage, destroyed with fire and sword as much as lay in them. Anno 911. they came againe into Ireland (saith Cooper) holding on in their former outrages. Anglesey spoy∣led by them of Dublin.Anno 913. (saith Carodoc) the men of Dublin with great forces came to Anglesey, preyed and destroyed the Iland, and returned to Ireland: the cause I finde not, but that sea and land was bent to mis∣chiefe, the fire upon the land, and piracie upon the sea. Anno 925. the second yeere of the raigne of Adelstane, the base sonne of Edward the first, (called Edward Senior) King of West-Saxons, was a great armie gathered by the said Adelstane, against Hawlaffe, King of Ireland, the sonne of Suthricus, and a Painym, saith Polychronicon,Hawlaffe, King of Ireland. Bromford saith Grafton. who came with the whole power of the Scots and Danes against him, and gave him battaile at Brimesturie, where Adelstane had the victory, and slue the said King Hawlaffe, and the
King of Scots, and five Kings of the Danes and Normans, and twelve Earles, so that he brought all the land of England and Scot∣land into subjection, which none of his Predecessours had ever at∣tempted. So farre out of Caradoc in the British Chronicle. Polychronicon writeth of Hawlaffe, that he was the sonne of Sitri∣cus, and had married the daughter of Constantine, King of Scots, and by his aide entred the mouth of the river of Humber, with a strong navy, and when both armies had encamped themselves, Hawlaffe used this policie; He tooke a Harpe, and in Harpers attire, went to Adelstanes Tent, where he harped, and viewed their dit, dispositi∣on, and behaviour, tooke money for his musicke, which in heart he disdayned, he secretly, as he thought, hid the money in the ground, and went away. A souldier that sometime served Hawlaffe, espied it, and told Adelstane the whole; why, saith Adelstane, diddest not thou acquaint me sooner? he answered, O King, the faith I owe thee now, sometime I ought to Hawlaffe, if I had beene false to him, thou wouldst have suspected me afterwards; but now remove thy Tent, for he will suddenly come upon thee. For all the haste that Adelstane made, Hawlaffe came in the night, slue a certaine Bishop and his com∣pany that were fleeing, and many others: hee hasted to Adelstanes Tent, but he was provided, and in armes, and at the breake of the day, set upon his enemies, and foiled them, as formerly is delivered. Anno 926. (Saxo Grammaticus, Albertus Krantz, and others are mine Authors) Knutus and Herald, sonnes to Gormo, King of Denmarke, following the steps of their fathers, gave themselves to Pi∣racie; roved, crossed, and hulled upon the seas, all was fish that came to their nets; they arrived in Ireland, and laid siege to Dublin. The King of Leinster sent especially, and laid an ambush within a mile of Dublin, and whilst the Danes scaled the wals without, the Citizens manfully defended themselves within, and others were carelesse of themselves abroad; one of the espials levelled an arrow at Knutus, and gave him such a wound, that he shortly dyed thereof. The Danes prevailed, but their ioy upon his death was turned into sorrow; Gor∣mo the father so intirely loved this Knutus his sonne, that he vowed, whosoever brought him newes of the death of his sonne Knutus, for recompence, should die the death. Thira, daughter to Edward the Martyr, (saith Functius) the mother, being a Christian (though Gor∣mo were a bloudy Infidell) having certaine intelligence of the death of Knutus, durst not reveale it, but used this policie: shee caused in¦stead of her husbands princely robes, (wherewith he was on a mor∣ning to make himselfe ready) mourning cloathes to bee laid before him, and such funerall exequies, as were used to be prepared for the witnessing of the sorrow and griefe conceived for the departure of some deare friend; woe is me (saith Gormo) now my sonne Knutus is dead, this I gather by these circumstances. Then answered Thira the
Queene, you my Lord discover it, not I. Gormo dyed for sorrow, and Thira lamented in one day the departure of her Lord and hus∣band the King, the death of her sonne, and her owne dolefull wid∣dowhood. Anno 939. (so writeth Caradoc) Abloic a most worthy Prince, and Monarch of Ireland deceased. Anno 940. after the death of Athelstane, his brother Edmund raigned over Britaine. He subdued the Danes that remained in Nor∣thumberland, together with others that came out of Ireland to in∣vade the land with Anlaffe their Captaine, saith Fabian; he slue some, and banished the rest, so writeth Cooper. Saint Maries Abbey foun∣ded by DublinAnno 948. the Abbey of the blessed Virgin Mary, by Dublin, was founded by the Danes. Molanus writeth of one Columbanus an Abbot of Irish birth that became a recluse or an anachorist, Anno 957. in the Church yard of the Monasterie of Gandavum, where he kept the space of two yeeres, and there ended his dayes. This yeere, saith Caradoc, Congelach, King of Ireland was slaine, but he sheweth not where nor how. Anno 959. Edgar, the sonne of Edmund, beganne his raigne o∣ver England, he reduced all into one Monarchie. Camden found in a Charter, where Edgar delivered of himselfe, that it pleased God of his mercy to grant unto him, together with the command of England, to subdue all the Ilandish kingdomes of the Ocean, together with their fierce and mighty Kings as farre as Norwey, and the greatest part of Ireland, with Dublin the most noble Citie thereof, unto the kingdome of England. Anno 966. Rodericke, the sonne of Edwall Voell, Prince of Wales, was slaine by Irish men that landed there for a prey, spoyled the country, and destroyed Aberfraw. Caradoc so complaineth of them. Molanus writeth of one Forananus a Bishop, which flourished, Anno 980. he termeth him Bishop of Domenormor,Forananus his life. and Metropoli∣tane of Ireland and Scotland: where he mightily erred in the name of the place, of the person, and his stile. For hee was Bishop of Dro∣more in Ireland, and no Metropolitane at all, but to his purpose hee findeth him among his Saints of Flanders, and saith, that he was war∣ned in a vision to travaile; so that he with a company of Irish Priests, arrived in France, and came to Rome, in the time of Benedict 7. from thence he came backe to the Monasterie of Walciodorum, where hee and his Priests became professed Monkes, of the order of Saint Be∣nedict, for the space of twelve yeeres, and there ended their dayes. The Monkes there, saith he, were wont among other Saints at Easter, yeerely to call upon him▪ Sancte Foranane ora pro nobis, untill that the reformers of Bursfeld wiped him out of the Catalogue of Saints, for that he was not canonized by the Church of Rome.
Anno 988. (as I finde in the British Chronicle) Elwmaen, the sonne of Abloic, King of Ireland, was slaine, and a great number of people dyed with famine; that is alwaies the end of civill warres and rebellion in Ireland. Anno 1004. the Scots (I know not the cause) entred Ireland, and after their manner, as also the Danes did then in England, preyed,Scots in Ire∣land. bur∣ned, and destroyed: they tooke Gulfath and Vbiad, Irish Lords, and put out their eyes, they ransacked also the Citie of Dublin. Anno 1012. Grace and Dowlinge, the Irish Antiquaries doe con∣curre,Battaile of Clantarfe. (the English Writers are silent) and deliver how that Bernai∣dus, commonly called Brian Bowrow, Monarch of Ireland,Brin Boroave. and his sonne Murcath, alias Murchardus Mac Brian, with other Kings of the land subiect unto him, gathered great power, and met at Clantarfe, nigh Dublin, and gave a sore battaile unto Sutraic, alias Sutric, the sonne of Abloic, King of Dublin, and unto Moilmordha, King of Leinster. This Sutric, to withstand the Monarch, had hired to his aide, all manner of strangers he could get by sea or by land, as Danes, Norwegians, Scots, Britaines, Pirates, and sea rovers. The fight was desperate, the field all bloud, a horse (they say) was sometime to his belly in bloud. There were slaine that day of the one side, Brian the Monarch, and his sonne Murchard; of the other side, Moilmordha King of Leinster, Rodericke the Arch-Pirate, and Captaine of the strangers, with others of both sides innumerable. Sutrick was sore wounded, was brought to Dublin, and shortly after died of his wound. I pray thee gentle Reader, who got by the bargaine? As farre as ever I could learne, a woman set them together by the eares. The Booke of Houth, after the Irish observation, delivereth the story thus. There was a Merchant in Dublin,The cause of the field of Clantarfe, out of the booke of Houth. commonly called the white Merchant, a Dane, the fourth sonne of the King of Denmarke who had a faire wife of Irish birth, and he being full of iealousie, and ready to travaile for merchandize into farre countries, desired of Bri∣an Borow, Monarch of Ireland, that his wife (untill his returne) might waite upon his Lady, soiourne in his house for the safeguard of her person, credit, and honestie, the which was granted, and the King undertooke it. This Merchant made as speedy a returne as he could, and being landed early in a morning, with a privy key, entred the chamber where his wife lay, and found Morogh Mac Brian the Kings sonne in bed with his wife; hee wheeled about, devising what was best to be done, at length resolving himselfe to depart for that time, tooke Moroghs sword, and put it into his owne scabbard, and his in∣to Moroghs scabbard. Hee went to the King, and complained of the abuse here spoken of; the King answered, He is my sonne, give thou iudgement upon him; saith the Merchant, let him keepe the whore still, I will be revenged upon him and his partakers in the field, as soone as
possibly may be, and I doubt not but all Ireland shall rue the day of this villanie. Immediately he went to Denmarke, brought over to his aide, thirty thousand Danes and Norwegians, landed at Clantarfe, whereof the field was called the field of Clantarfe; hee summoned Morogh and his favourites to fight, and thought at the first to have taken Dublin. Brian Borow fearing this, made more haste then good speed, tarried not for the forces of the land, that were comming with his sonne Donogh to his aide, but rashly with his sonne Morogh, (the Author of all this mischiefe) gave them battaile. The which bat∣taile all the forenoone being cruelly fought, seemed all to leane on the Irish side, but in the afternoone, the Danes that were in the rere, and yet fresh for any fight they had, were directed to wheele about, and to take the voward unknowne unto the Irish, which fiercely fought and encountred with the wearie and wounded Irish, and wonne the field. Here was Brian Borow, and his sonne Morogh, and eleven thousand of the Irish slaine. One thing further (gentle reader) note, there was a Priests sonne, accounted a tall man of armes, who in the beginning of the battaile, fled away, fearing the hardinesse of the Danes and Norwegians, and went to Donogh Mac Brian, the brother of Morogh, who was com∣ming with forces to the field, and perswaded him to retraict; saying further, that there was no hope of good successe to bee obtained in this field. This man being taken, confessed the whole treason, and for punishment, was carried to the winde gates, twelve miles from Dub∣lin, set alive standing in the ground, with a great heape of stones a∣bout him, as it pleased the Commanders to direct. In Stanihurst I finde that the the chiefe Potentates of the Irish, were Brian Borow, Miagh Mac Brian, (whom formerly I termed Morogh) Tady O Kel∣ly, Dolir Ahertegan, and Gille Barramed, and that they were buried at Kilmaniham, over against the great Crosse. Anno 1031. as it is remembred by Caradoc in the British Chroni∣cles, there was great stirre and bloudshed in South-Wales, by the meanes of Howell and Meredith, the sonnes of Edwyn ap Evean ap Owen ap Howell Dha, that made claime unto that country against Rytherch ap Iestyn, Prince of South-Wales. Howell and Meridith hired unto them a King of Ireland, (whose name is not set downe) which brought with him a great armie of Irish-Scots; the armies met, the fight was cruell, much bloud on both sides was shed, in the end, Rytherch the Prince was discomfited and slaine, by which means they attained unto the governement of South-Wales, the which they ioyntly ruled, and bountifully rewarded the Irish King. There is at Sauntrie, some three miles from Dublin, yeerely re∣membrance of Saint Pappan that was borne there.Saint Pappan. Molanus calleth him Poppon. He travailed into France, builded there many Monaste∣ries, (saith mine Author) and preferred to governe them many men,
became an Abbot himselfe, and departed this life, Anno 1048. and lyeth buried at Stabuletum in France, where hee governed. Lastly, mine Author noteth, that he was a Saint, but never canonized. Conan, the sonne of Iago, Prince of North-Wales, married Ra∣nulph, the daughter of Alfred, King of Dublin, who in the warres betweene Iago his father, and Griffith the sonne of Lhewelyn ap Sit∣sylte, sometimes King of Wales, (saith Caradoc) was driven to flee into Ireland for safegard of his life. This Conan, Anno 1041. came with Alfred his father in law, with great power out of Ireland to recover his country: they shortly landed in Wales, and by treason, secretly tooke Griffith the King, and carried him towards their ships, but when it was knowne, the country upon the sodaine rose, armed themselves, followed the Irish men, made great slaughter of them, rescued their Prince, and drove Alfred and Conan, with the rest of their forces, to their shippes, and so to Ireland. Stow following Fabian, writeth how that Anno 1049. certaine forces out of Ireland, (whom hee calleth Irish Pirates) with 36. ships, entred the mouth of Severne, landed in a place called Westlap∣ham, and with the helpe of Griffith King of South-Wales, spoyled along those coasts, and did great mischiefe. Afterwards Griffith, and those Irish Pyrates, ioyning their powers together, passed over the river Wie, and burnt Dumenham, and slue man, woman, and childe, leaving nothing behinde them, but bloud and ashes. Worce∣ster, Glocester, and Herefordshire, rose in Armes against them, but many of them in cruell fight being slaine, the rest put to flight, the Irish returned home merrily, loaden with spoyle. Anno 1050. Conan gathered an armie of his friends in Ireland, attempting the second time the recoverie of his inheritance, he hoy∣sed up saile towards Wales, but on a sodaine there arose such a tem∣pest upon the seas, that scattered his Navie, and drowned the most part of his ships, so that he gave over the voyage for that time. About this time (wherein the English and British historiogra∣phers doe agree) Robert, Archbishop of Canterbury, accused Earle Godwin and his five sonnes, (especially Swaine and Harold) of trea∣son, and Queene Editha the daughter of Godwin, of adulterie, who being called before the King, refused to appeare, and therefore were banished the land, and the Queene was put away from the King. Godwin and Swaine fled to Flanders, Harold and Leofwin (Warwell saith Holinshead) to Ireland, and the Queene was sent with one Maid to the Monasterie of Wilton. Immediately the King disposed of all their possessions. It was not long after ere Godwin and Swaine got shippes, men, munition, and all necessaries in Flanders, the like did Harold and Leofwin in Ireland, they all met upon the seas, to wit, the father, the mother, and the five sonnes; they spoyled the Ile of Wight, Partland, Peveneseny, Romny-heath, Folkeston, Dover,
and Sandwich, and entring the Thames, destroyed Sheppey, and bur∣ned the Kings houses at Mielton.Or Midleton. Then they met with the kings Fleet upon the seas, and being ready to fight, Bishop Stigand stept be∣tweene them, and reconciled both sides in such sort, that the King re∣stored them their lands and goods, tooke home the Queene, and ba∣nished Robert the Archbishop, with all the French men which had put buzzes and suspitions into the Kings head. Anno 1054. as Powell in his annotations upon Caradoc, hath lear∣nedly collected; King Edward by evill counsell (as it was thought) banished Algar, Earle of Chester, which had treason laid to his charge, whereupon Algar gate him into Ireland, and there provi∣ding him eighteene shippes of warre, well appointed and manned with stalworth men, of Irish birth, returned and joyned himselfe with Griffith, King or Prince of Wales, who both together, invaded the country of Mercia about Hereford, where Ranulph, Earle of that country (who was sonne to King Edwards sister, named Goda, by her first husband Walter de Manut) came against them with a great ar∣mie, and met them about two miles from Hereford, where after a sore fight, by the space of three houres, Ranulph and his armie were discomfited, and about 500. of them slaine, and the rest put to flight, whom Griffith and Algar pursued to Hereford, and entring the towne, set the Cathedrall Church on fire, and slue the Bishop named Leogar, with seven of the Canons, and most lamentably (as it falleth out in warres) spoyled and burned the towne. King Edward being advertised hereof, gathered an armie, and sent Harold the sonne of Earle Godwin against them, who pursuing the enemies to North-Wales, passed through Stradlewyde to Snowdon: but Griffith and Algar being loath to meete Harold, got them againe into South-Wales, whereof Harold being advertised, left one part of his armie in North-Wales, to resist the enemy there, and returning with the re∣sidue to Hereford, caused a great trench to be cast round about the towne, with a high rampire, strongly fortifying the gates of the same. After this, by meanes of a parlee had with Griffith and Algar, at a place called Biligellagh, a peace was concluded, whereupon Algar being pardoned by the King, and restored againe to his Earledome, returned home to Chester. About two yeeres after, Algar was accused againe of treason, and the second time exiled the land, fled into Ireland, where he was most ioyously received of his old followers, and offered more kinde∣nesse, then he requested, for hee had most honourably dealt with the Merchants and owners of the former ships, and most kindely intrea∣ted, and bounteously rewarded the Irish souldiers, the which then in his second extremity, was not forgotten. With shippes, men and munition out of Ireland, he bent his course to Wales, repaired to his old friend Griffith, Prince of Wales, where he was most welcome,
and shortly restored againe to his Earldome by the meanes and in∣treaty of certaine strangers, which had lately there arrived out of Norway. Camden writeth how that Anno 1066. Godred, surnamed Cronan, the sonne of Hiraldniger, of Island, invaded the Ile of Man, thence came into Ireland, did the like unto Dublin, and a great part of Leyn∣ster, made great spoyle, and went backe againe. The British Chronicle reporteth of Dermot, (a King in Ireland) that in Anno 1068. he was murthered, but the manner hee sheweth not; the commendation he giveth of him is this: He was the worthi∣est and noblest Prince that ever ruled in Ireland. Polychronicon reporteth, how that Anno 1072. at Winsore before William the Conquerour, and the Cleargie, the controversie between the Archbishops of Canterbury and Yorke was heard at large, and decided, and that Bedaes historie was shewed, where it appeared that from Austen the Monkes time, till Bedaes death, (about 140. yeeres) the Archbishop of Canterburie had primacie over all Great Britaine & Ireland, that he had held Councels by Yorke, summoned Bishops of Yorke, consecrated Bishops, and punished Bishops of Yorke for their offences, and iudicially removed them. Philip Flatesburie a great Antiquarie, whom Stanihurst follow∣eth, and Iames Grace of Kilkenny, with Dowlinge his ioynt Col∣lectour doe write, how that Anno 1074. Patricke, Bishop of Dublin, was consecrated in Pauls Church in London, by Lanfranke, Archbi∣shop of Canterburie, upon commendatorie Letters of Teridionatus, alias Terdilnacus, Monarch of Ireland, and Godericke, King of Lein∣ster, and with teste of the Clergie and Laytie of that Diocesse of his lawfull and orderly election. Further I finde recorded, that it was the manner to consecrate Bishops in this sort, and that the Monarch of Ireland in regard of his royall principalitie and title of honour with other priviledges belonging to his Monarchie, had negative voyce in the nomination of Bishops throughout his Realme. Secondly, how the Archbishop of Canterbury took of him that was so consecrated, a corporall oath of Canonicall obedience (as his predecessours for∣merly used) to him and his successors; and lastly, gave him letters te∣stimoniall thereof to the Monarch and King of Leynster: Cambrensis sheweth the reason of this consecration, namely, how that in Ireland as then, there was no Archbishop, but one Bishop consecrated another, untill that Anno 1148. Iohannes Papiron, a Priest Cardinall, sent from Eugenius 3. together with Christian, Bi∣shop of Lismore, Legate of all Ireland, came to the land, and brought with them foures Paales. But of this more in another place. The same Flattesburie writeth further, how that the said Lan∣franke in like sort consecrated Donatus, Bishop of Dublin, Anno 1085.
About this time, Godwin and Edmund, sonnes to King Harold, (my Author is Thomas Walsingham, Monke of Saint Albans) which for∣merly had fled into Ireland for succour, unto Dermotte Mac O Nell, King of Ireland, returned with 66. saile, landed in Sommersetshire, (saith Stow) where Brian, the sonne of Eudo, Duke of Brabant, met them and gave them battaile, wherein (saith Stow) the brethren gate the victory, and the Irish men with many great preyes out of Corne∣wall and Devonshire returned into Ireland. But Walsingham (which seemeth more true) writeth that it was a bloudie battaile, wherein 1070. of the English and Normans, with certaine of the Nobilitie of the land, were slaine, and the enemies with aide of their ships, fled, and brought heavy newes home to their deerest friends in Ireland. It is very like that William the Conquerour immediately upon this, sent great forces into Ireland, to bee revenged of them for relie∣ving or assisting his enemies: for Stow writeth out of William of Malmsbury, thus: Lanfranck, Archbishop of Canterbury, being in such favour with King William, that the said William thought not good to deny any thing that hee requested, procured by his industrie, that the said King left his ill custome of selling his prisoners which hee tooke in Ireland, which was a thing hardly granted unto him, and to Wolstan, Bishop of Worcester, the gaine that the King had by the sale of those Irish men was such. The British Chronicle reporteth how that Anno 1087. and the last yeere of William Conquerour, the sonnes of Blethlyn ap Convyn, sometime King of Wales, gathered their strength together against Rees ap yder, who not being able to meete with them, fled to Ire∣land, and there he purchased to himselfe great friends, and got an ar∣mie of Irish men and Scots, to whom hee promised great rewards when he should obtaine his kingdome, & so landed in South-Wales with these strangers, and when his friends heard thereof, they drew unto him, and the other came in all haste to vanquish him before hee had made a head, and gathered forces together; to bee short, at Wechryd they gave battaile,Or Llechryd. where they were discomfited, and two of the brethren slaine, to wit, Madoc and Kirid, and the other fled and forsooke the country. As soone as Rees was in quiet possession of his country, he sent away the Irish men with great rewards. All the Lords of the Ilands sent messengers unto Murchard, alias Moragh O Brien, King of Ireland, that it would please him to send them some worthy man of royall bloud to be their King, during the nonage of Olanus, the sonne sonne of Godred, King of Man. Where∣upon he sent unto them one Dopnald Mac Tady, whom hee deepely charged to governe that kingdome, which of right appertained not to him, with all kindenesse, love and modesty; but hee was no sooner warm in the kingdome, but he forgot his instructions, and the charge his Lord had given him, he poled, he pilled, and practised all kinde of
tyranny, for the space of three yeers. Then all the Lords of the Ilands rose in armes against him, and banished him out of those parts, so he fled into Ireland, of whom they never heard any further newes. Stanihurst findeth that Anno 1095. there came certaine Esterlings to the North side of Dublin adjoyning to the Liffie, and seated them∣selves there, so that of them to this day, the place is called Ostomon∣towne, and corruptly, Oxmonton, and the Parish, Saint Michans,Saint Michan lived, Anno 1095. of one Michanus a Dane and a Bishop which founded the Church, unto whom Murchard, or Moragh King of Leynster, gave that par∣cell of land to that use. The faire greene or Commune, now called Ostmontowne-greene, was all wood, and hee that diggeth at this day to any depth, shall finde the ground full of great rootes. From thence, Anno 1098. King William Rufus, by licence of Murchard, had that frame which made up the roofe of Westminster Hall, where no English Spider webbeth or breedeth to this day. Cambrensis in his Itinerarie of Cambria, reporteth, how that King William standing upon some high rocke in the farthest part of Wales, beheld Ireland, and said, I will have the shippes of my kingdome brought hither, wherewith I will make a bridge to invade this land: Murchard King of Leynster heard thereof, and after he had paused a while, asked of the reporter; hath the King in that his great threat∣ning, inserted these words, if it please God? No, then (said he) seeing this King putteth his trust onely in man, and not in God, I feare not his comming. Anno 1095. Murchard, (so writeth Holinshed) alias Morogh,Samuel, Bishop of Dublin. King of Leynster, with the Clergie, and people of the Citie of Dublin, ele∣cted one Samuel a Monke of Saint Albans, an Irish man borne, to the governement of the Church, and Bishops See of Dublin, and accor∣ding to the antient custome, presented him by sufficient letters of te∣stimony unto Anselme Archbishop of Canterburie, to be consecra∣ted by him, who (according to their request) did so, and tooke of him an oath of Canonicall obedience after the usuall manner. Anno 1097. the Citizens of Waterford perceiving that by reason of the great multitude of people in that citie,Malchus, first Bishop of Waterford. it was necessarie for them to have a Bishop, obtained licence of their King and Rulers, to erect in their Citie, a Bishops See, and besought them to write to An∣selme, Archbishop of Canterburie, to have his consent therein, and permitted them to nominate a man meete for the place. Hereupon Morogh King of Leynster, wrote unto Anselme, informing him of the whole matter, wherein one Malchus was commended and pre∣sented unto him to be admitted and consecrated if he thought good; these letters were subscribed by Murchard, King of Leynster, Der∣motte his brother, Bishop Dufnald, Idiman, Bishop of Meath, Samu∣el, Bishop of Dublin, and Ferdomnachus, a Bishop in Leynster. An∣selme considering their request to be honest and necessarie, examined
the man, gave him the oath of Canonicall obedience, and consecra∣ted Malcus Bishop of Waterford. About this time, to wit, Anno 1098. the Normans having slaine Rees ap Twyde, Prince of South-Wales, they bent their forces a∣gainst Griffith ap Conan, Prince of North-Wales, by the conduct of Hugh de Montgomerie, Earle of Saloppe and Arundell, (called of the Welchmen, Hugh Gough,) and of Hugh Vras, Earle of Chester. Griffith the Prince fled to the mountaines, and sent for aide into Ire∣land, (saith Caradoc) where he received cold comfort, then to avoid farther mischiefe and treason, which hee suspected to have beene wrought against him, fled into Ireland. In the same season, Magnus King of Norway (so Stow calleth him) the sonne of Olavus, the sonne of Harold Harvager, came with great forces, and subdued the Iles of Orknay, with the Ile of Man, entred into Anglesey, incountred with Hugh, Earle of Salop, who withstood his landing, in the which skir∣mish, Hugh the Earle had an arrow shot in his face, which pierced his braine, of which he died; whereupon the Normans retraited. Mag∣nus invadeth Ireland (saith Saxo Grammaticus) and Griffith the Prince of Wales returned to his country, and made peace with the Normans, and governed the same fiftie yeeres. Many things worthy of memory are recorded of this Griffith ap Conan. Powell writeth that hee was an Irish man by his mother, daughter of the King of Dublin, and also by his Grandmother, and that hee was borne in Ireland, and that he brought over with him out of that country into Wales, divers cunning Musitians, who devised in manner, all the in∣strumentall musicke upon the Harpe and Crowth that is there used, and made lawes of minstrelsee to retaine the Musitians in due order. I have not yet done with Magnus the Norwegian, of him Cam∣den writeth a worthy storie. Magnus (saith he) caused a fleete to bee in readinesse of an 160. saile, and sailed into the Orkeneys, the which he forthwith subdued, he passed through all the Ilands, made them subject unto him, and arrived in the Ile of Man; when hee beheld how pleasant the Iland was, he made choice thereof for habitation, fortified therein, which of him to this day beares his name. Hee so hampered the inhabitants of Galloway in Scotland, that hee made them bring him timber to his Port for the frame of his fortifications. Afterward he sailed to Anglesey in Wales, where he met with two Hughs, both Earles, the one he slue, the other he put to flight, and made the Iland subiect unto him. The Welsh men gave him many gifts and rewards, he bade them farewell, and so returned to Man. He sent to Murchard, alias Morogh, King of Ireland, his shooes, com∣manding him to hang them upon his shoulders upon Christmas day as he passed through his Hall, in the sight of his Embassadors, that thereby he might understand that he was subject to Magnus the king. When the Irish men heard thereof, they tooke it in ill part, and
chafed exceedingly, but King Morogh, a wise and a sage Prince, smi∣ling at the conceit, with great modesty and discretion gave this an∣swer. I will not onely beare his shooes, but I had rather eate them, then that King Magnus should destroy any one Province in Ireland. Whereupon he fulfilled his command, honoured his Ambassadors, sent many Presents unto King Magnus, and concluded a league. The Ambassadors upon their returne, related all circumstances gave great report and commendation of the land, delivered how pleasant and fruitfull the soile was, the temperature of the ayre, and how healthfull the dwelling was. Magnus hearing this, immediately it ranne in his head to conquer all Ireland; he commanded a great fleet to be in a readinesse, and he himselfe going before with sixteene saile privily to espie and search out the strength of the land, and unadvi∣sedly ranging from his shippes, was upon a sodaine compassed and hemmed in by the Irishmen, and slaine, with all in a manner that were with him. Thus Magnus is become Minimus, in fine, hee was buried in Saint Patrickes Church of Downe. So farre Camden in sub∣stance. The British Chronicle writeth, how that before this insolent attempt, he had procured for his sonne, a daughter of King Morogh in marriage, and that he made him King of Man, but I doe not finde that he enjoyed it. Carodoc writeth, how that Anno 1101. Robert de Mountgomerie, Earle of Salop, and Arnulph his brother, Earle of Pembroke, rebel∣ling against King Henry, Robert sent for aide to Magnus, but could get none, Arnulph sent Gerald of Windesore, his Steward to Mur∣chard, alias Morogh, King of Ireland, to desire his daughter in marri∣age, the which hee obtained with promise of great succours, which did encourage him the more against the King; whereupon Arnulph went with all haste into Ireland for his wife and Irish forces. Earle Ro∣bert seeing himselfe disappointed, sent to the King, desiring him that he might forsake the Realme, which thing the King granted, and he sailed into Normandie. Arnulph received message from the King, that either he should follow his brother, and depart the land, or yeeld him∣selfe to his mercie, he chose to forsake the land, and fled into Ireland. Not long after, Owen the sonne of Cadogan, after hee had done great mischiefe and spoile upon the English, Normans, Flemings, and Welsh men, fled into Ireland to King Morogh, who joyfully received him, for he had beene there before, returned to Wales, and fled thi∣ther the second time, and in like sort the third time. Anno 1113. or thereabout, Griffith the sonne of Rees ap Twyder, Prince of South-Wales, who for feare of the King, had beene of a childe brought up in Ireland, came to Gerald, Steward of Pembroke his brother in law, and others of his friends, to recover his country, whom the King by secret policies and practises pursued, so that hee was forced to flee againe.
In the time of King Henry the first, I finde that there was great stirre betweene Murchard or Morogh, King of Leynster, and the Citizens of Dublin, for it seemeth that hee used grievous exactions and tyrannies over them, so that the Dublinians in revenge of him, sent for Godred, King of Man, and the Ilands, so writeth Camden, and made him their King. Morogh mustereth his country, gathereth for∣ces, procureth aide, marcheth against his enemies, pitcheth his campe at the towne of Coridelis, sent his brother (by the mother side) Osi∣bell, with three thousand horse well appointed to Dublin, where hee was slaine by Godred, and by the men of Dublin, and the rest discom∣fited and put to flight. Godred found himselfe well satisfied with spoiles, and returned to Man; they of Dublin likewise thought them∣selves in some sort reasonably well revenged of their King, quitted themselves for a while, and by mediation and intercession after many Presents and Gifts were reconciled. There was great banquetting and feasting, and ioy outward of all sides, but inward, lay venome and treason, like sparkles of fire covered with ashes, which broke forth not long after, as I am readie to deliver. Stanihurst, Grace and Dowlinge doe write, that the Councell of the Citie determining to establish and decree many good lawes and orders, for the publike weale of the towne, and commons of the same, appointed a solemne day of meeting, sent for Morogh their King, humbly craving with all loyall circumstances, his presence, counsaile, and assistance among them at the day appointed, the which hee granted; when the day came, and that they had debated many matters, the King as he sate merrily in his chaire, sporting himselfe, and reporting some pleasant historie, one suddenly stept unto him, and tooke away his weapon, the rest came upon him, and stabbed him to the death; they were not content with this, but they cast him into a base grave, and in further contempt and dispute of his person, they threw a dogge upon him, and earth upon them both, the which Dermotte his sonne revenged afterwards, as shall appeare in processe of the historie. About the yeere 1134. after Functius his computation, one Ha∣rold, borne in Ireland, (so writeth Saxo) gathered forces, and be∣came the terrour of Norway, affirming withall, that he was the sonne of Magnus the Dane that invaded Ireland, and for truth thereof, he would declare it by fire. When the time and place was appointed, with his bare feet he trode upon a fierie plate, and felt no hurt: the Norwegians admired, and would make him their King, which was the roote of many mischiefes in Norway. He was a man faire spoken, strong, hardy, and swift of foot, and it seemeth, after the manner of Ireland, that he went much bare, so that the soles of his feet were as hard as horne, and could not easily take harme by fire, by which meanes he deceived the Norwegians. Nicholaus, King of Denmarke, corrupted Magnus of Norway by secret meanes to cut him off.
Magnus practised with Ericus a Danish Captaine, to dispatch him immediately after his Coronation. To bee short, Ericus came with great forces to Scypetors, (a Village where Herald was) in the night time, laid siege to his Pallace, and by the breake of day, pulled him and his sonnes forth by the head and shoulders, and put them to death. In the time of Henry 1. King of England, flourished Celsus,Celsus, Bishop of Armagh. Bishop of Armagh, and ended his dayes with the entrance of King Stephen to the Crowne. He descended of Noble Parentage in Ireland, whom Saint Bernard with others, for divers rare and singular gifts, highly commendeth; he had beene brought up in the Vniversitie of Oxen∣ford, where in the liberall sciences, and profound literature, he excel∣led others of his time; when he perceived by the infirmities of his bo∣dy, that age hastened to an end, and that his naturall course was in short time to be finished, he desired of them that were present, their favours, and prayed them to use meanes unto others that were ab∣sent, and especially unto the two Kings of Mounster, (so Bernard wri∣teth) that Malachias might succeed him in the Bishopricke of Ar∣magh. He was a married man, and died of great age, and lyeth buried with his wife and children in the said Church. Malachias in the time of King Stephen, succeeded Celsus in the Bi∣shopricke of Armagh, whose life Saint Bernard,Malachias, Bi∣shop of Ar∣magh. Abbot of Clareval∣lis, Capgrave, and Conganus, an Abbot of Ireland have written at large. He was borne in Ireland amongst barbarous people (saith Ber∣nard) yet in his birth and native soile, hee sucked of them no more barbarousnesse, then the Sea fish take of the salt water. His Parents for wealth and might, were in great account in those dayes; he was brought up at Armagh, under Imarius the Anachorite, where Celsus made him both Deacon and Priest at the age of 25. yeeres, from thence with licence of Imarius and of Celsus, he went to Malchus, Bi∣shop of Lismore in Mounster, a man of Irish birth, that had beene a Monke sometimes in the Abbey of Winchester in England, and from thence advanced to the Bishopricke of Lismore. And to make the historie plaine, there was at that time, great warres betweene Cor∣macke, King of Mounster, and his brother for the Soveraignty; the brother prevaileth, Cormacke fleeth to the Bishop of Lismore, and in his distressed estate, tooke a Monkes Cell, and led a private life. Ma∣lachias was appointed his Tutor, where Cormacke continued untill that a King there adjoyning, pittying his miserie, gathered forces, and restored him to his kingdome. Immediately after this, Letters came for Malachias in most earnest sort, that he should come to Armagh, where not farre off, an Vncle of his, a man of great command, a Lord of a country, rich and po∣tent (that held in his hands all the wasted Monasterie of Benchr, alias Bengor) dwelled; of which Monasterie I have spoken before in
the raigne of King Arthure. Malachias upon his comming, restored these possessions, and reedifieth the old Monasterie, and appointed one Malchus, brother to Christianus, Abbot of Melefont, governour of the place; when Malachius was thirty yeeres of age, he was made Bishop of Conor, (Conorets saith Bernard) where hee met by his owne report, (more then I am willing to lay downe in writing) so rude and barbarous a people, as worse could not be found upon the face of the earth, yet the holy man ceased not to travaile among them by preaching and teaching, and by all meanes possible to winne them; not long after, a certaine King of Vlster destroyed Conor, and put the people to the sword, burned and spoyled, and made havocke of all, whereupon Malachias with a hundred and twenty brethren, fled to Mounster, where King Cormake gave him great entertaine∣ment, and ayded him greatly in the building of the Monastery of Ybrak. By this time, Celsus spoken of before, fell sicke and dyed. The rude people thrust in Mauritius that usurped the place some five yeeres, then Malchus, Bishop of Lismore, and Gislebertus the first Le∣gate that came to Ireland, from the Pope, called the Bishops and Princes of the land together, appointed Malachias for the place. And when death had swiftly cut off the intruder Mauritius, that damna∣ble nation thrust in Nigellus, but he prospered not long, so that Mala∣chias enjoyed it quietly. Of the injury done to that Church, and the abuse of that time, heare Bernard, (as he learned of Conganus and o∣thers) report. The see of Ardmach (saith Bernard) for the reverence and honour of Saint Patricke the Apostle of that nation, which con∣verted that whole land to the faith, in the which See living, he ruled, and in which dying, he rested, is had of all men from the beginning, in so great reverence, that not onely the Bishops and Ministers of the Clergie, but the Kings and Princes of that nation, carry themselves in all obedience unto their Metropolitane, so that he being one, ruleth all: but there crept in a most detestable custome, through the divel∣lish ambition of certaine mighty men, that the holy See was obtai∣ned by inheritable succession, neither were any suffered to enioy the Bishopricke, but such as were of their tribe and familie, neither did this execrable succession hold for a small time, but for the space of fifteene generations, now in this diabolicall malice elapsed. And so farre this wicked and adulterous generation had confirmed to it selfe this lewd interest, yea rather an injurie to be punished with all manner of death, that if at any time there should want Clerks of that race, yet never wanted Bishops. To be short, there were before Celsus, eight Bishops married men, besides himselfe, without orders, yet learned men; from hence over all Ireland, issued that dissolution of ecclesiastiall dis∣cipline, which Malachias found in Conor, the rooting out of godly censure, and the abandoning of religion; from hence every wherein stead of Christian meekenesse, was brought in cruell barbarousnesse,
yea, paganisme and infidelity under a Christian name; for that which was not heard of from the originall of Christianitie, without order, without reason, the Metropolitans at their pleasure changed, and in∣creased the number of Bishops, so that one Bishopricke contented not it selfe with one Bishop, and no marvaile, for how could it fare well with the members of so diseased a head? they possessed the Sanctuary of God in this sort, the space well neere of two hundred yeeres; hee meaneth unto the dayes of Celsus and Malachias. Cambrensis in his itinerarie of Cambria, had relation no doubt unto this, where he with Baldwin, Archbishop of Canterbury, in visitation about Wales, came to the Church called lure padaen vacor, that is, the Church of great Paternus, mis-stiled with the governement therof, for thus he writeth: This Church, like as many more throughout Ireland and Wales, hath a Laye man to their Abbot, use hath prevailed, and a lewd custome hath crept in, that great and mighty men in Parishes, have beene by the Clergie appointed Patrons and defendors; afterwards have usurped unto themselves the right thereof. Immediately hee reporteth of a travailer that came hither out of little Britaine in France, that had for his further knowledge seene many countries, and fashions of sundry nations, and entring into the said Church on the Sabbath day, way∣ted for divine Service, they rung the Bell, they tould, they waited long, at length came in the Abbot, with some twenty after him in armes, and wilde lookes, every one having (fon villuge, so the Britaines ter∣med it) a forrest Bill on his shoulder; the travailer asked which is the Abbot, answer was made the formost, with the greatest forrest Bill; the travailer asked, hath he any other ornament, or doth he use any other weede? answer being made, no, then said hee, I have travailed farre enough, I will see no more fashions whilst I live, after that I have seene an Abbot carry a forrest Bill upon his backe. Now to returne whence I have made this digression, for the abuse of the Church causeth me to abuse the reader. Malachias, when he had peaceably enioyed Ardmagh some three yeeres, with the consent of the three Bishops and Princes, he resigned his place to Gelasius, and returned to his former Bishopricke, not of Conor, but of Dune, for he had placed one in Conor before, to wit, Oedanus his disciple; here Bernard noteth that where Dune and Co∣nor were before this time united through ambition and covetousnesse, this man of devotion and conscience, separated them againe, dividing the Churches as they had beene of old, for the good will he bare to Armagh, he tooke his iourney towards Rome, landed in Scotland, came to Yorke, sailed to France, and lodged at Clarevallis; hee came to Rome in the time of Innocentius 2. who made him his Legate of Ireland, in the roomth of Gislebert, the old man spoken of before, which had made sute to be removed. Boniface appointed Armagh to be a Metropolitane See, but did not effect it, and promised the pall
which he did not performe; Bernard maketh mention of two Metro∣politan Sees, one procured by Celsus, the other by Malachias; but where and how I finde no antient record. Bale is of opinion they were in vocibus, and not in rebus, for lacke of money to pay for them. Vpon his returne hee came to Clarevallis, thence to England, so to Scotland, (where King David most royally entertained him) and lastly, to his Abbey of Benchor in Vlster. Of his conversation, heare Bernard: from the day of his birth, to the day of his death, hee lived sine proprio, without claiming propertie in any thing; he had neither men servants, nor maid servants, neither townes nor villages, neither any reuenue ecclesiasticall or temporall in his Bishopricke; for his pro∣vision, (ad mensam episcopalem) hee had no certainty allotted him whereupon a Bishop might live, hee had no certaine Monastery or dwelling place, for hee daily went about all the Parishes, preaching the Gospell, and living by the Gospell, as the Lord had ordained, saying, the labourer is worthy of his reward; of his labours and such as travelled with him, he carried about to relieve them all; to be short, Malachias neither in dyet or rayment was discerned from the rest of the brethren; when he went a preaching with footmen, he went on foot, being a Bishop and a Legate: and here Bernard exclaimeth, when he entreth into the consideration of the difference betweene him and his brethren, and the nephewes of the Apostles, so he calleth them. Towards his latter dayes, hee sorrowed that Ireland had not the pall, and as oft as he thought upon Innocentius 2. his promise, he sighed, who (as formerly I have delivered) had promised, not per∣formed; when he heard that Eugenius his successor was come unto France, he thought it a fit time to obtaine his purpose, he tooke ship∣ping for Scotland, where King David received him as in times past, and thence unto England, where the jarre betweene the King of England, and the Pope, hindred his passage, yet he got into France, and straight to Clarevallis, where hearing that Pope Eugenius was returned to Rome, he rested himselfe, fell sicke of an ague, and there dyed, being of the age of 54. yeeres, Anno 1148. 4 Nonas Novem∣bris, so farre Bernard in substance, yet Antonine saith hee dyed, Anno 1140. In his time lived Conganus, Abbot of Benchor, who enformed Ber∣nard of the whole life of Malachias, and wrote at large thereof him∣selfe, inserting many fabulous things, and saith Nicholas Magwire, he wrote not onely the life of Malachias, but also the life of Bernard. I finde him to be the Patron of Killaskin, otherwise called Killeshin, in Monte Margeo, and the Barony of Marghagha in Leynster, spo∣ken of before. In this time lived Tundalus Magus, so surnamed, because suspected for a Sorcerer, borne and brought up in Mounster (in Cashell, saith Lepelo, in the West of Ireland) of Noble birth, and by calling a
Knight: Antonius out of Vincentius reporteth, that hee was fierce and cruell, and in the end became a Carthusian Monke, for that or∣der beganne as we may reade in the life of Bruno, the first founder thereof, upon some great extremity, (whereof the Proverbe rose, de∣speratio facit Monachum, desperation maketh a Monke) it seemeth that he had in his life time committed some hainous offences, and was mightily tormented in conscience, and fell into trances and ex∣tasies; upon his recovery he delivered unto the world, strange & dam∣nable untruths, (saith Bale) of Heaven, Hell, Purgatory, and I wot not what, for a man distracted, knoweth not what he saith. Bale writeth, (talia ad terrorem fingebant scelestissimi; Nebolones some∣what excusing him, and extenuating his imbecillities and biddeth him farewell: Clarint Stephano Rege in Anglia dominante; & satana apud Hybernos suas vires exercente; hee flourished when Stephen raigned over England, and the divell domineered over Ireland. Hee wrote a booke of Revelations, the which Melchior Canus, Albertus Crantzius, and Gobelenus have utterly condemned. He wrote also the life of Vrsula, and the 11000. Virgins, printed at Cullen, the which Zazarias Lepelo counteth for lyes and fables. Anno 1142. the Abbey of Molyfont was founded by Donatus, alias Donogh, King of Louth, alias Vriell, some call him Donogh O∣carvell; the first Abbot was Christianus, who afterwards was Bishop of Lysmore, and Legate of all Ireland. Anno 1144. William, Bishop of Winchester, by authority of Pope Celestine 2. in a Councell held at London, brought in the use of cursing with Bell, Booke, and Candle, which liked the Irish Priests well, to terrifie the Laytie for their Tithes. Foxe. Anno 1148. there fell great variance betweene Owen, surnamed Gwyneth, Prince of NorthWales, and Cadwallader his brother, they were both the sonnes of Griffith ap Conan, Prince of North Wales. This Cadwallader fled into Ireland, and hired to his aide, Octer Mac Octer Curbell Mac Therulfe, with a great number of Irish men, and red shankes, for 2000. markes, and landed at Abermeany in Carnar∣vonshire, against whom, Prince Owen came with great power, but be∣fore the Armies met, there was a peace concluded betweene the bre∣thren, which when the Irish men understood, they kept with them Cadwallader, as prisoner, for their pay formerly promised, so that hee was faine to deliver 2000. heads of Cattell, besides many prisoners and spoyles that were taken in the country; but Prince Owen as soone as he knew his brother to be set at liberty, set upon the Irish men (his stomacke was full of revengement) slue a great number of them, and recovered all the Cattell, with the prisoners, and other spoyle, so that in the end, as many as escaped with life, returned to Ireland with sorrow, shame, and losse, and made no bost of their voyage; so wri∣teth Carodoc.
The same yeere, Anno 1148. Iohn Papire a Priest Cardinall, toge∣ther with Christianus Bishop of Lismore, the Popes Legate over the whole Land, being sent by Eugenius, came into Ireland. And in An∣no 1151. saith Mathew Paris, but by the consent of most Writers, Anno 1152. summoned a Councell, where in the presence of the Bi∣shops, Abbots, Kings, Dukes, & the Antients of Ireland, by the Apo∣stolike authoritie, Colledge of Cardinals, & consent of the Bishops, Abbots, & others there present, they ordained foure Archbishopricks in Ireland, and gave them foure pales, to wit, Ardmach, Dublin, Ca∣shell, and Tuam. In Ardmach, then sate Gelasius, in Dublin Grego∣ry, in Cashell Donatus, in Tuam Edanus; these were the first Arch∣bishops of Ireland. The records from that time to this day, of the foure Provinces, the foure Archbishoprickes with their Bishops and Suffragans, in Latine, and vulgar speech, with their titles of Saints and Patrons, together with the unions of them in processe of time following, I finde thus, Anno 1151. these Abbies were founded, de Beatitudine, de duillio, de Magio, de valle salutis, and happily the Monasterie which Mathew Paris and Polychronicon spake of upon this occasion. There was a Knight (say they) called Owin, of Irish birth, which had long served King Stephen in his warres, got licence to repaire unto his native soile, and to visit his friends; when hee came to Ireland, hearing the fame of the Purgatory of the second Patricke the Abbot, and not the Bishop, so I reade in Polychronicon, it came in his minde to visit the same, he being in the Cave, and concavities under ground, saw strange sights, and making report thereof unto King Stephen, obtai∣ned licence of him thenceforth to leade a religious and solitary life: he obtained also of King Stephen, (so Mathew Paris writeth) a par∣cell of ground in Ireland to build a Monasterie called Luden, an Ab∣bey of white Monkes, where Gervasius became the first Abbot, and where Gilbert a Monke trayned up Owen in the order thereof. This Gilbert (saith mine Author) wrote as Owen told him all the reports that are now extant of that Purgatory, so that it seemes to be no an∣tient matter, but a late device, first found by this Owen, in the late dayes of King Stephen. Anno 1152. was the battaile of Monad more fought in Ireland, betweene Leinster and Mounster men,The battaile of Monad more. where (saith Holinshed) the flower and chiefest personages of Leinster and Mounster were slaine, and saith Iohn Plunket, Mounster lost the field, Anno 1154. Terdie∣lach, King of Connaght dyed, there succeeded him, Rorie Oconochor Rowag, commonly called Roderic, who slue his owne brother that aspired to the kingdome of Connaght, and in this successe, attemp∣ted further, and became Monarch of Ireland. Henry 2 was crowned King of England, 1154.Henry 2 King of England, the sonne of Mathilda the Empresse, subdued Scotland, Ireland, Orchades, and the furthest Ocean Ilands;
he was Protector of France, and was offered the kingdome of Ieru∣salem: this Noble Henry was crowned King of England, Anno 1154. he married Elenor, daughter and heire of William, Duke of Aqui∣taine, the which Elenor had been formerly married to Lewis, King of France, and upon dislike, divorced, under pretence that they were within the fourth degree of consanguinity: he was knighted by Da∣vid, King of Scots, and after many broyles, & much bloudshed, adop∣ted by King Stephen for his sonne, and consequently proclaimed heire apparant to the Crowne of England, and thereupon after the dis∣cease of Stephen, crowned with great ioy and applause of the people. Anno 1154. the same yeere that Henry the second was crowned, the Abbey of Kyrie-eleeson was founded. Anno 1155. saith Mathew Paris and Fabian, and the first or se∣cond of Henry 2. raigne, (though Stow referre it to the 7. and Anno 1160▪ the King cast in his minde to conquer Ireland, hee saw that it was commodious for him, and considered that they were but a rude and savage people, for so the historiographers doe write, whereupon in his ambitious minde, he sent unto Adrian, Bishop of Rome, one Iohn Salsbury, (who by the said Bishop afterwards was made Bishop of Carnolum in France) with others, delivering his sute to that effect. Adrian being a man of English birth, heard his Ambassadors the more willingly, considered the matter advisedly, together with his colledge of Cardinals, and granted him his request, as followeth: Adrian the Bishop, the servant of the servants of God, to his most deer sonne in Christ, the Noble King of England, sendeth greeting and Apo∣stolike benediction: your magnificence hath beene very carefull and stu∣dious how you might enlarge the Church of God here in earth, and in∣crease the number of his Saints and elect in heaven, in that as a good Catholike King, you have and doe by all meanes labour and travell to enlarge and increase Gods Church, by teaching the ignorant people the true and Christian religion, and in abolishing and rooting up the weedes of sinne and wickednesse. And wherein you have, and doe crave for your better furtherance, the helpe of the Apostolike See (wherein more speedily and discreetly you proceed) the better successe we hope, God will send, for all they which of a fervent zeale and love in religion, doe begin and enterprise any such thing, shall no doubt in the end, have a good and prosperous successe: And as for Ireland, and all other Ilands where Christ is knowne, and the Christian religion received, it is out of all doubt, and your excellencie well knoweth, they doe all appertaine and belong to the right of Saint Peter, and of the Church of Rome, and we are so much the more ready, desirous and willing to sow the accepta∣ble seede of Gods word, because we know the same in the latter day will be most severely required at our hands: you have (our welbeloved sonne in Christ) advertised and signified unto us, that you will enter
into the Land and Realme of Ireland, to the end to bring them to obe∣dience unto Law, and under your subjection, and to root out from among them, their foule sinnes and wickednesse, as also to yeeld and pay yeere∣ly out of every house, a yeerely pension of one penny to Saint Peter, and besides also will defend and keepe the rites of those Churches, whole and inviolate: We therefore well allowing and favouring this your godly disposition, and commendable affection, doe accept, ratifie, and assent unto this your petition; and doe grant that you (for the dilating of Gods Church, the punishment of sinne, the reforming of manners, plan∣ting of vertue, and the increasing of Christian religion) doe enter to pos∣sesse that land, and thereto execute according to your wisedome, whatso∣ever shall be for the honour of God, and the safety of the Realme: and further also we doe strictly charge and require, that all the people of that land, doe with all humblenesse, dutifulnesse, and honour, receive and accept you as their Liege Lord and Soveraigne, reseruing and accepting the right of holy Church to be inviolably preserved: as also the yeerely pension of Peter pence out of every house, which we require to be truely answered to Saint Peter, and to the Church of Rome. If therefore you doe minde to bring your godly purpose to effect, indevour to travell to re∣forme the people to some better order and trade of life, and that also by your selfe, and by such others as you shall thinke meet, true, and honest in their life, manners, and conversation, to the end the Church of God may be beautified, the true Christian religion sowed and planted, and all other things done, that by any meanes shall or may be to Gods honour, and salvation of mens soules, whereby you may in the end receive of Gods hands, the reward of everlasting life, and also in the meane time, and in this life, carry a glorious same and an honourable report among all nations. The King upon the receit hereof, was very glad, and let it lye dorment by him, untill better opportunity was offered, as here∣after shall appeare. Anno 1166. Moragh Mac Cocholan, King of Ireland, called a great Councell at Dublin, gave battaile to the King of Leinster, and killed him, and shortly after was himselfe slaine by Ororic, which succee∣ded in the soveraignty; the same yeere saith Guttyn Owen in his Bri∣tish Chronicle, Henry 2. being at Chester, hired many shippes out of Ireland for his ayde, against North-Wales, but hee discharged them immediately, for his purpose tooke no good effect, in as much as the present troubles of Normandy called him away. In this pastime (so the old English delivereth) or rather the hurly-burly of the world, amids the warres of France, Flanders, and England; Ireland was all in armes, the occasion was as followeth. Dermot Mac Moragh, King of Leinster, was a long time enamoured with the wife of Ororike, King of Meth, some call him Morice, some other Mordich, she was the daughter of Omalarghlun, whom nature had made faire, the world a Queene, and lust a Harlot: the booke of
Howth reporteth at large, how Ororic was old, his Queene young and wanton, and that in derision, when he came from hunting, and being an hungred, she gave Apples to eate, which had beene in some undecent place of her body to be spoken of, so that the scent of them was strong, whereat she smiled; her Lord and husband having se∣cretly learned her lewd practise, tooke with him the day following, two of her foster brothers a hunting, gelded them, baked their stones, brought the Pie hot to his Lady and her Gentlewomen, when hee had commended the rarenesse of the meat, the fond wantons and giglets, fell to it, when they had satisfied themselves, saith Ororic, how like you this Pye, excellent good meat say they; it is (saith hee) the meat which you love raw and rosted, what is that (say they) the stones of your two foster brethren; with that she cast up a wilde look, and never beheld him cheerefully againe. Ororic her Lord and hus∣band being in pursuit of kerne theeves and outlawes that had migh∣tily annoyed his people in the furthest part of his country, she with all celerity, supposing it a fit time, sent for her lover Dermotte, the message was no sooner delivered, but hee was a horse backe, posting to the Harlot; to be short, he tooke her away with him, at which time (O false heart) she strugled, she cryed, as though she were unwilling, and that hee forced her. Ororic immediately heard of it, gathered his forces together, mustred his people, craved ayde, and among others, wrote unto Roderick, Monarch of Ireland as followeth. Though I am not ignorant, (most renowned Prince) that humane causes are to be weighed in the balance of patience, and that a man endued with vertue, will not effeminate himselfe by reason of the un∣constant and mutable minde of a Harlot, yet in so much this horri∣ble crime, (whereof I am fully perswaded) came to your eares be∣fore my messenger could deliver his letters, a thing heretofore not heard of, as farre as I remember, not practised against any King of Ireland; severity causeth me to call for justice, when charity admoni∣sheth me not to seeke revengement. If thou behold the shame, I con∣fesse it redoundeth to me alone; if you weigh the cause, it is common to us both; what confidence shall we repose in our subjects that are bound unto us in regard of our Princely command, if this effeminate adulterer, or rather queller of chastity, shall escape unpunished for so abhominable a fact? for the unchastised offences of Princes, notori∣ously committed in the sight of al men, breed a most pernitious imita∣tion, as precedents unto the people; in summe you have sufficient ex∣perience of my good will and affection towards you, you see mee wounded with the cruell darts of fortune, vexed with infinite dis∣commodities, and now extremely driven to my utter shifts: It re∣maines, (seeing I am wholly yours) that not onely with counsell, be∣ing requested, but with armes, being urged, you revenge my quarrell: this when you will, and as you will, not onely I aske, but require at your hands. Farewell.
The Monarch for some former quarrell against Dermot was all on fire, and joyning forces with Ororic, entred Leinster with fire and sword, the people cry woe and alacke (O bone in Irish) now are wee punished for the lewdnesse of our Prince. Dermot lulling himselfe in his lovers armes, heareth the newes, starteth upon a sodaine, behol∣deth his Lady, hath no power to speake, runneth forth, calleth his men, cryeth for aid, throughout his country, none gave are unto him; the country thought now (whereas they could not) that God will be revenged on him for his exactions, cruelty, tyranny, and all other villanies practised upon his subjects, and especially for deflou∣ring another mans wife: when he saw himselfe quite forsaken, voyd and destitute of all ayde, he betooke himselfe to the sea, and fled for England, but what became of the Harlot I cannot learne; belike shee hanged her selfe when she had set all the country in uprore. Anno 1169. (Iohn Clin and Iohn Stow are mine Authors) now that Dermot is fled, I am to insert a story out of the British Chronicles of Conwey and Strotflur Abbeyes, afore I discourse of him which was in the same yeere, that he tooke the sea, how that Owen Gwyneth, Prince of North-Wales, had a sonne called Ryryd, who in the right of his wife, as it seemeth, was Lord of Clochran in Ireland, and another sonne begotten vpon an Irish woman, called Howell, and a third sonne cal∣led Madoc. This Madoc finding his country in great contention, and his brethren at civill warres, prepared certaine ships with men and munition out of Wales and Ireland, and sought adventures by seas, he sailed west from the coast of Ireland, so farre north, that hee came to a land unknowne, where he saw many strange things. This land in the opinion of Humphrey Lloyde, the great Antiquary of Britaine, must needs be some part of that country, of which the Spaniards af∣firme themselves to be the first discoverers since Hannos time. For by reason and order of cosmographie, this land to the which Madoc came, must needs be sonne part of Nova-hispania, or Florida; where∣upon it is manifest that the same country was long before discovered by Britaines and Irish men, afore either Columbus or Americus Vespa∣tius, led any Spaniards thither. Of the voyage and returne of this Madoc, there be many fables, the which I will not report. He prepa∣red ships for a second voyage, and tooke with him men and women to inhabit that land, therefore it is to be presupposed that he and his people inhabited part of those countries, for it appeareth by Francis Loves, that in Acusanus and other places, the people honoured the Crosse, whereby it may be gathered, that Christians had been there before the comming of the Spaniards: but because this people were not many, they followed the manners of the land, and used their lan∣guage. I am of opinion with others, that the land whereunto Madoc came, was some part of Mexico; first of all, for that the inhabitants of that land report, their Rulers to have descended from a strange
nation that came from a far country, which thing is confessed by Mu∣tesuma, King of that country, in his orations made for quieting of his people at his submission to the King of Castile, Hernando Curtecius being then present, which is laid downe in the Spanish Chronicles, of the conquest of the West-Indies; secondly the british words and names of places used in that country to this day, doe argue the same, as when they talke together, (they say) Gwrando, which is hearken or listen in British. Also if you peruse Sir Humphrey Gilberts disco∣very, they have a Bird, which they call Pengwin in Brittish and Cor∣nish, a white-head, but the Iland of Corroeso, the Cape of Britaine, the river of Gwyndoor and the white rocke of Pengwyn, be British or Welch words: whereby it appeareth, that it was that country which Madoc and his people inhabited: now remembring my selfe that my pen hath not carryed me so far unto forraigne countries by sea, but that I expect Dermots returne by sea and by land into Ire∣land. Dermot Mac Morogh came to Henry 2. in Normandie, made his moane (as formerly in substance is delivered) craved aide for his restitution into his country, being a King exiled, although distressed and void of comfort, unlesse hee might obtaine it at his Majesties hands; the Kings hands being full of warres, he granted him his fa∣vourable letters as followeth. Henry, King of England, Duke of Normandie and Aquitaine, Earle of Anjow, &c. unto all his subiects, English, Normans, Welch, and Scots, and to all nations and people being his subiects, greeting; where∣as Dermot Prince of Leinster most wrongfully (as he enformeth) bani∣shed out of his owne country, hath craved our ayde, therefore for so much as we have received him unto our protection, grace and favour, whosoever within our Realmes, subiects unto our command, will ayde and helpe him whom wee have embraced as our trustie friend, for the recovery of his land, let him be assured of our favour and licence in that behalfe. Dermot returned ioyfully with these letters, and came to Bristoll, where at that time, Richard, surnamed Strangbow, Eare o Penbroke and Chepstow lay, hee shewed his letters, caused them at severall times, publikely to be read, conferred with Earle Richard, and con∣cluded to give the Earle his sole daughter and heire in marriage, and his whole interest in the kingdome of Leinster after his decease. Ri∣chard undertooke of the other side to effect all his desire. As Dermot wayted for a winde, it came in his minde for the shorter cut into Ire∣land, to goe by land into Saint Davids, where he was refreshed, and greatly pittied by the Bishop there, and concluded in like sort (as with the Earle before) with Robert fitz Stephens, and Moris Fitz Ge∣rald, by the mediation of the good Bishop there, to restore him unto his kingdome, upon condition that hee should give them and theirs for ever, the towne of Wexford, and two cantreds of land next
adjoyning; upon this hee tooke shipping, secretly came to Fernes, and lived privately among the Clergie all that winter, expecting per∣formance of promises out of England. Anno 1170. Abbatia de Castro Dei, was founded in the same yeere, and the first day of May, (so writeth Stow) Robert Fitz Stephens, with David Barrie, and Hervie de Monte, Mariscospie of Strangbow his nephew, according to his promise, with thirty Knights, threescore Esquires well mounted, and three hundred foot, being Archers well appointed, of his owne kin∣dred, and trayning up in feates of armes, and the choice souldiers of all Wales, landed at the Bann, not farre from Wexford; hereupon the rime runneth. At the Creeke of Bagganbun, Ireland was lost and wonne. Here some allude unto the blinde Prophecie of Merlin, that hee should meane this noble Warrior and worthy Knight, where he saith; A Knight biparted shall first enter with force of Armes, and breake the bounds of Ireland: this they would have understood of Robert Fitz Stephens, an English man, borne in Normandie, and of Nesta his mother, daughter to Res ap Tuyder Prince of South Wales; so I finde in Cambrensis; but if Merlin had foresight in this, I had rather take his Prophecie verified in respect of his Armes and Ensignes, which were biparted, being of two sundry changes, namely, party par pale gules and ermine, a saltier counterchanged; for commonly all Prophecies have their allusions unto Armes, and by them they are discovered, though at the first not so apparant, before the event there∣of take place. The next day after, in the same place, landed Morice Prendergast, whom Stanihurst calleth Prendelgast de Rofensi Walliae Demetiae Pro∣vinciâ, as Cambrensis writeth; the which I take to be about Milford in South-Wales, accompanied with ten Knights, and a great num∣ber of Archers in most gallant sort in two ships. Immediately, Ro∣bert Fitz Stephens directeth his letters to Dermot, who could scarce reade them for joy of their arrivall, and sent forthwith his base sonne Donald with five hundred men to salute them, and hasteneth after himselfe with all speed; off goeth his poore mantle wherein hee ob∣scurely shrowded himselfe, on goeth his princely attire; the Irish men follow him, the fame thereof is spread over the whole land: such as before in his distressed state flatly forsooke him, now runne and flat∣ter, and fawne upon him; to be short, they meete, they confirme the former leagues with oathes, and ioyne forces together, and they march towards Wexford, to lay siege to the towne; the townesmen a fierce & wilfull people (to the number of 2000.) sally forth with full purpose to give them battaile in the field, but when they heard the
Trumpets sound, the horses neyghing, and beheld their glittering Armes, the ratling of their furniture, horse and men in compleat Armes, and all most comely in battaile array, (the like of them not formerly seene, neither heard of) they alter their mindes, they retire into the towne, they make fast their gates, and fire the suburbs. Fitz Stephens came to the wals, filled the trenches with armed men, and appointed his Archers to levell at the wals and turrets, if occasion were offered: the townesmen manfully defended themselves, threw over the wals great stones and pieces of timber, hurt many, and made them voyd the place, among whom, a couragious Knight, called Da∣vid Barrye, adventured to scale the walles, but with a great stone which fell upon his head-piece, he was cast downe to the ditch, and carried away by his fellowes with safeguard of his life, upon this they goe to the sea strand, and fired all the ships and vessels which they found there. The next day after, upon better advice and deliberation, they ap∣proach unto the wals, and gave a new assault, the townesmen within beganne to distrust their state, being upon this sudden arrivall of the strangers, not sufficiently provided of men, munition, and victuals, to encounter with them, and remembring againe, how most unnatu∣rally they had rebelled against their Prince and Soveraigne, they sent messengers to Dermot, to intreate for peace, (alas it was farre from the heart) the which was granted, and tooke of them pledges and ho∣stages for the performance thereof. Lastly, Mac Moragh, according to his former promise gratified these first adventures, hee gave unto Robert Fitz Stephens, and Morrice Fitz Gerrald, who was as yet in England, the towne of Wexford, and the territories thereunto ad∣ioyning, and unto Hervie de Monte Morisco, two cantreds on the sea side, betwixt Wexford and Waterford. Dermot Mac Moroch and his company now take heart, they en∣crease their Army with Wexford men, and become 3000. strong. The next iourney they bend their course towards Ossory, where one Donald, or Mac Donell was Prince, whom Dermot hated deadly, and for this cause Donald suspected Dermots sonne and heire to have much familiaritie with his wife, and therefore in his jealous humour, ap∣prehended him, imprisoned him, and pulled out both his eyes, (but say they) though sight failed him, his feeling did not, for she loved him the more, in so much that she satisfied his lust, and ranne away after him. When Robert Fitz Stephens, and the Gallants of Britaine entred the country, they found neither dastards, nor cowards, but va∣liant men with horse and foot; they found the country fast with woods, bogges, and paces trenched and plashed; yet the valour of the adventurers was such, presuming upon former fortunes, to have the like future successes, with loose wings drove them out of the woods and bogges, into the plaine and champion land, where the
horsemen with their speares overthrew them, and the foote finding them groveling, runne them thorow, and ended their dayes; the Gallowglasses followed, and cut off their heads. And here Dermot Mac Morogh is mightily condemned, he being originally for exacti∣on, extortion, cruelty, tyranny, and other damnable offences, iustly exiled, now sheweth no Princely stomacke, but a base Wolvish minde; for when 300. of the Ossory mens heads were throwne at his feete, (alas they had not offended) hee viewed them all, and finding one whom he knew, and mortally hated, he held him by the head and eares, and most brutishly with his teeth, bit the nose and lips of the dead, whom without the ayde of the Britaines, hee durst not be∣hold in the face. In this bloudy course, Dermot directed these worthy warriours, they more affecting the prey for their present mainte∣nance, then the bloud of any person, to spoyle, burne, waste the coun∣try, and murther the poore and seely people, which God wot, meant no harme: whereupon Donald, Prince of Ossory, despising Dermot Mac Morogh, by the advice of his Councell and friends, sent to Ro∣bert Fitz Stephens in writing as followeth: Sir Knight of Noble race, renowned for martiall prowesse, Donald Prince of Ossory sendeth greeting: Dermot that damnable adulterer in his owne person, with the King of Meths wife, and in his sonnes person with my wife, have drawne thee and those Gallants, (most worthy Knights) into this poore country and naked people: I will yeeld my selfe (it is for the good of my poore followers) into thy hands, peace I crave, and peace let me have. Robert Fitz Stephens acquainted Dermot Mac Morogh with the premises of all sides, the Irish dissembled, (as hereafter shall further appeare) peace they granted, and they acknowledged Der∣mot for their Lord and Soveraigne. In all this service, I may not con∣ceale what Cambrensis delivereth. David Barry and Meilerius, effe∣cted singular exployts, and deserved no lesse commendations. As soone as the good successe of Dermot and the strangers lately arrived, was spread abroad, Rory Oconochor, alias Rodericke, King of Con∣naught, Monarch of Ireland, called the Princes and Nobles of the land together, and layeth before them the dangerous estate and im∣minent perill of the whole land, how Dermot guilefully had tray∣ned in strangers, how hee and the strangers were like to ouer-runne all, unlesse with all expedition, this mischiefe were prevented; in summe they concluded, that every man shall to his Armes, and make ready horse and foot, and set upon these invaders. Dermot Mac Morogh, having certaine knowledge of this great se∣paration and mischiefe intended, and his false harted subjects, that lately fawned vpon him were fled to the enemies, fearing the puisance of the Monarch, and the forces of the whole land, called Robert Fits Stephens, and said vnto him; Fortune is fickle, our state is an ague that commeth by fits, my friends fleet away, and argue false hearts, no
marvaile though I bee disquieted, if you stick not to mee I am undone: Robert Fitz Stephens replied, Wee have left behind us our deare friends and our native soyle, wee have fired all our shippes, not upon intent to runne away, wee haue already in armes ingaged our lives, fall out as fall out may, wee will live and dye together, bee you true to us, wee will not bee false to you: Dermot hereupon gathering his spirits together, got him and his followers to a certaine fastenesse, not farre from Fernes, where hee intrenched and plashed himselfe, being invi∣roned with woods, hils, rockes, bogges and waters, a place to mans seeming inaccessible and invincible, to endure for a while wandring clowds, and threatning stormes of his adversaries, to vanish and bee caried away with waving winds of fortune and unfortunate warres: Whose foresight and ready wit Robert Fitz Stephens highly com∣mended, Immediatly there came a Messenger from Roderic the Mo∣narch unto Robert Fitz Stephens with this message: The Britans may not by the Lawes of Armes, display their Banners and Ensignes in forreine possessions, and dispose the lawfull heires of their inheritance, but they are with licence of the Irish to pack home whence they came: It is a blemish for the Brittish nation, iniuriously to giue aide to a shamefull fact, neither may the lechery of Dermot, be mantled under British cloaks, wherefore depart and forsake him that is forsaken of God and man. And here by my messenger receive to defray your charges, and trans∣port you to your native soyle. Robert Fitz Stephens answereth, your present I will not accept, faith and troth I have pawned to my friend Dermot, I will not breake: hee forsakes not me, I will not forsake him, neither leave him distressed; you speake of lechery, what is that among martiall men? I heare you have Bastards your selfe, to what end is your embassie? If Roderick give councell, we need it not; if he Prophecie, we credit not his oracle; if he command as a Prince, we obey not his auto∣rity; if hee threaten as an enemie, a figge for his Monarchy. The messenger returned with small welcome, going and comming; Ro∣deric bethought himselfe againe, and sent letters to Dermot, per∣swading him to be at peace with his country people, and to banish the strangers out of the Land; he rejected his councell and despiseth the messenger: Roderic seeing that his private practises tooke small effect, put himselfe in armes, assembleth his forces, and delivereth un∣to them these speeches: You right worthy and valiant defenders of your Country and liberty; Consider with what people and for what cause wee are now to fight and wage battell, the enemy of his owne Country, the tyrant over his owne people, the exile fugitive, behold hee is returned backed with strangers, and purposeth to destroy us and the whole Nation; hee being an enemy, hath brought in those enemies, which have beene ever hatefull unto us all, and are most greedy to have the Soveraignty and Dominion over us all, protesting openly and firmely avouching, that by fatall destiny they are to bee Commanders
over this land. And so farre hath he poured out his venome, that there is no favour, nor mercy to be looked for at his hands. O cruell beast, (yea more cruell then ever was beast) who lately bit with his owne teeth, the nose and lips of the dead: he to satisfie his insatiable malice and bloudy minde, spareth neither man, woman, nor childe: he deserveth well to be hated of all, that opposeth himselfe an enemy to all; wherefore my lo∣ving and deere country men, be well advised, looke about you, and con∣sider advisedly, how by the like meanes, (I meane civill warres) all Realmes and nations for the most part have beene overthrowne and brought to utter ruine. Iulius Caesar attempted the invasion of Bri∣taine, was twice foyled, and indured the repulse, but when Androgeus Duke of London fell at variance with the King, to be revenged, sent for Iulius, who thereupon returning, subdued the land. The Britaines be∣ing at discord, and hating their vicious King Careticus, the Saxons finding opportunitie to over-runne all, sent for Gurmundus the arch-Pirate and terror of the Ocean seas, who ioyning forces together, foyled the Britaines, and banished their King: not long after, Isembert aspi∣ring to the Crowne of France, procured the said Gurmund to his ayde: behold the end, Gurmund was slaine, Isembert overthrowne, and his whole practise came to nought. Wherefore let us with one minde, like those valiant Frenchmen in our rightfull cause, in the defence of our country, and safeguard of the lives of our wives and children, couragi∣ously give the onset upon our enemies. And whiles these strangers are but few in number, let us stoutly issue out upon them. The fire while it is but in embers and sparkles, may easily be covered with ashes, but if it breake into flames, it is hard to be quenched▪ wherefore it is expedient we stoppe beginnings, and prevent sicknesse when it creepeth least; when it takes roote, it will hardly be cured: wherefore cheere my hearts, wee fight for our country and liberty, let us leave unto our posterity an im∣mortall fame, let us march on, and lustily assault them, that the over∣throw of a few, may be a terrour to many, and that it may be a president unto all forraigne Potentates, never to attempt the like againe. Dermot Mac Morogh and his men receive intelligence of this march, and the approach of the enemy, and beholding his men, some∣what dismaid, turned him to them with loving countenance: yee men of Leynster, my naturall subjects, of my flesh and bloud, whom loy∣alty, truth and kindred hath hitherto lincked together; let us live to∣gether, and dye together, in the defence of our persons and country; you see how that wicked and ambitious minded Rodericke, the Au∣thor of many mischiefes, not contented with his owne country and kingdome, seeketh now the soveraignty and dominion over the whole land, the which, I hope, God will not permit. You see his glory, his pride, and audacious attempts, how he lifteth up his head, and loo∣keth aloft: he trusteth to his multitude, doubt you not but that God is on our side, and the rightfull cause ours, though wee of country
birth, to you Leinster men I speake, bee not so many as they are, nei∣ther so well appointed, it forceth not, for victory is not measured by multitude, but by valour and courage, and oftentimes, wee know, that a few stout and hardy men have foiled troupes of sluggards, da∣stards and white liverd Souldiers: If you mistrust any defect in your selves, behold a present supply at your back and elbow. Doe not you see these Worthy Knights, these Valiant Warriers these Noble gallants, the flowre of Brittaine? their valour in part you have sufficiently tryed, their furniture excelleth, their order and aray is most comely, they have forsaken their native soyle, their friends and kindred, and all for our sakes; will they fly? no, they have burned their Ships, the Land will yeeld them neither succour nor refuge, neither will the bloody tyrant Roderic shew any mercy; wee are sworne the one to the o∣ther, while breath lasteth and life endureth. If the enemy pretend with the sword to chastise us for our sinnes, as it appeareth by their slaunde∣rous & shamelesse reports; alas, what have you done? God knoweth, your consciences are cleare, your cause honest, to take Armes in defence of your Prince, and Countrey? Why doe they not behold the blemishes, nay the hainous enormities and villanies that raigne among them? Their carrows, their kerne, their theeves, their murders, their swearing, their lying, their drunkennesse, their whordome and bloody minds who reformeth? The Tyrant Roderic hath murdered his owne naturall brother, hee hath three wives alive, he hath eleven bastards by severall women: O villaine, to behold a mote in our eye, and cannot see a beame in his owne. If the tyrant make challenge and pretend title to Leinster, because the same hath sometimes beene tributarie to some one King of Connoght; by the same reason also may wee demand and challenge all Connoght; for our ancestors have beene sole Governours of both, and Monarchs of all Ireland. The Lawes of all Nations doe permit, and allow to resist and withstand force and injury, with force and strength; Let us be of good courage, wee stand vpon a good ground, our seat is na∣turally very strong of it selfe, & now by our industry made more defen∣sive; feare nothing, quit your selves like men. When Dermot had made an end of his Irish Oration, Robert Fitz Stephens in the Brittish tongue turneth him to the Brittaines. You my companions in mar∣tiall affaires, you lusty young gallants that have endured with me many perils, yet still retaine your noble and valiant courage; consider whence wee came, what wee are, and the cause we have in hand; we are lineally descended from Troy, whose fame hath filled the whole earth, and now lately some of us out of Normandy, have seated our selves in Brittaine, and have to our wives, children, and kindred of the ancient and noble Brittish race; of the one we cary our valiant and noble mind, of the other wee learned the experience in feates of Armes; wee are not come hi∣ther as pirats and theeves, to robbe and spoile (as it is well knowne unto you) wee had our native soile to inhabit, wee had our kindred about us,
and the countenance of great persons, wee came after the course of the World, as Marshall men (but in an honest cause) to take our adven∣tures. Heere wee are, our friends are with us, our foes are in armes a∣gainst us, wee are well appointed, the enemy is but a wilde, naked, rasall and savage people: feare nothing, our cause is good; Dermot sought us, we sought not him, hee loveth our nation, and our friends in former times have found friendship in his Countrey, hee is a Prince lately exi∣led, whose fall is more to be pittied then envied; we are to comfort him, to aide him, and to restore him to his Kingdome. It is more honorable to make then to be a King, and to restore then to exile: he is a Prince of a bountifull mind, hee hath promised large for us and our heires after us, hee hath in part already most faithfully performed, his yeeres are many, and his daies are but few; after him wee shall enjoie his, and if we overcome the enemy, wee shall possesse all: feare not death; it is but a short delay betweene transitory and eternall life, it is but a short pas∣sage from vaine and temporall delights, to certaine and perpetuall joies, if we conquer here, wee shall inherit here, and purchase unto us immor∣tall fame; if we misse here, we are sure of a Kingdome in another world. Roderic considering with himselfe, the events of warres how doubt∣full and uncertaine they are, wrought all meanes to intreat for peace, being timerous to adventure battaile with strangers, whose force hee mightily feared, and whose puissance and valour being renowned, he was loth to encounter withall; he sent messengers unto Dermot Mac Morogh, promising him that hee and his heires should in peace and quietnesse enjoy all Leinster, and acknowledge him for his chiefe King and Monarch, and to yeeld unto him the service and homage that to that belonged; and that he should deliver him his sonne Cun∣thurus (Cnothurinus saith Stanyhurst) for pledge and hostage. And if the peace were truly kept and performed, Roderic promised to give him his daughter in marriage, and in the end when Leinster should bee quitly setled and reduced to the old Irish order, Dermot should drive away the Brittans and strangers, and procure no more into the Land; all this was concluded vpon, and solemnely undertaken by oathes on both sides, yet all was but flat dissimulation. In the nook of this, landeth at Wexford Maurice Fitz Girald, brother to Robert Fitz Stephens by the mothers side, in two ships, having in his com∣pany, tenne Knights, thirty horsemen, archers and foot a hundred, whereof Dermot was very glad and mightily encouraged on everie side. And immediately tooke with him Morice Fitz Girald, and bent his forces towards Dublin, to be revenged on them, for many wrongs, and especially for the death of his father, whom they murthered in their Councell house, as formerly hath beene delivered, and after for more despite buried him with a Dog: They left Robert Fitz Ste∣phens behind busily imployed in building of a Fort or a strong hold some two miles from Wexford, in British and Irish called the Car∣ricke.
As they drew neere Dublin, they preyed, they spoyled, they burned all before them. Dublin trembled for feare, the townesmen intreated for peace, the which was granted upon the delivery of cer∣taine pledges and hostages▪ In the meane while, no small stirre arose betweene Roderic the Monarch, and Donald, Prince of Limerike for chiefery. Whereupon there arose deadly hatred and martiall warres: Roderic drew all his forces against him; Dermot Mac Moroogh sent to Robert Fitz Ste∣phens, that in all haste he should draw forces to the ayde of Donald Prince of Limirike his sonne in law, which was accordingly affected, where Roderic was foyled, lost his chiefery, and with shame enough returned to his own country. Now Dermot Mac Morogh is puffed up with these prosperous successes, and whereas a while agoe, he would have contented himselfe with Leynster alone, now Connaght and all Ireland seeme little enough unto his aspiring minde. Secretly hee ac∣quainteth Robert Fitz Stephens, and Maurice Fitz Gerald with his purpose, and offereth any of them his daughter and heire with his in∣heritance after, upon condition, that they should send for supplies of their kindred and country men, to effect his enterprises; they modest∣ly thanked him for his offers, and refused his daughter, for that they were both already married, and withall wished him to write for Ri∣chard Strangbow, with whom he had formerly concluded to that ef∣fect, unto whom he addresseth his messenger, and directeth his let∣ters in this forme: Dermot Mac Morogh, Prince of Leinster, to Richard Earle of Chep∣stow, the sonne of Earle Gilbert, sendeth greeting. If you doe well consi∣der the time of men and matters, as we doe which are distressed, then would you regard whether we have cause to complaine of men, or to ma∣ligne and curse the infortunate time. Even as the seely Storkes and Swallowes with their comming, prognosticte the summer season, and with westerly windes are blowne away: we have observed times and sea∣sons fit for your arrivall and transportation, if your affaires had cor∣respondently accorded unto our expectations. East and West no doubt would have fitted our purpose, but hitherto being frustrated of your long desired presence and promises, unlesse the most valiant Knights of your country birth, (whose valour and prowesse my penne is not able to paint unto the posterity) had upheld our state and dignity. We beseech you a∣gaine and againe, in the league and amitie of Princes, not to use further delayes; our successe hitherto hath beene to our hearts desire. Leynster is our owne, your comming will inlarge our bounds, the speedier it is, the more gratefull; the hastier, the more joyfull; the sooner, the better wel∣come. Richard Strangbow was pleased with these letters, glad of the successe of Robert Fitz Stephens, and cast with himselfe, how hee might speedily passe for Ireland. He repaired to King Henry 2. hum∣bly beseeching him, either to restore him to such possessions, as by
right of inheritance did belong unto him, or to give him Passe to seek adventures in some forraigne country, and among some strange na∣tion. Stanihurst excellently conceited, layeth downe the Kings an∣swer: Henry smiling within himselfe, saith, Loe, whether and where thou wilt goe and wander for me, it shall be lawfull for thee, take De∣dalus wings and flye away. Strangbow betweene east and earnest, takes this for a sufficient licence, and makes ready for Ireland, and sends before him, Reimond le Grosse, nephew to Robert Fitz Ste∣phens, and Morice Fitz Gerald, sonne to William Fitz Gerald, the el∣der brother, which land at Dundorogh, commonly called Dunde∣nold, West of Wexford, with tenne Knights, forty Esquires, and fourescore Archers and foot; whereupon Omolaghlin Ophelin, Lord of the Decies, raised the country, consulted with the townesmen of Waterford, and concluded that it stood them upon, with all expedi∣tion, to set upon the strangers; they made ready 3000. men by land, they runne up and downe the shore, they row; their song was kill, kill, kill, Reimond straight upon his arrivall, had fortified himselfe, the Waterfordians march against him in battaile array, the Britaines being but sixscore and ten, came forth to make good the field against 3000. Reymond perceiving in the skirmish that the enemy over-laid them, retired to his Fort, the Irish perswading themselves at that in∣stant to give the Britaines an utter overthrow, thicke and thinne, with all haste pursued them, and the formost entring at the foote of the last Britaine into the Fort, had his head cloven in two with Reymonds sword, immediately saith Reymond, strike the drumme, follow mee fellow souldiers; the Irish being disordered, and out of battaile array, and discouraged with the death of one man, flie away; then they which in this doubtfull skirmish were like to be vanquished and quite overthrown, became victors, conquerours, & wan the field; they cha∣sed the Waterfordians that were out of order, & at their wits ends, & slue of them, saith Cambrensis, above 500. persons, and being weary of killing, they cast a great number of those whom they had taken pri∣soners, headlong from the rocks, into the sea. In this service, Sir Wil∣liam Ferand, a Knight, deserved singular commendations, and was the onely man of all the Britaines, saith Stanihurst that was slaine: Thus fel the pride and rash attempt of Waterford, thus decayed their strength and force, and thus became the ruine and overthrow of that Citie, which, as it bred a great hope and consolation to the Britaines, so was it the cause of a great desperation and terrour to the enemy. They tooke 70. of the best men in Waterford prisoners, they enter into consultation, and call a martiall court, what was to be done with them. Reymond full of pittie and compassion, delivereth his opinion; you my noble and valiant companions, and fellow souldiers, for the in∣crease of whose honour, vertue and fortune, wee presently seeme to contend, let us consider what is best to bee done with these our
prisoners and captives: for my part I doe not thinke it good, nor yet allow that any favour or curtesie should be at al shewed to the enemy, but understand you, these are no enemies now, but men; no rebels, but such as be vanquished and cleane overthrowne, and standing in defence of their country by evill fortune and hard destiny, are subdu∣ed; their adventures were honest, and their attempts commendable, and therefore they are not to be reputed for theeves, factious persons, traitors, nor yet murtherers; they are now brought to that distresse and case, that rather mercy for example sake is to bee shewed, then cruelty to the increase of their misery to be ministred: surely our an∣cestors in times past, (although indeed it bee very hard to be done) were wont when fortune favoured, to temper their loose mindes, and qualifie their unruly affections, with some one discommoditie or o∣ther: wherefore let mercy and pitty, which is in man most commen∣dable, worke so in us, that we that now have overcome others, may subdue our owne mindes, and conquer our owne affections. For mo∣desty, moderation, and discretion, are wont to stay hasty motions, and to stoppe the course of rash devices. O how commendable and honourable is it to a Noble man, that in his greatest triumph and glo∣ry, he counteth it for a sufficient revenge, that hee can revenge, and be wreaked! Iulius Caesar, whose conquests were such, his victory so great, and his triumphs so many, that the whole world was noysed therewith, he had not so many friends who reioyced for the same, but he had many more enemies that maligned and enuied his succes∣ses, not onely in slanderous words, and evill reports, but many also secretly conspired, devised and practised his death and destruction; And yet he was so full of pitty, mercy, and compassion, that he never commanded nor willed any to bee put to death for the same, saving onely one Domitius, whom he had of meere clemency for his lewd∣nesse before pardoned, for his wickednesse released, and for his trea∣chery acquitted. And thus as his pitty did much increase his honour, so did it nothing hinder his victories. Oh how beastly then and im∣pious is that cruelty, wherein victory is not ioyned with pitty! for it is the part of a right Noble and Valiant Conquerour, to count them enemies, that doe wage the battaile, contend and fight for the victo∣ry, but such as be conquered, taken prisoners, and kept in bonds and captivitie, to take and repute them for men; that hereby fortitude and force may diminish the battell, and end the quarrell, as also hu∣manitie may increase love, and make peace. It is therefore a great commendation, and more praise worthy to a noble man, in mercy to be bounteous, then in victory to be cruell. For the one onely lyeth in the course of fortune, but the other in vertue. And as it had beene a great increase of our victory, and an augmentation of honour, if our enemies had beene slaine in the field, and overthrowne in the battaile; so they being now taken and saved, as it were men returned from
rebels to the common society, and fellowship of men. If wee now should kill them, it will bee to our great shame, dishonor and re∣proach for ever. And for as much as by the killing and destroying of them, wee shall bee never the neerer to have the command of the country, and never sooner to be Lords of the Land) and yet the ran∣soming of them very good for the maintenance of the Souldiers, the good fame of us, and the advancement of honour) wee must need thinke that it is better to ransome them, then cruely to kill them; for as it is requisite, that a Souldier in the field fighting in armes, should then thrist for the blood of his enemy, trie the force of his sword, and valiantly stand to his tackle for victory; so when the fight is ended, the warres ceased, and the armour laid downe, and all strongnesse of hostility set apart, then in a Noble man must humanity take place, pitty and commiseration must be shewed, and all kindnesse of curtesie must be extended. With this they were all drawen to some mildnesse and remorse, and ready to shew favour in hope of friendship againe. Henry de Monte Marisco, who came thither to salute Reimond, stands vp in op∣position, bent to blood and villany, in whom there was neither man∣hood in battell abroad, nor mercy in consultation at home, and spake as followeth: Reimond hath very exquisitly discoursed of pitty and mercy in set speeches, uttering his eloquence hath shewed his mind, and declared his opinion, perswading and inducing us to be∣leeve that a strange land were to be conquered sooner by mercy and fond pittie, then by fire and sword; but I pray you, can there bee a worse way then to hold that course. Did Iulius Caesar or Alexan∣der of Macedonia, by such meanes or in such order conquer the whole world; did the Nations from out of all places runne to sub∣mit themselves under their command, and imperie in respect of their pitty and mercy, and not rather compelled so to doe for feare and per∣force? For people whilst they are yet proud and rebellious, all pitty and mercy set apart, are by all manner of meanes and wayes to bee subdued: but when they are once brought under subjection and bondage, & ready to serve and obey, then they are with all curtesie to be intreated and kindly dealt withall, so that the state of the Govern∣ment be in safety and void of dāger, herein & in this point, must pitty be used; but in the other severity or rather cruelty is more necessary: here clemency is to be shewed, but in the other rigour without favour is to be ministred. Reimond perswadeth that mercy is to bee extended as upon people already subdued and subjected, or as though the ene∣mies were so few and of so small a number, as against whom no va∣liant service nor chivalry can be exploited; and yet they are ready to joine with us, whereby our force may bee increased, and our power augmented: but alas, doe not we see, how that the whole notion and people of Ireland are fully bent and (not without cause) altogether conspired against us? surely me thinks Reimond is contrary to him∣selfe,
for why? his coming hither was not to dispute of pitty, nor to reason of mercy, but to conquer the nation, to subdue the peo∣ple: Oh what an example of impious pitty were it then, to neglect our owne safety, and to have remorse and compassion vpon others distresses! moreover wee have here in the field and in armour, more enemies then friends, we are in the middle of perils and dangers, our enemies being round about us in every corner: and shall wee thinke this to be nothing, but that we must bee also in the like distresse and danger among our selves: Round about us our enemies are infinit, and within our selves, some there be which practise and work our de∣struction: And if it should happen that our Captives and Prisoners should escape, and breake loose out of their bonds, which are but ve∣ry weake and slender, no doubt they would forthwith take our own armour and weapons against us; well, well, the Mouse is in the cub∣bord, the Fire is in the lappe, and the Serpent is in the bosome, the enemie is at hand ready to oppresse his adversarie, and the guest is in place with small curtesie to requite his host. If our enemies, when they come in good array, and well appointed to give the onset, and to wage battel against us; if they should happen to have the victorie, & the vpperhand over us, would they deale in pitty and mercy? would they grant us our lives? would they put us to ransome? Tush, what needs many words, when the deeds are apparent; our victory is to bee used, that the destruction of these few may bee a terror to many, whereby all others, and this wild and rebellious nation may take example, and bewar how they meddle and encounter with us; of two things we are to make choice of one, for either we must valiantly and couragiously stand to performe what we have taken in hand, and all fond pitty set aside, boldly and stoutly to overthrowe and van∣quish this rebellious and stubborne people, or (if we shall after the mind and opinion of Reimond altogether be pittiful and full of mer∣cy) we must hoise up our sailes, and returne home, leaving both the Country, and all that we have already gotten, to this miserable and wretched people. When Herveie had made an end of his speech; they put it to voyces, and the voyces went on Herveis side; where∣upon the Captaines (as men condemned) were brought to the Rockes, and after their Limbs were broken, they were cast head long into the Seas, and drowned every mothers sonne. Vpon the 23. of August, being Saint Bartholomewes Eeve, and yeere aforesaid, to wit, Anno 1170. Richard, surnamed Strangbow Earle of Strigulia (whose original and of-spring in another place her∣after (if God permit) shall bee laid downe) landed in the Haven of Waterford, where Dermos Mac Morogh, Robert Fitz Stephens, and Maurice Fitz Gerauld, and Reimond le Grosse met him, and joy∣ned their forces together? Reimond le Grosse was made generall of the field, they tooke small rest after their arrivall; for upon Bartholomew
day being tuesday, with Banners displayed, in good aray they assaulted the City by water and by land, the townesmen manfully defended themselves, and gave them two repulses: Reimond having compassed the towne, espied without adjoyning unto the towne wall (where now standeth a strong Bulwarke) an old Cabban, propped with old timber, and entred into the old wall, the which proppes they sawed asunder, then downe falleth the cabban, and withall a great part of the wall: the breach thus made, the Brittains doe enter, and in the streets kill man, woman and child, and there left them in heapes: In Reignald tower, upon the wall of the tower they found one Reignald (I take it the tower beareth the name of him) and Omalaghlin Ophelim, Lord of the Decies, whose lives Dermot Mac Morogh saved: they found there other two, whom they put to the sword, they rifled the houses, they ransacked the City, they made havock of all, lastly they left there a strong ward. Then according to precedent cove∣nants, Dermot gave his daughter Eva in marriage to Richard Strang∣bow, and after solemnity thereof, they all marched with their forces towards Dublin: For Dermot bare them a deadly hatred, and hi∣therto winked at them, untill further oportunity served, for the vil∣lany and cruelty they shewed to his father; the townsmen of Dublin foreseeing his revenging mind, procured to their aid as many as they could throughout the land, they trenched, they plashed in paces, streets and narrow places, all the wayes along to Waterford, to hinder their march. Dermot was not ignorant thereof, whereupon he led the army from out the common and beaten way, through the Mountaines of Glandelogh, and came safe to the walles of Dublin. There the Citizens sent messengers to intreat for peace, and amongst others, Laurence O Toole Arcbishop of Dublin: while they parled without for peace, Sir Remond le grosse, and Sir Miles Cogan scaled the wals; for, saith Cambrensis, they were more desirous to fight under Mars in the field, then in the Senate to sit with Iupiter in Councell; they made a breach, they enter the Citie, they put all to the sword: in the meane while, Hastulphus the Commander of the City, with a great many of the better sort, with their Riches and Iewels, escaped and fled by the Sea to the North Ilands. When the Earle had spent a few daies in the towne, he left Miles Cogan Governour therof, and by the perswasion of Dermot Mac Mo∣rogh, he drew his forces into Meth to be avenged of Ororicke, whom some call Morice, some Murdich, who was the cause of his exile, and whose wife Dermot had formerly taken away. The Earle no sooner entred the Countrey, but the Army was given wholly to the spoile; they robbed, they spoiled, they burned, and wasted all before them: Roderic King of Conoght and Monarch of Ireland, seeing his neigh∣bours house set one fire, thought it high time to looke to his owne, and wrotte to Dermot Mac Morogh, contrary to the order of Peace,
formerly concluded, thou hast procured and allured a swarme and multitude of strangers, to invade this land; all the while thou didst containe thy selfe within compasse of thine owne territories, we win∣ked at thy proceedings, but forasmuch as now thou not caring for thy oath, nor regarding the safety of thy hostages, hast so fondly and falsly passed thy bounds, I require thee that thou wouldest retire, and withdraw these excourses and inrodes of strangers, or else, to begin, I will not faile to cut off thy sonnes head, and send it to thee with speed. Dermot despised the messenger, and would scarce vouchsafe to reade his letter; upon the messengers returne, Roderic was mad, and in his rage, caused his pledges head, the sonne of Dermot Mac Mo∣rogh to be cut off. In this troublesome time, the Primate of Armagh called the Prelates and Clergie to a Synod; at Armagh, assembled a Councell; where, according to their wisedomes, they endeavoured to finde out the cause of these miseries that fell upon the land, they in∣quired not whether the Bishops had bought their Bishoprickes for money, whether their Parsons did pray, whether their Ministers were lettered; what whoredome, symony, or lechery, with other enormities, raigned among the Clergie, but simply, like themselves, posted over all to the Laytie, and concluded (insipienter) that the iust plague fell upon the people, for merchandizing of the English nation; for then they bought and sold of the English birth, such as they found, and made them bondslaves; so they served Saint Patricke, cal∣led the Apostle of Ireland, who was a bondman sixe yeeres in Ire∣land, but Patricke preached Christ, and the English nation reformed the land. Here the sacred letters reconcile all, the stone which the buil∣ders refused, is become the corner stone, and why so? the answer follow∣eth, it is the Lords doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes. But I may not so leave my Prelates, they synodically decreed as followeth: that all the English men within the land, whatsoever they were, should bee manumised; a worshipfull piece of worke, and no thanke to them all, for the English sword was then ready to cut off the Irish heads: this reformation was but a sweeping of a house with a Foxes tayle. The prosperous successes of Earle Richard, surnamed Strangbow, were no sooner effected, but fame flyed abroad, and flatterers carried it to Henry the seconds eares, and made him jealous, as Kings com∣monly are, that a subject as Richard was, should not onely in the right of his wife, content himselfe with Leinster, but most presump∣tuously without licence, as the King alledged, attempt the conquest of a kingdome, where he formerly by grant of Adrian, was interes∣sed. Whereupon the King in his iealous rage, indeavouring to stop the Springs and Water-courses, proclaimed: We, Henry, &c. Forbid and inhibit, that from henceforth no shippe from any place of our domi∣nio, shall traffique or passe into Ireland; and likewise charge that all our subjects upon their dutie of allegiance, which are there commo∣rant,
shall returne from thence into England before Easter next follow∣ing, upon paine of forfeiture of all their lands, and the persons so diso∣beying, to be banished our land, and exiled for ever. The Earle seeing himselfe in this distresse, being in perill to lose his friends, and to want his necessaries out of his native soile, by enter∣course of Merchants, calleth a Councell; where it was agreed and concluded, that Sir Reimond Legrosse should bee sent over to pacifie the King (who then was in Aquitaine) with these letters: Most puis∣sant Prince, and my dread Soveraigne, I came into this land with your Majesties leave and savour (as farre as I remember) to aide your ser∣vant Dermot Mac Morogh; what I have wonne, was with the sword, what is given me, I give you, I am yours, life and living at your com∣mand. Vpon the receit of these letters, there fell of all sides, three disasters, the King was mightily incensed against Earle Richard, and therefore delayed Sir Reimond Legrosse, and gave him no answer; secondly, the death of Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury troubled him excee∣dingly, and to helpe the readers memory with the time, it was as the rime delivereth, Annus millenus, centenus septuagenus Primus erat, primas quo ruit ense Thomas. The third was, that Dermot Mac Morogh a most bountifull Prince, died and was buried at Fernes. Anno 1171. Hastulpus, late Governour of Dublin (of whom I have formerly spoken) returneth, and entreth the haven of Dublin, with threescore saile to his aide, of Ilanders, Norwegians, and Esterlings, they forthwith landed, and unshipped themselves, and had to their Captaine, saith Cambrensis, one Iohn Wood, some call him mad Iohn, for the prankes he playd, for wood and mad beare one sense. Stani∣hurst calleth him Pewood, Douling, Heywood. They were all mighty men of warre, and well appointed after the Danish manner, being harnessed with good Brigandines, jackes and shirts of maile; their Shields, Bucklers, and Targets, were round, and coloured red, and bound about with iron, and as they seemed in armes, so were they no lesse in mindes; iron-strong and mighty; they marched in battaile array towards the East gate of the Citie. Miles Cogan the Gover∣nour, with a faire company (yet but a handfull to the number of the enemy, sallied forth, and gave them battaile, where both sides lost many a tall man. Miles Cogan seeing himselfe overlaid with the furi∣ous rage and multitude of his adversaries, gave backe, and retired in∣to the towne; by this time, Richard Cogan his brother had secretly issued out with a good company, at the South posterne gate, compas∣sed the Danes, and being at the foot of the rereward, made mighty
cry and shout, whereat the Danes were amazed, and the two bre∣thren had the killing of them before and behinde. The Danes brake their array, threw their Armes away, fled towards their ships, where many also for haste were drowned. In this skirmish, Iohn Wood was slaine, and Hastulphus taken prisoner, and put to his ransome. The prodigalitie of this Hastulphus was such, that he contented not him∣selfe with life, but braved and bragged of his exploits, in the hearing of Miles Cogan, and therewithall delivered, that that attempt was no∣thing, but a taste or proofe of the Irish valour, and shortly, they should see another manner of forces assault them; What (saith Miles Cogan) is it not enough for him to have his life, but he must threaten us with further rebellion; goe, take him, and cut off his head. And thus the blabbe of his tongue, turned to his confusion. Shortly after, the Irish and country birth, lying aloofe, wayting for all opportunities, and understanding of some unkindenesse and displeasure conceived by King Henry the second, against Earle Ri∣chard, and in that quarrell generally against all the Britaines and in∣vaders of Ireland; they put their heads together, they plot, they draw their draughts and devices, to lay siege to recover the Citie of Dub∣lin, and the chiefest instrument was Laurence O Toole, Archbishop of Dublin, who wrote unto Roderic, King of Connaght, & unto Gotred, alias Godfrey, King of Man, and to all the Princes of Ireland, that it would please them (some in regard of neighbourhood, othersome in regard of naturall affection unto their native soile and distressed coun∣try men of Irish birth) put to their helping hand, ioyne their forces together, lay siege to the Citie of Dublin by sea and by land, relieve their brethren, rid them from the Britaines hands, and restore them to their former liberty. The Bishop for the good opinion that was held of his learning, gravitie, and sanctitie, prevailed, insomuch, that Gotred, King of Man, came into the harbour of Dublin, with thirty saile. Roderic the Monarch and forces of Ireland came by land, and incamped within sight of the towne. Within the towne, were Earle Richard Strangbow, Maurice Fitz Gerald, Reimond Legrosse, lately ar∣rived from out of England, Miles Cogan, Richard Cogan, with other worthy men and Citizens, to the number of thirty thousand fighting men. As they were prepared for battaile, (as commonly one mischiefe falleth in the necke of another) Donald, the base sonne of Dermot Mac Morogh, came in post to the Earle, and delivered how that Ro∣bert Fitz Stephens in his Fort of Carreck by Wexford, was besieged with three thousand men of Wexford and Kinsele, by the conduct of Donald, Prince of Limeric, sonne in law to Dermot Mac Morogh, who before time in his extremity, and in the warres betweene him and Roderic the Monarch, for chiefery, (at the request of Dermot Mac Morogh, was relieved by Robert Fitz Stephens, and so aided, that he foiled his enemy; and thus good is recompenced with evill. In
this perplexitie and doubtfull danger, Maurice Fitz Gerald full of courage, turneth him to the Earle, and the martiall men in these words: you most valiant men, wee came not into this land, neither were we procured hither to be idle, or to live deliciously, but to try fortune, and to seeke adventures; wee stood sometime upon the top of the wheele, and the game went of our side, now mee thinkes for∣tune wheeles about, let us not be dismaid, for that which is low now, will be up againe, and so we must tarry and take our time; such is the mutability among the sonnes of men, the fickle and uncertaine course of humane causes, so that prosperitie and adversitie, enterchangeably doe follow the one after the other. After day, commeth the night, and when the night is passed, the day dawneth againe; the sunne ri∣seth, and spreads his beames over the face of the earth, holdeth his course to his fall, passeth the night season, and riseth againe; we who before this time have made great triumphs, and had the wings of for∣tune to flye withall, and are now clowded and inclosed by our ene∣mies on every side, our victuals are scant, the King our Soveraigne Lord frowneth upon us, we are barred of release by sea and by land, our friends cannot helpe us, our enemies are ready to devoure us: plucke up your hearts, if God be with us, we care not who is against us; but alas my brother Fitz Stephens, whose valiantnesse, and noble enterprise brake the yce, and made way for us into this Iland, is now shut up in a weake hold, and feeble place, with wife and children, too weake and slender to keepe out so great a force. O trayterous Do∣nald of Limiric, O trecherous and halfe-hearted people of Kensele and Wexford! peace is war, trust is trechery, and truth is falshood among them: why then doe we tarry, why doe we linger? is there any hope of reliefe from our native soile? no, no, the matter is now otherwise, and we our selves are presently in a worse case, for as our nation at this present is odious and hatefull unto the Irish men, so are we also mis-led with some disgrace in our country, wherefore in so much as fortune favoureth the forward and couragious, and discoura∣geth the dastard and faint-hearted, while our wits are fresh, while our bodies are able, while wee are all on heart, let us give the on-set; though we are not so many in number as they are, our courage and valour is knowne to exceed theirs, they are but naked wretches, and unarmed people. Reimonà Legrosse immediately breaketh out in these speeches. My Vncle Maurice hath gravely delivered his minde, he hath pithily advised us, and prudently councelled us: this is no time to sit in councell, to spend time in speeches, or to use delayes, the danger is at hand, the enemy is at the doore, wee are compassed by sea and by land, there is no flying, we must fight it out; our provisi∣on is spent, England dares releeve us no more, Ireland defieth us, the Kings Maiestie (I know) dispraiseth not our activities, and yet gra∣ceth not our successes; he discommendeth not our valour, yet envieth
all our glory, though in words he reporteth well of our service, yet in deeds secretly hindereth the course thereof; lastly, he feareth that which we meant not, and doubteth of that which we thinke not of; wherefore all doubts and delaies set apart, let us, as becometh men of our sort, try the course of fortune, and proue the force of the ene∣my; let that appeare unto them which is knowne unto us; of what race we came, and of what stock wee are discended. Camber the first King of Cambria our native Country, was our Ancestor, and the sonne of that Noble Brutus, the first and sole Monarch of Brittaine, whose Ancestor was Troos, the founder of that most antient City of Troy, who descended from Dardanus the son of Iupiter, from whom is derived unto us, not onely the stemme of antient Nobility, but also a certaine naturall inclination of valiant minds, and couragious stomachs resolutely to follow all exploits of prowesse and chivalry; and shall we now like sluggarts, degenerate from so noble a race, and like a sort of Cowards, be afraid of these naked and unarmed Raskals, in whom there is no valour, by reason of knowledge or experience in Armes? Shall such a rable of savages pinne us up within the wals of little Dublin? When in times past all the Princes in Greece kept warres the space of ten yeeres and odde months, against our Ance∣cestors in the famous City of Troy; and could not preuaile against them, untill they used treasons, and practised treacheries which bred unto them a more infamous victory, then a glorious Triumph? Let it never be said, that the blood of the Trojans shall be stained in our pusillanimity, and receive reproach by our peevish dastardy: Fortune, though she be pourtraied to be blind, as ever void of right judgement, and to stand upon a rolling stone, as being alwaies flitting and un∣constant; yet for the most part, shee helpeth such as be of couragious minds, & valiant stomachs; you wil say, we are but a few, and the ene∣my infinit in number; what then? Victory consisteth not in multi∣tudes, neither conquest in numbers: Did not Thomiris the Scythian Queene, with hundreds, overthrow Cyrus with thousands, and tooke him and slew him? Did not Laomedes the Spartane encounter (ha∣ving but foure thousand Souldiers) with mighty Xerxes, who brought five hundred thousand to the field, and overthrew him? Did not Alexander with a few Macedonians ouerthrew Darius, the great Monarch of Persia? Did not he take him, his wife, and daughters prisoners, and make a Conquest of Persia? Have not wee in our persons (all praise be given to God, the giver of Victory) e∣ven you, right honorable Earle at Waterford, my uncle Fitz Ste∣phens at Wexford, my selfe at Dondorogh with a few given many the foile; what remains, sith time shall sooner faile then matter want? let us like men shew resolute minds in this service. And to conclude, my mind then and opinion is, that we doe issue out upon them as se∣cretly and as suddenly as we may, and give the onset.
And for so much as Roderic of Conoght, is the generall of the field, in whom lyeth the chiefest force, and on whom all the rest doe chief∣ly depend, it shall be best to begin with him, and if we can giue him the overthrow, all the rest will flie, and we shall obtaine a glorious victorie; but if we shall fall into their hands and be slaine, yet shall we leave an honorable report and an immortall fame to our posteritie. He had no sooner ended his speech, but every man armed himselfe to goe forth, and give the onset: They divided the Army in three bat∣tailes; and although at the first, they contended for the Vanguard, yet quickly they were accorded and marched forward. Reimond le Grosse resolutely given, with twenty Knights, and souldiers well ap∣pointed, tooke the Vanguard. Miles Cogan with thirty Knights, and many a worthy warriour, kept the maine battaile. Earle Strangbow, and Maurice Fitz Gerald, with fourty Knights, Gentlemen and com∣mon souldiers, took the Rereward, in every ward were placed some of the Citizens, and other some with martiall men, left at home for the guard and safety of the City: early in the morning when the enemy was unarmed & out of order, little thinking that so few within durst attempt to give the onset to so many without, they fell upon them, killed without mercy, and the rere was so forward, that they came with the Vanguard by wheeling about to the slaughter of the ene∣mie. Roderic all this while trusting to his troupes and multitude of people, feared nothing, he took his ease and pleasure, and was bathing himself; but when the larum was up, & that he saw his men on every side fall to the ground, never tarried, called for man nor Page to array him, but tooke his mantle and ranne away all naked, and hardly esca∣ped with life. The Britaines pursued after, and had the killing of them all that day, in the evening they returned into the Citie, not onely with the honour of the field, but rich booties, and praies of vi∣ctuals, armour and other pillage, as much as man and beast could cary: Immediatly, also the rumor hereof, the other Campes were dispersed, namely, Laurence the Archbishop (whom it had beseemed better to have beene at home with his porthouse, then in Campe with rebels) Mathelan Machalem, Gillemehelmocus, Otuetol, Ororic Prince of Meath, Ocarol, alias Ocarvell Prince of Vriell, Machfalin, Ochadese, with many other great Commanders, where every man shifted for himselfe; of Gotred, alias Godfray King of Man that came by Sea, I find nothing, for upon this disaster he tooke him to the seas the next day, without any further deliberation; Miles Cogan is left to go∣verne Dublin, and the Earle with his Army marched towards Wex∣ford, to raise the siege at the Carreke, to relieve Robert Fitz Stephens; as he passed by Odrone, the forces of Leinster, by the conduct of Do∣nole Obrene Prince of Limerik, and Donald Prince Osery set upon him, and fought a cruell fight, but he went on with the losse of one man. As he came to the borders of Wexford, certaine messengers
met and informed him of the mischance that happened to Robert Fitz Stephens, and the firing of the Towne of Wexford; adding more∣over, that the Wexfordians were fully determined, if the Earle came any further towards them, they would cut off all the heads of Fitz Stephens and all his company, and send them unto him; whereupon with heavy cheere and sorrowfull heart he changed his mind & tur∣ned to Waterford. But afore I proceede any further, I am to deliver the manner of the treachery and villany shewed unto Robert Fitz Stephens: Donold of Limric, sonne in Law to Dermot Mac Morogh, while his father lived, he was one that favoured the Brittains, and not without cause; but now forgetting humanity returneth to his vomit, bends his course towards Wexford, and while other states of Ireland by East and by North, with might & maine practised the rooting out of the Brittains, he flies to the South, and raiseth Wexford, & Kensile to lay siege to the Carreke, the fort of Robert Fitz Stephens. First they begin with force, and seeing that failed them, they fall to guiles and subtilities under color of peace, pretending nothing but pure love, tender affection and safeguard of his person, and all that were with him; they bring with them two Bishops, the one of Kildare, the o∣ther of Fernes, in their formall moods, with other Religious persons (O damned Prelats) and they had with them the Masse Booke, the host, with certaine Reliques; upon these they take corporall oathes, and sweare with great solemnity and protestations as followeth: (For the good will and affection wee beare unto you) whom we have alwaies found a curteous and bountifull Prince, we are to signifie un∣to you this much; how that Dublin is taken, the Earle Strangbow, Maurice Fitz Girald, Reimond le Grosse, Miles Cogan, with all the En∣glish are put to the sword, and now Roderic the Monarch, with all the power of Conoght and Leinster posteth hither to rase even with the ground, all the Forts, Holds, and Castles, which the English∣men have, and especially to apprehend you Robert Fitz Stephens, and Willam Not, that were the forerunners into this Land of all this mis∣chiefe; wherefore take this for truth and be well advised what to doe, if they take you there is no mercy; if you will put your selfe with your company and goods into our hands, in the faith of Christiani∣ty we sweare we will safely transport you and yours unto Wales, so shall you not lose so much as a haire of your head; wherefore the great Army being at hand, yeeld, come forth and shippe your selfe for Wals. Robert Fitz Stephens (who would not in this case give credit) yeelded himselfe into their hands, immediatly (more like Iewes then Christians) they strippe them out of all that ever they have, they hang one, they throw another over a rocke, they breake anothers necke, one hath his eyes puld out, another hath his tongue cut, some they scourge with thongs, other some they take, and with sledges breake their Armes and thighes, the greatest kindnesse they
shew is iron and imprisonment, the which Robert Fitz Stephens en∣dured; now leaving these bloody Massacers and themselves, I will turne to Waterford after Earle Strangbow. When Earle Strangbow came to Waterford, he found there Hervie de Monte Marisco new∣ly arrived out of England, with letters from the King, requiring him forthwith to repaire unto his Majesty. Strangbow together with Hervy tooke the first wind and went for England, and found the King at Newham not farre from Glocester, where he was in rea∣dinesse with a great Army to saile out into Ireland, whereafter sun∣dry altercations passed betweene them, at length (as they say) by meanes of Hervy, the Kings displeasure was appeased, and it was a∣greed that the Earle should sweare alleageance to the King, and yeeld and surender unto him the City of Dublin, with the Cantreds there∣unto adjoining, as also such Townes and Forts as were bordering upon the Sea side, and as for the residue he should have and reteine to him and his heires, holding the same of the King and his heires. Strangbow was no sooner knowne to be in England, and Reimond at Waterford, but Ororic Monoculus, the one eyed Prince of Meath, mustred a great number of Souldiers, and laid siege to the City of Dublin. Miles Cogan the Governour withall his company (while the enemy was carelesse) upon a sudden issued out and fell upon them unawares, and made a great slaughter of them, among whom both Ororic and his sonne were slaine. In the British Chronicles copied by Owen Cretten out of the Abbies of Conwey in North-wales, and Stratflur in South-wales, I find re∣corded that when King Henry the 2. made preparation for the con∣quest of Ireland, Richard Strangbow Earle of Strigale, Marshall of England, being reconciled to the King, had all his Lands in England and Normandy restored unto him againe, and thereupon the King made him Seneschall (Steward, saith he, of Ireland) Then came Rees prince of South-wales, and offred the King to further his Conquest, 300. Horses, 400. Oxen, and for performance of all services gave him 14. pledges; when they were presented the King made choice of 30. principall Horses, gave backe all the rest, confessing himselfe greatly pleasured at his hands. Anno 1172. upon Saint Lukes day the 18. of October, Henry the 2. the 17. yeere of his raigne, the 41. of his age, entred the Haven of Waterford so writeth Cambrensis that lived then, and being landed to the harty joy of the English, and fained welcome of the I∣rishmen, had by them of Wexford formerly spoken of, Robert Fitz Stephens in irons presented before him, whom the Wexfordians (herein I commend Stanihursts indifferent dealing) rather of malice & cankard spight, then for just cause, did charge with many hainous crimes. The King advisedly to pacifie the rage of furious people, for
for the present time, committed him to prison, whence shortly after, he was with honour and credit, discharged, and advanced to his great preferment. After that the King had a little rested himselfe, and the messengers scattered themselves with newes over the land, the Princes were a∣mazed, they knew the Kings greatnesse was such, if faire meanes would not, force should constraine them, and therefore in policie re∣solved themselves to yeeld allegiance, homage and fealtie. Whereup∣on Dermot Mac Carty, Prince of Corke, began, became tributarie, sware faith, truth, and loyaltie to the King of England. And the King thereupon gave the kingdome of Corke to Robert Fitz Stephens and Miles Cogan as hereafter more at large shall appeare. From Waterford the King raised his army, and marched towards Lismore, where he tarryed two daies, and from thence he marched to Cashill, not farre from the Shure, and thither came to him, Do∣nald O Bren, Prince of Limric, who submitted himselfe, became tri∣butarie, and swore fealty; whereupon the King as hee had formerly done with Corke, appointed a Governour for Limric: then also came in Donall, Prince of Ossorie, and Omelaghlen Ophelin, Lord of the Decies, with all the chieftaines of Mounster, submitting themselves, as others had formerly done, surrendring unto the Kings hands, their territories, and holding them againe at his pleasure. Thence the King returned to Waterford, left there his houshold, and Robert Fitz Barnard, governour of the towne, and marched with his army to∣wards Dublin. In his iourney there came unto him of the chiefest commanders of the land, Omathelan, Machelan, Ophelan, O Mac Chel∣weie, Gille Mac Holemoc, O tuell helly Ocathdhessy, O Caraell of Vriell, and Roric the sonne of Monoculus of Meth. But Roderic the Monarch came no neerer then the Shanon, where Hugh de lacy, and William Fitz Aldelme, by the Kings command met him, and hee desiring peace, submitted himselfe, swore allegiance, became tributarie, and did put in (as all others had done) hostages and pledges for the per∣formance of the same. Thus was all Ireland, saving Vlster, brought in subjection, and every Prince of the other parties, in his owne person, saving Roderic King of Connaght, submitted himselfe: but he subtil∣ly alledged, that he submitted Connaght, but not the command of all Ireland, the which he reserved for the Monarch and his successors: but of this hereafter if God permit. Christmas drew on, which the King kept at Dublin, where hee feasted all the Princes of the land, and gave them rich and beautifull gifts, they repaired thither out of all parts of the land, and wonderfull it was to the rude people to behold the Majestie of so puissant a Prince, the pastime, the sport, and the mirth, and the continuall mu∣sicke, the masking, mumming, and strange shewes, the gold, the sil∣ver, and plate, the precious ornaments, the dainty dishes, furnished
with all sorts of fish and flesh, the wines, the spices, the delicate and sumptuous banquets, the orderly service, the comely march, and seemly array of all officers: the Gentlemen, the Esquires, the Knights, and Lords in their rich attire (such as rugged Mantles and Irish Troosses were never acquainted withall) the running at Tilte in com∣pleat harnesse, with barb'd horses, where the staves shivered and flew in splinters, safer to sit, then upon an Irish Pillion that playeth crosse and pile with the rider, the plaine honest people admired, and no mer∣vaile: but now to more serious matters. Henry 2. having thus con∣quered Ireland (with the envy of the French and forraigne Princes) without one drop of sweat, without drawing of sword, or shedding of one drop of English bloud, (as it became his Princely calling) tur∣ned himselfe to reforme the state Ecclesiasticall, and the misdemea∣nours of holy Church, whereof Cambrensis writeth: In the yeere of Christs incarnation 1172. and in the first yeere, when Henry the most Noble King conquered Ireland, Christianus, Bishop of Lismore, and Legate of the Apostolike See; Donatus, Archbishop of Cashill; Laure∣ance, Archbishop of Dublin; and Catholius, Archbishop of Tue∣mond, with their Suffragans, and fellow Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Deanes and Archdeacons, and many other Prelates of the Church of Ireland, by the commandment of the King, did assemble themselves, and kept a Synod at Cashill, and there debating many things concerning the wealth, estate, and reformation of the Church of Ireland, did pro∣vide remedies for the same. At this Councell, in behalfe of the King, (whom he had sent thither) there were Raffe, Abbot of Buldeway, Raffe, Archdeacon of Landaffe, Nicholas, the Kings Chaplaine, with divers other Clerkes; sundry good statutes and wholesome lawes were there de∣vised, which were after subscribed and confirmed by the King himselfe, and under his authority, which were these that follow. First, it is decreed that all good and faithfull Christian people throughout Ireland, shall refraine and forbeare to marry with their neere kins folkes and cousins, and match with such as lawfully they might doe. Secondly, that children shall be catechized without the Church door, and baptized in the Font appointed in the Church for the same pur∣pose. Thirdly, that every Christian doe truely and faithfully pay yeerely, the tithes of his Cattell, Corne, and all other his increase and profits, to the Church or Parish where he is a parishioner. Fourthly, that all the Church lands and possessions throughout all Ireland, shall be free from all secular exactions and impositions, and espe∣cially that no Lords, Earles, or Noble men, nor their children nor fa∣mily, shall extort or take any cony and livery, cosheries or cuddies, or any other like custome from thence, forth, in or upon any of the Church land and territories; and likewise that neither they, nor any other per∣son,
doe thenceforth exact out of the said Church lands, old wicked and detestable customes of cony and livery, the which they were wont to ex∣tort upon such townes and villages of the Churches, as were neere, and next bordering upon them. Fiftly, when carik or composition is made among the laye people, for any murther, that no person of the Clergie, (though he be a kinne to a∣ny of the parties) shall contribute any thing thereunto, but as they bee guiltlesse of the murther, so shall they be free from paying of money for any such release for the same. Sixtly, that all and every good Christian, being sicke and weake, shall before the Priest and his neighbours, make his last Will and Testa∣ment, and his debts and servants wages being paid, all his moveables to be divided, (if he have any children) into three parts, whereof one part to be to the Children, another to his Wife, and the third part to be for the performing of his Will; and if so be that hee have no children, then the goods to be divided into two parts, whereof the one moytie to be to his Wife, and the other to the performance of his Will and Testament. And if he have no Wife, but onely Children, then likewise the goods to be divided into two parts, whereof the one to himselfe, and the other to his children: Seventhly, that every Christian dying in the Catholike faith, shall be reverently brought to the Church, and to bee buried, as appertai∣neth. Eightly and lastly, that all the divine Service in the Church of Ire∣land, shall be kept, used, and observed in the like order and manner as it is in the Church of England; for it is meet and right, that as by Gods providence and appointment, Ireland is become now subject, and under the King of England: so the same should take from thence, the or∣der, and rule, and manner how to reforme themselves, and to live in better sort. Gelasius, Primate of Armagh, was not at this Synod, but at his comming to Dublin, hee concurred with his Collegues, and confir∣med the premises. He was a man of great learning, godly life, and great age; when by reason of age, sight, and strength, and stomacke failed him, as he travailed, he had with him alwaies, a white Cow that gave him milke, and was his onely sustentation. Gilbert succee∣ded this Gelasius in that See. The Antiquaries of that time have re∣corded, that the winter during the Kings abode in Ireland, there rose such stormes and tempest by sea and by land, that no newes could be heard either out of England or Normandie, neither Shippe or Barke crosse the seas, untill mid-Lent, at what time with an easterly winde, there came out of England, and Aquitaine in France, newes unto the King, how that there came into Normandy in France, two Cardinals from Alexander the third, to wit, Albertus and Theodi∣nus, to enquire of the death of Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury:
Whereupon the King sent in post before him, to signifie that he was returning with all speede, and that he would conferre with them in Normandie. And leaving Ireland, hee was very sorry that time and leisure served not to lay things in better order for the stay of the land. And also suspecting the greatnesse of Richard, Earle Strangbow, whom at that time he tooke with him into England; hee appointed to go∣verne Dublin, Hugh de Lacy, to whom he had given in Fee, the ter∣ritorie of Meth, with twenty Gentlemen to his Guard. Robert Fitz Stephens, and Morice Fitz Girald, with twenty others to attend their persons. Likewise he left Governours over Waterford, Humfrey de Bohune, Robert Fitz Bernard, and Hugh de Graunt devil with forty persons to their guard. Lastly, hee assigned over Wexford, William Fitz Adelme, Philip de Bruesa, and Philip de Hastings, with twenty to their guard, and tooke shipping at Wexford, Munday in Easter weeke, by sixe a clocke in the morning, with full saile, and lan∣ded the same day about noone, at Saint Davids in Wales; so writeth Cambrensis in his vaticinall historie, and in his Itinerarie of Cambria. What time the King was in Ireland, there fell a great plague in his army, which was some cause of his departure from Dublin to Wex∣ford. Cambrensis out of the mouth of the common people, attributeth it unto certaine Archers, cessed at Finglas, that cut downe the trees of the Church-yard, and therefore were they iustly punished, and left their bones there every one; but the British Chronicle, and Ho∣linshed also, more likely to be true, affirmeth that there fell a plague a∣mong the Kings souldiers in Ireland, by reason of the change of the ayre, and victuals, and concourse of people, corrupting the same. The names of the men of account orderly as they came to the con∣quest of Ireland. Dermot Mac Morogh, Prince of Leinster, after his returne out of England, wintred at Fernes, expecting the comming of these Con∣querours. Robert Fitz Stephens, the Kings Constable at Abertivy: Anno 1170.David Barry. Hervie de Monte Marisco, married Nesta, daughter to Maurice Fitz Girald. Willi Nott. Maurice Prendregast. Meilerus. Maurice Fitz Girald. Reimond le Grosse, nephew to Robert Fitz Stephens, married with Basilia, the sister of Earle Strangbow. William Ferrand. Richard Strangbow, Earle of Penbroke. Miles Cogan. brethren & nephewes to Robert Fitz Stephens, and Maurice Fitz Girald. Richard Cogan. brethren & nephewes to Robert Fitz Stephens, and Maurice Fitz Girald.
Henry 2. King of England, &c.Anno 1172. Hugh de Lacy. William Fitz Adelme. Raffe Abbot of Bulldewa in Normandie. Raffe, Archdeacon of Landaff. Nicholas, the Kings Chaplaine. Humphrey de Bohune. Robert Fitz Bernard. Hugh de Grandevilla. Philip de Brensa. Philip de Hastings. Silvester, Giraldus, Barry, Cambrensis. Iohn Ridensford. Girald. the two sonnes of Maurice Fitz Girald. Alexander. the two sonnes of Maurice Fitz Girald. William Makrell. Philip Mercrs. William Morice, Fitz Girald his eldest sonne, married with Elen, sister to Earle Strangbow. Griffin the sonne of William Fitz Girald the elder brother. Philip Welsh. Adam Herford brethren. ...... Herford brethren. ...... Purcell, Lievetenant of the Army, slaine by the Waterfor∣dians. Nich. Wallingford a Prior, afterwards Abbot of Malmesburie. David Welsh, nephew to Reimund. Ieffrey Welsh. Reimund of Kantan. Reimund Fitz Hugh. Milo of Saint David. Robert Poer. Osbert of Hertford. Willin Bendger. Adam of Gernemie. Hugh Tirell. Iohn de Courcey. Hugh Cantwell. Redmond Cantimore.
Alliance of the chiefe Conquerours of Ireland. Nesta the daughter of Rees ap Tuyder, Prince of South-Wales, Loved Henry the first, King of Eng∣land, father to Henry father to Henry Fitz Henry. Meiler Fitz Henry. Robert Fitz Henry. was maried twice, 1 Steven Custos castri Abertivi. Robert Fitz Stevē Rafe, Meredcalas Meredith Milo. 2 Gerald of Windsor. Williā Fitz Girald who had is∣sue, Reimund le Grosse, who married Basilia, Strangbowes Sister. Griffeth. Mau∣rice Fitz Girald William married El∣len, Sister to Strang∣bow, Camb. or by o∣thers, Alma, Daugh∣ter of Strangbow. Girald. Alexander. Nesta, married to Her∣vie de monte Marisco. Milo or Miles. David, Bishop of Saint Davids.
Not long after the Kings departure out of Ireland, Ororic of Meth craved a parlee, with Hughe Delacy; pretending reformation of abuses, and establishing of perfect love and amity; but meant no∣thing else, saving falshood, treason and villany: the place being ap∣pointed (Cambrensis calleth it Ororics Hill, I take it to be the Hill of Taragh) and oathes taken of each side, with conditions that all armes should be laid aside, and few persons approach to the place, Ororic contrary to the covenants, laid an ambush, that upon a signe or token given by him, they should forth with issue out of the bushes, and ditches, and effect his traiterous devices: The night before the parly, Griffith the nephew of Robert and Morice, being the sonne of Wil∣liam the elder brother, dreamed in his sleepe, that he saw a great heard of wild hogges, rush upon Hugh Delacy, and his uncle Maurice, and that one of them being more furious and raging then the rest, had rent them with his tuskes, and tore them in pieces, if he had not with his force rescued them, and killed the Bore: this dreame trou∣bled him exceedingly, wherewith he acquainted his company; and made him and the rest be the more upon their keeping, to prevent treachery: The houre of parlee came, they met and confered toge∣ther. Griffith not forgetting his dreame, made choice of seven tall men of his owne kindred, in whom he reposed great trust and confi∣dence, well mounted, with swords, sparthes, and sheilds; raunged the fields (as nigh the Hill as they might) and made sundry Carreers and brave Turnaments, under pretence of recreation and pleasant pastime; yet alwaies casting an eye to the Hill, to see the end of this parlee. Hughe Delacy and Ororic, being somewhat long together, Ororic to worke his treason, stept aside, faining to make water, upon the signe he gave his men brought him his horse, and sparth, the which he taking upon his shoulder, ment therewith to have cloven Hughe Delacy his head, if the interpreter had not stept betweene, whose arme was cleane cut off and himselfe wounded to the death. Maurice Fitz Girald and Griffith his nephew rush in, the trai∣tours of the one side, the true men of the other are together by the eares; when Ororic the traitor tooke horse to runne away, Griffith with his launce runne him through, and killed him and his horse and three of his men, cut off his head and sent it to the King of England: this was the end of Orirics treason, and the effect of Griffiths dreame. Immediatly upon this, Earle Richard (being formerly upon re∣conciliation made with the King, appointed Seneschall of Ireland) is now sent out of Normandy, by especially commission from the King, with Reimondle grosse his brother in Law, in joint commission to governe the whole land, & to be his Lieutenant in Ireland; where he found the Irish saith Cambrensis, constant in inconstancy, firme in
wavering, and faithfull in untruthes: he found emulation betweene Hervy and Reimond, and the Army in a mutiny, for lacke of pay at Herveies hands; whereupon he made Reimond Lievetenant of the forces. Reimond immediatly mustred his men, drew them forth to the Decies among the Rebels, where they preyed and spoiled. Se∣condly, they marched to Lismore, where they did the like. Lastly, along the Sea cost, they goe with their booties, preyes and rich pil∣lage towards Waterford; and finding at Dunganan some thirteene botes out of Waterford and other places, they lade them with their preys, intending by water to saile for Waterford; while they waited for wind, Corke men envyed their successe; prepared 32. Barks, manned and furnished them out out of their Towne, to overthrow Reimond and the English men, and to recover the preyes; they met, they fought cruelly; Corke men are overthrowne, and their Captain Gilbert Mac Turger was slaine, by a valiant Knight Philip Welsh, and finally Adam Herford with all his charge, safely arrived in Water∣ford. Reimond was not at this skirmish, but by the way he met with Dermot Mac Corty Prince of Desmond, who with great power was come to the aid of the men of Corke. They likewise skrimished and fell to a cruell fight, where Dermot forsooke the field with small cre∣dit, and Reimond went to Waterford with foure thousand head of cattell. Immediatly upon this, newes came out of England unto Reimond, that William Fitz Girald his father, was departed this life; where∣upon he sailed to Wales, and Hervey De monte Marisco was appoin∣ted by the Earle, Lieutenant of the forces. This Hervey to advance his credit, purposed to worke some exploits, and drew out of Dublin the Earle to Cashil; there also after consultation by mandat from the Earle, he appointed the Souldiers that were at Dublin to meet him: When they came as farre as Ossorie, Donald Prince of Limirik, ha∣ving by his espials before hand intelligence thereof, stole upon them in the morning; slue of them foure Knights, whereof O Grame an Irish man was one, and foure hundred souldiers; with this the Earle was discouraged, and went to Waterford; the Irish gathered heart and determined to roote out al the Englishmen. So that Roderic Prince of Conoght tooke this opportunity, passed the Shannan, and wasted all to the walles of Dublin. The Earle being in this perplexity wrote unto Reimond, that was in Wales. As soone as you have read those our letters, make all the haste you can to come away, and bring with you all the helpe and force you can make, and then accor∣ding to your own will and desire, you shall assuredly enjoy that which you long looked for. Immediatly he prepared himselfe, together with his cousin Meilerius; shipped 30. young Gentlemen of his own kindred. 100. horsemen, with 300. archers & foot, of the best & chosen men of all Wales; and in 20. Barkes arrived in Waterford: It was at such time
as the Waterford men had determined to kill every English man within the walles; but when they saw the Barkes come in with flags, and banners displaid, they were astonied, and staid their course. Reimond entreth the towne of Wexford, setteth all in order, taketh the Earle with him, and all their forces, and went to Wexford; hee had left behinde him one Purcell his Lievetenant to guard the town, whom the Waterfordians slue, and put to the sword, of English birth, man, woman and childe; but such as had fled to Reynolds towre, plagued them sore afterwards, drove them to intreate for peace, the which they obtained with hard conditions: And, saith the booke of Houth, the Waterfordians were ever after the lesse beleeved. For all the troubles in England and Normandie, and these treasons and rebellions in Ireland, the King was not unmindefull to quiet the people, and to establish himselfe and his heires in the kingdome; first, he sent Embassadors to Rome to cleere himselfe of the death of Tho∣mas of Canterbury: secondly, he sent messengers thither concerning the state of Ireland, whereunto Alexander the third, answered as fol∣loweth, Alexander the Bishop, the servant of the servants of God, to his dearely beloved sonne, the Noble King of England, greeting, grace and Apostolike benediction. Forasmuch as things given and granted upon good reason, by our predecessors, are to be well allowed of, rati∣fied and confirmed; wee well considering and pondering the graunt and priviledge for and concerning the dominion of the land of Ire∣land to us appertaining, and lately given by Adrian our predecessor; we following his steps, doe in like manner confirme, ratifie and al∣low the same, reserving and saving to Saint Peter, and to the Church of Rome, the yeerely pension of one penny out of every house, as well in England, as in Ireland; provided also that the barbarous peo∣ple of Ireland by your meanes be reformed and recovered from that filthy life, and abhominable conversation; that as in name, so in life and manners they may be Christians; and that as that rude and dis∣ordered Church, being by you reformed, the whole nation may also, with the profession of the name, be in acts and deeds, followers of the same. And saith the booke of Houth, Alexander the third be∣sought the devill to take them all that gainesayed this Kings title, Amen. Henry 2. sent this priviledge to Ireland by Nicholas Walling∣ford, a Prior, afterwards Abbot of Malmesbury, and William Fitz Adelme. And then being at Waterford, they caused an assembly, and a Synod of the Bishops and Clergie within the land to be gathered to∣gether, where, in open audience, this priviledge of Alexander, and the other of Adrian (formerly spoken of) were read, and published, and ratified. Reimond having setled his affaires at Wexford, marched towards Dublin, the noyse of his comming drave Roderic the rebell of Connaght away; he was no sooner come to Dublin, but the newes of the rebellion of Limric followed after, where Donald O bren
having sworne faith and fealty unto Henry 2. is now revolted and turned to his vomit. Reymond maketh preparation, mustereth his men, chose out 26. gallants, 300. horsemen, and 300. Archers, and foote, and commeth to Lymeric, where he found the Bridges drawn, the river swift and impassable, the townesmen upon the walls, with all manner of defence for their safeguard. David Welsh, a lusty Gen∣tleman, maketh no more adoe, but putteth spurres to his horse, and with good guiding thereof, crosseth the river, and got to land; imme∣diately he calleth to his company, come, I have found a Ford: yet for all that, none would follow, but Ieffery Welsh, and Meilerius Fitz Henry. Then Reimond turneth him to the army with these words: You worthy men, who of nature are valiant, and whose Prowesse we have well tryed, come away, the way heretofore not knowne, and the river hitherto thought not passable, by our adventures, a foord is now found therein; let us therefore follow him that is gone before, and helpe him being now in distresse; let us not suffer nor see so worthy a Gentle∣man thus for our common cause and honour, oppressed, to perish, and to be cast away before our eyes, and in our sight, for want of our help, and by meanes of our dastard cowardize. It is no time to use many words, the shortnesse of the time, the present necessitie of this Noble Gentleman, and the state of our own honour, urgeth expedition, and requireth haste. And even with the words, he put spurres to his horse, and adventu∣reth the river, after whom, followed the whole company, every one striving who might be formost. And as God would, they passed all o∣ver safe, saving two souldiers, and one Gwydo a Gentleman: when they had recovered land, the enemy fled, whom they pursued, and in the chase slue a number of them, they entred the towne, got great spoyles and riches, but greater honour and fame. When all was quiet, Reimond left there a strong Garrison, and Miles of Saint Davids, Lievetenant over them, and returned to the borders of Leinster. Envy hardly sleepeth, but is still devising of mischiefe; Hervie de monte Marisco, though now by marriage allyed unto Reymond, yet by malice worketh his overthrow, enuying his honour and prosperous successe, sendeth secret letters to the King against him, which are not worthy to be recorded, being but the sinke of secret malice. The King, (as the nature of Princes is to be jealous and suspitious of any great∣nesse) is easily brought to credit Hervie, and thereupon sendeth foure of his servants to Ireland, Robert Poer, Osbert of Herlotte, or Here∣ford, William Bendeger, and Adam of Gernemie; two of them to stay with Earle Richard, and the other two to bring Reimond away with them; as Reymond was ready to goe for England, newes came that Donald, Prince of Lymeric had besieged the towne, and that the gar∣rison was greatly distressed, and in want of victuals: the Earle, with Reimond and the foure Gentlemen, fell to consultation, what course to hold; they found in the army a secret mutiny, where the souldiers
said flatly, they would not serve that way, unlesse Reimond were their Captaine; to be short, it was concluded that Reimond should under∣take the service; when he had mustered and made choice of horse and foot, he marched towards Lymeric: Donald, Prince of Ossory, who bore private grudge to Donald of Lymeric, Morogh of Kencile, with other Irish men, then served and attended upon Reimond. By the way a Post came, and certified Reimond, that Donald of Lymeric had raised his siege, and was come to the pace of Cashill to give him bat∣taile; this pace of it selfe was naturally very strong, but by trench∣ing, and hedging, and plashing of trees, it seemed invincible. When of each side they were ready to joyne battaile, Donald, Prince of Os∣sory being desirous to see his enemy of Lymeric and Thomond o∣verthrowne, turneth him to the English men with these words: You worthy▪ Noble, and valiant Conquerours of this land, you are this day valiantly to give the onset upon your enemies, which if you doe af∣ter your old and accustomed manner, no doubt the victory will be yours; for we with our sparthes, and you with your swords, will sharpely pur∣sue them, as they shall very hardly escape our hands, & avoid our force, but if it so fall out (which God forbid) that you be overthrowne, and hove the worse side, be you assured that wee will leave you, and turne to our enemies, and take part with them. Wherefore be of good courage, and looke well to your selves, and consider that you are now farre from any Fort or place of refuge, and therefore if you should be driven to flye, the same will be long and dangerous unto you. As for us, ye may not trust to us, for we determine to sticke to them who shall have the victo∣ry, and will pursue and be on the jackes of them who shall flye and runne away: and therefore be no longer assured of us, then whilst yee be Con∣querours: Meilerius, who had the foreward, being somewhat mo∣ved and warmed with those words, suddenly, like a blast of winde, entred the Passe, pulled away the bushes, brake downe the hedges, the Pioners filled the trenches, and speedily made plaine the way, with no small slaughter of the enemies, and so they marched with∣out any great perill to Lymeric, where they releeved the army, and set things in order, and rested a short time. Roderic of Connaght, and Donald of Thomond finding themselves weake, craved a parlee, it was granted them: Roderic would needs keepe on the water, and Do∣nald kept the wood. Who would trust them that would trust no o∣ther? Reimond chose the midst betweene them both; to be short, a peace was concluded, they both submitted themselves, gave hosta∣ges, made fealtie, and swore to be true thenceforth for ever to the King of England, and to his successors after him. This service was no sooner performed, but there came messengers to Reimond from Der∣mot Mac Carty Prince of Desmond, humbly craving his aide, against his eldest son Cormac O Lechan, who was in armes against his natural father: with the advice of his Councell; Reimond granteth aide, hee
marcheth towards Corke and subdueth the rebell, the sonne dissem∣bleth with the father and clapt him in prison: the father requiteth the sonne with like: he got him in under colour of peace, clapt him in pri∣son and cut off his head. And not long after, saith Cambrensis, the men of Corke at a parlee not farre from the Towne, slew their Prince Dermot Mac Carty, and most of his company. Anno 1177. (so writeth Holinshed) Henry the 2. held a Parlia∣ment at Windsore, where Laurence Archbishop of Dublin was pre∣sent; as what time Roderic King of Conoght sent thither the Arch∣bishop of Tuam, the Abbot of Saint Brandon, with one Laurence his Chaplen; offring all submission and loyalty. The King wil∣lingly heard them, and gladly concluded a Peace at the importunate suit of his Messengers to avoid further trouble; injoyning Roderic to pay him in token of subjection, a tribute of Cow hides, the Charter of agreement was drawne and subscribed as follow∣eth. A Charter of agreement be∣tweene Henry 2. Kng of En∣gland, and Ro∣deric King of Connoght.Hic est finis & concordia quae facta fuit apud Windesore, in Octabis Sancti Michaelis, Anno gratiae 1175. Inter Dominum Regem Angliae Henricum secundum; & Rodericum Regem Conaciae, per Catholicum Tuamensem Archepiscopum & Abbatem C. Sancti Brandani, & Magistrum Laurentium Cancellarium Regis Conaciae. 1. Scilicet quod Rex Angliae concedit predicto Roderico Ligio homini suo Regnum Conaciae quamdiu ei fideliter serviet, vt sit Rex sub eo, paratus ad servitiū suū, sicut homo suus & ut teneat terrā suam, ita bene & in pace sicut tenuit antequam Dominus Rex Angliae intra∣ret Hiberniam; reddendo ei tributum: & totam illam terram & ha∣bitatores terrae habeat sub se, & justiciae ut tributum Regi Angliae inte∣grè persolvant, & per manum ejus sua jura sibi conservent, & illi qui modo tenent, teneant in pace, quam diu mansuerint in fidelitate Regis Angliae, & fideliter & integre persolverint tributum & alia jura sua quae ei deben, per manum Regis Conaciae, salvo in omnibus jure & honore Domini Regis Angliae & suo. 2. Et si qui ex eis Regi Angliae, & ei rebelles fuerint, & tribu∣tum & alia jura Regis Angliae, per manum ejus solvere noluerint, & a fidelitate Regis Angliae recesserint, ipse eos justitiet & amoveat, & si eos perse justitiare non poterit; Constabularius Regis Angliae & fa∣milia sua de terra illa juvabunt cum ad hoc faciendum, quum ab ipso fuerint requisiti, & ipsi viderint quod necesse fuerit, & propter hunc finem reddet predictus Rex Conaciae Domino Regi Angliae tributum singulis annis; scilicet, de singulis decem animalibus, unum coium placabile mercatoribus, tam de tota terra sua quam de aliena. 3. Excepto quod de terris illis quas Dominus Rex Angliae retinuit in dominio suo, & in dominio Baronum suorum nihil se intromittet: Scilicet Duvelina cum pertinentijs suis, & Midia cum omnibus perti∣nentijs
suis, sicut unquā Murchart Wamai Leth Lachlin, eam melius & plenius tenuet, aut aliqui qui eam de eo tenuerint. Et excepta Weseford∣ia cum omnibus pertinentijs suis, scilicet cum tota Lagenia, & excepta Waterf. cum tota terra illa quae est a Waterf. usque ad Dungarvan; ita ut Dungarvan sit cum omnibus pertinentijs suis, infra terram illam. 4. Et si Hibernenses illi qui aufugerint redire voluerint ad ter∣ram Baronum Regis Angliae, redeant in pace reddendo tributum predi∣ctum quod alij reddunt, vel faciendo antiqua servitia quae facere sole∣bant pro terris suis, et hoc sit in arbitrio Dominorum suorum, et si aliqui eorum redire noluerint, Domini eorum et Rex Conaciae accipiat obsides, ad omnibus quos ei Cōmisit Dominus Rex Angliae ad volunta∣tem Domini Regis et suam, et ipse dabit obsides ad voluntatem Domini Regis Angliae illos vel alios, et ipsi servient Domino de Canibus et Avibus suis singulis annis de presentis suis, et nullum omnino de qua∣cunque terra Regis sit, retinebunt contra voluntatem Domini Regis. Hijs testibus Richardo Episcopo Wintoniae, Gaufrido Episcopo Eliensi, Laurentio Duvelinensi Archepiscopo, Gaufrido, Nicolao, et Ro∣gero Capelanis Regis, Guilelmo Comit. Essex, et aliis multis. Moreover at that Parliament, the King gave an Irishman named Augustine, the Bishopricke of Waterford, which was then voyd, and sent him unto Ireland, with Laurence the Archbishop of Dublin, to be consecrated of Donatus Archbishop of Cashill. Anno 1176. Bertran de Verdon founded the Monastery of Cro∣kisdan. As Reimond marcheth towards Leinster, newes came unto him from the Lady Basilia his wife, that Strangbow was dead, the which hee concealed with good countenance; and called a secret councell of the wiser sort and trustiest friends, how to dispose of the State of the Land, afore the Irish were acquainted therewith: it was agreed upon for that the enemy were many, the forces but few, they should strengthen all their holds upon the Sea cost untill the K. plea∣sure were further knowne, and withdraw the midland garrisons to supply and compleat the same. And among others they thought good to take the garrison out of Lymerik and deliver the Towne to the charge of Donald Obrien of Thomond Prince of Lymericke; he being sent for, came in poast, understanding Reimonds pleasure, was the gladdest man that might bee, and undertooke the charge, Viz. to keepe the Towne to the Kings use, and at his pleasure to re-deliver it, as also in the meane time to keepe the peace: this he under∣tooke with Corporall oathes, and solemne vowes; and thereupon delivered hostages. But the Englishmen were no sooner over the one end of the Bridge, but Donald broke the other end, and set fire in the foure quarters of the Towne, saying there shall no English race rest here any longer: This they beheld with their eyes, to their no small griefe of mind. Cambrensis inveyeth against this Donald Obrien cal∣ling him traitour, wicked, impudent, perfidious, perjured and what
not? This was in Anno one thousand, one hundred, seventy seven. Earle Strangbow left behinde, one daughter of tender yeeres, and lyeth buried in the Church of the blessed Trinity in Dublin, over a∣gainst the Pulpit, in the body of the Church, whose exequies, Lau∣rence O Toole, Archbishop of Dublin did solemnize with great reve∣rence; whereupon the King sent into Ireland, William Fitz Adelme to be his Lievetenant, with the allowance of twenty Gentlemen of his houshold, and joyned with him in commission, Iohn de Courcy, with the allowance of tenne men to attend his person. Robert Fitz Stephens, and Miles Cogan, who had nobly served him in his wars two yeers, with the allowance of twenty men to attend their persons; at which time, saith Holinshed, the Irish men paid the King a tribute of twelve pence yeerely for every house, or else for every yoke of Ox∣en, (alias plow) which they had of their owne. Richard, surnamed Strangbow, had to his father, Gilbert, likewise surnamed Strangbow, for his valour & strength; this Gilbert was E. of Ogye in Normandie, & Lord of Totenhā, Alverdiston, & Wolaston in England, so created by Henry 1. William the son of Osbert, a Nor∣man, E. of Ogie in Normandie, had issue, Richard, E. of Ogie, this Ri∣chard had issue Walter & Gilbert, aforesaid father to Richard E. Strang∣bow; William Fitz Osbert came into England in the ayde of William the Conquerour. And as far as I can learn, Walter was the first Earle of Penbroke (the Britaines call it Penbraich More, the head of an arme of the sea) whence both the Countie, and the most noble Earldome have their denominations. Arnulph de monte Gomerik, the yonger sonne of Roger de montegomerik, that was by William the Conque∣rour created Earle of Arundell and Shrewsbury, builded the Castle of Penbroke, where Henry the seventh was borne; William the Con∣querour gave him Divet and Cardigan, hee was Earle of Ogie, and the second Earle of Penbroke, and married the daughter (by the mediation of Girald de Windsore, Constable of his Castle) of Mo∣rogh, King of Leinster in Ireland. Gilbert, surnamed Strangbow, was created by King Stephen, the third Earle of Penbroke, hee was Earle of Ogie in Normandie, Lord of Totenham, Alverdiston, Wolaston, and Cardigan, and in England succeeded Arnulph. Henry the first made him Earle of Strigule, now called Chepstow, and gave him Cardigan; this Gilbert builded Castrogie, alias Castrum Ogie, in Gwent, and the Castle of Stratmirike. Richard, surnamed Strangbow, succeeded his father Gilbert; his stile as I take it is thus. Richard, surnamed Strangbow, Lord of To∣tenham, Alverdiston, Wolaston, and Cardigan; in England, Earle of Penbroke, Earle of Strigule, alias Domonius de Chepstow in Eng∣land, Earle of Ogie in Normandie, Earle of Leicester, Earle Marshall of England, Vicegerent of Normandie, Lord Lievetenant of Ireland, and Prince of Leinster in the right of Eva his wife, sole heire of Dermot Mac Morogh, King of Leinster.
This Richard had issue by his first wife, a sonne, a fine youth, and a gallant stripling, who following his father with some charge in bat∣taile array, as he passed by Idrone in Leinster, to relieve Robert Fitz Stephens in Wexford, upon the sight and cry of the Irish men, when his father was in cruell fight, gave backe with his company, to the great discouragement of the host, yet the Earle got the victory, and commanded with the teares in his cheekes, that his sonne should be cut in the middle with a sword for his cowardize in battaile; he was buried in the Church of the blessed Trinitie in Dublin, where now his father resteth by his side, and caused the cause of his death for an Epitaph to be set over him. Nate ingrate mihi pugnanti terga dedisti, Non mihi, sed genti & regno quoque terga dedisti. My sonne unkinde didst flye the field, the father fighting hard, Nor me, nor English birth didst weigh, nor kingdome didst regard. How the sonne pleaded with his father for the place of service, and how the father answered, Stanihurst hath many circumstances here∣of, and delivered, that his owne father in his fury, and in the face of the enemy, cut him off, and marvaileth that Cambrensis would con∣ceale it, and in the end taketh it as a matter of truth, both by the te∣stimony of the Tombe in Christ Church, as also by the industry of Sir Henry Sidney, Knight, a great favourer of Antiquities, in preser∣ving the same, to the knowledge of the posterity. Richard Earle Strangbow by his second wife Eva, the daughter of Dermot Mac Morogh, had issue, one daughter, Isabell, whom Richard the first gave in marriage to William Maxfield, Lord Maxfield, Earle Marshall of England, of whom (God willing) I shall have occasion to speake further, when I come to his time. The same yeere that Strangbow dyed, viz. 1177. (so Holinshed writeth) Iohn de Courcy entred Vlster, discomfited the Irish, and wanne the Citie of Dune, where the body of Saint Patricke, Saint Colme, and Saint Brigide the Virgin rests, whom Courcy calleth tria jocalia Hiberniae, the three jewels of Ireland. At the winning of Dune, Roderic King of Connaght, and Monarch of Ireland, (at severall times before sworne to the King) raised a mighty army against Cour∣cy, where Roderic was overthrowne, and the Bishop of Dune taken prisoner among other rebels; the which Bishop, at the request of Cardinall Vinian (then present) was set at liberty. This Cardinall, saith mine Author, intitled Sancti Stephani de monte Celio, was sent from Alexander 3. and comming into England without licence, was pardoned by Henry 2. and permitted to goe into Scotland, and the north parts, where his commission directed him; when he had ended
his businesse in Scotland, he passed over into Man, where he held his Christmas with Gotred, King of Man, and after the Epiphanie, sailed from thence into Ireland, and came thither (saith Newbrigiensis) the same time that the English men invaded the country, and was enter∣tained by Roderic, and the Bishop of Dune, and others, with great reverence. The Irish men aske councell of Vivian the Legate, what in that case he thought best to be done, whether they should fight, or yeeld unto the English nation; he gave counsell, forgetting what Adrian 4. and Alexander 3. had formerly granted and said, fight in defence of your country. This Legate (craftily preventing all mishaps) took the Church of Dune for his sanctuary, and had in readinesse the Popes commission, and the King of Englands Passe unto the Captaines of Ireland for his safe conduct: From thence he went to Dublin, called the Prelates, held a councell, and filled his bagges with the sinnes of the people; the English Captaines understanding of it, gave him in charge, either to depart the land, or to goe to the warres, and serve for pay with them, and no longer to receive money for nought. In the booke of Howth it is further alledged, how that this Legate in his Synod at Dublin (whether it were to curry favour with the English men, and to colour his other pranckes, it forceth not greatly) shewed and published openly the King of Englands right to Ireland, with the Popes grant and confirmation, and accursed all those that gainesaid the same. Now to the true history of Sir Iohn de Courcy, as worthy a Knight for martiall prowesse, as ever trode upon Irish ground, whom Cam∣brensis lightly overskipped, partly upon private grudge, for that Sir Iohn de Courcy allowed him not for Vicar generall in Ireland, and Se∣cretary to the State, partly in favour of Sir Hugh Delacy, who malig∣ned and envied the honor and renowne, and prosperous successes of Courcy; lastly for feare of King Iohn, into whose displeasure Courcy fell, through the false accusation of Lacy and his faction, yet the cer∣tainty of his exploits hath beene preserved, and in Latine committed to Paper by a Fryer in the North, the which booke Oneil brought to Amagh, and was translated into English by ..... Dowdall, Primate there, Anno 1551. He was by father a Norman, by mother a Cambri∣an or Britaine, and married the daughter of Gotred, King of Man; he was a Gentleman descended, as it seemeth by his coate, of an antient house, of whom the Irish men hold that Merlin prophecied, where he wrote: A white Knight sitting on a white horse, bearing birds in his shield, shall be the first which with force of Armes, shall enter and subdue Vlster. He served King Henry the second in all his warres, and in France he met with a worthy Knight, Sir Amoricus Tristeram, who mar∣ried Courcy his sister, and whether it was derived of the Ladies name,
or for that they were married on Saint Laurence day, ever after hee and his posterity after him, was called Sir Amoricus de Sancto Lau∣rentio, whence the Noble house of Howth is lineally discended, wher∣of hereafter in another place more at large. These two Knights be∣came sworne brethren in the Church of our Lady at Roane; where solemnely they vowed to serve together, to live and dye together and equally to devide betweene them what they wanne by the sword, or should be given them in regard of their service: Thus they conti∣nued in France, Anjou, Normandy, and England; and when Sir Iohn de Courcy was joyned in commission with William Burgh Fitz Adelme and others; Sir Amoricus de Sancte Laurentia, accompanied him into Ireland, where Courcy receaved a graunt of the King, by Patent for him and his heires or assignes after him, to enjoy in that Land all that he could Conquer with the sword, reserving to the King homage and fealty; they landed at Houth and there fought a cruell fight by the side of a Bridge, where Sir Iohn de Courcy being sickly, taried abord the shippe. Sir Amoricus being Chiftaine and Generall of the field by land▪ behaved himselfe most worthily; many were slaine on both sides, but Sir Amoricus got the victory, with the lose of seven of his owne blood, sonnes, uncles and nephewes, wher∣upon for his singular valour and good service there performed, that Lordship was allotted unto him for his part of the conquest, with o∣ther things which Sir Iohn de Courcy gave him. Immediatly, Sir Iohn de Courcy, Sir Amoricus de Saint Laurence, and Sir Roger Hoer, so well appointed as then contented them, directed their course to∣wards the North; the principall cause that moved them (besides their valour) was the hard government of William Fitz Adelme, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, whose conditions Cambrensis who then lived and was conversant with him, delivereth in this sort. He was co∣vetous, proud, malicious, envious, a favorite of wine and women and good to none, but to his back and belly: and by his backe he un∣derstood his kindred, and by his belly he ment his children, for he op∣posed himselfe, most enviously against the Garraldins, Fitz Stephens and Barries, the first most valiant Conquerors of the Land, and a∣gainst their posterity, &c. While Courcy is on his way, give me leave, gentle Reader, to e∣ternise the Memoriall of Maurice Fitz Gerald: As he was of birth and parentage nobly and worshiply discended, so was he in conditi∣on and for martiall prowesse every way renowned. Cambrensis his kinsman commendeth him greatly and no lesse then he deserved. He left this world to the great griefe of all the true harts in Ireland, and lieth buried in the Monastery of grey Friers without the wales of Wexford, his ..... sonnes whom William Fitz Adelme maligned, builded the Castle of Fernes. In his time, (saith Cambrensis) at Wir∣lo, where Maurice Fitz Girald dwelled, there was a Monster, begotten
by a wicked man of that nation upon a Cow, a vice (saith he) at that time too common among that nation. It had the body of a man, but all the hinder parts of an oxe, from the anckles of the legges, and the wrists of the armes, he had the hoofes of an oxe; his head was all bald saving a few small and thinne haires; his eyes, great, round, and blacke like an Oxe; nose he had none, but two holes; speake hee could not, but onely bellow like a Cow: this Monster did daily resort to the house of Maurice Fitz Girald about dinner time, and such meat as was given him, he tooke it in his hoofes, and put it to his mouth, and so fed himselfe. Diviners in those daies construed this of the govern∣ment of Fitz Adelme, the which in their opinion was monstrous, but there I leave, and returne to Courcy. Iohn de Courcy after foure dayes, some miles come to Daud with∣out resistance, and unlooked for, contrary to all mens expectation, the which in a word hath beene spoken of before: strange it is to see what a sudden feare will worke. Dunlenus, (whom I take to be O Do∣nell) no base nor meane Commander of that place, fled away, left armes, men and munition behinde, happy was hee (in his owne opi∣nion) that he had escaped the hands, he wist not of what enemy; the trumpets sounded, the armour ratled, the women clapt their hands, the children cryed, the townesmen to goe, the leaders entred, the soul∣diers ryfled, the towne upon a sodaine was ransacked, doores, win∣dowes, cupboards, chests flew open, the army after long march, and sore travaile, being in great want and weakenesse, had their housing, firing, dyet, and fare of the best, bedding, cloathing, gold, silver, plate, and rich booties, without checke or controulement of any, and re∣spite for certaine daies to breath, rest, and recreate themselves. In the necke of this out of Scotland, the winde blew one Vinianus a Cardi∣nall (spoken of before) which tooke upon him to intreate a peace betweene the two nations, but could not prevaile. After eight dayes, Roderic the Monarch, and O Donnell, King of Duune, had mustred their men, gathered forces, gotten great ayde, and prepared an hoast of tenne thousand fighting men, and came to besiege the City. Sir Iohn de Courcy, having but seven hundred, thought best not to bee cooped within, nor caged like a Bird, prepared to give them battaile abroad, marched forth, and ordered his army as followeth; he divi∣ded his men into three companies, the horsemen being seven score, were set in a winge on the left hand, under the leading of Sir Amori∣cus de Saint Laurantio, every horseman having a bowman behinde him. On the right hand, Sir Roger Poer, who had married Sir A∣moricus Neece, led the foot company, close by a bogge side, in the midst came Sir Iohn de Courcy, with his company; the way was nar∣row where they should encounter, and the English men had the vantage of a great hedge and ditch of the one hand, and a bogge on the other to gall the enemies horses, where no horse could enter
within them. Odonell seeing the Horsmen to be but a few, comman∣ded his foot and maine battaile to make a stand untill hee sent them word to march on, meaning to make short worke with the Horse∣men, and so to breake the necke of the strength of the battaile; the Horsemen joyne battaile, the Archers gall Odonels horses with arrowes, whom the English launce slew not, the horse unsadled, and when the English quiver was empty, the archer with his sword haught the horses and dispatched the men that were unhorsed and cast to the ground. Odonels horsemen being somewhat discomfited retired, Sir Amoricus cals upon Courcy and Poer, to bring on the foote, who metting with the foote and maine battaile of the Irish (that expected newes from Odonell) fought most fiercely: No instrument of Warre could be heard, the cry of both sides pierced the clouds, the gald hor∣ses grievously complained, the maimed souldiers groueling on the ground and gasping for breath gave pittifull groanes; the Irish flang darts and stones, the English shoote arrowes, the Irish with sparthes and galloglasse axes, the English with speares and swords encounter on both sides most valiantly; the splints of brokē staves fly about their eares, and eyes, sparkles of fire from their swords and targets, and the blowes upon their helmets yeelded the sound of hammers working upon anviles, both sides deserved honor and singular commenda∣tions; the slaughter was great on both sides, and continued long; many of the English were slaine, and a number of the Irish were left alive, they determined to make an end of the English that day; the rere of the Irish march couragiously, the English had the bog of the one side, and the ditch of the other, and the entrance to them was ful of heads, legs, and armes, dead corps, armor and horses dead, and lying a long striving with death, that they could not approch, where∣upon they broke their battaile aray, dispersed themselves, and from the paces entred the plaines. Sir Amoric watching his opportunity, called Ieffrey Montgomery his sisters sonne and standard bearer, and said: Have not we quitted our selves like men this day, and shall wee dishonour the field so much as to suffer yonder company to escape our hands; come, advance your Standard, let us wheele about and give the on-set: Montgomery replied, it seemes strange unto mee, to see your stomach passe your strength, we have wonne honour advisedly, and shall we now rashly lose it? of seven score, we have but forty horses left, the rest are wounded, tired and not fit for service: then said Amorich give me the Standard, I will beare it my selfe; if that be your pleasure (saith Mountgomery) you shall not heareafter charge me with cowardise, under this Standard have I got honour, and under this Standard (if God so so please) I will dye. With this they wheeled about and overtooke the foot of the Irish, being loden with armes, and wearied with fight, with their launces they strooke them to the ground, they gave the on-set a fresh upon the horsemen which were about 200. and had
Connor O Laghlin to their leader, who retreated in battaile array, rea∣dy to answer the fight. Sir Amoricus in that skirmish was twice vn∣horsed, and by his men lift up againe, afterwards in a filthy foord he was unhorsed againe, and his horse slaine under him: whereupon some of his troope lighted, stood very stoutly by him, tooke wea∣pons out of the dead mens hands that lay along the way, & kept the Foord from horse and man, untill Sir Iohn de Courcy came to the res∣cue, at which time many of the Irish were slaine, and the rest fled a∣way: thus in the end God gave the victory unto the English men, af∣ter the losse of many a brave man, and especially Lyonell Saint Lau∣rence, nephew to Amoricus, whose death was greatly lamented. When they had buried their dead, and gathered their armes, they re∣turned to Dune. The Midsummer following, Courcy fought the second battaile nigh the walles of Dune (saith Stanihurst) and overthrew fifteene thousand men in Vlster. And saith the booke of Houth, after that field, Vlster men had small stomacke to give any onset upon the En∣glish men: yet I finde the field to have beene bloudy of both sides, and that Sir Amoricus was sore wounded, laid under a hedge, eating hony suckles for his reliefe, where he left much bloud, and was carri∣ed away betweene foure men; his wounds were so many, and so dan∣gerous, that no Physitian or Surgeon could promise life the space of nine dayes, yet in the end, recovered. Next unto him was his sonne Sir Nicholas Saint Laurence, a most valiant Knight so sore wounded in nine severall places, that he was once left for dead, but at length re∣covered, to the great comfort of his friends. The third battaile that Sir Iohn de Courcy fought, was in Ferng, a∣gainst eleaven thousand Irish men: the occasion was thus, Courcy had builded many Castles throughout Vlster, and especially in Fern, where Mac Mahon dwelled; this Mac Mahon with solemne protesta∣tions vowed to become a true and faithfull subiect, gave Courcy ma∣ny gifts, and made him his Goship, which is a league of amitie high∣ly esteemed in Ireland. Whereupon Courcy gave him two Castles with their demeanes to hold of him. Within one moneth after, this Mac Mahon returning to his vomit, brake downe the Castles, and made them even with the ground. Sir Iohn de Courcy sent unto him to know the cause that moved him to fall to this villanie: his answer was, that he promised not to hold stones of him, but the land, and that it was contrary to his nature, to couch himselfe within cold stones, the woods being so nigh, where he might better warme him∣selfe, with other slender and scornefull answers. Courcy to be reven∣ged of him, saw no better course then to prey his country, mustred his men, entred the land, and swept all the cattell before him. The prey was so great, that it could not be driven, unlesse it were devided into three parts, and to that end, this company in like sort was pro∣portioned
betweene the foremost of the voward, and the last of the rereward, there was three miles distance; the paces were narrow, the way miry and boggy, with thicke bushes on either side, the Irish be∣ing (as I said before) eleven thousand in number, stood upon all ad∣vantages, had their espials upon them, divided themselves likewise, and stept in betweene every of the English companies, and upon a sudden, made such a cry, and gave such a shout, that the woods rang thereof, and the Cowes ranne like divels upon the drivers, and over∣threw horse and man, so that there were more slaine and trode under foot in the mire and dirt, of the English men, by the Cowes, then by the sword of the rebels. Vpon this cry, all the Cowes were lost, and the men fell to blowes, where the Irish being acquainted with every blinde way, made better shift then the English. Courcy and his bro∣ther Amoricus, with such as were alive, hastened out of the woods, and came to a Plaine, where they viewed each other some quarter of a mile distant. Sir Amoric turned backe, and cast up his eyes, and saw Sir Roger Poer that had married his Neece, about a sevenight before, pulled and halled by the Irish, and carried away prisoner; follow me, saith he unto his company, I will rescue him, or I will dye on the place; he suddenly comming upon their heeles, set upon them, and carried away Sir Roger Poer; with that, the Irish gave such a shout, that all the rest of their company that were dispersed and scattered a∣mong the bushes, gathered themselves together to that place, to an∣swer the cry, and stept betweene Sir Amoric and Sir Iohn Courcy, so that with great perill of their lives, and losse of many men, they came together to that place; when they met, they bewailed their losses, and being environed with bogges and marishes, they forsook their horses, and fell to kill them, and shifted for themselves; the Irish most eager∣ly pursued them, and at length, one William Lawyard overtooke Cour∣cy, hee with his company turned their faces, fought a cruell fight, wherein (saith mine Author) there were slaine of the Irish men, sixe score. After this skirmish, followed Arte boy, with three hundred, and set upon Courcy, who slue of the Irish, nine score: last of all, Mac Mohon, the ground of all this mischiefe, came blowing, and set upon Courcy, with whom the base sonne of Sir Amoricus encountred, slue him, and fourescore of his men, and drove the rest to flye, the day being thus spent, the night made an end of that battaile: as the night fell, Sir Iohn de Courcy by good hap, lighted upon an old Fort of his owne, moted or trenched about, where there was a good watch kept, he being glad of them, and they of him, camped there with his forces that night, and the enemy within halfe a mile of them, as it appeared by the great fires they made after their travaile. Sir A∣moric Saint Laurance after a short nap or slumber, tooke a few with him, went to espie the enemies campe, and made a speedie returne, he pressed upon his brother Courcy and the campe, to wake them, and
delivered unto them these speeches: I have scouted abroad, and spared you in your heavie sleepe, I viewed the enemies campe, whom I take to be 5000. strong, and that by the scope of their cabbins; wee are but 500. fighting men, all wearied with sore fight, long travaile, and somewhat discouraged with hard fortune, not fit to make any great enterprize, or to performe any worthy exploit; nay a worse matter, there are among us such as have deadly wounds, but the dead sleep suppresseth their com∣plaints, and further, our men watch without sufficient release, and the enemy hath his fill every way; our case is desperate, if the enemy set up∣on us to morrow, we are not able to withstand him, wee shall be slaine every mothers sonne; wherefore I thinke best that we now set upon them that are now feasting and sleeping, voyd of all feare of us, whom in their opinion, they hold for men quite overthrowne, and never able to make a head againe, and that we leave some of our sicke men here to ward, and take some of the fresh men with us. When hee had ended his speech, there was silence for a certaine space, wherein one looked upon the other. Then Sir Iohn Courcy spake, I looked all this while for some of these young gallants, and your fellow souldiers to deliver their cou∣rage; but one thing further, Sir Amoric, where are their horses be∣stowed? he answereth, your white horse, and my blacke gelding, I have cunningly conveyed away, and the rest I can point you to with my finger. Then saith Sir Iohn Courcy, this is mine advice: Let two men ride these two horses, and gather their horses together, and or∣derly in each side drive them upon the enemy, all wee in armes will come after, and suddrnly give the shout upon them in their slee pes, and serve them with their horses, as they served us with our kine: Every man liked well of this course, and when they came to the place, they had the killing of them at their owne desire. There the English came, victualled, apparrelled, armed, and horsed themselves, never better in their lives. Of 5000. Irish, there escaped not above 200. which ranne so fast, (saith my Author) that a horse could not hold them. Of the English, the day before, 400. men were missing, but in that mornings worke, onely two. Lastly, Sir Iohn Courcy, with some hearts ease, returned to his old Fort, where hee had camped that night, rested there a while, and sent to Dublin and elsewhere a∣mong his friends, for supplies of men and other necessarie provisi∣ons. There are some out of the schoole of envy, with grace, to dis∣grace Courcy, (whom I have in part touched before) that report the story otherwise, which deliver not wherein he was to be honoured, but wherein he was foyled, fortuna de la guerra, that hee was driven with eleven persons in armes, to travaile a foot some 30. miles, for the space of two dayes, the enemy still pursuing, (the which they lay not downe) all fasting without any reliefe, untill hee came to an old Castle of his owne, which savoureth not altogether of truth, but for∣wards with the history.
The fourth battaile that Sir Iohn Courcy fought was in Vriell, for this cause: Courcy had sent certaine of his servants into England, for victuals, munition, and divers necessaries; the ship was by foule weather driven into a creick in Vriell, cald Torshead; O Hanlan with others being acquainted with all circumstances, bord the ship, put men and mariners to the sword, and make a prize and havocke of all: Courcy hearing of this, gathered his forces together; draweth to∣wards the Nury to come into Vriell to be revenged of them for this injury; by the way he was given to understand, that all the Irish of those parts were in armes prepared for him in their defence, to justi∣fie their doings, and that they had camped by South of Dundalke, and by North of the river Dondoygon. Courcy having marched to a place within a mile and a halfe of the Irish campe, made a stand, cald his brother Amoric, Sir Roger Poer, with others, and consulted what course was best to be held. Sir Roger Poer being full of courage, be∣gins: I thinke best to hold still with us the favour of Fortune; they are many, we are but few, the longer we behold them, the worse wee shall like them; the souldiers would be set a worke, and the more we linger, the more doubts and buzzes will enter his braine; for often wee see, that the sight maketh, and the sight mar∣reth. Next, Sir Amoric delivereth his opinion: we came not hither to make hasty worke, but advisedly to performe service; true it is, as you have delivered, they are manie we are but few in comparison of their number; afore we give battaile, there are 3. things (as I take it) re∣quisite to be considered, the cause wherefore we fight, the number of both sides, that they be somewhat equally matched, and the place where both joyne battaile together. I would not have any of my speeches drawn to discourage or dismay any valiāt mind. To the first, our parentage is knowne, we are no base people, our valour is tryed, our enemy hath the proofe thereof; we come not to steale, but to be revenged of the theeves that murthered our men, & robbed us of our necessary provision. Secondly, where we find our company small, and our side weake, and the ground not fitting us for any advantage, where force cannot further, let policie take place; my advice is that a begger or a Frier shall goe from us to the Irish campe, and informe them, that Sir Hugh Delacy came yesternight with a great force, to Drogheda, and that he saw two miles off a great army of horse and foot, somewhat westerly of him, which he supposeth to bee the En∣glish Army, that marched all night from Tradaf towards Dundalke; in the meane while, my sonne Nico: with twenty choice horsemen, together with our lackies and horseboies, for the greater shew upon our hackneis and garrans, shall wheele Westwards on the right hand, that it may concurre with the Fryers tale, and give us a signe what we shall doe, and we will march after to see the event; when the ene∣my
hath discried us, we shall perceive by his stirring what he meanes to doe; if they turne face to us and offer fight, our foot shall recouer Dondalke afore theirs, and with our horses wee will so handle the matter, that we shall sustaine no great losse: if they fly and take the river, the sea comes in, we shall overtake them afore halfe passe over. All were well pleased with his device, and followed the direction. Nico. Saint Laurence with his company, wheeles before, Sir Iohn de Courcy a loofe followeth after, Sir Roger Poer takes the rereward; the enemy having discried them takes the river: Sir Nico. gave the signe, whereupon the English Army give a great shout and follow∣eth their heeles; the Irish breake their araie, they tumble one upon another in the water: the cariage drowns some, the sea and the swift∣nesse of the tyde take others away; such as would not venter the water, were slaine by the English; Othanlan and his company that had passed the water, seeing the slaughter of his men, could not come to the rescues, by reason of the salt water: the Englishmen having quitted that place, were directed by the Fryer to a foord on the left hand, where they passed over, and pursued the rest: The Horsemen overtooke the Foot of the Irish, and skirmished with them, untill Sir Iohn de Courcy came by that time; the sea likewise had stopped the Irish from flying, at a great water, a mile from the Lurgan on the Southside of Dundalk. The Irish seeing themselves in this strait, turne their faces, choose rather to dye with the sword like men, then to be drowned in the seas like beasts. There were in that place, some 6000. Irish, and about 1000. English, there was no advantage of ground, it booted not to fly on any side; the coward must in that case try himselfe a man, the fight was sore, no mercy but dead blowes: The foot of the English drew backe, Sir Iohn de Courcy their leader, was left in the midst of his enemies with a twohanded sword, wa∣shing and lashing on both sides, like a Lion among sheepe (saith my Author) Nicolas posteth to his father Amoric, that was in chase of ths scattred horsemen of the Irish, and cried, alas father, mine uncle Sir Iohn is left alone in the midst of his enemies, and the foot have forsaken him; with that Sir Amoric lighted, killed his horse and said, here my sonne take charge of these horsemen, and I will lead on the foot company, to the rescue of my brother Courcy; come on fellow souldiers saith he, let us live and dye together: He gave the on-set upon the foot of the Irish, rescued Sir Iohn Courcy that was sore wounded, and with cruell fight in manner out of breath; with the sight of him, the souldiers take hart and drive the Irish to retreit; the slaughter on both sides was great, few of the Irish and fewer of the English were left alive: The Irish got them to the Fewes, and the English to Dundalke; but who got the best there is no boast made. Not long after, Sir Iohn de Courcy went into England, where the
King in regard of his good service, made him Lord of Conoght and Earle of Vlster; upon his returne (saith Stanihurst) which was in the Canicular daies, he fought at the Bridge of Ivora a cruell battaile, and prostrated his enemies, with great honour; and for that I find litle written thereof, I thought good thus lightly to passe it over, as others before me have done: After this he builded many Castles in Vlster, made bridges, mended high wayes, repaired Churches, and governed the Country in great peace, untill the dayes of King Iohn, where I shall have further cause to discourse of him. Amids these tumults in the North, Miles Cogan bestirred him∣selfe, in the West; he passed the Shannon into Conoght with 540. men, where (saith mine Author) never Englishman entred before, whereupon the Conoght men, drove before them, all their cattle into the fastnesses, carried with thē as much as they could, fired the rest, with their Townes, Villages, Houses and Cottages. Milo marched as far as Tuam, where he rested 8. dayes, and finding man and beast fled, and the Country barren of victualls, he returned towards the Shan∣non, and by the way met with Roderic the Monarch, which lay in ambush with three Companies waiting his comming: At their mee∣ting, they skirmished a long while, and fought a cruell fight, where the enemy lost many, and Milo but three men, then hee passed the ri∣ver and came safely to Dublin. Anno William Fitz Adelme, the Kings Lievtenant is cal∣led into England: Hee was a man that did no honour to the King, neither good to the Country, whom every good man in his life time detested, and all Irish Chronicles after his death have defamed. In his roome the King appointed Hugh Delacy Deputy of Ireland, and joy∣ned in Commission with him Robert Poer Seneschal of Wexford and Waterford. Not long after, the King sent into Ireland Miles Cogan and Ro∣bert Fitz Stephens with others, and gave them (in regard of their ser∣vice) all South Mounster, to with the Kingdome of Corke in Fee for ever, to be equally divided betweene them, except the City of Corke, and one Cantred thereunto adjoyning; also he gave unto Philippe de Bruse all North Mounster, to wit the Kingdome of Lymerick. After they had pacified Dermot Mac Carty, Prince of Desmond, quieted the Country, and divided their territories, they conducted Philippe de Bruse to Lymerick to take possession of the Kings graunt given him in those parts. As they came to the walles of Lymerick, the Citizens of spight in sight of them all, to the end that no Englishman should roost there, set the Town on fire. Philippe de Bruse was therewithal discouraged, and his Company, in so much that when Robert Fitz Stephens and Miles Cogan, offred to adventure their lives in the recovery of the Kingdome of Lymerik, with all their aide and assistance; he refused
it, and returned with them to Corke, esteeming it farre better to lose Lymric, and with safetie to dwell among his lovers and friends, then to lose life and kingdome by dwelling among such Iewes, as will fire their owne houses, and cut all English throats. In a while after, Miles Cogan, and Raffe the sonne of Robert Fitz Stephens, who had lately married Miles daughter, went towards Lis∣more to parlee with Waterford men, and determined that night to lodge with one Mac Tyrid, who had solemnly invited them. As they waited in the field, expecting the comming of the Waterfordians, this Mac Tyrid unawares stealing upon them, most traiterously slue them, and five of their company, whereupon the whole country was in up∣roare, insomuch that Dermot Mac Carty, and all the Irish in those parts, together with Mac Tyrid, that most perfidious traitor, were in armes, determining thenceforth to be no longer the Kings loyall subjects; when they had gathered their forces together, they laid siege to Corke, meaning to cut off Robert Fitz Stephens, and all the English men there. Robert Fitz Stephens being distressed in Corke, fearing the open enemy without, and mistrusting the secret enemy within, sent post to Wexford, to his nephew Reimond le Grosse, pray∣ing him to come to his aide. Reimund forthwith, with twenty knights, and one hundred foot and bowmen, entred the Lee, landed at Corke, encountred with the enemies, killed some, drove other to flye, and compelled the rest to submit themselves, and sue for peace. When the King understood of this, he sent Richard Cogan, bro∣ther unto Miles, to supply his brothers roome in the kingdome of Corke, a man no way inferiour to his brother for valour and martiall prowesse; in his companie came Philip Barry, and Girald Barry his brother, (otherwise called Silvester Giraldus Cambrensis, the famous learned man) nephewes of Robert Fitz Stephens, with a jolly troupe of horse and foot, chosen and picked men. Robert Fitz Stephens, and Richard Cogan enjoyed this kingdome of Corke peaceably for cer∣taine yeeres, and in processe of time, for want of heires male of them, it came to two daughters, the one of them was married to Robert de Carew, the other to Patricke de Courcy, and they in right of their wives, enjoyed the same during their lives, and after them, their heires, untill such time as by a division growne (as I take it in Eng∣land) betweene the two houses of Yorke and Lancaster, the Irish men expelled them, and recovered the country unto themselues. Anno 1178. The Monasterie, Beatae Mariae Roseae vallis, called Rosgls, was founded. Yet others thinke it was in Anno 1189. I may not forget Harvey de monte Marisco, (of whom often mention is made before) who after many spitefull parts, treacheries and false accusations ex∣hibited by him unto the King against most noble servitors, became a Monke: the man was sore troubled in conscience, and in his course he made the common saying true (desperatio facit Monachum.) Hee
had founded (saith Felcon) the Monastery of our blessed Lady, de Portu Donbrodthi, he gaue unto the Monasterie Saint Trinitatis of Canterbury, his territories & advousons along the sea coast, between Waterford and Wexford, and there cloystred himselfe; I would (saith Cambrensis) he had changed his conditions with his habit. The same yeere (saith Holinshed) there came from Pope Alexan∣der 3. into England, two Cardinals, Alberto desuma, and Petro de sancta Agatha, whose commission was to summon the Bishops of England, Ireland, Scotland, with the Isles, and Normandie, to the generall Councell of Lateran in Rome: after they had obtained li∣cence to passe through his dominions, the King swore them upon the holy Evangelist, that in their Legateship they should not attempt any thing that might be hurtfull to the King or his dominions, and that upon their returne, they should visite him homewards: where∣upon out of Ireland there went thither, Laurence, Archbishop of Dublin, and Catholicus, Archbishop of Tuam, with some other five or sixe Irish Bishops, whom the King likewise swore, that they should not procure any damage to his Realmes and dominions. The Realme of Ireland at this time was singular well governed by Hugh de Lacy, a good man, and a wise Magistrate, who for the good of the land and the people, established many good orders: he made Bridges, and builded Townes, Castles, and Forts, throughout Lein∣ster, as Sir Iohn de Courcy did in Vlster in his time; the Priest kept his Church, the Souldier his Garrison, and the Plow-man followed his Plough, yet cankred envy quieted not her selfe, practised mischiefe against him, so that he was charged before the King, to attempt the Crowne of Ireland, and make himselfe absolute Lord of the land, and that he had married the King of Connaghts daughter, (saith Holin∣shed) contrary to the Kings pleasure. The King immediately (as Princes are jealous of great men) called him into England, appointed governours, Iohn Constable, and Richard Peche. This Lacy behaved himselfe so discreetly and dutifully in England, that he cleered him∣selfe of all suspition, that the King was resolved of his truth and fide∣lity, and sent him backe againe into Ireland, with further credit then formerly he had done, and that within three moneths, and gave him the absolute command and Lievetenantship of the land, and joyned as assistant unto him, Robert Salisbury, calling home the former go∣vernours. It was not long, but he was upon malitious occasion, the second time sent for into England, and one Philip of Worcester, (Cambren∣sis is mine Author) a valiant souldier, a bountifull and a liberall man, with a most brave troupe of horse and foot, arrived in Ireland, with command to send over Hugh de Lacy, and he to remaine there as Go∣vernour of the land, until Iohn his sonne came over. Stanihurst is of opinion, that he went over into England, and cleering himselfe, spee∣dily
returned againe, which cannot well stand with the course of the history; for when Philip of Worcester tooke upon him the governe∣ment, Lacy hastened the building and finishing of the Castle of Der∣wath (whereof my penne immediately shall make report) and there ended his dayes. And now to Philip of Worcester, and his compa∣nion Hugh Tirell, Cambrensis, and Stanihurst especially, write most bitter of them: of Philip, how that first of all he resumed and seized unto the Kings use, the lands of Ocathesie, and divers other parcels which Hugh de Lacy had sold away, and these he appointed to serve for the Kings provision, and the Governours diet. And after the winter was past, he assembled and mustred his men and companie, and began to travaile from place to place. In March about the middle of Lent, he came to Armagh, where he extorted, and perforce exa∣cted from the Clergie there, a great masse of money and treasure, and from thence he went to Dune, and from Dune to Dublin, laden with gold, silver, money, and monies worth, the which he extorted in e∣very place where he came, and other good did he none. Hugh Tirell his fellow scraper, tooke from the poore Priests at Armagh, a great brasse panne or brewing fornace, which served the whole house: see the iust iudgment of God, (the which then was so constraced, as Cam∣brensis hath delivered in his Vaticinall history, and likewise in his to∣pagraphie) Philip at the townes end of Armagh, was taken with a sudden pang, and the same so vehement, that it was supposed hee should never have recovered it. When he came to himselfe, a poore man standing by said, Let him alone, he must have breath till he come to the divell, and then the divell will have him, and all that he extor∣ted from us. Hugh Tirell that carried the panne as farre as Dune, and the Priests curse withall, in night time had his lodging set on fire, where house, and houshold-stuffe, and all that he had there, was con∣sumed to ashes, together with the horses that drew the same (and so no thankes to him) he left it behinde him for lacke of carriage. The Castles which Lacie builded for the good of the Land, were these. First, Laghlen, of old called the Blacke Castle, upon the Barrow be∣tweene Ossory and Idrone, of which Castle by Henry 2. command∣ment, Robert Poer had the charge, untill in cowardize sort he gave o∣ver the same, and forsooke it; whereupon Cambrensis then living, ma∣keth this invective: O what worthy Champions and fit men for martiall feates, were this Poer and Fitz Adelme, to inhabit and com∣mand such a nation as is destitute of noble and valiant mindes? but a man may espie the variable sleight of fortune, disposed to smile at foo∣lery, how from the base dunghill, hee advanceth to high dignities: for why? they two had more pleasure in chambering, wantonnesse, playing with young girles, and on the Harpe, then in bearing of shield, or wearing of Armour: but in sooth it is to bee admired, that so Noble a Prince as Henry 2. is, would send such cowards to com∣mand,
or to direct in place of service. But to the history. This blacke Castle now called New Leighlin, for difference of Old Leighlin, which is the Bishops seate, standeth in the Barony of Ydrone, which was the antient inheritance of the Carews: who being Barons of Ca∣rew in Wales, so farre as I can learne, one of them married the daugh∣ter and heire of the Barron of Ydrone, and so the Carewes became, and were for the terme of many yeeres, Barons of Ydrone, untill the troublesome time of Richard 2. when the Carewes with all the En∣glish of Ireland, in manner were driven to forsake the land.Castles buil∣ded by Sir H de Lacy. He buil∣ded in Leix for Meilerius Tachmeho, alias Cachmehe, and as for Kil∣dare, with the country adjoyning, the which, as Cambrensis writeth, was by Earle Strangbow given him, the Governours in Hugh de La∣cy his absence, subtilly tooke it away from him, under colour of ex∣change, and gave him Leix, a wilde savage country, with woods, pa∣ces, bogges, and rebels farre from succour or rescue. In Meth, he buil∣ded Clanarec, Dunach killar, alias Killairie, the Castle of Adam de Ieypon, alias sureport, and Gilbert de Nugents of Delvyn. In Fotheret of Onolan, alias Fethred Onolan, in Latin, Rotheric, he builded a Ca∣stle for Reimond, and another for Griffin his brother, the sonnes of William Fitz Girald, for Walter of Ridensford, he builded in Omor∣chu, alias Moroghs country Trisseldermot, otherwise called Trisdel∣dermot, about five miles from Caterlogh, and likewise Kilka, in the country of Kildare. For Iohn de Hereford, he builded a Castle in Col∣lach, otherwise called Tulacfelmeth: for Iohn declawsa, alias Clavill, he builded a Castle upon the Barrow, not farre from Leighlin, now supposed to be Carlogh, though some attribute it to Eva, Earle Strangbow his wife; yet it is evident next after the Danes, that the En∣glish men builded all the Castles of Ireland. He builded also neere A∣boy, a Castle that he gave to Robert Bigaret, another not farre from thence, which he gave to Thomas Fleminge, another at the Narach on the Barrow, for Robert Fitz Richard; lastly, he builded the Castle of Derwath, where he made a tragicall end; for on a time when each man was busily occupied, some lading, some heaving, some playste∣ring, some engraving, the Generall also himselfe digging with a Pick-axe, a desperate villaine among them, whose toole the Lord Lieve∣tenant used, espying both his hands occupied, and his body bent downewards, with an axe, cleft his head in sunder; his body the two Archbishops, Iohn of Dublin, and Mathew of Cashill, buried in the Monasterie of the Bectie, that is, in Monasterio Beatitudinis, and his head in Saint Thomas Abbey at Dublin, whose death (I read in Ho∣linshed) the King was not sorry of, for he was alwayes jealous of his greatnesse. Vpon the death of Lacy, Sir Roger le Poer a most worthy Knight, who served valiantly in Vlster, in company with Sir Iohn de Courcy, being made Governour of the country about Leighlen in Ossorie, was
in most lamentable sort traiterously slaine; and upon that occasion, there was (saith Cambrensis) a privy conspiracy over all Ireland a∣gainst English men: But gentle Reader, I must backe a little, to bring on the yeeres to concurre with the history. Anno 1180. The Monastery De Choro Benedicti, and of Ieripont was founded. The same yeere dyed Laurence Archbishop of Dublin (whose life foraine Writers, as Surius, Baronius, Molanus, and Lep∣pelo with others have written) his father hight Maurice, his mother Iniabre Principis filia, a great Commander in Leinster; the Marty∣rologe of Sarum saith he was bastard: This Maurice being at conti∣nuall warres with Dermot Mac Morogh King of Leinster, upon a league of amity concluded betweene them, delivered unto him for pledge his youngest sonne Laurence; Dermot sent him to a desert solitary place and barren soile to be kept, where he was like to perish with famine: Maurice hearing thereof, tooke 12. of Dermots princi∣pall followers, clapt them in prison, and sent Dermot word, that hee would cut off their heads, unlesse he would release and send him his sonne out of that slavish and miserable servitude: Dermot released the youth, and delivered him not to his father, but to the Bishop of Glandelogh, and the Bishop charged his Chaplen with his bringing up; the Chaplen trained him up so vertuously, that in a short time after he was made Abbot of Glandelogh, & shortly after that againe, upon the death of Gregory Archbishop of Dublin, he was chosen to suceed him. So holy a man was he, as some of mine Authors doe write, that he caused one of his men to whippe him twice a day, be∣like he had deserved it in his youth. His Legend reporteth that in time of famine and scarcity in Ireland, e releeved daily 500. persons at his doore for 3. yeres space. Henry the 2. did not favour him, for he had both in publicke and private at sundry times (as formerly in part hath beene touched) beene an instrument of rebellion and of many mischiefes against the English nation, and at the Councell of Lateran, contrary to his Oath, inveighed bitterly against the King; Stainhursh excuseth him, saying, that hee pleaded for the immunities of the Churches of Ireland, somewhat prejudiciall to the Kings preroga∣tive. He came to the King at Canterbury, where the Monkes recei∣ved him with solemne Procession, and hee gave himselfe one whole night to prayers before Saint Thomas his shrine, for good successe in his affaires with the King: A foole espied him in his Pontificall weed, wholly devoted to Saint Thomas Becket: And said, I can doe no better deed then to make him equall with Saint Thomas; with that tooke a club, ranne through the throng, and gave him such ablow upon the pat, that the blood ran downe his eares; the man was so sore wounded, that it was thought hee would streighway yeeld up the Ghost; the cry was up, the foole runne away, the Bishop taking breath called for water, and in a short time after was healed: his sute
unto the King was, (as foraigne Writers deliver) for Deronog King of Ireland; but saith Holinshed, which is likeliest to bee true, it was in the behalf of Roderic King of Conoght, which had often promi∣sed true subjection and fidelity unto the King, but never performed; he had brought with him Roderic his sonne as a pledge for perfor∣mance of convenants, formerly passed betweene them; as the pay∣ment of tribute and such like; but the King neither liked the one or the other, but charged the Archbishop not to depart without his li∣cence. The King shortly after tooke shipping at Sandwich and sailed into Normandy. The Archbishop followed him, and there dyed of an Ague; whereupon (as Holinshed writeth) the King sent Ieffray De Haile, one of his Chaplens and a Chaplen also of Alexander the Popes Legat into Ireland, to seize the Archbi. see into his hands, and further it is alleaged, that being the Popes Legate of Ireland; he ab∣horred incontinency so much, that for augmentation of penance, hee would absolve no dissolute Priest, but sent them to Rome for absolu∣tion; and proved in regard of former favours, there, Amicus Curiae, so that he sent thither out of Ireland at one time, 140. Priests, saith the Legend, De peccato Luxuriae convictos Romam misit absolvendos; convicted of Lechery: Behold gentle Reader, the holy lives of the Priests of that age, and the Sanctity of the Romane Sea, in pardoning of them all, propter quid, alias propter quas. Pope Honorius the 3. Anno Pontificatus 9. vel 10. Canonized this Laurence for a Saint, who is Calendred the 14. of November, or as the Bull of his Canoni∣zation hath, the 18. of the Calends of December, which is all one; the which Bull followeth in these words. Honorius Episcopus, servus servorum Dei, universis Christi fide∣libus, in Rothmugensi Provincia constitutis salutem, & Apostolicam benedictionem. Ineffabilis providentia Dei congruentibus singulis quibus{que} temporibus ordinariè, dispensans in splendoribus Sanctorum Ecclesiam suam, quasi ex utero genuit Deum, in exordio ipsius nascentis Ecclesiae crebro miraculorum fulgore abstupefaciens gentes, ac prode∣stinatos in Fide generans Iesu Christi, Cujus hoc fieri nomine & vir∣tute videbant, ipsos filiorum adoptionis numero aggregavit. Deinde crescrute numero & multitudine populi vocati de tenebris, ambulantes juxta Isaiae Vaticinium in lumine Domini Dei sui, mirabilis dispensa∣tor in pluviam fulgura sua fecit, dum signis suis & miraculis (quae non erant jam fidelibus necessaria) intermissis, super novos populos pastores qui eos pascerent scientia & doctrina ...... sicut per os Ieremiae pro∣miserat, suscitavit Doctores Ecclesiae; qui terram cordis fidelium imbre doctrinae complerent, & extirpatis sensibus vitiorum cum ad proferen∣dum virtutum germen & fructum boni operis foecundaret. Caeterum quia Charitate frigescente ab exercitio boni operis, torpet Catholicus; errore devio abducente, delirat haereticus; cecidit velamine adhuc
super cor permanente, Iudaeus; & in tenebris ambulat fide lucis non∣dum sibi oriente, Paganus: Misericors Dominus qui neminem vult perire signa interdum innovat, & miseratus immutat ex numero illo∣rum quos in Ecclesia triumphante glorificat aliquorum fidem et meritae in militante miraculis declarando, ut per ea Catholici mentis ...... discusso ad boni operis excitentur instantiam, haeretici errore dimisso ab isto reducantur ad viam veritatis et vitam. Sanctae ergo memoriae Laurentio Dublinensi Archepiscopo, apud Ecclesiam Sanctae Mariae de Ango Rathmagensis Diocesos, ubi corpus ejus feliciter requiescit, divino munere coruscante miraculis; Venera∣bilis frater noster Archepiscopus, et dilecti filij Capitulum Rathma∣gense, una cum Abbate et Conventu Ecclesiae supradictae, multis{que} alijs Archiepiscopis et Episcopis, Abbatibus et Religiosis viris, ejus venerabi∣lis vitae, insignia coruscantia miracula, suis nobis literis intimantes humiliter supplicarunt ut ipsum Sanctorum Catalogo ascribere curare∣mus; quatenus autoritate (sicut convenit) Apostolica, dignus honor il∣li exhiberetur in terris, qui (sicut claris signis et evidentibus argu∣mentis apparet) honoratur in coelis. Licet igitur quos divina honorat dignatio, humana devotio prompto affectu debeat honorare, volentes in hujusmodi negotio secundum consuetudinem Apostolicae sedis, matu∣ritate debita procedere; praefato Archiepiscopo & Decano & Thesau∣rario Rathmagensi, dedimus in mandatis ut superdicti viri vita & mi∣raculis inquirerent diligentissime veritatē, & eam nobis fideliter inti∣marent, ut ea planè comperta pro supplicantiū desiderio securius annis∣ere valeremus. Ipsi autem mandatum nostrum cum diligentia exe∣quentes quod de prefati viri conversatione ac vita istis certificare ne∣quibant, eo quod per partes illas transjectus faciens, in Ecclesia praedicta correptus infirmitatus decubuit & infra octavum ab hac luce migravit diem, scripserunt venerabili fratri nostro Archiepiscopo Dublinensi ut veritatem super hoc inquisitam iis per suas literas intimaret, qui citra mare Hibernicum illustris Regis Anglorum negotiis occupatus & volens id inquirere per se ipsum, venerabili fratri nostro Darensi Episcopi suffragano suo, ac Priori Sanctae Trinitatis Dublinensis com∣misit in hujusmodi negotio vices suas, ac demum literas eorum, sancti∣tatem vitae & conversationis saepe dicti viri plenius continentes suo & ipsorum sigillis munitas destinarunt eisdem, quas una cum depositioni∣bus testium super miraculis captorum nobis cum sigillis propriis trans∣miserunt. Colligimus vero ex earum serie litterarum, quod saepe dictus vir Regis & Reginae Hiberniae filius extitit, & ab infantia Sacris Lit∣teris eruditus, senilem gessit in juventute gravitatem & mundanarum illecebras vanitatum à se ultra quam aetas illa solebat, abdicavit. De∣inde in Archepiscopum Dublinensem assumptus, sic de virtute in vir∣tutem profecerit, ut in oratione assiduus, austerus in maceratione pro∣prii corporis, ac in Eleemosinarum largitione profusus, se totaliter Domi∣no dedicarit.
Per depositìonem verò testium predictor. constitit evidenter sanctam vitam ejusdem esse tot sequentibus miraculis comprobatam quae non parvā texerent historiam si quis vellet ea singula scribere seriatim: sed ut non praeter mittamus claudi gressum, caeci visum, surdi auditum, muti loquelam, leprosi mundationem & varijs afflicti languoribus sanitatem ad invocationem ejus nominis, & ea sola quae inter caetera emi∣cuerunt miracula breviter perstringamus. Nam idem sanctus, (imo Deus ob ipsius merita gloriosa) septem mortuos (quorum quatuor tridu∣ani erant) mirificè suscitavit. De ipsius sanctitate tantis certificati mi∣raculis, divinumque secuti judicium, quod eius glorificatio nobis tam evidentibus innotuit argumentis, eundem sanctiss. Catalogo sanctorum adscripsimus & annumerandum decrevimus, sanctorum Collegio Con∣fessorum ac inter eos Christi fidelibus venerandum statuentes, ut ejus veneranda festivitas de cetero annis singulis decimo octavo Kalendas Decembris solemniter celebretur. Monemus igitur universitatem ve∣stram, & hortamur in Domino quatenus Deum devotis mentibus col∣laudantes & studentes proficere tantae virtutis exemplo, ejusdem glori∣osissimi Confessoris apud Deum suffragia humiliter imploret. Nos autem de Dei omnipotentis misericordia & beatorum Petri & Pauli authori∣tate confisi, omnibus vere penitentibus & confessis qui ad prefatam Ec∣clesiam, in die solemnitatis ejusdem gloriosissimi confessoris vel infra Octabis cum devotione accesserint ejus orationum suffragia petituri 20. dies de iniunctis sibi penitentijs miserecorditer relaxamus. Dat. 3. Idus Decembris pontifitatus nostri anno decimo. Molanus writeth of this Laurence, that he favoured Monkes great∣ly, and hearing of the fame of the 28. Monasteries of Aroatia, in the confines of Atrebatum in the low Countries, made the secular Priests called Cannons in Dublin, become regular cannons, according unto the order of Aroatia. After his discease, Iohn Comin, an English man, a Monke of Evesham (an Abbey in England) by the Kings direction, was made Archbishop of Dublin, confirmed by Pope Lucius at Vi∣terbium, and also made a Cardinall (so writeth Cambrensis) Anno 1148. the Monasterie legis dei, that is, of Leix, was founded, Anno 1185. Iohn, the fift sonne of Henry 2. of the age of twelve yeeres, lan∣ded at Waterford in the Realme of Ireland, from the first arrivall of his father, thirteene yeeres, from the first landing of Earle Strangbow, fourteene yeeres, and from the first entrance of Robert Fitz Stephens, fifteene yeeres. In the Chronicles of England I finde, that Anno 1177. in a Parliament held at Oxford, Henry 2. created his sonne Iohn, King of Ireland. In Anno 1185. he dubbed his sonne Iohn, Knight, and set him in a readinesse for Ireland, sending the new Bishop Iohn of Dub∣lin, as his precurser thither for all things necessarie. Item the same yeere he obtained of Pope Vrban 3. a licence to crowne which hee would of his sonnes, King of Ireland, and for reformation thereof, sent him a crowne of Peacocks tayles, I would say feathers, after a
feat manner woven in with gold; lastly, how that Vrban 3. sent two Legates, Octavianus, a subdeacon Cardinall, and Hugh de Novant from the Court of Rome, to crowne Iohn, King of Ireland, but Hen∣ry 2. delayed it so, that it was not effected; hereof (as I suppose) it ri∣seth that oftentimes we finde him called King Iohn afore he was crow∣ned: but to the Irish history. At the first landing and entring of the Kings sonne at Waterford, a great many of the chiefest commanders in those parts, who since their first submission unto King Henry, con∣tinued faithfull and true, being advertised of this his arrivall, came and resorted unto him in peaceable manner after their best manner, to sa∣lute him and congragulate his comming, one made curtesie, another kneeled, some tooke him by the hand, other some offer to kisse him. The new gallants and Normans, such as had not beene before ac∣quainted with the country, neither the homelinesse of the people, set them at nought, laughed at their Mantles and Troosses, derided their glibbes and long beards, one takes a sticke, and pats the Irish man on the pate, another halls the mantle, and pricks him behinde with a pinne, some have their glibbes and long beards pulled, and depar∣ting, have flappes on the lippes, thumpes in their neckes, and the doores clapt on their heeles, with diuers other abuses, and undiscreet entertainement. These men (not without cause) being mightily dis∣pleased, shifted themselves out of the towne, and in all haste got them home. And from thence (saith Cambrensis) with their wives, chil∣dren, and houshold, departed, and went some to the Prince of Lyme∣ric, some to the Prince of Corke, some to Roderic, Prince of Connaght, and so some to one Lord, and some to another; and to these they de∣clared orderly, how they had beene at Waterford, and what they had seene there, and how they were evill intreated, and that a yong man was come thither, guarded with beardlesse boyes, and guided by the councels of young men, in whom there was no stay, no sobriety, no stedfastnesse, no assurednesse, whereby they and their country might be secured of any safety. These Princes, and namely they three of Connaght, Corke, and Lymeric, who were the chiefest, and who were then preparing themselves in a readinesse to have come and salute the Kings Sonne, and to have yeelded unto him their dutifull obeysance, as faithfull subiects; when they had heard these newes, they be∣gan forthwith to bethinke themselves, that of such evill beginning, a worse ending would ensue: wherefore with one consent, they con∣cluded to stand and ioyne together against the English nation, and to their uttermost power, to adventure their lives, and to stand to the defence of their country and liberties, and for the performance thereof, they enter into a new league among themselves, and swore each to other, and by that meanes, enemies before, are now become friends, and reconciled, as of old, Ephraim against Manasses, and Ma∣nasses
against Ephraim, and both against the Tribe of Iuda. Herod against Pilate, and Pilate against Herod, both become friends to cru∣cifie Christ. To be short, there followed a generall revolt and rebel∣lion over all Ireland. Cambrensis alledgeth a second cause of this re∣volt. How that when Robert Fitz Setphens first entred the land, there were certaine Irish men which tooke part with him, served faithfully, and were as reason required, rewarded for their service, and had for recompence, certaine lands given them, which they quietly held, and peaceably enioyed, untill the comming of the Kings sonne, then new commers wanting both living and governement, had it given them to furnish them in their foolish prodigalitie, so that these Irish men flying unto the enemies, became not onely enemies, but were espials upon the English, and conductors of the enemy against them. A third reason of ill successe, Cambrensis urgeth against England; first, how that the Britaines or Cambrians (so he termeth them) entring this land, and breaking the ice to the conquest of Ireland, were after∣wards by William Fitz Adelme, and others, envied, and every way maligned: secondly, how that the English commanding the land, were by the English disgraced, and one often times articling, accu∣sing, and disgracing one another: thirdly, how that the Normans comming in place, overthrew all, for the King being borne beyond the seas, affected them most, they were of his Councell at home in time of peace, and made Commanders abroad in time of warres; these comming with the Kings sonne into Ireland, were fine in their apparrell, delicate mouthed, feeding upon dainties, they could not disgest their meat without Spice and Wine at every meale; they could not endure the service in the Marches and borders, they would not remaine in remote places, they brooked not the Forts, Holds, and Garrison places; but liberty they liked of, so it were in a walled town; a warme chamber, a Ladies lappe, a soft bed, a furre gowne, and their Lords sides to guard and attend, pleased them well; they would talke and bragge of service, sweare and stare at home, stand upon the pantofles of their reputation, disdaine others, and especially the I∣rish, and durst not shew their faces in the field. These were they that gave themselves to command the Irish, that would not be comman∣ded by them, they polled, pilled, extorted, and what not. In the space of eight moneths that Earle Iohn staied in Ireland, I finde that he built three Castles, Tibrach, Lismoore, and Archfinan, alias Ardsivin: at Ardsivin upon Midsummer day, (so Cambrensis reporteth) the Prince of Lymeric bent and animated to rebellion, slue foure Knights, and the greater part of the Garrison there: shortly after, the same rebels of Lymric, by a slight, drew out the Garrison to seize upon a prey, and lying in ambush, killed many of them, but these revolters escaped not scotfree in all the parts of the land: for at this time when the Irish men of Kennally with great forces had
entred Meth, killing, burning, spoiling, and preying the Country. William le Petit, Governour or Iusticer (saith Cambrensis) drew a head against them, rescued the prey, put them to flight, made a great slaugh∣ter of them, and sent a hundred heads of the principall of them to Dublin. The Kings sonne hearing of these troubles, hastned away unto England, left the land tumultuous, troublesome & al upon an uprore; committed the charge thereof (saith Stanihurst) Bruseo, Courceo, Giraldidis, &c. in primis Hugonis Lacaei virtuti, where in truth I find no such matter, for Cambrensis (whom herein I must relie unto) being then in Ireland with the Kings son, reporteth how that Henry the second, hearing of the course which these greene heads held in Ireland; thought good to call them all unto England, and send thither no more such young commanders, and by the advice of his Councell committed the charge and absolute command thereof, unto Sir Iohn de Courcy, whom hee appointed Lord Lievtenant of Ireland (the Booke of Houth also testifieth the same.) Earle Iohn immedi∣atly gathered forces, travailed over the whole land, pacified for the time Corke, Tumound and Conoght, From the death of Hugh Delacy, who was slaine, Anno 1186. unto the time Hugh Delacy the yon∣ger came to be Lord Iustice, of whom hereafter more at large. Here gentle Reader, Cambrensis leaveth us, who most faithfully continued the affaires of Ireland, some 30. yeeres and odde: he was by father a Barry, by mother a Gerraldin, nephew to Morice Fitz Gerald and Ro∣bert Fitz Stephens, that first entred to the Conquest of Ireland; hee was borne in Pembrok-shire, and was Archdecon of Saint Davids and Brechnoc, and diversly imployed by Henry the second, in whose time, among others, the first Conquerors & his kindred; he came into Ireland againe, and became Tutor unto Iohn the Kings sonne, and ac∣companied him into Ireland; he wrote many learned workes, and a∣mong other, the Conquest of Ireland, the Topography of Ireland, and Mirabilia Hiberniae. Whereof hee dedicated one unto Richard Earle Strangbow, and another unto Henry the second; he was elected Archbishop of Saint Davids, but at Rome he was out-bid, by him that had more money, and missed the Cushin; hee departed this life, when hee was about foure score yeeres old, and resteth at Saint Da∣vids. Yet one thing further of him which he reporteth of himselfe, how that he at the time of his being in Ireland, had Conference with Mathew Archbishop of Cashill, and he saying among other things: You have many Saints in Ireland, but I doe not find any martyr a∣monst you: the Bishop taking it in ill part, as spoken in derision of the Nation, answered with great anger, Sir, it is so that our people is rude, savage and barbarous, yet there is none so brutish and blou∣dy, as to lay violent hands upon a Priest; now it fals out that wee are to be governed by such a Nation as is not guiltlesse of Prelats
deaths, and it is like, (if it stands with Gods pleasure) that shortly we shall make up a number of Irish martyrs this he spitefully spake, mea∣ning the death of Thomas of Canterbury. In a while after that Sir Iohn de Courcy had brought the whole land to a good passe,Sir H de Lacy. the yonger L. Iustice of lie▪ and pacified the Irish tumults (this I find in the Booke of Houth) Sir Hugh Delacy the younger is sent over into Ire∣land as Lord Iustice, to take the absolute Command of the Realme. He had no sooner landed but he sent very imperious letters unto Sir Iohn de Courcy, to discharge him, and all that were authorized by him of their places, and command, and in like sort (like the green heads spoken of a little before, which landed with Earle Iohn) they braved it out, disdained old experimented souldiers, and offered sun∣dry disgraces unto the rest of the English; so that thereof rose much heartburning, division, quarrels and bloody brawles. The Irish seeing this sudden alteration, this division among the English, this undiscreet government, thought now to find fit opportunity publikely to rele∣ase themselves of that, which they had oft secretly intended; by their runnagades they summoned at a day a place, all the Chieftaines of I∣rish birth to a parlee; where after many doubts debated, many griefes opened, they concluded with full resolution to invade all the English, and roote them wholly out of the land; and first they swoare to bee true one to another, throughout that whole rancke of rebels, as farre as life, lands, and goods would reach to effect this enterprise: Se∣condly, they swoare never to yeeld obedience to the English nation againe. Oconor King of Conaght becomes the mouth of the Irish,Oconnor K. of Conaght with 20000. men. per∣swades to his liking, disswades where fancy pleaseth not, and ga∣thered together in short time, an Army (as mine Author saith) of 20000. fighting men; his policy was first, to cleare Conoght, and afterwards all Vlster, and so by degrees the whole land, the which he doubted not of, as he delivered to his followers. Sir Iohn de Cour∣cy understanding this, and doubting what hee should finde at Sir Hugh Delacies hands, sent letters in post to his brother Sir Amorick Saint Laurence who shortly to his ayd marched towards the North, with 30. Knights and 200. foot. Oconor hearing this, lyeth in am∣bush in most secret wise, and sendeth scouts of horse and foot before him, to apprehend and cut off all espials, which might bewray his ambush, and give intelligence to Sir Amorick to prevent the dan∣ger; Sir Amorick boldly marcheth on, misdoubting nothing, for that he understandeth by his espials nothing to the contrary, till he came to the Divels mouth; where upon a sudden, beholding Oconor and his huge Army peeping out of their ambush, was amazed, made a stand, and consulting with his company, wist not what to doe; there was no flying, there was no fighting, one to a hundred was no equal match; a horseman whose name was Mountgomery, in a few words
said this. Let us fly and save our lives, as for the foot company wee can doe them no good by figting; by flying and saving our owne lives, we may succour their wives, children and kindred. By that time Sir Amorick his brother (leader of the foot company) came to the consultation, and said, I see by all circumstances, that you meane to flie, and you Sir Amorick my noble brother, what meane you to give eare to these cowardly horsemen, will you leave us here as sheepe in the mouths of this mercilesse people, and ravening wolfes, ready to rent us in peeces? Have you forgotten the bloody battels we followed you in? and do you not see that we have left our Coun∣try, our wives, our children and dearest friends, and now stand at deaths doore, to be forsaken of you whom wee never left so disolate and distressed: if you weigh not our lamentable estate, regard your owne honour, and the house you are descended of. Will you lose in an houre, the honour you wanne in many yeeres? Call to re∣membrance, most worthy Knight, how that in Vriell in manner in the like distresse; you dismounted your selfe, slew your horse, led the foot, animated the company, recovered your selfe, and ended with honour? Wee are your flesh and your blood, wee come hither to fight, to live and to dye together; I know the worst; I am resolved, if we fight we dye, if we fly we are slaine; is it not better for us to dye in fight like men, and so winne honour, then to bee slaine in flight like beasts, and gaine shame for ever? With this Sir Amorick turned him to the foot company, and hardly gathering breath with the sorrow of his heart, resolved himselfe thus: I have no power to fly and leave my frinds, my flesh and blood, in this extreme distresse. I will live with them, who for my sake came hither, if it so please God, and I will dye with them, if it bee his pleasure, that ending here wee shall meet againe bodies and soules at the last day, God and the World beare witnesse, that wee doe as Christian Knights ought to doe, I yeeld my soule into Gods hands, my body to returne whence it came, my service to my naturall Prince, my heart to my wife and brother, Sir Iohn de Courcy, my might, my force and bloody sweat to the ayd of you all that are in the field: He lighted, kneeled upon his knees, kissed the crosse of his sword, ranne his horse through, saying thou shalt never serve against mee, that so worthily hast served with mee. The like did all the rest; then looking about with a chearefull coun∣tenance, as if he had not beene the man, that was formerly dismaid, charged two young Gentlemen of the company to get them to the top of an Hill, hard by adjoyning, and beholding the battell, upon their returne homwards make true report to his brother Courcy and others of that daies service. Immediatly they prepared to battaile, the enemies marvailed, seeing them approch, that they durst (being so few) abide the field; they made likewise a stand, and cast doubts, whether the Englishmen in this attempt had not some great supply;
rescues are maine battaile following after, they would not give the on-set, before they had certain knowledge thereof, by scoutes and espials: to be short, they joyne the battaile, where to deliver the whole in few words; Sir Amorick was slaine and all his company. It was a bloody day, when all the one side, and a 1000. of the other side, fell to ground. Oconor and his company seing the end of this field, durst never againe give battell unto the English, but sued to Sir Hugh Delacy then Lord Iustice for peace, which he obtained, vowing, as he had many a time before, faith, truth and perfect subje∣ction: This Oconor after his reconciliation made report unto Sir Hugh Delacy, of that daies work, that he thought verily, there was ne∣ver the like seen upon the earth; how that the Englishmen not being able to stand in fight, turned backe to backe, with sparthes and two handed swords, untill the last man was slaine. The lamentation that Sir Iohn de Courcy made, when this was bruted abroad, I will not stand to rehearse. I am now to end with King Henry the second, a most worthy Prince, whose troubles every way troubled not him so much, as the unnaturall rebellion of his sonnes, and the Iealousie of his Queene; he raigned 34. yeeres, 9. months and two dayes: his Epitaph in Mathew Paris and in others I find thus. Rex Henricus eram, mihi plurima regna subegi, Multiplicique modo Duxque Comesque fui: &c▪ Of late King Henry was my name, Which Conquered many a Land; And divers Dukdomes did possesse, And Earldomes held in hand, And yet while all the earth could scarce My greedy mind suffice; Eight foot within the ground now serves Wherein my Carcas lyes. Now thou that readest this, note well My force, with force of Death; And let that serve to shew the state Of all that yeeldeth breath: Do good then here, fore slow no time, Cast off all worldly cares; For brittel world full soone doth faile, And death doth strike unwares.
Richard the first, the third sonne of Henry 2. began his raigne o∣ver England the 6. of Iuly, Anno 1189. For his valence, he was called Coeur de Lyon, the Lyons heart; he was affianced, but never marri∣ed, to Adela, or Alice, daughter to the French King, and in his iour∣ney to the holy land, he tooke to wife in the Ile of Cyprus, the Lady Berengaria, daughter to Garsias (some say Sanctius) King of Nauarre, and died without issue; when he had raigned nine yeeres, nine mo∣neths, and two and twenty dayes. It is noted by the Antiquaries, that upon the death of his father, he had three notable windfals, the first was the Crowne of England, the second was his fathers trea∣sure, which he found at Salisbury, amounting to nine hundred thou∣sands pound in coyne, besides Plate, precious stones, Iewels and ap∣parell; lastly, in the Coffers of Ieffrey Ridley, Bishop of Elye, who dyed intestate, he found towards his coronation 3260. pound in sil∣ver, five markes in gold, which was better; for his coronation was most Royall. Iohn Comyn Archbishop of Dublin was at it. Mathew Paris in Latine, and Holinshed in English have penned it verbatim. Will. K. of Scots did him homage, and when he was the second time crowned King, bare a sword before him. King Richard the first yeere of his raigne, gave the Lady Isabell, sole daughter and heire of Ri∣chard, surnamed Strangbow, Earle of Penbroke, to William Maxfield, Lord Maxfield, and Earle Marshall of England, Anno 1189: This William, his surname was not Marshall, as Sir Iohn Plunket his collection hath laid downe, but Maxfield, his descent I finde thus; with William the Conquerour, there came into England to his ayde, one Walter Maxfield a Norman, that was his Marshall; this Walter had issue, William, William had issue, Walter, Walter had issue, Iohn, Iohn had issue, this William Maxfield, that married Isabell, the daugh∣ter of Strangbow, who was made Earle Marshall of England, Earle of Penbroke in Wales, and Prince of Leinster in Ireland, in the right of his wife. This William was in great favour with King Richard the first, that gave him the Lady Isabell to wife, and honoured him so at his coronation, that he bare a regall Scepter before the King, in the top whereof was set a Crosse of gold, and when the King with full de∣termination passed over into Normandie, and from thence into the Holy Land, he assigned him the third governour of the Realme, Iohn Earle of Morton, Anno 1199. after the death of his brother Richard, sent this William among others into England, to set all things in a readinesse for his coronation, the which being the 27. of May, and yeere aforesaid, gave him his full creation to the Earledome of Pen∣broke, and girded him with the sword; not long after, King Iohn sent him with others, as Embassadors to the French King, with sundry other imployments; he was also in great favour with Henry 3. as shall be shewed when I come to his raigne. He had five sonnes, and five daughters, his sonnes all succeeded him in the Earldome of Penbroke,
and office of Marshalsie, together with the Principality of Leinster, and dyed all without issue. The daughters were all honourably matched in the life time of their father and brethren, and had his ter∣ritories and possessions in Wales and Ireland, orderly divided among them, the which they and their posterity peaceably enioyed. This William Earle Marshall the elder, came to Ireland, Anno 1207. hee builded the Castle of Kilkenny, and gave the towne a Charter, with priviledges wich they enjoy to this day: hee founded there also the Monasterie of the blacke Fryers, and ended the way of all flesh at London, Anno 1220. and lyeth buried in the temple of his Lady Isa∣bell at Tinterne in Wales. William Marshall his eldest sonne succeeded him, both in the of∣fice of Marshall, and Earldome of Penbroke and Ogie, and Principa∣litie of Leinster; he granted a Charter to the towne of Kilkenny, Anno 1223. sixt of Aprill, with the testate of Thomas Fitz Antony, Lord of Thomas stowne, Seneschall, of Leinster, Fulkoe, Carnae; Walter Pursell, William Grace, Haman Grace, Amnar Grace, and others, he ended his dayes at Kilkenny, Anno 1231. and resteth in the Monastery there, which his father had formerly founded. Againe, of this William I have seene another Charter, exemplified Anno 1329. by King Edward the third, with an inspexim. Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Aquitanie omnibus Ballivis & Ministris omnium villarum & villatorum Lagenie & cete∣ris quibuscunque deijsdem partibus salutem. Supplicavit nobis supe∣rior et communitas villae de Kilkenny quod cum Willielmus nuper Co∣mes Mariscallus et Pembrochie (tempore quo idem Comes extiterat Domini totius terrae Lageniae) concesserit Burgensibus et Communita∣ti ville predicte qui pro tempore fuerint, diversas libertates, inter quas videlicet, quod ipsi in perpetuum per totam Lageniam terram, & pote∣statēin suam tam villa quā alibi essent quieti de theulonio, lastagio, pori∣tagio, & de omnibus aliijs consuetudinibus quibuscunque, quam quidem cartam inspeximus, &c. Teste Iohanne Darcy Iusticiario nostro Hiber∣nie apud Kilkenny, 8. die Iulij anno regninostri 3. per billam ipsius Iu∣sticiarij. Yet Holinshed writeth that this William Marshall the youn∣ger, deceased at London, and lyeth buried by his father in the new Temple. Richard Marshall the second brother succeeded; he was Earle Mar∣shall of England, Earle of Penbroke in Wales, and Ogie in Norman∣die, and Prince of Leinster in Ireland. In the yeere 1233. and the Mo∣neth of Aprill, in a battell nigh Kildare, upon the great Heath called the Curragh, fighting against the Oconors; hee tooke his deaths wound, whereof shortly he dyed. Hee lieth buried by his brother William in the blacke Fryers at Kilkennye, which was the foundati∣on of William, Earle Marshall, his father. Henry the third lamented his death, and protested that he lost then the worthiest Captaine of
his time. His tombe (with the tombe of eighteene Knights that came over at the Conquest, and resting in that Abbey) at the suppression of the Monasterie, was defaced, and inhabitants there turned them to their private uses; and of some they made swine-troughs, so as there remaineth no Monument in the said Abbey, save one stone, whereupon the picture of a Knight is portraied, bearing a shield a∣bout his necke, wherein the Cantwels armes are insculped; and yet the people there call it Ryddir in Curry, that is, the Knight slaine at the Curraghe. Iohn Clyn, guardian of the Fryers there, in his Annals of Ireland writeth thus. Post incarnatum lapsis de virgine natum Annis millenis tribus triginta ducent is In primo mensis Aprilis, Kildariensis Pugna die Sabbati fuit in tristitia facti Acciderant stallo pugnae Comiti Mariscallo. And upon his Tombe. Hic Comes est positus, Richardus vulnere fossus Cujus sub fossa Kilkennia continet ossa. After the decease of Richard Gilbert, Marshall, the third brother was Earle Marshall of England, Earle of Penbroke and Ogie, and Prince of Leinster, Anno 1239. King Henry the third held his Christmas at Winchester, where there rose a grudge betweene the King and this Earle Gilbert, by reason that this same Earle, with his servants, having tip-staves in their hands, comming to the Court, were not suffered to enter within the gates, but were kept backe by the Porters and others: of which injury when hee complained, the King made him an overthwart answer. Whereupon the Earle not well pleased therewith, estranged himselfe from the Court, and went into the North country, so that thenceforth, he and his brother Wal∣ter gave small attendance upon the King; and to end with this Earle Gilbert, it fell out on a time, in a Turnay which hee had attempted without the Citie of Hereford, contrary to the Kings pleasure, that his unruly horse cast him, so that of the hurt which he tooke with the fall, he shortly after departed this life, in the yeere 1241. and was bu∣ried in the new temple Church at London: hee had married the La∣dy Margaret, the sister of Alexander, King of Scots, who by her had no issue; she also dyed Anno 1245. Walter Marshall succeeded Gilbert in all the former honours and possessions, both in England and Ireland, who because he had pro∣cured the turnament wherein his brother was slaine, hardly obtained of the king the same. He departed this life at Godrike Castle by Mon∣mouth
and was buried at Tintern, Anno 1245. leaving no issue be∣hind him. Anselme Marshall the fift sonne of William Earle Marshall suc∣ceded Walter, hee was the last of the Maxfields, and died without issue. Hee had married Mathildis or Mawd daughter of the Earle of Hereford, anc because hee had entred without doing of homage un∣to the King, his wife after his decease could have no dowry, wherof among the statutes of England I find the cause by especial words thus overruled· When any dyeth and his heire entreth into the Land, that his An∣cesters held of the King, the day that he died before he hath done ho∣mage to the King, and received seisin of the King, hee shall give no free hold thereby; and if hee dyed seised during that time, his wife shall not be indowed of the same land as came late in urc; by Mawd the daughter of the Earle of Hereford, wife of Anselme the Marshal. Who after the death of Walter Marshall of England his brother, tooke his seisin of the Castle and mannor of Strogill, and died in the same Castle; before hee had entred by the King, and before hee had done homage unto him, whereupon it was agreed, that his wife should not be indowed, because that her husband had not entred by the King, but rather by trusion. This Anselme died in England, and was buried at Tinterne. After the death of these five brethren; Florilegus writeth thus. All the sonnes of William the great Marshall (it is not knowne what sinne required the same) according to the Prophecy of the Countesse their mother, without issue left behind them, as shadowes departed out of this world; yet all successively became Earles, even as their mother by a Propheticall spirit foreshewed, and so the Noble sheild or buckler of the Marshalls, dreadful to so many and so great enemies of England, vanished away. Mathew Paris wrote the story at large. The aforesaid William, as Warlike and stout, called Marshall, as if hee had beene Mars his Seneschall while in Ireland hee gave himselfe to slaughter, and burning, and got to himselfe large posses∣sions, he tooke away by strong hand and injuriously, from an holy Bishop two mannors or Lordships belonging to his Church, and pre∣sumptuously usurped them, as though he might, by just title pos∣sesse them, as if he had wonne them with the sword. The Bishop af∣ter many admonitions, and receiving many froward answers, thun∣dred against him (and not without cause) the sentence of Excommu∣nication, the which the Earle despised, and pleaded for excuse; the warlike season keeping injuries upon injuries: Whereupon not with∣out advisement one Maister Gervasius de Melckeria, framed of him this distinction and shrowded himselfe in his person.
Sum quem Saturnum sibi sensit Hibernia, Solem Anglia, Mercurium Normania, Gallia Martem. Iam whom Ireland Saturne hight, and England Sol me cals, Amids the Normans Mercury, and Mars among the Gauls. The meaning in a word is, how that he in his time had tamed the wild Irish, and had beene the shining beame of honour unto the English, as an Ambassadour to pacifie the Normans, and an invin∣cible Knight among the French nation, but forwards with Paris; the aforesaid Earle held those mannors all his life time, and annexed them unto his dominions: Within a few yeeres after, the Earle en∣ded the way of all flesh, and was buried in the new Temple at Lon∣don; the Bishop hearing of this (for he was the Bishop of Fernes, a Cistertian Monke, by birth Irish, and famous for Sanctity) not with∣out great paine in travaile, he went unto the King, who then was in London, exhibited a grievous complaint of the injury done unto him, and how that hee had justly excommunicated the Earle, and humbly besought the King, that by his soveraigne authority and Princely mandat, and also for the good of the said Earle Williams soule, he would see his mannors restored unto him, that in so doing (though he were dead) yet might reape the benefit of absolution. The King with this was moved, and willed the Bishop to repaire to the Earles grave and absolve him, and he would diligently labour for his satis∣faction; the Bishop together with the King went to his Tombe, and in the hearing of al that were present, as if they had been both alive, said, O William, that here lyest interred, and wrapped in the bonds of Ex∣communication, if the thing which thou hast injuriously taken away from my Church, bee restored by the king, or by thine heire, or by some one of thy kindred or friends, with competent satisfaction, I absolve thee, o her wise I doe ratifie the said sentence that thou being ever wrapped in thy sinnes, maiest remaine damned in hell. The King hearing this, was moved and sharply rebuked the immoderat rigour of the Pontificall Prelate. To whom the Bishop replied, my Lord ann dread soveraigne, marvaile not, though I be out of patience, for he hath spoiled my Church to his great commoditie. The King then secretly conferring with William the eldest sonne of this Earle, and heire to the whole, and now invested in the inheritance and Earle∣dome, and certaine others his brethren, besought them by the resto∣ring the mannors unjustly taken away, mercifully to deliver their fa∣thers soule; To whom William the heir made answer, I doe not be∣leeve, neither is to be credited, that my father tooke them injuriously, for that which is gotten by the sword, may lawfully be enjoyed; for if that old and doting Bishop hath given a wrong sentence, let the
curse light upon his owne pate. I will not weaken my estate, nor di∣minish the inheritance wherein I am invested, my father dyed seized thereof, and I have rightly entred. Vnto these words all the brethren yeelded their consents. The King being then of tender yeeres, and under Tutor, would not give cause of heavinesse unto so great and Noble a personage; when the Bishop understood this, hee was more waspish, and moved with the countenance of the sonnes, then with the former iniury of the father, and turning him to the King, spake aloud; what I have said, I have said; what I have written, I have written, never to be blotted out. To be short, the Bishop with great sorrow departed, and in bitter∣nesse, prophecied of the ill successe of the children, who dyed and lived in great honour all the dayes of their lives: but these matters we are to referre to the secret iudgement of God. After the decease of these five brethren, five Earles, and five Prin∣ces of Leinster, leaving no issue behinde them, the five daughters their sisters, Ioane, Mathilda, Isabell, Sibilla, and Eva, being honoura∣bly matched, had their fathers and brethrens possessions and territo∣ries in Ireland orderly divided amongst them; Ioane, the eldest daugh∣ter of William Earle Marshall, and eldest sister of the five brethren (before spoken of) was married to Warren de Mountchensen, who in right of her, had allotted unto him, the County of Wexford; they had issue, one daughter, Ioane that was married, Anno 1247. to Wil∣liam de Valence, a Norman, the sonne of Hugh Brune, Earle of March, and Turryn, Vicount of Curce, &c. hee was halfe brother to King Henry the third, by Queene Isabell, daughter and heire of Amerie, Earle of Angolesm, the widdow of King Iohn. This William in the right of his wife, was Earle of Penbroke, and Lord of Wexford, and died Anno 1296. he had issue, two sonnes and two daughters, Willi∣am de Valence, Owdomare alias Aimer de Valence, Isabell and Ioane; William succeeded his father in the Earldome of Penbroke, and Lord∣ship of Wexford, and died without issue. Aymer his brother after him, was Earle of Penbroke, and Lord of Wexford, and died with∣out issue, whereupon the inheritance fell to the two sisters, Isabell and Ioane. Isabell was married to Iohn Hastings, Lord Hastings of A∣bergevenny, who in the right of his wife had one halfe of the coun∣ty of Wexford allotted unto him, and had issue, Elizabeth, which married Reynold, Lord Gray of Ruthin. Ioane the second sister was married to Iohn Lord Comyn, who in her right, had the other halfe of Wexford, and he had issue, two daughters, Elizabeth and Ioane; Eli∣zabeth married Richard Lord Talbot, and Ioane was married to Da∣vid, Earle of Atholl in Scotland, and thus the County of Wexford was divided. Mathilda, or Mawde, the second daughter of William, Earle Marshall of England, had the county of Cattelough, alias Carlogh,
assigned unto her: she was married to Hugh Bigod, Earle of Norfolke, father of Ralph Bigod, whose daughter and heire Isabell, was married to Sir Gilbert Lacy, who had issue, Margery and Mawd, Margery was married to Iohn Lord Verdon, of whom the Earle of Shrewesbury, and the Earle of Essex are descended. Mawd married Ieffery Genivill, father to Peter Genivill, whose daughter and heire was married to Roger Mortimer, Lord of Wigmore, and the first Earle of March. Isabell, the third daughter of William, Earle Marshall of England, had to her portion, the county of Kilkenny. She was married to Sir Gilbert de Clare, Earle of Glocester and Herford, whose discent is before spoken of. Hee was slaine by the Scots in King Edward the seconds time, and died without issue. I have seene a Charter gran∣ted by him to the towne of Kilkenny. Gilbert Clare, Earle of Glo∣cester and Herford, to our Seneshall of Kilkenny, and to our treasu∣rer of the same, greeting; know you that we for the common profit of the towne of Kilkenny, of our especiall favour have granted to our loving Burgesses of the same towne, &c. the whole in substance is, that none shall sell victuals there, but it shall be prized by the officers of our towne. After the decease of Sir Gilbert Clare, then the Earle∣domes of Glocester and Herford, and the County of Kilkenny, fell betweene his three sisters, begotten upon Isabell aforesaid, to wit, Elenor, Margaret, and Elizabeth. Elenor was married to Hugh Spen∣cer the younger, Margaret was married to Peter Gaveston, and after his death, to Hugh Lord Audely; Elizabeth was married first to Wil∣liam Lord Burgh, Earle of Vlster; the second time to Ralph Roch, Ba∣ron of Farmoy; thirdly, to Theobald, Lord Verdon; and lastly, to Ro∣ger Damary, and had issue by every one of them. Sibilla the fourth daughter of William Earle Marshall, had to her part the Countie of Kildare, and was married to William Ferers, Earle of Ferers and Darby, who had issue, Agnes, Isabell, Mathilda, Sibil∣la, Cecilia, and a second Sibill; Agnes was married to VVilliam de Vescy, who had issue, Iohn de Vescy, who had issue, VVilliam de Vescy that died without issue in his fathers life time. Lastly, this County of Kildare was given by the King unto Iohn Fitz Thomas, the first Earle of Kildare, as hereafter in more convenient place shall ap∣peare. Eva, the first daughter of VVilliam Earle Marshall, had to her portion, the Mannor of Dounmas in Leix, and was married to VVil∣liam Bruse, Lord Bruse of Gower, who had issue, Mathilda, Elenor, and Eva. Mathilda was married to Roger Mortimer, Elenor was married to Humphery de Bohun Earle of Herford and Eva, to Can∣tilupe, alias VVilliam de Canlow: Of the line of these Maxfields, I meane of VVilliam Earle Marshall of England, the pedigree & discent of this Noble familie, the properties and purports holds of the daugh∣ters. I have seene sundry copies. Nicholas Magwir, Bishop of Leighlen
perfected an abstract of the division of the land in Ireland, among the daughters and the paritcularities thereof, which is to be seene in the red towne-booke of Kilkenny: and now forwards with the history, from whence I have somewhat digressed. Anno 1190. (in which yeere the Citie of Dublin, by foule mishap, was fired to ashes) King Richard set all in a readinesse for his iourney into the holy land, gathered masses of money together, and among o∣thers it is remembred, what a summe of money he received of Hugh Pudsey a Norman, and Bishop of Durham, that gave an inestimable summe to be made an Earle, whom the Antiquaries doe condemne for his intolerable pride, and damnable covetousnesse, whom the King also flowted after hee had received the coyne; saying, Loe, I have made a young Earle of an old Bishop▪ In this voyage and prepa∣ration for the recovery of Ierusalem, and the ayde of the Christians in Asia, there went Fredericke, Emperour of Almaine, Richard, King of England, Philip of France, VVilliam of Cicilia, Otho, Duke of Burgundie, the Venetians, Pisanes, Frisones, Danes and Flemings. Now that the King is on his iourney abroad, let us talke a little (gen∣tle Reader) of little Iohn at home: Stanihurst leads me into the histo∣ry, and reporteth that Anno 1189. he came into Ireland, and sojour∣ned at Dublin; the storie goeth (and especially in Hector Boetius, and Iohn Major, Antiquaries of Scotland) how that in those daies, there were many outlawes in the North parts of England; of these out∣lawes, Robin Hood, and little Iohn were Chiefetaines: It was said of Robin Hood that he was an Earle, and after outrages by him commit∣ted, he kept the woods; his company was of some hundred persons, all chosen and picked Archers, of singular strength to handle their weapons, and such as durst encounter with 400. others: they robbed none but the rich, as Tanners, and Grasiers, and Vsurers, and Bishops, Priests, and fat Abbots; they shed no bloud, they killed no man, re∣leeved themselves and the poore also with their spoyles. Robin Hood after many theevish feats, fell sicke, went into a Nunnery in Scotland, to be let bloud, where he was betrayed, and bled to death: wherup∣on the company brake, and the crue dispersed themselves, every man to shift for himselfe; little Iohn came to Ireland, with many of his confederates, and found in the woods, enough to fit his humour, and fell so much to his old occupation, that he was faine to flye the land. In the end, he went to Scotland, and there died. There are memora∣ble acts reported of him, which I hold not for truth, that he would shoot an arrow a mile off, and a great deale more; but them I leave a∣mong the lyes of the land. Anno 1191. the Monasterie de iugo Dei, was founded Anno 1193. King Richard after many most valiant exploits in the Holy Land, (the which I hold not so necessary for this place) after the drowning of Fredericke the Emperour, and after the sudden and envious depar∣ture
of Philippe King of France; hearing the conspiracy of the said Philippe, and the treason of his brother Iohn aspiring to the Crowne of England; made peace with the Saladine for three yeres, and with a small company returning homewards, was taken prisoner by Leopold, Duke of Austria, who brought him to Henry the Emperour, and there kept him in prison a yeere and 5. months, untill he had paid his ransome, which was Anno 1194. Hee was received into England with the joy and applause of all true harts, and having setled the affaires of the Realme in due sort, he went into France, where he had much a doe with the French King, the which for brevities sake, I doe omit, and yet one memorable act of his I may not omit, and thus it was; There came unto him one Fulco a Priest, who with great courage and boldnesse said: Thou hast, O Mighty King three daughters very vicious and of evill disposition, take good heed of them, and betimes provide them good husbands; to whom the King in rage answered: thu errant lyar, and shamelesse hypo∣crit, thou knowest not where thou art, nor what thou sayest, I weene thou art not well in thy wits, for I have never a daughter, as the world will beare me witnesse, get thee out of our presence. To whom Fulco re∣plyed, If it like your Grace, I lye not, but say truth, for you have three daughters which continually frequent your Court, and (more is the pitty) wholly possesse your person; I meane, Pride, Covetousnesse and Leachery. The King thereat smiled, and called his Lords and Barons unto him, and related what Fulco had delivered unto him, and there∣upon gave his resolution: Here before you all I doe presently bestow my three daughters. First, I give my daughter swelling Pride, to the proud Templars: my greedy daughter Avarice, to the covetous Or∣der of the Cistercian Monkes: and my daughter Leachery, to the wan∣ton Prelats of the Church. This noble King went to besiege a Town called Chalus Cheverell in Poitou, in the confines of Britaine, where unlooked for, from the wall of the Towne, he was wounded with a venomed arrow out of a Crosbow; whereof shortly after hee died: afore his death hee sent for him, that was the cause of his death, for∣gave him, yea & gave him money in his purse; but after his death he was apprehended and cut off with cruell tortures. Lastly, King Ri∣chard tooke order for his buriall, thus he bequeathed his body to Fount Ebrad, there to lye at his fathers feet, whom in his life time he had offended; his heart to Roan that had alwayes been true unto him; and his bowels to Chalus Cheverell where he tooke his death, for that filth was fit for them, that had beene unto him both false and rebellious, Mathew Paris hath is Epitaph thus. The conceit is that Chalus was casus lucis.Ad Chalus cecidit Rex, regni cardo Richardus, His ferus, his humilis, his agnus, his Leopardus;
Casus erat lucis Chalus. Per secula nomen Non intellectum fuerat, sed nominis omen Non patuit, res clausa fuit; sed luce cadente Prodiit in lucem pro casu lucis ademptae. Againe of his legacie. Pictavus exta ducis sepelit, tellusque Chalutis Corpus dat claudi sub marmore fontis Ebrandi: Neustria tuque tegis cor inexpugnabile Regis: Sic loca per trina se sparsit tanta ruina; Nec fuit hoc funus, cui sufficeret locus unus. Iohn the fift sonne of Henry the second, Earle Morton, alias Mor∣taigne and Lord of Ireland, as formerly hath beene delivered, by the gift of his brother King Richard the first, Earle of Cornwall, Dorset, Sommerset, Nottingham, Darby, Lancaster, and in the right of his marriage, Earle of Glocester, was Crowned at Westminster, King of England, Anno 1199. Hee was first married to Isabell (whom the Britaines called Hawise, and the Cornish Avis) daughter to Robert Earle of Glocester, who for that they were found within the third degree, were divorced, so that King Iohn left both the Lady Isabell and the Earledome of Glocester, whereupon by the advice of Philip King of France, he matched in holy wedlocke with Isabell daughter to Amerie, Earle of Angolesme. This Isabell (if not married) had beene affianced to Hugh Brune, Earle of March, a Noble man of Aquitaine, who gave battaile in that quarell to King Iohn, and was discomfitted, yet after the death of King Iohn, hee had her to wife. Immediatly upon the Coronation of Henry the third (who suc∣ceeded him) broyles beganne in England, France and Ireland, which had every way a tragicall end. Bruse in England, Arthure in France, and Courcy in Ireland, are testimonies thereof: But orderly of these as the Nature of the Historie requires; Arthure the sonne of Ieffry Plantagenet nephew to King Iohn, lived when his uncle Iohn aspired to the Crowne, being 16 yeeres of age, he was affianced to a daughter of Philippe the French King, the said Philippe Knighted him in the field; he was Duke of Britain, Earle of Anjou, Poitiers, Maine and Turrow of Normandy. He did homage unto his uncle for some, and to Philippe for the rest; his uncle had him in Iealousie, first lest that in processe of time, he would make claime to the Crowne: secondly, for that he adhered too much to the French, and the young Prince upon conference, with bold spirit told him, that he did him wrong, and that hee was bound in honour to deliver unto him the Crowne of England, with all that thereunto appertained. Shortly after, it fell
out that King Iohn took this Arthure confederate against him, with William de Bruse, Hugh Brune and others, imprisoned him in Falaise in Normandy; from thence he was brought to Roane, and there clapt in the Tower, under the custody of Robert de Veipont, where shortly after he finished his life, whether by leaping into the ditch, thinking to make his escape, or by meane of some privy hand, which murther it is not as yet agreed upon Vtinam (saith Mat. Paris) non ut fama refert invida; by occasion whereof, K. Iohn was ever after had in great suspition, whether justly or unjustly the Lord knoweth King Iohn fearing the secret practises of his adversaries, and doubting the revolt of his Barons, sent for his further security, unto those whom he most suspected for hostages and pledges of their Ioialty, and among others, unto William de Bruse a Normand borne, but Lord of Brechnok, saith Guttin Owen, and a great commander in South-wales. The wife, like a quicke Dame, taking the answer out of her husbands mouth, gave this round speech; that shee would not give any of her sonnes to King Iohn, who already had slaine and murthered his owne nephew Arthur. These words being lavishly delivered unto the King, set him in such a heat of displeasure against her husband (though hee had rebuked her sharply for the same) that the L. Bruse with his wife and children fled the Realme, and got them unto Ireland for safeguard of their lives; and when King Iohn came unto Ireland, they fled to the Ile of Man, where they were ap∣prehended and sent to the Castle of Windsore in England, and there (as the common fame went) famished to death. But William de Bruse himselfe escaped the hands of the King in Ireland, and fled into France, died at Corbell, and was buried in Paris. The next that comes upon the stage is Sir Iohn de Courcy Earle of Vlster, Lord of Conaght, that had lastly beene L. Liev. of Ireland, who governing the land with great circumspection, together with Sir Hugh de Lacy the younger, who maligned him secretly, and envied his prosperity, in so much that hee accused him to King Iohn, saying, that he laid to the Kings charge the murthering of his nephew Arthure; where∣upon King Iohn sent for him into England; and gave commission unto Sir Hugh de Lacy, and his brother Walter Delacy, to attach his person. Sir Iohn de Courcy having secret intelligence of their drift, kept himselfe a loofe: Sir Hugh Delacy finding that levied an army, and invaded Vlster; the Country rose against him and drove him to flie. Then Lacy praclaimed him traitor, and marched towards him with all the forces he could make. Courcy in like sort prepared for his comming. At Dune they met and fought a cruell battaile, where the field was all blood, and many slaine on both sides, but in the end the victo∣ry fell to Courcy, and Lacy went back with shame enough. Then Lacy practised how he might betray him.
It is said among the Irish, that Courcy offred the combat, and that Lacy refused it, aleadging that it was not for him, that represented the Kings person, to hazard his life with an inferior, being a subject and a traytor.Lacy makes proclamation, promising a large reward to him that should bring him in Courcy either alive or dead, but it would not be; then privily he dealt with some of his servants, that if they would undertake the apprehension of him, they should have great rewards; it was concluded, and this advice the betraiers gave: Sir Iohn de Courcy is a mighty man in armes, and of such strength, that no one man dares be so hardy as lay hand upon him, and againe hee is alwaies both in publick and privat well provided: Yet we can di∣rect you a course to bring your purpose to effect: upon good Friday yeerly he weares no armes, but is wholly given to divine contempla∣tion, and commonly walketh all solitary round about the Church∣yard of Dune: if you provide a troope of horsemen in a readinesse, and send your espiall before, there you shall have him, apprehend him and worke your will, and hither they came, and laid hands up∣on him. Courcy now unarmed and altogether distressed; ranne to a wooden crosse that stood in the Church yard, tooke the pole therof and laid about him lustily; Courcy at that time had but a few atten∣ding on him, and they armelesse; of which number, were two young Gentlemen, the sonnes of Sir Amorick Saint Laurence which were slaine; to bee short, the Author of the Booke of Houth reporteth, that Courcy in that Skirmish slew 13. of Lacy his men, that died not upon the Crosse, but under the Crosse, but in the end he was carried away, conveied beyond the seas, clapt in the Towre of London, and condemned to perpetuall imprisonment: Whereupon Lacy for that service, had the Earledome of Vlster given him, and the Iudases that betrayed their Master had their hire. Then they craved of Sir Hugh de Lacy a pasport into England, with the relation of the good service they had done in Ireland, which was granted upon condition, that upon the paine of death, they should never returne into Ireland a∣gaine, neither to open the same afore it were demanded of them: It was as followeth. I Hugh de Lacy Lord Iustice of Ireland, servant to my dread So∣veraigne Lord King Iohn: To all them that shall read these few lines, greeting; know you that thse men, whose names are under written, served sometimes Sir Iohn de Courcy late Earle of Vlster, but now in durance in the Towre of London, and for a summe of money, betraied their owne Master into my hand. I deeme them no better then Iudas the traitor: how hardly soever I have conceived of Courcy, I hold them a thousand times more damnable traitors. Wherefore let no sub∣ject within any of the Kings dominions, give them any entertainment, but spit in their faces, and suffer them to rogue about and wander as Iewes. He provided them a barke, with saile and victuall, but gave
them no Pilots nor sea-faring men, for want of skill they could not take the seas, but were tossed with winde and weather, along the Coast, at length the Tyde brought them into the river of Corke: they were no sooner landed, but they were apprehended, examined, and brought to Sir Hugh de Lacy, and forthwith all foure hanged cheeke by jole. Not long after, there fell some difference betweene Iohn, King of England, and Philip, King of France, for the right of some Fort in Normandie, who to avoyde the shedding of Christian bloud, agreed of each side to put it to a combat; of King Philips part there was a French man in readinesse; King Iohn upon the sudden wist not what to doe for a Champion to encounter with him; at length, one attending upon his person, enformed him that there was one Courcy in the Towre of London, the onely man in his dominions (if hee would undertake it) to answer the challenge. King Iohn ioyfull of this, sent the first, yea second, and third time, promising large re∣wards, and rich gifts, and that it stood him upon as farre as the ho∣nour of his Crowne and kingdome did reach, to make good the com∣bat. Courcy answered very frowardly, (the which was taken in good part in regard of the urgent necessitie) that he would never fight for him, neither for any such as he was, that he was not worthy to have one drop of bloud spilt for him; that he was not able to requite him the wrongs he had done him, neither to restore him the hearts ease he had bereaved him of: yet notwithstanding all the premises, he was willing, and would with all expedition, be ready to venture his life in defence of the Crowne and his country. Whereupon it was a∣greed, that he should be dyeted, apparrelled, and armed to his con∣tent, and that his owne sword should be brought him out of Ireland. The day came, the place appointed, the Liste provided, the scaffolds set up, the Princes with their nobilitie of each side, with thousands in expectation. Forth comes the French Champion, gave a turne, and rests him in his tent: They sent for Courcy, who all this while was trussing of himselfe about with strong poynts, and answered the mes∣sengers, if any of their company were to goe to such a banquet, I thinke he would make no great haste. Forth he comes, gave a turne, and went into his Tent. When the Trumpets sounded to battaile, forth come the combatants, and viewed each other. Courcy beheld him with a wonderfull sterne countenance, and passed by. The French man not liking his grimme looke, the strong proportion and feature of his person, stalked still along, and when the Trumpets soun∣ded the last charge, Courcy drew out his sword, and the French man ranne away, and conveyed him to Spaine. Whereupon they soun∣ded victory, the people clapt their hands, and cast up their cappes; King Philip desired King Iohn that Courcy might bee called before them, to shew some part of his strength and manhood, by a blow up∣on
on a Helmet; it was agreed, a stake was set in the ground, and a shirt of maile, and a Helmet thereon; Courcy drew his sword, looked won∣derfull sternely upon the Princes, cleft the helmet, the shirt of maile, and the stake so farre in, that none could pull it out but himselfe. Then the Princes demanded of him, what hee meant to looke so sowrely upon them; his answer was, if hee had missed his blow upon the blocke, he would have cut off both the Kings heads. All that hee said was taken in good part: King Iohn discharged him out of all his troubles, gave him great gifts, and restored him to his former posses∣sions in Ireland. It is written further, that hereupon hee sailed into England, came to Westchester, offered himselfe to the sea, and was put backe againe fifteene times by contrary windes which rose upon a sodaine, to the English shore. And in the booke of Houth it is deli∣vered, that upon every repulse, the night following, he was admoni∣shed in a vision, not to attempt the seas, for to saile into Ireland, and that he should never set foot upon any land there; and withall, that the reason was yeelded thus. Courcy, thou hast done very ill, for thou hast pulled downe the master, and set up the servant; for he had trans∣lated the Cathedrall Church, and the Prebendaries of the blessed Tri∣nitie in Dune, into an Abbey of blacke Monkes, brought thither from Chester, and consecrated the same to the honour of Saint Pa∣tricke. Whereupon remembring himselfe that he had done very ill in taking the name from God to a creature, gave sentence upon himself, that he was worthily punished. Immediately hee altered his course, went into France, and there died: now forwards with the history, according to the due course of time in the raigne of King Iohn, so the booke of Houth reporteth. Anno 1202. Meler Fitz Henry, whose father was the base sonne of King Henry the first, founded the Abbey of Cownall; hee came into Ireland with the first Conquerours, being a young stripling, and is highly commended by Cambrensis for his great valour, and wor∣thinesse in martiall prowesse: he left this world, Anno 1220. his E∣pitaph I finde in Iohn Clynne. Conduntur tumulo Meyleri nobilis ossa, Indomitus domitor totius gentis Hibernae. Intombed are the bones of him they Noble Meler call, Who was the tamelesse tamer of the Irish nation all. Anno 1205. in the seventeenth yeere of the raigne of King Iohn, Theobald Fitz Walter, Fitz Gilbert, Becket the first Lord Butler of Ireland, founded the Monastery of Wethencia, alias Wethran, alias Wethenoya, alias Voghney, in the county of Limeric; this difference I finde in Dowling, Grace, and others.
Anno 1206. Saint Monon an Irish man, and a Martyr, (Molanus layeth him downe among the Saints in Flanders) flourished; he is re∣puted the Patron of Nassonia, under the command of the Abbot of Saint Hubert, in the Lordship of Audiamum; he was the Disciple of Saint Remulch, and Saint Iohn Agnus, Bishop of Trajectum, and of Irish birth; this Monon was murthered at Ardevenna, (saith Molanus) by some bloudy massacres, & lyeth buried at Nassonia, in the Church which he there had founded. A rebellion in Thurles.Anno 1208. (I finde it in Dowlinge and Grace) Sir Hugh de Lacy the younger, being Lord Iustice, entred into Thurles, where the country being in rebellion, offered him battaile, he laid siege to Castle Meiler, wanne it, brake it downe, and made it even with the ground; but he lost there more men, (say the Irish) then he tooke away with him; the chiefe Rebell was Ieffery Mac Moris, alias Morich. Blacke Mon∣day.Anno 1209. the occasion of blacke Munday, and the originall re∣membrance thereof rose at Dublin. The Citie of Dublin by reason of some great mortality, being wasted and desolate, the inhabitants of Bristoll flocked thither to inhabit, who after their country manner, upon Holy dayes, some for love of the fresh ayre, some to avoyd idle∣nesse, some other for pastime, pleasure, and gamings sake, flocked out of the towne towards Cullen wood upon Munday in Easter weeke. The Birnues and Tooles, (the mountaine enemies) like Wolves lay in ambush for them, and upon espiall finding them unarmed, fell upon thē, & slue some 300. persons, besides women & children, which they led in their hands, although shortly after, the towne was upon the re∣port thereof, eftsoones peopled againe by Bristolians; yet that dismall day is yeerely remembred, and solemnly observed by the Maior, Sheriffes, and Citizens, with feast and banquet, and pitching up of tents in that place in most brave sort, daring the enemy upon his pe∣rill, not to bee so hardy, as once to approach neere their feasting campe; and whereas the Irish heretofore accounted Tuesday their fatall and infortunate day, (for Lymric was twice wonne, Wexford yeelded up, Waterford was besieged, and Dublin was sacked upon a Tuesday) now they have Munday in memory, making difference of dayes, not fitting the minde of the Apostle, which forbade the super∣stitions or vaine observations of daies, &c. Gal. 4. Anno 1211, (or somewhat before) the Monastery of Grenard was founded by Richard Tute, who shortly after miscarried at Athlone, by the fall of a Turret, and was buried in the same Monastery. About the same time, in the yeere 1209. the Monastery of Forte was foun∣ded by Walter Lacy, Lord of Meth. King Iohn in Ireland.Anno 1210. and the twelfth yeere of his raigne, King Iohn came into Ireland, and landed at Waterford with an huge army, marvel∣lous well appointed to pacifie that rebellious people, that were uni∣versally revolted, burning, spoyling, preying, and massacring the
English. Fabian and Graffton alleage the cause that moved the Irish∣men to this rebellion, to have been for that the King endevord to lay grievous taxes upon them towards his aide in the warres against the French King, which they could not brooke, and therefore rose in armes against their Soveraigne. When hee came to Dublin the whole Countrey fearing his puissance, craved peace and flocked unto him along the sea cost, the Champian Countries and remote places receiving an oath to bee true and faithfull unto him. There were 20. (Reguli) of the chiefest rulers within Ireland, which came to the King to Dublin, and there did him homage and fealty, as appertai∣ned. Harding nameth them Lord O Neale, and many more. Wal∣singham remembreth Catelus King of Conaght, it forceth it not though they misse the right names of place and person; it is a fault in manner common to all foraigne writers. After this hee marched forwards into the land, and tooke into his hands, divers Fortresses, and strong Holds of his enemies, that fled before him, for feare to be apprehended; as William le Bruse, Mathilda his wife, William their sonne with their traine, of whom I spake before; also Walter de Lacy Lord of Meath, and Hugh de Lacy Earle of Vlster, and Lord Iustice of Ireland, fearing his presence, fled into France; their exaction, oppression and tyranny was intole∣rable. Likewise they doubted how to answer the death of Sir Iohn de Courcy Lord of Ratheny and Kilbarrock within 5. miles of Du∣blin, whom they had murthered, of especiall malice and deadly ha∣tred. First, for that he was of the house of Sir Iohn de Courcy, Earle of Vlster, (whom the Lacies alwaies maligned.) Secondly, for that he had made grievous complaints of them in England to King Iohn, the tryall whereof they could not abide. Vp∣on the sight of the Lacies,Iohn Graye B. of Norwich L. Deputy. King Iohn made Iohn Gray Bishop of Norwich his deputy. Of these Lacies it is further remembred in the Booke of Houth, and other antiquities; how that in France they ob∣scured themselves, in the Abbey of S. Taurin, and gave themselves to manuall labour, as digging, delving, gardening, planting, and greffing for daily wages, the space of 2. or 3. yeares; the Abbot was well pleased with their service, and upon a day (whether it were by reason of some inkling or secret intelligence given him, or otherwise) demaunded of them of what birth and parentage they were, and what Country they came from; when they had acquainted him with the whole, hee bemoned their case, and undertooke to become a suiter unto the King for them; in a word hee obtained the Kings favour for them thus farre, that they were put to their fyne, and resto∣red to their fromer possessions; so that Walter de Lacy paid for the Lordship of Meath 2500. Markes, and Hugh his brother, for Vlster and Conaght a greater summe.
Hugh de Lacy, in remembrance of this kindnesse which the Ab∣bot shewed them, tooke his nephew, his brothers sonne with them into Ireland, one Alured, whom he Knighted and made Lord of the Dengle. The Monkes also, which out of that Monastery hee had brought with him into Ireland, hee honoured greatly, and gave them entertainment in Four, the which Walter De Lacy had former∣ly builded. King Iohn having pacified the land, ordained that the English Lawes should bee used in Ireland, appointed 12. English shires with Sheriffes and other Officers, to rule the same, according unto the En∣glish Ordinances; hee reformed the Coine and made it uniforme, (some say it was Gray his Deputy) of like weight and finenes, and made it currant as well in England as in Ireland. When hee had disposed of his affaires, and ordred all things at his pleasure, he tooke the sea againe, with much triumph, and landed in England the 30. day of August. Anno 1213. When the French King by instigation of Innocen∣tius 3. Bishop of Rome, prepared to invade England: King Iohn eftsoone understanding thereof, made provision accordingly to an∣swer his enterprise, and among others (the cause why the story is here inserted) Holinshed writeth how that to his aid the Bishop of Norwich, the Kings Deputy of Ireland, levied an Army of 300. foot well appointed, beside horsemen which arrived in England to the encouragement of the whole Campe. And as the French was frustrate of his purpose, so they shortly returned with great joy to their native Country. Castle of Du∣blin buildeth.In the same yeere, Viz. 1213. Iohn Comin Archbishop of Dublin departed this life, and was buried in the Quire of Christ-Church, whom Henry Loudres succeeded in the dayes of this King Iohn. This Henry builded the Castle of Dublin, and was made Lord Iu∣stice of Ireland.Schorchbill. His tenants nic-named him Schorchbill or Schorc∣villen upon this occasion; Hee being peaceably stalled in his Bishopprike, summoned all his tennants and farmers at a certain day appointed, to make their per∣sonall appearance before him, and to bring with them such evidences and writings as they enjoyed their holds by; the tenants of the day appointed, appeared, shewed their evidences to their Landlord, mistrusting nothing; hee had no sooner received them, but afore their faces, upon a suddain cast them all into a fire, secretly provided for the purpose; this fact amazed some that they became silent, mo∣ved others to a stirring choller and furious rage, that they regarded neither place nor person, but brake into irreverent speeches: Thou an Archbishop, nay, thou art a Schorcvillen, an other drew his weapon and said, as good for me kill as be killed; for when my evidences are burned, and my living taken away from me, I am killed. The Bishop
being thus tumult, and the imminent danger, whipt out at a backe doore: His Chaplains, Registers, and Summoners, were well knockt, and some of them left for dead. They threatned to fire the house over the Bishops head; some meane was made for the present time to pacifie their outrage, with faire promises, that all hereafter should be to their owne content: upon this they departed, the intent of the promises I cannot learne, othersome inveigh against it; but in fine, complaint thereof being made to Henry 3. the King thought so hardly of the course, that he removed him from his Iusticeship, and placed in his roome, Maurice Fitz Girald, of whom hereafter.Maurice Fitz Girald Lord Iustice. This Loudreds was buried in Christ Church. In the same yeere also King Iohn being mightily distressed through the practises of hir Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Monkes, Priests of his dominions, and the Barons of his Kingdome revolting, and the inward hatred of the French King, with forraigne powers intending an open invasion, was driven, to prevent further mischiefe, as I finde in Polychronicon, to surrender his Crowne from his head, and to sub∣ject his Kingdomes of England and Ireland, tributarie to the See of Rome, and as his client, vassall and feodarie to that See, to hold them of Innocentius the Bishop: againe, England being interdicted, and Ireland likewise, were after released upon agreement, compositi∣on, and Charter, and homage, as in the Chronicle of England more at large appeareth. The death of King Iohn, and the manner of it, I referre to the En∣glish Chronicles. After his decease, Henry the third, his eldest sonne, aged about nine yeeres, began his raigne, Anno 1216. Anno 1220. and the fourth yeere of Henry the third, so writeth Clyn, Dowling, and Grace; together with the English Antiquities, in their Irish collections; all Meth was wonderfully afflicted and wa∣sted by reason of the priuate quarrels and civill warres betweene Wil∣liam Earle Marshall, Earle of Penbroke, &c. and Sir Hugh de Lacy, Earle of Vlster, and Lord of Connaght. Trimme was besieged, and brought to a lamentable plight, and when the rage and furie of those garboiles was somewhat mitigated and appeased, after the shedding of much bloud, the same yeere to prevent afterclaps, and subsequent calamities, the Castle of Trim was builded. About this time, certaine worthy persons of great fame and re∣nowne, to wit, Henry Loudreds, Roger Peppard, and William Peppard, Lords successively, de saltu Salmonis, and Meiler Fitz Henry, one of the first Conquerours, paid nature her due, sinne her debt, and ended their daies. It appeareth in Stanihurst, that the same yeere that Henry Loudreds died, viz. 1220. the Castle of Dublin was builded: I meane the walles foure square, or quadrangle wise, but the foure Turrets and the other afterwards. Sir Henry Sidney is said to have builded the in∣ner
lodgings, in whose eternall commendation, I finde in the said Sta∣nihurst, these verses. Gesta libri referunt multorum clara virorum, Laudis & in chartis stigmata fixa manent: Verum Sidnaei laudes haec saxa loquuntur, Nec jacet in solis gloria tanta libris. Si libripereant, homines remanere valebunt, Si pereant homines ligna manere queant; Lignaque si pereant, non ergo saxa peribunt, Saxaque si pereant tempore, tempus erit, Si pereat tempus, minime consumitur aevum, Quod cum principio, sed sine fine manet. Dum libri florent, homines dum vivere possunt, Dum quoque cum lignis saxa manere valent, Dum remanet tempus; dum denique remanet aevum, Laus tua Sydnaei, digna perire nequit. Anno 1224: Abbatia de Albo tractu was founded. By generall consent of Antiquaries, after the death of Henry Loudres, spoken of before. Maurice Fitz Gerald was by Henry the third, made Lord Iu∣stice of Ireland, and afterwards fell in the Kings displeasure, and was removed, but the yeeres they agree not upon, wherein I finde great discord. The English Chronicle of Ireland delivereth that hee was made Lord Iustice Anno 1228. Florilegus and Holinshed write, that he was removed from his Iusticeship, Anno 1245. and Iohn Fitz Ieffery sub∣stituted in his roome. Mathew Paris writeth that hee was removed, Anno 1248 but howsoever they have mistaken the yeeres, or whe∣ther the fault of the Printer crept in, it forceth not; I am to deliver to the reader, the truth of the history, and the most worthy service of this Noble man, with the yeeres and the time as neere as I can. Anno 1229. in the raigne of Henry the third, Maurice Fitz Gi∣rald being Lord Iustice, (Mathew Paris and Holinshed write the storie) one Stephen Chapplen, and Nuntio to Pope Gregory, came to King Henry with the Popes Apostolike Mandates and procura∣tion letters, requiring of spirituall & temporall throughout England, Ireland, and Wales, the tenth of all their moveables, to the mainte∣nance of his warres against Fredericke the Emperour. At the day and place appointed when the King and his Lords spirituall and tempo∣rall met together, and the Nuntio had read his letters, the King was silent, & reputed (saith mine Author) as consenting thereto; the Earles and Barons (saith Paris) & all the Laytie said flatly, that they would give the Pope no tenths, neither subject their Baronies and locall possessions to the Church of Rome; the Clergie after three or foure
dayes deliberation, fearing the thunderbolts of excommunication, with grudging and murmurs, and many a bitter curse, yeelded; yet Ranulphus, Earle of Chester, alone, stood stoutly in the cause, and would not permit the Clergie of his country to become in bondage, neither to contribute the said tenths, though England, Wales, Scot∣land, and Ireland were compelled to pay. Ireland sent likewise after their money, Irish curses, for they were driven at the worst hand to sell unto the mercilesse Merchants, their Cowes, Hackneyes, Cad∣does, and Aqua vitae, to make present payment, and were driven in that extremitie, to pawne and sell their Cups, Chalices, Copes, Al∣tar-clothes and vestments. Anno 1230▪ (as I finde recorded in the booke of Houth) Hubertus de Burgo was Lord Iustice of Ireland, as I gather, in the absence of Maurice Fitz Girald, to whom the King gave the land ..... and Connaught, and made him Earle of Connaught, and shortly after, ob probitatem & fidelititem ex imiam, so I reade in Ypodigma Neu∣stria, being called into England for his uprightnesse and singular fide∣lity, was made governour of the King, Lord Iustice of England, and Earle of Kent, by the consent of all the Peeres of the Realme; after∣wards as the course of this world wheeles about, hee fell into the Kings displeasure, so that he called him old traytor, (and in his rage would have runne him thorow with his sword, had not the Earle of Chester and others runne betweene) for that (saith Stow) hee had taken five thousand markes of the Queene of France, to hinder his purpose; to avoyd the Kings displeasure, this Hubert fled to the Chappell of Brandwood in Essex, where he was taken, and by com∣mandement of the King, sent to the Tower of London; all his friends forsooke him, none answered for him but the Archbishop of Dublin; wherein we may behold as in a Glasse, the disposition of feyned friends in former ages, who in the Spring of a mans felicity, like Swal∣lowes, will flye about him, but when the winter of adversitie nippeth, like Snailes they keepe within their shels: at length this Hubert was somewhat reconciled to the Kings favour, that he was inlarged, yet banished the Court: lastly, he ended his miseries at his Mannor house of Bansted in Surry, and was buried at the Church of the Fryers Preachers at London, which was then in Holborne; unto the which Church he gave his noble Palace at Westminster, the which after∣wards Walter Grey the Archbishop of Yorke bought of them, and made it his Inne, since commonly called Yorke House, but now White-Hall. So farre Stow, Holinshed, and others. The yeere aforesaid, I finde one Ieffery March, alias Maurish, (so Holinshed calleth him) in Mathew Paris, Galfridus de Marisco, to have beene Lord Iustice of Ireland: so it may be in the absence of Maurice Fitz Girald, who made three journeys to King Henry the third; one with great power out of Ireland to ayde him beyond the seas;
secondly, to cleare himselfe of the death of Richard Marshall Earle of Pembrook: lastly, with Irish forces against the Welshmen. Mat. Paris and Holinshed, make report of his good service; How that when an Irish petit King in Conaght, understanding that both the King of England, and the Earle Marshall and Maurice Fitz Gerald were gone over into France, and so Ireland left without any great aide of men of warre, on the English part, raised a mighty Army, and with the same entred into the Marches and borders of the English dominion, spoiling and burning the Country before him. And how that Ief∣fray de Maurisco then Lord Iustice, being thereof advertized; called to him Walter de Lacy, Lord of Meth, and Richard de Burgh, assem∣bling therewithall an hugh Army, the which he divided into three parts, appointing the said Walter de Lacy and Richard de Burgh with the two first parts, to lye in ambush within certain Woods, through the which he purposed to draw the enemies. And marching forth with the third, which he reserved to his owne government, he profered battaile to the Irishmen, the which when they saw but one battaile of the Englishmen, boldly assaid the same. The Englishmen according to the order appointed, faining as though they had fled and so retired still backe, till they had trained the Irish within danger of their other two battailes which comming forth upon them, did set on them eagerly; whilest the other which seemed before to fly, returned back againe, and set upon them in like manner; by meanes whereof, the Irish men being in the midst were beaten downe: if they stood to it, they were before and behind slaine; if any offered to fly hee was overtaken, thus in all parts they were utterly vanquished, with the losse of 20000. Irish, and the King of Conaght taken and committed to prison. This Noble Ieffray de Marisco (of whom Holinshed writeth) a man some time in great honour and possessions in Ireland, fell into the displeasure of the King, was banished; who after he had remained long in exile, suffred great miserie, ended the same by naturall death: Thus the un∣stable Wheele goeth round about: and yet I may not so leave it hee had a sonne called William de Maurisco, who together with the father (the Iustice of God requiring the same) came to most shamefull ends: Matthew the Munke of Westminster and Matthew Paris the Munke of Saint Albones, doe write the Story: While the King was beyond seas, a certain noble man of Irish birth to wit Willielmus de Maurisco, an exiled and banished man, the sonne of Ieffray de Maurisco, for some hainous offence laid to his charge, kept himselfe in the Isle of Lun∣dy, not farre from Bristall, preying, robbing and stealing, as a notorious Pirate; at length being apprehended, together with 17. of his confede∣racy, and by the Kings commandement adjudged to cruell death; he was drawne at London with his confederats, at horse tailes to the Gibbet, and there hanged and quartered: His father one of the mightiest men of
Ireland, by name Galfridus de Maurisco, hearing thereof, fled into Scotland, and scarce there could hee lye safe; who pinnig away with grief and sorrow, soone after ended a miserable life, with wished death; againe after in another place he writeth, Galfridus de Maurisco recke∣ned amongst the most Noble of Ireland, an exile and a banished man, died pitifully, yet not to be pitied; whom being banished Ireland, ex∣pulsed out of Scotland and fled out of England, France received for a begger, where hee ended an unfortunate life, after the most shamefull death of his sonne Willielmus de Maurisco. These things therefore I deliver more at large unto the hearers, that every man may wey with himselfe, what end is alloted unto treason, and especially being committed against the sacred person of a Prince: His father against Richard Earle and Marshall in Ireland, and his son William against the King, unadvisedly and unfortunatly adventured to practice mischiefe. Paris addeth the name of this William was very odious unto the King, for so much it was reported, that through the councell of Ief∣fray his father, he had conspired the death of the King, and that he had traitorously sent that varlet, which came in the night season, to Woodstock to slay the King, and last of all, that hee had killed at London in presence of the King; one Clemens, a Clerk, messenger of some Noble man of Ireland, that came to informe the King a∣gainst him. About this same time, florished a Learned man of Irish birth, one Cornelius Historicus, so called, because hee was an exquisit anti∣quary Bale: and Stanihurst have briefly written his life and his com∣mandations out of Hector Boetius, who was greatly furthered by this Cornelius, to the perfecting of the Scotish History, hee wrote as they say: Multarum rerum Cronicon. lib. 1. About this time, Viz. Anno 1230. there rose a doubt in Ireland, so that they sent to England to be therein resolved: the King, by his learned Councell answered as followeth. Henry by the grace of God, &c. King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy and Guian, &c. Trusty and welbeloved Gerald Fitz Maurice Iusticer of Ireland, greeting; VVhereas certien Knights of the parties of Ireland lately informed us; that when any land doth discend unto sisters, within our dominion of Ireland, the Iustices errant in those parties are in doubt, whether the younger sister ought to hold of the eldest sister, and doe homage unto her or not. And forasmuch as the said Knights have made instance, to bee certified how it had beene used before within our Realme of England in like case; at their instance we doe you wit, that such a Law and Custome is in England in this case, that if any holding of us in chief, happen to die, having daughters to his heires our ancestors, and we after the death of the father, have
alway had and received homage of all the daughters, and every of them in this case did hold of us in chiefe. And if they happned to be within age, we have alway had the ward and marriage of them, and if hee bee tennant to another Lord, the sisters being within age, the Lord shall have the ward and manage of them all, and the eldest onely shall doe ho∣mage for herselfe, and all her sisters, and when the other sisters come to full age, they shall doe their service to the Lord of the fee, by the hands of the eldest sister; yet shall not the eldest by this occasion, exact of her younger sisters homage, ward, or any other subjection; for when they be all sisters, and in manner, as one heire to one inheritance: if the eldest should have homage of the other sister, or demaund ward, then the inhe∣ritance should seeme to be divided so, that the eldest sister should seeme to be segnioresse and tennant of inheritance, simul & semel, that is to say, heire of her owne part, and segnioresse to her sisters, which could not stand well together in this case, for the eldest can demaund no more then her sisters; but the chiefe mease by reason of her auncienty. Moreover, if the eldest sister should take homage of the yonger, she should be as a seg∣nioresse to them all, and should have the ward of them and their heires, which should be none other, but but to cast the Lambe to the Wolfe to be devoured. And therefore wee command you that you cause the aforesaid cu∣stomes that bee used within our Realme of England, in this case to bee proclaimed throughout our dominions of Ireland, and to be straightly kept and observed, in testimony whereof, &c. I witnesse my selfe at Westminster, the ninth of February, the thirteeneth yeere of our Raigne. Anno 1233. or as some will have it, 1234. the 7. of Aprill, there appeared as it were foure Sunnes, besides the naturall Sunne, of a red colour, and a great Circle of Christall colour; from the sides whereof went out halfe Circles; in the divisions whereof, the foure Sunnes went forth. There followed that yeere great warre and cruell bloodshed, & general great disturbance throughout England, Wales, and Ireland, so write Matthew Paris and Stow. This troublesome yeere died Gualter Lacy Lord of Meath, leaving behind him two daughters, coheires to inherit his possession (to wit) Margret that was maried to the Lord Theobald Verdon and Mathilda married to Ieffray Genevile. Amids these troubles in the flourishing daies of Maurice Fitz Gerald, Hubert de Burgo, Ieffray de Morisco, and Gualter de Lacy, whose ends followed according: The Noble Earle Richard Maxfield Lord Maxfield, Earle Marshall of England, spoken of before, and being by them maligned, was traitorously cut off by sundry devilish draughts. Matthew Paris wrot the Story at large, laid downe their practise on both the sides of the seas, their forged letters; and secretly as it were by stealth, fixing thereto the Kings seale: Hee cal∣leth
them traitors, Iudasses; and Ieffery de Morisco he termeth Achi∣tophell that gave wicked counsell. Hubert had a lamentable end, Ieffery dyed in misery, Lacy was shortly cut off, and Maurice Fitz Girald was with dishonour removed from his Iusticeship. This Maurice of the King desired to bee reconciled to Gilbert Marshall his brother, whom he greatly feared, and offered in satisfaction to build with all speed, a noble Monastery, and to endow the same with large posses∣sions, and to furnish it with a reverent covent, to pray for the soule of Richard Marshall: at length with much adoe, and importunate in∣treaty of the King and Nobility of England, Gilbert Marshall granted him peace; but of Earle Richards end I have spoken somewhat be∣fore. About the yeere 1233. or 34. Hugh Mapleton, Bishop of Ossorie, whose Episcopall see was then at Achboo, in upper Ossorie, began the foundation of the Cathedrall Church, now standing in the Irish towne of Kilkenny, in the honour of God and Saint Canicus, (of whom the towne of Kilkenny hath the name) and is reckoned the first founder. Hee ordained three Canons for the service, hee gave them divers Churches and tithes for their maintenance, as in the foundation of those Chanons more at large doth appeare. He builded the Bishops Court of Aghor, adding thereto fish-ponds, fishings, and other necessaries. Such good men lived in those dayes. At the same time came the King of Connaught, exhibiting a grie∣vous complaint unto Henry the third (saith Mathew Paris) against Iohn de Burgo, the sonne, as I suppose, of Hubert de Burgo before spo∣ken of; that he had entred his country with forces, and wasted the same with fire and sword, that it would please his Majestie to doe him justice, and command such rash attempts to be bridled, alledging that he was his loyall subject, and paid for his kingdome, an annuall pension, mounting to the summe of 5000▪ marks, ever since King Iohn had subdued his kingdome, and that he would rid him of that base upstart, or new commer which sought unjustly to disherit him. The King tendred his reasonable requests, and commanded Maurice Fitz Girald then present, to plucke up by the roote, the fruitlesse Plant, the which Hubert Earle of Kent had sometime planted in those parts, while he was in Ruffe, that it might budde no more. Hee wrote also unto the Nobilitie of Ireland, that they should banish the said Iohn de Burgo, and peaceably establish the King in his kingdome, who with these princely favours, joyfully returned into his country. Anno 1235. (saith Cooper) the Irish men rebelled; so hee left it, and so I leave it too. Anno 1236. Mathew Paris doth write that in the North parts not farre from the Abbey of Rochor Rupie, and also in Ireland, and the parts there abouts more apparantly, strange and wonderfull sights were seene, which amazed the beholders: to wit, there appeared
comming forth of the earth, companies of armed men on horseback, with Speare, Shield, Sword, and banners displaid in sundry formes and shapes, riding in battaile array, and encountring together; and this sight appeared sundry dayes each after other; sometimes they seemed to joyne as it had beene in battaile, and fought sore; and some∣times they seemed to just and breake staves, as if it had beene at some triumphant justs of torny. The people of the country beheld them a farre off with great wonder, for the skirmish shewed it selfe so live∣ly, that now and then they might see them come with their empty horses, sore wounded and hurt, and likewise men mangled and blee∣ding; A pittifull fight to behold, and that which seemed more strange, and most to be mervailed at, after they vanished away, the prints of their feet appeared in the ground, and the grasse trodden in those pla∣ces where they had beene seene. Anno 1240. Petrus de Supino came from Pope Gregory into Ireland, with an authenticke papall mandate,Petrus de Supino & Petrus Ru∣beus, Pope Gregories a∣gents in Ire∣land and Scot∣land, were rifled of all they had by the Emperour. requiring under paine of Ex∣communication, and other censures ecclesiasticall the twentieth part part of the whole land, besides donatives and private gratuities to the maintenance of his warres against Fredericke the Emperour, where he extorted, saith Mathew Paris, a thousand and five hundred markes, and above, saith Florilegus; at which time also one Petrus Pubeus, in∣titled the Popes Familiar, and kinsman, and both bastards, saith Bale, filled in like sort his fardles in Scotland. These Nuntioes were so craf∣ty, that they needed no Brokers, they secretly understood by Posts and Cursitors, the state of the Court of Rome, which quailed them full sore, that the Pope was either gone, or panted for life; secretly by the conduct of the Monkes of Canterbury, they were conveyed to Dover, where they tooke shipping, and crossed the seas. The Em∣perour Fredericke, against whom this provision was made, having intelligence thereof, and secretly acquainted with the Popes state, wrote to the King of England to apprehend such prollers, wherein he also reproved his cowardize. The Emperour when he understood that the birds were flowne away, made search for the neast, yet over∣tooke them in Italy; where, to be short, hee imprisoned them, their kindred and favourers rifled them of their money, and sent them to Rome to sing for more money: he that will reade the story more at large, let him repaire to Mathew Paris. The same yeere, saith Mathew Paris, Andelmus borne in Cullen, a man highly commended for life and learning,Andelmus, Pri∣mate of Ar∣magh. was by the Bishop of Worcester, solemnly consecrated at Westminster, Archbishop of Ar∣magh, and Primate of Ireland, in the presence of the King, the Le∣gate,The Castle of Sligoe builded Girald Fitz Maurice Ri∣cardus de Burgo in Gascoigne. and many reverend Prelates. Anno 1242. Maurice Fitz Girald, Lord Iustice of Ireland, builded the Castle of Sligoe. Anno 1243. Clun and Dowlinge write, that Giraldus Fitz Mau∣rice,
Richardus de Burgo, and Hugh de Lacy, Earle of Vlster in Ire∣land, ended the way of all flesh, and was buried at Carechfergus. Ma∣thew Paris giveth Lacy great commendations, that he was a most renowned warriour, and a valiant Conquerour of a great part of Ire∣land. This Lacy left behinde him one daughter and heire, whom Walter de Burgo married, and in her right, became Earle of Vlster: of Richardus de Burgo, Mathew Paris writeth he had great possessions and lands in Ireland, by the conquest of his most Noble father. Anno 1245. Florilegus, Powell (out of Gittin Owen) and Holinshed, doe write how that the Welch men rebelled against the King, and his forces being foyled by David ap Llewelin Prince of Wales, hee sent into Ireland to Maurice for ayde, and was in winter time mightily distressed, the which I finde by Powell recorded and written by a Noble man out of the campe unto his friends. The King with his army lyeth at Gannocke, fortifying of that strong Castle, and we live in our Tents, thereby watching, fasting, praying, and freezing with cold; wee watch for feare of the Welch men, who are wont to invade and come upon us in the night time; we fast for want of meate, for the halfe penny loafe is worth five pence; we pray to God to send us home speedily; we starve for cold, wanting our winter garments, and having no more but a thinne lin∣nen cloath betweene us and the winde; there is an arme of the seas un∣der the Castle where we lye, whereto the tyde commeth, and many shippes come up to the haven, which bring victuals to the Campe, from Ireland and Chester. The King all this while expected the ar∣rivall of Maurice Fitz Girald, with his Irish forces, mused with him∣selfe, fretted with himselfe, the winde serving, and yet said nothing; at length the Irish sayles are discryd, a shore they came, and Maurice Fitz Girald, (together with Phelina, Oconor) Oconoghor, saith another in battaile array, present themselves before the King at Chepstow, say the Irish Chroniclers, but the British Chroniclers coppied out of the Abbies of Conwey and Stratflur, by Owen Gittine, deliver they landed at the Ile of Man or Anglesey, the which in mine opinion see∣meth to be most likely to be true. For David ap Llewelin was Prince of North-Wales, and there kept his forces, & Chepstow is in South-Wales; and besides, it is agreed upon of all sides, that the Irish lan∣ding, spoyled the Ile of Anglesey, laded themselves with spoyles, and going to their ships, were driven to runne and leave all behinde; but to be short, when all the forces joyned together, the Welch men were overthrowne; the King manned and victualled his Castles, re∣turned into England, gave the Irish men leave to returne, winking a while in policie at the tarriance and slow comming of Maurice Fitz Girald: when Maurice Fitz Girald, Lord Iustice arrived in Ireland, he found O Donell the Irish enemy, upon the death of Hugh Lacy, in Armes, invading and sore annoying the Kings subjects in Vlster, and
called unto him Cormake Mac Dermot Mac Dory, with great forces, and entred Tireconell, preyed, burned, and spoyled, and vanquished the enemy; there he slue Moyleslaghlon O Donell, called King of Key∣vayle, together with Gille Canvinelagh, Obugill, and Mac Surley, cal∣led King of Oyrisgall, with divers others, gentlemen of those parts: in like sort many English men were cast away in the river, whose pas∣sage O Donell stopped, and slue there William Butt, high Sheriffe of Connaught, together with a valiant young Gentleman his brother. When the Lord Iustice had thus atchieved his purpose, hee manned and victualled the Castle of Sligo, tooke pledges of O Neale to keepe the Kings peace, and left them in the said Castle, gave Cormake Der∣mot Mac Dory that came to his aide, the moytie of Connaught, and returned with a great prey. When this noble service was performed, the King disgorged him∣selfe, and what inwardly he had conceived, and for a while concei∣ved against the Lord Iustice,Iohn Fitz Ieffery Lord Iustice, Anno 1245. he then in writing delivered, and remo∣ved Maurice Fitz Girald out of his Iusticeship, and placed in his roome, Iohn Fitz Ieffery de Morisco, the which the Irish Chroniclers have suppressed, yet Florilegus and Holinshed doe write, Mauritium Hiberniae Iustitiariū eo quod ficte & tarde auxilium ab hibernia domi∣no Regi duxerat periclitanti a Iustitiaria Deposuit. This Maurice departed out of this world, Anno Dom. 1256. was buried saith Clyn in the habit of the Fryers Minors at Yough-halle, the which Morice had founded, of whom Mathew Paris saith thus; he was a valiant Knight, a very pleasant man, inferiour to none in Ire∣land, who sometime swayed the land when hee had the sword of Iu∣sticeship; this man lived with commendations all the dayes of his life, but peradventure falsly reported of, and stained in the end with the death of Richard, Earle Marshall. Anno 1247. after that Henry the third, and the Clergie of England and Ireland found themselves mightily grieved at the Popes exacti∣ons and intollerable extortions in England, Wales, and Ireland, and had signified the same in writing to the Court of Rome; whereupon saith Florilegus, the Court of Rome fretted and sorrowed, that their avarice was as well reproved, as restrained. Innocentius 4. devised in his conceit, a milder course to be held, that in stead of a greater summe, they should give him at that time out of those dominions, to supply his wants, but eleven thousand markes. Then saith Florilegus, Ma∣ster Iohannes Rusus was sent into Ireland, furnished with authority, diligently to collect the Popes money, as a Legate, yet not clad in scarlet, lest the Pope should offend the King of England, who hath this priviledge, that no Legate set foot on his land, unlesse hee be sent for, or licenced; but the said Iohn being a sophisticall Legate, vigi∣lantly plying the papall mandate, and his owne private gaine, extor∣ted out of Ireland, about sixe thousand markes; the which by the
conduite of the Clergie, was transported and conveied to Lon∣don, about the Feast of Saint Michaell the Archangell. The same yeere, saith Florilegus, there was a marveilouse and strange Earthquake over England; but saith Felcon, over Ireland:A great Earth∣quake. And all the West of the world, and there followed immediatly a continu∣all untemperature of the ayre, with a filthy skurfe; the Winter stor∣my cold and wet, which continued untill the 11. of Iuly, and put the Gardeners, Fruterers, and Husbandmen void of all hope, in so much they complained that Winter was turned to Summer, and Summer to Winter, and that they were like to lose all, and bee un∣done. Anno 1252. saith Dowling and Grace, and the English Anoni∣mus, but Clyn and Florilegus write, that it was 1254. King Henry gave to Prince Edward his sonne, Gascoigne, Ireland, Wales, Bristow, Stanford and Grantham, and sent him to Alphonsus King of Spaine, to take Ellionor his sister to wife, where hee was by the said King Knighted, and returned together with his wife into England, with great riches. Anno 1255. Alanus de la Zouch, was made Lord Iustice; so I finde in the Booke of Houth, after his departure out of Ireland, hee being a Lord Baron, and chiefe Iustice in England; Florilegus, Humfrey Loid and Stow, doe write the Story how hee came to his end; great strife rose in England, betweene certaine of the Nobility, about territories lands and titles, whereto each side made claime; the matters in controversie, by direction from the King were decided in Westminster Hall; the first Controversie was betweene Iohn Earle of Surrey and Warren, and Hugh de Lacy Earle of Lincolne, which went upon Lacy his side. The second was, betweene this Earle War∣ren and Allan de la Zouch, this Zouch being Chiefe Iustice asked Earle Warren, how he held his land, Earle Warran drew foorth his sword and said, by this mine Ancestors held the same, and by this I presently hold it, and with that ranne the Chiefe Iustice through in Westminster Hall, and in his flight wounded also his sonne; thence hee fled to his Castle at Risgate, whome Prince Edward the Kings eldest sonne pursued with an Army; to whom the Earle submitted himselfe, and afterwards with friends, and what with money paci∣fied all. Anno 1256. in the warres of Lewelin Prince of Wales, so I find in the records of Conway & Stratflur Copied by Gettine Owen.The Irish com∣ming to aid Ed. Earle of Che∣ster, were slaine and their ships suncke. Edward Earle of Chester, fell to outrage one while against the King, another while against the Welshmen; his Army was 1500. foot and 500. horse. Henry the third together with Richard Earle of Cornewall, and King of Almane wrote unto him gently, wishing him to returne to his Country and keepe the peace, and not to provoke the Welshmen to Armes; the which he refused to doe, but sent to the
Irishmen for succour and supplies. Prince Edward the Kings eldest sonne, understanding thereof, rigged a Navy, met with the Irish fleet, killed their men and sunck their ships, few onely remaining to returne, and to make report of this hard successe in Ireland; In a while after, the King raised warres against Lewellin Prince of Wales, and the Welshmen (saith Paris, Causa autem eorum etiam hostibus eorum justa videbatur,) and was brought to a narrow straight, so that he sent to Ireland, and to Gascoigne for succour; the Irishmen not forgetting their late overthrow, were loath to come (being of all sides driven to serve) in the end came, and joyned with their Kings forces, where no memorable act was performed, for God, saith Paris, defended the poore people that put their whole confidence in him. About this time, to wit, Anno 1256. Florished Iohannes De Sacro Bosco;The life of Ioannes de Sa∣cro Bosco. Bale out of Leland, will have him to be a Yorkeshire man, and terme him Iohn Holyfaxe, Stanihurst writeth he was borne in Ireland at Holy Wood, in Fingall, some 12. miles from Dublin, and there∣fore called Iohannes De Sacro Bosco, which carried great likly-hood with it, untill they are reconciled (which side prevaileth, I waigh not greatly) I thought good to insert him, for so much as his great lear∣ning graced him unto the posterity: In his springing yeeres hee suckt the sweet milk of good learning, in the famous Vniversity of Oxford; afterwards he went to Paris, where he professed the learned Sciences, with singular commendations, and there slumbreth in the dust of the earth, whose exequies and funerals were there with great lamentations solemnized: first, hee followed Aristotle, afterwards gave himselfe to the Mathematikes, and addicted himselfe so much thereto, that none of the posterity (as is thought) could follow him; hee wrote. De Spaera Mundi lib. 1. Tractatum de spaera, quatuor. De Algorismo lib. 1. Omnia quae a primeva rerum orig. De Anni Ratione lib. 1. Cmoputus scientiam considerans. Breviarium Iuris lib. 1. Verborum superficie penitus. Vpon his Tombe together with the Mathematicall Astrolabe, was insculped as followeth. The Epitaph of Iohannes de Sacro Bosco.M. Christi bis. C. quarto deno quater anno, De Sacro Bosco discrevit tempora ramus, Gratia cui nomen dederat divina Iohannes. Stepham Espee Lord Iustice of Ireland. The battell of Downe.Anno 1258. Stepham Espee, alias De longa spatha, that is Stepham with the long skeine or two handed sword, Earle of Salibury, as I sup∣pose, was made Lord Iustice of Ireland; this Stepham gave battell
unto Oneile, and the rebels of Vlster and Conaght, and slue of them together with Oneile (saith Clinne) in one day, three hundred fifty and two, and departed this life, saith Florilegus, 1260. Anno 1260. William Denne was made Lord Iustice, in whose time Greene Castle, Arx Viridis was destroyed,S. Willi. Denne Lord Iustice, Anno 1260. and the Carties plaied the Divells in Desmond, where they burned, spoiled, preyed, and slue many an innocent; they became so strong, and prevailed so mightily that for the space (so it is reported) of twelue yeeres the Desmonds durst not put plow in ground in his owne Country; at length through the operation of Satan, a bane of discord was throw∣en betweene the Carties and the Odriscoles: Odonovaies Mac Do∣noch, Mac Mahonna, Mac Swines, and the inhabittants of Muscrie, in so much that by their cruell dissention, they weakened themselves of all sides, that the Desmond in the end overcame and overtopped them all; but in the beginning of these garboils, I find that the Car∣ties slue of the Desmonds, Iohn Fitz Thomas founder of the Mona∣stery and Covent of Trally, together with Maurice his sonne; eight Barons 15. Knights, beside infinite others, at a place called Callan, where they were buried. Mine Authors are Iohn Clinne onely, and the Booke, of Houth. In the end of these tumults, dyed Sir William Denny Lord Iustice, Anno 1261. Richardus de Capella,Richardus de Chappella Lord Iustice of Ireland, Anno 1261. otherwise called Rochell (Clinne calleth him La Rochell de Capella) became Lord Iustice of Ireland. Anno 1262. There rose in Dublin a great stirre betweene the Prior and Covent of the blessed Trinity now called Christ-Church, and the Communalty of the City, about the tithe fish of the Liffy. Anno 1264. Walter Bourke, commonly called Walterus de Burgo (spoken of before) was made Earle of Vlster, hee had married the daughter and heire of Sir Hugh Delacy the younger, and in her right enjoyed the Earledome. The Booke of Houth layeth downe the descent, that this Wal∣ter by the said heire of Vlster had issue Walter, and hee had issue five daughters; 1. Ellen that married Robert le Bruse King of Scotland; 2. Elizabeth, that married the Earle of Gloster; 3. Iohan, that mar∣ried Thomas Earle of Kildare; 4. Katherine, that married the Earle of Louth; 5. Margaret, that married the Earle of Desmond; the 6. Ellinor, that married with the Lord Multon, notwithstanding these honourable matches and amity concluded in the outward sight of the world there rose deadly warres between the Giraldins and Burks, which wrought blood sheds, troubles by partaking throughout the Realme of Ireland; at the same time the fury of the Giraldins was so outragious, in so much that Morice Fitz Maurice the second, Earle of Desmond, opposed himselfe against the sword, and tooke at Trisledermote now called Castle Dermocke; Richard de Capella the
Lord Iustice, Theoball le Butler and Iohn or Millis de Cogan, and committed them to the prisons in Leix and Donamus; but the yeere following, Henry the third not pleased with these commoti∣ons and hurly burlies, by mature advice taken of his Councell, paci∣fied the variance betweene them; discharged Denny of his Iustice∣ship, and appointed David Barry Lord Iustice in his place. David Barry Lord Iustice, Anno 1207.Anno 1267. David Barry tooke, by the appointment of the King, the sword of Iusticeship and the command of Ireland, and quelled or tamed (saith the English Anonymos) the inso∣lent dealing of Morice Fitz Maurice, Cousin german to Gi∣rald. The same yeere, saith (Iohn Clinne) the Fryers Preachers, first of all settled themselves at Rosse in Wexford,The Fryers Preachers and Minors came to Ireland. and the Minors at Kilkennie, and two yeeres after at Clone∣mell. Anno 1268. Conochur Obrian was slaine by Dermot Mac Mo∣nard;Maurice Fitz Girald Earle of Desmond drowned. and the same yeere (saith Felcon and Clinne) Maurice Fitz Gerald Earle of Desmond, was drowned crossing the seas between England and Ireland, leaving behind him a sonne and heire, of the age of 3. yeeres and a halfe. Robert Vfford Lord Iustice, Anno 1268. The Castle of Roscommon. Ric. de Exester Lord Iustice, Anno 1269. Othobone the Popes Legat.The same yeere, Robert Vfford became Lord Iustice of Ireland, and began to build the Castle of Roscommon. Anno 1269. Richard de Excester was made Lord Iustice, who dyed the same yeere, together with his wife Margery de Say; the same yeere (saith Florilegus) Othobone the Popes Legat, held a Councell at Paules in London, where he called before him the Clergy of En∣gland, Wales, Ireland and Scotland, and left among them certaine constitutions, which were afterward, commended by Linwood, and are at this day in request, the which constitutions of Otho and Otho∣bon, were afterwards confirmed by the Archbishop of Canterbury in Ed. 1. raigne. Holinshead. Iames L. Audley Lord Iustice, Anno 1270. The Irish re∣bels.Anno 1270. The Lord Iames Audley was made Lord Iustice of Ireland, and dyed with the fall of a horse; in his time Florilegus and Holinshead note, there was great commotion in Ireland, the Irish tooke Armes against the English, burned, spoiled, destroied and slue as well the Magistrates as others. Clinne goeth more particularly to worke, and delivereth how that the King of Conaght by force of Armes, in the plaine field overthrew Walter Burke Earle of Vlster, who hardly escaped with life, yet dyed the yeere following, and slue a great number of Nobles, and Knights, that held with the Burk, and among others, by especiall name the Lord Richard Verdon, and the Lord Iohn Verdon, and that there ensued over all Ireland great famine and pestilence, as the sequell of warres. About this time, say our Antiquaries, the Bishop of Rome sent to Ireland, requiring the tithes of all spirituall promotions for 3. yeeres
to come to maintaine his warres against the King of Aragon, the which was greatly murmured at, and gainesaid, yet the Nuntio went not empty away. Anno 1272. the most renowned King Henry the third, having li∣ved 65. yeeres, and raigned 56. and 28: dayes, ended his dayes, and was buried at Westminster. Edward, the first of that name, sonne of King Henry the third, surnamed Long-shankes, of the age of 35. yeers, began his raigne, Anno 1272. Anno 1272. and the first of Edward the first his raigne,Maurice Fitz Maurice, Lord Iustice, Anno 1272. called Rochfallath. Maurice Fitz Maurice was made Lord Iustice, in whose time the Irish brake out into cruell rebellion, rased and destroyed the Castles of Aldleeke, Roscommon, Scheligath and Randon; this Maurice, (saith Clyn) not long after was betrayed by his owne followers in Ophali, taken and imprisoned. Anno 1273. the Lord Walter Genvill (who lately returned home from the Holy Land) was sent into Ireland,Walter Lord Genevill, Lord Iustice Anno 1273. and appointed Lord Iu∣stice: in his time (so write Dowlinge and Grace) the Scots and Red-shankes out of the high land crossed the seas, burned townes and vil∣lages, most cruelly killed man, woman and childe, tooke a great prey, and returned home afore the country could make preparation to pur∣sue them: but in a while after, to bee revenged of them, Vlster and Connaught mustred a great Armie under the leading of Richar∣dus de Burgo, and Sir Eustacele Poer knight, made after them, entred the Islands, and high land of Scotland, slue as many as they could finde, burned their Cabbans and Cottages, and such as dwelt in caves and rockes under ground (as the manner is to denne out Fox∣es) they fired and smothered to death, covering their entrances into the ground with great and huge stones, and so returned into Ire∣land. Anno 1276. what time Thomas Clare came into Ireland, and mar∣ried the daughter of Maurice Fitz Maurice. The Castle of Roscom∣mon was taken by the Irish, and a great overthrow given vnto the English men at Glynburry (Glandelory, saith Clyn) where William Fitz Roger, Prior of the Kings hospitallers, and many others, were taken prisoners, and a great number of others were slaine; at what time also Ralph Pepard, and Otholand gave O Neale a sore battaile. Anno 1277. Walter Lord Genuill was sent for into England,Robert Vfford Lord Iustice, Anno 1277. and Robert Vfford the second time tooke the office of Iusticeship; at this time Muridath or Murtagh, a notable rebell, was taken at the No∣raght, by Gualter de Fant, and executed: Thomas Clare likewise in
this rebellion, slue Obryan Roe, King of Thomond, and yet after this, the Irish drew such a draught, that they closed him up in Slew Ban∣ny, together with Maurice Fitz Maurice his father in law, and all their forces, untill they gave hostages to escape with their lives, upon condition to make satisfaction for the death of O brian and his fol∣lowers, and in the meane while to yeeld them up the Castle of Ros∣common, although the conditions seemed hard & prejudiciall to the Kings Maiesty, yet were they driven for safeguard of their lives to condiscend thereunto. In this rebellious season, to cleere himselfe, that in his owne person he came not to daunt the enemy, Robert Vf∣ford the Lord Iustice was sent for into England, who substituted in his roome, one Fryer Robert Fulborne, Bishop of Waterford, who when he had cleered himselfe, came and resigned his place of Iustice∣ship. Robert Vfford going into En∣gland, substitu∣ted Fulborne Bishop of Wa∣terford.Anno 1278. there rose civill warres, no better then rebellion, be∣tweene Mac Dermot de Moylargo, and Cathgur O Conoghor, King of Connaught, where there was great slaughter and bloud-shed on both sides, and the King of Connaught slaine. Raphaell Holinshed in his Irish collection thinketh that there were slaine at that time, above two thousand persons. The King of England hearing thereof, was migh∣tily displeased with the Lord Iustice, and sent for him into England, to yeeld reason why he would permit such shamefull enormities un∣der his governement. Robert Vfford substituted Robert Fulborne, (as before) satisfied the King that all was not true that hee was charged withall, and for further contentment, yeelded this reason, that in po∣licie he thought it expedient to winke at one knave cutting off ano∣ther, and that would save the Kings Coffers, and purchase peace to the land; whereat the King smiled, and bid him returne to Ireland. The groats, pence, halfe pence, and farthings were made.Anno 1279. (Stow is mine Author) King Edward commanded groats of foure pence a piece, pence, halfe pence, and farthings, to be coyned, and to be currant through England and Ireland, not decry∣ing the old; whereupon saith he, these verses were made: Edward did smite round penny, halfe penny, farthing, The crosse passes the bond, of all throughout the ring: The Kings side was his head, and his name written, The crosse side, what Citie it was made in, coyned and smitten. The poore man ne to Priest, the penny frayses nothing, Men give God aye the least, they feast him with a farthing: A thousand two hundred, fourescore yeeres and moe, On this money men wondred, when it first began to goe.
Anno 1280. the Citie of Waterford saith Clyn,Waterford burned. through some foule mischance was all set on fire; others report that some Merchant stran∣ger being wronged, as they thought, by the Citizens, brought bagges of powder out of their ships, and threw them in the night season, in at their sellers windowes, and coales of fire after them, and spoyled the City in that sort, that it was long after ere they could recover themselves. Anno 1281. Robert Fulborne Bishop of Waterford,Robert Fulborne Lord Iustice of Ireland. was by dire∣ction from the King, ordained Lord Iustice of Ireland. This yeere there was a great rebellion in Connaught, and in upper Ossory,Anno 1281. and in Archloe, which cost many mens lives, but the ringleaders were cut off. Adam Cusack slue William Barret and his brethren, which con∣tended about lands. In Connaught, Hogken Mac Gill Patricke was cut off; in Vppsory, Murtough Mac Muroch, with Art: his brother, lost their heads at Wickloe, another saith at Artchloe, so Clyn and Dow∣linge doe report. Anno 1283. (it is remembred by Clyn and others) that a great part of Dublin was burned. Campanile & Capitulum sanctae Trinitatis,Dublin burned saith mine Author, the belfrie or steeple and Chapter house of the blessed Trinity, with the Dormiture and Cloyster. Others write that certaine Scots to be revenged upon some Citizens for wronging of them, set Skinner-Row a fire, and by that meanes the fire ranne into Christ Church, but the citizens of Dublin (therein greatly to bee commended) before they went about to repaire their owne private houses, agreed together to make a collection for repayring the ruine of that antient Church. Anno 1284. flourished Ieffery,Galfridus de sancto Leodega∣rio. or (as Clyn writeth) Galfridus de sancto Leodegario, Bishop of Ossorie, the second founder of the Ca∣thedrall Church of Setus Canicus, and the first founder of the Col∣ledge of the Vicars of the same Church, who gave unto the Colledge and vickars of the same Church, for the maintenance of divine Ser∣vice, his Manse and lodging, with the edifices thereunto adjoyning, the rectory of Kilkesh, and revenue de manubrinnio, one marke ster∣ling, of the Abbot of Duiske, for the land of Scomberlowaie with other revenues. The said Ieffery by combate (the combatants I finde not recorded) anno 1284. recovered the Mannor of Sirekeran in Elly, now Ocarolls country. He builded part of the Mannors of Aghboo and Dorogh, he builded a great part of the Church of Saint Canicus, formerly begunne by Hugh Mapilton his Predecessor, hee exchanged the towne Scomkarthie, for the towne of Killamerry, with William Marshall the Earle of Penbroke, in his kinde of devotion he injoyned the collegiat Vicars of Kilkenny to celebrate the universary and ani∣versary
of the reverend fathers his predecessors, Walter Barkeley, Gal∣frid Turvill, Hugh Mapilton, and others, and his successors and Ca∣nons in the said Church of Ossory. He established other things for the good of the Burgesses of Crosse ..... in the Irish towne of Kil∣kenny, as in the foundation of the Burgesses there more at large doth appeare: he dyed Anno 1286. and lyeth buried before the Chappell of our Lady, in the Cathedrall Church. Thus farre the Collections of Doctor Hanmer: the Continuation following is taken out of the Chroni∣cles of Henry Marleburrough.
HENRY MARLEBVRROVGH'S CHRONICLE OF IRELAND. ANno 1285. the Lord Theobald Butler fled from Dublin, and died shortly after; and the Lord Theobald Verdon lost his men and horses, going towards Ophali, and the next morning, Girald Fitz Maurice was taken prisoner, and Iohn Sam∣forde was consecrated Archbishop of Dublin, and the Lord Ieffery Genuill fled, and Sir Gerard Doget, and Ralph Petit were slaine. Anno 1287. deceased Richard Decetir, Girald Fitz Maurice, Tho∣mas de Clare, Richard Taff, and Nicholas Telinge Knights. Anno 1288. In England a bushell of Wheate was at foure pence. And Fryer Stephen Fulburne Lord Iustice of Ireland dyed. And Iohn Samford Archbishop of Dublin was made Lord Iustice. And the Lord Richard Burgh, Earle of Vlster, besieged Theobald Verdon in the Castle of Aloan, and came to Trymm with a great power by the working of Walter Lacy. Anno 1290. Was the chase or discomfiture of Ophaly, and divers Englishmen were slaine. And Mac Coghlan slue Oolaghlin. And Wil∣liam Bourgh was discomfited at Delvin by Mac Coghlan. And Gilbert Earle of Glocester, married the daughter of King Iohn le Bayloll, King of Scotland. And Sir William Vescy was made Lord Iustice of Ire∣land: Anno 1294. Deceased Iohn de Samford, Archbishop of Dublin, and Iohn Fitz Thomas, and Iohn de la Mare tooke prisoners, Richard Bourgh Earle of Vlster, and William Bourgh in Meath. And the Ca∣stle of Kildare was taken, and by the English and Irish, the whole
countrie was wasted. And Calwagh burnt all the rolles and tallyes of that countie. And Richard was delivered out of the Castle of Leye for his two sonnes. And Iohn Fitz Thomas with a great armie, came into Meath. Anno 1295. William Dodinsell Lord Iustice of Ireland dyed, and the Lord Thomas Fitz Maurice was made Lord Iustice. Anno 1296. Fryer William de Hothum was consecrated Archbi∣shop of Dublin. Anno 1298. The Lord Thomas Fitz Maurice dyed, and an agree∣ment was made betwixt the Earle of Vlster, and the Lord Iohn Fitz Thomas: and Sir Iohn Wogan was made Lord Iustice of Ireland. Anno 1299. William, Archbishop of Dublin dyed: and Richard de Feringes was consecrated Archbishop of Dublin. Anno 1302. The King of England (Edward the first) went into Scotland, and there Sir Iohn Wogan Lord Iustice of Ireland, and the Lord Iohn Fitz Thomas with many others met with him. Anno 1305. King Edward made the inquisitions of Treylbaston. The same yeere Iordan Comin slue Conthir de Ophaly: and Calwagh his brother was slaine in the Court of Peirs de Birmingham at Car∣ricke: and Balimor was burnt: Anno 1306. Edward the second succeeded his father being dead, in the kingdome. In the beginning of his raigne, he called back from beyond the seas, Peirs de Gaveston, whose company in the presence of his father he abjured: and being wholly taken up with him, he neg∣lected Isabell his Queene, and his Nobles; for which cause the No∣bles being offended, they banished the said Peirs into Ireland, where also the Kings treasure that was sent over thither, was wantonly con∣sumed. Then Peirs was called backe againe, but in regard the Kings treasure was spent as aforesaid, the Nobles make an insurrection, and put away Peirs from the King. Anno 1308. And in the second of King Edward the second, Peirs de Gaveston, by the Lords of England, but contrary to the Kings minde, was banished into Ireland, about the nativitie of our Lady: but the next yeere hee was called backe againe, and the King met him at Chester. Anno 1309. The Lord Ieffery Genvill became a Fryer at Trym, of the order of the Preachers: and the Lord Peirs de Birmingham dyed. Anno 1311. Was the consecration of Iohn Leeke, Archbishop of Dublin: and Richard Bourgh Earle of Vlster, with a great armie went to Bourath in Thomound, and there he was taken prisoner by Sir Ro∣bert de Clare, and Iohn Fitz Walter, Lacy, and many others were slaine: and there dyed Sir Walter la aint, and Sir Eustace Power. And the next yeere, Maurice Fitz Thomas, and Thomas Fitz Iohn, married two daughters of the Earle of Vlster. And Saint Fingay
was translated; and William de Lowndres the first, and Iohn the son of Sir Richard Bourgh Knight deceased, and the Lord Edmund Butler made 30. Knights. Anno 1313. Died Iohn Leek, Archbishop of Dublin, and Theobald Verdon came over Lord Iustice of Ireland, and William de Montency and Richard Loundries died. Anno 1315. The Lord Edward Bruse brother of the King of Scots, entred the North part of Vlster with a great Army, upon Saint Augustines day, in the month of May; and afterward hee burned Dundalke, and a great part of Vrgile: and the Church of Athirde was burned by the Irish: And in the warre of Comeram in Vlster, Richard Earle of Vlster was put to flight: and Sir William Bourgh, and Sir Iohn Mandevill, and Sir Alan Fitz Warren were taken pri∣soners, and the Castle of Norburgh was taken. Moreover at Kenlis in Meath, the Lord Roger Mortimer in the warre together with the said Edward were put to flight, and many of the men men of the said Roger were slaine and taken prisoners, and he burnt the Towne: and after this he went as farre as Finnagh and the Skerries in Leinster; and there incountred him Edmund Butler Lord Iustice of Ireland, the Lord Iohn Fitz Thomas, afterward Earle of Kildare, and the Lord Arnold Power; and every one of them had a great ar∣my to war against him: and upon the sodaine there arose a dissention amongst them, and so they left the field; and this dissention hapned upon the 26. day of Ianuary: after this hee burnt the Castle of Leye, and afterward hee returned into Vlster, and besieged the Castle of Knockfergus, and slue Thomas Mandevill and Iohn his brother at Downe, comming out of England; and then returned into Scotland. Anno 1316. Edward Bruse before Easter, came into Ireland with the Earle of Murry and other armies, and besieged the Castle of Knockfergus; afterward they went to Castle Knock, and there tooke the Baron prisoner, and Edward Bruse lay there: and Richard Earle of Vlster lay in Saint Maries Abbey neere Dublin. Then the Major and Commonalty of the City of Dublin, tooke the Earle of Vlster prisoner, and put him in the Castle of Dublin and slew his men and spoiled the Abbey. Then the said Bruse went as farre as Lym∣merick after the Feast of Saint Matthew the Apostle, and staied there untill after Easter; and in the meane time Roger Mortimer the Kings Lievtenant, landed at Waterford with a great Army, and for feare of him, Edward Bruse made haste to goe into the parts of Vlster, and Iohn Fitz Thomas was created Earle of Kildare: also Oconthir of Conaght and many other of the Irish of Conaght and Meath were slaine, neere Athenry by the English there: also there was a great slaughter made by Edmond Butler, neere Testilldermot upon the I∣rish: and another slaughter by the same Edmund upon Omorthe at Balitcham.
Anno 1317. The said Lievtenant delivered the Earle of Vlster out of the Castle of Dublin, and after Whitsuntide, hee banished out of Meath Sir Walter and Sir Hugh de Lacy, and gave their lands un∣to his souldiers, and they together with Edward Bruse went back into Scotland: and Alexander Bignor was consecrated Archbishop of Dublin. Anno 1318. The Lord Roger Mortimer went againe into England, and Alexander Bignor was made Lord Iustice, and Edward Bruse and the said Walter and Hugh de Lacy with a great Army, landed at Dundalke upon Saint Calixtus the Popes day; and there the Lord Iohn Brimingham, Richard Tute and Miles Verdon, with one thou∣sand three hundred twenty foure men incountred them, and slew the said Edward Bruse, with eight thousand two hundred seventie foure of his men; and the said Iohn Birmingham did cary the head of the said Edward into England, and gave it to King Edward, and the King gave unto the said Iohn and his heires males, the Earle∣dome of Lowth, and the Barony of Athirdee to him and his heires; also Sir Richard de Clare, with foure Knights and many others, were slaine in Thomond. Anno 1319. The Lord Roger Mortimer came over a∣gaine Lord of Iustice of Ireland. And the Towne of Athessell and Plebs, were burned by the Lord Iohn Fitz Thomas, bro∣ther to the Lord Maurice Fitz Thomas. And the Bridge of Kilcolin was built by Maurice Ikis. Anno 1320. The Lord Iohn Fitz Iohn, Earle of Kildare, was made Lord Iustice. And the bridge of Leiglin was built by Mau∣rice Iakis. Anno 1321. There was a very great slaughter made of the Oconhurs at Balibagan, by the English of Leinster and Meath. And the said Earle of Lowth was made Lord Iu∣stice. Anno 1322. Died the Lord Richard Birmingham, Lord of Athenry, the Lord Edmund Butler, and the Lord Tho∣mas Persivall. Moreover the Lord Andrew Birmingham, and Sir Richard de la Londe, were slaine by Onolan. Anno 1323. Iohn Darcy came over Lord Iustice of Ireland. Anno 1325. Deceased Nicolas Fitz Simon Gonvill. Anno 1326. The Lord Richard Burgh Earle of Vlster died: Edward the third, sonne to Edward the second, after the Conquest, at the age of fifteene yeeres, in his fathers life time; upon Candlemas day was crowned King at Westminster. In the beginning of whose raigne there was great likelyhood of good successe to follow: For then also the Earth received fruitfulnesse, the Ayre temperature and, Sea calmenesse.
Anno 1327. Donald sonne to Art, Mac Morch, and Sir Henry Traharne were taken prisoners. Anno 1328. Deceased the Lord Thomas Fitz Iohn Earle of Kildare, and the Lord Arnold Power, and William Earle of Vl∣ster came into Ireland. Anno 1329. Iohn Brimingham Earle of Lowth, and Peter his brother with many other, were slaine on Whitsun, even at Balibragan by the men of the Country: Also the Lord Thomas But∣ler, and divers other Noble men were slaine by Macgohegan and o∣ther Irishmen, neere to Molingar. Anno 1330. There died Sir Richard Deicetir: Also the Earle of Vlster went with a great Army into Mounster upon Obren: Also the Prior of the Hospitall, then Lord Iustice, put the Lord Maurice Fitz Thomas Earle of Desmond, into the custody of the Marshall, out of the which hee freely escaped. And Sir Hugh de Lacy returned into Ireland, and obteined peace of the King. Anno 1331. The Earle of Vlster went into England, and great slaugher was made upon the Irish in O kenslie; also the Castle of Ar∣clow was taken by the Irish, and great slaughter made of the English ni the Cowlagh by Otothell, where Sir Philip Bryt and many o∣thers were slaine; and the Lord Anthony Lacy came over Lord Iu∣stice of Ireland, and great slaugter was made of the Irish at Thurles, by the men of the Country, and at Finnath in Meath; there were many of them slaine by the English: also the Castle of Fernis was taken and burned by the Irish: also Maurice Fitz Thomas Earle of Desmond was apprehended at Limerick by the Lord Iustice, upon the day of the Assumption, and sent unto the Castle of Dublin. Moreover, the Lord Iustice tooke Sir William Birmingham and Walter his sonne at Clomell by a wile, whilest hee was sick in his bed, and sent them likewise unto the Castle of Dublin on the 19. day of Aprill. Anno 1332. Sir William Birmingham was hanged at Dublin, but Walter his sonne was delivered, by reason hee was within orders. Also the Castle of Clonmore was taken by the English, and the Ca∣stle of Bonrath was destroyed by the Irish of Thomond: also Henry Mandevill was sent prisoner to Dublin; likewise Walter Burgh with two of his brethren were taken in Conaght, by the Earle of Vlster, and sent to the Castle of Norburgh: also the said Lord Iustice was deposed by the King, and went into England with his wife and children; and Iohn Darcy was made Lord Iustice, and great slaughter was made upon Bren Obren and Mac Carthy in Munster, by the En∣glish of that Country. Anno 1333. The Earle of Desmond by the Parliament held at Dublin, was sent over into England unto the King; and VVilliam
Earle of Vlster, in going toward Knock fergus, upon the seventh day of Iune was treacherously slaine, neere to the foords in Vlster by his owne people: but his wife with his daughter and heire, escaped in∣to England; which daughter was married unto the Lord Lionell, the Kings sonne, and afterward died at Dublin; and had a daughter and heire, which was afterward married unto Roger Mortimer, Earle of March, and Lord of Trim: And to revenge the death of the said Earle, the Lord Iustice of Ireland with a great Army, went into Vl∣ster. But before that hee came thither, the men of that Country had done the revenge: and the Lord Iustice with his Army, went into Scotland to the King of England; because at that time hee was there in warre; and hee left the Lord Thomas Burgh his Lievtenant in Ireland: also on Saint Margarets Eve, great slaughter was made in Scotland by the Irish; and so what by the King in one part, and the Lord Iustice in another, Scotland was Conquered, and Edward Balioll was established King of Scotland; and Iohn Darcy came back Lord Iustice of Ireland, and delivered VValter Birmingham out of the Castle of Dublin. Anno 1336. On Saint Laurence day, the Irish of Conaght were discomfited and put to flight by the English of the Coun∣try there, and there were slaine tenne thousand and one En∣glishman. Anno 1342. And in the sixteenth of King Edward the 3. Pope Benedict deceased; Clement the sixth succeeded, a man truly of great learning, but exceeding prodigall, so that hee would bestow upon his Cardinals Church livings in England when they were vacant, and would goe about to impose new titles for them. For which cause the King of England about the yeere 1344. disannulled the provisi∣ons so made by the Pope, interdicting upon paine of imprisonment, and death, that none should bring any of them. Anno 1348. There was great mortality in all places, especially in and about the Court of Rome, Avinion, and about the sea coastes of England and Ireland. Anno 1349. Deceased Alexander Bignor, upon the foureteenth day of Iuly, and the same yeere was Iohn de Saint Paul consecrated Archbishop of Dublin. Anno 1355. Died Maurice Fitz Thomas, Earle of Desmond, L. Iustice of Ireland. Anno 1356. Deceased the Lord Thomas de Rokesbie, L. Iustice of Ireland. Anno 1357. Began great variance betwixt Master Richard Fitz Ralphe Primat of Ardmagh, and the foure Orders of begging Fryers. Anno 1360. Deceaded Richard Archbishop of Ardmagh, upon the seventeenth day of the Kalends of December in the Popes Court,
and Richard Kilminton dyed in England, therefore the controversie ceased betwixt the Clergie and the orders of begging Fryers. Anno 1361: and in the thirty fourth yeere of K. Edward the third, about Easter, began a great mortalitie of men, consuming many men, but few women, in England and Ireland. Also the same yeere, the Lord Lionell, Sonne to King Edward the third, Duke of Clarence, came over the Kings lievetenant into Ireland. Anno 1362. deceased Iohn de Saint Paule, Archbishop of Dublin, on the fift day before the Ides of September. Anno 1363. Thomas Minot was consecrated Archbishop of Dublin. Anno 1369. the Lord William Windsor came over, the Kings Lievetenant in Ireland. Anno 1370. there was a third great Pestilence in Ireland. And the Lord Gerald Fitz Maurice, Earle of Desmond, and the Lord Iohn Fitz Richard, and the Lord Iohn Fitz Iohn, and many other Noble men, were taken prisoners, and many others were slaine by Obren and Maccoinnard of Thomond, in the moneth of Iuly. Anno 1372 Sir Robert Asheton came over Lord Iustice of Ire∣land. Anno 1373. there was great warre betwixt the English of Meth, and Offerolle; in which warre, many upon both sides were slaine, Anno 1375. Thomas, Archbishop of Dublin departed this life, and the same yeere was Richard de Wikeford consecrated Archbishop there. Anno 1381, Edmund Mortimer the Kings Lievetenant in Ireland, Earle of March and Vlster, dyet at Coke. Anno 1383. the fourth great Pestilence was in Ireland. Anno 1385. Dublin Bridge fell. Anno 1387. about Martilmas, the Peeres of England rose against those that were of the side of King Richard the second: but Robert Veer, Duke of Ireland, came over to Chester, and got together ma∣ny men, and put them in array to march backe toward the King: whom the said Peeres met at Rotcotebridge, and slue Thomas Molleners, and spoyled the rest: neverthelesse, the Duke of Ire∣land escaped. But in the same yeere on the morrow after Candle∣mas day, a Parliament beganne at London: in which were adjudg∣ed the Archbishop of Yorke, the Duke of Ireland, the Earle of Suf∣folke, &c. Anno 1388. foure Lord Iustices of England were banished in∣to Ireland, by a decree of the Parliament: and it was not lawfull for them either to make lawes, or to give counsell, upon paine of the sen∣tence of death. Anno 1390. Robert de Wikeford Archbishop of Dublin, departed
this life, and the same yeere was Robert Waldebie translated unto the Archbishopricke of Dublin, being an Augustine Fryer. Anno 1394. and in the seaventeenth yeere of King Richard the se∣cond, died Anne, Queene of England: and the same yeere about Mi∣chaelmas, the King crossed the seas over into Ireland, and landed at Waterford the second day of the moneth of October, and went back about Shrovetide. Anno 1397. Fryer Richard de Northalis, of the order of the Carme∣lites, was translated to the Archbishopricke of Dublin, and died the same yeere. Also the same yeere, Thomas de Craulie, was consecrated Archbishop of Dublin. And Sir Thomas Burgh, and Sir Walter Bir∣ningham slue sixe hundred Irish men with their Captaine Macdowne. Moreover, Edmund Earle of March, Lord lievetenant of Ireland, with the aide of the Earle of Ormond, wasted Obren's country, and at the winning of his chiefe house, hee made seaven Knights, to wit, Sir Christopher Preston, Sir Iohn Bedlow, Sir Edmund Loundres, Sir Iohn Loundres, Sir William Nugent, Walter de la Hide, and Robert Cadell. Anno 1398. and in the two and twentieth of King Richard the se∣cond, on Ascention day, the Tothillis slue forty English men. A∣mong whom these were accounted as principall, Iohn Fitz Williams, Thomas Talbot, and Thomas Comyn. The same yeere upon Saint Margarets day, Edmund, Earle of March, the Kings lievetenant, was slaine, with divers other by Obren, and other Irishmen of Leinster, at Kenlis in Leinster. Then was Roger Greye elected Lord Iustice of Ireland. The same yeere on the feast day of Saint Marke, the Pope and Confessor came to Dublin, the Noble Duke of Surrey, the Kings lievetenant in Ireland, and with him came Thomas Crauly, Archbi∣shop of Dublin. Anno 1399. and of King Richard the three and twentieth, on Sun∣day being the morrow after Saint Petronilla the Virgins day, the il∣lustrious King Richard landed at Waterford with two hundred shippes: and the Friday after, at Ford in Kenlis, in the Countie of Kildare, there were slaine, two hundred Irish men by Ienicho and other English men, and the morrow after, the Citizens of Dublin brake into Obrens country, slue three and thirty of the Irish, and tooke fourescore men, women, and children. The same yeere King Richard came to Dublin upon the fourth Kalends of Iuly, where hee was advertized of the comming of Henry, Duke of Lancaster into England; whereupon he also speedily went over into England: and a little while after, the same King was taken prisoner by the said Hen∣ry, and brought to London, and there a Parliament was holden the morrow after Michaelmas day, in which King Richard was deposed from his kingdome, and the said Henry, Duke of Lancaster, was crowned King of England, on the feast day of Saint Edward the Confessor.
Anno 1400. and in the first yeere of the raigne of King Henry the fourth, at Whitsontide, the Constable of Dublin Castle, and divers others at Stranford in Vlster, fought at Sea with the Scots, where many Englishmen were slaine and drowned. The same yeere on the feast of the Assumption of the blessed Virgin Mary, King Henry, with a great army, entred Scotland, and there he was advertized that Owen Glendor, with the Welsh men, had taken armes against him: for which cause he hastened his iourney into Wales. Anno 1401. in the second yeere of King Henry the fourth, Sir Iohn Stanley the kings Lievetenant, in the moneth of May, went over into England, leaving in his roome Sir William Stanley. The same yeere on Bartholomew Eeven, arrived in Ireland, Stephen Scroope, Lievete∣nant unto the Lord Thomas of Lancaster, the kings Lievetenant of Ireland. The same yeere on Saint Brices day, the Lord Thomas of Lancaster, the kings Sonne, and Lord Lievetenant of Ireland, arri∣ved at Dublin. Anno 1402. on the fift Ides of Iuly, was the dedication of the Church of the Fryers Preachers in Dublin, by the Archbishop of Dublin. And the same day the Maior of Dublin, namely, Iohn Drake, with the citizens and townesmen, neere to Bre, slue of the Irish, foure hundred ninety three, being all men of warre. The same yeere in September a Parliament was held at Dublin; during the which, in Vrgile, Sir Bartholomew Verdon, knight, Iames White, Stephen Gernond, and their complies, slue Iohn Dowdall Sheriffe of Lowth. Anno 1403. in the fourth yeere of king Henry, in the moneth of May, Sir Walter Betterley, Steward of Vlster, a right valiant knight, was slaine, and to the number of thirty other with him. The same yeere on Saint Madlins Eeven, neere unto Shrewesbury, a battell was fought betweene king Henry, and Henry Percy, and Tho∣mas Percy then Earle of Worcester; which Percyes were slaine, and on both sides there were sixe thousand and more slaine in the bat∣taile. The same yeere about Martlemas, the Lord Thomas of Lan∣caster, the kings Sonne, went over into England, leaving Stephen Scroope his Deputy there: who also in the beginning of Lent, say∣led over into England, and then the Lords of the land chose the Earle of Ormond to be Lord Iustice of Ireland. Anno 1404. in the fift yeere of king Henry, Iohn Colton, Arch∣bishop of Armagh, departed this life upon the fift of May, unto whom Nicholas Flemming succeeded. The same yeere on the day of Saint Vitall the Martyr, the Parliament began at Dublin, before the Earle of Ormond, then Lord Iustice of Ireland, where the Sta∣tutes of Kilkenny and Dublin were confirmed, and likewise the Char∣ter of Ireland. The same yeere Patricke Savage was treacherously slaine in Vlster, by Mac Kilmori, and his brother Richard was given
for a pledge, who was murthered in the prison, after hee had paid two thousand markes. The same yeere upon Martilmas day, decea∣sed Nicholas Houth, Lord of Houth, a man of singular honesty. Anno 1405. in the sixt yeere of King Henry, in the moneth of May, three Scottish Barkes were taken, two at Greenecastle, and one at Dalkay, with Captaine Thomas Macgolagh. The same yeere the Merchants of Droghedah entred Scotland, and tooke pledges and preyes. The same yeere on the Eeven of the feast day of the sea∣ven brethren, Oghgard was burnt by the Irish. The same yeere in the moneth of Iune, Stephen Scroope crossed the seas over into Eng∣land, leaving the Earle of Ormond, Lord Iustice of Ireland. The same yeere in the moneth of Iune, they of Dublin entred Scotland at Saint Ninian, and valiantly behaved themselves: and afterward they entred Wales, and there did much hurt to the Welch men, and brought away the shrine of Saint Cubius, and placed it in the Church of the holy Trinitie in Dublin. The same yeere on the Eeven of the feast of the blessed Virgin, Iames Butler, Earle of Ormond, dyed at Raligauran, (whose death was much lamented) whilest hee was Lord Iustice of Ireland, unto whom succeeded Girald, Earle of Kil∣dare. Anno 1406. in the seaventh yeere of King Henry, on Corpus Chri∣sti day, the citizens of Dublin, with the country people about them, manfully vanquished the Irish enemies, and slue divers of them, and tooke two Ensignes, bringing with them to Dublin, the heads of those whom they had slaine. The same yeere the Prior of Conall, in the Plaine of Kildare, fought valiantly, and vanquished two hundred of the Irish that were well armed, slaying some of them, and cha∣sing others; and the Pryor had not with him, but twenty English men: and thus God assisteth those that put their trust in him. The same yeere after Michaelmas, came into Ireland, Scroope, Deputie Iu∣stice to the Lord Thomas of Lancaster, the Kings Sonne, Lord Lieve∣tenant of Ireland. The same yeere dyed Innocent the seaventh, to whom succeeded Gregorie in the Popedome. The same yeere a Par∣liament was holden at Dublin, on the feast of Saint Hillary, which in Lent after was ended at Trym, and Meiler Birmingham slue Cathole O Conghir, in the end of Frebruary; and there dyed Sir Ieffery Vaulx, a Noble Knight in the Countie of Carlogh. Anno 1407. a certaine most false fellow, an Irish man, named Mac Adam Mac Gilmori, that had caused forty Churches to be destroyed, who was never baptized, and therefore hee was called Corbi; tooke prisoner Patricke Savage, and received for his ransome, two thou∣sand markes, and afterwards slue him, together with his Brother Ri∣chard. The same yeere, in the feast of the exaltation of the holy Crosse, Stephen Scroope, Deputy to the Lord Thomas of Lancaster, the Kings
sonne, Lord Lievtenant of Ireland, with the Earles of Ormond and Desmond, and the Prior of Kilmainan and divers other Captaines, and men of warre of Meath, set from Dublin, and invaded the land of Mac Murch, where the Irish had the better part of the field for the former part of the day, but afterwards they were valiantly rescued by the said Captaines, so that Onolad with his sonne and divers others, were taken prisoners. But then and there being advertised that the Burkens and Okeroll, in the County of Kilkenny, had for the space of two dayes together done much mischiefe, they rode with all speed unto the Towne of Callan, and there encountring with the adversa∣saries, manfully put them to flight, slue Okeroll and eight hundred o∣thers; and it was averred by many, that the Sunne stoodstill for a space that day, till the Englishmen had ridden 6. miles, which was much to be wondred at. The same yeere, Stephen Scrope went over into England, and Iames Butler Earle of Ormond, was elected by the Country L. I. of Ireland. The same yeere, in England neere unto Yorke, was slaine Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolf, and the Bi∣shop of Bangor, were taken prisoners. Anno 1408. The said Lord Iustice held a Parliament at Du∣blin, in which the Statutes of Kilkenny and Dublin were established, and the Charter granted under the grear Seale of England against Purveiors. The same yeere, the morrow after Lammas day, the Lord Tho∣mas of Lancaster the Kings sonne, Lord Lievtenant of Ireland, lan∣ded at Carlingford, and in the weeke following, he came unto Du∣blin and arrested the Earle of Kildare, comming to him with three of his familie; hee lost all his goods, being spoiled and rifled by the Lord Lievtenant his servants, and himselfe kept still in the Castle of Dublin, till he had paid three hundred markes fine. The same yeere on the day of Saint Marcell the Martyr, the L. Stephen Scrope died at Tristledermot. The same yeere, the said L. Thomas of Lancaster, at Kilmainan was wounded, and hardly escaped death; and after caused summons to be given by Proclamation, that all such as ought by their tenures to serve the King, should assemble at Rosse: and after the Feast of Saint Hillary, he held a Parliament at Kilkenny, for a tallage to be granted; and after the 13. of March he went over into England, leaving the Prior of Kilmainan his Deputy in Ireland. This yeere, Hugh Mac Gilmore was slaine in Cragfergus within the Church of the Fryers Minors, which Church hee had before destroyed, and broken downe the Glasse-windowes, to have the Iron barres, through which his enemies the Savages entred upon him.
Anno 1409. Of King Henry the fourth in Iune, Ianico de Artois, with the Englishmen slue fourescore of the Irish in Vlster. The same yeere, on the day of Saint Iohn and Paul, Alexander the fifth of the Order of Fryers Minors was consecrated Pope, and Pope Gregory and Antipope Clemens were condēned for heretickes: and by these meanes unity was made in the Church. The same yeere a heretick or Lollard of London was burned, because he did not beleeve in the sacrament of the altar. Anno 1410. Pope Alexander died on the day of the Apo∣stles Philippe and Iacob, at Bononia; to whom succeeded Iohn the XXIII. Anno 1411. On Thursday before Septuagesima, marriage was celebrated betwixt William Preston and the daughter of Edward Paris; and on Saint Valentines even and day, marriages were cele∣brated between Iohn Wogan and the daughter of Christopher Preston and Walter de la Hide, and the second daughter of the same Christo∣pher, with a great deale of charges. Anno 1412. About the feast of Tiburtius and Valerianus, Ocon∣third did much mischiefe in Meath, and tooke a hundred and three score Englishmen. The same yeere Odoles a Knight and Thomas Fitz Maurice She∣rife of Limerick slue each other. The same yeere, on the nineth Kalends of Iune, there died Ro∣bert Mountaine Bishop of Meath, to whom succeeded Edward Dandisey sometimes Archdeacon of Cornward. The same yeere in Harvest, the Lord Thomas of Lancester Duke of Clarence, went over into France, and with him went the Duke of Yorke, the Earle of Ormond and Green-Cornwall with many others. The same yeere, on Saint Cutberts day, King Henry the fourth departed this life. To whom succeeded Henry the fifth his eldest sonne. Anno 1413. On the fifth Ides of Aprill, namely, the first Sunday of the Passion of our Lord, A. being the Dominicall letter, Henry the fifth, was crowned King of England at Westmin∣ster. The same yeere, on the first of October, there landed in Ireland at Clontarf, Iohn Stanley the Kings Lievtenant in Ireland; he departed this life the 18. of Ianuary. The same yeere, after the death of Iohn Stanly Lievtenant, Thomas Crawly Archbishop of Dublin, was chosen Lord Iustice of Ireland, on the 11. Kalends of February; the morrow after Saint Mathias day, a Parliament began at Dublin, and continued for the space of 15. daies. In which time the Irish burned all that stood in their way,
as their usuall custome was in times of other Parliaments: whereup∣pon a tallage was demaunded but not granted. Anno 1414. The English slue of the Irish of the Omordris and Odemsis, neer to Kilka, Thomas Crawly Archbishop of Dublin, then Lord Iustice of Ireland, in Tristledermot, praying in Procession with his Clergy, and his men, with the helpe of those of the Country, slue one hundred of the Irish enemies. In the feast of Saint Gordian and Epimachus, the English of Meath were discomfited, and there Tho∣mas Manrevard Baron of Skrine was slaine, and Christopher Flem∣nig and Iohn Dardis taken prisoners, and many others were slaine by Oconthir and the Irish. On Saint Martins Eve, Sir Iohn Tal∣bot, Lord Furnivall, the Kings Lievtenant in Ireland landed at Dalkey. Anno 1415: In the moneth of November a right noble man that walled the suburbs of Kilkenny departed this life; and after Hallon∣ide Fryer Patricke Baret Bishop of Fernes a Canon of Kenlis dyed, and was buried there. Anno 1416. On the feast day of Saint Gervasius and Prothasius the Lord Furnivall Lord Iustice of Ireland, had a sonne borne at Fin∣glasse; about this time Stephen Flemming Archbishop of Armagh, a venerable man died, after whom succeeded Iohn Suaing: And the same time dyed the Lord and Fryer Adam Leins, of the Order of the Preaching Fryers, Bishop of Ardmagh. On the day of Saint Laurence the Martyr, the Lord Furnivals sonne Thomas Talbot, that was borne at Finglasse departed this life, and was buried in the Quire of the Fryers Preachers Church in Dublin. About the same time the Irish fell upon the Englishmen and slue many of them, among whom Thomas Balimore of Baliquelan was one. The Parliament which the last yeere had beene called and holden at Dublin; was this yeere removed to Trim, and there began the 11. of May, where it continu∣ed for the space of 11. dayes, in the which was granted unto the L.L. a subsidy of foure hundred markes. Anno 1417. Vpon May Eve, Thomas Granly Archbishop of Dublin, went over into England, and deceased at Faringdon, but his body was buried in the New Colledge at Oxford. This man is great∣ly praised for his liberality, he was a good almes-man, a great Clerk, a Doctor of Divinity, an excellent Preacher, a great builder, beautifull, courteous, of a sanguine complexion, and of a tall stature, in somuch as in his time it might be said unto him; Thou art fairer then the sons of men, grace and eloquence proceeded from thy lips: He was 80. yeeres of age when he died, and had governed the Church of Dublin almost 20. yeeres in great quiet. Anno 1418. The Annunciation of our Lady was in Easter weeke, and shortly after, the Lord Deputy spoiled the tenants of Henry Crus and Henry Bethat; also at Slane upon the feast day of S.
Iohn and S. Paul, the Earle of Kildare, Sir Christopher Preston, and Sir Iohn Bedlow were arrested and committed to ward, within the Castle of Trim, because they sought to commune with the Prior of Kilmaynan. Vpon the 29. of Iune, Mathew Husseil Baron of Gal∣trim deceased, and was buried in the Covent of the Fryers Preachers of Trim. Anno 1419. upon the eleventh of May, dayed Edmund Brel sometime Major of Dublin, and was buried at the Fryers Preachers of the same City. A Royall Councell was holden at the Naas, where were granted unto the Lord Lievtenant 300. markes. At the same time died Sir Iohn Loundres Knight. The same yeere upon Cene thursday, Othoill tooke fowre hun∣dred Cowes belonging unto Balimore, breaking the peace, contrary to his oath: The fourth Ides of May, Mac Morthe, chiefe Captaine of his Nation, and of all the Irish in Leinster, was taken prisoner. And the same day, was Sir Hugh Cokesey made Knight. The last of May, the Lord Lievtenant and the Archbishop of Dublin, with the Major, rased the Castle of Kenini. The morrow after the feast of Processus and Martinianus, the Lord William de Burgh and o∣ther Englishmen, slue five hundred of the Irish, and tooke Okelly: On the feast day of Mary Magdalen, the Lord Lievtenant Iohn Talbot went over into England; leaving his Deputy there the Archbishop of Dublin, carying along with him the curses of many, because hee being runne much in debt for victuall and divers other things, would pay little or nothing at all. About Saint Lau∣rence day, divers dyed in Normandy, as Fryer Thomas Butler, that was Prior of Kilmainan, and many others. Whom Fryer Iohn Fitz Henry succeeded in the Priory. The Archbishop of Dublin, being Lord Deputy, made an assault upon Scohies, and slue thirtie of the Irish, neere unto Rodiston. Also the thirteenth of February, Iohn Fitz Henry, Prior of Kilmainan departed this life; and William Fitz Thomas was chosen to suc∣ceed in his place, & was confirmed the morrow after Saint Velentines day. Also the morrow after the Lord Iohn Talbot Lord Furnivall delivered up his place into the hands of the Lord Richard Talbot Archbishop of Dublin, who was afterward chosen to be Lord Iustice of Ireland. Anno 1420. about the fourth des of Aprill, Iames Butler, Earle of Ormond, Lord Lievetenant of Ireland, landed at Waterford, and shortly after he caused a combat to be fought betwixt two of his cou∣sins: of whom one was slaine in the place, and the other was carried away sore wounded unto Kilkenny. On Saint Georges day, the same Lord Lievetenant held a Councell at Dublin, and there summoned a Parliament, and after the midst thereof, he made great preyes upon O Rely Mac Mahon, Mac Gynoys.
And the seventh of Iune, the Parliament began at Dublin, and there were granted to the Lord Lievetenant, seaven hundred markes. And that Parliament continued for sixteene dayes, and was adjourned a∣gaine to Dublin untill Munday after Saint Andrewes day. And in the said Parliament were reckoned up the debts of the Lord Iohn Talbot, late Lord Lievetenant, which amounted to a great summe. Also on the morrow after Michaelmas day, Michael Bodley departed this life. Vpon Saint Francis Eeve, dyed Fryer Nicholas Talbot, Abbot of the Monastery of Saint Thomas the Martyr at Dublin, whom Fryer Iohn Whiting succeeded. The morrow after the feast day of the Apostles Simon and Iude, the Castle of Colmolin was taken by Thomas Fitz Girald. And on Saint Katherines Eeven, Buttler, Sonne and heire un∣to the Earle of Ormond, was borne: and the Munday after Saint An∣drewes day, the Parliament was begun at Dublin, and continued for thirteene dayes; and there were granted unto the Lord Lievetenant, three hundred markes, and then againe the Parliament was adjour∣ned untill Munday after Saint Ambrose day. Then rumours were spread abroad, that the Lord Thomas Fitz Iohn, Earle of Desmond, was departed this life at Paris, upon Saint Laurence day, and that he was buried in the Covent of the Fryers Preachers there, the King of England being there present. After whom succeeded his Vncle Iames Fitz Girald, whom he had three severall times renounced, alledging that he was an unthrift, and had wasted his Patrimony both in Ire∣land and England, and that hee gave or would give lands unto the Monastery of Saint Iames of Keynisham. Anno 1421. Our Lady day fell out to be upon Munday in Ea∣ster weeke. Also the Parliament began the third time at Dublin, the Munday after Saint Ambroses day; and there it was ordained that agents should be sent over unto the King for reformation of matters touching the state of the land; namely, the Archbishop of Armagh, and Sir Christopher Preston, Knight. At the same time Richard Ottdi∣an, Bishop of Casshell, was accused of Iohn Gese, Bishop of Lismore and Waterford, upon thirty articles: among other, one was, that he made very much of the Irish, and that he loved none of the English nation, and that he bestowed no Benefice upon any English man, and that he counselled other Bishops not to give the least Benefice to any of them: that he counterfeited the Kings Seale and letters Patents: that he went about to make himselfe King of Munster: and that hee had taken a Ring from the image of Saint Patricke, (which the Earle of Desmond had offered) and bestowed it upon his Concubine And he exhibited many other enormious matters against him in writing, by whom the Lords and Commons were troubled. Also in the same Parliament, there arose a contention betwixt Adam Payn, Bishop of Clone, because the said Adam would have united unto his See, the Church of another Prelate, and the other would not give way unto
it; and so they were dismissed unto the Court of Rome, & the Parlia∣ment continued eighteene dayes. Then newes were stirring, that the Lord Thomas of Lancaster, Duke of Clarence, was slaine in France, and many other with him. Vpon the seventh of May there was slaughter made upon the Earle of Ormonds, the Lord Lievetenants men, by Omordris, neere unto the Monastery of Leys, and there were seaven and twenty English men slaine: the chiefe whereof were Purcell and Grant, tenne Noble men were taken prisoners, and two hundred fled unto the said Abbey, and so saved themselves. About the Ides of May, dyed Sir Iohn Bedloe, knight, and Ieffery Galon, sometime Maior of Dublin, who was buried in the house of the Fry∣ers Preachers of the same City. About the same time, Mac Mahon an Irish Lord, did much hurt in Vrgile, by wasting and burning all be∣fore him. Vpon the seaventh of Iune, the Lord Lievetenant entred into the Country, about Leys, upon Omordris, leading a very great army, and for the space of foure dayes together, slaying the people, till the Irish were glad to sue for peace. On the feast of Saint Michael the Arch-angell, Thomas Stanley, with all the Knights and Esquires of Meath and Irel, tooke Neyle O Donnell prisoner, and slue the rest, in the fourteenth yeere of the raigne of King Henry the sixt. Here endeth the Chronicle of Henry Marleburrough. FINIS.
A VIEW OF THE STATE OF IRELAND, Written dialogue-wise betweene Eudoxus and Irenaeus, By EDMUND SPENSER Esq. in the yeare 1596. VVhereunto is added the History of IRELAND, By EDMUND CAMPION, sometime fellow of St Iohn's Colledge in Oxford. Published by Sir IAMES WARE Knight. DUBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers. M.DC.XXXIII.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LO. VISCOVNT WENTWORTH, LO. DEPVTY GENERALL OF IRELAND, LO. PRESIDENT OF HIS MAIESTIES COVNCELL ESTA∣BLISHED IN THE NORTH PARTS OF ENGLAND, AND ONE OF HIS MAIESTIES MOST HONORABLE PRIVIE COVNCELL. RIGHT HONORABLE, THE sence of that hap∣py peace, which by the divine providence this Kingdome hath enjoyed, since the beginning of the raigne of his late Ma∣jestie of ever sacred me∣mory, doth then take the deeper impression, when these our halcyon dayes are compared with the former turbulent and tempestuous times, and with the mise∣ries (of severall kindes) incident unto them. Those
calamities are fully set out, and to the life by Mr Spenser, with a discovery of their causes, and re∣medies, being for the most part excellent grounds of reformation. And so much may be justly expected from him in regard of his long abode and experience of this Kingdome. In these respects, and for other good uses, which the collections (now communi∣cated) doe afford for matter of history and policy, I am incouraged to dedicate them to your Lordship, and humbly to desire your favourable acceptance of them, and of Your Lordships ever humbly devoted IAMES WARE.
THE PREFACE. HOw far these collections may conduce to the knowledge of the antiquities and state of this Land, let the fit reader judge: yet something I may not passe by touching Mr Edmund Spenser & the worke it selfe, lest I should seeme to offer injury to his worth, by others so much celebrated. Hee was borne in London of an ancient and noble fami∣ly, and brought up in the Vniversitie of Cam∣bridge, where (as the fruites of his after labours doe manifest) he mispent not his time. After this he became Secretary to Arthur Lord Grey of Wilton, Lord Deputy of Ireland, a valiant and worthy Governour, and shortly after for his services to the Crowne, he had bestowed u∣pon him by Queene Elizabeth, 3000. acres of land in the Countie of Corke. There hee finished the later part of that excellent poem of his Faery Queene, which was soone after un∣fortunately lost by the disorder and abuse of his servant, whom he had sent before him into Eng∣land, being then a rebellibus (as Annal. rr. Anglic. & Hi∣bern. pag. 729, edit. 1625. Camdens words are) è laribus ejectus & bonis spoliatus. He decea∣sed
at Westminster in the yeare 1599. (others have it wrongly 1598.) soone after his returne into England, and was buried according to his owne desire, in the collegiat Church there, neere unto Chaucer, whom he worthily imitated, (at the costes of Robert Earle of Essex,) wherupon this Epitaph was framed, Hîc prope Chaucerum situs est Spenserius, illi proximus ingenio, proximus ut tumulo. Hîc prope Chaucerum Spensere poeta poetam conderis, & versu quàm tumulo propior. Anglica te vivo vixit plausit{que} poesis, nunc moritura timet te moriente mori. As for his worke now Ex Bibliothe∣câ Remi in Chri∣sto patris D. Ia∣cobi Vsserij Ar∣chiep. Armacha∣ni. published, although it sufficiently testifieth his learning and deepe judgement, yet we may wish that in some pas∣sages it had bin tempered with more moderati∣on. The troubles and miseries of the time when he wrote it, doe partly excuse him, And surely wee may conceive, that if hee had lived to see these times, and the good effects which the last 30. yeares peace have produced in this land, both for obedience to the lawes, as also in traf∣fique, husbandry, civility, & learning, he would have omitted those passages which may seeme to lay either any particular aspersion upon some families, or generall upon the Nation. For now we may truly say, jam cuncti gens una sumus, and that upon just cause those ancient statutes,
wherein the natives of Irish descent were held to be, and named Irish enemies, and wherein those of English bloud were forbidden to marry and commerce with them, were repealed by Vid. lib. Status. Hiborn. edit. Dubl. an. 1621. pag. 427. act of Parlament, in the raigne of our late Soveraigne King IAMES of ever blessed memory. His proofes (although most of them conje∣cturall) concerning the originall of the lan∣guage, customes of the Nation, and the first peopling of the severall parts of the Iland, are full of good reading, and doe shew a sound judgment. They may be further confirmed by comparing them with Richard Creagh's Booke de linguâ Hibernicâ, which is yet extant in the o∣riginal manuscript, & althogh mixed with mat∣ter of story, leaning too much to some fabulous traditiōs, yet in other respects is worthy of light. Touching the generall scope intended by the author for the reformation of abuses and ill customes, This we may say, that although very many have taken paines in the same subject, du∣ring the raigne of Queene Elizabeth, and some before, as the Floruit subini∣tium reg. Edw. 4 author of the booke intituled Sa∣lus populi, and after him Floruit sub Hen. 8. Patrick Finglas, cheife Baron of the Exchequer here, and afterwardes cheife Iustice of the common pleas, yet none came so neere to the best grounds for reforma∣tion, a few passages excepted, as Spenser hath done in this. Some marginall notes I have ad∣ded, although not intending any, untill the fourth part of the Booke was printed.
A VIEVV OF THE STATE OF IRELAND, Written Dialogue-wise betweene Eudoxus and Irenaeus, By Edmund Spenser Esq. in the yeare 1596. Eudox. BVT if that Countrey of Ireland, whence you lately came, bee of so goodly and commodious a soyle as you report, I wonder that no course is taken for the turning thereof to good uses, and redu∣cing that nation to better government and civility. Iren. Marry so there have bin divers good plottes devised, & wise Councels cast already about reformation of that Realme, but they say, it is the fatall destiny of that Land, that no purposes whatsoever which are meant for her good, wil prosper or take good effect, which whether it proceed from the very Genius of the soyle, or influence of the starres, or that almighty God hath not yet appointed the time of her reformation, or that hee reserveth her in this unquiet state still, for some secret scourge, which shall by her come unto England, it is hard to be knowne, but yet much to be feared. Eudox. Surely I suppose this but a vaine conceipt of simple men, which judge things by their effects, and not by their causes; for I would rather thinke the cause of this evill, which hangeth upon that Countrey, to proceed rather of the unsoundnes of the Councels, and plots which you say have bin oftentimes laid for the reformation, or of faintnes in following & effecting the same, then of any such fatall course appointed of God, as you misdeeme, but it is the manner of men, that when they are fallen into any absurdity, or their actions succeede not as they would, they are alwayes readie to impute the
blame thereof unto the Heavens, so to excuse their owne follies and imperfections. So have I heard it often wished also, (even of some whose great wisedomes in opinion should seeme to judge more soundly of so weighty a consideration) that all that land were a Sea poole: which kinde of speech, is the manner rather of desperate men farre driven, to wish the utter ruine of that which they cannot redress, then of grave Councellors, which ought to thinke nothing so hard but that thorough wisedome, it may bee mastered and subdued, since the Poet saith, that the wiseman shall rule even over the Starres, much more over the Earth, for were it not the part of a desperate Phisitian to wish his diseased Patient dead, rather then to apply the best indea∣vour of his skill, for his recovery. But since we are so farre entred, let us, I pray you, a little devise of those evils, by which that country is held in this wretched case, that it cannot (as you say) be recured. And if it be not painefull to you, tell us what things during your late con∣tinuance there, you observed to bee most offensive, and greatest im∣peachment to the good rule and government thereof. Iren. Surely Eudox. the evils which you desire to be recounted are very many, & almost countable with those which were hidden in the basket of Pandora. But since you please I will out of that infinite num∣ber, reckon but some that are most capitall, & commonly occurrant both in the life & conditions of private men, as also in the managing of publicke affaires and pollicy, the which you shall understand to be of divers natures, as I observed them: For some of them are of verie great antiquity and continuance; others more late and of lesse indu∣rance; others dayly growing and increasing continuallie by their e∣vill occasions, which are every day offered. Eudox. Tell them then, I pray you, in the same order that you haue now rehearsed thē, for there can be no better method then this which the very matter it selfe offereth. And when you have reckoned all the evils, let us heare your opinion for the redressing of thē: After which there will perhaps of it selfe appeare some reasonable way to settle a sound and perfect rule of government, by shunning the former evils, and following the offered good. The which method we may learne of the wise Phisitians, which first require that the malady be knowne throughly, and discovered: Afterwards to teach how to cure and re∣dresse it: And lastly doe prescribe a dyet with straight rule and orders to be dayly observed, for feare of relapse into the former disease, or falling into some other more dangerous then it. Iren: I will then according to your advisement begin to declare the evils, which seeme to me, most hurtfull to the common-weale of that land; And first those (I say) which were most auncient and long growne. And they also are of three sorts: The first in the Lawes, the second in Customes, and the last in Religion. Eudox. Why Irenaus can there be any evill in the lawes, can things which are ordained for the good and safety of all, turne to the evill and hurt of them? This well I wore both in that State, and in all
other, that were they not contained in duty with feare of law, which restraineth offences, and inflicteth sharpe punishment to misdoers, no man should enjoy any thing; every mans hand would be against an o∣ther. Therfore in finding fault with the Lawes, I doubt me, you shall much over-shoote your selfe, and make me the more dislike your o∣ther dislikes of that government. Iren. The Lawes Eudox. I doe not blame for themselves, know∣ing right well that all Lawes are ordained for the good of the com∣mon-weale, and for repressing of licentiousnesse and vice, but it fal∣leth out in Lawes, no otherwise then it doth in Physick, which was at first devised, and is yet daylie ment, and ministred for the health of the Patient. But neverthelesse we often see, that either thorough ignorance of the disease, or thorough unseasonablenesse of the time, or other accidents comming betweene, in stead of good, it worketh hurt, and out of one evill, throweth the Patient into many miseries. So the Lawes were at first intended for the reformation of abuses, and peaceable continuance of the Subiect; but are sithence ei∣ther disanulled, or quite prevaricated thorough change and alterati∣on of times, yet are they good still in themselves, but in that commō-wealth which is ruled by them, they worke not that good which they should, and sometimes also that evill which they would not. Eudox. Whether doe you meane this by the Common-Lawes of that Realme, or by the Statute Lawes, and Acts of Parliaments. Iren. Surely by them both: for even the Common law being that which William of Normandy brought in with his conquest, and laid u∣pon the neck of England, though perhaps it fitted well with the state of England then being, and was readily obeyed thorough the power of the Commander, which had before subdued the people unto him, & made easie way to the setling of his will, yet with the state of Ire∣land peradventure it doth not so well agree, being a people very stubborne and untamed, or if it were ever tamed, yet now lately having quite shooken off their yoake, & broken the bonds of their o∣bedience. For England (before the entrance of the Conqueror) was a peaceable Kingdome, and but lately inured to the milde and goodly government of Edward surnamed the Confessor, besides now lately growne into a loathing and detestation of the unjust and tyrannous rule of Harold an usurper, which made them the more willing to ac∣cept of any reasonable conditiōs, & order of the new victor, thinking surely that it could be no worse then the latter, and hoping well it would be as good as the former, yet what the proofe of first bringing in & establishing of those lawes was, was to many full bitterly made knowne. But with Ireland it is farre otherwise, for it is a Nation ever acquainted with warres, though but amongst themselves, & in their owne kinde of military discipline, trayned up ever from their youthes, which they have never yet beene taught to lay aside, nor made to learne obedience unto Lawes, scarcely to know the name of Law, but in stead thereof have alwayes preserved and
kept their owne Law, which is the Brehon Law. Eudox. What is that which you call the Brehon law, it is a word unto us altogether unknowne? Iren. It is a rule of right unwritten, but delivered by tradition from one to another, in which oftentimes there appeareth great shew of e∣quity, in determining the right betweene party and party, but in ma∣ny things repugning quite both to Gods Law, and mans: As for ex∣ample in the case of murder, the Brehon, that is their judge, will com∣pound betweene the murderer, and the friends of the party murdered which prosecute the action, that the malefactor shall give unto them, or to the child, or wife of him that is slain, a recompence, which they call an Eriach: By which vilde law of theirs, many murders amongst them are made up, and smothered. And this Iudge being as hee is called the Lords Brehon, adjudgeth for the most part, a better share unto his Lord, that is the Lord of the soyle, or the head of that Sept, and also unto himselfe for his judgement a greater portion, then unto the Plantiffes or parties greived. Eudox. This is a most wicked law indeed: But I trust it is not now used in Ireland, since the Kings of England have had the absolute do∣minion thereof, and established their owne Lawes there. Iren. Yes truly, for there be many wide countries in Ireland which the lawes of England were never established in, nor any acknowledg∣ment of subjection made, & also even in those which are subdued; & seeme to acknowledge subjection, yet the same Brehon law is practi∣sed among themselues, by reason, that dwelling as they doe, whole nations and septs of the Irish together, without any Englishman a∣mongst them, they may doe what they list, and compound or altoge∣ther conceale amongst themselves their owne crimes, of which no notice can be had, by them which would and might amend the same, by the rule of the Lawes of England. Eudox. What is this which you say? And is there any part of that Realme or any Nation therein, which have not yet beene subdued to the Crowne of England? Did not the whole Realme universally ac∣cept and acknowledge our late Prince of famous memory Henry the Viiith for their onely King and Leige Lord? Iren. Yes verily: in a Parliament holden in the time of Sir Antho∣ny Saint-Leger then Lord Deputy, all the Irish Lords and principall men came in, and being by faire meanes wrought thereunto, ac∣knowledged King Henry for their Soveraigne Lord, reserving yet (as some say) unto themselves all their owne former priviledges and Seignories inviolate. Eudox. Then by that acceptance of his Soveraignty they also ac∣cepted of his lawes. Why then should any other lawes be now used amongst them? Iren. True it is that thereby they bound themselves to his lawes & obedience, and in case it had beene followed upon them, as it should have beene, and a government thereupon setled among them
agreeable thereunto, they should have beene reduced to perpetuall civilitie, and contained in continuall dutie. But what bootes it to breake a Colte, and to let him straight runne loose at randome. So were these people at first well handled, and wisely brought to acknowledge allegiance to the Kings of England: but being straight left unto themselves and their owne inordinate life and manners, they eftsoones forgot what before they were taught, and so soone as they were out of sight, by themselves shooke off their bridles, and beganne to colte anew, more licentiously then before. Eudox. It is a great pittie, that so good an oportunity was omit∣ted, and so happie an occasion fore-slacked, that might have beene the eternall good of the Land. But doe they not still acknowledge that submission? Iren. No, they doe not: for now the heires and posterity of them which yeelded the same, are (as they say) either ignorant thereof, or doe wilfully deny, or stedfastly disavow it. Eudox. How can they so doe justly? Doth not the act of the Pa∣rent in any lawfull graunt or conveyance, bind their heires for ever thereunto? Sith then the Auncestors of those that now live, yeelded themselves then subjects and Liegemen, shall it not tye their Chil∣dren to the same subiection? Iren. They say no: for their Auncestours had no estate in any their Lands, Seigniories, or Hereditaments, longer then during their own lifes, as they alledge, for all the Irish doe hold their Land by Ta∣nistrie; which is (say they) no more but a personall estate for his life time, that is, Tanist, by reason that he is admitted thereunto by ele∣ction of the Countrey. Eudox. What is this which you call Tanist and Tanistry? They be names and termes never heard of nor knowne to us. Iren. It is a custome amongst all the Irish, that presently after the death of any of their chiefe Lords or Captaines, they doe presently assemble themselves to a place generally appointed & knowne unto them to choose another in his steed, where they doe nominate and e∣lect for the most part, not the eldest sonne, nor any of the children of the Lord deceased, but the next to him of blood, that is the eldest & worthiest, as commonly the next brother unto him if he have any, or the next cousin, or so forth, as any is elder in that kinred or sept, and then next to him doe they choose the next of the blood to be Tanist, who shall next succeed him in the said Captainry, if he live therunto. Eudox. Doe they not use any ceremony in this election? for all barbarous nations are commonly great observers of ceremonies and superstitious rites. Iren. They vse to place him that shalbe their Captaine, upon a stone alwayes reserved for that purpose, & placed commonly upon a hill. In some of which I have seen formed & ingraven a foot, which they say was the measure of their first Captaines foot, whereon hee standing, receive an oath to preserve all the auncient former cu∣stomes
of the Countrey inviolable, and to deliver up the succession peaceably to his Tanist, and then hath a wand delivered unto him by some whose proper office that is: after which, descending from the stone, he turneth himselfe round, thrice forward, & thrice backward. Eudox. But how is the Tanist chosen? Iren. They say he setteth but one foot upon the stone, and re∣ceiveth the like oath that the Captaine did. Eudox. Have you ever heard what was the occasion and first be∣ginning of this custome? for it is good to know the same, and may perhaps discover some secret meaning and intent therein, very mate∣riall to the state of that government. Iren. I have heard that the beginning & cause of this ordinance amongst the Irish, was specially for the defence and maintenance of their Lands in their posteritie, and for excluding all innovation or a∣lienation thereof unto strangers, and specially to the English. For when their Captaine dieth, if the Signiorie should descend to his child, & he perhaps an Infant, another peradventure step in between, or thrust him out by strong hand, being then unable to defend his right, or to withstand the force of a forreiner, and therfore they doe appoint the eldest of the kinne to have the Signiorie, for that he com∣monly is a man of stronger yeares, and better experience to maintain the inheritance, and to defend the Countrey, either against the next bordering Lords, which use commonly to incroach one upon ano∣ther, as each one is stronger, or against the English, which they thinke lye still in waite to wype them out of their Lands and Territoryes. And to this end the Tanist is alwayes ready knowne, if it should hap∣pen the Captaine suddenly to dye, or to be slaine in battell, or to be out of the Countrey, to defend and keepe it from all such doubts and dangers. For which cause the Tanist hath also a share of the Country allotted unto him, and certaine cuttings and spendings upon all the inhabitants under the Lord. Eudox. When I heard this word Tanist, it bringeth to my re∣membrance what I have read of Tania, that it should signifie a Pro∣vince or Seigniorie, as Aquitania, Lusitania, and Britania, the which some thinke to be derived of Dania, that is, from the Danes, but, I thinke, amisse. But sure it seemeth, that it came anciently from those barbarous nations that over-ranne the world, which possessed those Dominions, whereof they are now so called. And so it may well be that from thence the first originall of this word Tanist and Tani∣stry came, and the custome thereof hath sithence, as many others els, beene continued, But to that generall subjection of the Land, whereof wee formerly spake, me seemes that this custome or tenure can be no barre nor impeachment, seeing that in open Parliament by their said acknowledgment they waved the benefite thereof, and submitted themselves to the benefite of their new Sove∣raigne. Iren. Yea but they say as I earst tolde you, that they reserved
their titles, tenures and Seigniories whole and sound to themselves, and for proofe alledge, that they have ever sithence remained to them untouched, so as now to alter them, should (say they) be a great wrong. Eudox. What remedie is there then, or meanes to avoide this inconvenience? for without first cutting of this dangerous custome, it seemeth hard to plant any sound ordenance, or reduce them to a ci∣vill government, since all their ill customes are permitted unto them. Iren. Surely nothing hard: for by this Act of Parliament where∣of wee speake, nothing was given to K. Henry which he had not be∣fore from his Auncestors, but onely the bare name of a King, for all other absolute power of principality he had in himselfe before deri∣ved from many former Kings, his famous Progenitours and worthy Conquerors of that Land. The which sithence they first conquered and by force subdued unto them, what needed afterwards to enter into any such idle termes with them to be called their King, when it is in the power of the Conqueror to take upon himself what title he will, over his Dominions conquered. For all is the Conque∣rours, as Tully to Brutus faith. Therefore (me seemes) instead of so great and meritorious a service as they boast they performed to the King, in bringing all the Irish to acknowledge him for their Liege, they did great hurt unto his Title, and have left a perpetuall gall in the minde of the people, who before being absolutely bound to his obedience, are now tyed but with termes, whereas else both their lives, their lands, and their liberties were in his free power to appoint what tenures, what lawes, what conditions hee would over them, which were all his: against which there could be no rightfull resistance, or if there were, he might when he would establish them with a stronger hand. Eudox. Yea but perhaps it seemed better unto that noble King to bring them by their owne accord to his obedience, and to plant a peaceable government amongst them, then by such violent means to pluck them under. Neither yet hath he therby lost any thing that he formerly had, for having all before absolutely in his owne power, it remaineth so still unto him, he having thereby neither forgiven, nor forgone any thing thereby unto them, but having received somthing from them, that is a more voluntary and loyall subjection. So as her Majesty may yet when it shall please her, alter any thing of those for∣mer ordinances, or appoint other lawes, that may be more both for her owne behoofe, and for the good of that people. Iren. Not so: for it is not so easie, now that things are growne unto an habit, and have their certaine course to change the channell, & turne their streames another way; for they may have now a colo∣rable pretence to withstand such innovations, having accepted of o∣ther lawes and rules already. Eudox. But you say they do not accept of them, but delight rather to leane to their old customes & Brehon lawes, though they be more
unjust and also more inconvenient for the common people, as by your late relation of them I have gathered. As for the lawes of England they are surely most just and most agreeable, both with the govern∣ment and with the nature of the people. How falls it then that you seeme to dislike of them, as not so meete for that Realme of Ireland, and not onely the Common Law, but also the Statutes and Actes of Parliament, which were specially provided and intended for the on∣lie benefit thereof? Iren. I was about to have told you my reason therein, but that your selfe drewe me away with other questions, for I was shewing you by what meanes, and by what sort, the Positive Lawes, were first brought in and established by the Norman Conquerour: which were not by him devised nor applyed unto the state of the Realme then be∣ing, nor as yet might best be (as should by Lawgivers principally be regarded) but were indeed the very Lawes of his owne Countrey of Normandie. The condition whereof, how farre it differeth from this of England, is apparant to every least judgement. But to transferre the same lawes for the governing of the Realme of Ireland, was much more inconvenient and unmeete, for he found a better advantage of the time, then was in the planting of them in Ireland, and follow∣ed th'execution of them with more severity, and was also present in person to overlooke the Magistrates, and to over awe these subjects with the terrour of his Sword, and countenance of his Majesty. But not so in Ireland, for they were otherwise affected, and yet doe so re∣maine, so as the same Lawes (me seemes) can ill fit with their disposi∣tion, or worke that reformation that is wished. For Lawes ought to be fashioned unto the manners & conditions of the people, to whom they are meant, and not to be imposed upon them according to the simple rule of right, for then (as I said) in stead of good they may worke ill, and pervert Iustice to extreame injustice. For hee that transferres the Lawes of the Lacedemonians to the people of Athens, should finde a great absurditie and inconvenience. For those Lawes of Lacedemon were devised by Licurgus as most proper and best agree∣ing with that people, whom hee knew to be enclined altogether to warres, and therefore wholly trained them up even from their Cra∣dles in armes and military exercises, cleane contrary to the instituti∣on of Solon, who in his Lawes to the Athenians laboured by all meanes to temper their warlike courages with sweet delightes of learning and sciences, so that asmuch as the one excelled in armes, the other exceeded in knowledge. The like regard & moderation ought to be had in tempering and managing of this stubborne nation of the Irish to bring them from their delight of licentious barbarisme unto the love of goodnes and civilitie. Eudox. I cannot see how that may better bee then by the Disci∣pline of the Lawes of England: for the English were at first, as stoute and warlike a people as ever the Irish, and yet you see are now brought unto that civillity, that no nation in the world excelleth
them in all goodly conversation, and all the studies of knowledge and humanitie. Iren. What they now be, both you and I see very well, but by how many thornie and hard wayes they are come thereunto, by how many civill broiles, by how many tumultuous rebellions, that even hazzarded oftentimes the whole safety of the kingdome, may easily be considered: all which they neverthelesse fairely overcame, by rea∣son of the continuall presence of their King, whose onely person is oftentimes in stead of an Army, to containe the unrulie people from a thousand evill occasions, which this wretched kingdome for want thereof is dayly carried into. The which whensoever they make head, no lawes, no penalties, can restraine, but that they doe in the violence of that furie, tread downe and trample under foote all both divine and humane things, and the lawes themselues they doe speci∣ally rage at, and rend in peeces, as most repugnant to their libertie and naturall freedome, which in their madnes they affect. Eudox. It is then a very unseasonable time to plead law, when Swords are in the hands of the vulgar, or to thinke to retaine them with feare of punishments, when they looke after liberty, and shake off all governement. Iren. Then so it is with Ireland continually, Eudoxus; for the sword was never yet out of their hand, but when they are weary of warres and brought downe to extreame wretchednesse, then they creepe a little perhaps and sue for grace, till they have gotten new breath and recovered their strength againe. So as it is in vaine to speake of plan∣ting lawes, and plotting pollicie, till they be altogether subdued. Eudox. Were they not so at the first conquering of them by Strongbowe in the time of King Henry the second? was there not a tho∣rough way then made by the sword, for the imposing of the lawes upon them? and were they not then executed with such a mightie hand as you said was used by the Norman Conquerour? What oddes is there then in this case? why should not the same lawes take as good effect in that people as they did here, being in like sort prepared by the sword, and brought under by extreamity? and why should they not continue in as good force and vigour for the containing of the people? Iren. The case yet is not like, but there appeareth great oddes be∣tweene them: for by the conquest of Henry the second, true it is that the Irish were utterly vanquished and subdued, so as no enemy was able to hold up head against his power, in which their weakenes hee brought in his lawes, and settled them as now they there remaine; Like as William the Conquerour did, so as in thus much they agree; but in the rest that is the cheifest, they varie: for to whom did King Henry the second impose those lawes, not to the Irish, for the most part of them fled from his power, into deserts and mountaines, lea∣ving the wyde countrey to the Conquerour: who in their stead eft∣soones placed English men, who possessed all their lands and did
quite shut out the Irish, or the most part of them. And to those new inhabitants and Colonies, he gave his lawes, to wit the same lawes, under which they were borne and bred, the which it was no difficul∣tie to place amongst them, being formerly well inured thereunto, unto whom afterwards they repaired diverse of the poore distressed people of the Irish, for succour and reliefe of whom, such as they thought fit for labour and industriously disposed, as the most part of their baser sort are, they received unto them as their vassalls, but scarcely vouchsafed to impart unto them the benefit of those lawes under which themselves lived, but every one made his will and com∣mandement a law unto his owne vassall: Thus was not the Law of England ever properly applyed unto the Irish Nation, as by a purpo∣sed plot of government, but as they could insinuate and steale them∣selves under the same, by their humble carriage and submission. Eudox. How comes it then to passe, that having beene once so low brought, and thoroughly subjected, they afterwards lifted up themselves so strongly againe, and sithence doe stand so stiffely a∣gainst all rule and government? Iren. They say that they continued in that lowlinesse, untill the time that the division between the two houses of Lancaster and Yorke arose for the Crowne of England: at which time all the great English Lords and Gentlemen which had great possessions in Ireland, repai∣red over hither into England, some to succour their Friends here, and to strengthen their partie for to obtaine the Crowne, others to de∣fend their lands and possessions here against such as hovered after the same upon hope of the alteration of the kingdome and successe of that side which they favoured and affected. Then the Irish whom be∣fore they had banished into the mountaines, where they lived onely upon whitt meates, as it is recorded, seeing now their lands so dis∣peopled, and weakened, came downe into all the plaines adjoyning, and thence expelling those few English that remained, repossessed them againe, since which they have remained in them, and growing greater, have brought under them many of the English, which were before their Lords. This was one of the occasions by which all those Countreyes, which lying neere unto any Mountaines, or Irish desarts, had beene planted with English, were shortly displanted and lost. As namely in Mounster all the lands adjoyning unto Slewlogher, Arlo, and the bog of Allon. In Connaght all the Countries bordering upon the Curlues, Mointerolis, and Orourkes Countrey. In Leinster all the lands bordering unto the Mountaines of Glanmalour, unto Shillelah, unto the Brackenah, and Polmonte. In Vlster all the Countreyes neere unto Tir∣connel, Tyrone, and the Scottes. Eudox. Surely this was a great violence: but yet by your speach it seemeth that onely the Countreyes and valleyes neere adjoyning unto those mountaines and desarts, were thus recovered by the Irish: but how comes it now that we see almost all that Realme reposses∣sed of them? was there any more such evill occasions growing by
the troubles of England. Or did the Irish out of those places so by them gotten breake further and stretch themselves out thorough the whole land: for now, for ought that I can understand, there is no part but the bare English Pale, in which the Irish have not the greatest footing. Iren. But out of these small beginings by them gotten neare to the mountaines, did they spread themselves into the Inland, and also to their further advantage, there did other like unhappy accidents hap∣pen out of England; which gave heart and good opportunity to them to regaine their old possessions: For in the raigne of King Edward the fourth, things remained yet in the same state that they were after the late breaking out of the Irish, which I spake of; and that noble Prince began to cast an Eye unto Ireland, and to minde the reformation of things there runne amisse: for he sent over his brother the worthy Duke of Clarence, who having married the heire of the Earle of Vlster, and by her having all the Earledome of Vlster, and much in Meath and in Mounster, very carefully went about the redressing of all those late evills, and though he could not beate out the Irish againe, by rea∣son of his short continuance, yet hee did shut them up within those narrow corners and glynnes under the mountaines foote, in which they lurked, and so kept them from breaking any further, by buil∣ding strong holdes upon every border, and fortifying all passages. Amongst the which hee repaired the Castle of Clare in Thomond, of which Countrey he had the inheritance, and of Mortimers lands ad∣joyning, which is now (by the Irish) called Killaloe. But the times of that good King growing also troublesome, did lett the thorough re∣formation of all things. And thereunto soone after was added ano∣ther fatall mischeife, which wrought a greater calamity then all the former. For the said Duke of Clarence then Lord Lieutenant of Ire∣land, was by practise of evill persons, about the King his brother, cal∣led thence away: and soone after by sinister meanes was cleane made away. Presently after whose death, all the North revolting, did set up Oneale for their Captaine, being before that of small power and regard: and there arose in that part of Thomond, one of the O-Briens, called Murrogh en-Ranagh, that is, Morrice of the Ferne or wast wilde places, who gathering unto him all the reliques of the discontented Irish, eftsoones surprised the said Castle of Clare, burnt, and spoyled all the English there dwelling, and in short space possessed all that countrey beyond the River of Shanan and neere adjoyning: Whence shortly breaking forth like a suddaine tempest he over-ran all Moun∣ster and Connaght; breaking downe all the holds and fortresses of the English, defacing and utterly subverting all corporate Townes, that were not strongly walled: for those, he had no meanes nor Engines to overthrow, neither indeed would hee stay at all about them, but speedily ran forward, counting his suddennesse his most advantage, that he might overtake the English before they could fortifie or ga∣ther themselves together. So in short space hee cleane wyped out
many great Townes, as first Inchequin, then Killalow, before called Clariford, also Thurles, Mourne, Buttevant, and many others, whose names I cannot remember, and of some of which there is now no memory nor signe remaining. Vpon report whereof there flock∣ed unto him all the scumme of the Irish out of all places, that ere long he had a mighty Army, and thence marched foorth into Leinster, where he wrought great out-rages, wasting all the Countrey where he went; for it was his policie to leave no hold behinde him, but to make all plaine and waste. In the which he soone after created him∣selfe King, and was called King of all Ireland, which before him I doe not reade that any did so generally, but onely Edward le Bruce. Eudox. What? was there ever any generall King of all Ireland? I never heard it before, but that it was alwayes (whilst it was under the Irish) divided into foure, and sometimes into five kingdomes or dominions. But this Edward le Bruce what was hee, that could make himselfe King of all Ireland? Iren. I would tell you in case you would not challenge me anon for forgetting the matter which I had in hand, that is, the in∣convenience and unfitnesse which I supposed to be in the lawes of the Land. Eudox. No surely, I have no cause, for neither is this imperti∣nent thereunto; for sithence you did set your course (as I remember in your first part) to treate of the evils which hindered the peace and good ordering of that Land, amongst which, that of the inconveni∣ence in the lawes, was the first which you had in hand, this discourse of the over-running & wasting of the Realme, is very materiall there∣unto, for that it was the begining of al the other evils, which sithence have afflicted that land, & opened a way unto the Irish to recover their possession, & to beat out the English which had formerly wonne the same. And besides, it will give a great light both unto the second and third part, which is the redressing of those evils, & planting of some good forme or policy therin, by renewing the remembrance of these occasiōs & accidents, by which those ruines hapned, & laying before us the ensamples of those times, to be cōpared to ours, & to be war∣ned by those which shall have to doe in the like. Therefore I pray you tell them unto us, and as for the point where you left, I will not forget afterwards to call you backe againe thereunto. Iren. This Edw. le Bruce was brother of Robert le Bruce, who was King of Scotland, at such time as K. Edward the second raigned here in England, and bare a most malicious and spightfull minde against K. Edward, doing him all the scathe that hee could, and annoying his Territoryes of England, whilest hee was troubled with civill warres of his Barons at home. Hee also to worke him the more mischiefe, sent over his said brother Edward with a power of Scottes and Red-shankes into Ireland, where by the meanes of the Lacies, and of the Irish, with whom they combined, they gave footing, and gathering unto him all the scatterlings and out-lawes out of all
the woods and mountaines, in which they long had lurked, mar∣ched foorth into the English pale, which then was chiefly in the North from the point of Donluce and beyond unto Dublin: Having in the middest of her Knockfergus, Belfast, Armagh, and Carling∣ford, which are now the most out-bounds and abandoned places in the English Pale, and indeede not counted of the English Pale at all: for it stretcheth now no further then Dundalke towardes the North. There the said Edward le Bruce spoyled and burnt all the olde English Pale Inhabitants, and sacked and rased all Citties and Corporate Townes, no lesse then Murrough en Ranagh, of whom I earst tolde you: For hee wasted Belfast, Greene-Castle, Kelles, Bellturbut, Castletowne, Newton, and many other very good Townes and strong holdes, hee rooted out the noble Families of the Audlies, Talbotts, Tuchets, Chamberlaines, Maundevills, and the Savages out of Ardes, though of the Lo: Savage there re∣maineth yet an heire, that is now a poore Gentleman of very meane condition, yet dwelling in the Ardes. And comming lastly to Dundalke, hee there made himselfe King, and raigned the space of one whole yeare, untill that Edward King of Eng∣land having set some quiet in his affaires at home, sent over the Lord Iohn Birmingham to bee Generall of the Warres against him, who incountering him neere to Dundalke, over-threw his Army, and slew him. Also hee presently followed the vi∣ctory so hotly upon the Scottes, that hee suffered them not to breathe, or gather themselves together againe, untill they came to the Sea-coast. Notwithstanding all the way that they fledde, for very rancor and despight, in their returne they utterly con∣sumed and wasted whatsoever they had before left unspoyled, so as of all Townes, Castles, Forts, Bridges, and Habitations, they left not any sticke standing, nor any people remayning, for those few which yet survived, fledde from their fury further into the English Pale that now is. Thus was all that goodly coun∣trey utterly wasted. And sure it is yet a most beautifull and sweet Countrey as any is under Heaven, being stored throughout with many goodly Rivers, replenished with all sorts of Fish most abun∣dantly, sprinkled with many very sweet Ilands and goodly Lakes, like little inland Seas, that will carry even shippes upon their waters, adorned with goodly woods even fit for building of houses & ships, so commodiously, as that if some Princes in the world had them, they would soone hope to be Lords of all the Seas, and ere long of all the world: also full of very good Ports and Havens opening upon England, as inviting us to come unto them, to see what excellent cō∣modities that Countrey can afford, besides the soyle it selfe most fer∣tile, fit to yeeld all kinde of fruit that shall be committed thereunto. And lastly, the Heavens most milde and temperate, though somwhat more moist then the parts towards the West. Eudox. Truly Iren. what with your praises of the countrey, and
what with your discourse of the lamentable desolation therof, made by those Scottes, you have filled mee with a great compassion of their calamities, that I doe much pitty that sweet Land, to be sub∣iect to so many evills as I see more and more to bee layde upon her, and doe halfe beginne to thinke, that it is (as you said at the begin∣ning) her fatall misfortune above all other Countreyes that I know, to bee thus miserably tossed and turmoyled with these variable stormes of affliction. But since wee are thus farre entred into the consideration of her mishaps, tell mee, have there beene any more such tempests as you terme them, wherein she hath thus wretchedly beene wracked? Iren. Many more God wot, have there beene, in which princi∣pall parts have beene rent and torne asunder, but none (as I can re∣member) so universall as this. And yet the rebellion of Thomas fitz Garret did well-nye stretch it selfe into all parts of Ireland. But that which was in the time of the government of the Lord Grey, was sure∣ly no lesse generall then all those, for there was no part free from the contagion, but all conspired in one, to cast off their subiection to the Crowne of England. Neverthelesse thorough the most wise and vali∣ant handling of that right noble Lord, it got not the head which the former evills found; for in them the Realme was left like a ship in a storme, amidst all the raging surges, unruled, and undirected of any: for they to whom she was committed, either fainted in their labour, or forsooke their charge. But hee (like a most wise Pilote,) kept her course carefully, and held her most strongly even against those roa∣ring billowes, that he safely brought her out of all; so as long after, even by the space of 12. or 13. whole yeares, she roade at peace, tho∣rough his onely paines and excellent indurance, how ever envy list to blatter against him. But of this wee shall have more occasion to speake in another place. Now (if you please) let us returne againe un∣to our first course. Eudox. Truely I am very glad to heare your iudgement of the government of that honorable man so soundly, for I have heard it of∣tentimes maligned, and his doings depraved of some, who (I per∣ceive) did rather of malicious minde, or private grievance, seeke to detract from the honour of his deeds and Counsels, then of any iust cause, but hee was neverthelesse in the iudgements of all good and wise men, defended and maintained. And now that hee is dead, his immortall fame surviveth, and flourisheth in the mouthes of all people, that even those which did backbite him, are checked with their owne venome, and breake their galls to heare his so honorable report. But let him rest in peace, and turne we to our more trouble∣some matters of discourse, of which I am right sorry that you make so short an end, and covet to passe over to your former purpo∣ses, for there be many other parts of Ireland, which I have heard have bin no lesse vexed with the like stormes, then these which you have treated of, as the Countries of the Birnes & Tooles neere Dublin,
with the insolent out-rages and spoyles of Feagh mac Hugh, the Countreyes of Catherlagh, Wexford, and Waterford, by the Cave∣naghes. The Countreyes of Leix, Kilkenny, and Kildare by the O Moores. The Countreyes of Ofaly and Longford by the Con∣nors. The Countreyes of Westmeath, Cavan, and Lowth, by the O Relyes, the Kellyes, and many others, so as the discoursing of them, besides the pleasure which would redound out of their History, be also very profitable for matters of policy. Iren. All this which you have named, and many more be∣sides, often times have I right well knowne, and yet often doe kindle great fires of tumultuous broyles in the Countreyes borde∣ring upon them. All which to rehearse, should rather bee to Chronicle times, then to search into reformation of abuses in that Realme, and yet very needfull it will bee to consider them, and the evills which they have often stirred up, that some redresse thereof, and prevention of the evills to come, may thereby ra∣ther be devised. But I suppose wee shall have a fitter opportuni∣ty for the same, when wee shall speake of the particular ab∣uses, and enormities of the government, which will bee next af∣ter these generall defects and inconveniences which I saide were in the Lawes, Customes, and Religion. Eudox. Goe to them a Gods name, and follow the course which you have promised to your selfe, for it fitteth best, I must confesse with the purpose of our discourse. Declare your opini∣on as you began about the Lawes of the Realme, what incom∣moditie you have conceived to bee in them, chiefly in the com∣mon Law, which I would have thought most free from all such dis∣like. Iren. The Common Law is (as I saide before) of it selfe most rightfull and very convenient (I suppose) for the King∣dome, for which it was first devised: for this (I thinke) as it seeemes reasonable, that out of your manners of your people, and abuses of your Countrey, for which they were invented, they take their first beginning, or else they should bee most unjust; for no Lawes of man (according to the straight rule of right) are just, but as in regard of the evills which they prevent, and the safety of the Common-weale which they provide for. As for example, in your true ballancing of Iustice, it is a flat wrong to punish the thought or purpose of any before it bee enacted, for true Iustice punisheth nothing but the evill act or wicked word, that by the Lawes of all Kingdomes it is a capitall cryme to devise or purpose the death of your King: The reason is, for that when such a purpose is effected, it should then bee too late to devise thereof, and should turne the Common-wealth to more losse by the death of their Prince, then such punishment of the malefactors. And therefore the Law in that case punisheth the thought, for bet∣ter is a mischiefe, then an inconvenience. So that Ius politicum,
though it bee not of it selfe just, yet by application, or rather necessity it is made just, and this onely respect maketh all Lawes just. Now then, if these Lawes of Ireland bee not likewise applyed and fitted for that Realme, they are sure very inconve∣nient. Eudox. You reason strongly: but what unfitnesse doe you finde in them for that Realme, shew us some particulars. Iren. The Common Law appointeth, that all tryalls, as well of Crimes, as Titles and Rights, shall bee made by verdict of a Iury, chosen out of the honest and most substantiall Free-holders▪ Now, most of the Free-holders of that Realme, are Irish, which when the cause shall fall betwixt an Englishman and an Irish, or betweene the Queene, and any Free-houl∣der of that Countrey, they make no more scruple to passe against an Englishman, and the Queene, though it bee to strayne their oathes, then to drinke milke unstrayned. So that before the Iury goe together, it is all to nothing what the verdict shall be. The tryall have I so often seene, that I dare confidently avouch the abuse thereof. Yet is the Law of it selfe, (as I said) good, and the first institution thereof being given to all Englishmen ve∣ry rightfully, but now that the Irish have stepped into the very roomes of your English, wee are now to become heedfull and pro∣vident in Iuryes. Eudox. In sooth Iren. you have discoversed a point worthy the consideration; for heereby not onely the English subject findeth no indifferencie in deciding of his cause, bee it never so just; but the Queene aswell in all pleas of the Crowne, as also in inquiries for Escheates, Lands attainted, Wardshipps, Con∣cealements, and all such like, is abused and exceedingly dam∣maged. Iren. You say very true; for I dare undertake, that at this day there are more attainted Lands, concealed from her Maje∣stie, then shee hath now possessions in all Ireland, and it is no small inconvenience: for besides that, shee looseth so much Land as should turne to her great profite, shee besides loo∣seth so many good subjects, which might bee assured unto her, as those Landes would yeelde Inhabitants and living unto. Eudox. But doth many of that people (say you) make no more conscience to perjure themselves in their verdicts, and damne their soules? Iren. Not onely so in their verdicts, but also in all other their dealings: especially with the English they are most will∣fully bent: for though they will not seeme manifestly to doe it, yet will some one or other subtle-headed fellow amongst them, put some quirke, or devise some evasion, whereof the rest will likely take hold, and suffer themselves easily to be led by him to
that themselves desired. For in the most apparant matter that may bee, the least question or doubt that may bee mooved, will make a stoppe unto them, and put them quite out of the way. Besides, that of themselves (for the most part) they are so cautelous and wylie-headed, especially being men of so small ex∣perience, and practice in law matters, that you would wonder whence they borrow such subtiltyes and slye shifts. Eudox. But mee thinkes this inconvenience might bee much helped in the Iudges and chiefe Magistrates which have the choo∣sing and nominating of those Iurors, if they would have dared to appoint either most Englishmen, and such Irishmen as were of the soundest judgment and disposition; for no doubt but some there bee incorruptible. Iren. Some there bee indeede as you say, but then would the Irish partie crye out of partialitie, and complaine hee hath no Iustice, hee is not used as a subject, hee is not suffered to have the free benefite of the Law, and these out-cryes the Magistrates there doe much shunne, as they have cause, since they are rea∣dily hearkened unto heere, neither can it bee indeede, although the Irish party would bee so contented to be so compassed, that such English free-houlders which are but few, and such faith∣full Irish-men, which are indeede as few, shall alwayes bee cho∣sen for tryalls, for being so few, they should bee made weary of their free-houldes. And therefore a good care is to bee had by all good occasions, to encrease their number, and to plant more by them. But were it so, that the Iurors could bee pick∣ed out of such choyce men as you desire, this would neverthe∣lesse bee as bad a corruption in the tryall, for the evidence be∣ing brought in by the baser Irish people, will bee as deceiptfull as the verdict, for they care much lesse then the others, what they sweare, and sure their Lordes may compell them to say any thing, for I my selfe have heard, when one of the baser sort (which they call Churles) being challenged and reproo∣ved for his false oath, hath answered confidently, that his Lord commaunded him, and it was the least thing that hee could doe for his Lord, to sweare for him; so inconscionable are these common people, and so little feeling have they of God, or their owne soules good. Eudox. It is a most miserable case, but what helpe can there then bee in this? for though the manner of the tryalls should bee altered, yet the proofe of every thing must needes bee by the testimony of such persons as the partyes shall pro∣duce, which if they shall bee corrupt, how can there ever a∣ny light of the truth appeare, what remedy is there for this e∣vill, but to make heavy Lawes and Penalties against Iu∣rors.
Iren. I thinke sure that will doe small good, for when a people be inclined to any vice, or have no touch of Conscience, nor sence of their evill doings; it is bootelesse to thinke to restraine them by any penalties or feare of punishment, but either the occasion is to be ta∣ken away, or a more understanding of the right, and shame of the fault to be imprinted. For if that Licurgus should have made it death for the Lacedemonians to steale, they being a people which naturally delighted in stealth, or if it should bee made a capitall crime, for the Flemmings to be taken in drunkennesse, there should have beene few Lacedemonians then left, and few Flemmings now. So unpossible it is, to remove any fault so generall in a people, with terrour of lawes or most sharpe restraints. Eudox. What meanes may there be then to avoyde this inconve∣nience, for the case seemes very hard? Iren. We are not yet come to the point to devise remedies for the evils, but only have now to recount them, of the which, this which I have told you is one defect in the Common Law. Eudox. Tell us then (I pray you) further, have you any more of this sort in the Common Law? Iren. By rehearsall of this, I remember also of an other like, which I have often observed in trialls, to have wrought great hurt and hin∣derance, and that is the exceptions which the common law alloweth a Fellon in his tryall, for he may have (as you know) 56. exceptions perēptory against the Iurors, of which he shal shew no cause. By wch shift there being (as I have shewed you) so small store of honest Iury∣men, he will either put off his tryall, or drive it to such men as (per∣haps) are not of the soundest sort, by whose meanes, if he can acquite himselfe of the crime, as he is likely, then will he plague such as were brought first to bee of his Iurie, and all such as made any party a∣gainst him. And when he comes forth, he will make their Cowes and Garrons to walke, if he doe no other harme to their persons. Eudox. This is a slye devise, but I thinke might soone bee reme∣died, but we must leave it a while to the rest. In the meane-while doe you goe forwards with others. Iren. There is an other no lesse inconvenience then this, which is, the tryall of accessaries to fellony, for by the common Law, the ac∣cessaries cannot be proceeded against, till the principall have recei∣ved his tryall. Now to the case, how it often falleth out in Ireland, that a stealth being made by a rebell, or an outlawe, the stolne goods are conveyed to some husbandman or Gentleman, which hath well to take to, and yet liveth most by the receipt of such stealthes, where they are found by the owner, and handled: whereupon the partie is perhaps apprehended and committed to Goale, or put upon sureties, till the Sessions, at which time the owner preferring a bill of Indict∣ment, proveth sufficiently the stealth to have beene committed upon him, by such an Outlaw, and to have beene found in the possession of the prisoner, against whom, neverthelesse, no course of law can pro∣ceede,
nor tryall can be had, for that the principall Theife is not to be gotten, notwithstanding that he likewise, standing perhaps indi∣cted at once, with the Receiver, being in rebellion, or in the woods: where peradventure he is slaine before he can be gotten, and so the Receiver cleane acquitted and discharged of the crime. By which meanes the Theeves are greatly incouraged to steale, and their main∣tainers imboldened to receive their stealthes, knowing how hardly they can be brought to any tryall of Law. Eudox. Truely this is a great inconvenience, and a great cause (as you say) of the maintenance of Theeves, knowing their Receivers al∣wayes ready, for were there no receivers, there would be no theeves: but this (me seemes) might easily be provided for, by some act of Par∣liament, that the receiver being convicted by good proofes might re∣ceive his tryall without the principall. Iren. You say very true Eudox. but that is almost impossible to be compassed: And herein also you discover another imperfection, in the course of the Common Law, and first ordinance of the Realme: for you know that the said Parliament must consist of the Peeres, Gentlemen, Free-holders, and Burgesses of that Realme it selfe. Now these being perhaps themselves, or the most part of them (as may seeme by their stiffe with-standing of this Act) culpable of this crime, or favourers of their freinds, which are such, by whom their Kitchins are sometimes amended, will not suffer any such Statute to passe. Yet hath it oftentimes beene attempted, and in the time of Sir Iohn Parrot very earnestly (I remember) laboured, but could by no meanes be ef∣fected. And not onely this, but many other like, which are as neede∣full for the reformation of that Realme. Eudox. This also is surely a great defect, but wee may not talke (you say) of the redressing of this, untill our second part come, which is purposely appointed thereunto. Therefore proceed to the recoun∣ting of more such evils, if at least, you have any more. Iren. There is also a great inconvenience, which hath wrought great dammage, both to her Majesty, and to that common wealth, thorough close and colourable conveyances of the lands and goods of Traytors, Fellons and Fugitives. As when one of them mindeth to goe into rebellion, hee will convey away all his lands and Lord∣ships, to Feoffees in trust, wherby he reserveth to himselfe, but a state for terme of life, which being determined either by the sword or by the halter, their lands straight commeth to their heire, and the Queen is defrauded of the intent of the Law, which laide that grievous pu∣nishment upon Traytors, to forfeite all their lands to the Prince, to the end that men might the rather be terrified from committing trea∣sons, for many which would little esteeme of their owne lives, yet for remorse of their wives and children would bee with-held from that haynous crime. This appeared plainely in the late Earle of Des∣mond. For before his breaking forth into open Rebellion, hee had conveyed secretly all his lands to Feoffees of trust, in hope to have
cut off her Maiestie from the escheate of his Lands. Eudox. Yea, but that was well enough avoided, for the Act of Parliament which gave all his lands to the Queene, did (as I have heard) cut off and frustrate all such conveyances, as had at any time by the space of twelve yeares before his rebellion, beene made, within the compasse whereof, the fraudulent Feoffement, and ma∣ny the like of others his accomplices and fellow-traytors were con∣tained. Iren. Very true, but how hardly that Act of Parliament was wrought out of them, I can witnesse; and were it to be passed againe, I dare undertake it would never be compassed. But were it also that such Acts might be easily brought to passe against Traytors and Fel∣lons, yet were it not an endlesse trouble, that no Traitour or Fellon should be attainted, but a Parliament must be called for bringing of his Lands to the Queene, which the Common-Law giveth her. Eudox. Then this is no fault of the Common Law, but of the persons which worke this fraud to her Majestie. Iren. Yes marry; for the Common-Law hath left them this be∣nefite, whereof they make advantage, and wrest it to their bad pur∣poses. So as thereby they are the bolder to enter into evill actions, knowing that if the worst befall them, they shall lose nothing but themselves, whereof they seeme surely very carelesse. Eudox. But what meant you of Fugitives herein? Or how doth this concerne them? Iren: Yes, very greatly, for you shall understand that there bee many ill disposed and undutifull persons of that Realme, like as in this point there are also in this Realme of England too many, which being men of good inheritance, are for dislike of Religion, or danger of the law, into which they are run, or discontent of the present go∣vernment, fled beyond the seas, where they live under Princes, which are her Mties professed enemies, & converse, & are confederat with o∣ther traitors & fugitives, which are there abiding. The which never∣thelesse have the benefits & profits of their lands here, by pretence of such colourable conveyances thereof, formerly made by them unto their privie Friends heere in trust, who privily doe send over unto them the said Revenues wherwith they are there maintained and en∣abled against her Majestie. Eudox. I doe not thinke that there be any such fugitives, which are relieved by the profite of their Lands in England, for there is a straighter order taken. And if there bee any such in Ireland, it were good it were likewise looked unto, for this evill may easily be reme∣died. But proceede. Iren. It is also inconvenient in the Realme of Ireland, that the Wards and Marriages of Gentlemens children should be in the dis∣position of any of those Irish Lords, as now they are, by reason that their Lands bee held by Knights service of those Lords. By which means it comes to passe that those Gentlemen being thus in the ward
of those Lords, are not onely thereby brought up lewdly, and Irish-like, but also for ever after so bound to their services, they will runne with them into any disloyall action. Eudox. This greivance Iren. is also complained of in England, but how can it be remedied? since the service must follow the tenure of the lands, and the lands were given away by the Kings of England to those Lords, when they first conquered that Realme, and to say troth, this also would be some prejudice to the Prince in her ward∣shipps. Iren. I doe not meane this by the Princes wards, but by such as fall into the hands of Irish Lords, for I could wish, and this I could enforce that all those wardships were in the Princes disposition, for then it might be hoped, that she for the universall reformation of that Realme, would take better order for bringing up those wards in good nurture, and not suffer them to come into so bad hands. And although these things bee already passed away, by her Progenitours former grants unto those said Lords; yet I could finde a way to re∣medie a great part thereof, as hereafter, when fit time serves shall ap∣peare. And since we are entred into speech of such graunts of former Princes, to sundry persons of this Realme of Ireland, I will mention unto you some other, of like nature to this, and of like inconvenience, by which the former Kings of England, passed unto them a great part of their prerogatives, which though then it was well intended, and perhaps well deserved of them which received the same, yet now such a gapp of mischeife lyes open thereby, that I could wish it were well stopped. Of this sort are the graunts of Counties palatines in Ireland, which though at first were granted upon good consideration when they were first conquered, for that those lands lay then as a very border to the wild Irish, subject to continuall invasion, so as it was needfull to give them great priviledges for the defence of the Inhabitants thereof: yet now that it is no more a border, nor fronti∣red with enemies, why should such priviledges bee any more con∣tinued? Eudox. I would gladly know what you call a County palatine, and whence it so called. Iren. It was (I suppose) first named palatine of a pale, as it were a pale and defense to their inward lands, so as it is called the English Pale, and therefore is a Palsgrave, named an Earle Palatine. Others thinke of the Latine, palare, that is to forrage or out-run, because those marchers and borderers use commonly so to doe. So as to have a county palatine is, in effect, to have a priviledge to spoyle the ene∣mies borders adjoyning. And surely so it is used at this day, as a pri∣viledged place of spoiles and stealthes, for the county of Tipperary, which is now the onely countie palatine in Ireland, is by abuse of some bad ones, made a receptacle to rob the rest of the Counties a∣bout it, by meanes of whose priviledges none will follow their stealthes, so as it being situate in the very lap of all the land, is made
now a border, which how inconvenient it is, let every man judge. And though that right noble man, that is the Lord of the liberty, do paine himselfe, all he may, to yeeld equall Iustice unto all, yet can there not but great abuses lurke in so inward and absolute a privi∣ledge, the consideration whereof is to be respected carefully, for the next succession. And much like unto this graunt, there are other pri∣viledges graunted unto most of the corporations there: that they shal not be bound to any other government then their owne, that they shall not be charged with garrisons, that they shall not bee travailed forth of their owne franchises, that they may buy and sell with theeves and rebels, that all amercements and fines that shal be impo∣sed upon them, shall come unto themselves. All which, though at the time of their first graunt they were tollerable, and perhaps rea∣sonable, yet now, are most unreasonable and inconvenient, but all these will easily be cut off with the superiour power of her Majesties prerogative, against which her owne grants are not to be pleaded or enforced. Iren. Now truely Irenaeus you have (me seemes) very well han∣dled this point, touching inconveniences in the Common-Law there, by you observed; and it seemeth that you have had a mindefull regard unto the things that may concerne the good of that Realme. And if you can aswell goe thorough with the Statute lawes of that land. I will thinke you have not lost all your time there. Therefore I pray you, now take them in hand, and tell us, what you thinke to bee amisse in them. Iren. The Statutes of that Realme are not many, and therefore we shall the sooner runne thorough them. And yet of those few there are impertinent and unnecessary: the which though perhaps a the time of the making of them, were very needfull, yet now tho∣rough change of time are cleane antiquated, and altogether idle: As that which forbiddeth any to weare their beards all on the upper lippe, and none under the Chinne. And that which putteth away saf∣fron shirts and smockes. And that which restraineth the use of guilt bridles and petronels. And that which is appointed for the Recor∣ders and Clerks of Dublin and Tredagh, to take but ij. d. for the cop∣py of a plainte. And that which commaunds Bowes and Arrowes. And that which makes, that all Irishmen which shall converse among the English, shall be taken for spyes, and so punished. And that which forbids persons amesnable to Law, to enter and distraine in the lands in which they have title, and many other the like, I could re∣hearse. Eudox. These truely, which yee have repeated, seeme very fri∣volous and fruitelesse, for by the breach of them, little dammage or inconvenience, can come to the Common-wealth: Neither indeed, if any transgresse them, shall he seeme worthy of punishment, scarce of blame, saving but for that they abide by that name of Lawes. But Lawes ought to be such, as that the keeping of them, should be great∣ly
for the behoofe of the Common-weale, and the violating of them should be very haynous, and sharpely punishable. But tell us of some more weighty dislikes in the Statutes then these, and that may more behoofefully import the reformation of them. Iren. There is one or two Statutes which make the wrongfull di∣strayning of any mans goods against the forme of Common Law, to be fellony. The which Statutes seeme surely to have beene at first meant for the good of that Realme, and for restrayning of a foule a∣buse, which then raigned commonly amongst that people, and yet is not altogether laide aside: That when any one was indebted to ano∣ther, he would first demaund his debt, and if he were not payed, hee would straight goe and take a distresse of his goods or cattell, where he could finde them, to the value; which he would keepe till he were satisfied, and this the simple Churle (as they call him) doth com∣monly use to doe, yet thorough ignorance of his misdoing, or evill use, that hath long settled amongst them. But this, though it bee sure most unlawfull, yet surely (me seemes) too hard to make it death, since there is no purpose in the party to steale the others goods, or to conceale the distresse, but doth it openly, for the most part, before witnesses. And againe, the same Statutes are so slackely penned (be∣sides the later of them is so unsensibly contryved, that it scarce carry∣eth any reason in it) that they are often and very easily wrested to the fraude of the Subject, as if one going to distrayne upon his own land or Tenement, where lawfully he may, yet if in doing therof he trans∣gresse the least point of the Common Law, hee straight committeth fellony. Or if one by any other occasion take any thing from ano∣ther, as Boyes use sometimes to cap one another, the same is straight fellony. This is a very hard Law. Eudox. Nevertheles that evill use of distrayning of another mans goods yee will not deny, but it is to be abolished and taken away. Iren. It is so, but not by taking away the subject withall, for that is too violent a medecine, specially this use being permitted, and made lawfull to some, and to other some death. As to most of the corporate Townes there, it is graunted by their Charter, that they may, every man by himselfe, without an Officer (for that were more tollerable) for any debt, to distraine the goods of any Irish, being found within their liberty, or but passing thorough their townes. And the first permission of this, was for that in those times when that graunt was made, the Irish were not amesnable to Law, so as it was not safety for the Townes-man to goe to him forth to demaund his debt, nor possible to draw him into Law, so that he had leave to bee his owne Bayliffe, to arrest his said debters goods, within his owne franchese. The which the Irish seeing, thought it as lawfull for them to distrayne the Townes-mans goods in the Countrey, where they found it. And so by ensample of that graunt to Townes-men, they thought it lawfull, and made it a use to distrayne on anothers goods for small debts. And to say truth, mee thinkes it hard for every tri∣fling
debt, of 2. or 3. shil: to be driven to Law, which is so farre from them sometimes to be sought, for which me thinketh it too heavy an ordinance to give death, especially to a rude man that is ignorant of law, and thinketh that a common use or graunt to other men, is a law for himselfe. Eudox. Yea, but the Iudge when it commeth before him to tryall, may easily decide this doubt, and lay open the intent of the Law, by his better discretion. Iren. Yea, but it is dangerous to leave the sence of the Law unto the reason or will of the Iudge, who are men and may bee miscaried by affections, and many other meanes. But the Lawes ought to bee like stony Tables, plaine, stedfast, and unmoveable. There is also such another Statute or two, which make Coigny and Livery to bee treason, no lesse inconvenient then the former, being as it is penned, how ever the first purpose thereof were expedient, for thereby now no man can goe into another mans house for lodging, nor to his owne Tennants house to take victuall by the way, notwithstanding that there is no other meanes for him to have lodging, nor horse meate, nor mans meate, there being no Innes, nor none otherwise to bee bought for money, but that he is endangered by that Statute for trea∣son, whensoever he shall happen to fall out with his Tennant, or that his said hoste list to complaine of greivance, as oftentimes I have seene them very malitiously doe, thorough the least provocation. Eudox. I doe not well know, but by ghesse, what you doe meane by these termes of Coigny and Livery, therefore I pray you explaine them. Iren. I know not whether the words bee English or Irish, but I suppose them to bee rather auncient English, for the Irish men can make no derivation of them. What Livery is, wee by common use in England know well enough, namely, that it is allowance of horse-meate, as they commonly use the word in stabling, as to keepe horses at Livery, the which word, I guesse, is derived of livering or delive∣ring forth their nightly foode: So in great houses, the livery is said to be served up for all night, that is their evenings allowance for drinke. And livery is also called, the upper weede which a serving man wear∣eth, so called (as I suppose) for that it was delivered and taken from him at pleasure: So it is apparant, that by the word Livery, is there meant horse meate, like as by the word Coigny, is understood mans meate. But whence the word is derived is hard to tell: Some say of Coine, for that they used commonly in their Coignies, not onely to take meate, but coine also: and that taking of money was speciallie meant to be prohibited by that Statute: but I thinke rather this word Coigny is derived of the Irish. The which is a common use amongst Land lords of the Irish, to have a common spending upon their Ten∣nants: for all their Tennants, being commonly but Tennants at will, they use to take of them what victuals they list: For of victuals they were wont to make small reckoning: neither in this was the Tennant
wronged, for it was an ordinary and knowne custome, and his Lord commonly used so to covenant with him, which if at any time the tenant disliked, hee might freely depart at his pleasure. But now by this Statute, the said Irish Lord is wronged, for that hee is cut off from his customary services, of the which this was one, besides many other of the like, as Cuddy, Coshery, Bonnaght, Shrah, Sorehin, and such others: the which (I thinke) were customes at first brought in by the English upon the Irish, for they were never wont, and yet are loath to yeeld any certaine Rent, but only such spendings: for their common saying is, Spend me and defend me. Eudox. Surely I take it as you say, that therein the Irish Lord hath wrong, since it was an auncient custome, and no∣thing contrary to Law, for to the willing there is no wrong done. And this right well I wot, that even heere in England, there are in many places as large customes, as that of Coignie and Livery. But I suppose by your speach, that it was the first meaning of the sta∣tute, to forbid the violent taking of victualls upon other mens Te∣nants against their wills, which surely is a great out-rage, and yet not so great (mee seemes) as that it should be made treason: for con∣sidering that the nature of treason is concerning the Royall estate or Person of the Prince, or practizing with his enemies, to the derogati∣on and danger of his Crowne and dignitie, it is hardly wrested to make this treason. But (as you earst said) Better a mischiefe then an inconvenience. Iren. Another Statute I remember, which having beene an auncient Irish Custome, is now upon advisement made a Law, and that is called the Custome of Kin-cogish, which is, that e∣very head of every Sept, and every chiefe of every kinred or family, should bee answerable and bound to bring foorth every one of that sept and kinred under it, at all times to be iustified, when hee should be required or charged with any treason, felony, or other haynous crime. Eudox. Why? surely this seemes a very necessary Law. For considering that many of them bee such Losells and scatterlings, as that they cannot easily by any Sheriffe, Constable, Bayliffe, or other ordinary Officer bee gotten, when they are challenged for any such fact, this is a very good meanes to get them to bee brought in by him, that is the head of that sept, or chiefe of that house, wherfore I wonder what just exception you can make against the same. Iren. Truely Eudoxus, in the pretence of the good of this Sta∣ture, you have nothing erred, for it seemeth very expedient and necessary, but the hurt which commeth thereby is greater then the good. For whilest every chiefe of a sept standeth so bound to the Law, for every man of his blood or sept that is under him, and hee made great, by the commaunding of them all. For if hee may not commaund them, then that Law doth wrong, that bin∣deth
him to bring them foorth to bee iustified. And if hee may commaund them, then hee may commaund them aswell to ill as to good. Heereby the Lords and Captaines of Countreyes, the principall and heades of septs are made stronger, whome it should bee a most speciall care in policie to weaken, and to set up and strengthen diverse of his underlings against him, which whensoever hee shall offer to swarve from duty, may bee able to beard him; for it is very dangerous to leave the commaund of so many as some septs are, being five or sixe thousand persons, to the will of one man, who may leade them to what he will, as he himselfe shall be inclined. Eudox. In very deede Iren. it is very dangerous, seeing the disposition of those people is not alwayes inclineable to the best. And therefore I holde it no wisedome to leave unto them too much commaund over their kinred, but rather to with-drawe their followers from them asmuch as may bee, and to gather them under the commaund of Law, by some better meane then this cu∣stome of Kin-cogish. The which word I would bee glad to know what it namely signifieth, for the meaning thereof I seeme to under∣stand reasonably well. Iren. It is a word mingled of English and Irish together, so as I am partly ledde to thinke, that the custome thereof was first English, and afterwardes made Irish: for such an other Law they had heere in England, as I remember, made by King Alured, that every Gentle∣man should bring foorth his kinred and followers to the Law. So Kin is English, and Congish Affinitie in Irish. Eudox. Sith then wee that have thus reasonably handled the inconveniences in the Lawes, let us now passe unto the second part, which was, I remember, of the abuses of customes; in which mee seemes, you have a faire champian layde open unto you, in which you may at large stretch out your discourse into many sweete remembrances of antiquities, from whence it seemeth that the cu∣stomes of that nation proceeded. Iren. Indeede Eudox. you say very true; for all the customes of the Irish which I have often noted and compared with that I have read, would minister occasion of a most ample discourse of the originall of them, and the antiquity of that people, which in truth I thinke to bee more auncient then most that I know in this end of the world, so as if it were in the handling of some man of sound judgement and plentifull reading, it would bee most pleasant and profitable. But it may bee wee may at some other time of meeting, take occasion to treate thereof more at large. Heere onely it shall suffise to touch such customes of the Irish as seeme offensive and repugnant to the good government of that Realme. Eudox. Follow then your owne course, for I shall the bet∣ter content my selfe to forbeare my desire now, in hope that
you will, as you say, some other time more aboundantly satis∣fie it. Iren. Before we enter into the treatie of their customes, it is first needfull to consider from whence they first sprung▪ for from the sundry manners of the nations, from whence that people which now is called Irish, were derived, some of the customes which now remain amongst them, have beene first fetcht, and sithence there continued amongst them; for not of one nation was it peopled, as it is, but of sundry people of different conditions and manners. But the chiefest which have first possessed and inhabited it, I suppose to bee Scy∣thians. Eudox. How commeth it then to passe, that the Irish doe derive themselves from Gathelus the Spaniard? Iren. They doe indeed, but (I conceive) without any good ground. For if there were any such notable transmission of a Colony hether out of Spaine, or any such famous conquest of this Kingdome by Gathelus a Spaniard, as they would faine be∣lieve, it is not unlikely, but that the very Chronicles of Spaine, (had Spaine then beene in so high regard, as they now have it) would not have omitted so memorable a thing, as the subduing of so noble a Realme to the Spaniard, no more then they doe now neglect to memorize their conquest of the Indians, specially in those times, in which the same was supposed, being nearer un∣to the flourishing age of learning and Writers under the Romanes. But the Irish doe heerein no otherwise, then our vaine English∣men doe in the Tale of Brutus, whom they devise to have first conquered and inhabited this Land, it being as impossible to proove, that there was ever any such Brutus of England, as it is, that there was any such Gathelus of Spaine. But sure∣ly the Scythians (of whom I earst spoke) at such time as the Nor∣therne nations over-flowed all Christendome, came downe to the sea-coast, where inquiring for other Countries abroad, & getting intelligence of this countrey of Ireland, finding shipping convenient, passed thither, and arrived in the North part thereof, which is now called Vlster, which first inhabiting, and afterwards stretching them∣selves forth into the Land, as their numbers increased, named it all of themselves Scuttenland, which more briefly is called Scutland, or Scotland. Eudox. I wonder (Irenaeus) whether you runne so farre astray, for whilest wee talke of Ireland, mee thinkes you rippe up the o∣riginall of Scotland, but what is that to this? Iren. Surely very much, for Scotland and Ireland are all one and the same. Eudox. That seemeth more strange; for we all know right well that they are distinguished with a great Sea running between them, or else there are two Scotlands.
Iren. Never the more are there two Scotlands, but two kindes of Scots were indeed (as you may gather out of Buchanan) the one Irin, or Irish Scots, the other Albin-Scots; for those Scots are Scythians, arri∣ved (as I said) in the North parts of Ireland, where some of them after passed into the next coast of Albine, now called Scotland, which (after much trouble) they possessed, & of themselves named Scotland; but in processe of time (as it is commonly seene) the dominion of the part prevaileth in the whole, for the Irish Scots putting away the name of Scots, were called onely Irish, & the Albine Scots, leaving the name of Albine, were called only Scots. Therefore it commeth thence that of some writers, Ireland is called Scotia maior, and that which now is called Scotland, Scotia minor. Eudox. I doe now well understand your distinguishing of the two sorts of Scots, & two Scotlands, how that this which now is called Ire∣land, was anciently called Erin, and afterwards of some written Scot∣land, & that which now is called Scotland, was formerly called Albin, before the comming of the Scythes thither; but what other nation in∣habited the other parts of Ireland? Iren. After this people thus planted in the North (or before) for the certaintie of times in things so farre from all knowledge can∣not be justly avouched) another nation comming out of Spaine, arri∣ved in the West part of Ireland, & finding it waste, or weakely inhabi∣ted, possessed it, who whether they were native Spaniards, or Gaules, or Africans, or Gothes, or some other of those Northerne nations which did over-spread all Christendome, it is impossible to affirme, only some naked conjectures may be gathered, but that out of Spaine certainely they came, that doe all the Irish Chronicles agree. Eudox. You doe very boldly Iren. adventure upon the Histories of auncient times, and leane too confidently on those Irish Chronicles which are most fabulous and forged, in that out of them you dare take in hand to lay open the originall of such a nation so antique, as that no monument remaines of her beginning and first inhabiting, especially having bin in those times without letters, but only bare traditions of times & remembrances of Bardes, which use to forge and falsifie every thing as they list, to please or displease any man. Iren. Truly I must confesse I doe so, but yet not so absolutely as you suppose. I do herein relye upon those Bards or Irish Chroniclers, though the Irish themselves through their ignorance in matters of learning and deepe judgement, doe most constantly beleeve and a∣vouch them, but unto them besides I adde mine owne reading, and out of thē both together, with comparison of times, likewise of man∣ners & customes, affinity of words and names, properties of natures, & uses, resemblances of rites & ceremonies, monuments of Churches and Tombes, and many other like circumstances, I doe gather a likelyhood of truth, not certainely affirming any thing, but by
conferring of times, language, monuments, and such like, I doe hunt out a probability of things, which I leave to your judgement to be∣lieve or refuse. Neverthelesse there be some very auncient Authors that make mention of these things, and some moderne, which by comparing them with present times, experience, and their owne reason, doe open a window of great light unto the rest that is yet unseene; as namely of the elder times, Caesar, Strabo, Tacitus, Pto∣lomie, Pliny, Pomponius Mela, and Berosus: of the later, Vincenti∣us, Aeneas Sylvius, Luidus, Buchanan, for that hee himselfe being an Irish Scot or Pict by nation, and being very excellently lear∣ned and industrious to seeke out the truth of all things concerning the originall of his owne people, hath both set downe the testi∣mony of the auncients truely, and his owne opinion together with∣all very reasonably, though in some things he doth somewhat flat∣ter. Besides the Bardes and Irish Chroniclers themselves, though through desire of pleasing perhappes too much, and ignorances of Arts, and purer learning they have clauded the truth of those lines, yet there appeares among them some reliques of the true antiquitie, though disguised, which a well eyed man may happily discover and finde out. Eudox. How can there be any truth in them at all, since the anci∣ent nations which first inhabited Ireland, were altogether destitute of letters, much more of learning, by which they might leave the ve∣rity of things written. And those Bardes comming also so many hun∣dred yeares after, could not know what was done in former ages, nor deliver certainty of any thing, but what they fayned out of their un∣learned heads. Iren. Those Bardes indeed, Caesar writeth, delivered no certaine truth of any thing, neither is there any certaine hold to be taken of a∣ny antiquity which is received by tradition, since all men be lyars, & many lye when they wil, yet for the antiquities of the written Chro∣nicles of Ireland, give me leave to say something, not to justifie them, but to shew that some of them might say truth. For where you say the Irish have alwayes bin without letters, you are therein much de∣ceived; for it is certaine, that Ireland hath had the use of letters very anciently, and long before England. Eudox. Is it possible? how comes it then that they are so un∣learned still, being so old schollers? For learning (as the Poet saith) Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros: whence then (I pray you) could they have those letters? Iren. It is hard to say, for whether they at their first comming in∣to the Land, or afterwards by trading with other nations which had letters, learned them of them, or devised them amongst themselves, is very doubtfull, but that they had letters aunciently, is nothing doubtfull, for the Saxons of England are said to have their letters, & learning, and learned men from the Irish, and that also appeareth by the likenesse of the Character, for the Saxons Character
is the same with the Irish. Now the Scythians, never, as I can reade, of old had letters amongst them, therfore it seemeth that they had them from the nation which came out of Spaine, for in Spaine there was (as Strabo writeth) letters anciently used, whether brought unto them by the Phenicians, or the Persians, which (as it appeareth by him) had some footing there, or from Marsellis, which is said to have bin inha∣bited by the Greekes, & from them to have had the Greeke Character, of which Marsilians it is said, that the Gaules learned them first, & u∣sed them only for the furtherance of their trades & privat busines, for the Gaules (as is strongly to be proved by many ancient & authenti∣call writers) did first inhabite all the sea coast of Spaine, even unto Cales, & the mouth of the straights, & peopled also a great part of Ita∣ly, which appeareth by sundry havens & cities in Spaine called from them, as Portugallia, Gallecia, Galdunum, & also by sundry nations ther∣in dwelling, which yet have received their own names of the Gaules, as the Rhegni, Presamarei, Tamari, Cineri, and divers others. All which Pomponius Mela being himselfe a Spaniard, yet saith to have descended from the Celts of France, whereby it is to be gathered, that that Nati∣on which came out of Spaine into Ireland, were anciently Gaules, and that they brought with them those letters which they had anciently learned in Spaine, first into Ireland, which some also say, doe much re∣semble the olde Phenician Character, being likewise distinguished with pricke and accent, as theirs aunciently, but the further enquirie hereof needeth a place of longer discourse then this our short confe∣rence. Eudox. Surely you have shewed a great probability of that which I had thought impossible to have bin proved, but that which you now say, that Ireland should have bin peopled with the Gaules, seemeth much more strange, for all the Chronicles doe say, that the West & South was possessed & inhabited of Spaniards: and Cornelius Tacitus doth also strongly affirme the same, all which you must over∣throw and falsifie, or else renounce your opinion. Iren. Neither so, nor so; for the Irish Chronicles (as I shewed you) being made by unlearned men, & writing things according to the ap∣pearance of the truth, which they conceived doe erre in the circum∣stances, not in the matter. For all that came out of Spaine (they being no diligent searchers into the differences of the nations) supposed to be Spaniards, & so called them; but the ground-work therof is never∣thelesse true & certain, however they through ignorance disguise the same, or through vanity, whilst they would not seem to be ignorant, doe thereupon build & enlarge many forged Histories of their owne antiquity, which they deliver to fooles, and make them believe for true▪ as for example, That first of one Gathelus the sonne of Cecrops or Argos, who having married the King of Egypt his daughter, thence sailed with her into Spaine, & there inhabited: Then that of Nemedus and his sonnes, who comming out of Scythia, peopled Ireland, and in∣habited it with his sonnes 250. yeares, until he was over-come of the
Giants dwelling then in Ireland, and at the last quite banished and rooted out, after whom 200. yeares, the sonnes of one Dela, being Scythians arrived there againe, and possessed the whole land, of which the youngest called Slanius, in the end made himselfe Monarch. Last∣ly of the 4. sonnes of Milesius King of Spaine, which conquered the land from the Scythians, and inhabited it with Spaniards, and called it of the name of the yongest Hiberus, Hibernia: All which are in truth fables, and very Milesian lyes, as the later proverbe is: for never was there such a King of Spaine, called Milesius, nor any such Colonie seated with his sonnes as they faine, that can ever be proved, but yet under these tales you may in a manner see the truth lurke. For Scy∣thians here inhabiting, they name and put Spaniards, whereby appea∣reth that both these nations here inhabited, but whether very Spani∣ards, as the Irish greatly affect, is no wayes to be proved. Eudox. Whence commeth it then that the Irish doe so greatly co∣vet to fetch themselves from the Spaniards, since the old Gaules are a more auncient and much more honorable nation. Iren. Even of a very desire of new fanglenes and vanity, for they derive themselves from the Spaniards, as seeing them to bee a very honourable people, and neere bordering unto them: but all that is most vaine, for from the Spaniards that now are, or that people that now inhabite Spaine, they no wayes can prove themselves to descend; neither should it be greatly glorious unto them, for the Spaniard that now is, is come from as rude and savage nations as they, there being, as there may be gathered by course of ages, and view of their owne History (though they therein labour much to enoble themselves) scarce any drop of the old Spanish blood left in them, for all Spaine was first conquered by the Romans, and filled with colonies from them, which were still increased, and the native Spaniard still cut off. Afterwards the Carthaginians in all the long Punick warres (having spoiled all Spaine, and in the end subdued it wholly unto themselves) did as it is likely, root out all that were affected to the Romans. And lastly the Romans having againe recovered that countrey, and beate out Hannibal, did doubtlesse cut off all that favored the Carthaginians, so that betwixt them both, to and fro, there was scarce a native Spa∣niard left, but all inhabited of Romans. All which tempests of troubles being over-blowne, there long after arose a new storme, more dread∣full then all the former, which over-ran all Spaine, and made an infi∣nite confusion of all things; that was, the comming downe of the Gothes, the Hunnes, and the Vandals: And lastly all the nations of Scy∣thia, which like a mountaine flood, did over-flow all Spaine, and quite drowned and washt away whatsoever reliques there was left of the land-bred people, yea, and of all the Romans too. The which Nor∣therne nations finding the nature of the soyle, and the vehement heat thereof farre differing from their constitutions, tooke no felicity in that Country, but from thence passed over, and did spread them∣selves into all Countryes of Christendome, of all which there is
none but hath some mixture or sprinckling, if not throughly people∣ing of them. And yet after all these the Moores and the Barbarians breaking over out of Affrica, did finally possesse all Spaine, or the most part thereof, and did tread under their heathenish feete, what e∣ver little they found yet there standing. The which though after they were beaten out by Ferdinando of Arragon and Elizabeth his wife, yet they were not so cleansed, but that through the marriages which they had made, and mixture with the people of the land, during their long continuance there, they had left no pure drop of Spanish blood, no more then of Roman or of Scythian. So that of all nations under hea∣ven (I suppose) the Spaniard is the most mingled, and most uncertaine, wherefore most foolishly doe the Irish thinke to enoble themselves by wresting their Auncientry from the Spaniard, who is unable to derive himselfe from any in certaine. Eudox. You speake very sharpely Iren. in dispraise of the Spani∣ard, whom some others boast to be the onely brave nation under the Skie. Iren. So surely he is a very brave man, neither is that any thing which I speake to his derogation, for in that I said he is a mingled people, it is no dispraise, for I thinke there is no nation now in Chri∣stendome, nor much further, but is mingled, and compounded with others: for it was a singular providence of God, and a most admirall purpose of his wisedome, to draw those northerne heathen nations downe into those Christian parts, where they might receive Chri∣stianity, and to mingle nations so remote miraculously, to make as it were one blood and kindred of all people, and each to have know∣ledge of him. Eudox. Neither have you sure any more dishonoured the Irish, for you have brought them from very great and ancient nations, as any were in the world, how ever fondly they affect the Spanish. For both Scythians and Gaules were two as mighty nations as ever the world brought forth. But is there any token, denomination or monument of the Gaules yet remaining in Ireland, as there is of the Scythians? Iren. Yea surely very many words of the Gaules remaining, and yet dayly used in Common speech. Eudox. What was the Gaulish speech, is there any part of it still used among any nation? Iren. The Gaulish speech, is the very British, the which was ve∣ry generally used here in all Brittaine, before the comming of the Saxons: and yet is retained of the Welshmen, Cornishmen, and the Brit∣taines of France, though time working the alterarion of all things, and the trading and interdeale with other nations round about, have changed and greatly altered the dialect thereof, but yet the originall words appeare to be the same, as who hath list to read in Camden and Buchanan, may see at large. Besides there be many places, as havens, hills, townes and Castles, which yet beare the names from the Gaules, of the which, Buchanan rehearseth above 500. in Scotland, and I can
(I thinke) recount neere as many in Ireland which retaine the old de∣nomination of the Gaules, as the Menapij, Cauci, Venti, and others; by all which and many other reasonable probabilities (which this short course will not suffer to be laide forth) it appeareth that the cheife Inhabitants in Ireland were Gaules, comming thither first out of Spain, and after from besides Tanais, where the Gthes, the Hunnes, and the Getes sate downe, they also being (as it is said of some) ancient Gaules, and lastly passing out of Gallia it selfe, from all the Sea-coast of Bel∣gia and Celtica, into al the southerne coasts of Ireland, which they pos∣sessed and inhabited, whereupon it is at this day, amongst the Irish a common use, to call any stranger Inhabitant there amongst them, Gald, that is descended from the Gaules. Eudox. This is very likely, for even so did those Gaules anciently possesse all the southerne coasts of our Brittaine, which yet retaine their old names, as the Belga, in Sommerset-shire, Wilshire, and part of Hamshire, Attrebatij in Barkeshire, Regni in Sussex and Surry, and many others. Now thus farre then, I understand your opinion, that the Scy∣thians planted in the north part of Ireland: the Spaniards (for so we call them, what ever they were that came from Spaine) in the west, the Gaules in the south: so that there now remaineth the east parts to∣wards England, which I would be glad to understand from whence you doe thinke them to be peopled. Iren. Mary I thinke of the Brittaines themselves, of which though there be little footing now remaining, by reason that the Saxons af∣terwards, and lastly the English, driving out the Inhabitants thereof, did possesse and people it themselves. Yet amongst the Tooles, the Birns, or Brins, the Cavenaghes▪ and other nations in Leinster, there is some memory of the Britans remayning. As the Tooles are called of the old British word Tol, that is, a hill Countrey, the Brins of the Bri∣tish word Brin, that is, woods, and the Cavenaghes of the word Caune, that is, strong, so that in these three people the very denomination of the old Britons doe still remaine. Besides when any flieth under the succour and protection of any against an enemie, he cryeth unto him, Comericke, that is in the Brittish, helpe, for the Brittaine is called in their owne language, Comeroy. Furthermore to prove the same, Ireland is by Diodorus Siculus, and by Strabo, called Britannia, and a part of great Brittaine. Finally it appeareth by good record yet extant, that King Arthur, and after him Gurgunt, had all that Iland under their al∣leagiance and subjection, hereunto I could add many probabilities of the names of places, persons, and speeches, as I did in the former, but they should be too long for this, and I reserve them for another. And thus you have had my opinion, how all that Realme of Ireland was first peopled, and by what nations. After all which the Saxons suc∣ceeding, subdued it wholly to themselves. For first Egfrid King of Northumberland, did utterly waste and subdue it, as appeareth out of Beda's complaint against him, and after him, King Edgar brought it under his obedience, as appeareth by an auncient Record, in which
it is found written, that he subdued all the Islands of the North, even unto Norway, and brought them into his subjection. Eudox. This ripping of Auncestors, is very pleasing unto me, and indeede savoureth of good conceipt, and some reading withall. I see hereby how profitable travaile, and experience of forraine nations, is to him that will apply them to good purpose. Neither indeed would I have thought, that any such antiquities could have beene avouched for the Irish, that maketh me the more to long to see some other of your observations, which you have gathered out of that country, and have earst halfe promised to put forth: And sure in this mingling of Nations appeareth (as you earst well noted) a wonderfull provi∣dence and purpose of Almighty God, that stirred up the people in the furthest parts of the world, to seeke out their regions so remote from them, and by that meanes, both to restore their decayed habita∣tions, and to make himselfe knowne to the heathen. But was there I pray you no more generall employing of that Iland, then first by the Scythians, which you say were the Scottes, and afterward by the Spa∣niards, besides the Gaules, Brittaines and Saxons? Iren. Yes, there was another, and that last and greatest, which was by the English, when the Earle Strangbowe having conquered that land, delivered up the same into the hands of Henry the second then King, who sent over thither, great store of Gentlemen, and other warlike people, amongst whom, he distributed the Land, and setled such a strong Colonie therein, as never since could with all the subtle practices of the Irish be rooted out, but abide still a mighty people, of so many as remaine English of them. Eudox. What is this that you say, of so many as remaine English of them? Why? are not they that were once English, English still? Iren. No, for some of them are degenerated and growne almost meere Irish, yea and more malitious to the English then the Irish them∣selves. Eudox. What heare I? And is it possible that an Englishman brought up in such sweet civility as England affords, should find such liking in that barbarous rudenes, that he should forget his owne na∣ture, and forgoe his owne nation, how may this bee, or what (I pray you) may be the cause thereof? Iren. Surely, nothing but the first evill ordinance and institution of that Common-wealth. But thereof here is no fit place to speake, least by the occasion thereof, offering matter of a long discourse, we might be drawne from this, that we have in hand, namely the handle∣ing of abuses in the Customes of Ireland. Eudox. In truth Iren. you doe well remember the plot of your first purpose; but yet from that (me seemes) yee have much swarved in all this long discourse, of the first inhabiting of Ireland, for what is that to your purpose? Iren. Truely very materiall, for if you marked the course of all that speech well, it was to shew, by what meanes the customes, that
now are in Ireland, being some of them indeede very strange and al∣most heathenish, were first brought in: and that was, as I said, by those Nations from whom that Countrey was first peopled; for the diffe∣rence in manners and customes, doth follow the difference of nations and people. The which I have declared to you, to have beene three especially which seated themselves here: to wit first the Scythian, then the Gaules, and lastly the English. Notwithstanding that I am not ig∣norant, that there were sundry Nations which go footing in that land, of the which there yet remaine divers great families and septs, of whom I will also in their proper places make mention. Eudox. You bring your selfe Iren. very well into the way againe, notwithstanding that it seemeth that you were never out of the way, but now that you have passed thorough those antiquities, which I could have wished not so soone ended, begin when you please, to de∣clare what customes and manners have beene derived from those nations to the Irish, and which of them, you finde fault withall. Iren. I will begin then to count their customes in the same or∣der that I counted their Nations, and first with the Scythian or Scottish manners. Of the which there is one use, amongst them to keepe their cattle, and to live themselves the most part of the yeare in Boolies, pa∣sturing upon the mountaine, and waste wilde places; and removing still to fresh land, as they have depastured the former. The which ap∣peareth plaine to be the manner of the Scythians, as you may read in Olaus Magnus, and Io: Bohemus, and yet is used, amongst all the Tarta∣rians and the people about the Caspian Sea, which are naturally Scy∣thians, to live in heards as they call them, being the very same, that the Irish Boolies are, driving their cattle continually with them, and feeding onely on their milke and white meates. Eudox. What fault can you finde with this custome? for though it be an old Scythian use, yet is it very behoofefull in this Country of Ireland, where there are great mountaines, and waste deserts full of grasse, that the same should be eaten downe, and nourish many thou∣sands of cattle, for the good of the whole Realme, which cannot (me thinks) well be any other way, then by keeping those Boolies there, as yee have shewed. Iren: But by this custome of Boolying, there grow in the meane time many great enormityes unto that Common-wealth. For first if there be any out-lawes, or loose people, (as they are never without some) which live upon stealthes and spoyles, they are evermore succoured and finde releife only in these Boolies, being upon the waste places, whereas else they should be driven shortly to starve, or to come downe to the townes to seeke releife, where by one meanes or other, they would soone be caught. Besides such stealthes of cattle as they make, they bring commonly to those Boolies, being upon those waste places, where they are readily received, and the theife harboured from danger of law, or such Officers as might light upon him. More∣over the people that thus live in those Boolies, grow thereby the more
barbarous, and live more licentiously then they could in Townes, using what manners they list, and practizing what mischeifes and villainies they will, either against the government there, by their combynations, or against private men, whom they maligne, by stea∣ling their goods, or murdering themselves. For there they thinke themselves halfe exempted from law and obedience, and having once tasted freedome, doe like a steere, that hath beene long out of his yoke, grudge and repyne ever after, to come under Rule againe. Eudox. By your speech Iren. I perceive more evill come by this use of Boolies, then good by their grasing: and therefore it may well be reformed: but that must be in his due course, doe you proceed to the next. Iren. They have another custome from the Scythians, that is the wearing of Mantles, and long Glibbes, which is a thicke curled bush of haire, hanging downe over their eyes, and monstrously disguising them, which are both very bad and hurtfull. Eudox. Doe you thinke that the Mantle commeth from the Scy∣thians? I would surely thinke otherwise, for by that which I have read, it appeareth that most Nations of the world aunciently used the Mantle. For the Iewes used it, as you may read of Elyas Mantle, &c. The Chaldees also used it, as yee may read in Diodorus. The Egyptians likewise used it, as yee may read in Herodotus, and may bee gathered by the description of Berenice, in the Greeke Commentary upon Calli∣machus. The Greekes also used it aunciently, as appeareth by Venus Mantle lyned with starrs, though afterwards they changed the forme thereof into their cloakes, called Pallia, as some of the Irish also use. And the auncient Latines and Romans used it, as you may read in Virgil, who was a very great Antiquary. That Euander, when Aenaeas came to him at his Feast, did entertaine and feast him, sitting on the ground, and lying on Mantles. Insomuch as he useth the very word Mantile for a Mantle. —Humi mantilia sternunt. So that it seemeth that the Mantle was a generall habite to most Na∣tions, and not proper to the Scythians onely, as you suppose. Iren. I cannot deny but that aunciently it was common to most, and yet sithence disused and laide away. But in this later age of the world, since the decay of the Romane Empire, it was renewed and brought in againe by those Northerne nations, when breaking out of their cold caves and frozen habitations, into the sweet soyle of Europe, they brought with them their usuall weedes, fit to sheild the cold, and that continuall frost, to which they had at home beene in∣ured: the which yet they left not off, by reason that they were in per∣petuall warres, with the Nations whom they had invaded, but still removing from place to place, carried alwayes with them that weed, as their house, their bed, and their garment, and comming lastly into Ireland, they found there more speciall use thereof, by reason of the rawe cold climate, from whom it is now growne into that generall
use, in which that people now have it. After whom the Gaules succee∣ding, yet finding the like necessitie of that garment, continued the like use thereof. Eudox. Since then the necessity thereof is so commodious, as you alledge, that it is insteed of housing, bedding, & cloathing, what rea∣son have you then to wish so necessarie a thing cast off? Iren. Because the commoditie doth not countervaile the discō∣moditie: for the inconveniences which thereby doe arise, are much more many. For it is a fit house for an Out-law, a meet bed for a Re∣bell, & an apt cloake for a thiefe. First the Out-law being for his ma∣ny crimes and villanyes, banished from the Townes & houses of ho∣nest men, & wandring in waste places, far from danger of law, maketh his Mantle his house, & under it covereth himselfe from the wrath of Heaven, frō the offence of the Earth, & from the sight of men. When it raineth it is his pent-house; when it bloweth it is tent, when it free∣zeth it is his Tabernacle. In sommer he can weare it loose, in winter he can wrap it close, at all times he can use it; never heavy, never cum∣bersome. Likewise for a Rebell it is as serviceable. For in his warre that he maketh (if at least it deserve the name of warre) when he still flyeth from his foe, & lurketh in the thicke woods & straite passages, waiting for advantages, it is his bed, yea and almost as his houshold stuff. For the wood is his house against all weathers, & his Mantle is his couch to sleepe in. Therein he wrappeth himself round, & couch∣eth himselfe strongly against the gnats, which in that countrey doe more annoy the naked Rebels, whilst they keepe the woods, & doe more sharply wound them then all their enemies swords, or speares, which can seldome come nigh them: yea & oftentimes their Mantle serveth them, when they are neere driven, being wrapped about their left arme in steed of a Target, for it is hard to cut thorough with a sword, besides it is light to beare, light to throw away, and being (as they commonly are) naked, it is to them all in all. Lastly for a Theife it is so handsome, as it may seeme it was first invented for him, for un∣der it he may cleanly convey any fit pillage that commeth handsom∣ly in his way, & when he goeth abroad in the night in free-booting, it is his best & surest friend; for lying as they often do 2. or 3. nights to∣gether abroad to watch for their booty, with that they can prettily shroud themselves under a bush or a banke side, till they may conve∣niently do their errand: & when all is over, he can in his mantle passe thorough any town or company, being close hooded over his head, as he useth, from knowledge of any to whom he is indangered. Besides this, he or any man els that is disposed to mischief or villany, may un∣der his mantle goe privily armed without suspition of any, carry his head-peece, his skean, or pistol if he please, to be alwayes in readines. Thus necessary & fitting is a mantle for a bad man, & surely for a bad huswife it is no lesse convenient, for some of them that bee wandring woemen, called of them Mona-Shul, it is halfe a wardrobe: for in sum∣mer you shal find her arrayed commonly, but in her smock & mantle
to be more ready for her light services: in winter, and in her travaile, it is her cloake and safeguard, and also a coverlet for her lewde exer∣cise. And when she hath filled her vessell, under it she can hide both her burden, and her blame; yea, and when her Bastard is borne, it serves insteed of swadling clouts. And as for all other good women which love to doe but little worke, how handsome it is to lye in and sleepe, or to louse themselves in the Sun-shine, they that have beene but a while in Ireland can well witnes. Sure I am that you will thinke it very unfit for a good huswife to stirre in, or to busie her selfe about her huswifry in such sort as she should. These be some of the abuses for which I would thinke it meet to forbid all Mantles. Eudox. O evill minded man, that having reckoned up so many uses of a Mantle, will yet wish it to be abandoned! Sure I thinke Di∣ogenes dish did never serve his Master for more turnes, notwithstan∣ding that he made it his Dish, his Cup, his Cap, his Measure, his Wa∣ter-pot, then a Mantle doth an Irish man. But I see they be most to bad intents, & therefore I will joyne with you in abolishing it. But what blame lay you to the glibbe? take heed (I pray you) that you be not too busie therewith for feare of your owne blame, seeing our Englishmen take it up in such a generall fashion to weare their haire so immeasurably long, that some of them exceed the longest Irish glibs. Iren. I feare not the blame of any undeserved dislikes: but for the Irish glibbes, they are as fit maskes as a mantle is for a thiefe. For whensoever he hath run himselfe into that perill of Law, that he will not be knowne, he either cutteth off his glibbe quite, by which he be∣commeth nothing like himselfe, or pulleth it so low downe over his eyes, that it is very hard to discerne his theevish countenance. And therefore fit to be trussed up with the Mantle. Eudox. Truly these three Scythian abuses, I hold most fit to bee taken away with sharpe penalties, and sure I wonder how they have beene kept thus long, notwithstanding so many good provisions and orders, as have beene devised for that people. Iren. The cause thereof shall appeare to you hereafter: but let us now go forward with our Scythian customes. Of which the next that I have to treat of, is the manner of raising the cry in their conflicts, & at other troublesome times of uproare: the which is very natural Scy∣thian, as you may read in Diodorus Siculus, & in Herodotus, describing the maner of the Scythians & Parthians comming to give the charge at battles: at which it is said that they came running with a terrible yell as if heaven & earth would have gone together, which is the very I∣mage of the Irish Hubub, which their Kerne use at their first encounter. Besides, the same Herodotus writeth, that they used in their battles to call upon the names of their Captains or Generals, & somtimes upon their greatest Kings deceased, as in that battle of Thomyris against Cy∣rus: which custome to this day manifestly appeareth amongst the I∣rish. For at their joyning of Battle, they likewise call upon their Captaines name, or the word of his Auncestours. As they under
Oneale cry Laundarg-abo, that is, the bloody hand, which is Oneales badge. They under O Brien call Laun-laider, that is, the strong hand. And to their ensample, the old English also which there remayneth, have gotten up their cryes Scythian-like, as Crom-abo, and Butler-abo. And here also lyeth open an other manifest proofe, that the Irish bee Scythes or Scots, for in all their incounters they use one very common word, crying Ferragh, Ferragh, which is a Scottish word, to wit, the name of one of the first Kings of Scotland, called Feragus, or Fergus, which fought against the Pictes, as you may reade in Buchanan, de rebus Scoticis; but as others write, it was long before that, the name of their chiefe Captaine, under whom they fought against the Africans, the which was then so fortunate unto them, that ever sithence they have used to call upon his name in their battailes. Eudox. Believe me, this observation of yours Irenaeus, is very good and delightfull; far beyond the blinde conceipt of some, who (I remember) have upon the same word Ferragh, made a very blunt conjecture, as namely M. Stanihurst, who thogh he be the same coun∣treyman borne, that should search more neerely into the secret of these things, yet hath strayed from the truth all the heavens wyde, (as they say) for he thereupon groundeth a very grosse imagination, that the Irish should descend from the Egyptians which came into that Island, first under the leading of one Scota the daughter of Pharaoh, whereupon they use (saith he) in all their battailes, to call upon the name of Pharaoh, crying Ferragh, Ferragh. Surely he shootes wyde on the Bow hand, & very far from the marke. For I would first know of him what auncient ground of authority he hath for such a senselesse fable, & if he have any of the rude Irish bookes, as it may be hee hath, yet (me seemes) that a man of his learning should not so lightly have bin carried away with old wives tales, from approvance of his owne reason, for whether it be a smack of any learned iudgment, to say, that Scota is like an Egyptian word, let the learned iudge. But his Scota ra∣ther comes of the Greeke σκότοσ, that is, darknes, which hath not let him see the light of the truth. Iren. You know not Eudoxus, how well M. Stan. could see in the darke, perhaps he hath Owles or Cats eyes: but well I wot he seeth not well the very light in matters of more weight. But as for Ferragh I have told my coniecture only, and yet thus much I have more to prove a likelyhood, that there be yet at this day in Ireland, many Irish men (chiefly in the Northerne parts) called by the name of Ferragh. But let that now be: this only for this place suffiseth, that it is a word used in their cōmon hububs, the which (with all the rest) is to be abo∣lished, for that it discovereth an affectatiō to Irish captainry, which in this platform I indevour specially to beat down. There be other sorts of cryes also used among the Irish, which savour greatly of the Scythi∣an barbarisme, as their lamentations at their buryals, with dispairfull out-cryes, and immoderate waylings, the which Master Stanihurst might also have used for an Argument to proove them Egyptians.
For so in Scripture it is mentioned, that the Egyptians lamented for the death of Ioseph. Others thinke this custome to come from the Spaniards, for that they doe immeasurably likewise bewayle their dead. But the same is not proper Spanish, but altogether Heathenish, brought in thither first either by the Scythians, or the Moores that were Africans, and long possessed that Countrey. For it is the manner of all Pagans and Infidels to be intemperate in their waylings of their dead, for that they had no faith nor hope of salvation. And this ill cu∣stome also is specially noted by Diodorus Siculus, to have beene in the Scythians, and is yet amongst the Northerne Scots at this day, as you may reade in their Chronicles. Eudox. This is sure an ill custome also, but yet doth not so much concerne civill reformation, as abuse in Religion. Iren. I did not rehearse it as one of the abuses which I thought most worthie of reformation; but having made mention of Irish cryes I thought this manner of lewd crying and howling, not impertinent to be noted as uncivill and Scythian-like: for by these old customes, and other like coniecturall circumstances, the descents of nations can only be proved, where other monuments of writings are not remay∣ning. Eudox. Then (I pray you) whensoever in your discourse you meet with them by the way, doe not shun, but boldly touch them: for be∣sides their great pleasure and delight for their antiquity, they bring also great profit and helpe unto civility. Iren. Then sith you will have it so, I will heere take occasion, since I lately spake of their manner of cryes in ioyning of battaile, to speake also somewhat of the manner of their Armes, and array in Battell, with other customes perhappes worthy the noting. And first of their Armes and Weapons, amongst which their broad Swordes are proper Scythian, for such the Scythes used commonly, as you may read in Olaus Magnus. And the same also the old Scots used, as you may read in Buchanan, and in Solinus, where the pictures of them are in the same forme expressed. Also their short Bowes, and little Quivers with short bearded Arrowes, are very The originall of the very name of Scythi∣ans seemeth to come from shooting. vide Selden. annot. in Poly. olb. (ex Gorop. Becan. eccesel. et Alu∣vedi lg.) pag. 122. Scythian, as you may reade in the same Olaus. And the same sort both of Bowes, Quivers, and Arrowes, are at this day to bee seene commonly amongst the Nor∣therne Irish-Scots, whose Scottish Bowes are not past three quarters of a yard long, with a string of wreathed hempe slackely bent, and whose Arrowes are not much above halfe an ell long, tipped with steele heads, made like common broad Arrow heades, but much more sharpe and slender, that they enter into a man or horse most cruelly, notwithstanding that they are shot foorth weakely. More∣over their long broad Shields, made but with wicker roddes, which are commonly used amongst the said Northerne Irish, but especially of the Scots, are brought from the Scythians, as you may read in Olaus Magnus, Solinus, & others: likwise their going to battle without armor on their bodies or heads, but trusting to the thicknes of their glibbs,
the which (they say) will sometimes beare off a good stroke, is meere Scythian, as you may see in the said Images of the old Scythes or Scots, set foorth by Herodianus and others. Besides, their confused kinde of march in heapes, without any order or array, their clashing of swords together, their fierce running upon their enemies, and their manner of fight, resembleth altogether that which is read in histories to have beene used of the Scythians. By which it may almost infallibly be ga∣thered together, with other circumstances, that the Irish are very Scots or Scythes originally, though sithence intermingled with many other Nations repairing and joyning unto them. And to these I may also adde another strong conjecture which commeth to my mind, that I have often observed there amongst them, that is, certain religious ce∣remonies, which are very superstitiously yet used amongst them, the which are also written by sundry authours, to have bin observed a∣mongst the Scythians, by which it may very vehemently be presumed that the nations were anciently all one. For Not he, but Herodotus in the life of Ho∣mer. Plutarch (as I remember) in his treatise of Homer, indeavouring to search out the truth, what countryman Homer was, prooveth it most strongly (as he thinketh) that he was an Aeolian borne, for that in describing a sacrifice of the Greekes, he omitted the loyne, the which all the other Grecians (saving the Aeolians) use to burne in their sacrifices: also for that he makes the intralls to be rosted on five spits, which was the proper manner of the Aeolians, who onely of all the nations of Grecia, used to sacrifize in that sort. By which he inferreth necessarily, that Homer was an Ae∣olian. And by the same reason may I as reasonably conclude, that the Irish are descended from the Scythians, for that they use (even to this day) some of the same ceremonies which the Scythians anciently used. As for example, you may reade in Lucian in that sweet Dia∣logue, which is intitled Toxaris, or of friendship, that the common oath of the Scythians was by the sword, and by the fire, for that they accounted those two speciall divine powers, which should worke vengeance on the perjurers. So doe the Irish at this day when they goe to battaile, say certaine prayers or charmes to their swords, ma∣king a crosse therewith upon the earth, and thrusting the points of their blades into the ground, thinking thereby to have the better suc∣cesse in fight. Also they use commonly to sweare by their swords. Also the Scythians used when they would binde any solemne vow or combination amongst thē, to drink a Bowle of blood together, vow∣ing therby to spend their last blood in that quarrell: & even so do the wild Scots, as you may read in Buchanan: and some of the Northerne Irish. Likewise at the kindling of the Fire, and lighting of Candles, they say certaine prayers, & use some other superstitious rites, which shew that they honour the Fire and the light: for all those Nor∣therne Nations having beene used to be annoyed with much colde and darkenesse, are wont therefore to have the Fire and the Sunne in great veneration; like as contrarywise the Moores and Egyptians which are much offended and grieved with extreame heat of the
Sunne, doe every morning when the Sunne ariseth, fall to cursing and banning of him as their plague. You may also reade in the same booke, in the tale of Arsacomas, that it was the manner of the Scy∣thians, when any one of them was heavily wronged, and would as∣semble unto him any forces of people to joyne with him in his re∣venge, to sit in some publicke place for certaine dayes upon an Oxe hide, to which there would resort all such persons as being disposed to take Armes, would enter into his pay, or joyne with him in his quarrell. And the same you may likewise reade to have beene the ancient manner of the wilde Scotts, which are indeed the very natu∣rall Irish. Moreover the Scythians used to sweare by their Kings hand, as Olaus sheweth. And so do the Irish use now to sweare by their Lords hand, and to forsweare it, holde it more criminall then to sweare by God. Also the Scythians said, that they were once a yeare tur∣ned into Wolves, and so is it written of the Irish: Though Master Camden in a better sense doth suppose it was a disease, called Lycan∣thropia, so named of the Wolfe. And yet some of the Irish doe use to make the Wolfe their Gossip. The Scythians used also to see the the flesh in the hide: & so doe the Northerne Irish. The Scythians used to draw the blood of the beast living, & to make meat thereof: & so doe the Irish in the North still. Many such customes I could recount unto you, as of their old manner of marrying, of burying, of dancing, of singing, of feasting, of cursing, though Christians have wyped out the most part of them, by resemblance, whereof it might plainly ap∣peare to you, that the Nations are the same, but that by the reckoning of these few, which I have told unto you, I finde my speech drawne out to a greater length then I purposed. Thus much onely for this time I hope shall suffise you, to thinke that the Irish are anciently de∣duced from the Scythians. Eudox. Surely Iren. I have heard in these few words, that from you which I would have thought had bin impossible to have bin spoken of times so remote, and customes so ancient: with delight whereof I was all that while (as it were intranced, and carried so farre from my selfe, as that I am now right sorry that you ended so soone. But I marvaile much how it commeth to passe, that in so long continuance of time, and so many ages come betweene, yet any jot of those olde rites and superstitious customes should remaine amongst them. Iren. It is no cause of wonder at all, for it is the maner of many Na∣tions to be very superstitious, and diligent observers of old customes & antiquities, which they receive by continuall tradition from their Parents, by recording of their Bards and Chronicles, in their songs, and by daylie use and ensample of their elders. Eudox. But have you (I pray you) observed any such customes amongst them, brought likewise from the Spaniards or Gaules, as these from the Scythians? that may sure be very materiall to your first purpose. Ien. Some perhaps I have, & who that will by this occasion more
diligently marke and compare their customes, shall find many more. But there are fewer remayning of the Gaules or Spaniards, then of the Scythians, by reason that the partes, which they then possessed, lying upon the coast of the Westerne and Southerne Sea, were sithence vi∣sited with strangers and forraine people, repayring thither for traf∣ficke, and for fishing, which is very plentifull upon those coasts: for the trade and interdeale of Sea-coast Nations one with another, wor∣keth more civilitie and good fashions, (all Sea men being naturally desirous of new fashions,) then amongst the Inland folke, which are seldome seene of forrainers; yet some of such as I have noted, I will recount unto you. And first I will for the better credit of the rest, shew you one out of their Statutes, among which it is enacted, that no man shall weare his beard onely on the upper lip, shaving all his Chinne. And this was the auncient manner of the Spaniards, as yet it is of all the Mahometans to cut off all their beards close, save onelie their Muschachios, which they weare long. And the cause of this use, was for that they being bred in a hot countrey, found much haire on their faces and other parts to be noyous unto them: for which cause they did cut it most away, like as contrarily all other nations brought up in cold countryes, doe use to nourish their haire, to keepe them the warmer, which was the cause that the Scythians and Scottes wore Glibbes (as I shewed you) to keepe their heads warme, and long beards to defend their face, from cold. From them also (I thinke) came saffron shirts and smocks, which was devised by them in those hote Countryes, where saffron is very common and rife, for avoy∣ding that evill which commeth by much sweating, and long wearing of Linnen: Also the Woemen amongst the old Spaniards had the charge of all houshold affaires, both at home and abroad, (as Boemus writeth) though now the Spaniards use it quite otherwise. And so have the Irish weomen the trust and care of all things, both at home, and in the field. Likewise round leather Targets is the Spanish fashion, who used it (for the most part) painted, which in Ireland they use also in many places, coloured after their rude fashion. Moreover the man∣ner of their Woemens riding on the wrong side of the horse, I meane with their faces towards the right side, as the Irish use, is (as they say) old Spanish, and some say African, for amongst them the woemen (they say) use so to ride. Also the deepe smocke sleive, which the Irish women use, they say was old Spanish, and is used yet in Barbary: and yet that should seeme rather to be an old English fashion, for in Ar∣mory the fashion of the Manche, which is given in Armes, by many being indeede nothing else but a sleive, is fashioned much like to that sleive. And that Knights in auncient times used to weare their Mi∣stresses or Loves sleive, upon their Armes, as appeareth by that which is written of Sir Launcelot, that he wore the sleive of the faire maide of Asteloth in a Tourney, whereat Queene Gueneuer was much dis∣pleased. Eudox. Your conceipt is good, and well fitting for things so far
growne from certainty of knowledge and learning, onely upon like∣ly-hoods and conjectures. But have you any customes remaining from the Gaules or Brittaines? Iren. I have observed a few of either; and who will better search into them, may finde more. And first the profession of their Bardes was (as Caesar writeth) usuall amongst the Gaules, and the same was al∣so common amongst the Brittans, and is not yet altogether left off, with the Welsh which are their posterity. For all the fashions of the Gaules and Brittaines, as he testifieth, were much like. The long darts came also from the Gaules, as you may read in the same Caesar, and in Io: Boemus. Likewise the said Io: Boemus writeth, that the Gaules used Swords a handfull broad, and so doe the Irish now. Also they used long Wicker sheilds in Battaile that should cover their whole bo∣dies, and so doe the Northerne Irish. But I have not seene such fashio∣ned Targets used in the Southerne parts, but onely amongst the Nor∣therne people, and Irish-Scottes, I doe thinke that they were brought in rather by the Scythians, then by the Gaules. Also the Gaules used to drinke their enemyes blood, and painte themselves therewith. So al∣so they write, that the old Irish were wont, and so have I seene some of the Irish doe, but not their enemyes, but freinds blood. As namely at the execution of a notable Traytor at Limericke, called Murrogh O-Brien, I saw an old woman, which was his foster mother, take up his head▪ whilst he was quartered, and sucked up all the blood that runne thereout, saying, that the Earth was not worthy to drinke it, and therewith also steeped her face and breast, and tore her haire, cry∣ing out and shreeking most terribly. Eudox. You have very well runne thorough such customes as the Irish have derived from the first old Nations which inhabited the land: namely the Scythians, the Spaniards, the Gaules, & the Brittaines. It now remaineth that you take in hand, the customes of the old English which are amongst the Irish: Of which I doe not thinke that you shall have much cause to finde fault with, considering that by the English, most of the old bad Irish customes were abolished, and more civill fashions brought in their stead. Iren. You thinke otherwise Eudox. then I doe, for the cheifest abuses which are now in that Realme, are growne from the English, and some of them are now much more lawlesse and licentious then the very wilde Irish: so that as much care, as was then by them had to reforme the Irish, so and much more, must now bee used to reforme them, so much time doth alter the manners of men. Eudox. That seemeth very strange, which you say, that men should so much degenerate from their first natures, as to growe wilde. Iren. So much can liberty and ill examples doe. Eudox. What liberty had the English there, more then they had here at home? were not the lawes planted amongst them at the first and had they not Governours to curbe and keepe them still in
awe and obedience? Iren. They had, but it was for the most part, such as did more hurt then good, for they had governours for the most part of them∣selves, and commonly out of the two families of the Geraldines and Butlers, both adversaries and corrivales one against the other. Who though for the most part they were but Deputies under some of the Kings of Englands Sonnes, Brethren, or other neare kinsmen, who were the Kings Lieutenants, yet they swayed so much, as they had all the Rule, and the others, but the title. Of which Butlers and Geraldynes, albeit (I must confesse) there were very brave and worthy men, as al∣so of other the Peeres of that Realme, made Lo: Deputies, and Lo: Iustices at sundry times, yet thorough greatnes of their late con∣quests and seignories they grew insolent, and bent both that regall authority, and also their private powers, one against another, to the utter subversion of themselves, and strengthning of the Irish againe. This you may read plainely discovered by a Letter written from the Cittizens of Corke out of Ireland, to the Earle of Shrewsbury then in England, and remaining yet upon record, both in the Towre of Lon∣don, and also among the Chronicles of Ireland. Wherein it is by them complained, that the English Lords and Gentlemen, who then had great possessions in Ireland, began thorough pride and insolency, to make private warres one against another, and when either part was weak, they would wage & draw in the Irish to take their part, by wch meanes they both greatly incouraged, and inabled the Irish, which till that time, had beene shut up within the mountaines of Slewlogher, and weakened and disabled themselves, insomuch that their revenues were wonderfully impaired, and some of them which are there rec∣koned to have been able, to have spent 12. or 1300. pounds per annū, of old rent (that I may say no more) besides their Commodities of Creekes and havens, were now scarce able to dispend the third part. From which disorder, and through other huge calamities, which have come upon them thereby, they are almost now growne like the Irish, I meane of such English, as were planted above towards the West, for the English pale hath preserved it selfe, thorogh nearenes of the state in reasonable civilitie, but the rest which dwelt in Connaght and in Mounster, which is the sweerest soyle of Ireland, and some in Leinster and Vlster, are degenerate, yea, and some of them have quite shaken off their English names, and put on Irish that they might bee altogether Irish. Eudox. Is it possible that any should so farre growe out of frame that they should in so short space, quite forget their Countrey and their owne names: that is a most dangerous Lethargie, much worse then that of Messala Coruinus, who being a most learned man, tho∣rough sickenesse forgat his owne name. But can you count us any of this kinde? Iren: I cannot but by report of the Irish themselves, who report, that the These fa∣milies of Mac-mahones and Mac-swines are by others held to be of the an∣cient Irish. Mac-mahons in the north, were aunciently English, to wit,
descended from the Fitz Vrsula's, which was a noble family in Eng∣land, and that the same appeareth by the signification of their Irish names: Likewise that thevide anno. pag. praeced. Mac-swynes, now in Vlster, were auncient∣ly of the Veres in England, but that they themselves, for hatred of En∣glish, so disguised their names. Eudox. Could they ever conceive any such dislike of their owne naturall Countryes, as that they would bee ashamed of their name, and byte at the dugge from which they sucked life? Iren. I wote well there should be none, but proud hearts doe of∣tentimes (like wanton Colts) kicke at their Mothers, as we read Al∣cibiades and Themistocles did, who being banished out of Athens, fled unto the Kings of Asia, and there stirred them up to warre against their Country, in which warres they themselves were Cheifetaines. So they say did these Mac-swines and Mac-mahons, or rather Veres and Fitz Vrsulaes, for private despight, turne themselves against Eng∣land. For at such time as Robert Vere Earle of Oxford, was in the Ba∣rons Warres against King Richard the second, through the mallice of the Peeres, banished the Realme and proscribed, he with his kinsman Fitz Vrsula fled into Ireland, where being prosecuted, and afterwards in England put to death, his kinsman there remaining behinde in Ire∣land rebelled, and conspiring with the Irish, did quite cast off both their English name and alleagiance, since which time they have so re∣mained still, and have since beene counted meere Irish. The very like is also reported of the Mac-swines, Mac-mahones, and Mac-Shehies of Mounster, how they likewise were aunciently English, and old fol∣lowers to the Earle of Desmond, untill the raigne of King Edward the fourth. At which time the Earle of Desmond that then was, called Thomas, being through false subornation (as they say) of the Queene for some offence by her against him conceived, brought to his death at Others hould that he was be∣headed at Tre∣dagh 15. Febr. 146. by (the command of) Iohn Tipof Earle of Wor∣cester, then Lo: Deputy of Ire∣land, for ex∣acting of Coyne and Livery. vid. Caden. Britan. pag. 738 edit. . an▪ 1607 Tredagh most unjustly, notwithstanding that he was a very good and sound subject to the King: Thereupon all his Kinsemen of the Ge∣raldines, which then was a mighty family in Mounster, in revenge of that huge wrong, rose into Armes against the King, and utterly re∣nounced and forsooke all obedience to the Crowne of England, to whom the said Macswines, Mac-shehies, and Mac-mahones, being then servants and followers, did the like, and have ever sithence so conti∣nued. And with them (they say) all the people of Mounster went out, and many other of them which were meere English, thenceforth joy∣ned with the Irish against the King, and termed themselves very Irish, taking on them Irish habits and customes, which could never since be cleane wyped away, but the contagion hath remained still amongst their posterityes. Of which sort (they say) be most of the surnames which end in an, as Hernan, Shinan, Mungan, &c. the which now ac∣count themselves naturall Irish. Other great houses there bee of the English in Ireland, which thorough licentious conversing with the Irish, or marrying, or fostering with them, or lacke of meete nurture, or other such unhappy occasions, have degenerated from their aun∣cient
dignities, and are now growne as Irish, as O. Hanlons breech, as the proverbe there is. Eudox. In truth this which you tell is a most shamefull hearing, and to be reformed with most sharpe censures: in so great personages to the terrour of the meaner: for if the Lords and cheife men dege∣nerate, what shall be hoped of the peasants, and baser people. And hereby sure you have made a faire way unto your selfe, to lay open the abuses of their evill customes, which you have now next to de∣clare▪ the which no doubt, but are very bad being borrowed, from the Irish, as their apparell, their language, their riding, and many other the like. Iren. You cannot but hold them sure to be very uncivill, for were they at the best that they were of old, when they were brought in, they should in so long an alteration of time seeme very uncouth and strange. For it is to be thought, that the use of all England, (was in the raigne of Henry the second, when Ireland was planted with English) very rude and barbarous, so as if the same should be now used in Eng∣land by any, it would seeme worthy of sharpe correction, and of new lawes for reformation, for it is but even the other day, since England grew civill: Therefore in counting the evill customes of the English there, I will not have regard, whether the beginning thereof were English or Irish, but will have respect onely to the inconvenience thereof. And first I have to finde fault with the abuse of language, that is, for the speaking of Irish among the English, which as it is un∣naturall that any people should love anothers language more then their owne, so it is very inconvenient, and the cause of many other evills. Eudox. It seemeth strange to me that the English should take more delight to speake that language, then their owne, whereas they should (mee thinkes) rather take scorne to acquaint their tongues thereto. For it hath ever beene the use of the Conquerour, to despise the language of the conquered, and to force him by all meanes to learne his. So did the Romans allwayes use, insomuch that there is al∣most no Nation in the world, but is sprinckled with their language. It were good therefore (me seemes) to search out the originall cause of this evill, for the same being discovered, a redresse thereof will the more easily be provided: for (I thinke) it very strange, that the English being so many, and the Irish so few, as they then were left, the ewer should draw the more unto their use. Iren. I suppose that the cheife cause of bringing in the Irish lan∣guage, amongst them, was specially their fostering▪ and marrying with the Irish, the which are two most dangerous infections, for first the childe that sucketh the milke of the nurse, must of necessity learne his first speach of her, the which being the first inured to his tongue, is ever after most pleasing unto him, insomuch as though hee after∣wards be taught English, yet the smacke of the first will allwayes a∣bide with him, and not onely of the speach, but also of the manners
and conditions. For besides that, yong Children be like Apes, which will affect and imitate what they see done before them, especially by their nurses whom they love so well, they moreover drawe into themselves, together with their sucke, even the nature and dispositi∣on of their nurses: for the minde followeth much the temperature of the body: and also the words are the image of the minde, so as they proceeding from the minde, the minde must needes be affected with the words. So that the speach being Irish, the heart must needes bee Irish▪ for out of the abundance of the heart, the tongue speaketh. The next is the marrying with the Irish, which how dangerous a thing it is in all common-wealthes, appeareth to every simplest sence, and though some great ones have perhaps used such matches with their Vassals, and have of them neverthelesse raised worthy issue, as Tela∣mon did with Termessa, Alexander the Great with Roxane, and Iulius Caesar with Cleopatra, yet the example is so perillous, as it is not to be adventured: for in stead of those few good, I could count unto them infinite many evill. And indeed how can such matching succeede well, seeing that commonly the childe taketh most of his nature of the Mother, besides speach, manners, and inclynation, which are (for the most part) agreeable to the conditions of their mothers: for by them they are first framed and fashioned, so as what they receive once from them, they will hardly ever after forgoe. Therefore are these evill customes of fostering and marrying with the Irish, most carefully to be restrayned: for of them two, the third evill that is the custome of language, (which I spake of,) cheifly proceedeth. Eudox. But are there not lawes already provided, for avoyding of this evill▪ Iren. Yes I thinke there be, but as good never a whit as never the better, for what doe Statutes availe without penalties, or lawes with∣out charge of execution? for so there is another like law enacted a∣gainst wearing of the Irish apparell, but neverthemore is it observed by any, or executed by them that have the charge: for they in their private discretions thinke it not fit to bee forced upon the poore wretches of that Country, which are not worth the price of English apparell, nor expedient to be practised against the abler sort, by rea∣son that the country (say they) doth yeeld no better, and were there better to be had, yet these were fitter to be used, as namely the mantle in travailing, because there be no Innes where meete bedding may be had, so that his mantle serves him then for a bed. The leather quil∣ted Iacke in journeying and in camping, for that it is fittest to be un∣der his shirt of Male, and for any occasion of suddaine service, as there happen many, to cover his trouse on horsebacke. The great linnen Roll, which the Women weare, to keepe their heads warme, after cutting their haire, which they use in any sickenesse. Besides their thicke folded linnen shirts, their long sleived smocks, their halfe slei∣ved coates, their silken fillets, and all the rest: they will devise some colour for, either of necessity, or of antiquity, or of comelynesse.
Eudox. But what colour soever they alledge, mee thinkes it not expedient, that the execution of a Law once ordayned, should be left to the discretion of the Iudge, or Officer, but that without partialitie, or regard, it should be fulfilled aswell on English, as Irish. Iren. But they thinke this precisenes in reformation of apparell, not to be so materiall, or greatly pertinent. Eudox. Yes surely but it is: for mens apparell is commonly made according to their conditions, & their conditions are oftentimes go∣verned by their garments: for the person that is gowned, is by his gowne put in minde of gravitie, and also restrained from lightnes, by the very unaptnesse of his weed. Therefore it is written by Aristotle, That when Cyrus had overcome the Lydians that were a warlike nati∣on, and devised to bring them to a more peaceable life, hee changed their apparell & musick, and in stead of their short warlike coat, cloa∣thed them in long garments like women, and in stead of their war∣like musick, appointed to them certaine lascivious layes, and loose Iiggs, by which in short space their mindes were so mollified and a∣bated, that they forgot their former fiercenesse, & became most ten∣der & effeminate, whereby it appeareth, that there is not a little in the garment to the fashioning of the minde and conditions. But be these which you have described, the fashions of the Irish weedes? Iren. No: all these which I have rehearsed to you, bee not Irish garments, but English; for the quilted leather Iack is old English: for it was the proper weed of the horseman, as you may read in Chaucer, when he describeth Sir Thopas apparell and Armour, as hee went to fight against the Gyant, in his robe of Shecklaton, which is that kind of guilded leather with which they use to imbroyder their Irish Iac∣kets. And there likewise by all that description, you may see the very fashion and manner of the Irish horseman most truely set forth in his long hose, his ryding shooes of costly Cordwaine, his hacqueton, & his haberion, with all the rest thereunto belonging. Eudox. I surely thought that the manner had beene Irish, for it is farre differing from that we have now, as also all the furniture of his horse, his strong brasse bit, his slyding reynes, his shanke pil∣lion without stirruppes, his manner of mounting, his fashion of ry∣ding, his charging of his speare aloft above head, the forme of his speare. Iren. No sure; they be native English, and brought in by the En∣glishmen first into Ireland: neither is the same accounted an uncome∣ly manner of ryding: for I have heard some great warriours say, that in all the services which they had seene abroad in forraine Countreyes, they never saw a more comely man then the Irish man, nor that commeth on more bravely in his charge, neither is his manner of mounting unseemely, though hee lacke stirruppes, but more ready then with stirruppes; for in his getting up, his horse is still going, whereby hee gayneth way. And therefore the
stirrup was called so in scorne, as it were a stay to get up, being derived of the olde English word Sty, which is, to get up, or mounte. Eudox. It seemeth then that you finde no fault with this manner of ryding, why then would you have the quilted Iacke laide away? Iren. I doe not wish it to be laide away; but the abuse thereof to be put away; for being used to the end that it was framed, that is, to be worne in warre under a shirt of Mayle, it is allowable, as also the shirt of Mayle, and all his other furniture: but to be worne daylie at home, and in townes and civile places, it is a rude habite and most un∣comely, seeming like a players painted coate. Eudox. But it is worne (they say) likewise of Irish Foot∣men, how doe you allow of that? for I should thinke it very un∣seemely. Iren. No, not as it is used in warre, for it is worne then likewise of footmen under their shirts of mayle, the which footmen they call Galloglasses, the which name doth discover them also to be auncient English: for Gall-ogla signifies an English servitour or yeoman. And he being so armed in a long shirt of Mayle downe to the calfe of his leg, with a long broad Axe in his hand, was then Pedes gravis ar∣maturae, (and was insteed of the armed footeman that now wea∣reth a Corslet,) before the Corslet was used, or almost inven∣ted. Eudox. Then him belike you likewise allow in your straite refor∣mation of old customes. Iren. Both him and the Kerne also, (whom onely I take to bee the proper Irish Souldier) can I allow, so that they use that habite and custome of theirs in the warres onely, when they are led forth to the service of their Prince, and not usually at home, and in civile places, and besides doe laye aside the evill and wilde uses which the Galloglasse and Kerne doe use in their common trade of life. Eudox. What be those? Iren. Marrie those bee the most barbarous and loathly condi∣tions of any people (I thinke) under heaven: for from the time that they enter into that course, they doe use all the beastly beha∣viour that may bee, they oppresse all men, they spoile aswell the subject, as the enemy; they steale, they are cruell and bloodie, full of revenge, and delighting in deadly execution, licentious, swearers, and blasphemers, common ravishers of woemen, and murtherers of chil∣dren. Eudox. These bee most villainous conditions, I marvaile then that they be ever used or imployed, or almost suffered to live; what good can there then be in them? Iren. Yet sure they are very valiaunt, and hardie, for the most part great indurers of colde, labour, hunger, and all
hardnesse, very active and strong of hand, very swift of foot, very vi∣gilant and circumspect in their enterprises, very present in perils, very great scorners of death. Eudox. Truely by this that you say, it seemes that the Irishman is a very brave Souldier. Iren. Yea surely, in that rude kinde of service, hee beareth himselfe very couragiously. But when hee commeth to experience of service abroad, or is put to a peece, or a pike, hee maketh as worthie a Souldiour as any Nation hee meeteth with. But let us (I pray you) turne againe to our discourse of evill customes amongst the Irish. Eudox. Me thinkes, all this which you speake of, concerneth the customes of the Irish very materially, for their uses in warre are of no small importance to bee considered, aswell to reforme those which are evill, as to confirme and continue those which are good. But fol∣low you your owne course, and shew what other their customes you have to dislike of. Iren. There is amongst the Irish a certaine kind of people, called Bardes, which are to them in steed of Poets, whose profession is to set foorth the praises or dispraises of men in their Poems or Rymes, the which are had in so high regard and estimation amongst them, that none dare displease them for feare to runne into reproach tho∣rough their offence, and to bee made infamous in the mouthes of all men. For their verses are taken up with a generall applause, and usually sung at all Feasts and meetings, by certaine other persons, whose proper function that is, who also receive for the same, great rewards and reputation amongst them. Eudox. Doe you blame this in them which I would otherwise have thought to have beene worthy of good accompt, and rather to have beene maintained and augmented amongst them, then to have beene disliked, for I have reade that in all ages, Poets have beene had in speciall reputation, and that (mee thinkes) not without great cause; for besides their sweete inventions, and most wittie laies, they have alwayes used to set foorth the praises of the good and vertuous, and to beate downe and disgrace the bad and vitious. So that many brave yong mindes, have oftentimes thorough hearing the praises and famous Eulogies of worthie men sung and reported unto them, beene stirred up to affect the like commendations, and so to strive to the like deserts. So they say that the Lacedemonians were more excited to desire of honour, with the excellent verses of the Poet Tirtaeus, then with all the exhortations of their Captaines, or authority of their Rulers and Magistrates. Iren. It is most true, that such Poets as in their writings doe labour to better the manners of men, and thorough the sweete baite of their numbers, to steale into the young Spirits a de∣sire of honour and vertue, are worthy to bee had in great respect.
But these Irish Bardes are for the most part of another minde, and so farre from instructing yong men in morall discipline, that they them∣selves doe more deserve to bee sharpely disciplined, for they sel∣dome use to choose unto themselves the doings of good men for the Arguments of their Poems, but whomsoever they finde to be most licentious of life, most bolde and lawlesse in his doings, most dangerous and desperate in all parts of disobedience and rebellious disposition, him they set up and glorifie in their Rithmes, him they praise to the people, & to yong men make an example to follow Eudox. I marvaile what kinde of speeches they can finde, or what face they can put on, to praise such bad persons as live so lawleslie and licentiouslie upon stealthes and spoyles, as most of them doe, or how can they thinke that any good mind will applaude or approve the same. Iren. There is none so bad Eudoxus, but shall finde some to favour his doings, but such licentious partes as these, tending for the most part to the hurt of the English, or maintenance of their owne lewde libertie, they themselves being most desirous therof, doe most allow. Besides this, evill things being decked and attired with the gay attire of goodly words, may easily deceive, & carry away the affection of a yong mind, that is not well stayed, but desirous by some bolde ad∣ventures, to make proofe of himselfe, for being (as they all be broght up) idlely, without awe of Parents, without precepts of masters, and without feare of offence, not being directed, nor imployed in any course of life, which may carry them to vertue, will easily be drawne to follow such as any shall set before them, for a yong minde cannot rest, if he be not still busied in some goodnesse, he will finde himselfe such businesse, as shall soone busie all about him. In which, if he shall find any to praise him, & to give him encouragement, as those Bardes and Rythmers doe for little reward, or a share of a stolne Cow, then waxeth he most insolent and halfe madde with the love of himselfe, & his owne lewd deeds. And as for words to set forth such lewdnes, it is not hard for them to give a goodly and painted shew thereunto, borrowed even from the praises which are proper to vertue it selfe. As of a most notorious thiefe & wicked out-law, which had lived all his life-time of spoyles & robberies, one of their Bardes in his praise will say, that he was none of the idle milke-sops that was brought up by the fire side, but that most of his dayes he spent in armes & valiant enterprises, that he did never eat his meat, before he had won it with his sword, that he lay not all night slugging in a cabbin under his mantle, but used commonly to keepe others waking to defend their lives, and did light his candle at the flames of their houses, to leade him in the darkenesse: That the Day was his Night, and the Night his Day, that he loved not to be long woing of wenches to yeeld to him, but where he came, he tooke by force the spoyle of other mens love, and left but lamentation to their lovers; that his musick was not the harpe, nor layes of love, but the cryes of people, and clashing of
Armor: & finally, that he died not bewayled of many, but made ma∣ny waile when he died, that dearely bought his death. Doe you not thinke (Eudoxus) that many of these praises might be applyed to men of best deserts, yet are they all yeelded to a most notable Traytor, & amongst some of the Irish not smally accounted of. For the song, when it was first made and sung to a person of high degree there, was bought (as their manner is) for forty crownes. Eudox. And well worthy sure. But tell me (I pray you) have they any Art in their compositions? or bee they any thing wittie or well favoured as Poemes should be? Iren. Yea truely, I have caused divers of them to be translated un∣to me, that I might understand them, & surely they savoured of sweet wit and good invention, but skilled not of the goodly ornaments of Poetry: yet were they sprinkled with some pretty flowres of their naturall device, which gave good grace & comlinesse unto them, the which it is great pitty to see so abused; to the gracing of wickednes & vice, which with good usage would serve to adorne & beautifie ver∣tue. This evill custome therfore needeth reformation. And now next after the Irish Kerne, me thinks the Irish hors-boyes would come well in order, the use of which, though necessity (as times now be) do en∣force; yet in the thorough reformation of that Realme they should be cut off. For the cause why they are now to be permitted, is want of convenient Innes for lodging of travailers on horsback, & of hostlers to tend their horses by the way. But when things shalbe reduced to a better passe, this needeth specially to be reformed. For out of the fry of these rake-hell horse-boyes, growing up in knavery and villainy, are their Kerne continually supplyed & maintained. For having been once brought up an idle horse-boy, he will never after fall to labour, but is only made fit for the halter. And these also (the which is one foule over-sight) are for the most part bred up amongst the English∣men, of whom learning to shoote in a piece, and being made acquain∣ted with all the trades of the English, they are afterwards when they become Kerne, made more fit to cut their throats. Next to this, there is another much like; but much more lewde and dishonest, and that is, of their Carrows, which is a kinde of people that wander up and downe to Gentle-mens houses, living onely upon Cardes and Dice, the which, though they have little or nothing of their owne, yet will they play for much money, which if they winne, they waste most lightly, and if they lose, they pay as slenderly, but make re∣compence with one stealth or another, whose onely hurt is not that they themselves are idle Lossells, but that thorough gaming, they draw others to like lewdnesse and idlenesse. And to these may bee added another sort of like loose fellowes, which doe passe up and downe amongst Gentlemen, by the name of Iesters, but are (indeed) notable rogues, & partakers not onely of many stealthes, by setting forth other mens goods to be stolne, but also privy to many traitrous practices, and common carryers of newes, with desire whereof you
would wonder how much the Irish are fed, for they use commonly to send up and downe to know newes, and if any meet with another, his second word is, what newes? Insomuch that hereof is tolde a prettie jest of a Frenchman, who having beene sometimes in Ireland, where he marked their great inquirie for newes, and meeting after∣wards in France an Irishman, whom hee knew in Ireland, first saluted him, and afterwards said thus merrily: O Sir, I pray you tell me of curtesie, have you heard any thing of the newes, that you so much in∣quired for in your Countrey? Eudox. This argueth sure in them a great desire of innovation, & therfore these occasions which nourish the same, must be taken away, as namely those Iesters, Carrowes, Mona-shutes, & all such straglers, for whom (me thinkes) the short riddance of a Marshall, were meeter then an ordinance or prohibitiō to restrain thē. Therfore (I pray you) leave all this rabblement of Runnagates, & passe to other customes. Iren. There is a great use amongst the Irish, to make great assem∣blies together upon a rath or hill, there to parlie (as they say) about matters and wrongs betweene Township & Township, or one privat person and another. But well I wot, and true it hath beene oftentimes proved, that in their meetings many mischiefes have beene both pra∣ctised & wrought; for to them doe commonly resort all the scumme of the people, where they may meete and conferre of what they list, which else they could not doe without suspition, or knowledge of o∣thers. Besides at these meetings I have knowne divers times, that ma∣ny Englishmen, & good Irish subjects, have bin villainously murdered by moving one quarell or another against them. For the Irish neuer come to those Raths, but armed, whether on horse or on foot, which the English nothing suspecting, are then commonly taken at advantage like sheep in the pin-folde. Eudox. It may be (Irenaeus) that abuse may be in those meetings. But these round hills and square Bawnes which you see so strongly trenched and throwne up, were (they say) at first ordained for the same purpose, that people might assemble themselves therein, and therefore aunciently they were called Talk-motes, that is, a place of people, to meete or talke of any thing that concerned any difference betweene parties and Towneships, which seemeth yet to me very re∣quisite. Iren. You say very true Eudoxus, the first making of these high hils, were at first indeed to very good purpose for people to meet, but howsoever the times when they were first made, might well serve to good occasions, as perhaps they did then in England, yet things being since altered, & now Ireland much differing from the state of England, the good use that then was of them, is now turned to abuse; for those hills wherof you speak, were (as you may gather by reading) appoin∣ted for 2 special uses, & built by 2 several nations. The one is that wch you call Talk-motes, which were built by the Saxons, as the word be∣wraieth, for it signifieth in Saxon, a meeting of folk, & these are for the
most part in forme foure square, well intrenched, the others that were round, were cast up by the Danes, as the name of them doth be∣token, for they are called Danes-Rathes, that is, hills of the Danes, the which were by them devised, not for treaties and parlies, but ap∣pointed as fortes for them to gather unto, in troublesome time, when any trouble arose, for the Danes being but a few in comparison of the The like rea∣son may be gi∣ven for the making of such Rathes in Ireland, by the Danes or Norwegians. vid. Gir. Cambr. to∣pg. Hb. distinct. 3. cap. 37. Saxons (in England) used this for their safety, they made those small round hills, so strongly fenced, in every quarter of the hundred, to the end that if in the night, or any other time, any troublous cry or uproare should happen, they might repaire with all speed unto their owne fort, which was appointed for their quarter, and there remaine safe, till they could assemble themselves in greater strength, for they were made so strong with one small entrance, that whosoever came thither first, were he one or two, or like few, he or they might there rest safe, and defend themselves against many, till more succour came unto them: and when they were gathered to a sufficient number, they marched to the next fort, and so forward till they met with the pe∣rill, or knew the occasions thereof. But besides these two sorts of hills, there were anciently divers others, for some were raised, where there had been a great battle fought, as a memory or Trophie there∣of, others, as monuments of burialls, of the carcasses of all those that were slaine in any field, upon whom they did throwe such round mounts, as memorialls of them, and sometimes did cast up great heapes of stones, (as you may read the like in many places of the Scripture) and other whiles, they did throw up many round heapes of earth in a circle, like a garland, or pitch many long stones on end in compasse, every of which (they say) betokened some person of Note, there slaine and buried, for this was their auncient custome, be∣fore Christianity came in amongst them, that Church-yards were inclosed. Eudox. You have very well declared the originall of their mounts and great stones incompassed, which some vainely terme, the ould Gyants Trevetts, and thinke that those huge stones, would not else be brought into order or reared up, without the strength of Gyants. And others as vainely thinke that they were never placed there by mans hand, or Art, but onely remained there so since the beginning, and were afterwards discovered by the deluge, and laide open as then by the washing of the waters, or other like casualty. But let them dreame their owne Imaginations to please themselves, you have satisfied me much better, both for that I see some confirmation thereof in the holy writt, and also remember that I have read in many Historyes and Chronicles, the like mounts and stones, oftentimes mentioned. Iren. There be many great authorities (I assure you) to prove the same, but as for these meetings on hills, whereof we were speaking, it is very inconvenient that any such should be permitted. Eudox. But yet it is very needefull (me thinkes) for many other purposes, as for the countryes to gather together, when there is any
imposition to be laide upon them, to the which they then may all a∣gree at such meetings, to devide upon themselves, according to their holdings and abilities. So as if at these assemblies, there be any Offi∣cers, as Constables, Bayliffes, or such like amongst them, there can be no perill, or doubt of such bad practises. Iren: Neverthelesse, dangerous are such assemblies, whether for Cesse or ought else, the Constables and Officers, being also of the Irish, and if any of the English happen to be there, even to them they may prove perillous. Therefore for avoyding of all such evill occa∣sions, they were best to be abolished. Eudox. But what is that which you call Cesse, it is a word sure unused amongst us heere, therefore (I pray you) expound the same? Iren. Cesse is none other then that which your selfe called impo∣sition, but it is in a kinde unacquainted perhaps unto you. For there are Cesses of sundry sorts, one is the cessing of Souldiours upon the Countrey: For Ireland being a Countrey of warre (as it is handled) and allwayes full of Souldiours, they which have the government, whether they finde it the most ease to the Queenes purse, or the most ready meanes at hand, for victualing of the Souldiour, or that neces∣sity inforceth them thereunto, doe scatter the Army abroad in the Countrey, and place them in Villages to take their victuals of them, at such vacant times as they lye not in Campe, nor are otherwise im∣ployed in service. Another kinde of Cesse, is the imposing of provi∣sion; for the Governors house-keeping, which though it be most ne∣cessary, and be also (for avoyding of all the evills formerly therein used) lately brought to a composition, yet it is not without great in∣conveniences, no lesse then here in England, or rather much more. The like Cesse is also charged upon the Countrey sometimes for victual∣ling of the Souldiours, when they lye in Garrison, at such times as there is none remayning in the Queenes store, or that the same cannot be conveniently conveyed to their place of Garrison: But these two are not easily to be redressed when necessity thereto compelleth, but as for the former, as it is not necessary, so is it most hurtfull and of∣fensive to the poore country, and nothing convenient for the Souldi∣ours themselves, who during their lying at Cesse, use all kinde of outragious disorder and villany, both towards the poore men, which victuall and lodge them, as also to all the Country round about them, whom they abuse, oppresse, spoyle, & afflict by all the meanes they can invent, for they will not onely, not content themselves with such victuals as their hostes, nor yet as the place, perhaps affords, but they will have other meate provided for them, and Aqua vitae sent for, yea and money besides laide at their trenchers, which if they want, then about the house they walke with the wretched poore man and his silly wife, who are glad to purchase their peace with any thing. By which vile manner of abuse, the countrey people, yea and the very English which dwell abroad and see, and sometimes feele
this outrage, growe into great detestation of the Souldiours, and thereby into hatred of the very government, which draweth upon them such evills: And therefore this you may also ioyne unto the former evill customes, which we have to reprove in Ireland. Eudox. Truly this is one not the least, and though the persons by whom it is used, be of better note then the former roguish sort, which you reckoned, yet the fault (me thinkes) is no lesse worthy of a mar∣shall. Iren. That were a harder course Eudoxus, to redresse every abuse by a marshall, it would seeme to you very evill surgery to cut off e∣very unsound or sicke part of the body, which being by other due meanes recovered, might afterwards doe very good service to the body againe, and haply helpe to save the whole: Therefore I thinke better that some good salve for the redresse of the evill bee sought forth, then the least part suffered to perish: but hereof wee have to speake in another place. Now we will proceede to other like defects, amongst which there is one generall inconvenience, which raigneth almost throughout all Ireland: that is, the Lords of land and free-hol∣ders, doe not there use to set out their land in farme, or for tearme of yeares, to their Tennants, but onely from yeare to yeare, and some during pleasure, neither indeede will the Irish Tennant or husband∣man otherwise take his land, then so long as he list himselfe. The rea∣son hereof in the Tennant is, for that the Land-lords there, use most shamefully to racke their Tennants, laying upon them Coigny and Li∣very at pleasure, & exacting of them (besides his Covenants) what he pleaseth. So that the poore husbandman either dare not binde him∣selfe to him, for longer tearme, or thinketh by his continuall liberty of change, to keepe his Land-lord the rather in awe from wronging of him. And the reason why the Land-lord will no longer covenant with him, is, for that he dayly looketh after change and alteration, and hovereth in expectation of new worlds. Eudox. But what evill commeth hereby to the Common-wealth or what reason is it that any Land-lord should not set, nor any Ten∣nant take his land, as himselfe list? Iren. Marry the evils which commeth hereby is great, for by this meanes, both the Land-lord thinketh that he hath his Tennant more at commaund, to follow him into what action soever hee shall enter, and also the Tennant being left at his liberty is fit for every occasion of change that shall be offered by time: and so much also the more ready and willing is he to runne into the same, for that hee hath no such state in any his houlding, no such building upon any farme, no such coste imployed in fensing or husbanding the same, as might with-hold him from any such willfull course, as his Lords cause, or his owne lewde disposition may carry him unto. All which hee hath forborne, and spared so much expence, for that he had no firme estate in his Tenement, but was onely a Tennant at will or little more, and so at will may leave it. And this inconvenience may be reason enough
to ground any ordinance for the good of the Common-wealth, a∣gainst the private behoofe or will of any Landlord that shall refuse to graunt any such terme or estate unto his Tennant, as may tende to the good of the whole Realme. Eudox. Indeede (me thinkes) it is a great willfullnes in any such Land-lord to refuse to make any longer farmes unto their Tennants, as may, besides the generall good of the Realme, be also greatly for their owne profit and availe: For what reasonable man will not thinke that the Tenement shalbe made much better for the Lords behoofe, if the Tennant may by such good meanes bee drawne to build him∣selfe some handsome habitation thereon, to ditch and inclose his ground, to manure and husband it as good Farmours use. For when his Tennants terme shalbe expired: it will yeeld him in the renewing his lease, both a good fine, and also a better rent. And also it shall be for the good of the Tennant likewise, who by such buildings and in∣closures shall receive many benefits: first by the handsomenesse of his house, he shall take more comfort of his life, more safe dwelling, and a delight to keepe his said house neate and cleanely, which now be∣ing as they commonly are, rather swyne-styes, then houses; is the cheifest cause of his so beastly manner of life, and savage condition, lying and living together with his beast in one house, in one roome, in one bed, that is, cleane strawe, or rather a foule dunghill. And to all these other commodities, hee shall in sort time finde a greater added, that is his owne wealth and riches increased, and wonderfully inlar∣ged, by keeping his Cattle in inclosures, where they shall allwayes have fresh pasture, that now is all trampled and over-runne, warme covert, that now lyeth open to all weather, safe being, that now are continually filched and stolne. Iren. You have Eudoxus well accompted the commodities of this one good ordinance, amongst which, this that you named last is not the least, for all the other being most beneficiall to the Land-lord and Tennant. This cheifly redoundeth to the good of the Common-wealth, to have the land thus inclosed, and well fenced. For it is both a principall barre and impeachment unto theeves from stealing of cattle in the night, and also a gaule against all Rebels, and Outlawes, that shall rise up in any numbers against the governement, for the theife thereby shall have much adoe, first to bring forth, and after∣wards to drive away his stolne prey, but thorough the common high wayes, where he shall soone bee descryed and met withall: And the Rebell or open enemy, if any such shall happen, either at home, or from abroad, shall easily be found when he commeth forth, and also be well incountred withall by a few, in so straight passages and strong inclosures. This therefore when wee come to the reforming of all those evill customes before mentioned, is needefull to be remembred but now by this time (me thinkes) that I have well run thorough the evill uses which I have observed in Ireland. Neverthelesse I well note that there be many more, and infinitely many more in the pri∣vate
abuses of men. But these that are most generall, and tending to the hurt of the Common-weale, (as they have come to my remem∣brance) I have as breifly as I could rehearsed unto you. And there∣fore now I thinke best that we passe unto our third part, in which we noted inconveniences that are in Religion. Eudox. Surely you have very well handled these two former, and if yee shall as well goe thorough the third likewise, you shall merit a very good meed. Iren. Little have I to say of Religion, both because the parts thereof be not many, (it selfe being but one) and my selfe have not much beene conversant in that calling: but as lightly passing by I have seene or heard: Therefore the fault which I finde in Religion is but one, but the same is universall, thoroughout all that country, that is, that they be all Papists by their profession, but in the same so blindly and brutishly informed, (for the most part) that not one a∣mongst a hundred knoweth any ground of Religion, or any Article of his faith, but can perhaps say his Pater noster or his Ave Maria, without any knowledge or understanding what one word thereof meaneth. Eudox. Is it not then a little blot to them that now hold the place of government, that they which now are in the light themselves, suf∣fer a people under their charge, to wallow in such deadly darke∣nesse. Iren. That which you blame Eudox. is not (I suppose) any fault of will in those godly fathers which have charge thereof, but the in∣convenience of the time and troublous occasions, wherewith that wretched Realme hath continually beene turmoyled; For instruction in Religion needeth quiet times, and ere we seeke to settle a sound discipline in the Clergy, we must purchase peace unto the Laity, for it is ill time to preach among swords, and most hard or rather impos∣sible it is to settle a good opinion in the mindes of men, for matters of Religion doubtfull, which have doubtlesse an evill opinion of us. For ere a new be brought in, the old must be removed. Eudox. Then belike it is meete that some fitter time be attended, that God send peace and quietnesse there in civill matters, before it be attempted in Ecclesiasticall. I would rather have thought that (as it is said) correction must first begin at the house of God, and that the care of the Soule, should have beene preferred before the care of the Body. Iren. Most true Eudoxus, the care of the soule, and soule matters is to be preferred, before the care of the body, in consideration of the worthynesse thereof, but not till the time of reformation, for if you should know a wicked person dangerously sicke, having now both soule and body greatly diseased, yet both recoverable, would you not thinke it evill advertizement to bring the Preacher before the Phisitian, for if his body were neglected, it is like that his languishing soule being disquieted by his diseasefull body, would utterly refuse
and loath all spirituall comfort, but if his body were first recured, & broght to good frame, should there not then be found best time, to re∣cover the soule also. So it is in the state of a Realme: Therefore (as I said) it is expedient, first to settle such a course of government there, as thereby both civill disorders, and ecclesiasticall abuses may be re∣formed and amended, whereto needeth not any such great distance of times, as (you suppose) I require, but one joynt resolution for both, that each might second and confirme the other. Eudox. That we shall see when we come thereunto, in the meane time, I conceive thus much, as you have delivered, touching the ge∣nerall fault, which you suppose in Religion, to wit, that it is Popish, but doe you finde no particular abuses therein, nor in the ministers thereof? Iren: Yes verily, for what ever disorders you see in the Church of England, yee may finde there, and many more: Namely, grosse Symo∣ny, greedy covetousnesse, fleshly incontinency, carelesse sloath, and generally all disordered life in the common Clergy men: And be∣sides all these, they have their particular enormityes; For all Irish Priests, which now injoy the Church livings, they are in a manner meere lay men, saving that they have taken holy orders, but other∣wise they doe goe, and live like lay men, follow all kinde of husban∣dry, and other worldly affaires, as other Irish men doe. They neither read Scriptures, nor preach to the people, nor administer the Commu∣nion, but Baptisme they doe: for they Christen yet after the Popish fashion, onely they take the tithes and offerings, and gather what fruite else they may of their livings, the which they convert as badly and some of them (they say) pay as due tributes and shares of their li∣vings to their Bishops, (I speake of those which are Irish) as they re∣ceive them duely. Eudox. But is that suffered amongst them? It is wonder but that the Governours doe redresse such shamefull abuses. Iren. How can they, since they know them not? for the Irish Bi∣shops have their Clergy in such awe and subjection under them, that they dare not complaine of them, so as they may doe to them what they please, for they knowing their owne unworthynesse and incapa∣city, and that they are therefore still removeable at their Bishops will, yeeld what pleaseth him, and he taketh what he listeth: yea, and some of them whose Diocesses are in remote parts, somewhat out of the worlds eye, doe not at all bestow the Benefices, which are in their owne donation, upon any, but keepe them in their owne hands, and set their owne servants and horse-boyes to take up the Tithes and fruites of them, with the which some of them purchase great Lands, and build faire Castles upon the same. Of which abuse if any question be moved they have a very seemely colour and excuse, that they have no worthy Ministers to bestow them upon, but keepe them so bestowed for any such sufficient person, as any shall bring unto them.
Eudox. But is there no law nor ordinance to meet with this mis∣chiefe? nor hath it never before beene looked into? Iren. Yes, it seemes it hath, for there is a Statute there enacted in Ireland, which seemes to have beene grounded upon a good mea∣ning, That whatsoever Englishman of good conversation and suffi∣ciencie, shall bee brought unto any of the Bishoppes, and nomina∣ted unto any living, within their Diocesse that is presently voyde, that he shall (without contradiction) be admitted thereunto before any Irish. Eudox. This is surely a very good Law, and well provided for this evill, whereof you speake, but why is not the same obser∣ved? Iren. I think it is well observed, and that none of the Bishops trans∣gresse the same, but yet it worketh no reformation thereof, for many defects. First there are no such sufficient English Ministers sent over as might be presented to an Bishop for any living, but the most part of such English as come over thither of themselves, are either unlear∣ned, or men of some bad note, for which they have forsaken England. So as the Bishop to whom they shalbe presented, may justly reject them as incapable and insufficient. Secondly, the Bishop himselfe is perhappes an Irish man, who being made Iudge by that Law, of the sufficiencie of the Ministers, may at his owne will, dislike of the Englishman, as unworthy in his opinion, and admit of any Irish, whom hee shall thinke more for his turne. And if hee shall at the instance of any Englishman of countenance there, whom hee will not displease, accept of any such English Minister as shall bee endered unto him, yet hee will under hand, carry such a hard hand over him, or by his Officers wring him so sore, that hee will soone make him weary of his poore living. Lastly, the Benefices themselves are so meane, and of so small profite in those Irish Countreyes, thorough the ill husbandrie of the Irish people which doe inhabite them, that they will not yeelde any competent maintainance for any honest Minister to live upon, scarcely to buy him a gowne. And were all this redressed (as happily it might bee) yet what good should any English Mini∣ster doe amongst them, by teaching or preaching to them, which ei∣ther cannot understand him, or will not heare him? Or what com∣fort of life shall he have, where his Parishioners are so insatiable, so intractable, so ill affected to him, as they usuall bee to all the English; or finally, how dare almost any honest Minister, that are peaceable civile men, commit his safetie to the handes of such Neighbours, as the boldest Captaines dare scarcely dwell by? Eudox. Little good then (I see) was by that Statute wrought, how ever well intended, but the reformation therof must grow high∣er, and be brought from a stronger ordinance, then the commaunde∣ment, or penaltie of a Law, which none dare informe or complain of
when it is broken; but have you any more of those abuses in the Clergy? Iren. I would perhappes reckon more, but I perceive my speech to grow too long, and these may suffise to judge of the ge∣nerall disorders which raigne amongst them; as for the particulars, they are too many to be reckoned. For the Clergy there (excepting the grave Fathers which are in high place about the State, and some few others which are lately planted in their Trinity Colledge by Dublin, which was founded by Queene Eliz 3 Martij 159. The 13. of the same moneth, its first stone was laide by Thomas Smyth then Mayor of Dublin, and the 9. of Ian 1593. it first admitted Students. new Col∣ledge) are generally bad, licentious, and most dis∣ordered. Eudox. You have then (as I suppose) gone tho∣rough those three first parts which you proposed unto your selfe, to wit, The Inconveniences which you ob∣served in the lawes, in the customes, and in the Religion of that land. The which (me thinkes) you have so thoroughly tou∣ched, as that nothing more remaineth to e spoken thereof. Iren. Not so thoroughly as you suppose, that nothing can re∣maine, but so generally as I purposed, that is, to lay open the gene∣rall evills of that Realme, which doe hinder the good reformation thereof, for to count the particular faults of private men, should be a worke too infinite, yet some there be of that nature, that though they be in private men, yet their evill reacheth to a generall hurt, as the ex∣tortion of Sheriffs, and their Sub-sheriffs & Bayliffes, the corruption of Victuallers, Cessors, and Purveyors, the disorders of Seneschalls, Captaines, and their Souldiers, and many such like: All which I will onely name here, that their reformation may bee mended in place where it most concerneth. But there is one very foule abuse, which by the way I may not omit, and that is in Captaines, who notwith∣standing that they are specially imployed to make peace thorough strong execution of warre, yet they doe so dandle their doings, & dal∣lie in the service to them committed, as if they would not have the enemy subdued, or utterly beaten downe, for feare lest afterwardes they should need imployment, & so be discharged of pay: For which cause some of them that are layde in garrison, doe so handle the mat∣ter, that they will doe no great hurt to the enemyes, yet for colour sake, some men they will kill, even halfe with the consent of the ene∣my, being persons either of base regard, or enemies to the enemy, whose heads eftsoones they send to the Governor for a commendati∣on of their great indevour, telling how weighty a service they per∣formed, by cutting off such and such dangerous Rebells. Eudox. Truely this is a prettie mockerie, and not to be permitted by the Governours. Iren. But how can the Govrrnour know readily what persons those were, & what the purpose of their killing was, yea & what will you say if the Captaines doe iustifie this their course by ensample of some of their Governours, which (under Benedicite, I doe tell it to you) doe practise the like sleight in their governments?
Eudox. Is it possible? take heed what you say Irenaeus. Iren. To you onely Eudoxus, I doe tell it, and that even with great hearts griefe, and inward trouble of mind to see her Majestie so much abused by some who are put in speciall trust of those great affaires: Of which, some being martiall men, will not doe alwayes what they may for quieting of things, but will rather winke at some faults, and suffer them unpunished, lest they (having put all things in that assu∣rance of peace that they might) they should seeme afterwards not to be needed, nor continued in their governments with so great a charge to her Maiestie. And therefore they doe cunningly carry their course of government, and from one hand to another doe bandie the ser∣vice like a Tennis-Ball, which they will never strike quite away, for feare lest afterwards they should want. Eudox. Doe you speake of under Magistrates Irenaeus, or princi∣pall Governours? Iren. I doe speake of no particulars, but the truth may be found out by tryall and reasonable insight into some of their doings. And if I should say, there is some blame thereof in the principall Go∣vernours, I thinke I might also shew some reasonable proofe of my speech. As for example, some of them seeing the end of their government to draw nigh, and some mischiefes and trou∣blous practice growing up, which afterwardes may worke trouble to the next succeeding Governour, will not attempt the re∣dresse or cutting off thereof, either for feare they should leave the Realme unquiet at the end of their government, or that the next that commeth, should receive the same too quiet, and so happily winne more prayse thereof, then they before. And therefore they will not (as I said) seeke at all to represse that evill, but will either by graunting protection for a time, or holding some empar∣lance with the Rebell, or by treatie of Commissioners, or by other like devices, onely smother and keepe downe the flame of the mis∣chiefe, so as it may not breake out in their time of government, what comes afterwards they care not, or rather wish the worst. This course hath beene noted in some Governors. Eudox. Surely (Irenaeus) This if it were true, should bee worthy of an heavy iudgment: But it is hardly to bee thought, that any Go∣vernour should so much either envie the good of that Realme which is put into his hand, or defraude her Maiestie who trusteth him so much, or maligne his successour which shall possesse his place, as to suffer an evill to grow up, which he might timely have kept under, or perhaps to nourish it with coloured countenance, or such sinister meanes. Iren. I doe not certainely avouch so much (Eudoxus) but the sequele of things doth in a manner proove, and plainly speake so much, that the Governours usually are envious one of anothers greater glory, which if they would seeke to excell by better gover∣ning, it should bee a most laudable emulation. But they doe quite
otherwise. For this (as you may marke) is the common order of them, that who commeth next in place, will not follow that course of government, how ever good, which his predecessors held, either for disdaine of himselfe, or doubt to have his doings drowned in an other mans praise, but will straight take a way quite contrary to the former: As if the former thought (by keeping under the Irish) to re∣forme them: the next by discountenancing the English, will curry favour with the Irish, and so make his government seeme plausible, as having all the Irish at his commaund: But he that comes after, will perhappes follow neither the one nor the other, but will dandle the the one and the other in such sort, as hee will sucke sweete out of them both, and leave bitternesse to the poore Countrey, which if he that comes after shall seeke to redresse, he shall perhappes finde such crosses, as hee shall hardly bee able to beare, or doe any good that might worke the disgrace of his predecessors. Examples you may see hereof in the governours of late times sufficiently, and in o∣thers of former times more manifestly, wen the government of that Realme, was committed sometimes to the Geraldines, as when the house of Yorke had the Crowne of England, sometimes to the Butlers, as when the house of Laencaster got the same. And other whiles, when an English Governour was appointed, hee perhaps found ene∣mies of both. Eudox. I am sorry to heare so much as you report, and now I be∣gin to conceive somewhat more of the cause of her continuall wret∣chednes then heeretofore I found, and wish that this inconvenience were well looked into, for sure (me thinkes) it is more weightie then all the former, and more hardly to be redressed in the governor, then in the governed, as a malady in a vitall part is more incurable then in an externall. Iren. You say very true; but now that we have thus ended all the abuses and inconveniences of that government which was our first part. It followeth now that we passe unto the second part, which was of the meanes to cure and redresse the same, which wee must labour to reduce to the first beginning thereof. Eudox. Right so Irenaeus: for by that which I have noted in all this your discourse, you suppose, that the whole ordinance and insti∣tution of that Realmes government, was both at first when it was placed, evill plotted, and also sithence thorough other over-sights, came more out of square to that disorder which it is now come unto, like as two indirect lines, the further that they are drawne out, the further they goe asunder. Iren. I doe see Eudoxus; and as you say, so thinke, that the longer that government thus continueth, in the worse course will the Re∣alme be, for it is all in vaine that they now strive and endeavour by faire meanes and peaceable plotts to redresse the same, without first remmooving all those inconveniences, and new framing (as it were) in the forge, all that is worne out of fashion: For all
other meanes will be but as lost labour, by patching up one hole to make many, for the Irish doe strongly hate and abhorre all reformati∣on and subjection to the English, by reason that having beene once subdued by them, they were thrust out of all their possessions. So as now they feare, that if they were againe brought under, they should bee likewise expelled out of all, which is the cause that they hate the English government, according to the saying, Quem metuunt oderunt: Therefore the reformation must now bee the strength of a greater power. Eudox. But me thinkes that might be by making of good lawes, and establishing of new Statutes, with sharpe penalties and punish∣ments, for amending of all that is presently amisse, and not (as you suppose) to beginne all as it were anew, and to alter the whole forme of the governement, which how dangerous a thing it is to attempt, you your selfe must needes confesse, and they which have the mana∣ging of the Realmes whole policy, cannot without great cause, feare and refraine, for all innovation is perillous, insomuch as though it bee meant for the better, yet so many accidents and fearefull e∣vents may come betweene, as that it may hazard the losse of the whole. Iren. Very true Eudoxus, all change is to be shunned, where the affaires stand in such sort, as that they may continue in quietnes, or be assured at all to abide as they are. But that in the Realme of Ireland we see much otherwise, for every day wee perceive the troubles growing more upon us, and one evill growing upon another, inso∣much as there is no part now sound or ascertained. but all have their cares upright, wayting when the watch-word shall come, that they should all arise generally into rebellion, and cast away the English subjection. To which there now little wanteth, for I thinke the word be already given, and there wanteth nothing but oportunitie, which truely is the death of one noble person, who being himselfe most stedfast to his soveraigne Queene, and his Countrey, coasting u∣pon the South Sea, stoppeth the ingate of all that evill which is looked for, and holdeth in all those which are at his becke, with the terrour of his greatnesse, and the assurance of his most immoveable loyaltie: And therefore where you thinke, that good and sound lawes might amend, and reforme things there amisse; you think sure∣ly amisse. For it is vaine to prescribe Lawes, where no man ca∣reth for keeping of them, nor feareth the daunger for breaking of them. But all the Realme is first to be reformed, and lawes are after∣wards to bee made for keeping and continuing it in that reformed estate. Eudox. How then doe you think is the reformation thereof to be begunne, if not by lawes and ordinances? Iren. Even by the sword, for all these evills must first be cut a∣way by a strong hand, before any good can bee planted, like as the corrupt braunches, and unwholesome boughes are first to bee
pruned, and the foule mosse cleansed and scraped away, before the tree can bring forth any good fruite. Eudox. Did you blame mee even now, for wishing of Kerne, Horse-boyes, and Carrowes, to be cleane cut off, as too violent a meanes, and doe you your selfe now prescribe the same medicine? Is not the Sword the most violent redresse that may bee used for any evill? Iren. It is so, but where no other remedie may bee devised, nor hope of recovery had, there must needes this violent meanes bee used. As for the loose kinde of people which you would have cut off, I blamed it, for that they might otherwise perhaps bee brought to good, as namely by this way which I set be∣fore you. Eudox. Is not your way all one with the former in effect, which you found fault with, save onely this oddes, that I said by the halter, and you say by the sword, what difference is there? Iren. There is surely great, when you shall understand it, for by the sword which I named, I did not meane the cutting off all that na∣tion with the sword, which farre bee it from mee, that I should ever thinke so desperately, or wish so uncharitably, but by the Sword I meane the royall power of the Prince, which ought to stretch it selfe forth in the chiefest strength to the redressing and cutting off those evills, which I before blamed, and not of the people which are evill. For evill people, by good ordinances and govern∣ment, may be made good; but the evill that is of it selfe evill, will never become good. Eudox. I pray you then declare your minde at large, how you would wish that sword which you meane to be used to the reforma∣tion of all those evills. Iren. The first thing must be to send over into that Realme, such a strong power of men, as should perforce bring in all that rebellious route and loose people, which either doe now stand out in open Armes, or in wandring companies doe keepe the woods, spoyling the good subjects. Eudox. You speake now Irenaeus of an infinite charge to her Ma∣jestie, to send over such an Army, as should tread downe all that stan∣deth before them on foot, and lay on the ground all the stiff-necked people of that land, for there is now but one Out-law of any great reckoning, to wit, the Earle of Tyrone abroad in armes, against whom you see what huge charges shee hath beene at this last yeare, in sen∣ding of men, providing of victualls, and making head against him, yet there is little or nothing at all done, but the Queenes treasure spent, her people wasted, the poore Countrey troubled, and the ene∣my neverthelesse brought into no more subjection then he was, or list outwardly to shew, which in effect is none, but rather a scorne of her power, and emboldening of a proud rebell, and an incou∣ragement to all like lewdlie disposed Traytors, that shall dare to
lift up their heele, against their soveraigne Lady: Therefore it were hard counsell to drawe such an exceeding great charge upon her, whose event should be so uncertaine. Iren. True indeede, if the event should bee uncertaine, but the certainty of the effect hereof shall be so infallible, as that no reason can gainesay it, neither shall the charge of all this Army (the which I demaund) be much greater, then so much as in these last two yeares warres, hath vainely beene expended. For I dare undertake, that it hath coste the Queene above 200000. pounds already, and for the present charge, that she is now at there, amounteth to very neere 12000. pounds a moneth, whereof cast you the accompt: yet nothing is done. The which summe had it beene imployed as it should bee, would have effected all this which now I goe about. Eudox. How meane you to have it imployed? but to bee spent in the pay of Souldiours, and provision of victualls. Iren. Right so, but it is now not disbursed at once, as it might be, but drawne out into a long length, by sending over now 20000 pounds, and next halfe yeare 10000. pounds, so as the Souldiour in the meane time for want of due provision of victuall, and good pay∣ment of his due, is starved and consumed, that of a 1000. which came over lusty able men, in halfe a yeare there are not left 500. And yet is the Queenes charge never a whit the lesse, but what is not payd in present money, is accounted in debt, which will not be long unpayd, for the Captaine, halfe of whose Souldiours are dead, and the other quarter never mustered, nor seene, comes shortly to demand payment of his whole accompt, where by good meanes of some great ones, and privy shareings with the Officers and servants of other some, hee receiveth his debt, much lesse perhaps then was due, yet much more indeede then he justly deserved. Eudox. I take this sure to be no good husbandry, for what must needes be spent, as good spend it at once, where is enough, as to have it drawne out into long delayes, seeing that thereby both the service is much hindred, and yet nothing saved but it may be Irenaeus that the Queenes treasure in so great occasions of disbursements (as it is well knowne she hath beene at lately,) is not alwayes so ready, nor so plentifull, as it can spare so great a summe together, but being payed as it is, now some, and then some, it is no great burthen unto her, nor any great impoverishment to her Coffers, seeing by such delay of time, it daylie commeth in, as fast as she parteth it out. Iren. It may be as you say, but for the going thorough of so ho∣norable a course (I doubt not) but if the Queenes Coffers be not so well stored (which we are not to looke into) but that the whole Realme which now as things are used, doe feele a continuall burthen of that wretched Realme, hanging upon their backes, would for a small riddance of all that trouble, be once troubled for all: and put to all their shoulders, and helping hands, and hearts also, to the de∣fraying of that charge, most gladfully and willingly, and surely the
charge in effect, is nothing to the infinite great good, which should come thereby, both to the Queene, and all this Realme generally, as when time serveth shall be shewed. Eudox. How many men would you require to the furnishing of this which yee take in hand? and how long space would you have them entertained? Iren. Verily not above 10000. footemen, and a 1000. horse, and all these not above the space of a yeare and a halfe, for I would still as the heate of the service abateth, abate the number in pay, and make other provision for them, as I will shew. Eudox. Surely it seemeth not much which you require, nor no long time, but how would you have them used? would you leade forth your Army against the Enemy, and seeke him where he is, to fight? Iren. No Eudoxus; That would not be, for it is well knowne that he is a flying enemie, hiding himselfe in woodes and bogges, from whence he will not drawe forth, but into some straight passage or pe∣rillous foord, where he knowes the Army must needes passe: There will he lye in waite, and if hee finde advantage fit, will dangerously hazard the troubled Souldiour. Therefore to seeke him out that still flitteth, and follow him that can hardly bee found, were vaine and bootelesse, but I would devide my men in garrison upon his Coun∣trey, in such places as I should thinke might most annoy him. Eudox. But how can that be Irenaeus with so few men? for the ene∣mie as you now see, is not all in one Country, but some in Vlster, some in Connaght, and others in Leinster. So as to plant strong garrisons in all those places should neede many more men then you speake of, or to plant all in one, and to leave the rest naked, should be but to leave them to the spoyle. Iren. I would wish the cheife power of the Army to be garrisond in one Countrey that is strongest, and the other upon the rest that is weakest▪ As for example, the Earle of Tyrone is now accompted the strongest, upon him would I lay 8000. men in garrison, 1000. upon Pheagh Mac Hugh and the Cavanaghes, and 1000. upon some parts of Connaght, to be at the direction of the Governour. Eudox. I see now all your men bestowed, but what places would you set their garrison that they might rise out most conveniently to service? and though perhaps I am ignorant of the places, yet I will take the Mappe of Ireland, and lay it before me, and make mine eyes (in the meane time) my Schoole-masters, to guide my understanding to judge of your plot. Iren. Those eight thousand in Vlster, I would devide likewise into foure parts, so as there should be 2000. Footemen in every garrison: The which I would thus place. Vpon the Blacke water, in some con∣venient place, as high upon the River as might be, I would lay one garrison. Another would I put at Castle-liffer, or there-abouts, so as they should have all the passages upon the River to Logh-foyle. The
third I would place about Fermanagh or Bundroise, so as they might lye betweene Connaght and Vlster, to serve upon both sides, as occasi∣on shall be offered, and this therefore would I have stronger then any of the rest, because it should be most inforced, and most imployed, and that they might put wardes at Balli-shanon, and Belick, and all those passages. The last would I set about Monoghan or Balturbut, so as it should fronte both upon the Enemie that way, and also keepe the Countyes of Cavan and Meath in awe, from passage of straglers from those parts, whence they use to come forth, and oftentimes use to worke much mischeife▪ And to every of these garrisons of 2000. Footemen, I would have 200. horsemen added, for the one without the other, can doe but little service. The 4. Garrisons thus being pla∣ced, I would have to bee victualled before hand for halfe a yeare, which you will say to be hard, considering the corruption and usuall waste of victualls. But why should not they be aswell victualled for so long time, as the ships are usually for a yeare, and sometimes two, seeing it is easier to keepe victuall on land then water. Their bread I would have in flower, so as it might be baked still to serve their ne∣cessary want. Their Beere there also brewed within them, from time to time, and their Beefe before hand barelled, the which may bee used, but as it is needed: For I make no doubt but fresh victualls, they will sometimes purvay for themselves, amongst their Enemies. Here∣unto likewise would I have them, have a store of hose and shooes, with such other necessaries as may be needefull for Souldiours, so as they should have no occasion to looke for releife from abroad, or oc∣casion of such trouble, for their continuall supply, as I see and have often proved in Ireland to bee more cumberous to the Deputy, and dangerous to them that releive them, then halfe the leading of an Army; for the Enemy knowing the ordinary wayes thorough the which their releife must be brought them, useth commonly to draw himselfe into the straight passages thither-ward, and oftentimes doth dangerously distresse them, besides the pay of such force as should be sent for their convoy, the charge of the carriages, the exactions of the Countrey shall be spared. But onely every halfe yeare the supply brought by the Deputy himselfe, and his power▪ who shall then vi∣site and overlooke all those Garrisons, to see what is needefull to change, what is expedient, and to direct what hee shall best advise. And those 4. Garrisons issuing forth, at such convenient times as they shall have intelligence or espiall upon the enemy, will so drive him from one side to another, and Tennis him amongst them, that he shall finde no where safe to keepe his Creete in, nor hide himselfe, but fly∣ing from the fire shall fall into the water, and out of one danger into another, that in short space his Creete, which is his cheife sustenance, shall be wasted with preying, or killed with driving, or starved for want of pasture in the woods, and he himselfe brought so lowe, that he shall have no heart nor ability, to indure his wretchednesse, the which will surely come to passe in very short time, for one Winter
well followed upon him will so plucke him on his knees, that he will never be able to stand up againe. Eudox. Doe you then thinke the Winter time fittest for the ser∣vices of Ireland, how falls it then that our most imployments bee in Summer, and the Armies then led commonly forth? Iren. It is surely misconceived, for it is not with Ireland as it is with other Countryes, where the warres flame most in Summer, and the Helmets glister brightest in the fairest Sunshine: But in Ireland, the Winter yeeldeth best services, for then the trees are bare and na∣ked, which use both to cloath and house the Kerne, the ground is cold and wet, which useth to be his bedding, the aire is sharpe and bitter, to blowe thorough his naked sides and legges, the kyne are barren and without milke, which useth to be his onely foode, neither if hee kill them, will they yeeld him flesh, nor if he keepe them, will they give him foode, besides being all with Calfe (for the most part) they will thorough much chasing and driving, cast all their Calves, and loose their milke, which should releive him the next Summer. Eudox. I doe well understand your reason, but by your leave, I have heard it otherwise said, of some that were Outlawes: That in Summer they kept themselves quiet, but in Winter they would play their parts, and when the nights were longest, then burne and spoyle most, so that they might safely returne before day. Iren. I have likewise heard, and also seene proofe thereof true: But that was of such Outlawes as were either abiding in well inhabi∣ted Countryes, as in Mounster, or bordering on the English pale, as Feagh Mac Hugh, the Cavanaghes, the Moores, the Dempsies, or such like: For, for them the winter indeede is the fittest time for spoyling and robbing, because the nights are then (as you said) longest and darkest, and also the Countryes round about are then most full of Corne, and good provision to be gotten every where by them, but it is farre otherwise with a strong peopled enemy, that possesse a whole coun∣trey, for the other being but a few, and indeede privily lodged, and kept in out villages, and corners nigh to the woodes and mountaines, by some of their privy friends, to whom they bring their spoyles and stealthes, and of whom they continually receive secret releife: But the open enemy having all his Countrey wasted, what by him∣selfe, and what by the Souldiours, findeth then succour in no place: Townes there are none, of which hee may get spoyle, they are all burnt: bread he hath none, he ploweth not in Summer: Flesh he hath, but if he kill it in Winter, he shall want milke in Summer, and shortly want life. Therefore if they bee well followed, but one Winter, you shall have little worke with them the next Summer. Eudox. I doe now well perceive the difference, and doe verily thinke that the Winter time is there fittest for service, withall I con∣ceive the manner of your handling of the service, by drawing sud∣daine draughts upon the Enemy, when he looketh not for you, and to watch advantages upon him, as hee doth upon you. By which
straight keeping of them in, and not suffering them at any time long to rest, I must needes thinke that they will soone bee brought lowe, and driven to great extreamities. All which when you have perfor∣med and brought them to the very last cast, suppose that they will offer, either to come to you and submit themselves, or that some of them will seeke to withdraw themselves, what is your advice to doe, will you have them received? Iren. No, but at the beginning of those warres, and when the Garrisons are well planted, and fortified, I would wish a Proclamati∣on were made generally, to come to their knowledge: That what persons soever, would within twenty dayes absolutely submit them∣selves, (excepting onely the very Principalls and Ring-leaders) should finde grace: I doubt not, but upon the settling of these Garri∣sons, such a terrour and neere consideration of their perillous state, would be strucken into most of them, that they will covet to drawe away from their Leaders. And againe I well know that the Rebells themselves (as I saw by proofe in Desmonds warres,) will turne away all their rascall people, whom they thinke unserviceable, as old men, women, children, and hyndes (which they call Churles,) which would onely waste their victualls, and yeeld them no ayde, but their Cattle they will surely keepe away: These therefore though policy would turne them backe againe, that they might the rather consume and afflict the other Rebells, yet in a pittyfull commiseration I would wish them to be received; The rather for that this sort of base people, doth not for the most part rebell of themselves, having no heart thereunto, but are by force drawne by the grand Rebells into their action, and carryed away with the violence of the streame, else they should be sure to loose all that they have, and perhaps their lives too: The which they now carry unto them, in hope to enjoy them there, but they are there by the strong Rebells themselves, soone turned out of all, so that the constrainte hereof, may in them deserve pardon. Likewise if any of their able men or Gentlemen shall then offer to come away, and to bring their Cattle with them, as some no doubt may steale them away privily, I wish them also to be received, for the disabling of the enemy, but withall, that good assurance may be taken for their true behaviour and absolute submission, and that then they be not suffered to remaine any longer in those parts, no nor about the Garrisons, but sent away into the inner parts of the Realme, and dispersed in such sort as they may not come together, nor easily returne if they would: For if they might bee suffered to re∣maine about the Garrisons, and there inhabite, as they will offer to tille the ground, and yeeld a great part of the profit thereof, and of their Cattle, to the Coronell, wherewith they have heretofore tempted many, they would (as I have by experience knowne) bee ever after such a gaule, and inconvenience to them, as that their profit shall not recompence their hurt, for they will privily releive their friends that are forth, they will send the Enemy secret advertizements of all their
purposes and journeyes, which they meane to make upon them, they will not also sticke to drawe the enemy privily upon them, yea and to betray the fort it selfe, by discovery of all her defects and disad∣vantages (if any be) to the cutting of all their throates. For avoiding whereof and many other inconveniences, I wish that they should be carried farre from thence into some other parts, so that (as I say) they come in and submit themselves, upon the first summons: But after∣wards I would have none received but left to their fortune and mise∣rable end: my reason is, for that those which will afterwards remaine without, are stout and obstinate Rebells, such as will never be made dutifull and obedient, nor brought to labour or civill conversation, having once tasted that licentious life, and being acquainted with spoyle and out-rages, will ever after be ready for the like occasions, so as there is no hope of their amendment or recovery, and therefore needefull to be cut off. Eudox. Surely of such desperate persons, as will follow the course of their owne folly, there is no compassion to bee had, and for others you have proposed a mercifull meanes, much more then they have deserved, but what then shall be the conclusion of this warre; For you have prefixed a short time of its continuance? Iren. The end will (I assure me) bee very short and much sooner then can be in so great a trouble, as it seemeth hoped for, although there should none of them fall by the sword, nor bee slaine by the Souldiour, yet thus being kept from manurance, and their Cattle from running abroad, by this hard restraint they would quickly con∣sume themselves, and devoure one another. The proofe whereof, I saw sufficiently exampled in these late warres of Mounster, for not∣withstanding that the same was a most rich and plentifull countrey, full of corne and cattle, that you would have thought they should have beene able to stand long, yet ere one yeare and a halfe they were brought to such wretchednesse, as that any stony heart would have rued the same. Out of every corner of the woods and glynnes they came creeping forth upon their hands, for their legges could not beare them, they looked like anatomies of death, they spake like Ghosts crying out of their graves, they did eate the dead Carrions, happy were they could finde them, yea, and one another soone after, insomuch as the very carcasses they spared not to scrape out of their graves, and if they found a plot of water-cresses or Shamrocks; there they flocked as to a feast for the time, yet not able long to continue therewithall, that in short space there were none almost left, and a most populous and plentifull countrey suddainely left voyde of man and beast, yet sure in all that warre, there perished not many by the Sword, but all by the extremitie of famine, which they themselves had wrought. Eudox. It is a wonder that you tell, and more to bee wondred how it should so shortly come to passe. Iren. It is most true, and the reason also very ready, for you must
conceive that the strength of all that Nation, is the Kerne, Galloglasse, Stocah, Horseman and Horseboy, the which having beene never used to have any thing of their owne, and now being upon spoyle of o∣thers, make no spare of any thing, but havocke and confusion of all they meet with, whether it bee their owne Friends goods, or their Foes. And if they happen to get never so great spoyle at any time, the same they waste and consume in a tryce, as naturally deligh∣ting in spoyle, though it doe themselves no good. On the o∣ther side, whatsoever they leave unspent, the Souldier when hee commeth there, spoyleth and havocketh likewise, so that betweene both, nothing is very shortly left. And yet this is ve∣ry necessary to bee done for the soone finishing of the warre, and not onely this in this wise, but also those subiects▪ which doe border upon those parts, are either to bee removed and drawne away, or likewise to bee spoyled, that the Enemy may find no suc∣cour thereby. For what the Souldier spares, the Rebell will sure∣ly spoyle. Eudox. I doe now well understand you. But now when all things are brought to this passe, and all filled with these ruefull spe∣ctacles of so many wretched Carcases starving, goodly Countreyes wasted, so huge desolation and confusion, that even I that doe but heare it from you, and doe picture it in my minde, doe greatly pit∣tie and commiserate it. If it shall happen that the state of this mi∣serie and lamentable image of things shall bee tolde, and fee∣lingly presented to her sacred Maiestie, being by nature full of mercy and clemency, who is most inclinable to such pittifull complaints, and will not endure to heare such Tragedies made of her poore people and subiects, as some about her may insinuate. Then shee perhappes for very compassion of such calamities, will not onely stoppe the streame of such violence, and returne to her wonted mildenesse, but also conne them little thankes which have beene the authours and Councellours of such bloodie plat∣formes▪ So I remember that in the late government of that good Lord Grey, when after long travell, and many perillous assayes, he had brought things almost to this passe, that you speake of, that it was even made ready for reformation, and might have beene brought to what her Maiestie would, like complaint was made against him, that he was a bloodie man, and regarded not the life of her subiects no more then dogges, but had wasted and consumed all, so as now she had nothing almost left, but to raigne in their Ashes, eare was soon lent therunto, & all suddenly turned topside-turvy the Noble Lord eft-soones was blamed, the wretched people pittied & new counsells plotted, in which it was concluded that a generall par∣don should be sent over to all that would accept of it, upon which all former purposes were blancked, the Governour at a bay, and not only all that great and long charge which shee had before beene at quite lost and cancelled, but also all that hope of good which was
even at the doore put back, and cleane frustrated. All which, whether it be true or no, your selfe can well tell. Iren. Too true Eudoxus, the more the pitty, for I may not for∣get so memorable a thing: Neither can I bee ignorant of that peril∣lous device, and of the whole meanes by which it was compassed, & very cunningly contrived by sowing first dissention betweene him, & an other noble personage; where in they both at length found how notably they had beene abused, and how thereby under hand, this universall alteration of things was brought about, but then too late to stay the same, for in the meane time all that was formerly done with long labor, & great toyle, was (as you say) in a moment undone, and that good Lord blotted with the name of a bloody man, whom, who that well knew, knew to be most gentle, affable, loving and tem∣perate. But that the necessitie of that present state of things, inforced him to that violence, and almost changed his naturall disposition. But otherwise he was so farre from delighting in blood, that often∣times he suffered not just vengeance to fall where it was deserved: and even some of them which were afterwardes his accusers, had tasted too much of his mercy, and were from the gallowes brought to bee his accusers. But his course indeede was this, hat hee spared not the heades and principalls of any mischievous practi∣ses or rebellion, but shewed sharpe iudgement on them, chiefly for ensamples sake, that all the meaner sort, which also were generally then infected with that evill, might by terrour thereof bee reclay∣med, and saved, if it were possible. For in the last conspiracy of Consulat (s place) Camden. an∣nal. rerum An∣glic. & Hiber. ad an. 1520. some of the English Pale, thinke you not that there were ma∣ny more guiltie then they that felt the punishment? yet hee tou∣ched onely a few of speciall note, and in the tryall of them also e∣ven to prevent the blame of cruelty and partiall proceeding, and seeking their Blood, which he, as in his great wisedome (as it seem∣eth) did fore-see would bee objected against him; hee for avoyding thereof, did use a singular discretion and regard. For the Iury that went upon their tryall, hee made to bee chosen out of their nearest kinsmen, and their Iudges he made of some of their owne Fathers, of othets their Vncles and dearest friends, who when they could not but justly condemne them, yet he uttered their judgment in aboun∣dance of teares, and yet hee even heerein was called bloody and cruell. Eudox. Indeed so have I heard it heere often spoken, but I perceive (as I alwayes verily thought) that it was most unjustly, for hee was alwayes knowne to bee a most iust, sincere, godly, and right noble man, farre from such sternenesse, farre from such unrighteousnesse. But in that sharpe execution of the Spa∣niards, at the fort of Sinerwick, I heard it specially noted, and if it were true as some reported, surely it was a great touch to him in ho∣nour, for some say that he promised them life: others at least hee did put them in hope thereof.
Iren. Both the one and the other is most untrue; for this I can assure you, my selfe being as neare them as any, that hee was so farre either from promising, or putting them in hope, that when first their Secretarie (called as I remember) Signior Ieffrey an Ita∣lian, being sent to treate with the Lord Deputie for grace, was flatly refused: And afterwards their Coronell named Don Seba∣stian, came forth to intreate that they might part with their Armes like Souldiers, at the least with their lives according to the custome of Warre, and Law of Nations, it was strongly denyed him, and tolde him by the Lord Deputie himselfe, that they could not iustly pleade either custome of Warre, or Law of Nations, for that they were not any lawfull Enemies, and if they were, hee willed them to shew by what commission they came thither in∣to another Princes Dominions to warre, whether from the Pope or the King of Spaine, or any other, the which when they said they had not, but were onely adventurers that came to seeke fortune a∣broad, and to serve in warres amongst the Irish, who desired to en∣tertaine them. It was then tolde them, that the Irish themselves, as the Earle and Iohn of Desmond, with the rest, were no lawfull Enemies; but Rebells and Traytours, and therefore they that came to succour them, no better then Rogues and Runnagates, specially comming with no licence, nor commission from their owne King. So as it should bee dishonourable for him in the name of his Queene, to condition or make any tearmes with such Rascalls, but left them to their choyce, to yeeld and submit themselves, or no: whereupon the said Coronell did absolutely yeeld himselfe and the Fort, with all therein, and craved onely mercy, which it being not thought good to shew them, for daunger of them, if being saved, they should afterwardes ioyne with the Irish, and also for terrour to the Irish, who are much imboldened by those forraigne succours, and also put in hope of more ere long, there was no o∣ther way but to make that short end of them as was made. There∣fore most untruely and maliciously doe these evill tongues back∣bite and slander the sacred ashes of that most iust and honourable personage, whose least virtue of many most excellent that aboun∣ded in his Heroicke spirit, they were never able to aspire unto. Eudox. Truely Irenaeus, I am right glad to be thus satisfied by you, in that I have often heard questioned, and yet was never able till now, to choake the mouth of such detractours, with the cer∣taine knowledge of their slanderous untruthes, neither is the know∣ledge hereof impertinent to that which wee formerly had in hand, I meane for the thorough prosecuting of that sharpe course which you have set downe for the bringing under of those Rebells of Vlster and Connaght, and preparing a way for their perpetuall refor∣mation, least happily by any such sinister suggestions of cru∣eltie and too much blood-shed, all the plot might be over-throwne,
and all the coste and labour therein imployed, bee utterly lost and cast away. Iren. You say most true, for after that Lords calling away from thence, the two Lords Iustices continued but a while: of which the one was of minde (as it seemed) to have continued in the footing of his predecessors, but that he was curbed and restrayned. But the o∣ther was more mildly disposed, as was meete for his profession, and willing to have all the wounds of that Common-wealth healed and recured, but not with that heede as they should bee. After when Sir Iohn Perrot succeeding (as it were) into another mans harvest, found an open way to what course hee list, the which hee bent not to that point which the former Governours intended, but rather quite contrary, as it were in scorne of the former, and in vaine vaunt of his owne Councells, with the which hee was too willfully carryed; for hee did treade downe and disgrace all the English, and set up and countenance the Irish all that hee could, whether thinking thereby to make them more tractable and buxome to his government, (wherein hee thought much a∣misse) or privily plotting some other purposes of his owne, as it partly afterwards appeared, but surely his manner of governe∣ment, could not be sound nor wholesome for that Realme, it being so contrary to the former. For it was even as two Physicians should take one sicke body in hand, at two sundry times: Of which the former would minister all things meete to purge and keepe under the Bodie: the other to pamper and strengthen it suddenly againe, whereof what is to bee looked for, but a most daungerous re∣lapse? That which wee now see thorough his rule, and the next after him, happened thereunto, being now more daunge∣rously sicke then ever before. Therefore by all meanes it must bee fore-seene and assured, that after once entering into this course of reformation, there bee afterwardes no remorse nor drawing backe for the sight of any such ruefull objects, as must thereupon followe, nor for compassion of their cala∣mities, seeing that by no other meanes it is possible to cure them, and that these are not of will, but of very urgent neces∣sitie. Eudox. Thus farre then you have now proceeded to plant your garrisons, and to direct their services, of the which ne∣verthelesse I must needes conceive that there cannot be any certaine direction set downe, so that they must follow the occasions which shall bee daylie offered, and diligently awayted. But by your leave (Irenaeus) notwithstanding all this your carefull fore-sight and provision (mee thinkes) I see an evill lurke unespyed, and that may chance to hazard all the hope of this great service, if it bee not very well looked into, and that is, the corruption of their Captaines; for though they be placed never so carefully, and their Companies filled never so sufficiently, yet may they, if
they list, discarde whom they please, and send away such as will perhappes willingly bee ridde of that dangerous and hard service, the which (well I wote) is their common custome to doe, when they are layde in garrison, for then they may better hide their de∣faults, then when they are in Campe, where they are continually eyed and noted of all men. Besides, when their pay commeth, they will (as they say) detaine the greatest portions thereof at their plea∣sure, by a hundred shifts that need not here be named, through which they oftentimes deceive the Souldier, and abuse the Queene, and greatly hinder the service. So that let the Queene pay never so fully, let the Muster-Master view then never so diligently, let the Deputy or Generall looke to them never so exactly, yet they can cozen them all. Therefore me thinkes it were good, if it be possible, to make pro∣vision for this inconvenience. Iren. It will surely be very hard; but the chiefest helpe for pre∣vention hereof must be the care of the Coronell that hath the govern∣ment of all his garrison, to have an eye to their alterations, to know the numbers and names of the sick Souldiers, and the slaine, to marke and observe their rankes in their daylie rising forth to service, by which he cannot easily bee abused, so that hee himselfe bee a man of speciall assurance and integritie. And therefore great regard is to bee had in the choosing and appointing of them. Besides, I would not by any meanes, that the Captaines should have the paying of their Souldiers, but that there should bee a Pay-master appointed, of speciall trust, which should pay every man according to his Captaines Ticket, and the accompt of the Clerke of his Band, for by this meanes the Captaine will never seeke to falsifie his alterations, nor to diminish his Company, nor to deceive his Souldiers, when nothing thereof shalbe sure to come unto himselfe, but what is his owne bare pay. And this is the manner of the Spaniards Captaine, who never hath to meddle with his Souldiers pay, and indeed scor∣neth the name as base to be counted his Souldiers Pagadore, whereas the contrary amongst us hath brought things to so bad a passe, that there is no Captaine but thinkes his Band very sufficient, if hee can muster 60: and stickes not to say openly, that he is unworthy to have a Captainship, that cannot make it worth 500l. by the yeare, the which they right well verifie by the proofe. Eudox. Truely I thinke this a very good meanes to avoid that in∣convenience of Captaines abuses. But what say you to the Coronell? what authority thinke you meete to be given him? whether will you allow him to protect or safe conduct, and to have martiall lawes as they are accustomed? Iren. Yea verily, but all these to bee limited with very straite in∣structions. As first for protections, that hee shall have authority af∣ter the first Proclamation, for the space of twentie dayes, to pro∣tect all that shall come in, and them to send to the Lord De∣putie, with their safe conduct or passe, to bee at his disposition,
but so as none of them returne backe againe, being once come in, but be presently sent away out of the Countrey, to the next She∣riffe, and so conveyed in safetie. And likewise for martiall Lawe, that to the Souldier it bee not extended, but by tryall formerly of his cryme, by a Iury of his fellow Souldiers as it ought to bee, and not rashly at the will or displeasure of the Coronell, as I have sometimes seene too lightly. And as for o∣ther of the Rebells that shall light into their handes, that they bee well aware of what condition they bee, and what holding they have. For in the last generall warres there, I knew ma∣ny good Free-holders executed by martiall law, whose landes were thereby saved to their Heires, which should have other∣wise escheated to her Majestie. In all which the great discretion and uprigntnesse of the Coronell himselfe is to bee the chiefest stay both for all those doubts, and for many other difficulties that may in the service happen. Eudox. Your caution is very good; but now touching the Arch-Rebell himselfe, I meane the Earle of Tyrone, if he in all the time of these warres, should offer to come in and submit himselfe to her Ma∣jestie, would you not have him received, giving good hostages, and sufficient assurance of himselfe? Iren. No marrie, for there is no doubt, but hee will offer to come in, as hee hath done diverse times already, but it is without any intent of true submission, as the effect hath well shewed, nei∣ther indeed can hee now if hee would, come in at all, nor give that assurance of himselfe that should bee meete: for being as hee is ve∣ry subtle headed, seeing himselfe now so farre ingaged in this bad action, can you thinke that by his submission, hee can purchase to himselfe any safetie, but that heereafter, when things shall bee quieted, these his villanies will be ever remem∣bred, and whensoever hee shall treade awry (as needes the most righteous must sometimes) advantage will bee taken thereof, as a breach of his pardon, and hee brought to a reckoning for all for∣mer matters; besides, how hard it is now for him to frame him∣selfe to subjection, that having once set before his Eyes the hope of a Kingdome, hath therunto not onely found incouragement from the greatest King in Christendome, but also found great faintnes in her Maiesties withstanding him, wherby he is animated to think that his power is able to defend him, & offend further then he hath done, whensoever he please, let every reasonable man iudge. But if hee himselfe should come and leave all other, his accomplices without, as O Donel, Mac Mahone, Maguire, & the rest, he must needs thinke that then even they, will ere long cut his throate, which having drawne them all into this occasion, now in the midst of their trouble giveth them the slip, whereby hee must needes perceive how impossible it is for him to submit himselfe. But yet if hee would so doe, can he give any good assurance of his obedience? For how weake
hould is there by hostages, hath too often beene proved, and that which is spoken of taking Shane O-Neales sonnes from him, and set∣ting them up against him is a very perillous counsaile, and not by any meanes to be put in proofe, for were they let forth and could over∣throwe him, who should afterwards overthrow them, or what assu∣rance can be had of them? It will be like the tale in Aesop, of the wild horse, who having enmity with the Stagg, came to a man to desire his ayde against his foe, who yeelding therevnto mounted upon his backe, and so following the stagge, ere long slew him, but then when the horse would have him alight he refused, but ever after kept him in his subjection and service. Such I doubt would bee the proofe of Shane O-Neales sonnes. Therefore it is most dangerous to attempt any such plot, for even that very manner of plot, was the meanes by which this trayterous Earle is now made great: For when the last O-Neale, called Terlagh Leinagh, began to stand upon some tickle termes, this fellow then, called Baron of Dunganon, was set up as it were to beard him, and countenanced and strengthened by the Queene so far, as that he is now able to keepe her selfe play: much like unto a Game∣ster that having lost all, borroweth of his next fellow-Gamester somewhat to maintaine play, which he setting unto him againe, short∣ly thereby winneth all from the winner. Eudox. Was this Rebell then set up at first by the Queene (as you say) and now become so undutifull? Iren. He was (I assure you) the most outcast of all the O-Neales then, and lifted up by her Majesty out of the dust, to that he hath now wrought himselfe unto, and now hee playeth like the frozen snake, who being for compassion releived by the husbandman, soone after he was warme began to hisse, and threaten danger even to him and his. Eudox. He surely then deserveth the punishment of that snake, & should worthily be hewed to peeces. But if you like not the letting forth of Shane O-Neales sonnes against him, what say you then of that advice which (I heard) was given by some, to draw in Scotts to serve against him? how like you that advice? Iren. Much worse then the former, for who that is experienced in those parts knoweth not that the O-Neales are neerely allyed unto the Mac-Neiles of Scotland, and to the Earle of Argyle, from whence they use to have all their succours of those Scottes and Redshanckes: Besides all these Scottes are through long continuance intermingled and allyed to all the inhabitants of the north:The causes of these feares have been am∣putated, since the happy uni∣on of England and Scotland, established by his late Maje∣sty. So as there is no hope that they will ever be wrought to serve faithfully against their old friends and kinsmen: And though they would, how when they have overthrowne him, and the warres are finished, shall they themselves be put out? doe we not all know, that the Scottes were the first inhabi∣tants of all the north, and that those which now are called the north Irish, are indeed very vide ed. Ec∣cles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 1. Scottes, which challenge the ancient inheritance and dominion of that Countrey, to be their owne aunciently: This
then were but to leap out of the pan into the fire: For the cheifest caveat and provision in reformation of the north, must be to keep out those Scottes. Eudox. Indeede I remember, that in your discourse of the first peopling of Ireland, you shewed that the Scythians or Scottes were the first that sate downe in the north whereby it seemes that they may challenge some right therein. How comes it then that O-Neales claimes the dominion thereof, and this Earle of Tyrone saith that the right is in him? I pray you resolve me herein? for it is very needefull to be knowne, and maketh unto the right of the warre against him, whose successe useth commonly to be according to the justnes of the cause, for which it is made: For if Tyrone have any right in that Seig∣niory (me thinkes) it should be wrong to thrust him out: Or if (as I remember) you said in the beginning that O-Neale when he acknow∣ledged the King of England for his Leige Lord and Soveraigne, did (as he alleadgeth) reserve in the same submission, his Seigniories and rights unto himselfe, what should it be accounted to thrust him out of the same? Iren. For the right of O-Neale in the seigniory of the north, it is surely none at all: For besides that the Kings of England conquered all the Realme, and thereby assumed and invested all the right of that land to themselves and their heires and successours for ever: So as nothing was left in O-Neale but what he received backe from them, O-Neale himselfe never had any ancient Seigniory over that country, but what by usurpation and incroachment after the death of the Duke of Clarence, he got upon the English, whose lands and possessions being formerly wasted by the Scottes, under the leading of Edward le Bruce, (as I formerly declared unto you) he eft-soones entred into, and sithence hath wrongfully detained, through the other occupations and great affaires which the Kings of England (soone after) fell into here at home, so as they could not intend to the recovery of that Countrey of the north, nor restraine the insolency of O-Neale, who finding none now to withstand him, raigned in that desolation, and made himselfe Lord of those few people that remained there, upon whom ever sithence he hath continued his first usurped power, and now exacteth and extorteth upon all men what he list; So that now to subdue or expell an usurper, should bee no unjust enterprise or wrongfull warre, but a restitution of auncient right unto the Crowne of England, from whence they were most unjustly expelled and long kept out. Eudox. I am very glad herein to be thus satisfied by you, that I may the better satisfie them, whom I have often heard to object these doubts, and slaunderously to barke at the courses which are held a∣gainst that trayterous Earle and his adherents. But now that you have thus settled your service for Vlster and Connaght: I would bee glad to heare your opinion for the prosecuting of Feagh Mac Hugh, who being but a base villaine, and of himselfe of no power, yet so
continually troubleth the State, notwithstanding that he lyeth under their nose, that I disdaine his bold arrogancy, and thinke it to be the greatest indignity to the Queene that may be, to suffer such a caytiffe to play such Rex, and by his ensample not onely to give heart and in∣couragement to all such bad Rebells, but also to yeeld them succour and refuge against her Majesty, whensoever they fly unto his Come∣ricke, whereof I would first wish before you enter into your plot of service against him, that you should lay open by what meanes, he be∣ing so base, first lifted himselfe up to this dangerous greatnes, and how he maintaineth his part against the Queene and her power, not∣withstanding all that hath beene done and attempted against him. And whether also hee have any pretence of right in the lands which he houldeth, or in the warres that he maketh for the same? Iren. I will so, at your pleasure, and will further declare, not on∣ly the first beginning of his private house▪ but also the originall of the sept of the Birnes and Tooles, so farre as I have learned the same from some of themselves, and gathered the rest by reading: The people of the Birnes and Tooles (as before I shewed unto you my conje∣cture) descended from the auncient Brittaines, which first inhabited all those easterne parts of Ireland, as their names doe betoken, for In Richard Creagh's booke de lingua Hibernica, there is a very plentifull collection of Irish words, derived from the Brit∣tish or Welch tongue, which doth much strengthen the Au∣thors opinion, in houlding that the Brnes, Tooles, and Cavenaghs, with other the ancient inhabi∣tants of the easterne parts, were originally Brittish Colonyes. vid▪ pag. 32 & 33. Brin in the Brittish language signifieth wooddy, and Toole hilly, which names it seemeth they tooke of the Countryes which they inhabited, which is all very mountainous and woody. In the which it seemeth that ever since the comming in of the English with Dermot Mac Murrogh King of Leinster, who was surnamed also ni-Gall, as being a friend to the English, and a cheife instru∣ment in inciting them to the conquest of Ireland. Dermot ni-Gall, they have continued: Whether that their coun∣trey being so rude and mountainous was of them despi∣sed, and thought unworthy the inhabiting, or that, that they were received to grace by them, and suffered to enjoy their lands, as unfit for any other, yet it seemeth that in some places of the same they have put foote, and fortified with sundry Castles, of which the ruines onely doe there now remaine, since which time they are growne to that strength, that they are able to lift up hand against all that state; and now lately through the boldnes and late good successe of of this Feagh Mac Hugh, they are so farre im∣boldened, that they threaten perill even to Dublin, over whose necke they continually hang. But touching your demand of this Feaghes right unto that Countrey which he claimes, or the seigniory therein, it is most vaine and arrogant. For this you cannot be ignorant, that it was part of that which was given in inheritance by Dermot Mac Morrough King of Leinster, unto Strongbowe with his daughter, and which Strongbowe gave over unto the King and his heires, so as the right is absolutely now in her Majesty, and if it were not, yet could it not be in this Feagh, but in o O-Birn. O Brin, which is the ancient Lord of all that Countrey, for he and his auncestours were but followers unto O-Brin, and his grandfather Shane Mac Terlagh, was a man of mea∣nest
regard amongst them neither having wealth nor power. But his Sonne Hugh Mac Shane, the father of this Feagh, first began to lift up his head, and through the strength and great fastnes of Glan-Malor, which adjoyneth unto his house of Ballinecor, drew unto him many theeves and out-lawes, which fled unto the succour of that glynne, as to a sanctuary and brought unto him part of the spoyle of all the Countrey, through which he grew strong, and in short space got unto himselfe a great name thereby amongst the Irish, in whose footing this his sonne continuing, hath through many unhappy occasions, in∣creased his said name, and the opinion of his greatnes, insomuch that now he is become a dangerous Enemy to deale withall. Eudox. Surely I can commend him, that being of himselfe of so meane condition, hath through his owne hardinesse lifted himselfe up to the height, that he dare now front Princes, and make tearmes with great potentates; the which as it is to him honourable, so it is to them most disgracefull, to be bearded of such a base varlet, that be∣ing but of late growne out of the dunghill, beginneth now to over∣crow so high mountaines, and make himselfe great protectour of all Outlawes and Rebells that will repaire unto him. But doe you thinke he is now so dangerous an enemy as he is counted, or that it is so hard to take him downe as some suppose? Iren. No verily, there is no great reckoning to bee made of him, for had he ever beene taken in hand, when the rest of the Realme (or at least the parts adjoyning) had been quiet, as the honourable Gent. that now governeth there, (I meane Sir William Russell) gave a no∣table vide Camdeni annales, sub se∣nem anni 1594. attempt thereunto, and had worthily performed it, if his course had not beene crossed unhappily, he could not have stood 3. moneths, nor ever have looked up against a very meane power: but now all the parts about him being up in a madding moode, as the Moores in Leix, the Cavenaghes in the county of Wexford, and some of the Butlers in the county of Kilkenny, they all flocke unto him, and drawe into his country, as to a strong hould where they thinke to be safe, from all that prosecute them: And from thence they doe at their pleasures breake out into all the borders adjoyning, which are well peopled countryes, as the counties of Dublin, of Kildare, of Catherlagh, of Kilkenny, of Wexford, with the spoiles whereof they victuall and strengthen themselves, which otherwise should in short time be star∣ved, and sore pyned, so that what he is of himselfe, you may hereby perceive. Eudox. Then by so much as I gather out of your speech, the next way to end the warres with him, and to roote him out quite, should be to keepe him from invading of those countryes adjoyning, which (as I suppose) is to be done, either by drawing all the inhabitants of those next borders away, and leaving them utterly waste, or by plan∣ting garrisons upon all those frontiers about him, that when he shall breake forth, may set upon him and shorten his returne. Iren. You conceive very rightly Eudoxus, but for that the dis∣peopling
and driving away all the inhabitants from the countrey a∣bout him, which you speake of should bee a great confusion and trouble, aswell for the unwillingnesse of them, to leave their possessi∣ons, as also for placing and providing for them in other Countryes, (me thinkes) the better course should be by planting of Garrisons a∣bout him, which whensoever he shall looke forth, or be drawne out with the desire of the spoyle of those borders, or for necessity of vi∣ctuall, shall be alwayes ready to intercept his going or comming. Eudox. Where then doe you wish those Garrisons to be planted that they may serve best against him, and how many in every Gar∣rison? Iren. I my selfe by reason that (as I told you) I am no martiall man, will not take upon me to direct so dangerous affaires, but onely as I understood by the purposes and plots, which the Lord Gray who was well experienced in that service, against him did lay downe: To the performance whereof he onely required 1000. men to be laid in 6. garrisons, that is, at Ballinecor 200. footemen and 50. horsemen, which should shut him out of his great glynne, whereto he so much trusteth; at Knockelough 200. footemen and 50. horsemen, to answere the coun∣ty of Catherlagh; at Arclo or Wicklow 200. footemen and 50. horse∣men to defend all that side towards the Sea. In Shillelagh 100. foote∣men which should cut him from the Cavanaghes, and the county of Wexford; and about the three Castles 50. horsemen, which should de∣fend all the county of Dublin; and 100. footemen at Talbots towne, which should keepe him from breaking out into the County of Kil∣dare, and be alwayes on his necke on that side: The which Garrisons so laide, will so busie him, that he shall never rest at home, nor stirre forth abroad but he shall be had; as for his Creete they cannot be a∣bove ground, but they must needes fall into their hands or starve, for he hath no fastnes nor refuge for them. And as for his partakers of the Moores, Butlers, and Cavanaghes, they will soone leave him, when they see his fastnes and strong places thus taken from him. Eudox. Surely this seemeth a plot of great reason, and small diffi∣culty, which promiseth hope of a short end. But what speciall dire∣ctions will you set downe for the services and risings out of these Garrisons. Iren. None other then the present occasions shall minister unto them, and as by good espialls, whereof there they cannot want store, they shall be drawne continually upon him, so as one of them shall be still upon him, and sometimes all at one instant, bayting him. And this (I assure my selfe) will demaund no long time, but will be all fi∣nished in the space of one yeare, which how small a thing it is, unto the eternall quietnesse which shall thereby be purchased to that Re∣alme, and the great good which should growe to her Majesty, should (me thinkes) readily drawe on her Highnesse to the undertaking of the enterprise. Eudox. You have very well (me thinkes) Irenaeus plotted a course
for the atcheiving of those warres now in Ireland, which seemes to aske no long time, nor great charge, so as the effecting thereof bee committed to men of sure trust, and sound experience, aswell in that Country, as in the manner of those services, for if it bee left in the hands of such rawe Captaines, as are usually sent out of England, be∣ing thereunto onely preferred by friendship, and not chosen by suffi∣ciency, it will soone fall to the ground. Iren. Therefore it were meete (me thinkes) that such Captaines onely were thereunto employed, as have formerly served in that Country, and been at least Leivtenants unto other Captaines there. For otherwise being brought and transferred from other services a∣broad, as in France, in Spaine, and in the Low-Countryes, though they be of good experience in those, and have never so well deserved, yet in these they will be new to seeke, and before they have gathered expe∣rience, they shall buy it with great losse to her Majesty, either by ha∣zarding of their companies, through ignorance of the places, and manner of the Irish services, or by loosing a great part of the time which is required hereunto, being but short, in which it might be fi∣nished, almost before they have taken out a new lesson, or can tell what is to be done. Eudox. You are no good friend to new Captaines; It seemes Iren. that you barre them from the credit of this service: but (to say truth) me thinkes it were meete, that any one before he came to bee a Cap∣taine, should have beene a Souldiour, for parere qui nescit, nescit impe∣rare. And besides there is great wrong done to the old Souldiour, from whom all meanes of advancement which is due unto him, is cut off by shuffling in these new cutting Captaines, into the place for which he hath long served, and perhaps better deserved. But now that you have thus (as I suppose) finished all the warre, and brought all things to that lowe ebbe which you speake of, what course will you take for the bringing in of that reformation which you intend, and recovering all things from this desolate estate? in which (mee thinkes) I behold them now left, unto that perfect establishment and new common-wealth which you have conceived of, by which so great good may redound unto her Majesty, and an assured peace bee confirmed, for that is it whereunto wee are now to looke, and doe greatly long for, being long sithence made weary with the huge charge which you have laide upon us, and with the strong indurance of so many complaints, so many delayes, so many doubts and dan∣gers, as will hereof (I know well) arise, unto the which before wee come, it were meete (me thinkes) that you should take some order for the Souldiour, which is now first to bee discharged and disposed of, some way: the which if you doe not well fore-see, may growe to as great inconvenience as all this that I suppose you have quit us from, by the loose leaving of so many thousand Souldiours, which from thence forth will be unfit for any labour or other trade, but must ei∣ther seeke service and imployment abroad, which may be dangerous,
or else perhaps imploy themselves heere at home, as may bee discommodious. Iren. You say very true, and it is a thing much mislyked in this our Common-wealth, that no better course is taken for such as have beene imployed in service, but that returning whether maymed and so unable to labour, or otherwise whole and sound, yet after∣wards unwilling to worke, or rather willing to set the hang-man on worke. But that needeth another consideration; but to this which wee have now in hand, it is farre from my meaning to leave the Soul∣dier so at randome, or to leave that waste Realme so weake and desti∣tute of strength, which may both defend it against others that might seeke then to set upon it, and also to keepe it from that relapse which I before did fore-cast. For it is one speciall good of this plot, which I would devise, that 6000. Souldiers of these whom I have now imployed in this service, and made thoroughly acquainted both with the state of the Countrey, and manners of the people, should henceforth bee still continued, and for ever maintayned of the Countrey, without any charge to her Majestie, and the rest that ei∣ther are olde, and unable to serve any longer, or willing to fall to thrift, as I have seene many Souldiers after the service, to prove very good husbands, should bee placed in part of the landes by them wonne, at such rate, or rather better then others, to whom the same shall be set out. Eudox. Is it possible Irenaeus? can there be any such meanes de∣vised, that so many men should be kept still in her Majesties service, without any charge to her at all. Surely this were an exceeding great good both to her Highnes to have so many olde Souldiers al∣wayes ready at call, to what purpose soever she list to imploy them, and also to have that land thereby so strengthened, that it shall nei∣ther feare any forraine Invasion, nor practise, which the Irish shall e∣ver attempt, but shall keepe them under in continuall awe and firme obedience. Iren. It is so indeed. And yet this truely I doe not take to be any matter of great difficultie, as I thinke it will also soone appeare unto you. And first we will speake of the North part, for that the same is of more weight and importance. So soone as it shall appeare that the Enemy is brought downe, and the stout Rebell either cut off, or driven to that wretchednesse, that hee is no longer able to holde up his head, but will come in to any conditions, which I assure my selfe will bee before the end of the second Winter, I wish that there bee a generall Proclamation made, that whatsoever Out-lawes will freely come in, and submit themselves to her Maje∣sties mercy, shall have liberty so to doe, where they shall either finde that grace they desire, or have leave to returne againe in safety, upon which it is likely that so many as survive, will come in to sue for grace, of which, who so are thought meet for subjection, and fit to be brought to good, may be received, or else all of them;
(for I thinke that all wilbe but a very few) upon condition and as∣surance that they will submit themselves absolutely to her Maie∣sties ordinance for them, by which they shall be assured of life and libertie, and be onely tyed to such conditions as shall bee thought by her meet for containing them ever after in due obedience. To the which conditions I nothing doubt, but that they will all most readi∣ly, and upon their knees submit themselves, by the proofe of that which I have seene in Mounster. For upon the like Proclamation there, they all came in both tagg and ragg, and when as afterwardes many of them were denyed to be received, they bade them doe with them what they would, for they would not by any meanes returne againe, nor goe forth. For in that case who will not accept almost of any conditions, rather then dye of hunger and miserie. Eudox. It is very likely so. But what then is the Ordinance, and what bee the conditions which you will propose unto them, which shall reserve unto them an assurance of life and li∣berty. Iren. So soone then as they have given the best assurance of themselves which may be required, which must be (I suppose) some of their principall men to remaine in hostage one for another, and some other for the rest, for other surety I reckon of none that may binde them, neither of wife, nor of children, since then perhappes they would gladly be ridde of both from the famine, I would have them first unarmed utterly, and stripped quite of all their warre∣like weapons, & then these conditions set downe, & made knowne unto them, that they shall bee placed in Leinster, and have land given them to occupy and to live upon, in such sort as shall be∣come good subjects, to labour thenceforth for their living, and to apply themselves to honest trades of civility, as they shall every one be found meete and able for. Eudox. Where then a gods name will you place them in Leinster? or will you finde out any new land there for them that is yet un∣knowne? Iren. No, I will place them all in the Countrey of the Birnes and Tooles, which Pheagh mac Hugh hath, and in all the lands of the Cavanaghes, which are now in rebellion, and all the lands which will fall to her Maiestie there-abouts, which I know to be very spacious and large enough to containe them, being very This carrieth no fit proporti∣on for the transplantati∣on intended by the Author, considering the large extent of Vlster, and the narrow bounds heere limited. neere twenty or thir∣ty miles wyde. Eudox. But then what will you doe with all the Birnes, the Tooles, and the Cavanaghes, and all those that now are joyned with them. Iren. At the same very time, and in the same very manner that I make that Proclamation to them of Vlster, will I have it also made to these, and upon their submission thereunto, I will take like assurance of them as of the other. After which I will translate all that remaine of them, unto the places of the other in Vlster, with all their Creete,
& what else they have left them, the which I will cause to be divided amongst them in some meete sort, as each may thereby have some∣what to sustaine himselfe a while withall, untill by his further tra∣vaile and labour of the Earth, hee shalbe able to provide himselfe better. Eudox. But will you give the land then freely unto them, and make them heires of the former Rebells? so may you perhaps make them also heires of all their former villainies and disorders, or how else will you dispose of them? Iren. Not so: But all the lands will I give unto Englishmen, whom I will have drawne thither, who shall have the same with such estates as shall bee thought meete, and for such Rent, as shall eft∣soones bee rated; under every of those Englishmen will I place some of those Irish to bee Tennants, for a certaine Rent according to the quantity of such Land, as every man shall have allotted unto him, and shalbe found able to wield, wherein this speciall regard shall be had, that in no place under any Land-lord, there shall bee many of them placed together, but dispersed wide from their acquaintance, and scattered farre abroad thorough all the Country: For that is the evill which now I finde in all Ireland, that the Irish dwell altogether by their septs, and severall nations, so as they may practise or con∣spire what they will, whereas if there were English well placed a∣mong them, they should not bee able once to stirre or to murmure, but that it should be knowne, and they shortened according to their demerites. Eudox. You have good reason, but what rating of rents meane you, to what end doe you purpose the same? Iren. My purpose is to rate the rent of all those lands of her Maie∣sties, in such sort unto those Englishmen which shall take them, as they shall be well able to live thereupon, to yeeld her Maiesty rea∣sonable Chiefrie, and also give a competent maintenance unto the garrisons, which shall be there left amongst them; for those Souldi∣ours (as I tolde you) remaining of the former garrisons, I cast to maintaine upon the rent of those landes, which shall bee escheated, and to have them divided thorough all Ireland, in such places, as shalbe thought most convenient, and occasion may require. And this was the course which the Romanes observed in the Conquest of England, for they planted some of their Legions in all places convenient, the which they caused the Countrey to maintaine, cutting upon every portion of land a reasonable rent, which they called Romescot, the which might not surcharge the Tennant or Free-holder, and might defray the pay of the Garrison: and this hath beene alwayes observed by all Princes in all Countries to them newly subdued, to set Garrisons amongst them, to containe them in dutie, whose burthen they made them to beare, and the want of this ordinance in the first conquest of Ireland by Henry the Se∣cond, was the cause of the so short decay of that government, and the
quicke recovery againe of the Irish. Therefore by all meanes it is to bee provided for. And this is that I would blame, if it should not misbecome mee, in the late planting of Moun∣ster, that no care was had of this Ordinance, nor any strength of garrison provided for, by a certaine allowance out of all the saide Landes, but onely the present profite looked into, and the safe continuance thereof for ever heereafter negle∣cted. Eudox. But there is a Band of Souldiours layde in Mounster, to the maintenance of which, what oddes is there whether the Queene receiving the rent of the Countrey, doe give pay at her pleasure, or that there be a settled allowance appointed unto them out of her lands there? Iren. There is great oddes: For now that said rent of the Coun∣trey is not appointed to the pay of the Souldiers, but it is by every other occasion comming betweene, converted to other uses, and the Souldiours in time of peace discharged and neglected as unnecessa∣ry, whereas if the said rent were appointed and ordained by an esta∣blishment to this end only, it should not bee turned to any other, nor in troublous times upon every occasion, her Majestie, bee so troubled with sending over new Souldiours as shee is now, nor the Countrie ever should dare to mutinie, having still the Soul∣diour in their necke, nor any forraine enemie dare to invade knowing there so strong and great a Garrison, allwayes ready to receive them. Eudox. Sith then you thinke that this Romescot of the pay of the Souldiours upon the land, to be both the readiest way to the Souldi∣ers, and least troublesome to her Majestie; tell us (I pray you) how would you have the said lands rated, that both a rent may rise there∣out unto the Queene, and also the Souldiers receive pay, which (mee thinkes) wilbe hard. Iren. First we are to consider, how much land there is in all Vlster, that according to the quantity thereof we may cesse the said rent and allowāce issuing therout. Vlster (as the ancient records of that Realme doe testifie) doth containe 9000. Plow-lands, every of which Plow-lands containeth 120. Acres, after the rate of 21. foote to every perch of the Acre, every of which Plow-lands I will rate at 40s. by the yeare, the which yearely rent amounteth in the whole to 18000l. besides 6s.8d. chiefrie out of every Plow-land. But because the coun∣tie of Louth, being a part of Vlster, & containing in it 712. Plow-lands is not wholly to escheate to her Majestie, as the rest, they having in all their warres continued for the most part dutifull, though other∣wise a great part thereof is now under the Rebells, there is an abate∣ment to be made thereout of 400. or 500. Plow-lands, as I estimat the same, the which are not to pay the whole yearly rent of 40s. out of e∣very Plow-land, like as the escheated lands doe, but yet shall pay for their composition of cesse towards the keeping of Soldiers, 20s. out of
every Plow-land, so as there is to bee deducted out of the former summe 200. or 300l. yearely, the which may neverthelesse be suppli∣by the rent of the Fishings, which are exceeding great in Vlster, and also by an increase of rent in the best lands, and those that lye in the best places neere the Sea-coast. The which eighteene thousand pounds will defray the entertainment of 1500. Souldiers, with some over-plus towardes the pay of the victuallers, which are to bee im∣ployed in the victualling of these garrisons. Eudox. So then belike you meane to leave 1500. Souldiers in garrison for Vlster, to bee payde principally out of the rent of those lands, which shall be there escheated unto her Majestie. The which, where (I pray you) will you have them garrisoned? Iren. I will have them divided into three parts, that is, 500. in e∣very garrison, the which I will have to remaine in three of the same places, where they were before appointed, to wit, 500. at Stra∣bane, and about Longhfoile, so as they may holde all the passa∣ges of that part of the Countrey, and some of them bee put in wardes, upon all the straights thereabouts, which I know to be such, as may stoppe all passages into the Countrey on that side, and some of them also upon the Ban, up towardes Lough-Sidney, as I formerly directed. Also other 500. at the Fort upon Lough-Earne, and wardes taken out of them, which shall bee layde at Fermannagh, at Bealick, at Ballyshannon, and all the streightes to∣wardes Connaght, the which I know doe so strongly command all the passages that way, as that none can passe from Vlster into Connaght, without their leave. The last 500. shall also remaine in their Fort at Monoghan, and some of them bee drawne in∣to wardes, to keepe the Kaies of all that Countrey, both down∣wards, and also towardes O Relies Countrey, and the Pale, and some at Eniskillin, some at Belturbut, some at the blacke Fort, and so along that River, as I formerly shewed in the first plan∣ting of them. And moreover at every of these Forts, I would have the seate of a Towne layde forth and incompassed, in the which I would wish that there should inhabitants of all sortes, as Merchants, Artificers, and Husbandmen, bee placed, to whom there should Charters, and Fraunchises bee graunted to imcorporate them. The which as it wilbe no matter of difficultie to draw out of England, persons which would very gladly be so pla∣ced, so would it in short space turne those parts to great commodity, and bring ere long to her Majestie much profit, for those places are so fit for trade and trafficke, having most convenient out-gates by divers rivers to the Sea, and In-gates to the richest parts of the land, that they would soone be enriched, and mightily enlarged, for the very seating of the garrisons by them, besides the safetie and assurance which they shall worke unto them, will also draw thither store of people and trade, as I have seene ensample at Mariborogh and Philipstowne in Leinster, where by reason of those two Fortes,
though there were but small wardes left in them, there are two good Townes now growne, which are the greatest stay of both those two Countries. Eudox. Indeed (me thinkes) three such Townes as you say, would doe very well in those places with the Garrisons, and in short space would be so augmented, as they would bee able with little to in-wall themselves strongly, but for the planting of all the rest of the Countrey, what order would you take? Iren. What other then (as I said) to bring people out of Eng∣land, which should inhabite the same, whereunto though I doubt not but great troopes would be readie to runne, yet for that in such cases, the worst and most decayed men are most ready to remove, I would wish them rather to bee chosen out of all partes of this Realme, ei∣ther by discretion of wise men thereunto appointed, or by lot, or by the drumme, as was the olde use in sending forth of Colonies, or such other good meanes as shall in their wisedome bee thought meetest. Amongst the chiefe of which, I would have the land sett into Seigniories, in such sort as it is now in Mounster, and divided into Hundreds and Parishes, or Wardes, as it is in England, and layde out into Shires, as it was aunciently, viz. The Countie of Downe, the Countie of Antrim, the Countie of Louth, the Countie of Armaghe, the Countie of Cavan, the Countie of This is now part of the Countie of London-derry. Colerane, the Countie of Monoghan, the Countie of Tirone, the Countie of Fer∣mannagh, the Countie of Donnegall, being in all tenne. Over all which I wish a Lord President, and a Councell to bee placed, which may keepe them afterwards in awe and obedience, and mini∣ster unto them Iustice and equity. Eudox. Thus I see the whole purpose of your plot for Vlster, and now I desire to heare your like opinion for Connaght. Iren. By that which I have already said of Vlster, you may gather my opinion for Connaght, being very answereable to the former. But for that the lands which shal therein escheat unto her Maiesty, are not so intirely together, as that they can be accōpted in one summe, it nee∣deth that they be cōsidered severally. The Province of Connaght in the whole containeth (as appeareth by the records of Dublin) 7200 plow lands of the former measure, and is of late divided into sixe Shires or Counties. The Countie of The County of Clare was anciently ac∣counted part of the Province of Mounster, whence it hath the name of Tuadmuan, or Thomond, which signifieth north Mounster, and hath at this day its peculiar Governour, as being exemp∣ted from the Presidencies of Mounster and Connaght. Clare, the Countie of Leytrim, the Countie of Roscoman, the countie of Galway, the countie of Maio, & the Countie of Sligo. Of the which all the Countie of Sligo, all the Countie of Maio, the most part of the Countie of Roscoman, the most part of the Countie of Letrim, a great part of the county of Galway, & some of the county of Clare, is like to escheat to her Maiesty for the rebelliō of their present possessors. The which two counties of Sligo & Maio are supposed to containe almost 3000. plow-lands, the rent whereof rateably to the former, I valew almost at 6000l. per annum. The countie of Roscoman, saving that which pertaineth to the house of Roscoman, & some few o∣ther English there lately seated, is all one, and therefore it is wholly
likewise to escheate to her Majesty, saving those portions of English inhabitants, and even those English doe (as I understand by them) pay as much rent to her Majesty, as is set upon those in Vlster, counting their composition money therewithall, so as it may all run into one reckoning with the former two counties: So that this county of Ros∣coman containing 1200. Plow-lands, as it is accompted, amounteth to 2400li. by the yeare, which with the former two counties rent, maketh about 8300l. for the former wanted somewhat. But what the escheated lands of the county of Gallway and Letrim will rise unto, is yet uncertaine to define, till survey thereof be made, for that those lands are intermingled with the Earle of Clanricardes, and others lands, but it is thought they be the one halfe of both those counties, so as they may be counted to the value of one whole county, which containeth above 1000. plough-lands, for so many the least county of them all comprehendeth, which maketh 2000li. more, that is in all ten or eleven thousand pounds. The other 2. counties must remaine till their Escheates appeare, the which letting passe yet, as unknowne, yet this much is knowne to be accompted for certaine, that the com∣position of these two counties, being rated at 20. shil: every plowland, will amount to above 2000. pounds more, all which being laide to∣gether to the former, may be reasonably estimated to rise unto 13000 pounds, the which summe, together with the rent of the escheated lands in the two last countyes, which cannot yet be valued (being as I doubt not) no lesse then a thousand pounds more, will yeeld pay largely unto 1000. men and their victuallers, and 1000. pounds over towards the Governour. Eudox. You have (me thinkes) made but an estimate of those lands of Connaght, even at a very venture, so as it should be hard to build any certainty of charge, to be raised upon the same. Iren. Not altogether yet upon uncertainties, for this much may easily appeare unto you to be certaine, as the composition money of every plowland amounteth unto, for this I would have you princi∣pally to understand, that my purpose is to rate all the lands in Ire∣land at 20. shil: every plowland, for their composition towards the Garrison. The which I know in regard of being freed from all other charges whatsoever, will be readily and most gladly yeelded unto. So that there being in all Ireland (as appeareth by their old records) 43920. plowlands, the same shall amount to the summe likewise of 43920. pounds, and the rest to be reared of the escheated lands which fall to her Majesty in the said Provinces of Vlster, Connaght, and that part of Leinster under the Rebells, for Mounster wee deale not yet withall. Eudox. But tell me this by the way, doe you then lay compositi∣on upon the escheated lands as you doe upon the rest? for so (mee thinkes) you reckon alltogether. And that sure were too much to pay 7. Nobles out of every plowland, and composition money be∣sides, that is 20. shil: out of every plowland.
Iren. No, you mistake me, I doe put onely 7. Nobles rent and composition both upon every plowland escheated, that is 40. shil: for composition, and 6. shil: 8. pence for Cheiferie to her Maje∣stie. Eudox. I doe now conceive you, proceede then (I pray you) to the appointing of your Garrisons in Connaght, and shew us both how many and where you would have them placed? Iren. I would have 1000. laide in Connaght, in 2. Garrisons, name∣ly 500. in the county of Mayo, about Clan Mac Costilagh, which shall keepe all Mayo and the Bourkes of Mac William Eighter: The other 500. in the county of Galway, about Garrandough, that they may con∣taine the Conhors and the Bourkes there, the Kellies and Murries, with all them there-abouts, for that Garrison which I formerly placed at Loughearne will serve for all occasions in the County of Sligo, being neere adjoyning thereunto, so as in one nights march, they may bee almost in any place thereof, when neede shall require them. And like as in the former places of Garrisons in Vlster, I wished three corpo∣rate townes to be planted, which under the safeguard of that strength should dwell and trade safely with all the Countrey about them; so would I also wish to be in this of Connaght: and that besides, there were another established at Athlone, with a convenient ward in the Castle there for their defence. Iren. What should that neede, seeing the Governour of Connaght useth to lye there alwayes, whose presence will bee a defence to all that Towneship? Iren. I know he doth so, but that is much to be disliked, that the Governour should lye so farre of, in the remotest place of all the pro∣vince, whereas it were meeter that he should be continually abiding in the middest of the charge, that he might both looke out alike, unto all places of his government, and also be soone at hand in any place, where occasion shall demand him, for the presence of the Governour is (as you said) a great stay and bridle unto those that are ill disposed: like as I see it is well observed in Mounster, where the dayly good thereof is continually apparant: and for this cause also, doe I greatly mislike the Lord Deputies seating at Dublin, being the outest corner of the Realme, and least needing the awe of his presence, whereas (me thinkes) it were fitter, since his proper care is of Leinster, though he have care of all besides generally, that he should seate himselfe at Athie, or there-abouts, upon the skirt of that unquiet countrey, so that he might sit as it were at the very maine maste of his Ship, whence he might easily overlooke and sometimes over-reach the Moores, the Dempsies, the Connors, O-Carroll, O-Molloy, and all that heape of Irish na∣tions which there lye hudled together, without any to over-awe them, or containe them in dutie. For the Irishman (I assure you) feares the governement no longer, then he is within sight or reach. Eudox. Surely (me thinkes) herein you observe a matter of much importance more then I have heard ever noted, but sure that seemes
so expedient, as that I wonder that heretofore it hath beene over∣seene or omitted, but I suppose the instance of the Citizens of Dublin is the greatest lett thereof. Iren. Truely then it ought not so to be, for no cause have they to feare that it will be any hinderance to them, for Dublin will bee still as it is the key of all passages and transportations out of England thi∣therto, no lesse profit of those Cittizens, then it now is, and besides o∣ther places will hereby receive some benefit: But let us now (I pray you) come to Leinster, in the which I would wish the same course to be observed, that was in Vlster. Eudox. You meane for the leaving of the Garrisons in their forts, and for planting of English in all those Countryes, betweene the county of Dublin and the county of Wexford, but those waste wilde places I thinke when they are won unto her Majesty, that there is none which will be hasty to seeke to inhabite. Iren: Yes enough, (I warrant you) for though the whole tracke of the Countrey be mountainous and woody, yet there are many good∣ly valleyes amongst them, fit for faire habitations, to which those mountaines adjoyned will be a great increase of pasturage, for that Countrey is a great soyle of cattle, and very fit for breed as for corne it is nothing naturall, save onely for Barly and Oates, and some places for Rye, and therefore the larger penny-worthes may be allowed to them, though otherwise the widenes of the mountaine pasturage doe recompence the badnes of the soyle, so as I doubt not, but it will find inhabitants and undertakers enough. Eudox. How much doe you thinke that all those lands which Feagh Mac Hugh houldeth under him, may amount unto, and what rent may be reared thereout, to the maintenance of the Garrisons that shall be laide there? Iren. Truely it is impossible by ayme to tell it, and for experience and knowledge thereof, I doe not thinke that there was every any of the particulars thereof, but yet I will (if it please you) guesse thereat, upon ground onely of their judgement which have formerly devi∣ded all that country into 2. sheires or countyes: Namely the countie of Wicklow, and the county of This is part of the county of Wexford. Fernes, the which 2. I see no cause but that they should wholly escheate to her Majesty, all save the Barony of Arl which is the Earle of Ormond's auncient inheritance, and hath ever been in his possession, for all the whole land is the Queenes, unlesse there be some grant of any part thereof, to bee shewed from her Majesty▪ As I thinke there is onely of New Castle to Sir Henry Har∣rington, and of the Castle of Fernes to Sir Thomas Masterson, the rest being almost 30. miles over, I doe suppose, can containe no lesse rhen 2000. plowlands, which I will estimate at 4000. pounds rent, by the yeare. The rest of Leinster being 7. Counties, to wit, the County of Dublin, Kildare, Catherlagh, Wexford, Kilkenny, the Kings & the Queenes county, doe containe in them 7400. plowlands, which amounteth to so many pounds for composition to the Garrison, that makes in the
whole 11400. pounds, which summe will yeeld pay unto 1000. Souldiours, little wanting, which may be supplied out of other lands of the Cavenaghes, which are to be escheated to her Majesty, for the Rebellion of their possessors, though otherwise indeede they bee of her owne ancient demeasne. Eudox. It is great reason. But tell us now where you will wish those Garrisons to be laide, whether altogether, or to bee dispersed in sundry places of the country? Iren. Marry in sundry places, viz. in this sort, or much the like as may be better advised, for 200. in a place, I doe thinke to bee enough, for the safeguard of that country, and keeping under all sud∣daine upstarts, that shall seeke to trouble the peace thereof, therefore I wish 200. to be laide at Ballinecor, for the keeping of all bad persons from Glan-malo, and all the fastnes there-abouts, and also to containe all that shall be planted in those lands thenceforth. Another 200. at Knockelough in their former place of Garrison, to keepe the Bracknagh and all those mountaines of the Cavenaghes, 200. more to lie at Fernes and upwards, inward upon the Sane, 200. to be placed at the fort of Leix, to restraine the Moores, vpper-Ossory, and O-Carrol, other 200. at the fort of Ofaly, to curbe the O-Connors, O-Molloyes, Mac Coghlan, Mageoghegan, and all those Irish Nations bordering there-abouts. Eudox. Thus I see all your men bestowed in Leinster, what say you then of Meath? Iren. Meath which containeth both East Meath, and West Meath, and of late the Annaly, now called the county of Longford, is counted ther∣unto: But Meath it selfe according to the old records, containeth 4320. plowlands, & the county of Longford 947. which in the whole makes 5267. plowlands, of which the composition money will a∣mount likewise to 5267. pounds, to the maintenance of the Garrison: But because all Meath lying in the bosome of that kingdome is all∣wayes quiet enough, it is needelesse to put any Garrison there, so as all that charge may be spared. But in the county of Longford I wish 200. footemen and 50. horsemen to bee placed in some convenient seate betweene the Annaly and the Breny, as about Lough Sillon, or some like place of that River, so as they might keepe both the O-Relies, and also the O-Ferrals, and all that out-skirt of Meath in awe, the which use upon every light occasion to be stirring, and having continuall enmity amongst themselves, doe thereby oftentimes trouble all those parts, the charge whereof being 3400. and odde pounds is to be cut out of that composition money for Meath and Longford, the over-plus being almost 2000. pounds by the yeare, will come in clear∣ly to he Majesty. Eudox. It is worth the hearkening unto: But now that you have done with Meath, proceede (I pray you) to Mounster, that wee may see how it will rise there for the maintenance of the Garrison. Iren. Mounster containeth by record at Dublin 16000. plow∣lands, the composition whereof, as the rest will make 16000. pounds
by the yeare, out of the which I would have 1000. Souldiours to be maintained for the defence of that Province, the charge whereof with the victuallers wages, will amount to 12000. pounds by the yeare, the other 4000. pounds will defray the charge of the Presidency and the Councell of that Province. Eudox. The reckoning is easie, but in this accompt, by your leave, (me thinkes) you are deceived, for in this summe of the composition money, you accompt the lands of the undertakers of that Province, who are by their graunt from the Queene, to bee free from all such impositions whatsoever, excepting their onelie Rent, which is surely enough. Iren. You say true, I did so, but the same 20. shil: for every plow∣land, I meant to have deducted out of that rent due upon them to her Majesty, which is no hinderance, nor charge at all more to her Maje∣sty then it now is, for all that rent which shee receives of them, shee putteth forth againe to the maintenance of the Presidency there, the charge wherof, it doth scarcely defray, whereas in this accompt both that charge of the Presidency, and also of a thousand Souldiours more, shall be maintained. Eudox. It should be well if it could be brought to that: But now where will you have your thousand men garrisond? Iren. I would have a hundred of them placed at the Bantry where is a most fit place, not onely to defend all that side of the west part from forraine invasion, but also to answere all occasions of troubles, to which that Countrey being so remote is very subject: And surely there also would be planted a good towne, having both a good haven and a plentifull fishing, and the land being already escheated to her Majesty, but being forcibly kept from her, by one that proclaimes himselfe the Bastard Son of the Earle of Clancar, being called Donell Mac Carty, whom it is meete to foresee to. For whensoever the Earle shall die, all those lands (after him) are to come unto her Maje∣sty, he is like to make a foule stirre there, though of himselfe no power, yet through supportance of some others who lye in the wind, and looke after the fall of that inheritance. Another hundred I would have placed at Castle Mayne, which should keepe all Desmond and Kerry, for it answereth them both most conveniently: Also about Kilmore in the county of Corke would I have 2. hundred placed, the which should breake that nest of theives there, and answere equally both to the county of Limericke, and also the county of Corke: Another hun∣dred would I have lye at Corke, aswell to command the towne, as al∣so to be ready for any forraine occasion: Likewise at Waterford, would I place 2. hundred, for the same reasons, and also for other privy causes, that are no lesse important: Moreover on this side of Arlo, neere to Muskery quirke, which is the Countrey of the Burkes, about Kill-Patricke, I would have two hundred more to be garrisond, which should skoure both the white Knights country and Arlo, and Muske∣ry quirk, by which places all the passages of Theives doe lye, which
convey their stealth from all Mounster downewards towards Tip∣perary, and the English pale, and from the English pale also up unto Mounster, whereof they use to make a common trade: Besides that, ere long I doubt that the county of Tipperary it selfe, will neede such a strength in it, which were good to be there ready before the evill fall, that is dayly of some expected: And thus you see all your Garri∣sons placed. Eudox. I see it right well, but let me (I pray you) by the way aske you the reason, why in those Citties of Mounster, namely Waterford and Corke, you rather placed Garrisons, then in all others in Ireland. For they may thinke themselves to have great wrong to bee so char∣ged above all the rest? Iren. I will tell you, those two Citties, above all the rest, doe offer an in-gate to the Spaniard most fitly: But yet because they shall not take exceptions to this, that they are charged above all the rest, I will also lay a charge upon the others likewise, for indeed it is no reason that the corporate townes enioying great franchizes and priviledges from her Majesty, and living thereby not onely safe, but drawing to them the wealth of all the land, should live so free, as not to be parta∣kers of the burthen of this Garrison, for their owne safety, specially in this time of trouble, and seeing all the rest burthened (and there∣fore) I will thus charge them all ratably, according to their abilities towards their maintenance, the which her Majesty may (if she please) spare out of the charge of the rest, and reserve towards her other costes, or else adde to the charge of the presidency in the North. Waterford C. Corke L. Limericke L. Galway L. Dinglecush X. Kinsale X. Yoghall X. Kilmallock X. Clonmell X. Cashell X. Fedard X. Kilkenny XXV. Wexford XXV. Tredagh XXV. Rosse XXV. Dundalke X. Mollingare X. Newrie X. Trim X. Ardee X. Kells X. Dublin C. In all 580. Eudox. It is easie Irenaeus to lay a charge upon any towne, but to foresee how the same may be answered and defrayed, is the cheife part of good advisement. Iren. Surely this charge which I put upon them, I know to bee so reasonable, as that it will not much be felt, for the port Townes that have benefit of shipping, may cut it easily off their trading, and in land townes of their corne and cattle, neither doe I see, but since to them especially the benefit of peace doth redound, that they especi∣ally should beare the burthen of their safeguard and defence, as wee see all the townes of the Low-Countryes, doe cut upon themselves an excise of all things towards the maintenance of the warre that is made in their behalfe, to which though these are not to be compared
in richesse, yet are they to bee charged according to their po∣vertie. Eudox. But now that you have thus set up these forces of Soldi∣ers, and provided well (as you suppose) for their pay, yet there re∣maineth to fore-cast how they may bee victualled, and where pur∣veyance thereof may bee made, for in Ireland it selfe, I cannot see almost how any thing is to bee had for them, being already so pittifully wasted, as it is with this short time of warre. Iren. For the first two yeares, it is needefull indeede that they bee victualled out of England thoroughly, from halfe yeare to halfe yeare, afore-hand. All which time the English Pale shall not bee burdened at all, but shall have time to re∣cover themselves, and Mounster also being reasonably well sto∣red, will by that time, (if God send seasonable weather) bee thoroughly well furnished to supply a great part of that charge, for I knowe there is great plenty of Corne, sent over Sea from thence, the which, if they might have sale for at home, they would bee glad to have money so neere hand, specially if they were streightly restrayned from transporting of it. Thereunto also there will bee a great helpe and furtherance gi∣ven, in the putting forward of husbandrie, in all meete pla∣ces, as heereafter shall in due place appeare. But heereafter when things shall growe unto a better strength, and the Coun∣trey bee replenished with Corne, as in short space it will, if it bee well followed, for the Countrey people themselves are great plowers, and small spenders of Corne, then would I wish that there should bee good store of Houses and Magazins ere∣cted in all those great places of garrison, and in all great townes, as well for the victualling of Souldiers, and Shippes, as for all Occasions of suddaine services, as also for preventing of all times of dearth and scarcitie; and this want is much to bee com∣playned of in England, above all other Countreyes, who trusting too much to the usuall blessing of the Earth, doe never fore-cast any such hard seasons, nor any such suddaine occasions as these troublous times may every day bring foorth, when it will bee too late to gather provision from abroad, and to bring it per∣happes from farre, for the furnishing of Shippes or Souldiers, which peradventure may neede to bee presently imployed, and whose want may (which GOD forbid) hap to hazard a King∣dome. Eudox. Indeede the want of those Magazins of victualls, I have oftentimes complayned of in England, and wondered at in other Countreyes, but that is nothing now to our purpose; but as for these garrisons which you have now so strongly planted throgh∣out all Ireland, and every place swarming with Souldiers, shall there bee no end of them? For now thus being (me thinkes) I doe see rather a Countrey of warre, then of peace & quiet, which you
earst pretended to worke in Ireland, for if you bring all things to that quietnesse that you said, what then needeth to maintaine so great for∣ces, as you have charged upon it. Iren. I will unto you Eudox. in privitie discover the drift of my purpose, I meane (as I tolde you) and doe well hope thereby both to settle an eternall peace in that Countrey, and also to make it very profitable to her Majestie, the which I see must bee brought in with a strong hand, and so continued, till it runne in a stead∣fast course of governement, which in this sort will neither bee difficult nor dangerous, for the Souldier being once brought in for the service into Vlster, and having subdued it and Connaght, I will not have him to lay downe his Armes any more, till hee have effe∣cted that which I purpose, that is, first to have this generall compo∣sition for maintenance of these thoroughout all the Realme, in re∣gard of the troublous times, and daylie danger which is threatned to this Realme by the King of Spaine. And thereupon to bestow all my Souldiers in such sort as I have done, that no part of all that Re∣alme shall be able to dare to quinch: Then will I eftsoones bring in my reformation, and thereupon establish such a forme of govern∣ment, as I may thinke meetest for the good of that Realme, which being once settled, and all things put into a right way, I doubt not but they will runne on fairely. And though they would ever seeke to swerve aside, yet shall they not bee able without forreine vio∣lence, once to remoove, as you your selfe shall soone (I hope) in your own reason readily conceive, which if it shall ever appeare, then may her Majestie at pleasure with-draw some of the garrisons, and turne their pay into her Purse, or if shee will never please so to doe (which I would rather wish) then shall shee have a number of brave olde Souldiers alwayes ready for any occasion that shee shee will imploy them unto, supplying their garrisons with fresh ones in their steed. The maintenance of whome, shall bee no more charge to her Majestie, then now that Re∣alme is, for all the revenue thereof, and much more shee spend∣eth, even in the most peaceable times, that are there, as things now stand. And in time of warre, which is now surely every se∣venth yeare, shee spendeth infinite treasure besides, to small pur∣pose. Eudox. I perceive your purpose, but now that you have thus strongly made way unto your reformation, and that I see the people so humbled and prepared, that they will and must yeeld to any Ordinance that shall bee given them. I doe much de∣sire to understand the same; for in the beginning you promi∣sed to shewe a meanes how to redresse all those inconvenien∣ces and abuses, which you shewed to bee in that state of Go∣vernment, which now stands there, as in the Lawes, Customes, and Religion, wherein I would gladly know first, whether in steed of those Lawes, you would have new lawes made, for now for ought
that I see, you may doe what you please. Iren. I see Eudox. That you well remember our first purpose, and doe rightly continue the course thereof. First therefore to speake of lawes, since wee first beganne with them, I doe not thinke it now convenient, though it bee in the power of the Prince to change all the lawes, and make new; for that should breede a great trouble and confusion, aswell in the English there dwelling, and to be planted, as also in the Irish. For the English having beene alwayes trayned up in the English governement, will hardly bee inured to any o∣ther, and the Irish will better be drawne to the English, then the English to the Irish governement. Therefore sithence wee cannot now apply lawes fit to the people, as in the first institutions of common-wealths it ought to bee, wee will apply the people, and fit them unto the Lawes, as it most conveniently may bee. The Lawes therefore wee resolve shall abide in the same sort that they doe, both Common-law and Statutes, onely such de∣fects in the common-law, and inconveniences in the Statutes, as in the beginning wee noted, and as men of deeper insight shall advise, may be changed by some other new acts and ordinances to bee by a Parlament there confirmed. As those for tryalls of pleas of the Crowne, and private rights betweene parties, colourable conveyan∣ces and accessaries. Eudox. But how will those be redressed by Parlament, when as the Irish which sway most in Parlament (as you said) shall oppose themselves against them? Iren. That may well now bee avoyded: For now that so many Free-holders of English shall bee established, they together with Burgesses of Townes, and such other loyall Irish-men, as may bee preferred to bee Knights of the Shire, and such like, will bee able to beard, and to counter-poise the rest, who also being now more brought in awe, will the more easily submit to any such ordinan∣ces as shall bee for the good of themselves, and that Realme ge∣nerally. Eudox. You say well, for by the increase of Free-holders, for their numbers hereby will be greatly augmented, but how shall it passe thorough the higher house, which still must consiste all of Irish? Iren. Marry that also may bee redressed by ensample of that which I have heard was done in the like case by King Edward the third (as I remember) who being greatly bearded and crossed by the Lords of the Cleargie, they being there by reason of the Lords Abbots, and others, too many and too strong for him, so as hee could not for their frowardnesse, order and reforme things as hee desired, was advised to direct out his Writts to cer∣taine Gentle-men of the best ability and trust, entituling them therein Barons, to serve, and sitt as Barons in the next Parlament. By which meanes hee had so many
Barons in his Parlament, as were able to weigh downe the Cleargy and their friends: The which Barons they say, were not afterwardes Lords, but onely Baronets, as sundry of them doe yet retayne the name. And by the like device her Maiestie may now likewise curbe and cut short those Irish and unruly Lords, that hinder all good pro∣ceedings. Eudox. It seemes no lesse then for reforming of all those inconve∣nient Statutes that you noted in the beginning, and redressing of all those evill customes: and lastly, for settling of sound Religion a∣mongst them, me thinkes you shall not neede any more to over-goe those particulars againe, which you mentioned, nor any other which might besides be remembred, but to leave all to the reformation of such a Parlament, in which, by the good care of the Lord Deputie & Councell, they may all be amended. Therfore now you may come un∣to that generall reformation which you spake of, and bringing in of that establishment, by which you said all men should be contained in duty ever after, without the terror of warlike forces, or violent wre∣sting of things by sharpe punishments. Iren. I will so at your pleasure, the which (me thinkes) can by no meanes be better plotted, then by ensample of such other Realmes as have beene annoyed with like evills, that Ireland now is, and useth still to bee. And first in this our Realme of England, it is manifest by report of the Chronicles, and auncient Writers, that it was greatly infested with Robbers and Out-lawes, which lurking in Woods and fast places, used often to breake foorth into the high-wayes, and sometimes into small villages to robbe and spoyle. For re∣dresse whereof it is written, that King Alured, or Aldred, did di∣vide the Realme into De bis qui plura scire avet, consulat D. Hen Spelmanni eq. aur. Archaeolo∣gum, in Borshol∣der & Hundred. Shires, and the Shires into Hundreds, and the Hundreds into Lathes or Wapentackes, and the Wa∣pentackes into Tythings▪ So that tenne Tythings make an Hundred, and five made a Lathe or Wapentake, of which tenne, each one was bound for another, and the eldest or best of them whom they called the Tythingman or Borsolder, that is, the eldest pledge became sure∣ty for all the rest. So that if any one of them did start into any undu∣tifull action, the Borsolder was bound to bring him forth, who joy∣ning eft-soones with all his Tything, would follow that loose per∣son thorough all places, till they brought him in. And if all that Tything fayled, then all that Lathe was charged for that Ty∣thing, and if that Lathe fayled, then all that Hundred was demaunded for them; and if the Hundred, theh the Shire, who joyning eft-soones together, would not rest till they had found out and delivered in that undutifull fellow, which was not amesnable to Law. And heerein it seemes, that that good Saxon King follow∣ed the counsell of Iethro to Moyses, who advised him to divide the people into Hundreds, and to set Captaines and wise men of trust over them, who should take the charge of them, and ease of that burthen. And so did Romulus (as you may read) divide the Romanes
into Livie speaking of Romulus hath it thus, Populū in curias 30. di∣visit, &c. Eodem tempore & cen∣turiae tres equi∣tum conscriptae sunt. And so we have it in Sex∣tus Aurel. Vi∣ctor's booke, de viris illustribus urbis Romae. Tres equitum centurias insti∣tuit (saith he) Plebem in tri∣ginta curias di∣stribuit. Tribes, and the Tribes into Centuries or Hundreths. By this ordi∣nance, this King brought this Realme of England, (which before was most troublesome) unto that quiet State, that no one bad person could stirre, but he was straight taken holde of by those of his owne Tything, and their Borsholder, who being his neighbor or next kins∣man were privie to all his wayes, and looked narrowly into his life. The which institution (if it were observed in Ireland) would worke that effect which it did in England, and keep all men within the com∣passe of dutie and obedience. Eudox. This is contrary to that you said before; for as I remem∣ber, you said, that there was a great disproportion betweene England and Ireland, so as the lawes, which were fitting for one, would not fit the other. How comes it now then, that you would transfferre a prin∣cipall institution from England to Ireland? Iren. This law was not made by the Norman Conqueror, but by a Saxon King, at what time England was very like to Ireland, as now it stands: for it was (as I tolde you) annoyed greatly with Rob∣bers and Out-lawes, which troubled the whole state of the Re∣alme, every corner having a Robin Hood in it, that kept the woods, and spoyled all passengers and Inhabitants, as Ireland now hath, so as me thinkes, this ordinance would fit very well, and bring them all into awe. Eudox. Then when you have thus tythed the Communalty, as you say, and set Borsolders over them all, what would you doe, when you came to the Gentle-men, would you holde the same course? Iren. Yea marry, most especially; for this you must know, that all the Irish almost boast themselves to be Gentlemen, no lesse then the Welsh; for if he can derive himselfe from the head of any Sept, (as most of them can, they are so expert by their Bardes) then hee holdeth himselfe a Gentleman, and thereupon scorneth to worke, or use any hard labour, which hee saith, is the life of a Peasant or Churle: But thenceforth becommeth either an horse-boy, or a Stocah to some Kerne, inuring himselfe to his weapon, and to the gentlemanly-trade-of stealing (as they count it.) So that if a gentleman or any wealthy man Yeoman of them, have any Chil∣dren, the eldest of them perhaps shall be kept in some order, but all the rest shall shift for themselves, and fall to this occupation. And moreover it is a common use amongst some of their Gentlemens sonnes, that so soone as they are able to use their Weapons, they straight gather to themselves three or foure straglers, or Kearne, with whom wandring a while up and downe idlely the Countrey, taking onely meate, hee at last falleth unto some bad occasion that shall be offered, which being once made knowne, hee is thenceforth counted a man of worth, in whome there is courage, whereupon there draw to him many other like loose young men, which stirring him up with incouragement, provoke
him shortly to flat Rebellion, and this happens not onely some∣times in the sonnes of their Gentle-men, but also of their Noble-men, specially of them who have base Sonnes. For they are not onely not ashamed to acknowledge them, but also boaste of them, and use them to such secret services, as they themselves will not be seene in, as to plague their Enemyes, to spoyle their Neighbours, to oppresse and crush some of their owne too stubburne Free-holders, which are not tractable to their wills. Eudox. Then it seemeth that this ordinance of tithing them by the pole, is not onely fit for the Gentle-men, but also for the Noble-men, whom I would have thought to have beene of so honourable a minde, as that they should not neede such a kinde of being bound to their allegiance, who should rather have held in, and stayde all the other from undutifulnesse, then neede to bee forced thereunto themselves. Iren. Yet so it is Eudoxus; but because that Noble-men cannot be tythed, there being not many tythings of them, and also because a Borsolder over them, should be not onely a great indignitie, but also a danger to adde more power to them then they have, or to make one the commander of tenne, I holde it meeter that there were onely sureties taken of them, and one bound for another, whereby if any shall swerve, his sureties shall for safe-guard of their Bonds, either bring him in, or seeke to serve upon him; and besides this, I would wish them all to bee sworne to her Majestie, which they never yet were, but at the first creation, and that Oath would sure contayne them greatly, or the breach of it bring them to shorter vengeance, for God useth to punish perjurie sharpely: So I reade, that there was a corporall Oath taken in the raignes of Richard he 2. Edward the Second, and of This service was performed by Sir Richard Edgecomb, being appointed thereunto by a speci∣all commission from K. Henry the seventh. There is yet extant an exact diary of all his procee∣dings therein, from his first landing at Kinsale the 27th of Iune 1488. till his departure from Dublin the 30th of Iuly next. Henry the Seventh, (when the times were very broken) of all the Lords and best Gentle-men, of Fealtie to the Kings, which now is no lesse needfull, because many of them are suspected to have taken an other Oath privi∣ly to some bad purposes, and thereupon to have recei∣ved the Sacrament, and beene sworne to a Priest, which they thinke bindeth them more, then their alleagiance to their Prince, or love of their Coun∣trey. Eudox. This tything to the Common people, and taking sure∣ties of Lords and Gentlemen, I like very well, but that it wilbe very troublesome; should it not be as well for to have them all booked, and the Lords & Gentle-men to take all the meaner sort upon them∣selves, for they are best able to bring them in, whensoever any of them starteth out. Iren. This indeed (Eudoxus) hath beene hitherto, and yet is a common order amongst them, to have all the people booked by the Lords and Gentlemen: but yet the worst order that ever was devised,
for by this booking of men, all the inferiour sort are brought under the command of their Lords, and forced to follow them into any action whatsoever. Now this you are to understand, that all the Re∣bellions which you see from time to time happen in Ireland, are not begun by the common people, but by the Lords and Captaines of Countries, upon pride or willfull obstinacy against the government, which whensoever they will enter into, they drawe with them all their people and followers, which thinke themselves bound to goe with them, because they have booked them and undertaken for them, and this is the reason that in England you have few such bad occasi∣ons, by reason that the noble men, how ever they should happen to be evill disposed, have no commaund at all over the Communalty, though dwelling under them, because that every man standeth upon himselfe, and buildeth his fortunes upon his owne faith and firme assurance: The which this manner of tything the poles will worke al∣so in Ireland. For by this the people are broken into many small parts like little streames, that they cannot easily come together into one head, which is the principall regard that is to be had in Ireland, to keepe them from growing unto such a head, and adhering unto great men. Eudox. But yet I cannot see, how this can bee well brought with∣out doing great wrong unto the noble men there, for at the first con∣quest of that Realme, those great Seigniories and Lordships were gi∣ven them by the king, that they should bee the stronger against the Irish, by the multitudes of followers and tennants under them: All which hold their tenements of them by fealty, and such services, whereby they are (by the first graunt of the King) made bounden unto them, and tyed to rise out with them into all occasions of ser∣vice. And this I have often heard, that when the Lord Deputy hath raised any generall hostings, the Noble men have claimed the lea∣ding of them, by graunt from the Kings of England, under the great Seale exhibited, so as the Deputies could not refuse them to have the leading of them, or if they did, they would so worke, as none of their followers should rise forth to the hostage. Iren. You say very true, but will you see the fruite of those grants, I have knowne when those Lords have had the leading of their owne followers under them to the generall hostings, that they have for the same cut upon every plowland within their country 40. shil: or more, whereby some of them have gathered above seven or eight hundred pounds, and others much more into their purse, in lieu whereof they have gathered unto themselves a number of loose Kearne out of all parts, which they have carried forth with them, to whom they ne∣ver gave any penny of entertainement, allowed by the Countrey or forced by them, but let them feede upon the Countryes, and extort upon all men where they come, for that people will never aske bet∣ter entertainement then to have a colour of service or imployment given them, by which they will pole and spoyle so outragiously, as
the very enemy cannot doe much worse: And they also sometimes turne to the enemy. Eudox. It seemes the first intent of those graunts was against the Irish, which now some of them use against the Queene her selfe: But now what remedy is there for this? or how can those graunts of the Kings be avoyded, without wronging of those Lords, which had those lands and Lordships given them. Iren. Surely they may be well enough, for most of those Lords since their first graunts, from the Kings by which those lands were given them, have sithence bestowed the most part of them amongst their Kinsfolke, as every Lord perhaps hath given in his time one another of his principall Castles to his younger Sonne, and other to others, as largely and as amply as they were given to him, and others they have sold, and others they have bought, which were not in their first graunt, which now neverthelesse they bring within the compasse thereof, and take and exact upon them, as upon their first demeasnes all those kinde of services, yea and the very wilde exactions, Coignie, Livery, What Coigny and Livery doe signifie, is for∣merly expressed see pag. 24. Sorehon was a tax laide upon the Free-hol∣ders, for cer∣taine dayes in each quarter of a yeare, to finde victualls, and lodging, and o pay cer∣taine stipends, to the Kerne, Galloglasses, and horsemen. Sorehon, and such like, by which they pole and utterly undoe the poore Tennants and Free-houlders under them, which either thorough ignorance know not their tenures, or through greatnes of their new Lords dare not challenge them, yea, and some Lords of countryes also, as great ones as themselves, are now by strong hand brought under them, and made their Vassalls. As for example Arun∣dell of the Stronde in the county of Corke, who was aunciently a great Lord, and was able to spend 3500. pounds by the yeare, as appeareth by good Recordes, is now become the Lord Barries man, and doth to him all those services, which are due unto her Majesty. For reforma∣tion of all which, I wish that there were a commission graunted forth under the great Seale, as I have seene one recorded in the old Coun∣cell Booke of Mounster, that was sent forth in the time of Sir William Drurie, unto persons of speciall trust and judgement to inquire tho∣roughout all Ireland, beginning with one county first, and so resting a while till the same were settled, by the verdict of a sound and sub∣stantiall Iury, how every man houldeth his land, of whom, and by what tenure, so that every one should be admitted to shew and exhi∣bite what right he hath, and by what services hee houldeth his land, whether in cheife or in soccage, or by Knights service, or how else soever. Thereupon would appeare, first how all those great English Lords doe claime those great services, what Seigniories they usurpe, what wardships they take from the Queene, what lands of hers they conceale: and then how those Irish Captaines of Countryes have in∣croached upon the Queenes Free-holders and Tennants, how they have translated the tenures of them from English houlding, unto Irish Tanistry, and defeated her Majesty of all her rights and dutyes, which are to acrew to her thereout, as wardships, Liveries, marriages, fines of alienations, and many other Commodities, which now are kept and concealed from her Majesty, to the value of 40000. pounds per
annum, I dare undertake in all Ireland, by that which I know in one county. Eudox. This Irenaeus, would seeme a dangerous commission, and ready to stirre up all the Irish in Rebellion, who knowing that they have nothing to shew for all those lands which they hould, but their Swords, would rather drawe them, then suffer the lands to bee thus drawne away from them. Iren. Neither should their lands be taken away from them, nor the utmost advantages inforced against them: But this by discretion of the Commissioners should be made knowne unto them, that it is not her Majesties meaning to use any such extreamity, but onely to reduce things into order of English Law, and make them hould their lands of her, and to restore to her, her due services, which they de∣taine out of those lands, which were aunciently held of her. And that they should not onely, not be thrust out, but also have estates and grants of their lands new made to them from her Majesty, so as they should thence-forth hould them rightfully, which they now usurpe wrongfully, and yet withall I would wish, that in all those Irish coun∣tryes, there were some land reserved to her Majesties free disposition for the better containing of the rest, and intermingling them with English inhabitants and customes, that knowledge might still be had of them, and of all their doings, so as no manner of practise or conspi∣racy should be had in hand, amongst them, but notice should bee given thereof by one meanes or another, and their practises prevented. Eudox. Truely neither can the Irish, nor yet the English Lords, thinke themselves wronged, nor hardly dealt withall herein, to have that which is indeede none of their owne at all, but her Majesties ab∣solutely given to them, with such equall conditions, as that both they may be assured thereof, better then they are, and also her Maje∣sty not defrauded of her rightly utterly, for it is a great grace in a Prince, to take that with conditions, which is absolutely her owne. Thus shall the Irish be well satisfied, and as for the great men which had such graunts made to them at first, by the Kings of England, it was in regard that they should keepe forth the Irish, and defend the Kings right, and his Subjects: but now seeing that in stead of defen∣ding them, they robbe and spoyle them, and in stead of keeping out the Irish, they doe not onely make the Irish their tennants in those lands, and thrust out the English, but also some of themselves become meere Irish, with marrying with them, with fostering with them, and combyning with them against the Queene: What reason is there but that those graunts and priviledges should bee either revoked, or at least reduced to the first intention for which they were graunted, for sure in mine opinion they are more sharpely to bee chastised and re∣formed, then the rude Irish, which being very wilde at the first, are now become more civill, when as these from civillity are growne to be wilde and meere Irish.
Iren. Indeede as you say Eudoxus, these doe neede a sharper refor∣mation then the Irish, for they are more stubborne, and disobedient to law and governement, then the Irish be. Eudox. In truth Irenaeus, this is more then ever I heard, that any English there, should bee worse then the Irish: Lord how quickely doth that Countrey alter mens natures? It is not for nothing (I per∣ceive) which I have heard, that the Councell of England thinke it no good policie, to have that Realme reformed, or planted with English least they should grow so undutifull as the Irish, and become much more dangerous: As appeareth by the ensamples of the Lacies in the time of Edward the Second, which you spake of, that shooke off their allegiance to their naturall Prince, and turned to Edward le Bruce, to make him King of Ireland. Iren. No times have bene without bad men: but as for that pur∣pose of the Councell of England which you spake of, that they should keepe that Realme from reformation, I thinke they are most lewdly abused, for their great carefulnesse, and earnest endeavours doe wit∣nesse the contrary. Neither is it the nature of the Countrey to alter mens manners, but the bad mindes of the men, who having beene brought up at home under a straight rule of duty and obedience, be∣ing alwayes restrayned by sharpe penalties from lewde behaviour, so soone as they come thither, where they see lawes more slackely ten∣ded, and the hard restraint which they were used unto now slacked, they grow more loose and carelesse of their duty, and as it is the na∣ture of all men to love liberty, so they become flat libertines, and fall to all licentiousnes, more boldly daring to disobey the Law, tho∣rough the presumption of favour and friendship, then any Irish dareth. Eudox. Then if that be so, (me thinkes) your late advisement was very evill, whereby you wished the Irish to be sowed and sprinckled with English, and in all the Irish Countryes to have English planted a∣mongst them, for to bring them to English fashions, since the English sooner drawe to the Irish, then the Irish to the English: for as you said before, if they must runne with the streame, the greater number will carry away the lesse: Therefore (me thinkes) by this reason it should bee better to part the Irish and English, then to mingle them to∣gether. Iren. Not so Eudoxus, but where there is no good stay of Go∣vernment, and strong ordinances to hould them, there indeede the fewer will follow the more, but where there is due order of disci∣pline and good rule, there the better shall goe foremost, and the worst shall follow. And therefore now, since Ireland is full of her owne na∣tion, that ought not to be rooted out, and somewhat stored with En∣glish already, and more to be, I thinke it best by an union of manners and conformity of mindes, to bring them to be one people, and to put away the dislikefull conceipt both of the one, and the other, which will be by no meanes better, then by this intermingling of
them: For neither all the Irish may dwell together, nor all the English, but by translating of them and scattering them amongst the English, not onely to bring them by dayly conversation, unto better liking of each other, but also to make both of them lesse able to hurt. And therefore when I come to the tything of them, I will tithe them one with another, & for the most part will make an Irish man, the tything∣man, whereby he shall take the lesse exception to partiality, and yet be the more tyed thereby. But when I come to the Head Borough, which is the head of the Lathe, him will I make an English man, or an Irish man of speciall assurance: As also when I come to appoint the Alderman, that is the head of the Hundreth, him will I surely choose to be an English man of speciall regard, that may be a stay and pillar of all the Borough under him. Eudox. What doe you meane by your hundred, and what by your Borough? by that, that I have read in auncient records of England, an hundred did containe an hundreth villages, or as some say an hun∣dreth Plough-lands, being the same which the Saxons called Cantred is a Brittish word, answering to the Saxon Hundred. How much land a Cantred containeth, is variously delivered. Some hould that it containes 100. townes. So Gir. Barry or Cambrensis, in his itinerary of Wales, (lib. 2. cap. 7.) Dicitur au∣tem Cantredu (saith he) composito vocabulo tam Britannica quam Hibernica lingua, tanta terrae portio, quanta 100. villas contineta solet. The Author here cies a record which makes it containe but 30. towne-lands: and Iohn Clynn, (if my copy therein be not mistaken) hath but 20. But another more auncient MS. some∣time belonging to the Friars Minors of Multifernan, hath 30. Qualibet cantreda (saith Clinne) continet xx. (al. xxx.) villatas terrae, quaelibet villata potest sustinere 300 vaccas in pascuis, it quod vaccae in x. (al. 1111.) partes divisae, nulla alteri appropinqua∣bit, quaelibet villata continet viii. carucatas. We finde also there the Provinces of Ireland thus divided into Cantreds. Vltonia continet 35. cantredas, Conacia 30. Lagenia 31. Mdia 18. & Mo∣monia 70. See more concerning cantreds in Sir Hen. Spelman's excellent Glossary. As cantreds are diversly estimated, so are also carues or plowlands. Cantred, the which Cantred, as I finde it recorded in the Blacke Booke of [the Exchequer of] Ire∣land, did containe xxx. villatas ter∣rae, which some call quarters of land, and every villata can main∣taine 400. Cowes in pasture, and the 400. cowes to be devided into 4. heards, so as none of them shall come neere other: every villata containing 18. Plowlands, as is there set downe: & by that which I have read of a Borough it signi∣fieth a free towne, which had a principall Officer called a Head-Borough, to become Ruler, and undertake for all the dwellers un∣der him, having for the same franchises and priviledges graunted them by the King, whereof it was called a free Borough, and of the Lawyers Franci plegium. Iren. Both that which you said Eudoxus, is true, and yet that which I say not untrue, for that which you spake of deviding the Countrey into hundreds, was a devision of the lands of the Realme, but this which I tell, was of the people, which were thus devided by the pole: So that hundreth in this sense signifieth a 100. pledges, which were under the command and assurance of their Alderman, the which (as I suppose) was also called a Wapentake, so named of touching the weapon or speare of their Alderman, and swearing to follow him faithfully, and serve their Prince truly: But others thinke that a Wapentake was 10. hundreds or boroghs: Likewise a Borogh, as I here use it, and as the old lawes still use, is not a Borogh towne, as
they now call it, that is a franchised towne: But a maine pledge of 100. free persons, therfore called a free borough or (as you say) Fran∣ci-plegium: For Borh in old Saxon signifieth a pledge or surety, and yet is so used with us in some speeches (as Chaucer saith) St Iohn to Borroh, that is for assurance and warranty. Eudox. I conceive the difference: But now that you have thus devided the people into these Tythings and Hundreths, how will you have them so preserved and continued, for people doe of∣ten change their dwelling places, and some must die, whilst other some doe growe up into strength of yeares, and become men. Iren. These Hundreds I would wish to assemble themselves once every yeare with their pledges, and to present themselves be∣fore the Iustices of the peace, which shall bee thereunto appoin∣ted, to bee surveyed and numbred, to see what change hath hap∣pened since the yeare before, and the defects to supplie, of young plants late growne up, the which are diligently to bee overlooked and viewed of what condition and demeanour they be, so as pledges may bee taken for them, and they put into order of some Tything, of all which alterations notes is to be taken, and Bookes made there∣of accordingly. Eudox. Now (mee thinkes) Irenaeus, you are to bee warned to take heede lest unawares you fall into that inconvenience which you formerly found fault with in others: Namely, that by this booking of them, you doe not gather them into a new head, and having broken their former strength, doe not unite them more strongly againe: For every Alderman having all these free pledges of his Hundred under his commaund, may (me thinkes) if hee be evill disposed drawe all his Companie into an evill action. And likewise by this assembling of them once a yeare unto their Al∣derman by their Weapentakes, take heede lest you also give them occasion and meanes to practise together in any conspi∣racyes. Iren. Neither of both is to be doubted, for their Aldermen and Head Boroughes, will not be such men of power and countenance of themselves, being to be chosen thereunto, as neede to be feared: Neither if hee were, is his Hundred at his commaund, further then his Princes service, and also every Tything man, may controll him in such a case. And as for the assembling of the Hundred, much lesse is any danger thereof to be doubted, seeing it is before some Iu∣stice of Peace, or some high Constable to bee thereunto appoin∣ted: So as of these Tythings there can no perill ensue, but a cer∣taine assurance of peace and great good, for they are thereby with∣drawne from their Lords, and subjected to the Prince: Moreover for the better breaking of these heads and septs, which (I tould you) was one of the greatest strengthes of the Irish, me thinkes it should bee very well to renewe that ould Statute, which was made in the An. 5. Edw 4. raigne of Edward the fourth in Ireland, by which it
was commaunded, that whereas The statute referres onely to the Irish, dwelling among the English in the counties of Dublin, Meth, Vriel, and Kildare▪ Vriel called also Ergallia, did ancient∣ly comprehend all that countrey which is now divided into the Counties of Louth and Mono∣ghan although it may be concei∣ved, that Louth was onely in∣tendd by the statute, because Monoghan was then (in a man∣ner) wholly possessed by the Irish. all men then used to be called by the name of their septs, according to the severall Nations, and had no surnames at all, that from thenceforth each one should take upon himselfe a severall surname, either of his trade and facultie, or of some quality of his body or minde, or of the place where he dwelt, so as every one should be distinguish∣ed from the other, or from the most part, wherby they shall not onely, not depend upon the head of their sept, as now they do, but also in time learne quite to forget his Irish Nation. And here withall would I also wish all the O's and the Mac's, which the heads of septs have taken to their names, to bee utterly forbidden and extinguished. For that the same being an ordi∣nance (as some say) first made by The custome of prefixing the vowell O to many of the chiefe Irish surnames, began soon after the yeere M. in the raigne of Brien boroma (the son of Kenne∣thy) King of Ireland, As for Mac in surnames, it beareth no o∣ther signification, then Fitz doth among the French, and (from them) the English, and ap with the Welsh. And although it were more anciently used then the o∣ther, yet it varied according to the fathers name, and became not so soone fully settled in families. O Brien for the strengthning of the Irish, the abrogating thereof will asmuch infeeble them. Eudox. I like this ordinance very well; but now that you have thus divided & distinguished them, what o∣ther order will you take for their manner of life? Iren. The next that I will doe, shalbe to appoint to every one that is not able to live of his Free-holde, a certaine Trade of life, to which he shall finde himselfe fittest, and shalbe thought ablest, the which trade hee shalbe bound to follow, & live onely thereupon. All trades therefore are to be understood to be of three kindes; Manuall, Intellectuall, & mixed. The first containing all such as needeth exercise of bodily labour, to the performance of their profession. The second consisting only of the exercise of wit & reason. The third sort, part of bodily labor, & part of the wit, but depending most of industrie and carefulnes. Of the first sort be all handy-crafts & husbandry labour. Of the second be all Sciences, and those which be called the liberall Arts. Of the third is Merchandize & Chafferie, that is, buying & sel∣ling, & without all these three, there is no Common-wealth can al∣most consist, or at the least be perfect. But the Realme of Ireland wan∣teth the most principall of them, that is, the intellectuall; therfore in seeking to reforme her state, it is specially to be looked unto. But be∣cause by husbandry, which supplyeth unto us all things necessary for food, wherby we chiefly live. Therefore it is first to be provided for. The first thing therefore that wee are to draw these new tythed men into, ought to be husbandry. First, because it is the most easie to be learned, needing onely the labour of the Body. Next, because it is most generall and most needfull, then because it is most naturall; and lastly, because it is most enemy to warre, and most hateth unquietnes: As the Poet saith, —bella execrata colonis. for husbandry being the nurse of thrift, & the daughter of industrie and labour, detesteth all that may worke her scathe, and destroy the
travaile of her hands, whose hope is all her lives comfort un∣to the Plough, therefore are those Kearne, Stocaghes and Horse-boyes to bee driven and made to imploy that ablenesse of Bodie which they were wont to use to theft and villainy, hencefoorth to labour and industry. In the which, by that time they have spent but a little paine, they will finde such sweetenesse and happy contentment, that they will afterwardes hardly bee haled a∣way from it, or drawne to their wonted lewde life in theeverie and roguerie. And being once thus inured thereunto, they are not onely to bee countenanced and encouraged by all good meanes, but also provided that their children after them may be brought up likewise in the same, and succeede in the roomes of their Fathers. To which end there is a Anno 25o Hen. 6. Statute in Ireland already well provided, which commaundeth that all the sonnes of husbandmen shall be trained up in their Fathers trades, but it is (God wot) very slenderly executed. Eudox. But doe you not count in this trade of husbandry, pastu∣ring of cattle, and keeping of their Cowes, for that is reckoned as a part of husbandrie. Iren. I know it is, and needefully to bee used, but I doe not meane to allow any of those able bodies, which are able to use bo∣dily labour, to follow a few Cowes grazeing. But such impotent persons, as being unable for strong travaile, are yet able to drive Cattle to and fro to their pasture, for this keeping of Cowes, is of it selfe a very idle life, and a fit nurserie for a Thiefe. For which cause (you remember) I disliked the Irish manner of keeping Boolies in Summer upon the mountaines, and living after that savage sort. But if they will algates feede many Cattle, or keepe them on the Mountaines, let them make some townes neare to the Mountaines side, where they may dwell together with neighbours, and bee conversant in the view of the world. And to say truth, though Ireland bee by nature coun∣ted a great soyle of pasture, yet had I rather have fewer Cowes kept, and men better mannered, then to have such huge in∣crease of Cattle, and no increase of good conditions. I would therefore wish that there were some ordinances made amongst them, that whosoever keepeth twentie Kine, should keep a Plough going, for otherwise all men would fall to pasturage, and none to husbandry, which is a great cause of this dearth now in England, and a cause of the usuall stealthes in Ireland: for looke into all Countreyes that live in such sort by keeping of Cattle, and you shall finde that they are both very barbarous and uncivill, and also greatly given to warre. The Tartarians, the Musco∣vites, the Norwegians, the Gothes, the Armenians, and many other doe witnesse the same. And therefore since now wee purpose to draw the Irish from desire of warre and tumults, to the love of peace and civility, it is expedient to abridge their great custome of
hardening, and augment their trade of tillage and husbandrie. As for other occupations and trades, they need not bee inforced to, but every man to bee bound onely to follow one that hee thinkes himselfe aptest for. For other trades of Artificers will be occupied for very necessitie, and constrayned use of them, and so likewise will merchandize for the gaine thereof, but learning and bringing  in liberall Sciences, will not come of it selfe, but must bee drawne on with streight Lawes and ordinances: And therefore it were meete that such an act were ordained, that all the Sonnes of Lords, Gentlemen, and such others as are able to bring them up in learning, should be trayned up therein from their Child-hoods. And for that end every Parish should be forced to keepe a pettie Schoole-master, adjoyning unto the Parish Church, to bee the more in view, which should bring up their children in the first Elements of Letters: And that in every Countrey or Baronie, they should keepe an other able Schoole-master, which should instruct them in Grammer, and in How requi∣site also an U∣niversitie is for the further growth in learning, the judicious well know. This happinesse we now enjoy, to the great benefit of this Land. And although former attempts have beene made for erecting and establishing Vniversities in Ireland, yet through want of meanes, which should have beene allotted for their mainte∣nance, they have soone faded. So hapned it with that Acade∣my which Alexander de Bgnor Archbishop of Dublin erected (in S. Patricks Church) in Dublin, and procured to be confir∣med by Pope Iohn the 2th. And no better succeeded that which was afterwards erected at Tredagh by Act of Parlament Anno 5. Edw. 4. (as appeares in the roll of that yeare in the Chauncery) whereby all the like Priviledges, as the Vniversity of Oxford (in England) enjoyed, were conferred u∣pon it. Besides these wee finde mention of others, farre more ancient, as at Armagh, and Ross. Carbry, or Ross. atlithry, as it is called in the life of S. Faghnan the Founder, who lived in the yeare 590. Ipse Sanctus (saith the Author) in australi Hibernia plagâ iuxta mare, in suo Monasterio quod ipse funda∣vit, ibi crevit civitas, in quâ semper manet magnum studium sco∣larium, quod dicitur Rossailithry, habitabat. But a further search were fit to bee made touching those of the elder times. the Principles of Sciences, to whom they should be compelled to send their youth to bee disciplined, whereby they will in short space grow up to that civile conversati∣on, that both the children will loath their former rudenesse in which they were bred, and also their Parents will even by the en∣sample of their young Children, perceive the foulenesse of their owne behaviour, compared to theirs; for Learning hath that wonderfull power in it selfe, that it can soften and temper the most sterne and savage nature. Eudox. Surely I am of your minde, that nothing will bring them from their uncivile life sooner, then learning and disci∣pline next after the knowledge and feare of GOD. And there∣fore I doe still expect, that you should come thereunto, and set some order for reformation of Religion, which is first to bee respected, according to the saying of CHRIST, Seeke first the King∣dome of Heaven, and the Righteousnesse thereof. Iren: I have in minde so to doe; but let me (I pray you) first finish that which I had in hand, whereby all the ordinances which shall afterwardes bee set for Religion, may abide the more firmely, and bee observed more diligently. Now that this people is thus tythed and ordered, and every one bound unto some ho∣nest trade of life, which shall bee particularly entered and set downe in the tything Booke, yet perhappes there will bee some
stragglers and runnagates, which will not of themselves come in and yeeld themselves to this order, and yet after the well finishing of the present warre, and establishing of the Garrisons in all strong places of the Countrey, where their wonted refuge was most, I sup∣pose there will few stand out, or if they doe, they will shortly bee brought in by the Eares: But yet afterwardes, lest any one of them should swerve, or any that is tyed to a trade, should afterwardes not follow the same, according to this institution, but should straggle up and downe the Countrey, or mich in Corners a∣mongst their Friends idlely, as Carrowes, Bardes, Iesters, and such like, I would wishe that a Provost Marshall should bee ap∣pointed in every Shire, which should continually walke about the Countrey, with halfe a dozen, or halfe a score horsemen, to take up such loose persons as they should finde thus wande∣ring, whome hee should punish by his owne authority, with such paines as the person shall seeme to deserve; for if hee be but once so taken idlely roguing, hee may punish him more lightly, as with stockes, or such like; but if hee bee found a∣gaine so loytering, hee may scourge him with whippes, or rodds, after which if hee bee againe taken, let him have the bitternesse of Marshall lawe. Likewise if any reliques of the olde rebellion bee found by any, that either have not come in and sub∣mitted themselves to the Law, or that having once come in, doe breake forth againe, and walke disorderly, let them taste of the same cuppe in Gods Name, for it was due to them for their first guilt, and now being revived by their later loosenesse, let them have their first desert, as now being found unfit to live in the Common-wealth. Eudox. This were a good ordinance: but mee thinkes it is an un∣necessary charge, and also unfit to continue the name or forme of any Marshall-Law, when as there is a proper Officer already appointed for these turnes, to wit the Sheriffe of the Shire, whose peculiar Of∣fice it is to walke up and downe his Bayli-wicke, as you would have a Marshall to snatch up all those Runnagates and unprofitable mem∣bers, and to bring them to his Gaole to bee punished for the same. Therefore this may well be spared. Iren. Not so (me thinkes) for though the Sheriffe have this au∣thority of himselfe to take up all such stragglers, and imprison them, yet shall hee not doe so much good, nor worke that terrour in the hearts of them, that a Marshall will, whom they shall know to have power of life and death in such cases, and specially to bee appoin∣ted for them: Neither doth it hinder that, but that though it per∣taine to the Sheriffe, the Sheriffe may doe therein what hee can, and yet the Marshall may walke his course besides, for both of them may doe the more good, and more terrifie the idle Rogue, knowing that though he have a watch upon the one, yet hee may light upon the other: But this proviso is needefull to bee had in this case,
that the Sheriffe may not have the like power of life, as the Marshall hath, and as heretofore they have beene accustomed; for it is dange∣rous to give power of life into the hands of him which may have be∣nefit by the parties death, as if the said loose liver have any goods of owne, the Sheriffe is to seize thereupon, whereby it hath come to passe, that some who have not deserved iudgement of death, though otherwise perhaps offending, have beene for their goods sake caught up, and carryed straight to the bough, a thing indeed very pittifull & horrible. Therefore by no meanes I would have the Sheriffe have such authority, nor yet to imprison that Lozell, till the Sessions, for so all Gaoles might soone be filled; but to send him to the Marshall, who eftsoones finding him faultie, shall give him meete correction, and ridd him away forthwith. Eudox. I doe now perceive your reason well: but come wee now to that whereof wee earst spake, I meane, to Religion and religious men, what order will you set amongst them? Iren. For Religion little have I to say, my selfe being (as I said) not professed therein, and it selfe being but one, so as there is but one way therein, for that which is true onely is, and the rest is not at all, yet in planting of Religion, thus much is needefull to bee observed, that it bee not sought forcibly to bee impressed into them with terrour and sharpe penalties, as now is the manner, but rather delivered and intimated with mildenesse and gentlenesse, so as it may not be hated before it be understood, and their professors despised and rejected. And therefore it is expedient that some discreete Ministers of their owne Countrey-men, bee first sent o∣ver amongst them, which by their meeke perswasions and instru∣ctions, as also by their sober lives and conversations, may draw them first to understand, and afterwards to imbrace the doctrine of their salvation; for if that the auncient godly Fathers, which first con∣verted them, when they were Infidells, to the Faith, were able to pull them from Idolatry and Paganisme, to the true Beliefe in CHRIST, as S. Patricke, and S. Columb, how much more easily shall godly teachers bring them to the true understanding of that which they already professed, wherein it is great wonder to see the oddes which is betweene the zeale of Popish Priests, and the Ministers of the Gospell, for they spare not to come out of Spaine, from Rome, and from Remes, by long toyle and daungerous travay∣ling hither, where they know perill of death awayteth them, and no reward or richesse is to bee found, onely to draw the people unto the Church of Rome, whereas some of our idle Ministers, having a way for credite and estimation thereby opened unto them, and having the livings of the Countrey of∣fered unto them, without paines, and without perill, will neither for the same, nor any love of God, nor zeale of Religion, nor for all the good they may doe, by winning Soules to God, bee drawne foorth from their warme neastes, to looke out into
Gods harvest, which is even ready for the sickle, and all the Fields yellow long agoe, doubtlesse those good olde godly Fathers, will (I feare mee) rise up in the day of judgement to condemne them. Eudox. Surely, it is great pitty Iren. that there are none chosen out of the Ministers of England, good, sober, and discreet men, which might be sent over thither to teach and instruct them, and that there is not asmuch care had of their soules, as of their Bodies, for the care of both lyeth upon the Prince. Iren. Were there never so many sent over, they should doe smal good till one enormity be taken from them, that is, that both they bee restrayned from sending their yong men abroad to other Vni∣versities beyond the Sea, as Remes, Doway, Lovaine, and the like, and others from abroad bee restrayned for comming into them▪ for they lurking secretly in their houses, and in corners of the Countrey, doe more hurt and hinderance to Religion with their private perswasions, then all the others can doe good with their publique instructions, & though for these latter there be a good Sta∣tute there ordained, yet the same is not executed; & as for the former there is no law, nor order for their restraint at all. Eudox. I marvaile it is no better looked unto, and not only this, but that also which I remember you mentioned in your abuses con∣cerning the profits and revenewes of the Lands of Fugitives in Ire∣land, which by pretence of certaine colourable conveyances are sent continually over unto them, to the comforting of them and others a∣gainst her Majestie, for which here in England there is good order ta∣ken, and why not then aswell in Ireland? For though there be no Sta∣tute there yet enacted therefore, yet might her Majestie by her onely prerogative, seize the fruites and profites of those Fugitives Lands into her handes, till they come over to testifie their true alleagi∣ance. Iren. Indeede shee might so doe, but the comberous times doe perhappes hinder the regard thereof, and of many other good inten∣tions. Eudox. But why then did they not mend it in peaceable times? Iren. Leave we that to their grave considerations; but proceed we forward. Next care in Religion is to build up and repayre all the ru∣ined Churches, whereof the most part lye even with the ground, and some that have bin lately repayred, are so unhandsomely pat∣ched, and thatched, that men doe even shunne the places for the uncomelinesse thereof; therefore I would wishe that there were order taken to have them built in some better forme, ac∣cording to the Churches of England; for the outward shewe (assure your selfe) doth greatly drawe the rude people to the reverencing and frequenting thereof. What ever some of our late too nice fooles say, there is nothing in the seemely forme, and
comely order of the Church. And for the keeping and continuing them, there should likewise Church-wardens of the gravest men in the parish be appointed, as they bee here in England, which should take the yearely charge both hereof, and also of the Schoole-houses which I wish to be built neere the said Churches, for maintenance of both which, it were meete that some small portion of lands were al∣lotted, sith no more Mortmaines are to be looked for. Eudox. Indeede (me thinkes) it would be so convenient, but when all is done, how will you have your Churches served, and your Mi∣nisters maintained▪ since the livings (as you say) are not sufficient scarce to make them gownes, much lesse to yeeld meete maintenance according to the dignity of their degree. Iren. There is no way to helpe that, but to lay 2. or 3. of them to∣gether, untill such time as the Countrey grow more rich and better inhabited, at which time the Tythes, and other obventions will also be more augmented and better valued: But now that we have thus gone through all the 3. sorts of trades, and set a course for their good establishment: let us (if it please you) goe next to some other neede∣full points of other publicke matters no lesse concerning the good of the Common-wealth, though but accidentally depending on the former. And first I wish that order were taken, for the cutting and opening of all places through woods, so that a wide way of the space of 100. yards might be layde open in every of them, for the safety of travellers, which use often in such perillous places to be robbed, and sometimes murdered. Next that Bridges were built upon the Rivers, and all the fordes marred and spilt, so as none might passe any other way but by those Bridges, and every Bridge to have a gate and a gate-house set thereon, whereof this good will come that no night stealths which are commonly driven in by-wayes, and by blinde fordes un∣used of any, but such like shall not be conveyed out of one country into another, as they use, but they must passe by those Bridges, where they may either be haply encountred, or easily tracked, or not suffe∣red to passe at all, by meanes of those gate-houses thereon: Also that in all straights and narrow passages, as betweene 2. boggs, or through any deepe foord, or under any mountaine side, there should be some little Fortilage, or wooden Castle set, which should keepe and com∣maund that straight, whereby any Rebells that should come into the country, might be stopped that way, or passe with great perill. More∣over that all High wayes should be fenced and shut up on both sides, leaving onely 40. foote breadth for passage, so as none should be able to passe but through the high wayes, whereby theeves and night Robbers might be the more easily pursued and encountred, when there shall be no other way to drive their stolne cattle, but therein, as I formerly declared. Further that there should bee in sundry conve∣nient places, by the high wayes, townes appointed to bee built, the which should be free Burgesses, and incorporate under Bayliffes, to be by their inhabitants well and strongly intrenched, or otherwise
fenced, with gates on each side thereof, to be shut nightly, like as there is in many places in the English pale, and all the wayes about it to be strongly shut up, so as none should passe but through those townes: To some of which it were good that the priviledge of a market were given, the rather to strengthen and inable them to their defence, for there is nothing doth sooner cause civility in any countrie then ma∣ny Market townes, by reason that people repairing often thither for their needes, will dayly see and learne civill manners of the better sort: Besides, there is nothing doth more stay and strenghthen the Country, then such corporate townes, as by proofe in many Rebel∣lious hath appeared, in which when all the countryes have swerved, the townes have stood fast, and yeelded good releife to the Souldi∣ours in all occasions of services. And lastly there is nothing doth more enrich any country or Realme, then many townes, for to them will all the people drawe and bring the fruits of their trades, aswell to make money of them, as to supply their needefull uses, and the Countrymen will also be more industrious in tillage, and rearing of all husbandry commodities, knowing that they shall have ready sale for them at those townes, and in all those townes should there be convenient Innes, erected for the lodging and harbouring of Travel∣lers, which are now oftentimes spoyled by lodging abroad in weake thatched houses, for want of such safe places to shroude them in. Eudox. But what profit shall your market townes reape of their market? when as each one may sell their corne and cattle abroad in the country, and make their secret bargaines amongst themselves as now I understand they use. Iren. Indeede Eudoxus, they doe so, and thereby no small incon∣venience doth rise to the Common-wealth, for now when any one hath stolne a Cowe or a Garron, he may secretly sell it in the coun∣try without privity of any, wheras if he brought it to a market towne it would perhaps be knowne, and the theife discovered. Therefore it were good that a straight ordinance were made, that none should buy or sell any cattle, but in some open market, (there being now market townes every where at hand,) upon a great penalty, neither should they likewise buy any corne to sell the same againe, unlesse it were to make malt thereof, for by such ingrosing and regrating wee see the dearth that now commonly raigneth here in England, to have beene caused. Hereunto also is to bee added that good ordinance, which I remember was once proclaimed throughout all Ireland. That all men should marke their cattle with an open severall marke upon their flanckes or Buttockes, so as if they happened to be stolne, they might appeare whose they were, and they which should buy them, might thereby suspect the Owner, and be warned to abstaine from buying them of a suspected person, with such an unknowne marke. Eudox. Surely these ordinances seeme very expedient, but spe∣cially that of free townes, of which I wonder there is so small store
in Ireland, and that in the first peopling and planting thereof, they were neglected and omitted. Iren. They were not omitted, for there were through all places of the Country convenient, many good townes seated, which tho∣rough that inundation of the Irish, which I first told you of, were ut∣terly wasted and defaced, of which the ruines are yet in many places to be seene, and of some no signe at all remaining, save onely their bare names, but their seates are not to be found. Eudox. But how then commeth it to passe, that they have never since beene recovered, nor their habitations reedified, as of the rest, which have beene no lesse spoyled and wasted. Iren. The cause thereof was, for that after their desolation, they were begged by Gentlemen, of the Kings, under colour to repaire them, and gather the poore reliques of the people againe together, of whom having obtained them, they were so farre from reedifying of them, as that by all meanes they have endeavoured to keepe them waste, least that being repaired, their Charters might be renewed, and their Burgesses restored to their lands, which they had now in their possession, much like as in those old monuments of Abbeyes, and re∣ligious houses, we see them likewise use to doe: For which cause it is judged that King Henry the eight, bestowed them upon them, con∣ceiving that thereby they should never bee able to rise againe. And even so doe these Lords, in these poore old corporate townes, of which I could name divers, but for kindling of displeasure. There∣fore as I wished many corporate townes to be erected, so would I a∣gaine wish them to be free, not depending upon the service, nor un∣der the commaund of any but the Governour. And being so, they will both strengthen all the Country round about them, which by their meanes will be the better replenished and enriched, and also be as continuall houldes for her Majesty, if the people should revolt or breake out againe, for without such it is easie to forrage and over-run the whole land. Let be for ensample all those Free-boroughes, in the Low-Countryes, which are now all the strength thereof. These and other like ordinances might be delivered for the good establishment of the Realme, after it is once subdued and reformed, in which it might afterwards be very easily kept and maintained, with small cae of the Governours and Councell there appointed, so as it should in short space, yeeld a plentifull revenue to the Crowne of England: which now doth but sucke & consume the treasure thereof, through those unsound plots and changefull orders, which are dayly devi∣sed for her good, yet never effectually prosecuted or perfor∣med. Eudox. But in all this your discourse I have not marked any thing by you spoken touching the appointment of the principall Of∣ficer, to whom you wish the charge and performance of all this to be committed: Onely I observed some fowle abuses by you noted in some of the late Governours, the reformation where∣of
you left of, for this present place. Iren. I delight not to lay open the blames of great Magistrates to the rebuke of the world, and therefore their reformation I will not meddle with, but leave unto the wisedome of greater heads to be considered, only thus much I will speake generally thereof, to satisfie your desire, that the government and cheife Magistracy, I wish to continue as it doth, to wit, that it be ruled by a Lord Deputy or Iu∣stice, for that it is a very safe kinde of rule, but there withall I wish that over him there were placed also a Lord Lieutenant, of some of the greatest personages in England, such a one I could name, upon whom the eye of all England is fixed, and our last hopes now rest, who being intituled with that dignity, and being here alwayes resi∣dent, may backe and defend the good course of that government a∣gainst all maligners, which else will through their cunning working under hand, deprave and pull backe what ever thing shall be begun or intended there, as we commonly see by experience at this day, to the utter ruine and desolation of that poore Realme, and this Leiutenan∣cie should be no discountenancing of the Lord Deputy, but rather a strengthning of all his doings, for now the cheife evill in that go∣vernment is, that no Governour is suffered to goe on with any one course, but upon the least information here, of this or that, hee is ei∣ther stopped and crossed, or other courses appointed him from hence which he shall run, which how inconvenient it is, is at this houre too well felt: And therefore this should be one principall in the appoin∣ting of the Lord Deputies authority, that it should bee more ample and absolute then it is, and that he should have uncontrouled power, to doe any thing, that he with the advisement of the Councell should thinke meete to be done: For it is not possible for the Councell here, to direct a Governour there, who shall be forced oftentimes to fol∣low the necessitie of present actions, and to take the suddaine advan∣tage of time, which being once lost will not bee recovered, whilst through expecting direction from hence, the delayes whereof are of∣tentimes through other greater affaires most irkesome, the oportu∣nityes there in the meane time passe away, and great danger often groweth, which by such timely prevention might easily bee stopped: And this (I remember) is worthily observed by Machiavel in his discourses upon Livie, where he commendeth the manner of the Ro∣mans government, in giving absolute power to all their Councellors and Governours, which if they abused, they should afterwards deare∣ly answere: And the contrary thereof he reprehendeth in the States of Venice, of Florence, and many other principalityes of Italy: who use to limit their cheife Officers so strictly, as that thereby they have oftentimes lost such happy occasions, as they could never come unto againe: The like whereof, who so hath beene conversant in that go∣vernment of Ireland, hath too often seene to their great hinderance and hurt. Therefore this I could wish to be redressed, and yet not so but that in particular things he should be restrained, though not in
the generall government, as namely in this that no offices should bee sould by the Lord Deputy for money, nor no pardons, nor no prote∣ctions bought for reward, nor no beoves taken for Captainries of Countryes, nor no shares of Bishopricks for nominating of Bishops, nor no forfeytures, nor dispensations with poenall Statutes given to their servants or friends, nor no selling of licences for transportation of prohibited wares, and specially of corne and flesh, with many the like, which neede some manner of restrainte, or else very great trust in the honorable disposition of the Lord Deputy. Thus I have Eudoxus, as briefly as I could, and as my memorie would serve me, run through the state of that whole Country, both to let you see, what it now is, and also what it may bee by good care and amendment: Not that I take upon me to change the policy of so great a kingdome, or prescribe rules to such wise men, as have the handling thereof, but onely to shew you the evills, which in my small experience I have observed, to be the cheife hinderance of the refor∣mation, and by way of conference to declare my simple opinion for the redresse thereof, and establishing a good course for government, which I doe not deliver as a perfect plot of mine owne invention to be onely followed, but as I have learned and understood the same by the consultations and actions of very wise Governours and Councel∣lours, whom I have (sometimes) heard treate hereof: So have I thought good to set downe a remembrance of them for my owne good, and your satisfaction, that who so lift to overlooke them, al∣though perhaps much wiser then they which have thus advised of that State, yet at lest by comparison hereof, may perhaps better his owne judgment, and by the light of others fore-going him, may fol∣low after with more ease, and haply finde a fairer way thereunto, then they which have gone before. Eudox. I thanke you Irenaeus, for this your gentle paines, withall not forgetting now in the shutting up, to put you in minde of that which you have formerly halfe promised, that hereafter when wee shall meete againe, upon the like good occasion, you will declare un∣to us, those your observations which you have gathered of the anti∣quities of Ireland. The end.
Faults escaped. PAg▪ 25. lin. 45. for and he, read he is. pag. 27. lin, 28. in some copies, for Albany, read either Albi∣on or England. pag. 32. lin. 22. for admirall read admirable. pag. 33. lin. 38. for afer, read before, pag. 48▪ lin. 14. for Termssa, read Tecmessa. pag. 54. lin. 34. & 46 for Talkmot, read Folkmoes, and in the Margent add, vid. D. Hen. Splmanni Glossarium, pag. 74▪ lin. 44▪ for Sinerwicke, read Swer∣wicke.
ANNOTATIONS. VPon review of that part which was printed, before I began to inserte any notes, these few animadversions are added. Pag. 6. lin. 39. —the first originall of this word Tanist and Tanistry came. See whether it may not be more fitly derived from Thane, which word was com∣monly used among the Danes, and also among the Saxons in England, for a noble man, and a principall officer. Pag. 11. lin. 14. —duke of Clarence, who having married the heire of the Earle of Vlster, &c. It was not George Duke of Clarence here spoken of by the author, but De hac re vid Camd. Britan. pag. 336. & an∣nal. Hib. ab to edi. ad an. 136 Lionell Duke of Clarence, third sonne of King Edw. the 3. who mar∣ried the Earle of Vlsters daughter, and by her had the Earledome of Vlster. and although Edw. the 4. made his brother the Duke of Cla∣rence, Lo. Lieutenant of Ireland, yet the place was still executed by his Deputyes (which were at severall times) Thomas Earle of Des∣mond, Iohn Earle of Worcester, Tho. Earle of Kildare, and William Shir∣wood Bishop of Meth, the Duke himselfe never comming into Ireland to governe there in person. Pag. 26. lin. 26. —Kin is English, and Congish affinity in Irish. I conceive the word to be rather altogether Irish. Kin signifying in Irish, the heads or chiefe of any septs. Pag. 27. The discourse from the word Scythians in the 11. line, unto the end of the parenthesis in the 30. line, is wholly to be crossed out, as be∣ing then agreeable to the best MS. Copie, onely after Scythians, add, which. Touching the Scythians A regione qua∣dam qua dicitur Scythia: dicitur Scita, Sciticus, Scoticus, Scotus, Scotia. Tho. Walsingham. i Hypodigmat Ne striae, ad an. 1185. or Scotts arrivall in Ireland, see Nennius an ancient Brittish author (who lived in the yeare of Christ 858.) where among other things we have the time of their arrivall. Brit∣tones (saith he) venerunt in 3. aetate mundi in Britanniam, Scythae autem in 4. obtinuerunt Hiberniam. Pag. 28. lin. 35. —remembrances of Bards. Of the ancient Bards or Poets, Lucan makes
this mention in the first booke of his Pharsalia. Vos quoque qui fortes animas, belloque peremptas, Lauaibus in longum vates dimititis aevum, Plurima securi fudistis carmina Bardi. Concerning the Irish Bardes see pag. 51. The word signified among the Gaules a singer, as it is noted by Mr Camden, and Mr Selden, out of Festus Pompeius, and it had the same signification among the Brittish. Sr Iohn Price in the description of Wales, expounds it to bee one that had knowledge of things to come, and so (saith he) it signifieth at this day. taking his ground (amisse) out of Lucan's verses. Doctor Powell in his notes upon Caradoc of Lhancarvan saith, that in Wales they pre∣served Gentlemens armes and pedegrees. At this time in Ireland the Bard by common acceptation, is counted a rayling Rimer, and di∣stinguished from the Poet. Pag. 29. lin. 10. —an Irish Scot or Pict by nation. Bede tells us that the Picts were a colo∣ny of Scythians, who first comming into Ireland, and being denyed residence there by the Scots, were perswaded by them to inhabit the North parts of Britaine. But Mr Camden, out of Dio, Herodian, Tacitus, &c. and upon consideration of the customes, name and language of the Picts, conceives not improbably, that they were naturall Britons, although distinguished by name. Pag. 29. lin. 28. Those Bardes indeed Caesar writeth— Concerning them I finde no mention in Caesar's commentaryes, but much touching the Druides, which were the Priests and Philosophers, (or Magi as Hist. nat lib. 16. cap▪ 44. Pliny calls them) of the Gaules & British. Illi rebus divinis intersunt, (De bllo Galli. o ib. 2. saith he) sacrificia publica ac privata procurant, religiones interpretantur. Ad hos magnus adolescentium numerus disciplinae caussâ concurrit, magnoque ij sunt apud eos honore. &c. The word Droi had anciently the same si∣gnification (as I am informed) among the Irish. Pag. 30. lin. 30. —and Cornelius Tacitus doth also strongly affirme the same. Cornelius Taci∣tus in the life of Iulius Agricola saith thus. Silurum colorati vultus, & torti plerumque crines, & positus contra Hispaniam, Iberos veteres trajecis∣se, easque sedes occupâsse fidem faciunt. This he speaketh touching the Silures which inhabited that part of South-Wales, which now we call Herefordshire, Radnorshire, Brecknockshire, Monmouth shire, and Glamorganshire. And although the like reason may be given for that part of Ireland which lyeth next unto Spaine, yet in Taci∣tus we find no such inference. Rer. Scot. lib. 2. Buchanan indeed upon the conje∣cture of Tacitus hath these words. Verisimile a. non est Hispanos relictâ
à tergo Hiberni, terrâ propiore, & coeli & soli mitioris, in Albium primùm descendisse, sed primùm in Hiberniam appulisse, at{que} inde in Britanniā colo∣nos missos. Which was observed unto me by the most learned Bishop of Meth, Dr Anth. Martin, upon conference with his Lordship about this point. One passage in Tacitus touching Ireland (in the same booke) I may not heere omit, although it be extra oleas. Quinto ex∣peditionum anno (saith he) nave primâ transgressus, ignotas ad tempus gentes, crebris simul ac prosperis praelijs domuit, eamque partem Britanniae quae Hiberniam aspicit, copijs instruxit, in spem magis quam ob formidinem. Siquidem Hibernia medio inter Britanniam atque Hispaniam sita, & Galli∣co quoque mari opportuna valentissimam imperij partem magnis invicem usibus miscuerit. Spatium ejus si Britanniae comparetur, angustius, nostri maris insulas superat. Solum coelumque & ingenia, cultus{que} hominum haut multùm à Britannia differunt, meliùs aditus portus{que} per commercia & ne∣gotiatores cogniti. Agricola expulsum seditione domesticâ unum ex regulis gentis exceperat, ac specie amicitiae in occasionem retinebat. Saepè ex eo audi∣vi Legione unâ & modicis auxilijs debellari, obtineríque Hiberniam posse. idque adversùs Britanniam profuturum, si Romana ubique arma, & velut è conspectu libertas tolleretur. Pag. 31. lin. 4. —Slanius, in the end made himselfe Monarch. The Irish stories have a continued succession of the Kings of Ireland from this Slanius, untill the conquest by King Henry the second, but very uncertaine, especi∣ally untill the planting of Religion by S. Patrick, at which time Loe∣garius, or Lagirius was Monarch. Pag. 33. lin. 35. Ireland is by Diodorus Siculus and by Strabo called Britannia. Iris is by Diodorus called a part of Brittaine: but Ireland by neither of them Britannia. Pag. 33. lin. 38. —King Arthur, and before him Gurgunt. Concerning King Arthur's conquest of Ireland, see Geffry of Monmuth, and Matthew of West∣minster, at the yeare 525. where he is said to have landed in Ireland with a great army, and in a battle to have taken King Gilla-mury pri∣soner, and forced the other Princes to subjection. In our Annals it appeares that Moriertach (the sonne of Erca) was at that time King of Ireland, of which name some reliques seeme to be in Gilla-Mury, Gilla being but an addition used with many names, as Gilla-Patrick, &c. But in the Country writers (which I have seene) I find not the least touch of this conquest. Pag. 34. lin. 23. —amongst whom he distributed the land. King Henry the 2. gave to Gir. Camb. Hib. expugn. lib. I. cap. 2.Ri∣chard Strong-bow Earle of Striguil or Penbroke, all Leinster, excepting
the citty of Dublin, and the Cantreds adjoyning with the maritime townes and castles. Vnto Vid. Rog. de Hoveden pag. 567, edit. Franc. & Camd. Brit. pag. 739. Robert fitz Stephen, and Miles de Cogan he granted the Kingdome of Corke, excepting the Citty of Corke, and the Ostmans Cantred. And unto Rog. de Hove∣den ibid. Philip de Bruse the Kingdome of Limericke. But in a confirmation of King Iohn to William de Bruse (or Braos) Nephew to this Philip, wee finde that hee gave to him onely Chart. an. 2. Io. in arce Lond. honorem de Limerick, retentis in dominico nostro (as the words of the Charter are) civitate de Limerick & donationibus episcopatuum & ab∣batiarum, & retentis in manu nostrâ cantredo Ostmannorum & S. insulâ. Among other large graunts (remembred by Hoveden) which this King Henry gave to the first adventurers, that of Meth to Sr Hugh de Lacy is of speciall note. The grant was in these words. HEnricus Dei gratiâ Rex Angliae, & Dux Normanniae & Aquitaniae, & Comes Andegauiae. Archiepisco∣pis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Iustitiarijs, & omnibus ministris & fidelibus suis Francis, Anglis & Hiberniensibus totius terrae suae, Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse & concessisse, & praesenti chartâ meâ confir∣mâsse Hugoni de Lacy pro servitio suo, terram de Midiâ cum omnibus pertinentijs suis per servitium quinquaginta militum sibi & haeredibus suis, tenendū & habendū à me & haeredibus meis, sicut Murchardus Hu-melathlin eam tenuit, vel aliquis alius ante illum vel posteà. Et de incremento illi dono omnia feoda quae praebuit, vel quae praebebit circa D∣veliniam, dum Balivus meus est, ad faciendum mihi serviti∣um apud civitatem meam Duveliniae. Quare volo & firmi∣ter praecipio, ut ipse Hugo & haeredes sui post eum praedi∣ctam terram habeant, & teneant omnes libertates & liberas consuetudines qu sibi habeo vel habere possum per prae∣nominatum servitium, à me & haeredibus meis, benè & in pace, liberè, & quietè, & honorificè, in bosco & plano, in pratis & pascuis, in aquis & molēdinis, in vivarijs & stagnis, & piscationibus & venationibus, in vijs, & semitis, & portu∣bus maris, & in omnibus alijs locis, & alijs rebus ad eam pertinentibus cum omnibus libertatibus, quas ibi habeo, vel illi dare possum, & hâc meâ chartâ confirmare. Test. co∣mite Richardo filio Gilberti, VVillielmo de Braosa, &c. Apud VVeisford.
But above all other graunts made by K. Henry the 2. that to his sonne Iohn is most memorable. Deinde (saith In Henr. 2. pag. 566·. Hoveden) venit rex Oxenford, & in generali concilio ibidem celebrato constituit Iohannem fili∣um suum Regem in Hiberniâ, concessione & confirmatione Alexandri summi Pontificis. By vertue of this graunt both in the life time of his father, and in the raigne of his brother king Richard, he was stiled in all his charters Dominus Hiberniae, and directed them thus, Ioannes Do∣minus Hiberniae, & comes Morton. Archiepiscopis, episcopis, comitibus, baro∣nibus, Iustitiarijs, vicecomitibus, constabularijs, & omnibus ballivis & mi∣nistris suis totius Hiberniae, salutem. Thus we have it frequently (al∣though sometimes with a little variation) in the Registers of Saint Mary Abbey, and Thomascourt by Dublin. How the Earle in Leinster, and Lacy in Meth, distributed their lands, (besides what they retained in their owne hands,) is delivered by Maurice Regan, (interpreter to Dermot Mac Murrough King of Leinster) who wrote the Historie of those times in French verse. The booke was tran∣slated into English by Sir George Carew Lo. President of Mounster, af∣terwards earle of Totnes, and communicated to me, by our most re∣verend and excellently learned Primate. There wee finde that the Earle gave to Reymond le Grose in Consul. Gir. Camb. Hib. ex∣pugn. lib. 2. cap. 4▪ marriage with his sister, Fotherd, O∣drone, and Glascarrig, unto Hervy de Mount-marish, hee gave Obarthy, unto Maurice de Prindergast, Fernegenall, which was afterwards confer∣red upon Robert fitz Godobert but by what meanes he obtained it (saith Re∣gan) I know not. Vnto Meiler Fitz Henry he gave Carbry, unto This Maurice soone after de∣ceasing at Wexford, king Iohn then earle of Moreton confirmed to his sonne Willi∣am Fitz Maurice cantredum terrae quem Makela∣nus tenuit, il∣lum scin quo villa de Nas sita est, quam comes Richardus dedit Mauritio patri ipsius Wil∣lielmi. Thus the charter▪ habetu in ro. com. placis an. 10. Hen. 6. in iurri Birmin∣ghamiano▪ Mau∣rice Fitz Gerald the Naas Ofelin (which had beene possessed by Mackelan) and Wickloe, unto Walter de Ridelesford he gave the lands of Omorthy, un∣to Iohn de Clahul the marshalship of Leinster, and the land betweene Agha∣bo and Leghlin, unto Robert de Birmingham Ofaly, and unto Adam de Hereford large possessions. What these possessions were, are thus noted in the Register of Thomascourt abbey, where speaking of the Earle, Posteà Lageniâ perquisitâ, erat quidam juvenis cum eo quem multûm dile∣xit, & dedit eidem pro servitio suo terras & tenementa subscripta, viz. te∣nementum de saltu Salmonis, Cloncoury, Kill, Houterard, & tenementum de Donning cum omnibus suis pertinentijs. Thus the Register. This A∣dam de Hereford was founder of Saint Wulstan's Priory neere Leixlip in the county of Kildare. But we proceed with Regan. Vnto Miles Fitz David who was one of his cheife favorites, he gave Overk in Ossory, to Thomas le Flemming, Arde, to Gilbert de Borard, Ofelmith, to a knight cal∣led Reinand he gave 15. knights fees adioyning to the sea, and to one Robert (who was afterwards slaine in Connaght) the Norragh. What partition Lacy made in Meth, he thus delivers. Vnto his speciall friend Hugh Tirrell he gave Castleknock: and unto William Petit Castlebreck. I have seene an ancient deede made by Sir Hugh de Lacy to this William Petit wherein among other things he graunts unto him Matherethirnan cum omnibus pertinentijs suis, exceptis Lacu & villa quae dicitur Dissert, &c. Vnto the valiant Meiler fitz Henry (sayth Regan) he gaue Magher∣neran the lands of Rathkenin, and the cantred of Athnorker. Vnto Gilbert
de Nangle all Magherigallen, unto Iocelin the sonne of Gilbert de Nangle, the Navan and the land of Ardbraccan: unto Richard de Tuite he gave faire possessions, unto Robert de Lacy Rathwer, unto Richard de la Chappell he gaue much land, unto Geffry de Constantine Kilbisky and Rathmarthy: Vnto Adam de Feipo, Gilbert de Nugent, William de Misset, and Hugh de Hose, he gaue large inheritances. In Lacyes graunt to Feipo, we finde that he gave him Skrine, et praeterea (sayth the Magn. regest. mon. B. Mariae iua Dublin. fol▪ 76. deede) feodum unius militis circa Duvelinam, scil. Clantorht & Santref. &c. In his graunt to Gilbert de Nugent, (the originall whereof I have seene, with an impression upon the seale, of a knight armed and mounted,) he gave to him Del∣vin, quam in tempore Hebernicorum tenuerunt O-Finelans, cum omnibus pertinentijs & villis, quae infra praedictam Delvin continentur, exceptâ quadam villâ Abbatis Fourae nomine Torrochelasch pro servitio 5. militum. Thus the Charter. To Misset hee gave Luin, and to Hussey or Hose Galtrim. Regan proceeds. Vnto Adam Dullard hee gave the lands of Dullenvarthy, unto one Thomas he gave Cramly, Timlath-began northeast from Kenlis, Lathrachalim, and Sendevonath, and unto Richard le Flem∣ming he gave Crandon at 20. Knights fees. Pag. 36. l. 26. —they changed the forme thereof into their cloakes called Pallia. As the Romans had their gowne called toga, so the ancient outward ve∣stiment of the Grecians was called Pallium, by some translated a Mantle, although it be now commonly taken for a Cloake, which doth indeed somewhat resemble a Mantle. By these different kinds of habit, the one was so certainly distinguished from the other, that the word Togatus was often used to signifie a Roman, and Palliatus a Grecian, as it is observed by Romanae histor. antholog. lib. 2. sect. 3. cap. 7. Mr Tho. Godwin out of De iud▪ l. 3. cap. 19. Sigonius. To∣gati saith he) pro Romanis dicti, ut Palliati pro Graecis. But that the ancient Latines and Romans used it, as the Author alledgeth, (out of I know not what place in Virgil) appeareth no way unto mee. That the Gowne was their usuall outward garment, is most certaine, and that commonly of wooll, finer or courser, according to the dignity of the person that wore it. Whence Horace: —Sit mihi mensa tripes, et Satyr. 3. lib. 1.Concha salis puri, et toga quae defendere frigus Quamvis crassa, queat— And from this difference betweene the ancient Roman and Greci∣an habit, grew the proverbs, modò palliatus, modò togatus, and de togâ ad pallium, to denote an unconstant person. Pag. 36. lin. 32. — Humi mantilia sternunt.
Euanders entertainment of Aeneas, is set out in the 8. booke of Vir∣gils Aeneis, but there we have no such word as mantile. In his enter∣tainment by Dido we have it, but in another sence. Iam pater Aeneas, & jam Troiana iuventus Conveniunt, stratoque super discumbitur ostro,AEneid. lib. 1▪ Dant famuli manibus lymphas Cereremque canistri Expediunt, tonsis{que} ferunt mantilia villis. Pag. 38. lin. 44. —as in that battle of Thomyris against Cyrus. Herodotus in the descrip∣tion of that battle hath no such thing. Pag. 41. lin. 30. —by the sword and by the fire. Lucian hath it, by the sword & by the wind. Somewhat may be gathered to this purpose out of the An 45▪ Vlster An∣nals, where Laegarius (or Lagerius) a heathen King of Ireland, being taken prisoner by the Leinster men, is said to have bin released upon an oath, which was per solem & ventum.
Out of the fourth Booke of the Faerie Queene, Canto XI. concerning the rivers of Ireland. NEthence the Irish Rivers absent were, Sith no lesse famous then the rest they be, And joyne in neighbourhood of kingdome neere, Why should they not likewise in love agree, And joy likewise this solemne day to see? They saw it all, and present were in place; Though I them all according their degree, Cannot recount, nor tell their hidden race, Nor read the salvage coūtries, thorough which they pase. There was the Liffie, rolling downe the lea, The sandy Slane, the stony Aubrian, The spacious Shenan spreading like a sea, The pleasant Boyne, the fishy fruitfull Ban, Swift Awniduffe, which of the English man Is call'd Blacke water, and the Liffar deepe, Sad Trowis, that once his people over-ran, Strong Allo tombling from Slewlogher steep, And Mulla mine, whose waves I whilom taught to weep. And there the three renowmed brethren were, Which that great Giant Blomius begot Of the faire Nymph Rheûsa wandring there, One day, as she to shunne the season hot, Vnder Slewbloome in shady grove was got, This Giant found her, and by force deflowr'd: Whereof conceiving, she in time forth brought These three faire sons, which being thence forth powrd In three great rivers ran, and many countries scowrd. The first, the gentle Shure, that making way By sweet Clonmell adornes rich Waterford; The next the stubburne Newre, whose waters gray By faire Kilkenny, and Rosseponte boord; The third, the goodly Barow, which doth hoord Great heapes of Salmons in his deepe bosome: All which long sundred, doe at last accord To joyne in one, ere to the sea they come, So flowing all from one, all one at last become,
There also was the wide embayed Mayre, The pleasant Bandon crownd with many a wood, The spreading Lee, that like an Iland faire Encloseth Corke with his divided flood; And balefull Oure, late staynd with English bloud: With many more, whose names no tongue can tell. All which that day in order seemely good Did on the Thamis attend, and waited well To doe their duefull service, as to them befell. Out of the seventh Booke of the Faerie Queene. Cant. VI. EFtsoones the time and place appointed were, Where all both heavenly Powers, and earthly wights, Before great Natures presence should appeare, For tryall of their Titles and best Rights, That was, to weet, upon the highest hights Of Arlo-hill (Who knowes not Arlo-hill?) That is the highest head (in all mens sights) Of my old father Mole, whom Shepheards quill Renowmed hath with hymnes fit for a rurall skill. And were it not ill fitting for this file, To sing of hilles & woods, mongst warres & Knights, I would abate the sternenesse of my stile, Mongst these sterne stounds to mingle soft delights; And tell how Arlo through Dianaes spights (Beeing of old the best and fairest Hill That was in all this holy Islands hights) Was made the most unpleasant, and most ill. Meane while, O Clio, lend Calliope thy quill. Whylome, when IRELAND florished in fame Of wealth and goodnesse, far above the rest Of all that beare the British Islands name, The Gods then us'd (for pleasure and for rest) Oft to resort there-to, when seem'd them best: But none of all there-in more pleasure found, Then Cynthia; that is soveraine Queene profest Of woods and forrests which therein abound, Sprinkled with wholesome waters, more then most on ground.
But mongst them all, as fittest for her game, Either for chace of beasts with hound or bowe, Or for to shrowde in shade from Phoebus flame, Or bathe in fountaines that doe freshly flowe, Or from high hilles, or from the dales belowe, She chose this Arlo; where she did resort With all her Nymphes enranged on a rowe, With whom the woody gods did oft consort: For, with the Nymphes, the Satyres love to play & sport. Amongst the which, there was a Nymph that hight Molanna; daughter of old father Mole, And sister unto Mulla faire and bright: Vnto whose bed false Bregog whylome stole, That Shepheard Colin dearely did condole, And made her lucklesse loves well knowne to be. But this Molanna, were she not so shole, Were no lesse faire and beautifull then shee: Yet as she is, a fairer flood may no man see. For first she springs out of two marble Rocks, On which, a grove of Oakes high mounted growes; That as a girlond seemes to deck the locks Of some faire Bride, brought forth with pompous showes Out of her bowre, that many flowers strowes: So, through the flowry Dales she tumbling downe, Through many woods, and shady coverts flowes, (That on each side her silver channell crowne) Till to the Plaine she come, whose Valleyes she doth drowne. In her sweet streames, Diana used oft (After her sweaty chace and toylesome play) To bathe her selfe; and after, on the soft And downy grasse, her dainty limbes to lay In covert shade, where none behold her may: For, much she hated sight of living eye. Foolish God Faunus, though full many a day He saw her clad, yet longed foolishly To see her naked mongst her Nymphes in privity. No way he found to compasse his desire, But to corrupt Molanna, this her maid, Her to discover for some secret hire: So, her with flattering words he first assaid, And after, pleasing gifts for her purvaid, Queene-apples, and red Cherries from the tree, With which he her allured and betrayd,
To tell what time he might her Lady see When she her selfe did bathe, that he might secret bee. There-to he promist, if she would him pleasure With this small boone, to quit her with a better; To weet, that where-as she had out of measure Long lov'd the Fanchin, who by nought did set her, That he would undertake, for this to get her To be his Love, and of him liked well: Besides all which, he vow'd to be her debter For many moe good turnes then he would tell; The least of which, this little pleasure should excell. The simple mayd did yeeld to him anone; And eft him placed where he close might view That never any saw, save onely one; Who, for his hire to so foole-hardy dew, Was of his hounds devour'd in Hunters hew. Tho, as her manner was on sunny day, Diana, with her Nymphes about her drew To this sweet spring; where, doffing her array, She bath'd her lovely limbes, for Iove a likely pray. There Faunus saw that pleased much his eye, And made his heart to tickle in his brest, That for great joy of some-what he did spy, He could him not containe in silent rest; But, breaking forth in laughter, loud profest His foolish thought. A foolish Faune indeed, That couldst not hold thy selfe so hidden blest, But wouldest needs thine owne conceit areed. Babblers unworthy been of so divine a meed. The Goddesse, all abashed with that noise, In haste forth started from the guilty brooke; And running straight where-as she heard his voyce, Enclos'd the bush about, and there him tooke, Like dared Larke; nor daring up to looke On her whose sight before so much hee sought. Thence, forth they drew him by the hornes, and shook Nigh all to peeces, that they left him nought; And then into the open light they forth him brought. Like as an huswife that with busie care Thinks of her Dairy to make wondrous gaine, Finding where-as some wicked beast unware That breakes into her Dayr'house, there doth draine
Her creaming pannes, and frustrate all her paine; Hath in some snare or gin set close behind, Entrapped him, and caught into her traine, Then thinkes what punishment were best assign'd, And thousand deathes deviseth in her vengefull mind: So did Diana and her maydens all Vse silly Faunus, now within their baile: They mocke and scorne him, and him foule miscall; Some by the nose him pluckt, some by the taile, And by his goatish beard some did him haile: Yet he (poore soule) with patience all did beare: For, nought against their wills might countervaile: Ne ought he said what-ever he did heare; But hanging downe his head, did like a Mouse appeare. At length, when they had flouted him their fill, They gan to cast what penance him to give. Some would have gelt him, but that same would spill The Wood-gods breed, which must for ever live: Others would through the river him have drive, And ducked deepe: but that seem'd penance light; But most agreed and did this sentence give, Him in Deeres skin to clad; and in that plight, To hunt him with their hounds, him selfe save how he might. But Cynthia's selfe more angry then the rest, Thought not enough, to punish him in sport. And of her shame to make a gamesome jest; But gan examine him in straighter sort, Which of her Nymphes, or other close consort, Him thither brought, and her to him betraid. He, much affeard, to her confessed short, That't was Molanna which her so bewrayd, Then all at once their hands upon Molanna laid. But him (according as they had decreed) With a Deeres skin they covered, and then chast With all their hounds, that after him did speed; But he more speedy, from them fled more fast Then any Deere: so sore him dread aghast. They after follow'd all with shrill out-cry, Shouting as they the heavens would have brast, That all the woods and dales where he did flie, Did ring againe, and loud reecho to the skie. So they him follow'd till they weary were;
When, backe returning to Molann' againe, They, by command'ment of Diana, there Her whelm'd with stones. Yet Faunus (for her paine) Of her beloved Fanchin did obtaine, That her he would receive unto his bed. So now her waves passe through a pleasant Plaine, Till with the Fanchin she her selfe doe wed, And (both combin'd) themselves in one faire river spred. Nath'lesse, Diana, full of indignation, Thence-forth abandond her delicious brooke; In whose sweet streame, before that bad occasion, So much delight to bathe her limbes she tooke: Ne onely her, but also quite forsooke All those faire forrests about Arlo hid, And all that Mountaine, which doth over-looke The richest champain that may else be rid, And the faire Shure, in which are thousand Salmons bred. Them all, and all that she so deare did way, Thence-forth she left; and parting from the place, Thereon an heavy haplesse curse did lay To weet, that Wolves, where she was wont to space, Should harbour'd be, and all those Woods deface, And Thieves should rob and spoile that Coast around, Since which, those Woods, and all that goodly Chase, Doth to this day with Wolves and Thieves abound: Which too-too true that lands in-dwellers since have found. To the right honourable Thomas Earle of Ormond and Ossory.Lord Trea∣surer of Ireland. REceive most noble Lord a simple taste, Of the wild fruit, which savage soyle hath bred, Which being through long warres left almost waste, With brutish barbarisme is overspred: And in so faire a Land, as may be red, Not one Parnassus, nor one Helicon Left for sweet Muses to be harboured, But where thy selfe hast thy brave mansion; There indeed dwell faire Graces many one, And gentle Nymphes, delights of learned wits, And in thy person without Paragone All goodly bounty and true honour sits. Such therefore, as that wasted soyle doth yield, Receive deare Lord in worth, the fruit of barren field. E. S.
To the most renowned & valiant Lord,Lord Deputy of Ireland. Arthur Lord Grey of VVilton, Knight of the noble order of the Garter &c. MOst noble Lord, the pillor of my life, And Patron of my Muses pupillage, Through whose large bountie poured on me rife, In the first season of my feeble age, I now doe live, bound yours by vassalage, Sith nothing ever may redeeme, or reave Out of your endlesse debt so sure a gage, Vouchsafe in worth this small gift to receive, Which in your noble hands for pledge I leave Of all the rest, that I am tyde t'account: Rude rimes, the which a rustick Muse did weave In savage soyle, far from Parnasso mount, And roughly wrought in an unlearned Loome: The which vouchsafe deare Lord, your favourable doome. E. S. To the right noble Lord and most valiant Captaine, Sir Iohn Norris, Knight, Lord President of Mounster. VVHo ever gave more honourable prize To the sweet Muse, then did the Martiall crew; That their brave deeds she might immortalize In her shrill tromp, and sound their praises dew? Who then ought more to favour her, then you Most noble Lord, the honour of this age, And Precedent of all that Armes ensue? Whose warlike prowesse, and manly courage, Tempred with reason and advizement sage, Hath filld sad Belgick with victorious spoile, In France and Ireland left a famous gage, And lately shak't the Lusitanian soile. Sith then each where thou hast disspred thy fame, Love him, that hath eternized your name. E. S.
A translation made ex tempore by Mr Edm. Spenser upon this distich, written on a Booke belonging to the right honorable Richard Earle of Corke, &c. NVlla dies pereat, pereat pars nulla die, Ne tu sic pereas, ut periêre dies. LEt no day passe, passe no part of the day, Lest thou doe passe, as dayes doe passe away. Verses upon the said Earles Lute. VVHilst vitall sapp did make me spring, And leafe and bough did flourish brave, I then was dumbe and could not sing, Ne had the voice which now I have: But when the axe my life did end, The Muses nine this voice did send. E. S.
