257 99845844 10770
The Arte of Loue. OR, Loue discouered in an hundred seuerall kindes. ET VS∣QVEAD NV∣BES VERIT∣AS TVA Printed at London by P.S. for William Leake: and are to be sold at his shop in Paules Churchyard, at the signe of the Greyhound. 1598.
To the Right Worshipfull Ma: Henry Prannell Esquire, the true Friend and Fauourer of all laudable Professions. SIR, the stranger may these my sa∣lutations seeme vnto ye, in that I being a Stranger and neuer treading on English ground till this instant, make choice of you for my first En∣tertainer, intruding my selfe as a guest, whereas yet I haue no acquaintance at all. But if you
shall deeme me blame-worthy heerein, (as I will not greatly stand in maintaining anie pre∣sumption) the fault indeed is a kinde Countrimans of yours, who would needes haue mee leaue my honourable Friends in Italy, and those great prefer∣ments alotted me in France, to trie the aire & climate of faire Englands Maiden Kingdome. And whereas diuers others in∣treated me to honorable habi∣tations, yea, as great places of reckoning as anie mine owne natiue Soile affoorded me: yet the perswasions of this your wel-wishing Friend hath ouer∣ruled
me, to lay all my fortunes at your feete, & either by your fauour to liue here for euer, or by your discountenance to re∣turne backe disgraced. The rude English I speake, I learnd it of him: the danger I may in∣curre, I impose vpon him: one∣ly (for his friendly association in my trauell) if you allow me anie grace, bestow it on him. For, as his affection to you ex∣ceedeth that of manie: so, (in mine opinion) if you trie him, you shall finde him as forward to your welfare as anie. Your Worships to bee commaunded: Hecatonphila.
Jn Artem amandi Decastichon. EXimiè scripsit Cicero, benè pinxit Apelles, Inuidiae morsum sensit vterque tamen. Conscia mens recti cum te comitetur euntem, Sperne venenato quicquid ab ore fluit. Quòd liber est nitidus, miscetur & vtile dulci, Dexter Apollo tibi; Fama perennis erit. Ergo macte animo, nec publica cōmoda tardes, Ingenij viuent sic monumenta tui. Candidus Interpres laudetur, & optimus Au∣thor, Viuat vterque diu, cedat vtrique decus. FRANCISCVS MERES.
The Argument. VIncentio Bentiuoli beeing Duke of Ferrara, a solemne contract of mariage was cō∣cluded, betweene Ludouico his Sonne, and faire Annabella, Daughter to the Marquesse of Mont-Ferrat. And when the tìme of the Nuptialls came to bee perfourmed, there wanted no re∣sort of honorable Personages, nor anie magnificent cost and royall pompe, as might well be seeme a matter of such importance, as al∣so the time so necessarily vrging it. Triumphes, Tiltes, Maskes, Barriers, were one while Compa∣nions with this gracious Assem∣blie, then another while stately
Tragedies, and queint conceited Comedies holpe to beguile the idle howres: & when neither of these were thought expedient, then ci∣uill discourse and familiar confe∣rence liberally passed between the Lords and Ladies. Jnto seuerall Companies were these Discoursers deuided, some intreating on martiall affaires, others of ciuill and domesticall occasions. But they who are the Argument of our present Trea∣tise, their talke consisted onely of Loue, laying downe Rules, grounds, and principles, where∣by (at full) to instruct the true Arte of Loue.
One Ladie (among the rest, tearming her selfe Hecatonphi∣la) was allowed to be chiefe Spea∣ker in this discoursing of Loue: and though at diuers times before shee had indifferently instructed all (or at least the most part) of them, concerning the proceeding in so weightie a matter, yet now at this instant they request a fur∣ther satisfaction. Shee, loth to denie anie thing remaining in her power, and see∣ing the pastime which was prepa∣red for that night to be a pleasant Comedie, euen almost at the point of presentment, while the Act∣ors were attiring and furnishing
themselues to their intended mer∣riment, she deliuered this her short Instruction to the Arte of Loue, fitting it with the breuitie of the time, & the earnest desire of them that so much importunde her theretoo, beginning her Discourse as hereafter followeth.
HECATONPHILA The Arte of Loue. Written by Master Le∣on Baptista Alberto, Flo∣rentine: wherein is taught an hundred kindes of Loue. I Take it to be a part of humanitie, as also an action of pittie & compas∣sion, seeing for the most part amongst you (faire Ladies) so manie signes of an afflicted spirite, onely through the weightie oppres∣sions of loue, that by all the wit and cunning remaines in me, I should in∣struct
how this burthen might bee more easie, and lesse troublesome vn∣to you. For beholding at this instant (most sweete Sisters) manie of yee leaning your heads on your hands, others crosse armd ore the breast, some (bit∣terly sighing) hiding their eyes with their fingers, other some lending their lookes to all parts of this Thea∣ter, as it wer to espie among the mul∣titude, the man whō they most of all expect, & with greatest longing de∣sire to see. Whereby I cannot chuse but take pittie on them, whom I know to bee in the same agonie, which I my selfe haue heertofore felt, being then lesse seene and skild in loues affaires, than now I am at this instant. Now albeit you are furnished of good iudgement and singular wise∣dome, whereby to direct & gouerne ye in the case of Loue; yet make no
doubt at all (faire Patrones of beau∣tie) but being lesse experienced ther∣in than I, that you shall heare some thing deliuered from me, as pleasing to heare, as profitable to practise. At no time can bee found a better Phisition, than hee, who hauing first tasted an infirmitie himselfe, learnes thereby the skill of helping others in∣fected with the same disease. As for my self, concerning mine own loue, and others made knowen to mee; I finde, that without anie repenting, I haue satisfied my desires (for one wo∣man) more than an hundred other Louers could doo: so that at euerie Fall of the leafe, & likewise for euerie Summer season, I might iustly make account of a whole yeres experience in loue. Vpon this occasion, learned men (who aboue al other most please and content me) in their priuate amorous Discourses call mee Hecatonphila,
which is as much to say, as An hun∣dred Loues; wherefore from me, be∣yond all other, they would seeke to gather the fruites of the second Tri∣umph, concerning the sweetes and pleasures of Loue. Therefore (faire Friends, and my dearest Delights) while the Comoe∣dians delay their time of appearing on the Stage, listen to me as diligent∣ly and attentiuely as ye can: yea, to me I say, who am a perfect Mistresse in this Arte, and desirous withall to make you deepely learned therein; that you may learn how to end your Loues with maruellous pleasure and contentment, without dread of anie sinister accident, that may befall in the progresse of your loue.
CAP. 2. AS concerning mine owne Loues, (which till this instant were neuer more than two) with those of others, wherein I haue imployed my labour and industrie: but onely of the first, thorough my want of prouidence, I haue no great occasion to complaine: And that was in my yong yeares, when I set a high rate on mine owne beautie, e∣steeming more a bare victorie of o∣pinion, than the endowment of such an especial occasion, wherby I might soly studie & endeuour, to make my selfe faire and beautifull indeed. But for this euer afterward I gaue thankes to Venus and Cupid, who in my first affections & yonger errors, gaue me a Loue discreete, wise, mo∣dest,
vertuous, pittifull, patient, and worthie of all commendation: of whom I learned (that which is onely sufficient) to loue secretly, and with∣out pride, controuling daylie mine owne imperfections, and practising the knowledge of manie things ne∣cessary to true and perfect louing: as for example, to rehearse large Histo∣ries by lookes onely, & other especi∣all matters by least suspected behaui∣our. But most happy is the Louer what∣soeuer, whose fortune is so good as to light on so true and faithfull a Friend: sweet loue, sweet pastime, but swee∣test of all is the first kindled heate, which brings the louer both pleasure and profit together, whereby he may the better attaine his owne conten∣tation. The first loue, being not counterfet but surely grounded, can neuer be re∣mooued from the remembrance: but
truly the sweetnes of those ioies were rare and numberlesse, were they not often troubled by crooked & finister meanes, as oftentimes happens to vs women, such as I was in my yong & vainer dayes, as shewing our selues too disdainful, & reckoning the mea∣nest of our owne priuate opinions, to be farre beyond all others. Fooles that wee bee, how manie wonderfull pleasures lose we, in nice shunning them? Afterward, both a∣lone and publique, how much do we bemone our owne stearne rudenesse? Thus first (through our owne fault) we finde the cause of our annoiance, til with floods of teares we weare out the flint of our stonie stubbornnesse, learning thereby to become more milde and tractable. It is best then to learne, how to loue without fiercenesse or disdaine, but it falls out verie sildome, that without some bitternesse one can
endure the sweete which growes by Loues beginning, except wee first make choyce of such an one, as shall appeare most meete and worthie to be beloued. Listen then (faire Virgins) & learn of me to passe pleasantly the course of your life, as also to bring such qui∣et to your Loue, as the issue thereof shalbe most peaceable and glorious. CAP. 3. HEere then will I first instruct ye, how to make choyce of a right good Louer: & af∣terward teach, in what ma∣ner and by what arte you may take & entertaine him, with all the grace & good wil in such cases requisite. Last∣ly, ye shall vnderstand from me, with what ease and securitie yee may long
time triumph in your amorous en∣terprises. For which good Lessons, I wold next of all know, what thanks or kindnes (on your behalfe) I shalbe requited withall? But out alas, what recompence shal I expect frō ye (faire louely Cre∣atures) when ye haue proou'd, what pleasure, profit & contentment these my instructions shall enrich ye with∣all? Well, come what may, I will wayte for nothing else from yee, or make anie other demaund, but when yee haue attentiuely heard my spee∣ches and admonitions, that ye would bestow your loue effectually on the partie, by whom ye finde your selues to be loyally beloued. For this I dare certainly assure yee, that whatsoeuer she bee among yee, that in her course of loue will not ob∣serue my Aduertisements, let her neuer looke for anie amorous con∣tent, without verie great crosses and
perturbations, neither shall shee liue without the charge and oppression of infinite cares, greefes and heart-killing passions. Listen then aduised∣ly, how much it shal auaile ye to loue discreetly, and how preiudiciall be∣side, the want of this knowledge in loue will be vnto ye. CAP. 4. FIrst then must wee shew yee, what kinde of Louers they ought to bee, of whom you should make choyce: and therefore (sweet Sisters) bee carefull of this first precept, that yee chuse not a man ei∣ther too yong, or ouer-wearied with yeares: for no age can bee more suc∣cessefull in louing, than when a man is in the state of firme strength & abi∣litie: which being alreadie spent and gone in old men, makes them vnapt or incapable of those sweet pastimes
the case of Loue requires. Think with your selues what a hell it is, to loue where the like cannot be returned againe. Whereas the able gallant Youth, being in the first flow∣er of his manly age, hath a most deli∣cate aspect or countenance, declares a more firme & potent constitution, and is able to endure watchings or o∣ther weightie burdens, in better sort than those of weaker disposition can. But learne with me (I beseech ye) to know, how many discommodities attend vpon such men, as being ouer yong, are likewise vnapt for loue. They are not expert, & euery smal occasion seemes in their mindes to make a verie great shadow, being al∣waies hasty, & subiect to no patience. They are sudden, rash & indiscreet, knowing little, & therefore improui∣dent, suspitious in all things, & easily caried away with any disdainful con∣ceit. Sildome shal ye see thē without some folowing friend, to whom they
wil discourse a whole historie of their amorous passions, taking delight in counterfeiting and defending appa∣rances of truth, and making open vaunts of approoued falshoods. Here hence insues it, that these re∣ports passing from one to another, whatsoeuer is spoken of vs women, bee it neuer so false, as quickly will some be found to beleeue it. Thus by the meanes of these indis∣creet yong heads, before wee can scant know the name of him we pur∣pose to loue, wee are made common reports and pratlings of the people. And sometimes it happeneth, that when all sinister language is silent of vs, then our owne fortune resembles the yong Liones following the Hart, who iested & dallied verie long with her yet in the end cast her off: rather than which inconuenience should happen to me, I would make electi∣on of an elder Louer, than one so
ouer yong and voyd of reason. The Louer more seene in yeares, will be wise, discreet, readie to know and accomplish whatsoeuer, accord∣ing to time, place, and all offered oc∣casions: whereas the yong gadding head, not obseruing those necessarie rules, can neuer know how to fit him selfe with these needfull furnitures. Note well the discreet Louer, and yee shall see him silent, secret, pati∣ent, modest & aduised: but the yong Fantasticke will go vp and downe all day before your doore; where, thogh he be alone, yet euerie passenger shal be a witnesse of his inward affection. The elder Fauour it, except there∣too induced by some mightie occa∣sion, will neuer giue ouer his enter∣prise, his Loue is his hearts Heauen: but if he cease to loue, yet neuer will he become an enemie, hate, or seeme molestuous vnto ye, either by word or deed.
The yong wanderer, like one that newly comes into a publique market place, walkes along euerie side, and admireth all things, desiring to inioy each thing hee beholdeth: but with the least looke he is presently chaun∣ged: and no greater miserie can hap∣pen to her that truly loueth, than to affect the man, whose heart and soule are not solemnly dedicated and linkt together, to desire or couet more than one onely Loue. But that which is worst of all, these young amorous Gallants, for euerie smal occasion giue ouer their affecti∣on, conuerting their behauiour and all else towards vs, as if we were their verie greatest enemies. Vnhappie then are we, that by lo∣uing such yong straglers, proud min∣ded, and voyd of counsell, must liue continually in feares, compassed in with worlds of endlesse molestati∣ons.
In a soft and gentle molde, anie print or forme we like, may easily be effected: euen so in this first estate of greene & delicate youth, sooner (be∣leeue me) may loue be extinguished, than rightly enkindled. This makes euerie one timorous to deale with so sweete a solace: re∣membring the beautifull Rose, that it both springs & dies in one Summer; and haile stones fallen in the morn∣ing are no where to bee found the same day at night. Hereby ye may perceiue, faire vir∣gins, that men ouer aged, are not the aptest for loue: likewise these yong∣er sort to bee verie daungerous, and therefore not to be dealt withall; but such as florish in a mature and setled middle age, may perfourme, what the too olde are vnable for, and know that, which those young and greene wits are vtterly vnexpert and ignorant in.
An apple being well knit together and mellowed, is more sweete and pleasing than when it is greene; yet that apple beeing ouer-ripe and too much mellowed, becomes wrinck∣led, saplesse, and wel neere sauour∣lesse: euen such is the loue of men ouer young and ouer olde; the one sowre and sharpe, the other dry and senselesse. Heere too I must now adde, that in loue are infinite pleasures, no lesse de∣lightsome, than to be admired; as in the marriage bed, where is all kinde conference, discouering of greefes, recounting afflictions passed, clear∣ing all suspitions, correcting with sweet accusations one another: thus out-wearing the slow-paced howers, one while with true-loues teares, an∣other while with intyre reioycing. To the faithfull Louer, nothing is more pleasing, than to feele on her cheekes, or in her bosome, the teares
of him she loueth, sweetly trickling downe: what honnie of Hybla, what cinamon of Arabia, or what Nec∣tar prepared for the gods themselues to drinke, can be imagined so sweet, (faire Glories of Vertue) as one little teare of him whom you intirely loue? A thing inestimable, a delight admi∣rable, nothing so precious, where∣with may not be valued al the pearles of India, the gold of the Persians, or Emperie of the Latines; no, not with the verie least teare (sweete Sister) of thy affected Louer. Oh happie Maiden, oh fortunate Louer, that seest shining in thy soules eyes, loue, faith, pittie, and all other sweetnes, religiously combyned fast together. So that by these, and infi∣nite other heauenly pleasures, which though auaileable▪ yet heere I let passe for breuities sake, and some o∣ther serious respects: affirming this, Greene Youth is not for ye, old Age
is as vnnecessary, only the meane be∣tweene both, the sound setled spirite, is aboue all other to be preferred. CAP. 5. HEthertoo ye haue heard, of what Age your Louers ought to be: there are now other things most profita∣ble, concerning their election, which I will rehearse to yee as breefely as I can. Neuer could I finde my selfe incli∣nable to loue a man ouer-rich, be∣cause these money-mongers will buy loue without exchange of good will, and seeking to serue their turne with manie, neuer keepe faith with anie. As hard a matter do I account it, to loue a man ouer-beautiful, because he being desired of diuers, though I
loue him neuer so earnestly, yet shall I be in continuall feare to loose him. As dangerous I take it, to loue a man lifted by Fortune to anie great dignitie, because he can neuer intend to loue without many witnesses, both strangers and domesticall, abroad & at home. He can neuer go abroad, but with a mightie throng of Seruants and Friends, which makes him ordinari∣ly more noted of the world, than o∣thers are. Such men are commonly of proud spirit and puft vp courage, compas∣sing manie things rather by violence, than any fauour, loue, or friendship. As little wisedome is it, to loue such as are slothfull, dull spirited and cou∣ragelesse, who through want of bet∣ter wit or exercise, make an arte or occupation of their loue, gadding a∣broad with frizled lockes, embroide∣red garments, & other open marks of
their lightnesse, onely but to procure their owne scorne and derifion. Flie from such (faire Sisters) and take heed of them, for they loue not a iote, but spend the day in these odde courses, not as requiring your kind∣nesse, but for lacke of other labour: and looke what they say to you, the same will they to whomsoeuer they meete withall; and doubt not, but what they speake of others, the same will they of you, be it true or false. I holde it in like manner as blame-worthie, to fore-stall good fortune in better place, and stoop to the affecti∣on of a Boore, Peazant, Carterly clowne, or such like, because it is a submission to men of the very vylest and basest condition: for marke what inconuenience followes thereupon. These abiect hirelings and mercena∣rie groomes; thinke to attaine some title of honour, by giuing it foorth in publique to be knowen, that they are
fauoured by such a Gentlewoman, or beloued by a Ladie of so great height and calling. Moreouer, vnder colour of religi∣on, to loue him, who pretending zeal in his speeches, shall discouer and re∣prooue that publiquely, which him∣selfe seekes for in secrete, and gladly would attaine vnto; I condemne as much as anie of the rest, and holde it for a misfortune hardly to be repay∣red. Then all these rehearsed, vz. The too rich, too beautifull, too fortu∣nate, too negligent, too base, and too holie, are men not to bee regarded, neither contained within my lessons, anie way to be beloued; let vs learne to know them then, that are to bee tearmed worthie of affection.
CAP. 6. MAke no doubt (dere Sisters) in fixing your fancies on such a louer, as is not poor, misshapen, defamed, or a villaine: ye shall easily perceiue when he is indu∣ed with wisedome, modestie, pati∣ence and vertue. It hath euermore been my natural inclination, to loue such an one, (as I haue said before) that was addicted to good letters, learned, and adorn∣ed with manie vertues, euen such an one as my first husband was; whom (indeed) I loued more dearly, than I did mine owne selfe: for hee was of goodly personage, of exceeding qua∣lified conditions, accompanied with a maiesticall countenance, gentle & affable, compleat in all parts of hu∣manitie,
and of a minde (diuine as it were) farre beyond all other men. He abounded in all vertues, espe∣cially those that best beseemed the greatest Princes, being of comely & strong personage, couragious, har∣die, affable, graue, secret, modest, merrie, pleasant, where he deemed it best became him; eloquent, learned, amiable, pittifull, warie, expert, quick witted, and (aboue all) most loyall, & exceding in al the parts of gentlenes. Verie skilful was he in the exercise of Armes, managing great horses, and either at his launce, bow, or such commendable qualities, right ready: well seene in sciences, musique, pain∣ting, engrauing, yea all other Artes whatsoeuer; and yee can name no laudable action fit for a man, but I i∣magine he could therein very hardly be seconded. Impossible it is for mee to recount the moitie of his admirable vertues,
which worthily made him famous, affected, and euerie where regarded. Thinke then (faire Ladies) I neede not be ashamed, both to esteeme and tearme him my Lord, being such an onely most sweete and loyall Louer, neither a matter hard or laborious to me, readily and at all times to please and obey him; nay, I thought my selfe most happie and fortunate, if I might expresse my vttermost dili∣gence, in doing whatsoeuer he plea∣sed to commaund me. Who better could deserue such dutie and reuerence at my hand, than such a worthie husband? Oh my Lord, most blessed haue I euer repu∣ted my selfe, seeing Fortune bestow∣ed such a Loue on me, as had not his like. But alas, my mishap chaunced afterward, cutting off the felicitie of such a heauenly kinde of life, by ta∣king him from me into a farre distant Countrey, and death could bee no
worse to mee, than this sowre separa∣tion: yet this is some consolation to my soule, that the remembraunce of thy faith and loue continueth aliue in me, which I keepe and will doo with all religious duty I can, as a most me∣morable testimonie of our neuer sun∣dred affection. Such a Loue as this (faire Ladies) yea, such a Loue, if such a one maye be met withall, doo I councell ye to make choyce off, and intyrely to loue him, neuer preferring anie to the so∣uereigntie of your affections, but such as are wise, vertuous, and mo∣dest. These are they that will requite your faith and kindnes with endlesse recompences, and by whom ye shall neuer need to doubt any sinister acci∣dent. These (like Poets, Times glories) will make your names immortall, gi∣uing true fame and eternitie to your
beautie and vertues: Lesbia, Corinna, Cynthia, and manie more deceased a thousand yeares since, yet liue, by be∣ing beloued of vertuous and learned men. Loue then (sweete Sisters) those that are learned, wise, modest & ver∣tuous: so shall your liues be heere as none the like, and your loues remem∣bred, as none comparable. CAP. 7. THus hauing declared, how ye should elect men wor∣thie of your loue, now will I shew the meanes to en∣tertaine and preserue them still in lo∣uing. And first of all let me tell yee (faire Creatures) that nothing better be∣commeth your excellent perfecti∣ons,
and sooner preuaileth in con∣quering his heart you ayme at, than a sweete carriage of countenance, as also a comely, discreete, and modest presence: one piercing looke heates and enkindles the dullest desire, one modest amorous glaunce awakens sleepie thoughts, fetcheth fire from the flint, and makes the hart as yeeld∣ing, as your own can craue enioying. Heerein I haue discerned manie young Damosels, (through want of better wit) verie much to deceiue themselues, imagining, that a man no sooner lookes on them, but pre∣sently he is in loue with them: which makes them verie liberall in eying e∣uerie one, and take plesure in gazing on each goer by, still thinking theyr beautie increased by their often be∣holding, wheras men are rather wea∣ried with noting their vanitie. But beleue me (deare Friends) it is no part of beauties glorie, to attract
a troope of eies, or be beleagerd with an hoast of idle regarders: couet ra∣ther priuately to bee seene, as one a∣dorned with vertue, courtesy and hu∣manitie, than gold, purple, silke or sil∣uer, for that shall make thee truly ho∣noured, when the other will leaue thee foolishly despised. One onely light makes an entyre and perfect shadow, whereas manie lights being together, confounds & defaceth it: euen so from one onely Friend and loyal Louer, true and per∣fect loue is to bee expected; for well may she bee compared to the Brood∣hen, that all the daye long bestowes her paines in all the dust shee meetes withall, and yet sleepes at night hun∣grie and vnsatisfied. It is good then for her that loueth, to imploy all her endeuour, to finde the meanes for preseruing one entire Loue onely: for how vnwise is shee that considers not, how manie casu∣alties
and dangers happen in loue, e∣specially when affection is rouing at more than one marke onely? Vnderstand (faire Sisters true loue is a matter immortall, not to bee de∣uided or seuered: for when it is truly bestowed where your soule solemnly affecteth, what beside it is bragd or boasted on to anie other, is woords without woorth, and golden showes with glassie substance. She that can deuide her liking into diuers parts & proportions, knowes not how to loue indeed, but pro∣phanes so sacred a profession, & shee that labours not to maintaine loue in his true and onely glorie, deserues not to haue the benefites of loue, but rather to be generaly hated and con∣temned. And though all other reasons auai∣led as nothing in this behalfe, yet thinke with your selues, that beeing pursued with a multitude of riualls,
what expectation is to be had there∣of? I will not stand to rehearse all the inconueniences, but let this one suf∣fise for the residue. If yee lend good lookes to euerie one, ye bring your selfe into a hell & intollerable seruitude: for then, if ye grace one more than another, pre∣sently ariseth hatred and contentions betweene them. What daily is then to bee lookt for about your doores, but brawles, quarrels, frayes & mur∣ders, made onely about you? The people laye the blame hereof vppon you, worthily despising yee for these rude inciuilities. Some one of them, either to de∣spite his enemie the more, or because he will be singuler in his owne con∣ceipt, beares downe the rest with tearmes and brauadoes, he becomes the kill-cow, he will haue more than anie, though he merit lesse than any: where ere hee comes, hee brags of
your fauours, presents, letters, and tokens, yea, sometime of kindnesse that might be kept closer. And hear∣ing the like deliuered from another, with oathes and protestations, how true I know not, (furie beeing enkin∣dled) nothing but blood can allay this hot tempest; and you being the cause thereof, are publiquely condemned, that neuer can your credit bee after∣ward repayred. But admit that all your Louers were ciuill and modest, no way iniu∣ring your fame and reputation, yet shal ye finde great defect in this mul∣titude of followers, and that the pro∣secuting of their loue will proue very perillons. Continuallye will they bee to one another as spyes, murmurers, and secrete enemies, so that no place or time can yeeld yee anye safe assurance or priuiledge, but by one or other ye shall bee continually
siedged, & neuer enioy one minutes rest, from their ceaselesse perturbati∣ons. Therefore would I aduise ye, not to be so generall in your affection, but to elect one Louer onely, such a one as before I haue deciphered vnto ye, to whom ye may safely disclose your harts secretes, and finde your loue e∣uerie way effectually requited. To all other beside, ye must be ve∣rie scarce and sparing of your beha∣uior: for they perceiuing themselues not to be regarded, will suffer yee to enioy your owne choyce the more quietly, because no man will loue longer, than hee hath hope to bee e∣steemed. If they discerne in your lookes no apparant signes of loue, they will cease al pursute, and for beare further molestation: abuse not then your selues with the opinion of some vain headed wantons, who are perswaded
that the onely meanes to make them affected, consists in brauery of attire, and gay decking of the bodie to bee gazde on. But I assure ye (deare Sisters) that neither golde, pearles, periwigs nor painting, but faire & comely demea∣nour, humanitie, gentlenesse and modestie, are the true weapons to win Loue withall, and the onely faire Trophees that beautifies his Tri∣umph. I haue seene more homely in aides beloued for their ciuill demeanour & modestie, than faire faces for their pride and boldnes and reason giues vs knowledge by most apparaunt proofes, that a proud minde can ne∣uer loue as it should doo. What thinke ye (sweet Sisters) did first of all incite and prouoke yee to loue? Questionlesse neither golde, purple, precious stones, or any other of Fortunes ornaments: but rather
discreet behauiour, vertue, modesty, gentlenes and ciuilitie, discerned in your amorous Seruants: then looke what first procured you to affect, the selfe same in others makes you to bee fauoured. Giue then your selues to one mo∣dest Louer onely, not audaciously, as diuers ouer-bold and impudent vse to doo, but with a womanly cariage, an affable demeanous, true signes of humanitie, simple facilitie, & a plea∣sing disposition, whereby you shall gaine as much grace, good will and equall affection, as you can wish or desire from your chosen Fa∣uourite.
CAP. 8. THus ye see how yee should make your election of one onely Louer, of mature age, vertuous, modest & ciuill behauiour, as I haue alreadie described vnto ye: him and no other would I wish ye to affect, euen as yee seeke to bee required with the like a∣gaine in him. Not much differing from this pre∣sent purpose, I begin now to remem∣ber mine owne former loues, when sitting weeping by my deare beloued mother, I would make complaint vn∣to her, that my Husband (the onely moitie of my soule, to whom I frank∣ly gaue my selfe, despising the thoght of anie other) seemed vnkind to me, and in outward appearaunce did not
manifest such affection toward mee, as my simple wisedome craued and expected. Continuing in the heate of these amorous oppressions, I found but one comfort onely in this my martir∣dome; which was, to weepe my fill daily, and declare my greefes to my pittying Mother, still accusing (to my vttermost) my Husband with great crueltie. When such large expence of teares and heart-renting sighes auai∣led not, I would often intreat and de∣sire him, that hee should not forsake my companie, and seeme so disdain∣full to her, that intyrely loued him: but his discreete aunsweres (as now I can confesse they were, though then my folly would not suffer mee to dis∣cerne so much) declared him to bee a wiser Husband than I was a Wife, and his councell was more auailable, than I had wit to conceiue.
But I being then yong, and in the extremitie of Loues flames, as many other in the like case doo, tooke all in the worst sense, fretted, greeued, and wept alone by my selfe, imagining still, that I loued but in vaine, & fan∣cied where I was not affected. These troubles and molestations made me so forget my selfe, that I v∣sed the aduice of forcerers and char∣mers, hearbes, vearses, oyntments, or anie thing thoght likely to induce & procure loue: them I made proofe of, as deeming I had him not sure e∣nough, who loued me better than I did my selfe. In teares at length I told all to my Mother, and she being well acquain∣ted with youths peeuish follies, wor∣thily controlling my deepe indiscre∣tion, vsed these or the verie like spee∣ches vnto me. Daughter, the eye onely is Loues directer, no hearbe, no potion, no
enchauntment, neither Circes nor Moeris, that could chaunge them∣selues, & other humane shapes, into beasts and monsters of strangest qua∣lities, haue anie power at all by theyr spells or exorcismes to procure loue, or preuaile against a minde not de∣termined to loue. Let her then that will declare her selfe a Louer, affect truly him whom she deemes to be the like. One knowes not a Musitian, but either by his voyce or touching hys instrument: euen so ye cannot be re∣puted a perfect Louer, but by the te∣stimonie of the true signes belonging to Loue. Figures are fallacies, & shewes no substances; loue more priuately, than may be noted apparantly, so shall ye expresse your loues value, and your wittes vertue: for by following this course, yee shall haue this assurance, to be as intyrely affected, as your self
can fancy, and the least friendly look shall finde as fauourable liking. Heertoo she added diuers other reasons, but none so pleasing (mee thought) as this. Beware Daughter (quoth she) that when reports come of others despi∣sing thee, thou be not as readie to be∣leeue, as the other to belye, and so prooue as sudden in hatred, as they were swift to incense thee. We should bee naturally inclined rather to loue thā hate, because loue is full of sweetnesse, and hatred hath no felicitie but in bitternes & sowre∣nesse. Therefore thus resolue with thy selfe, that whosoeuer shall per∣ceiue thy hearts firme affection, will hold it as religion to returne thee the like: leaue then these had courses, to base abusers of their time, for they that so liue, shal worthily be loathed, and run into more contempt, than thou hast reason to consider.
Loue, and thou shalt be belou'de; be kinde, curteous, gentle, and debo∣naire, that thy outward demeanour may  harts feruor: for thus shall the fire that warmes thee, heate him, and make him as tractable, as thy selfe can be affable. What thogh he bee somwhat slow in discouering his affection? thou oughtest not to misdeeme thereof, but conceiue the best in such a case, gouerning thy self by this rule; That he who is long ere he loues, is much longer ere he mis∣likes, for hastie fancie hath as hastie flight: whereas loue growing by lea∣sure, hath aduise for his guide, com∣fort by his continuaunce, and true fame after death to make him eter∣nall. He neuer slips or falls, that runneth with discretion; and the tree which is slacke in sprouting, is as slow in pe∣rishing. Wel worthie regarding were these
good admonitions, for (to my cost) since then, I haue found them most certaine. How manie disdaines, how manie molestations, more hurtfull to my selfe, than offensiue to him: yea, how manie wrongs bare my Husband at my hand, only through no other oc∣casion, but because indeed I knew not rightly how to loue? All which notwithstanding, his affection to me neuer failed, & scant∣ly would hee seeme to shew himselfe anie way offended: he saw it was but my want of better iudgement, &, be∣ing borne weake by nature, I must needes declare the same in nurture; which though he had admirable pa∣tience to endure, yet had I no reason at all to discerne. My Grandame beeing a Woman experienst in manie things, but espe∣cially in the Arte instructing to loue, tolde mee that long since, which I
found most true in my Husband. A patient man (quoth shee) is the true honour of manhood; for being euer∣more wise and secret to himselfe, bee his wrongs few or manie, his bosome is their buriall, and tungs abroad shal not tattle of his troubles at home. E∣uen so did I finde it in my Husband: for though I daily gaue him cause to be displeased, and (indeed) presumed a little too much on his patience, yet (God knowes) much griefe would he smoother with a smile, pittying to to haue my errors showen, or his dis∣quiet reuealed to anie. Consider then (faire Ladies) on the good precepts rehearsed, be con∣stant in loue, & doubt not of the like: the next way to purchase contempt, is by shewing your selues vnkinde, & the surest waye to win loue, is by ex∣pressing true loue; hate then the one, and be sure to enioy the honor of the other.
CAP. 9. YE haue hithertoo heard, sweete Sisters, what elec∣tion yee should make of modest and vertuous Lo∣uers; likewise, that ciuill conuersation and faire demeanour, both preuailes and purchaseth such meete men for ye. It remaines now to know the latter part, how this loue may be kept in perfect continuance, that the pleasure thereof may for e∣uer be preserued. Which I hope ye wil account as a most necessarie consequent, and that no lesse skill is to be vsed in keeping, than was in obtaining: for in com∣passing of a thing, wee are often∣times
assisted by fortune and good hap, but to keepe the same in such e∣state as it should bee, requires indu∣strie, wisedome, & carefull diligence: for the felicities of Loue are subiect to manie infirmities, one while, by time and course of occasions, ano∣ther, by the iniquitie and mallice of enuious persons, somtime thorough lets and hinderaunces ensuing by for∣tune, then againe by want of know∣ledge, how to guide and gouerne our selues in louing. To Time and Fortune (faire La∣dies) wee must needes bee obedient. And as he that intends to passe a Ri∣uer, stayes on the banke till the rough stormes bee ouer-blowen: so in the stearne tempests of time, wee should awaite and not wilfully cast our selues into daunger, considering that what may not bee done to day, happily to morrow in better sort will bee com∣passed.
Let the way be neuer so long, hold on, and at length thou shalt attayne the end. Thinke then no trauaile te∣dious in Loue: if thou meete anye crosse encounters, proceed on chear∣fully, and at last thou shalt land in the wished hauen. As for the slaunder and detraction which oftentimes attendeth on se∣crete loue, it may easely bee escaped, because hidden Loue is fortefied on all sides with infinite good excuses, which serues as a rampart against all bad reports. But among all the aduerse chaun∣ces incident to vs Louers, (as I haue tried by mine own proofe, and noted the like in others) there can no mis∣hap whatsoeuer betide vs, but it re∣ceiues from our selues the ground & originall; as by our ouer-much in∣constancie, pride, wilfulnes, disdaine, and such like, which proones more to our owne harme, than theirs wee
seeke to hurt. And let me assure yee, that there is nothing more preiudiciall to the sweete proceeding of loue, than our owne peeuish humours, which being carried away with meere shaddowes in manie things, continually deludes vs with vaine and idle fantasies in all things. Onely our own folly and obstinate opinions, makes vs afterward sit a∣lone, and sigh out our repentaunce, nor ensues this fault so much by im∣prouidence, as through pride and vaine conceit at the first in our selues: therefore he spake both well and tru∣ly, that affirmed: A proud Woman could not loue effectually, because suspition continually attendeth her. Suspition ensueth through lacke of knowledge, and distrust, waited on by disdaine; which makes vs to shun, iniure and torment them, that too dearly loue vs: thus our crooked be∣hauiors
serue as instructers to them, & look what coyne they receiued of vs, they pay vs backe with the like. There are some of vs women, who deeme themselues neuer satisfied with pride, furie, and scornfulnesse, which makes but a bad agreement a∣mong vs: for where disdain is enter∣tained, contempt of all kindnesse is the more increased, and it is pittie a true Louer shuld haue such a reward for his labour. But she that is of a noble inclinati∣on, gracious, benigne, modest, kinde and gentle, will listen to iust excuses, and let reason be her ruler. If anger would presume, she will quickly sup∣presse it; if disdaine would attempt her, shee can foorthwith turne it off: remembring, that loue must bee im∣braced with loue, & wher the enemy is repulsed, the solace is with greater sweetnes receiued. Be not then coy, proud or scornful in affectiō, but (like
your faire semblances) full of all affa∣bilitie. Which of yee would denie him whom ye dearly loue, whatsoeuer he demaundeth? Little can ye do then, if (at his request) ye will not forsake a fond and friuolous opinion: learne, as my Lord taught me in my first af∣fections, to reiect and despise all such hurtfull follies. I tooke extreame delight, sweete Sisters, in commending him whom I knew to be compleat in all arts and vertues, especially this whereof wee now conferre: yet let it not seeme of∣fensiue to ye, that among my praises of him whom I loued, and euer shall, I mingle some of mine owne infir∣mities, wherein, either you haue like∣wise fallen through lacke of proui∣dence, or maye heereafter by ouer∣much peeuishnesse. Being a yong Damosell, rash and vnexperienced, I began to loue, fal∣ling
afterward to a little pride in my selfe, which drew me to disdaine, and such fantasticke humours, as falling from one peruerse opinion to ano∣ther, I grew afterward suspitious of anie occasion whatsoeuer. My Husband was a goodly perso∣nage, of exceeding pleasing speech and vertuous qualities, which made him called to manie companies, lo∣ued and esteemed of euerie one ge∣nerally, and herehence began in me a world of afflictions. Whatsoeuer woman lookt on him, I iudgd her immediatly a riuall in my loue, my thoughts were neuer free from iealous suspition: if he were in my sight, yet I deemed him not sure enough, and what woman lookt vp∣pon him but once, I wisht she might be blinde for euer afterward. I could neuer glut mine owne eyes with sufficient gazing on him, but de∣sired that perpetually they might be
fixed on him, when he came toward me, no woman in the world could be more contented; and let him but go backe againe, I imagined no torment might be so greeuous. My too much reposing trust in him, began to make me distrustfull of my selfe: and, though needlesse suspiti∣on had got some hold of me, as yet it robd me not of my loues felicitie, nor anie way impaired the height of my pleasures. So long these golden howres, daies, months and yeares endured, till for∣tune (enuying my further happines) suffered me to see a certaine Gentle∣woman, who albeit her deserts else where were worthie liking, yet mee thought her familiaritye fitted not with my Husband. Hereupon, as if I had been woun∣ded with a deadly stroke, my face be∣came pale and wan, deepe concei∣ued displeasure sate vppon my brow,
and my former pleasing disposition conuerted into such melancholy, as my Husband (being present) & con∣quered with compassion, gathering by his discretion, what danger here∣by might redound to our loue, both in teares, & other apparant testimo∣nies of sorow, he declared how great∣ly this mishap did discontent him. All which was no appeasing of my furious oppression, but I must needs goe complaine my selfe to my Mo∣ther: who, to witnes her owne expe∣rience, as also to withdraw mee from so vaine a perswasion, affirmed; That shee had both noted and heard their discoursing, meruailing I wold shew my selfe so immodest, as to iudge of honest demeanour so absurdly and rashly, and the Gentlewoman, com∣ming but in kindnes to see mee, my Husband (for my sake) gaue her such entertainment, aswell knowing what became him, farre better than I did.
Her words wanted strength to re∣mooue mine opinion, I reputed it an iniurie, and therefore I would not be otherwise perswaded, but gaue this frantick spleene such souereigntie o∣uer me, that I grew into a wonderfull hatred against him, concluding, ne∣uer after to loue him againe, but ra∣ther greeuing for the affection I had bestowed on him alreadie. And in this heate, I shut vp my selfe to soli∣tude, purposing while I liued to loath mens cōpany: loue now was changd to hate, faire looks to bitter frownes, & all else were my vtter foes, but such whose fortunes did equall mine affli∣ctions. Alas, what fooles are we women, transported vp and downe with these amorous passions? When I percei∣ued my former determination of so∣litarinesse, to haue no likelihood of continuance, then became I deuout and religious, none but Church-go∣ers
might now bee my companions, with them (sister-like) I went from Church to Church, vsing all the meanes I could deuise, to forget the loue of him whom I thought my greatest enemie. And, least conference with ouer-manie, might alter mine intent, I would prattle with dumbe pictures, vowing this day and that day to en∣ter religion, because I would become a sworne aduersarie to loue. See here my silly wisedome, as if I could thus haue left my Husband, at mine owne proper pleasure, being bound to him in the bond of all humilitie & dutie. The verie thoght of Loue, I found wold not agree with the austeritie of Religion; the one, in bitternes, I dee∣med sweet, and the other, in the very best estate, somewhat too sowre. Thus, while with one nayle I thought to expell another, in seek∣ing to quench Loue, I kindled it
more violent, and where I was but sindgd before by the flame, now, in e∣uerie part of me, I felt the fire hotly burning. Thus one while, I would faine be free from Loues mightie thraldome, yet lothe at another, to loose his con∣tinuall amorous seruice, whose verie lookes were my life, and whose ab∣sence was more bitter than a thou∣sand deaths. But I was cunning enough to keep all this close, and seemed outwardly to feele no greefe at all, when (God knowes) how extreamely my poore heart was tormented. Sullen will made me to delight in solitude, darke roomes and obscure vaults would I daily walke in, where, like a witlesse foole, I did nothing else but plague my self, and please others, who in secrete smiled at my peeuish disposition. In the end, being well disciplinde
with mine owne disease, and more wearie of this oppression, than I would the world shuld haue known, I became a little more friendly to my Husband, desiring that still he would keepe me companie, and I might be his glasse continually to gaze on. To ease himselfe of my daily mo∣lestations, and somwhat to sooth me in this friuolous humour, he yeelded to let his owne affaires run lauishly at randome, and suggest my sottishnes with all possible conuersation & ob∣seruance. When I had gotten this vaine vi∣ctorie, it were wonderfull to tell you, how prowde I became thereof, for then I beganne to determine a soue∣raigntie in my selfe, to make my will a law, and his submission the onelye piller to maintaine and vnder-prop it. I grew then into such extremitie of bold and vndecent presumption, that I would esteeme of him as I
list, offend him when I pleased, ha∣uing no other reason, but onely his patient sufferance: if he laughed, I would lowre; if hee spake faire, I would be froward; if hee desired to walke, I would tarrie at home; if he inuited friends to be merrie, I would deuise al the meanes I could to make them malcontent: thus home was a hell to him, abroad, little or nothing better, and I (like a verie diuell) con∣tinually tormenting him. But who sustained the worst al this while? His patience did priuiledge him for inward vexation, so that my selfe bare the burden of this disquiet, and I did my selfe more harme, than I could doo him: for my blood began to drie vp, my mind afflicted with in∣supportable sorrowes, all my veynes seemed as shrunke and wythered, & daily was I subiect to (welneere) ho∣werly swounings. Which my pitti∣ful Husband with great griefe behol∣ding,
my former faire shape to bee so strangely altred, and without any iust cause of offence proceeding from himselfe, he still desired to know the reason of this maladie, & whether it lay in him by any means to help it, or if at him I was thus offended. If not (quoth he) but that your displeasure is kindled against some other, wrong not your selfe with these sharpe tor∣mentings, but let mee reuenge it on whom so ere it be: for it is a debt due to Loue, and a right which hee doth by great reason challenge, that be∣tweene two vnited soules, nothing should bee kept in secret, but the one bee alwayes priuie to the others op∣pressions; because a Louer (in such a case) is to be commaunded, and ei∣thers counsel is not to be scorned, but obeyed as the onely salue to cure any amorous sicknes. But I (euen as it is the nature of ma∣nie other women, neuer to be suffised
with iniury, much lesse with reuenge) one while tooke pride to see him hū∣bled, another while practised how to preuaile more & more against him, smiling to see him so obsequious, & I sit (as it were) controlling ouer him. I wished that he might know the ground of my greefe; yet, if by my speeches hee anie way perceiued it, with stout courage & solemne oaths I would flatly denie it: affirming that he had no way offended me, but the cause of my distemper grew by o∣thers. Then would I shew disdainfull looks, scorne to keep him company, and expresse manifest hatred against him: and so long I continued in these pestilent humors, onely to make him wearie with the weight of this mar∣tyrdome, that I could sing when hee sighed, smile when he wept: & (thogh indeed I lou'd him) yet I took a great pride in these commaunding beha∣uiours.
Thus, though outwardly I appea∣red to bee high minded and imperi∣ous, yet iealozie within kept me hot & fiery, loading me with more migh∣tie molestations, than those foolish conceits of mine could burden him withall: yet still his patience exceed∣ed my presumptions, and the more I grew stubborne, the lesse he cared for it. How sorie haue I been (manie times) within my selfe, that I could not by my disdaines and outrages, prouoke him to anger? I could haue wisht my selfe in hell, to haue gotten him but half way thither. See (poore soules) the folly of our selfe wills. When all the rest preuailed not▪ to plague him as I would, I fell to this wicked purpose, to seeme in outward shew quite weaned from his Loue, and that my affection was inclined to some other; which to make hym the more soundly beleeue, in his sight I would talk idly & fondly with
yong Gallants, to kindle the same fire in him, that flamed so extreamely in mee. Thus after long seeking mine own miserie, at length I found it; and I was not so greedie of compassing it before, but then I would as gladly haue been rid of it againe. Much raine weares out the rough∣est marble, and with continuance of strokes the hardest steele is pierced: euen so, the greatest patience (by ex∣tremities) may be peruerted, and the kindest hart made cruell by intollera∣ble torturing. His loue, which before flamed to∣ward mee like Aetna, became now more cold than frostie Caucasus; his kinde lookes, faire presence, and ad∣mirable sufferance, were now sowre frownes, moodie gestures, & stearne impatience: which (finding to my cost, and feeling to be so cruell) then, each word I had spoken, each deede
I had done, & euery priuate thought which had displeased him, with true teares I bewailed, & with sighes from my soule intirely repented. But what a hell is it, when repen∣tance auailes not? Let me complain, it was to no purpose, though I sighed and sorrowed, it had no successe: his wrongs had been so mightie, and my wilfull transgressions so manie, as I could not but expect a iust deserued punishment, hauing thus (through mine owne folly) procured both his hurt and mine owne. Infortunate wretch, my teares and torments I cannot expresse vnto yee: the nights seemed too long, weary∣ing me with a thousand reuoluings and repentances, the dayes likewise appeared gloomie and dark, because I had no succour but solitude onely. My breast was nothing else but a store-house of cares, griefes and vex∣ations; my thoughts, like distempe∣red
seas, diuersly transported, one while with anger, then with repen∣tance, now with disdaine, then again with loue; now with pittying my self, then him whom I had displeased: I would, and I would not, I wept, plea∣ded excuses, told my selfe the whole storie of my silly behauiour, wishing I could againe haue recouered so much time spent in vaine. At length it was my good fortune, (though all this while I had been so vnhappie) to know for certainty, that my former suspition concerning the Gentlewoman, which had been the cause of my so long discontentment, was nothing els but the folly of mine owne peeuish fancie, and no offence at all committed by my Husband. Had I not then great reason to bee ashamed of my selfe, as one almost vnmeet for anie vertuous company? Iudge you (faire Ladies) that are care∣full of your honours, and would not
haue your good names to bee anie way scandalized: was it time to sub∣mit my selfe speedily or no? & to beg fauour of him, to whom I had beene so farre vnfriendly? But to see how different the nature of men is from vs women, & where true wisedome is embraced, how no malice can haue long predominance: he, who neuer was acquainted with vnciuill disdaine, but euermore de∣spised all franticke follies, vppon my submission vvas immediately satisfi∣ed; all offences past before, vvere presently forgiuen, and as effectually forgotten, as if neuer at all commit∣ted. Then could I not chuse but confes my infirmities, finding that most true vvhich himselfe had alvvaies taught me, that in loue the least suspition is foorthvvith to be disclosed, & a con∣ceit no sooner taken, but presently to be told.
For, a Louers best strength is subiect to much weaknes, and suspition once entered the minde, will hardly with reason or perswasions be mastred. It may bee compared to an Egge, the more it is heated, it wexeth the hard∣er: so iealous suspect, the more it is credited, the worse it is for vs; and the lesse wee regard it, the greater is our quiet. They that pay for experience, as I did, will rue it as I doo; and they that preuent the sweetes of Loue by their own wilfulnes, may wish for them af∣terward, and yet walk without them. My lucke was little better, which I sigh to remember, because when our felicitie began again to be firme, and that now I would not loose the least portion of pleasure, our Countreyes affaires robd mee of my Husbands companie; where, with the losse of him, I would my life had perished.
CAP. 10. THus fals it out with vs (fair Sisters) alas too often, we care not for delight when wee haue it in possession, but would giue our liues for it when it is too farre from vs. See then how manie inconueni∣ences attend on false suspition: suspi∣tion breedes disdaine, disdain couets reuenge, reuenge prosecutes iniuries, which iniuries doo bring the wracke and ruine of all loue delights: this makes our soules opprest with infinit molestations, beeing a more plague to our owne selues, than them wee would offend. Thus in stead of smi∣ling, we sluce foorth whole riuers of teares; for friendly conference, wee vse bitter taunts and tearmes: & loue
being created a heauen, wee make it worse than hell; then shun suspition as a deadly poyson, for that is the on∣ly enemie to true loues felicitie. Seeke not for that which yee will be sorrie for afterward & enquire not too curiously after your Louers liues: for beleeue mee (faire Ladies) if you be wronged in loue, and know it not, the blame is theirs, not yours; and an iniurie endured, is better than one of∣fered. Couet not then to know, what ye cannot wisely gouern: if he be kinde to you, it is sufficient; if he erre with∣out cause, your glorie is the greater. But neuer will hee stray abroad, that findes all well at home; & neuer will he care for another, that may haue his owne in quiet. Without thred, a needle serues to no vse, nor the plesures of loue, with∣out due prosecution: and though a needle haue two, three eyes or more,
by reason whereof it carries as many threds with it, yet it makes but one entrance, marrie it makes the worke the faster: euen so, he that delights to dally with manie, bindes himselfe thereby the more strictly to her hee loues indeed. But happie is she that knowes how to ioy with him whom manie couet to enioy, and she that can skill of ma∣king her self the cheefest, shalbe sure to finde no equall in her loues good fortune. CAP. 11. LOue then (sweete Soules) the men that loue you, be conten∣ted with your liking, and seeke not to know that which will hurt ye: flie suspition, disdaine, and all other proud humors; belieue none but him
loue, if yee wish well to your owne selues: for look what loue ye extend, the like shall ye finde againe, and the firmer ye keepe your faith, the faster shall ye finde his, whom ye haue cho∣sen to affect. Thinke not but mens constancie in loue must needs goe beyond ours, for men bee lesse suspitious than wee are; therefore they haue the greater wisedome and gouernment. They perseuere more than we can, because they are lesse obstinate. They are not so sudden in ill con∣ceit as we be, because they haue bet∣ter courage and loftie disposition. They cannot beare hatred so long as we vse to do, by reason they are of a more magnifique minde, and affa∣ble nature. No hindrance whatsoeuer can stay them in their amorous deseigns, be∣cause their permanencie exceedes ours, and their qualities are not so a∣pish
as ours. Some of vs women are timorous, and the least occasion offered, is our guide to suspition: which friuolous humour makes vs scorne others, al∣beit our owne errours goe farre be∣yond theirs. Each smal offence we seek reuenge for, hauing no moderation in malice and misliking, but liue as capitall e∣nemies to them that loue vs most. We know how to offend, but not to suffer: wee are quickly led into er∣rour, but neuer firme in beleefe, for looke how our opinions are, such bee our behauiours, and an imagi∣nation once setled, is not in haste remooued.
CAP. 12. THis opinion hath alwayes beene the destruction of kindnes. For (as my Hus∣band once told mee) it re∣sembles the Mole, that beeing in the deep earths obscuritie, straies about euerie way, passing thorow the har∣dest molde she meetes withall; now, so soone as she comes but to the day∣light, all her force and strength im∣mediately failes her: euen such in this iealous opinion hid within the darke clowde of an afflicted minde, it ne∣uer ceaseth to remoue fresh thoghts with infinit perturbations: but when truth doth discouer it, it is presently nothing. When ye manifest your conceipt to him yee loue, vsing withall some
reasonable excuse, ye cleare both his doubts and your own dread: encrea∣sing (withall) his affection the more toward ye: for then yee declare, all trust is not remooued, and shew a de∣sire of loue to be continued. Which in like occurrences hapning after∣ward, makes him the more careful of offensiue behauiour; and when oc∣casion is hindred, the lesse wrong can be offered. Whereas on the contrarie, suspect kept within the heart and not reuea∣led, caries ye headlong from one bad conceit to another; and then yee see what mischeefe immediately fol∣lowes. For a man tost in the tempest of continual molestations, if he finde that reason bee vtterly abandoned, though hee giue yee leaue to pursue your head-strong opinions, yet hee will bestow his loue, where hee may finde it in better sort requited. Is not this a faire haruest of such foolish
humours? and a verie meete recom∣pence for such vain and rude demea∣nour? Yee may then sit and sigh, but who will bemone ye? You may crie for comfort, and it flyes the faster from ye. And when this shall come to the cares of others, what censure will they presently passe vpon yee? That ye were rash, indiscreete, vnthankfull and vnkinde: yee were beloued, and despised it; had a true Loue, & knew not how to vse him; therefore wor∣thily do ye beare the burthen of your owne abuses. Others, lesse acquainted with these mightie disgraces, seeing ye not walk as ye were wont, not your Loue kee∣ping yee familiar companie, they iudge as their opinions please them; That; either greater faults are com∣mitted, than may well bee endured, or such imperfections crosse your course, which rather deserue burying
in silence, than publikely to be spoke of, for scandall of the Sexe. CAP. 13. IT may so come to passe, that your Louer being ouer pas∣sionate by reason of your of∣fences, and touched too neere with the piercing point of your continual iniuries, will reuenge himselfe with your shame, and ease his owne op∣pression by your publique defamati∣on. For ye must thus be perswaded, that hee whome your rigours haue brought to an extreame estate, as it were next neighbour euen to deaths doore; will regard your disgrace no more, than you did his disease; and take as little compassion on your ho∣nour, as you did on his life. Remember then (deare Sisters)
that by beeing so vniust, proud, vn∣kinde and disdainfull, the lampe of faire renowme is quite extinguished: and in stead of true loue with the pleasures thertoo pertaining, ye shall receiue but counterbuffes of your owne cruelties, and a iust measure of reuenge, for beeing so desirous to seeke it. Alone shall ye be left without Lo∣uer or Seruant, accompanied onely but with teares and sighes: & where before you suspected a riuall in your loue, you shall then finde your selfe not to be lou'd at all: but, like one cast off and despised, fearing (withall) to be further afflicted. Consider (faire Ladies) the most constant patience (being too far pro∣uoked) conuerteth into furie; and a wrathfull Louer is more to be feared, than a sauage monster that hath no reason.
CAP. 14. HEertoo could I adde diuers other such discommodi∣ties, no lesse to bee respect∣ed, your selues beeing the originall. Yee shall finde that those plesant places, where before ye were wont to passe the time in sport & de∣lights, through want of his compa∣nie that then graced the Assembly, they are become like solitarie deserts, and vnhaunted walkes, not so plea∣sing before, but now as vncouth. A∣las poore soules, what a torment wil it be vnto yee, to see the yeares faire seasons so often wheele about, when ye wer wont to be at amorous sports, sweete conference, and other deli∣cate recreations: now to finde no more, but that ther were such times,
and once yee had a Loue, who made all those delights in their verie chie∣fest luster? For now the times are mi∣serably changed; ye are left compa∣nionlesse, ioylesse, neighboured on euerie side with greefe and calamitie: sighes and teares abound, but return no benefit; manie eyes looke on, but none lending pittie; and that which indeed is the verie worst of all, aban∣doned by him, who was your liues solace, & bayted at by euerie one for a course so carelesse. Then bee no more (sweete Sisters) like to blowen bladders, puft vp with proud opinion and needlesse suspiti∣on, seeking therby to make conquest of your Louers. What victorie call yee that, which hurteth your owne selues, and bringeth (beside) the losse of your Loue? Striue to vanquish & surmount him in loyaltie and kind∣nes, and then the victorie will bee to eithers profit.
It is a farre greater emperie, to make your selues belou'd by louing, than reaching thereat by sinister waies, to procure your Louers da∣mage, and your owne downfall: for in nothing is a gentle & braue minde more to be discerned, than in lenitie, humanitie, pittie, and affabilitie; where contrariwise, loathsome dis∣daine breedes all inciuilitie, and none but a wicked minde dooth nourish such thoughts, as knowing neither how to reuenge, nor how to pardon. Then least yee should fall into such misfortune, & haue your faire names blemished by so foule a blot, follow the courses I haue alreadie declared, giue your selues to loue truly, and yee shall finde loue againe as truly. Chuse a Louer as I haue aduised ye, neither yong nor old, modest and vertuous: win his loue by gentlenes and all faire behauiour; so shall yee still preserue Loue in his cheefest so∣ueraigntie,
and make the issue there∣of peacefull and glorious. CAP. 15. REmember heer withall, that your quiet will be the more effectuall, if so soone as a fond suspition is conceiued, yee seeke for immediate resolution therein, remaining firme and immo∣uable in your selues, as also toward him whom your hart hath elected, as knowing the benefite that ensues by the one, and the vnrecouerable losse hapning by the other. And, affecting thus with intyrest faith, diligent obseruaunce, and all kindes of gracious vsage: the mise∣ries and mishaps attending on proud opinion, which is the vtter ship∣wrack & perishing of loue, can neuer
preuaile against yee, but howrely ioy and felicitie euermore await on ye. CAP. 16. HAd I more leasure, I would teach yee manie other rules to be obser∣ued in loue: but I see the Comedie is in some for∣wardnes, & the Personages ready at∣tyred that are to present it: then till some other time & place conuenient wil I refer what remains as yet vndis∣couered, as hauing not gone throgh a quarter of the hundred kindes of loue. In meane while, sweet Sisters, shew your selues pleasing and tracta∣ble to your Louers, be not offensiue to them, and thereby hurtfull to your selues. Be warned by the multitude of so many exāples, change not plesure
for paine, solace for sighing, and all loues heauen, for foule hates hell. As ye desire to be beloued, so shew you the like: no enchauntment, no hearbe, no charme preuailes so much in loue, as the verie power of an im∣moouable affection. Loue then, and shun all misbeliefe of your Louer, then will he embrace ye with all due correspondence: dis∣robe your selues of iealous doubts, disdaines and opinions; so shal your liues bee matchlesse, and your Loues im∣mortall. Tutto vince Amare. FINIS.
