3571 20190593 23781
NATVRES EMBASSIE: OR, THE WILDE-MANS MEASVRES: Danced naked by twelue Satyres, with sundry others continued in the next Section. Wilde men  dance wise measur; Come then , Though I  wilde, my measures are not so. Printed for Richard Whitaker. 1611
TO THE ACCOM∣PLISHED MIRROR OF TRVE worth, Sr. T. H. the elder, knight, pro∣fessed fauorer and furtherer of all free∣borne studies: continuance of all happinesse. WHen the natures of men are cleere peruerted, then it is high time for the Satyrist to pen som∣thing which may diuert them from their impietie, and direct them in the course and progresse of Vertue; vp∣pon which consideration, I, (as the meanest Me∣nalchas that is able to play vpon an oaten pipe) began presently to describe the nature of Men, made so farre good by obseruation, as my weake and immature iudgement could attaine vnto; meaning to make the Poets verse an Axiome: Scribimus indocti, docti{que} poemata passim. This thus discussed and weyed, I was long in doubt to whom I should dedicate this vnfruit∣full vintage, rather gleanings, or whō I should
flie vnto for sanctuarie, if the sinister Reade (as who euer wrote without his Detractour) should carpe at my labours. Wherefore standing longer in suspence then the matter required,  picked forth your selfe, most able to weaue an Apologie for your friends defects. Let not there∣fore the maleuolent censures of such men whose chiefest eye-sores be other mens workes, and whose choisest content is to blemish them with imperfections, receiue the least countenance from you, whose iudgement by giuing these my labours approbation, shal be a greater argument of their merit, then their partiall censures shall argue their want. Hiparchion was graced as well as Musaeus, though the best of his measures was but piping to the Muses. For the paines of well-affected Authors neuer faile of patrons (at least amongst ingenuous men) to protect thē, of fauorites to second them, or guardians du∣ring their minoritie to foster them. And such is your integritie and true loue to learning, that the meanest sheepheard if the flie for refuge vn∣der your shelter, shall be accepted aboue the mea∣sure of his deserts, or meanes of his hopes. For without question, if your acceptance did not far exceed the height and weight of my Discourse, Quid hic nisi vota supersunt? there would no∣thing remaine for me, but to fall to my prayers,
in beseeching the kind & vnkind Reader (like our penurious pamphlet Orator) to commiserate my Treatise, and in stead of a narration, to make a publike supplication: but being protected by the singular care and prouiding eye of your fauours; —Maior sum quàm cui potuit fortuna nocere. I haue penned this short Discourse, interwo∣uen with history as well as poesie, for two things summarily, and especially for the first thereof. The first is the iniquitie of this present time wherein we liue: so that Nature had either time now to send an Ambassage or neuer: since At{que} homines prodigia reru maxima. Mulier formosa superne desinit in piscem— Such is the course of degenerate Nature, that in a conceipt of her selfe she thinks she can mend her selfe by being adorned with vnnaturalized ornaments, which Nature neuer apparelled her with. The second reason is the motion of a priuate friend of mine, whose pleasure may com∣mand my whole meanes, yea my selfe to the vt∣termost of my abilitie. These reasons haue I alledged, lest my Preface should seeme naked of Reason, which were ridiculous to the reasonable Reader, and to you especially, whose maturitie in arguments of this Qualitie, hath gained you a deserued Opinion, enabled by Iudgement, of power to counteruaile the censures of others lesse
iudicious. Thus tendring you the fruites of m Reading compiled, and in manner digested, no out of selfe-conceit, but aime to publique goo intended, Irest. From my studie. May 24. Yours to dispose Richard Brathwayt.
The distinct ubihct of euery Satyre, contained in either Section: with an exact suruey or dis∣play of all such Poems, as are couched or compiled within this Booke. 1. DEgeneration, personated in Nature. 2. Pleasure, in Pandora. 3. Ambition, in the Giants. 4. Vaine-glory, in Craesus. 5. Crueltie, in Astiages. 6. Adulterie, in Clytemnestra. 7. Incest, in Tereus. 8. Blaspemie, in Caligula. 9. Beggarie, in Hippias. 10. Miserie, in Taurus. 11. Hypocrisie, in Claudius. 12. Excesse, in Philoxenus; with three funerall E∣picedes, or Elegiack Sestiads. The second Section. 1. Sloth, in Elpenor. 2. Corruption, in Cornelia. 3. Atheisme, in Lucian. 4. Singularitie, in Steichorus. 5. Dotage, in Pigmalion. 6. Partialitie, in Pytheas. 7. Ingratitude, in Periander. 8. Flatterie, in Terpnus. 9. Epicurisme, in Epicurus. 10. Briberie, in Diagoras.
11. Inuention, in Triptolemus. 12. Disdaine, in Melonomus. 13. Idolatrie, in Protagoras. 14. Tyrannie, in Eurysteus. 15. Securitie, in Alcibiades. 16. Reuenge, in Perillus. 17. Mortalitie, in Agathocles. 18. In Nasonem Iuridicum. Mythologia. Two short moderne Satyres. Pastorall tales, or Eglogues. Omphale, or the inconstant shepheardesse. ODES. 1. The Trauellour. 2. The Nightingale. 3. The Lapwing. 4. The Owle. 5. The Merlin. 6. The Swallow. 7. The fall of the leafe. With two conclusiue Poems, entituled Brittans Blisse. And an Encomion to the Common Law: or, Arete∣nomia.
The first Argument. NAture the common mother (to vse an Ethnicke induction) bree∣deth diuers effects, according to the constitution of each particu∣lar bodie, being composed and compacted of that Matter wher∣to we shall returne, being Earth. Now though Nature (as with the Morall Philosopher I may say) neuer is deceiued, as she is considered in her owne frame, bringing forth alwayes men able to the performing of humane functions, faire in pro∣portion and state of their bodies, apt for the atchi∣uing of anie matter either publike or priuate: yet notwithstanding, manie times by euents and ac∣cidents, diuers deformities & blemishes appeare, which by Nature were not decreed to be: and like are the maleuolent affections arising from the di∣stempered qualitie of the minde. And whereas many in the corruption of their erring opinions and reasonlesse arguments, haue auerred how Na∣ture is the primarie mouer, conseruer and preseruer, yet Seneca will tell you, that it is God that wor∣keth these things which we ascribe to a fained Deitie; and that Nature differeth no more from God or God from Nature, then Annaeus from Vide Epist. ad Lucil. Seneca:
as he speaketh in his naturall Questions, and in his bookes of Benefiting. But this was the opinion of such as had not the supreme light of deuine knowledge to them reuealed, but such as wor∣shipped whatsoeuer they thought was a guider or director of them, or by custome (how ridicu∣lous soeuer) was traduced to them. So we mayVide Episto. A∣lex and▪ de situ & statu Indiae. reade in the ancient historians, of the Egyptians who adored whatsoeuer they thought comely, as the Sunne, the Moone, the starres and inferiour lights. Others worshipped trees, stockes, stones, and venimous serpents. Thus did the brutish affe∣ctions of vnnaturall men shew their Gods by de∣ciphering an heauenly power or influence, in Branches and such workes of Nature. But these though in no wise excusable, may admit some reasonable defence, forasmuch as their conceipt could reach no further. For as Zenophanes saith, IfZenophanes. beasts could paint, they would pourtray God to their owne shape and feature, because they could conceiue no further. And this is the cause why the Heathen a∣dored their plants, starres, and such creatures, in∣asmuch as they could not reach nor attaine to the knowledge of an higher Deitie. But to conferre them, that is, the Heathen and prophane people with the now-being Christians, it will seeme wonderfull, if I make manifest by relation had to their liues, how the depraued conditions of our Christians now adayes (whose knowledge giues them assurance of Eternitie) walke in as great blindnesse and palpable darknes as euer the Hea∣thenThe occasion of this Treatise. did. And since the matter is most apparent,
high time it is for Nature to send her Embassie to this Age for her Reformation. THE FIRST SATYRE. THou wicked lumpe in a deformed guise, Tripping like Hymen on his wedding day, Nature thy former Insolence defies, Saying thou errest from her natiue way: For all thy foolish wayes are baits to Prima est qu si tittillato de lectationis in corde, secund confensio, te tium factum e consuetudo. Aug. Serm. 44. sin, Where vertue droupes, and vice comes dancing in. Doth not thy habite shew thy wanton mind, Forward to all things but to vertuous life: Passing those bounds which Nature hath assign'd, Twixt Art and Nature by commencing strife? I tell thee, Nature sends me to represse Thy foolish toyes, thy inbred wantonnesse. But thou wilt say, Nature hath made me faire, Should I rob Beautie of her proper due? Should I not decke her with  à natur corrumpitur a arte. embroidred haire, And garnish her with Flora's vernant hue? I must, I will, or else should I disgrace With a rent maske the beautie of my face. But I will answer thee for all thy beautie: If thou wilt be an Ape in gay attire, Thou doest not execute that forme of dutie, Which Nature at thy hand seemes to require: Which not redrest, for all thy goodly port, Thou must be stript, and whipt, and chastisd for't.
Nature hath sent me to foreware thy we, Lest thou secure of thy distresse, reioyce: If thou wax Sequitur su∣perbos vltor à ergo Deus. proud, then where so ere thou go Thou shalt decline: this resteth in thy choice, Whether to die branded by Infamie, Or to preserue thy life in memorie. This thus obserued, wilt thou yet be proud? And grow ambitious, bearing in thy brow The stampe of honour, as if thou hadst vow'd No grace on thy inferiours to bestow? Proud minikin let fall thy plumes, and crie Nature, I honour will thy Embassie. It was a good time when Eue spun her threed, And Adam Pastinatio deuinum opus. Hesiod. digg'd to earne his food thereby: But in this time Eues do their panches feed, With daintie dishes mouing luxurie. That was the golden age, but this is lead, Where vice doth flourish, vertue lieth Damnosa quid non immi∣nuet dies? aetas parentis peior est uis, &c. dead. This therefore is my message pend by Truth, Erected in the honour of Dame Nature, Inueying gainst Pride, whose aspiring grouth Disfigureth the beautis of the creature: Thus haue I spoken that which Nature mou'd me, Directed to thee, for Dame Nature lou'd thee.
The Argument. HEsiod reporteth how Pandora was sent from Iupiter to deceiue mankind, at least to make triall of his frailtie, by the free proffers of her bounty, sending her full fraught with all Pleasures, to the end some thereof might ensnare and insensate the minds and affectiōs of the then liuing and inhabiting Arcadians, to whom her message was principally addressed, as appeareth in the first booke of his Opera & dies. This Pandora is voluptuous, (though her name signifie munificence, or an vniuersall exhibitresse of all gifts) sent to enthrall and captiuate the ap∣petites and affections of men, to the intent they might yeeld themselues vassals and bondslaues to all sensuall desires, foments of impietie, or agents of immodestie. And Pandora seemeth to make this speech or oration vnto them, as an introduction formally handled, for their pleasure & delectation. Louing Arcadians, if this spacious world now so specious (whilome an indigested chaos) were first ordained for a place of libertie, do not you make it a cage of restraint. It was the will of Nature, who not onely founded but disposed of this vni∣uerse as you see, that Men the hope of her loines and ioy of her life, should liue deliciously, and not be enfeebled by strict & rigorous abstinence the
Mother of diseases, ng and nourishing many grosse, and maleuolent humours, whereby the health vseth to be empaired, and the whole state of your bodies dissolued. Wherefore Iupiter as your common prouider, foreseeing those mise∣ries which were incident before my coming to all mankind, hath now appointed Me as Deputie to bring this message vnto you, that from hence∣forth you should wallow in pleasures and delights according to your owne desires and affections. Let not fruitlesse Abstinence be a meanes to re∣straine you, or Teperance a chaine to withhold you, but like Talassioes companions bid conti∣nencie adieu, and make haste to lasciuious mee∣tings: for to make recourse to the principall de∣light of a knowing man, Contemplation, is it not tedious to spend a mans time in studie or endlesse speculation? Yes certainly, nothing can be worse then to waste mans life like Epictetus lampe; no∣thing better then to cōsume mans daies in Polixe∣nus cell. And though Epictetus may say, -Semper aliquid discens senesco, alwayes learning I grow a∣ged, yet Polixenus may auerre a matter though of lesse consequence, yet a practise of more self-for∣getting chearfulnesse,—Semper aliquid bibens, nihil extimesco, alwayes drinking I am cheered. So that nothing can abash Polixenus, nothing can dismay him: for his daily practise exempts him from me∣ditation of griefe, being as remote from danger as he stands secure for honour, making euery day his owne prouider, and standing as respectlesse of posteritie as he is carelesse in hoording Treasure.
He is happie, and free from dangers menacing a∣broad, or aspiring thoughts (Ambitions subtilest traines) vndermining at home. But Epictetus feare proceedeth from the height of his knowledge, fearing Death the abridgement of knowledge: yet fearelesse of Death it selfe, for it is nothing; but the issue of Death making his knowledge no∣thing. Polixenus none can disturbe; for his minde is fixed on that obiect which is placed before him; since Nature hath alotted him meate, drinke and apparell, he respects no more. Yet as rich as Bias, for he can sing,—Omnia mea mecum porto. But simple Epictetus, who reposeth so great trust in his Contemplatiue part, whereto auailes his studie? whereto tendeth this Speculation? since Art hath made him no wiser then to make no dif∣ference betwixt wine and water. Neither hath Art made him any thing the richer: for his Lan∣terne is of more value then all the rest of his sub∣stance. Then as you will haue regard to your estate or to the health of your delicate bodies, ponder the effect of my Oration, and reape those sensible delights made yours by fruition, in contempt of Stoicke and strict contemplation. When Pandora had made this plausiue Oration, mans minde (by an inbred appetite to what is pleasant) was soone addicted and inclined to the premises; exclaiming with Herodian, that it was a difficult thing to subdue a mans affections. Wher∣fore no sooner was Pandora gone, but presently they Subsideba autem in imo vase, sps. began to cast off the reines of discipline, ex∣posing themselues to follie and all recreancie.
Now see into the Morall hereof, how Man is most addicted to that which in it owne nature is most depraued, alwayes saying with Medaea in the Tragedie,—video melior a probóque Deteriora sequor. Such is the crookednesse of mans nature, that he is prone to the worse part, and consequently like foolish Epimetheus readie to receiue Argici∣da's rewards, subiects of impietie and lasciuious desires, as Ad Epyme∣thea Iupiter misit inclytum Argicidam, mu∣nera ferentem deorū celerem nuncium, &c. Hesiod reporteth of him. Iupiter sent cunning Argicidas to Epimetheus, with intent to ensnare his affections with the faire shew of such pleasant Floremiuuen∣tutis non deci∣duum. rewards as he brought with him; namely tempting obiects like Athalantaes apples, whereby she was deluded, her speed fore-slowed, becoming a prey to Pomoeis that subtile courser as he him∣selfe wished. Such are the gifts of Nature, which oft bewitch the mind of the receiuer. So that Elpenor was ne∣uer more deformed (whose feature became the prodigie of Nature) then He who suffereth his minde (the light of his body) to be by these gifts besotted. For first he takes a view of them; then he desires them, and after the desire he entertaines them. Which receit is no sooner made, then Cyr∣ces with her Cup, or the Syrens with their voyce, inchant these poore eompanions of Ulisses: but he who Ulisses-like stands firme, and not to be re∣moued by any fond alluremēt, carrying with him that Homerus in Odiss. Moli or herbe of grace by which all charmes are frustrated, shall be a spectator of his Compa∣nions misery, in himselfe secured while they are
splitted, which I, in this second Satyre briefly and compendiously collected (as well by reading as obseruation seconded) haue by a morall inference in some sort declared. THE SECOND SATYRE. Pandora the inchantresse. PAndora, shall she so besot thy mind, That nothing may remaine for good instruction? Shall she thy mind in chaines and fetters bind, Drawing thee onward to thy owne destruction? Be not so foolish, lest thou be oretaken, And in thy shipwracke liue as one forsaken. For though that Nature which first framed thee, Seeme to winke at thy crimes a day or two, Yea many yeares, yet she hath blamed thee For thy offences, therefore act no more. Though she delay assure thee she will call, And thou must pay both vse and principall. She smileth at thy locks brayded with gold, And in derision of thy selfe-made shape, Who would beleeue (saith Bella es noui∣mus & puella, verū est: & di∣uos: Quis enim potest negare Sed dum te ni∣mium fabulla laudas, nec di∣ues, neque bel∣la, nec puella es. Martial. in Epigram. she) this is but mold, Who trips the streets like to a golden Ape? Nature concludes, that Art hath got the prize, And she must yeeld vnto her trumperies. For I haue seene (saith Nature) what a grace Art puts vpon me, with her painted colour: How she Nonne vul∣gatuin est bo∣nas formas co∣russa deuenu∣stare Pic. Mi∣ran. in Epist. Vermillions ore my Maiden-face,
Now nought so faire, though nought before was fouler; Indeed I am indebted to her loue, That can giue mouelesse Natur e menes to moue. Thou black-fac'd Trull, how dar'st thou be so bold, As to create thy selfe another face? How dar'st thou Natures feature to controle, Seeking by Art thy former to disgrace? By heauens I loath thee for thy Panthers skin, Since what is faire without is foule within. Indeed thou art ashamed of thy forme: And why? because of beautie thou hast none; Nay rather grace, by which thou may'st adorne Thy inward part, which chiefly graceth one; "Complaine of Nature (gracelesse) and despaire, "Since she hath made thee foule, but others faire. But yet thou wilt be faire, if Talis ornatus non est Dei. painting may Affoord thee grace and beautie in thy brow: Yet what auailes this fondling? for one day Painting will ceasse: though painting flourish now; "Itch not then after fashions in request, "But those that comeliest are, esteeme them best. Yet for all this, I pittie thee poore soule, In that Dame Nature hath not giuen thee beautie: Hang downe thy head like to a desart Owle, Performe in no case to her shrine thy dutie: Vnto her altar vow no sacrifice, Nor to her deitie erect thine eyes.
Thou hast good cause for to lament thy birth; For none will court thee smiling at thy feature, But prize thee as the refuse vpon earth, Since on my faith thou art an vglie creature, Yet ill wine's good when it is in the caske, And thy face faire oreshadow'd with a maske. O be contented, with thy forme, thy feature, Since it is good enough for wormes repast, Yeelding thy due vnto the shrine of Nature, The fairest faire must yeeld to death at last! Thinke on thy mould, and thou wilt seriously Receiue the charge of Natures Embassie. The Argument. IF I should intreate of such affaires as rather con∣ferre vnto a warlike discourse, then reforming of the multiplicity of errors raging & reigning in this Age, strangely depraued, and in the vniuersall state of her body distempred, I might seeme to make an vnprofitable messenger in this weighty Embassie: but to that end haue I chosen such matter as may be a motiue for the furtherance of this mine assay. When this—indigesta moles, this vnseasoned peece of matter had first receiued some forme or fashion, then presently as it increased in yeares, so it began to adorne it selfe with a comely pre∣sence,
attired modestly without affectatiō, seeme∣ly without curiositie, simply without the vanitie of Art, knowing, what was shame without an artifi∣ciall blush. So that those dayes well deserued the name of—golden Age: for—redeunt Saturniaregna. But afterward by a degenerate, rather vnnaturall course (as what is not corrupted in time, if we con∣sider her originall puritie) A certaine kind of people,The Giants. Caeus, Iapetus, Typhaeus. as extraordinarie in proportion for their great∣nesse, so of vnbounded mind for their ambition and boldnesse, began first to wage battell with the gods immortall: till the gods perceiuing their stout and aspiring natures, ouerthrew them in their own practises: for they did—Imponere Pelion Ossae. Tumble mount Pelion vpon Ossa, whereby they might reach euen vnto heauen: but the gods made those mountaines the Giants sepulchers; where they lie (vnder those vast hils) and euery seuenth yeare, as the Poets faine—Sub tanti oneris immen∣sa mole corpora subleuantes, & eorum opera perperam aggressa execrantes, they lie vnder the weight of so great a burthen to giue them a sensible touch of their former ambition. Not without an excellent morall inclusiuely shadowed, and fitly applied to such ambitious heads who are alwayes aspiring high, till with the Giants they be cast downe, lea∣uing no other monument to posteritie, saue dishonour, the due guerdon of their impietie. And surely who shall but consider the diuerse singular ends and purposes wherto those pregnant fictions of the Poets were addressed, wittily and emphati∣cally
expressing their seuere and impartiall judge∣ments, iustly inflicted on offendors, shall see in them a wonderfull inuention, and a continuall discourse, proceeding forward without any al∣teration, tedious digression, or materiall diffe∣rence in the relation. Againe, to obserue the re∣uerence which euen the Pagan Authors vsed to∣ward their gods, beginning no worke of what consequence soeuer, without inuocation of their fained deities, would moue in vs a more serious admiration. So that as Valerius Maximus saith,—Ab loue optimo maximo orsi sunt prisci oratores: The ancient Orators vsed alwayes to begin their works in their forme of pleading, with an auspicious Iu∣piter, whereby their workes might haue good suc∣cesse and proceeding. So may I say, by a present application had to these times, that as our best-pro∣mising labours become fruitlesse, vnlesse the Almightie prosper and giue them successe: so by necessarie conse∣quence, whosoeuer falleth into contempt and de∣spising of God immortall, shall haue his purposes defeated, and vtterly vanquished with the fore∣named Giants. Wherefore my third Satyre shall inueigh against such as in contempt of God (gi∣antlike) practise not onely to pull him from his throne by violence, but blaspheme him through a forlorne and godlesse insolence, and as though God had not the power to reuenge, will exte∣nuate his power and lessen his maiestie.
THE THIRD SATYRE. THou wicked Caitiffe proud of being nought, Wilt thou prouoke thy God to strike thee down Since he with care and labour hath thee sought, And diuerse fauours in his mercy showne? Do not draw downe the viols of his ire, Lest he reward thy sinne with quenchlesse fire. Thou sillie worme compact of slimie mud, Which shalt returne to earth from whence thou can Thou which conceiued was of corrupt bloud, Thou wormlin, how dar'st thou reuile his name? Farwell thou gracelesse Impe, thou saplesse branch, Borne to contemne thy God, to cram thy panch. Thou Epicure, that liu'st in liuing ill, Liuing by louing to stretch forth thy gut, Taking more pleasure thy deepe panch to fill, Then in thy maker confidence to put: Thou f thy feeding shalt receiue thy food, Amongst such vipers as shall sucke thy bloud. It is the nature of the viperous brood, To be the athor of their parents death; Like an Horse-leach. Hyrudo they do sueke their bloud, And take away that breath, which gaue them brea Thou Vipera viperae mortem adfert. Plin. in natur. Hist. dum pario, perio. ibidem. Praemorso Ma∣ris capite parit vipera. viperlike dsel auns thy parents name, As though to vtter him thou thought it shame. Shame on thy naming, if thou wilt denie Him, who first gaue thee breath and vit all spirit,
Him, who can giue thee true tranquillitie, Him, who will shew thee meanes how to inherit; Leaue off thy foolish fantasies, be wise, Lift vp thy eyes to him who gaue thee eyes. But if (vngratefull wretch) thou feele his grace, Yet wilt not yeeld him thanks for all his loue, Be sure he will auert his diuine face, And all his wonted mercies cleane remoue; So thou the swine that breakes the acorne-shell, Regardest not the tree from whence they fell. Be warn'd by Gaeus, who with Giants power, Thought with his fellowes to Saying with Tiridates in Ta∣citus: Sua retinere, priuatae domus, de alienis cer∣tare regia laus est. clime vp to heauen, But vanquish'd by his power doth all deuoure, Under the ruggie mount aines are laid euen, Therefore beware, aspire thou not so high, Lest thou lie low, where those same Giants ly. Thou art a shadow, God the substance is,Auicen. Tho. in quest. Aug. in Pelag. Yet insubstantiate, whose Deitie Doth comprehend all things, for all are his, Yet he is not Continet om∣nia tamen non continetur ab aliquo. contain'd most certainely, For he is infinite in qualitie, Endlesse in loue, boundlesse in quantitie. As for his presence, it is euery where, On Terrae Mari∣que Deus est, nec terrae Ma∣riue homo est, qui nouit vbi Deus non ost. sea, on land, and in the depth of depths, His prouidence in each place doth appeare, His meroie is for generations kept, Wilt thou (fond foole) contemne his heauenly power, Who gouernes thee, point, moment, minute, houre.
What though so many will entice to euill, And in plaine tearmes denie the Deitie? Let them remaine as fuell for the diuell, Confesse thou still his power effectually: Looke in the Planets, and the starres, whose light, Giues record of his power, signes of his might. If thou looke vpward, bodies there be manie, Yet trouble they not one anothers motion, If thou looke downward, there the Threatning earth with in∣undations, yet bounded in with her banks as with a girdle. Sea doth moue thee Beating the shores, while shores beate backe the Ocean Looke to the earth, and thou wilt wonder there, To see a Ball so firmely hang in Aire. But if these motiues limit not thy will, Then I'le endorse this in thy forlorne brow, How with thine owne hand, thou thy bloud doest spill, The fruites whereof thy punishment shall show. Denie not him who neuer did deny, For thy default vpon the Crosse to die. The Argument. IT is reported of Croesus, that he sent for Solon, well perceiuing that he was esteemed the wisest in Greece: to the intent he might see him placed in his maiesty, pompe, and great solemnity. When Solon was come, he demanded of him, whom he
thought to be the happiest man in the world; not doubting but he would conclude him to be the happiest, considering the magnificence of himself, the admiration of his attendants, & the security of his state, grounded on such powerfull alliance. So∣lon (contrary to his expectance) replyed, He could iudge none truly happie before his death,—Ne∣minem ante obitum faelicem esse arbitror. Yet Croesus would not let him go so, but demanded further: whom he thought then liuing to be the happiest; whereto answered Solon, Tellus; & who next saith Croesus? Next to Tellus do I esteeme Cleobis & Bi∣ton (who died in the very performance of parentall obedience:) & so forward without the least men∣tion made of Croesus felicitie. Whereby it seemed that Croesus was much offended, though he cōcea∣lde his anger for that present time, lest the foolish conceipt of his selfe-esteemed happinesse should become palpable. But within short time afterward He found Solons saying most true: for being taken prisoner by Cyrus the Persian king, he was grie∣uously punished, & restrained by straite seuere im∣prisonmēt, till such time as a day was appointed for Croesus death: & being to be set vpon the fagot, & ready to suffer death, he cried forth: O Solon, Solon, vera sunt quae dixisti neminem ante obitum faelicem: Cyrus hearing these words, and enquiring the meaning of them, presently deliuered him, answe∣ring: & ea quoque mihi euenire possunt. Conside∣ring the state of mans life to be vncertaine, and that none ought to plant his hopes vpon that sta∣bilitie of fortune in terrene affaires, as to promise
himselfe security in his state, or continuance of successe for one victorie atchieued: seeing her wings are not clipped, that her flight should be restrained, nor to any Prince so particularly enga∣ged, that he onely should be by her attended. In briefe, as the onely hope of the vanquished con∣sists in the expectance of all extremitie: so is it the principall glory of the Conquerour, to moderate his fortune by a mild and tempreate bearing of himselfe to the conquered. Hence also haue wee sufficient argument of reproofe, towards such as take pleasure or delight in their abundance, as Croesus did, so as their minds become drowned, hauing no respect to the eternitie promised. The reason is, they repose their beatitude and felicity in things transitorie and vncertaine, not looking vp to the Author of all blisse and happinesse, who is the director and protector of all men, disposing them to the line and leuell of his blessed will, by expecting them foreslowing, inuiting them re∣sisting, recalling them wandering, and embra∣cing them returning: without whose aide our strength is weakenesse, without whose light our sight is blindnesse, and without whose grace our endeuours are fruitlesse. For alas, what is mans di∣rection but distraction, what is his knowledge but imperfection, and what is the best of his re∣solution but confusion, wanting his gracious pre∣uention that giueth to each worke a happy period and conclusion? Especially in this curious and in∣tricate Labyrinth of mans life, wherein many Cymmerian windings (to wit, priuate seduce∣ments)
are framed and cunningly contriued by that subtil-winged Dedalus. So as miserably are we forced to erre and stray, vnlesse by Ariadnes threed, that is, the heauenly light of Gods illumi∣nating Spirit, we be directed and conducted in this vast Theatre of intricacy, to the flowrie Eden of endlesse felicitie. For without that all working po∣wer, we are ouerwhelmed with darknesse, not a∣ble to attaine to the comfort of our soules, to en∣ioy the fruition of eternall consolation in the life to come. To shew you the worthie intendments and re∣solutions of the Ancient, would but make a flou∣rish without effect: as by way of illustration ex∣amplefide in mortification, to shew you how Ori∣gen made himselfe an Eunuch, Democritus put out his owne eyes, Crates cast his monie into the sea, Thracius cut downe all his vines. Seeing then that to examplifie a mans writings in these daies, is but to beate the aire, vnlesse inuection or a bitter Sa∣tyre moue it, I will make haste to runne into my former reprehension, since with Iuuenall I may well conclude, Spite of our teeth when vice appeares in sight, We must the Satyres play, and tartly write: Where a good Poets greatest difficultie, is to re∣straine himselfe from Satyricall poesie; for impiety like a tetter vniuersally spreading, is such, as no man but he will either be a gamester or a specta∣tor in gaming: either wanton or a fauou∣rite of wantonnesse: therefore now or ne∣uer:
—Rumpantur Ilia Codri, Inuidia. Now to our Satyre. THE FOVRTH SATYRE. THou happie Croesus in thy heapes of gold, Erect thy selfe a God vpon thy throne, Let it be framed of a purer mold, Then of the Pumice, or the marble stone: Let it be honor'd euen in Croesus name, Since golden Croesus did erect the same. Wilt thou indeed, be honour'd for a god, And with the starres aray thy Princely head? Be sure ere long to feele an iron rod: To crush thee downe, and thy accursed seede. For if thou do denie Qui in Deum delinquit, eum relinquit. thy God his right, He will depriue thy power, abridge thy might. Art thou a crauling worme, a feeble creature, And yet dost thinke thy selfe a god on earth? Canst thou so easily transforme thy nature: Chang'd to immortall, from a mortall birth? Poore simple gull, a cockhorse for this god, No god but Homines cum hominibus san∣guinem & ge∣nus miscent. man, whose sinnes deserue Gods rod. Star-staring earthling, puff'd with insolence, Conceipted of thy selfe without desert, Comparing with the Deuine excellence, For which thy follie, thou shalt feele the smart;
Do not Quicquid à vobis minor extimescet, Maior hoc vobis dominus minatur. thinke God will suffer thee to raigne, That sleights his workes, and takes his name in vaine. And as for Croesus, if he liue for aye, Then will I thinke he is a god indeed: But he ere long shall haue a dying day, And be inclosed in an earthly weede. Therefore fond Croesus, thinke but of thy gold, As rusticke people of the vilest mold. Yet thou mayst The different betwixt the poor wanting, and rich not vsing, by these two expressed, the one carendo, the ther non fruendo. vse it Croesus, to thy good, So thou repose no confidence therein, So thou abuse it not, it is allow'd, Abuse, not vse, is Author of the sinne. Be not deceiu'd through any false pretence, To hoord vp coine, and hurt thy conscience. This is a simple traine, a net for fooles, Not able to deceiue the Sapiens ipse fingit fortunat sibi. wiser men. Fishes be sooner catcht, in glistring pooles, Then in a troubled creuise, marsh or fen, But wisest fishes, neuer will appeare,Lucan. in bell. Phar. Where they perceiue the smallest cause of feare. Thus is the forme of wisedome well explaned, Euen in a Christall glasse most eminent, Wherein our distinct natures are contained, As in a Table aptly pertinent, How that bewitch'd we are in seeming good, And that prooues poyson which we tooke for food.
This is my Satyre, Croesus which I send thee, To th'end thou mayst admonish'd be of this; I hope my Satyre will in time amend thee, And draw thy mind from earth-opinion'd blisse. Wherefore farewell, and if thou wilt be blessed, Flie from this rust, by it thy mind's oppressed. The Argument. TRogus Pompeius relateth in his generall Hi∣storie, how Astyages dreamed that there sprong a vine forth of the wombe of his daughter Mandanes, whose broad-spreading branches o∣uershadowed all Asia, wherefore to take away the ground and foundation of his feare, hauing vnderstood by the Magi, that by the vine was inti∣mated Cyrus, who should ouershadow all Asia with his victorious and conquering hand, he commanded Harpagus one of his priuie Coun∣sell to take the babe and slay it, that whatsoeuer his dreame imported, might by this meanes be preuented: but Harpagus more cōpassionate then Astiages (though too remorcelesse) exposed it to the crueltie of sauage beasts, where (so carefull is nature of her owne) it found more pittie in the wild forrest, then in his grandfathers Pallace, be∣ing for some dayes nourished by a she-wolfe or
bitch, (whence Nurses to this day reserue the name of Spacon,) and after found by one Faustu∣lus a shepheard, was deliuered to his wife to be brought vp and nursed: which she, delighted with the chearfull countenance of the child, did accor∣dingly, till in tract of time Cyrus came to the vn∣expected height of an Empire, and fullfilled those predictions and Prophecies which were formerly spoken of him. This Argument haue I culled, to the end my Satyre, vsing the liberty of so materiall an Argument, may inueigh against such as seeke by all wayes to dilate and propagate the borders and bounders of their kingdome, (not respecting the meanes, so they may attaine the end) or strengthen the continuance of their vniust claime by sinisterHe siod. in ope ri: & die. meanes: not vnlike to Polynices and Eteocles in the Tragedie; who though they were brethren, euen the haplesse children of wofull Oedipus, yet could they not content themselues with their peculiarPolynices & Eteocles mono machia de regno decertantes mutuis vulneri bus concide∣runt, ibid. shares seuerally limited, and mutually allotted, but must crie:—Aut Coesar, aut nullus: wherefore they enioyed the fruites of seldome prospering deuision, a short reigne, attended on with perpetuall infamie after death. Wherefore that is the best la∣bour or trauell, where they do Vide Ethico rum axiomata & eorum prae cipua ratioci∣nandi argumē ta, quorum cer tissimis princi∣pijs fundamen ta virtutum innixa sunt.—Proponere la∣borem vt cum virtute & iustitia coniungant. This is the best strife, the best contention, which (in a glorious emulation) is conuersant about vertue, not entertai∣ning an vniust practise to gaine a kingdome, but euer to conclude with Aurelius Sextus:—Ex pes∣simo generene catulum: Man that is wicked in his proceedings, getting an Empire by bloud (with∣out
regard of election or descent) may liue, and for a while flourish, but he shall die without an Heyre: therefore this Satyre is purposely directed to such, (with an equall reflex from superiour to inferiour) as respect not the meanes how to ob∣taine a kingdome, so they may haue a kingdome, agreeing with that in the Poet; Regam, modum regnandi non quaeram. I will gouerne, though I seeke not the meanes how to gouerne well: or thus: I will gouerne, though I regard not the meanes whereby I come to gouerne. Thus much for a wic∣ked Amulius, who will gouerne though it be by the death or deposing of his brother Numitor, or an impious Pigmalion, who will murther Sychaeus his brother to be enioyer of his treasure, or a faith-infringing▪ Polymnestor, who betrayes the trust of a Protector, in praying vpon the Orphane Polidorum obtruncat & auro vi potitur. 3. Aeead. Polydore. Of these my Satyre shall intreate, and brand them with the marke of an iniurious pos∣session. THE FIFT SATYRE. THou hellish Et satu terra efando. brood, borne to thine owne offence, Thou that wilt run into a streame of bloud, Yet cries againe; It's in mine owne defence, Hauing no care of vow-linckt brotherhood; Be thou thine owne destroyer, thine owne foe, And may thy conscience fret where ere thou goe: What doest thou get, by getting of a crowne, Deposing him, that is the lawfull heire?
But cares and feares, and sorrowes of thine owne, With As it is written of August: that he had broken sleepes and vse to send for some to passe the night away in telling tales or holding him with talke. Tit. Liu. dec. 3. gastly visions, motiues to despaire? Lament thy raigne, dominions got by wrong, May floure awhile, but last they cannot long. Though Numitor depos'd be by his brother, Fate hath her stroke, some Romulus will spring, Or if not Romulus, there will some other Depose his greatnesse, make himselfe a king. Thus as he got his kingdome, shedding As Mitbrid tes was said to plant his king∣dome on an in∣direct foundati on, Blood. Ap- pian. Alexan, bloud, He of his bloudie purchase reapes small good. Where Iurisdiction is obtain'd by might, Without apparent right vnto the crowne, Shall soone extinguish all her former light, And change her forme like to the waining Moone. For such vsurping kings as aime at all, Shall misse their aime, and with their Scepter fall. And thou Pigmalion, who art neuer fil'd,De caede fra∣terna vberiori modo exarat vid. Virgil. 1. Lib. AEnead. But euer gapes for riches and for gold, Till thou with might thy Brothers bloud hast spil'd, Or till thy yauning mouth be stopt with mold, Either repent thy wrong, or thou shalt heare, A thousand A Tergo Ne meis. Furies buzzing in thine eare. Foolish Astyages that meanes to raigne, And plant thy throne on earth eternally, I tell thee (doting King) though thou disdaine, Cyrus should raigne, he will part stakes with thee: No, he'le haue all, thou art his subiect made, And with his vine all Asia's shadowed.
Though thou do marry, and assure to wife, Thy faire Mandanes, to a countrey Cbyses. squire, That her meane marriage might secure thy life, A king shall spring from such an homely sire. It is in vaine to plot, when gods resist, Who can defeate our proiects as they list. What Polynices, wilt thou fight, with whom? With thine owne brother deare Eteocles; Will you contend, fince you be both as one? 2 Brothers. Cleon will neuer fight with Pericles; Then why will you, the children of one sire, Against each other mutually conspire? Fie on you both, what sauage crueltie, Hath thus possest you in your tender age, Brother gainst brother most inhumanely, To shew your selues as Men in beastly rage? Farewell vngodly Twins, borne for debate, When Ruine knocks, Repentance comes too late. Farewell Astyages, that reignes for aye, And thou Pigmalion, who do'st gape for wealth, Amulius too, who learning to obay, Perceiues how Realmes decline that's got by stealth. Farewell, and if my tart lines chance to spite ye, My Satyre sayes, A dead dog cannot bite me.
The Argument. CLytemnestra Agamemnons wife, forsaking her owne husband Agamemnon, ran to the vn∣chast bed of Aegistus, where she prostituted her selfe, regardlesse of her birth, and neglectfull of her honour. This Agamemnon perceiued, but through the exceeding loue he bore her, seeming∣ly couered this her apparent dishonour, labou∣ring to reclaime her rather by clemencie then rigour: but she persisting in her hatefull lust and vnlawfull affection, perswaded Aegistus by vr∣gent solliciting to continue in his former adulte∣rie, without regard to Agamemnons loue, or the infamie of her owne life. And hauing not as yet spun the web of her mischiefe, she seconds her las∣ciuious attempt with a secret practise, conspiring with her fauourite Aegistus her husbands death, which was afterwards effected, but not vnreuen∣ged. This instance shall be the first subiect vnto my Satyre; wherein I meane to display the impu∣dencie of such, as out of a godlesse securitie, vsu∣ally auouch and iustifie their wicked and sensuall pleasures with Phaedra in the Poet, writing to her sonne in law Hyppolytus after this manner: One house hath held, one house shall hold vs twaine, once did we kisse, and we will kisse a∣gaine. Vt tenuit domus vna duos, domus vna tenebit, Oscula apertadabas, oscula apertadabis. For such incestuous Phaedraes, let them diuert their
eyes to the ensuing Satyre, and then answer me▪ whether they do not blush at their decyphered follie, which more apparent then light will shew it selfe to euery eye: for the retiredst angle or cor∣ner cannot giue vice a couer, whose memorie may be darkned, but not extinguished: nor can the wide wombe of the earth find her a graue where∣in to interre her, being like Pasyphaes issue, The Min∣taure. eue a shame to the Parent. And as Hecubaes sonne, portending Per somnum ardentem fa∣cem se pepe∣risse sentiens. destruction to the Troian Citie, was thought fit to be casten forth, lest the euent there∣of should be answerable to the Prophesie: so shall this accursed issue, this execrable Progenie shew it selfe, and be fitter for casting forth then preser∣uing, since Clytemnestra shall feele the edge of cruelty, and the scourge of deuine furie. THE SIXT SATYRE. WHat Clytemnestra, com'd so soone abroad, Forth of Aegistus bed thy husbands foe! What is the cause thou makest so short abode, Is it because thy husband wills thee so? No it's because Quaeritur AE∣gistus quare sit factus adulter in promptu causa est, desi∣diosus erat. Ouid. he's weary of thy sinne, Which he once sought, but now is cloyedin. What's that thou weares about thy downie necke? O it's a painted heart, a Iewell fit, For wanton Minions who their beauties decke, With garish toyes, new Suiters to begit: Thou hast a painted heart for chastitie, But a true heart for thy adulterie.
Speake on Adultresse, let me heare thy tongue, Canst varnish ore thy sin with Insipiens elo∣quentia, vti gladius in fu∣rentls manu, nō obesse maxime non potest. Mirand. in laud. Herra. eloquence? Silence; such sinnes should make the sinner dumbe, And force his speech to teare-swolne penitence; Do not then shadow thy lasciuious deeds, For which the heart of Agamemnon bleeds. Leaue of (foule strumpet: keepe thy husband bed, Thou hast no interest in Aegistus sheetes: Infamous acts, though closely done are spred, And will be blaz'd and rumour'd in the streetes. Flie from this scandall, lest it soile thy name, Which blemisht once, is nere made good againe. Is not thy husband worthy of thy loue? Too worthy husband of a worthlesse whoore, Then rather chuse to die then to remoue: Thy chast-vowd steps from Agamemnons boore? He's thine, thou his, O Vsing the word of that chast Romane Matron: where thou art Caius, I am Caia. may it then appeare, Where ere he is, that thou art onely there. But for Hyppolitus to be incited By his step-mother, O incestuous! And to his Theseu. fathers bed to be inuited: What fact was euer heard more odious? But see (chast youth) though she perswade him to it, Nature forbids, and he's asham'd to do it. The Applica∣tion of the Mo∣rall. You Quis fucum in proba virgine non damnet? Quis in vestal non detesteturi Pic Mirand.  Epist. painted Monkies that will nere restraine, Your hote desires from lusts-pursuing chase, Shall be consumed in a quenchlesse flame, Not reft of griefe, though you were reft of grace,
Bereft of grace, and buried in shame, Regardlesse of your honour, birth, or name. I can discerne you by your wanton toyes, Your strutting like Dame Iuno in her throne, Casting concealed fauours vnto boyes: These common things are into habits growne, And when you haue no fauours to bestow, Lookes are the lures which draw affections bow. Trust me I blush, to see your impudence, Sure you no women Si puellam viderimus mo∣ribus lepidam at{que} dicaculam, laudabimus, exosulabimus: haec in matro∣na damnabi∣mus & perse∣quemur. ibid. are, whose brazen face, Shewes modestie ha's there no residence, Incarnate diuels that are past all grace; Yet sometimes wheate growes with the fruitlesse tares, You haue fallne oft, now fall vnto your prayers. The Argument. WHosoeuer will but consider the fortune, or rather misfortune of Tereus for his wickednesse, shall behold as in a glasse or trans∣parent mirror, the fruite of adulterous beds. For his licencious and inordinate lust contained with∣in no bounds, but continuing in all prohibited desires, and now pursuing with an incestuous heate Phylomele his wiues sister, hath transformed himselfe into a reasonlesse creature; for now Te∣reus
in Vpubam changeth his former nature and condition, becoming in shape as odious, as his life was impious, as the Poet testifieth: Uertitur in volucrem, cuistant pro vertice cristae. Thus may adulterous want-graces looke into Te∣reus fall, and then apply his ruine to their present state. I gather these Arguments out of fictions and Poeticall inuentions, yet are not these fables without their deuine Morals; for such men as are touched with this crime or the like, ought to be ashamed of their follie, since the very heathen Poets, whose best of sacred knowledge was the light of Nature, could exclaime against them, and pourtray the forme of their liues in a fained inuention. For to exemplifie speciall punishments inflicted on particular sinnes, The Hpyes. Those birds which still frequented Phineus armie, and annoyed him with such a filthy sent, that euen vpon ship∣boord they would come flocking to his Nauie, and bring a loathsome stench, whereby they vsed to infect his meate, neuer departing from him ei∣ther morne or night, but would—Escopulis exi∣re, & vniuersam lassem teterrimo faetore inficere. Wherefore was this, but forasmuch as by the per∣swasion of his second wife Idaea, he put forth the eyes of his children had by his Cleopatr▪ first wife? of which in the latter part of this Satyre I meane especially to insist, declaring by way of aggrauation the wic∣kednesse of such Iniustae Nouercae, who will tyran∣nise ouer their stepchildren, respectlesse of Phi∣neus punishment or Idaeas vexation. And though some obiect, that these Arguments be but fruit∣lesse
inuentions hatched forth of Poets braine yet must they of force confesse ingenuously, that their Morals conferre no lesse benefit, then if de riued from a truer subiect: for whosoeuer will not beware of Idas fact, shall vndergo Idaeas Quem fecere parem crimina, faa parem. Ibid. punish∣ment; let them therefore auoyd the fact prece∣dent, or let them expect the punishment subse∣quent.* Par tibi culpa fuit, par tibi paena subit. alib. Nec culpa est leuior, nec tibi paena minor. THE SEVENTH SATYRE. HOw now fond Tereus, whither rid'st so fast, To Progne or to Itis? O, it's true, Thou goest vnto thy sister, made vnchast, By thy enforced rape, for she nere knew What lusts-embraces meant, till thou hadst taught her, Which gaue her cause of sorrowing euer after. Come backe againe, go to thy chast wiues bed, Wrong not the honour of a spotlesse wife, What fruite yeelds lust when thou hast surfeted, But wretched death, drawne from a wicked life? Returne fond lustfull man, do not dishonour Poore Phylomele, for heauens eyes looke on her. It may be thou alledg'st, Forfitan & narres quam sit tibi rustica coniux. rusticity Appeareth in the fashions of thy Deare; Is this a cloake to liue licentiously? No, if her breeding more vnciuill were, These should not be occasions of thy shame, For in discretion thou shouldst couer them.
Thou art that Rusticke, she the modest flower, Not seeking for to grow with other plants Then with thy selfe, though thou for euery boore, Suites thy affection, yet affection wants: She loues, thou lusts, thine is a borrowed name,Amor perenni coniugis castae manet. Senn Octau. For shame-fast loue need neuer blush for shame. How now Prince Phineus, where's thy childrens eyes, Are they put out, who mou'd thee to offend? Was it Idaea, whom the gods defies? Whom neither heauen nor earth can well commend. It was Idaea, she the Step-dame cries, Haste Phineus haste, pull out thy childrens eyes. He'le do it for thee, there's no question why, To faire Idaea, chast Queene to his bed, He should the murdring of his soule deny, Much lesse to cause his childrens bloud be shed; See step-dames see, how hatefull is your guilt▪ When to raise yours, anothers bloud is spilt! Murder thy children, put out Orphans eyes, God cannot salue their extreame heauinesse: He cannot heare them when they make their cries, Nor can he comfort them in their distresse. Yes, he can heare and see, and though he come With a slow pace, he will at last strik home. Then grieue, but let not griefe driue to despaire; Trust, but let Trust breed no securitie, For crying sinnes when they presuming are, Oft wound so deepe they find no remedie.
Farewell Idaea, may my Satyre heare, For each bloud-drop th'ast shed, thou shedst a teare. The Argument. THe Argument of this Satyre shall be against all wicked Iulians, all godlesse Apostates. And though in the third Satyre I haue touched this Ar∣gument briefly: yet now more amply meane I to deblazon the forlorne condition of these vnna∣turall monsters. For to produce the Authorities & Opinions of the very heathen Phylosophers, they haue generally concluded, not onely a God, but a Trinitie, Three in-beings or persons coessentiall. As first the Platonists, who haue concluded a Minder, Minding, and a Minded, but the chiefe hereof the Minder. From the Platonists let vs descend to the Pythagorians, amongst whom Numenius mostThe Pythag. Numenius. worthie for his learning (insomuch as Porphyrie a man of ripe iudgement and pregnant conceit, albeit a profest enemie of Christ, wrote many seuerall Commentaries vpon him) speaketh thus: Touching the Indiuiduate essence of God, it is compact of it selfe in one, subsisting of none, in and of himselfe alone, not to be contained or cir∣cumscribed within any limits or bounds, being euer during in time, before time, and without time; incomprehensible in his works, indiuisible,
in his substance insubstantiate. The AcademicksThe Academ. in like sort conclude the same, yeelding to an om∣nipotent power, working according to the diuine will of the worker; wherein they giue excellent instances and similitudes in the The Sunne, beames, and heate alluding to the blssed. Trinitie. Stoicks. Sunne, and the heate proceeding from the Sunne, drawing from thence a singular argument to proue the diuine Trinitie. Zeno the father of the Stoicks, acknow∣ledged the Word to be God, and also the spirit of Iupiter. Thus Academicks of later times, Sto∣icks, Pythagorians, and Platonists, confesse this heauenly power▪ and shall we who are borne inHermes his de∣ of the diuerse wor∣kings. the dayes of light and truth deny the same? Her∣mes can conclude, how—Radij deuini sunt eius o∣porationes mirae, Radi mundani sunt natur & rerum similitudines variae, Radij humani snt artes & scien∣tiae. And shall we confesse the later, but not the first, from whence the later be deriued? Plato in his 13. Epistle to King Dennis writeth thus. When I13. Epist. to King Dennis. vid. Sene. in Epist. ad Lucil. write in earnest, you shall know hereby, that I be∣gin with one God; but when I write otherwise, then I begin with many gods. Aristotle like wise that serious inquisitor in the secrets of Nature, could say:—Ens entium miserermei. Thus are outGod was not made at any time, in a much as he is euerla∣lastingly vnbe. gotten. Galen. Atheists conuinced by Pagans; for neither Or∣phuus whose inuention gaue that opinion of plu ralitie of gods first footing, nor Dagoras the A∣thenian, who denied that there was any God, were exempted from seuerest censure, the one ha∣uing his opinions publickly refelled, the other for his contempt of the gods, expulsed. For such no∣uell opinions as Antiquity had not traduced nto
them, but seemed repugnant to what they belee∣ued touching their gods, were esteemed peril∣lous, and the founders of them worthie due pu∣nishment. And how much more ought we reue∣rently to obserue and carefully retaine what Sa∣cred authoritie, grounded on better warrant then Pagan Antiquitie, hath commended to vs, where euery clause, euery syllable, sentence and title are full of sententious sweetnesse, and diuine fulnesse? As for the palpable blindnesse of such as see not, or wilfull ignorance of such as see but will not, the time will come when He, whom they denie shall reueale himselfe in furie, and those grosse o∣pinions which with such asseuerance they main∣tained shall be testimonies against them to con∣uince them. And though, as Suetonius witnesseth, there be some, who like Caligula will threaten the are, that she shall not raine vpon his publicke games or  spectacles, shewing himselfe so peremptorie, as though he would cope with the iortall Gods, yet would he—ad minima toni∣trua,Vid. Sueton. Tranq. in vit. Calig. &  a conniuere, caput obuoluere, ad ver maiora proripere se è strato, sub lectum{que} condere so∣lebat: at the noise of thunder or lightning winke hard, couer his head, and  his eares, to take a∣way the  of his feare: yea more then this, he would leape out of his bed and hide himselfe vnder it. Thus did he contemne him whose works made him tremble, derogating from his power, yet astonished  the voice of his thunder: and though in  me and his predecessor Tiberius there flourished a Phylo the ew. worthie Philosopher, who all∣beit
a Iew by nation, yet frequent amongst the Romanes, had great iudgement in matters diuine, and spake profoundly of the things which belon∣ged vnto the expectation of Nations: Notwith∣standing all this, they continued without the leat acknowledgement of a Deitie, and in contempt of the diuine power, threatning the heauens if they scouled or frowned vpon the Romane game∣sters, as I haue before mentioned. Whereby it seemes they reposed such confidence in the height of their present estate, as they imagined so firme a foundation could be shaken by no Superiour power; for indeed worldly pompe makes men for the most part forgetful of their duty towards their Creator, thinking (as men in a fooles Paradise) that this present Sunshine of their seeming felici∣tie shall neuer set. Yet no sooner shall hoarie age draw neare, then—friget aestus honoris, and their former chearefulnesse enfeebled with all infirmi∣ties, shall with lame limmes and a queasie voice crie out,—Non eadem est aetas: then shall the cure∣lesse itch of honor by the brine of age be allayed, youthfull sports abandoned, and a quiet life ra∣therPetitur ha caelum via. desired then magnificence of estate. Conclu∣ding with Seneca the Phylosopher, inueying a∣gainst the tyrannie of Nero to this effect: Well did I liue, when I from enuie rid, Was pent vp 'mongst the Rocks of th'Corsian sea, Where if I still had liu'd as once I did,In the Tragedi of Agrip. Well had it gone both with my state and me. For whosoeuer shall but seriously consider the state and course of mans life, which is intangled
with so sundrie and manifold perills, shall call it with the Poet,—mundum vitro similantem, where life is an exile, the passage a perill, and the end doubtfull. Thus farre of those who either with successe of fortune puffed, or height of honour transported, or through a carnall libertie benum∣med, trust so much in the arme of flesh, as they wholly denie the power and maiestie of the onely God (or soueraigne good) preferring a momen∣tanie delight before a celestiall reward. Now to my Satyre. THE EIGHT SATYRE. NOw stout Caligula that dar'st the gods, Saying, they must not frowne vpon thy pleasure, Thou and immortall powers are still at odds, Whose Modo auari∣tiae singulos in∣crepa, & quod puderet eos locuple∣tiores esse, quā se. in vit. Calig. gold's thy god, whose deitie's thy treasure. Thou'lt feele the smart hereof, when thy estate, Founded on frailie shall be ruinate. Thou wilt not feare him while thou liues on earth, Though life and power, and all be in his hand, Thou'lt fight with him (poore worme) that giues the breath, And with the breath of flesh checke Ioues command. Unhappie Prince, though thou the happiest seeme, This reigne of thine is but a golden dreame. And when this dreame is past, and thou awake, From thy soule-charming slumber thou must on,
Taking thy iourney to the Sperent te tartara regem. Stygian lake, Or flame exhaling quenchlesse Phlegeton, Where poysoned Adders shall infect thy tongue, Which did so impiously her maker wrong. Flie from the horror of thy damned soule, For sure ere long thou shalt be punished. See how thy soule deformed is and foule, Soiled with sinne, with errours blemished. O Christus laua∣crū est animae, canalis gratiae: Lauacrum, in quo anima im∣mergitur & la∣uatur, Canalis, à qua omnis gratia animae deriuatur. wash them then, some hope doth yet remaine, But now vnwasht they'le nere be white againe! Art not asham'd for to denie his power, Who giueth life vnto each liuing thing? To heauen, to earth, to sea, and to each flower, He giueth meanes, for by him all things spring. Who will not then, and knowing this, account The earth's the Lords, and he's Lord Paramount? Doest thou not see the fabricke of this earth, And all the plants which flourish in their kind, How by his power each creature bringeth forth, As if indeed they knew their makers mind: Where th'very earth-worme that's endu'd with sence, Is not excluded from his The very hedg∣hog is not exclu∣ded from his pre∣uidnce. Aug. prouidence? Then leaue this damn'd opinion, Iulian, Be not too confident of earthly rule: Remember still thou art a mortall man, And in his power who can the seas controule. It's he can make this earths foundation shudder, Whose Empires reach from one Sea to another.
Yet thou Caligula canst threat the gods, If they descend but in a winters showre, And saist in scorne, Thou'lt beate them with thy rods, If they hold on, vpon thy games to lowre. Yet cowardize constraines thee for to flie, At euery flash, and like a Babe to crie. Thou'lt menace death vnto Eternitie, If they obey not thy imperious pleasure: Thus gods themselues must feele thy tyrannie, Enioynd to dance attendance at thy leysure: Yet for all this, if thou but Thunder heares, Thou pulls thy cap downe ore thy frighted eares. So euery false Apostate will be stout, Before he feele the Uiols of Gods wrath: But when he tasts thereof he gins to doubt, And calls to mind how he But see, being in the way of doing well, shame holds him from the faith from which he fell. forsooke his faith. His fall from which, confessing with his tong, His tongue is speaking, but his heart is dombe. Dumbe shalt thou be, for heauen will haue it so, Since thou appliest thy tongue to wickednesse, Abusing that, gainst him who did bestow All that thou hast, this's thy vnthankefulnes. Yet but relent, and doubt not to obtaine, That heauenly grace, which else thou canst not gaine. Gracelesse beware, and feare the power of heauen, Who can destroy thee in a minutes space, He who can make, the Excelsa humi∣liando & humi∣lia exaltando. steepest mountaines euen, Whose footstoole's earth, & heauen his dwelling place.
Feare, gracelesse feare, and thou shalt liue for euer, For feare giues life to death, health to the liuer. Liue thou shalt neuer, if thou do not care To shew respect to th'supreme Maiestie, He whom we feare, who tenders our wel-fare, And guides vs in this vale of miserie. Pagan thou art, vnlesse thou do amend, Whose endlesse sinnes expect a Iulian and Foe∣lix had both mi∣serable ends: while Iulian that impious Apostate conti∣nued in his blas∣phemie: Ecce quam sumptuo∣sis vasis filio Mariae mini∣stratus! vid. Ve∣nerab. Bed. 3. lib. wofull end. Therefore as thou regardst thy sweete soules health, Or honour of thy Maker, now reclaime Thy breach of faith stain'd with the worlds filth, If thou a sonne of Syon meanes to raigne. Fare well or ill; if well thou meanes to fare, Unto the Temple of thy God repaire. The Argument. HYppeas that worthy Grecian, who stroue for the games in the Olympiads, wore no other apparell saue what with his owne hands (being a generall Artist) he had framed, hauing not so much as the ring of his finger, or bracelet about his arme, but were made by him, yea & the shooes of his feete, which with his owne skill he made likewise. This Hyppeas hauing gained the chiefest prizes by meanes of his actiuitie; and now retur∣ning
in the triumph of a Conquerour with a Co∣ronet of floures empaled, to receiue the propo∣sed reward: the publicke Notarie of these games came (according to the wonted custome vsually obserued) to demaund the best raiment or choy∣cest particular ornament the Conquerour had a∣bout him. Now this fellow, whom continuance of time had made impudent, seeing the bountie of the conquering Hippeas, according to the man∣ner, receiued the best raiment the Victor wore: and scarce contented therewith, (like an infati∣gable suiter) begged farther his stockings, and Hyppeas denied him nothing. So long he conti∣nued in begging, and he in giuing, till Hyppeas went naked forth of the Olympiads, hauing no∣thing wherewith he might shew his friends any semblance of conquest or victorie, saue his na∣ked bodie, which he presented vnto them, vsing these words vnto the Notarie:—What I haue gi∣uen thee, I would haue bestowed on my professedst ene∣my, for such motiues of vaineglory should rather moue me to loath them then loue them, leaue them, then liue with them, remembring, how The sage Eutrapelus expresly bad, His foes should haue the choycest robes he had, Wherein he found by proofe this speciall good, To make himselfe more humble, them more proud. The name of this begger was Mynthos, who ha∣uing thus polled & spoiled this worthy Conqueror of all his apparell through his importunacie in de∣manding, presently thus answered one by whom he was sharpely taxed: Nemo est quin aliqua in
arte praeclarus est, ego autem in praemia & vestimenta comparando, palmam & gloriam adeptus sum, meque diuitem ex aliorum paupertate feci. This shall be the Argument of this ninth Satyre, touching im∣pudent crauers: These—Iri egentes, of whom the Poet speaketh, who make themselues rich by their seruile basenesse, and as Vultures feede best vpon the stinkingst carrion, so they vpon others riot, prodigalitie, and dissolution, sucking like the Sangui-sugae, who feede themselues with bloud till they burst. Reason haue I to inuey against them, since Israel the elect and select people of God were not to receiue them—Let there be no begger in Israel. Time was not then for Parasites to currie fauour, when none was to haue reliefe but by his labor; so expresly was euery one enioy∣ned to apply his vocation, that he who would notGen. 3. 19. 2. Thes. 3. 10. Prou. 5. 15. 1. Thes. 4. 11. labour should not eate. And may these insatiable Mynthes taste the like fare, being deriued from as base beginnings as they are oftimes aduanced without merit to great meanes and possessions, yea composed of as ignoble and degenerate minds, as they are sprong of ingenerous bloud. THE NINTH SATYRE. HYppeas, your cloake I craue, that is my due, Your stockings too, and such like toyes as these, Free to bestow a Bountie were in you, And yet a debt, for you do know my fee's. But Debt to mention I do think't vnfit, When Bountie is so neare to answer it.
And yet I want, and yet what can I want, When He of whom I craue's so prone to giue? When store by Ioue is sent, there is no scant, All famine leaue, and all in plentie liue. See what thou wants then Mithos, and but craue it, Hyppeus is stor'd, and thou art sure to haue it. Belt, Beuer, Buskin, view from top to toe, See what thou wants his Wardrope will supply, And laugh at him when thou hast vs'd him so, And bid him triumph in his victory. Let him go nak'd, and boast what he hath done, Whilest thou enioyes the Booties he hath won. Yet tearme him Prince of bountie, and requiteThe true descrip∣tion of a Para∣site. In seeming Protestations, and in vowes, Yet care not for him when he's out of sight; For those thriue best who can make fairest shows: In speaking much, but little as they meane, And being such, but not the same they seeme. I would I could, thus maist Satis domi talium saluta∣torum habeo. Plut. in vit. Ti∣ber. thou bring him o, I could extend my wealth vnto my will, I would erect to show what you haue done, Some Time-out liuing Monument, to fill The world with amazement, when they heare What you haue bene, and what your actions were. And then impart thy want, how fortunes are Vnequally deuided, yet to such As He whose Bountie giues to each his share, Though much he hath, yet ha's he not too much:
And then with cap in hand beseech his worth, Be good to thee, that's borne of obscure birth. Indeed thou seemes to be an obscure Asse, Aspacious Beggar, begging euery where,Vid. Persi. in Satyr. Who wilt not suffer a patcht boote to passe, But thou wilt beg it for thy leg that's bare. Indeed too bare thou art, too impudent, That with thy owne state canst not be content. Pesant like Bastard, hate thy Beggarie, Liue on thy owne, not on anothers state; Thou that descendest from base penurie, Wilt by thy Begging liue at higher rate?Vid. Iuuenal. Saty. Numbred thou art amongst such men as begs, The smoke of Chimmes, snuffes, and Vintners dregs. Thou art defam'd, for all deride thy kneeling, Thy capping, cringing, and thy temporizing, As if thou hadst of modestie no feeling, But from anothers razing drew thy rising. Well, for thy begging we will beg for thee, The Pattent of disgrace and infamie. So with thy wallet as a beggar should,Qualis es, talis appare. Be not asham'd to seeme that which thou art, Sowe patch on patch, to keepe thee from the cold, And shew thy want in each seame-rented part: But do not rere thy fortunes on mens fall, For such base Beggars are the worst of all.
I write not to thee in a sublime stile,Vulum verba decent. Horat. Such is vnfit thy errors to conuince; Satyres though rough, are plaine and must reuileA Satyres na∣iue Rhetoricke. Uice with a Cynicke bluntnesse, as long since Eolis, Ari∣stobulus, Ariste∣, &c. Those graue iudicious Satyrists did vse, Who did not taxe the time, but times abuse. And yet I wish my pen were made of steele, And euery leafe, a leafe of lasting brasse, Which might beare record to this Commonweale, When this Age's past, to Ages that shall passe. But these as others must, shall lose their name,Debemur mor∣ti nos nostra{que}. And we their Authors too must die with them. Yet well I know, I shall Characterd be, In liuing letters, prouing what I write, To be athenticke to posteritie, To whom this Ages vices I recite. Which, much I doubt, as they're successiue still, By course of yeares, so they'le succeed in ill. For vice nere dyes intestate, but doth leaue, Something behind, to shew what it hath bene; Yea canting knaues that hang on others sleeue, Can charge their heires still to pursue the streame, Where Iohn a style bequeathes to Iohn a noke, His Beggars rags, his dish, his scrip, his poke. With which Ile beg; no, with my soule I scorne it, He rather carrie tankaras on my backe; Yet th'rade is thriing, true, but I'ue forsworne it, Nor would I beg, though competent I lacke.
Before I should make congies to aswayne, I would for sweare to take my legs againe. I am but poore, and yet I scorne to beg▪ To be a Bastard to my Progenie, Yea I will rather with Poyson. Sycites fig▪ a Prouerbe. Sycites feg, Receiue my death, then get me infamie. I'le be a galley-slaue in Turkish ship, Rather then scrape my crums out of a scrip. Bias was poore, and yet his wealth increased, All that he had he carried still about him; Bias is dead, his goods by death are seised,Vid. dict. Cre∣tensium. Mydas is poore, his goods were all without him. Bias and Mydas both agree in this, Earths blisse when we're in earth quite vanish'd is. Candaules in primo libro Iu∣stini, Qui osten∣dens eam Gigi (depositaveste) tantae insaniae paenas luit, à Gige im conditur mi∣ra virtu ∣nuli cooperto∣Vnde Poeta; coniugis vt nu∣dam speciem monstraffet a∣mico: Dilectam speci∣em perdit, ami∣cus habet. Quasi silentium damnum pulchritudinis esset. ibid. Uid. Ci. de off. 3. Lib. Plato. de leg. l. 1. Candaules he was rich, yet he was poore, Rich in his coffers rammed downe with gold, Yet poore in this, his wife did proue a whoore, Showne naked vnto Gyges to behold. Collatine poore, yet rich, his wife is chast. Both these agree in this, by death embra'st. Irus, qui in domo Vlissis post reditum suum, ab Vlisse, pugna nimirum eius, per∣emptus est; Irus qui Scrinio suo & Obba in plataeis Greciae mendicare solebat, super∣bia quadam (aut spe suauioris lucri) affectus, in Penelopem, inter Penelopis socios, (vt uncius potius quam procus) accedere usus est;—Dignum supplicium pertulit, quia tanta animi audacia (more procacis mendici) in lares consularis digitatis viri procedere ausit. Vid. Hom. Ili. interp. Calab. Irus was poore, but Croesus passing rich, Irus his scrip differs from Croesus boord, Yet now compare them and I know not which,
Is better furnish'd or the worser stor'd: For see their fates, they both in one agree, Since by pale Death they both arrested be. Priscillaes purse, Demosthenes n Orator of A∣thens. Demosthenes his hand, Do differ much, the one is alwayes shut, The other open, for rewards doth stand; Yet if we measure either by his foot, That close-shut purse, and that receiuing hand, Haue equall shares made by the Virga sepul∣chralis. Varr. Sextons wand. Yet Beggar, thou that begs, and hopes to gaine Store of rewards, for to relieue thy need. Or surfet rather, tell me what's thy aime, When those Pascentur à nobis quae pas∣untur in nobis. Vermes. thou feeds, shall on thy car kasse feed? For then where's the Beggar now become, Whose shame's too great, to hide with shroud or tombe? Take these rude Satyres as compos'd by him Who loues his state farre better then thy trade, For Exp'd to ame, and in∣ie betraid. Beggars lose more then they seeme to win, Since their esteeme for euer's blemished: Liue at a lower rate, and beg the lesse. I'le liue to write, if thou thy fault redresse. Amicus non Mendicus.
The Argument. TAurus Raptus abit media quod ad aethera Taurus arena, non fuit hoc artis sed pietatis ops. Martial. in Epi. in Amphythe. Caesa. a rich Iustice, seemed to carrie great port and state in his countrie where he liued, though more feared then loued: for the proud miser seldome liues to be inheritour of a friend: but afterward his misery was most apparently known by his desolate house, as vnacquainted with hospitality as an vsurers heire with frugalitie, ha∣uing onely a case for a man, a blew-coat I meane without a man, a shadow without a substance. In this Satyre next ensuing is described the mise∣rable nature of such, as notwithstanding their out∣ward port, glorying of more then euer their vn∣worthie minds could reach to, be the very picturesIt is a great shame for a man to haue a poore heart and a rich purse. and Idaeas of misery, as I may well call them: where desire of hauing so much ouerswayes them, as care of reputation lightly moues them. This Ar∣gument is short, for the Satyre will shew her owne meaning without any further illustration. THE TENTH SATYRE. TAurus Cornua Vi∣brando, nescit sua cornua Taurus; Whereto it was shrewdly answe∣red: Cornua dum cernit,  sua cornua Taurus. a Iustice rich, but poore in mind, (Riches make rich-men poore through miserie,) Had long time liu'd as one in hold confin'd, With gates close-shut from hospitalitie:
Meanes without men he had him to attend, Lest what he spar'd his Retinue should spend. One time a Traueller chanc'd to repaire To Taurus house, to quench his vehement thirst, But he poore man could find no comfort there: Drinke could he get none, if his heart should burst; Men he saw none, nor ought to cheare his want, Saue a Signa dat Hospitis, sed habentur in Hospitis vm▪ bram. Blew-coate without a cognisant. The Traueller conceited in distresse, Straight thus discours'd, his As quicke con∣ceits will passions best allay. passion to allay: This Iustice is a Seruing-man I guesse, Who leaues his coate at home when he's away: Therefore I was deceiu'd and did amisse, To seeke a Iustice where a blew-coate is. But as the Traueller went on his way, He met the Iustice in a ragged suite, Who in a Bench-like fashion bad him stay, Saying—He ought a Iustice to salute: The man at first perplex'd, and now awake, Tooke heart of grace, and did this answer make. Sir, if I haue forgotten my regard Vnto your place, forgiue my ignorance, My eye could not discerne you, till I heard Your selfe report your owne preeminence, Whose name is Terror, and whose awfull breath, Is messenger of furie, and of death.
And great I beare's endowments you possesse, But worthie greater then you do enioy, Witnesse your open house, which doth expresse The care you haue your fortunes to employ In bounties : your good beere doth show it, Being kept so well, as none can come vnto it. Taurus he stamp'd, cald his attendants knaues, And so he might, for none could be offended, Where art thou Tom (quoth he) Iack, George, out slaues, Faining their voyces▪ All shall be amended. Then answers he himselfe, Let none depart, But entertaine all with a chearefull heart. The Traueller though he conceiued all, Seem'd to admire the bountie of the place, Till th'badge-lesse coate thas hung within the hall, Forc'd him to laugh the Iustice in the face. Why doest thou laugh (quoth he?) I laugh to note, For want of men, what seruic's in a coate. The Argument. CLaudius a Romane, for his approued honesty respected for the most part, gained no lesse
good opinion with the Conscript fathers in the Senate-house, then popular loue in the Citie for his grauitie was such, as none could detect him of the least imputation, hauing alwayes in the whole course of his pleading such pithie, sen∣tentious, and select discourse, that it yeelded no lesse admiration to the hearers, then a generall estimation to himselfe, at that time reputed one of the hopefullest young Orators: but most especi∣ally for his deuotion and religion to the gods, then, amongst the Romans adored and worship∣ped. This Claudius after this generall report and good liking which all had of him, vpon a solemne night appointed for the sacrifizing to Et festa so∣lennia Martis. vid. Varr. & Ouid. de fast. Mars in behalfe of a battell which was to be made against a Prince of Numidia, (in which holy rites there were appointed Augurs for the coniecturing of these things) seeing the opportunitie of the Augu∣res absence, renewed the familiaritie which he of long time had with one of the Augures wiues. Now the Augur hauing left behind him his Osci∣nes or Prophesing birds (a neglect of such impor∣tance as it discouered his owne shame,) came to his house where he detected Claudius, who had long The fish Sepia is betrayed by a blacke colour which she casteth out to couer her, so these coun∣terfets by the cloud of a pre∣tended holinesse, which shall be as a cloud of wit∣nesse against them. time counterfeited puritie. THE ELEVENTH SATYRE. CLaudius is pure, abiuring prophane things, Nor will he companie with wickednesse: He hates the source whence leud affections springs, He'le not consent with deeds of naughtinesse:
Yet he will deale, so none do see his sinne, Yea though heauens eyes he cares not looke on him. He will not speake vnto a Maide in th'streete, Left his repute should fall vnto decay: Yet if they two in priuate chance to meete, He in a pure embrace will bid her stay. Saying: I will instruct thee prettie Nan, How thou shalt be a formall Puritan. Then drawes he forth to moue the Maids affection, The forc'd description of their puritie, How he and she be children of election, And must be sau'd what ere the wicked be. For vices are tearm'd vertues, where we make Lust but an Act for Procreation sake. What then are Maids, thus he induceth her, But Uirgins still that do impart their loue, To such an Vt prurit vit One as is their furtherer In holy zeale, and can the spirit moue? Nought lesse but more, for there's a heauie vae, Or curse denounc'd on them that barren be. Cloze then in silence, eyes of men are shut, None can detect vs, but the eyes of heauen, And when we act, those lights are sealed vp, For vnto vs more libertie is giuen Then vnto others, since the very name, Of lust is chang'd when th' righteous vse the same.
Thou hypocrite, whose counterfeited zeale,Hypocrisis du∣lex est malum, issimulatio & eccatum. Makes thee seeme godly to the worelds eye, Yet doest the golden fruites of Vesta steale, When thou perceiues no man thy sins doth spie. Leaue this dissembled zeale, for thou art knowne The wickedst sinner, when thy inside's showne. The Argument. THe Historie of Phyloxenus is most amply rela∣ted in the diuerse writings of sundrie authen∣ticke Authors, being infamous for his greedie de∣sire vnto meate and drinke, and therefore as is testified of him, Aristotle moc∣king the Epi∣cures, said, that vpon a time they went all to a Temple together, beseeching the gods that they would giue them necks as long as Cranes and Hernes, that the pleasure and taste of meate might be more longin relishing: complaining a∣gainst Nature for making their necks too short. Gruis collum sibi dari optabat, vt cibum potum{que} maiori cum delectatione caperet. This Phyloxenus and that rauenous Heliogabalus shall be the subiects of this ensuing Satyre, touching or ra∣ther concluding the condition of all Epicures in these two. If thou that readèst me be touched, as tainted with this particular sinne, blush, but do not shew thy passion towards the poore Satyre, for Bee-like she hath no sooner stung thee, then she loseth her power of being further reuenged of thee. Wage not warre against a dead Monument, since Plinie warnes thee: Cum mortuis nil nisi laruas lu∣ctari. Take therefore this Satyre in good part, and rather fret against thy selfe, in that thou hast mat∣ter in thee fit for a Satyrists subiect, then vent thy
splene towards him, who makes thy defects the effects of his subiect. THE TWELFTH SATYRE. PHyloxenus lookes lanke with abstinence: Poore man I pittie him, I thinke he's sicke; No, this his seeming is a false pretence, The greedie Cormorant will each thing licke: Whose drum-stretch'd case can scarce his guts containe Since he hath got the gullet of a Crane. Thou thinkes there is no pleasure but in feeding, Making thy selfe, Like those  satiable glutt Uitellius and Appius, to wh Cormorants  ther land, wat nor are mig be sufficient. And Camblet the gluttonous king of Lydi deuoured in  dreame his wi while she lay sleeping toget in the same b and finding h hand between his teeth when he awaked,  slue himselfe, fearing disho nour. slaue to thy appetite; Yet whilest thou crams thy selfe, thy soule is bleeding, And Turtle-like mournes, that thou shouldst delight, In such excesse as causeth infamie, Starues soule, spoiles health, and ends with beggarie. Remember (thou besott'd) for I must talke, And that with serious passion, thou that Well descri by that Motto Non citius e quam excedi pascit & pos Elpenors vi vid. Geor. Vi Silenus in A tro. tasts The choycest wines, and doest to Tauernes walke, Where thou consumes the night in late repasts. Confusion now, drawes neare thee where thou kneeles, Drinking deepe healthes, but no contrition feeles. It may be, He that teacheth may be taught, And Socraticum speculum no chalibaeum  materiale. vid. Brasiuo.  praefatione. Socrates of Sostenes may learne, Euen He, that for thy good these precepts brought, To publicke light, may in himselfe discerne Something blameworthie, true, and heauen he could, Reforme his errors rightly as He would.
But harder is't by much for to performe, Then to prescribe, where many seeme to vrge, The present times abuse, but n'ere reforme Those, crimes in them which they in others scourge: But where the Author makes vse of his paines, As well as Reader, there's a double gaines. And these are th'gaines which I do sue to haue, Seeking no lesse thy benefit herein, Then my peculiar good: where all I craue, Is but thy prayer to purge me of my sinne. I do not write, as I my paines would sell, To euery Broker, vse them and farewell. Nam inepto risu res nulla ineptior est.Catull. Finis Satyrarum. An end of the Satyres composed by the foresaid Author in the discharge of Natures Embassie: pur∣posely penned to reclaime man, whose vicious life promising an vnhappie end, must now be taxed more sharply, since vice comes to grea∣test growth through impunitie.
A CONCLVSIVE ADMONITION TO THE READER. IF any man shall reade, and making vse Of these my Satyres, grow distemperate, By making of a good intent abuse, In that I seeme his life to personate; Let him content himselfe, be it good or ill, Gall'd horses winch, and I must gall him still. A Satyrist ought to be most secure, Who takes exception at his cancred style, And he that most repines, let him be sure, That he's the man whom Satyres most reuile. Therefore who would be free from Satyres pen, Ought to be Mirrors in the sight of men. These two months trauell like the Almond rod, May bring forth more when oportunitie Giueth fit time, wherein vice loath'd by God, May be displaide, and curb'd more bitterly. Till which edition, take these in good part, Or take them ill, how-ere, they glad my heart.
HERE FOLLO∣WETH SOME EPYCEDES or funerall Elegies, concerning sundry exquisite Mirrours of true loue. The Argument. TWo louely louers so deuided be, As one to other hardly can repaire, In Sestos she, and in Abydos he, He swims, she waits & weeps, both drowned are Waues cut off Heroes words, the Sea-nimphs mone, One heart in two desires, no graue but one. I. ELEGIE. HEro was willing to Leanders suite, But yet Leanders opportunitie Could not be so, as answers his repute: Lust sometime weares the robe of modestie: Silent he woes, as bashfull youths must do, By sighs, by teares, and kissing comfits too. But what are these wherè fancie seated is, But lures to loose desires, sin-sugred baits, That draw men onward to fooles paradice, Whose best of promises are but deceits?
And such Leanders were, meere golden dreames, That leaue the waking senses in extreames. But loue flame-like, though it restrained be, Will still ascend, and so it far'd with him: For now he cries, Hero I come to thee, And though I cannot run, yet I will swim, Where, while I swim, send thy sweet breath but hither, And Zephire-like it will soone waft me thither. Hero remaineth on the floting shore, Waiting the blest arriuall of her friend, But she (poore she) must neuer see him more, Seeing him end before his iourney end: In whose hard fate a double death appeares, Drownd in the sea, and in his Heroes teares. Still she laments, and teares her forlorne haire, Exclaming'gainst the fates, whose crueltie Had chang'd her hope-refi fortune to despaire, Abridging loue, true louers libertie; But since its so (quoth she) the waues shall haue, More then by right or iustice they can craue. With that she leapt into the curled floud, And as she leapt, she spake vnto the waue, Remorcelesse thou (quoth she) that stain'd his bloud, Shall now receiue two louers in one graue. For fit it is, who liuing had one heart, Should haue one graue, and not inter'd apart.
Yet in my death I do inuoke the Powers, Which do frequent this wofull Riuer side, That they adore and decke our Tombe with flowers, Where ere our loue-exposed corps abide. And if they aske where they shall find our graues, Let them looke downe into these surging waues. And I intreate my friends they do not weepe, In that we are departed to our rest, Sweete rest, may Hero say, when in her sleepe She clips Leander whom she loued best: She lou'd him best indeed, for she did craue To be enhearsed with him in one waue. This was no sooner spoke, but raging streames, Cut off poore Heroes speech, and with their force, Clos'd her in silence, while each Nimph complains, And chides the Riuer for his small remorse. Thus ended they, their ends were their content, Since for to die in Loue, their minds were bent. Let not fond loue so fondly thee embrace, Lest like the Iuie or the Misselto, It winde about thee to thy owne disgrace, And make thee slaue to brutish passions too. Be constant in thy loue, as chast not spotted, Loue well and long, but not in loue besotted.
The Argument. LOuers consent finds fit place of recourse, For Loues content chang'd into discontent, King Ninus tombe their sconce or sorrows source, To which a dreadfull Lyonesse is sent: Which Thisbe spies and flies: her bloudie tyre, Bereaues her Loue of life, and both expire. II. ELEGIE. WEll then we will repaire vnto that place, Where we shall haue fruition of our ioy, By Ninus tombe, farre from our parents face, Where mutuall Loue needs little to be coy: Where met, we may enioy that long-sought pleasure, Which Loue affoords, when Loue vnlocks her treasure. Thisbe was mute, in being mute she yeelded, Who knowes not Maides, by silence giue consent? So on her silence her assent was builded, Since in his loue she plac'd her sole content; Onward he goes most forward to obtaine, That which she wish'd, but Parents did restraine. And coming nigh vnto king Ninus Tombe, Erected neare a Christ all riueling, There as she mus'd a Lion fierce did come Forth of the groue, whence he his prey did bring.
Who all embrude with slaughter and with bloud, Came for to quench his thirst at that same floud. Thisbe perceiuing this enraged beast, Fled for her refuge to a hollow tree, Yet she for hast, what she suspected least, Let fall her Tire, and to her shelfe did flee; Where in the shade while she affrighted stood, The Lion tinct her virgine-tire with blood. And hauing now well drench'd his bloudie iawes, Making  vnto his shadie den, Young Pyramus for to obserue loues lawes, (Loues lawes must needs be kept) did thither tend, And coming neare, her could he not espie, But her vnhappie Tire di'd bloudily. Which he no sooner with his eyes beheld, Then he exclaim'd against his destinie, Since Thisbe was by his request compeld, To be a pray to Lions cruelty: And taking vp the bloud besmeared Tire, Amintas. like his end he doth conspire. Yet fore his end in dismall sort he cried, Fie on the fates, that did poore Thisbe kill, Fie on those ruthlesse gods that haue decreed, Wilde sauage beasts her crimson bloud to spill; But why do I stand arguing with fate, Lamenting ore her breathlesse corps too late?
For if thou lou'd her, shew thy loue in this Lost, to regaine her presence by thy death; Death, which hath left thee this poore Tire to kisse, On which I'le breath and kisse, and kisse and brea Farewell my loue, if Piramus did loue thee, He'le shew his loue, his loue shall be aboue thee. Strike home (fond man) and do not feare grim death, But meete him in the mid-way to thy graue; For Thisbes loue I gladly lose my breath, And that is all that Thisbe now can haue: And with this speech, deepe griefe cut off his word, He slue himselfe with his owne dismall sword. Thisbe long trembling in her hollow Caue, Came forth at last to meete her dearest loue. How apt is loue the chastest to depraue, Making a rauenous Uultur of a Doue; Wherefore in haste she hies her to the spring, Where she might heare a dolefull Syluane sing. And to receiue the sorrow more at large, Nigher she drew vnto that mournfull tune, Where like a merchant in a splitted barge, She stood amaz'd, and standing listned one. Sorting his griefe vnto her deare friends griefe, Whom she sought out, to yeeld her some reliefe. Good Siluane say (thus spake she) hauing found him, Did'st see a youth coast neare this darkesome way? For much I feare, some sauage beast hath wound him, If thou canst guide me to him, pray thee say:
Here is the Tombe where he appointed me, To stay for him, yet him I cannot see. Uirgin (quoth he) that youth you seeke is gone; Whither (kind Siluane?) I will after him, He shall not leaue me in this wood alone, For trust me Siluane I haue frighted bin, And by a dreadfull Lion so beset, As I am hardly my owne woman yet. See Ladie, see; with that he vanished, To waile the losse of Nais he had kept, Who by a Centaure lately rauished, Was quite conueyd away while th' Siluane slept. She turnes her eye, yet scarce will trust her eye, No, nor the place where she doth see him lye. Dead! why it cannot be, thus she began, Who could harme thee that nere did any harme, No not in thought to any liuing man? With that she felt his pulse if it were warme, But breathlesse he, key-cold as any stone, She lookes and weepes, and bathes him looking on. Yet long it was ere she could shed a teare, For greatest grieues are not by teares exprest, Deepe-rooted sorrowes greatest burden beare, Kept most in heart, but showne in eye the least. For lesser grieues haue eyes to bring them forth, But greatest still are strangled in their birth.
Griefe therefore doth rebound, and with rebound She shakes her Piramus and strokes his cheeke: Loue was all eares, for he did heare her sound, And mou'd his head from ground, but could not speake; Yet did he hold her hand, as if her hand Staid Deaths arrest, and could him countermand. And as a man who ship-wrack'd on the Sea, Not able to endure vnto the Port, Takes hold on wracke, which He as constantly Keepes in his hand, as he did labour for't: From which, no danger whatsoere beside him, Nor death it selfe can any way deuide him. Euen so did Piramus keepe in his armes, The choisest body of his chastest loue, Whereby he thinkes himselfe so free from harmes, As die he cannot till he thence remoue: Yet though it's death to him, since Thisbe would, He is contented to let go his hold. This seene, (sayes Thisbe) since thy loue is such, That to deuide thy selfe from thine owne loue, To thee's a second death or harder much, And mou'd by me thy hold thou doest remoue; Ere long will Thisbe shew her selfe to thee, An equall Mirror of loues constancie. Yet do I pray those friends who are conioyned To vs in Bloud, to take of vs compassion, That as our Loues, our corpes may be combined, With funerall rites after our countrie fashion:
And when to ashes they our corps shall burne, Let both our drearie ashes haue one vrne. Let both our graues (poore graues) be ioyn'd in one, As both our hearts were linked in one twist: And let our corps be couer'd with one stone, So may our bones so neerely ioyn'd be blist; For gods this priueledge to louers giue, When others die by death, in death they liue. By this young Thisbes speech was finished, Who was as wearie to enioy her life, As a loose Matron of her husbands bed, Or a young spend-thrift of his long-liu'd wife: Euen so was Thisbe, whom death did afford, Though not same hand to kill, yet selfe-same sword. But yet some Plant is still affectionate, Unto a Louers death, whose constancie Neuer doth alter from her wonted state, But perseueres in stedfast certaintie: For th' Mulberrie, seeing them Mourners lacke, Milke-white before put on a sable blacke. Morus thus altred in her former hue, Changing her colour for the death of Loue, Hath to this day her mourning-weed to shew; Well might they moue vs then, when they did moue The senslesse trees, who did so truly grieue, As for their sake they would their colour leaue.
The Argument. THe losse of Didoes honour and her loue, Are both bemon'd: Anna but all in vaine, Seekes to recomfort her: she seemes to proue No faith in strangers: she dissolues her traine: Incense is burn'd; a fire she doth deuise, Wherein she makes her selfe the sacrifice. III. ELEGIE. DIdo lamenting, that Aeneas should So soone conuert his loue to bitter hate, The thought whereof surpast a thousand fold, The losse of Scepter, honour, or estate: Curseth the hap she had to entertaine, Or giue such harbour to a thanklesse Swaine. Yet do not so (quoth she,) he's generous, Sprong from the Troian stocke and Progenie: Curse him not Dido, it were ominous To his proceedings and his dignitie; He did requite thy loue, thou knowst deuoutly, And did performe his Turnaments as stoutly. Sweete was the Pleasure, though the fruite be sower, Deare his embraces, kind his fauours too, Witnesse that Bower (aye me) that rosie Bower, In which heauen knowes, and few but heauen do know,
I gag'd my heart to him, he his to me, Which makes me ty'd in faith how ere he be. And he protested, Simple woman, thou To credit what a stranger had protested▪ For what is he that liues, and will not do As much or more, till he hath fully feasted His eager Appetite, which being allaid, He streight forgets the promise he hath made? And so did he, respectlesse of his vow, Or (breach of faith) which whatsoere he thinke, Will be reueng'd by Heauen▪ and sharply too, Gods do not euer sleepe when they do winke. For though they spare, They will at last strike home, And send Reuenge to th'infant in my wombe. Poore Orphane Infant, whose iniurious birth, As closely done, shall closely be suppressed, And haue a double Mother, Mee and Earth, And for thy Fathers sake a double chest: Whose Tombe shall be my wombe, whose drerie shrowd, Shall be my selfe, that gaue it life and food. This as she spake her Sister she came in, Aduising her vnto a milder course, Then to afflict her selfe with thought of him Whose heart was  of pittie and remorse; Wherefore (said she) since sorrow is in vaine, Forget his absence, that will salue your paine. Will salue my paine (quoth she!) and then she gro'd,
Cures to apply is easier then to cure: No, no, my sorrowes may be well bemon'd, But nere redrest: for th' eye of  too pure, To view my sinne, my soile▪ my guilt, my staine, Whose die's so deepe 'twill nere be white againe. Yet to preuent the scandall would ensue, If fame should know what hath in priuate bene, I'le lop this Branch, lest Time should say, it grew (Adulterate Issue) from the Carthage Queene: Which ere I do▪ lest I incurre heauens hate, With Incense burn'd, their wrath I'le expiate. Wherewith I'le purge (if such may purged be) The fact I did, which grieues me that I did, Staining my honour with his periurie, Which gods do see, though it from man be hid: For this (deare sister) build me here a fire, To sacrifice my shame, appease heauens ire. Anna, for so her Sister hight, doth rere This fatall pile, preparing all things meete For such a sacrifice, as Iuniper, Spicknarde, and Mirrhe, to make the Incense sweete, Unknowne to what her Sister did intend, Whose faire pretence came to a timelesse end. Sister (quoth Dido) now you may be gone, Sweete is Deuotion that is most retir'd, Go you aside, and leaue me here alone, Which Anna did as Dido had requir'd: Who now alone with heauen-erected eyes,
Her wofull selfe she makes the sacrifice. Anna retir'd, did heare her Sister shrike, With which at first affrighted, she made haste, To see th'euent, the sight whereof did strike Such a distraction in her, as it past The bounds of Nature, where experience tries, More sorrow's in the heart then in the eyes. At last her eyes long shut vnsealed were, To eye that mournfull Obiect, now halfe turn'd To mouldred ashes, for it did appeare, As halfe were scorch'd, the other halfe were burn'd: Which seene, she cries, and turnes away her sight, Black woe betide them that such guests inuite. Anna thus left alone, yet mindfull too, Of Didoes honour, reares a Princely shrine, The like whereof that Age could neuer show, Nor any Age, till Artemisias time:Wie to Mau∣lus king of Ca▪ a. vid. Plutar.  Apotheg. On which was this engrauen: Loue was my losse, Rich was my Crowne, yet could not cure my crosse. Thus Dido di'd, who was not much vnlike Unto the Countriman who nourished The dead-staru'd Uiper, that vngratefull snake,Latet Anguis  herba. Who reft him life, that it had cherished: So Dido she, whose fall my Muse recites,ec Hospes ab lospite tutus. Lies slaine by him, whom she in loue inuites.
AN ELEGIE VPON THESE ELEGIES. LEt fond Leander warne thee, to remaine Upon the Riuer banke in safetie: Let Piramus rash fact thy hand restraine, Too deare costs Loue, mix'd with such crueltie: Lastly, let Dido warne thee by her end, To trie that Guest thou makes thy bosome friend. Venit amor grauius quo serius vrimur intus, Vrimur, & caecum pectora vulnus habent.
THE SECOND SECTION OF DIVINE AND MORALL SATYRES: With AN ADIVNCT VPON THE PRECEDENT; WHEREBY THE Argument with the first cause of publishing these Satyres, be euidently related. Disce & doce. LONDON, Printed for RICHARD WHITAKER. 1621.
TO THE WOR∣THIE CHERISHER AND NOVRISHER OF ALL GENE∣rous studies, S. W. C. Knight, R. B. His affectionate Country-man wisheth the increase of all honour, health, and happinesse. SIR, When I had compos'd these rag∣ged lines, Much like the Beare who brings her young ones forth, In no one part well featur'd, she repines, That such a lumpe of flesh should haue a birth: Which to reforme, she's said to vndertake A second taske, and licks them into shape. So I producing these vnriper seedes, Scarce growne to their perfection, knew not how, (Since different humour, different censure breeds) How they should come to ripenesse, but by you:
Whose faire acceptance may such count'nance show, As you may others moue to grace them too. Nor do I doubt but these shall purchase grace, 'Mongst such as honour vertue, for how low So'ere the style be, Subiect is not base, But full of Diuine matter; and I know, The Sunne giues life, as well to simple weeds, As vnto flowers or other fruitfull seeds. Yours in all faithfull Obseruance, Richard Brathwayte, Musophylus. Vpon the Dedicatorie. THough he (and happie he) bereft by fate, To whom I meant this worke to dedicate, This shall find shelter in his liuing name, He's chang'd indeed, but I am still the same.
The Argument. of Elpenor an Epicure, liuing sensually in a Caue, respectlesse of the soules eternitie. ELpenor, who long time liuing (as the Dormouse) in the caue of sen∣sualitie and securitie, rested care∣lesse of a future blessing, as one rauished with the present delight of carnall libertie, became at last restrained by the vertuous edict of a gracious Em∣perour, by whom he was exiled and banished, not onely from the Princes Court, but from the vt∣most coasts of Arcadia wherein he liued. Now it chanced, that during such time as he remained in Cadmos a Satyrist of no lesse respect then appro∣ued grauitie, well obseruing the impietie of Elpe∣nor, as also the deserued censure which his Epicu∣reall life had incurred; endeuoured to describe his condigne fall, with no lesse pregnancie of wit, and maturitie of iudgement, then a setled seuerity in reprehension of his godlesse opinions: which Description he fixed (as may be imagined) vpon the Portall gate, where he might of necessitie see his owne impietie as in a glasse transparent, per∣spicuously demonstrated. What discontent he
conceiued in the displaying of his owne shame, may be coniectured by the subiect of this Inue∣ction, taxing him of his infamous life, the onely occasion of his obscure end: whose fortunes were aforetime most eminent, now most deiected. Et quanta est infaelicitas, fuisse faelicem, &c? Boaethiu THE FIRST SATYRE. ELpenor groueling in his duskie caue, Secure of God or Gods high prouidence, Nought but luxurious dishes seemes to craue, To satisfie the appetite of sence. He spurnes at heauen, contemnes all supreme power, Priding in that will perish in an houre. God is of no respect with Epicures, Sencelesse of of heauen or minds tranquilitie, Sencelesse of Hell, which euermore endures, Glad to receiue earths ioyes satietie: Where rapt with Obiects of deceiuing Pleasure, They liue to sin, but to repent at leasure. Is not that Statue (say Elpenor) thine, With eyes-inflam'd and palsie-shaking hand, Vpon whose fore-head's writ, Abuse of time? I know it is, for I do see it stand Neare Baccus shrine, where either drinkes to other, Healths to Eryca, their lasciuious Mother. Where Syren voyces so apply the eare, With an affected melodie, that earth
Might a phantasticke Paradise appeare, Through consort of an vniuersall mirth, Which these inchanting harmonists did vse, To th'wofull friends of wandring Ithacus. But who is He that seemes to challenge thee, Yet staggers in his challenge? O I know him, It's Hans the Dutch man, new arriu'd from Sea, Stand fast Elpenor, if thou'lt ouerthrow him. But why enioyne I that thou canst not do, Halfe of a stand were well betwixt you two. And much I doubt, lest Cripple-like you grow, So long it is, as it is out of mind, Since you were seene by any man to go, Which makes me heare your legs are hard to find: For vse brings on Perfection, and I feare Your dropfie-legs are out of vse to beare. See thou vnweldy wretch, that fatall shelfe, To which thou art declining, being growne A heauie vselesse burthen to thy selfe, In whom no glimpse of vertue may be showne: A Barmie leaking vessell (which in troth) For want of reason is fill'd vp with froth. Aged Turpilio grones at mispent time, Wishing he had his youth to passe againe: For then He would not vse't as thou doest thine, But mone the houres which He hath spent in vaine. But Time runs on, and will not make returne, When Death succeeds, whom no man can adiourne.
And seest thou this, and wilt thou not prouide For Deaths arrest, whose sad approch will be So full of horror, as thou scarce shalt bide, So grim he is, that He should looke on thee? And yet He will, for he no diffrence makes, Twixt rich and poore, but whom He likes he takes. Thy Prince thou seest, whose vertues are so pure He cannot breath on vice, hath thee exil'd, Forth of his royall confines, to secure His Realme the more, lest it should be defil'd By thy deprau'd example, which once stain'd, (So ranke is vice) would hardly be reclaim'd. Trunke of Confusion, which deriues thy being From no supernall essence for with it, Thy works, words, motions haue but small agreeing, But from securitie, where thou doest sit; Feeding thy vast-insatiate appetite, With euery day new dishes of delight. O rouse thy selfe from that obscurest vale, And sing a thankefull Hymne vnto thy Maker, Creepe not vpon thy bellie like the Snaile, But like the Larke mount vp to thy Creator; Adorning thee with reason, sense and forme, All lost in thee, through want of Grace forlorne. Honour doth ill become the slothfull man, Who Zanie- like becomes a slaue to pleasure, For He, when vrgent causes moue Him, than Neglects Occasion, and reserues that leasure,
Which might haue bene employd in cares of state, For his delights, bought at too high a rate. This thy experience tells thee, whose estate Once high, now low, made subiect to disgrace, Shewes thou art chang'd from what thou was of late, Yet to my iudgement in a better case: So thou consider th'state from whence thou came, And leaue that vice which did procure the same. But doubt I must, (ô that my doubts were vaine) Such great expence is made of precious time, As 'twill be much to do to wash the staine Of that enormious loathsome life of thine. YetSicut nullus est locus in quo malum nō per∣petratur, ita nullus sit locus in quo de malo poenitentia non agatur. Teares haue power, and they are soueraigne too, And may do more then any else can do. Then comfort take, yet comfort mixe with teares, ThouCadmos a hi by Laodicea out of which issueth the Riuer Lycus, it taketh this name from Cad∣mus sonne to A∣genor king of Phaenicia. Cadmos leaues, and it's thy natiue soile; Suppose it be, each coast or clime appeares The good-mans wished Country, which blest style, Exceeds all worldly comfort, which thou had, For this is passing good, that passing bad. I do not speake, as those whose guilded breath, Traines on the vicious with deceiptfull hope; For I haue set before thee life and death, And this I aim'd to make my chiefest scope: That if reward of life could no way gaine thee, The feare of death & vengeance might reclaime thee. Life as a Crowne or Diadem is due,
To such whose wayes are not in Error led, Death as a guerdon doth to such accrue, Whose carnall hearts with pleasures captiued, Thinke not on Death, till Death his flag display, And now secure shall take their life away. Turne then vnto the coast of Arcadie, From whence thou wast exil'd, and there suruey The vertues of that Prince did banish thee, And weigh the cause why there thou might not stay: Which done, seeke to regaine thy Princes loue, But chiefly His, that is thy Prince aboue. The Argument. COrnelia wife to Pompey, surnamed the Great, after her husbands ouerthrow in Pharsalia, slaine within short time after by the procurement of Septimius in the kingdome of Egypt; became much distressed with the discomfort of her losse, and the sorrowfull issue of his death. Which is as passionately expressed by Lucan in Pompeies ex∣postulation with Cornelia his beloued Ladie,—Quid perdis tempora luctu? Cornelia thus de∣priued of all assistants saue Teares (sorrowes he∣reditarie treasures) for the better reliefe of her estate (the poore remainder of her fortunes) sued out a petition vnto the Emperour Caesar, whose
royall clemency (as she thought) could not choose but take pittie on the wife, whose husband was become a bootie to his Conquest. But how rea∣sonable soeuer her demands were, it skilled not, for by the corrupt and indirect dealing of Caelius and Tuberculus she was resisted. The Satyrist therefore in deploring of Cornelia's miserie, and inueying against the two Courtiers corruption, morally dilateth on the desolate estate of a for∣lorne widdow, and the sinister practises of corrupt Aduocates. THE SECOND SATYRE. POmpey the Great no sooner was interr'd, But poore Cornelia his distressed wife, To her deceassed Lords estate preferr'd, Was drawne by Consul Asper into strife: And so opprest by hote pursuite of foes, That she deuoid of friends was fraught with woes. She, wofull she, lest she should lose her state, Makes meanes toA prodigall Courtier, but in great fauour with Caesar. Caelius to preferre her suite, Which he's content to do, but at such rate, As 'twill cost deare to bring the cause about: Yet she remedilesse, to worke her peace, Stood not much on't, but did the Courtier please. Caelius possest of his iniurious fee, Which he consum'd in riotous expence, Forgot the widdows cause dishonestlie, Without remorse or touch of conscience:
For vnder hand (as Courtiers vse to do) He takes a priuate bribe of Asper too. Cornelia now in hope of good successe, Comes vnto Caelius as her purchas'd friend, And humbly craues to know what's her redresse, Or in what sort her suite is like to end: Where He as strangely answers her demand, And say's, her suite came neuer to his hand. No suite! (thus did this Matron streight reply) O Rome where is thyIustice may be ptly compared to the Celedonie stone, which re∣taineth her ver∣ue no longer then it is rubbed with gold. Iustice now enthron'd, Thou that didst vse to heare a widdow crie, And right her cause as thou her wrongs bemon'd! But spare Cornelia, what reliefe can come Frō corrupt Courts, where gold makes Consuls dumbe? If my much-honor'd Lord, whose Country loue Reft him of breath, should see this present time, How gifs can limit Iustice, would't not moue His Royall spirit, seeing me and mine, Whose onely comfort's this, we may repose, And ioy in this, we haue no more to lose? Whilest wrong'd Cornelia sat thus pensiuely, One of especiall esteeme with Pompey before  ouerthrow. Tuberculus a Courtier past that way, Who in compassion of her miserie, Knowne to her selfe not to her grieues, did stay; For generous minds are neuer more exprest, Then in applying comfort to th' distrest. Ladie (quoth he) if I could ease your griefe,
The loue I owe vnto your familie, Me thinks might promise to your selfe reliefe, Impart them then, what ere your sorrowes be: Cures haue bene wrought where little was expected, For where the mind is willing, ought's effected. She hearing him so vertuously inclin'd, Prone vnto pittie, sighing did declare, How that her sonne young Pompey was confin'd,Sext. Pompe. Which was the greatest subiect of her care: Whom if He would make meanes for to release, The current of her sorrowes soone would ceasse. Another suite I haue, which Asper moues, To force me from my right of widdowhood, Wherein his worser cause the better proues, ForInimieiti potentum vio∣lentae. Senec. mightie men can hardly be withstood: In these I must intreate your Lordships care, In lieu whereof I'le gratifie with prayer. Tuberculus did answer her demands, But he expectedLike Verconiu in the time of Alexander Se∣uerus, who pre∣tending familia∣ritie with the Emperour, took mens mony for preferring thei suites, abused them, & did them no good at all: a last conuented before the Em∣perour, he wa iudged to be hanged vp in a chimney, and s perish with smoke, for that he sold smoke t the people. Lampid. in Seu. Verco. ointment, and delaying, To giue her further comfort, there He stands, He for his fee, she for her cause stood praying. Cornelia well perceiuing what He would, Good gods (quoth she) is Iustice wholly sould? How do you meane (quoth he) it is our meanes, Could we be thus enameld euery day, Or in such port maintaine our fauning friends, If we receiu'd not profit by delay? No Ladie, no, who in these dayes do liue,
And would haue Iustice, must not sticke to giue. Thus was Cornelia crost, her meanes preuented, No comfort now remaining saue despaire; Wherefore (perforce) she rests hope-reft, contented To lose the sight of her confined heire, Who liues restrain'd: Asper her state hath got, And poore Cornelia with her cause forgot. The Argument of Lucian. LVcian a professed enemy to Christ, detracting much from the deuine & sole-healthfull My∣steries of our Redemptiō, wherby he became odi∣ous to the all-seeing veritie; chanced to trauell for delight, (as one of generall obseruation) into for∣raine places: where (as heauens iust doome would haue it) he was worried by dogs, as a iust reward for his impious and egregious contempt towards God; reuiling that all-seeing Maiestie of Christ with the sacred office of his Ministers, and like a snarling or biting Curre, barking at the admirable and ineffable workes which were wrought by Gods omnipotencie: for which cause God accor∣dingly punished him. A remarkable spectacle to all ensuing ages, conclúding emphatically with the Satyrist.
Ingeniosus erat, superum sed acerrimus hostis, At canis est superum tempore praeda canum. Wittie, but foe to God, who long in vaine, Barking at God, by barking currs was slaine. The Satyre followeth, Morally applyed. THE THIRD SATYRE. INgenious Lucian, ripe in poesie, Apt to compose, and pregnant to inuent, Well read in secrets of Phylosophie,In vit. Luci. And in all Morall knowledge excellent; For all these rarer parts vnto him giuen, Ceass'd not toIsti latrant non mordent, non noceut: August. barke against the power of heauen. This snarling Curre, for he detracted God, As profest enemie to pietie, Chanced to trauell, where Gods irefull rod Made him a witnesse to posteritie; For this sameThus as he ba k'd against the God of heauen, To barking curr he for a prey w giuen. wretch who bark'd against heauens power, Did barking currs (such was heauens doome) deure. Soile to his soule, and so to Christs profession, For He no Christ profest, but thought't a scorne That God made man, from God should haue cōmission, Without mans helpe to be of Uirgin borne: Yet see his fall, who did himselfe deceiue, Unpitied dies, and dying ha's no graue. What's Sions peace (sayes He) there's no such place;The Atheists ∣pinion. Earth hath her Sion, if we ayme our care At any other Mansion, it's a chase
So fruitlesse, as if we should beate the ayre, Or plant our hope in things which cannot be, And such's our trust in fained Deitie. Thou vglie visard, that with faire pretence Of Morall discipline shadowes thy sin, Reclaime thy selfe by timely penitence, And loath that horrid Caue thou wallowest in: Thy sin's deepe-dide, yet not of that deepe staine, But Teares & Prayers may make them white againe.Lachymae erbis, suspiria ois immisce∣ntur. Hast thou no Anchor to relie vpon?Anchora cui pes est innixa, Angularis lapis  quem funda∣. No Refuge nor no Recluse for thy hope? Behold thy Iesus he's thy corner stone, Make him thy ayme, thy succour, shelter, scope, And he'le receiue thee in the Throne of blesse,. The boundlesse Ocean of all happinesse. Returne thou wicked Lucian, make thy verse Thy Retractation, be not ouerbold,Vt medicus, erite tractat ulnera, Qi o∣era retractat  edi∣a. Lest when good-men shall view thy forlorne hearse, In thy reproch they cause this to be told To after-ages: Here he lies intert'd, Who erring knew, and in his knowledge err'd.Errando dis∣o. Sweete and delightfull Poems canst thou make,Qualis ergo st ista, quae am multa de aeteris nouit,  se qualiter acta sit pror∣us ignorat August. Of Hymen rites, or Venus dalliance, And pleasant seemes the labour thou doest take, While to thy Pipe deluded Louers dance: But in such sacred measures thou art slow, As teach men how to liue, and what to know.
Mirrha the wanton mother of a wanton, Gamesome the Mother and the Daughter too, Giues a fit subiect for thy Muse to chant on, Relating what a Louer ought to do; In which lasciuious straine, fond Loue is brought To hate what's good, but to affect what's naught. Thou canst report how Romanes ioyned were,Vid. Tit. Liu. in Dec. 1. & 3. Ouid. in fast. First with the Sabines, and what strange delights Tooke their inuention from those feasts were there, Duly solemniz'd on their nuptiall nights; Of Sphinx, Charybdis, Scilla, Ctesiphon, With Proetus letters against Who slue the two monsters Chymera and Solymos in Ly∣cia. Bellerophon. These thou canst feature as Apelles, He The Prince of painters could not better show Their formes, then thou their natures, which may be Portrayers of thy wit and learning too: But what are these but shadowes, if thou moue Thy eye to those blest obiects are aboue? Lend but thy eare to aerie warbling Birds, Which day by day sing pleasant madrigals; And thou shalt heare what praise the Larke affoords,Larke. Whilest with sweete Hymnes she on her maker cals, A laudes i∣cendo dicitur Alauda. Where each repayes their due in their degree, And much abashd do rest asham'd of thee. The flower which hath no sense, nor hath no feeling, Nor apprehends the difference of things, Performes her office in delight of smelling, Likewise the tree most fruitfull blossoms brings:
The Serpent, Adder, and each crauling worme, Haue mutuall duties giuen them with their forme. The Basiliske the The Pismire and Locust (of all other crea∣tures) haue no king nor leader. vid. AElian, & Plin. in natur. Hist. king of Serpents is, The Lion of all beasts, the Cedar tree Is chiefe of Trees, Leuiathan of fish, And man ore these hath sole supremacie: Thus euery Creature in her seuerall kind, Hath seuerall Lords and limits her assign'd. Thou Lucian art endu'd  at these want, And canst distinguish betwixt good and ill, Yet thou denies what other Creatures grant, And which is worse, thou so continuest still: Thou laughs at Adams fall, and thinks't ashame, Man should auouch an Apple caus'd the same. Wo worth that fruite that had so bitter taste, Bringing Perdition to the soule of man, That free-borne Creature, which so farre surpast Mans fraile condition when it first began; That was an Apple that too dearely cost, Which made so many soules for euer lost. If I should Catechise thee Lucian, And tell the vertue of each seuerall thing; How reason first was distribute to man, And how the earth globe-like in aire doth hing, The secret grouth of Plants which daily grow, Yet Spicas ere∣uisse cernimus, eas autem quando ceue∣runt non cer∣nimus. how or when no humane sense can know.
The That starrie Gallerie embos with gold, fretted with orbs of Christall, sil∣uer'd ouer, with pearle pau'd, roofed with an Agget couer. Fabrick of the heauen, whose eminence Shewes admiration to vs that behold Her glorious Bodies sacred influence, Whose distinct Motion, who is't can vnfold? None but the Author and the founder can, For it exceedes the reach of any man. If I should question thee, whence these deriue Their proper Motion, it would thee behooue To yeeld, that some to these do Motion giue, Since what se're moues doth by another moue: Which thou confirmes and adds, nought vnder Sunne Is done in these, but is by Nature done. So thou Holding with Albumazar tha his leading the children of Is∣rael ouer the Red sea, was n more but obser∣uing the influ∣ence of Starres, and waining season of the Moone that withdraweth the tides; and that miraculous issu∣ing of water ou of the rocke, by the stroke of a rod was no more, but noting those spring-heads, whereto the wild asses resor∣ted to quench their thirst. referrs that wonderfull Creation, After the Deluge to a mortall wight, Discoursing vainly how Deucalion, Refurnish'd earth which was vnpeopled quite; But thou deceiued art, it's nothing so, For it was God that gaue increase to Noe. We are his clay, we must confesse his power, He is our Potter, whose deuine command Can dash vs earthen vessels in one Whom th' morning sees so proudly go, ere euening come may lie full low, Senec. houre, Subiect vnto the iudgement of his hand; For he no sooner shall withdraw his breath, Then Man leaues to be Man, and welcomes death. Heauens power to which no Mortall can extend, (Not to be argued or disputed on,) Because it's not in Man to comprehend, The radiant Splendor of the glorious Sunne:
Much lesse profounder secrets, which were fram'd, For admiration, not to be prophan'd. We haue heard of diuerse, exem∣plarily punished euen in that wherein they cō∣emptuously pro∣faned; as Iulian, Herodias, Bal∣hasar, and Thy∣melicus the en∣terlude-plaier; who dancing vpon the scaffold in a Cope (a  of the Church) fell downe dead. Thymelico sl∣tatori, &c. Vid. Val. Maxi. lib. 1. cap. 2. Prophan'd, if nam'd without due reuerence, To that Supreme all-working Maiestie, Whose Palme containes this Earths circumference, Whose praise takes accent from heauens Hierarchie. Let not, O let not him who gaue man tongue, To yeeld him praise, for silence make it dumbe. Thou canst compose a song of Shepheards liues, Spent in a pleasant veine of Recreation, How they sit chatting with their wanton wiues, Tricking and toying in a Shepheards fashion: This thou canst do, and it's done pretily, For it shews wit, yet spent vnfittingly. O if thou would confine thy selfe in reason, And leaue fond Poems of a doting Louer, Obseruing Natures tone, tune, time, and season, How well would these seeme to that powerfull mouer; Whose eyes are pure, and of that piercing sight, As they loue light, but hate such works are light. But O too vaine's the current of thy vaine, Soild with the Motiues of vntamed lust, Which layes vpon thy Name that endlesse shame, As shall suruiue, when thou return'd to dust, Shalt much lament those Poems thou hast writ, Through th'light conceit of thy licentious wit. Nor is it gaine mou's thee to prostitute,
That precious talent which thou doest possesse; No, it's delight thou hast to gaine repute, 'Mongst men madeSicut Bellu sunt humanae, ita homine sunt belluini. beasts through their voluptuousnes O hate that affectation, lest this shelfe, Of vaine applause do ruinate thy selfe! For such esteeme, what honour wil't afford, What comfort in the graue, where thou lies dead; When thy lasciuiousBy those st∣dies, which I affected, am I condemned, by those I praised, am I disparra∣ged. Aug. works shall beare record, Of what was by thee writ or published? Nay 'twill preiudice thee, it cannot chuse, Vaine's that opinion ill-men haue of vs. Thus thou sustaines the height of miserie, To see aTwo brothers, sonnes to Argi a Propheesse i the temple of Iuno. Cleobes and Biton grac'd, With honour, fame, desertfull dignitie, Thy glory prun'd, thy laurell-wreath defac'd: The triumphs of thy wit so quite forgot, As if (so fickle's fame) thou flourish'd not. Nor can we say those slourish, whose renowne Consists in praise of vice, for though they seem Vnto the worlds eye so fully knowne, Yet they shall be as if they had not bene; When vice, which to aduance was their desire, Shall melt away as waxe before the fire. Rest not, but labour Lucian to preferre The sage contents of sacred Mysteries, Before such Rithms as teach men how to erre, Whose best instructions are but vanities; Which if thou do, wits Treasure shall increase,
And crowne thee Laureat in the Land of peace. Yet reade not so, as not to vnderstand The graue remainders of Times ancient Booke; For what a follie is't to haue in hand Bookes nere red ouer! This, thatIn Demo∣sthene magna pars Demo∣sthenis abest, um legitur & non auditur. Sage for sooke, When in his course of reading He did vse, The choycest flowers in euery worke to chuse. Thus Lucian haue I warn'd thee to forbeare, That snarling humour, of detracting such Whose vertues shine as Starres in highest Sphaere, Whose worthie Liues can well abide the tutch; Defame notEa sola neque datur dono ne∣que accipitur. Salus. vertue, rather emulate, Good-mens example, that's a vertuous hate. The Argument of Stesichorus. STesichorus is fained to haue lost his eyes for dis∣praising Helen of Greece, and afterwards to haue recouered the same by praising her. The Mo∣rall alludeth to such, who ouerborne with the vn∣bounded height of their owne conceit, distaste the opinion of a multitude, to make their owne ir∣regular iudgement passe for current. These (as we say) vse euer to swim against the streame, affecting that least, which seemes approued by the most: scorning to guide their ship by anothers Card,
measure their life by anothers line, or walke in a common path. Some other application may this Morall make, as One vpon this fable would haue Stesihorus to shadow a Malecontent, by whom things generally esteemed vse to be most disua∣lued, delighting in nothing more then opposi∣tion. Others by way of similitude compare him to One, who by much gazing on the Sunne be∣comes di-sighted; so He, by too intentiue fixing his eye vpon beautie, became blinded: the deuine application whereof I leaue to euery mans pecu∣liar conceite, not louing to presse these further, then their owne natiue sence will beare. The sub∣iect, where of this Satyre intreateth, more particu∣larly applyed, may chance to glance at some whose singularitie gaines them Opinion aboue reason; but silence is their best salue, labouring ra∣ther to redeeme the time, then reueale their owne shame. Let them be of more humble nature, and I will spare to prosecute any further. Nihil tam vo∣lucre est quàm maledictum, the poyson whereof is as strong as the passage swift; the vnworthinesse of which condition as I haue euer loathed, so a milde and temperate reproofe for vertues sake haue I euer loued: not ignorant, how some vices (as other sores) are better cured by lenitiues then corasiues, lest the Patient crie out—Grauiora sunt, haud feram. Iudge of the Satyre.
THE FOVRTH SATYRE. STesichorusA lyrick Poet, famous for his sweete and plea∣sing veine. like Zeuxes cannot paint, Nor like Lysippus can delineate; For then He would giue that accomplishment To Hellens beautie, as might propagate Her fame to following times, when Ages passe, Which by Record might shew what Hellen was. Blind Byard now, see how thy iudgement err'd, By gazing long n beautie thou art blind, Recanting all too late what thou auerr'd, So diffrent is th'opinion of that mind, Where onely selfe-conceit drawes men to shew Their priuate iudgement, giuen they care not how. Was she not faire that made all Troy to burne, That made Prince Paris wander to and fro, That made Queene Hecuba so sore to mourne, Both for her selfe and for her Issue too? Yes she was faire, how ere thy eye esteeme her, Nor can conceit of one make beauty meaner. What made stout Menelaus passe the Sea? What Telamon to rig his well-mann'd ship, What Aiax, what Achylles? It was she, Whose sweete ambrosiacke breath and cherri-lip, Relish'd of Nectar, and infus'd a spirit, In Cowards breasts, to gaine true fame by merit. Old subtill Sinon can prepare assault,
Against the strongest battlements of Troy, Whilest armed Grecians in that ribbed vault, Prest for encounter, purpos'd to destroy, Issue from Pallas horse, so aptlyIt was made by Phereclus, who was after slaine by Merion in the siege of Troy. madè, As Troy had cause to curse the cunning Iade. Art thou perswaded yet to praise her beautie, Sith Nature hath surpast Her selfe in skill, As one ingag'd in some respect of dutie, Unto her sex, to make them honor'd still? O be perswaded, to her shrine repaire, For howsoere thou saies, thou thinks Her faire! Faire in proportion, motiue in her pace, An eye as chearefull as the morning-Sunne, Her haire, her smile, her well-beseeming grace, By which so many Troians were vndone: In briefe, examine Her from top to toe, And then admire each part accomplish'd so. Such admiration as like Linceus eyes, Transparent Brightnesse seemes to penetrate: For if Apollo seeing Daphnes thighes, Wau'd by the Easterne winde, forgot his state, Himselfe and all, Proportion well may moue, Since gods themselues were tost by gusts of loue. Did not faire Phyllis dote vpon a Swaine, She passing faire, and he a witherd lad, Whence we may reason, none can loue restraine, Nor set it limits which it neuer had: For when we haue done all that we can do,
It will haue th'course and readie passage too. Yet Loue's so pure it can endure no staine, Stain'd Loue is lust, which is not in her brest: Spotlesse content she seekes, which if she gaine, She freely liues, and fairely takes her rest: But barr'd of this, without repose she lies, And dying liues, and liuing loathed dies. It is not VenusNaeuus erat veneri species▪ Helenae{que} ci∣catrix gloria, quae Paridem fecit amore pa∣rem. mole nor Hellens scarre, Adds fuell to affection, for though these Gaue beautie summons to commence Loues warre, Yet outward graces do but onely please, As Obiects do the eye; where Loues best part Consists not in the eye, but in the Heart. But now to thee, who did dispraise that faire, Whose beautie ruin'd Cities, now disclaime Thy purblind iudgement, and withall compare Hellen with Hero, or some choicer Dame: And then it may beLumie qui semper prodi∣tur ipse suo. Cupid will restore Thine eyes to thee, which He put out before. The Argument of Pigmalion. PIgmalion, whom no surpassing beautie in all Cyprus could captiuate, at last hauing made a curious Image or Picture of an amiable woman,
was so rauished with the accomplished propor∣tion of his owne worke, that enamoured there∣with, He intreated Uenus to put life in his Image, which with such Artfull delineature he had composed. Venus taking commiseration vpon his prayers and teares, infused life in his Picture, whereof He begat a beautifull daughter called Papho, from whom (or from Mount Paphos) Ve∣nus is said to haue taken her name, styled some∣times by the Poets Eryca, sometimes Paphia: whose feasts with all ceremoniall rites vsually per∣formed in the honour of an immortall goddesse, were originally solemnized and celebrated onely by the Shepheards of those Mountaines, but after∣wards more generally obserued. The Morall in∣cludethNote this you painted faces, whose natiue Countrey (once white Albion) is become reddish, with blushing at your vanities. the vaine and foolish Loues of such as are besotted on euery idle picture or painted Image, whose selfe-conceited vanitie makes beauty their Idoll, becoming Creatures of their owne making, as if they dis-esteemed the creation of their Ma∣ker. The Satyre though compendious, compriseth much matter. Reade it, and make vse of the se∣quele. THE FIFT SATYRE. PIgmalion rare, in rare Proportions making, Yet not in quickning that which He had framed, So exquisite in artfull curious shaping, In nought (if Zeuxes iudgd) could He be blamed: Yet skillfull though He were in formes contriuing, Yet not so skilfull in those formes reuiuing.
Reuiu'd! I wrote amisse, they neuer liued: Improper then to say, they were reuiued. He builds him Like those Pul∣inaria erected by the heathen for their Pagan images. Temples for his Image-gods, And much beotted with their faire aspect, In admiration of his worke, He nods, And shakes his Head, and tenders them respect; I cannot tell (quoth He) what passion moues me, But sure I am (quoth He) faire Saint I loue thee, Thou art my handie-worke, I wish my wife, If to thy faire Proportion thou hadst life. Canst thou Pigmalion dote so on shrines, On liuelesse Pictures, that was neuer rapt With any beautie Cyprus Ile confines? These (foolish man) be for thy Loue vnapt; They cannot answer Loue for Loue againe, Then fond Pigmalion do thy Loue restraine; Such enslesse creatures as haue onely being, Haue with embraces but an harsh agreeing. They haue no moysture in their key cold lips, No pleasure in their smile, their colour stands; Whilest yuthfull Ladies on the pauement trips, They stand as Pictures Quid agunt in corpore casto cerussa & mi∣nium, centum{que} venena colorū Victor. ad Sal∣onem. should, with saplesse hands; And well thou knowes, if Passiue be not mouing, The Actiue part can yeeld small fruits of louing: Why art thou so besotted till with woing, Since there's no comfort when it comes to doing? Can any idle Idoll without breath, Giue thee a gracefull answer to thy suite?
Nay rather like dead corps surpriz'd by death, It answers silence when thou speakes vnto't. Desist then (fond Pigmalion) and restraine To loue that Creature cannot loue againe; What will it pleasure thee a shrine to wed, That can afford no pleasure in thy bed? Thou art not so —Sie coniu∣ge Caelebs Viuebat, thala mique diu con∣sorte . Metam. 10. lib. bewitcht with any beautie, How faire sore wthin thy Natiue Ile, No Nimph can moue thy Loue, or force thy dutie, As doth this Picture, whose art-forcing smile Can giue thee small content, and wherefore then Should painted Statues so entangle men? It's loue thou sayest, Pigmalion, that doth moue thee, But thou loues such as cannot say they loue thee. Turne thee vnto leud Pasyphaes lust, Wife to a braue and valiant Minos king of Crete. Champion, Who on a Bull (see how affection must Passe Reasons limit) fondly dotes vpon; Non frustra dictus Bos ouis Imbr Olor, Whence our En∣glish Poet as pro∣perly annexed this Disticke, imitating the former in matter and manner: In vaine Ioue was not stil'd right sure I am, From th'shape  tooke of Bull, sheepe, shower, and swan. vid. Ouid. in Metamorph. Ioue on a Heifer, Danae of a shower, Such is the vertue of loues-working power: No time, place, obiect, subiect, circumstance, Can still Loues pipe, when Cupid leades the dance. Then who will aske the reason of thy Loue, Which shewes most strength when she can shew least rea∣son, And cannot Proteus-like with each blast moue, Nor free her selfe from soule-deluding treason! She like the Moone is not each month in waine, For th'obiect of her loue is of that straine, Nor land, nor sea, nor tempests though they thwart her
Can fro her Sphere by Opposition part her. Do but torment Her with the sight of woe, Uexe her with anguish and with discontent, She will not make her friend in heart, her foe; No, if she were with depth of sorrowes spent; Yet like Which is ele∣gantly expressed by our moderne Poet. Anthaeus, when she's most cast downe, She gathers strength, and is not ouerthrowne: She cannot breake her vow, her legall oath,Whose fall (An∣thaeus-like) pro∣uok'd him more, And made him stronger then he was before. But meanes (if life permit) to keepe them both. Then (honour'd Picture) let me thee embrace; With that He hugd it in his lustfull armes, And now and then He smeer'd the Pictures face, Praying the gods to keepe it from all harmes: And prayed (a senslesse prayer) Ioue to defend, His Picture from diseases to the end; So to enioy her dalliance with more pleasure, Whose presence He esteem'd the precious't Treasure. Each euen he vs'd to dresse it for his bed, For in a gowne of Tissue was it clothed, And put a night-tyre on it's iuorie head, And when night came He made it be vnclothed; Where, lest He should his lustfull fauours hide, He vs'd to lay the Picture by his side, Where He drew to it as He saw it lie, But when it would not be, He wish'd to die. Ungratefull Creature (would Pigmalion say) That neuer doest afford one smile on me, That dallies thus with thee, each night, each day;
Faire Saint, what needes this curiositie? While with a Oscula dat reddi{que} putat oquiturque  netque. Met 10. lib. kisse He oft his speech would breake, By threats or faire intreats to make it speake: And when He had his fruitlsse pratling done, He would in rage call it an Idoll dumbe. But angrie with himselfe, He streight would blame His too rash furie, crauing pardon too, That he should stile it with so harsh a Name, And wish'd him powre to die, or it to do, Swearing by heauen, if sheete did chance to mue, It was the nimble action of his Loue. Coy-toying Girle (quoth He) what meaneth this, Is it your modestie, you will not kisse? Nought though it answer'd, he would prosecute His wooing taske, as if it stood denying, And thus would vrge it; Deare accept my suite, Be not so fearefull, feare thou not espying, I haue excuses store, then listen me; For I will vow I was enam'ling thee: Then sport thee wench, securely frolick it, That I on thee a Niobe may get. Thus whilest He vainely pratled to his Shrine, Aurora with her radiant beames appeared, And blushing red, as if she tax'd the time, For such licentious motions, slilie peered In at a chinke, whereby she did discouer An idoll courted by an idle Louer: And scarce Aurora now had time to show her, But fond Pigmalion made this speech vnto her:
What haue I done (thou iealous light) said He, That I should thus depriued be of louing? What couldst thou do, to adde more miserie, Then in thy speedie rising, hastie mouing? Thou might haue spar'd one day, and hid thy light, Enioyning Earth to haue a Vt geminata duos nox incly∣ta iungat amo∣es. double night, Where ghastly furies in obliuion sit, For darke misdeeds for darknesse be most fit. But He cut off his speech with many grone, Hastning to rise, yet went to bed againe, And as He goes, He sees the darknesse gone, And Phaebus coursers galloping amaine: Which seene, at last He rose with much adoe, And being vp, began afresh to woe; Yet hauing so much sense as to perceiue, How he had err'd, He ceasseth now to craue. For He intends to worke another way, By Inuocation on some heauenly power, The onely meanes his passion to allay; Which to performe, retiring to his bower, He made these Orisons: Venus faire Queene, Then whom in heauen or earth nere like was seene, Be thou propitious to my prayers, my teares, Which at thy Throne and Pedestall appeares. I whom nor Swaine nor Nimph could ere inchant, Am now besotted with a senslesse creature, Whom though I do possesse, yet do I want, Wanting life breathing in her comely feature, Which by infusing life if thou supplie,
Ile liue to By offring sa∣crifice to Venus in the Ile of Cy∣prus. honour thee, if not, I die; For what is life where discontent doth raigne, But such a farme as we would faine disclaime? Venus much mou'd with his obsequious prayers, And liquid teares, his suite did satisfie, Infusing breath into her senslesse veines, Now full of iuyce, life, and agilitie; Which being done, the Picture mou'd, not missing To lure Pigmalion to her lips with kissing, Reaping great ioy and comfort in their toying, Depriu'd before of blisse, blest now enioying. Blest in enioying and possessing that, Which doth include true Loues felicitie, Where two are made ioynt owners of one state, And though distinct, made one by vnitie; Happie then I, (Pigmalion did reply,) That haue possession of this Deitie, No humane creature but a Parragon, Whose liuelesse forme once Nimphs admired on. This said, she streight retires vnto the place, Where she her moulding had, by whom she now (I meane Pigmalion) obtain'd such grace, As He her maker and her husband too, Tooke such content in his now-breathing wife, As they scaree differ'd once in all their life, But this was then: Let this suffice for praise, Few wiues be of her temper now adaies. The faire and fruitfull daughter He begat,De sobole ig∣malionis.
Of this same liuely Image had to name, Papho the faire, a wench of Princely state, From whence Illa Paphum genuit, de quo tenet insula no∣men. Ibidem. Ile Paphos appellation came, Consecrate vnto Venus, beauties Queene, By whose aspect that Ile is euer greene; Wherein there is a pleasant Mirtle-groue, Where a shrine stands to shew Pigmalions loue. The Argument of Pytheas. PYtheas an Athenian Orator much delighted with good cloaths, and proud of his owne tongue: when law began to grow out of request (for the Athenians endeuoured to bring in Pla∣oes commonweale) whereby the Court of the A∣reopagitae became much weakened, and the fre∣quencie of Clyents discontinued; Acolytus a bitter Satyrist, chancing to meete with Pytheas this spruce Lawyer in rent clothes, at abare Ordina∣rie, liuing vpon Pythagoras diet, viz. rootes; ob∣serued this vnexpected mutation, and with Demo∣critus readie to laugh at others miserie, compiled this short Satyre, to adde new fuell to Pytheas dis∣content. THE SIXT SATYRE. PYtheas a Lawyer of no small respect, Garded, regarded, dips his tongue in gld,
And culls his phrase, the better to effect What He and his penurious Client would; Upon his backe for all his anticke showes, More clothes He weares then how to pay He knowes. And what's the reason; he hath Law at will, Making a good face of an euill matter, And euery day his thirstie purse can fill; With gold thou liest; with nought but wind and water: Ile tell thee why, Platoes new Commonweale, Makes Pytheas leaue off pleading, and go Siste latrare foris, & promo∣ue coepta la∣tronis. steale. What Pytheas, steale? is't possible, that He That had a Pomander still at his nose, That was perfum'd with balls so fragrantly, Should now another trade of liuing choose? He must and will, nor dare He show his face Halfe casement-wide, that open'd many a case. The other day but walking on the streete, I saw his veluet gerkin layd to pawne,Si toga, sic crines, pignor iuris rant. His graue Gregorian, for his head more meete, Then Brokers shop, and his best pleading gowne; Nay which was more, marke Pytheas conscience, There lay to pawne his Clients euidence. But it's no maruell, Pride must haue a fall, Who was on Cockhorse borne through Fortunes streame, Is now cashier'd from th' Areopagites Hall, And on each bulke becomes a common theame: O blest vacation, may thou neuer cease, But still haue power to silence such as these!
Well, farewell Law▪ if Lawyers can be poore, For I esteem'd them onely blest in this, That Danaes lap with gold-distilling shower, Had made them line all heires to earthly blisse: But since these conscript fathers we adore, Feele want of wealth, we'le worship them no more. The Argument of Periander. PEriander that wise Prince of Corinth, elected one of the Sages of Greece, fell in his old age to pouertie; whereby, though his Axiomes were no lesse esteemed, his deuine Aphorismes no lesse regarded, (as held for the very Vid. Laer. de vit. Phyloso. Oracles of some superiour power) yet the respect which former time had of him grew lessened, through the de∣crease of his friends and fortunes: which was no sooner perceiued, then the distressed Sage lamen∣ting the worlds blindnesse, that vseth to be taken sooner with a vaine shadow then any solid sub∣stance, wrote this Satyricall Elegie in a pensiue moode, inueying against the vncertaine and in∣constant affections of men, who measure happi∣nesse not by the inward but outward possessing. Whereby He inferreth, that howsoeuer the wise∣man may seeme miserable, He is not so, but is more rich in possessing nothing, then the coue∣tous
foole in enioying all things: for his estima∣tion is without him, whereas the other hath his within Him, which is to be more preferred, (I meane the minds treasure, before the rubbish of this world,) then light before darknesse, the radi∣ant beames of the Sunne before thicke and duskie clouds, or pure and temporate aire before foggie and contagious vapors. THE SEVENTH SATYRE. VNgrateful Greece, that scornes a man made poore Respecting not the treasure of his mind, Whose want of wealth must shut him out of doore; The world's no friend to him that cannot findVirtus post nummos. A masse of gold within their mouldred cell, No matter how they get it, ill or well. This I experienc'd of, may well perceiue, Euen Whose fathers was Cypselus, descending from the Heraclyd fa∣milie. Periander I, of late a Sage Of stately Greece, whom now she'le not receiue, Because opprest with want, surpriz'd with age; Euen I, that of the Ephorus was among the Lace∣demonians as Tribunus among the Romans. Ephori was one, One of the chief'st, but now retires alone. Yet not alone, though none resort to me, For wisedome will haue sociats to frequent her: And though proud Greece frō hence should banish thee, Friends thou hast store, will knocke and knocking enter: And firme Amicis & fae∣licibus & infae∣licibus eundem te prebe. Laert. in senten. Periand. friends too, whose vertues are so pure, Uice may assay, but cannot them allure.
With what respect was I once grac'd by you, You gorgeous outsides, Fortunes painted wall, When rich; but poore, you bid my rags adue, Which did at first my troubled mind appall; But noting well the Be not afraid (saith Petrarch) though the house (the bodie be shaken) so the soule, (the guest of the body) fare well. Petrarch. de Remed. vtri∣usque fortunae. worlds inconstant course, I thought her scorne could make me little worse. Remorcelesse Greece, wert thou of marble made, Thou might shed teares to see thy Sage dismaide, By whose direction thou hast oft bene stayd, When both thy hope decreast, and fame decaid; Both which restor'd by Him, got that report, To Him and his, as thou admir'd him for't. Yet canst thou not discerne, twixt wisedomes straine, And those discording tones of vanitie, For all thy ayme is benefite and gaine, And these are they thou makes thy Deitie; To second which, this caution thou doest giue, Who know not to dissemble, cannot liue. I know thy follies, and will brute them too, For thou hast mou'd my splene, and I must speake, Since thou applies no salue to cure my woe,Demadis saying as, that Dra∣oes lawes were ritten with loud and not ith inke. I must complaine perforce, or heart-strings breake; Iustice is turn'd to wormewood in your land, And corrupt dealing gets the vpper hand. You itch (and out of measure) with desire Of hearing nouelties, and strange deuices, And scorch'd with heate of lusts-enraged fire, Set marks of Loue, make sale of Venus prizes:
Broad-spreading vice, how deare so'ere it cost, To purchase it, you'le vye with who bids most. You Hydra-headed monsters full of poyson, Infecting euery place with stinking breath,Plin. in nat. hist. Alcyat. in Em∣blem. What ere proceeds from you is very noysome, And like the Basiliske procuring death: I care not for your hatred, if your loue Like Tritons ball, with such inconstance moue. These fleering flies which flicker to and fro, And beate the vaine ayre with their rusling wings, Be their owne foes, and they professe them so, When they their wings with flames of furie cinge; For they whose hate pursues a guiltlesse one, With Ixions wheele, Tantalus apples, and Sysiphus stone: peculiar punishments in∣flicted on these persons for their lust, auarice, & crueltie, as the Poets faine. Sysiphus do role his restlesse stone. You cannot grieue me with your enmitie, Nor much offend me with your hatefull breath, For ill mens loue and hate, are equally Priz'd by the good, whose chiefest aime is death, And how to die: for much it doth not skill, What ill-men speake of vs, or good or ill. What golden promises did I receiue, Yet see their issue; base contempt and scorne Ore my deiected state triumphed haue: So as proud Greece vnmindfull to performe What merit craues, and what she's bound to do, Neglects my want, and glories in it too. Bias my Brother-sage I now remember,
Shipwrack'd in Priene Ile, whose wofull case Seemes to resemble fate▪crost Periander, Like Ianus statue, shewing face to face; Let's then, since equall fortune frownes on either, (Kind Bias) sound our wofull plaints together. Let Priene Ile relate thy hard mischance, Let Or Corinth in Greece. Greece bewaile my fall, my ruin'd state, Thou while on Sea thy exil'd ship doth lance, Thou lightly weighes th'inconstancie of fate: Rouze Periander then, that't may be said, Thy Infaelicem di∣cebat, qui ferre nequiret infaeli∣citatem. in vit. Bi. patience hath thy fortune conquered. Get thee to Schooles, where pure Phylosophie In publicke places is sincerely taught, And thou shalt heare, there's no calamitie, Can dant a spirit resolu'd to droupe with nought That want or woe can menace, for though woe, Make Omnia aduer∣sa exercitatio∣nes accidenti∣bus bonis esse puta. vid. Bot. in lib de malis. Potest dici mi∣ser, non potest lesse. ibid. good-men wretched seeme, they are not so. Well may misfortunes fall on our estate, Yet they're no blemish to our inward worth, For these are but the gifts of purblind fate, That domineers sole soueraignesse on earth; But we are placed in an higher seate, Then to lie prostrate at Dame Fortunes feete. Her palsie hand wherewith she holds her ball, Moues with each blast of mutabilitie, And in whose lap she lists, she lets it fall, Thus mocks she man with her inconstancie; Then who is he (if wise) esteemes her treasure,
No sooner giuen, then tane when we displease her. She faunes, she frownes, she lasts not out a Moone, But waines each month, and waining doth decrease: Those whom she did aduance, she now throwes downe, And those which lik'd Her once, do now displease: Thou reeling wheele, that moues so oft a day, That weaues thy Sic licium texit, sic telae stamina soluit weft, and takes thy web away. Titus that Prince so much admir'd by men, Stiled Mans Darling for his curtuous mind,Sueton. Tran in vit. Tit. Did thinke all powers by fate to haue their raigne, As if she had no limits Her assign'd, But (though deuinely-learn'd) did erre in this, For fates be rul'd by supreme Quicquid bon egeris in Deos refer. Deities. Then why should I (fond man) so much depend,Laert. in. vit. Phil. Vpon a Creature, which hath her existing In a Superiour power, and doth extend No further then heauens please? for her subsisting, Essence, power, Empire, soueraigne command▪ Hath her direction from Iehouahs hand. Rest thee then Periander, and despise Uulgar opinion swaide by multitude, Thou was esteemed once for to be wise, Shew it in publicke; let liues enter lude Vniuersus mundus exer∣cet Histrionem. Acted by thee vpon this worlds stage, Contemne that Greece which scornes distressed age.
The Historicall Argument of Terpnus Musician vnto Nero; with a Satyre annexed to it as followeth. TErpnus a Romane Lyrick, or as some will haue him, a cōmon Cy∣tharede, with whom Nero, yt pre∣sident to Tyrants vsed to consort, and with whose admirable skill he was exceedingly delighted: in processe of time fell into Neroes disgrace, for play∣ing to him at Agrippina his mothers funerals: where he sung the dismall and incestuous bed of Orestes, the crueltie of Sphinx, reuiling at their ty∣rannie; which so greatly displeased Nero, that he banished him his Court and royall Pallace, inioy∣ning him withall neuer to frequent the Muses Temple. The Morall importeth Such, as laying aside Time-obseruing, do not sew pillowes to their Prin∣ces elbowes, but with bold and resolued spirit, will with Calistenes tell Alexander of his drunken∣nesse, with Canius tell Tyberius of his crueltie, with Brutus tell Caesar of his vsurping, with Cato Censorius will reprehend the Commonweale for
her ryoting. And true it is, that a Commonwealth is better gouerned (if of necessitie it must be go∣uerned by either) by Cynickes then Epicures, more offences for most part arising by alluring and in∣ducing men to sensuall pleasures, then by Spartas Damasymbrotos, his restraining of youth. The La∣conians neuer liued so securely, as when they liued barely; nor euer did Romes Commonwealth di∣late her bounders more then by the practise of le∣gall austeritie, nor decrease more then by intro∣duction of lawlesse libertie. And yet I find it more rare to heare any admonitions but Placentia in the Courts presence; then to see a graue and demure seeming, couer an hypocrites ranke dissembling. We haue more Ayming no lesse at priuie gloers and de∣luders, then a aspiring plot∣ters, and state∣intruders. Seiani (which I wish had Seians fall) then Vticani to prouide for a Commonweals safetie. There were many could greete Caesar with an Aue, but there were few would put him in mind of his Memento mori. Many could perswade Phaeton that he could guide the Sunnes chariot in better order then his gray-hair'd father, but by assenting to their perswasions, he was like to make a flame of the world. Nothing more dangerous to the state of a well-gouerned Commonweale, then Parasites, the tame beasts of the Citie (as Diogenes calls them). If the perswading sycophancie of Times-obseruancie had not besotted Candaules with his wiues beautie, he had preuented that mi∣serable euent which by his owne Gyges was pra∣ctised and performed. Dicit Varius, negat Scan∣rus, vri creditis? Varius affirmes it, Scaurus denies it, whether beleeue you? The one sincerely voyd
of dissembling flatterie: the other glosingly voyde of truth and veritie. By the one we are subiect to the ruine of our state: by the other aduanced to a firmer constancy then such as may be any way subiect to mutabilitie. Nero in the beginning ofQuin quenniū ero. his time banished al the Spintriae, Inuentos of beast∣ly pleasures out of his kingdome; I would he had banished time-obseruing flatterers, and that he had retained such as Terpnus, that would repre∣hend him in his enormities. Iulius Caesar was too much addicted to his Parasites, but his successour Augustus was—ad accipiendas amicitias rarissimus, ad retinendas vero constantissimus. It was long ere he would entertaine a friend, but being retained, he was most constant in his fauour towards him. The old approbation of friendship comes into my mind, to eate a bushell of salt ere we be acquain∣ted. We may trie our friends as Pilades did his O∣restes, Damon his Pythias, Aeneas his Achates, but it will be long I feare me, ere any of vs possesse such impregnable Assistants, such Presidents of true friendship. The skilfull Painter when he de∣pictures an vnthankfull man, because he cannot well delineate him in his colours, without some proper Motto better to explaine him, representeth him in the Picture of a Viper, that killeth her fee∣der. There be many such Vipers, which appeare in externall shew as true hearted as Turtles, I feare thm more then the open force of mine enemie: for these sugred kisses bring destruction to the re∣ceiuer. Boaethius defining a good man, saith: He may be thus defined: he is a good man—cui nullum
bonum malumue sit, nisi bonus malusue animus: to whom nothing is esteemed either good or euill, but a good or an euill mind; and what effectually maketh this euill mind, but either an inbred euill disposition, which ariseth from the crookednesse of his nature, or frō the euill perswasions of depra∣ued time-obseruers: for the best natures be (for the most part) soonest peruerted & seduced. Then how necessarie is it to oote out so noysome and pesti∣lent a weede as flatterie, which corrupteth the af∣fections of the worthiest and most pregnant wits, as daily example hath well instructed vs? How hatefull was it to that worthie Thebane Prince, Agesilaus, that memorable mirror of iustice (& no lesse hatefull to our renowned Prince, whose ex∣quisite endowments make him as eminent abroad, as vs blessed at home) to see a flatterer in his Pal∣lace? nay so much contemning popular applause, that he would not suffer his Statue to be erected, lest thereby the vaine and profane adorations of his subiects should grieue the gods, disdaining that veneration of any mundane power, should be con∣fusedly mixed with adoration and worship of the gods immortall: well remembring Hesiods ca∣ueat—, we must not mixe prophane worships with deuine. That Court-gate in RomeThe Parasite∣gate. called Quadrigemina, I would haue it demolished in Troinouant, lest her estate second Roms slauery. Cicero thinks that no vice can be more pernicious then assentation, the verie helper and furtherer of all vices. She can giue life and being to the aspi∣ring thoughts of man, when He soares too ambi∣tiously,
to the pearch of preferment, honour, or the like. That wicked Catiline who conspired against Rome, and aspired to the Diadem, seeking to re∣duce the Empire from a gouernment Aristocra∣ticke, to a Catilines Monarchie; was egged & in∣stigated thereto by complices fit for that purpose, and well sorting with such an agent, such a cruell practitioner—Incredibilia, immoderata & nimis alta semper cupiendo, in desiring things incredible, immoderate, and too high aboue ordinary reach. The like befell vpon Carba, and those who sought to dissolue the Romane Monarchie, & to make it an Oligarchie or some other gouernment, which was vncertaine, because their intendments neuer came to their accomplished ends. These things thus considered in their natures, I haue here de∣scribed Terpnus▪ sinceritie in reprehending Neroes crueltie, concluding with Flaccus Dystih. —Hic murus ahaeneus esto, Nil conscire sibi nulla, pallescere culpa. What hard mischance so ere to thee befall, Let thy pure conscience be the brazen wall. The Satyre ensueth, which most especially aymeth at Time-obseruers, some whereof in particular I haue instanced, as Seianus, Perennius, Sycites; the dismall euents whereof with their Tragicke ends, I haue amply described.
THE EIGHTH SATYRE. TErpnus Terpnum thaaedum gentem tur praeter alio accersijt. in Nero. Musician to a tyrant Prince, Nero by name, did in the fneralls Which were solemniz'd on his mothers hearse, Sing on his Lute these wofull tragicalls: Where euery straine he strooke vpon his string, Did vexe the conscience of the tyrant king. Incestuous Inter caet cantauit Ca cem parturi tem, Oreste matricidam Oedipodem excaecatum, Herculem in num, &c. S in vit. Ner. Oedipus who slue his father, Married his mother, and did violate The law of nature, which aduis'd him rather Single to liue, then take to such a state, Becomes a subiect fit, for this sad hearse, Where inke giues place to bloud to write her verse. Cruell Orestes bath'd his ruthlesse sword, Estrang'd from strangers, in his mothers blood, So little pittie did the child afford To Her, that was the parent of the brood; Yet some excuse for this Orestes had, Mad men exemption haue, and He was mad. Sphinx subtile Giant, who did riddles put Unto each passenger He met withall, Which, who could not resolue He peece-meale cut, Throwing them frō steepe rocks whence they should fall, Whereby their members broke and crush'd in peeces, Remain'd as food in Sea to sillie fishes. Yet this he did vpon mature aduice,
For who so'ere He were assoil'd this question, Was not opprest by him in any wise, But might with safest conduct trauell on; Where thou foule Matricide doest infants vex, Without respect of person, state, or sex. There is no sex which may exempted be, From thy insatiate hand embrew'd in blood,iuis gaudet ma cruore. . But waxing proud in others miserie, Doest tyrannize vpon poore womanhood: Blood-thirsty Tyrant there's prepar'd a doome, To startle thee that rip'd thy mothers wombe. Rauing Orestes heard a furious crie, Which did attend his phrensie to his graue, And did disturbe his restlesse sleepe thereby, So as saue troubled dreames He nought could haue: With many broken sleepes, to shew his guilt, Of his deare mothers bloud, which He had spilt. Which poore Orestes had no sooner heard,git ab agro  ciuitatem, à blico ad do∣m, à domo  cubiculum. ugust. in ear. . 45. Psal. Then to his pillow in a dismall sort, Streight He retir'd, and being much afeard, Lest hell and horror should conuent him for't, With hands lift vp to heauen and hideous crie, He oft would curse himselfe, and wish to die. Turne me (ye gods) quoth he, to some wild beast,estes . Some sauage Lion, or some Tyger fierce, Since I delight so much in bloud to feast, For who can with remorse my deeds rehearses Which if time should with her obliuion smother,
Bloud cries reuenge, reuenge me cries my mother. Worse then the beasts thou art, they cherish them, And bring their parents food when they grow old: Who then can daigne to looke on thee for shame, That hast defac'd that forme that gaue thee mold? The tender Storke that sees her parents lack,Basilius  8. 9. Will bring them food, and beare them on her back. But thou a mirrour of impietie, Depriues thy parent of her vitall breath, And makes her subiect to thy cruelty, Thus she that gaue thee life, thou giues her death: A sweete reward; O then ashamed be, Thou staine of Greece, that Greece should harbor thee. Thus would Orestes frame his sad discourse, With words as vile as were his actions foule, To moue his phrenticke passions to remorse, Which long (too long) had triumpht ore his soule; Nor could he find vnto his woes reliefe, Till He was so vexed with fu∣ries (the reuen∣gers of his mo∣thers bloud) that he wandered mad vp and downe till he came to Taurica, where he foun an end of his troubles. . . death did end his life, and cure his griefe. If all his teares and ruthfull miseries, Could neuer expiate his mothers death, To what extent shall thy calamities Grow to in time, that stops thy mothers breath, Euen A grippinaes breath, whose cursed birth, Maks her to curse the wombe that brought thee forth? This Nero notes, and noting shewes his ire, By outward passions, yet concealeth it,
Resolu'd ere long to pay the minstrels hire, When time and opportunitie should fit; For tyrants haue this propertie 'boue other, They meane reuenge, yet their reuenge cā smothe And so did Nero, whose perplexed mind, Guilty of what was ill, seem'd to admire His Art in Musicke, rather then to find Any distast, lest He should shew the fire, Which lay rak'd vp in ashes, and display What time might sleight, but could not take away. Yet he began to scoule and shake the head, With eyes as fierie-red as Aetnaes hill, Willing him streight to other acts proceed, And silence them that parents bloud did spill: Sing to thy Lute (quoth he) straines of delight, To cheare th'attendants of this wofull Agrippinaes funerals. sight. Terpnus did passe vnto another theame, Yet still relates He in the end of all, The facts of Oedipus, Orestes shame, How and by what effects succeed'd their fall; Whereby (as well it was by all perceiued) Nero the tyrant inwardly was grieued. Terpnus continu'd in his Lyricke ode, So long as Nero in his throne remained, But now impatient longer of abode, Wearied with audience (for so he feined) Terpnus left off from prosecuting further, The sad relation of this cruell For which no law amongst the Pagans was enacted: imagi∣ning, none could be so brutish as commit such vn∣turall cruelty. murther.
But see the Tyrant, who before delighted More with the musicke of good Terpnus lyre, Then any thing which ere his soule affected, Neuer more straines of Terpnus did require; For being grieu'd, each day his grieues increased, Till Terpnus exile made his grieues appeased. Yet not For hauing slaine his mother, he saw in his sleepe a ship, the rudder whereof was wrested frō him guiding it, whence he was haled by Octau. to most hideous darknesse. ibid. appeased, for each day each night, He heard the hideous cries of Furies shriking: Oft would He turne himselfe before day-light, But got no rest, his bodie out of liking, Yet tyranniz'd in spilling bloud apace, Act vpon act as one bereft of grace. Sometimes He saw his mother haling him, With wombe new-rip'd; there In vit. Ner. Sporus whō He sought, To make of man a woman drag him in; Here sundrie Matrons whom he forc'd to nought,Like the vision appeared to Ti∣berius crying  —Redde Ger∣manicum. And slue defil'd, which fix'd on Him their eye, Which seene, He fled, but flying could not flie. O conscience, what a witnesses thou brings, 'Gainst Him that iniures thee, where no content Can giue houres respite to the state of kings, Thou of thy selfe art sole-sufficient, To hale or heale, to hale from life to death, Or heale the wound of which he languisheth? Behold here Terpnus courage, to correct The great abuses of his Princes mind, Whose pompe, port, power, He lightly doth respect, To taxe those crimes to which He is inclin'd:
He's no Court-Adder that will winde him in, To Princes grace by praising of his sinne. O I could wish we had such Terpni many, Who would not sooth nor flatter, but auoch, Blacke to be blacke: but there's I feare not any, Too few at least, I doubt me rightly such; And yet me thinks such Phoenix's might build here, Within this Ile, as well as other where.Vid. Cornel. Tacit. & Sueto. Tranq. in vit. Tib. Seianus, let him bloome in other coasts, And purchase honour with his flatterie, Let his aspiring thoughts make priuate boasts, To raise his Fortunes to a monarhie, He cannot prosper here▪ for wy, we kno, State-ruine from Court-parasites may grow. So Seian thought (what haue not Traitors thought) To currie fauour with the Senators, The better to atchieue what He had wrought, By secret plots with his conspirators; Faire-tong'd, false-heart, whose deepe-cōtriuing brai Gaue way to ruine, where He thought to raigne. But He's well gone, Rome is dispatch'd of one That would haue made combustion in the state, Whose death made Hers reioyce, but His to mone▪ Who on his fall built their vnhappie fate; For Treason like a linked chaine doth show, Which broke in one, doth breke in others too. Next whom Perennius, whose affected grace,
Italian-like, seem'd as compos'd by art, May for his smoothing humour take the place, Who sole-possessor of a Princes heart, The youthfull Commodus, did so allure him, As his aduice seemes onely to secure him. Faire Prince (quoth he) if any worldly wight,A  dor. May solace those faire corps fram'd curiously, Expresse Her onely when she comes in sight, And I your pleasure soone will satisfie; Your Unckle he's too strict, he's too seuere,—Exeat aul Qui vult esse pius. Lucan. . . To coupe you vp in ilence alwaies here. What priuiledge haue Princes more then we, If they depriued be of open aire? What comfort reape they in their Empirie, If Nestor-like, they still sit in their chaire? No, no, deare Prince, you know a Prince is borne To be his subiects terror, not their scorne. No. Theater rear'd in your royall Court, Turney, lust, Barrier, should solemniz'd be, To which a Romane Prince should not resort, Amazing Ladies with his maiestie; O then it is a shame for your estate, To seeme in ought for to degenerate! How gorgeously did Rome demeane her then, When young Vitellius didBankettig ∣uer three times, and nw and then foure tims aday. in vit. Vi∣tll. banket it, Seruing at table miriads of men, With lustie Ladies which did reuell it? Yet you more high in state, more ripe in wit,
Must Hermit-like in cell retired sit. Shake off these Sages which do now attend you, For they like fetters do restraine your pace; Giue lustfull youth in euery part his due,Nec fuge me (fgiebat enim) iam pascua Lernae, &c. Lib. 1. Meta. Let sprightly gallants take the Sages place, By which enthron'd secure, you may command, As▪ Ioue erst did, with Io in his hand. This did Perennius moue, and tooke effect, Greene thoughts receiue too aptly wanton seede, Remaining with the Prince in chiefe respect, As they are wont, who Princes humours feed; Till He conspiring to vsurpe the crowne,Vid. Aurl. Sex. in epit. Herod. in vit. Commod. Amidst his honours was cast headlong downe. Where he receiu'd a doome that seru'd for all, (Like doome still breath on such infectious breath) For soring thoughts must haue as low a fall, Whose fauning liues play prologue to their dath: For well I kow no bane on earth can be Worse to the State then rust ofVid. Cicero∣nem in Laelio prope finem, &c. flatterie. Then should these last-ensuing times beware, Lest they commit offences of like kind, Which in the common wealth procure that iarre, As by their proiects we subuersion find: For they depraue the vertues of the best, And in the highest Cedars build their nest. Sycites, he whose sycophants pretence, Made wofull hauocke of his Common weale,
Abusing much his Princes innocence, At last by time (as time will all reueale) Became displeasde, who as He was afo Vnto the state, the state adiudg'd him so. AN ADMONITION. BE thou a Terpnus to restraine abuse, Sin-training pleasures fraught with vanitie; Be thou no Seian, no Perennius, To humour vice to gaine a Monarchie; Be not Sycites, let examples moue thee, And thou wil cause the Commonweale to loue thee. The Argument of Epicurus, as in the first Satyre familiarly expressed, so now in his miserable end with liuely colours described. EPicurus, who first inuented that sect of Epicu∣risme, delighting in nothing saue voluptuous pleasures and delights, in the end being grieuous∣ly vexed with the stopping of his vrine, and an in∣tollerable paine and extremitie of his bellie ex∣ulcerated, became mightilie tormented; yet be∣sotted with the fruition of his former pleasure, (so violent are customarie delights) thus conclu∣ded:
O quàm flici exitu fiem expectatum vitae  imposui? With how happie an end do I limit  course and progresse of my life? The morall ▪ cludes such, as haue liued in securitie, and ca▪ lesnesse, respectlesse of God or his iudgement; an euen now readie to make an end of so haple & fruitlesse a race, close vp the date of their life  securely as they liued carnally. The second  tyre in the former Section comprehends the lik subiect, though the one seeme more generall v der the name of Pandora, implying a gouerne and directresse in all pleasures, or exhibitresse o all gifts: The other more particular, containing one priuate and peculiar Sect, euen the Epicures, who thought that the chiefe good consited in a voluptuous and sensuall life, expecting no future doome after the tearme and end of this life. Here consider the momentanie and fraile course of this short and vnconstant life, tossed and turmoiled with many turbulent billows, exposed to sundrie slfs of perillous assaults, many home∣bred and forreine commotions; in which it beho∣ueth vs (like expert Pilots) to be circumspect i so dangerous a voyage, lest sailing betwixt Scyll and Charybdis, presumption and despaire, by en∣countring either we rest shipwracked: where if any (which is rare to find) passe on vntroubled, yet must He of necessitie conclude with Senec▪ No tempestate vexor, sed nausea. So slow is euery one to proceede graduate in vertues Academi▪—it a vt non facile est reputare, vtrum inhonestiori∣bus corporis partibus rem qaeusierit, an amiserit:
Cicero well obserueth in his Declamation against Salust. For who is he of so pure and equall temper, whose man-like resolution holds him from being drawne and allured by the vaine baits and deceits of worldly suggestions? where there be more of Penelopes companions in euery stew, in euery brothell of sinne and wantonnesse, then euer in any age before. Euery one vt Lutulentus sus—as a hogge wallowing in the mire of their vaine conceits, roue from the marke of pietie and so∣brietie▪ into the broad sea of intemperance and sensualitie: but none more of any Sect then Epi∣curisme, which like a noisome and spreading Can∣ker, eats into the bodie and soule of the professor, making them both prostitute to pleasure, and a very sinke of sinne. The Satyre will explane their defects more exactly, which followeth. THE NINTH SATYRE. THat Epicurus who of late remained Subiect to euery fowle impietie, Now with distempers and night-surfets pained, Bids mirth adue, his sole felicitie: His vrine stopt wants passage from his vaines, Which giues increase to hi incessant paines. Yet feeles He not his soules-afflicted woe, Unmindfull (wretched man) of her distresse, But pampers that which is his greatest foe, And first procur'd his soules vnhappinesse: He cannot weepe, He cannot shed a teare,
But dying laughs, as when He liued here. His Bon-companions drinking healths in wine, Carousing flagons to his health receiuing, Whose sparkling noses taper-like do shine, Offer him drinke whoseResembling ne Elderton, on whom this in∣scription was writ: here lieth runken Elder∣on, in earth now hrust: what said  thrust? nay ather here lies hirst. n Rem. of a greater worke. thirstie mind is crauing: For though He cannot drinke, yet his desire▪ Is to see others wallow in the mire. Turne him to heauen He cannot, for He knowes not Where heauens blest mansion hath her situation: Tell him of heauens fruition, and he shewes not The least desire to such a contemplation: His sphere inferiour i, whose vanitie Will suite no court so well asOrcus vobis ducit pedes. Tartarie. He hath no comfort while He liueth here, For He's orewhelmed with a sea of griefe, And in his death as little ioy appeares, For death will yeeld him small or no reliefe: He thought no pleasure after life was ended, Which past, his fading comforts be extended. Horror appeares euen in his ghastly face, And summons (wofull summons) troups of diuels, Whilst He benumn'd with sinne reiecteth grace, The best receit to cure soule-wounding euils: Forlorne He liues, and liues because He breaths, But in his death sustaines a thousand deaths. Ungratefull viper, borne of vipers brood, That hates thy parent, braues ore thy Protector,
Whose seruile life did neuer any good, But hugging vice, and spurne Him did correct her; See how each plant renewes and giues increase, By him, whom stones would praise, if man should ceasse. Nor plant, nor worme, nor any senslesse creature, Will derogate from Gods high Maiestie, Since they from him, as from the supreme Nature, Receiue their vigour, grouth, maturitie, Substance, subsistence, essence, all in one, From Angels forme vnto the senslesse stone. But time hath hardn'd thy depraued thoughts, Custome of sin hath made thy sin, no sin; Thus hast thou reap'd the fruite thy labours sought,Th Epic Cau. And dig'd a caue in which thou wallowest in; The Porter of which caue, sreproch and shame, Which layes a lasting scandall on thy name. Aswine in mind, though Angell-like in forme, Prposterous end to such afaire beginning, That Thou, whom such a feature doth adorne As Gods owne Image, should be soild with sinning; Who well may say of it thus drown'd in pleasures▪ This Superscription is not mine but Caesars. T wantest grace, and wanting, neuer callest, Nessled in mischiefe and in discontent; Thou who from light to darknesse headlong fallest▪ Hauing the platforme of thy life mispent, Rouse thee Thou canst not, for securitie Hath brought thy long sleepe to a Lethargie.
Dull Dormouse, seeping all the winter time,ic faciut hye∣nem decipien∣do, glires. Cannot edure the breath of aire or winde, But euer loues to make the Sunne to shine Vpon her rurall Cabbin; that same mind Art Thou endew'd withall, All winter keeping Thy drunken cell, spends halfe thy life in sleeping▪ Thou when thou read'st in stories of the Ant, The painfull Be, the early-mounting Larke, Thou cals them fooles, for Thou hadst rather want, Pine, droupe, and die in pouertie then carke: Thou thinks there is noAccording to hat of the Poet.—No pleasure but to swill, And full, to mptie, and be∣ing▪ empie, ill. pleasure, but to dwell In that vast Tophet Epicurean cell. Art thou so sotted with earths worldly welth, That thou expects no life when this is ended? Do'st thou conceiue no happinesse in health, If health in healths be not profanely spended? Well there's small hope of thee, and thou shalt fid, Sinne goes before, but vengeance dogs behid. Thou cast not tell by thy Philosophie, Where th' glorious Synod of the Angels sit, Nor canst thou thinke soules immortalitie, Should any mortall creature well befit: Unfit thou art for such a prize as this, Which Saints haue wish'd to gaine, and gain'd t wish. Thou fings strange Hymnes of loue of shepeard-swains, How Amarillis and Pelargus woed, Where in loue measures thou employes some paines, To make thy works by wanton eares allow'd;
For loues encounter loose wits can expresse it, But for diuie power they will scarce confesse it. Thus should each sinne of thine vnmasked be, Each crime deblazon'd in her natiue colour: There would appeare such a deformitie, As th'Greeke Thersites shape was neuer fowler;Homer. in Iliad: & alib. Which if compar'd to th'powerfull works of grace, Would looke agast, asham'd to show their face. If I should moue thee, rectifie thy cares, I know twere fruitlesse, all thy care's to sinne▪ Whose barren haruest intersowne with tares, Endeth farre worse then when it did begin; A ranke indurate vlcerous hard'ned ill, Can ill be bett'red till it haue her fill. And yet when as this phrenticke mood shall leaue thee,Ad poenas tar∣dus Deus est, ad praemia velox. There is some hope of gaine-recouerie, When thy offensiue life mispent shall grieue thee; Thy wound's not mortall, looke for remedie; But if like Epicure thou still doest lie, As thou liues ill, so doubt I thou must die.
The Argument of Diagoras Orator of Athens. Dagoras a corrupt Orator vsing to receiue bribes, was exiled, and this Satyre to gall him the more, engrauen vpon his shipboord: As followeth. THE TENTH SATYRE. DIagoras was once to pleade a cause, Which th'aduerse partie hauing well obserued, Claps me a guilded goblet in his clawes, Which He as priuately (for sooth) reserued; Speake (quoth this client) either nought at all, Or else absent you from the sessions hall. Absent He would not be, and yet as good, For his mute tongue was absent in the cause, Saying, the cause he had not vnderstood, And therefore wish'd that he a while might pause; But hauing pau'd too long, through his delay The Court dismist, the Senat went away. Seeing the Senate gone, good gods (quoth he) Can we not haue our causes heard, whose truth Is manifest as light? ô thus we see Our Clients wrong'd, whose wrongs afford much uth:
I would not answer this before Ioues throne, If I thereby might make the world mine owne. Nought to a conscience pure and void of blame, Which (Ioue be prais'd) is i this spotlesse brest, For no foule act could blemish ere my name, No corrupt bribe did ere enrich my chest; Yes one (the Clyent answer'd) you know when: It's true indeed (my friend) and nere but then. Yes once you know (another answer'd) more, When you protested the Angina pain'd you, For which coruption, you had gold in store, That silent speech of yours abundance gain'd you: It's true indeed, yet there's none can conuict me, That ere my conscience for these did afflict me. Nay that He sweare (quoth one) I neuer knew Remorce of conscience or releting teare: That heart of yours aid nere repentance shew, But could take more, if that you did not feare ou should detected be, and your offence, AsThere were certaine image of Iudges (by re port) set vp at Athens, hauin neither hands nor eyes: imply∣ing that Ruler and Magistrate should neither be infected wit bribes, nor any o therway drawn from that whic was lawfull an right. But most happi were those daye wherein Basil the Emperour of Constantino∣ple liued, tha whensoeuer h came to his iudg ment seate, he found neither partie to accuse, nor defendan t answer. iustice craues, should giue you recompence. Thus as they talk'd, thus as they did discourse, In came a Senatour, which did reueale, His corrupt dealings, for He did enforce Himselfe to publish what He did conceale: Whose crimes diuulg'd, He presently was led To Coos hauen, whence He was banished. Thus was a corrupt Orator conuicted,
Pressing himselfe with his owne obloquie, Whose selfe-detection made his state afflicted, His hands the weauers of his tragedie; Which I could wish to all of like desert, Whose good professio's made a guilefull art. The Argument. TRiptolemu is reported to haue inuented Til∣lage the first of any, and to haue taught the art of sowing corne: whereupon the gratefull hus∣bandman, to repay the thankfulnesse of his well∣willing mind, rendreth this Elegie, as in part of payment for so rare inuention: Satyrically withall inueying against such, who eate the fruite of o∣thrs labours, liue on the sweat of others brow, and muzling the mouth of the oxe that treads▪ o the corne, reape what they neuer sowed, drinke o the vine they neuer planted, and eate at the Alt of which they neuer partaked. THE ELEVENTH SATYRE ELEGIACK. AGed Triptolemus father of our field, That teacheth vs thy children rare effects; We do vnto thy sacred Temple yeeld The fruits we reape, and tender all respects
To thee, that hast this rareDona fero Cereris—M. lib. 5. inuention found, And gaue first light of tillage to our ground. Describe we cannot in exact discourse, Those rarer secrets which proceed from thee, For polish'd words with vs haue little force, That are inured to Rusticitie; But what we can we'le do, and to that end, To thee (as Patron) we our fields commend. By thee we till the wilde vntempered soile, Make rising hillocks champion and plaine; Where though with early labour we do toile, Yet labour's light where there isSpes alet a∣gricolas. hope of gaine: We thinke no hurt, but trauell all the day, And take our rest, our trauels to allay. No proiect we intend against the State, But cuts the bosome of our Mother earth; We giue no way to passion or debate; By labour we preuent our Countries dearth: Yet this ascribe we not to our owne part, But vnto thee, that did inuent this art. Those glorious Trophies which Menander set, In honour of the sacred Deities, Would be too long a subiect to repeate, Rear'd in such state with such solemnities; Yet these to ours, inferiour be in worth, Those were of earth, these tell vs vse of earth. We ope the closet of our mothers breast,
And till the sedgie ground with crooked plough, And in the euening take our quiet rest, When we the heate of day haue passed through: Thus do we sow, thus reape, and reaping we Do consecrate our first fruites vnto thee. And with our fruites our wonted Orisons, With solemne vowes to thy obsequious shrine, WhoseOf the dedica∣tion of Pagan Temples, vid. Var. de Ant. & Macrob. dedication merits heauenly songs, Will we protest what's ours is euer thine; For what we haue came from thy deuine wit, Or from His power that first infused it. By thee we plant the—Ex nitido fit rusticus, atque Sulcos & vineta crepat mera, praeparatvlmos. Hor. Uine and Oliue tree, Contriue coole harbors to repose and lie: By thee ourVina genero∣fissima, Massi∣ca, Cecub, Falerna. Hipp. de coll. Uine sends grapes forth fruitfully, The Almond, Chestnut, and the Mulberrie; Thus Saturns golden age approcheth neare, And (Flora-like) makes spring-time all the yeare. The pleasant banks of faire Parnassus mount, With trees rank-set and branchie armes broad-spred, The Mirtle-trees hard by Castalias fount, With flowrie wreaths thy shrine haue honoured; 'Mongst which, no Iland's more oblig'd to thee, Then this same Ile of famous Britannie. As in some parts of Egypt, which (though elsewhere excee∣ding fruitfull) hrough extre∣mitie of heate become to the people inhabit ble. Others intemporate through parching heate, Haue their fruites blasted ere they come to light, As in Sythia, which region in most places is so cold, as fruites can come so no ripenesse. For as the Astro∣logers are of opi∣ion, there is a ertaine breadth in the heauen, n earth from North to South, bounded out by some of the principall Circles, of the which ar 5. in all: one fierie betweene the two Tropicks which is called Zona Torrida: two extreme cold, betweene the Polare circles and the Poles of the wold: and two temporate betwene either of he Polare circles and his next Tropicke. Others are planted in a colder seate,
Whereby the Sun-beames seldome shew their might▪ But we (and therein blest) inhabite one, Which as it's fruitfull, it's a temp'rate Zone. How can we then if we do ought, do lesse Then labour to requite as we receiue? For such a burning wind's vnt hankefulnesse, As by it we do lose that which we haue: Let each then in his ranke obserue his measure, And giue Him thanks that gaue Him such a treasure. How many regions haue their fruites deuoured, By th'Caterpiller, Canker, Palmerworme? Whil'st by thy grace so richly on vs powred, Our fields reioyce, and yeeld increase of corne; O then admire we this great worke of thine, Whereby allBarbarus i uidit—Met. l.  regions at our state repine! Repine they may, for we surpasse their state, In power, in rihes, sinewes of sharpe warre; They led in blindnesse attribute to fate, What ere befall, we to the morning starre, By which we are directed euery day, Or else like wandring sheepe might loose our way. Hesiod relates seuen fortunate reposes,Canariae—for∣tunatae insulae. vid▪ Hesiod. i li. de oper: & die. pag. 15.  in be a∣torum insuli. Ilands, which Fortune fauours for their seate, Adorn'd with fruitfull plants sent-chafing roses; Where there breaths euer a soile-cherishiag heate, By which the plants receiue their budding power, And needs no other dew, no other shower.
These fruitfull Ilands which this Poet shewes,les in the ocean foure hundred mils fro Spaie Were seated farre within the Ocean, And neuer warr'd as other Ilands vse, Being in peacefull league with euery man: Confer now these together, and then see If this blest Iland be not Brittannie. Blest were those Ilanders that did possesse The fertile borders of those healthfull Iles, And we as blest haue no lesse happinesse, In this our Ile, not stretch'd to many miles; Though when thoseThe two vni∣ersities. streames of Hellicon appeares, It doubles fruites in doubling of her yeares. Thames full as pleasant as Euphrates flood, Though she containe not in her precious nauell, TheTagus, Ganges, nd Pacteolus hree riuers fa∣mous for their golden oare or grauell. golden oare of Ganges, yet as good As any gold or any golden grauell, Transporting hence, and bringing here againe, Gaine to the Citie by their fraught of graine. Thus water, ayre, and earth, and all vnite Their powers in one, to benefit our state, So as conferring profit with delight, Well may we tearme this Iland fortunate; For we more blest then other Iles haue bin, Enioy both peace without and peace within. Vnto his altar let vs then repaire, That hath conferd these blessings on our land, And sure we are to find him present there, Apt to accept this offring at our hand;
Where, as He hath remembred vs in peace, We'le yeeld him fruites of soules and soiles increase. To thee then (blessed Deitie) is meant,The true expla∣nation of th Elegi. This vot all sacrifice, how ere we speake, Of old Triptolemus thy instrument; For midst nuentions we will euer seeke To raise thy praise, who hast thy Throne aboue vs, And daily shewes that thou doest dearely loue vs. The Argument. MElonmus a shepheard of Arcadia, who ha∣uing frequented the plaines there long time, with great husbandrie vsed to exercise his pa∣stures▪ receiuing no small profite from his fruitfull flocke: in the end fell in loue with Cynthia Queene of the forrest adioyning: whom hauing woed with many loue-inducing tokens, and shep∣heards madrigals, a spent the profit of his flock in gifts (with too lauish a bountie bestowed vpon her) and yet could no way preuaile, being posted off with many triling delayes; in the end wrote this short Satyre in a Cynick mood, reuiling at the coutousnesse and inatiable desire of women, who will prostitute their fauour for lucre sake vn∣to the meanest swaine, till they haue consumed the
fruite of his stocke, and then will turne him ouer shipboord. THE TWELFTH SATYRE. MElonomus a worthie shepheard swaine, Besotted with faire Cynthia's amorous face▪ Beseeched Her to loue for loue againe, And take compassion on his wofull case; Which she halfe-yeelding to, dissembling too, Did moue the swaine more eagerly to woo. And that withNon sumus in∣gratae, poscunt pulcherima pulchrae; Muera si refe∣as, oscula gra∣a feres. gfts most powerfull to ensnare The minds of maids, whose curious appetite, Desires as they be faire to haue things faire, To adde fresh fuell vnto loues delight; Which to effect, each morne a flowrie wreath, Compos'd th swne, to breath on Cynthia's breath. Fine comely bralets of refinedRupibus ex∣tractum Cali∣baeis mitit e∣lectrum, &c. Whence it is said cometh the urest Amber. Amber, Vsed this Shepheard swaie to tender her, And euery morne resorting to he chamber, Would there appeare ere Phoebus could appeare, Where tellg tales as shepheards vse to tell, She forc'd a smile, as thogh he k'd Him well. Thus poore Melonomus continued long, Thus at Loues arre this Client oubtfull stands, And weepes, & wipes, & wring and wreathes his ands. Hoping for resolution a her , Whilest with delayes He mixed gifts among, Which (as He thought) were fancies strongest bds; And still He craues dispatch of his request, And to performe what she in  profest.
Bt she, from day to day puts off, replying, She scarce resolued was to marrie yet: But when hisInstat aman, tamen odit a∣mans, sic mune∣ra quaerit, Queis tamen acceptis, nescit amare magis. gifts surceast, she flat denying, Answer'd, A swaine was for a Queene vnfit; He rurall, homely, bred of meane descent, She royall-borne, of purer Element. Melonomus thus answer'd, wisely fram'd Ths graue reply: And is it so indeed? Be all those gifts I gaue (all which He nam'd)A sudden reso∣lution requiting her sudden dis∣daine. To no effect? why then returne and feed Thy want on flocke, surceasse thy bootlesse suite, Since she consum'd thy flocke with all their fruite. Aged Alomaenon who my father was,I cānot trull is I, nor fancie all I see, if she be faire, wise and an heire, that girle liketh me. And as I guesse knew well the shepheards guise, Thought scorne to set his loue on euery lasse, Aye me vappie, of a sire so wise; But this disdaine that lowres on beauties brow, Shall teach me, swaines with swaines know best to do. The skipping Rams that butt with ragged hornes, And brou vpon each banke with sweete repast, Shall not my lous head with wreathes adorne, (But heauen forgiue my follie that is past;) I will not fancie Cynthia, since she In my distresse scornes to conuerse with me.
The Argument of Protagoras. PRotagoras adored the stones of the altar, con∣ceiuing them to be happie, as the Phylosopher Aristotle witnesseth: Lapides, ex quibus ar strue∣bantur, faelices esse putabat, quod honorentur. H thought the very stones themselues to be happie, of which the altars were builded, because (saith he) they might be honoured. In this Argument, be such men shadowed, as most impiously worship the crea∣ture for the Creator, the worke for the worker. Therefore haue I subinsrted this Satyre, to in∣ueigh against the senslesse Gentiles and Painims, who in the foolishnesse of their hearts, vsed to a∣dore stockes, stones, plants, and senslesse crea∣tures, Nunc deorum causam agam; I will nowCi. de nat. deor. pleade the cause of God, so iniuriously dealt with∣all by his owne workmanship. Alexander him∣selfe being but a mortall man as we our selues be, commanded Callistenes his Scholemaister to be slaine, because He would not worship H for a god: much more aboue comparison, may God who is immortall and onely to be feared, punishAlan. de con∣quest. nat. yea and destroy them that in contempt of his infi∣nite power and all-working maiestie, adore the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, Isis and Osyris, with many other vaine, idolatrous, and profane venera∣tions, derogating from the power and incompre∣hensible
essence of God. When a King beholds his subiects to reserue their allegiance to any Mo∣narch saue himselfe, He makes them to be proclai∣med Traitors to his Crowne and person: Euen so the King of heauen, when He seeth any subiect of his (as we be all and happie if so we be, and not slaues to the captiuitie and thraldome of sinne,) presently proscribeth him, or will punish him with death, lest others by his impunitie should attempt the like. Wherefore then should any profane man, so ouershadowed with the duskie clouds of error and impietie, transgresse the deuine precepts, Lawes, and Ordinances of the Almightie; those e∣ternall decrees established and enacted in the glo∣rious Synod of heauen, by relinquishing the sweet promises of God, and communicating the wor∣ship of the Creator with the creature, as if there were a distribution to be made vnto either? But I will referre them to this following Satyre. THE THIRTEENTH SATYRE. PRotagoras both wicked and profane, Wicked in life, profane in worshipping, Adored stones: (see Pagas, see your shame) And thought them worthie too of reuerencing; For if the gods be honoured, said He, Needs must the stones whereof their Temples be. The like conceit He had of altars too, And of the stones whereof they were erected, To which He oft would solemne worship doe,
And taxe such men by whom they were neglected; Wishing sometime He were an altar stone, That to himselfe like honour might be done. Thou senslesse man depriu'd of reasons lore,A iust reproofe to all Idolaters. What grace art thou (forlorne) endewd withall, That thou shouldst shrines and seslesse stones adore, That haue no eares to here when thou doest call? Thou deemes these relikes happie, when god wot, If they were happie, yet they know it not. The Altar is the shrine thou offrest to, Thy incense, sacrifice, and fat of beasts, Which on the altar thou art wont to do, Not to the altar where thou makes request; For it's enioynd thee by expresse command, To keele to nothing fashion'd by mans hand. The Manuall artist sets vpIngtes  erigit, c  cutat quo erigi, quā curiose dispo∣nere quod arte conicit, &c. heapes of stones, Erecting curious Statues to adore, But what are these, can they attend our mones? No, they haue eares to heare, but heare no more Then rubish, clay, or stone, whereof they'r said, (And such were Pagan Idols) to be made. Turne thee vnto the East, from whence the Sunne Hath his arising, whence He doth proceed, As Bridegroome from his chamber, and doth runStadium solis. His spacious course with such a passing speed, As twentie foure houres He doth onely borrow, To post the world from end to end quite thorow.
Each plant on earth, each creature in the sea, From whence haue they their grouth, I pray thee say▪ Do they deriue't from stones or imagerie? Nay, I must tell thee, thou art by the way, It's no inferiour power brings this to passe, But his, who is, shall be, and euer was. And he it is who notes thy errors past, And can reuenge, though He the time adiourne, Whose loue vnto his sheepe doth euer last,Deus  maxi∣me iratus, no iratus, cum ira∣tus propitius, &c. Qui fecit te si∣ne te, non sal∣uabit te sine te. August. And still expects and waits for thy returne; But how can He to thee in kindnesse shew him, That giues thee hands, yet will not lift them to him? Ungratefull thou to haue that ill conceit, Of his all-being and all-seeing power, Whose blest tuition guards vs and our state, Whose surest hold is like a fading flower, That springs and dies, such is the pompe of man, As there He ends in earth where He began. Horror of men, contempt to thy beginning, Shame to the world, wherein thou doest suruiue▪ Whose best religion is an act of sinning,Exorto tremo∣re, erubescet conscientia, ob∣stupescet con∣scia mentis sci∣entia, & dicen∣di facultates penitus amit∣tent organa, &c. In which thou meanes to die, and loues to liue; What shall these shrines affoord thee after death, The breath of life? no, for they haue no breath. Then here Ile leaue thee, yet with sorrow too, Thy Image moues compassion, though't may be, Thou'lt aske the reason why I should do so, Since sorrowes source hath lost her course in thee;
To which I may in reason thus reply, My eyes are wet, because thy eyes are dry. Yet will I to the altar, not t'adore it, But offer incense to assoile thy sin; Where full of teares I'le weepe, and weeping ore it, Wish thy returne, that thou may honour him, Whose worship thou prophan'd (as was vnfit) Entitling any creature vnto it.Numen si diui∣dis, perdis. Three other Satyres composed by the same Author, treating of these three distinct subiects. 1. Tyrannie, personated in Eurystheus. 2. Securitie, in Alcibiades. 3. Reuenge, in Perillus. With an Embleme of Mortalitie, in Agathocles. The Argument. EVrystheus a potent and puissant Prince of Greece, by the instigation of Iuno imposed Hercules most difficult labours, to the end to haue him dispatched. But of such inuincible patience was Hercules in suffering, and of such resolution i performing, as to his succeeding glory he pur∣chased
himselfe honour through their hate, gai∣ning to himselfe renowne, where his foe inten∣ded ineuitable reuenge. Whence we may col∣lect two remarkable things, no lesse fruitfull in obseruing, then delightfull in perusing. The one is, to note how prompt and prepared men of de∣praued or vicious disposition are, to put in execu∣tion the pleasure of great ones, how indirect or vnlawfull soeuer their pleasures be: directing and addressing their employments to the bent of their command, be it wrong or right. And these are such who account it good sauing policie, to keepe euer correspondence with greatnesse, esteeming no supportance firmer, no protection safer, then to hold one course with those high-mounting Cedars, from whose grouth the lower shrubs re∣ceiue shadow and shelter. The second which I note, is to obserue what glorious and prosperous successe many haue, who pursued and iniuriously persecuted (like Zenocrates Sparrow) either find some compassionate bosome to cheare & receiue them, or by the assistance of an vnconfined o∣wer, attaine a noble issue in midst of all occurren∣ces. To insist on instances, were to enlarge an Ar∣gument aboue his bounds: few or none there are who haue not or may not, haue instance in the one, as well as personall expience in the other. Espe∣cially when we recal to mind how many instant & imminent dangrs haue bene threatned vs, & how many gracious and glorious deliueraces tendred vs. Some other excellent obseruations might be culled or selected from the flowrie border of this
subiect, but my purpose is rather to shadow at some, then amply to dilate on all. For I haue euer obserued, how Arguments of this nature are to most profit composed, when they are not so am∣ply as aptly compiled: Long and tedious discour∣ses being like long seruices, tending more to sur∣fet then solace; whereas the pleasure of varietie, draweth on a new appetite in midst of satietie. Now to our proposed taske: where you shall s how harmelesse innocencie shuffels out of the hands of boundlesse crueltie. THE SATYRE. HOe Euristheus, I am hither sent, From Iunoes Princely pallace to thy Court, To tell thee, thou must be her instrument, (And to that purpose she hath chus'd thee for't) To chastise Hercules, growne eminent By his renowned conquets: do not show Thy selfe remisse, Iuno will haue it so. And Iuno shall; I will such taskes impose, That earth shall wonder how they were inuented, So as his life he shall be sure to lose, What do I care, so Iuno be contented, Darknesse shall not my secresies disclose? Her will is my command, n must I aske Whence's her distast; come yong man heare your taske A fruitfullHesperidum  in custo∣les, peuigiles tinent soro∣s. garden, full of choyce delights, Enricht with sprayes of gold and apples too, Which by three sisters watch'd both dayes and nights,
Yeeld no accesse vnto th'inuading foe, Is thy first progresse; where with doubtfull fight, Thou must performe thy taske: this is the first, Which if it proue too easie, next is worst. For in this first thou art to deale with women, And reape a glorious prize when thou hast done; And such an enterprize (I know) is common, Crowning vs great by th'triumph we haue wonne: Aurifer n∣mora eretem ferentia corti∣cem,  pomum. Gold is so strange a baite, as there is no man, But he will hazard life to gaine that prize, Which makes men fooles that are supposed wise. But next taske shall be of another kind, No golden apples pluck from Hesperie: For in this worke thou nought but dong shalt find, Augei stabul &c. Augean stables must thy labour be, Which if thou cleare not, as I haue assign'd, Death shall attend thee: tis in vaine to come, By prayers or teares to change my fatall doome. The third, that hideous Hydra, which doth breedAbscisso capi te, caput renas citur alerum. Increase of heads, for one being cut away, Another springs vp streight way in her stead: Hence then away, and make me no delay, Delay breeds danger, do what I haue said, Which done thou liues, ich vnperform'd thou dies,He coucheth  his labours (inf nite in number and nature) i hese thre. This said; Alcydes to his labour hies. Alas (poore man) how well it may be said, So many are the perils he must passe, That he with dangers is inuironed?
So hopelesse and so haplesse is his case, As he by death is so encompassed, That howsoere his power he meanes to trie, Poore is his power, he must be forc'd to die. Imperous tyrant, couldst thou wreak thy rage On none but sch whose valour hath bene showne, As a victorious Mirror to this age, And hath bene blaz'd where thou wer't neuer knowne? Must thou his person to such taskes engage, As flesh and bloud did neuer yet sustaine? Well, he must trie, although he trie in vaine. Yes, he will trie, and act what he doth try, He'le tug and tew, and striue and stoope to ought, YeaNon terret mors sapien∣tem. die, if so with honour he may de, Yet know, that those who haue his life thus sought, Are but insulting types ofThales mile∣sius inteo∣ganti quid dif∣ficile; senem (inquit) videre tyrannum. tyrannie, Whose boundlesse splene, when He hath past these shelues, Will be disgorg'd, and fll vpon themselues. For see, thou cruell sauage, whose dsire Extends to bloud, how this aduentr'ous Knight, Gaines him renowne, and scorneth to retire, Till he hath got a conqust by his fight: So high heroick thoughts vse to aspre, As when extremest danger  enclose them, They sleight those foes that labour to oppose them. Here see those taskes which thy imperious power, Impos'd this Noble champion, finished; The Serpent,Pro telo gerit quae fudit, ar∣matus venit Leone & Hy∣dra. Sec. Hydra, which of heads had store,
Now headlesse lies by valour conquered, The stables purg'd from th'filth they had before, The golden Apples Trophies of his glorie, Dilate their ends vnto an endlesse storie. Here see th'euent where vertue is the aime, Here see the issue of a glorious mind, Here see how martiall honour makes her claime, Here see the crowne to diligence assign'd, Here see what all may see, a souldiers fame, Not tipt with fruitlesse titles, but made great, More by true worth, then by a glorious seate. For such, whose natiue merit hath attain'd Renowne 'mongst men, shouldSi sola nob adsunt prospe∣ra, soluimur: a virtutem vero melius per ad∣uersa solidamu Greg. aduerse gusts assaile thē In such an Orbe rest their resolues contain'd, As well they may inuade but not appall them, For from esteeme of earth they'r wholly wain'd, Planting their mounting thoughts vpon that sphere, Which frees such minds as are infranchis'd there. Hence learne ye Great-ones, who esteeme it good Sufficient to be great, and thinke't well done, Be't right or wrong, what's done in heate of blood, Hence learne your state, lest ye decline too soone, For few ere firmely stood, that proudly stood. But specially ye men that  inLocum virtu habet. Se. place, Iudge others as your selues were in same case. Here haue you had a mirror to direct Your wayes, and forme your actins all the better, Which president if carelesse, ye neglect,
And walke not by this line, liue by this letter, Hows' ere the world may tender you respect, Ye are but gorgeous paintings daubed ouer, Clothing your vice with sme more precious couer. Hence likewise learne ye whom the frowne of fate, Hath so deprest, as not one beame doth shine Vpon the forlorne mansion of your state, To beare with patience and giue way to time, So shall vie with Fortune in her hate; And prize all earths contents as bitter-sweete, Which armes you 'gainst all fortunes ye can meete. This great Alcydes did, who did with ease (For what's vneasie to a mind prepard) DiscomfitHas Hydra ensit, his ia∣ent Stympha∣ides. Ibid. th' Hydra and th' Stymphalides, With whom he cop'd, encountred long and warr'd▪ And gain'd him glory by such acts as these. Obserue this Morall (for right sure I am) The imitation shewes a perfect man. The last not least, which may obserued be,—Nessus hos truxit dolos. Ictus sagittis qui tuis vitam xpulit. Cruore tincta st Palla semi∣eri, pater. Nessusque nunc as exigit pae∣as sibi. n Herc. Ot. Is to suppesse splene or conceiued hate, Which in perfidious Nessus you may see, Fully portraid, who meerely through deceit, Practis'd Alcydes wofull Tragedy: For of all passions, there's  that hath More soueragnty ore man, then boundlesse wrath. Which to restraine, (for wherein may man show Himselfe more manly, then in this restraint) That there is nought more generou, you should kno,
Then true compassion to the indigent, Which euen humanitie saith, that we oweFlete Here∣leos numina casus. ibid. One to another, while we vse to tender Loue to our Maker, in him to each member. Thus if ye do, how low soere ye be, Your actions make you noble, and shall liue After your summons of Mortalitie, And from your ashes such a perfume giue, As shall eternize your blest memorie: If otherwise ye liue, ye are at best But guilded gulls, and by opinion blest. The Argument. ALcibiades a noble Athenian, whose glorious & renowned actions gained him due esteeme inOthers are of o∣pinion that he was drawne fr sensuall affecti∣ons to the pra∣ctise of vertue, by the graue in∣struction of So∣crates: but it ap∣peares otherwise by his much fre∣quenting Ti∣mandraes com∣panie. Vid. Plut. in vit. Alcib. his Country: at last by retiring himselfe frō armes, gaue his mind to sensuality; which so effeminated his once imparallel'd spirit, as he became no lesse remarkable for sensuall libertie, then he was be fore memorable for ennobled exploits of martiall chiualrie. From hence the Satyre deriues his sub∣iect, inueying against the remisnesse of such as waine their affections from employment, exposing their minds (those glorious or resplendent images of their Maker) to securitie, rightly termed the di∣uels opportunitie. How perillous vacancie from af∣faires
hath euer bene, may appeare by ancient and moderne examples, whose Tragicall catastroph wold craue teares immix'd with lines. Let this suf∣fice, there is no one motiue more effectually mo∣uing, no Rhetoricke more mouingly perswading, no Oratorie more perswasiuely inducing, then what we daily feele or apprehend in our selues. Where euery Quot horae (si male expensae) tot itae. Quot horae, tot brae. houre not well employed, begets some argument or other to moue our corrupt na∣tures to be depraued. Let vs then admit of no va∣cation, saue onely vacation from vice. Our liues are too short to be fruitlesly employed, or remisly pased. O then how well spent is that oyle which consumes it selfe in actions of vertue Whose precious selfe's a glory to her selfe! May nothing so much be estranged frō vs as vice, which, of all others, most disfigures vs; Though our feete be on earth, may our minds be in heauen: where we shall find more true glory then earth can affoord vs, or the light promises of fruit∣lesse vanity assure vs. Expect then what may me∣rit your attention; a rough-hew'd Satyre shall speake his mind boldly without partiality, taxing such who retire from action, wherein vertue con∣sisteth, and lye sleeping in securitie, whereby the spirit, or inward motion of the soule wofully droupeth. THE SATYRE. AWake, thou noble Greeke! how should desire, Of sensuall shame (soules staine) so dull thy wit,
Or cloud those glorious thoughts which did aspire, Once to exploits which greatnesse might befit? Where now the beamlins of that sacred fire, Lie rak't in ashes, and of late do seeme (So ranke is vice) as if they had not bene. Can a faith-breaking leering Illa pictura  est. Ambr exam. l. 6. . 8. Curtizan, Whose face is glaz'd with frontlesse impudence, Depresse the spirit of a Noble man, And make him lose his reason for his sence? O span thy life (for life is but a span) And thou shalt find the scantling is so small, For vaine delights there is no Sicut capillu non peribit de capite, ita ne momentum d tempore. Ber time at all! Shall azur'd breast, sleeke skin, or painted cheeke, All  attire is the at∣tire of sinne. Gorgeous attire, locks braided, wandring eye, Gaine thee delight, when thou delights should seeke In a more glorious obiect? O relie On a more firme foundation, lest thou breake, Credit with Him who long hath giuen thee trust, Which thou must pay be sure, for he is iust. O do not then admire, what thy desire Should most contemne, if reason were thy guide; Let thy erected thoughts extend farre higher, Then to these wormelins that like Sunt ita poae matis vmbrae. shadowes glide, Whose borrowed betutie melts with heate of fire. Their shape from Quarum vi∣cum est offici, ab officina eli∣cere formam. Lecythum ha∣bet in malis. vid. vit, ad Sa shop is bought and brought; ô art What canst thou promise to a knowing heart! A knowing heart, which plants her choicest blisse In what it sees not, but doth comprehend
By eye of faith! not what terrestriall is, But what affoordeth Ea vita beata est, quando quod optimum est, amatur & habetur. Sola eius visio, vera mentis nostrae refectio est. Greg. in Mor. Expo. in Iob. comfort without end, Where we enioy whats euer we did wish; Who then, if he partake but common sence, Will ere reioyce, till he depart from hence? Yet see the blindnesse of distracted man, How he prefers one moment of delight, (Which cheares not much when it does all it can) Before delights in nature infinite, Whose iuyce (yeelds perfect fulnesse, sure I am:) O times! when men loue that they should neglect, Disualuing that which they should most respect. For note how many haue aduentured Their liues (and happy they if that were all) And for a Quanta amē∣tia est effigiem mutare naturae, picturam quae∣rere▪ Cypri. de discip. & hab. irg. painted trunke haue perished; O England, I thy selfe to witnesse call, For many hopefull plants haue withered Within thy bosome, cause whereof did spring, Mearely from lust, and from no other thing! How many promising youths, whose precious bloud Shed by too resolute hazard, might haue done Their gracious Prince and natiue Countrie good, In heate of bloud haue to their ruine gone, Inanis gloriae uccum propriae aluti praepo∣entes. While they on termes of reputation stood, Preferring titles (see the heate of strife) Before the loue and safete of their life? O Gentlemen, know that those eyes of yours, Which should be piercing like the Cunctarum quippe aium visum acies a∣quilae superat: ita vt solis ra∣dios fixos in se eius oculos nul∣la luis suae co∣ruscatione re∣uerberans, claudat. Greg▪ in Mor. Expos. in Iob. Eagles eyes,
Are not to view these Dalilahs of ours, But to eye heauen and sullen earth despise, And so increase in honours as in houres. O ye should find more happinesse in this, Then spend the day in courting for a kisse! Were time as easie purchas'd as is land, Ye better might dispense with losse of time; Or 'twere in you to make the Sunne to stand, So many points t'ascend or to decline, ' de say ye had the world at command: But as time Quicquid de illo praeteritum est, iam non est quicquid de il∣lo futurum est, nondum est. Aug. past, is none of yours, once gone, So that time is not yours, which is to come. Addresse yours selues then to that glorious place, Where there's no time, no limit to confine, No alteration: but where such a grace, Or perfect lustre beautifies the clime, Where ye'r to liue, as th'choisest chearefullst face, Ye ere beheld on earth, were't nere Videdo pul∣chra, cogita haec omnia, & pulchriora, esse in coelo: viden∣do horribilia, cogita haec om∣nia, & horribi∣liora, esse in inferno. Lans∣perg. so faire, Shall seeme deformitie to beautie there. But this shall serue for you! now in a word, Heare me In Timandrae gremio paululū recumbens, pe∣rimitur. Plut▪ i vit. Alcib. Timandra (for I must be heard;) Thou whose light shop all vanities affoord, Reclaime thy sensuall life, which hath appear'd As odious and offensiue to thy Lord, As those lasciuious robes (robes suiting night) Are in disgrace, when good men are in sight. More to enlarge my selfe were not so good, Perhaps this litle's more then thou wilt reade:
But if thou reade, I wish't may stirre thy blood, And moue thee henceforth to take better heed, Then to transgresse the bounds of womanhood: Whose chiefest essence in these foure appeare, In gate, looke, speech, and in the robes you weare. The Argument. PErillus an excellent Artificer (being then fa∣mous for excellent inuentions) to satisfie the inhumane disposition of the tyrant Phalaris, as al∣so in hope to be highly rewarded for his ingeni∣ous deuice: made a bull of brasse for a new kind of torment, presenting it to Phalaris, who made, triall thereof by tormenting Perillus first therein. From this Argument or subiect of reuenge, we may obserue two speciall motiues of Morall in∣struction or humane Caution. The first is, to de∣terre vs from humoring or soothing such, on whom we haue dependence, in irregular or sini∣ster respects. For the vertuous, whose comfort is the testimonie of a good conscience, scorne to hold cor∣respondence with vicious men, whose commands euer tend to depraued and enormious ends. The second is, a notable example of reuenge in Perillus suffering, & in Phalaris inflicting. Much was it that this curious Artizan expected, but with equall & deserued censure was he rewarded: for inglorious
seconded by like ends. Hence the Satyre display∣eth such in their natiue colours, who rather then they will lose the least esteeme with men of high ranke or qualitie, vse to dispence with faith, friend, and all, to plant them firmer in the affection of their Patron. But obserue the conclusion, as their meanes were indirect, so their ends sorted euer with the meanes. They seldome extend their temporizing houres to an accomplished age, but haue their hopes euer blasted, ere they be well bloomed: their iniurious aimes discouered, ere they be rightly leuelled: and their wishes to a tra∣gicall period exposed, as their desires were to all goodnesse opposed. May all proiectors or state∣forragers sustaine like censure, hauing their na∣tures so reluctant or opposite to all correspon∣dence with honour. Longer I will not dilate on this subiect, but recollect my spirits, to adde more spirit to my ouer-tyred Satyre, who hath bene so long employed in the Embassie of Nature, and wearied in dancing the Wilde mans measure, that after Perillus censure she must repose ere she proceede any further; and take some breath ere I dance any longer. THE SATYRE. BRaue Enginer, you whose more curious hand Hath fram'd a Bull of brasse by choycest art, That as a Trophie it might euer stand, And be an Embleme of thy cruell heart: Hearke what's thy tyrant Phalaris command,
Whose will's a law; and hauing heard it well, Thy censure to succeeding ages tell. Thou must (as it is iust) be first presented A sacrifice vnto the brazen Bull, And feele that torture which thy art inuented, That thou maist be rewarded to the full; No remedy, it cannot be preuented. Thus, thus reuenge appeares which long did smother, He must be catcht, that aimes to catch another. Iust was thy iudgement, Princely Phalaris, Thy censure most impartiall; that he Whose artfull hand that first contriued this, To torture others, and to humour thee, Should in himselfe feele what this torture is. Which great or small, he must be forc'd to go, May such For so Dioge∣nes the Cynicke tearmes all hi∣mering Timists or temporizing sycophants. La∣ert. tame-beasts be euer vsed so. Like fate befell vnhappie Who built Pal∣las horse, and after perished in the siege of Troy. Homer. in iad. Phereclus, Who first contriu'd by cunning more then force, To make once glorious Troy as ruinous As spoile could make it: therefore rear'd a Horse, Framed by Pallas art, as curious, As art could forme, or cunning could inuent, To weaue his end, which art could not preuent. See ye braue state-proiectors, what's the gaine Ye reape by courses that are indirect: See these, who first contriu'd, and first were slaine, May mirrors be of what ye most affect! These labour'd much, yet labour'd they in vaine;
For there's no wit how quicke soere can do it, If powers diuine shall make Witnesse th matchlesse Po der plor, no les miraculously  uealed, then mi chieuously con triued, no les happily preue ted, then hate∣fully practised. Of which cruel Agents (being his owne sub∣iects) our grac ous Soueraigne might iusty tak vp the complain of that Princely Prophet Dauid My familiar friends, whō I trusted, which did eate of my bread, haue lif∣ted vp their heeles against me. Psal. 51. and 55. Si non parcet, perdet. resistance to it. And can ye thinke that heauen, whose glorious eye Surueyes this Uniuerse, will daigne to view Men that are giuen to all impietie? You say, he will; he will indeed, it's true; But this is to your further misery. For that same eye which viewes what you commit, Hath sight to see, and power to Vbi non est per gratiam, adest per vin∣dictam. Aug. punish it. To punish it, if hoording sin on sin, Ye loath Repentance, and bestow your labour, Onely to gaine esteeme, or else to win By your pernicious plots some great mans fauour; O I do see the state that you are in, Which cannot be redeem'd, vnlesse betime With Qui non ge∣mit peregrimus, non gaudebit ciuis. Aug. sighs for sins, you wipe away your crime! For shew me one, (if one to shew you haue) Who built his fortunes on this sandie ground, That euer went gray-headed to his graue, Or neare his end was not distressed found, Or put not trust in that which did deceiue! Sure few there be, if any such there be, But shew me one, and it sufficeth me. I grant indeed, that for a time these may Flourish like to a Bay tree, and increase, Like Oliue branches, but this lasts not aye, Their Halcyonci di∣es ab Halcyo∣nis anibus di∣cti: neque boni maliue ominis aues hos esse arbitror; quan∣tum tamen à Propheta dici∣tur, tantum à me afferendum asserendumque esse puto. Etiam Ciconia in coelo noit stata tempora sua, & Turtur, grusque, & Hirundo obseruant tempus aduentus sui. Ierem. 8. 7. Halcyon dayes shall in a moment ceasse,
When night (sad night) shall take their soules away. Then will they tune their strings to this sad song, Short was our sun-shine, but our night-shade long Ye then, I say, whose youth-deceiuing prime, Promise successe, beleeue't from me, that this, When time shall come (as what more swift then time) Shall be conuerted to a painted blisse, Whose gilded outside beautifide your crime; Which once displaide, cleare shall it shew as light, Your Sommer-day's become a winter night. Beware then ye, who practise and inuent, To humour greatnesse; for there's one more great, Who hath pronounc'd, like sinne, like punishment;Paiculpa, ari poena. Whom at that day ye hardly may intreat, When death and horror shall be eminent: Then will ye say vnto the Mountaines thus, And shadie groues, Come downe and couer vs. But were ye great as earthly pompe could make ye, Weake is the arme of flesh, or The priuiledge of greatnesse, must be no sub∣erfuge for guil∣inesse. mightinesse, For all these feeble hopes shall then forsake ye, With the false flourish of your happinesse, When ye vnto your field-bed must betake ye; Where ye for all your shapes and glozed formes, Might deceiue men, but cannot deceiue wormes.
The Statue of Agathocles. The Argument. AGathocles a tyrant of Syracusa, caused his Sta∣tue to be composed in this manner. The Caput de a ro innuendo  gis dignitatem brachia de eb re intimando eius venusta∣tem, caetera li∣nimenta de aer denotādo ste nuitatem, pe∣des vero de terra, indican∣do eius fragili∣tatem. vid. Plut▪ Apotheg. head of gold, armes of iuory, and other of the liniments of purest brasse, but the feete of earth: intimating, of what weake and infirme subsistence this little∣world, Man, was builded. Whence we may col∣lect, what diuine considerations the Pagans them∣selues obserued and vsually applied to rectifie their morall life: where instructions of nature directed them, not onely in the course of humane socie∣tie, but euen in principles aboue the reach and pitch of Nature, as may appeare in many Philoso∣phicall Axioms, and diuinely inserted sentences in the Workes of Plato, Plutarch, Socrates; and amongst the Latines in the inimitable labours of Seneca, Boaethius, Tacitus, and Plinius Secundus. Vpon the Morall of this Statue of Agathocles in∣sists the Author in this Poeme, concluding with this vndoubted position: That as foundations on sand are by euery tempest shaken, so man standing on feete of earth, hath no firmer foundation then mutabi∣litie to ground on.
THE EMBLEME. A Gathocles, me thinkes I might compare thee, (So rare thou art) to some choice statuarie, Who doth portray with Pencile he doth take, Himselfe to th'image which he's wont to make; How artfull thou, and gracefull too by birth, A King, yet shewes that thou art made of earth, Not glorying in thy greatnesse, but would seeme, Made of the same mould other men haue bene! A head of gold, as thou art chiefe of men, So chiefe of mettalls makes thy Diadem; Uictorious armes of purest iuorie, Which intimates the persons puritie; The other liniments compos'd of brasse, Imply th'vndaunted strength of which thou was; But feete of earth, shew th'ground whereon we stand, That we're cast downe in turning of a hand. Of which, that we might make the better vse, Me thinkes I could dilate the Morall thus. Man made of earth, no surer footing can Presume vpon, then earth from whence be came, Where firmenesse is infirmenesse, and the stay On which he builds his strongest hopes, is clay. And yet how strangely confident he growes, In heauen-confronting boldnesse and in showes, Bearing a Giants spirit, when in length, Height, breadth, and pitch he is of Pigmeis strength. Yea I haue knowne a very Dwarfe in sight, Conceit himselfe a Pyramis in height, Ietting so stately, as't were in his power
To mount alof vnto the airie tower. But when Man's proud, I should esteeme't more meete Not to presume on's strength, but looke on's feete: Which nature (we obserue) hath taught the In euius atrio res pedes lum non citius figi∣tur, quam in se ipso statim dè ijcitur. Vid. Plin in nat. Hist. Aelian. ibid. Sambuc. in Em∣blem. Alciat. ibid. Swan, And ought in reason to be done in Man. Weake are foundations that are rer'd on sand, And on as weake grounds may we seeme to stand, Both subiect to be ruin'd, split and raz't, One billow shakes the first, one griefe the last. Whence then or how subsists this earthly frame, That merits in it selfe no other name, Then O quam con∣tempta res est homo, nisi supra humana se ! shell of base corruption! it's not brasse, Marble, or iuory, which when times passe, And our expired fates surceasse to be, Reserue in them our liuing memorie. No, no, this mettall is not of that proofe, We liue as those vnder a shaking roofe, Where euery moment makes apparent show, For want of props of finall ouerthrow. Thus then, me thinkes you may (if so you please) Apply this Statue of Agathocles; As he compos'd his royall Head of gold, The pur'st of mettals, you are thereby told, That th' Head whence reason and right iudgement springs, Should not be pesterd with inferior things; And as his actiue sinnewes, armes are said, To shew their purenesse, to be iuored, Like Pelops milke-white shoulders; we are giuen To vnderstand, our armes should be to heauen, As to their proper orbe enlarg'd, that we Might there be made the Saints of puritie; By rest of th' parts which were compos'd of brasse,
(Being of bigger bone then others was) We may collect, men made of selfe-same clay, May in their strength do more then others may. Lastly o earth, as men subsistence haue, Their earthly Pes in terris, nens sit in coe∣is. feete do hasten to their graue. A short Satyre of a corrupt Lawyer. THE XIIII. SATYRE. NAso is sicke of late, but how canst tell?. He hath a swelling in his throate I feare; iudg'd as much, me thought He spake not well, In his poore clients cause: nay more I heare, His tumour's growne so dang'rous, as some say, He was absolued but the t'other day. And what confest He? not a sinne I trow, Those He reseru'd within a leatherne bag, And that's his conscience; did He mercy show Unto the pore? not one old rotten rag Would he ffoord them, or with teares bemone them, Saying, that—forma pauperis had vndone them. Did He not wish to be dissolu'd from hence? No, when you talk'd of finall Dissolution,
He with a sea of teares his face would drench, Wishing He might but make another motion, And He would be dissolu'd when He had done: But His forg'd motion each tearme day begun. Had He some matter laid vpon his heart? Abundance of corruption, foule infection. Did He no secret treasure there impart?Oleum grati . Nought but a boxe containing his complexion. What was it Sir, some precious oyle of grace? No, but an oyle to smeere his brazen face. I haue heard much of his attractiue nose, How He could draw white Riols with his breath;Aurū palpabil & aurum pota∣bile; Aurum ob∣rizum & aurum adulterinum. It's true indeed, and therefore did He choose To drinke Aurum potabile at his death, Nor car'd He greatly if He were to lose His soule, so that He might enioy his nose. It was a wonder in his greatest pine, How He should haue remorse; for well I know, In his successiue fortunes nought could straine His hardned conscience, which He would not do For hope of gaine, so as in time no sinne So great, but grew familiar with him. O Sir, the many fees He had receiu'd, And hood-winck'd bribes which at his death opprest him, The forged deeds his wicked braine contri'd, And that blacke buckram bag which did arrest him, Commencing suite in one, surcharg'd Him so, That He was plug'd into a gulph ofwo.
O what a smoke of powder there appeared At the dissoluing of his vglie soule; All that were present there to see Him feared, His case vncas'd did show so grim, so foule: Yet there were some had hope He would do well, Make but one motion, and come out of hell. But others fear'd that motion would be long, If it should answer motions He made here: Besides, that place of motions is so throng, That one will scarce haue end a thousand yeare. Then Naso fare thee well, for I do see, Earth sends to hell thy mittimus with thee. Two short moderne Satyres. Pseudophilia. In Ambulantem. Hypocritam. A Walking Hypocrite there was, whose pace, Trunkhose, small ruffe, deminutiue in forme, Shew'd to each man He was the child of grace, Such were the vertues did his life adorne; Nought could He heare that did of lightnesse come, But He would stop his eares, or leaue the roome. Discourse (thus would He say) of things deuine, Soyle not your soules with such lasciuiousnesse:
Your vessels should with precious vertues shine, As lamps of grace and lights of godlinesse; But lasse for wo, sin's such a fruitfull weed, Still as one dies another doth succeed. Here one doth beate his braine 'bot practises, There is another plotting wickednesse; O how long Lord wilt thou blindfold their eyes, In suffering them to worke vnrighteousnesse? Well, I will pray for them, and Syons peace, The prayers of Saints can no way chuse but please Thus did this mirror of deuotion walke, Inspir'd it seem'd with some Angelicke gift, So holy was his life, so pure his talke, As if the spirit of zeale had Ely left, And lodg'd within his breast, it could not be, Fuller of godly feruor then was He, But see what end these false pretences haue, Where zeale is made a cloke to couer sinne, This whited wall to th'eye so seeming graue, Like varnish'd tombes had ought but filth within, For though of zeale He made a formall show, In Fortune Alley was his Rendeuow. There He repos'd there He his solace tooke, Shrin'd neare his Saint, his female-puritan, In place so priuate as no eye could looke, To what they did, to manifest their shame: But see heauens will, those eyes they least suspected, First ey'd their shame, whereby they were detected.
Thus did his speech and practise disagree In one exemplar, formall, regular, In th'other loose through carnall libertie, Which two when they do meete, so different are, As there's no discord worse in any song, Then twixt a hollow heart and holy tongue. For He that doth pretend, and think't enough, To make a shew of what He lest intends, Shall ere the period of his dayes run through, Beshrew himselfe for his mischieuous ends; For he that is not good but would be thought, Is worse by odds then this plaine dealing nough Poligonia. In Drusum meretri∣cium Aiutorem. DRusus, what makes thee take no trade in hand, But like. Hermaphrodite, halfe man halfe womā Pandors thy selfe, and stands at whoores command, To play the bolt for euery Haxter common? Spend not thy houres with whoores, lest thou confesse, There is no life to thy obduratenesse. Obdurate villaine hard'ned in ill, That takes delight in seeing Nature naked, Whose pleasure drawne from selfe-licentious will, Makes thee of God, of men, and all forsaked;
Shame is thy chaine, thy fetters linkes of sinne, Whence to escape is hard, being once lock'd in. What newes from Babell, where that prple whoore, With seared marrow charmes deluded man, So lull'd a sleepe, as He forgets heauens power, And serues that hireling-Neapolitan? I'le tell the Drusus, sad and heauie newes, Death vnto Drusus while he hants the stewes. An Admonition to the Reader vpon the precedent Satyres. WHo will not be reprou'd, it's to be fear'd, Scornes to amend, or to redeeme the time; For spotlesse Vertue neuer there appear'd, Where true Humility, that fruifull vine Hath no plantation, for it cannot be, Grace should haue growth but by Humilitie. Let each man then into his errors looke, And with a free acknowledgement confesse; That there are more Errataes in his booke, Then th'crabbedst Satyre can in lines expresse: For this will better Him, and make Him grow In grace with Vertue, whom He knowes not now.
These my vnpolish'd Satyre: I commend, To thy protection, not that I do feare Thy censure other wise then as a friend, For I am secure of censre I may sweare, But for forme sake: if shou't accept them do, If not, I care not how the world go. Thine if thine owne, Musophilus. Silentio culpa crescit.
THE SHEPHEARDS TALES. Too true poore shepheards do this Prouerbe find, No sooner out of sight then out of mind. LONDON, Printed for Richard Whitaker. 1621.
HIS PASTORALLS ARE HERE CONTINVED WITH THREE OTHER TALES; hauing relation to a former part, as yet ob∣scured: and deuided into certaine Pastorall Eglogues, shadowing much delight vnder a rurall subiect. The Argument. HEre Corydon proues, That nothing can be sent, To crosse loue more, Thē friends vnkind restraint. The second Argument. COrydon coy Celia woes, And his loue by tokens showes, Tokens are those lures, that find Best accesse to woman kind. Long he woes ere he can win;
Yet at last she fancieth him: And so firme, as you shall heare, Each to other troth-plight were; But alas, where loue is most, There it oft-times most is crost. For these two are closly pent, Each from other by restraint; He, vnto the plaine must go, Loue-sicke, heart-sicke, full of wo, Where he sings such chearefull layes, In his chast choise, Celias praise, That steepe mountaines, rocks and plaines, Seeme entranced with his straines: But alas, while he does keepe, Helplesse shepheard, haplesse sheepe, Celia for to seeke her make, From her keeper makes escape, And vnto the mountaine goes, Where her selfe, her selfe doth lose; While one of Lauerna'es crew, Seizeth on her as his dew, Where by force, by awe, by feare, She was long detained there, And in the end affianc'd so, As she ends her life in wo.
THE SHEPHEARDS TALES. The shepheards. Technis. Dymnus. Dorycles. Corydon. Sapphus. Linus. THE FIRST EGLOGVE. Corydons tale. NAy shepheards stay, there is no hast but good, We three are shepheards, and haue vnder∣stood Both of your follies and your fancies too; Dor. Why tell vs Corydon, what thou wouldst do! Cor. Shew my misfortune Swaines, as you haue done, ech. Deferre it till to morrow Corydon. Cor. No, Technis no, I cannot if I would, You'ue told your griefes, and now mine must be told: What though the Sunne be drawing to the West, Where he intends to take his wonted rest, Tis Moone-light (lads) and if it were not light, Welcome you are to lodge with me all night. Dor. Thankes Corydon. Cor. Why thanke you Corydon? Simple and meane's the cottage where I won, Yet well I wot, for chestnuts, cakes, and creame, If you'le accept my welcome as I meane, You shall not want, but haue sufficient store, With hearty welcome swaines, what would ye more? Dym. More Corydon! t'is all that we can wish, But to thy tale, let's heare now what it is. Dor. Yes, do good Corydon; and we will stay;
Cor. Attend then shepheards, heare what I shall say. Sap. And when you'ue done, I will begin with mine; Lin. Which I'le continue in the euening time. Cor. Well said, good shepheards, we are iustly three, To answer their three tales, and here for me. There was a Maid, and well might she be said, So chast, so choice she was, to be a Maid, Where lillie white mixt with a cherrie red, Such admiration in the shepheards bred, As well was he that might but haue a sight Of her rare beauty mirror of delight. Oft would she come vnto a siluer spring, Which neare her fathers house was neighboring, Where she would eye her selfe as she did passe, For shepheards vse no other looking-glasse. Tech. Tru Corydon. Cor. But which may seeme more rare, This Maid she was as wise as she was faire; So as discretion did so moderate The safe condition of her low estate, As enuie neuer wrong'd her spotlesse name, Or soild her matchlesse honour with defame. Dor. Under a happie Planet she was borne, Cor. She was indeed; nor did she euer scorne, The company of any country maid, How meane soere or sluttishly araid: But she would be their play-fare, to make chuse, Of such poore simple sports as wenches vse. Yea in their wakes, shroues, wassel-cups, or tides, Or Whitson-ales, or where the country brides Chuse out their bride-maids, as the custome is, She seld or neare was seene to do amisse: But so respectiue of her name and fame,
That though she blusht, she neuer blusht for shame Of any act immodest, but retain'd That good opinion which her vertues gain'd. Dym. Sure Corydon this was a Saintly woman; Cor. Indeed such Saints 'mongst women are not cōmon: But to my story; her did many swaine, By fruitlesse suite endeuour to obtaine, As young Spudippus, rich Archymorus, Actiue Aminta, youthfull Hirsius. Dor. It seemes sh'ad choice. Cor. Yes Dorycles, she had: And some of these were good, and some as bad, But neither good nor bad, nor rich nor poore, Could her content, though she had dily store. Yet from Pandoras box did nere proceed, More hatefull poyson vpon humane seed, Then from these for lorne louers, whose repor, (But iust is heauen, for they were plagued for't,) Aspers'd this scandall on faire Celia, That she had made her choice some other way. Tech. Unworthy louers. Cor. True indeed, they be Unworthy th'loue of such an one as she; For Linus you do know them; Lin. Yes, I do, But specially Spudippus, whom I know, To be the notedst cot-queane that's about him. Tec. Sure Linus thē she could not chuse but flout him. Cor. Perhaps she did, yet with that modestie, As she did shadow it so couertly, That he could scarce discouer what she ment. Lin. How ere Spudippus would be patient.
Dor. Then he's some gull. Lin. No he's a wealthy man, And such an one as rightly, sure I am, Knows how much milke crummock his cow wi gie, And can discerne a riddle from a siue. Cor. Linus, it seemes thou knowes him passing well. Lin. Las if I would, some stories I could tell, Would make you laugh: for as it hanc'd one day, Some with my selfe did take his house by th'way, Where we an houre or two meant to remaine, To trie how he his friends would entertaine. Dor. And pray thee how? Lin. I'le tell thee Dorycles: Hauing an houre or two taken our ease, And readie to depart (I pray thee heare) He sent one of his Sculletie for sce beare, Which though long first, came in an earthen cup, Which being giuen to me, I drunke it vp; Which drunke. Cor. How then good Linus, pray thee say? Lin. The rest were forc'd to go a thirst away. Dor. Had he no more? Cor. Thou vs'd him in his kind. Lin. May all be vsed so that haue his mind. But much I feare me,  ue disturbed thee, Now Corydon shew what th'euent may be! Cor. Long did these woe, but Celia could approue Of nothing lesse then of these swainlings loue, Yet would she faine to fancie one of these, Whereby she might her bedrid father please. Tech. Had she a father? Cor. Yes, asrly Lout,
Who long had laine decrepit with the gout, And liu'd for all the world, and so did die Like to a hog, that's pent vp in a stie. Dor. Some cancred erwig. Cor. True a very elfe, Who car'd not who staru'd; so he fed himselfe. He, as the want of one sense is exprest, By giuing more perfection to the rest, For euen his sense of feeling did decline, Though he had bene a nigglar in his time, Y all those mouing, actiue faculties, Which in the heate of youth are wont to rise, Gaue way vnto suspition, lest his daughter Through those loue-luring gifts which many brought her, Should set her Maiden honor at whole sale. Tech. Age h'as an eare indeed for euery tale. Cor. True, Technis true, for no affection can Haue more predominance ore any man, Then iealousie a selfe-consuming rage, Is said to haue ore men of doting age. Dor. Thy reason Corydon? Cor. That disesteeme Of being now more weake then they haue bene, Makes them repine at others now that may, And are as able to beget as they. Tech. Tis rightly noted Corydon. Lin. Yes, he Knowes by obseruance whence these humors be. Cor. Linus I do, and better had I bene, If I had neuer knowne what these things meane; But shepheards you shall heare the reason, why I should this Dotards humour thus descrie.
Sap. Yes, do good Swaine. Cor. It chanc'd vpon a night, A Moone-light night, when Moone and starres shi bright, That I with other shepheards did repaire To th' old-mans house, and found faire Celia there, Whom I in  with a kind salute, Kist, & with speaking heart though tongue was mut, Wish'd; ô what wishes do possesse a mind, That dare  vtter how his heart's inclind! She might be mine, thrice blest in being mine. Dor. Why didst not woe her Saine, for to be thine? Cor. Yes. Doycles I woed her, though not then, For Maidens they are bashfull amongst men, And  not  odestie impart, What they could  consent to with their heart; So as to tell , truly Dorycles, We past that night in making purposes, Singing of catches; with such knowne delights, As young folke vse to passe ore winter nights. And at that time, I may be bold to tell thee, For such conceits I thought none could excell me. For well you know, I was in Hyble bred, And by the  sisters nourished, So as being str'd by Nature, help'd by art, There was o straine  bore not in some part: Which gaue faire Celia such entire content, As she discouerd after, what she ment. Though I may eare, for fiue months I came to her, And with some termes of art assaid to woe her: During which time, all th' answer I could get, Was this; she did not meane to marrie yet. Tech. Tht's all the aswer these young women haue,
While they reiect what after they receiue. Cor. Technis, indeed I did perceiue as much, Though all young wenches humours be not such: But th'greatest cause of Celias distaste, Which made me many times the lesser grac't, Proceeded from that chrone her dogged father, As after by coniectures I did gather: Perswading her, that she should plant her loue On such whose hopefull meanes might best approue Her discreet choice: and that was not to be Affianced to such an one as me. Dor. Alas poore Swaine; 'tis true what th'Prouerbe saith, We aske not what he is, but what he hath. Cor. And yet perswasions which her father vs'd, Could not preuaile with her, for she had chus'd, In heart I meane. Tech. Whom did she ote vpon? Cor. Will ye beleeue me! Tech. Yes. Cor. Twas Corydon. Lin. Thrice happie swaine. Cor. Thrice happie had I bene, If I had slept still in this golden dreame; But afterwards occurrences there were, Which thus abridg'd my hopes, as you shall heare. Such deepe impression had affection made, As there remained nothing vnassaid, To consummate our wishes, but the rite. Tech. Yes something else. Cor. What Technis! Tech. Marriage night. Sap. They had enioyed that, you may suppose.
Cor. No, Sapphus no, she was not one of those: So modest, chast, respectiue of her name, Pure and demure, as th'sweetnesse of her fame, Aboue the choisest odors that are sent From spicie Tmolus flowrie continent, Sent forth that fragrant and delightfull sauour, As none ere heard, and did not seeke to haue her. For sundrie choise discourses haue we had, And I nere knew that ought could make her glad, Which had least taste of lightnesse. Tech. Sure thou art, So much thy praises relish true desert, Worthy such vertuous beautie. Cor. Technis no, Albeit Celia steem'd me so, As long and tedious seem'd that day to be, Which did deuide her from my companie. So as in silent groues and shady launes, Where Siluans, water-nimphs, fairies, and faunes, Use to frequent, there would we sit and sing, Eying our beauties in a neighbour spring, Whose siluer streamlings with soft murmring noise, To make our consort perfect, gaue their voice. And long did we obserue this custome too, Though her consent did bid me ceasse to woe: For now I was no woer, but her loue, And that so firmely linkt, as nought could moue, Alter or sunder our vnited hearts, But meagre death, which all true louers parts. Tech. Then Corydon, to me it doth appeare, That you were troth-plight. Cor. Technis so we were.
But see (good shepheards) what succeeded hence: This loue she bore me did her sire incense, So as discurteously he pent his daughter In such a vault, I could not see her after. Which when my friends perceiu'd, they grieued were, That th'loue which I his Celia did beare, Should be rewarded with contempt and scorne, Being for parentage equally borne, With best of his, as most of you can tell. Lin. Proceed good Corydon, we know it well. Cor. For was I not of Polyarchus line, A noble shepheard! Sap. True, who in his time Solemniz'd many wakes on this our downe, And ere he dide was to that honour growne, As all our plaines resounded with his laies, Sung by our Swaines in Polyarchus praise. Cor. It seemes thou knew him Sapphus: but attend For now my storie draweth neare an end. My friends distasting this repulse of mine, Forc'd me from th'course whereto I did incline: So as my hopes confin'd, I'me driuen to go From Adons vale vnto a mount of wo. Lin. Vnhappie shepheard. Cor. And vnhappie sheepe, For ill could I my heards from worrying keepe, Though to that charge my friends enioyned me, When I could scarcely keepe my owne hands free, From doing violence vpon my selfe: So as one day vpon a ragged shelfe, Wreath'd round with Iuie, as I ate alone, Descanting Odes of sorrow and of mone,
I chanc'd on my mishap to meditate, Celias restraint, and my forlorne estate; Which done, I vow'd if speedy remedy Gaue no reliefe vnto my maladie, That very cliff where I repos'd that day, Should be the meanes to take my life away. Tech. O Corydon this soundeth of despaire. Cor. It does indeed: but such a watchfull care, Had gracious Pan of me, that in short time, These motiues to despaire 'gan to decline, And lose their force: so as when griefes grew ripe, I vs'd to take me to my oaten pipe. Dor. But ere thou proceed further, tell vs Swaine, Where all this time thou vsed to remaine. Cor. A broad-spread oake with aged armes & old, Directs the passenger the way he would, Neare Cadmus rising hillocks, where the spring Of golden Tagus vseth oft to bring Such precious trafficke to the neighbour shore, As former times through blindnesse did adore Those urled streames, wherein they did descry Their loue to gold, by their Idolatrie: That shady oake I say, and that blest spring, In my distresse, gaue me such harboring; As night and day I did not thence remoue, But waking mus'd, and sleeping dream'd of lue. Tech. Who euer heard the like! Dor. How didst thou liue? Cor. On hope. Tech. Weake food. Cor. Yet did it comfort giue, To my afflicted mind, which did desire,
Euer to singe her wings in fancies fire. For many weekes in this distrest estate, Wretched, forlorne, helplesse and desolate, Sate I deiected, musing on despaire, And when those drerie clouds would once grow faire: But las the more I did expect reliefe, The lesse hope had I to allay my griefe, So as in th'end, as you shall after heare, All meanes for my redresse abridged were. But that you may perceiue what loue can do, And how effectually her passions show, I who before I louely Celia kent, Knew not what th'Heliconian Muses ment, Addrest my selfe; Lin. To what good Corydon? Cor. To write of loue, and thus my Muse begun. Tech. Pray thee kind Swaine let's heare what thou didst write. Dor. Yes do: for well I know it will delight Sepheards to heare, of shepheards amorous toyes; Sap. On then good Corydon. Cor. Haue at ye Boyes. Celia speake, or I am dombe, Here I'le soiorne till thou come, Seeke I will till I grow blind, Till I may my Celia find. For if tongue-tide, string would breake, If I heard but Celia speake; And if blind, I soone should see, Had I but a sight of thee; Or if lame, loue would find feete, Might I once with Celia meete;
Or if deafe, should I but heare Loues sweete accents from thy eare: Thy choice notes would me restore, That I should be deafe no more. Thus though dombe, blind, deafe, and lame, Heard I but my Celias name, I should speake, see, heare, and go, Vowing, Celia made me so. Tech. Beshrow me Corydon, if I had thought, That loue such strange effects could ere haue wrought, Cor. Yes Technis, yes, loue's such a wondrous thing, That it will make one plungd in sorrow sing, And singing weepe, for griefe is wont to borrow Some strains of ioy, that ioy might end in sorrow. For what is woe (as we must needs confesse it) Hauing both tongue and teares for to expresse it, But a beguiling griefe, whose nature's such, It can forget, lest it should grieue too much. Dor. Indeed such sorrow seldome lasteth long, But say good Swaine, heard Celia of thy song? Cor. I know not, Dorycles: but twas her lot, That from her keeper afterwards she got. Tech. Happie escape. Cor. Ah Technis, say not so, For this escape gaue new increase to wo; Lin. How could that be? Cor. Heare but what did ensue, She was preuented by a ruffin-crue, As she vpon the mountaines rom'd about, Through desart caues to find her shepheard out. Tech. Alas poore wench; what were they Corydon? Cor. Such as did haunt there, and did liue vpon
Rapine and violence, triumphing in Impunitie, sole motiue vnto sin. In briefe, they were, for so they did professe, Of braue Lauerna'es crue, that patronesse Of all disorder, and each euening time Offer'd stolne booties to her godlesse shrine. Tech. Mishap aboue mishaps. Cor. True, so it was; My lasse she lost her lad, the lad his lasse. And sundry daies, this rout did her detaine, While haplesse, helplesse she did sore complaine Of their inhumane vsage, but her griefe, Sighs, sobs, teares, throbs, could yeeld her small reliefe: For in the end one of this forlorne crew, Seiz'd on my long-lou'd Celia as his dew, To whom espousd whether she would or no, She ends her life, her tedious life, in wo. Lin. A sad euent: but can she not be freed? Cor. To what end Linus, she's dishonoured! Tech. Unhappie fate. Cor. Besides, she now is tide, And by enforcement, made anothers Bride. Come shepheards come, and say if euer time, Made heardmens woes so ripe, as't hath done mine. Sap. Yes Corydon, though thou thy griefes hast showne, Which makes thee thinke none equall to thine owne, I haue a Tale will moue compassion too, If Swaines haue any pittie. Dym. Pray thee how? Sap. Nay I will not be daintie; but attend, And then compare our stories to the end,
And you'le conclude that neuer any Swaine Did lone so well, and reape so small a gaine. The Argument. SApphus woes Siluia, Yet he thinks it ill, To take to that, Which he did neuer till. The second Argument. SHe, whose sweet and gracefull speech, Might all other shepheards teach: She, whom countries did admire, For her presence and attire: She, whose choise perfections mou'd, Those that knew her to be lou'd. She, euen Siluia, for saue she, None so faire, and firme could be; When she should be Sapphus Bride, And their hands were to be tide With their hearts in marriage knot, Sapphus heares of Siluias blot. Whereby Sapphus doth collect,
How hard it is for to affect, Such an one as will reioyce, And content her in her choice; He concludes, since all things be Certaine in vncertaintie, Who would trust what women say, Who can do but what they may. Forts are won by foes assault, If Maids yeeld, it is Mans fault. THE SECOND EGLOGVE. Sapphus tale. I Had a Loue as well as any you, And such an one, as had she but her due, Deseru'd the seruice of the worthiest swaine That ere fed sheepe vpon the Westerne plaine. Dym. Good Sapphus say, what was thy lasses name? Was it not Siluia? Sap. The very same; It seemes thou knew her. Dym. Yes exceeding well, And might haue knowne her, but I would not mell, In more familiar sort. Sap. Unworthy Swaine, Did her affection merit such astaine? Suppose she threw some looser lookes vpon thee, And thou collected thence she would haue won thee, Is this th'requit all of the loue she bore? Dym. Nay on good Sapphus, I'le do so no more. Sap. No more! why now I sweare, and may be bold That Dymnus would haue done it if he could.
Why sir, what parts were euer in you yet, That she on you such fancie should haue set? Tech. Fie, shepheards fie, we come not here to scold: Come Sapphus, tell thy tale as we haue told. Sap. Dymnus doth interrupt me. Lin. Dymnus ceasse. Dym. Nay I haue done, so he will hold his peace. But to vpbraid me, that I had no part To gaine her loue, I scorne it with my heart: For Ile auouch. Tech. Nay then the strife's begun. Dor. Dymnus for shame. Dym. Nay shepheards, I haue done. Dor. Pray then proceed good Sapphus. Sap. Willingly: Though I can hardly brooke this iniury. Dym. Why Sapphus, I am sure thou know'st all this, That she was light. Sap. I know she did amisse, Yet I must tell you Dymnus,'t had bene fit, That rather I then you had noted it: For it concern'd me most. Dym. Pray let it rest, I did not know so much, I may protest. Sap. Dymnus, enough: and thus I do proceed; Vpon a time when I my flocks did feed, Her father Thyrsis chanc'd to come that way, And to obserue me more, a while made stay Upon the Downe, where I did feede my sheepe: Who eyingme, how duely I did keepe My woollse store (as I had care) from worrien, Scab, sought, the rt or any kind of murren:
Tooke such a liking on me, as to say The very truth, vpon next holy day, He did inuite me to his house, where I Found what was loue in louely Siluia's eye. In briefe, I lou'd her, I may boldly tell, And this her father notes, and likes it well: For oft vs'd he to say, right sure I am, A penny in a man then with a man, He did esteeme more of, which he applide Unto that care which he in me descride. Dym. A iolly Swaine he was. Sap He was indeed, And on these Downs more frolicke rams did breed, Then any Swainling that did dwell about him, And truth to say, they would do nought without him. Dor. Tis said that Thirsk frō Thirsis tooke her name, Who thither with his heards a grazing came, And plaid vpon his pipe such pleasant straines, As he yet liues vpon the neighbour plaines. Sap. This know I Dorycles, that in my hearing, He pip'd so sweete, that many shepheards fearing Th'melodious straines which issued from his reed, Would so amaze their flocks they could not feede: Ioyntly together in a secret caue, Where Palms and Mirtles their increasing haue, They so contriu'd an harbour for the nonst, That he might from the scorching Sunne be sconst, And sing at pleasure, while his accents raising, Heardsmen were hearing, and their heards were gra∣zing. For curious seats hewne from the solid stone, Were aptly fram'd for Swaines to sit vpon, Who in his voice conceiu'd such choice delight,
As a whole Sommer day from morne to night, Seem'd but an houre, so sweetly did he sing, While euery day he found out some new spring. But all too long digression haue I made; Falling in loue with Siluia as I said, I saw and perishd, perishd, for it cost My libertie, which I by seeing lost. Dor. Deare was that sight. Sap. Yet dearer may I sweare, Was she to me, then any senses were: For other obiects I did wholly shon, Chusing her selfe for me to looke vpon. Neither was I hope-reft, for she did seeme To fancie me, hows'euer she did meane; And I deseru'd it, as I thought that day, For clothed in my suite of shepheards gray, With buttond cap and buskins all of one, I may assure you (heardsmen) I thought none On all our Downe more neate or handsome was, Or did deserue more kindnesse from his lasse. Dym. A good conceit doth well. Sap. And truth was this, She shew'd me all respect that I could wish, And vndissembled too, I am perswaded, Though afterwards all that affection faded. For on a day, (this I thought good to tell, That you may thence perceiue she lou'd me well) In a greene shadie harbour I repos'd, With Sycamours and Iuipers enclos'd, She priuately into the harbour crept, Which seene, I fatn'd a sleepe, but neuer slept. Tech. A faire occasion!
Lin How did she reueale Her loue? Sap. If you had felt, what I did feele, You neuer would awakt, but wisht do die, In such a soule-beguiling phantasie. For first sh eyed me, nor contented so, With nimble pace she to my lips did go: And calls, and clings, and clips me round about, Using a soft-sweete dalliance with her foote, Not to awake me from my cheare full dreame, But to impart what she in heart did meane; Wherewith I seem'd to wake. Tech. Why didst thou so? Sap. Technis, I thought she trod vpon my toe, But as I wak'd, she without further stay, Dying her cheekes with blushes, stole away. Dym. This shew'd she lou'd thee. Sap. So I know she did, But who can perfect what the fates forbid? For long we liued thus, and loued too, With vowes as firme as faith and troth could do, That nought should ere infringe that nuptiall band, Confirm'd betwixt vs two with heart and hand. So as with Thirsis knowledge and consent, After so many weekes in loue-toyes spent, It was agreed vpon by either side, That I should be her Bridegroome, she my Bride. And th'day of Solemnization was set downe, So as the choisest youths in all the towne, Addrest themselues, for I was valued then Amongst the chiefest Swaines, to be my men. Lin. I know it Sapphus, both thy wealth and worth,
Were both of power enough to set thee forth. Sap. In briefe, for I your patience might wrong, To stand vpon these marriage rites too long; To th'Church we went, suspecting I may sweare, No such euents as after did appeare. Tech. What sad euents, good Sapphus? Sap. Being now Come to do that which we could nere vnde, The Priest pronounc'd a charge, whereby was ment, If either of vs knew impediment, Why we should not be ioyned, then to speake, That we in time might such a wedlocke breake; Or any one there present should shew cause, Why we might not be married by the lawes: There to declare, in publicke one of these, Or else for euer after hold their peace. God speed them well, said all, saue onely one, Who stod from thence some distance all alone, Crying, aloud in open audience, Sapphus for beare, there is no conscience, That thou should ioyne thy hand to one defil'd; At least prouide a father for her child, Which she kind pregnant wench is great withall. And, who ere got it, will thee father call. Tech. This was a strange preuention. Sap. I confesse it, But ify'ad heard how Meuus did expresse it, (For so his name was) you would haue admir'd His frontlesse impudence. Dym. Sure he was hir'd, To frustrate these solemnities. Sap. A no,
Beleeue me Dymnus it was nothing so: For she was fruitfull long before her time, But th'fault was hers, it was no fact of mine: So as her neighbours iudg'd and censurd on her, That she begun by time to take vpon her. But this shall be in silence past for me, Onely she's shadowed in my A Poem ent tled Omphale. Omphale, And so charactred, as the time may come, Siluia shall be as Flora was in Rome. Dor. But what succeeded hence? Sap. Upon this voice There streight arose a strange confused noise, Some Meuus tax'd, and said he was to blame, To blemish any modest Maidens name; Others were doubtfull, left it should be true, And thus they thought, and thus it did ensue. I now suspicious of this foule dishonour, Which Meuus publickly had laid vpon her: Resolu'd those solemne spousals to delay, And put them off vntill another day: Meane while, (attend me Swains) when th'day came on That I should marrie, Siluia had a sonne. Cor. God blesse the boy. Dym. Who might the child be git? Sap. Nay Dymnus sure, who euer fatherd it. Dym. Who I! Sap. Nay blush not man for you haue told, You might oft-times haue done it if you wold; But I do wish her all the good I can, And praise her choise, though I be not the man. Tech. Vnhappie choice! Dor. Hard fate!
T'is nothing so, You'le heare a choise more fatall ere you go. These were but toyes to entertaine the time, Prepare your handkerchers if you'le haue mine. All. What, must we weepe? Lin. Shepheards a while forbeare, And if there be no cause, iudge when you heare. The Argument. LInus doth Lesbia loue, And woe, and win, And after by her Lightnesse wrongeth him. The second Argument. LOuely Lesbia, who might be, For birth, beauty, quality, Styled Natures Paragon, Fram'd for Swaines to dote vpon; In a word for to expresse, Feature of this Shepheardesse, If you would her stature know, She was neither high nor low;
But of such a middle size, As if Nature did deuise, (For as't seemeth so she ment) To make her, her president; With a Sun-reflecting eye, Skin more smooth then iuory; Cherrie lip, a dimple chin, Made for loue to lodge him in; A sweete chearing-chafing sent, Which perfum'd ground where she went; A perswasiue speech, whose tongue Strucke deepe admiration dombe. She, euen she, whom all approu'd, Is by liuely Linus lou'd, And at last (what would ye more) Though she was betroth'd before To Palemon, that braue Swaine, Who quite droupes through her disdaine, Is with rites solemnized, Vnto Linus married; Whom he finds (as heauen is iust) After, staind with boundlesse lust, So as he laments his state, Of all most vnfortunate, That he should in hope of pelfe, Wrong both others and himselfe.
THE THIRD EGLOGVE. Linus tale. I Lou'd a lasse, alas that ere I lou'd, Who as she seem'd to be, if she had prou'd, A worthier Swaine the countrey nere had bred, And her I woing won, and winning wed. Tech. I like theé Linus, thy preamble's short; Lin. Technis, indeed I  not of that sort, Who for a thing of nought will pule and crie, And childishly put finger in the eye; The burden of my griefe is great to beare. Dor. What is it Linus, pray thee let vs heare? Lin. The Maid I got, and Lesbia was her name, Was to another troth-plight ere I came. Cor. How should she Linus then be got by thee? Lin. It was my fate, or her inconstancie. Hows'ere I haue her, and possesse her now, And would be glad to giue her one of you. Tech. Art wearie of thy choice? Lin. Technis, I am, For I'me perswaded fhe'd wearie any man. So seeming smooth she is and euer was, As if she hardly could say Michaelmas: But priuately so violently fierce, As I'me afraid her name will spoile my verse. Cor. This is some hornet sure. Lin. A very waspe,
Whose forked tongue who euer should vnelaspe, Would find't a taske to charme it. Dym. Is't so tart; Lin. O Dymnus, that thou didst but feele a part Of my affliction, thou wouldst surely mone, And pittie me, that's matcht to such an one; For tell me shepheards was there ere so rare, A crime, wherein my Lesbia doth not share? Proud, (though before as humble to the eye As ere was Maid) so as one may descrie, Euen by her outward habit what she is, And by her wanton gesture gather this: If thou be chast, thy body wrongs thee much, For thy light carriage saith, thou art none such. Sap. Some fashion-monger I durst pawne my life. Lin. Sapphus 'tis true, such is poore Linus wife, Though ill it seemes a country Shepheardesse, Such harsh fantasticke fashions to professe: One day vnto a Barber she'de repaire, And for what end but this, to cut her haire, So as like to a Boy she did appeare, Hauing her haire round cut vnto her eare. Cor. Good Linus say, how lookt that Minx of thine? Lin. Like to a fleecelesse Ewe at shearing time. So cowd she was, as next day she did show her Upon the Downs, but not a Swaine could know her; So strangely clipt she seem'd, and in disguise, So monstrous ougly, as none could deuise To see one clad in lothsomer attire: And this she knew was farre from my desire, For I did euer hate it. Tech. Pray thee Lad
Tell vs in earnest how she might be clad! Lin. There is a fashion now brought vp of late, Which here our country Blouzes imitate, The cause whereof I do not thinke it fit, If I did know't, for to discouer it, But sure I iudge, some rot's in womans ioynts, Which makes them faine to tye them vp with points. Dym. With points! Lin. Yes Dymnus, that's the fashion now, Whereof I haue a tale, right well I know, Will make you laugh. Dor. Let's heare that tale of thiue. Lin. Shepheards you shall; it chanc'd vpon a time, That Lesbia, whose spirit euer would Obserue the fashion, do I what I could, Bearing a port far higher in a word, Then my abilitie could well afford: That she I say into this fashion got, (As what was th'fashion she affected not) Of tying on with points her looser waste; Now I obseruing how her points were plast, The Euen before she to a wake should go, I all her points did secretly vndo, Yet therewith all such easie knots did make, That they might held till she got to the wake, Which she not minding. Cor. On good Linus, on. Lin. She hyes her to the wake (my Corydon.) Where she no sooner came, then she's tane in, And nimbly, falls vnto her reuelling, But see the lucke on't, while she scuds and skips, Her vnderbody falls from off her hips,
Whereat some laught, while others tooke some ruth, That she vncas'd, should shew the naked truth. But heare what happen'd hence, ere th'setting Sunne Lodg'd in the West, she heard what I had done; So as resolu'd to quite me in my kind, Next morne betime, she Hylus chanc'd to find. Sap. Who, Clytus boy! Lin. Yes Sapphus, selfe-same Lad, Who was a good boy, ere she made him bad. Tech. Pray Linus how? Lin. Through her immodestie, She him allur'd for to dishonour me. Tech. Difloy all Lesbia; but pray the shew, Did Hylus (harmelesse youth) consent thereto? Lin. Technis, he did; Dor. How shouldst thou know as much? Lin. She did display't her selfe. Dor. Is her shame such? Lin. Yes, and withall defide me to my face, With such iniurious speeches of disgrace, As patience could not beare. Tech. And didst thou beare them? Lin. Yes, Technis yes, & smild when I did heare them For this is my conceit, it seemeth no man, To shew his violence vnto a woman. Dym. Linus sayes well, but womans nature's such, They will presume if men do beare too much. For if the tongue vpon defiance stand, The tongue should be reuenged by the hand. Lin. Some would haue done it Dymnus, but I thought If I reuenge by such base meanes had sought, The woreld would condemne me; she could blind
Most men with an opinion, she was kind, But in a modest sort: for on a time, Rich Amphybaeus offring to the shrine Of Panaretus (as there went report) Sought for her loue in a dishonest sort, With price, with prayer, yet nere attain'd his aime, To soile her honour, or her vertues staine; Sap. Women are nice when simple heard-men craue it, And will say nāy, when they the fainst would haue it. Lin. 'Tis right; and now good shapheards tell me true, Haue I not cause, for I'le be iudg'd by you, To mone my hard mishap? Tech. Thou hast indeed. Cor. Thy woes, friend Linus, make my heart strings bleed; Lin. I thanke you all; but will you heare a song, Penn'd in the meditation of my wrong! Dor. For loues-sake do! Lin. Iudge if the descant fit The burden of my griefe, for this is it; As for the note before I further go, My tune is this, and who can blame my woe? If Marriage life yeeld such content, What heauie hap haue I, Whose life with griefe and sorrow spent, Wish death, yet cannot die: She's bent to smile when I do storme, When I am chearefull too, She seemes to loure, then who can cure, Or counterpoize my woe? My marriage day chac'd you away,
For I haue found it true, That bed which did all ioyes display, Became a bed of rue; Where aspes do brouze on fancies floure, And beauties blossome too: Then where's that power on earth may cure, Or counterpoize my woe? I thought loue was the lampe of life, No life without' en loue, No loue like to a faithfull wife: Which when I sought to proue, I found her birth was not on earth, For ought that I could know; Of good ones I perceiu'd a dearth, Then who can cure my woe? Zantippe was a iealous shrow, And Menalippe too, Faustina had a stormie brow, Corinna'es like did show; Yet these were Saints compar'd to mine, For mirth and mildlesse too: Who runs diuision all her time, Then who can cure my woe? My boord no dishes can afford, But chafing dishes all, Where selfe-will domineres as Lord, To keepe poore me in thrall; My discontent giues her content, My friend she vowes her foe:
How should I then my sorrowes vent, Or cure my endlesse woe? No cure to care, farewell all ioy, Retire poore soule and die, Yet ere thou die, thy selfe employ, That thou maist  the skie; Where thou may moue commanding Ioue, That Pluto he might go To wed thy wife, who end't thy life, For this will cure thy wo! Dym. I iudge by this, that thou wouldst faine for sake her, And freely giue her any that would take her. Lin. Dymnus I would, but I my crosse must beare, As I haue done before this many yeare; But since our griefes are equally exprest, Let's now compare which is the heauiest! Tech. I lost my Amarillid; Dor. But she Was nothing to Bellina. Dym. No, nor she Like to my faire Palmira. Cor. Nor all three Equall to Celia; Sap. Let Siluia be The onely faire. Lin. Admit, they all were faire, Your griefes with me, may haue no equall share, For you are free, so as perhaps you may Make choice of some, may be as faire as they; But I am bound, and that in such a knot,
As onely death may it vnloose, or not. Tech. To Linus must we yeeld; but who are these? Dor. Two iollie shepheards, that do hither prese, With ribbon fauours, and rosemary sprigs, Chanting along our Downes their rurall ijg, As to some wedding boun; Sap. You may presume, For Iohn vnto the May-pole is their tune, And that's their bridall note. Lin. Let vs draw neare them, Close to this shadie Beech, where we may heare them. The shepheards holy-day, reduced in apt measures to HobbinallsForth of a curi∣ous Spinet gra∣ced with the best rarities of Art and Nature, Mopsus a shep∣heard, and Ma∣rina a shephear∣desse, singing a Nuptiall hyne in the way o the Bridall. Galliard, or Iohn to the May-pole. MOpso. Come Marina let's away, For both Bride and Bridegroome stay, Fie for shame are Swaines so long, Pinning of their head-geare on? Pray thee see, None but we, Mongst the Swaines are left vnreadie, Fie, make hast, Bride is past, Follow me and I will leade thee.
Mar. On my louely Mopsus, on, I am readie, all is done, From my head vnto my foote, I am fitted each way to't; Buskins gay, Gowne of gray, Best that all our flocks do render, Hat of stroe, Platted through, Cherrie lip and middle slender. Mop. And I thinke you will not find Mopsus any whit behind, For he loues as well to go, As most part of shepheards do. Cap of browne, Bottle-crowne, With the leg I won at dancing, And a pumpe Fit to iumpe, When we shepheards fall a prancing. And I know there is a sort, Will be well prouided for't, For I heare, there will be there Liueliest Swaines within the Shere: Ietting Gill, Iumping Will, Ore the floore will haue their measure: Kit and Kate, There will waite, Tib and Tom will take their pleasure.
Mar. But I feare; Mop. What doest thou feare? Mar. Crowd the fidler is not there: And my mind delighted is, With no stroake so much as his. Mop. If not he, There will be Drone the piper that will trounce it. Mar. But if Crowd, Strucke aloud, Lord me thinks how I could bounce it! Mop. Bounce it Mall, I hope thou will, For I know that thou hast skill, And I am sure thou there shalt find, Measures store to please thy mind; Roundelayes, Irish-hayes, Cogs and rongs and Peggie Ramsie, Spanilet to, The Uenetto, Iohn come kisse me, Wilsons fancie. Mar. But of all there's none so sprightly To my eare, as tutch me lightly: For it's this we shepheards loue, Being that which most doth mo; There, there, there, To a haire, O Tim Crowd, me hinks I heare thee, Young nor old, Nere could hold, But must leake if they come nere thee.
Mop. Blush Marina, fie for shame, Blemish not a shepheards name; Mar. Mopsus why, is't such a matter, Maids to shew their yeelding nature? O what then, Be ye men, That will beare your selues so froward, When you find Us inclin'd, To your bed and boord so toward? Mop. True indeed, the fault is ours, Though we tearme it oft-times yours; Mar. What would shepheards haue vs do, But to yeeld when they do wo? And we yeeld Them the field, And endow them with our riches. Mop. Yet we know, Oft-times too, You'le not sticke to weare the breches. Mar. Fooles they'le deeme them, that do heare them Say, their wiues are wont to weare them: For I know there's none has wit, Can endure or suffer it; But if they Haue no stay, Nor discretion (as tis common) Then they may Giue the sway, As is fitting to the woman.
Mop. All too long (deare loue) I weene, Haue we stood vpon this theame: Let each lasse, as once it was, Loue her Swaine, and Swaine his lasse: So shall we Honor'd be, In our mating, in our meeting, While we stand Hand in hand, Honest Swainling, with his Sweeting. Dor. How say you shepheards, shall we all repaire Unto this wedding, to allay our care? Dym. Agreed for me. Tech. And I am well content. Cor. On then, let's make our life a merriment. Sap. See where they come! May Hymen aye defend them. Lin. And far more ioy then I haue had God send them. FINIS.
OMPHALE, OR, THE INCONSTANT SHEPHEARDESSE. Perijssem, nisi perijssem. LONDON, Printed for RICHARD WHITAKER. 1621.
To her in whose chast breast choisest vertues, as in their Abstract, are seated: The accomplishd Lady P. W. wife to the Nobly-descended S. T. W. Knight: and daughter to the much honoured, S. R. C. All correspondence to her worthiest wishes.
OMPHALE, OR, THE INCONSANT SHEPHEARDESSE. IN bondage free, in freedome bound I am, A hopelesse, haplesse, loue-sicke, life-sicke man; When I write ought, streight loue preuenteth me, And bids me write of nought but Omphale: When I ride East, my heart is in the West, Lodg'd in the center of her virgin-breast. The homeliest cell would chearefull seeme to me, If I in it might liue with Omphale. My youth growes ag'd, for though I'me in my prime, Loue hath made furrowes in this face of mine; So as last day (aye me vnhappie elfe) Looking in th'glasse, I scarce could know my selfe. And I, from whom these sharpe extreames did grow, Was not content, but I must tell her too, Which made her proud, for few or none there are, (If women) but they'r proud if they be faire. All this last Sommer hath it bene my hap, To sport, toy, play, and want on in her lap,
And euer th'more I plaid, if so I could, Or strength admitted meanes, the more I would: For truth confirmes that Maxime, where we find A louing, loyall, well-disposed mind, Prest for encounter, there we loue to plant, Feeding on Loues delights in midst of want; For Loue contemnes all want, and counts't a gaine, To purchase one houres ioy with two yeares paine. Alas how oft (too oft thou well may say) Haue I in priuate spent with her the day, Inuoking th'Sunne, plants, heauen, and earth and all, If fall I should, she did procure my fall? And still she vow'd, and bit her lip, and stept Apart from me, and wip'd her eyes and wept, And stood and chid, and call'd me most vniust, To harbour in my bosome such distrust. And I (too credulous I) as one dismaid, Was forced to recant what I had said, Swearing I was resolu'd that th'constancie, Of Or Hypermne∣stra, one of the fisue daughters of Dnaus, who out of a tender uptiall ffectiō, saued her hus∣band Lynceus from that great slaughter which was committed by her sisters, in ying their husbands. Hypemnestra match'd not Omphale. Thus did I gull my selfe to sooth my loue, Who prou'd a Serpent, though she seem'd a Doue: For vowes, protests, and all that she had spoken, Were by her light affection quickly broken. And whence came this? not frō me, heauen thou knowes, But from my loue who triumphs in my woes; My loue; raze out that name: she was indeed, When thou and she your lanbkins vs'd to feede On Arnus flowrie banks, being wont to make Posies and nosegaies for her shepheards sake, And bind them to his hooke; but let that passe, She is not she, nor time the same it was.
For then (ô then) suspicious eyes were free, And none but heauenly bodies lookt on thee; (Too faire spectators,) though we now and then Dispence with Gods sight rather then with men. And can she thinke on this and not relent, Or thinking not of this, can she consent To leaue Admetus? Yes, why can she not! Now loues she Cloris, and I feare his lot Will proue as fatall, for her very eye Tells me she meanes to tread her shoe awry. And this I saw before, and durst not see, For th'loue I bore to her, perswaded me She could not be so thankelesse, as requite My faithfull seruice with such strange despite: Yet I perceiu'd, not by suspicious feare, But by the Organs both of eye and eare, That loue was fained which to me she bore, Reseruing others to supply her store. And I confesse in th'end I iealous grew, For some had many fauours, I but few; Others had smiles, I frownes, so as I say, I found her former fancie fall away, Which gaue increase to griefe, cause to my eye To looke into her steps more narrowly; So as poore foole (so vainely did I erre) I thought each bush did play th'Adulterer, So violent was this passion; which to show, Though of Actaeons there be store enow, I briefly meane, (and let all others passe) To tell you how my iealous humour was. Each thing I ey'd, did represent to me, The louely feature of my Omphale,
Yet so, as still that precious forme I saw, Did by attractiue power another draw, To make her forme more complete, for we know, Number can ne're consist of lesse then two. Streight did I see, (suspition made me see) My selfe made cuckold in a phantasie, Which in my thoughts such deepe impression tooke, As now and then I threw away my booke, Calling my selfe an Asse, to pore on that Which gaue my wench time to cornute my pate; And to confirme the height of my disgrace, Suffer the rifling of her common place. Sometimes in silent nights, when hoarie care Is charm'd asleepe, and men exempted are From day-bred passions, would I start from bed, And sweare, the night had me dishonoured; While she (sleepe-lulled soule) did thinke no harme, But lay entwining me with arme in arme: Yet hearing me she wakt, and chid me too, For doing (humerous foole) what I did do, And as she chid I wept, yet inward faine, My dreames prou'd false, I went to bed againe. If I but found her in discourse with any, I streight renounc'd her loue, and swore too many Were factors in my Pinnace, yet one frowne Sent from her brow, subdude me as her owne. If she receiu'd a letter from a friend, I streight coniectur'd what it did intend; Supposing (vaine suppose) where th'place should be, That witnesse might the shame of Omphale: To which I vow'd reuenge, though nothing were, But my owne thoughts that ministred this feare.
Oft would I faine (for what were all my thoughts, But fictions meerely) that she played nought With her owne shadow, and Narcissus-like, That in her forme she tooke such quaint delight, As forced now to surfet on her store, She prou'd this true: Much plentie made her poore. Thus did her presence cause me to admire her, Her absence like occasion to desire her; Without whose presence, though the Sunneshone faire, All seemed darke, because she was not there. Last time we parted with teare-trickling eye, Hand ioyn'd in hand right ceremonially, I calld the heauens and sacred powers aboue, To witnesse with me my vnfained loue, And vow'd withall, if ere it should appeare, I broke the faith which I had plight to her, Or entred any bed lasciuiously, Intending to play false with Omphale, Or entertain'd least thought of disrespect To her or hers in nature of neglect, Or euer cancell'd th'deed, which (heauens you know, Was seal'd and was deliuer'd twixt vs two) Or euer chang'd my fancie, to deuide My shared loue vnto another Bride, Or ere disclaim'd what I in secret vow'd, Or disallow what Hymen had allow'd; If this or that, or any of these all, Should censure me of lightnesse, that my fall Might recompence my shame (which heauens forbid) And this I vow'd to do, and this I did. Nor did she spare to second me in this, But wish'd if ere she chanc'd to do amisse,
With an intent of ill, or violate Those solemne hests our loues had consummate, Or ftain'd that spousall rest, that blest repose, Where two encountred, yet were neither foes; Or disesteem'd my loue, or prized it Lesse then a constant louer did befit, Or let one day or night passe carelesly, Without recalling me to memory, Or giue occasion to the world to say, She loues another when her loue's away, Or entertaine a fauour, or descry Least of affection by alluring eye, Or riot in my absence, or consort With any that might blemish her report, Or frequent publicke presence, which might moue A subiect for varietie of loue: If this or that, or any should begin To taxe her life, might vengeance plague her sinne. Thus we both vow'd, and thus we parted too, But heare how soone my loue infring'd her vow; No sooner had the region of the West, Remou'd me from my loue, and reft me rest, Where steepie mountaines ragged and vneuen, Ossa and Pelion-like do menace heauen, Where scalpie hils and sandie vales imply, The ploughmans toile's requited slenderly; Where their course feeding and their homely fare, Makes their wits lumpish, and their bodies spare: Then she (inconstant she) forgot me cleane, And all her vowes, as if I had not bene. Distance of place, made distance in our loue, And as my body mou'd, her loue did moue
From her first center: thus euen in my Prime, Did my loue change, when I did change my clime. Thus like blind Cupids ball (by fancie crost) Was I to euery hazard strangely tost; Thus was my seruice guerdon'd with disgrace, While Cloris crept into Admetus place: And can her height of sinne be thus forgot? No, wanton no, who is it knowes it not? So as thy crime thy nature will display, And make thy storie worse then Cressida, Who in contempt of faith, (as we do reade) Reiected Troilus for Diomede! Canst thou make shew of loue to me or any, That art expos'd to louing of so many? Canst thou haue heart to vow, when thou forsooke, And didst infringe the oath which thou first tooke? Canst thou haue face to come in open light, That hast incurr'd reuenge in his pure sight, Whose vengeance thou inuok't? canst thou repaire Unto thy sex, or taste the common ayre, Hauing, (by making of thy faith so common) Infected th'ayre, impeach'd the Sex of women? Canst thou looke on that faithlesse hand of thine, And giue it to another being mine? Canst thou, and see that face, not blush to see Those teares thou shed, and vowes thou made to me? Or canst embrace another in thy bed, Hearing thy first espoused friend not dead? Suppose I should surprize thee, could I long Restraine my hand, and not reuenge my wrong? Could I allay my passion vnexprest, Or see th'Adulterer sleepe within thy brest?
Could I endure my bed should be abus'd, Or see her strumpeted, whom I had chus'd? Could I content my selfe to see my shame, And coward-like, not to redresse the same? No, no insatiate thou, sooner could time Leaue his gradation, or the Sunne to shine, Light bodies to ascend and leaue their center, Riuers their downeward course, then I should venter My patience on that odds: but foolish I, That gaue no credit to mine eare or eye, But made my senses all Cassandra'es, where Mine eare presag'd, yet l'de not trust mine eare: Such strange distempers doth this Circe breed, This phrensie-fancie in a louers head, That though he heare, see, taste, and touch, & smell His loues vnkindnesse, yet he dare not tell, But must renounce th'instruction of all these, Yea, (euen himselfe) that he his wench may please. O why should man tearme woman th'weaker kind, Since they are stronger, as we daily find, In will, and head, although their husbands browes, Oft to a harder kind of temper growes? So as for all that we do style them weaker, They oft become to be their husbands maker! But now Admetus, wilt thou pine and die, And aste thy selfe for her inconstancie? Wilt thou lament the losse of such an one, As hath resolu'd to keepe her faith with none? Or canst thou dote on her, that longs to be Affected of each youth that she doth see? No, no Admetus, since she proues vntrue, Shed not one teare nor sigh, for none is due,
But offer Pan the chiefe of all thy flocke, That thou art rid of such a weathercocke. Now maist thou pipe vpon thy oaten reede, Whilest thy Mug-sheepe on Arnus pastures feede: Where bonnie Clytus will attend on thee, And Mopsus too will keepe thee companie. There the late-freed Capnus will repaire, And ioy to taste the freedome of the ayre; Where he will descant on no rurall theame, But on Ambitions curbe, the golden meane. And ioy he may, for who did euer heare Such alterations as in him appeare? Where long restraint hath labour'd to restore That loue to him, which he had lost before. With whom Admetus may in consort ioyne, Comparing of your fortunes one by one; He to regaine the loue which he had lost, Thou to forget her loue that wrong'd thee most. And well would this beseeme Admetus straine, ▪ For shepheards should not laugh at others paine, But in compassion of their grieues and them, To imitate their passions in the same. And this's a better course, and safer too, Then to do that which thou so late didst do, Pining and puling, wishing death appeare, Which for thy wishes was no whit the neare. "For death (whē we are happie) will come nie vs,Ioe in Oet. Her. "But if we wretched be, then death will flie vs. How oft hath my experience made this good, When wishing death, I was by death withstood? For still I thought my woes would haue an end If Mors sola portus, dabitut aerumnis locus. ibid. Deian. Death arriu'd, afflictions welcome friend.
But th'more I sought, the more he fled from me, To make me riper in my miserie: "For griefe is of that nature, as it growes "In age, so new effects it daily showes. Yet now thou liues (and thanks to th'powers aboue) Hast neare by this, supprest the thoughts of loue. Now canst thou feed, and sleepe, and laugh, & talke, Sport, and tell tales, refresh thy selfe, and walke In flowrie Meedes, whilest thou seest Cloris hing His iealous head to heare the Cuckow sing, Alas (poore man) what bondage is he in, To serue a Swaine that's cauteriz'd in sin, Expos'd to shame, and prostitute to lust, In whom nor's grace, nor faith, nor loue, nor trust? And heauen I wish, she may in time reclaime Her former course, and rectifie the same: But th' Pumice stone will hardly water yeeld, Or grace appeare in such a barren field: For such light mates encompasse her about, As Vertue's choak't before it can take roote. O Cloris, if thou knew Admetus mind, And th'hard conceit he h'as of womankind, Whose fairest lookes, are lures, affections, baits, Words, wind, vowes, vaine, and their protests de∣ceits, Songs, charms, teares, traines to trace vs to our end, Smiles, snares, frowns, fears, which to our ruine tend: Then wouldst thou (Cloris) censure Omphale, The pregnant mirror of inconstancie, And curbe thy fancie, ere it haue least part In one can vow so often with one heart. For heare me (Cloris) she did neuer show
More loue to thee, then she to others too: Yet what art thou (if man) maist build thee more Upon her faith then others did before? What art thou canst perswade thy selfe of this, She'le not tread right, h'as trod so long amisse, Or that she'le now proue constant, that h'as prou'd, So faithlesse to the most, that she has lou'd? No, Cloris no, the Prouerbe it is true, And is confirm'd in her whom thou doest sue; "To wash the Moore, is labouring in vaine, "For th'colour that he h'as, is di'd in graine. So th'more thou striues to make her blacknes white, Thou drawes heauens curtaine to display her night. Her night indeed, saue that no starres appeare, (No lights of grace) within her hemi-spheare, But th'changing Moone, whose lightnesse doth expresse That light-inconstant mind of Omphales: "Where Vertue seemes at Nature to complaine, "That vice should be at full, and she at waine. Yet Nature answers, she h'as done her part, And that the fault is rather in her heart, That is so spacious, to entertaine The wauering loue of euery wanton Swaine. And I assent to Nature, for it's showne, By her rare workemanship, what she h'as done, In giuing beautie lustre, her content; In forming her, her selfe to represent. And reason good; for when I thinke vpon, That Zeuxes, Phydias, and Pigmalion, (Those natiue artists) who indeed did striue To make their curious statues seeme aliue, Reducing art to Nature; then I find,
Nature had cause to satisfie her mind In something aboue art, that after-time Might moue her to reioyce, art to repine. And what more mouing patterne could there be, Then the admired forme of Omphale, Whose feature equall'd Nature, and did show The very Spring whence fancie's said to flow? For first her stature's seemely, which I call, Neither too dwarfish low, nor giant-tall; Her front a rising mount, her eyes two lamps, Which, wheresoere she lookes impression stamps; Her cheeke twixt rosie red and snowie white, Attracts an admiration with delight; Her nose nor long nor short, nor high nor low, Nor flat, nor sharpe, the token of a shrow; Her mouth nor ferret-straite, nor callet-broade, But of an apt proportion, as it should; Her breath the fragrant odour, which loue sips From these two cherrie portels of her lips; Where those two iuory pales or rowes of teeth, Accent her speech, perfumed by her breath; Her chin th'inclining vale, deuided is, By th'daintie dimple of loues choisest blisse, Which, as maine flouds from smallest currents flow, Deriues her sweets to th'riuelings below; Her necke arocke enazur'd with pure veines Of orient pearle, which with amorous chaines Of lou's desir'd embraces, charmes the eye, And tyes it to her obiect, when she's by; Her breasts two Orbs or Mounts, or what you will That may include perfection, which to fill The world with admiration, are laydout,
To worke the feate her lightnesse goes about; Two prettie nipples, one oppos'd gainst t'other, Challenge the name of Nurse aswell as Mother: Though some (for state makes loue to children worse) Scorne, being mothers to become their nurse. In briefe her all, (because I'le not descend, In praise of that, where praises haue no end) Is beauties faire Idaea, which implies Height of content, to loues amazed eyes. And yet this she, the modell of delight, Though outward faire, seemes to my inward sight, As spotted as the Ermine, whose smooth skin, Though it be faire without, is foule within. For what more foule then vice? but chiefly that Which makes a woman to degenerate, From her more shamefast Sex, where modestie Should sit vpon her cheeke, to verisie What th' Comick said: Errant, nee sedem repetunt serenam Quae petulanti corde resurgunt, &c. straid thoughts find neuer rest, "But shamefast lookes become a woman best. Indeed they do; for there is greater sence, That shame should moue man more then impudence; For bashfull lookes adde fuell to loues fire, While th' spirit of lust doth with her flame expire. Which makes me wonder, that th'interiour light Whence man resembles God, should lose his sight, By doting on an Idoll, that can take To charme loues dazled eyes a Syrens shape, Making Art vye with Nature for the best, And soiling that which should surpasse the rest. For what is faire, if that be all there is, But an eye-pleasing thing, that yeelds no blisse, Wanting that inward faire, which who enioyes,
Esteemes all outward ornaments as toyes, Compared to that beauty, which no Art Could euer equall, or expresse in part? Indeed the grace of vertue is more rare, And exquisite, when she that's good is faire, For she becomes most complete well we know, That's grac'd with vertue and with beautie too. Whence that experienst Morall vs'd to reachSocrates. A looking glasse to such as he did teach; Wherein, if such were faire themselues did eye, He would exhort them rather to apply Their minds to vertue, for great pittie twere, Foule soules (quoth he) should haue a face so faire: But if deform'd, he streight would counsell them, With wholesome precepts to supply the same; For fit it were (quoth he) a face so foule, Should be prouided of a beauteous soule. But rare's this composition, for we find, Seldome that double blisse in woman-kind, Where she that's faire can soone admire her owne, And knowes what Nature for her selfe hath done: Yeashe by this can learne another straine, Put on coy looks, and th'fashion of disdaine, Mins-speech, huff-pace, sleeke-skin, and perfum'd breath, Goats-haire, brests-bare, plume-fronted, fricace∣teeth, All which infuse new motions into man, Late borrow'd of th'Italian Curtezan. But now to thee thou wanton, will I come, To taxe, not visit that polluted tombe, Of all infection, which to giue it due, Is now become no Temple but a stue; Tell me, disdainfull faire, if I ere wrong'd,
Or thee, or any that to thee belong'd! Haue I incurr'd dishonour, or deuoted My loue to many, whereby I am noted? Haue I bene too profuse in my respect, To othersome, and blancht thee with neglect? Haue I incurr'd a merited disgrace, In begging loue when thou was out of place? Haue I by courting any, ere exprest, My selfe ought lesse then what I still profest? Didst euer see a fauour worne by me, But that poore bracelet I receiu'd of thee, Twisted with gold, and with thy faithlesse haire, Which now I'ue throwne away with all my care? Did I ere vow and breake, as thou hast done, Or plight my faith (saue thee) to any one? Why then shouldst thou infringe that sacred oath, Which with a kisse was sealed to vs both, When scarce one houre did vs occasion giue, (So short was time) to take our lasting leaue? But I can guesse where thou wilt lay the blame; Not on thy selfe, but on them whence thou came, That lustfull stocke I meane, which gaue beginning To thee of being first, and then of sinning. It's true indeed, we know a poisoned spring, Can seld or neuer wholesome water bring, Nor can we looke that any barren field, Should ought saue tares or fruitlesse Darnell yeeld: For this from Scripture may collected be, "Such as the fruite is, such is still the tree. Too late I find this true, and heauens I wish, My former harmes may caution me of this; For what is ill descendeth in a blood,
Sooner and surer too, then what is good. "For th'fathers vertues still attend his bere, "And being dead, with him lie buried there; "But th'vices which he had are not content "To die with him, but liue in his descent. So natiue is thy ill, hauing her birth From that corrupted stock which brought thee forth, As sooner may the Aethiope become white, Th' Cymmerian pitchie shade transparent light, The Tiger leaue his nature, th' Wolfe his prey, The Sunne to guide the chariot of the day, TheQueis pario perio; quod a∣cerbae prolis imago Exticit, & tene∣rae nota paren∣tis erit. vid. Al∣cyat. Pellican her desart, or theQuae parenti confecto aetate consulit, eique prestando na tale officium, proprijs alis ge∣rit. vid. Basil. in Homil. Craine, That nat'rall loue which in her doth remaine Unto her parents; then thy parents shame, Got by their sinne, be wiped from thy name. No wanton, no, thy darknesse is displayd, Which can by no meanes re-disperse her shade, But shall suruiue all time; for it's the will Of Powers aboue, there should be life in ill, As well as good: that th' memory of the first Might make succeeding ages count her curst. For I haue rod (and thou was cause I red) Some fickle Dames in stories mentioned, Whose small respect to th'honour of their name, Hath made them since the lasting heires of shame: And such were Messalina, Martia, Faustina, Lays, Claudia,Portia the fa∣mous Curtizan; and that noble Ladie, an emi∣nent patterne of modestie, wife to Port. Cato the Se∣natour. Portia, Two of which name there were of different kind, In th'various disproportion of their mind; "One good, one ill, one light, one constant prouing, "One spousall-lothing, one her honour louing. But which of these can equall Omphale?
Or which of these liue more licentiously? All patternes in their time (as well they might) And cautions too, to moue vs tread aright That do succeed them: yet obserue this staine, This wedlocks-blemish, and you will complaine, Of th'present times, that they'r more ripe in sinne, And breach of faith, then former times haue bin. More ripe indeed, for where's that age become, "Folke di'd for loue, as we haue red of some, Who their affections so implanted haue, As nought could bury fancie but their graue? But these were childish times; indeed they were, For rather then for her I'de shed one teare, That disesteemes my loue, or send one grone, Or sigh, or sob, or pule, or make a mone, Or fold my armes, as forlorne louers vse, Or grieue to lose, when she doth others chuse, Or breake my sleepe, or take a solemne fast, I wish that taske might be Admetus last. No Omphale, though time was when I mourn'd, That time is chang'd, and now my humour's turn'd; So as I scarce remember what thou art, That once lay neare and deare vnto my heart. Now is my Pasture greene and flourishing, And poore Melampus which was wont to hing His heauie head (kind curre) for's maisters sake, Begins his sullen humour to forsake. Now is my bottle mended, and my hooke, My bag, my pipe, so as if thou should looke, And see Admetus with his woollie store, Thou'de say, he were not th'man he was before; And iudge him too, (to see him now reuiue,
And change his note) the happiest man aliue. And so I am, to liue and leaue to loue, (Though faithfull mates would flinty natures moue) Whose rare effects the Poet seemes to show, When wiues expresse th'affections which they owe. "Turture sic turtur iungit a∣nanda suo. Turtle with Turtle, husband with his mate, "In distinct kindes one loue participate. But since affection is so rare to find, Where th'face weares not the liuerie of the mind, And womans vowes (asSic iurare so∣ent, sed non eruare puellae. Lucian. th' Satyre rightly saith) Be rather made for complement then faith; Be free from loue Admetus: if not free, At least from loue of such as Omphale. FINIS.
A Poem describing the leuitie of a woman: reseruing all generous respect to the vertuously affected of that Sexe. FIrst I feare not to offend, A very thing of nothing, Yet whom thus farre I commend, She's lighter then her clothing: Nay from the foote vnto the crowne, Her very Fan will weigh her downe: And marke how all things with her Sexe agree, For all her vertues are as light as she. 1. She chats and chants but ayre, A windie vertue for the eare, T'is lighter farre then care, And yet her songs do burthens beare. 2. She dances, that's but mouing, No heauie vertue here she changes, And as her heart in louing, So her feete in constant ranges. She softly leanes on strings, She strikes the trembling lute and quauers:
These are nō weigntie things, Her strokes are light, so are her fauours. Those are her vertues fitting to her kind, No sooner showne, but they turnd all to wind. Then to you, O Sexe of fethers, On whose browes sit all the wethers, I send my Passion weau'd in rimes, To weigh downe these light emptie times. Descript. VVHat are you, O heires of scorning, But like Dew that melts each morning; Euening vapours, and nights prize, To answer our voluptuous eyes: And but to screene that sinnes delight, I thinke there neuer had bene night. Nor had we bene from vertue so exempt, But that the tempter did leaue you to tempt. You bit the Apple first that makes vs die, Wheres'ere we looke the apple's in our eye, And death must gather it; for your turn'd breath, And mortall teeth e'en to the core strucke death. FINIS.
HIS ODES: OR, PHILOMELS TEARES. Odes in straines of sorrow tell Fate and fall of euery fowle, Mounting Merlin, Philomel, Lagging Lapwing, Swallow, Owle; Whence you may obserue how state Rais'd by pride, is raz'd by hate. LONDON. Printed for Richard Whitaker. 1621.
TO THE GENEROVS, INGENIOVS, AND IVDICIOVS PHILALETHIST, Thomas Ogle Esquire: the succeeding issue of his diuinest wishes. VNknowne to you I am, yet knowne I am To th' better part of you, your vertuous name; Which like a precious odour hath infus'd Your loue so much in me, as I haue chus'd Your selfe, to patronize what I haue writ, Whose name I thought had power to shelter it. I grant indeed, Smooth Sic tereti cursu repetit spiracu∣la montis Aquila, quae valles spernit, vt alta petat. Sol radios mit∣tit, radios{que} re∣flectit ocellis; Aquila sis vis semper (Amice) tuo. Alcyat. in Emblem. Sa. ibid. Plin. in Nat. Hist. Aelian. ibid. Greg. in Mor. expo. in Iob. Eagle for your name, Includes that Sun-reflecting (Anagram) These birds which in my Odes their fates display, Are some night-birds, as others of the day; Which in my iudgement, tenders more delight, To see how sin's orecurtained by night, Whereas the day sends forth his golden raies, And shewes such birds as chant their makers praise. Which Morall, as it suites these times of ours, I do disclaime my right in't, it is yours, If you esteeme it worthie to obtaine Your approbation: This is all our ayme. R. B.
THE TRAVELLOVR, DILATING VPON THE sundrie changes of humane affaires, most fluctuant when appearing most constant. AN ODE. TEll me man, what creature may Promise him such safe repose, As secure from hate offoes, He may thus much truly say, Nought I haue I feare to lose, No mischance can me dismay; Tell me, pray thee (if thou can) If the woreld haue such a man! Tell me, if thou canst discerne By thy reasons excellence, What man for his prouidence, Of the Pismire may not learne: Yet that creature hath but sense, Though she do her liuing earne, Spare, not costly, is her fare, Yet her granar shewes her care!
Tell me, canst thou shew me him, That exact in each deuice, Is at all times truly wise, And is neuer seene to swim (For in this his iudgement lies) Gainst the current of the streame, But seemes to haue full command, Of each thing he takes in hand! Tell me, was there euer knowne Such a man that had a wit, And in some part knew not it, Till at last conceited growne, He grew prowder then was fit, Euer boasting of his owne; For that Maxime true we know, "He that's wittie, knowes him so! Tell me, is that man on earth, Whose affaires so stable are, As they may for all his care, Fall not crosse and crabdly forth, And of sorrowes haue no share, Which descend to man by birth; What is he can promise rest, When his mind's with griefe opprest▪ Tell me, is there ought so strong, Firmely-constant, permanent, Or on earth such true content, As it fadeth not ere long: Is there ought so excellent,
As it changeth not her song, And in time that all deuoures, Mixeth sweets with sharpest soures! Tell me, who is he that shines In the height of Princes loue, Sitting minion-like with loue, Glorying in those golden times, But he feares something may moue His distast by whom He climbes: Wherefore he that feares to fall, Should forbeare to climbe at all! Tell me, where is Fortune plac'd, That she may not men beguile, Shrowding frownes with fained smile; Where is He so highly grac'd, Shewing greatnesse in his stile, Hath not bene in time out-fac'd, By some riuall, where still one Striues to put another downe! Tell me, then what life can be Moresecure, then where report Makes vs onely knowne to th' Court, Where we leade our liues so free, As we're strangers to resort, Saue our priuate familie; For I thinke that dwelling best, Where least cares disturbe our rest!
THE NIGHTINGALL. 2. ODE. IVg, IVg; faire fall the Nightingall, Whose tender breast Chants out her merrie Madrigal, With hawthorne prest: Te'u, Te'u, thus sings she euen by euen, And represents the melodie in heauen; T'is, T'is, I am not as I wish. Rape-defiled Phylomel In her sad mischance, Tells what she is forc'd to tell, While the Satyres dance: Vnhappie I, quoth she, vnhappie I, That am betraide by Tereus trecherie; T'is, T'is, I am not as I wish: Chast-vnchast, defloured, yet Spotlesse in heart, Lust was all that He could get, For all his art: For I nere attention lt To his suite, nor gaue consent▪ T'is, T'is, I am not as I wish.
Thus hath faithlesse Tereus made Heartlesse Phylomele Mone her in her forlorne shade, Where griefe I feele: Griefe that wounds me to the heart, Which though gone, hath left her smart; T'is, T'is, I am not as I wish. THE LAPWING. 3. ODE. VNhappie I to change my aerie nest, For this same marish dwelling where I rest, Wherfore my song while I repeate, I'le close it vp; Rue yet, rue yet. Euery Cowheard driuing his beasts to graze, Disturbs my rest, me from my nest doth raise, Which makes my young take vp this song, To wreake my wrong; Rue yet, rue yet. Thou subtile Stockdoue that hast cheated me, By taking vp thy nest where I should be, Hast me and mine in perill set,
Whose song is fit; Rue yet, rue yet. Solely-retired, see I liue alone, Farre from recourse or sight of any one, And well that life would suite with me, Were I but free; Rue yet, rue yet. Young-ones I haue, that thinking I am fled, Do leaue their nest, and run with shell on head, And hauing found me out we cry, Both they and I; Rue yet, rue yet. Crest-curled mates why do you beare so long The Stockdoues pride, that triumphs in your wrong Let vs our signals once display, And make him say; Rue yet, rue yet. Too tedious hath our bondage bene I wis, And onely patience was the cause of this, Where if we would contract our power, We'de sing no more; Rue yet, rue yet. March on then brauely, as if Mars were here, And hate no guest so much as slauish feare, Let the proud Stockdoue feele your wing, That he may sing; Rue yet, rue yet.
Let none escape, though they submissiue seeme, Till you haue spoil'd and quite vnfether'd them, So you shall make them vaile the wing, And hence forth sing; Rue yet, rue yet. THE OWLE. 4. ODE. IA Kings daughter, see what pride may do, In fatall yewe takes vp my for∣lorne seate, The cause wherof was this, if you would know, I would haue better bread then grew on wheate, Though now a Mouse be all the food I eate, And glad I am when I can feed of it. Ruff-curled necke, see I reserue some show Of what I was, though far from her I was, Wherein my boundlesse pride so farre did grow, That as in place I did the rest surpasse, So in the purest beautie of my face, Courting my selfe in fancies looking glasse. Milke-bathed skin, see wantons what I vs'd, To make my skin more supple, smooth, & sleeke,
Wherein my natiue hue by Art abus'd, I lay a new complexion on my cheeke, Sending my eyes abroad suters to seeke, And vying fashions with each day i'th weeke. Nought I affected more then what was rare, "Best things (if common) I did disesteeme, Seld was I breathd on by the publike ayre, "For those are most admir'd are seldome seene, Which is, and hath a custome euer bene, "Such as come oft abroad, we vulgar deeme. Thus selfe-admir'd I liu'd, till thus transform'd, I got a feature fitting with my pride: For I that scorned others now am scorn'd, Had in disgrace; and in pursuite beside; May the like fate like spirits aye betide, So worthlesse honour shall be soone descride. For ruff thick-set, a curle-wreathed plume, Round bout my necke I weare, for tyres of gold A downie tuft of feathers is my crowne, For fan in hand my clawes a pearch do hold, And for those cates and dainties manifold, "A mouse I wish, but wants her when I would. Be well aduis'd then Minions, what you do, "Portray my feature, and make vse of it, What fell to me may like wise fall to you, And then how daring-high so ere you sit, Nought but dishonour shall your pride begit, "Dead to report of Uertue as is fit.
THE MERLIN. 5. ODE. WHence Nisus, whence, Is this the fate of kings, For arme on Scepter, To be arm'd with wings? Poore speckled bird, see how aspiring may Degrade the high, and their estate betray. Once Fortune made Nisus her fauorite, And rer'd his throne To such vnbounded height, That forreine states admir'd what he possest, Till slie ambition nestled in his breast▪ Till then how blest, And after see how base His greatnesse fell, When reft of Princely grace; Those many fleering Parasites he gain'd, In his successe, not one in want remain'd Chesses he weares Now on his downie feete,
Where once guilt spurs, With store of pearle set Adorn'd his nimble heeles, and hooded now, His beuer wants: this can ambition do. Vp still he mounts, And must a pleasure bring, That once was king, To meaner then a king; Where he, who once had Falkuers at command, Is faine to picke his meate from Falkners hand. Imperious fate, What canst not thou effect, When thou perceiues In man a dis-respect Vnto thy honour, which we instanc'd see, In no one Nisus better then in thee! But stow bird stow, See now the game's a foote, And white-maild Nisus, He is flying to't; Scepter, Crowne, Throne & all that Princely were Be now reduc'd to feathers in the ayre,
THE SWALLOW. 6. ODE. YOu chatt'ring Fleere, you Faune, you sommer-friend, Not following vs, but our suc∣cesse, Will this your flatt'ring humour nere haue end, Of all other meritlesse? Flie I say, flie, be gone, Haunt not here to Albion: She should be spotlesse, as imports her name, But such as you are borne to do her shame. How many faire protests and solemne vowes, Can your hatefull consorts make, Wheras (heauen knows) these are but only shows Which you do for profit-sake? O then leaue our coast and vs, Blemish'd by your foule abuse, Vertue can haue no being, nor could euer, Where th'Parasite is deem'd a happy liner. Tale-tattling gossip, prone to carrie newes, And such newes are euer worst, Where false report finds matter, and renewes Her itching humour till it burst,
Where each euen finds  enough, All the gloomie winter through, To passe  night away▪ and  tries, That truth gets friendship seldomer then lies. Spring-time when flowers adorne the chearefull mede, And each bird sings on her spray, When flowry groues with blossom checkered, And each day seemes a marriage day, Chattring Swallow thou canst chuse Then a time to visit vs; Such are these fained friends make much vpon vs, When we are rich, but being poore they shun vs. The stormie winter with his hoarie locks, When each branch hangs downe his head, And icie flawes candies the ragged rocks, Making fields discoloured, Driues thee from vs and our coast, Where in spring-time thou repo'st; Thus thou remaines with vs in our delight, But in our discontent th art out of sight. Time-seruing humorist that faunes on Time, And no merit doest respect, Who will not loath that sees that vaine of thine, Where deserts are in neglect, And the good is priz'd no more Then the ill, if he be poore? Thou art the rich mans claw-backe, and depends No more on men, then as their trencher-friends.
Go turne-taile go, we haue not here a Spring For such tempoizing mates, Pan's in our Ile, and he scornes flattering; So those Guardians of our States, Who are early vp and late, And of all, this vice doth hate: Flie tell-tale, flie, and if thou wilt, complaine thee, That Albyon's harsh, and will not entertaine thee. THE FALL OF THE LEAFE. 7. ODE. FLora where's thy beauty now, Thou was while'om wont to show? Not a branch is to be seene, Clad in Adons colour greene; Lambkins now haue left their skip∣ping, Lawn-frequenting Fauns their tripping; Earths bare breast feeles winters whipping, And her brood the North-winds nipping. Though the Boxe and Cypresse tree, Weare their wonted liuerie, And the little Robin scorne To be danted with a storme, Yet the Shepheard is not so, When He cannot see for snow, Nor the flocks which he doth owe, And in drifts are buried low.
Nor the Grazer, discontent That his fodder should be spent, And when winter's scarce halfe-done, All his stacks of hay are gone; Nor the Lawyer, that is glad When a motion's to be had, Nor poore Tom, though he be mad; "Cold makes Tom a Bedlam sd. Nor the Webster, though his fecte By much motion get them heate, Nor the knaue that curries leather, Nor the cross-ledgg'd Taylor neither, Nor at glass-worke, where they doubt Lest their costly fire go out, Nor the carefull carking Lout, That doth toyle and trudge about. No, north' Ladie in her coach, But is muff▪d when frosts approach, Nor the crazie Citizen, But is furrd vp to the chin, Oister-callet, slie Vpholster, Hooking Huxster, merrie Malster, Cutting Haxter, courting oister, Cunning Sharke, nor sharking foister. Thus we see how Fall of th'leafe, Adds to each condition griefe, Onely two there be, whose wit Make hereof a benefit; These, conclusions try on man,
"Surgeon and Physician, While it happens now and than, Kill then cure they sooner can! Now's their time when trees are bare, Naked scalps haue lost their haire, Teeth drop out and leaue their gumms, Head and eyes are full of rheumes, Where if Traders strength do lacke, Or feele aches in their backe, Worse by odds then is the racke, They haue drugs within their packe. Thus the harshest seasons come In good season vnto some, Who haue knowne (as it is meete) Smell of gaine makes labour sweet: But where labour reapeth losse, There accrews a double crosse; First, fond cares his braine doth tosse, Next, his gold resolues to drosse. FINIS.
To my knowing and wor∣thie esteemed friend AVGV∣STINE VINCENT, all meri∣ting content. MAy you be in Your actions prosperous,Augustines . Tute vineas . And as ingenious, So victorious; So may your fate, Smile on your happie name, And crowne you with, A glorious Anagram: While Vertue, (Mans best lustre) seemes to be, That style, which stamps You deepe in Heraldrie.
BRITTANS BLISSE. A Pean of thanksgiuing for our long enioyed peace under a gracious Soueraigne. PEace, Plentie, Pleasure, Honour, Harbour, Health, Peace, to encrease In substance and in wealth; Plentie, to praise, Heauens Soueraigne the more, Pleasure, to solace vs Amidst our store, Honour, to guerdon Merit in our time, Harbour, to fit Each vnder his owne vine, Health, to enioy A blessing so deuine, Deriu'd from Iesses roote And Dauids line.
Health, Harbour, Honour, Pleasure, Plentie, Peace, Which from our Soueraigne Haue their prime increase; Health, to performe Our distinct offices, Harbour, to shroud vs From extremities, Honour, to crowne The temples of desert, Pleasure, to cheare The intellectuall part, Plentie, to store Our hopes with all successe, Peace, to accomplish Our full happinesse. All which, by heauens hand powr'd on Albyon, Make vp a Catalogue to looke vpon; That for so many quiet Halcyon dayes, Her precioust prize, might be her Makers praise. Pacis, honoris, amoris, Edena Britannica nostri, Regeregente bono, leta trophaea gerit.
Vpon the worthie and sincere Proficients and Professants of the common Law; an Encomiastick Poem. LAw is the line, Whose leuell is dispatch, A lampe, whose light shewes Iustice what is right, A larke, whose vnseal'd eyes Keepes early watch, A loome, whose frame Cannot be sway'd by might, A list, where truth Puts iniury to flight; Streight line, bright lampe, Sweete larke, strong loome, choice ist, Guide, shine, shield, guard, And liue truths Martialist. Law is the sterne, Which steares the ship of state, The glorious stem Whence Iustice sciens spring, The chearefull starre, Which early shines and late,
The staffe, whose stay Supports the languishing, The streame, whose spring Is euer cherishing; Rare sterne, rich stem, cleare starre, Firme staffe, pure streame, Steere, cheare, direct, support, Refresh the meane. Blest then are you, Who labour to redresse The poore mans case, And measure your contents By shielding th'weake From awfull mightinesse, Like graue Professants, Good Proficients, Clozing with equitie Your ioynt consents; 'Tis you, 'tis you, Who in this blemishd time, Send out your lights While other starrs decline. When Greece in glory flourish'd, She did reare Some Images neare Iustice sacred throne,
Which to be lame and blind Portrayed were, As proper obiects To be look'd vpon, Implying what In Iustice should be done; Blind to distinguish Friend or foe, and lame, From taking bribes, To staine Astraeas name. Cleare lights, pure lamps, Rare stemms, rich streames of life, Who shine, beame, spring, And draine your christall course From Iustice throne, To coole the heate of strife, By curbing aw with law, With censure, force, To chastise with restraint, Cheare with remorse; Long may you liue, Since by your life you giue Iustice new breath, And make her euer liue. Salus ciuitatis sita est in legibus.
IN MOMVM. QVid carpendo premis tua viscera ferrea Mome? Momus, Mimus eris dum mea scripta premis. Haud curo inuidiam, mea spes tenuissima tuta est, Nam tuta est tenuis vena, sed alta minus. Anguis es, & viridi latitans sub fronde, venenum Eijcis, exiguo tempore inermis eris. Non sum cui fortuna nocet, vel fata iuuabunt,Me paucis mal le à sapientibus esse probatum. Fata canunt magnis, non cecinere meis. Non cecinere meis, licet ista poemata magnis (Si mihi vota fauent) sint relegenda locis. IN ZOILVM. TExit vt exiguam subtilis Aranea telam, Mercurium in lingus, non in pectore geris. Zoile sic scriptis tela retorque meis. Torque, retorque, manet mea laus, mea gloria maior, Quo magis exhausta est gloria maior erit. Ulciscar scriptis: tua mens tuus vltor adibit, Inuidiae stimulis mens tua puncta tuis. Pone miser miserae monumenta miserrima vitae, Uixisti misero more, miser{que} mori. IN PARONEM. PAro parem, nec habet nec habere optat, Impar est praemijs, impar & laboribus;Inuisurum faci ius quam imi∣tutum. Zenxes. Opera carpit mea studijs assiduis, Tacet, attamen aliena carpit;
O quantae tenebrae tenuere locum, Tuum, Cymmerijs inuolutum vmbris?Vid. Martial. Lib. 3. Epig. in Zoilum. Conuiua qui quis Zoili po∣test esse, &c.—rumpant ilia Cdri  dia. Vt minus afflares aliorum operibus, Opera carrigis, emendare nequis; Oleum & operam perdidit Paro Per aurea secula transeat Maro. Non plura referam, reticere iuuat, Si tu maleuolam reprimes linguam, Sin maledicendo pergas dispergere Hisce teterrima crimina scriptis,Crescant &c crepant. Vi. Apoeg. Scribam, liuorem irritare magis Torquendo rigidi viscera Paronis. AD INVIDVM. Exeat Menippus. INuidus vlciscens vltor sibi maximus esset, Nam stupet ille malis sic periendo suis. AD SEIPSVM. Intret Aristippus. TV tibi res solitus non te subiungere rebus, Me peritura doces spernere, spreta pati. FINIS.
Measures, now I must repse, (Retire ) and laugh at vertues foes, Who let them frne, , fret, this is my Mot, My spirit about their spite; I feare them not. Faults are as obuious to bookes in Presse, as mis∣construction after. Do me the fauour to coriect such escapes with thy pen as are past in the Prit: for such as are more consequent they are here no∣ted, for the impertinent they are to thy discreeter iudgement referred. Errata. Pag. Ta for , reae in  subiect. pag. 48.  line . leaue pag.  5. for that, . that p. 68. l. 16. for suppressed, . upprest. p. 79. l. 14. for , . feare p. 110. l. vlt. for marks, marts. p. 160. l 8. for excellent, . exqui∣se. p. 161. l. 1. dde are euer 0 be. p. 164 for eminent, . imini∣nent. ibid.  p. 209. in mrg, adde, .
