4318 99843067 7775
THE DVTCH SVRVAY. Wherein are related and truly discoursed, the chiefest losses and acquirements, which haue past betweene the Dutch and the Spaniards, in these last foure yeares Warres of the Netherlands, with a comparatiue ballancing and estimation of that which the Spaniards haue got in the Dutchies of Cleeue and Iuliers, with that which they haue lost vnto the Dutch and Persians, in Brasilia, Lima, and Ormus. VVhereunto are annext the Mansfeldian motiues, directed vnto all Colonels, Lieutenant-Co∣lonels, Sergeant Majors, priuate Captaines, inferiour Offi∣cers, and Souldiers, whose seruice is engag'd in this pre∣sent expedition, vnder the conduct and commaund of the most illustrious Prince ERNESTVS, Earle of Mansfield. AT LONDON Printed by Edward All-de, for NATHANIEL BVTTER. 1625.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE THOMAS Lord Cromwell, Baron of Oukeham in Rutland-shire, Vicount Lecall in the King∣dome of Ireland, and one of his Maiesties Honourable Priuie Councell in that Kingdome: and Colonell of a Regiment of Foote vnder the most illustrious Prince ERNESTVS Earle of Mansfield, W. C. wish∣eth that happinesse which he himselfe desireth. RIght Honorable, I made bold to consecrate vnto your most iudicious censure, this Dutch Suruay or ballance, which if it proue waight in the Bal∣lance of your estimation, and appeare in the triall as free from errour as it is from partiality, the Author shall thinke his endeuours fortunate. The mo∣tiues which inuited me to this Dedication, were first of all your knowne zeale to equity and reli∣gion;
for the sacred priuiledges whereof, the Ne∣therlanders haue fought most resolutely for ma∣ny yeares together to the wonder of their friends, to the terrour and astonishment of their mortall Enemies: So that if we shall admire the greatnes of the Heluetian Cantons raised out of the ruines of the house of Austria, or the fortune of the Venetian Cōmon-wealth, erected out of the Reliques of the Romane Empire declining in Italy, we may iustly wonder at the swelling power of this Estate, or∣dayned by God in this latter age, to checke the greatnes of Castile, whose seuere and rigorous dealing made them first to quit the yoake, and vindicate their liberty from Philips tyrannie and oppression. The next motiue which imboldned me to this attempt, was your gracious promise made vnto me by the mediation of a noble Gen∣tleman, for farthering me with a place according to my calling, in this new intended iourney: which if I may enioy vnder your Honors fauour and commaund, I hope that God will so assist me with his grace, that the bent of my meane endeuours shall wholy tend to the seruice of God, my Country, and your Honoured selfe. Vnto this discourse is added, besides a briefe en∣couragement vnto those, who are designed for vndertakers in this expedition vnder Count
Mansfield; the which I doe not, because I thinke their resolutions to neede the spurre, for ours commonly are so forward, that they neede the bridle, but that those spirits who are either igno∣rant or iealous of the motiues, may rectife their mindes by the knowledge and consideration of them. Thus desiring your Honours fauourable acceptance, I leaue and rest, Your most obliged Seruant. VV. C.
To the Reader. GEntle Reader, thou maist behold in this discourse a true Suruay of those more remarkable losses and acquirements which haue past be∣tweene the Dutch and the Spani∣ards, since the expiration of the last truce, which ended with the beginning of the yeare 1621. Thou maist behold also a true counterpoise or comparatiue ballancing of the same, wherein it doth most plainely appeare, that the Dutch haue not onely not beene loosers in these latter and time neerer warres of the Netherlands, but for diuers ad∣uantageous respects, haue beene victorious against their potent and most redoubted Enemies, who vnder the co∣lourable pretence of the Burgonian Title, sought to in∣fringe the liberties of these Countries, contrarie to the auncient customes, freedomes, and priuiledges of the same. To this relation is annexed a briefe encourage∣ment vnto all those, who either as voluntaries or by way of Imprest, are ingage in this expedition of Count
Mansfield. In the censure of both these, let thy iudge∣ment be milde and fauourable, and not according to the common Current of the disaffected and Spaniolized English, whose reports are so farre from truth & equity in these and other traditions, that they wholy encline to partiality and detraction: For my part I know the can∣dour and integritie of my owne thoughts, and how free they are from any bending inclination or report, being vnwilling that any knowne truth, though it were in gi∣uing the Diuell his due, should be wronged by any fa∣bulous or counterfeit adumbrations. The conscience of this, armes me against the danger of their malicious aia∣culations, and makes me hopefull of the impartiall Rea∣ders best construction, which if I may obtaine, I shall for euer rest happy for this their good estimation.
THE DVTCH SVRVAY. THat Historicall faith which pro∣ceedeth from the irradiation of re∣port, as it is oftentimes grounded vpon the Marble foundation of truth: so is it many times built vp∣on the sandy base of misprision, er∣rour and coniecture: and this doth happen either through the malig∣nity of our owne will, which doth facilitate the beliefe of those things, which we with willing affectation doe desire, for qua volumus facile credimus, or through the vanity of false Intelligence, which makes vs conceiue Chimaraes for Idaeas, falshoods for truths, doubtfull pro∣babilities for manifest and assured demonstrations. A conclusion not onely true in all Histories whatsoeuer, either auncient or moderne, whereas the Eare but not the Eye giues information, but most especially verifi∣able in the present subiect of this relation & discourse: for although within the reuolution of these last sixe yeares, the sword hath beene put into the Papall hand, and by their powerfull instruments of Spaine & Austria, Bohemia hath beene repossest, and contrary to the cu∣customes
and priuiledges of the same, of an electiue Kingdome, hath bin mad absolute and successiue, al∣though the Paltz by the politique ayre of their verball treaties and illusions, hath not onely beene taken, but most iniuriously kept away from Frederick, the most worthy and vndoubted Palatine thereof; and though the Valtoline besides, hath been spoiled, and despoiled from the Grisons, a people free, and so acknowledged from the prescription of antiquity: yet let the Spaniolized English say what they will, and let their rumour blaze what it can to the contrary: the Spaniards haue not onely not beene victorious, but haue suffered many and most remarkable losses by the Dutch, in these latter and time-neerer Warres of the Netherlands. In the diluci∣dation whereof I meane not to instance in the losse of men, money, munition, and shipping, which like our haire growe out againe vpon euery new reinforcement and supply, but in those dammages, which are most solid and substantiall, as the losse of Townes, Cities, Lands, and Territories, which like an arme or legge cut off, sildome or neuer growe out againe, to the vse and interest of their first possessors, especially they being seized by the Dutch or Spaniards, whose talents are of a strong retentiue power, and who know to keepe that, which they haue once gotten and acquired, as well as any Nations in Christendome whatsoeuer: so that if we shall comparatiuely ballance the Spanish Acquisiti∣ons in the Dutchies of Iuliers and Cleaueland, with their bleeding detriments, sustained in Brasilia, Lima, and Ormus: wee shall see the former to bee exceeded by the latter, beyond the paralell and degrees of all com∣parison. For the better light and manifestation whereof,
we must vnderstand thus much, that those parcels which Philip the 4. now holdes in Cleeue and Iuliers, were not plumes aunciently belonging to that new spread Eagles backe of Spaine, but fastned on like Icarus wings, vpon the halfe-naked skin of that Austrian Pullet now growne bigger, then the Dam it selfe, by the sticking waxe of Philip the seconds policies and pretences. By these meanes following your Philippick proiects vp∣on these now and new inthralled Seigneuries, were brought and wrought almost to the full period, and non datur vltra of his desires. William the last, Duke of Cleaues, of that name who deceased at Duisseldorp, in the yeare of our Lord God 1592. married his sonne Iohn William vnto Iaqueline, the daughter of the Marquesse of Baden, a woman infamously famous for her dissolute and licentious life; and the censure of her imprison∣ment for the same, for bringing in of the Spaniards vn∣to those Countries, and for making of your Cleuian sim∣plicity, first acquainted with the snaffle of the Casti∣lian rule and gouernment. But these, both the Father and the Sonne dying without heires male, the inheri∣tance descended to two pretended heires female. The one married vnto the Marquis of Brandenburge, a re∣formed Protestant, the other married vnto the Prince of Newenburge, a Romane Catholique. Both these fight for the bone, whilst a third and fourth take away the flesh: for notwithstanding diuers admonitions and cautions to the contrary from some of their fastest friends, who were iealous of their good, and studious of the common peace and tranquility of their domini∣ons; The Newenburger strengthens himselfe with Par∣tisans of the same faction and religion, and drawes vnto
his succours: the King of Spaine, the Emperour of Ger∣manie, with other Austrian Princes and Potentates. The Brandeburger vseth a draught of the same policie, and inuites the States of the Lowe Countries, the Kings of England and France vnto his succour and assistance. An experience which shall proue hurtfull both to the one and to the other, as the sequell shall declare: for the Spaniards hauing seized vpon Weezell, Rhinebercke, Duisseldorpe, and other places of the Dutchie, keepe them vpon pretence of their charges, and assurance of their Frontier. The Dutch hauing surprised Rees, Em∣bricke, Cleeue, Goffe, and Gulicke, man these Townes with their owne Garrisons, vpon the consideration of the same and other pretences. Gulicke was a thorne in Albertus foote, and an eye∣sore in the Castilians light. Vanderbercke must plucke this out, being Generall of the Spanish Forces in their Cleuian expedition, which began vnder his command in the midst of August 1622. That yeare being the next after the expiration of the truce, the Enemies were ve∣ry strong, as hauing three Armies in the field, one in Flaunders besieging Sluce, vnder the commaund of Inigo de Borges, and the Bishop of Gaunt, another houering about Goffe and Zantom, commaunded by the Marquis Spinola, which attended the motions of our Nassauian Armie, lying then as in our durtie Quarters of Dornicke, and this third which beleguerd Gulicke, vnder the con∣duct of the Earle of Monts, commonly called Henry Vanderberke. This Citie is the Metropolis of the Dutchy of Iuliers, vnto which it giues his name seated vpon the Riuer of Roer, in a fruitful Cuntry, which stretcheth frō thence vnto the bankes of the Dent. It was well forti∣fied
and defended, for besides the olde fortifications which were found at the first reducement of this place, there were new Rauelins and halfe Moones made by the directions of the Prince of Orange, and for their de∣fence there lay fourteene Companies of foote, English, Dutch and French within the walls, vnder their Go∣uernour Signieur Pethan, besides Thomas Villers troupe of Horse, which was reputed to be one of the brauest in all the Netherlands. But although it were well man∣ned, and strongly fortified, yet for want of victuals it must yeeld to the power of the Conquerour: for the prouision and store of the Magazine growing tainted, by Commission from the States Pithan, makes sale of it, vnto those Merchants that would giue most for it. Spi∣nola vnderstanding of this by the Nuntioes of his intel∣ligence, before it could be re-victualed by the States, sends Henry Vander Barke to besiege it with an Armie of sixteene thousand men, both Horse and Foote, consist∣ing of diuers Nations, as Italians, Spaniards, French, and Almaines. Vpon their first approches, and before all the aduenues and passages were blockt vp, some of the Captaines, amongst whom Captaine Haydon, and Captaine Aishley, were most forward, presented their seruice vnto the Gouernour, and offered him vpon his leaue to victuall the Towne aboundantly from the pro∣uisions of the Country: the season of the yeare seruing fitly for it, it being as then about the beginning of Har∣uest, The counsell was good and wholsome, and might haue wrought the preseruation of Gulick, if it had beene apprehended and executed in time. But Pethan obli∣ging himselfe too strictly to his Commission, reiecteth the proffer, pretending that hee durst not doe it as ha∣uing
no Warrant for this Designe. In the meane time Count Henricke well husbanding this occasion, sits downe before the Towne, Intrencheth himselfe strong∣ly, and drawes his approches close to our vtter Works, for the better planting of his Cannon. Thus Pethan sees his errour, and too late seekes to redresse the same. Then hee resolues vppon a sally which might haue wrought some good effect, if it had beene sooner en∣terprized. In this conflict our men surpriz'd and sleigh∣ted one of the Enemies Fortifications, charged them home to their teeth, and hauing got some proportion of spoiles and victuals, made their retreat good vnto the Ports, with the losse only of Captaine Bassenheime, and sixe and thirty of their Horsemen: amongst the rest young Captaine Haydons valour was most remark∣able; he was Captaine of a Foote Company, yet vpon that day he seru'd on Horse-backe. One of the Enemies aduauncing himselfe before the grosse of their troupes, dares any of our side proudly to the Combat. Haydon accepts it, and charging him with his Pistoll, kill'd the Challenger vpon the place, and after that being re∣charg'd by a second, he falls backe to the body of our Troupes in safety. The fortune of this skirmish did but tye the squib to the Bulls tayle, encreasing our appe∣tite and their anger. Vpon this they batter our Ram∣piers furiously with the Cannon, and salute the defen∣dants with often vollies of their Musket shot. Our men answere them with Balls of the same mettall. Amongst the midst of these Reuolets, passing with a doubtfull successe of fortune betweene the besiegers and the be∣sieged, there chanced a casuall fire to be kindled in the Spanish Quarters. Our Fire-men plye this place with
their Shotte both great and small, and worke some re∣markable dammage vpon the Enemies. But these ex∣ploites could not alay the biting smart of our hunger, which now began to rage and raigne in euery Quarter: For the Towne Prouisions being spent, and the Maga∣zins wasted, things vnusuall, and vnaccustomed to the palate, were deuoured; as Dogs, Cats and the like. This inforcement caused Pethan to demaund a Parlee about the midst of Ianuarie: notwithstanding his first pro∣mise to Vander Berke, that he would not hearken to the motion of that accord till Easter. For this purpose three Captaines were sent out of the Ports vnto their Campe, the one an English man, the other two French & Dutch. After some difficul¦ties, the agreement was consummated vpon these con∣ditions following. First, that the Spaniards should not bring the Inqui∣sition into the Dutchie of Iuliers▪ nor make any alterati∣on in matters of Religion. 2. That the Captaines and Souldiers should depart vpon honourable termes, with their Armes fixt, Co∣lours flying, Drums beating, and their Wiues, Chil∣dren and Goods. 3. That their Ordnance and Munition should re∣maine in the Towne. 4. That their Armourers, Smithes, and Gunners, might haue liberty freely to depart with the Souldiers. 5. That the Gouernour and Captaines might haue Horse and Waggons, with a sufficient conuoy to con∣duct them to Nimeghen, and that their sick & wounded might stay vntill they were recouered, and then to haue Waggons to conduct them to the same place.
6. That the Captaines and Souldiers should haue a whole yeares liberty, to sell their lands if they had any. 7. That the Captaines and Souldiers which were in any other place of the Dutchie, should haue leaue to come thither, and bring their Wiues and Children. 8. That the Armes and Commodities belonging to the Towne and Castle, should be left behinde. 9. That all Records and auncient Writings in the Towne and Castle, should remaine there still. 10. That the Souldiers should not be arrested for debt. 11. That the beds which the Souldiers had brought into the Towne, should be restored to their owners. 12. That the Electour of Brandeburghs Officers and Ministers should execute their Offices for the space of one whole yeare then next ensuing. 13. That the Citizens might depart the Citie, and dispose of their goods within one yeare. 14. That there should be two Hostages giuen on ei∣ther side, vntill the Articles were performed, all which being signed and sealed by the Gouernour, hee should send a Copie of it to the Prince of Orange, and be bound to yeeld the place, if they were not releeued within 12. dayes, with 300. Waggons at the least: which time be∣ing expired, and no reliefe comming from Dornicke or else-where. Vanderberke sent 600. Waggons to trans∣port their baggage, wishing the Gouernour to hasten his departure: who sending the keyes vnto the Earle, departed with all his Goods and Souldiers, leauing two Hostages behinde, vntill the Waggons were re∣turned. Pethan vpon his comming to the Hague, was arrested
by order from the States, and the Prince of Orange was confined as prisoner to his owne house, hauing a Guard of Muskettiers set ouer him, and his dignities which he enioyed in that Common-wealth, were suspended for a time, vntill he should cleare himselfe, and giue a iust account of his actions. Thus you see the losse of Gulicke conquered some fifteene yeares before, by the valour of the States for∣ces, ioyntly with the succours of foure thousand Eng∣lish, vnder the commaund of that noble and well expe∣rienced commander Generall Cecill; and now re-con∣quered by the Spaniards, more by the power of hunger, then the powerfulnes of their Armes: which losse came not solitarie and alone, but was aggrauated with the society of another, though of lesse consequence and im∣portance: and this was the surprise of Lulstorff, Blanken∣burge, and Monawe, small Garrisons held by Branden∣burge, in the Dutchie of Iuliers, and the taking of Goffe, a little Towne in Cleaueland, seated vpon the South side of the Rhine, almost opposite vnto Rees, which makes the second losse of Townes or Territories, sustai∣ned by the States, in these last Warres of the Nether∣lands. This place was of no great importance, onely it made the Westerne parts of Cleeue, pay some small Contribution to the Electour of Brandenburge. It was meanely fortified, and but weakely manned; and there∣fore vpon the Spinolians first approches & summons, it yeelded to the stronger, the Souldiers of the Garri∣son departing vpon conditions of honor. Afterwards by directions from their Counsell of Warre, they for∣tified
it with a Rampier, Counterscarfe, and some other outer Works, so that it is now become a peece of some reasonable defence. His Excellencie the Prince of Orange carying Argus eyes vppon all your Spanish proiects; before their Workes were well setled, marcht thither in the latter end of Summer 1623. intending to take the Towne by an Onslate. In his Armie there were my Lord of Essex, my Lord Wriotheslie, sonne to the Earle of Southampton, with diuers other noble Voluntiers from England, Fraunce, and else-where. But he dealt with an Enemie, whose eyes were as good as his hands: for they hauing notice of his comming, fore-layd the passage, and re∣solued preuention to the vtmost. The Prince viewing their Forces thus facing of our Armie, and lodged be∣sides in a place of aduantage: after a long Alto, wherein he braued the foes, retired his Troupes from the enter∣prise of Goffe, which still groanes vnder the yoake of the Castilian gouernement and oppression. The third losse which the States of the vnited Pro∣uinces haue receiued, and that since the taking of Gulick and Goffe, hath beene the surprisall of Papenmuch, a strong Sconce, built by the Confederates in a certaine Iland of the Rhine, betweene Coleine and Bonne, an Imperiall Towne, heretofore surprized by Sir Martin Skencke, in the yeare 1587. The Spaniards knew what a bridle Skenks Sconce (a Fort built vpon that nooke of Land) where the Rhine deuideth it selfe into two branches, making the Peniusula of Grauen worke, had been to their projected designes vpon Cleeue, Geldres, and Friseland, they could not suffer a snaffle of the same mettall, and
making, in the mouth of the Bishop of Colein, a crea∣ture of Spaine, and wholly deuoted to the house of Au∣stria. Besides, the possessing of it did concerne them much, for the transportation of their Forces from or into the lower circles of the Empire, and for victualing of Rhineberke, Weezell, and other places, by the commo∣dity of the Riuer. These motiues incited Spinola to send thither an Armie of sufficient strength and number, for the conquest of this important Citadell. These troupes were commaunded by the Prince of Chimay, and one Bree, Lieutenant Generall vnto the Prince of Newen∣burge. They raised small Forts, commonly called Re∣douts vpon euery passage, drew their approches with∣in a conuenient distance, and brought some Peeces of the greater size from Iuliers for the battery: and be∣sides, they built two small Ships of Warre, not draw∣ing much water vpon the Rhine, to this intent that all the land passages being stopt, & the aduenues by water being also shut vp, time and hunger (two powerfull in∣struments, much made vse of by the Fabian Generals of Spaine) might worke the conquest and deliuerance of this place. The euent answered their expectation: for the Defendants being prest with this vnresistable diffi∣culty, surrendred vp the Sconce about the latter end of the yeare 1622. vpon condition to depart with bagge and baggage. And thus you see a full suruay of those greater and more substantiall losses, which the States haue suf∣fered, since the expiration of the last twelue yeares truce, from their ancient and sworne Enemies of Spaine. The relation of their victories followes, suparlatiue to
their dammages, both for the respect of honour, and the waight of their importance: and these may be re∣duc'd vnto two heads, vnto their victories acquired at Rishame and Ormus, Ilands seated vpon the coast of Per∣sia, and aunciently belonging to that Kingdome, or to their Conquests in Brasilia and Peru, Prouinces of the new world, discouered by Americus, from whence it tooke his name, for the vse of Ferdinand and Isabella, their children, heires, and successours. For although in the Conquest of the fore-said Ilands, the Dutch as well as our English, were but auxiliaries vnto the Persi∣ans, yet because they were pars magna laboris, they had I say a great share in the labour and danger of this ex∣ploit, by way of reducement, and not improperly, it may bee fylde amongst the number of their atchiue∣ments. This Rishame or Rhisme is a small Iland, distant from Ormus some foure leagues, and separated from thence by a small fret of the Sea, commonly called the sound of Balsora. The Portingals had built a strong Castle in it, manned with three hundred Christians, and fiue hundred Negroes, commanded by Rufero their Gouernour. Our Fleete vpon the 24. of Ianuarie 162, came within shot of the Castle, and plied the Defen∣dants with diuers peales of Ordinance, and by the fa∣uour of our shipping and Cannon, gaue meanes to the Persian, to land ten thousand of his Souldiers. These Mahometan Troupes were commaunded by one of their Sultans, for so they call their Lords, a man of great valour and conduct, as the sequele shall make good. Vpon their first landing they play the Terriers, put themselues into the earth, & bring their approches
within a neere distance. Rufero terrified with this strait assignement, as being inuironed both by land and wa∣ter, and hauing no Element to helpe him, but the all-common Ayre, and the fire of his Cannon, demaunds a parlee: to hinder farther effusion of blood it was graunted. But the conditions proposed were dislikt by the Assailants: for the Portugall wholy ayming at the preseruation of Ormus, and sleighting that of Rhisme, be∣cause he saw no possibility to keepe it, offers presently to surrender the Castle, vpon condition that his men, both Spaniards and Blacks, might haue free liberty to passe ouer vnto Ormus. Any man that had but Poliphe∣mus eye, might see through the mist of this pretence. Our Captaines, Blight, Weddall, and Mr. Monnox, men much honoured for this seruice, were apprehensiue enough to conceiue the aduantage of this proposition. Therefore they reiect it, and fall to their battery againe, so that waighing neerer to the Castle, they bestowe seauen or eight hundred great Shot vpon the Curtin and Bulwarkes. The Persians likewise from the land side, draw their rowling trenches within a stones cast, and ply the Castellans with vncessant vollies of their small Shot, who answered them with the like, and flung diuers Pots of Wilde-fire and Granadoes into their Workes, which did them much hurt. The terrour of this caused a second parlee; wherein Rufero offers to surrender the place vpon these cautions following, that he might depart to Ormus with his Armes and Muni∣tion, and race the walls of the Castle downe to the ground. This second motion being reiected like as the former, we saluted them afresh with the thunder of the
same curtesie. But the Defendants seeing themselues thus distressed on all sides, yeeld at the last vppon these conditions. That they should depart with bagge and baggage, and all other things that they had, their Armes, Muni∣tion, and Ordnance expected, and that the Souldiers, as well Blackes as others, should be transported vnto Muskat, a Towne which the Portingals hold vpon the Arabian shore, onely some of the Principals were to be detayned aboord our Shippes, and to be disposed of as occasion should require; so the Castle of Rhisme was surrendred vnto the Persians the 30. of Ianuarie 1621. and all the Articles were performed on both sides, sa∣uing that the Sultan caused some fourescore of the captiue Negroes to be murdered, contrary to the dig∣nity and faith of his promise. After the Conquest of Rhisme, the Christian Fleete set saile for Ormus, and the Persian land forces wasted ouer in 200. Boates, made for that purpose. This Iland was made tributary to the Portugals anno 1606. who taking aduantage of the Persian troubles, and their neg∣lect of maritine affaires, fortified themselues strongly in this place, which they kept to their great profit and honour aboue fourescore yeares, vntill after the death of Sebastian, and the Conquest of Portugall, it was vni∣ted together with the Terceraes, Ginnie, Brasilia, and the East Indies, vnto the Kingdome of Spaine. Although it were barren, and had little or no fresh water, yet was it reasonable well inhabited, and payd for their customes yearely to the King, being a Mahometan 140000. Se∣raffs, with whom the Spaniards cried at the least halfe
share. It is seated in the Persian Gulph, opposite to Combrene, on the maine land of Persia, and in respect of the commodious scituation, it stands fitly for the traf∣fique of Arabia, Persia, and India. Of this Iland the Ara∣bians vse to say. Si terrarum orbis quaqua patet annulus esset, Illius Ormusium gemma decus{que} foret. Which we may English thus: If the world a ring were, then the precious stone Of that rich ring were Ormus Ile alone. The present Sophie being sensible of this thorne, which so long had stucke in his predecessours foote, re∣solues vppon a remedy befitting the greatnesse of his Designe. And euer since his acquaintance with Sir Robert Sherlie, resoluing vpon the conquest of this Iland, now vndertakes it with the auxiliarie Forces of the Dutch and English, and that Land Armie which sub∣dued Rhisme, now re-inforced with new supplies from the Continent. The 10. of February 1621. the Persians landed 3000. of their men, who marched straight vnto the Towne, which being a place of no great defence, they tooke it, without any resistance at all; The Portu∣gals & the Moores retiring themselues into the Castle with their goods and treasure. Vpon this the Chri∣stian Fleete plies the Forte, and the Enemies Fri∣gats which lay vnder the Lee thereof with their Ord∣nance: and the Mahometans Land their whole Ar∣mie, plant their Batteries, and mount their Cannon, which they had borrowed from the Christians. And that they might with more expedition and facility, make themselues Maisters of this peece: they vnder∣vndermined
the wall at least tenne foote right in, and placed fortie Barrels of Powder in the Mine, which being sprung vpon Sunday, the 17. of the same moneth, made a breach of some twentye foote broad at least. Presently vpon this, th' Assailants present themselues brauely to the breach, and seeking to gaine their passage to the top of the ruines, are as re∣solutely repuls'd by the Defendants: Who salute them with Stones, Powderpots, Tarlin, and Musket∣shot; and make good the breach from noone to night, against all commers; notwithstanding the furie of the Artillery, and the continuall vollies of Musket bullets, which fell in as thicke as haile amongst them. The Por∣tugals lost two Cullers displaid one after another, with some of their forwardest men, & their Battlements and Barricadoes made of Cotton sackes, were much torne and defaced with the furie of our Ordinance. The Persians lost not fortie men out-right, but some three hundred or more were wounded and burnt, part of whom afterwards perished. The 20. day in the mor∣ning, there came out of the Castle two aged men with a youth, and three or foure Negroes attending them, who were presently conueyed by Sea (to the intent that they might not view our workes) to the house of Dabul, whereas the Sultan attended by diuers Cushel Bassaes, and his Guard of Arabians, went to meete, and treat with these Portugals. But this taking no effect, they desired leaue of him to goe ouer to Combreane to the Sophie, which was granted them. But when they came ouer, he would condiscend to nothing without the consent of the Christians. The Spanish Delegates
being thus dismist, the Persians sinke thēselues in their Mines againe, and after they had made the vault capa∣cious enough, they lodged 55. Barrels of powder in it, and ram'd vp the hole which gaue entrance to this Mine, with Timber, Stones, and Morter. It tooke fire about sixe of the clocke earely in the morning, be∣ing the 2. of Aprill, and blew vp most of the We∣sterne Bulworke, with such violence and impetuositie, that the stones of this worke were blowne at least sixe hundred paces from the place. This mine was sprung contrary to the intentions of the Dutch and English in the time of the parlee, and that by the directions of the Persian Generall, who was blemisht with treacherie for doing of this acte. For at that time there were many Portugals walking vpon the wall where the blow was giuen; foure or fiue of whom were blown vp and slaine. The 14. of Aprill the Persians blew vp the 3. Mine, vpon the east side of the Castle, yet would they not as yet enter, because they were working of another on the west side, which they sprung the 17. of the same month. The Mahometan souldiers vpon this entered, and possest themselues of the westerne Bulworke, and seeking to force the Portugals Barricadoes, were by them repulst with great slaughter. The Persian Sultan seing his men retire, comes to the foote of the breach, and with his sword in his hand ready drawne, makes them renue the assault againe: In which conflict, the valour of one Portugall was most remarkable, who with his Sword and Buckler, fought vpon the point of the breach, and forceably repulst the assailants. But
marke how Fortune proues a Step-dame to his valour: He charging freely vpon one of them with his Rapier, thrust it into one of their wooden Bucklers and before he could free the point, hee was charged by three or foure of the Persians, and cut in pieces by them. With∣in two or three dayes after this assault, the Sophie passed ouet from Combreane vnto the Iland of Ormus, where he shewed that magnificence & munificence (befitting one of Ismaels successors) vnto the souldiers and Offi∣cers of the Army. The besiegded seeing no hope of succours, and that themselues were disabled in their defences, by Mines, Batteries, and Assaults, yeelded the Castle vpon these conditions. 1 That they might depart with bagge and baggage, without any armes, sauing their Swords and Ra∣piers. 2 That the sicke and wounded should be left in the Towne, and lookt vnto by Chirurgions. 3 That aswell these as those that were sound, should be conueyed vnto Muskat, a Mountain town of Arabia, by the Robert and Sherling, two English ships. Thus this Castle and Iland the 24. of Aprill were yeelded to the Sophie by the auxiliary meanes of the Dutch and En∣glish, after it had bene possest by the Portugals and Spaniards an hundred and eighty yeares. The second losse which the Spaniards haue suffered since these last warres of the Netherlands, hath beene the taking of the towne and part of Todos los Sanctos, in Brasilia. This Countrey is limited on the South with Riedo la Plate and Chile, on the North with Guiana,
on the East with the Ocean, and on the West with the Mountaines of Peru, called the Audes, which deuideth the Countrey of Ieruaua, as the Apemine doth Italy, and as Taurus and Caucasus doe Asia. The people which inhabit these steepe and craggie Mountaines, are more barbarous then other Americans, as being taunie all ouer their bodies, going altogether naked, and liuing without houses or bedding: Those of the vally are more temperate and ciuill, as partaking the qualities and temperature of the Climate: The Earth of the vallies, is fatte, greene, and alwayes flourishing; aboun∣ding with Sugar, Mace, and your Brasilian Wood, vsed in Europe for your dying of reddes; the Trees wherof are of exceeding bignesse, wherein Nature proues the Architect, for diuerse large families which dwell in the bodies and branches of them. This land was first discoueted by Pedro Aluari Caprioli, at the expences of Emanuel King of Portugal, Anno 1500. afterwards it was more exactly suruayed by Americus Vespucius, next by Giouanni de Empoli a Florentine, Anno 1503. Afterwards by Iohn Stadius a Dutch-man, Anno. 1554. And by the Edict of that Monster of Man-kinde (Pope Alexander the sixt) it was appropriated to the Portugals; the rest of America being allotted to the Castilians. The chiefest Citties of this Prouince are, 1 Fernambuco. 2 Ascensio. 3 Todos los Sanstos, otherwise called St. Salua∣dor. This towne stands vpon a Bay of the same name, vnto which the Riuer of Reall dischargeth it selfe, and hath Fernambuco an hundred miles to the northward,
and it lyes from the Equinoctiall fifteen degrees to the southward. It was reasonable strong, and thought by the Portugals (who are generally ouer-weening in their owne conceits, both of themselues and their owne strength) to be tenable against any forces whatsoeuer. The journey being resolued on by the West Indian Company of the Netherlands, they put to Sea the 22. of December 1623. from Texell a Port of Holland, with a Fleete of thirtie ships, well furnished with Armes, Lead, Powder, Ordinance, and other warlike muni∣tion. Iacob Willeks, a man of good experience in Mari∣tine matters, commanded for the sea, and the Lord of Dorte commanded all the Land-forces. The Lord Generall hauing ouer-sayled the Admirall, had beene before the towne three dayes before, being the 6. of May 1624. and hauing exchanged some shot with the Castle, went to sea againe, as resolued to seeke out their Admirall Willekes, and the rest of the company. This attempt gaue an alarum to the Spaniards, who conie∣cturing as the truth was, that more numbers followed these, & that for some designe vpon this pce, prepared themselues for their defence, with all preuention and prouision possible. They mounted eight pieces of Ordinance vpon a Battery of Free-stone, the Slaues of the towne (aswell Christians as others) were commaunded to the Ram∣pier, and raised two new batteries by the direction of the Vize-roy, who was also very carefull to see the men mustered and ezercised in their armes according to the manner of the Castilian Discipline, the number of whom amounted to some 5500. men, whereof the In∣tants
made 4000. and the souldiers 1500. They of the Land battered our shippes furiously from the Castles, and vpon one of the three was the Vize-roy himselfe, with his sonne, and the greatest part of the Gentry. Our Admirall in the meane time sayled vp & downe in the Bay, resoluing how hee might land his Troups with best aduantage; for this respect, he imbarks 1600. of his best and choicest men in foure of the tallest shippes, and commanding the rest to follow slowely, he enters the Bay the 9. of May 1624. Comming neare the Enemies Batteries, he caused all their Ordinance to be discharged on their Castles and Platformes, and landing some hundred men with their loug-boats, they took the Batteries presently: the Marriners doing very good seruice in this assault with their Boate-hookes. Vpon this the Defendants hang out a flagge of truce, and most of them quit the foresaid places. But the Vize-roy, persists resolute in defence of that Breach, whereupon himselfe was ingag'd, and though hardly prest by the Dutch, he fights it out to the vtmost with some of the brauest Caualeroes of the town. But when he saw at the last, himselfe forsaken of all sides, he fled towards his own Pallace: but in the way our Marriners & soldiers ceazed vpon his person; who putting his sword into his sheath, deliuered these words vnto thē: I haue beene faitbfull vnto my King, and if my men had not so basely forsaken me, your forces should not haue taken the Castle so soone. Vpon the surrender of the Castle, all the lesser Forts yeelded themselues, and ac∣knowledged the fortune of the Canqueror; the which was the more happy in this respect, because it was
accomplished with little effusion of Christian blood, there being not slaine aboue forty common Souldi∣ers, and one Captaine. The tenth day of May, the Netherlanders went to surprise the Towne, but when they approached neere the Ports, they perceiued that it was abandoned by the Inhabitants, so that our Souldiers entred without any resistance. The pillage was great in Coyne, Plate, Ie∣wels, and other rich moueables, which the Souldiers tooke out of the Houses, Store-houses, and Cellars. Moreouer, there were taken 12000. Chests of Sugar, thirty Ships laden with rich Marchandize, which lay in the harbour, and eight shippes more of the Spaniards, which arriued there since, not hauing notice of the Dutchmens fortunes and proceedings. The third maine losse which the Spaniards haue su∣stained since the expiration of the last truce, hath beene at Lima, a famous Emporian and hauen Towne in Peru. This Prouince was first discouered by Francisco Pisarro, afterwards Marquis of Antillo, and Diego de Almagro, af∣terwards honoured with the title of chiefe discouerer by the Emperour Charles the fift; to whose vse it was first conquered by these aduentrous Spaniards from Atapalipa and his brethren, right pretenders and inhe∣ritours of the same. It hath on the East the Perunian mountaines, on the West Ma re Pacificum, or del Sur, on the North Castilia Aurea, and the Riuer of Peru, from whence the Country taketh his name, and on the South it hath Chila for his borders. The length of it is from the Citie of Pasto, vnto the Prouince of Chili, one thou∣sand eight hundred leagues, as large as the leagues of
Castilia. This Land is the seate of many wonders: thence groweth that odoriferous wood, whose barke being incided, distils a meruailous sweet liquor, where∣with if any annoint a dead body, the carkasse corrup∣teth not. Neere to a cape or point of land, commonly called Destahelena, there are found certaine Springs of Pitch or Tarre, seruiceable for the calking & trimming of Ships. Here are Riuers which runne all day, but stand still at night, the reason whereof is, because their current is maintained by the snowe, which melts a day time, but freezeth againe at night. It rayneth in the mountaines, but neuer in the Plaines of Peru, the assigned reason whereof is, that in the Plaines, and neere the Sea coast, there bloweth all the yeare long one only winde which the Mariners call Siluester, which runneth along with such forcible violence, that the cloudes and vapours can haue no rest in the middle Region ouer the plaine Country. Besides other small townes which the Chri∣stians haue in the Plaines, they haue fiue principle Ci∣ties. The first is called Pito Veio, which standeth very neere the equinoctiall: this Citie is poore, and apt for diseases, yet hath it some Mines of Gold & Emeraulds. Fifteene leagues within the Maine is another Citie called St. Michael, which in the Indian speech they call Pura. This is a pleasant soile and fruitfull, but there are no Mines of Golde nor Plate. Threescore leagues for∣ward alongst the coast standeth another Citie in a val∣ley called Trugillio, being distant from the Sea two leagues. This Citie is placed in a plaine plot neere to the Reuers side, and is abundantly prouided of Wheat,
Maiz, and Cattell. It is also exceeding well built, and in it there are three hundred housholds of Spaniards. The fourth chiefe Citie is, that of Aroquipa, com∣monly called the faire. The soile neere vnto it is health∣full, and aboundant of all kinde of victuals, standing some 12. leagues from the Sea coast, vpon a Riuer that is faire and Nauigable, so that Ships of good burthen may come vp to the walls of the Citie, by which means it is thought the habitation of this towne will encrease. It doth not onely supply her owne necessities, but serues the Citie of Cusco, and the Prouince of Carchas, with all things needfull; from which places there is great re∣sort vnto Aroquipa, by reason of the frequent contracta∣tion here, t for the golden mettall of Potosi. The fifth principall Citie exceeding all the rest in beauty, strength, and riches, is that of Luma scituated in a valley of the same name, some fourescore leagues from Trugillio. The Country there-about is plentifull of Corne, and many sorts of fruits and cattell: the buil∣ding of this place is such, that all the streetes doe meete in a faire large place, from the which a man may see through euery streete into the fields. The dwelling is meruailous healthfull, because it standeth in a tempe∣rate climate, not afflicted too much with extremities of heate and colde: the hottest season of the yeare be∣ing more temperate then that of Spaine. For in the time of their Summer heate, there falleth euery day in the morning a sweete and cooling dewe, which is not hurtfull, but rather profitable for the health of man. For it being vsed by way of Lotion, it is good for the head aches and other diseases. All Spanish fruit grow∣eth
and prospereth well in this soile, especially Oren∣ges, Lemonds, Figges, Pomgranates, and Vines, wher∣of there had beene great abundance, if the frequent broyles and tumults betweene the Spanish Souldiers had not hindred the labour and Plantation of the Hus∣bandmen. This Citie is iudged to be the most pleasant dwel∣ling of all the Land, in respect of the commodity of the harbour, the great contractation of Marchants, and the generall resort of the people of the maine Land, who come thither from all parts, and buy their furniture and prouision. From the Mines of this Prouince, is brought great store of gold and siluer. The scituation of it is neere the midst of the Land as yet discouered, for which cause the Emperour Charles the fifth, placed there a Chauncerie royall, and Iudges to decide his subiects causes, which also doth encrease the conflu∣ence of the people. It is seated two leagues from the Roade, commonly called Callee de Lima, or the Port of Lima. Le Hermite Generall of a Fleete vnder the States of the vnited Prouinces, knowing how much the gai∣ning of this place might accommodate the Hollan∣ders, and incommodate the Spaniards, resolues vpon the attempt. And being furnished with a sufficient number of shipping, and men befitting such an enter∣prise, he sets saile from the Netherlands, and after a te∣dious Nauigation through the Straights of Magellan, arriues at last in the South Sea opposite vnto Lima; where hee makes his intention knowne to the Compa∣nie, and then aduentures vpon the exploit: wherein Fortune shewed her selfe so fauourable, that with little
or no losse, he made himselfe Master of the Callee de Lime, to the great terrour of the Citie, which as some men report, hath since yeelded it selfe to the mercy of the Hollanders. The Conquerours got a great spoile in Shipping, Treasure, and other rich commodities, and haue since gotten two other places in the Prouince of Peruana. Thus you haue seene a true Suruay of those most re∣markable losses and victories, which haue hapned be∣tweene the Hollanders and the Spaniards since the last truce, which ended with the beginning of the yeare 1621. It followes, that after their expression we should iustly counterpoise, and ballance them: which if wee doe without nationall respect or partiall inclination, wee shall see the Dutch Acquisitions to exceede the Spanish, and yet their losses to be farre inferiour vnto the others. For leauing out Ormus out of the ballance, because it is now peculiariz'd vnto the Persian, al∣though it were won by the succours of the Dutch and English: if wee counterpoize the Conquest of Saint Saluador, and the part of Lima (omitting that of the Ci∣ties as doubtfull) with al the new Acquisitions of Spaine, we shall behold these to ouerway all those, which this Nation hath of late acquired in Cleeue and Iuliers; and this aduantage doth proceede not from one, but from diuers conditions and respects. For first of all, the pro∣fits of Gulicke, & of the Dutchie, with their extraordina∣rie Fees and Contributions, will not amount to aboue an hundred thousand Duckats yearely, and allowing two thousand Souldiers for the Garrison of that Sig∣neurie, and euery man to haue fiue Shillings a weeke for
his pay, the annuall reuenue will hardly quit the char∣ges, wheras rating the reuenues of Brasilia at three mil∣lions of Duckats, and allowing one third of this accru∣ment to rise from Fernambuco, & another from Ascensio, Todos los Sanctos, with the territorie thereto adioyning, shall by this account bring a million yearely to the Cantors of the Netherlands. 2. Papenmuch with the tolage of the Rhine and; Goffe, with the contribution money drawne from the Boores of West Cleaueland, did hardly pay their owne Gari∣sons, but the keeping of the Port of Lima, may draw (perhaps) a plentifull Contribution from the golden Mines of Chili and Potosi, besides those spoiles that Le Hermite hath already gotten esteemed to bee an inesti∣mable Masse, and worth many Tuns of gold. 3. The Catholicke King payes fourescore thousand Duckats vnto the Prince of Newenburge by Compositi∣on, for the resignation of these two Dutchies, but the States holde those new Acquisitions in America, by the tenure of their Sword, and by that ius acquisitum, which power and fortune haue giuen to the stronger. 4. The Spanish King hath other competitours in Cleaue & Iuliers, besides the Confederates of the seauen Prouinces, as the house of Brandeburge, and (perhaps) the posterity of the Newenburger, may rowse themselues out of that Lethargie, wherein the Spanish Pistolets haue put their sencelesse Father, and lay clayme to that Inheritance, which doth belong to them, or the Brande∣burger Iure gentium: but the Hollanders haue no other titular pretenders, to their new purchases in Peruana and Brasilia, but the house of Spaine, vnto whom they
haue seldome lost any thing, which they were once pos∣sest of, and whereas the Sea could helpe them for many yeares together. 5. The losse of Gulicke, Goffe, and Papenmuch, giues no other disaduantage to the States, they hauing Rees, Embricke, and Skenkes Sconce, betweene that and their neerest frontier; but the possessing of these two places in the West Indies, the one vpon the North, the other vpon the South Sea, doe euen wast in the intermediate Continent of America, and giue an entrance vnto those Prouinces, whose golde hath battered the walls, and opened the gates of the strongest Townes of Christen∣dome, for the Spaniards. 6. And lastly, the Inhabitants of Cleaue and Iuliers, doe not well like the hard and heauy hand of your Ca∣stilian gouernment, no more then doe all the lower circles of the Empire, as well knowing how these In∣truders haue impaired the Germane liberty, and spur∣gall'd Bohemia and the Palatinate almost to death: but the Brasilians and Peruuians, yea the very Portugals themselues would willingly receiue the law from the Dutch-men, whom they admire as much for their faire and gentle gouernement, as they hate the others for their rigour, tiranny, and oppression.
The Mansfeldian Motiues, directed vnto all Colonels, Liuetenant-Colonels, Captaines, Inferiour Officers and other Souldiers, which either as Voluntiers, or by way of Imprest, are ingaged to serue in this next Expedition, intended by the grace of God vnder the conduct and com∣maund of the most Illustrous and War∣like Prince ERNESTVS, Earle of Mansfield. HOnourable Professors of Armes, you may see in this Dutch Sur∣uay or ballance, the swelling fortune of a triumphant State: You may beholde also a hand∣ful of Netherlanders, with some few Mercinary French and En∣glish, giue the checke to that Kingdome, which so long hath stroue for the Monar∣chie, Supreame Paramount of all Christendome: Let this President serue for our present encouragement; and withall, let vs consider, that if those 7. Prouinces (thought to be but a morsell for the Spaniards mouth, they being not as bigge as that part of England whch lyes Northward beyond the Trent) could make their
partie good for so many yeares together, against the Catholique King, and his Pack-horse the Catholique Bishop of Rome: What shall not the vnited forces of England, France, Denmarke, and the Nether∣lands doe against Pope, or Emperour, Austrian or Bauarian, or any other Christian Potentate what∣soeuer; The expected blessings of God, conti∣nuall supplies of meanes, and the vndoubted Iu∣stice of a good cause concurring therewithall? In the prosecution whereof, let not the Papall curses and ful∣minations, the vncharitable censures of your Iesuitized English, nor the foolish presages of the Speedewels ill speed, any thing deterre vs: For that Royall Ship which should haue transported ouer the Count, was cast a∣way by the default of the Pilot, a man not well aquain∣ted with those Seas, a stranger vnto Flushing, and pos∣sest (as it is thought) with a malicious resolution a∣gainst the person of Count Mansfield. So that lea∣uing any coniecture vpon this euent, befitting aswell a Colledge of Romane Augurs, as it doth a Conclaue of Ignatius Disciples, let vs discend nearer to the pur∣pose, and accommodate our selues to the expression of these Motiues, which may confirme the stronger, and strengthen the more doubtfull and weaker spirits (if there be any such) who are vndertakers in this new de∣signed Mansfeldian Expedition. And first, concerning those Motiues, your worthinesse may vnderstand that they may fitly be reduced vnto the number of three. The first whereof, is the sufficiency and conduct of that Generall vnder whom you are to vndertake. The second is the meanes of prouision and prepara∣tion
made for the vndertakers. The third motiue, is the cause conceaued, though not expressed, for which you are to vndertake and vn∣dergoe this action. And first, concerning the Generall, you are to fight vnder one whom neuer aduersity could deiect, nor euer prosperity could once erect beyond the temper of true command. You are to fight vnder such a Commander, whom Pistolets, promises, nor proscrip∣tions (the powerfull Instruments to subiect staggering resolutions) could once diuert from the tenour of his intendments. You are to serue vnder his Banners, of whom we may boldly say thus, Qui cum ab omnibus de∣sertus erat, seipsum tamen non deserit, When he was forsa∣ken by the two Anhalts, Ausberge, and other Princes of the Vnion, neuer forsooke himselfe, nor left the cause of the King of Bohemia in the suds. Are you to encoun∣ter with your Enemies in Campania? vnder whose Co∣lours can you sustaine the shock of Hostile opposition better then vnder his, who beate Leopoldus men in their owne Quarters at Hagenawe, killed Bawer the Duke of Bauariaes General in his lodging at Heseldorff, & fought that memorable battell of Fleury neere Namurs, wherein fifteene thousand of his men vanquisht sixteene thou∣sand of Gonsaluo de Cordabaes troupes, & 20000. Boores of their party besides? Are you to make a retrait from the pursuing enemie? Is not this that braue Conductor, who made that famous retraite from Bohemia into the Palatinate, and from thence vnto Breda, a tract of sixe hundred English miles at least? which considering the valour and aduantage of the pursuers, was not inferi∣our vnto that retraite of Zenophons from out of Persia,
nor that of Conons from Aquilia into Britannie. Are you to besiege Towne or Fortresse? Consider then how the Count forced Pilsen, a principall towne in Bohemia, which Zischa anuo 1470. could not subdue, nor the Hus∣sites in their ten moneths siege, anno 1434. could not conquer; and this he did being weakely accompanied, and beyond the expectation of humane reason. Consi∣der this besides, how that after the defeate of Zablatti, he rallied his troupes in the Winter season, wonne Vo∣dian, Prachalis, and Wintenberg, one after another, and though detained by Christian of Anhaults letters, he be∣sieged Pisack, a strong place, & of importance, & wonne this Towne the sixth of December, inforcing nature as the said Christian wrote vnto him. Are you distressed for want of meanes and victuals, so that you haue no∣thing but the ayre and your swords to liue by? remem∣ber how yee shall martch vnder that Generall, who maintained an Armie consisting of diuers Nations and different humours, like another Hanniball without mu∣tinie, yet without pay for three yeares together, filling their panches & their purses with the plentifull spoiles of Alsatia, Metz, and Triers, and with the abundant pro∣uisions of Emden, Munster, and Westphalia? To be briefe, are you to actuate or endure any thing, remember this that you doe it vnder the fortune, valour, and good con∣duct of Count Mansfield. The second motiue which may serue to encourage vs, is the sufficient prouision of meanes prouided for this iourney, as men, munition, victuals, and money: the sinewes, by which Warre is supported, and all Martial enterprises are brought to a happy accomplish∣ment.
Our men are those Laconian walls of bones, which must make good this attempt against all opposi∣tion: and these are the chiefest Nations, and flower of all Christendome. The French haue beene held the best Cauallerie of the world, seldome or neuer beaten, except it were by our English Bils and Bowes; of these we shall haue sixe thousand Carbins, and armed Curaiciers. The Ger∣manes were held in the time of Guichardine, the best foote of the world, and so much redoubted by the Ita∣lians, that they durst not encounter with them, except they had foote companies of the same Nation: and of these, we shall muster eight or ten thousand. Our English in these latter times, haue bin reputed the best Battalions of Pikes in all Christendome, and whom the Spaniards in their ouer-valuing humor, will acknowledge onely to be seconds vnto themselues; and of men fit to handle these Armes, England sends forth twelue thousand. The vnexhausted Mines of Britanie, will furnish these braue Troupes with Lead and Iron for their Ammunition: our Magazins will supply their wants with Serpentine and Corn-pouder for Shot and Batterie, and our friends of the Continent will pro∣uide Waggons, Horses, and other necessaries fit for the conuoy of such a Royall Army. Money will not be wanting, nor I hope the mutinous sound of Gelt will neuer be heard in our Quarters, nor an Electo chosē to reforme the same; for besides the liberall Contribution of diuers noblemen of England, forwarder of this enter∣prise, and the plentifull prouision of our Parliament in that behalfe, Fraunce and Sauoy, Germanie and Venice,
contribute towards the charges of this intended iour∣ney. But is there any man who doubts the want of vic∣tuals, whose courage depends vpon his Colon, and who neuer fights well, but when his paunch is full? Let this man whose thoughts are so vnsouldierlike, knowe, that besides our owne prouisions, which I hope wil be abundant and enough, France is contracted vnto vs with a new alliance, and the frontier of that Kingdome, against the higher and lower Germanie, runneth a tract of fiue hundred miles at least: So that in all reason it cannot be farre from the seate of our acti∣on. And can wee dreame then of want and scarcities, hauing such a plentifull friend to our neighbour, who without all peraduenture, will furnish vs with Graine, Beefes, Muttons, and all other necessaries, which are fit for the maintenance and preseruation of an Armie? In the third and last place follow the causes, which may moue and incite vs to this enterprise, and these are of two sorts, either of policie or of Religion. Con∣cerning the politique causes, I will enter no farther in∣to their mysterie, then duty and modesty will giue mee leaue: For I know there is a sanctum sanctorum of poli∣cie; there is an inner Court of Royall Counsell, into which no man ought to enter, except Assuerus put out the golden rod of his admission. Onely I will giue this caution to those spirits who are ouer-curious after this Inquest, and deliberate continually with themselues, whether the recouerie of the Palatinate, or the reuenge of the Bauarians and Emperours wrongs be the causes of this expedition, I will giue I say that caution which his Maiestie gaue in the last Parliament: That no man
should question, whether the Empire, Bauaria, or any other determinate place, should be the seate of this Warre, since the discouery of this particular cannot chuse but preiudice the present seruice: for an Enemie warn'd is arm'd, secrecie is the spirit of action, and this with an expedite deliuery, crownes all warlike exploits, with successe and glory. But concerning that point of Religion, I will enlarge my speech more freely, and boldly maintaine notwith∣standing any opposition to the contrary; that this iourney is not pro focis alone, but pro aris, not for tem∣porall respects onely, but for conscience, Religion, and the propagation of the Gospell concurring therewith∣all. And for the vindication of their wrongs, what task can be too hard? what danger can be too difficult? so that if we were to martch ouer the sandy Deserts of Arabia, ouer the vnpassable wildes and woulds of Scithia or the Frozen Slowes of Swethland and Muscouia: if we were to encounter with famine, fire, and sword, nay with all the terrours of mortality, and that their feare∣full consideration should terribilize their nature and condition, we should consider what Christ suffered for vs, and suffer any thing, yea all things with patience, for his Religion, Truth, and Gospell. Our Enemies haue made Religion their stalking horse, and our backs their pack-horse: by which meanes they haue imposed a Ro∣mish Florentine tricke vpon our credulous confidence, and open breasted, meaning. It remaines for vs, that wee should recollect our strengths and spirits, make our reuenge as sensible as our iniuries are prouoking, and martch at length ouer
their bellies, who haue rid pack-ridge so long vpon our backes. And to end, that our actions may pertake of externall glory here, and after this life of eternall glorification, let the seruice of God, our Country, and the common cause, be the generall bent and scope of all our enterprises, fighting for Dauids cause; let vs arme our selues with Dauids resolution, and let vs come against them, who came against vs with shield, sword, and speare, in the name of the Lord of Hoasts, the God of the Hoast of Israel; and then hee that teacheth our fingers to fight, and our hands to wage the Battell, shall breake the cheeke-bone of our Enemies, and make them become like those Princes which perished at Endor, euen durt and dung vnder our feete. Quod faxit Deus. GEntle Reader, you shall vnderstand that since the Writing and Imprinting of this re∣lation, Goch hath beene recouered by the Prince of Oranges Forces; which makes the Dutch ac∣quirements by so much the greater, and the Spa∣nish losses since the expiration of the last truce, by so much the more grieuous in those Countries of Cleeue and Juliers. FINIS.
