6468.5 22282598 25315
A NEW AND Short Defense of Tabacco: with the effectes of the same: and of the right vse thereof. printer's or publisher's device LONDON Printed by V. S. for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Signe of the Holy Lambe in Paules Church-yard. 1602.
To the Reader. GOod Reader, the Author of this little Pamphlet per∣ceauing how vehemently (yet without iust cause) the vse of Tabacco hath of late beene by common speach detracted, & by diuerse, publikely written against, desireth herein briefly, by his owne example and experience (being a man of good quality, learning, and iudgement) to satisfie and direct his friends and countrimen, in the pra∣ctise, and taking of that hearb; And
hath, to that end, set downe such a perfect and sound. Rule, and Me∣thode, as may confirme those who do rightly vse the same, in the conti∣nuance there of, and confute others, who vniustly, speake euill against that, of whose true vertue they are vtterly ignorant, themselues either not vsing it, or abusing it, Extm, & vltra modum, know not, that, Insani sapiens nomen feret, aequusiniqui vltra quam satis est virtutem si petat ipsam. And that the best things may loose their naturall propertie, being disor∣dered and misapplied, as continuall experience in most thinges dooth too well witnesse. But for the virtue of this diuine herbe (well applied) the Author hereof is testis oculatus,
without any exception, one that hath practised the same (and that very profitably,) on his owne body, which, by the power thereof, hee hath recouered to perfect health, & strength, as a man of so many yeares may haue, so as to his own comfort, and for others to follow in the same directions, he may iustly set it down probatum est. There are (I knowe) many others, who by the like right vse of Tabacco haue found the like happy effects, but through want of kinde affection to their countrie∣men, or like miserable Euclioes (vn∣willing that any should participate with them in their golden felicitie) do smother the vertue of that which no charitable mind would haue to
lie and die in silence. Let those therefore, who shall receiue, either delight in reading, or profit in pra∣ctise of what is contained in this litle Epitome, thinke but thankefully of the writer, who wisheth a gene∣rall benefit of his poore la∣bour. Farewell.
TABACCO Artis poeoniae decus. PErvsing twoo seuerall Discourses, lately putte downe by twoo singu∣lar exquisite learned Physitions, Con and Pro, touching the nature, vse and operation of our multum magnifico, lately recepted Indian Tabac∣co: The one of them, bitter, inuectiue, and patheticall against it: The other, milde, modest, and apologeticall for it. And finding them both in effect, and greatest materiall pointes to concur, only differing, and dissenting, in trifling toies, and tearmes, triuiall: I could not hold, but somewhat admire their serious dispute, De lana caprina. For in good sooth who wots not (trow you) that euery poore simple in Phisicke, as all other matters elsewhere of good worth, and greatest esteeme, (Per inscitiam ac in curiam) may lewdly be abused. Now, forasmuch as: Scholam medendi, mutua concordia deceat, vt hanc litem
quodammodo , I thought it not amisse, Pro meo mdulo, to insert herevnto my censure of proofe, and that also, so much the more willingly, inasmuch as I am not Prosopoleptes, any way partially affected, nei∣ther yet, tam astergus sencelesse, to conceale mine in∣debted, and deuoted affiance vnto that famous, and renowned Tabacco, for it rare, and manifold demerits. By fortunate vse whereof, not only diuers gentlemen, elsewhere generally, but my selfe likewise, principally, and particularly, haue receiued such admirable graces and helpes, as may not in any wise, without impious ingratitude to God-ward, and the like iniurie, to the hearbe it selfe, be either smothered vp in obliuion; or else, buried, (amnestia quadam perenni, quod absit.) The commendation and vertue whereof may easily be discouered by these two speciall meanes and markes, Nempe, Skill. Square. The former of them is col∣lected and gathered by Reading Reason. The other is approoued and confirmed by Practise Demonstration. Termes (I confesse) quaint and conceited, yet not farre vnfit, pro materia subiecta, vt sequitur. And here, by your fauour, Prima etiam fronte, before I proceede any further to my purpose, I am seriously & friendly to forewarne all forward Tabacconists, that
of purgatiue medicines, Some are compoundes: O∣thers are simples. Compoundes. Electuarium Indum: Electuar: de succ: ros: Diaprunis Diacatholicon Diaphaenicon. And many such like, of that crew Simples. Scammonie Stibbium Colocynthis Lawrell Saena Alex. with some others of that sort Vnto this latter Rancke I doe associate Tabacco, as one like, both in Nature and Qualitie. Now let me tell you by the way, that all these, and euery of them in it selfe, whether it be compound, or simple, is indued with some one malignant quality or other, and that same also otherwise praedominant and pernicious, vnlesse in compounds, by mixture, it be reformed: or in simples singularly wel restrained and curbed, algates portending and intending, Non tam redimendam, quam dirimendam sanitatem. Wherefore vigilant circumspection must be had, that Tabacco be handled considerately and respectiuely, not, phanati∣cally, phantastically, insolently, excessiuely, and wan∣tonly, as some humorous, pragmaticall, Iocodocians
(vaine and ) vse to doe, whose noses are like vn∣to Mount Aetna, their mouthes and lippes (as it were) th'out-brust of Pluto his hellish smoake, flying, and flashing about their faces, with euery Huffe, Snuffe, and Puffe, spitting out their owne folly, to the great of∣fence of many. I dare not theere presume in this point to limite vnto Tabacco and Tabacconists, any exact Do∣ses in weight, or measure▪ but will remitte that matter to Discretion, to be receiued, by graine, scruple, or dragme, according to the list and capacitie of the ta∣ker. And now forward to my purpose. Ast, pugnare metus, retrò pudor ire vetabat: Well: Etsi omnia non possumus omnes: Tamen, Est quódam prodire tenus: si non datur vltra. Skill Reading. Reasoning. Praesuppose some small reading in me to haue pre∣ceeded. Then my reason shalbe drawne and deriued from the Substance of Tabacco. Qualitie of Tabacco. Condition of Tabacco. First, Whose Essence and Substance, cannot rightly be termed bad or base, but ought truly to be accoun∣ted pure and precious, by vertue whereof, in marue∣lous operation, mens bodies and members are deli∣uered
and cleered from innumerable, and those also most grosse, taedious, dolefull, and desperate mala∣dies. Contraria contrariis curantur. Second, Whose Qualities of high degree, scilicet, in exiccando celebritèr, & in aperiendo celeritèr, do migh∣tily and mainely worke change, and reforme all the enormities in our queasie bodies; The head, from de∣stillation: The leights, from straightnesse: The li∣uer, from obstruction; and consequently, all other our principall partes, from infinite diseases, and grie∣uances, vt nihil supra: All which effectes, do suffici∣ently argue, and declare the admirable and powerful force and dignitie thereof. Third, Whose Condition and propertie (doubtles) most milde and comfortable to mee, dooth leaue be∣hinde it, in my mouth (taken by pipe) a certaine sweet fragrant moisture, Referens mellitum quid, not much vnlike the pleasant deaw on oken leaues, in prime of Maie, wherevppon Hony-bees, at that time, do most commonly and comfortably feede. Then, to pretend, that by smell and taste, our sense is offended by Heate and drieth thereof, Radicall moi∣sture is exhausted, concoction hindred, propagation decayed, poyson and venome into mens bodies in∣funded, and melancholy bredde and encreased, are meere nugations, and yet grieuous imputations, and great indignities offered to that innocent Tabacco, ad∣mitte such accidents doe happen by the immoderate and inconsiderate vsage thereof: Vitium est hominis, non artis nec herbae.
For, whosoeuer list without preiudice, to make faithfull triall thereof, as my selfe haue doone, shall easily finde, feele, and confesse, without impeach∣ment, that it is: Absque omnifarragine. In Essence, commendable. Smell, comfortable. Taste, tolerable. Vertue, forcible. Effect, most admirable. Ecquid amplius? So that euery discreet person without al suspition of Deleterion, Anodinon, Stupifaciendi, Inficiendi, Horroris, aut Offendiculi, And euery other considerate man and woman, &c. of Highest degree. Finest graine. Sharpest sence May safely without danger, I say (not feede,), smell, touch, taste, and take, of our renowned Tabacco, without annoy: By it, (Certes,) all superfluous redoundant moisture in mens members, are wonderfully drained, & drenched, obstructions reserate and opened, paines, surrances, and grieuances, maruellously appeazed; me∣lancholie, and such mad humors, neuer a deale the more, supra modum, augmented.
I am neither Pary the French conceited, (as a bog∣gle or a Bug-beare) Antipatheticè, to feare & abhorre it, neither yet: D. T. English Metamorphosed, Sym∣patheticè, to feele and confesse so much defect, by one daies want of it. But Vt ingenuè referam: Nec inficias e∣am; Ego sum, qui sum, , Tamaegomet sum rigidus inclytae Tabaccae, satelles, vt existimem herculè ac credam, (me Iu∣dice) there is not any one simple vnder the Sunne, wor∣thie to stand in Moode and Figure, with this our no∣ble Tabacco, neither yet, in any paralell, or degree of comparison, (yeelde all due complements vnto it;) neither is there any other hearbe else (in my conceit) in Orbe, aut per Orbem, (all Circumstances obserued) whereof, & by which, discreet Physitions may make to themselues, more, or the like gaine and commodity be it by fume, infusion, syrup, electuarie, or by way of extraction, Experto crede Roberto. And yet by your leaue (ne nimium efferam) semper excipio Platonem, I do confesse without disparagement vnto Tabacco. That there is one transcendent medicine, Supra Solem, most Soueraigne in maiestie, and powerfarre surpassing this our Tabacco, and all hearbs else: Whose praise is in the Prophet saying: Neque herba neque malagina, sed sermo tuus Domine, sanat vniuersa. Sit nomen Domini benedictum.
And thus farre concerning the word Skill, founded and formed vpon Reading and Reasoning. Square Demonstration. Practise. Proofe. Square consisteth vpon foure Mathematicall dimentions. Motiue. Affect. Effect. Rule. Motiue, Containeth th'opportunitie, occasioning me, to admit it. Affect, Declareth th'infirmities which forced me to frequent it. Effect, Sheweth th'alterations, strangely performed in me by it. Rule, Setteth downe the maner and fashion, how rightly to vse it. By the first you see, how dainty I made it be∣fore I durst receiue it.
By the next, you may learne in what plight I was, before I did practise it. By the third, you may vnderstand, how much I am amended, by operation of it. By the last, you may know, how safely and fruit fully to handle it. And heere by the way, omnis facessat in aliis inuidentia. meipso arrogantia. Enimuero, Etsi, vnica hyrundo, non faciat ver; Neque, exparticulari: sit sylogizari: Tamen. One particular true strange experiment, well tried in my selfe. Instar multorum esto. Giue credite, as shall seeme to your selues best, and make triall, as you shall finde cause and occasi∣on. Now, whether Tabacco do purge, Electiuè, aut pro∣miscuè, one, or more humors at once, by chance, or by choise, per se, aut per accidēs, Qualitate manifesta, aut Vir∣tute occulta, à contrarictate substantiae, aut similitudine na∣turae:
These Questions I leaue, as not pertinent ad no∣strum institutum, vnto the discusse and determination of greater Clerkes. And moreouer, why some men do affect it, Per sympathian, (vt qui pica laborant) louing∣ly, and longingly: And why others contrarily, do flie, hate, & abhorre it, per antipathian, as the Bird the Kite, the Mouse the Cat, the Beare the Ape, the Lion the Mouse, the Horse and the Bull, Ape and Cat, Pathetically, and maliciously, I wot not. But, my selfe (I say) without all vagrant affection, do embrace, praise, and recommend it, for that thereby, chiefely, taken by pipe, I haue receiued exopted health, rarely, speedily, and per∣fectly. Thus to the Square, and first to my Motiue, and other re∣portes. Motiue. THe first sunday, after Twelftide, now foure yeares past, a certain godly graue preacher, being at my house, and making him readie, that morning, I fortuned to salute him in his chamber, taking a Pipe of Tabacco: who eftsoones, earnestly intreated, and at length with much adoe, enduced mee, to harpe vppon his instrument, Ad vnum vsque aut alterum simplicem haustum, wherevnto I assented, but disdain∣fully.
Againe after a pause, resorting to his Lodging, I hapt to finde him doing as before: Then hee de∣maunded mine opinion of Tabacco. And hearing of no dislike from me, he importuned me most instantly, to trie some few sippes more, wherevnto I yeelded, yet very scornefully. Affirming withall neuerthe∣lesse, that it seemed tollerable, and might prooue no lesse profitable (doubtlesse) not onely, to many others, but to my selfe especially, (circumstan∣ces considered,) I being a Man, leane, feeble, full of defects, and infirmities, full of sleame and rheu∣maticke humidities; if euer it prooued profitable for any manne vnder the Cope of Heauen, compar∣ing my selfe, in that daintie conceit, vnto a Madde Dogge, (and no better,) whose propertie is, to shunne, flee, and refuse, the fresh running waters, his principall and chiefest comfort. Then, after Seruice and Ser∣mon done; at dinner time, in company of diuers good merry Gentlemen (my friends,) I hapt to forget my selfe a little, in eating and drinking, somewhat beyond my wonted measure and manner, expecting nothing more consequent, then due deserued torments, for that same daies delight. And at supper, finding my self vnfit, I did of purpose abstaine, (for it needed not) but yet I conueighed ouer frankely, and freely, a good cup of sacke. Since which my first acceptance of Ta∣bacco, vntill this instant, I protest I neuer felt any more of any my former pitiful and painful greeuances; And those manifold and dolorous of me, 50. yeeres space, & aboue, discomfortably endured. And for further te∣stimony
hereof, How, in the state of my body, it fared with me many yeeres at Oxford, in the time of Maister D. Marbecke, where I continued Multum diúque Valetudinarius, I appeale to his report and others that do know, Quod non mentiar. Thus, and by these motiues, became I dealer with Ta∣bacco. Affectus. ABout twelue yeeres of age, by meanes of a moist shirt, I was so dainly cast in Ptysin, , the ptisicke and straightnesse of breath, with a continuall destillation from head to lunges, encreasing daily, and hourely more and more: till, in the ende, I was constrained to change my studie, from Diuinitie, vnto Phisicke, for healths sake; yet for all mine owne painefull labours, and all other friendly helpes, euen of the best learned Phisitians in our time, I preuailed not, to any purpose, or effect: So that, I became dwined & pined, & finally, brought to such a pickle of leanenes, and feeblenes, throughout all the region and limmes of my body, that I could not ride foure mile end-way at any time, but incontinent, I became bed-rid for six daies space after; insomuch, as I was scarce able to walke ouer mine owne chamber, without some rest, or staie. Neither could I receiue any drinke at any
hand, were it Beere, or VVine, hote or cold, neither yet the very common aire at my mouth, but that immedi∣ately, I should be forced to cough, reach, striue, straine, and toile my selfe laboriously, and most lamentably, Ad vsque sudorem & dolorem non vulgares. Moreouer my meat, by the space of xiiij. yeares next before the taking of Tabacco, commonlie neuer staied with mee much aboue one quarter of an houre, or an half houre at the most, (and yet I durst not forbeare my meate vt∣terly, lest I should haue disused Nature:) And then, af∣ter a little slumber, at my first lying downe, I reiected my supper continually: Insomuch as, I was forced eue∣ry night in bed, to receiue a draught of warme posset Ale, for to loose it with ease. Then moreouer, after my first sleep, about 12. or one at midnight, lo, I did vsual∣ly cough, with euery drop of sweate vpon my bodie like a Bell, that euen fountaines of blood would spring from my nose, and streames, or streikes of blood like∣wise issued from my lungs Empyematicè, in spitting & streyning, together with a shortnes of breath, sorenesse of breast, and a generall faintnes throughout all the chest, and region of my bodie and limmes, in such sort, that I did seeme vnto most men, destitute, and de∣priued of all earthly comfort. And, as I may speake it, to be Nec animans, nec amans, both liuelesse and loue∣les, fearing and suspecting, not alitle, for diuerse yeares together, the vtter ruine and decay of all the seruicea∣ble partes of office within mee; the head, lungs, li∣uer, and such other praedominant members. Ne∣uerthelesse (vt verum fatear) since the first taste of
Tabacco, all those formerly most pittifull and paine∣full affections, are vanished and departed from mee, miraculously, cleerely, and vtterly, I praise God: So that from the first day I receiued this noble Tabacco, vntill this houre, I neuer felt any of those former grie∣uances any more, neither yet shall heereafter, I trust, through good guidance. Yea further, will you haue me to tell you ingenuè, merily, and vnfainedly, a truth? Lend mee your eares alittle while, not long. The first night that I tooke Tabacco, being demaunded vppon my waking, how I felt my selfe; I did directly aun∣swer: That me thought my breast was slitte, clouen, and diuided, (as it were) from throate to nauill, and I my selfe at large happily redeemed from captiuity to liberty, from sickenesse to health, from paines to de∣light, from continuall discouragement, to comfort and consolation: And so it seemes to mee still, God wottes, Wherefore, Lauda anima mea Dominum, and all that is within me, praise his holy name. Thus, and no otherwise, was I affected. Effectus. TAbacco, in my conceit, dooth, not onely open and dry, Ratione caliditatis & siccitatis, but also, suapte virtute, dooth purge and expell, quicquid
noxium, mightily and mainely. To giue you an in∣stance or example in my selfe; In processe of weekes, well I wot, it hath forced out of my braines, through the great middle Suture of my scull, at an emuncto∣rie, not much aboue the toppe of my eares, by times, more yellow, bitter, corrupt, choloricke moisture, I am sure, then three gill cuppes could containe, before it left that course of purging. This humour was the primarie and principall occasion (as I take it) of all my former inueterate fluxes and destillations, drop∣ping from the head downeward, infecting the leights, and forcing withal, intolerable sorenesse, ptisicke, and many other such inconueniences, of the like graine and grime, sustained of me, by the space of seauen and fiftie yeeres continuall, and more. Now all these accidents notwithstanding, (blessed be God for his mercy, in the meanes of mans health) euen since the very first assay of Tabacco: There hath beene, and yet is, quietnesse in my head, comfort in my stomacke, li∣berty in my lungs, strength and agility in my limbes, () perfection in my liuer, rest in my bones, and in vniuersa carne mea, sanitas. Finally, al the powers and faculties within me, be they Naturall, Vitall, or Ani∣mall, are so refreshed, and reuiued, that nowe beeing three score and nine yeeres of dayes compleate: my minde and body both, are made apt, nimble, and a∣ctiue (neuer better erst) for studie and trauell, fitting and conuenient. The Lord be praised. These, and no lesse were the effectes wrought vpon me by Tabacco.
Rule. AT the first brunt, sending to Durham, for some of this geere, to worke withall: two Tabacco pipes miscarried by the way, which might portend ali∣quod malum, (Nam in primo limite titubare omino∣sum:) Sending againe the second time, I spedde: Then Bonis auibus, I entertained Tabacco into request, and made triall of it actiuelie, as followeth. The first weeke, euery day once, I took one pipe only at a time; The second weeke, euery other day, one pipe onelie a day; The third weeke, euery third day, one pipe onlie a day: The fourth weeke, once only, and so forth, weekely, monthly, or quarterly, as occasion. The ma∣ner of my vsage is thus; being a man leane of consti∣tution and feeble, earely in the morning, being made ready, and my throate, lungs and stomach, scoured, by hauking, reaching, coughing, and spitting: Then I take my pipe of Tabacco, sitting close by a warme fire, the space of halfe an houre and more, vntill the giddi∣nesse and swimming in my head be past, and the me∣dicine also haue done it feate: then I vse to gargle my mouth with a cuppe of beere, well warmed with a toste. After that I receiue a good cuppe of Sacke. By meanes whereof, Tabacco, being, as it were, reuiued, nam vinum vires auget, beginnes afresh sensibly, to vi∣site and salute, head, stomacke, breast, fingers, and feet, for a prettie season: And when all those stormes, and stowers are ouer-shot, then doe I feele my selfe
light, and liuelie vnto any competent exercise, for∣bearing neuertheles, both meate, and common aire; keeping also within my chamber some two or three houres at the least, lest I should either hasten appetite too quickly, or else, catch some cold disorderly, all the pores of my body lying open & apt to harme, through the vehemeut operation and force of the foresaid Ta∣bacco. Now, if this be true, as true it is, (et ipse luce clari∣us) that it is so comfortable to choloricke, leane, and spinie men, much more of force must it needes be pro∣fitable for grosse, fat, and foggy bodies, repleat with hydropicall humours; so that consequently, I may con∣fidently inferre hereupon, that Tabacco, (good order obserued) is comfortable and commendable, for most men of any age, degree, constitution, or condition so∣euer; And thus did I vse, and yet by times do still vse Tabacco, with comfort and comoditie. Howbeit, of late, (not to dissemble,) hauing my whole bodie, ves∣sels, and frame therof, sufficiently reformed and clean∣sed, I do of purpose forbeare the frequent vse of it, lest I should seeme to haue forgotten what Galen sayed: scilicet, Sanas carnes habentes: facilè medicina soluuntur. And herevpon, whereas, before I did inferre, and a∣uerre, that Tabacco is commendable for most men of any age, degree, constitution, or condition soeuer: I would not be mistaken (for my meaning is, and so my
words import) chiefely men and women of riper age, in whom matter may appeare to worke vpon , a∣dultos ac prouectiores, and those either leane, full of hu∣morous superfluities accidental, or else, fat and foggie, hauing pleuthorica corpora, abounding with grosse mat∣ters, excrementitiall, apt to putrefaction: But for chill youths, and such other, hauing corpora mollia & carnem halienosam, ac spiritum locupletem innatum, , tender & healthfull, I take it not fit, by the sence alleadged. A∣pho: lib: 2. Apho: 36. Now you haue heard, and may conceiue, in what sorte I haue vnfolded and declared, pro posse, próque viribus, the true construction, and faithful interpreta∣tion of my first two capitall termes Skill and Square. And that geniculatìm in their subdiuision and mem∣bers Of Reading and Reasoning. Of Motiue: Affect: Effect: Rule. distinctly and cleerely. Wherein some men perhappes may suppose, that I haue satisfied, in some sorte, and fully accomplished mine intended purpose, in the setting forth of the E∣nargie, Vertue, and Valure of that worthy and twice re∣doubted Indian Tabacco: Yet neuerthelesse, vppon reuiew, and further contemplation, me seemes I haue
tript ouer, two of the most necessary reports, and repu∣tations belonging to Tabacco, vtpote Vse. Application. Whereof, the former I finde to be foure folde. For it is pro∣fitable to Reforme and rectifie what is amisse. Prouoke vomite vpward. Purge by siege, humors of any combina∣tion. Cure wounds of euery condition. Vses. First, Taken (by Pipe) in fume, to draine vp all su∣perfluous moisture, be it in ventriculo, hepate, cerebro, aut ipso etiam pulmone; or moreouer, to open and ease all the sluices, conduites, pipes, and passages, from parte to parte, in the whole frame and course of mans body, It is most soueraigne, and of singular operation. Secondly, Taken for Vomite, it is a present meane, vsed mausticè , being chewed vp and downe in the mouth, three or foure small peeces of Tabacco leafe at one time, one peece after another, vntill foure or fiue droppes thereof be drilled into the stomacke: Then, well I wot, there will be anone olde tumbling, heau∣ing, reaching, and flinging, whilest all matters offen∣siue be forced thence vpward: Albeit it will require your patience. Thirdly, Taken for Purge, a leafe stiept ouer night in a portion of white Wine or Rhenish, will giue a
mighty purge, deducing & deriuing in short processe, humors of any combination and excrements of euery condition, Per loca conferentia. Fourthly, Taken for Cure, the onely ashes thereof are profitable, and in most vse (no doubt) for greene wounds, vlcers, and olde sores of all sortes. These are the foure principall endes and vses of Tabacco. And, as the Vse, so is the Application of Tabacco. First, when you take it by Pipe, mine aduice is, that you put into your box of prepared powder, one grain at the least, of the oile of Anniseedes, it will giue your powder a maruellous grace, and comfortable, both to the smell, and taste, of the taker, not only pleasant and delectable, but also profitable and commendable, e∣specially to the daintier sort. Secondly, when you vse it for Vomite, doe not, in any case, abridge, or restraine, the violent operation thereof, by apposition of any dilatory mixture: But, suffer it to expresse it owne force in action, secundùm libitum suum, & vim innatam, for the more effectuall and speedier dispatch, of a surcharged stomacke, by reiectation. Thirdly, when you intend to Purge, omit not, for∣get not, it will be very expedient, and no lesse conue∣nient,
for you, and euery man of euery condition, the night before you take it, to infuse together with your Tabaccoes leafe in white wine, or other liquor, some prety portion of Synamon, Ginger, and Nutmegs brui∣sed, with two or three cheires of whole Mace: And (if you list) of Liquorice and Anniseedes likewise bruised, a small quantitie. These things are verè carminatiua, cordiall, & Alexipharmaca, and wil make your Tabac∣co to become medicamentum benedictum. Fourthly, When you apply it for Cure of wounds, you must remember to reserue the burnt ashes remai∣ning in your Tabaccoes pipe. Of the same, sprinckle into your greene wound, vlcer, or sore, and you shall see it performe strange and admirable effectes (as it were) vnum idémque, drying, cleansing, filling, and reforming the part and place affected, as shall apper∣taine. Many men doe diuersly report woonderfull ef∣fectes, in this behalfe, brought to passe, onely by the vertue and operation of Tabacco. And some pretty helpes (I confesse) at home, haue I also seene there∣by, to no small ease of diuerse, encouragement to o∣thers, and tending chiefly to the inestimable praise of God, the Author of all gnod: Wherefore I wil con∣clude with this Epiphonoema, Omnis spiritus laudet Dominum. Let euery thing that hath breath, praise the Lord.
THus much then, finally, and aphoristicè, for con∣clusion of mine owne experience and know∣ledge, in the triall of Tabaccoes virtue, not mind∣ing hereby, any way to offend, preiudice, or inter∣rupt my superiors; But rather algates, by all my best meanes, to forewarne, and exhort, all followers and fauorites of Tabacco, to remember, Ne quid nimis, and circumspectly to foresee, Ne quid temerè attentetur ali∣quando; and that due circumstances regarded, euery thing may rightly be ordered and marshalled, by skil∣full direction of the learned, lest happly, vnhappily, through mens rash and inconsiderate vsage thereof, they themselues (sua ipsorum culpa) catch Cop∣per for Coyne, and, insteade of vaine hoped for help, some due de∣serued harme. {inverted ⁂} FINIS
