8013 99847539 12576
❧ By the Queene. A Proclamation for maintenaunce of Tillage. THE Queenes Maiestie our Soueraigne Lady, callyng to her most gracious remembraunce, the good and profitable lawes and statutes made and set foorth in the tyme of her noble progenitours, for the mayn∣tenaunce of houses and tenementes of husbandry, and the encrease of Tillage, and for the mayntenaunce of hospitalitie in diuers of the late priories and monasteries, and agaynst the lettyng downe of townes, and the decay of houses of husbandry, and also agaynst the conuertyng of earable grounde from Tillage into pasture, as by the said lawes and sta∣tutes more at large doth and may appeare: And forasmuch as her Ma∣iestie is geuen to vnderstande, that notwithstandyng the saide good and profitable statutes and lawes, diuers and sundry of her subiectes in many shires of this realme, vpon a greedy and couetous minde, not hauyng regarde to obey the sayde lawes, haue and do dayly decay Townes and houses of husban∣drye and inclose their groundes, and conuert the same from tyllage into pasture, and kepe not such hos∣pitalitie as by the saide lawes they ought to do, to the great displeasure of almightie God, the prouoca∣tion of idlenesse, and destruction of her Maiesties people, wherby her realme is in some part weakened, and more is like, if speedy reformation be not had therein. The perill that may ensue many wayes ther∣by, her highnes entendeth to foresee, and to let the parties offendyng therein to vnderstande, that her Maiestie mindeth to haue speciall regarde therevnto. And yet doth neuerthelesse in the meane season by these presentes straightly charge and commaunde them, and euery of them that haue offended in any the premisses, that they do foorthwith refourme all such thynges, as they and euery of them haue done or suffered contrary to the sayde lawes and statutes, wherin yf her Maiestie shall perceaue they do neglect her commaundement therin, her highnesse intendeth foorthwith, and with all seueritie to pro∣ceede agaynst such offendours, and to see reformation of their offences, accordyng to the expresse wordes and true meanyng of her Maiesties lawes, without any further tolleration or remission. And for the better vnderstandyng of all such offendours, her highnesse pleasure is, that all her Iustices of assise, and Iustices of the peace, within the limittes of their Commissions, shall make diligent inquirie of the of∣ferences aforesayde, from tyme to tyme in all their assises and sessions: and shall further make speciall report to her highnesse, what they shall fynde of any such offendours in the premisses, or any part therof. Geuen at her Maiesties Pallaice of Westminster, the first day of March. 1568. in the .xi. yere of her highnesse most prosperous raigne. God saue the Queene. ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde, by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maiestie. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
