94 99836236 494
THE NATVRALL and Morall Historie of the East and West Indies. Intreating of the remarkeable things of Heaven, of the Elements, Mettalls, Plants and Beasts which are pro∣per to that Country: Together with the Manners, Ceremonies, Lawes, Governements, and Warres of the Indians. Written in Spanish by Ioseph Acosta, and translated into English by E. G LONDON Printed by Val: Sims for Edward Blount and William Aspley. 1604.
To the right Honorable Sir Robert Cicill Knight, Baron of Essingden, Vicount Cranborne, principall Secretary to his Maiestie, master of the Court of Wardes and Liveries, and one of his Highnesse most honourable Privie Counsell. RIght Honorable; If it ap∣peare presumption in me to shew my love, my du∣tie betraies me to it. The advantage I have gleaned from idle houres, in ex∣changing this Indian Hi∣story from Spanish to En∣glish, is commended to your Honors Patronage, whose first father Ioseph Acosta, hath with great observation made worthie the over-looking. A greater motive then that you are your selfe, needed not to excite me to this dedication. I beseech you my good Lord, take it into shelter, and receive that which is not, for that which I would it were. Let my insufficiencie be measured by my good will. So shall my poore abilities thrive vnder your in∣couragement, and happily leade me on to some stron∣ger vndertaking; wherein I shall bee bound to thanke you for mine owne paines, and for ever remaine Your Lordships most devoted E. G.
The Authors advertisement to the Reader. MANY have written sundry bookes and discourses of the New World at the West Indies, wherein they de∣scribe new and strange things disco∣vered in those partes, with the actes and adventures of the Spaniards, which have conquered and peopled those Countries. But hitherto I have not seene any other Author which treates of the causes and reasons of these novelties and wonders of nature, or that hath made any search thereof. Neither have I read any booke which maketh mention of the histories of the antient Indians, and naturall inhabitants of the New World. In truth these two things are difficult; The first being the works of Nature, contrarie to the antient and received Philosophy, as to shew that the region which they call the burning Zone, is very moist, and in many places very temperate, and that it raines there, whenas the Sunne is neerest, with such like things. For such as have written of the West Indies, have not made profession of so deepe Philosophie; yea, the greatest part of those Writers have had no knowledge thereof. The second thing it treats of, is, of the proper historie of the Indi∣ans, the which required much conference and travaile a∣mong
the Indians themselves: the which most of them that have treated of the Indies could not doe, either not vnder∣standing the language, or not curious in the search of their Antiquities: so as they have beene contented to handle those things which have beene most common and superficiall. De∣siring therefore to have some more particular knowledge thereof, I have beene carefull to learne from men of greatest experience and best seene in these matters, and to gather from their discourses and relations, what I have thought sit to give knowledge of the deedes and custome of these people. And for that which concernes the nature of those Countries, and their properties, I have learned it by the experience of many friends, and by my dilligence to search, discover, and conferre with men of iudgement and knowledge. In my opi∣nion there are many advertisements, which may serve and benefit better wits for the searching out of the truth, or to pro∣ceede farther, in finding that pleasing which is conteined heerein. So as although this new World be not new, but old, in respect of the much which hath beene written thereof; yet this historie may in some sort be hld for new; for it is partly historicall, and partly philosophicall, as well for that they are the workes of nature, as of free-will; which are the deedes and customes of men, the which hath caused mee to name it the Naturall and Morall Historie of the Indies. Containing these two things: In the first two bookes mention is made of that which concernes the heavens temperature, and habita∣tion of the world, which books I had first written in Latine, & now I have translated them into Spanish, vsing more the li∣berty of an author, then the strict bonds of a translator, to ap∣ply my self the better to those for whom it is written in the vul¦gar tong. In the two following books, is treated of that which concernes the Elements and naturall mixtures, as Mettalls, Plants, Beasts, and what else is remarkable at the Indies. The
rest of the bookes relate what I could certainely discover, and what I thought worthie memory of the Indians themselves, their Ceremonies, Customs, Governments, Wars, & Adven∣tures. In the same Historie shall be spoken (as I could learne and comprehend,) of the figures of the antient Indians, see∣ing they had no writing nor characters as we have, which is no small industry to have preserved their Antiquities, with∣out the vse of letters. To conclude, the scope of this worke is, that having knowledge of the workes of nature, which the wise Author of all nature made, we may praise and glorifie the high God, who is wonderfull in all things and all places. And having knowledge of the Indians customes, we may helpe them more easily to follow and persever in the high vocation of the Gospel; to the knowledge whereof, the Lord would draw this blinde nation in these latter daies. Besides al these things, every one may sucke out some profit for himselfe; for that the wise do alwaies draw forth some good out of the smalest sub∣iect, as we finde deepe Philosophie in the least and basest crea∣tures. I must onely advertise the Reader, that the two first bookes of this historie or discourse, were written in Peru, and the other five, since in Europe, dutie binding me to returne into these partes: so as some speake of matters of the Indies, as of things present, and others, as being absent. And therefore I have thought it good to advertise the Reader heereof, that this diversitie of speach may not be troublesome vnto him. Farewell.
A Table of the most remarkable things contained in this Naturall and Mo∣rall Historie of the Indies: A. Abundance of waters vnder the bur∣ning zone. folio 93 Absurditie of Platoes Atlantike Iland. 73 Abuse of the Spaniards at Peru taking winter for summer. 89 Acamapach first king of Mexico. 482 Accord betwixt the king of Mexico & his subiects before they attempted a warre. 532 Adlaguagi a kind of mummery of wo∣men. 367 Acts of Ferdinand Cortez. 574 Adimant makes a path in the Sea. 57 The Adamant impartes a vertue to yron to looke alwayes towards the north. 58 Vse of the Adamant to saile by not antient. 59 Adoration of the dead begunne and augmented. 340 Adultery punished with death. 469 Agilitie of monkies. 315 Aire how necessary for the life of man 114 The Aire stirred with the motion of the heauens vnder the Equinoctiall line, is sufficient to guide a ship. 137 Alcos little dogges, whereof the Indi∣ans are very carefull. 301 Amarro Ingua put to death by the Spa∣niards in Cusco. 481 Amber a kinde of physicall and sweet gumme. 287 Almonds growing in Cocos. 281 Almonds of Chacapoias helde for the rarest fruit in the world. ibid. The Auntients could not make a de∣termind voyage without the Com∣passe. 57 Th'Antients went only with oares. 60 Antient Doctors more studious of the Scriptures than of Philosophie. Annona a fruit called by the Spaniards Almond butter, by reason of some resemblance. 278 Apopanaca the overseer of the Mona∣steries of women. 367 Apachitas toppes of hilles that were worshipped. 540 Arches in buildings vnknowne to the Indians. 460 Aristotle not refuted by Lactantius as touching the place of the earth. 22 Armes of the Mexicans. 488 Army of the ayre foretelling a great ruine. 561 Arte of warre much honoured by the Mexicans. 488 Arte to know the Starres invented by the Phenicens. 54 Ashes issuing in great aboundance out of the Vulcans. 195 Advantage which the Christians had of the Indians to plant the faith
there. 389 S. Augustine doubts whether the hea∣ven invirons the earth of all parts 3 Attire for the head very divers in sun∣dry provinces at the Indies. 467 Austeritie practised by the Indians to keepe themselves chaste. 373 Axi a kinde of Indian pepper. 168 B. BAllance wherein the Divell made the Iapponois confes themselves. 401 Barkes at the Indies called Canoes. 68 Battell without bloudshed, made only for a ceremony at the yeelding of Tes∣cuco. 539 Balme of Palestina, and that of the In∣dis very different. 285 Bezars stone found in the stomacke of some beasts soveraigne against poi∣son, how it growes, and which are the most excellent. 323 Beasts carefully preserved by the In∣gus. 464 Beasts worshipped by the Indians, & why. 340 Beasts being venomous converted by divelish artes into good norishment 510 Beasts that are perfect cannot bee in∣gendred as those that are imperfect according to the order of nature. 65 Beasts of sundry sorts at the Indies that are not in Europe. 37 Birds remaine willingly in the water, and why. 305 Birds, some exceeding small, others wonderfull great. 309 Birds very profitable for the dung. 311 Bisexte vnknowne to the Indians. 437 Bochas and Suchs notable fishes in the Lake of Titicaa. 170 Bncos the divelles Ministers at the In∣dies. 370 Bridge of strawe very firme to passe o∣ver a swift streame. 93 Brises and lower winds are two gene∣rall names which comprehend the windes of either side. 132 Bodies being dead, wonderfully well preserved. 478 Burthen of the Indian sheepe, and what iournies they make so laden. 321 C CAcao a fruite much esteemed at the Indies, & serves them for mony. 271 Cacavi, bread made of a roote. 257 Calibasses, or Pompions at the Indies, and of their greatnesse. 264 Calculation of the Indians very witty and ready. 456 Camey the second moneth of the Indi∣ans. 412 Canes of sugar of great revenews. 298 Canopus a star seene at the new world. 16 Cap of Comorni, sometimes called the promontory of Cory. 37 Carthaginians did forbid the sayling to vnknowne lands, and why. 36 Care of the Mexicaines to teach their children their superstitious idola∣try. 486 Cattle in troupes without maisters in the Ilands of Cuba Iamaica, and o∣thers. 70 Cattle at the Indies killed onely for their hides. ibid. Caymans or Lizards like vnto Croco∣diles, whereof Pliie speakes. 165 Ceremony of the Mexicans in draw∣ing bloud from divers parts. 551 Ceremonies of the Indians in the bu∣riall of their dead. 348 Ceremonies at the sacrificing of men. 382 Chachalmua the chiefe priests and their attire at their sacrifices. ibid. Chasquis Indian posts that caried news to all places. 452
Chica a drinke very wholesome for the backe. 255 Chichimequas auntient Inhabitants of Nw Spaine, and of their barbarous life. 501 Chicocapote a fruit like vnto mermelade 278 Chille, a country of the same tempera∣ture with Spaine. 87 Chinchilles, small beasts that have ex∣quisite skinnes. 314 Chocholate, the Indians drinke, wherof they make great account. 271 Cinabrium, or vermilian, called by the Indians, Limpi. 238 Coca, a leafe which the Perusians vsed for money. 210 Coca, a small leafe whereof the Indians make great traffike: it doth incou∣rage and fortifie. 271 Cocas, Indian palmes, and of their rare properties. 280 Cochnille, a graine that growes vppon the Tunall trees. 275 Colleges ordained at Mexico to teach their young children to pronounce Orations. 447 Combate betwixt a Caymant and a Tyger. 166 Comedies very ordinary in China. 444 Combate betwixt an Indian and a Caymant. 167 Comets in the ayre moove from East to Weast. 137 Communion imitated by the slaves of Satan. 393 Comparison to prove the naturall ef∣fect of raine in the burning zone. 95 Crowne of the kings of Mexico like to that of the duke of Venice. 518 Crimes punished with death by the Indians. 469 Corriers at the Indies very swift being but footemen. 452 Coya the Inguas chiefe wife, whose son succeeded after the vncle. 455 Crosse, a notable starr at the new found world. 16 Crowning of the kings of Mexico, per∣fourmed with great solemnitie, and the shedding of much mans bloud. 541 Covetousnes of a certaine priest thin∣king to drawe gold out of a vulcan. 195 Councell of Lima dissolved the marri∣age betwixt brother and sister, and why. 471 Cotton growes vppon trees it serves to make linnen cloth. 276 Colde in the burning zone makes A∣ristotles opinion ridiculous. 101 Corage of men at the passage of Pon∣go. 176 The Continent of lands is ioyned in some part, or else it is very neere▪ 68 Before the Creation there was neither time nor place, a matter harde to i∣magine. 4 Crueltie of the Indians in their sacri∣fices. 382 Cruell ceremony to sprinckle the Em∣bassadours with bloud, thinking thereby to have a better answer. 571 Cu the great Temple of Mexico, and the singularities thereof. 361 Cugno, a kinde of bread at the Indies made of rootes. 186 Cuschargui, a dried flesh which the In∣dians vsed. 320 Cusco, the auntient habitation of the kings of Peru. 128 D DAies and nights equall al the yeere vnder the liquinoctiall. 83 Daies in summer very shorte at Peru. 103 Five Daies in the yeere superfluous, wherein the Indians did nothing. 434 Dancing and publike recreations ne∣cessary in every cōmon-weal. 492
Dauncing in Mexo, where the King himselfe dunced. 489 Dates, wilde bests almost like vnto moiles, and of their skinnes 313 Dluge pretended by the Indians, whereof there is some likelhood. 79 Dvision of the lands of Azcazalco, after the victory obtained by sco∣alt. 533 Discovery of the west Indies prophe∣cied by Senec. 38 Discovery of new lands, made more by tempest of weather than other∣wise. 62 Disseine of the Author. 82 The Divell jealous against God, and hates men mortally. 329 The Divell didde speake in the Indies Guacas or Oratories. 351 Difference of letters, pictures, & cha∣racters. 439 Difficultie to know whence the Indi∣ans come, for that they have vsed no letters. 79 Discourse vpon the discoverie of Ma∣gellan by Sarmiento. 154 Division of Peru into Lanos, Sierres, & Andes. 184 Division of the people. 456 Division of the Cittie of Mxico into foure quarters, made by the com∣maundement of their God. 512 Divinations practisd by the Indians, and how. 406 Divorces practised amongst the Mex∣icaines, and how. 409 Death the punishment of Virgins that were incontinent. 367 Death of Chimalpopoca the yoong king of Mexico, sline treacherously by the Tapanecan. 526 Death of Moesuma the lst king of Mexico. 576 Doctors of the holy church not to be reprooved, differing in opinion of Philosophie. 2 Dogges as dangerous as wolves. 301 Dogges daungerous in the Ilands of Cuba, Hispaniola, and others. 70 Drake an Englishman didde passe the straight of Magellan in our time, & others since. 154 Duckes in great aboundaunce in the Lake of Titicaca, and how they doe hunt them. 171 Drought followes not the neerenesse of the Sunne. 85 E. EAgle vppon a Tunall the Armes of Mexico, and why. 513 Earthquakes very strange, and the cause. 197 Earth, how it is sustained. 10 The Earth vnder the pole Antartike, is not all covered with waters. 18 The Earth in longitude is all of one temperature, but not in latitude. 29 The Earth with the water make one globe. ibid. Eclipse of the Moone a certain proofe of the roundnesse of the heavens. 6 Effectes naturall proceede from con∣trary causes. 96 Elements participate with the motion of the first moover. 138 Electours of the king of Mexico were commonly his kinsmen. 485 Election of the kings of Mexico, & the feastes at their instalment. ibid. Election of the first K of Mexico. 515 Entry of the Spaniards into new Spain in the yeere 1518. 558 Entrie of Cortez into Mexico. 574 Errour of imagination. 23 Esaies passage expounded by the ex∣emplification of the Gospel. 208 Emerauldes more esteemed in former time then now. 249 Exercises wherin they instructed their youth. 487 Explication of a passage of saint Paule against the roundnes of the earth. 14
Explication of the 110, Psalme vppon the same subiect. 15 F. FAmiliar reasons to teach an Indian, that the Sunne is no god. 42 Fasting of the Indians before the fea of Ita, not accompanying with their wives. 374 A Father loosing his children, was held for a great sinner, h would kil his childrē to save his own life. 399 Fertlitie vnfruitefull in the Ilandes of new Spain▪ 187 Feasts of Merchants made with many sportes. 424 Feast of the Idoll of Tlascalla. 355 Feasts for to have raine. 411 Feasts for every moneth. 412 Fre drawne out of two stickes rubbd one against another by the Indians. 119 Fire in hell different from ours. 195 Fire from heaven consumed for their sinnes. 63 Fish flying. 165 Fountaine casting vp hote water, the which turnes into a rocke. 173 Figge tree, whereof the one halfe car∣ries fruite at one season, the other at another. 297 loures of Europe grow best at the In∣dies. 283 loridians had no knowledge of golde. 207 Flowing and ebbing of the sea is no local motion, but an alteration and ferv of the waters. 162 Flowing and ebbing of the seas divers ibid. Fountaine of salt in Cusc. 174 Forrests wonderfull thicke at the In∣dies. 291 Forrests of orange trees at the Indies. 294 Forme of that which is discovered at Peru. 201 Frci Hnandes the Author of a rar booke of plants, roote, and physi∣call hearbes at the Idies. 90 Fruites of Europe much incrased a the Indies. 294 G. GArlicke much esteemed a th In∣die. 261 Gardin vppon the water in the midst of a Lake. 172 Gardins artificially made vppon the water t remove where they please. 519 Giant came in anient time to Peru. 62 Golde found in three sortes. 212 Gold of Caravana most famous at P∣ru. 214 Gold and silver esteemed throughout the whole world. 206 Golde & silver served the Indians but for ornament. 209 Gold why esteemd above other met∣talles. 212 Golde how refined into powlder. 214 Goomes, with physicall and odoif∣rous oyles with their names. 287 Gonzales Pziarre vanquished and de∣feated, his crueltie against the In∣dians. 475 Governors of provinces, how estbl∣shed by the Inguas. 455 Guacas or Sanctuaries very well main¦tained. 463 Guancos and Vicuna wilde goates. 70 Guayaquil an Indian oake, and verie sweete. 292 Guayavos an Indian fruite. 277 Guaynacapa, the great and valiant In∣gua, and his life, he was worshipped as a god in his life. 479 Guayras furnaces to refine gold. 233 Gospel preached to the Indians when their Empire was at the hghest, e∣ven a to the Romans. 583 H.
HAtunsqui Ayry, the six m∣neth of the Indians, which answe∣reth vnto Maie. 413 Harts of men pulld out and sacrificed: how that ceremony beganne. 509 Haire of the pries horribly long and annoynted with rozen. 403 Heaven is round, and turn vppon two Poles, prooved more by expe∣rience than demonstration. 5 Heaven no farther from the earth of the one side than of the other. 18 Hennes found at the Indies at the fst discovery, which they called Gual∣pa, and their egges Ponto. 306 Hercules Pillers the limites of the Ro∣man Empire, & of the old world. 27 Hipocrisie of Mtesuma last King of Mxico. 554 Historie of the Indies not to bee con∣temned, and why. 495 Historie of Mxico kept in the Libra∣rie of Vatican. 550 Historie of Mexico how framed. 446 Horses goodly and strong at the In∣dies. 301 Horse-shooes of silver for want of y∣on. 212 House admirably filled with all sortes of beasts like to another Noes Arke. 484 Humor of the Iewes contrary to that of the Indians. 76 I. IEalousie of the Indies one against an other for renowme of valour. 472 Idlenesse bannished by the Inguas as dangerous for the subiects. 457 Idoll carried by foure Priestes for a guide, whenas the Mexicaines did seek a new land like to the children of Israel. 504 Idolls of the kings Inguas reverenced as themselves. 356 Iland of Suatra now called Taproba∣a. 37 Iland tlnik of Pla a meere fabe 72 Iland of fagots made with exceeding labour to passe an army vppon the sea. 550 Ilands very farre from the firme land no inhabied. 9 Inmortalitie of the soule beleeved by the Indies. 347 Indies, what it signifieth, and what we vnderstand by that word. 47 Weast Indies, most popular governe∣ments, in the which there were but two kingdomes. 453 Indians not greatly desirous of silver. 76 Indians have lived in troups, as those doe of Florida, Brsill, and other pla∣ces. 80 Indians good swimmers. 168 Indians had no proper word to signi∣fie God. 334 The Indians know all Artes necessa∣rie for mans life, without any need one of another. 466 Infants sacrificed to the Sunne. 336 Inguas kings of Peru worshipped af∣ter their deaths. 344 The Inguas empery continued above 300. yeares. 471 Inguas married their sisters. 455 Inundation of Nile a naturall thing, though it seeme supernaturall. 88 Iustice, by whome executed in Mex∣ico. 486 Indian bookes how they can be made without letters. 440 Iustice severely executed by Motesu∣ma the last king of Mexico. 570 Integritie of women greatly honored by the Mexicaines. 409 Inventions of Iupanguy Ingua to de∣prive his father and brother of the kingdome. 476 L. LAke exceeding hote in the middest
of a colde land. 171 Lake of Mexico having two kindes of water. 172 Lakes on the tops of mountaines, and how they growe. 171 Lactanti laughes at the Perepatetiks touching the heaven. 2 Lactantius conuted touching the An∣tipodes. 21 Ladders of leather to come out of the mines. 230 Landes of excellent temperature not yet discovered. 190 Lawyers have erred. 432 Liberalitie of Autzol the eight king of Mexico. 551 Litters of massie golde. 212 Lions of Peru vnlike to them of Af∣ftrike. 70 the Indians hunt them. 303 M. MAlaca, formerly called, the golden Chrsonesus. 37 Mamacoas antient women, as it were mothers to the virgins secluded. 366 Mameys, a fruit like vnto peaches. 276 Manati a monstrous fish that feedes in the fields, it is like to flesh when ye eate it. 164 Mandarins Indian officers, how hard it is to bee capable of those offices. 440 Mangocapa the fit Ingua, and what they faine of him. 474 Maguey, a tree of woonders, and to what vse it serves. 273 Mandarin tongue is the writing of the Indians, and is done by characters. 441 Many rare things in nature, knowne more by chance thā by industry 63 Mans bloud drunke by the slave that should be sacrificed. 425 Marriage of the Indians how cele∣brated. 408 Marriage amongst the Indians defen∣ded onely in the first degree. 469 Marriage of the Inguas with their si∣sters vnlawful. 170 Marks of some navigations of the An∣tients. 61 Mattins at midnight practised by the Divells ministers. 365 Mays, Indian corne, howe they eate it, and make drinke thereof. 253 Mechoacanes enimes to the Mexicans, and why. 506 Men, how they might passe to the In∣dies. 51 and how they might peo∣ple it. 7 Men and women sacrificed at the death of the Inguas, to serve him in the other worlde. 346 Men made gods, and then sacrificed. 357 Men beeing sacrificed eaten by the Priests. 385 Mineralles imitate plants in their ma∣ner of growing. 203 Mines, some wandering, some fixt. 217 Mines in olde time very rich, yet no∣thing neere to them of Potozi. 224 Mines exceeding painefull. 228 Mines of quickesilver in Spaine. 238 Middle region of the ayre colde, and why. 108 Milles to grinde ettalls. 246 Mettall poore and rich what they be. 217 Mettall, the neerer that it is to the su∣perficies of th earth, the richer. 229 Mettalls why created. 205 Mettalles are no found but in barren grounds. 209 Mxi, chiefe of the people that came from Mexico from whom they took their name. 506 Mexico a Citty built in a Lake. 170 Mockery of the Mexicains against the Tlatelulcos afet they had vanqui∣shed them. 548 Moneth at the Indies of twenty daies 434
Morning most pleasant in Europe, and most troublesome in Peru. 113 Mulberie trees planted in new Spaine have greatly profited for silkworms 298 Muttons or sheepe of Peru serving or asss to carry their burthens, profi∣table above all other beasts. 319 N. NAvatalcas, people that reformed new Spaine. 498 Navigation at this day very easie. 56 Navigation of Salomon what it might be. 60 New Spaine what it is. 187 New world lying almost all vnder the burning zone. 82 Nights in summer very fresh at Peru in respect of Europe. 112 Nights of six months vnder the Pole. 29 Night, how it comes. 6 Nobilitie of Mexico murdered in dan∣cing by the Spaniardes. 576 Nostril of the kings of Mexico pierced to hang an emerald. 545 Nutts at the Indies vnpleasant called by them imprisoned. 280 O. OBiection against Aristol not re∣solved. 28 Occasion of warre betwixt the Tap∣necans and Mexicans. 526 Ocean at the Indies divided into the north and south seas. 207 Ointment which the Indians did vse, to make themselves fitte to speake with the Divell, the which made them cruell and without feare. 403 Ophir is at the east Indies. 41 Opinion of some that the earthly Pa∣radise is vnder the Equinoctill not without reson. 114 Orders of priests in Mexico and their ordinary offices. 365 Ords of Knghts in Mexico, and the markes they carried. 488 Oration of the Mexicains to the king of Culhuacan. 516 Oration that an old man made to A∣camaxtl first king of Mexico. 517 Oration of a Mexicaine knight, to re∣taine the people incensed for the murther of their king. 526 Oration of an olde Mexicaine for the election of a new king. 527 Oration of the K. of Tescuco, made to Moteçuma vpon his election. 555 P. PAchacamac the great Sanctuarie of the Indies. 334 Pacos, wilfull beasts, and how they be governed. 319 Pallaces of recreation and affliction. 563 Palisadoe horrible to beholde, all of dead mens heads. 362 Papas, rootes whereof some Indians make a bread called Cugno. 186 Papas a kinde of bread. 259 Papas in Mexico were the soveraigne priests of the Idols. 365 Paraguy a river in America which o∣verflowes like vnto Nile. 88 Passage of Pariacaca very daungerous by reason of the winde. 146 Passage of Pariacaca one of the high∣est partes of the earth. ibid. Pste of Mays, called by the Indians, the flesh of their god Vuziliputzl, which they eate. 393 Pastures at the Indies lie common, which makes flesh good cheap. 299 Paltas, a delicate fruite, and good for the stomacke. 277 Painting, the booke of fooles. 439 Penance inioyned by the Indian Con¦fessors. 401 Partriges none in Peru. 70 Pericolgero a very heavie beast. 314 Parrots flie by stockes like vnto Pige∣ons. 70
Pearles in olde time more esteemed than now. 251 Peru abounding in wine. 187 Peru abounds more in gold and silver then all the rest of the Indies. 207 Peru, what part of the world it is. 183 Peru, a name derived from a river of that country, not of Ophir, as some thinke. 42 Perusiens very carefull to preserve their History by tradition, without letters or characters. 449 Pleasant manner of fishing at the In∣dies. 168 Plots, why at this day they sit on the poope, and not on the prowe, as in olde time. 55 Phisitions in former times very cun∣ning at the Indies. 289 Pines, or pine apples at the Indies. 262 Pinchao, an idoll of the Sunne, & with what arte he was framed. 361 Pleasant act of a Portugall, whereby hee freed himselfe from sacrificing. 346 Plane brings forth fruit all the yeare. 267 Plane leafe fit to write on. 268 Planets moove not of themselves in a corruptible body. 7 Plants, why they profite more at the Indies than in Europe. 261 Plebeians excluded from the Kings presence, and from all office by Moteçuma. 557 Pliny died in too curious a search. 196 Pole at the south not marked by anie sixed starre. 16 Pongo the most daungerous passage in the worlde vppon the river of Ama∣zons. 176 Portugalles very expert in the Arte of navigation. 17 Potzi, a mountaine famous for the rich mines, and howe they were discovered. 219 Presages threatning the ruine of states not to be contemned as vain things 560 Priestes which every Indian Noble∣man had like vnto Almoners. 349 Priests of Idolles how they consulted with their gods. 360 Pretext of the Inguas to inlarge their dominions, was religion, which they held for the best. 472 Processions of the Indians. 394 Prodigious sights before the ruine of Mexico. 561 Profit which may be gathered by the reading of these excerable Indian superstitions. 428 Propertie most rare of the Adamant vnknowne to the Antents. 55 Province next to Mexico left vncon∣quered, to exercise their youth, and to take Captaines to sacrifice. 541 Ptolme and Avicen held the buning zone to be habitable. 102 Punas, a desart in Peru, where the aire killes both men and beasts. 149 Pyramide of fire appearing in the hea¦ven for a whole yeere, before the ruine of the Mexicain Empire. 561 Prte Ians country exceeding hot. 106 Q. QVantitie of golde which commeth yearely from the Indies into Spain 215 Quetzalcoalt the marchants god, and where he was worshipped. 354 Quppos bowes serving as registers for the remembring of that which pas∣sed in Peru. 449 Quicke-silver flies from all mettalles, except golde and silver. 234 Quicke-silver turnes into smoake, and againe into quickesilver. 235 Quickesilver heavier than anie other mettall. 236 Quickesilver how it is drawne out of the mines. 239
R. RAine caused by the heat of the bur∣ning zone. 89 Rayme the first month of the Indians, & it answ ers with December. 411 Our Reason ignorant even of natural things. 59 Regions very delightfull at the Indies. 114 Regions vnder the Equinoctiall verie temperate. 101 Religion served the Indians for a p∣text to make warre. 80 Remedy against the alteration which the winde causeth in Pariacaca. 147 Riches of some Ilands in new Spaine. 187 Riches incredible of the Perusiens, when they were taken by the Spa∣niards. 462 Rice very common at the Indies. 260 River of Amazons diversly called, it is termed the empresse of all rivers. 92 Rivers admirable vnder the burning zone. 93 River of Amazons three score leagues wide at the mouth. 92 River of Magdalene called the Geat river runnes farre into the sea and mingles not his water. ibid. Rivers, hlles, great stones, and toppes of mountaines worshipped by the Indian. 355 Rokes rsing in the middst of the sea and no botome to be sound about them. 202 Roses how they growe at the Indies. 283 Rounds of the heaven, and the mo∣en thereof vnknowne to some do∣ctors of the church. 2 Rootes worspt by the Indians. 341 Rooes very profitable at the Indies. ibidem A Rowle the make of the kings In∣guas, as heere the Spter and the Crowne. 297 Ruine of a great village full of sorce∣rers. 199 S. SAcrifices of men howe they were made. 383 Sacrifices diversly made by the Indi∣ans, and vpon divers occasions. 376 Sacrifices vsuall with the Indians in their necessities. 480 Sainos strange beasts to hunt, and how they may be slaine. 312 Salsepareille, good for the French dis∣ease. 174 Sciences knowne by the Chinois. 444 S. Croix of the Sierre a province of Char¦cas, how it was converted to the faith. 580 Sea held by the Antients vnnavigable beyond the straights of Gbraltar. 26 Seas, some hote, some cold. 111 Sea-water refresheth although it bee salt. 107 Silver, why esteemed above all other mettall next to gold. 216 Silver more esteemed in some places than gold. 217 Slver, how it is refined by fire, & how by quickesilver. 218 Silver of divers sortes. 232 Silver, how it is tried. 247 Soccabons artificially invented to draw foorth the mettall more easily. 229 The Sunne the nearer it is vnto vs the more it heates. 3 The Sun hath contrary effects with∣in the burning zone, and without the tropickes. 87 The Sunne by his great force causeth moisture vnder the Equinoctiall. 95 The Sunne worshipped commonly by the Indians. 335 A Sorceresse sister to the Idoll which built the towne of Malnalco, where there are none but sorcerers. 507 Spaniards borne at the Indies called
Crollos. 278 Spaniards held for gods. 69 Spaniards called by the Indians Vira∣chocas, children of God, and why. 480 Spanish ships esteemed by the Indians for rockes, and why. 69 The Spaniard one yeare with an o∣ther draws a million of silver from Potozi. 225 Springs of Nile sought for by Caesar. 30 Springs, some blew, others redde like bloud. 175 Snakes, the Armes of the kings of Pe∣ru. 338 Blacke Spots in the milken way at the south. 16 Starres, according to the Doctors of the Church moove of themselves. 2 Starres worshipped by the Indians for divers reasons. 336 Stones superstitiously offred at passa∣ges to have faire way. 341 Stones carved and cut like wood. 173 Stones, halfe golde, halfe stone. 212 Stones of a wonderfull greatnes arti∣ficially ioyned together by the In∣dians in their buildings without a∣ny morter. 459 Straight of Magellan discovered by a Portugall, and carrieth the same name. 152 Straight at the Articke Pole, which they imagine to be in Florida, not yet discovered. 157 Straight of Gibraltar called in olde time the Pllers of Hrcules. 151 Stuffes of three sortes made of wooll. 465 Suilles Indian nosegays, they love them greatly, and present them to their guests. 282 Supesttion vsed at the carrying of a streame through Mexico. 552 T. TAbacco, a plant vsed for a counter∣poison. 289 Tabos', according to the opinion of the Indians, the most auntient race of men. 79 Temperature quite contrary in lesse tha fiftie leagues. 183 Temple at Cusco like to the Pantheon at Rome. 359 Tescalipuca the god of Iubiles at Mexi∣co, and his ornaments. 353 Tharsis sometimes signifies the Criso∣lite or Iacinth, sometmes the Sea, which is of that colour, by the re∣verberation of the Sunne. 46 Tharsis in the Scripture is not Tarso a citty in Cilicia. 47 Tharsis and Ophir generall wordes in the Scripture. ibid. Tlasaltecas, the sixt generation of the Mavaalcas, they gave entrie to the Spaniardes. 501 Tlacaellc, the most valiant Captaine the Mexicaines had. 530 Thanksgiving after a victorie. 574 Tiburons, a very greedy fis. 165 Three kindes of beastes found at the Indies. 303 Three kinds of land at the Indies, and their qualities. 178 Three things ordinarily vsed in all the Indian ceremonies. 410 Three kinds of governement knowne at the Indies. 471 Tigres at Peru more cruell to the In∣dians than to the Spaniards. 70 Tigres may swimme seaven or eight leagues by sea. ibid. Tooth of a Giant of an exceeding greatnes. 501 Tree of a wonderfull greatnesse. 291 Titcaca a Lake of woonderfull great∣nesse. 169 The Trinitie imitated by the Divell, and worshpped by the Indians in three Images of the Sunne. 412 Tunall, a tree of a strange forme fit for
many vses. 274 V. VAlour of the Indians. 586 Vallies hotter than the mountains, and why. 108 Vallies the best habitations of Peru. 185 Varietie of temperature of lands lying vnder the Equinoctiall. 105 Vermllion and Quickesilver grow in the sme stone. 237 Victories of the Mexicans against the Tapenecans. 533 Vicugnes a kinde of wilde sheepe, the flesh is good for the paine in the ees. 316 Vines without fruit in new Spaine. 188 Vines in Peru and Chlle beare good wine. 296 Vines of the vallie of Ya, which doe growe and are never watered with any raine, and how. ibid Vines that carry grapes every moneth in the yeere. ibid. Viracoh, the name which the Indi∣ans gave to their supreme god, with others of great power. 333 Vuziliputzli the chiefe idoll of Mexico and his ornaments. 352 Vittells set vppon the tombes of dead men to feede them. 347 Voyce heard foretelling the ruine of Moteçuma. 565 Volcan of Guatmala more admirable than all the rest. 194 Volcans how entertained. 196 Voyage of Hannon the Carthaginan admirable in his time. 36 Vros bruish people which esteeme not themselves. 94 Vtilitie of all naturall histories. 117 Vnction of Vuzilovitli the second king of Mexico. 521 W. WAy by which the Spaniards go to the Indies, and their returne. 128 Waters of Guayaquil most soveraigne for the French disease. 174 Warres of the Mexicans most com∣monly to take prisoners. 483 Westerne windes hurtefull to silke∣wormes. 144 Westerne windes blowe not in the burning zone. 126 Whales how taken by the Indians, and how they eate them. 167 Windes very daungerous, which kill and preserve the dead bodies with∣out corruption. 147 Windes called Brises in the burning zone, which come from the east. 127 Windes, how many, and their names. 133 Windes of the land in the burning zone, blow rather by night than by day, and those of the sea contrary, and why. 142 Winde corrupts yron. 144 Windes that blowe southerly make the coast habitable. 125 One Winde hath diverse properties according to the place where it raignes, and the cause. 120 Winde doth cause strange diversities of temperature. 112 Wisedome of this world weake in di∣vine, yea in humane things. 31 Winter and summe, and the cause. 90 Woods rare and sweete at the Indies. 292 Words of a man which had his heart pulled out. 390 Writing of the Chinois was from the toppe downeward, and the Mexi∣cans from the foote vpward. 447 X. XAmabusis, pilgrimes forced to con∣fesse their sinnes vpon the toppe of a rocke. 400 Y. YCa and Arica, and their manner of
sayling in skinnes. 63 Year at the Indies divided into eigh∣teene moneths. 432 Youth very carefully instructed in Mexico. 489 Yeare at Peru approaching neerer to ours than that of Mexico. 437 Ytu a great feast at the Indies which they made in their necessitie. 416 Yupangu Ingua was in Peru like to an other Numa in Rome for the making of Lawes. 261 Z. ZEphiru a pleasant and wholesome winde. 126 Zone which they call burning, the Antients held inhabitable. 30 Burning zone in some partes tempe∣rate, in others colde, and in others hote. 101 Burning Zone peopled, and pleasaunt, contrary to the opinion of Philoso∣phers. 86 Burning Zone why temperate. 105 In the burning Zone they saile easily from east to weast, and not contra∣rie, and why. 132 In the burning Zone the neerenesse of the Sunne dooth not alwaies cause raine. 100 The end of the Table.
Errata. 111.22. for, Paraguen reade Paraguay. 120.30. for, River reade Region. 135.32. for, to reade in 141.28. for, the motion reade without any otion 148.33. for, inhabited reade not inhabited 164.17. for, greene reade great 198.23. for, hundred reade five hundred 213.21. for, Curuma reade Cucuma 229.17. for, to reade and 235.11. for, it reade that 241.8, for, it reade his 253.12, for, maces reade markes 274.8. for, little reade like 278.19. for, is no reade is a 351.25. for, many reade in many 368.2. for, possession reade profession 397.14. for, to the communion reade to the people in manner of a com∣munion 514.21. for partiall reade particular 324.32. for, convenient in a maner reade in a convenient manner. 335.3. for, of reade to 347.25. for, neither reade in their Gentle Reader, from the folio 225. line 14, 16, 19, 20. where you finde peeces reade pezoes till you come to folio 322. line 22.
THE FIRST BOOKE of the Naturall and Morall Historie of the East and West Indies. Of the opinions of some Authors, which supposed that the Heavens did not extend to the new-found world. The first Chapter. THE Ancients were so farre from conceypt, that this new-found world was peopled by any Na∣tion, that many of them could not imagine there was any land on that part: and (which is more worthie of admiration) some have flatly denyed, that the Heavens (which we now beholde) could extend thither. For although the greatest part, (yea, the most famous among the Phi∣losophers) have well knowne that the Heaven was round (as in effect it is) and by that meanes did com∣passe and comprehend within it self the whole earth: yet many, (yea, of the holy doctors of greatest au∣thoritie)
have disagreed in opinion vpon this point: supposing the frame of this vniversall world to bee fashioned like vnto a house: whereas the roofe that covers it, invirons onely the vpper part, and not the rest: inferring by their reasons, that the earth should else hang in the middest of the ayre, the which see∣med vnto them voyd of sense. For as we see in every building, the ground-worke and foundation on the one side, and the cover opposite vnto it: even so in this great building of the world, the Heaven should remaine above on the one part, and the earth vnder it. The glorious Chrysostome, (a man better seene in the studie of holy Scriptures, then in the knowledge of Philosophie) seemes to be of this opinion, when in his Commentaries vpon the Epistle to the He∣brewes, he doth laugh at those,Chrysost. homil. 14 & 17. in e∣pist and Hebre. which hold the hea∣vens to be round. And it seemes, the holy Scripture doth inferre as much; terming the Heavens a Taber∣nacle or Frame built by the hand of God. And hee passeth farther vpon this point, saying, that which mooves and goes,Chrys.hom. 6.13 in Gens. & hom. 12 ad pop. Antioch. is not the Heaven, but the Sunne, Moone and Starres which moove in the heaven, e∣ven as Sparrowes and other birds moove in the ayre: contrary to that, which the Philosophers hold, that they turne with the Heaven itselfe, as the armes of a wheele doe with the wheele.Theodore.Theodoret a very grave Authour, followes Chrysostome in this opinion, and Theophilus likewise, as hee is accustomed almost in all thinges.Theophil. in ca∣pitul. 8. ad He∣bre. But Lactantius Firmian, above all the rest, holding the same opinion,Lact. lib. 3.di∣vin. inst. ca. 24. doth mocke the Peripa∣tetickes and Academickes, which give the heaven a round forme, placing the earth in the middest there∣of: for that it seemeth ridiculous vnto him, that the
earth should hang in the ayre, as is before sayde. By which his opinion, hee is conformable vnto Epicurus, who holdeth, that on the other part of the earth, there is nothing but a Chaos and infinite gulph. And it see∣meth that S. Ierome draweth neere to this opinion,Iev. in epist. a Ephes.. 2. 4. wri∣ting vpon the Epistle to the Ephesians in these wordes. The naturall Philosopher by his contemplation pierceth to the height of heaven, and on the other part he findeth a great vast in the depth and bowels of the earth. Some likewise say that Procopius affirmes (the which I have not seene) vpon the booke of Genesis,Sixtu Senens. lib. 5. biblio. an∣not at. 3. that the opinion of Ari∣stotle, touching the forme and circular motion of the Heaven, is contrarie and repugnant to the holy Scrip∣tures. But whatsoever the Ancients say or holde tou∣ching this point, it must not trouble vs, for that it is wel knowne and verified, that they have not beene so stu∣dious in the knowledge and demonstrations of Philo∣sophie, beeing busied in other studies of farre greater importance. But that which is more to be admired, is, that S. Augustine himselfe,Aug. lib. 2. de Gen. ad lit. c. 9. so well seene in all naturall Sciences, yea, very learned in Astrologie and Physicke, remaynes yet still in doubt, not able to resolve, whether the Heaven did compasse in the earth on all parts.Id. Psal. 35. What care I (saith he) if we suppose the Heaven doth inviron the earth on all parts like vnto a bowle, beeing in the middest of the world, as a bottome is compassed with threed: or that we say it is not so, and that the Heaven covereth the earth of one part onely, as a great Basin that hangs over it. In the same place he seemeth to shew, (nay, hee speaketh plainely) that there is no certaine demonstration, to proove the figure of the world to be round, but onely by simple coniectures. In which places cited and others; they hold the circular motion of the Heaven very doubt∣full.
But wee ought not to take it offencively, nor esteeme lesse of the Doctors of the holy Church, if in some points of Philosophie and naturall knowledge, they have varied in opinion from that which is helde for good philosophie; seeing all their studie hath been to know, preach and serve the Creator of all things, wherein they have bin excellent, and having well im∣ployed their studies in causes of greater waight, it is a small matter in them, not to have knowen all particu∣larities concerning the creatures. But those vaine Phi∣losophers of our age, are much more to bee blamed, who having attayned to the knowledge of the being and order of the creatures, and of the course and mo∣tion of the Heavens, have not yet learned (wretched as they are) to knowe the Creator of all things, but busying themselves wholly in his workes, have not yet mounted by their imaginations to the knowledge of the Soveraigne Author thereof,Sapien. 13. Rom. 1. as the holy Scripture teacheth vs: or if they have knowne him, they have not served and glorified him, as they ought, blinded with their imaginations, whereof the Apostle doth accuse and blame them. That the Heaven is round on all parts, mooving in his course of it selfe. CHAP. 2. BVt comming to our subiect: there is no doubt, but the opinion which Aristotle and the other Peri∣pateticks held with the Stoicks, (that the figure of Heaven was round, and did moove circularly in his
course) is so perfectly true; as we which doe now live in Peru, see it visibly. Wherin experience should be of more force, then all Philosophicall demonstrations, being sufficient to proove that the Heaven is round, and comprehends and contaynes the earth within it of al parts. And to cleere any doubt that might grow, it sufficeth that I have seene in this our Hemisphere, that part of Heaven which turnes about this earth, the which was vnknowne to the Ancients: and have observed the two Poles, whereon the Heavens turne, as vpon their Axeltrees. I say, the Articke or North Pole, which those of Europe beholde, and the other Antarticke or Southerne Pole (whereof saint Au∣gustine is in doubt) the which we change and take for the North here at Peru,Aug. lib. 2. de Genes. ad lit. cap. 10. having passed the Equinocti∣all line. Finally, it sufficeth that I have sayled neere 70. degrees from North to South, that is, forty of the one side of the line, and 23. on the other, omitting at this present the testimony of others, which have say∣led much farther then my selfe, & in a greater height, comming neere 70. degrees towards the South. Who will not confesse, but the ship called the Victori (wor∣thie doubtlesse of eternall memorie) hath wonne the honor and praise to have best discovered and com∣passed the round earth, yea, that great Chaos, and infi∣dite Vast, which the ancient Philosophers affirmed to bee vnder, the earth, having compassed about the worlde, and circled the vastnesse of the great Oceans. Who is hee then, that will not confesse by this Navi∣gation, but the whole earth (although it were bigger then it is described) is subiect to the feet of man, se∣ing he may measure it? Thus, without doubt the Hea∣ven is of a round and perfect figure; and the earth
likewise imbracing and ioyning with the water, makes one globe or round bowle framed of these two ele∣ments, having their bounds & limits within their own roundnes & greatnes. The which may be sufficiently proved by reasons of Philosophie and Astrologie, lea∣ving al subtil definitions commonly obiected. That, to the most perfect body, (which is the Heaven) we must give the most perfect figure, which without doubt is round: whose circular motion could not be firme nor equall in it selfe, if it had any corner or nooke of any side, or if it were crooked, (as of necessitie it must be) if the Sun, Moone & stars, made not their course about the whole world. But leaving all these reasons, it seemes that the Moone is sufficient in this case, as a faithfull witnesse of the Heaven it selfe, seeing that her Eclypse happens, but when as the roundnesse of the earth opposeth it selfe diametrally betwixt her and the Sunne, and by that meanes keepes the Sunne∣beames from shining on her. The which could not chance, if the earth were not in the midst of the world compassed in and invironed by the whole Heaven. Some haue doubted whether the light of the Moone were borrowed from the brightnes of the Sunne: but it is needlesse, seeing there can bee found no other cause of the Eclipses, full, and quarters of the Moone, but the communication of the beames which proceed from the Sunne.Aug. ep. 109. ad Ianuarium. cap. 4. In like sort if wee will carefully exa∣mine this matter, we shall finde that the darkenesse of the night proceedes from no other cause but from the shadow which the earth makes, not suffering the light of the sunne to passe to the other parte of the hea∣ven, where his beames shine not. If then it be so, that the sunne passeth no farther, neyther doth cast his
beames on the other part of the earth, but onely turnes about, and returnes to his setting, making a ridge vpon the earth by his turning, (the which he must of force confesse, that shall denie the roundnes of the heaven, seeing (according to their saying) the heaven as a ba∣sen doth onely couer the face of the earth,) it should then plainly follow, that wee could not obserue the difference betwixt the daies and nights, the which in some regions be short and long according to the sea∣sons, and in some are alwaies equall: the which S. Au∣gustine noteth in his bookes De Genes. ad litter am.August. lib. de Genes. ad litte∣ram. cap. 19. That we may easily comprehend the oppositions, conversi∣ons, elevations, descents, and all other aspects and dis∣positions of Planets and starres, when we shall vnder∣stand they move, and yet notwithstanding the hea∣ven remaines firme and immoveable. The which see∣meth to me easie to comprehend, and will be to all o∣thers, if it may be lawfull to imagine that which my fancy doth conceive: for if we suppose that every star and planet be a body of it selfe, & that it be led & gui∣ded by an Angell,Dan. 14. as Habacuc was carried into Babilon: who I pray you is so blind, but seeth that all the diverse aspects which we see appeare in planets & starres may proceede from the diuersity of motion which he that guides them doth voluntarily giue them. We cannot then with any reason affirme, but that this space & regi∣on by which they faine that stars do continually march and rowle, is elementarie and corruptible, seeing it di∣vides it selfe when they passe, the which vndoubtedly do not passe by any void place. If then the region where∣in the starres and planets move, be corruptible, the stars and planets of their owne motion should be, by rea∣son likewise corruptible, and so by consequence they
must alter, change, and be finally extinct: for naturally that which is conteined is no more durable then that which conteineth. And to say that the Celestiall bodies be corruptible, it agreeth not with the psalme, That God made them for euer:Psal. 148. And it is lesse conformable to the or∣der & preservation of this vniversall world. I say more∣over, to confirme this truth, that the heauens move, and in them the starres march in turning, the which we can∣not easily discerne with our eyes, seeing we see that not onely thestarres do moue, but also the regions & whle parts of heaven: I speake not onely of the shining and most rsplendent parts, as of that which we call Via lact∣ea, and the vulgar, S. Iaques way, but also of the darker and obscurer parts in heaven. For there we see really, as it were spots and darkenes, which are most apparent: the which I remember not to haue seene at any time in Eu∣rope, but at Peru, and in this other Hemisphere I haue of∣ten seene them very apparant. These spots are in colour and forme like vnto the Eclips of the Moone, and are like vnto it in blacknes and darkenes: they march, fixed to the same starres, alwaies of one forme and bignes, as we haue noted by infallible observation. It may be this will seeme strange to some, & they will demand whence these spots in heaven should grow? To the which I can∣not answere otherwise at this time, but (as the Philoso∣phers do affirme) that this Via lactea, or milken way, is compounded of the thickest parts of the heaven: and for this cause it receiues the greater light, and contrari∣wise there are other parts very thinne and transparent, the which receiuing lesse light seeme more blacke & ob∣scure. Whether this be the true reason or no, I dare not certenly affirme. Yet is it true, that according to the figure these spots have in heaven, they moue with the
same proportion with their starres without any separa∣tion: the which is a true, certaine, and often noted expe∣rience. It followeth then by all that we haue said, that the heaven containeth in it all the parts of the earth, cir∣cling continually about it, without any more doubt. How the holy Scripture teacheth vs that the earth is in middest of the world. CHAP. 3. ALthough it seemes to Procopius, Gaza, and to some others of his opinion, that it is repugnant to the holy Scripture to place the earth in the middest of the world, and to say that the heaven is round: yet in truth,Hest 13. Sap. 1.27.11.18. Psal. 91.7.23.39.97. Iob 37. Eccles. 1. this doctrine is not repugnant, but conformable to that which it doth teach vs. For laying aside the tearmes which the Scripture it selfe doth vse in many places, The roundnesse of the earth. And that which it sayeth in an other place that whatsoever is corporeall, is vnviro∣ned and compassed in by the heavens, and conteyned within the roundnes thereof: at the least thy cannot deny, but that place of Ecclesiastes is very plaine, where it is said, The Sunneriseth and sets, and returnes to the same place, and so begins to rise againe: he takes his course by the South, turning towards the North: this spirit marchth compassing about all thinges, and then returnes to the same place. In this place the paraphrase and exposition of Gregorie Neocesarien, or Nazianzene, sayeth, The Sunne hauing runne about the whole earth, returnes as it were tur∣ning to the same point. That which Solomon saveth, (being interpreted by Gregorie) could not be trve, if any part of
the earth were not invironed with the heaven. And so S. Ierome doth vnderstand it,Ierom. cap. 3. ad Ephes. writing vpon the Epistle to the Ephesians, in this sort, The most common opinion affirmes (agreeing with Ecclesiastes:) That the heaven is round, mooving circularly like vnto a bowle. And it is most certaine, that no round figure conteyneth in it, eyther longitude, latitude, heigth or depth, for that all parts are equall. Whereby it appeares, according to S. Ierome, That those which hold the heaven to be round, are not repugnant to the holy Scripture, but conformable to the same.Basil. hom. li. 1. Hexam. prope finem. And although that S. Basile especially, and S. Am∣brose (who doth vsually imitate him in his bookes cal∣led Hexameron) seeme somewhat doubtfull of this point: yet in the end they grant that the world is round. It is true that S. Ambrose doth not yeelde to this quint∣essence,Amb. lib. 10. Hexam cap. 6. which Aristotle attributes to the heavens: with∣out doubt it is a goodly thing to see with what a grace and excellent stile the holy Scripture treates of the sci∣tuation and firmenes of the earth, to breed in vs a won∣derfull admiration, and no lesse content to behold the vnspeakable power and wisedome of the Creator.Psal. 74. For that in one place, God himselfe saies, that it was hee which planted the pillers which support the earth: gi∣ving vs to vnderstand (as S. Ambrose doth well ex∣pound it) that the vnmeasurable weight of the whole earth is held vp by the hands of the divine power.Amb. 1. Hexa. The holy Scripture doth commonly so call them, and vseth this phrase, naming them the pillers of heaven and earth: not those of Atlas, as the Poets faine: but of the eternall word of God, who by his vertue supports both heaven and earth. Moreover, the holy Scripture in an other place teacheth, that the earth, or a great part thereof,Iob. 9 26. is ioyned to, and compassed in by the Ele∣ment
of water, speaking generally, that God placed the earth vpon the waters. And in another place,Heb. 1. that hee framed the roundnes of the earth vpon the Sea. And although S. Augustine doth not conclude vpon this text as a matter of faith, that the earth and the water make one globe in the midst of the world, pretending by this meanes to give another exposition to the words of the Psalme:Aug. in Ps. 13 yet notwithstanding it is most certaine, that by the words of the psalme we are given to vnder∣stand, that we haue no other reason to imagine any o∣ther ciment or vniting to the earth then the Element of water, the which although it be pliant and movea∣ble, yet doth it support and inviron this great masse of the earth, the which was wrought by the wisedome of that great Architect. They say, the earth is built vpon the waters, and vpon the sea: but contrariwise, the earth is rather vnder the waters: for according to common iudgement and imagination, that which is on the o∣ther part of the earth which we inhabite, seemes to be vnder the earth, and so by the same reason, the waters and sea, which doe compasse in the earth on the other part, should be vnderneath, and the earth aboue: yet the very truth is, that what is properly beneath, that is alwaies in the midst of the vniversall: but the holy scripture frames it selfe to our manner of conceiving and speaking. Some may demaund (seeing the earth is set vpon the waters, as the scripture sayeth,) whereon the waters are placed, or what support have they? And if the earth and the water make one round globe, how can all this monstrous masse be sustayned? To this the holy scripture answereth them in another place, giving vs greatest cause to admire the power of the Creator: and saith in these wordes:Iob. 26. The earth extends towards the
North vpon the Vast, and stayes hanging vpon nothing. The which in trueth is very well spoken, for that really it seemes this heape of earth and water is set vpon no∣thing, when we describe it in the middest of the ayre, as in trueth it is. But this wonder which men so much admire, God himselfe hath not layd open, demanding of the same Iob in these termes:Iob 38. Tell mee if thou canst, who hath layd the lyne or cast the lead for the building of the world, and with what morter the foundations have beene layed and ioyned. Finally, to make vs vnder∣stand the fashion and modell of this admirable frame of the world, the Prophet Dauid accustomed to sing and praise his divine works, saies very well in a Psalme made of this subiect,Psal. 103. in these wordes, Thou which hast built the earth vpon firmenes it selfe, that it cannot stagger nor move for ever and ever. Meaning to shew the cause why the earth set in the midst of the ayre, falleth not, nor stagge∣reth from place to place, for that by nature it hath sure foundations, layed by the most wise Creator, to the end it might sustaine it selfe without any other support. Mans imagination is therefore deceived in this place, seeking other foundations of the earth, and for want thereof, doth measure divine things, according to hu∣maine reason. So that we neede not to feare (how geat or heavy soever this masse of earth then hanging in the aire seemeth to be,) that it can fal or turne topsy tury, being assured vpon this point: for that the same Psalmist saieth, that it shall neuer be overthrowne. Truly Dauid with reason (after he had beheld and sung the wonder∣full workes of the Lord) doth not cease to praise him in the same,Psal. 103. saying, O how great & wonderfull are the workes of the Lord. It appeares that all spring from his know∣ledge. And in truth (if I shall freely speake my opinion
touching this point) often in my trauell passing the great gulfes of the Ocean, and marching by other re∣gions of so strange lands, staying to behold and con∣sider the greatnes of these workes of the Lord, I felt a wonderfull consolation of the soveraigne wisedome and greatnes of the Creator, who shines in his works: in comparison whereof, all the Pallaces, Castells, and princely buildings, together with all the inventions of man, seeme nothing, yea, are base and contemptible in respect thereof. O how often hath come into my minde and mouth that place of the Psalme, which sayeth thus, Great comfort hast thou given me O Lord by thy workes: I will not cease to reioyce in the contemplation of the workes of thy hands. Really and in truth, the workes of God haue (I know not what) secret & hidden grace and vertve: the which although they be often beheld, yet do they still cause a new taste and content: where∣as contrariwise, the workes of man, although they be built with exquisite art, yet often seene, they are no more esteemed, but breede a distaste: be they most pleasant Gardins, Pallaces, or stately Temples, be they Piramides of proud buildings, Pictures, carved images, or stones of rare worke and invention, or whatsoever else adorned with all the beauties possible: Yet is it most certen that viewing them twice or thrice with attenti∣on, the eye presently turnes away, being glutted with the sight thereof. But if you beholde the sea with atten∣tion, or some steepe mountaine, growing from a plaine to a strange heigth, or the fieldes clad in their naturall verdure with pleasant flowres, or the raging course of some river, beating continually against the rocks: final∣ly, what worke of nature soever, although it be often viewed, yet doth it still breede a new content and ne∣ver
gluttes the sight: the which is like vnto a stately bancket of the divine wisedom, which doth alwaies cause a new consideration without any lothing. Containing an answere to that which is obiected out of the holy Scripture, against the roundnes of the earth. CHAP. 4. REturning then to the figure of heaven, I know not out of what authoritie of the holy scripture they can prove that it is not round, nor his motion circular: neither do I see (whereas S. Paul calles the heaven a Ta∣bernacle, or a Tent which God made,Heb. 8. & not man:) how can it be applied to this purpose: for although he telleth vs that it was made by God, yet must we not therefore coniecture that the heaven covereth the earth like to a roofe on the one part only, neither that the heaven was framed without motion, as it seemes some would inferre. The Apostle in this place treated of the confor∣mity of the auncient Tabernacle of the lawe, saying therevpon, that the Tabernacle of the new law of grace, is heaven: into the which, the great Priest Iesus Christ, entred once by his bloud: and thereby is vnderstood, that there is as great preheminence of the new aboue the old, as there is difference betwixt the author of the new, which is God, and of the olde which was man: although it be most certen, that the olde was built by the wisedome of God, who instructed his workeman BeZeleell.Exo. 36. Neither must we imagine that these compari∣sons, parables, and allegories, doe in all thinges agree
with that wherevnto they are applyed, as the hap∣py Crysostome hath learnedly spoken vpon this point.Chrisost. in 20. cap. The other authoritie (which S. Augustine saies is allea∣ged of some to shew that the heaven is not round) is this, The heavens stretch forth like vnto a skin.Psal. 103. Whereby he concludes that it is not round, but flat on the vpper part, wherevnto the same Doctor doth answere verie well and familiarly, giuing vs to vnderstand that that place of the Psalme, is not properly to be vnderstood of the figure of heaven,Aug. 2. de Gen. ad litterans. ca. 9. but onely to shew with what facilitie God built so great a heaven, being no more painefull for him to build so huge a couer as the hea∣ven is, then to vnfould a double skin. Or else the Psal∣mist pretending to shew vs the great maiesty of God, to whome the heaven with his greatnes and beautie doth serve in like manner, as our tents and pavilions in the field. The which was well expressed by a Poet calling it, The Tent of the cleere heaven. In like sort, the place of Isaii, which sayeth, Heaven serves mee as a chaire, and the earth for a foote-stoole.Isaie. 66. But if wee follow the error of the Antromorphites, which did atribute cor∣porall members vnto God, according to his divinitie: we should haue occasion vppon this last text, to exa∣mine how it were possible the earth should be a foote-stoole to Gods feete, and how the same God could hold his feete of the one part and the other, and ma∣ny heads round about, seeing that hee is in all partes of the world, which were a vaine and ridiculous thing. Wee must therefore conclude, that in the holy scrip∣tures we ought not to follow the letter which killes,2. Cori. .2. but the spirit which quickneth, as saith S. Paul.
Of the fashion and forme of Heaven, at the new-found world. CHAP. 5. MAny in Europe demaund of what forme and fa∣shion Heaven is in the Southerne parts, for that there is no certaintie found in ancient bookes, who al∣though they graunt there is a Heaven on this other part of the world, yet come they not to any knowledge of the forme thereof, although in trueth they make men∣tion of a goodly great Starre seene in those partes,Plin. lib. 6. cp. 22. which they call Canopus. Those which of late dayes have sayled into these parts, have accustomed to write strange things of this heaven; that it is very bright, ha∣ving many goodly starres: and in effect, thinges which come farre, are commonly described with encrease. But it seemes contrary vnto me, holding it for certaine, that in our Region of the North, there is a greater nomber and bigger Starres; finding no starres in these partes, which exceed the Fisher or the Chariot in bignesse. It is true, that the Crosse in these partes is very fayre and pleasing to behold: wee call the Crosse, foure notable and apparant starres, which make the forme of a crosse, set equally and with proportion. The ignorant sup∣pose this Crosse to be the southerne Pole, for that they see the Navigators take their heigth thereby, as we are accustomed to doe by the North starre. But they are deceyved, and the reason, why Saylers doe it in this orte, is for that in the South parts there is no fixed starre that markes the Pole, as the North starre doth to our Pole. And therefore they take their heigth by the
starre at the foot of the Crosse, distant from the true and fixed Pole Antarticke thirtie degrees, as the North starre is distant from the Pole Articke three degrees or little more. And so it is more difficult to take the heigth in those parts, for that the sayd starre at the foote of the Crosse must bee right, the which chanceth but in one houre of the night; which is in divers seasons of the yeere in divers houres, and often times it appeareth not in the whole night, so as it is very difficult to take the heigth. And therefore the most expert Pilots regard not the Crosse, taking the heigth of the Sunne by the Astrolabe, by which they know in what height they are: wherein commonly the Portugals are more ex∣pert, as a Nation that hath more discourse in the Arte of Navigation then any other. There are also other starres in these southerne parts, which in some sort re∣semble those of the North. That which they call the Milken way, is larger and more resplendent in the south parts, appearing therein those admirable blacke spots,Via lactea. whereof wee have made mention. As for other parti∣cularities, let others speake of them with greater curio∣sitle, and let this which wee have sayde, suffice for this time. That there is Land and Seavader the two Poles. CHAP. 6. IIt is no smal labour to have vnfolded this doubt with this knowledge and resolution, that there is a Hea∣ven in these parts of the Indies, which doth cover them
as in Europe, Asia, and Arike. And this point ser∣veth often against many Spaniards, who beeing here, sigh for Spaine, having no discourse, but of their coun∣trie, They wonder, yea, they grow discontented with vs, imagining that we have forgotten & make small ac∣compt of our native soyle. To whom we answere, that the desire to returne into Spaine, doth nothing trouble vs, being as neere vnto Heaven at Peru, as in Spaine: as saint Ierome saith well, writing vnto Paulinus; That the gates of Heaven are as neere vnto Brittanie, as to Ierusa∣lem. But although the Heaven doth compasse in the world of all pats, yet must we not imagine that there is land necessarily on all parts of the world. For being so, that the two elements of earth and water make one globe or bowle, according to the opinion of the most renowmed ancient Authors, (as Plutarch testifieth) and as it is prooved by most certaine demonstrations,Plut.li.de pla∣ctis hil. cap. 9. & 1. wee may coniecture, that the sea doth occupie all this part, which is vnder the Antartike or southerne Pole, so as there should not remaine any place in these partes for the earth, the which saint Augustine doth very lear∣nedly hold against them that maintaine the Antipodes, saying, that although it bee prooved, and wee beleeve that the worlde is round like to a bowle, wee may not therefore inferre, that in this other part of the worlde, the earth is vncovered, and without water. Without doubt,Aug. lib. 16. de cvit. cap. 9. saint Augustine speakes well vpon this point; and as the contrary is not prooved, so doth it not fol∣low, that there is any land discovered at the Antarticke Pole. The which experience hath now plainely taught vs, for although the greatest part of the worlde vnder the Pole Antarticke be sea, yet is it not altogether, but there is likewise land, so as in all parts of the world, the
earth and water imbrace one another, which truely is a thing to make vs admire and glorifie the Arte of the soveraigne Creator. We know then by the holy Scrip∣ture, that in the beginning of the worlde,Ges. 1. the waters were gathered together in one place, so as the earth re∣mayned vncovered. Moreover, the same holy Writte doth teach vs, that these gatherings together of the wa∣ter were called Sea; and as there be many, so of necessi∣tie there must be many Seas. And this diversitie of seas is not onely in the Mediterranean Sea, whereas one is called Euxie, another the Caspian, an other the Erethe∣an or redde Sea, an other the Persian, an other of Italie, and so many others. But also in the great Ocean, which the holy Scripture doth vsually call a gulph: although really and in trueth it be but a Sea, yet in many and di∣vers manners: as in respect of Peru and all America, the one is called the North Sea, the other the South; and at the East Indies, the one is called the Indian sea, the other that of China. And I have observed, as well by my owne navigation, as by the relation of others, that the Sea is never divided from the Lande above a thousand Leagues. And although the great Ocean stret∣cheth farre, yet doth it never passe this measure. I will not for all this affirme that wee sayle not above a thou∣sand leagues in the Ocean, which were repugnant to trueth, being well knowne that the shippes of Portugal have sailed foure times as much, and more; and that the whole world may bee compassed about by sea, as wee have seene in these dayes, without any further doubt. But I say and affirme, that of that which is at this day discovered, there is no land distant from an other firme land, by direct line, or from some Islands neere vnto it above a thousand leagues, and so betwixt two firme
lands there is no greater distance of sea, accompting from the neerest parts of both the lands: for from the end of Europe or Affricke and their coastes, to the Cana∣ries, the Isles of Acores, Cape Verd and others in the like degree, are not above three hundred leagues, or five hundred from the Mayne land. From the saide I∣lands running along to the West Indies, there are scant nine hundred leagues, to the Ilands of saint Dominick, the Virgins, the Happy Ilandes and the rest; and the same Ilands runne along in order to the Ilandes of Bar∣lovent which are Cuba, Hispanola, and Boriquen; from the same Ilands vnto the Mayne land are scarce two or three hundred leagues, & in the neerest part farre lesse. The firme land runnes an infinite space▪ from TerraFlo∣rida to the land of Patagons, and on the other side of the South, from the Straight of Maggellan, to the Cape of Mendoce, there runnes a long Continent but not very large: for the largest is the Travers of Peru, which is distant from Brasil about a thousand leagues. In this South Sea, although they have not yet discovered the ende towards the West, yet of late they have found out the Ilands, which they call Salomon, the which are ma∣ny and great, distant from Peru about eyght hundred leagues. And for that wee finde by observation, that whereas there bee many and great Ilandes, so there is some firme Land not farre off, I my selfe with many o∣thers doe beleeve, that there is some firme land neere vnto the Ilands of Salomon, the which doth answere vn∣to our America on the West part, and possibly might runne by the heigth of the South, to the Straightes of Maggellan. Some hold, that Nova Guinea is firme Land, and some learned men describe it neere to the I∣lands of Salomon; so as it is likely, a good parte of the
world is not yet discovered, seeing at this day our men sayle in the South Sea vnto China and the Philippines: and wee say, that to go from Peru to those parts, they passe a greater Sea, then in going from Spaine to Peru. Moreover, wee know, that by that famous Straight of Maggellan these two Seas doe ioyne and continue one with an other (I say the South sea with that of the North) by that part of the Antarticke Pole, which is in fiftie one degrees of altitude. But it is a great que∣stion (wherein many have busied themselves) whe∣ther these two Seas ioyne together in the North part: but I have not heard, that any vnto this day, could at∣tayne vnto this point, but by certaine likelihoods and coniectures, some affirme, there is an other Straight vn∣der the North, opposite to that of Maggellan. But it sufficeth for our subiect, to knowe, that there is a firme Land on this Southerne part, as bigge as all Europe, Asiae and Affricke: that vnder both the Poles we finde both land and sea, one imbracing an other. Whereof the Ancients might stand in doubt, and contradict it for want of experience. To confute the opinion of Lactantius, who holdes there be no Antipodes. CHAP. 7. SEeing it is manifest, that there is firme land vpon the South part or Pole Antartike, wee must now see if it be inhabited:Lact. lib. 7. in. divin. cap. 23. the which hath bene a matter very disputable in former times. Lactantius Firmian, and S. Augustine mocke at such as hold there be any Anti∣podes,
(which is as much to say,Aug. lib. 16. de utate. c. .9. as men marching with their feete opposite to ours. But although these two authors agree in theis ieasts, yet doe they differ much in their reasons and opinions, as they were of very divers spirits and iudgements. Lactantius followes the vulgar, seeming ridiculous vnto him that the hea∣ven should be round, and that the earth should bee compassed in the midst thereof, like vnto a ball, where∣of he writes in these tearmes, What reason is there for some to affirme, that there are Antipodes, whose steppes are opposite to ours? Is it possible that any should bee so grosse and simple as to beleeve there were a people or nation marching with their fete vpwardes, and their heades downwardes, and that thinges which are placed heere of one sort, are in that other part hanging topsie turvie: that trees and corne growe downwardes, and that raine, snow, & haile, fall from the earth vpward. Then after some other discourse, the same Lactantius vseth these words, The imagination and conceit which some haue had, suppo∣sing the heaven to be round, hath bene the cause to in∣vent these Antipodes hanging in the aire. So as I knowe not what to say of such Philosophers, whoe having once erred, continue still obstinately in their opinions defending one another. But whatsoever he saieth, wee that live now at Peru, and inhabite that part of the world which is oposite to Asia and their Antipodes (as the Cosmographers do teach vs) finde not our selves to bee hanging in the aire, our heades down∣ward, and our feete on high. Truly it is strange to con∣sider, that the spirit and vnderstanding of man can∣not attaine vnto the trueth, without the vse of ima∣gination: and on the other part, it were impossible but he should erre and be deceived, if hee should wholy
forbeare it. We cannot comprehend the heaven to be round as it is, and the earth to bee in the middest of it, without imagination. But if this imagination were not controuled and reformed by reason, in the end we should bee deceiued; whereby we may certainely conclude, that in our soules there is a certaine light of heaven, whereby wee see and iudge of the interior formes which present themselves vnto vs, and by the same we alow of, or reiect that which imagination doth offer vnto vs. Hereby we see that the rationall soule is above all corporall powers: and as the force and etenall vigour of truth doth rule in the most eminent part of man: yea, we plainely see that this pure light is participant and proceedes from that first great light, that whoso knoweth not this, or doubteth thereof, we may well say that he is igmorant, or doubtes whe∣ther he be a man or no. So, if we shall demaund of our imagination what it thinkes of the roundnes of hea∣ven, without doubt she will answere vs as Lactantius doth, That if the heaven were round, the Sun & starres should fall, when as they move and change their pla∣ces, rising towards the South. Even so, if the earth did hang in the ayre, those which inhabite the other part, should go with their feete vpwards, and their heades downward, and the raine which falles from above, should mount vpward, with many other ridiculous deformities. But if we consult with the force of reason, she will make small accoumpt of all these vaine ima∣ginations, nor suffer vs to beleeve them no more than a foolish dreame. But Reason will answer with this her integritie and gravitie, that it were a very grosse er∣ror, to imagine the whole world to be like vnto a house, placing the earth for the foundation, and the heaven
for the covering. Moreover she will say, that as in all creatures the head is the highest part and most eleva∣ted, although all creatures have not heades placed in one, and the same sctuation, some being in the high∣est part, as man, some athwart, as sheepe, others in the middest, as spiders:) even so the heaven, in what part soeuer it be, remaines above, and the earth likewise in what part soever, remaines vnderneath. Our imaginati∣on therefore is grounded vpon time and place, the which she cannot comprehend nor conceive in gene∣rall, but in particular. It followeth, that when wee shall raise it to the consideration of things which ex∣ceede the time and place which are knowne vnto her, then presently she shrinkes and cannot subsist, if reason doth not support her. In like sort we see, vpon the dis∣course of the creation of the worlde, our imagina∣tion straies to seeeke out a time before the creation thereof, and to build the world: she discribes a place, but shee comes not to consider that the worlde might bee made after another fashion. Notwith∣standing, reason doth teach vs, that there was no time before there was a motion, whereof time is the measure, neyther was there any place before the vniversall, which comprehendes within it all place.Arist. 1. dd Cel. ca. 3. Wherein the excellent Philosopher Aristotle doth plainely satisfie (and in few wordes) that ar∣gument made against the place of the earth, hel∣ping himselfe with our vse of imagination, when hee saeth, and with trueth, That in the world the same place of the earth is in the midst and beneath, and the more a thing is in the middest, the more it is vnderneath. The which answer being produced by Lactantius Firmian, yet hee doth passe it over without confu∣tation,
by reason, saying that he cannot stay there∣on, and omitte the handling of other matters. The reason why S. Augustine denied the Antipodes. CHAP. 8. THe reason which moved S. Augustine to deny the Antipodes, was other then that formerly alleadged, being of a higher iudgement, for the reson before men∣tioned (that the Antipodes should go vpwards) is con∣futed by the same Doctor in his booke of sermons in these words, The ancients hold,Aug lib. Cate∣goriacum. c. 10. in tom 1. that the earth of all parts is beneath, and the heaven above, by reason whereof the Antipodes, which they say go opposite vnto vs, have like vnto vs the heaven above their heads. Seeing then S. Augustine hath confessed this to bee conformable to good Philosophie, what reason shall we say did move so learned and excellent a man to follow the contrary opinion? Doubtlesse he drew the motive and cause from the bowels of divinitie, whereby the holie Writ doth teach vs, that all mankinde doth come from the first man Adam: and to say that men could passe to that new world, crossing the great Ocean, were vncredible, and a meere lye. And in truth, if the successe an expe∣rience of what we have seene in these ages, had not satis∣fied vs in this point, we had yet held this reason to bee good. And although we know this reason neither to be pertinent nor true, yet will we make answere therevn∣to, shewing in what sort, and by what meanes, the first linage of men might passe thither, and howe and by what meanes they came to people and inhabite the
Indies. And for that wee meane heereafter to intreat briefly of this subiect, it shall be fit now to vnderstand what the holy Doctor Augustine disputes vppon this matter in his bookes of the cittie of God, It is no point that we ought to beleeve (as some affirme) that there are An∣tipodes,Lib. 16. cp. 9 that is to say, men which inhabite that other part of the earth, in whose region the Sunne riseth when it sets with vs, and that their steppes be opposite and contrarie to ours, seeing they affirme not this by any certaine revelation which they have, but onely by a Philosophicall discourse they make, whereby they conclude, that the earth being in the middest of the world, invironed of all parts and covered equallie with the heaven, of necestitie that must be in the lowest place which is in the midst of the world. Afterwardes hee con∣tinues in these words, The holie Scripture doth not erre, neither is deceived in anie sort: the truth whereof is well approved in that which it propoundeth of things which are passed, for as much as that which hath benefore-told, hath succeded in every point, as we see: And it is a thing voide of all sense, to say, that men could passe from this continent to the new found world & cut through the Vast Ocean, seeing it were impossible for men to passe into those parts any other way, being most certain that almen descēd from the first man. Wherein we see, that all the difficultie S. Augustine hath found, was nothing else but the incomparable greatnes of this vast Ocean. Gregorie Nazianzene was of the same opinion,Nazian. epist. 27. ad Pstu∣minum. assuring (as a matter without any doubt) that it was not possible to saile beyond the Straights of Gi∣braltar: and vpon this subiect he writes in an Epistle of his: I agree well with the saying of Pindarus, That past Cadiz, that Sea is not nauigable. And hee himselfe in the funerall Sermon he made for saint Basil saith: It was not tollerable for anie one sailing on the Sea, to passe the
Straight of Gibraltar. And it is true, that this place of Pindarus, where he saith, That it is not lawfull, neyther for wise men nor fooles, to know what is beyond the Straight of Gibraltar, hath beene taken for a Proverbe. Thus we see by the beginning of this Proverbe, how the Anci∣ents were obstinately setled in this opinion; as also by the bookes of Poets, Historiographers and ancient Cosmographers, that the end and bounds of the earth were set at Cadiz in Spaine: where they plant the pillars of Hercules: there they set the limits of the Romane Empire, and there they describe the boundes of the world. And not onely prophane writers speake in this sort, but also the holy Scripture, to apply it selfe to our phrase saith, That the edict of Augustus Caesa was pub∣lished, to the end that all the world should be taxed: and of Alexander the great, that he stretched forth his Empire even to the end and vttermost bounds of the earth. And in another place they say, that the Gospell did flourish and increase through the vniversall world. For the holy Scripture by an vsuall phrase, calleth all the worlde, that which is the greatest part thereof, and was at that time discovered and knowne. And the Ancients were ignorant, that the East Indian Sea, and that of the West were navigable, wherin they have generally agreed. By reason whereof, Plinie writes as a certaine trueth, that the seas which are be∣twixt two lands, takes from vs a iust moitie of the habi∣table earth. For saith he, we cannot passe thither, ney∣ther they come hither. Finally, Tullie, Macrobius, Pom∣ponius Mela, and the ancient Writers hold the same o∣pinion.
Of Aristotles opinion, touching the new Worlde, and what abused him to make him deny it. CHAP. 9. BEsides all the former reasons, there was yet an o∣ther, which mooved the Ancients to beleeve it to be impossible for men to passe to this new world: the which they held; for that besides the vastnesse of the great Ocean, the heate of that Region, which they call the burning Zone, was so excessive, as it would not suffer any man, how venturous or laborious so-ever, to passe by sea or land, from one Pole to an other. For al∣though these Philosophers have themselves affirmed, that the earth was round, (as in effect it is) and that vnder the 2. Poles there was habitable land; yet could they not conceyve, that the Region, containing all that lyeth betwixt the two Tropickes, (which is the greatest of the five Zones or Regions, by the which the Cosmographers and Astrologers divide the Worlde) might be inhabited by man. The reason they give to maintaine this Zone to be inhabitable, was, for the heat of the Sunne, which makes his course directly over this Region, and approcheth so neere, as it is set on fire, and so by consequence, causeth a want of waters and pa∣stures. Aristotle was of this opinion, who although he were a great Philosopher, yet was hee deceyved in this poynt: for the cleering whereof, it shall be good to observe his reasons, and to note wherein he hath dis∣coursed well,Arist. 2. Meta ap. 5. and wherein he hath erred. This Philo∣sopher makes a question of the Meridionall or Sou∣therne winde, whether wee should beleeve it takes his
beginning from the South, or from the other Pole contrary to the North, and writes in these termes. Rea∣son teacheth vs, that the latitude and largenesse of the habi∣table earth, hath her boundes and limits, and yet all this ha∣bitable earth cannot bee vnited and ioyned one to the other, by reason the middle Region is so intemperate. For it is cer∣taine, that in her longitude, which is from East to West, there is no immoderate cold nor heate, but in her latitude and heigth, which is from the Pole to the Equinoctiall Line. So as we may well passe the whole earth in her longitude, if the greatnesse of the Sea, which ioynes lands together, were no hinderance. Hitherto there is no contradicting of Ari∣stotle, who hath great reason to affirme, that the earth in her longitude, which is from East to West, runnes more equally, & is more proper for the life and habita∣tion of man, then in her latitude from North to South. The which is true, not onely for this foresaid reason of Aristotle, that there is alwayes one temperature of the Heavens from East to West, being equally distant both from the Northerne colde and the Southerne heate. But also for an other reason, for that travelling alwayes in longitude, we see the dayes and nights succed one another by course, the which falleth not out going in her latitude: for of necessitie wee must come to that Region vnder the Pole, whereas there is continuall night for sixe Moneths, a very inconvenient thing for the life of man. The Philosopher passeth on further, rprooving the Geographers, which described the earth in his time, and saith thus: Wee may discerne the trueth of that which I have sayd, by the passages which may be made by land, and the navigations by sea, for there is a great difference betwixt the longitude and the latitude, for the distance from the pillars of Hercules, at the Straight of
Gibraltar, vnto the East Indies, exceeds the proportion of above five to three, the passage which is from Ethiopia to the lake of Meotis in the farthest confines of Scythia, the which is confirmed by the account of iourneyes by land, & by sayling, as we do now know by experience: we have also know∣ledge of the habitable earth, even vnto those partes which are inhabitable. And truely in this point wee must par∣don Aristotle, seeing that in his time, they had not dis∣covered beyond the first Ethiopia, called the exterior, ioyning to Arabia and Affricke, the other Ethiopia being wholy vnknowne in his age: Yea, all that great Land, which we now call the Land of Prete Ian, ney∣ther had they any knowledge of the rest that lyes vn∣der the Equinoctiall, and runnes beyond the Tropicke of Capricorne, vnto the Cape of good Hope, so famous and well knowne by the navigation of Portugals; so as if wee measure the Land from this Cape vnto Scythia and Tartaria, there is no doubt, but this distance and latitude, will proove as great as the longitude, which is from Gibraltar vnto the East Indies. It is certaine, the Ancients had no knowledge of the springs of Nilus, nor of the ende of Ethiopia, and therefore Lucan re∣prooves the curiositie of Iulius Caesar, searching out the springs of Nilus in these verses; O Romaine what availes thee so much travell, Lucan. 10. Pharsal.In search of Niles first source thy selfe to gravell. And the same Poet, speaking to Nile sayth: Since thy first source is yet so vnrevealed, Nile, what thou art, is from the world concealed. But by the holy scripture we may conceive that this land is habitable: for if it were not, the Prophet So∣phonias would not say (speaking of these nations cal∣led to the Gospell,)Soph. .3. The children of my dispersed (so he
calleth the Apostles) shall bring me presents from beyond the bancks of Ethiopia. Yet (as I have said) there is reason to pardon the Philosopher, who beleeved the writers and Cosmographers of his time. Let vs continue and examine what followes of the same Aristotle: One part of the world (saith he) which lieth towards the North, be∣yond the temperate zone, is inhabitable for the exceeding cold: the other part vpon the South, is likewise inhabitable beyond the Tropicke for the extreame heate. But the partes of the world lying beyond India on the one side, and the pil∣lers of Hercules on the other, without doubt cannot bee ioy∣ned and continued one with the other: so as all the habita∣ble earth is not conteined in one continent, by reason of the sea which divides it. In this last point he speakes truth: then hee continues touching the other partes of the world, saying, It is necessarie the earth should have the same proportion with the Pole Antarticke, as this our part which is habitable hath with the North: and there is no doubt, but in that other world all things should be ordred as in ours, especially in the growing and order of the winds. And having alleaged other reasons to no purpose, he con∣cludes, saying, We must confesse of necessitie, that the Sou∣therne wind is that which blowes and comes from the bur∣ning zone, the which being so neere the sunne, wantes wa∣ter and pastures. This is Aristotles opinion, and in truth, mans coniecture can hardly passe any farther. So as I do often consider (with a Christian contemplation) how weake the Philosophie of the wise of this world hath beene in the search of divine things, seeing in humaine things (wherein they seeme so well read) they often erre. Aristotle holds, that the habitable earth of the Pole Antartike, in longitude from East to West is very great, and in latitude from the Pole Antartike
to the Equicticall is very sall  the which is so con∣trary to the truth, that in a maner all the habitation on this side the Pole Antartike is in latitude, (I meane from the Pole to the line) and in longitude from East to West it is so small, as the latitude exceedes in three partes or more. In his other opinion he affirme, that the middle region is inhabitable, being vnder the bur∣ning zone, burnt vp by the excessive heate caused by the nerenes of the sunne▪ and by this reason hath nei∣ther waters nor pastures. The which is in like sot con∣trary: for the greatest part of this new world, is scitu∣ated betwixt the two Tropickes vnder the burning zone, and yet is it found very well peopled and inha∣bited by men and other sortes of creaures, being a region of all the world the most fruitfull of waters and pastures, and very temperate in the greatest pat, which the will of God hath so appointed, to shew that even in naturall things he hath confounded the wisedome of this world▪ To conclude, wee must beleeve that the burning zone is well inhabited, although the aun∣cients have held it impossible. But the other zone or region, which lyeth betwixt the burning zone and that of the Pole Antartike, although it bee in a climate more commodious for the life of man, yet is it smally peopled and inhabited, seeing wee know no other dwelling in it but the Kingdome of Chile and a small portion ioyning to the Cape of good Hope. The rest is possessed by the Ocean. Although many be of opinion (the which I likewise hold) that there is much more land not yet discovered, the which should be firme land opposite to the Kingdome of Chile, which runnes beyond the circkle or Tropicke of capricorne. And if there be any: without doubt it is a land of an excel∣lent
temper, being in the midst of two extreames, and scituate in the same climate with the best regions in Europe. And in this regarde Aristotles coniecture was good. But speaking of what is discovered at this day in this zone, it is little in regard of the large countries in∣habited vnder the burning zone That Plinie, and the auncients, held the same opinion with Aristotle. CHAP. 10. THis opinion of Aristotles, hath bene held by Plinie, who saith thus,Plin. lib. . cap. 61. The temperature of the middle regi∣on of the world, where the sunne continually runnes his course, is scorched and burnt vp as with a neere fire. Ioy∣ning to the same region, there are two others of ey∣ther side, which (lying betwixt the heat of this bur∣ning zone & the cruell cold of the other two extreams,) are very temperate, and can have no communication one with another, by reason of the excessive heate of the heaven: which hath bene the opinion of the An∣cients, generally discribed by the Poet in these verses. Heavens circuit is of fiue zones, one whereof, Which still the sunne burnes, makes the earth below With flames intempestiue red hotte to glow. And the same Poet in another place. Heare this, if any harbour in that seate Whose quarter vnder that large zone is set Amidst foure others by the sunne enlightned. And another Poet speakes more plainely.
As many regions are there on the ground, As are in heaven, wherein fiue parts are found, Whereof the midst, through heate raisd from the rayes Of scorching sunne, inhabitable staies. The Auncients have grounded their generall opi∣nion vpon one reason, which seemed to them cer∣taine and not to be confuted: for finding that the more a region drew neere vnto the South, the hotter it was: the proofe whereof was so infallible in those regions, as by the same reason in Italie, Apulia is hot∣ter then Tuscane, and in Spaine Andelozia then Biscaie. A thing so apparent, that although there bee but eight degrees difference or lesse betwixt the one and the other, yet do wee finde the one extreame hotte, and the other very colde, whereby they did inferre, that the region so neere the South, having the sunne so directly for zenith, must of necessity bee continu∣ally scorched with heate. They did likewise see, that the divers seasons of the yeere, as the Spring, Summer, Autumne & Winter, were caused by the neerenes and distance of the sunne, finding also that although they were farre from the Tropicke, by which the sunne doth passe in summer, yet when it approched neere vnto them, at the same season they felt great heate. Whereby they did coniecture, that if they had had the sunne so neere vnto them as to go directly over their heads, the heate would have bene so insupportable, as it would burne and consume men with the vehemency thereof. The same reason moved the Auncients, to thinke that the middle region was not habitable, and therefore they called it the burning zone. And in truth, if visible experience did not vnfold this doubt, we should yet confesse, that this reason were very peremptorie
and Mathematicall: whereby we may see how weake our vnderstanding is, to comprehend these naturall things. But wee may say, it is fallen out to the great good and happines of our age, to have the knowledge of these two great wonders, that is, to know how ea∣sily we may saile through the great Ocean, and that vnder the burning zone men inioy a very temperate heaven, the which the Auncients could never beleeve. Of the last of these two wonders, touching the qualitie and habitation of the burning zone, by the grace of God we will discourse amply thereof in the next book. I thinke it therefore fit in this booke to treat of the maner of sailing through the Ocean, for that it imports vs much for the subiect of this worke. But before wee come to this point, it shall be good to shew what the Auncients thought of these new men, whome we call Indians. That in ancient Bookes we finde some knowledge of this newe world. CHAP. 11. LEt vs returne to that which hath beene formerly spoken. Wee must necessarily conclude, that the Ancients did beleeve, that eyther there were no men beyond the Tropicke of Cancer (as S. Augustine and Lactantius doe affirme) or if there were any,Plutarch. 3. de placitis phil. cap. 11. at the least they did not inhabite betwixt the two Tropicks, (as Aristotle and Plinie have maintained, and before them the Philosopher Parmenides) the contrarie whereof is before sufficiently prooved, both for the
one and the other. But many through curiositie may demaund, if the Ancients had no knowledge of this trueth, which to vs is now so apparent: seeing that in trueth it seemeth very strange, that this newe worlde which is so spacious as we doe visibly see it, should be hidden from the Ancients by so many ages. But some at this day, seeking to obscure the felicitie of this age, and the glory of our Nation, strive to proove, that the new found world was knowne to the Ancients. And in trueth wee cannot deny, but there was some appa∣rency. S. Ierome writing vpon the Epistle to the Ephesi∣ans, sayth,S Ierom. super ap. 1. ad Ephes. We seeke with reason what the Apostle meaneth in these wordes, where he saith: you have walked for a season according to the course of this world, whether he would have vs to vnderstand, that there is an other world, which neither is, nor depends of this world: but other worldes, whereof Clement writes in his Epistle, the Ocean and the worldes which are beyond the Ocean: These are the wordes of S. Ierome, but in trueth I cannot finde this Epistle of S.Clement cited by S.Ierome: yet I beleeve vndoubted∣ly, that S.Clement hath written it, seeing S.Ierome ma∣keth mention thereof. And with reason saint Clement saith, that beyond the Ocean there is an other worlde, yea, many worldes, as in trueth there is; seeing there is so great distance from one newe worlde to an other new world: (I meane from Peru and the West Indies, to China and the East Indies.) Moreover, Plinie, who hath beene so curious a searcher out of strange things, reportes in his naturall Historie, that Hannon a Cap∣taine of the Carthaginians, sayled through the Ocean, from the Straight of Gibraltar, coasting alongst the land,Pil. li. 2. c. 67. even vnto the confines of Arabia, and that hee left this his Navigation in writing. If it bee as Plinie
writes, it followes that Hannon sayled as farre as the Portugals do at this day, passing twice vnder the Equi∣noctiall: which is a fearefull thing. And the same Plinie reports of Cornelius Nepos a very grave Authour, who saith, that the same course hath beene sayled by an o∣ther man, called Eudaxius, but by contrary wayes: for this Eudaxius following the King of Latyres, passed by the redde sea into the Ocean; and turning backe, came to the Straight of Gibraltar, the which Cornelius Nepos affirmes to have happened in his time. And also other grave Authors do write, that a ship of Carthage driven by force of winde into the Ocean, came to a Land, which vntill then was vnknowne: and returning to Carthage, kindled a great desire in the Citizens to dis∣cover and people this land: the which the Senate per∣ceyving, did forbid this navigation by a rigorous de∣cree; fearing that with the desire of new lands, they should leave to love their owne Countrie. By all this wee may gather, that the Ancients had some know∣ledge of the new world: yet shall you hardly finde in the bookes of ancient Writers, any thing written of our America, and all the West Indies: but of the East Indies (I say) there is sufficient testimonie, not only of that on the other side, but also of that on this side, which then was farthest off; going thither by a con∣trary way to that at this day. Is it not easie to find Mo∣laco in ancient bookes, which they called the golden Chersonese: the Cape of Comori, which was called the Promontorie of Coci; & that great & famous Iland of Sumatra, so well knowne by the ancient name of Ta∣probana. What shall wee say of the two Ethiopiaes, the Brachmanes, and that great Land of the Chinaes? Who doubtes, but there was often mention made thereof in
ancient bookes? But of the West Indies, we find not in Plinie, that in this navigation they passed the Ilands of the Canaries,Plin. lib. 6. cap. 21. which he calleth Fortunate: the prin∣cipall whereof is sayd to be called Canarie, for the mul∣titude of dogs which are in it. But there is scarce any mention in ancient books of the voyages which are made at this day beyond the Canaries, by the Gulph which with reason they call great. Yet many hold o∣pinion, that Seneca the Tragedian did prophecie of the West Indies, in his Tragedie of Medea, which transla∣ted, saith thus; Senec. in Md. Act. 2. in sin.An age shall come, ere ages ende, Blessedly strange and strangely blest, When our Sea farre and neere or'prest, His shoare shall farther yet extend. Descryed then shall a large Land be, By this profound Seas navigation, An other World, an other Nation, All men shall then discovered see. Thule accounted heretofore The worldes extreme, the Northerne bound, Shall be when Southwest parts be found, A neerer Isle, a neighbour shoare. This Seneca reports in these verses; & we cannot wel deny, but (vnderstanding it litterally) it is very true: for if we reckon the many yeeres he speakes of, begin∣ning from the time of the Tragedian, it is above a thousand and foure hundred yeeres past: and if it were from the time of Medea, it is above two thousand yeeres, the which we see plainely now accomplished: seeing the passage of the Ocean so long time hidden, hath beene found out, and that they have discovered a great land and a new world inhabited, more spatious
then all the Continent of Europe and Asia. But therein may a question with reason be made, whether Seneca spake this by divination, or poetically and by chance. And to speake my opinion, I beleeve hee did divine, after the manner of wise men and well advised; for that in his time they vndertooke newe voyages and navigations by sea, hee knew well, like a Philosopher, that there was an other land contrary and opposite vn∣to vs, which they call Antichthon. And by this ground he might conceyve, that the industrie and courage of man might in the ende passe the Ocean, and discover new lands and another world, for that in Senecaes time, they had knowledge of the Voyage which Plinie spea∣keth of, whereby they passed the great Ocean. The which seemes to bee the motive of Senecaes prophecie, as he giveth vs to vnderstand by these former verses, af∣ter the which having described the carefull life of the Ancients, free from malice, he followeth thus: Now is it not as earst it was, For whether the Ocean will or nill, He traverst is by hardy will: Which pastime makes time so to passe. And a little after he saith thus: Now every boat dares swimme and sport On surging Seas, fearing no wracke: Passengers seeking what they lacke, So long a voyage thinke but short. Nothing is nowe more to discover, No place is now left to surprise, Townes now that for defence devise, With new fortifications cover. All in the world turn'd round about, No thing in place as t'was enured,
Nothing vnseene, nothing assured This Circle vniverse throughout. The Indian, whom at home heate fries, Drinkes of Araxis waters cold: The Persian rich in gems and gold, Wash in the Rhine and Elbe likewise. Seneca did coniecture this by the great courage of men, as that which shall happen last, saying, It shall fall out in the latter age, &c. as hath bin before mentioned. Of the opinion which Plato held of the West Indies. CHAP. 12. IF any one hath treated more particularly of the west Indies, the honor belongs to Plato, who in his time faith thus. In those dayes, they could not sayle this Gulph (meaning the Atlantike Sea (which is the Ocean) which meetes at the Straight of Gibraltar) for that the passage was stopt at the mouth of the pillars of Hercules, (which is the same Straight of Gibraltar) and this Iland was in those dayes ioyned▪ to the foresaid mouth, and was of that bignesse, as it exceeded all Asia and Affricke together: and then was there a passage to goe from these Ilands to o∣thers, and from those others Ilandes, they went to the firme Land, the which was neere invironed with the very Sea. This is reported by Critias in Plato. And such as be∣leeve that this narration of Plato is a true Historie, deli∣vered in these termes, say, that this great Atlanticke I∣land (the which did exceed both Affricke and Asia in greatnesse) did then comprehend the greatest part of the Ocean called Atlantike: which the Spaniards nowe sayle in: and that those other Ilands, which (he sayde(
were neere vnto this great one; are those, which wee now call the Ilands of Barlovante; that is, Cuba, Hispa∣niola, S. Iohn de Port ricco, Iamaica, and other Ilands of that Countrie: and that the maine Land whereof hee maketh mention, is the same wee now call firme Land, that is, Peru and America; and that Sea, which he sayth is adioyning to the firme Land, is the South sea, the which he calleth the very Sea, for that in comparison of her greatnesse, all other Seas, both Mediterranean, yea, and the Atlantike Sea, are small in regard thereof. Hereby in trueth they give a cunning and wittie inter∣pretation to these words of Plato. But whether this in∣terpretation should be held for true or not, I am resol∣ved to declare in an other place. That some have held opinion that in places of holy Scrip∣ture, whereas they speake of Ophir, is to be vnderstood of our Peru. CHAP. 13. SOme hold opinion, that mention is made of the West Indies in the holy scripture; taking the region of Peru for that Ophir which so famous Robert Steevens, or to say more truely Francis Vatable, a man well seene in the Hebrew tong (as I have heard our master report, who was his disciple) saith in his annotations vpon the 9. chapter of the 3. booke of Kings, that the Iland of Hispaniola which Christopher Colombus found out, was that of Ophir,In. 3. lib. Reg. cap. 9. from whence Solomon caused to bee brought foure hundred and twentie, or foure hundred and 50. talents of most fine and pure golde,In. appaca Bibliae regiae impha leg. ca. 9. for that the golde of Cibao which our men bring from Hispa∣niola, is of the same fashion and qualitie. And there are
many others which affirme that our Peru is Ophir, deriving one name from another, who beleeve, that when as the booke of Paralipomenon was written,2. Parap. 9. 3. Reg. 10. they called it Peru, grounding it vpon that which the holy scripture saith, that they brought from Ophir pure gold, precious stones, and wood which was rare and goodly: which things abound in Peru, as they say. But in my opinion, it is farre from the truth, that Peru should be Ophir so famous in the Bible. For although in this Peru, there be good store of gold, yet is there not such aboundance, as it may be equalled with the fame of the riches that was in auncient time at the East Indies.2 Para. . 4. Reg. 22. 9. Reg 9. I finde not that in Peru there are such pre∣cious stones, or such exquisite woods, as the like have not bend seene at Ierusalem. For although there be ex∣quisite Emeralds, and some hard trees of Aromaticall wood, yet do I not finde any thing ofso great com∣mendation as the scripture giueth vnto Ophir. More∣over, it seemes not likely that Solomon would leave the East Indies (most rich and plentifull) to send his fleetes to this farther land: whether if they had come so of∣ten (as it is written,) we had surely found more signes and testimonies thereof. Moreover, the Etimologie of the name of Ophir, and the change or reduction there∣of to Peru, seemes to me of small consideration, being most certaine that the name of Peru is not very aun∣cient, nor common to all that countrie. It hath beene vsuall in the discoverie of the new world, to give names to lands and portes of the sea, according to the occa∣sions presented at their ariuall: and I beleeve that the name of Peru, hath bene so found out, and put in pra∣ctise: for we find heere that the name hath bene given to all the countrie of Peru, by reason of a river so cal∣led
by the inhbitants of the countrie, where the Spa∣niards arived vpon their first discoverie. Whereby we maintaine that the Indians themselves bee ignorant, and do not vse this name and appellation to signifie their land. It seemeth moreover, the same Authors will say, that Sepher spoken of in the scripture, is that which we now call Andes, which are most high moun∣taines in Peru. But this resemblance of names and ap∣pellations is no sufficient proofe. If that were of force, we might as well say, that Iectan is Iecsan, mentioned in the holy scripture. Neither may we say,Iectan filius He∣ber Gen 10. Iecsan filius A∣brahae ex Cetu∣ra. Gen. 25. that the names of Titus and Paul, which the Kings Inguas of Peru do vse, come from the Romans or Christians, seeing it is too weake an argument, to draw a conclu∣sion of great matters. We see plainely, that it is contra∣rie to the intention of the holy scriptures, which some have written, that Tharsis and Ophir were one and the same Province, conferring the 22▪ chapter of the 4. booke of the Kings, with the 20. chapter of the se∣cond booke of Paralipomenon, for that in the booke of the Kings, it is said, that Iosaphat prepared a fleete of shippes in Asiongaber to fetch golde at Ophir, and in Paralipomenon, it is written, that the same fleete was furnished to go vnto Tharsis. Whereby it may be sup∣posed, that in these fore-said bookes, where the scrip∣ture speakes of Tharsis and Ophir, that it meanes one thing. Some one may demaund, what region or Pro∣vince that Ophir was, whether Solomons fleete went with the Mariners of Hyram King of Tyre and Sidon to fetch hold. And whether King Iosaphats fleete,3. Reg. 9. 4. Reg. 22. pre∣tending to go, did suffer shipwracke, and perish in Asi∣ongaber, as the holy scripture doth testifie. In this I do willingly agree with the opinion of Ioseph, in his books
of Antiquities, where he saith, that it is a Province of the East Indies,Gen. 10. the which was found by that Ophir the sonne of Iectan, wherof mention is made in the 10. of Genessis: and that Province did abound with most fine gold. Thereof it comes, they did so much ex∣tol the gold of Ophir or of Ophas, or as some wil say, this word of Obrise is thesame with Ophrise, for finding there seven sortes or kindes of gold (as S. Ierome reportes,) that of Ophir was held for the most fine, as heere we esteeme the gold of Valdivia and Caramaya. The chie∣fest reason which moves me to thinke that Ophir is at the East Indies, and not in the West▪ is, for that Solo∣mons fleete could not come hither, without passing the East Indies, all China, and a great part of the sea: being vnlikely they would passe over all the world to come thither for gold, that continent especially ly∣ing in that sort, as they could not come to the know∣ledge thereof by any voiage by land. And hereafter we wil shew that the Ancients had never knowledge in thearte of Navigation, without the which they could not runne so farre into the sea. Finally, in these matters (when as there appeares no certaine proofes, but onely light coniectures,) wee are not bound to beleeve but what we shall thinke good. What Tharsis and Ophir signifie in the holy Scripture. CHAP. 14. IF every mans coniecture and opinion may be allow∣ed, for my part I hold, that in the holy scripture these words of Tharsis and Ophir, most commonly do not signifie any certaine place: but it is a word and signi∣fication
generall to the Hebrewes, as in our vulgar tongue, this word of Indies, is generall vnto vs in our vsuall maner ofspeech: for wee meane by the Indies, those rich countries which are farre off, and strange vnto vs. So we Spaniards do indifferently call Indies, the countries of Peru, Mexico, China, Malaca, and Bresil: and from what parts soever of these any letters come, wee say they bee from the Indies, which coun∣tries be farre distant and different one from another. Yet we cannot denie, but that name of Indies, is pro∣perly to be vnderstood of the East Indies. And for that in olde time they did speake of these Indies, as of a countrie farre off, so likewise, in the discoverie of o∣ther remote lands, they have given them the names of Indies, being distant from the rest, and held as the end of the world. Even so, in my iudgement, Tharsis in the holy scripture, doth not signifie any certaine and determined place, but onely regions a farre off, and (according to the vulgar opinion,) very rich and strange: for that which Iosephus and some others would affirme, that Tharsis is Tarso, according to the mea∣ning of the scripture,Ierom ad Mar∣cel. in. 3. tomo. in my opinion hath bene well refuted by S. Ierome: not onely for that these wordes are written with divers letters, the one with an aspi∣ration, the other without: but also, that many things are written of Tharsis, which cannot agree with Tarso, a Citie in Cilicia. It is true, that in some places of the scripture, Tharsis is said to be in Cilicia, the which you shall find in the booke of Iudith, speaking of Holopher∣nes, who having passed the limits of Assyria,Iudith. 2. he came to the great mountaines of Ange, (which perchance is Taurus,) which hilles be on the left hand of Cilicia, and that he entred into all the Castells,Lege Pline. lib. 5. cap. 27. where he assembled
all his forces, having destroyed that famous Citie of Melothi, he ruined all the children of Tharsis and of Israell, which were ioyning vnto the desart, and those which were in the South, towards the land of Cellon, and from thence passed Euphrates: but as I have saide, that which is so written of Tharsis,Theodor in 1. Ioan. cannot be applied to the Citie of Tharso. Theodoret and some others, follow∣ing the interpretation of the 70.Astasmont ibid and in alphabe∣to aparatus. in some places they set Tharsis in Affrike, saying, it was the same Citie which was aunciently called Carthage, and is now the kingdome of Thunis: and they say, that Ionas ment to go thether, when as the scripture reports, that hefled from the Lord into Tharsis. Others pretend, that Thar∣sis, is a certaine countrie of the Indies: wherevnto it seemes that S. Ierome is inclined.Ier. ad Marcel. I will not now de∣cide these opinions: but I holde that in this case, the scripture doth not alwaies signifie one region or cer∣taine part of the world. It is true, that the wise men or Kings that came to worshippe Christ, were of the East: and the scripture saith, they were of Saba, Epha, and Madiem. And some learned men holde that they were of Ethiopia, Arabia, and Persia: and yet the Psal∣mist and the Church sings of them:Psal 60 Isa. 16. The Kings of Thar∣sis shall bring presents. Wee agree then with S. Ierome: that Tharsis, is a word that hath many and divers signi∣fications in the scripture. Sometimes it signifies the Cri∣solite, or Iacinth stone, sometimes a certaine region of the Indies, sometimes the sea which is of the colour of a Iacinth by the reverberation of the sunne. But the same Doctor doth with reason deny that Tharsis is any region of the Indies whether Ionas would fly, seeing that parting from Ioppa, it had beene impossible to saile vnto the Indies by that sea, for that Ioppa (which at this
day wee call Iaffe,) is no port of the red Sea, ioyning to the East Indian Sea, but of the Mediterranean Sea, which hath no issue into the Indian. Where∣by it doeth plainely appeare, that the voyage which Solomons Fleet made, parting from Asiongaber (whereas the shippes of king Iosaphat were lost) went by the redde Sea to Tharsis and Ophir, the which is di∣rectly testified in the Scripture. The which voyage was very different from that which Ionas pretended to Tharsis: seeing that Asiongaber is the port of a Cittie of Idumea, seated vpon the Straight, whereas the red sea ioynes with the great Ocean. From this Ophir they brought to Salomon gold, silver, Elephants teeth, Mon∣kies, Indian Cocks, and their voyage was of three yeeres: all which without doubt ought to bee vnder∣stood of the East Indies, which is fruitfull and aboun∣dant of all these thinges, as Plinie testifieth, and our owne experience doth witnes. From our Peru, doubt∣lesse they could not bring any Elephants teeth, those beastes beeing vnknowne there; but they might well bring gold, silver, and pleasant monkies. Finally, the holy Scripture, in my opinion, doth commonly vn∣derstand by this word of Tharsis, eyther the great Sea, or farre and strange Regions. So as he supposeth that the prophecies which speake of Tharsis (seeing the spi∣rit of prophecie may comprehend all things) may of∣ten be applied to things of our new world.
Of the Prophecie of Abdias, which some doe interpret to be the Indies. CHAP. 15. MAny say and affirme, that in the holy Scripture it was foretold long before, that this new worlde should be converted to Iesus Christ by the Spanish na∣tion, and to this purpose they expound the text of the Prophecie of Abdias, which sayth thus: At the transmi∣gration of this Ot, the children of Israel shall possesse all the the dwellings of the Cananites vnto Sarepte, and the trans∣migration of Ierusalem, which is at Bosphorus, shall pos∣sesse the Citties of the South, and they that shall save, shall come vp to the hill of Sion to iudge the mount of Esau, and the kingdome shall bee the Lordes. This hath beene set downe acording to the letter, but the hebrew Authors reade it thus: And the transmigration of this Ot of the childrens, which be the Cananites, vnto Zarphat (which is France) and the transmigration of Ierusalem, which is in Sapharad (vnderstood for Spaine) shall possesse for inhe∣ritance the Cities of the South, and those which procure sal∣vation, shall mount vp to the hill of Sion, to iudge the mount of Esau, and the kingdome shall be the Lords. Yet some of them doe not produce any sufficient testimo∣ny of the Ancients, nor pertinent reasons to proove that Sapharad (which S. Ierome doth interpret the Bos∣phor or Straight, and the 70. Interpreters Euphrates,) should signifie Spaine, but their onely opinion. Others alleage the Caldean Paraphrase, which is of this opini∣on, and the ancient Rabbins, which expound it on this sort; as also that Zarphat is France, (which the vulgar and the 70- Interpreters call Sarepte.) But leaving this dispute, which belongs to men of more leisure; what
necessitie is there to beleeve, that the citties of the South or of Mageb (as the 70.write) be those of this new world? Moreover, what need is there to beleeve and to take the Spanish Nation for the transmigration from Ierusalem to Sapharad, vnlesse we will vnderstand Ierusalem spiritually, and thereby the Church? So as by the transmigration from Ierusalem to Sapharad, the ho∣ly spirite shewes vs the children of the holy Church, which inhabit the ends of the earth, & the banks of the Sea, for so is Sapharad vnderstood in the Syrian tongue, and doth well agree with our Spaine, which according to the Ancients is the ende of the earth, beeing in a manner all invironed with Sea. And by the Citties of the South, we may well vnderstand these Indies, seeing the greatest parte of this newe worlde is seated in the South; and the better part looks to the Pole Antartike. That which followeth is easie to interpret, viz. They which procure Salvation, shall ascend the hill of Sion, to iudge the mount of Esau. For wee may say, they vnite themselves to the doctrine and strength of the holy Church, which seeke to breake and disperse the pro∣phane errors of the Gentiles, for that may be interpre∣ted to iudge the mount of Esau: whereby it followes, that in those daies the Realme shall neyther bee for the Spaniards, nor for them of Europe, but for Iesus Christ our Saviour. Whosoever shall expound the Prophe∣cie of Abdias in this sort, ought not to be blamed; being most certaine, that the holy Spirit did vnder∣stand all secrets long before. And it, seemes there is great reason to beleeve, that mention is made in the ho∣ly Scripture of a matter of such importance, as the dis∣coverie of the Indies, of the new world, and their con∣version to the faith. Isay saith in these wordes; Oh the
wings of ships which come from the other part of Ethiopia.Isay. 18. luxt 70. Interp. Many learned Authors hold, that al this Chapter is vn∣derstood of the Indies:and that same Prophet in an o∣ther place saith;Iay. 66. Those which shall escape out of Israel, shal goe farre off to Tharsis and to remote Ilands, where they shal convert many Nations vnto the Lorde. Amongest the which, hee names Greece, Italie, Affricke with many o∣thers: the which without doubt may well bee applied vnto the conversion of the Indies. Being most certaine that the Gospel shall be preached generally throughout the world, as our Saviour hath promised, and then the ende of the world shall come. It followes then, and so we ought to vnderstand it, that there be many Nations vpon the face of the earth, to whom Iesus Christ hath not yet been preached. Whereby we may gather, that there remained a great part of the world vnknowne to the Ancients, and that yet at this day, there is a good part to discover. By what meanes the first men might come to the Indies, the which was not willingly, nor of set purpose. CHAP. 16. NOw it is time to make answer to such as say there are no Antipodes, and that this region where we live, cannot bee inhabited. The huge greatnes of the Ocean did so amaze S. Augustine, as he could not con∣ceive how mankinde could passe to this new-found world. But seeing on the one side wee know for cer∣taine, that many yeeres agoe there were men inhabi∣ting in these parts, so likewise we cannot deny but the scripture doth teach vs cleerely, that all men are come
from the first man: without doubt we shall be forced to beleeve and confesse, that men have passed hither from Europe, Asia or Affricke, yet must wee discover by what meanes they could passe. It is not likely that there was an other Noes Arke, by the which men might be trans∣ported into the Indies, and much lesse any Angell to carie the first man to this new world, holding him by the haire of the head, like to the Prophet Abacc: for we intreat not of the mightie power of God, but only of that which is conformable vnto reason, & the order and disposition of humane things. Wherefore these two things ought to be held for wonderfull and wor∣thie of admiration, yea, to bee numbred among the secrets of God. The one is; how man could passe so huge a passage by Sea and Lande. The other is; that there beeing such multitudes of people, they have yet beene vnknowne so many ages. For this cause I de∣maund, by what resolution, force or industrie, the In∣dians could passe so large a Sea, and who might be the Inventer of so strange a passage? Truely I have often times considered thereof with my selfe, (as many o∣thers have done) but never could I finde any thing to satisfie mee. Yet will I say what I have conceived, and what comes presently into my minde, seeing that testi∣monies faile mee, whom I might follow, suffering my selfe to be guided by the rule of reason, (although it be very subtill.) It is most certaine, that the first men came to this land of Peru by one of these two meanes, either by land or by sea. If they came by sea, it was casually, and by chance, or willingly, & of purpose. I vnderstand by chance, being cast by force of some storme or tem∣pest, as it happens in tempestuous times. I meane done of purpose, when they prepared fleetes to discover new
lands. Besides these two meanes, I see it is not possible to find out any other, if wee will follow the course of humane things, and not devise fabulous and poeticall fictions; for no man may thinke to finde another Eagle as that of Ganimede, or a flying Horse, like vnto Perseu, that should carie the Indians through the aire; or that peradventure these first men haue vsed fishes, as Mir∣maides, or the fish called a Nicholas, to passe them thi∣ther. But laying aside these imaginations and fopperies, let vs examine these two meanes, the which will bee both pleasant and profitable. First in my iudgement, it were not farre from reason to say, that the first and aun∣cient people of these Indies, have discovered and peo∣pled after the same sort as wee do at this day, that is, by the Arte of Navigation and aide of Pilots, the which guide themselves by the heigth and knowledge of the heavens, and by their industrie in handling and chan∣ging of their sailes according to the season. Why might not this well be? Must we beleeve, that we alone, and in this our age, have onely the Arte and knowledge to saile through the Ocean? Wee see even now, that they cut through the Ocean to discover new lands, as not long since Alvaro Mendana and his companions did, who parting from the Port of Lima, came alongt the West, to discover the land which lieth Eastward from Per;and at the end of three moneths, they discovered the Ilands, which they call the Ilands of Salomon, which are many and very great, and by all likelehood, they lie adioyning to new Guinnie,or else are very neere to some other firme land. And even now by commandement from the King and his Counsell, they are resolved to prepare a new fleete for these Ilands. Seeing it is thus, why may we not suppose, that the Ancients had the
courage and resolution to travell by sea, with the same intent to discover the land which they call Antictho opposite to theirs, and that (according to the discourse of their Philosophie) it should be with an intent, not to rest vntill they came in view of the landes they sought? Surely there is no repugnancie or contrarietie in that which wee see happen at this day, and that of former ages, seeing that the holy scripture doth wites, that Solomon tooke Masters and Pilots from Tyre and Sidon, men very expert in Navigation,2. Para▪ 9. who by their indu∣stry performed this voiage in three yeeres.3. Rz. 10. To what end thinke you doth it note the Arte of Mariners, and their knowledge, with their long voiage of three yeeres, but to give vs to vnderstand, that Solomons sleete sailed through the great Ocean? Many are of this opi∣nion, which thinke that S. Augustine had small reason to wonder at the greatnes of the Ocean, who might well coniecture, that it was not so difficult to saile through, considering what hath been spoken of Solo∣mons Navigation. But to say the truth, I am of a con∣trary opinion, neither can I perswade my selfe, that the first Indians came to this new world, of purpose, by a determined voiage; neither will I yeeld, that the An∣cients had knowledgein the Art of Navigation, where∣by men at this day passe the Ocean, from one part to another, where they please, the which they performe with an incredible swiftnes and resolution; neither do I finde in all Antiquities, any markes or testimonies of so notable a thing, and of so great importance. Be∣sides, I finde not, that in ancient bookes there is any mention made of the vse of the Adamant or Load∣stone, nor of the Compasse to saile by : yea, I beleeve they had no knowledge thereof. And if we take away
the knowledge of the compasse to saile by, we shall ea∣sily iudge how impossible it was for them to passe the great Ocean. Such as haue any knowledge of the sea, vnderstand me well: for that it is as easie to beleeve that a Mariner in full sea can direct his course where hee please, without a compasse, as for a blinde man to shew with his finger any thing, be it neere or farre off. And it is strange, that the Ancients have bene so long igno∣rant of this excellent propertie of the Adamant stone:Pinlib. 3. c. 6 and lib. 34. cap. 1.14. and lib. 7. cap. 4. for Plinie, who was so curious in naturall causes, wri∣ting of this Adamant stone, speakes nothing of that ver∣tue and propertie it hath, alwaies to turne the iron which it toucheth towards the North: the which is the most admirable vertue it hath. Aristotle, Theophra∣stes, Dioscorides, Lucretius, nor any other Writers, or na∣turall Philosophers,Dios.lib. . cap. 10. Lucret. lib. 6. that I have seene, make any men∣tion thereof, although they treate of the Adamant stone. Saint Augustine writing many and sundry pro∣perties and excellencies of the Adamant stone,Aug. de Cuit. D c. 4. vbi multa de mag∣net. in his bookes of the Citie of God, speakes nothing there∣of. And without doubt, all the excellencies spoken of this stone, are nothing in respect of this strange propertie, looking alwaies towards the North, which is a great wonder of nature. There is yet another ar∣gument,Plin.lib. 7. c. 16 for Plinic treating of the first inventers of Na∣vigation, and naming all the instruments, yet he speakes nothing of the compasse to sae by, nor of the Ada∣mant stone. I say onely, that the art to know the starres, was invented by the Phaeniciens. And there is no doubt, but whatsoever the Ancients knew of the Art of Na∣vigation, was onely in regard of the starres, and ob∣serving the Shoares, Capes, and differences of landes. And if they had once lost the sight of land, they knew
not which way to direct their course, but by the Stars Sunne, and Moone: and that sailing (as it doth often, in a darke and cloudie season,) they did governe them∣selves by the qualitie of the winds, and by coniec∣ture of the waies which they had passed. Finally they went as they were guided by their owne motions. As at the Indies, the Indians saile a long way by sea, guided only by their owne industrie & naturall instinct. And it serues greatly to purpose, that which Plinie writes of the Ilanders of Taprobana, (which at this day, we call Sumatra,) speaking in this sort, when as he treates of the art and industrie they vse in sailing. Those of Ta∣probana see not the North to saile by▪ which defect they sup∣ply with certaine small birdes they carrie with them, the which they often let flie, and as those birdes by a naturall in∣stinct flie alwaies towards the land, so the Mariners direct their course after them. Who doubtes then, if they had had any knowledge of the compasse, they would not have vsed these little birdes for their guides, to discover the Land. To conclude, this sufficeth to shew that the Ancients had no knowledge of the secrets of the Loadstone: seeing that for so notable a thing, there is no proper word in Latine, Greeke, or Hebrew: for a thing of such importance, could not have wanted a name in these tongues, if they had knowne it. Wherevpon the Pilots at this day to di∣rect him his course that holds the helme, sit aloft in the poope of the Shippe, the better to obserue the com∣passe: where as in olde time, they sat in the prow of the Shippe, to marke the differences of lands and seas, from which place, they commaunded the Helme: as they vse at this day, at the entrie or going out of any Port or haven : and therefore the Greekes
called Pilots Proritaes, for that they remained still in the prow. Of the properties and admirable vertue of the Adamant stone for Navigation, whereof the Ancients had no knowledge. CHAP. 17. BY that which hath been formerly spoken, it ap∣peares, that the Navigation to the Indies, is as cer∣taine, and as short, as wee are assured of the Adamant stone. And at this day, we see many that have sailed from Lisbone, to Goa, from Siville to Mexico, and through all the South sea, even vnto China, and to the straight of Maggellan, and that as certainely, & as easily, as the Hus∣bandman goeth from his Farme vnto the Citie. We have also seene men that have made fifteene, yea, eigh∣teene voiages to the Indies, and we have heard speake of some Ancients, which have made above twentie vio∣ges, passing, and repassing the great Ocean, in the which they have not seene any signes of such as have trave∣led, nor met with any passengers to demand the way of them.Sp. 2 For as the Wife man saith, a ship cutteth the waves of the water, leaving no way where it passeth, nor any path in the flouds. But by the vertue and pro∣pertie of the Adam ant stone, it makes as it were a bea∣ten path in this Ocean. The high Creator of all things, having imparted this vertue vnto it, that by the touch of iron, it hath alwaies his motion and aspect towards the North, in what part of the world soever you be. Some search what should be the cause of this wonder∣full propertie, and imagine I know not what simpathie. But for my part, I take more pleasure and content in
the considerations of these wonders, to praise the pow∣er and greatnes of the Almightie, and reioyce in the contemplation of his admirable workes, and to say with Solomon,Sap. 14. speaking vpon this subiect, O father whose providence governes and maintaines a peece of wood, gi∣ving it an assured way vpon the sea, and in the midst of the swelling waves, to shew, that in the like sort, thou canst save and deliver man from all perill and shipwracke; yea, although he were in the midst of the sea without shippe. But for that thy works are full of wisedome, men hazard their lives in a small peece of wood, and passe through the sea in a shippe, and are saved. And vpon the same subiect the Psalmist saieth, They which go to the sea in shippes, and trafficke by the great waters, have seene the workes of the Lord,Psal. 106. and his wonders in the depth of the sea. And in truth, it is not one of the least wonders of God, that the force of so small a stone should command the sea, and force the infinite depth thereof to obey him, and follow his commandement. But for that it is an vsuall thing, and seemes easie, men do not admire it, nor take any great regard thereof: and for that his bountie is such, the ignorant make lesse ac∣count thereof. Notwithstanding, such as will duly consider it, are led by reason, to blesse the wisedome of God, and to give him thankes for so great a benefite. Being then decreed in heaven, that these nations of the Indies, which have lyen so long hidden, should bee knowne and discovered, and that this rowt should be frequented, to the end so many soules should come to the knowledge of Iesus Christ, and winne eternall life. There was an assured guide provided for such as travell that way, that is, the Compasse to saile by, and the ver∣tue of the Adamant stone. Wee doe not certainely know at what time this Art of sailing was brought to
light. But for my part, I hold for certaine, that it is not veri ancient, for besides the reasons alleadged in the former chapter, I have not read in any ancient Author, treating of dialles, any mention made of the Adamant. And yet vndoubtedly, the principall and most necessa∣rie instument for sunne dialls, which we vse at this day, is the needle of iron touched with the Adamant stone. Some approved Authors write in the Historie of the East Indies, that the first which began to disco∣ver this secret vpon the sea, was Vascor de Gama, who in the height of Mosambique,Lib. 1. d Ital. illustr. regn. 19 Plin. lib. 2. cap. 71. &. lib. 7. c. 1. vlt. Ozor. de reb. gst. Eman. li. 1 met with certaine Mariners Moores, which vsed this compasse or needle to saile by, and by the meanes thereof, he sailed through those seas: yet they write not from whom they learned this Art. And some amongst them are of our opinion, that the Ancients were ignorant of this secret. Moreover, I will shew a greater wonder of the needle to saile by, which we might hold incredible, if we had not proofe thereof by vndoubted experience. The iron touched or rubbed with that part of the Adamant stone which is towards the South, hath this vertue, to turne alwaies and in all places to the contrarie, which is the North. Yet doth it not in all places directly regard it, but hath certaine points and climats, where it direct∣ly regardes the North, and their staies: but changing this climate, it inclines a little, either to the East, or to the West, the farther it goes from this climat, which the Mariners cal North-east, or North-west, which is to say, coasting or inclining to the East, or to the West. And it is a thing of such consequence, to vnderstand this declining or coasting of the needle, that if they observe it not advisedly (although it bee small,) they shall stray wonderfully in their course, and arrive in
another place then where they pretended to go. Once a very expert Pilot of Portugal told mee, that there were foure poyntes in all the world, whereas the needle looked directly towards the North, the which hee na∣med, but I do not well remember them. One is in the height of the Iland of Corvo at the Terceres or Acores, which is very well knowne to all men: but passing to a greater altitude, it declines to the West: and contra∣riwise, drawing to a lesse altitude, towardes the Equi∣noctiall, it leanes to the East. The masters of this Arte can well tell how farre and how much. For my part, I would gladly know, of such as presume to knowe all thinges, what should bee the cause of this effect, and for what reason, a little yron tou∣ched with the Adamant stone, receyves such ver∣tue, as to looke alwayes towards the North, and with such dexteritie, that it vnderstandeth the sundry Cly∣mates and scituations of the world, and which way it should turne and incline, as well as any Philosopher or Cosinographer whatsoever. And seeing wee cannot well discover the causes and reasons of these thinges which wee see dayly, without doubt they were very hard to beleeve, if they were not apparent. Herein we discover our follie & vanitie, to make our selves iudges' & to subiect divine & high things to our reason & dis∣course. It is therefore better, as S. Gregorie the divine sayth, o subiect reason vnto faith, for that in her owne mansion she hath no governement. But this shall suf∣fice. Let vs returne to our purpose, and conclude, that the vse of the needle to sayle by, was vnknowne to the Ancients: whereby we may resolve, that it was impos∣sible to make a determined voyage, parting from the other world, to come to this by the Ocean.
Wherein an answere is made to them that say, that in times passed they have sayled through the Ocean, as at this day. CHAP. 18. THat which is alleaged to the contrary of that which hath beene spoken, that Salomons Fleet say∣led in three yeeres, is no sufficient proofe, seeing the holy Scripture doth not directly affirme, that this voy∣age continued three yeeres, but that it was made once in three yeeres. And although wee graunt, that the voyage lasted three yeeres, it might bee, as it is likely, that this Fleet sayling towards the East Indies, was stay∣ed in their course, by the diversitie of Ports and Regi∣ons, which they discovered: as at this day, in all the South Sea, they sayle from Chile to newe Spaine, the which voyage, although it bee more certaine, yet is it longer, by reason of the turnings they are forced to make vpon the Coast, and they stay in divers Portes: And in trueth, I doe not finde in ancient bookes, that they have lanched farre into the Ocean, neyther can I beleeve, that this their sayling was otherwise then they vse at this day in the Mediterranean Sea: which makes learned men to coniecture, that in old time they did not sayle without Owers, for that they went al∣wayes coasting along the shoare: and it seemes the ho∣ly Scripture doth testifie as much, speaking of that fa∣mous voyage of the Prophet Ionas: where it sayes, that the Marriners being forced by the weather, rowed to land.
That we may coniecture, how the first Inhabitants of the Indies came thither by force of weather, and not wil∣lingly. CHAP. 19. HAving shewed, that there is no reason to beleeve, that the first Inhabitants of the Indies came thi∣ther purposely; it followeth then, that if they came by Sea, it was by chance, or by force of weather, the which is not incredible, notwithstanding the vastnesse of the Ocean, seeing the like hath happened in our time, when as that Marriner, (whose name we are yet ignorant of) (to the end so great a worke, and of such importance, should not be attributed to any other Au∣thor then to God) having (through tempest discove∣red this new world,) left for payment of his lodging, where he had received it, to Christopher Columbus, the knowledge of so great a secret. Even so it might chance, that some of Europe or Affricke in times past, have bin driven by soule weather, and cast vpon vnknowne lands beyond the Ocean. Who knoweth not, that most, or the greatest part of the Regions in this newe world, were discovered by this meanes, the which we must rather attribute to the violence of the weather, then to the spirit and industrie of those which have dis∣covered. And to the end we may know, that it is not in our time onely, that they have vndertaken such voi∣ages, through the greatnesse of our shippes, and the va∣lour and courage of our men: we may reade in Plinie, that many of the Ancients have made the like voya∣ges, he writes in this manner: It is reported that Caius Caesar, sonne to Augustus Caesar,Plin. li. 2. c. 69. having charge vpon the Arabian Sea, did there see and finde certaine pieces and re∣mainders
of Spanish shippes that had perished. And after he saith: Nepos reportes of the Northerne circuite, that they brought to Quintus Metellus Caeler companion in the Consulship to Caius Affranius (the same Metellus being then Proconsull in Gaule) certaine Indians which had beene presented by the King of Sueden: th which Indians, sailing from India, for their trafficke, were cast vpon Germanie by force of tempest. Doubtles, if Plinie speaketh truth, the Portugales in these daies, saile no further then they did in those two shipwrackes,Plin. lib 6. c. 22 the one from Spaine to the red Sea, the other from the East Indies to Germanie. The same Author writes in another place, that a ser∣vant of Annius Plocanius, who farmed the customes of the red Sea, sailing the course of Arabia, there came so furious a Northerne wind, that in fifteene daies he passed Caramania, and discovered Hippares, a port in Taprobane, which at this day we call Sumatra. And they report of a shippe of Carthage, which was driven out of the Mediterranean Sea, by a Northerne wind, to the view of this new world. The which is no strange thing to such as have any knowledge of the sea, to know that sometimes a storme continues long & furi∣ous, without any intermission. I my selfe, going to the Indies, parting from the Canaries, have in fifteene daies, discovered the first land peopled by the Spaniards. And without doubt, this voiage had been shorter, if the Mariners had set vp all their sailes to the Northerne winds that blew. It seemes therefore likely to me, that in times past, men came to the Indies against their wills, driven by the furie of the winds. In Peru, they make great mention of certaine Giants, which have been in those parts, whose bones are yet seene at Manta, and Port Viil, of a huge greatnes, and by their proportion,
they should be thrice as big as the Indians. At this day they report that the Giants came by sea, to make warre with those of the Countrie, and that they made goodly buildings, whereof at this day they shew a well, built with stones of great price. They say more∣over, that these men committing abhominable sinnes, especially against nature, were consumed by fire from heaven. In like fort the Indians report of Ya, and Arica, that in old time they were wont to saile farre to the Ilands of the West, and made their voiages in Seales skinnes blowne vp. So as there wants no wit∣nesses, to prove that they sailed in the South sea, be∣fore the Spaniards came thither. Thus we may well coniecture, that the new world began to be inhabited, by men that have been cast vpon that coast by the vi∣olence of the Northerne winds, as wee have seene in our age. So it is, (being a matter verie considerable) that the workes of nature of greatest importance, for the most part, have been found out accidentally, and not by the industrie and diligence of man. The grea∣test part of phisicall hearbes, of Stones, Plants, Mettalls, Perle, gold, Adamant, Amber, Diamont, and the most part of such like things, with their properties and ver∣tues, have rather come to the knowledge of man by chance, then by art or industrie, to the end wee may know, that the glorie & praise of such wonders, should be attributed to the providence of the Creator, and not to mans vnderstanding: for that which we thinke to happen accidently, proceedes alwaies from the ordi∣nance and disposition of God, who does all things with reason.
Notwithstanding all that hath bene said, it is more likely that the first inhabitants of the Indies, came by land. CHAP. 20. I Conclude then, that it is likely the first that came to the Indies, was by shipwracke and tempest of we∣ther, but heerevpon groweth a difficultie, which trou∣bleth me much. For, suppose wee grant that the first men came from farre Countries, and that the nations which we now see, are issued from them, and multipli∣ed; yet can I not coniecture, by what meanes brute beastes (whereof there is great aboundance) could come there, not being likely, they should have bin im∣barked and carried by sea. The reason that inforceth vs to yeeld, that the first men of the Indies are come from Europe, or Asia, is the testimonie of the holy scripture, which teacheth vs plainely, that all men came from Adam.en. 7. We can therefore give no other beginning to those at the Indies, seeing the holy scripture saieth, that all beasts and creatures of the earth perished, but such as were reserved in the Arke of Noe, for the multiplica∣tion and maintenance of their kinde: so as we must ne∣cessarily referre the multiplication of all beastes to those which came out of the Arke of Noe, on the mountaines of Ararat, where it staied. And by this meanes, we must seeke out both for men and beastes, the way whereby they might passe from the old world to this new. Saint Augustine, treating vpon this questi∣on, by what reason you shall finde in some Ilandes, Wolves,Ag. lib. 6. d: Ciuit. cap. 7. Tigers, and other ravenous beastes, which breede no profit to men, seeing there is no doubt, but Elephants, Horses, Oxen, Dogges, and other beastes
which serve man to vse, have been expresly carried in shippes, as we see at this day brought from the East in∣to Europe, and transported from Europe, to Peru, al∣though the voiages be verie long. And by what meanes these beastes which yeeld no profit, but are very hurte∣full (as Wolves, and others of that wilde nature) should passe to the Indies, supposing, as it is certaine, that the de∣luge drowned all the earth. In which Treatie, this lear∣ned & holy man laboures to free himselfe of these diffi∣culties, saying that they might swim vnto these Ilands, or that some have carried them thither for their delight in hunting: or that, by the will of God, they had been newly created of the earth, after the same maner of the first creation, when God said, Let the earth bring forth everie living thing according to his kinde,Gen. 1. Cattle, and cree∣ping Wormes, and the beastes of the field, every one in his kinde. But if we shall apply this solution to our purpose, the matter will remaine more doubtfull: for beginning at the last point, it is not likely, according to the order of Nature, nor conformable to the order of govern∣ment established by God, that perfect creatures, as Li∣ons, Tigers, and Wolves, should be engendered of the earth, as we see that Rattes, Frogges, Bees, and other imperfect creatures, are commonly engendered. More∣over, to what purpose is that which the scripture saieth, and doth so often repeate,Gen. 7. Thou shalt take of all the beastes and birdes of the aire, seven, and seven, male and female, to maintaine generation vpon earth; if such beasts after the deluge, should be created againe after a new kinde of creation, without coniunction of male and female? And heerevpon might grow another question: See∣ing such creatures are breeding on the earth (according to this opinion) wherefore are they not likewise in
all other partes of the maine Land, and in many Ilandes, seeing wee must not regarde the naturall order of generation, but the bountie of the Creator. On the other part, I will not hold it for a thing incre∣dible, that they have carried some of these beastes for the pleasure of hunting: for that we often see, Princes and great men keepe and nourish in their cages, (onely for their pleasure and greatnesse) both Lyons, Beares, and other savage beastes, especially when they are brought from farre Countries: but to speake that of Woolves, Foxes and other beasts which yeeld no pro∣fite, and have nothing rare and excellent in them, but to hurt the cattell; and to say also that they have carried them by sea for hunting, truely it is a thing that hath no sense. Who can imagine, that in so long a voyage, men would take the paynes to carrie Foxes to Peru, especi∣ally of that kind which they call Anas, which is the fil∣thiest that I have seene? Who would likewise say, that the have carried Tygers and Lyons? Truely it were a thing worthy the laughing at, to thinke so. It was suf∣ficient, (yea, very much) for men, driven against their willes by tempest, in so long and vnknowne a voyage, to escape the danger of the Sea with theyr owne lives, without busying themselves to carrie Woolves and Foxes, and to nourish them at Sea. If these beasts then came by Sea, wee must beleeve it was by swimming, which may happen in some Ilands not farre distant from others, or fom the mayne Land, the which wee cannot denie, seeing the experience wee have, and that wee see these beasts, beeing prest to swimme day and night without wearinesse, and so to escape. But this is to be vnderstood in smal, Straights and passages: for in our Ocean, they would mocke at such swim∣mers,
whenas birds faile in their flight, yea, those of the greatest wing, vpon the passage of so great a Gulph. And although we finde small birdes, which flie above a hundred leagues, as we have often seene in our travel, yet it is a matter impossible, at the least very difficult, for birdes to passe all the Ocean. All this beeing true which wee have spoken, what way all wee make for beastes and birdes to goe to the Indies? and how can I say, they passed from one worlde to an other? I con∣iecture then, by the discourse I have made, that the new world, which we call Indies, is not altogether seve∣red and disioyned from the other world: and to speake my opinion, I have long beleeved, that the one and the other world are ioyned and continued one with an o∣ther in some part, or at the least, are very neere. And yet to this day, there is no certaine knowledge of the contrary. For towards the Articke or Northerne Pole, all the longitude of the earth is not discovered, and many hold, that above Florida, the Land runnes out very large towards the North, and as they say, ioynes with the Scithike or Germaine Sea. Others affirme, that a Ship sayling in that Sea, reported to have seene the coast of Bacalaos, which stretcheth almost to the con∣fines of Europe. Moreover, no man knowes how farre the land runnes beyond the Cape of Mendoça in the South sea, but that they affirme it is a great Continent, which runnes an infinite length: and returning to the Southerne Pole, no man knowes the lands on the o∣ther part of the Straight of Magellan. A ship belon∣ging to the Bishoppe of Plaisance, which passed the Straight, reports to have sayled alwayes within sight of Land: the like Hernando Lamer a Pilot doth affirme, who (forced by foule weather) passed two or three de∣grees
above the sayd Straight. So as there is no reason or experience that doth contradict my conceit and o∣pinion; which is, that the whole earth is vnited & ioy∣ned in some part, or at the least, the one approcheth neere vnto the other. If this be true, (as in effect there is some likelyhood:) the answere is easie to the doubt we have propounded, how the first Inhabitants could passe to the Indies: For that wee must beleeve they could not so conveniently come thither by Sea, as tra∣velling by Land, which might be done without consi∣deration, in changing by little and little their lands and habitations. Some peopling the lands they found, and others seeking for newe; in time they came to inhabite and people the Indies, with so many nations, people, and tongues as we see. By what meanes tame Beasts passed to the Indies. CHAP. 21. THe signes and arguments, which offer themselves to such as are curious to examine the Indians ma∣ners and fashions, helpe much to maintayne the fore∣sayd opinion: for that you shall not finde any inhabi∣ting the Ilands that are farre from the maine Land, or from other Ilands, as the Bermudes, the reason where∣of is, for that the Ancients did never sayle but alongst the coast, and in view of land: whereupon it is repor∣ted, that they have found no great Ships in any part of the Indies, capable to passe such Gulphs, but onely Bal∣sae, Barkes and Canoes, which are all lesse then our long boates, the which the Indians doe onely vse, with the which they could not runne through so great a Pas∣sage,
without apparant danger of ship-wracke: and al∣though their shippes had beene sufficient, yet had they no knowledge of the Astrolabe or Compasse. If then they had beene but eight or tenne dayes at Sea with∣outsight of land, they must of necessitie loose them∣selves, having no knowledge where they were: wee know many Ilandes well peopled with Indians, and their vsuall navigations, the which was such, as they may well performe in Canoes and boats, without any Compasse to sayle by. Whenas the Indians of Peru, which remayne at Tombes, did see our first Spanish shippes sayling to Peru, and viewed the greatnesse of their sailes, being spread, and of the bodies of the ships, they stoode greatly amazed, not beeing able to per∣swade themselves that they were shippes, having never seene any of the like forme and greatnesse, they suppo∣sed they had beene rockes. But seeing them advance, and not to sincke, they stood transported with amaze∣ment, vntill that beholding them neerer, they discove∣red men with beards that walked in them, whom then they held for some gods or heavenly creatures. Where∣by it appeares, how strange it was to the Indians to have great Ships. There is yet an other reason, which confirmes vs in the foresayd opinion, which is, that these beastes (which we say are not likely to have been transported by Sea to the Indies,) remayne onely on the maine Land, and not in any Ilands, foure dayes ior∣ney from the maine Land. I have made this search for proofe thereof, for that it seemes to me a point of great importance, to confirme me in mine opinion, that the confines of the Indies, Europe, Asia, and Affricke have some communication one with another, or at the least, approch very neere together. There are in America
and Peru many wilde beastes, as Lyons: (although they be not like in greatnesse, fiercenesse, nor of the same colour, redde, to the renowmed Lyons of Affrica.) There are also many Tygers, very cruell, and more to the Indians then to the Spaniardes: there are likewise Beares, but in no great aboundance: of Boares and Foxes an infinite number. And yet if wee shall seeke for all these kindes of beastes in the Ilands of Cuba, Hispaniola, Iamaica, Marguerita, or Dominica, you shall not finde any. So as in the sayde Ilands, although they were very fertile, and of a great circuit, yet was there not any kind of beastes for service when the Spaniards arrived, but at this day there are so great troopes of Horses, Oxen, Kyne, Dogs and Hogges, which have multiplied in such abundance, as now the Kine have no certaine master, but belong to him that shal first kil them, be it on the mountaines or on the plaines; which the Indians do, onely to save their hides, whereof they make great traffick, without any regard of the flesh to eate it. Dogges have so increased, as they march by troopes, and endammage the cattell no lesse then wolves, which is a great inconvenience in these Ilands. There wants not onely beastes in these Ilands, but al∣so birdes both great and small. As for Parrets, there are many that flie by flockes, but (as I have said,) there are few of any other kinde. I have not seene, nor heard of any Partriges there, as in Peru. Likewise, there are few of those beastes, which at Peru they call Guancos, and Vicunas, like to wilde Goates, very swifte, in whose sto∣macke they find the Beezars stone, which many do greatly value: sometimes you shall finde them as bigge as a hens egge, yea, halfe as bigge againe. They have no other kinde of beastes, but such as we call Indian
sheepe, the which (besides their wooll and flesh (where∣with they clothe and feede themselves,) do serve them as Asses to beare their burthens. They carrie halfe as much as a Moyle, and are of small charge to their ma∣sters, having neede, neither of shooes, saddle, nor oates to live by, nor of any furniture, for that Nature hath provided them of all these, wherein she seemes to have favoured these poore Indians. Of all these creatures, and of many other sortes, whereof I will make menti∣on, the maine land at the Indies aboundes. But in the Ilands, there are not any found, but such as the Spani∣ards have brought. It is true, that once one of our Fri∣ars did see a Tigre in an Iland, as hee reported vnto vs vpon the discourse of his peregrination and shipwracke; but being demanded how farre it was from the maine land, he answered, sixe or eight leagues at the most; which passage, Tigres might easily swimme over. We may easily inferre by these arguments, and others like, that the first Indians went to inhabite the Indies, more by land then by sea; or if there were any navigation, it was neither great, nor difficult, being an indibitable thing, that the one world is continued and ioyned with the other, or at the least, they approach one neere vnto another in some parts. That the linage of the Indies, hath not passed by the At∣lantike Iland, as some do imagine. CHAP. 22. SOme (following Platoes opinion mentioned be∣fore,) affirme, that these men parted from Europe,Sag. cap. 12. or Affricke, to go to that famous and renowmed At∣lantike Iland, and so passed from one Iland vnto ano∣ther,
vntill they came to the maine land of the Indies: for that Critias of Plato in his time discourseth in this maner: if the Atlantike Iland wereas great as all Asia, and Affrike together, or greater, as Plato saies, it should of necessitie containe all the Atlantike Ocean, and stretch even vnto the Ilands of the new world. And Plato saieth moreover, that by a great and strange de∣luge, the Atlantike Iland was drowned, and by that meanes the sea was made vnnavigable, through the aboundance of banckes, rockes, and roughnesse of the waves, which were yet in his time. But in the end, the ruines of this drowned Iland weresetled, which made this sea navigable. This hath been curiously handled and discoursed of by some learned men of good iudgement; and yet (to speake the truth) being well considered, they are ridiculous things, resembling ra∣ther to Ovids tales, then a Historie or Philosophie, wor∣thy of accoumpt. The greatest part of Platoes Inter∣preters, affirme, that it is a true Historie, whatsoever Critias reports of the strange beginning of the Atlantike Iland, of the greatnes thereof, of the warres they had against them of Europe, with many other things. That which gives it the more credite of a true Historie, be the wordes of Critias, (whom Plato brings in in his time,) saying, that the subiect he meanes to treate of, is of strange things, but yet true. The other disciples of Plato, considering that this discourse hath more shew of a fable, then of a true Historie, say, that we must take it as an allegorie, and that such was the intention of their divine Philosopher. Of this opinion is Procles, and Porphire, yea, and Origene, who so much regardes the writings of Plato, as when they speake thereof, they seeme to bee the bookes of Moses, or of Esdras: and
whereas they thinke the writings of Plato have no shew of truth, they say, they are to be vnderstood mystically, and in allegories. But to say the truth, I do not so much respect the authoritie of Plato, (whom they call Di∣vine,) as I wil beleeve he could write these things of the Atlantike Iland for a true Historie, the which are but meere fables, seeing hee confesseth that hee lear∣ned them of Critias, being a little childe, who (among other songs,) sung that of the Atlantike Iland. But whe∣ther that Plato did write it for a true Historie, or a fable, for my part, I beleeve that all which he hath written of this Iland, beginning at the Dialogue of Time, and continuing to that of Critias, cannot be held for true, but among children and old folkes. Who will not ac∣coumpt it a fable, to say that Neptune fell in love with Clite, and had of her five paire of twinnes at one birth▪ And that out of one mountaine, hee drew three round balles of water, and two of earth, which did so well re∣semble, as you would have iudged them all one bow∣ell? What shall wee say moreover of that Temple of a thousand pace long, and five hundred broade, whose walles without were all covered with silver, the seeling of gold, and within ivorie, indented and inlaied with gold, silver, and pearle? In the end, speaking of the ru∣ine thereof, he concludes thus in his time, In one day, and one night, came a great deluge, whereby all our souldiers were swallowed by heapes within the earth, and in this sort the Atlantike Iland being drowned, it vanished in the Sea. Without doubt it fell out happily, that this Iland va∣nished so suddenly, seeing it was bigger then Asia and Affrike: and that it was made by enchantment. It is in likesort all one to say, that the ruines of this so great an Iland, are seene in the bottome of the sea, and that
the Mariners which see them, cannot saile that way. Then he addes, For this cause vnto this day, that Sea is not navigable, by reason of the bancke which by little & little is growne in that drowned Iland. I would willingly demand what Sea could swallow vp so infinite a continent of land, greater then Asia and Affrike, whose confines stretched vnto the Indies, and to swallow it vp in such sort, as there should at this day remaine no signes nor markes thereof, whatsoever: seeing it is well knowne by experience, that the Mariners finde no bottome in the Sea, where they say this Iland was. Notwithstan∣ding, it may seeme indiscreete and farre from reason, to dispute seriously of those things which are repor∣ted at pleasure, or if we shall give that respect to the au∣thoritie of Plato (as it is reason,) we must rather vnder∣stand them to signifie simply, (as in a picture) the pros∣peritie of a Citie, and withall, the ruine thereof. For the argument they make, to prove that this Atlantike Iland, hath bene really and indeede, saying that the sea in those parts, doth at this day beare the name of At∣lantike, is of small importance, for that wee knowe Mount Atlas,Plin. lib. 5. cap. 1. & lib. 6. c. 31 whereof Plinie sayes this sea tooke the name, is vpon the confines of the Mediterranean Sea. And the same Plinie reportes, that ioyning to the said Mount, there is an Iland called Atlantike, which he reportes to be little, and of small accompt. That the opinion of many which holde, that the first race of the Indians comes from the Iewes, is not true. CHAP. 23. NOw that wee have shewed how vnlikely it is, that the first Indians passed to the Indies by the Atlan∣tike
Iland, there are others holde opinion, that they tooke the way, whereof Esdras speakes in his fourth booke, in this manner: And whereas thou sawest that he gathered an other peaceable troope vnto him,4. Esdr. 13. thou shalt know, those are the ten tribes, which were caried away cap∣tives out of their own land, in the time of king Ozeas, whom Salmanazar king of the Assyrians tooke captives, and ledde them beyond the river, so were they brought into an other land: but they tooke this counsell to themselves, to leave the multitude of the heathen, and go forth into a farther coun∣trie, where never mankind dwelt, that they might there ob∣serve their statutes, which they could not keepe in their owne land: and they entred by the narrowe passages of the river Euphrates, for then God shewed his wonders, and stayed the springs of the flood, vntill they were passed over: for the way vnto that Countrie is very long, yea, of a yeere and a halfe, and this Region is called Arsareth, then dwelt they there vntill the latter time, and when they come forth againe, the most Mightie shall hold still the springs of the river a∣gaine, that they may goe through; for this cause sawest thou this multitude peaceable. Some will apply this text of Es∣dras to the Indies, saying, they were guided by God, whereas never mankinde dwelt, and that the land where they dwelt, is so farre off, as it requires a yeere and a halfe to performe the voyage, beeing by nature very peaceable. And that there are great signes and ar∣guments amongst the common sort of the Indians, to breed a beleefe, that they are descended from the Iewes: for commonly you shall see them fearefull, submisse, ceremonious and subtill in lying. And moreover they say, their habites are like vnto those the Iewes vsed, for they weare a short coat or waste-coat, and a cloake im∣broidered all about; they goe bare-footed, or with soles
tied with latchers over the foot, which they call Oiotas. And they say, that it appeares by their Histories, as also by their ancient pictures, which represent them in this fashion, that this attire was the ancient habite of the He∣brewes, and that these two kinds of garments, which the Indians onely vse, were vsed by Samson, which the Scripture calleth Tunicam, and Sidonem: beeing the same which the Indians terme wast-coat and cloake. But all these coniectures are light, and rather against them then with them; for wee know well, that the He∣brewes vsed letters, whereof there is no shew among the Indians; they were great lovers of silver, these make no care of it: the Iewes, if they were not circumcised, held not themselves for Iewes, and contrariwise the In∣dians are not at all, neyther did they ever vse any cere∣monie neere it, as many in the East have done. But what reason of coniecture is there in this, seeing the Iewes are so careful to preserve their language and An∣tiquities, so as in all parts of the world they differ and are known from others, and yet at the Indies alone, they have forgotten their Linage, their Law, their Ceremo∣nies, their Messias; and finally, their whole Iudaisme. And whereas they say, the Indians are feareful cowards, superstitious, and subtill in lying; for the first; it is not common to all, there are some nations among the Bar∣barians free from these vices, there are some valiant and hardy, there are some blunt and dull of vnderstanding. As for ceremonies and superstitions, the Heathen have alwayes vsed them much; the manner of habites descri∣bed which they vse, being the plainest and most simple in the world; without Arte, the which hath been com∣mon, not onely to the Hebrewes, but to all other Na∣tions; seeing that the very History of Esdras (if wee
shall beleeve the Scriptures that bee Apocrypha) make more against them then for their purpose: for hee saith in that place, that the ten tribes went from the multi∣tude of the Heathen, to keepe their faith and ceremo∣nies, and we see the Indians given to all the Idolatries in the world. And those which holde this opinion, see well if the entries of the River Euphrates stretch to the Indies, and whether it be necessary for the Indies to re∣passe that way, as it is written. Besides, I know not how you can name them peaceable, seeing they be alwaies in warre amongst themselves. To conclude, I cannot see how that Euphrates in Esdras Apocrypha, should be a more convenient passage to goe to the new world, then the inchanted & fabulous Atlantike Iland of Plato. The reason why we can find no beginning of the Indians. CHAP. 24. IT is easier to refute and contradict the false opinions conceyved of the Originall of the Indians, then to set downe a true and certaine resolution; for that there is no writing among the Indians, nor any certaine re∣membrances of their founders: neyther is there any mention made of this new world in their bookes that have knowledge of letters: our Ancients held, that in those parts, there were neyther men; land, nor heaven. So as hee should seeme rash and presumptuous, that should thinke to discover the first beginning of the In∣dians. But we may iudge a farre off, by the former dis∣course, that these Indians came by little and little to this newe world, and that by the helpe and meanes of the neerenesse of lands, or by some navigation: the
which seemes to mee the meanes whereby they came, and not that they prepared any armie to goe thither of purpose: neyther that they have been caried thither by any ship-wracke or tempest, although some of these things may chance in some part of the Indies: for these Regions beeing so great, as they containe Nations without number, we may beleeve, that some came to inhabite after one sort, and some after an other. But in the ende I resolve vpon this point, that the true and principall cause to people the Indies, was, that the lands and limits thereof are ioyned and continued in some extremities of the world, or at the least, were very neere. And I beleeve, it is not many thousand yeeres past, since men first inhabited this new world and West Indies, and that the first men that entred, were rather savage men and hunters, then bredde vp in civill and well governed Common-weales: and that they came to this new world, having lost their owne land, or being in too great numbers, they were forced of necessitie to seeke some other habitations; the which having found, they beganne by little and little to plant, having no other law, but some instinct of nature, and that very darke, and some customes re∣mayning of their first Countries. And although they came from Countries well governed, yet is it not in∣credible to thinke, that they had forgotten all through the tract of time and want of vse; seeing that in Spaine and Italie we find companies of men, which have no∣thing but the shape and countenance onely, whereby we may coniecture in what sort this new world grew so barbarous and vncivill.
What the Indians report of their beginning. CHAP. 25. IT is no matter of any great importance, to know what the Indians themselves report of their begin∣ning, being more like vnto dreames, then to true Hi∣ries. hey make great mention of a deluge happened in their Countrie: but we cannot well iudge if this de∣luge were vniversall (whereof the scripture makes men∣tion,) or some particular inundation of those regions where they are. Some expert men say, that in those Countries are many notable signes of some great in∣undation, and I am of their opinion which thinke that these markes and shewes of a deluge, was not that of Noe, but some other particular, as that which Plato speakes of, or Deucalions floud, which the Poets sing of: whatsoever it be, the Indians say, that al men were drow∣ned in this deluge: and they report that out of the great Lake Titicaca, came one Viracocha, which staied in Ti∣aguanaco, where at this day there is to bee seene the ru∣ines of ancient and very strange buildings, and from thence came to Cusco, and so began mankinde to mul∣tiply. They shew in the same Iland a small Lake, where they faine that the sunne hid himselfe, and so was pre∣served; and for this reason they make great sacrifices vnto him in that place, both of sheepe and men. Others report, that sixe, or I know not what number of men, came out of a certaine cave by a window, by whome men first began to multiplie: and for this reason they call them Pacaritampo. And therefore they are of opini∣on, that the Tambos is the most ancient race of men. They say also, that Mango Capa, whom they acknow∣ledge for the founder and chiefe of their Inguas, was
issued of that race, and that from him sprang two fami∣lies or linages, the one of Havan Cusco, the other of Vrni Cusco. They say moreover, that when the Kings Inguas attempted warre and conquered sundrie Pro∣vinces, they gave a colour and made a pretext of their enterprise, saying, that all the world ought to acknow∣ledge them; for that all the world was renued by their race and Countrie: and also that the true religion had been reveiled to them from heaven. But what availeth it to speake more, seeing that all is full of lies and vani∣tie, and farre from reason? Some learned men write, that all which the Indians make mention of, is not a∣bove 400. yeeres old, and whatsoever they speake of for∣mer ages, is but a confusion full of obscuritie, wherein we find no truth. The which may not seeme strange, they having no vse of bookes, or writing; in steede whereof, they vse counting with their Quipocamayes, the which is peculiar vnto them. But which reckoning all they can report is not past 400. yeeres. Instructing my selfe carefully of them, to know from what land, and what nation they passed, to that where they ow live, I have found them so farre vnable to give any rea∣son thereof, as they beleeve confidently, that they were created at their first beginning at this new world, where they now dwell. But we have freed them of this error by our faith,Act. 17. which teacheth vs, that all men came from the first man. There are great and apparant coniectures, that these men for a long time, had neither Kings nor common weales, but lived in troupes, as they do at this day in Florida, the Chiriquanas those of Bresill and ma∣ny other nations, which have no certaine Kings, but as occasion is offered in peace or warre, they choose their Captaines as they please. But some men excelling
others in force and wit, began in time to rule and do∣mineere as Nembroth did:Genit. so increasing by little and lit∣tle, they erected the kingdomes of Peru and Mexico, which our Spaniards found: and although they were barbarous, yet did they farre surpasse all the other Indi∣ans. Behold how the foresaid reason doth teach vs, that the Indians began to multiply, for the most part, by sa∣vage men and fugitives, which may suffice touching the beginning of these men we speake of, leaving the rest, vntill we treate of their Histo∣rie more at large.
THE SECOND BOOKE of the Naturall and Morall Hi∣storie of the Indies. That it is not out of purpose, but necessarie to treate of the . CHAP. 1. FOR the well conceiving of things at the Indies, it is necessarie to know the nature and disposition of that Regi∣on, which the Ancients did call the burning Zone, the which they held in∣habitable, seeing the greatest part of this new world, which hath bin of late discovered, lies and is scituate vnder this region in the midst of heaven. And it seemes to me greatly to purpose which some do say, that the knowledge of things at the Indies, depends of the well vnderstanding the nature of the Equi∣noctiall: for that the difference which is betwixt the one and the other world, proceeds in a maner from the qualities of this Equinoctiall. And we must note, that all the space betwixt the two Tropickes, must be pro∣perly taken and held for this middle line, which is the
Equinoctiall; so called, for that the Sunne running his course therein, makes the daies & nights even through∣out the world: yea, they that dwell vnder this line, in∣ioy, throughout the yeare, the same equalitie of daies, and nights. In this Equinoctiall line, we finde so many admirable qualities, that with great reason mans vnder∣standing doth studie and labour to search out the cau∣ses; not moved therevnto so much by the doctrine of ancient Philosophers, as by reason and certaine expe∣rience. For what reason the Ancients held, that the burning Zone was inhabitable. CHAP. 2. EXamining this subiect from the beginning, no man can denie that which we plainely see, that the Sunne when it drawes neere, doth heate, and when it retyres, groweth cold. The daies and nightes, with the Winter and Summer be witnesses heereof; whose va∣rietie with the heate and cold, growes by the neerenes and distance of the Sunne. Moreover it is certaine, the more the Sunne approacheth and casteth his beames prependicularly, the more the earth is scorched and burnt, the which we see plainely in the heate of the South, and in the force of Summer, whereby we may iudge (in my opinion) that the farther a Countrie is distant from the course of the Sunne, the more cold it is. So we finde by experience, that the Countries and Regions, which approach neerest to the North, are coldest: and contrariwise, those that lie neere the Zo∣diake, where the Sunne keepes his course, are most hot. For this cause Ethiopia passeth Affrike and Barbarie in
heate, Barbarie exceedes Andalousia, Andalousia, Castile and Arragon surpasse Biscaie and Fraunce. And the more they decline to the North, the colder they are: and so by consequence, those which approach neerest to the Sunne, and are beaten perpendicularly with his beames, they do most feele the heate thereof. Some vrge another reason to this effect, which is, that the motion of the heaven is very odaine and light towards the Tropikes, but neere the Poles it is slow and heavie, whereby they conclude, that the region which the Zo∣diake circles and conteines, is set on fire with heate for three causes and reasons; the one for the neerenes of the Sunne, the other, for that his beames reflect direct∣ly, and the third, for that it doth participate and feele this swift and sodaine motion of the heaven. See what reason and discourse teacheth vs, touching the cause of heat and cold vpon the regions of the earth. But what shall we say of the two other qualities, wet and drie? Even the same. For the drought seemes to grow by the neerenes of the Sunne, and moistnes, being reti∣red farre off, for that the night being colder then the day, is likewise more moist; and the day which is drier, is also hotter. Winter, whilst the Sun runnes his course farther off, is more cold and rainie, and Summer, when the Sunne is neere, is more hotte and drie: for even as the fire hath the propertie to parch and burne, so hath it to drie vp the moistnes. These things therefore considered, Aristotle and other Philosophers attribute vnto the regions of the South, which they call burning, an excessive heat and a drouth likewise. And therefore they said, this region is wonderfully scorched and drie; & so by consequence, hath neither waters nor pastures, whereby of necessitie it must be contrarie and vnfit for mans life.
That the burning Zone is very moist, contrary to the o∣pinion of the Ancients. CHAP. 3. ALl that we have propounded, seemes vndoubted∣ly true, and to purpose; and yet the conclusion they would draw from it, is directly false; for that the Region of the South, which they call the burning Zone, is peopled and inhabited by men; and wee our selves have stayed long there, beeing very commodi∣ous, pleasant and agreeable. If therefore it be so (as we cannot denie it) that from a true proposition, we can∣not draw a false conclusion, and yet this conclusion should be false, (as indeed it is,) we must of necessitie returne backe the same way, to examine this propositi∣on more strictly, & whence the error should proceede: we will first shew the trueth, as assured experience doth teach vs, then will we proove it, (although it be verie difficult) and will endevour to give a reaon, follow∣ing the termes of Philosophie. The last point that wee propounded, that the drought is greatest, whenas the Sunne is neerest to the earth, seemeth certaine and in∣fallible, and yet it is very false; fr there is never grea∣ter aboundance of raine in the burning Zone, then whenas the Sunne goeth directly over them, and is ve∣ry neere. Truely it is an admirable thing, and worthy observation, that the ayre is most cleere, and without rayne vnder this burning Zone, whenas the Sunne is farthest off; and contrariwise there is most rayne, snow and mists, whenas the Sunne is neerest. Such as have not travelled in this new world, wil happily thinke this incredible, and it will seeme strange even vnto such as have beene there, if they have not well observed it: but
the one and the other will willingly yeeld, in noting the certaine experience of that which hath beene sayd of this part of Peru, which looks to the Southerne or Antartike Pole: the Sunne is then farthest off, when it is neerest vnto Europe, that is, in Maie, Iune, Iuly and Au∣gust, whenas hee makes his course in the Tropicke of Cancer. During which Moneths, the aire at Peru is very cleere and calme, neyther doth there fall any snow or raine; all their rivers fall much, and some are dried vp quite: but as the yeere increaseth, and the Sunne ap∣procheth neere vnto the Tropicke of Capricorne, then begins it to raine and to snow, and their Rivers swell from October to December. Then after that the Sun retyring from Capricorne, whenas his beames reflect directly vpon the heads of them of Peru, then is the violence of their waters great, then is the time of raine, snow, and great overflowings of their Rivers, when as their heate is greatest, that is, from Ianuarie to mid March: this is so true and certaine, as no man may con∣tradict it. And at that time the contrary is found in the Regions of the Pole Articke, beyond the Equinoctiall, which proceeds from the same reason. But let vs now looke into the temperature of Panama & all that coast, as well of new Spaine, the Ilands of Barlovent, Cuba, Hispaniola, Iamaica, as of S. Iohn de Port ricco, wee shall without doubt finde, that from the beginning of No∣vember, vntill Aprill, they have the aire cleere and bright; the reason is, for that the Sunne passing by the Equinoctiall to the Tropicke of Capricorne, retyres from those Regions more then at any other time of the yeere. And contrariwise, they have violent showers and great swellings of water, whenas the Sunne re∣turnes and is neerest vnto them, which is from Iune, vn∣to
September, for then his beames beate most vpon them. The like happens at the East Indies, as we learne daily by letters that come. So as it is a generall rule, (although in some places there is an exception) that in the Region of the South or burning Zone, which is all one, the aire is most cleere and driest, whenas the Sun is farthest off; and contrariwise, when it approcheth, there is greatest rayne and humiditie: and even as the Sunne advanceth or retyreth little or much, even so the earth abounds or wants water and moisture. That in the Regions which be without the Tropicks, there is greatest store of waters, whenas the Sunne is far∣thest off, contrary to that vnder the burning Zone. CHAP. 4. IN Regions which lie without the Tropicks, we see the contrary to that which hath beene spoken: for that the rayne is mingled with cold, & the drought with heate, the which is well knowne in all Europe and the old world, as we see in the same manner in the new world, whereof the whole Kingdome of Chile is a wit∣nesse, which lying without the Tropicke of Capricorne, and in the same height with Spaine, is subiect to the same lawes of Winter and Summer, but that Winter is there, whenas it is Summer in Spaine, being vnder di∣vers Poles. So as when it is cold in these Provinces, the waters are in great aboundance, which is, when the Sunne is farthest off, from the beginning of Aprill, to the end of September: finally, the disposition of sea∣sons is like to that in Europe, which is, that the heat and drought comes whenas the Sunne returnes, which is
the cause that this Realme of Chile approcheth neerer the temperature of Europe, then any other of the In∣dies, as well in the fruites of the earth, as in the bodies and spirits of men. The like they report of that part which lies before the Inner Ethiopia, that stretcheth out in manner of a point vnto the Cape Bonne Espe∣rance or Good Hope, the which they holde for a true cause of the inundations of Nile, which bee in Sum∣mer, whereof the Ancients have so much disputed, for that in that Region the Winter and raine begins in A∣pril, whenas the Sunne hath passed Aries: and these waters, which partly grow from snow, and partly from raine, assemble and make great Lakes and Pooles, from whence by good and true Geographie the River of Nile proceedes, and by this meanes goes by little and little stretching out her course, till that having runne a long way, it finally in the time of Summer overflow∣eth Egypt, which seemeth against nature, and yet it is certainely reported; for at what time it is Summer in Egypt, lying vnder the Tropicke of Cancer, then is it winter at the springes of Nile, which is vnder the other Tropicke of Capricorne. There is in America an other inundation like to that of Nile, at Paraguen, or River de la Plata, which is as much to say, as the River of silver, the which receiving yeerely infinite waters which fall from the Mountaines of Per, doth so terribly swell in her course, and over-flowes that Region, as the Inha∣bitants are forced, during those Moneths, to retyre themselves into boats and Canoes, and to leave the dwelling of the Land.
That betwixt the two Tropicks, the greatest aboundance of raine is in Summer, with a discourse of Winter and Summer. CHAP. 5. TO conclude, Summer is alwayes accompanied with heate and drought, in the two temperate Zones, and Winter with cold and moistnesse: but vn∣der the burning Zone those qualities are not alike, for that raine accompanies heate, and drought followeth the cold: I vnderstand by cold, want of excessive heat, so as Winter is taken in our Europe for the colde and raynie season, and Summer for the hot and cleere sea∣son. Ou Spaniards which live at Peru, and in newe Spaine, seeing these two qualities not to concurre to∣gether as in Spaine, call that season Winter, wherein there is greatest aboundance of raine and waters; and Summer; where there is little or non at all: where∣in they are plainely deceived, although they airme by a generall rule, that in the Mountaines of Peru, it is Summer from the Moneth of Aprill to September, for that the raine ceaseth in that season; and that Win∣ter is, from the moneth of September vnto Aprill, for that the showres returne then▪ and therefore it is win∣ter and summer at the same instant that in Spaine. So as when the Sune goeth directly over their heads, they then take it to bee the depth of Winter, having grea∣test store of raine. But it is worthy to be laughed at, comming from ignorant men and vnlearned: for even as the difference betwixt the day and night proceeds from the presence or absence of the Sunne in our he∣misphere, according to the motion of the first motor, which is the cause of day and night; even so the diffe¦rence
which we see betwixt Winter and Summer, pro∣ceeds from the neerenesse and distance of the Sunne, according to the motion of the said Sunne, which is the proper cause. To speake trueth then, it is Summer whenas the Sunne is neerest, and Winter when it is farthest off. Both heate and coldnesse, and every other temperature, growes of necessitie, by the neerenesse and distance of the sunne; but to raine, or not to raine, which is humiditie and drought, doe not necessarily follow. It is therefore easie to iudge (besides this vulgar opinion) that at Peru, the Winter is cleere and without raine, and the Summer full of showres, and not other∣wise, as many beleeve, that the winter is hotte, and the summer cold. They fall into the like error, vpon the difference they make betwixt the Plaines and the Mountaines of Peru, saying, that when it is summer vpon the mountaine, it is winter in the vallie, which is in April, Maie, Iune, Iuly, and August: for then the aire is very cleere vpon the mountaine, without any raine or mistes, and at the same season, we commonly see fogges in the plaine, which they call Guarva, which is as it were a very sweet dew wherewith the sunne is covered. But winter and summer, as it is said, are cau∣sed by the neerenesse and distance of the sunne. See∣ing then that throughout all Per, both vpon the Mountaines and on the Plaines, the sunne approcheth and retyreth in one sort, there is no reason to say, that when it is summer in one part, that it is winter in an o∣ther; yet is it no mtter of any importance, to contend vpon the signification of words: Let them terme them as they please, and call that summer when it raines not, although the heat be greater. But that, whereunto we must have greatest regard, is the trueth of the subiect,
which is, that drought and want of raine, is not alwaies greatest, when the sunne approcheth neerest, as we see in the burning Zone. That the burning Zone abounds with waters and pa∣stures, against the opinion of Aristotle, who holds the contrarie. CHAP. 6. BY the former Discourse wee may easily conceive, that the burning Zone is not drie, but abounding with waters; the which is so true, as it exceeds all the Regions of the world for store of waters, except in some parts, where there are sands and desart Coun∣tries, as wee finde likewise in some other parts of the world. As for water from Heaven, wee have alreadie shewen, that there is great aboundance of raine, snow and haile, which especially abound in the kingdome of Peru. But as for land-waters, as rivers, fountaines, brookes, springs, floods, and lakes, I have not spoken thereof till now; yet being an ordinarie thing, that the waters below have a correspondencie with them a∣bove, wee must not imagine that there can bee any want: and in trueth there is so great store of springs and fountaines, as you shall not finde in any Region or Countrie of the world; so many lakes, marishes, and such store of rivers, for the greatest part of America is almost inhabitable through too great aboundance of waters: for that the rivers swelled with the great Raines in Summer, doe often overflow their banckes, with such furie, as they breake all they incounter: and in many places they cannot passe, by reason of the mudde and myre of marishes and vallies: for this cause,
those that live neere to Paraguen, (whereof wee have made mention,) foreseeing the rising of the River be∣fore it comes, put themselves and their goods into Ca∣noes, and so preserve themselves and their goods, foa∣ting vp and downe, almost for the space of three mo∣neths: and when the River is returned within her boundes, then they goe to their houses, still wette and dropping with the ood. And this River is so great, as Nile, Ganges & Euphrates all together cannot equall it. But what shall we say of the great river of Magdalaine, which falles into the sea betwixt S. Martha and Car∣thagene, and with reason is called the great river? Sai∣ling in those parts, I was amazed to see her streame (which was very cleere) runne ten leagues into the sea, being in breadth above two leagues, not mingling no vanquished with the violent waves of the Ocean. But if we shall speake more of rivers, that great floud called by some, the river of Amazons, by others Marannon, and by some, the river of Orellana, which our Spaniards sai∣led in their discoveries, ought to blemish all the rest; and in truth I am in doubt whither I may tearme it a river, or a sea. It flowes from the mountaines of Peru, from whence it receies a great aboundance of water, both of raine and of rivers, which it gathereth into it; then passing by the great plaines of Pautiti, Dorado, and the Amazons, in the end it falles into the Ocean, almost right against the land of Marguerite and Trinidado. It hath so large & broad a channel, specially in the last third part of her length, as it contains in it many great lands. And that which seemes incredible, when you saile through the midst of it, you shall see nothing but aire and water. They say moreover, that from the midst you cannot see nor discover with the eye, many great
and high mountaines which are vpon the bankes, by reason of her great bredth. We have learned from cre∣dible persons, the great and wonderfull bredth of this river (which in my opinion, deserves well the name of Empresse and Queene of all flouds,) which was by the report of a brother of our company, who being then yong, sailed it in the company of Peter d'Orsua, with whom hee was present at all the adventures of this strange entrie and discoverie; and at the seditious and pernitious acts of that wicked Diego d' Aguirra, from the which God delivered him to place him in our com∣pany. Such are the rivers in that region, which they call the burning Zone, and the drie & parcht vp countrie, in the which Aristotle and the Ancients affirmed there were neither waters, nor pastures. But seeing I have made mention of the river of Marannon, to shew the abundance of the waters that are in the burning zone, it shall not be from the purpose, to speake somewhat of that great Lake which they call Titicaca, which is in the midst of the Province of Collao. There are above ten great rivers which loose themselves entring into that Lake, and yet hath it no issue but one small current of water, although some hold it to be very deepe, and of such a fashion, as it is impossible to build a bridge over it, for the depth of the water, neither can they passe it by boate for the violence of the current. They passe it by an artificiall and notable practice, peculiar to the Indians, with a bridge of straw laied vpon the water, the which (being of so light a substance) sinkes not, and yet this passage is very easie and safe. This Lake con∣taines almost foure score leagues, thirtie five in length, and fifteene in bredth at the largest place. There are many Ilands which in olde time were inhabited and
tilled, but now lie waste. It brings forth a great aboun∣dance of reedes, which the Indians call Totora, which serves them to a thousand vses; for it is meate for swine, for horses, and for men, they make houses therewith, fire and barkes. To conclude, the Vros in this their To∣tora finde all they have neede of. These Vros be such dull and brutish people, as they esteeme not themselves men. It is reported of them, that being demanded of what nation they were? They answered, they were not men, but Vros, as it were some kinde of beastes. There are whole villages of these Vros inhabiting in the Lake in their boates of Totora, the which are tied together and fastened to some rocke, and often times the whole village changeth from place to place. So as hee that would seeke them now whereas they were yesterday, shall finde no shew nor remainder of them, or of their village. The current or issue of this Lake, having runne above fiftie leagues, makes another Lake, but lesse then the first which they call Paria, and containes in it some small Ilands, but they finde no issue thereof. Some imagine it runnes vnder the ground, & that it falles in∣to the South sea; giving out, that there is a branch of a river which they see rise and enter into the sea neere the banke, having no knowledge of the Spring. But con∣trariwise, I beleeve that the waters of this Lake, dissolve and are dispearsed within the Lake it selfe through the heate of the Sunne. This discourse seemes sufficient to prove, that the Ancients had no reason to holde, that the middle region was inhabitable for the defect of waters, seeing there is such store both from heaven and on the earth.
Shewing the reason why the Sunne without the Tropicks, causeth greatest quantitie of waters when it is farthest off; and contrariwise, within them it breedeth most, when it is neerest. CHAP. 7. COnsidering with my selfe often times, what should cause the Equinoctial to be so moist, as I have said; to refute the opinion of the Ancients, I finde no other reason, but the great force of the sunne in those partes, whereby it drawes vnto it a great aboundance of va∣pors from out of the Ocean, which in those parts is ve∣ry great and spatious: and having drawne vnto it this great aboundance of vapours, doth suddenly dissolve them into raine, and it is approoved by many tryed ex∣periences, that the raine and great stormes from heaven proceed from the violent heat of the Sunne: first (as we have said before) it raines in those countries, when∣as the Sunne casts his beames directly vpon the earth, at which time he hath most force: but when the Sun retyres, the heat is moderate, and then there falls no raine: whereby we may conclude, that the force and heat of the Sunne is the cause of raine in those Coun∣tries. Moreover we observe, both in Peru, New Spaine, and in all the burning Zone, that the raine doth vsually fall in after-noone, when as the sunne-beames are in their greatest force, being strange to see it raine in the morning. And therefore travellers fore-seeing it, begin their iourneyes earely, that they may end and rest be∣fore noone, for they hold that commonly it raines after noone. Such as have frequented and travelled those Countris, can sufficiently speake thereof. And there are, that (having made some abode there) say, that the
greatest aboundance of raine is, when the Moone is at the full; but to say the trueth, I could never make suffi∣cient proofe thereof, although I have observed it. Moreover, the dayes, the yeere and the moneths, shew the trueth hereof, that the violent heate of the sunne causeth the raine in the burning Zone: experience tea∣cheth vs the like in artificiall thinges, as in a Limbecke, wherein they draw waters from hearbs & flowers; for the vehemencie of the fire forceth and driveth vp an aboundance of vapours, which being pressed, and fin∣ding no issue, are converted into liquor and water. The like wee see in gold and silver, which wee refine with quicke-silver, the fire being small and slow, wee draw out almost nothing of the quicke-silver, but if it bee quicke and violent, it doth greatly evaporate the quick-silver, which incountring the head above, doth pre∣sently turne into liquor, and begins to drop downe: Even so the violent heate of the sunne produceth these two effects, when it finds matter disposed, that is, to draw vp the vapours on high, and to dissolve them pre∣sently, and turne them into raine, when there is any ob∣stacle to consume them. And although these things seeme contrary, that one sunne within the burning Zone, being neere, should cause raine, and without the Zone afarre off should breed the like effect; so it is, that all well considered, there is no contrarietie. A thou∣sand effects in naturall causes proceede of contrarie things by divers meanes: we drie linnen by the fire, and in the aire, and yet the one heats and the other cooles; pastures are dried and hardened by the sunne and with the frost; moderate exercise provokes sleepe, being too violent, it hindereth: if you lay no wood on the fire, it dieth; if you lay on to much, it likewise quencheth:
for the onely proportion entertaines and makes it to continue. To well discerne a thing, it must not be too neere the eie, nor too farre off, but in a reasonable dis∣tance proportionable; being too farre off from any thing, we loose the sight, and too neere likewise, we cannot see it. If the sunne beames be weake, they draw vp no fogge from the rivers, if they be violent, having drawne vp the vapours, they presently dissolve and consume them; but if the heat be moderate, it drawes vp and preserves it: for this reason the vapours rise not commonly in the night, nor at noone, but in morning, whenas the sunne begins to enter into his force. There are a thousand examples of naturall causes vpon this subiect, which we see do often grow from contrarie things: whereby we must not wonder, if the sunne be∣ing neere, engenders raine, and being farre off, works the like effect: but being of a moderate and proporti∣onable distance, causeth none at all. Yet there remaines one doubt, why the neerenes of the sunne causeth the raine vnder the burning Zone, and without, when it is farthest off. In my opinion the reason is, that in Winter without the Tropicks, the sunne hath not force sufficient to consume the vapours which rise from the land and sea; for these vapours grow in great aboundance in the cold region of the aire, where they are congealed and thickened by the extremitie of the cold; and after being pressed, they dissolve and turne into water. Therefore in Winter when the sunne is farthest off, the daies short, and the nights long, his heat hath small force: but when the sunne approa∣cheth, which is in the summer time, his force is such, as it drawes vp the vapors, and suddenly consumes and disperseth them; for the heat and the length of the
daies grow through the neerenes of the sunne. But within the Tropickes vnder the burning Zone, the far distance of the sunne workes the same effects that the neerenes doth without the Tropiks; by reason where∣of, it raines no more vnder the burning Zone when the sunne is farre off, then without the Tropicks when it is neerest, for that in this approaching and retying, the sunne remaines alwaies in one distance whence pro∣ceedes this effect of cleerenes. But when the sunne is in the period of his force in the burning zone, and that he cast his beames directly vpon the inhabitants heads, there is neither cleerenes nor drienes, as it seems there should be, but rather great and strange showers; for that by this violent heat, he drawes vp suddenly a great aboundance of vapours from the Earth and Ocean, which are so thicke, as the winde, not able easily to dis∣perse them, they melt into water, which breedeth the cold raine in so great aboundance: for the excessive heat may soone draw vp many vapours, the which are not so soone dissolved: and being gathered together through their great aboundance, they melt and dis∣solve into water. The which we may easily discerne by this familiar example: rost a peece of porke, mutton, or veale, if the fire be violent, and the meate neere, we see the fatte melts suddenly, and droppes away, the rea∣son is, that the violent heat drawes forth the humour and fatte from the meate, and being in great aboun∣dance, cannot dissolve it, and so it distills more away: But when the fire is moderate, and the meat in an e∣quall distance, we see that it rostes hansomely, and the fatte drops not too suddenly, for that the moderate heat drawes out the moistnes which it consumes sud∣denly. And therefore Cookes make a moderate fire,
and lay not their meate too neere nor too farre off, lest it melt away. The like may be seene in another expe∣rience in candles of tallow or waxe, if the wike bee great, it melts the tallow or the waxe, for that the heat cannot consume the moistnes which riseth, but if the flame be proporcionable, the waxe melts nor droppes not, for that the flame doth waste it by little and little as it riseth. The which seemeth to me the true reason, why vnder the Equinoctiall and burning Zone, the vi∣olence of the heat doth cause raine, the which in other Regions growes through want thereof. How wee should vnderstand, that which hath been for∣merly spoken of the burning Zone. CHAP. 8. IF in naturall and phisicall things, we must not seeke out infallible and mathematicall rules, but that which is ordinarie and tried by experience, which is the most perfect rule, wee must then beleeve what wee have said, that there is more humiditie vnder the bur∣ning Zone then in other Regions; and that it raines lesse there, when the sunne is neerest, must be taken and vnderstood after one sort, as in truth it is the most com∣mon and ordinarie. But this is not to hinder the ex∣ceptions which nature hath given to this rule, making some Regions of the burning Zone extreamely drie. The which is reported of Ethiopia, and wee have seene it in a great part of Peru, where all that land or coast, which they call Plaines, wants raine, yea, land wa∣ters, except some vallies, where rivers fall from the mountaines; the rest is a sandie and barren soile, where you shall hardly finde any springs, but some deepe
welles. But with the helpe of God, wee will shew the reason why it raineth not in these Plaines (the which many demand;) for now I onely pretend to shew, that there are many exceptions to naturall rules, whereby it may happen, that in some part of the burning Zone, it raines not when the sunne is neerest, but being far∣thest off, although vnto this daie I have neither seene nor heard of it: but if it be so, wee must attribute it to the particular qualitie of the earth: and also, if some∣times the contrarie doth chance, we must have regard that in naturall things there happens many contrari∣eties and les, whereby they change and dissolve one another. For example, it may be the sunne will cause raine, and that the winds will hinder it, or else cause more aboundance then hath been vsuall. The windes have their properties and divers beginnings, by the which they worke divers effects, the which are most commonly contrarie to that which the order & season requires. Seeing then in all places we see great varieties in the yeere, which proceedes from the divers moti∣ons and aspectes of Planets, it is not out of purpose to say, that in the burning Zone, wee may see and ob∣serve some things contrarie to that we have tried. But to conclude, that which we have spoken, is a certaine and vndoubted truth, which is, that the great draught which the Ancients held to be in the middle region, which they call the burning Zone, is nothing at all: but contrariwise there is great humiditie, and then it raines most, when the sunne is neerest.
That the Burning Zone is not violently hotte, but mode∣rate. CHAP. 9. HItherto wee haue treated of the humiditie of the Burning Zone, now it shall be fit to discourse of the other two qualities, Hotte, and Colde. We have shewed in the beginning of this Discourse, how the Ancients held that the burning Zone was hotte and exceeding drie, the which is not so; for it is hote and moist, and in the greatest part, the heat is not excessive, but rather moderate, which some would hold incredi∣ble, if we had not tried it. When I passed to the Indies, I will tell what chaunced vnto mee: having read what Poets and Philosophers write of the bning Zone, I perswaded my selfe, that comming to the Equinoctiall, I should not indure the violent heate, but it fell out otherwise; for when I passed, which was when the sun was there for Zenith, being entered into Aries, in the moneth of March, I felt so great cold, as I was forced to go into the sunne to warme me, what could I else do then, but laugh at Aristotles Meteors and his Philo∣sophie, seeing that in that place, and at that season, whenas all should be scorched with heat, according to his rules, I, and all my companions were a colde? In truth there is no region in the world more pleasant and temperate, then vnder the Equinoctiall, although it be not in all parts of an equall temperature, but have great diversities. The burning Zone in some parts is very temperate, as in Quitto, and on the plaines of Pe∣ru, in some partes verie colde, as at Potozi, and in some very hote, as in Ethiopia, Bresill, and the Molucques. This diversitie being knowne and certaine vnto vs, we must of force, seeke out another cause of cold and heat
then the sunne beames, seeing that in one season of theyeere, and in places of one height and distance, from the Pole and Equinoctiall we finde so great diver∣sitie, that some are invironed with heat, some with cold,Plato in Tim. & Critiae. and others tempered with a moderate heat. Plato placeth his most renowmed Atlantike Iland vnder the burning Zone; then he saieth, that at certaine seasons of the yeere, it hath the sunne for Zenith, and yet it was very temperate, fruitfull, and rich. Plinie saieth, that Taprobana (which at this day they call Sumatra,) is vnder the Equinoctiall,Plin. lib. 6. c. 12 as in effect it is, writing, that it is not onely happie and rich, but also peopled with men and beasts: whereby we may easily iudge, that al∣though the Ancients held the heate of the burning Zone to be insupportable, yet might they well vnder∣stand, that it was not so great as they had spoken. The most excellent Astrologer and Cosmographer Ptolome, and the worthie Philosopher and Physitian Avicen; were of a better resolution, being both of opinion, that vnder the Equinoctiall, there were verie commodious habitations. That the heat of the burning Zone is temperate, by reason of the rayne and the shortnes of the dayes. CHAP. 10. SInce the discoverie of this newe worlde, wee have found by experience, that which late Writers have held for trueth. But it is a naturall thing, whenas any matter beyond our conceit is made knowne vnto vs by experience, we by and by examine the cause. There∣fore wee desire to know the reason, why a Region
where the sunne approacheth neerest, is not onely tem∣perate, but in many parts cold. Considering this mat∣ter generally, I finde two general causes, which maketh this Region temperate: the one is that before mentio∣ned, for that this Region is very moist and subiect to raine, and there is no doubt but the rayne doth refresh it, for that the water is by nature cold; and although by the force of the fire it be made hotte, yet doth it tem∣per this heat proceeding onely from the sunne-beames. The which we see by experience in the inner Arabia, the which is burnt with the Sunne, having no showres to temper the violence thereof. The clouds and mists are the cause that the sunne offends not so much, and the showers that fall from them, refresh both the ayre and the earth, and moisten likewise how hot soever it be. They drinke raine water, and it quencheth the thirst, as our men have well tried, having no other to drinke. So as reason and experience doth teach vs, that raine of it selfe doth temper the heat; and having by this meanes shewed, that the burning Zone is much subiect vnto raine, it appeares that there is matter in it, to temper the violence of the heat. To this I will adde an other reason, which deserves to be knowne, not on∣ly for this matter, but for many others; for although the Sunne be very hotte and burning vnder the Equi∣noctiall, yet is it not long, so as the heate of the day be∣ing there shorter, and of lesse continuance, it causeth not so violent a heate; the which it behooves to spe∣cifie more particularly. Such as are practised in the knowledge of the Spheare teach very well, that the more the Zodiake is oblique and traversing our Hemi∣sphere, the more vnequall are the daies and nights; and contrariwise, where the sphere is straight, and the signes
mount directly, there the dayes and nights are equal. And therefore in all that Region which is betweene the two Tropicks, there is lesse inequality then with∣out them, and the more we approch the Line, the lesse inequalitie we finde, the which we have tryed in those parts. Those of Quitto, for that they are vnder the line; have not throughout the whole yeere, the dayes and nights more short at one season, then at an other, but are continually equall. Those of Lima beeing distant almost twelve degrees, finde some difference betwixt the dayes and the nights, but very little, for that in De∣cember and Ianuarie, the dayes increase an houre or little lesse. Those of PotoZi finde much more diffe∣rence, both in winter and in summer, being almost vn∣der the Tropicke. But those that live without the Tro∣pikes, find the dayes in winter shorter, and in summer longer: the more remote they are from the Equinoctial and come neere the Pole, as we see in Germany and in England, the daies are longer in summer, then in Italie and in Spaine. It is a thing which the Sphere doth teach, and experience doth plainely shew vs. We must adde an other proposition, which is likewise true and very considerable for all the effectes of nature to vn∣derstand the perseverance and continuation of the ef∣ficient cause to worke and moove. This presupposed, if any one demaund of me, why vnder the Equinoctiall Line, the heat is not so violent in summer, as in some other Regions, (as in Andelousiae in the moneths of Iuly and August) I will answere, that in Andelousia the dayes are longer, and the nights shorter; and as the day being hot, inflames and causeth heat; so the nights be∣ing cold and moist, give a refreshing. According to the which, at Peru, there is no such great heat, for that the
dayes in summer are not long, nor the nights short; so as the heate of the day is much tempered by the fresh∣nesse of the night. And although the burning Zone be neerer the Sunne then all other Regions, yet doth not the heate continue there so long. It is a naturall thing, that a small fire continued, heats more, then a greater that lastes but little, especially if there bee any thing to refresh it. He therefore that shal put these two properties of the Zone in one ballance, that it is most rainie in the time of greatest heate, and that the dayes are shortest there, he shall perchance finde them to e∣quall the other two contrarieties, which bee, that the Sunne is neerer and more directly over them then in other Regions. That there be other reasons besides the former mentioned, which shew, that the burning Zone is temperate, espe∣cially alongst the Ocean. CHAP. 11. BEing a thing concluded, that the two forenamed properties are common and vniversal to all the re∣gion of the burning Zone: and yet in the same there are found some places very hote, and other exceeding colde: Also, that the temperature is not there equall in all places, but vnder one climate, one part is hote, another colde, and the third temperate, all at one sea∣son; we are forced to seeke out other reasons, whence this great diversitie should proceede in the burning Zone. Discoursing therefore vpon this question, I do finde threeapparant and certaine causes, and a fourth more obscure and darke. The apparant and certaine causes be: The first is the Ocean, the second, the sci∣tuation
of the land, and the third, the nature and pro∣pertie of many and sundry windes. Besides these three which I holde for manifest, I beleeve there is a fourth hidden and lesse apparant, which is the propertie of the same land inhabited, and the particular influence of the heavens. Whoso woulde neerely consider the causes and generall reasons before mentioned, shall finde them insufficient for the full resolution of this point, observing that which daily happens in diverse partes of the Equinoctiall. Manomotapa, and a great part of the kingdom of Prester Iean are seated vnder the line, or very neere. In which regions they endure ex∣cessive heate, and the men are all blacke; the which is not onely in those parts of the land farre from the sea, but also in Ilands invironed with the sea. The Iland of Saint Thomas is vnder the Line, the Ilands of Cape Verd are very neere, and both in the one and the other are violent heates: and the men are likewise blacke. Vn∣der the same line, or very neere, lies a part of Peru, and of the new kingdome of Grenado, which notwithstan∣ding are very temperate Countries, inclining rather to colde then heate, and the inhabitants are white. The Country of Bresill is in the same distance from the line with Peru, and yet both Bresill and all that coast is ex∣treamely hot, although it be in the North sea, and the other coast of Peru, which is in the South sea, is very temperate. I say then, that whosoever would consider these differences, and give a reason thereof, cannot content himselfe with these generall rules before spe∣cified, to proove that the burning Zone may be a tem∣perate land. Among the speciall causes and reasons, I have first placed the Sea, for without doubt, the neere∣nesse thereof doth helpe to temper and coole the heat:
for although the water be salt, yet is it alwayes water, whose nature is cold, and it is a thing remarkeable, that in the depth of the Ocean, the water cannot be made hot by the violence of the Sunne, as in rivers: finally, even as salt-peeter (though it be of the nature of salt) hath a propertie to coole water, even so we see by ex∣perience, that in some ports and havens, the salt-water doth refresh; the which wee have observed in that of Callao, whereas they put the water or wine which they drinke, into the Sea in flaggons to be refreshed, where∣by wee may vndoubtedly finde, that the Ocean hath this propertie, to temper and moderate the excessive heate: for this cause we feele greater heat at land then at sea, Caeteris paribus; and commonly Countries lying neere the sea, are coooler then those that are farther off. Caeteris paribus, as I have said, even so the greatest part of the new world, lying very neere the Ocean, wee may with reason say, although it bee vnder the burning Zone, yet doth it receive a great benefite from the sea to temper the heat. That the highest landes are the coldest, and the reason thereof. CHAP. 12. BVt if we shall yet search more particularly, we shall not finde in all this land an equall temperature of heate, although it be in equal distance from the sea, and in the same degree, seeing that in some partes there is great heate, and in some, very little. Doubtlesse, the cause thereof is, that the one is lower, and the other higher; which causeth that the one is hote, and the o∣ther colde. It is most certaine, that the toppes of the
mountaines are colder then in the bottome of the val∣lies, the which proceedes, not onely for that the sunne beames have greater repercussions vpon lower places, although it be a great reason; yet there is an other, which is, that the Region of the ayre is colder when it is farthest from the ground. The Plaines of Collao at Peru & of Popaian in new Spaine make sufficient proofe hereof. For without al doubt those parts are high coun∣tries, and for this reason cold, although they be all in∣vironed with high points of mountaines, much subiect to the Sunne beames. But if we demand why at Peru, and in new Spaine, the Plaines along the coast be very hote, and the plaines of the same Countries of Peru and new Spaine be contrariwise colde? In truth I see no other reason can be given, but that the one is a lowe country, and the other high. Experience dooth teach vs, that the middle region of the ayre is colder than the neather. And therefore the more the mountaines ap∣proach to the middle, the colder they are, being cove∣red with snow and frosts. Reason it selfe dooth yeelde to it. For if there be a sphere and region of fire, as Ari∣stotle and the other Philosophers say, the middle region of the ayre must be most colde, by Antiparistasis, the colde being expelled and thickned there, as in summer time we see in wells that are very deepe. For this cause the Philosophers affirme, that the two extreame regi∣ons of the ayre, that above, and the other belowe, are the hottest, and the middle region more colde. If it be thus, as experience doth teach vs, we shall yet draw out another reason and notable argument, to shew that the burning Zone is temperate, which is, that the greatest part of the Indies is a high countrey, filled with many mountaines, which by their neerenesse refresh the
neighbour countries. You may continually see vppon the toppes of these mountaines, snow, haile and frozen waters; and the cold so bitter, as the grasse is all withe∣red, so as the men and beasts which passe that way, are benummed with colde. This, as I have saide, is in the burning Zone: and it happens most commonly when they have the sunne for zenith. It is therefore most cer∣taine and conformable vnto reason, that the moun∣taines are colder than the valleis and plaines, for that they participate more of the middle region of the aire, which is very colde. The cause why the middle region of the ayre is more colde, hath bin shewed before: for that the region of the aire next to the fiery exhalation, the which (according to Aristotle) is vpon the spheare of the aire, repells and thrustes backe all the colde, the which retires it selfe into the middle region of the aire, by Antiparistasis, as the Philosophers speake. Now if a∣ny one should question with me in this manner; If it be so that the ayre is hot and moist, as Aristotle holdes, and as we commonly say, whence then proceeds the cold which is congealed in the middle region of the ayre, seeing it cannot come from the fierie spheare? For if it come from the water, or the earth,Arist. Me. by this reason the lower region of the aire should be colder than the mid∣dle. To answer truely what I thinke, I will confesse, that this Argument and Obiection is so difficult, as I am al∣most ready to follow the opinion of such as reproove the qualities, agreements and disagreements which A∣ristotle gives vnto the Elements, saying they are but i∣maginations, who for this occasion hold the aire to be colde by nature. And to this end they vse many ar∣guments and reasons, whereof we will propound one
very familiar and well knowne, leaving the rest aparte. In the canicular dayes we are accustomed to beate the ayre with a fanne, and we finde that it doth refresh vs; so as these Authors affirme, that heate is no private pro∣perty of any other Element, but of fire only, which is dispersed and mingled with all things (as the great De∣nis doth teach vs.)Dionys. c. 25. de coel. hierar. But whether it be so, or otherwise (for I will not contradict Aristotle, but in that which is most certaine) in the end they agree all, that the mid∣dle region of the ayre is colder than the lowest next to the earth, as experience dooth shew vs; seeing that in this middle region are congealed, snowe, haile, frosts, and other signes of extreame colde. The middle regi∣on then which they call the burning Zone, having on the one side the sea, and on the other the mountaines, we must hold them for sufficient causes to temper and coole the heate. That the colde windes be the principall cause to make the burning Zone temperate. CHAH. 13. THe temperature of this region ought chiefly to be attributed to the property of the wind that blows in that country, the which is pleasant and fresh. The providence of the great God Creator of al things hath bin such, as he hath ordained fresh and coole windes in that region where the sunne makes his course (which seemes should be burnt vp) that by their coolenes the excessive heate of the sunne might be qualified. And they are not farre from apparance of reason, which held that the earthly Paradise was vnder the Equino∣ctiall. If they had not deceived themselves in the cause
of their opinion, saying that the equalitie of the dayes and nights, was sufficient of it selfe to make that Zone temperate; to which opinion many others have beene opposite, of which number was that renowmed Poet, saying; That coast incessantly by hotte beames tyred Of Phoebus, who from thence never retyred. The coolenesse of the night then is not sufficient to moderate and to correct the violent heate of the Sunne; but rather this burning Zone, receives so sweet a temperature, by the benefite of the fresh and pleasant aire, as notwithstanding, it were held by the Ancients to be more hotte then a burning furnace: yet those which inhabite there, take it for a delightfull spring. It appeares by arguments and very apparant reasons, that the cause heereof consistes principally in the qua∣litie of the winde. We see in one climate, some regions and Citties hotter then others, onely for that they feele lesse winde to refresh them. The like is in other Countries where no winde blowes, the which are all on fire like vnto a furnace. There are many of these Villages and Townes in Bresill, Ethiopia, and Paraguen, as every one knoweth, and that which is more conside∣rable; wee see these differences, not only on the Land, but also on the Sea: there are some seas where they feele great heat, as they report of that of Mozambigus and Ormus in the East, and of the Sea of Panama in the West: the which for this reason, engenders and brings forth great Lizards (called Cayamans,) as also in the sea of Bresill. There are other seas in the same degree of height, very colde, as that of Peru, in the which wee were a cold, (as I have said before) when we first sailed it, which was in March, when the Sunne was directly
over vs. In truth on this continent, where the land and sea are of one sort, wee cannot imagine any other cause of this so great a difference, but the qualitie of the winde which doth refresh them. If wee shall neerely looke into the consideration of the winde, whereof we have spoken, wee may resolve many doubts which some obiect, and which seeme strange and wonderfull: wherefore the Sunne casting his beames vppon the burning Zone, and particularly at Peru, and that more violently then in Spaine in the Canicular daies, yet they defend the heat with a light covering, so as with a slen∣der covering of mats or straw, they are better preser∣ved from the heate, then in Spaine vnder a roofe of wood, or a vault of stone. Moreover, why are not the nightes in summer at Peru, as hotte and troublesome as in Spaine? Wherefore on the highest tops of moun∣taines, even amongst the heaps of snow, you shall some∣times feele great and insupportable heat? Wherefore in all the Province of Colao, when ye come into the shade, how little soever, you feele cold: But comming into the Sunne beames, you presently finde the heate ex∣cessive? Why is all the coast of Peru, being ful of sands, very temperate? And why is Potozi (distant from the silver Citie but eighteene leagues, and in the same de∣gree) of so divers a temperature, that the Countrie be∣ing extreamely colde, it is wonderfully barren and drie? And contrariwise, the silver Citie is temperate, inclining vnto heat, and hath a pleasant and fertil soile? It is more certaine, that the winde is the principall cause of these strange diversities; for without the bene∣fite of these coole windes, the heate of the Sunne is such, as (although it bee in the midst of the snow,) it burnes and sets all on fire: but when the coolenes of the
aire returnes suddenly, the heat is qualified how great soever it be: and whereas this coole winde raines ordi∣narie, it keepes the grosse vapours and exhalations of the earth from gathering together, which cause a hea∣vie and troublesome heat: whereof we see the contra∣rie in Europe, for by the exhalation of these vapours, the earth is almost burnt vp with the Sunne by day, which makes the nights so hotte and troublesome, as the aire doth often seeme like vnto a furnace: for this reason, at Peru, this freshnes of the winde, is the cause (by the meanes of some small shade at the Sunneset∣ting) that they remaine coole. But contrariwise, in Eu∣rope the most agreeable and pleasing time in summer, is the morning, and the evening is the most hotte and troublesome. But at Peru, and vnder all the Equinocti∣all it is not so, for every morning the winde from the sea doth cease, and the Sunne beginnes to cast his beames; and for this reason they feele the greatest heat in the morning, vntill the returne of the same windes, which otherwise they call the tide or winde of the sea, which makes them first to feele cold. We have tried al this, whilst we were at the Ilands of Barlovante, where in the mornings we did sweat for heat, and at noone we felt a fresh aire; for that then, a North-easterly wind which is fresh and coole, doth commonly blow. That they which inhabite vnder the Equinoctiall, live a sweete and pleasant life. CHAP. 14. IF those which have held opinion, that the earthly Paradise was vnder the Equinoctiall, had beene gui∣ded by this discourse,Vies. lib. 13. de Ciuit. c. 21. they had not seemed altogether
deceived, not that I will conclude, that the delightfull Paradice, whereof the Scripture speakes was in that place, which were too great a temeritie to affirme it for certaine. But I may well say, if there be any Paradice on earth, it ought to bee placed whereas they inioy a sweete and quiet temperature; for there is nothing more troublesome or repugnant to mans life, then to live vnder a heaven or aire that is contrarie, trouble∣some or sicklie: as there is nothing more agreeable, then to inioy a heaven that is sound, sweet and pleasant: It is certaine that we do not participate of any of the Ele∣ments, nor have not the vse of any so often in our bo∣dies as of the aire. It is that which invironeth our bo∣dies on all parts, which enters into our bowells, and at everie instant visits the heart; and there ingraves her properties. If the aire be any thing corrupted, it causeth death, if it be pure and healthfull, it augmenteth the strength; finally we may say, that the aire alone is the life of man: so as although we have goods and riches, if the aire be troublesome and vnholsome, wee cannot live quietly, nor with content: But if the aire be health∣full, pleasant, and sweete, although we have no other wealth, yet doth it yeelde content. Considering with my selfe, the pleasing temperature of many Countries at the Indies, where they know not what winter is, which by his cold doth freese them, nor summer which doth trouble them with heat, but that with a Matte they preserve themselves from the iniuries of all wea∣ther, and where they scarce have any neede to change their garments throughout the yeere. I say, that often considering of this, I find that if men at this day, would vanquish their passions, and free themselves from the snares of covetousnesse, leaving many fruitelesse and
pernicious disseines, without doubt they might live at the Indies very pleasant and happily: for that which other Poets sing of the Elisean fields and of the famous Tempe, or that which Plato reports or faines of his At∣lantike Iland; men should finde in these lands, if with a generous spirit they would choose rather to com∣mand their silver and their desires, then to remaine slaves as they are. That which wee have hitherto dis∣coursed, shal suffice touching the qualities of the Equi∣noctiall, of colde, heat, drought, raine, and the causes of temperature. The particular discourse of windes, waters, landes, mettalls, plants, and beasts, (whereof there is great aboundance at the Indies,) shall re∣maine for the other bookes; for the difficultie of that which is handled in this, though briefly, will happily seeme too tedious.
An advertisement to the Reader. THE Reader must vnderstand, that I wrote the two first bookes in Latine, when I was at Peru, and therefore they speake of matters of the Indies, as of things present: Being since re∣turned into Spaine, I thought good to translate them into our vulgar tongue, and not to change my former maner of speeach. But in the five following bookes, for that I made them in Europe, I have beene forced to change my stile, and therein to treate of matters of the Indies, as of Countries and things absent. And for that this diversitie of speech might with reason offend the Reader, I have thought good to advertise him thereof.
THE THIRD BOOKE of the Naturall and Morall Hi∣storie of the Indies. That the naturall Historie of the Indies, is pleasant and agreeable. CHAP. 1. EVerie naturall Historie is of it selfe pleasing, & very profitable, to such as will raise vp their discourse and contemplation on high, in that it doth move them to glorify the Author of all nature, as we sea the wise & holy men do,Psal. 103.135. 91.92.18.8. Iob 28.39. specially Da∣vid in many Psalmes. And Iob likewise, treating of the secrets of the Creator, whereas the same Lord answe∣reth Iob so amplie. He that takes delight to vnderstand the wondrous works of Nature, shal taste the true plea∣sure & content of Histories; & the more, whenas he shal know they are not the simple workes of men, but of the Creator himself, & that he shall comprehend the natu∣rall causes of these workes, then shall he truly occupie himselfe in the studie of Philosophie. But he that shall raise his consideration higher, beholding the gret & first architect of all these marvells, he shal know his wisedom
and infinite greatnes, and (we may say) shall be divinely imployed. And so the discourse of naturall things, may serve for many good considerations, although the fee∣blenes and weakenes of many appetites, are common∣ly accustomed to stay at things lesse profitable, which is the desire to know new things, called curiositie. The Discourse and Historie of naturall things at the Indies (besides the common content it gives,) hath yet ano∣ther benefite, which is to treate of things a farre off, the greatest part whereof were vnknowne to the most excellent Authors of that profession, which have bin among the Ancients. And if wee should write these naturall things of the Indies, so amply as they require, being so strange, I doubt not but we might compile workse, no lesse then those of Plinie, Theophrastes, and Aristotle. But I hold not my selfe sufficient, and al∣though I were, yet is not my intent, but to note some naturall things which I haue seene and knowne being at the Indies, or have received from men worthy of cre∣dit, the which seeme rare to me, and scarce knowne in Europe. By reason whereof, I will passe over many of them briefly, ether bicause they are writen of by others, or else require a longer discourse then I can now give. Of the windes, their differences, properties, and causes in generall. CHAP. 2. HAving discoursed in the two former Books of that which concernes the heavens, and the habitation of the Indies in generall, it behooves s now to treate of the three elements, aire, water and land, and their com∣pounds, which be mettalls, plants and beasts; for as for
the fire, I see no speciall matter at the Indies which is not in other regions, vnlesse some will say, that the manner to strike fire in rubbing two stones one against another, as some Indians vse, or to boyle any thing in gourdes, casting a burning stone into it, and other such like things, are remarkeable, whereof I have written what might be spoken. But of those which are in the Vulcans and mouths of fire at the Indies, worthy doubt∣lesse to be observed, I will speake in their order, treating of the diversitie of grounds, whereas they finde these fires or Vulcans. Therefore to beginne with the winds, I say, that with good reason, Salomon in the great iudge∣ment which God had given him, esteemes much the knowledge of the windes; and their properties, being very admirable; for that some are moyst, others drie, some vnwholesome, others found, some hote, others colde, some calme and pleasant, others rough and tem∣pestuous, some barren, and others fertile, with infinite other differences. There are some windes which blow in certaine regions, and are, as it were, Lordes thereof, not addmitting any entry or communication of their contraries. In some partes they blow in that sorte, as sometimes they are Conquerours, sometimes conque∣red; often there are divers and contrary winds, which doe runne together at one instant, dividing the way betwixt them, sometimes one blowing above of one sort, and another below of an other sorte; sometimes they incounter violently one with another, which puts them at sea in great danger: there are some windes which helpe to the generation of creatures, and others that hinder and are opposite. There is a certaine wind, of such a quality, as when it blowes in some country, it causeth it to raine fleas, and in so great aboundaunce, as
they trouble and darken the aire, and cover all the sea shoare: and in other places it raines frogges. These di∣versities and others which are sufficiently knowne, are commonly attributed to the place by the which these windes passe. For they say, that from these places they take their qualities to be colde, hote, drie or moyst, sick∣ly or sound, and so of the rest, the which is partly true, and cannot be denied; for that in a small distance you shall see in one winde many diversities. For example, the Solanus or Easterne winde is commonly hote and troublesome in Spaine; and in Murria it is the coolest and healthfullest that is, for that it passeth by the Or∣chards, and that large champaine which wee see very fresh. In Carthagene which is not farre from thence, the same winde is troublesome and vnholesome. The me∣ridionall (which they of the Ocean call South, and those of the Mediterranean sea, Mezo giorno) common∣ly is raynie and boisterous, and in the same Citie wher∣of I speake, it is wholesome and pleasant. Plinie reports that in Affricke it raines with a Northerne winde, and that the Southerne winde is cleere. Hee then that shall well consider what I have spoken of these windes, hee may conceive, that in a small distance of land or sea, one winde hath many and diverse qualities, yea sometimes quite contrary; whereby we may inferre, that he draw∣eth his property from the place where it passeth, the which is in such sort true (although we may not say in∣) as it is the onely and principall cause of the di∣versitie of the windes. It is a thing we easely finde, that in a river containing fiftie leagues in circuite (I putte it thus for an example) that the winde which blowes of the one parte, is hote and moist; and that which blowes on the other, is colde and drie: Notwithstanding this
diversitie is not found in places by which it passeth, the which makesmee rather o say, that the windes bring these qualities with them, whereby they give vnto them the names of these qualities. For example, we at∣tribute to the Northerne winde, otherwise called Cicr∣co, the property to be colde and drie, and to dissolve mists; to the Southerne winde his contrary called Le∣vshe, wee attribute the contrary qualitie, which is moist and hote, and ingenders mists. This being gene∣rall and common, we must seeke out another vniversall cause, to give a reason of these effects. It is not enough to say, that the places by which they passe, give them these qualities, seeing that passing by the same places we see contrary effects. So as we must of force confesse, that the region of the heaven where they blowe, gives them these qualities; as the Septentrionall is colde, be∣cause it commes from the North, which is the region farthest from the Sunne. The Southerne which blows from the Midday or South, is hote, and for that the heate drawes the vapours, it is also moist and raynie: and contrariwise the north is drie and subtile, for that it suffereth no vapours to congeale. And in this maner wee may discourse of other windes, giving them the qualities of the region where they blowe. But looking more precisely into it, this reason can not satisfie me: I will therefore demaund, What doth the region of the aire by which they passe; if i doth  them their qualities. I speake it for that in German in the Southerne winde is hote and moist, and in Affrike the Northerne is cold and drie. Notwithstanding it is most certaine, that in what region soever of Germanie the Southerne winde is ingendred, it must needes be more cold then any part of Affrike where the Northerne is ingendred.
And if it be so, why is the Northerne winde more cold in Affrike then the Southerne in Germany, seeing it pro∣ceeds from a hotter region? Some may answer me that the reason is, for that it blowes from the North, which is colde; but this is neither sufficient, nor true: for if it were so, whenas the Northerne winde blowes in Af∣frike, it should also runne and continue his motion in al the Region, even vnto the North, the which is not so: For at one instant there blowe Northerne windes very colde, in countries that are in fewer degrees; and Sou∣therne winds which are very hotte, in countries lying in more degrees, the which is most certaine, vsuall, and well knowne. Whereby (in my opinion) wee may in∣ferre that it is no pertinent reason to say, that the places by which the winds do passe give them their qualities, or that they be diversified for that they blowe from di∣vers regions of the ayre, although the one and the other have some reason, as I have said. But it is needefull to seeke further, to knowe the true and originall cause of these so strange differences which we see in the windes. I cannot conceive any other, but that the same efficient cause which bringeth foorth and maketh the winds to grow, dooth withall give them this originall qualitie: for in trueth the matter whereon the windes are made, which is no other thing (according to Aristotle) but the exhalation of the interior Elements, may well cause in effect a great parte of this diversitie, being more grosse, more subtile, more drie, and more moist. But yet this is no pertinent reason, seeing that we see in one region, where the vapours and exhalations are of one sorte and qualitie, that there rise windes and effectes quite con∣trary. We must therefore referre the cause to the high∣er and celestiall efficient, which must be the Sunne, and
to the motion and influence of the heavens, the which by their contrary motions, give and cause divers influ∣ences. But the beginnings of these motions and influ∣ences are so obscure and hidden from men, and on the other part, so mighty, and of so great force, as the holie Prophet David in his propheticall Spirite, and the Pro∣phet Ieremie admiring the greatnes of the Lorde speake thus, Qui profert ventos d thesauris suis.:Psalm 134 Ieremy. 10. He that drawes the windes out of his treasures. In trueth these princi∣ples and beginnings are rich and hidden treasures: for the Author of all things holdes them in his hand, and in his power; and when it pleaseth him, sendeth them foorth for the good or chastisement of men, and sends foorth such windes as hee pleaseth: not as that Eolus whome the Poets doe foolishly faine to have charge of the winds, keeping them in a cave like vnto wild beasts. We see not the beginning of these windes, neyther do we know how long they shal continue, or whither they shall goe. But we see and know well the diverse effects and operations they have, even as the supreme trueth, the Author of all things hath taught vs, saying, Spiritus vbi vult spirat, & vocemeius audis, & nescis vnde venit, aut q vadit. The spirit or winde blowes where it plea∣seth, and although thou feelest the breath, yet doost thou not knowe whence it commeth, nor whither it shall goe: To teach vs, that conceiving a little of mat∣ters which are present & common vnto vs, wee should not presume to vnderstand that which is so high and so hidden, as the causes and motives of the Holy-ghost. It is therefore sufficient that wee knowe his operations and effectes, the which are plainely discovered in his greatnes and perfections, and to have treated alitle phi∣losophically of the windes, and the causes of their dif∣ferences,
properties, and operations, which wee have produced into three; the place by which they passe, the regions where they blowe, and the celestiall virtue, the beginning and motive of the windes. Of certaine properties of windes which blowe at the new worlde. CHAP. 3. IT is a question much disputed by Aristotle, whe∣ther the Southerne winde, which we call Abreguo, blowes from the pole Antartike, or onely from the E∣quinoctiall line which is properly to demaund, if beyond the Equinoctiall it holde the same qualitie of hote and rainie, as we see here. It is a point whereof we may with reason stand in doubt, for although it passe the Equinoctiall, yet is it still the Southerne wind, see∣ing it comes from the same parte of the worlde; as the Northerne winde which comes to the contrary, conti∣nues stil the same winde, although it passe the burning Zone and Equinoctiall line. And it seemes hereby, that these two windes should hold their first properties, the one to be hote and moist, the other colde and drie; the South to breede mists and raine, and the North to dis∣perse them, and to make a cleere Skie. Notwithstand∣ing Aristotle leanes to the contrary opinion, for that in Europe the Northerne winde is colde, because it comes from the Pole, a region extreamely colde, and the Sou∣therne winde contrariwise is hotte, because it comes from the South, which is the region the Sunne dooth most heate. By this reason then we should believe that the South winde should be colde to them that inhabite on the other side of the line, and the Northerne wind
should be hote, for in those partes the Southerne wind comes from the Pole, & the Northerne from the Line. And though it seemes by this reason, that the Southern winde should be more colde there, than the Northern is heere: for that they holde the region of the South Pole to be more colde then that of the North, by rea∣son that the Sunne stayeth seaven dayes every yeere in the Tropike of Cancer, more then it dooth in the Tro∣picke of Capricorne, as it appeareth by the Equinoxes and Solstices he makes in the two Circles, wherein it seemeth, that Nature would shew the preheminence and excellencie of this moity of the worlde, which is in the North, above the other parte in the South: so as it seemeth there is reason to beleeve that these qualities of the windes doe change in passing the Line; but in trueth it is not so, as I could comprehend by the ex∣perience I had some yeeres, being in those partes of the Indies, which lie on the South of the other side of the Line. It is true, that the Northerne winde is not vsually colde and cleere there as heere. In some parts of Peru, as at Lima, and on the Plaines, they find the Northern windes troublesome and vnwholesome, and all along the coast, which runs above five hundred leagues, they holde the Southerne windes for healthfull and coole, and (which is more) most cleere and pleasant; yea it never raines, contrary to that wee see in Europe, and of this side the Line. Yet that which chaunceth vpon the coast of Peru is no generall rule, but rather an excepti∣on, and a wonder of Nature, neuer to raine vpon that coast, and ever to have one winde, without giving place to his contrary, whereof we will heereafter speake our minde.
Now let vs stand vpon this point, that the Nor∣therne winde beyond the line, hath not the same pro∣perties, which the Southerne winde hath on this side, although they both blow from the midday, to regions and parts of the world which be opposite and contra∣rie. For it is no generall rule there, that the Northerne winde is neither hote nor rainie there, as the South winde is on this side; but contrariwise, it raines when∣as the South winde blowes there, as we see in all the Sierre or mountaine of Peru, in Chile, and in the Coun∣trie of Congo, which is on the other side of the line, and farre advanced into the Sea. And in Potozi like∣wise, the winde which they call Tomahani, (which is our North,) if my memorie faile me not, is extreamely cold, drie, and vnpleasant, as it is heere with vs. Yet doth not the Northerne winde disperse the cloudes vsually there, as it doth heere: but contrariwise, if I be not deceived, it doth often cause raine. There is no doubt, but the windes do borrow this great diversitie of contrarie effects, from the places by which they passe, and the neere regions where they are bred, as we see by daily experience in a thousand places. But spea∣king in generall of the qualitie of the windes, we must rather looke to the coastes or partes of the world from whence they proceede, then to observe, whether they be on this side, or beyond the line, as it seemes the Phi∣losopher held opinion. These capitall windes, which be the East, and West, have no such universall quali∣ties, nor so common in this continent, nor in the other, as the two former. The Solanus or Easterne winde, is commonly here troblesome & vnholsome, & the We∣sterne or Zephirus, is more milde and healthfull. At the Indies, and in all the burning Zone, the Easterne winde
which they call Brise, is contrariwise very healthfull and pleasant. Of the West, I cannot speake any thing certaine or generall, for that it blowes not at all, or ve∣ry seldome in the burning Zone, for in all the naviga∣tion betwixt the two Tropikes, the Easterne winde is ordinary. And for that it is one of the admirable workes of Nature, it shall be good to vnderstand the cause and the beginning thereof. That the burning Zone, the Brises, or Easterly windes, do continually blowe, and without the Zone the we∣sterne, and that the Easterly are ordinarie alwaies there. CHAP. 4. THe waies at Sea are not as at Land, to returne the sameway they passe. It is all one way (saieth the Philosopher) from Athens to Thebes, and from Thebes to Athens; but it is not so at Sea,Iuan. de cos in Decade. 1. li. 4. ca. 6. for we go one way, and returne by another. The first which discovered the East and weast Indies, laboured much with great diffi∣cultie to finde out their course, vntill that Experience (the mistris of these secrets,) had taught them, that to saile through the Ocean, is not like the passage in Italie, through the Mediterranean sea, where in their returne, they observe the same Ports and Capes they had sight of in their passage, attending still the benefite of the winde, which changeth instantly, and when that failes, they have recourse to their owers; and so the Gallies go and come daily, coasting along the shoare. In some partes of the Ocean, they may not looke for any other winde then that which blowes, for that commonly it continues long. To conclude, that which is good to
go by, is not fit to returne with: for in the sea beyond the Tropicke, and within the burning Zone, the Easter∣ly windes raine continually, not suffering their con∣traries. In the which region, there are two strange things, the one is, that in that Zone, (being the greatest of the five, into the which the world is divided,) the Easterly windes (which they call Brises) do raine, not suffering the Westerne or Southerne, (which they call lower windes,) to have their course at any season of the yeere: The other wonder is, that these Easterly windes never cease to blow, and most commonly in places neerest to the line, (where it seemes that calmes should be more frequent, being a part of the world, most subict to the heate of the Sunne, but it is con∣trarie, for you shall hardly finde any calmes there, and the winde is cold and continues longer, which hath been found true in all the navigations of the Indies. This is the reason, why the voyage they make from Spaine to the West Indies is shorter, more easie, and more assured, then the returne to Spaine. The fleetes parting from Siville, have more difficultie to passe the Canaries, for that the gulph of Yegues or of Mares, is variable, be∣ing beaten with divers windes, but having passed the Canaries, they saile with a westerne winde vntill they come to the burning Zone, where presently they finde an Easterly winde, and so they saile on with full windes, so as they have scant any nede to touch their sailes in the whole voiage: for this reason they called this great gulph, the gulph of Dances for the calmenes and pleasantnes thereof. Then following their course, they come to the Ilands of Guadelupe Dominique, Desire, Marigualante, and the rest, which in that place, be as it were, the suburbs of the Indies. There the fleetes sepe∣rate
and divide themselves, whereof some (which go to new Spaine,) take to the right hand towards Hispani∣ola; and having discovered Cape S. Anthonie, they passe vnto S. Ihon Delua, alwaies vsing the same Easterly windes. Those for the maine Land, take the left hand, discovering the high mountaine of Tayrone, then ha∣ving touched at Carthagene, they passe vnto Nombre de Dios, from whence they go by land to Panama, and from thence, by the South sea to Peru. But when the fleetes returne to Spaine, they make their voiage in this sort: The fleete of Peru discovers Cape S. Anthonie, then they enter into the Havana, which is a goodly Port in the Iland of Cuba. The fleete of new Spaine, doth likewise touch at the Havana, being parted from the true Crosse, or from the Iland of S. Ihon Delua, the which is not without difficultie, for that commonly Easterly windes blow there, which is a contrarie winde to go to the Havana. These fleetes being ioyned toge∣ther for Spaine, they seeke their height without the Tropicks, where presently they finde Westerly winds, which serve them vntill they come in view of the Aco∣res, or Terceres, and from thence to Seville. So as their voiage in going, is of a small height, not above twentie degrees from the line, which is within the Tropickes. But the returne is without the Tropickes, in eight and twentie or thirtie degrees of height at the least, for that within the Tropickes, the Easterne winds continu∣ally blow, the which are fittest to go from, Spaine to the West Indies, for that their course is, from East to west; and without the Tropickes, (which is in three and twentie degrees of height,) they finde westerly winds, the which are the more certaine and ordinarie, the farther you are from the line, and more fit to returne
from the Indies; for that they are windes blowing from the South and West, which serve to runne into the East and North. The like discourse is of the Navigati∣on made into the South sea, going from new Spaine, or Peru, to the Philippines or China, and returning from the Philippines or China to new Spaine, the which is easie, for that they saile alwaies from East to West, neere the line, where they finde the Easterly windes to blow in their poope. In the yeere 1584. there went a shippe from Callo in Lima to the Philippines, which sailed 2000. and 700. leagues without sight of land, and the first it discovered, was the Iland of Lus∣son, where they tooke port, having performed their voiage in two moneths, without want of winde or a∣ny torment, and their course was almost continually vnder the line; for that from Lima (which is twelve de∣grees to the South) he came to Menilla, which is as much to the North. The like good fortune had Alvaro de Mandana, whenas he went to discover the Ilands of Soloman, for that he had alwaies a full gale, vntill he came within view of these Ilands, the which must be distant from that place of Peru, from whence he parted, about a thousand leagues, having runne their course alwaies in one height to the South. The returne is like vnto the voiage from the Indies vnto Spaine: for those which returne from the Philippines or China to Mexico, to the end they may recover the Westerne windes, they mount a great height, vntill they come right a∣gainst the Ilands of Iappon, and discovering the Caliphor∣nes, they returne by the coast of new Spaine, to the Port of Acapulco, from whence they parted. So as it is pro∣ved likewise by this navigation, that they saile easily from East to West, within the Tropickes, for that their
Easterly windes do raine: but returning from West to East, they must seeke the Westerne windes without the Tropickes, in the height of seven and twentie de∣grees. The Portingales prove the like in their naviga∣tions to the East Indies, although it be in a contrarie course; for that going from Portugall the voiage is trou∣blesome, but their returne is more easie, for that in go∣ing, their course is from the West to the East: so as they must of necessitie mount, vntill they have found their generall windes, which they hold to be above the se∣ven and twentith degree. And in their returne, they discover the Terceres, but with more ease, for that they come from the East, where the Easterly or Northerne windes do serve them. Finally, the Marriners hold it for a certaine rule and observation, that within the Tro∣pickes continually raine Easterly windes, and therefore it is very easie to saile to the West. But without the Tropickes, there are in some seasons Easterly windes, and in some, and more ordinarie Westerne windes: by reason whereof, they which saile from West to East, labour alwaies to be out of of the burning Zone, to put themselves in the height of seven and twentie de∣grees. And for this reason, men have indangered them∣selves to vndertake strange Navigations, and to seeke out farre Countries vnknowne. Of the differences of the Brises or Easterne windes, and the Westerne, and likewise of other windes. CHAP. 5. ALthough that which we have spoken, be generall and well approoved, yet there remaines still a de∣sire in me to learne the cause of this secret; why vnder
the burning Zone we saile alwaies from East to Weast, with so great facilitie, and not from Weast to East▪ Which is as much as if wee should demaund, why the Easterly windes raine there, and not the Weasterly, for that according to good Philosophie, that which is per∣petuall, vniversall, and of it selfe (as the Philosophers say) must have a proper cause, and of it selfe. But be∣fore I stay at this question, which seemes remarkeable, it shal be necessary to shew what we vnderstand by Bri∣ses or Easterly windes, and Weasterly, for that it will serve much for this subiect, and for many other matters touching windes and navigations. The Pilotes make two and thirty poynts of windes, for that to bring their ship to the desired haven, they must make their account as punctually and as strictly as they can; for bending to the one side, or the other, never so little, in the end of their course, they should finde themselves farre from their pretended place. And they reckon but twoo and thirty quarters of the windes, for that more woulde confound the memorie. But with reckoning as they accompt two and thirty windes, so may they reckon, three score and foure, one hundred twenty and eight, and two hundred fifty and six. Finally, multiply these partes to an infinite, for the place where the shippe is, being as it were the centre, and all hemisphere in cir∣cumference, what should let, but wee may accompt lines without number, the which comming from this centre, drawe directly to these lineall circles in so many partes, which might cause as many diverse windes, see∣ing that the winde comes from all partes of the hemi∣sphere, which we may divide into as many parts as we will imagine, yet the wisedome of man, conformable to the holy Scripture, observes foure windes, the princi∣pall
of all others, and as it were the foure corners of the worlde, the which they ioyne in making a crosse with two lines, whereof the one goes from one Pole to an∣other; and the other from one Equinoctiall to the o∣ther. Of the one side the North or Aquilon, and the Southerne winde or mid-day opposite; and on the o∣ther side the East, which comes from the Sunne rising, and the Weast from his setting. And although the holy Scripture in some places speakes of other diversities of windes, as of Eurus and Aquilo, which those in the O∣cean sea call Nordest, & they of the mediterranean sea, Gregual, whereof there is mention made in Saint Paul navigation; yet the same holy Scripture makes menti∣on of those foure notable windes, which all the worlde knowes, which areas is saide, North, South, East and Weast. But for that we finde three differences in the rising of the Sunne, from whence the name of East comes, that is, the two greatest declinings which he doth vsu∣ally make, and the meane betwixt them both, as hee dooth rise in diverse places, in winter, in summer, and in that which holdes the middle of these two seasons. For this reason they have reckoned two other windes, the East of summer, and the East of winter; and by con∣sequence, two Weasts, the one of summer, and the o∣ther of winter, their contraries. So as there are eight windes in eight notable poyntes of heaven, which are the two Poles, the two Equinoxes, the two Solstices, and their opposites in the same Circle, the which are called by divers names and appellations in every place of the sea and land. Those which saile the Ocean, doe vsually call them thus. They give the name of North to those windes that blowe from our Pole, which carri∣eth
the same name, and Northeast that which is neerest, and comes from the summer East: They call East that which comes directly from the rising Equinoctiall, and Southeast that which comes from the winter rising. To the Mid-day or Pole Antartike they give the name of Southwest; and to that of the winters setting, the name of Southwest, to the right setting Equinoctiall the name of West, and to the summers setting, North∣weast. They divide amongst them the rest of the winds, and give them their names as they participate and ap∣proach to others: as North-northweast, North-north∣east, East-northeast, East-southeast, South-southweast, Weast-southwest, Weast-norwest; so as by their names we know whence they proceed. In the Mediterranean sea, although they follow the same division and maner of reckoning, yet doe they give them other different names; they call the North Tramontana, and his con∣trary, the South MeZo-giorno, or Mydy; the East they call Levant, and the Weast Povant: and those which crosse these foure they call thus: Southeast is by them named Xirocque, or Xaloque, and his opposite, which is Norwest; Mestrall they call the northeast. Gre or Gre∣guall; and the Southweast his contrary; Levesche, Li∣bique, or Affricaine. In Latine the foure knowne winds be, Sptentrio, Auster, Subsolanus, Favonius; and those which be interlaced are Aquilo, Vulturnus, Affricus and Corus; according vnto Plinie, Vulturnus and Eurus, is the same winde that Southeast or Xaloque, Favonius is the Weast or Ponnt, Aquilo and Boreas is Nortest or Gre∣gual, or Tramontana, Affricus and Libique is the South∣weast or Levesche, Auster and Notus is the South or Midday, Corus and Zephirus the Northwest or Mestral, and to the Northeast or Gregual, they give no other
name then Phenicien. Some divide them after an other maner: but for that it is not now our purpose to repeate the Latine and Greeke names of all the windes, lette vs onely shew which be those amongst these windes, that the Mariners of the Indian Ocean call Brises, and lower winds. I was long in some difficulty about these names, seeing them to vse them very diversly, vntill I found that these names were more generall, then proper and peculiar. They call Brises those which serve to goe to the Indies, the which blowe in their poope, which by this meanes comprehend all the Easterly windes, and those which depend of them. And they do call lower windes those which are fitte to returne from the Indies, which blowe from the South to the summer-weast, so as they be, as it were, two Esquadrons of windes of ey∣ther side, the Corporalles be of oneside Northeast or Greguall, on the other Southweast or Levesche. But you must vnderstand, that of the number of eight windes and differences which we have counted, five are proper to saile by, and not the other three. I say, that when a ship sailes at sea, he may make a long voyage with one of these windes, although they serve him not equally; but he cannot vse any of the other three. As if a shippe goe to the South, he shall saile with the North, North∣east, Northweast, and with East and Weast: for side∣windes serve to goe, or to come. But with a Southerne wind he cannot saile, being directly contrary, nor with with his two Collaterals which is Southest and South∣west, which is a very triviall thing, & common to them that saile. And therefore it is not needefull to explaine them heere, but to signifie that the side-windes of the right East, are those which commonly blow to the bur∣ning Zone, which they doe call Brises: and those from
the South declining to the Weast, which serve to saile from Weast to East, are not common in the burning Zone, and therefore they seeke them without the tro∣pikes; and the Indian Mariners commonly call them lower windes, or Vents dábas. What is the reason why sailing vder the burning Zone, we finde alwayes Easterly windes? CHAP. 6. LEt vs now speake of that which toucheth the Que∣stion propounded, what should be the reason whie vnder the burning Zone wee saile easily from East to Weast, and not contrary: wherein we must presuppose two certaine groundes. The one is, that the motion of the first moover, which they call Diurnall, not onlie drawes and mooves with him the celestiall spheares, which are inferiour vnto him, as wee see daily in the sunne, the moone, and the starres, but also the Ele∣ments do participate of this motion, insomuch as they are not hindered. The earth is not mooved, by reason of her heavinesse, which makes it immooveable, being far from this first motor. The element of water moves not likewise with this Diurnall motion, for that it is vnited to the earth and make one sphere, so as the earth keeps it from all circular motion. But th'other two ele∣ments of fire & aire, are more subtil and neerer the hea∣venly regions, so as they participate of their motion, and are driven about circularly, as the same celestial bo∣dies. As for the fire, without doubt it hath his sphere, (as Aristotle and other Philosophers have held) but for the aire (which is no point of our subiect) it is most cer∣taine that it mooves with a motion diurnall, which is
from East to Weast, which we see plainely in Comets that moove from the East vnto the Weast, mounting, descending, and finally turning in the hemispheare in the same sort as the Starres move in the firmament; for otherwise these Comets being in the region & sphere of the aire, whereas they ingender, appeares consum'd. It should be impossible for them to moove circularly, as they doe, if the element of the aire doth not moove with the same motion that the first motor dooth. For these elements being of a burning substance, by reason they should be fixt, without mooving circularly, if the sphere where they are did not moove; if it be not as we faine, that some Angell or intellectuall Spirite dooth walke with the Comet, guiding it circularly. In the yeere of our Lord God one thousand five hundred sea∣venty and seaven appeered that wonderfull Comet, (in forme like vnto a feather) from the horizon almost to the middest of heaven, and continued from the first of November, vntill the eight of December: I say from the first of November, for although in Spaine it was noted but the ninth of November (according to the testimony of Writers of that time) yet at Peru, where I was then, I remember well, we did see it, and observe it eight dayes before, and all the time after. Touching the cause of this diversity, some may dilate vpon it par∣ticularly, I will onely shew, that during those fourtie dayes which it continued, we all observed (both such as were in Spaine, and we that lived then at the Indies) that it mooved daily with an vniversall motion, from East to Weast, as the Moone and other Planets, wher∣by it appeeres that the sphere of the aire, being its Re∣gion, the element it selfe must of necessitie moove af∣ter the same sort. We noted, also, that besides this vni∣versall
motion, it had an other particular, by which it moved with the planets fro west to east; for every night it turned more Eastward▪ like vnto the Moone, Sunne, and Planet of Venus. Wee did also observe a third par∣ticular motion, whereby it mooved from the zodiacke towards the North; for after some nights it was found neerer vnto the Septentrionall signes. And it may be this was the reason why the great Comet was sooner seene by those that were southerly, as at Peru, and later discovered by them of Europe: for by this third motion (as I have saide) it approached neerer the Northerne Regions. Yet every one may well observe the differen∣ces of this motion, so as wee may well perceive, that many and sundry celestiall bodies, give their impressi∣ons to the sphere of the aire. In like sorte it is most cer∣taine that the ayre mooves with the circular motion of the heaven, from Est to West, which is the first ground before mentioned. The second is no lesse certaine, the which is, that the motion of the aire in those parts that are vnder the Line, or neere vnto it, is very swift and light, the more it approacheth to the Equinoctiall; but the farther off it is from the Line, approching neere the Poles, the more slowe and heavie this motion is. The reason heereof is manifest, for that the mooving of the celestiall bodies, being the efficient cause of the moo∣ving of the ayre, it must of necessitie be more quicke and light, where the celestiall bodies have their swift∣est motion. To labour to shew the reason why the heaven hath a quicker motion vnder the burning Zone, which is the Line, then in any other part of the heaven, were to make small account of men: seeing it is easie to see in a wheele, that its motion is more slowe and heavy in the
part of greatest circumference, then in the lesse, and that the greater circumference ends at one instant with the lesser. From these two grounds proceedes the rea∣son, where such as saile great gulphs from east to west, doe alwayes finde the winde in their powpe, going in a small altitude, and the neerer they come to the Equi∣noctiall, the more certaine and durable the winde is. And contrariwise, sailing from west to east, they always finde the winde contrary; for that the swift motion of the Equinoctiall drawes after it the element of the aire, as it doth the surplus of the higher spheares. So as the aire dooth alwayes follow the motion of the day. Go∣ing from east to weast, without any alteration, and the motion of the aire being swift, draweth after it all the vapours and exhalations which rise from the sea, which causeth in those Regions a continuall easterly winde, which runnes from the Levant. Father Alonso Sanches a religious man, and of our company, who hath tra∣velled the east and west Indies, as a man ingenious, and of experience, said, that sailing vnder the Line, or neere vnto it, with a continued and durable season, it seemed to him to be the same aire, mooved by the heaven the which guided the ships, and was not properly a winde nor exhalation, but an aire moved with the daily course of the sunne: for proofe whereof he shewed, that the season is alwayes equall, and alike at the gulph of Da∣nees▪ and in other great gulphes where wee saile vnder the burning Zone, by reason whereof their sailes are al∣ways of one fashion, without any blustring, having no neede, in a manner, to change them in all their course. And if the ayre were not mooved by the heavens, it might sometimes faile, sometimes change to the con∣trary, and sometimes there would grow some stormes.
Although this be learnedly spoken, yet can we not de∣ny it to be a winde, seeing there are vapours and exha∣lations of the sea; and that we sometimes see the Brise or easterly winds stronger, sometimes more weake, and placed in that sort, as sometimes they can hardly carry all their sailes. We must then know (and it is true) that the aire mooved, draweth vnto it the vapours it findes; for that the force is great, and findes no resistance, by reason whereof the easterne and weasterne windes are continuall, and in a maner alwayes alike, in those parts which are neere the Line, and almost vnder all the bur∣ning zone, which is the course the Sunne followes be∣twixt the two circles of Cancer and Capricorne. Why without the Zone, in a greater altitude, wee finde al∣wayes westrly winds CHAP. 7. WHoso would neerely looke into what hath bin spoken, may likewise vnderstand, that going from the west to the east, in altitude beyond the Tro∣pikes, we shall finde westerne windes, for that the mo∣tion of the Equinoctiall being so swift, it is a cause that the aye mooveth vnder it according to this motion, which is from east to weast, drawing after it the vapors and exhalations that rise of either side the Equinoctial or burning zone, incounting the course and motion of the zone, are forced by the repercussion to returne almost to the contrary, whence growe the southweast winds so ordinary in those parts. Even as we see in the course of waters, the which (if they be incountred by others of more force,) returne in a maner backe. So it seemes to be like in vapours and exhalations, whereby
it growes that the windes doe turne and separate them∣selves from one part to another. These westerly winds do commonly rai in a meane altitude, which is from twenty and seeven to thirty and seven degrees, though they be not so certaine nor so regular as the Brises that are in a lesse altitude. The reason is, for that the south∣west windes are no causes of this proper and equal mo∣tion of the heaven, as the Brises are, being neere to the Line. But (as I have said) they are more ordinarie, and often more furious and tempestuous. But passing into a greater altitude, as of fortie degrees, there is as small assurance of windes at sea as at land; for sometimes the east or north winde blowes, and sometimes the south, or weast: whereby it happeneth their navigations are more vncertaine, and more dangerous. Of the exceptions to the foresaid Rules, and of the Windes and Calmes both at Land and at Sea. CHAP. 8. THat which we have spoken of winds, which blow ordinarilie within and without the Zone, must be vnderstood of the maine Sea, and in the great gulphes; for at land it is otherwise, where we finde all sorts of windes, by reason of the inequalitie which is betwixt the mountaines and the vallies; the great num∣ber of Rivers and Lakes, and the divers scituations of Countries, whence the grosse and thicke vapors arise, which are moved from the one part or the other, ac∣cording to the diversitie of their beginnings, which cause these divers windes the motion of the aire, cau∣sed by the heaven having not power enough, to draw and move them with it. And this varietie of windes is
not onely found at land, but also vpon the sea coast, which is vnder the burning Zone, for that there be fo∣raine or land windes which come from the land, and many which blow from the sea; the which windes from the sea, are commonly more wholesome and more pleasant then those of the land, which are contra∣riwise troublesome and vnwholesome, although it be the differrence of the coast that causeth this diversitie: commonly the land windes blow from mid-night to the sunne rising, and the sea windes vntill sunne setting. The reason perhaps may be, that the earth, as a grosse substance, fumes more whenas the sunne shines not vpon it, even as greene wood, or scarce drie, smoakes most when the flame is quenched. But the sea, which is compounded of more subtile partes, engenders no fumes, but when it is hote, even as straw or haie, being moist and in small quantitie, breedes smoake when it is burnt, and when the flame failes, the fume suddenly ceaseth. Whatsoever it be, it is certaine that the land winde blowes by night, and that of the sea by day. So that even as there are often contrarie, violent, and tem∣pestuous windes vpon the sea coast, so do we see very great calmes. Some men of great experience report, that having sailed many great passages at sea vnder the line, yet did they never see any calmes, but that they al∣waies make way little or much, the aire being moved by the celestiall motion, which is sufficient to guide a ship, blowing in poope, as it doth. I have already said, that a ship of Lima going to Mania, sailed two thou∣sand seven hundred leagues, alwaies vnder the line, or not above twelve degrees from it, and that in the mo∣neths of Februarie and March, whenas the sunne is there for Zenith, and in all this space they found no
calmes, but alwaies a fresh gale, so as in two moneths they performed this great voyage. But in the bur∣ning Zone and without it, you shall vsually see great calmes vpon the coastes, where the vapors come from the Ilands, or maine land. And therefore stormes and tempestes, and the suddaine motions of the aire, are more certaine and ordinarie vpon the coastes, whereas the vapors come from the land, then in full sea, I meane vnder the burning Zone, for without it and at sea, there are both calmes and whirlewindes. Notwith∣standing, sometimes betwixt the two Tropickes, yea, vnder the line, you shall have great raine and suddaine showers, yea, farre into the sea; for the working where∣of, the vapors and exhalations of the sea, are sufficient, which moving sometimes hastily in the aire, cause thunder and whirlewindes, but this is more ordinarie neere to the land, and vpon the land. When I sailed from Peru to new Spaine, I observed, that all the time we were vpon the coast of Peru, our voiage was (as it was ordinary,) very calme and easie, by reason of the Sou∣therne winde that blowes, having alwaies a fore winde, returning from Spaine and new Spaine. As we passed the gulph, lanching farther into the sea, almost vnder the line, we found the season coole, quiet, and pleasant, with a full winde, but comming neere to Nicaragua, and to all that coast, we had contrarie windes, with great store of raine and fogges. All this navigation was vnder the burning Zone: for from twelve degrees to the South, which is Lima, wee sailed to the seventeenth, which is Gautulco, a port of new Spaine: and I beleeve, that such as have observed their navigations, made vn∣der the burning Zone, shall finde what I have said, which may suffice for the windes which raine at sea, vn∣der the burning Zone.
Of some mervellous effects of the windes, which are in some partes of the Indies. CHAP. 9. IT were a very difficult matter, to report particular∣ly the admirable effectes which some windes cause in divers regions of the world, and to give a reason thereof. There are windes, which naturally trouble the water of the sea, and makes it greene and blacke, others cleere as Cristall, some comfort and make glad, others trouble and breede heavines. Such as nourish silke∣wormes, have great care to shut their windowes, when∣as the South-west windes do blow, and to open them to the contrarie: having found by certaine experience, that their wormes diminish and die with the one, and fatten and become better with the other; and who so will neerely observe it, shall finde in himselfe, that the diversities of windes, cause notable impressions and changes in the bodie, principally in sicke partes and ill disposed, when they are most tender and weake. The holy scripture calleth one a burning winde,Ex. c. 10. & 14 Ib. 17. Ioan. 4. Osee. 13. Dan. 3. another, a winde full of dew and sweetnes. And it is no wonder if wee see such notable effects of the windes, in plants, beasts, and men, seeing that we see it visibly in yron, which is the hardest of all mettalls. I have seene grates of yron in some partes of the Indies, so rusted and con∣sumed, that pressing it betwixt your fingers, it dissolved into powder, as if it had been hay or parched straw, the which proceedes only from the winde which doth corrupt it, having no meanes to withstand it. But lea∣ving apart many other great and notable effects, I will onely make mention of two. The one, although it cau∣seth pangs grater then death it selfe, yet doth it not
breede any further inconvenience. The other takes a∣way life without feeling of it. The sicknes of the sea, wherewith such are troubled as first begin to go to sea, is a matter very ordinary; and yet if the nature thereof were vnknowne to men, we should take it for the pangs of death, seeing how it aflicts and torments while it doth last, by the casting of the stomacke, paine of the head, and other troublesome accidents. But in trueth this sicknes so common and ordinarie, happens vn∣to men by the change of the aire and sea. For al∣though it be true that the motion of the shippe helpes much, in that it moves more or lesse: and likewise the infections and ill favors of things in the shippe: yet the proper and naturall cause, is the aire and the vapors of the sea, the which doth so weaken and trouble the bo∣dy and the stomacke, which are not accustomed there∣vnto, that they are wonderfully moved and changed: for the aire is the Element, by which wee live and breathe, drawing it into our entrailes, the which we bathe therewithall. And therefore there is nothing that so suddenly, and with so great force doth alter vs, as the change of the aire we breathe, as we see in those which die of the plague. It is approved by many expe∣riences, that the aire of the sea, is the chiefe cause of this strange indisposition; the one is, that when there blowes from the sea a strong breath, we see them at the land as it were sea sicke, as I my selfe have often found. Another is, the farther we go into the sea, and retyre from land, the more we are touched and dazeled with this sicknes. Another is, that coasting along any Iland, and after lanching into the maine, we shall there finde the aire more strong. Yet will I not deny, but the mo∣tion and agitation may cause this sicknes, seeing that
we see some are taken therewith passing rivers in Barkes: others in like sort going in Coches and Caros∣ses, according to the divers complexions of the sto∣macke: as contrariwise, there are some, how boistrous and troublesome soever the sea be, doe never feele it. Wherefore it is a matter certaine, & tried, that the aire of the sea, doth commonly cause this effect in such as newly go to sea. I thought good to speake this, to shew a strange effect, which happens in some partes of the In∣dies, where the ayre & the wind that rains make men da∣zie, not lesse, but more then at sea. Some hold it for a fa∣ble, others say it is an addition: for my part I will speake what I have tried. There is in Peru, a high mountaine which they call Pariacaca, and having heard speake of the alteration it bred, I went as well prepared as I could. according to the instructions which was given me, by such as they call Vaguianos or expert men: but not∣withstanding all my provision, when I came to mount the degrees, as they call them, which is the top of this mountaine, I was suddenly surprized with so mortall and strange a pang, that I was ready to fall from the top to the ground: and although we were many in compa∣ny, yet every one made haste (without any tarrying for his companion,) to free himselfe speedily from this ill passage. Being then alone with one Indian, whom I in∣treated to helpe to stay me, I was surprised with such pangs of straining & casting, as I thought to cast vp my heart too; for having cast vp meate, sleugme, & choller, both yellow and greene; in the end I cast vp blood, with the straining of my stomacke. To conclude, if this had continued, I should vndoubtedly have died; but this lasted not above three or foure houres, that we were come into a more convenient and naturall tempe∣rature,
where all our companions (being fouteteene or fifteene) were much wearied. Some in the passage demaunded confession, thinking verily to die; others left the ladders and went to the ground, beeing over∣come with casting, and going to the stoole: and it was tolde me, that some have lost their lives there with this accident. I beheld one that did beate himselfe against the earth, crying out for the rage and griefe which this passage of Pariacaca hadde caused. But commonly it dooth no important harme, onely this, paine and trou∣blesome distaste while it endures: and not onely the passage of Pariacaca hath this propertie, but also all this ridge of the mountaine, which runnes above five hundred leagues long, and in what place soever you passe, you shall finde strange intemperatures, yet more in some partes then in other, and rather to those which mount from the sea, then from the plaines. Besides Pa∣riacaca, I have passed it by Lucanas and Soras; in an o∣ther place, by Colleguas, and by Cavanas. Finally, by foure different places, going and comming, and alwaies in this passage I have felt this alteration, although in no place so strongly, as at the first in Pariacaca, which hath beene tried by allsuch as have passed it. And no doubt but the winde is the cause of this intemperature and strange alteration, or the aire that raignes there. For the best remedy (and all they finde) is to stoppe their noses, their eares, and their mouthes, as much as may be, and to cover themselves with cloathes, especially the sto∣macke, for that the ayre is subtile and piercing, going into the entrailes, and not onely men feele this alterati∣on, but also beasts that sometimes stay there, so as there is no spurre can make them goe forward. For my part I holde this place to be one of the highest parts of land
in the worlde; for we mount a wonderfull space. And in my opinion, the mountaine Nvade of Spaine, the Pi∣rences, and the Alpes of Italie, are as ordinarie houses, in regarde of hie Towers. I therefore perswade my selfe, that the element of the aire is there so subtile and deli∣cate, as it is not proportionable with the breathing of man, which requires a more grosse and temperate aire, and I beleeve it is the cause that doth so much alter the stomacke, & trouble all the disposition. The passages of the mountaines Nvade, and other of Europe, which I have seene, although the aire be colde there, and doth force men to weare more clothes, yet this colde doth not take away the appetite from meate, but contrari∣wise it provokes; neyther dooth it cause any casting of the stomacke, but onely some paine in the feete and handes. Finally, their operation is outward. But that of the Indies, whereof I speake (without molesting of foote or hand, or any outward parte) troubles all the entrailes within: and that which is more admirable, when the sunne is hote, which maketh mee imagine, that the griefe wee feele comes from the qualitie of the aire which wee breathe: Therefore that is most subtile and delicate, whose colde is not so sensible, as piercing. All this ridge of mountains is, for the most part, desart, without any villages or habitations for men, so as you shall scarce finde any small cotages to lodge such as do passe by night: there are no beasts, good or bad, but some Vicunos, which are their countrey muttons, and have a strange and wonderfull property, as I shall shew in his place. The grasse is often burnt, and all blacke with the aire, and this desart runnes five and twenty or thirty leagues overthwart, and in length above five hundred leagues. There are other desarts or places in∣habited,
which at Peru they call Punas (speaking of the second poynt we promised) where the quallitie of the ayre cutteth off mans life without feeling. In former time the Spaniardes went from Peru, to the realme of Chille by this mountaine, but at this day they do passe commonly by sea, and sometimes alongst the side of it. And though that way be laborious and troublesome, yet is there not so great daunger as by the mountaine, where there are Plaines, on the which many men have perished and died, and sometimes have scaped by great happe, whereof some have remained lame. There runs a small breath, which is not very strong nor violent, but proceedes in such sorte, that men fall downe dead, in a manner without feeling, or at the least, they loose their feete and handes: the which may seeme fabulous, yet is it most true. I have knowne and frequented long the Gennerall Ierome Costilla, the auntient peopler of Cusco, who had lost three or foure toes, which fell off in passing the de∣sart of Chille, being perished with this aire, and when he came to looke on them, they were dead, and fell off without any paine, even as a rotten Apple falleth from the tree. This Captaine reported, that of a good army which hee had conducted by that place, in the former yeeres, since the discoverie of this kingdome by Alma∣gro, a great part of the men remained dead there, whose bodies he found lying in the desart, without any stink or corruption; adding thervnto one thing very strange, that they found a yong boy alive, and being examined how hee had lived in that place, hee saide, that hee laie hidden in a little cave, whence hee came to cutte the flesh of a dead horse with a little knife, and thus had he nourished himselfe a long time, with I know not how
many companions that lived in that sort, but now they were all dead, one dying this day, and another to mor∣row, saying that hee desired nothing more then to die there with the rest, seeing that he found not in himselfe any disposition to goe to any other place, nor to take a∣ny taste in any thing. I have vnderstoode the like of o∣thers, and particularly of one that was of our company, who being then a Secular man, had passed by these de∣sarts: and it is a strange thing, the qualitie of this colde aire, which killes, and also preserves the dead bodies without corruption. I have also vnderstoode it of a re∣verend religious man, of the Order of Saint Dominike, and Prelate thereof, who hadde seene it passing by the desarts: and which is strange, hee reported, that travel∣ling that way by night, was forced to defend himselfe against that deadly winde which blowes there (having no other meanes) but to gather together a great num∣ber of those dead bodies that lay there, and made ther∣of, as it were, a rampire and a bolster for his head: in this manner did he sleepe, the dead bodies giving him life. Without doubt this is a kinde of cold so piercing, that it quencheth the vitall heate, cutting off his influ∣ence; and being so exceeding colde, yet doth not cor∣rupt nor give any putrifaction to the dead bodies, for that putrifaction groweth from heate and moystnesse. As for the other kinde of ayre which thunders vnder the earth, and causeth earthquakes, more at the Indies, then in any other Regions, I wil speake thereof in trea∣ting the qualities of the land at the Indies. We wil con∣tent our selves now with what wee have spoken of the wind and aire, and passe to that which is to be spo∣kn of the water.
Of the Ocean that invirons the Indies, and of the North and South Seas. CHAP. 10. AMongst all waters the Ocean is the principall, by which the Indies have beene discovered, and are invironed therewith; for either they be Ilands of the Ocean sea, or maine land, the which wheresoever it ends, is bounded with this Ocean. To this day they have no discovered at the Indies any mediterranian sea, as in Europe, Asia, and Affrike, into the which there en∣ters some arme of this great sea, and makes distinct seas, taking their names from the Provinces they bathe: and almost all the mediterranean Seas continue and ioyne together, and with the Ocean itselfe, by the straight of Gibraltar, which the Ancients called, the Pillers of Her∣cules, although the red sea being separated from the mediterranean seas, enters alone into the Indian Oce∣an; and the Caspian sea ioynes not with any other: so that at the Indies wee finde not anie other sea then this Ocean, which they divide into two, the one they call the north sea, and the other the south; for that the Indies which were first discovered by the Ocean, and reacheth vnto Spaine, lies all to the north, and by that land there∣after discovered a sea on the other side, the which they called the South sea, for that they decline vntill they have passed the Line: and having lost the North, or Pole articke, they called it South. For this cause they have called all that Ocean the South sea, which lieth on the other side of the East Indies, althogh a great part of it be seated to the north, as al the coast of new Spaine, Nuaragna, Guatimala and Panama. They say, that hee that first discovered this sea, was called Blasconunes of
Bilbo, the which he did by that part which we now call maine land, where it growes narrow, and the two seas approach so neere the one to the other, that there is but seaven leagues of distance: for although they make the way eighteene from Nombre de Dios, to Pa∣nama, yet is it with turning to seeke the commoditie of the way, but drawing a direct line, the one sea shall not be found more distant from the other. Some have dis∣coursed and propounded to cut through this passage of seaven leagues, and to ioyne one sea to the other, to make the passage from Peru more commodious and easie, for that these eighteene leagues of land betwixt Nombre de Dios and Panama, is more painefull and char∣geable then 2300. by sea, wherevpon some would say, it were a meanes to drowne the land, one sea being lower then another.Herodous. As in times past we finde it writ∣ten, that for the same consideration, they gave over the enterprize to win the red sea into Nile, in the time of King Sesostris, and since, in the Empire of the Othomans. But for my part,Ioviu. I hold such discourses and propositi∣ons for vaine, although this inconvenient should not happen, the which I will not hold for assured. I beleeve there is no humaine power able to beat and breake downe those strong and impenetrable mountaines, which God hath placed betwixt the two seas, and hath made them most hard rockes, to withstand the furie of two seas. And although it were possible to men, yet in my opinion they should feare punishment from hea∣ven, in seeking to correct the workes, which the Crea∣tor by his great providence hath ordained and disposed in the framing of this vniversall world. Leaving this discourse of opening the land, and ioyning both seas together, there is yet another lesse rash, but very diffi∣cult
and dangerous to search out. Whether these two great gulphes do ioyne in any other part of the world, which was the enterprize of Fernando Magellan a Por∣tugall gentleman, whose great courage and constan∣cie in the research of this subject, and happy successe in the finding thereof, gave the name of etenall memory to this straight, which iustly they call by the name of the discoverer Magellan, of which straight we will in∣treate a little, as of one of the greatest wonders of the world. Some have beleeved, that this Straight which Magellan had discovered in the South sea, was none, or that it was straightned, as Don Alonso d' Arsille writes in his Auracane: and at this day there are some that say, there is no such straight, but that they are Ilands betwixt the sea and land, for that the maine land endes there, at the end whereof are all Ilands, beyond the which the one sea ioynes fully with the o∣ther, or to speake better, it is all one Sea. But in turth it is most certaine, there is a straight and a long and stretched out land on eyther side, although it hath not yet beene knowne how farre it stretcheth of the one side of the straight towards the South. After Magellan, a shippe of the Bishoppe of Plaisance passed the straight, Don Guiieres Carvaial, (whose maste they say is yet at Lima, at the entrie of the palace,) they went afterwards coasting along the South, to discover the Straight, by the commandement of Don Garcia of Mendoce, then governer of Chille, according to that which Captaine Ladrillero found it and passed it. I have read the discourse and report he made, where he saieth, that he did not hazard himselfe to land in the Straight, but having discovered the North sea, he returned back, for the roughnes of the time, winter being now come,
which caused the waves comming from the North, to grow great and swelling, and the sea continually fo∣ming with rage. In our time, Francis Drake an English∣man, passed this straight. After him, Captaine Sarmi∣ento passed it on the South side. And lastly, in the yeere 1587. other Englishmen passed it, by the instruction of Drake, which at this time runne along all the coast of Peru. And for that the report which the master Pilot that passed it made, seemeth notable vnto me, I will heere set it downe. Of the Straight of Magellan, and how it was passed on the South side. CHAP. 11. IN the yeere of our Lord God, one thousand five hundred seaventy nine, Francis Drake having passed the Straights that runne alongest the coast of Chille, and all Peru, and taken the shippe of Saint Iean d' Anthona, where there was a great number of barres of silver, the Viceroy Don Francis of Toledo armed and sent foorth two good shippes, to discover the Straight, appoynt∣ing Peter Sarmiento for Captaine, a man learned in A∣strologie. They parted from Callao of Lima in the be∣ginning of October; and forasmuch as vpon that coast there blowes a contrary winde from the South, they tooke the sea, and having sailed litle above thirty days with a favourable winde, they came to the same alti∣tude of the Straight: but for that it was very hard to dis∣cover, they approched neere vnto the land, where they entred into a great Bay, in the which there is an Archi∣pelague of Ilands: Sarimento grew obstinate, that this was the Straight, and staied a whole moneth to finde it
out, by diverse wayes creeping vppe to the high moun∣taines. But seeing they could not discover it, at the in∣stance of such as were in the army, they returned to sea. The same day the weather grew rough, with the which they ranne their course, in the beginning of the night the Admiralls light failed so, as the other shippe never see them after: The day following, the force of the winde continuing still, being a ide wind, the Ad∣miralles shippe discovered an opening, which made land, thinking good to enter there for shelter, vntill the tempest were past. The which succeeded in such sort, as having discovered this vent, they found that it ranne more and more into the land; and coniecturing that it should be the Straight which they sought, they tooke the height of the Sunne, where they found themselves in fiftie degrees and a halfe, which is the very height of the Straight: and, to be the better assured, they thrust out their Brigandine, which having run many leagues into this arme of the sea, without seeing any end, they found it to be the very Straight. And for that they had order to passe it, they planted a hie Crosse there, with letters thereon, to the end, that if the other ship should chance to arrive there, they should have newes of their Generall, and follow. They passed the Straight in a fa∣vourable time without difficultie, and passing into the north sea, they came to certaine vnknowne Ilandes, where they tooke in fresh water, and other refreshings: From thence they tooke their course towardes Cape de Vert, from whence the Pilote maior returned to Peru, by the way of Carthagene, and Panama, carrying a dis∣course of the Straight to the Viceroy, and of all their successe, of whom he was well rewarded for his good service.
But Captaine Peter Sarmiento sailed from Cape Vert to Seville in the same ship wherewith he had passed the Straight, and went to Court; where his Maiestie rewar∣ded him; and at his instance, gave commaundement to prepare a great army, which he sent vnder the com∣maund of Diego Flores de Valdes, to people and fortifie this Straight. But this army, after variable successe, spent much, and profited little. Returning now to the Viceadmiralles shippe, which went in company of the Generall, having lost him in the storme, they tooke the sea, but the wind being con∣trary and stormy, they looked all to perish, so as they confessed themselves, and prepared for death. This tempest continued three dayes without intermission, and hourely they feared to runne on ground; but it fel out contrary, for they went still from land, vntill the ende of the third day, that the storme ceased, and then taking the height, they found themselves in fif∣tie sixe degrees: but seeing they had not crossed, and yet were farre from land, they were amazed, whereby they surmized (as Hernando Lamero tolde me) that the land which is on the other side of the Straight, as wee goe by the south sea, runnes not the same o romer that it doth to the Straight, but that it turneth to the East▪ for else it were impossible but they shoulde have tou∣ched land, having runne so long time with this crosse winde: but they passed on no further, neyther coulde they discover the lands end (which some holde to be there) whether it were an Iland on the other side of the Straight, where the two seas of North and South doe ioyne together, or that it did runne vppe towardes the East, and ioyne with the land of Vesta, as they call it, which answers to the Cape of Good Hope (as it is the
opinion of some.) The trueth hereof is not to this day well knowne, neither is there any one found that hath discovered that land. The Viceroy Don Martin Hen∣rique sade vnto me, that he held this report for an n∣vention of the English, that the Straight should prsen∣lie make an Iland, and that the two seas did ioyne to∣gether; for that (beeing Viceroy of New Spaine) hee had diligently examined the Portugall Pilote, who had bin left there by Francis Drake, and yet had no know∣ledge of any such matter by him. But that was a very Straight, and a maine land on either side. Returning then to the saide Viceadmirall, they discovered this Straight (as the saide Hernando Lamero reported vnto mee) but by another mouth or entrie, and in a grea∣ter height, by reason of a certaine great Iland which is at the entrie of the Straight, which they call, the Bell, for the forme it carries. And (as he saide) hee woulde have passed it: but the Captaine and souldiers woulde not yeelde therevnto, supposing that the time was too farre spent, and that they were in great daunger. And so they returned to Chille and Peru, without passing it. Of the Straight which some holde to be in Florida. CHAP. 12. EVen as Magellan found out this Straight vppon the South, so some have pretended to discover another Straight, which they say is in the north, and suppose it to be in Florida, whose coast runs in such sort, as they knowe no end thereof. Peter Melendez the Adelantade, a man very expert at sea, affirmeth for certaine, that there is a Straight, and that the King had commanded
him to discover it, wherein he shewed a great desire: he propounded his reasons to proove his opinion, say∣ing, that they have seene some remainders of shippes in the North sea, like vnto those the which the Chi∣nois vse, which had beene impossible, if there were no passage from one sea vnto another. Moreover, he re∣ported, that in a certaine great Bay in Florida, (the which runnes 300. leagues within the land,) they see Whales in some season of the yeere, which come from the other sea. Shewing moreover other likelihood, he concludes, that it was a thing agreeing with the wise∣dome of the Creator, and the goodly order of nature, that as there was communication and a passage betwixt the two seas at the Pole Antartike, so there should in like sort, be one at the Pole Artike, which is the princi∣pall Pole. Some will say, that Drake had knowledge of this Straight, and that he gave occasion so to iudge, whenas he passed along the coast of new Spaine by the South sea. Yea, they hold opinion, that other English∣men which this yeere 1587. tooke a shippe comming from the Philippines, with great quantitie of gold and other riches, did passe this straight, which prize they made neere to the Calliphornes, which course the ships returning from the Philippines and China, to new Spaine, do vsually observe. They confidently beleeve, that (as the courage of man is great, and his desire infi∣nite, to finde new meanes to inrich himselfe) so with∣in few yeeres this secret will be discovered. And truly, it is a thing worthie admiration, that as the Ants do al∣waies follow the trace of other; so men in the know∣ledge and search of new things, never stay, vntill they have attained the desired end for the content and glo∣rie of men. And the high and eternall wisedome of the
Creator vseth this curiositie of men, to communicate the light of his holy Gospell to people, that alwaies live in the obscure darkenesse of their errors. But to con∣clude, the straight of the Artike Pole (if there be any) hath not been yet discovered. It shall not therefore be from the purpose, to speake what we know of the par∣ticularities of the Antartike straight, already discovered and knowne, by the report of such as have seene and observed it. Of the properties of the Straight of Magellan. CHAP. 13. THis Straight, as I have said, is iust fiftie degrees to the South, and from one sea to another, fourscore and ten, or a hundred leagues, in the narrowest place, it is a league and little lesse, wher it was intended the King should build a Fort to defend the passage. It is so deepe in some places, that it cannot be sounded, and in some places they finde grovnd at 18. yea, at 15. fa∣domes. Of these hundred leagues which it containes in length from one sea vnto the other, it is plainely seene, that the waves of the South sea, runne 30. leagues, and the other 70. are possessed with the billowes and waves of the North sea. But there is this difference, that the 30. leagues to the South, runne betwixt the rockes and most high mountaines, whose tops are con∣tinually covered with snow: so as they seeme) by rea∣son of their great height) to be ioyned together, which makes the entrie of the Straight to the South so hard to discover. In these 30. leagues, the sea is very deepe, and without bottome, yet may they fasten their ships
to the land, the bnckes being straight and vneven, but in the 70. leagues towards the North, they finde ground, and of either side there are large plaines, the which they call Cana. Many great rivers of faire and cleere water runne into this Straight, and therea∣bout are great and wonderfull forrests, whereas they finde some trees of excellent wood and sweete, the which are not knowne in these partes, whereofsuch as passed from thence to Peru, brought some to shew. There are many medowes within the land, and many Ilands in the midst of the Straight. The Indians that inhabite on the South side, are little, and cowards, those that dwell on the North part, are great and vali∣ant: they brought some into Spaine, which they hadde taken. They found peeces of blew cloth, and other markes and signes that some men of Europe had passed there. The Indians luted our men with the name of Iesia. They are good Archers, and go clad in wilde beasts skinnes, whereof there is great aboundance. The waters of the Straight rise and fall as the tide, and they may visibly see the tides come of the one side of the North sea, and of the other from the South whereas they meete, the which (as I have said) is thirtie leagues from the South, and three score and tenne from the North. And although it seemes there should be more daunger then in all the rest, yet whenas Captaine Sar∣minto his shippe (whereof I spake) passed it, they had no great stormes, but found farre lesse difficultie then they expected: for then the time was very calme and pleasant. And moreover, the waves from the north sea, came broken, by reason of the great length of three score and tenne leagues, and the waves from the south sea were not raging, by reason of the great deapth, in
which deapth, the waves breake, and are swallowed vp. It is true, that in winter the straight is not navigable, by reason of the tempests and raging of the sea in that sea∣son. Some shippes which have attempted to passe the Straight in winter, have perished. One onely shippe passed it on the South side, which is the Captaine I made mention of. I was fully instructed of all that I have spoken by the Pilote thereof, called Hernando A∣lonse, and have seene the true discription of the Straight they made in passing it, whereof they carried the co∣pie to the King of Spaine, and the original to their vice∣roy of Peru. Of the ebbing and flowing of the Indian Ocean. CHAP. 14. ONe of the mostadmirable secrets of Nature is the ebbing and flowing of the sea, not onely for this strange property of rising and falling, but much more for the difference there is thereof in diverse seas, yea in diverse coastes of one and the same sea. There are some seas that have no daily flowing nor ebbing, as we see in the inner Mediterranean, which is the Thyrene sea, and yet it flowes and ebbes every day in the vpper Mediter∣ranean sea, which is that of Venice, and iustly giveth cause of admiration, that these two seas being Medi∣terranean, and that of Venice being no greater then the other, yet hath it his ebbing and flowing as the Ocean, and that other sea of Italie none at all. There are some Mediterranean seas, that apparantly rise and fall everie moneth; and others that neyther rise in the day, nor in the moneth. There are other seas, as the Spanish O∣cean,
that have their flux and reflux every day; and besides that, they have it monethly, which commeth twice, that is to say, at the entry, and at the ful of every Moone, which they call Spring tides. To say that any sea hath this daily ebbing and flowing, and not mo∣nethly, I knowe not any. It is strange, the difference we finde of this subiect at the Indies, for there are some places whereas the sea doth daily rise & fall two leagues as at Panama, and at a high water it riseth much more; There are other places where it doth rise and fall so lit∣tle, that hardly can you finde the difference. It is ordi∣nary in the Ocean sea to have a daily flowing and eb∣bing, and that was twice in a naturall day, and ever it falls three quarters of an houre sooner one day then an∣other, according to the course of the Moone: so as the tide falles not alwayes in one houre of the day. Some would say, that this flux and reflux proceeded from the locall motion of the water of the sea; so as the water that riseth on the one side, falles on the other that is op∣posite vnto it: so that it is ful sea on the one side when as it is a lowe water on the opposite, as we see in a kettle full of water, when wee moove it, when it leanes to the one side the water increaseth; and on the other it dimi∣nisheth. Others affirme, that the sea riseth in all partes at one time, and decreaseth at one instant: as the boy∣ling of a pot, comming out of the centre it extendeth it selfe on all partes, and when it ceaseth, it falles like∣wise on all partes. This second opinion is true, and in my iudgement, certaine and tried, not so much for the reasons which the Philosophers give in their Meteors, as for the cer∣taine experience wee may make. For to satisfie my selfe vpon this point and question, I demanded particularly
of the said Pilot, how he found the tides in the straight, and if the tides of the South sea did fall whenas those of the North did rise. And contrariwise (this question being true) why the increase of the sea in one place, is the decrease thereof in another, as the first opinion hol∣deth. He answered that it was not so, but they might see plainely, that the tides of the North and South seas rise at one instant, so as the waves of one sea incountred with the other, and at one instant likewise they began to retire, every one into his sea, saying, that the rising and falling was daily seene, and that the incounter of the tides (as I have saide) was at three score and tenne leagues to the North sea, and thirtie to the South. Whereby wee may plainely gather, that the ebbing and flowing of the Ocean is no pure locall motion, but rather an alteration: whereby all waters really rise and increase at one instat, and in others, they diminih, as the boyling of a pot, whereof I have spoken. It were impossible to comprehend this poynt by experience, if it were not in the Straight, where all the Ocean, both on th'one side, & on th'other ioynes together: for none but Angelles can see it, and iudge of the opposite parts: for that man hath not so long a sight, nor so nimble and swift footing as were needefull, to transporte his eyes from one parte to another, in so short a time, as a tide will give him respite, which are only six houres. Of sundry Fishers, and their maner of fishing at the Indies. CHAP. 15. THere are in the Indian Ocean, an infinite number of fishes, the kindes & properties whereof the Cre∣ator
only can declare. There are many such as we have in the sea of Europe, as shaddes, and aloses which come from the sea into the rivers; dorads, pilchards, and ma∣ny other. There are others, the like I doe not thinke to have seene in these partes, as those which they doe call Cabrillas, which doe somewhat resemble the trowt, and in new Spaine they call them Bobos, they mount from the sea into the rivers. I have not seene any Besugues there, nor trowts, although some say there are in Chille. There are Tonins in some partes vpon the coast of Peru, but they are rare, and some are of opinion, that at a cer∣taine time they do cast their spawne in the Straight of Magellan, as they doe in Spaine at the Straight of Gibral∣tar, and for this reason they finde more vpon the coast of Chille, although those I have seene there, are not like to them in Spaine. At the Ilandes (which they call Barlovente) which are Cuba, Saint Dominique, Port ri∣que, and Iamaique, they find a fish which they call Ma∣nati, a strange kinde of fish, if we may call it fish, a crea∣ture which ingenders her yoong ones alive, and hath teates, and doth nourish them with milke, feeding of grasse in the fieldes, but in effect it lives continually in the water, and therefore they eate it as fish; yet when I did eate of it at Saint Dominique on a friday, I hadde some scruple, not for that which is spoken, but for that in colour and taste it was like vnto morselles of veale, so is it greene, and like vnto a cowe on the hinder partes. I didde woonder at the incredible ravening of the Ti∣brons, or sharkes, whenas I did see drawne from one (that was taken in the Port) out of his gullet, a buchers great knife, a great yron hooke, and a peece of a cowes head with one whole horne, neyther doe I knowe if both were there, or no. I did see in a creeke made with
that sea, a quarter of a horse for pleasure hanging vpon a stake, whither presently came a company of these Ti∣burons, at the smel thereof: and for the more pleasure, this horse flesh was hung in the aire, I knowe not how many hand breadth from the water; this company of fish flocke about it, leaping vp, and with a strange nim∣blenesse cut off both flesh and bone off the horse leg, as if it had beene the stalke of a lettuce; their teeth be∣ing as sharpe as a rasour. There are certaine small fishes they call Rambos, which cleave to these Tiburons, ney∣ther can they drive them away, and they are fed with that which falles from the Tiburons. There are other small fishes, which they call flying fishes, the which are found within the tropickes, and in no other place, as I thinke: they are pursued by the Ducades; and to escape them they leape out of the sea, and goe a good way in the ayre, and for this reason they are called flying Fi∣shes: they have wings as it were of linnen cloth, or of parchment, which do supporte them some space in the ayre. There did one flie or leape into the shippe wher∣in I went, the which I did see, and observe the fashion of his wings. In the Indian histories there is often mention made of Lezards or Caymans (as they call them) and they are the very same which Plinie and the Antients call Cro∣codiles, they finde them on the sea side, and in hote ri∣vers, for in colde rivers there are none to be found. And therefore they finde none vpon all the coast of Peru vn∣to Payra, but forward they are commonly seene in the rivers. It is a most fierce and cruell beast, although it be slow and heavie. Hee goes hunting and seekes his prey on the land, and what hee takes alive, he drownes it in the water, yet dooth hee not eate it, but out of the wa∣ter,
for that his throate is of such a fashion, as if there entred any water, he should easily be drowned. It is a woonderfull thing to see a combat betwixt a Caymant and a Tigre, whereof there are most cruell at the Indies. A religious man of our company tolde me that he had seene these beasts fight most cruelly one against the o∣ther; vpon the sea shoare the Caymant with his taile gave great blowes vnto the Tygre, striving with his great force to carry him into the water: and the Tygre with his pawes resisted the Caymant, drawing him to land. In the end the Tigre vanquished and opened the Lezard; it seemes by the belly, the which is most ten∣der and penetrable, for in every other parte hee is so hard, that no lance, and scarce a harquebuze can pierce it. The victory which an Indian had of a Caymant was yet more rare: the Caimant had carried away his yong childe, and sodainely plunged into the sea; the Indian mooved with choller, cast himselfe after him, with a knife in his hand, and as they are excellent swimmers and dievers, and the Caymant swimmeth alwayes on the toppe of the water, hee hurt him in the belly, and in such sort, that the Caymant feeling himselfe woun∣ded, went to the shoare, leaving the little infant dead. But the combate which the Indians have with Whales is yet more admirable, wherein appeares the power and greatnesse of the Creator, to give so base a Nation (as be the Indians) the industry and courage to incounter the most fierce and deformed beast in the worlde, and only to fight with him, but also to vanquish him, & not to triumph over him. Considering this, I have often remembred that place of the Psalme, speaking of the Whale, Draco iste quem formasti ad illudendum eum: What greater mockerie can there be, then to see an In∣dian
leade a whale as bigge as a mountaine, vanquished with a corde? The maner the Indians of Florida vse (as some expert men have tolde me) to take these whales, (whereof there is great store) is, they put themselves in∣to a Canoe, which is like a barke of a tree, and in swim∣ming approach neere the whales side, then with great dexteritie they leape to his necke, and there they ride as on horse backe expecting his time, then hee thrustes a sharpe and strong stake (which hee carries with him) into the whales nosthrill, for so they call the hole or vent by which they breathe, presently hee beates it in with an other stake as forcibly as hee can; in the meane space the whale dooth fuiously beate the sea, and rai∣seth mountaines of water, running into the deepe with great violence, and presently riseth againe, not knowing what to doe for paine; the Indian still sittes firme, and to give him full payment for this trouble, he beates an∣other stake into the other vent or nosthrill, so as he stop¦peth him quite, and takes away his breathing, then hee betakes him to his Canoe, which he holdes tied with a corde to the whales side, and goes to land, having first tied his corde to the whale, the which hee lettes runne with the whale, who leapes from place to place, whi∣lest he finds water enough: being troubled with paine, in the end hee comes neere the land, and remaines on ground by the hugenesse of his body, vnable any more to moove; then a great number of Indians come vnto the Conqueror, to gather his spoiles, they kill him, and cut his flesh in peeces, the which is bad enough; this do they drie and beate into powlder, vsing it for meate, it dooth last them long: wherein is fulfilled, that which is spoken in another Psalme of the whale, Dedisti eum escam populis Aethiopum: Peter Mendez the Adelantade
did often speake of this kinde of fishing. Whereof M∣nardes makes mention in his booke. There is an other fishing which the Indians do commonly vse in the sea, the which, although it be lesse, yet is it worthy the re∣port. They make as it were faggots of bul-rushes or drie sedges well bound together, which they call Ba∣sas, having carried them vppon their shoulders to the sea, they cast them in, and presently leape vppon them; being so set, they lanch out into the deepe, rowing vp and downe with small reedes of eyther side: they goe a league or two into the sea to fish, carrying with them their cordes and nettes vppon these faggots, and beare themselves thereon. They cast out their nettes, and do there remaine fishing the greatest parte of the day and night, vntill they have filled vp their measure, with the which they returne wel satisfied. Truely it was delight∣full to see them fish at Callao of Lima, for that they were many in number, and every one set on horsebacke, cut∣ting the waves of the sea, which in their place of fishing are great and furious, resembling the Tritons or Nep∣tunes, which they paint vppon the water, and beeing come to land, they drawe their barke out of the water vpon their backes, the which they presently vndoe, and lay abroade on the shoare to drie. There were other Indians of the vallies of Yca which were accustomed to goe to fish in leather, or skinnes of sea-wolves, blowne vp with winde, and from time to time they did blowe them like balles of winde, lest they should sinke. In the vale of Canete, which in olde time they called Guaroo, there were a great number of Indian fishers; but bicause they resisted the Ingua, when he came to conquer that land, he made shew of peace with them, and therefore to feast him, they appoynted a solemne fishing of ma∣nie
thousand Indians, which went to sea in their vessels of reeds; at whose returne, the Ingua (who had layde many souldiers in ambush) made a cruell butcherie of them, so as afterward this land remained vnpeopled, although it be aboundant and fertile. I did see an o∣ther manner of fishing, wherevnto Don Francis of To∣ledo the Viceroy didde leade mee, yet was it not in the sea, but in a river which they call great in the Province of Charcas, where the Indians Chiraquanas plunged into the water, and swimming wyth an admirable swiftnesse, followed the fish, where with dartes and hookes which they vse to carry in their right hand, on∣ly swimming with the left) they wound the fish, and so hurt, they brought them foorth, seeming in this more like vnto fishes then men of the land. But now that we have left the sea, let vs come to other kinde of wa∣ters that remaine to be spoken of. Of Lakes and Pooles that be at the Indies. CHAP. 16. IN place of the Mediterranean Sea, which is in the old world, the Creator hath furnished this new with many Lakes, whereof there are some so great, as they may be properly called seas; seeing the Scripture calleth that of Palestina so, which is not so great as some of these. The most famous, is that of Titicaca, which is at Peru, in the Province of Callao, the which as I have said in the former booke, containes neere fourscore leagues in compasse, into the which, there runnes ten or twelve great rivers. A while since, they began to
saile in it with barkes and shippes, wherein they procee∣ded so ill, that the first shippe was split with a tempest that did rise in the Lake. The water is not altogether sower nor salt, as that of the sea, but it is so thicke, as it cannot be drunke. There are two kindes of fishes breed in this Lake in great aboundance, the one they call Su∣ches, which is great and savorous, but phlegmatike and vnwholesome; and the other Bogos, which is more healthfull, although it be lesse and fuller of bones; there are great numbers of wilde-duckes and wigens. When∣as the Indians will feast it, or shew delight to any one that passeth along the two banckes, which they call Chucuyto and Omasugo, they assemble a great number of Canoes, making a circle and invironing the fowle, vntill they take with their hands what they please; and they call this maner of fishing Chaco. On the one and the other banke of this Lake▪ are the best habitations of Peru. From the issue thereof there growes a lesser Lake, although it be great, which they call Paria, vpon the bankes whereof, there are great numbers of cattell, especially swine, which grow exceeding fatte with the grasse vpon those banks. There are many other Lakes in the high mountains, whence proceede brooks & rivers, which after become great flouds. Vpon the way from Arequippa to Callao, there are two Lakes, vpon the mountains of th'one & other side the way, from th'one flowes a brooke, which growes to a loud, and falles in∣to the South sea; from the other, they say the famous river of Aporima takes her beginning; from the which, some hold that the renowned river of Amazos, other∣wise called Maragnon proceedes, with so great an as∣sembly and aboundance of waters, which ioyne in these mountaines. It is a question may be often asked,
why there are so many Lakes in the toppes of these mountaines, into the which no river enters, but con∣trariwise, many great streames issue forth, and yet do we scarce see these Lakes to diminish any thing at any season of the yeere. To imagine that these Lakes grow by the snow that melts, or raine from heaven, that doth not wholy satisfie me: for there are many that have not this aboundance of snow, nor raine, and yet we see no decrease in them, which makes me to beleeve they are springs which rise there naturally, although it be not against reason, to thinke that the snow and raine helpe somewhat in some seasons. These Lakes are so common in the highest toppes of the mountaines, that you shall hardly finde any famous river that takes not his beginning from one of them. Their water is very cleere, and breedes little store of fish, and that lit∣tle is very small, by reason of the cold which is there Continually. Notwithstanding, some of these Lakes be very hote, which is another wonder. At the end of the vallie of Tarapaya neere to Potozi, there is a Lake in forme round, which seemes to have been made by compasse, whose water is extreamely hote, and yet the land is very colde: they are accustomed to bathe them∣selves neere the banke, for else they cannot indure the heate being farther in. In the midst of this Lake, there is a boiling of above twenty foote square, which is the very spring, and yet (notwithstanding the greatnes of this spring) it is never seene to increase in any sort: it seemes that it exhales of it selfe, or that it hath some hidden and vnknowne issue, neither do they see it de∣crease; which is another wonder, although they have drawne from it a great streame, to make certaine en∣gines grinde for mettall, considering the great quantity
of water that issueth forth, by reason whereof, it should decrease. But leaving Peru, and passing to new Spaine, the Lakes there, are no lesse to be observed; especially that most famous of Mexico, where we finde two sortes of waters, one salt Lake to that of the sea, and the other cleere and sweete, by reason of the rivers that enter in∣to it. In the midst of this Lake, is a rocke verie delight∣full and pleasant, where there are baths of hote water that issue forth, the which they greatly esteeme for their health. There are gardins̄ in the middest of this Lake, framed and fleeting vpon the water, where you may see plottes full of a thousand sortes of hearbes and flowers, and they are in such sort, as a man cannot well conceive them without sight. The Citie of Mexico, is seated in the same Lake, although the Spaniards have filled vp the place of the scituation with earth, leaving onely some currents of water, great and small, which enter into the Citie, to carrie such things as they have neede of, as wood, hearbes, stone, fruites of the coun∣trie, and all other things. When Cortez conquered Mexico, he caused Brigandins to be made, yet afterwards he thought it more safe not to vse them: therfore they vse Canoes, whereof there is great store. There is great store of fish in this Lake, yet have I not seene any of price: notwithstanding, they say the revenue of this Lake, is worth three hundred thousand duckets a yeere. There are many other Lakes, not far from this, whence they bring much fish to Mexico. The Province of Me∣chovacan is so called, for that it aboundeth greatly with fish. There are goodly and great Lakes, in the which there is much fish, and this Province is coole and healthfull. There are many other Lakes, whereof it is not possible to make mention, nor to know them in
particular, onely we may note by that which hath beene discoursed in the former booke, that vnder the burning Zone there is greater abundance of Lakes, then in any other parte of the world: and so by that which we have formerly spoken, and the little we shall say of rivers and fountaines, we will end this discourse of Waters. Of many and divers Springs and Fountaines. CHAP. 17. THere is at the Indies, as in other parts of the world, great diversitie of Springs, Fountaines, and Ri∣vers, and some have strange properties. In Guancavilica of Peru, (where the mines of quick-silver be,) there is a Fountaine that casts forth hote water, and in running, the water turnes to rocke, of which rocke or stone, they build in a mauer all the houses of the Village. This stone is soft, and easie to cutte, for they cut it as easily with yron as if it were wood, it is light and lasting. If men or beasts drinke thereof, they die, for that it con∣geales in the very entrailes, and turnes into stone, and for that cause some horses have died. As this water turnes into stone, the which flowes, stoppes the pas∣sage to the rest; so as of necessitie it changeth the course, and for this reason it runnes in divers places, as the rocke increaseth. At the point of Cape S. Helaine, there is a spring or fountaine of pitch, which at Peru, they call Coppey. This should be like to that which the Scripture speakes of the savage valley, where they did finde pits of pitch. The Mariners vse these fountaines of pitch or Coppey, to pitch their ropes and tackling, for that it
serves them as pitch and tarre in Spaine. When I sailed into new Spaine by the coast of Peru, the Pilot shewed me an Iland, which they call the Ile of Wolves, where there is another fountaine or pit of Coppey or pitch, with the which they anoint their tackling. There are other fountaines and springs of Goultran rozen, which the Pilot (an excellent man in his charge) tolde me he had seene, and that sometimes sailing that waies, being so farre into the sea, as he had lost the sight of land, yet did he know by the smell of the Coppey, where he was, as well as if he had knowne the land, such is the savour that issues continually from that fountaine. At the baths, which they call the baths of Ingua, there is a course of water, which comes forth all hote and boi∣ling; and ioyning vnto it, there is another whose water is as cold as ice. The Ingua was accustomed to temper the one with the other; & it is a wonderfull thing to see springs of so contrarie qualities, so neere one to the o∣ther. There are an infinit number of other hote springs, specially in the Province of Charcas, in the water where∣of, you cannot indure to hold your hand, the space of an Ave Maria, as I have seene tried by wager. In a farme neere to Cusco, springs a fountain of salt, which as it runs turns into salt, very white & exceeding good, the which (if it were in another countrie) were no small riches, yet they make very small accoumpt thereof, for the store they have there. The waters which runne in Guayaquel, which is in Peru, almost vnder the Equinoctiall line, are held to be healthfull for the French disease, and o∣ther such like, so as they come from many places farre off to be cured. And they say the cause thereof is, for that in that Countrie there is great aboundance of rootes, which they call Sallepareille, the vertue and ope∣ration
whereof is so knowne, that it communicates her propertie to the waters wherein it is put to cure this disease. Bilcanota is a mountaine the which (according to common opinion,) is in the highest part of Peru, the toppe whereof is all covered with snow, and in some places is blacke like coale. There issueth forth of it, two springs in contrarie places, which presently growe to be very great brookes, and so by little and little become great flouds, the one goes to Calloa, into the great Lake Titicaca, the other goes to the lands, and is that which they call Yucay, which ioyning with another, runnes into the North sea, with a violent and furious course. This spring, when it comes out of the rocke Bilcanota, as I have said, is of the colour of lie, having an asshie co∣lour, and castes a fume as a thing burnt, the which runs farre in this sort, vntill the multitude of waters that runne into it, quench this smoake and fire which it drawes from the spring. In new Spaine, I have seene a spring as it were inke, somewhat blew, in Peru ano∣ther, of colour red like bloud, wherevpon they call it the red river. Of Rivers. CHAP. 18. AMongst all Rivers, not onely at the Indies, but ge∣nerally through the world, the River Maragnon, or of Amazons, is the chiefe, whereof we have spoken in the former booke. The Spaniards have often sailed it, pretending to discover the lands, which by report are very rich, especially those they call Dorado and Pay∣titi, Iean de Salnies, the Adelantade, made a memorable entrie, though of small effect. There is a passage which
they call Pongo, one of the most daungerous in all the worlde; for the river being there straightned, and for∣ced betwixt two high steepe rockes: the water falles di∣rectly downe with so great a violence, that comming steepe downe, it causeth such a boyling, as it seemeth impossible to passe it without drowning: yet the cou∣rage of men durst attempt to passe it, for the desire of this renowmed Dorado: they slipt downe from the top to the bottome, thrust on with the violence and cur∣rant of the floud, holding themselves fast in their Ca∣noes or barkes: and although in falling they were tur∣ned topsie turvie, and both they and their Canoes plunged into the deepe, yet by their care and industry they recovered themselves againe; and in this sort the whole army escaped, except some few that were drow∣ned. And that which is more admirable, they carried themselves so cunningly, that they neyther lost their powlder nor munition. In their returne (having suffe∣red many troubles and daungers) they were forced, in the end, to passe backe that same way) mounting by one of those high Rockes, sticking their poniards in the rocke. Captaine Peter d' Orsua made an other entry by the same river, who being dead in the same voyage, and the souldiers mutined; other Captaines followed the enterprise, by an arme that comes into the north sea. A religious man of our company told vs, that being then a secular man, he was present in a manner at all that en∣terprise, and that the tides did flowe almost a hundred leagus vp the river, and whereas it enters into the sea, (the which is vnder the Line, or very neere) it hath 70. leagues, breadth at the mouth of it, a matter incredible; and which exceedes the breadth of the Mediterranean
sea, though there be some others, who in their descrip∣tions give it but twenty five or thirty leagues bredth at the mouth. Next to this river that of Plata, or of Silver holdes the second place, which is otherwise called Para∣guy, which runnes from the mountaines of Peru, into the sea, in thirty five degrees of altitude to the South: it riseth (as they say) like to the river of Nile, but much more without comparison, and makes the fields it over∣flowes like vnto a sea, for the space of three moneths, and after returneth againe to his course, in the which ships do saile many leagues against the streame. There are many other rivers that are not of that greatnes, and yet are equall: yea they surpasse the greatest of Europe, as that of Magdalaine, neere to Saint Marthe the great river, and that of Alvarado in new Spaine, and an infinit number of others. Of the south side, on the mountains of Peru, the rivers are not vsually so great, for that their current is not long, and that many waters cannot ioyne together, but they are very swift, descending from the mountaines, and have sodaine falles, by reason where∣of they are very dangerous, and many men have peri∣shed there. They increase and overflowe most in the time of heate. I have gone over twenty and seaven ri∣vers vpon that coast, yet did I never passe any one by a foord. The Indians vse a thousand devises to passe their rivers. In som places they have a long cord that runs fro one side to th'other, & thereon hangs a basket, into the which he puts himselfe that meanes to passe; and then they drawe it from the bancke with another corde, so as hee passeth in this basket. In other places the Indian passeth, as it were on horse backe, vppon a bottle of straw, and behinde him hee that desires to passe; and so rowing with a peece of a boorde, carries him over.
In other places they make a floate of gourds or pompi∣ons, vppon the which they set men with their stuffe to carry over, and the Indians having cordes fastned to them, goe swimming before, and drawe this floate of pompions after them, as horses doe a Coach: others goe behinde thrusting it forward. Having passed, they take their barke of pompions vppon their backe, and returne swimming: this they doe in the river of Saint at Peru. We passed that of Alvarado in new Spaine vpon a table, which the Indians carried vpon their shoulders, and when they lost their footing, they swamme. These devises, with a thousand others wherewith they vse to passe their rivers, breede a terrour in the beholders, helping themselves with such weake and vnsure means; and yet they are very confident. They do vse no other bridges but of haire or of straw. There are now vppon some rivers bridges of stone, built by the diligence of some governours, but many fewer then were needfull in such a country, where so many men are drowned by default thereof, and the which yeeldes so much silver, as not onely Spaine, but also other strange Countries make sumptuous buildings therewith. The Indians do drawe from these floudes that runne from the moun∣taines to the vallies and plaines, many and great brooks to water their land, which they vsually doe with such industry, as there are no better in Murcia, nor at Millan it selfe, the which is also the greatest and onely wealth of the Plaines of Peru, and of many other partes of the Indies.
Of the qualitie of the land at the Indies in generall. CHAP. 19. WE may know the qualitie of the land at the In∣dies, for the greatest parte (seeing it is the last of the three Elements, whereof wee have propounded to treate in this Booke) by the discourse we have made in the former Booke of the burning Zone, seeing that the greatest part of the Indies dooth lie vnder it. But to make it knowne the more particularly, I have observed three kindes of lands, as I have passed through those Regions: whereof there is one very lowe, another ve∣ry high, and the third which holds the middle of these two extreames. The lower is that which lieth by the sea coasts, whereof there is in all partes of the Indies, and it is commonly very hote and moist, so as it is not so healthfull; and at this day we see it lesse popled, al∣though in former times it hath beene greatly inhabited with Indians, as it appeareth by the histories of New Spaine and Peru, and where they kept and lived, for that the soile was naturall vnto them being bred there. They lived of fishing at sea, & of seeds, drawing brooks from the rivers, which they used for want of raine, for that it raines little there, and in some places not at all. This lowe countrie hath many places inhabitable, as wel by reason of the sands which are dangerous, (for there are whole mountaines of these sandes) as also for the marishes which grow by reason of the waters that fall from the mountaines, which finding no issue in these flatte and lowe landes, drowne them, and make them vnprofitable.
And in trueth the greatest parte of all the Indian sea coast is of this sort, chiefly vppon the South sea: The habitation of which coasts is at this present so wasted & contemned, that of thirtie partes of the people that in∣habited it, there wants twenty nine; and it is likely the rest of the Indians will in short time decay. Many, ac∣cording to the varietie of their opinions, attribute this to diverse causes; some to the great labour which hath beene imposed vppon these Indians; others, vnto the change and varietie of meates and drinks they vse, since their commerce with the Spaniards; others to their great excesse & drinking, and to other vices they have: for my part, I hold this disorder to be the greatest cause of their decay, whereof it is not now time to discourse any more. In this lowe countrey (which I say general∣ly is vnhealthfull, and vnfit for mans habitation) there is exception in some places which are temperate and fertile, as the greatest part of the Plaines of Peru, where there are coole vallies and very fertile. The greatest part of the habitation of the coast entertaines all the traffike of Spaine by sea: whereon all the estate of the Indies de∣pendeth. Vpon this coast there are some Townes wel peopled, as Lima and Truxillo in Peru, Panama and Car∣thagena vppon the maine land, and in the Ilands S. Dominique, Port Ricco, and Havana, with many other Townes which are lesse than these, as the true Crosse in new Spaine, Yca, Arigua and others in Peru: the ports are commonly inhabited, although but slenderly. The second sort of land is contrary, very high, and by con∣sequent, colde and drie, as all the mountaines are com∣monly. This land is neither fertile nor pleasant, but ve∣ry healthfull, which makes it to be peopled and inhabi∣ted. There are pastures, and great store of cattell, the
which, for the most parte, entertaines life, and by their cattell, they supply the want they have of corne and graine, by trucking and exchange. But that which makes these landes more inhabited and peopled, is the riches of the mines that are found there, for that all o∣beys to golde and silver. By reason of the mines there are some dwellings of Spaniards and Indians, which are increased and multiplied, as Potozi and Gancave∣licqua in Peru, and Cacatecas in new Spaine. There are also through all these mountaines great dwellings of the Indians, which to this day are maintained; yea some will say they increase, but that the labour of the mines dooth consume many, and some generall diseases have destroyed a great part, as the Cocoliste in new Spaine: yet they finde no great diminution. In this extreamitie of of high ground they finde two commodities, as I have saide, of pastures and mines, which doe well counter∣vaile the two other that are in the lower grounds alon∣gest the sea coast, that is, the commerce of the sea, & the aboundance of wine which groweth not but in the hot landes. Betwixt these two extreames there is ground of a meane height, the which, although it bee in some partes higher or lower one than other, yet doth it not approach neyther to the heate of the sea coast, nor the intemperature of the mountaines. In this sorte of soile there groweth many kindes of graine, as wheate, bar∣ley, and mays, which grows not at all in the high coun∣tries, but well in the lower, there is likewise store of pasture, cattel, fruits, and greene forrests. This part is the best habitation of the three, for health and recreati∣on; and therefore it is best peopled of any parte of the Indies, the which I have curiously observed in manie voyages that I have vndertaken, and have alwayes
found it true, that the Province best peopled at the In∣dies be in this scituation. Let vs looke neerely into new Spaine, (the which without doubt is the best Province the Sunne dooth circle) by what parte soever you doe enter, you mount vp; and when you have mounted a good height, you beginne to descend, yet very little: and that land is alwayes much higher then that along the sea coast. All the land about Mexico is of this nature and scitu∣ation; and that which is about the Vulcan, which is the best soile of the Indies, as also in Peru, Arequipa, Gua∣mangua and Cusco, although more in one then in the o∣ther. But in the end, all is high ground, although they descend into deepe valleies, and climbe vppe to high mountaines: the like is spoken of Quitto, Saint Foy, and of the best of the new kingdome. To conclude, I doe beleeve that the wisedome and providence of the Cre∣ator would have it so, that the greatest parte of this countrey of the Indies should be hillie, that it might be of a better temperature: for being lowe, it had beene very hotte vnder the burning Zone, especially being farre from the sea. Also all the land I have seene at the Indies, is neere to the mountaines on the one side or the other, and sometimes of all partes: So as I have often∣times saide there, that I woulde gladly see any place, from whence the horizon did fashion it selfe and end by the heaven, and a countrey stretched out and even, as we see in Spaine in a thousand champaine fields; yet doe I not remember that I have ever seene such sightes at the Indies, were it in the Ilands, or vpon the maine land, although I have travelled above seaven hundred leagues in length. But as I have saide, the neerenesse of the mountaines is very commodious in this region, to
temper the heate of the Sunne. To conclude, the best inhabited partes of the Indies are as I have saide: and ge∣nerally, all that countrie aboundes in grasse, pastures, and forrests, contrary vnto that which Aristotle and the Auntients did holde. So as when wee goe out of Eu∣rope to the Indies, wee woonder to see the land so plea∣sant, greene and fresh. Yet this rule hath some excepti∣ons, & chiefly in the land of Peru, which is of a strange nature amongst all others, whereof wee will now pro∣ceede to speake. Of the properties of the land of Peru. CHAP. 20. WEe meane by Peru, not that great parte of the worlde which they call America, seeing that therein is contained Bresil, the kingdome of Chille, and that of Grenade, and yet none of these kingdomes is Pe∣ru, but onely that parte which lies to the South, be∣ginning at the kingdome of Quitto, which is vnder the Line, and runnes in length to the realme of Chille, the which is without the Tropickes, which were sixe hun∣dred leagues in length, and in breadth it containes no more then the mountaines, which is fiftie common leagues, although in some places, as at Chachapayas, it be broader. This parte of the world which we call Pe∣ru, is very remarkeable, and containes in it strange pro∣perties, which serveth as an exception to the generall rule of the Indies. The first is, that vpon all that coast it blowes continually with one onely winde, which is South and Southweast, contrary to that which dooth vsually blow vnder the burning Zone. The second is,
that this winde being by nature the most violent, tem∣pestuous, and vnhealthfull of all others, yet in this re∣gion it is marvellous pleasing, healthful, and agreeable: so as we may attribute the habitation of that part there∣vnto, without the which it would be troublesome and inhabitable, by reason of the heate, if it were not refre∣shed with the winde. The third propertie is, that it ne∣ver raines, thunders, snowes, nor hailes in all this coast, which is a matter worthy of admiration. Fourthly, that alittle distance from the coast it raines and snowes ter∣ribly. Fiftly, that there are two ridges of mountaines which runne the one as the other, and in one altitude, notwithstanding on the one there are great forrests, and it raines the greatest part of the yeere, being very hote; and the other is all naked and bare, and very colde: so as winter and summer are divided on those two moun∣taines, and raine and cleerenesse it selfe. For the better vnderstanding hereof, wee must consider that Peru is divided as it were into three partes, long and narrow, which they call Lanos, Sierras, and Andes; the Lanos runnes along est the sea coast; the Sierras be all hilles, with some vallies; and the Andes be steepe and craggie mountaines. The Lanos or sea coast, have some tenne leagues in breadth, in some parts lesse, and in some parts alittle more. The Sierra containes some twentie leagues in breadth: and the Andes as much, sometimes more, sometimes lesse. They runne in length from north to south, and in breadth from east to weast. It is a strange thing, that in so small a distance, as fiftie leagues, equal∣ly distant from the Line and Pole, there should bee so great a contrarietie, as to raine almost continually in one place, and never in the other. It never raines vpon the coast or Lanos, although there falles sometimes a
small dew, which they call Guarva, and in Castill Mol a, the which sometimes thickens, and falles in cer∣taine droppes of water, yet is it not troublesome, nor such as they neede any covering. Their coverings are of mattes with a little earth vpon them which is suffici∣ent. Vpon the Andes it raines in a manner continually, although it be sometimes more cleere then other. In the Sierra which lies betwixt both the extreames, it rai∣neth in the same season as it dooth in Spaine, which is from September vnto Aprill, but in the other season, the time is more cleere, which is when the Sunne is far∣thest off, and the contrarie when it is neerest, whereof we have discoursed at large in the former booke. That which they call Andes, and Sierra, are twoo ridges of most high mountaines, which runne above a thousand leagues, the one in view of the other, and almost equal∣ly. There are an infinite number of Vicagues, which breede in the Sierres, and are properly like vnto wilde goates, very nimble and swift. There are also of those beasts which they call Guanacos and Pacos, which are sheepe, which we may wel terme the asses of that coun∣trey; whereof we shall speake in their place. And vpon the Andes they finde Apes, very gentle and delightfull, and Parrots in great numbers. There also they find the hearb or tree which they call Coca, that is so greatly e∣steemed by the Indians, and the trafficke they make of it, is worthy much mony. That which they call Sierre, causeth vallies, whereas it opens, which are the best dwellings of Peru, as is the valley of Xauxa of Andaguaylas, and Yucay. In these val∣lies there growes wheat, mays and other sortes of fruits, but lesse in one then in the other. Beyond the Citie of Cusco, (the ancient Court of the Lordes of those
Realmes,) the two ridges of mountaines seperate them. selves one from the other, and in the midst leave a plaine and large champian, which they call the Pro∣vince of Callao, where there are many rivers and great store of fertile pastures: there is also that great Lake of Titicaca. And although it be a ful soile, and in the same height and intemperature, that the Sierre having no more trees nor forrests, yet the want they have of bread, is countervailed with the rootes they sowe, the which they call Papas, and they grow in the earth. This roote is the Indians foode; for drying it, and ma∣king it cleane, they make that which they call Chugno, which is the bread and nourishment of those Provin∣ces. There are other rootes and small hearbes which they eate. It is a healthfull soile, best peopled, and the richest of all the Indies, for the aboundance of cattell they feed, as well of those that are in Europe, as sheepe, neate, and goates, as of those of the Countrie, which they call Guanacos and Pacos, and there are store of Par∣tridges. Next to the Province of Callao, is that of Char∣cas, where there are hote vallies very fertile, and very high rockes, the which are very rich in mines, so as in no part of the world shall you finde better, nor fairer. The reason why it raines on the Lanos, along the Sea coast. CHAP. 21. FOr that it is rare and extraordinarie to see a Coun∣trie where it never raines nor thunders; men desire naturally to know the cause of this strangenes. The rea∣son which some give that have neerely looked into it, is, that vpon that coast there rise no vapors, sufficient
to engender raine for want of matter; but onely that there be finall and light vapors, which cannot breede any other then mistes and dewes, as we see in Europe, oftentimes vapors do rise in the morning, which are not turned into raine, but into mistes only: the which growes from the substance, which is not grosse and suf∣ficient enough to turne to raine. They say, the reason why that which happens but some times in Europe, falles out continually vpon the coast of Peru, is, for that this region is very drie, and yeeldes no grosse va∣pors. The drinesse is knowne by the gre abundance of sandes, having neither welles nor fountaines, but of fifteene stades deepe, (which is the height of a man or more,) and that is neere vnto rivers, the water where∣of, piercing into the land, giues them meanes to make welles. So as it hath been found by experience, that the course of rivers being turned, the welles have beene dried vp, vntill they returned to their ordinarie course: and they give this reason for a materiall cause of this effect, but they have another efficient, which is no lesse considerable, and that is the great height of the Sierre, which comming along the coast, shadowes the Lanos; so as it suffers no winde to blowe from the land, but above the toppes of these mountaines. By meanes whereof, there raines no winde, but that from the Sea, which finding no opposite, doth not presse, nor straine forth the vapors which rise to engender raine; so as the shadowe of the mountaines keepes the vapors from thickning, and convertes them all into mistes. There are some experiences agree with this discourse; for that it raines vpon some small hilles along the coast, which are least shadowed, as the rockes of Atico and Arequi∣pa. It hath rained in some yeeres whenas the Northern
or easterly windes have blowen: yea, all the time they have continued, as it happened in seventie eight, vpon the Lans of Trugillo, where it rained aboundantly, the which they had not seene in many ages before. More∣over, it raines vpon the same coast, in places, whereas the Easterly or Northerne windes be ordinarie, as in Guayaquil, and in places whereas the land riseth much, and turnes from the shadow of the mountaines, as in those that are beyond Ariqua. Some discourse in this maner, but let every one thinke as he please. It is most certaine, that comming from the mountaines to the vallies, they do vsually see as it were two heavens, one cleere and bright above, and the other obscure, and as it were a graie vaile spread vnderneath, which covers all the coast: and although it raine not, yet this mist is wonderfull profitable to bring forth grasse, and to raise vp and nourish the seede: for although they have plen∣tie of water, which they draw from the Pooles and Lakes, yet this moisture from heaven hath such a ver∣tue, that ceasing to fal vpon the earth, it breedes a great discommoditie and defect of graine and seedes. And that which is more worthy of admiration, the drie and barren sandes are by this deaw so beautified with grasse and flowers, as it is a pleasing and agreeable sight, and verie profitable for the feeding of cattell, as we see in the mountaine called Sandie, neere to the Cittie of Kings. Of the propertie of new Spaine, of the Ilands, and of other Lands, CHAP. 22. NEw Spaine passeth all other Provinces in pastures, which breedes infinite troopes of horse, kine,
sheepe, and other cattell. It aboundes in fruite and all kinde of graine. To conclude, it is a Countrie the best furnished, and most accomplished at the Indies. Yet Pe∣ru doth surpasse it in one thing, which is wine, for that there growes store, and good; and they daily multiplie and increase, the which doth grow in very hote vallies, where there are waterings. And although there bee vines in new Spaine, yet the grape comes not to his ma∣turitie, fit to make wine. The reason is, for that it raines there in Iulie and August, whenas the grape ripens: and therefore it comes not to his perfection. And if a∣ny one through curiositie would take the paines to make wine, it should be like to that of Genua and Lom∣bardie, which is very small and sharpe, having a taste like vnto veriuice. The Ilands which they call Barlovente, which be Hispaniola, Cuba, Port Ricco, & others there a∣bouts, are beautified with many greene pastures, and abound in cattell, as neate, and swine, which are be∣come wilde. The wealth of these Ilands, be their sugar∣workes and hides. There is much Cassia fistula & ginger. It is a thing incredible, to see the multitude of these marchandizes brought in one fleete, being in a maner impossible that all Europe should waste so much. They likewise bring wood of an excellent qualitie and co∣lour, as Ebone, & others, which serve for buildings and Ioyners. There is much of that wood which they call Lignum Sanctum or Guage, fit to cure the pox. All these Ilands and others there abouts, which are many, have a goodly and pleasant aspect, for that throughout the yeere, they are beautified with grasse & greene trees, so as they cannot discerne when it is Autumne or Sum∣mer, by reason of continuall moisture ioyned to the heate of the burning Zone. And although this land be
of a great circuite, yet are there few dwellings, for that of it selfe it engenders great Arcabutos, as they call them, which be Groves or very thicke Coppeses: and on the plaines there are many marishes and bogges. They give yet another notable reason, why they are so smally peopled, for that there have remained few na∣turall Indians, through the inconsideratenesse and dis∣order of the first Conquerors that peopled it: and therefore, for the most part, they vse Negros, but they cost deere, being very fit to till the land. There growes neither bread nor wine in these Ilands, for that the too great fertilitie and the vice of the soile, suffers them not to seede, but castes all forth in grasse, very vneaqual∣ly. There are no olive trees, at the least, they beare no olives, but manie greene leaves pleasant to the view, which beare no fruite. The bread they vse is of Cacave, whereof we shall heereafter speake. There is gold in the riuers of these Ilands, which some draw foorth, but in small quantitie, I was little lesse then a yeere in these ilands, and as it hath beene told me of the maine land of the Indies, where I have not been, as in Florida, Nicara∣qua, Guatimala, and others, it is in a maner of this tem∣per, as I have described: yet have I not set downe every particular of Nature in these Provinces of the firme land, having no perfect knowledge thereof. The Coun∣trie which doth most resemble Spaine, and the regions of Europe, in all the West Indies, is the realme of Chille, which is without the generall rule of these other Pro∣vinces, being seated without the burning Zone, and the Tropicke of Capricorne. This land of it selfe is coole and fertile, and brings forth all kindes of fruites that be in Spaine; it yeeldes great aboundance of bread and wine, and aboundes in pastures and cattell. The aire is
wholesome and cleere, temperate betwixt heate and cold, winter and summer are very distinct, and there they finde great store of very fine gold. Yet this land is poore and finally peopled, by reason of their conti∣nuall warre with the Auricanos, and their associates, be∣ing a rough people and friends to libertie. Of the vnknowne Land, and the diversitie of a whole day, betwixt them of the East and the West. CHAP. 23. THere are great coniectures, that in the temperate Zone at the Antartike Pole, there are great and fertile lands: but to this day they are not discovered, neither do they know any other land in this Zone, but that of Chille, and some part of that land which runnes from Ethiopia, to the Cape of Good Hope, as hath been said in the first booke; neither is it knowne if there be any habitations in the other two Zones of the Poles, and whether the land continues and stretcheth to that which is towards the Antartike or South Pole. Nei∣ther do we know the land that lies beyond the straight of Magellan, for that the greatest height yet discovered, is in fiftie ix degrees, as hath beene formerly saide; and toward the Artike or Northerne Pole, it is not knowne how farre the land extendes, which runnes beyond the Cape of Mendocin, and the Caliphornes, nor the bounds and end of Florida, neither yet how farre it extendes to the West. Of late, they have discovered a new land, which they call New Mexico, where they say is much people that speake the Mexicaine tongue. The Philippi∣nes and the following Ilands, as some report that know
it by experience, ranne above nine hundred leagues. But to intreate of China, Cochinchina, Syam, and o∣ther regions which are of the East Indies, were con∣trary to my purpose, which is onely to discourse of the West: nay, they are ignorant of the greatest part of A∣merica, which lies betwixt Peru and Bresill, although the bounds be knowne of all sides, wherein there is di∣versitie of opinions; some say it is a drowned land, full of Lakes and waterie places; Others affirme there are great and florishing kingdomes, imagining there be the Paytiti, the Dorado, and the Caesars, where they say are wonderfull things. I have heard one of our company say, a man worthy of credite, that hee had seene great dwellings there, and the waies as much beaten, as those betwixt Salamanca, and Villadillit, the which he did see, whenas Peter d'Orsua, and after, those that succeeded him, made their entrie and discoverie by the great ri∣ver of Amazons, who beleeving that the Dorado which they sought, was farther off, cared not to inhabit there, and after went both without the Dorado, which they could not finde, and this great Province which they left. To speake the truth, the habitations of Ame∣rica, are to this day vnknowne, except the extreamities, which are Peru, Bresill, and that part where the land be∣ginnes to straighten, which is the river of Silver, then Tucuman, which makes the round to Chille and Charc. Of late we have vnderstood by letters from some of ours which go to S. Croix, in the Sierre, that they go dis∣covering of great Provinces and dwellings, betwixt Bresill and Peru. Time will reveile them, for as at this day the care and courage of men is great, to compasse the world from one part to another; so wee may be∣leeve, that as they have discovered that which is now
knowne, they may likewise lay open that which re∣nes, to the end the Gospell may be preached to the whole world, seeing the two Crownes of Portugall and Caille, have met by the East and West, ioyning their discoveries together, which in truth is a matter to be observed, that the one is come to China and Iappan by the East, and the other to the Philippines, which are neighbours, and almost ioyning vnto China, by the West: for from the Ilands of Lusson, which is the chiefe of the Philippines, in the which is the Citie of Mamill, vnto Macan, which is in the Ile of Cauton, are but foure score or a hundred leagues, and yet we finde it strange, that notwithstanding th small distance from the one to the other, yet according to their accoumpt, there is a daies difference betwixt them; so as it is Sunday at Macan, whenas it is but Saterday at Mamille, and so of the rest. Those of Macan and of China have one day ad∣vanced before the Philippines. It happened to father Alo Sanches, of whom mention is made before, that parting from the Philippines, he arrived at Macan the se∣cond day of Maie, according to their computation, and going to say the Masse of S. Athanasius, he found they did celebrate the feast of the invention of the holy Crosse, for that they did then reckon the third of Maie. The like happened vnto him in another voyage be∣yond it. Some have found this alteration and diversitie, strange, supposing that the fault proceedes from the one or the other; the which is not so: but it is a true and well observed computation, for according to the diffe∣rence of waies where they have beene, we must neces∣sarily say, that when they meete, there must bee diffe∣rence of a day; the reason is, for that sailing from West
to East, they alwaies gaine of the day, finding the sunne rising sooner: and contrariwise, those that saile from East to West, do alwaies loose of the day, for that the Sunne riseth later vnto them; and as they approach nee∣rer the East or the West, they have the day longer or shorter. In Peru, which is westward in respect of Spaine, they are above sixe houres behinde; so as when it is noone in Spaine, it is morning at Peru; and when it is morning heere, it is mid-night there. I have made cer∣taine proofe thereof, by the computation of Eclip∣ses of the Sunne and Moone. Now that the Portugalls have made their navigations from West to East, and the Castillans from East to West, when they came to ioyne and meete at the Philippines and Macan, the one have gained twelve houres, and the other hath lost as much; so as at one instant, and in one time, they finde the difference of twentie houres, which is a whole day; so as necessarily, the one are at the third of Maie, when∣as the others accoumpt but the second; and whenas the one doth fast for Easter eve, the others eate flesh for the day of the resurrection. And if we will imagine that they passe farther, turning once againe about the world, vsing the same computation, when they should returne to ioyne together, they should finde by the same accoumpt, two daies difference: for as I have saide, those that go to the Sunne rising, accoumpt the day sooner, for that the Sunne riseth to them sooner, and those that go to the setting, accoumpt the day la∣ter, for that it goes from them later: finally, the diver∣sitie of the noone tide, causeth the divers reckoning of the day. And now for as much as those that doe saile from East to West, change their noone tide without perceiving it, and yet still follow the same computation
they did when they parted; of necessitie having made the compasse of the worlde, they must finde the want of a whole day in their computation. Of the Volcans or Vents of fire. CHAP. 24. ALthough we finde vents of fire in other places, as mount Aetna and Wesuvio, which now they call mount Sma, yet is that notable which is found at the Indies. Ordinarily these Volcans be rockes or pikes of most high mountaines, which raise themselves above the toppes of all other mountaines; vpon their toppes they have a plaine, and in the midst thereof a pitte or great mouth, which discends even vnto the foote there∣of; a thing verie terrible to beholde. Out of these mouthes, there issues smoake, and sometimes fire: some cast little smoake, and have in a manner no force of Vol∣cans, as that of Arequipa, which is of an vnmeasurable height, and almost all fand. It cannot be mounted vp in lesse then two daies, yet they have not found any shew of fire, but onely the reliques of some sacrifices which the Indians made while they were Gentiles, and sometimes it doth cause a little smoake. The Volcan of Mexico which is neere to the Village of Angels, is like∣wise of an admirable height, whereas they mount thir∣ty leagues in turning: from this Volcan issueth not con∣tinually, but sometimes, almost every day, a great exha∣lation or whirle-winde of smoake, which ascends di∣rectly vp like to the shot of a Crosse-bow, and growes after like to a great plume of feathers, vntill it ceaseth quite, and is presently converted into an obscure and darke cloude. Most commonly it riseth in the morning
after the Sunne rising, and at night when it setteth, al∣though I have seene it breake out at other times. Some∣times it dooth cast foorth great store of ashes after this smoake. They have not yet seene any fire come from it; yet they feare it will issue forth and burne al the land round about, which is the best of all the kingdome: And they holde it for certaine, that there is some cor∣respondencie betwixt this Vulcan & the Sierre of Tlax∣cala, which is neere vnto it, that causeth the great thun∣ders and lightnings they doe commonly heare and see in those parts. Some Spaniards have mounted vppe to this Volcan, and given notice of the mine of sulphre to make powl∣der thereof. Cortez reportes the care hee had to disco∣ver what was in this Volcan. The Volcans of Guatimalla are more renowned, as well for their greatnesse and height: which those that saile in the South Sea disco∣ver a farre off, as for the violence and terrour of the fire it casts. The three and twentieth day of December, in the yeere of our Lord God one thousand five hundred eighty and sixe, almost all the Cittie of Guatimalla fell with an Earthquake, and some people slaine. This Vol∣can had then sixe moneths together, day and night cast out from the toppe, and vomited as it were, a floud of fire, the substance falling vpon the sides of the Volcan, was turned into ashes like vnto burnt earth (a thing pas∣sing mans iudgement, to conceive how it could cast so much matter from its centre during sixe moneths, be∣ing accustomed to cast smoake alone, and that some∣times with small flashes. This was written vnto me be∣ing at Mexico, by a Secretarie of the audience of Gua∣timalla, a man woorthy of credite, and at that time it had not ceased to cast out fire. This yeere past, being
in Quitto in the Cittie of Kings, the Volcan which is neere therevnto, cast such aboundance of ashes, that in many leagues compasse thereabout it darkened the light of the day: and there fell such store in Quitto, as they were not able to goe in the streetes. There have beene other Volcans seene which cast neither smoake, flame, nor yet ashes, but in the botome they are seene to burn with a quicke fire without dying: such a one was that which in our time a coverous and greedy Priest seeing, perswaded himselfe that they were heapes of golde hee did see burning, imagining it coulde be no other mat∣ter or substance, which had burnt so many yeeres, and not consumed. And in this conceit hee made certaine kettles with chaines, and an instrument, to gather and drawe vp the golde out of this pitte or Volcan: but the fire scorned him, for no sooner did his yron chaine and caldron approach neere the fire, but sodainely they were broken in peeces. Yet some tolde mee, that this man was still obstinate, seeking other inventions for to drawe out this golde as he imagined. What should be the reason why the fire and smoake conti∣nues so long in these Vulcans? CHAP. 25. THere is no neede now to make any mention of o∣ther Vulcans, seeeing wee may well vnderstand by the former what they are: yet is it woorthy the search, what should be the cause why the fire and smoake con∣tinues in these Volcans; for that it seemes a prodigious thing, yea against the course of Nature, to vomite and cast out so many flames. Whence dooth this matter proceede, or whether it be ingendred within the bow∣elles
thereof? Some have held opinion, that these Vol∣cans consume the inner substance they have of Nature; and for this reason they beleeve, that naturally they shal end, whenas they have consumed the fuell (as a man may say) that is within them. According to which o∣pinion we see at this day, some mountaines and rockes, from whence they drawe a burnt stone which is light, but very hard, and is excellent to builde with, as that which is carried to Mexico. And in effect there are some shewes of that which hath beene spoken, that these mountaines or rockes hadde sometimes a naturall fire, which hath died after the matter was consumed; and so these stones have remayned burnt and pierced with the fire as we see. For my part, I will not contradict it, that in those places there hath not bin fire sometimes, or Volcans. But there is some difficultie to be beleeve it should be so in all Volcans, considering the matter they cast out is almost infinite; and that being gathered to∣gether, it could not be contained in the same conca∣vitie from whence it goes. Moreover, there are some Volcans, that in hundreds, yea thousands of yeeres are alwaies of one fashion, casting out continually, smoke, fire, and ashes. Plinie the Historiographer of naturall things (as the other Plinie his nephew reports) search∣ing out the secret how this should passe: and apprch∣ing too neere th'exhalation of fire of one of these Vol∣cans, died; and thinking by his diligence to find an end thereof, had an end of his life. For my parte, vpon this consideration I think, that as ther are places in th'earth, whose vertue is to draw vaporous matter, and to con∣vert it into water, which be the fountaines that alwayes runne, and have alwayes matter to make them runne, for that they drawe vnto them the substance of water.
In like sorte there are places that have the propertie to draw vnto them hote exhalations, and to convert them into fire and smoake which by their force and violence cast out other thicke matter which dissolves into ashes, into pumice stone, or such like substance: and for a suf∣ficient argument to proove it to be so in these Volcans, they sometimes cast smoke, and not alwayes, and some∣times fire, and not alwayes, which is according to that it can drawe vnto it, and digest, as the fountaines which in winter abound, and in summer decrease; yea some are quite dried vp, according to the force and vigour they have, and the matter that is presented: even so it is of these Volcans, which cast fire more or lesse at certaine seasons. Others say, that it is hell fire, which issueth there, to serve as a warning, thereby to consider what is in the other life: but if hell (as Divines holde) be in the centre of the earth, the which containes in diame∣ter above two thousand leagues, we can not iudge that this fire is from the centre; for that hell fire (as saint Ba∣sil and others teach) is very different from this which wee see, for that it is without light,Basil. psal. 28. & in exam. and burneth with∣out comparison much more then ours. And therefore I conclude, that what I have saide, seemes to me more reasonable. Of Earthquakes. CHAP. 26. SOme have held, that from these Volcans which are at the Indies, the earthquakes proceed, being very com∣mon there: but for that they ordinarily chance in pla∣ces farre from those Volcans, it can not be the totall cause. It is true they have a certaine simpathy one with
another, for that the hote exhalations which engender in the inner concavities of the earth, seeme to be the materiall substance of fire in the Volcans, whereby there kindleth an other more grosse matter, and makes these shewes of flame and smoke that come forth. And these exhalations (finding no easie issue in the earth) move it, to issue forth with great violence, wherby we heare that horrible noise vnder the earth, and likewise the shaking of the earth, being stirred with this burning exhalati∣on; Even as gunpowlder in mines, having fire put to it breakes rockes and walles: and as the chesnut laid into the fire, leapes and breakes with a noyse, whenas it casts forth the aire (which is contained within the huske) by the force of the fire: Even so these Earthquakes do most commonly happen in places neere the water or sea. As we see in Europe, and at the Indies, that townes and cit∣ties farthest from the sea and waters are least afflicted therewith; and contrariwise, those that are seated vp∣on portes of the sea, vpon rivers, the sea coast, and pla∣ces neere vnto them, feele most this calamitie. There hath happened in Peru, (the which is wonderfull, and worthy to be noted) Earthquakes which have runne from Chille vnto Quitto, and that is above hundred leagues, I say the greatest that ever I heard speake of, for lesser be more common there. Vpon the coast of Chille (I remember not well in what yeare) there was so terri∣ble an Earthquake, as it overturned whole mountains, and thereby stopped the course of rivers which it con∣verted into lakes, it beat downe townes, and flew a great number of people, causing the sea to leave her place some leagues, so as the shippes remained on drie ground, farre from the ordinary roade, with many o∣ther heavie and horrible things. And as I well remem∣ber,
they say this trouble and motion, caused by the Earthquake, ranne three hundred leagues alongest the coast. Soone after, which was in the yeere eighty two, happened that Earthquake of Arequipa, which in a ma∣ner overthrew the whole citie. Since in the yeere eigh∣tie sixe, the ninth of Iulie, fell an other Earthquake in the cittie of Kings, the which as the Viceroy did write, hadde runne a hundred three score and tenne leagues alongest the coast, and overthwart in the Sierre fiftie leagues. The mercy of the Lord was great in this earth quake, to forewarne the people by a great noyse which they heard alittle before the Earthquake, who taught by former experiences, presently put themselves in safe∣tie, leaving their houses, streets, and gardins, to go in∣to the fieldes; so as although it ruined a great parte of the Cittie, and of the chiefest buildings, yet there died not above fifteene or twenty persons of all the Inhabi∣tants. It caused the like trouble and motion at sea, as it had done at Chille, which happened presently after the Earthquake, so as they might see the sea furiously to flie out of her boundes, and to runne neere two leagues in∣to the land, rising above foureteene fadome: it cove∣red all that plaine, so as the ditches and peeces of wood that were there, swamme in the water. There was yet an other earthquake in the Realme and Cittie of Quit∣to; and it seemes all these notable Earthquakes vppon that coast, have succeeded one an other by order, as in trueth it is subiect to these inconveniences. And there∣fore although vpon the coast of Peru, there be no tor∣ments from heaven, as thunder and lightning, yet are they not without feare vppon the land: and so everie one hath before his eies, the Heraults of divine Iustice, to moove him to feare God. For as the Scripture saith,
Fecit haec vt timeatur. Returning then to our purpose, I say the sea coast is most subiect to these earthquakes, the reason is, in my iudgement, for that the water dooth stop the conduites and passages of the earth, by which the hote exhalations should passe, which are engende∣red there. And also the humiditie thickning the super∣ficies of the earth, dooth cause the fumes and hot exha∣lations to goe close together and incounter violently in the bowells of the earth, which doe afterwards breake forth. Some have observed, that such Earthquakes have vsually hapned, whenas a rainie season falles after some drie yeres. Wherevpon they say, that the Earthquakes are most rare, where are most welles, the which is ap∣prooved by experience. Those of the Cittie of Mexico holde opinion, that the Lake whereon it is seated, is the cause of the Earthquakes that happen there, although they be not very violent: and it is most certaine, that the Townes and Provinces, farre within the land, and far∣thest from the sea, receive sometimes great losses by these Earthquakes, as the Cittie of Chachapoyas at the Indies, and in Italie that of Ferrara, although vpon this subiect. It seemes this latter, being neere to a river, and not farre from the Adriatic sea, should rather be num∣bred among the sea-Townes. In the yeere of our Lord one thousand five hundred eightie and one, in Cugiano, a Cittie of Peru, otherwise called the Peace, there hap∣ned a strange accident touching this subiect. A village called Angoango (where many Indians dwelt that were sorcerers and idolatrers) fell sodainely to ruine, so as a great parte thereof was raised vp and carried away, and many of the Indians smothered, and that which seems incredible (yet testified by men of credit) the earth that
was ruined and so beaten downe, did runne and slide vpon the land for the space of a league and a halfe, as it had beene water or wax molten, so as it stopt and filled vppe a Lake, and remayned so spread over the whole countrey. How the land and sea imbrace one an other. CHAP. 27. I Wil end with this Element of earth, vniting it to the precedent of water, whose order and embracing is truely of it selfe admirable. These two elements have one spheare divided betweene them, and entertaine and embrace one another in a thousand sortes and ma∣ners. In some places the water encounters the land fu∣riously as an enemy, and in other places, it invirons it after a sweete and amiable manner. There are partes whereas the sea enters far within the land, as comming to visite it; and in other partes the land makes restitu∣tion, casting his capes, points and tongues farre into the sea, piercing into the bowelles thereof. In some partes one element ends and another beginnes, yeelding by degrees one vnto another. In some places (where they ioyne) it is exceeding deepe, as in the Ilands of the South Sea, and in those of the North, whereas the shippes ride close to the land; and although they sound three score and tenne, yea foure score fadomes, yet do they finde no bottome, which makes men coniecture, that these are pikes or poynts of land which rise vp from the bottome, a matter woorthy of great admiration. Heerevpon a very expert Pilote said vnto me, that the Ilands which they call of Woolves, and others, that lie
at the entry of the coast of New Spaine, beeing called Cocos, were of this manner. Moreover, there is a place in the midst of the great Ocean, without the view of land, and many leagues from it, where are seene as it were two towers or pikes of a very high elevated rocke, rising out of the middest of the sea, and yet ioyning vnto it they finde no bot∣tome. No man can yet perfectly comprehend, nor con∣ceive the full and perfect forme of the land at the In∣dies, the boundes being not wholy discovered to this day: yet wee may ghesse that it is proportioned like a heart with the lungs. The broadest of this heart is from Bresill to Peru, the poynt at the straight of Magellan, and the top where it ends is the firme land, and there the continent begins by little and litle to extend itselfe vn∣till wee come to the height of Florida and the vpper landes, which are not yet well discovered. We may vnderstand other particularities of this land at the Indies, by the Commentaries which the Spaniards have writ∣ten of their successe and discoveries; and amongest the rest, of the Peregrination which I have written; which in trueth is strange, and may give a great light. This in my opinion may suffice at this time, to give som know∣ledge of things at the Indies, touching the com∣mon elements, of the which all parts of the worlde are famed.
THE FOVRTH BOOKE of the Naturall and Morall Hi∣storie of the Indies. Of three kindes of mixtures or compounds, of the which I must intreate in this Historie. CHAP. 1. HAving intreated in the former booke of that which concernes the Elements, and the simples of the Indies, in this present booke we will discourse of mixtures and compounds, seeming fit for the subiect we shall treate of. And al∣though there be many other sun∣drie kindes, yet we will reduce this matter into three, which are Mettalls, Plants, and Beasts. Mettalls are (as plants,) hidden and buried in the bowels of the earth, which have some conformitie in themselves, in the forme and maner of their production; for that wee see and discover even in them, branches, and as it were a bodie, from whence they grow and proceede, which
are the greater veines and the lesse, so as they have a knitting in themselves: and it seemes properly that these minerales grow like vnto plants, not that they have any inward vegitative life, being onely proper to plants: but they are engendered in the bowels of the earth, by the vertue and force of the Sunne and other planets, and in long continuance of time, they increase and multiply after the maner of plants. And even as mettalls be plants hidden in the earth, so we may say, that plants be living creatures fixed in one place, whose life is maintained by the nourishment which Nature furnisheth from their first begnning. But living crea∣tures surpasse plants, in that they have a more perfect being; and therefore have neede of a more perfect foode and nourishment; for the search whereof, Na∣ture hath given them a moving and feeling to discover and discerne it. So as the rough and barren earth is as a substance and nutriment for mettalls; and that which is fertile and better seasoned a nourishment for plants. The same plants serve as a nourishment for living crea∣tures, and the plants and living creatures together as a nourishment for men, the inferiour nature alwaies serving for the maintenance and sustentation of the su∣periour, and the lesse perfect yeelding vnto the more perfect: whereby we may see how much it wants, that gold and silver and other things which men so much esteeme by their covetousnesse, should be the happi∣nes of man, wherevnto he should tend, seeing they be so many degrees in qualitie inferior to man, who hath been created and made onely to be a subiect to serve the vniversall Creator of all things, as his proper end and perfect rest, and to which man, all other things in this world, were not propounded or left, but to gaine
this last end. Who so would consider of things created, and discourse according to this Philosophie, might draw some fruite from the knowledge and considera∣tion thereof, making vse of them to know and glorifie their Author. But he that would passe on farther to the knowledge of their properties and profits, and would curiously search them out, hee shall finde in these crea∣tures, that which the Wiseman saies, that they are snares and pitfalles to the feete of fooles & ignorant, into the which they fall and loose themselves daily.Sap. 14. To this in∣tent therefore, and that the Creator may be glorified in his creatures, I pretend to speake of some things in this Booke, whereof there are many at the Indies worth the report, touching mettalls, plants, and beasts, which are proper and peculiar in those parts. But for that it were a great worke to treate thereof exactly, and requires grea∣ter learning and knowledge; yea, much more leisure then I have, my intent is only to treate of some things succinctly, the which I have observed, as well by expe∣rience, as the report of men of credite, touching these three things which I have propounded, leaving to men more curious and diligent to treate more amply of these matters. Of the aboundance and great quantitie of Mettall at the West Indies. CHAP. 2. THe wisedome of God hath made mettalls for phi∣sicke, and for defence, for ornament and for instru∣ments for the worke of men, of which foure things we may easily yeelde examples, but the principall end of mettalls, and the last thereof, is, for that the life of man
hath not onely neede of nourishment as the beasts, but also he must worke and labour according vnto the reason and capacitie which the Creator hath given him. And as mans vnderstanding doth apply it selfe to divers artes and faculties, so the same Author hath gi∣ven order, that hee should finde matter and subiect to diverse artes, for the conservation, reparation, suretie, ornament and exaltation of his workes. The diversi∣tie therefore of mettalls, which the Creator hath shut vp in the closets and concavities of the earth, is such, and so great, that man drawes profit and commoditie from everie one of them. Some serve for curing of dis∣eases, others for armes and for defence against the ene∣mies, some are for ornament and beautifying of our persons and houses, and others are fit to make vessels and yron-workes, with divers fashions of instruments, which the industry of man hath found out and put in practise. But above all the vses of mettalls, which bee simple and natural, the communication and commerce of men hath found out one, which is the vse of money, the which (as the Philosopher saieth) is the measure of all things.rit . Ethic. cap. 5. And although naturally, and of it selfe, it be but one onely thing, yet in value and estimation wee may say, that it is all things. Mony is vnto vs as it were, meate, clothing, house, horse, and generally whatsoe∣ver man hath neede of. By this meanes all obeyes to mony, and as the Wise man saith, to finde an invention that one thing should be all. Men guided or thrust for∣ward by a naturall instinct, choose the thing most du∣rable and most maniable, which is mettall, and a∣mongst mettals, gave them the preheminence in this invention of mony, which of their nature were most durable and incorruptible, which is silver and golde.
The which have bin in esteeme, not onlie amongst the Hebrewes Assirians, Greekes, Romans, and other nations of Europe and Asia, but also amongst the most retyred and barbarous nations of the world, as by the Indians both East and West, where gold and silver is held in great esteeme, imploying it for the workes of their Temples and Pallaces, & for the attyring and ornament of kings and great personages. And although we have found some Barbarians, which know neither gold nor silver, as it is reported of those of Florida, which tooke the bagges and sackes wherein the silver was, the which they cast vpon the ground, and left as a thing vnprofi∣table. And Plinie likewise writes of the Babitacques, which abhorred gold, and therefore they buried it, to the end that no man should vse it. But at this day they finde few of these Floridiens or Babitacques, but great numbers of such as esteeme, seeke, and make accoumpt of gold and silver, having no neede to learne it of those that go from Europe. It is true, their covetousnesse is not yet come to the height of ours, neither have they so much worshipped gold and silver, although they were Idolaters, as some blinde Christians, who have committed many great out-rages for gold and silver. Yet is it a thing very worthy consideration, that the wisedome of the Eternall Lord, would inrich those partes of the world, which are most remote, and which are peopled with men of lesse civilitie and governe∣ment, planting there great store of mines, and in the greatest aboundance that ever were, thereby to invite men to search out those lands, and to possesse them, to the end that by this occasion, they might plant religi∣on, and the worship of the true God, amongst those that knew it not, fulfilling therein the prophecie of
Isaie.ie. 54. saying, that the Church should stretch forth her boundes, not onely to the right, but also to the left: which is vnderstood as S. Augustine saieth, that the Gospell should be spread abroad,Aug. lib. 1. de cono. ang. cap. 31. not onely by those that sincerely, and with a true & perfect charity preach and declare it, but also by those that publish it, tending to temporall ends; whereby wee see, that the Indian land, being more aboundant in mines and riches, hath beene in our age best instructed in the Christian religion, the Lord vsing our desires and inclinations to serve his soveraigne intentions. Herevpon a Wise man said, that what a father doth to marie his daughter wel, is to give her a great portion in mariage; the like hath God done for this land so rough and laboursome, gi∣ving it great riches in mines, that by this meanes it might be the more sought after. At the West Indies then there are great store of mines of all sortes of met∣talls, as copper, yron, lead, tinne, quicke-silver, silver and gold: and amongst all the regions and partes of the In∣dies, the realmes of Peru abound most in these mettalls, especially with gold, silver, quicke silver, or mercurie, whereof they have found great store, and daily disco∣ver new mines. And without doubt, according to the qualitie of the earth, those which are to discover, are without comparison, farre more in number, then those which are yet discovered: yea, it seemes that all the land is sowed with these mettalls, more then any other in the world that is yet knowne vnto vs, or that anci∣ent writers have made mention of.
Of the qualitie and nature of the earth where the mettalls are found, and that all these mettalls are not imployed at the Indies, and how the Indians vsed them. CHAP. 3. THe reason why there is so great aboundance of mettalls at the Indies, (especially at the west of Pe∣ru, as I have saide,) is the will of the Creator, who hath imparted his giftes as it pleased him. But com∣ming to a naturall and philosophicall reason,Philo. lib 5. de Genes.mund. it is very true, which Philon a wise man writes, saying, that gold, silver, and mettalls, grow naturally in land that is most barren and vnfruitefull. And we see, that in lands of good temperature, the which are fertile with grasse and fruites, there are seldome found any mines; for that Nature is contented to give them vigour to bring forth fruites more necessarie for the preservation and maintenance of the life of beasts and men.Euseb. lib. 8. de prepar. evau. c. 9. And con∣trariwise to lands that are very rough, drie, and barren, (as in the highest mountains and inaccessible rockes of a rough temper,) they finde mines of silver, of quicke-silver and of gold, and all those riches (which are come into Spaine since the West Indies were discovered) have been drawne out of such places which are rough and full, bare and fruitlesse: yet the taste of this mony, makes these places pleasing and agreeable, yea, well inhabited with numbers of people. And although there be, as I have said, many mines of all kinds of mettalls as at the Indies, yet they vse none but those of gold and silver, and as much quicke-silver as is necessarie to refine their gold and silver. They carrie yron thither from Spaine and China. As for copper, the Indians have drawne
of it, and vsed it for their armes, the which were not vsually of yron, but of copper. Since the Spaniards pos∣sessed the Indies, they have drawne very little, neither do they take the paine to seeke out these mines, al∣though there be many busying themselves in the search of richer and more precious mettalls, wherein they spend their time & labour. They vse no other mettalls, as copper, and yron, but only that which is sent them from Spaine, or that which remaines of the refining of gold and silver. We finde not that the Indians in for∣mer times vsed gold, silver, or any other mettall for mo∣ny, and for the price of things, but only for ornament, as hath beene said, whereof there was great quantitie in their Temples, Palaces, and Toombes, with a thou∣sand kindes of vessels of gold and silver, which they had. They vsed no gold nor silver to trafficke or buy withall, but did change and trucke one thing for ano∣ther, as Homer and Plinie report of the Ancients. They had some other things of greater esteeme,Plin. lib. 33. cap. 3. which went currant amongst them for price, and in steede of coine: and vnto this day this custome continues amongst the Indians, as in the Provinces of Mexico, in steede of money they vse Cacao, (which is a small fruite,) and therewith buy what they will. In Peru they vse Cocae, to the same end, (the which is a leafe the Indians e∣steeme much,) as in Paraguay, they have stampes of yron for coine, and cotten woven in S. Croix, of the Sierre. Finally, the maner of the Indians trafficke, and their buying and selling, was to exchange, and give things for things: and although there were great martes and famous faires, yet had they no neede of mony, nor of brokers, for that every one had learned what he was to give in exchange for every kinde of marchandise.
Since the Spaniards entred, the Indians have vsed gold and silver to buy withall: and in the beginning there was no coine, but silver by weight was theirprice and mony, as they report of the ancient Romans. Since,li. lib. 33. c. 4 for a greater benefite, they have forged coine in Mexi∣co and Peru, yet vnto this day they have not in the West Indies, coined any mony of copper or other mettall but onely of silver and golde: for the richnes of that Countrie hath not admitted nor received such money as they call bullion, nor other kindes of alloy, which they vse in Italie, and in other Provinces of Europe; Al∣though in some Ilands of the Indies, as S. Dominique & Port Ricco, they vse coine of leather, which is square, the which are currant onely in those Ilands, having lit∣tle silver or gold. I say little, although there be much, for that no man digges it and refines it. But for that the riches of the Indies, and their maner to labour in the mines, consistes of golde, silver, and quickesilver, I will speake some thing of these three mettalls, leaving the rest for this time. Of golde which they digge and refine at the Indies. CHAP. 4. GOld amongst other mettals hath bin alwayes held the most excellent; and with reason, beeing the most durable and incorruptible of all others; for sire which consumes and diminisheth the rest, amends it, and brings it to perfection. Golde which hath often passed through the fire, keepes his colour, and is most fine and pure; which properly is called (as Plinie saith) Obriso, wherof the Scripture makes so often mention, &
vse, which consumeth all other mettalles, (as the same Plinie saith) dooth not any thing waste golde,Plin. lib. 33. c. 3 nor yet hurte it, neither is it eaten, nor groweth olde. And al∣though his substance and body be firme and solide; yet dooth it yeelde and bow woonderfully; the Beaters and Drawers of golde knowe well the force it hath to bee drawen out without breaking. All which things well considered, with other excellent properties, will give men of iudgement to vnderstand, wherefore the holie Scripture dooth compare Charitie to golde.Apoc. 3. & 21. Cant. 3. Psal. 67. 3. Reg. 6. To con∣clude, there is little neede to relate the excellencies thereof to make it more desirable. For the greatest ex∣cellencie it hath, is to be knowne (as it is) amongst men, for the supreame power and greatnesse of the worlde. Comming therefore to our subiect; at the Indies there is great abundance of this mettall, and it is wel knowne by approoved histories, that the Inguas of Peru did not content themselves with great and small vessels of gold, as pots, cups, goblets, and flagons; yea with kowles or great vessells, but they had chaires also, and litters of massie golde: and in their Temples they had set vppe maine Images of pure golde, whereof they finde some yet at Mexico, but not such store as when the first Con∣querours came into the one and the other kingdome, who found great treasure, and without doubt there was much more hidden in thearth by the Indians. It would seeme ridiculous to reporte that they have made their horse shooes of silver for want of yron, and that they have payd three hundred crownes for a bottle of wine, and other strange things; and yet in trueth this hath come to passe, yea and greater matters. They drawe golde in those partes, after three sorts: or at the least, I have seene all three vsed. For eyther they find gold in
graines, in powlder, or in stone. They do call golde in graines, small morsels of gold, which they find whole, without mixture of any other mettall, which hath no neede of melting or refining in the fire: and they call them pippins, for that commonly they are like to pip∣pins, or seeds of melons, or pompions: and that wher∣of Iob speakes, when he saies, Leve illius aurum,Iob 18. though sometimes there be greater, and such as I have seene weighed many poundes. It is the excellencie of this mettall alone (as Plinie affirmes) to be found thus pure and perfect, which is not seene in any other mettalles,Plin. lib. 3. ca. 5 which are alwayes earthly, and have a scumme, and neede purging by the fire: I have likewise seene silver naturall like to. Yea there is an other kinde which the Indians call Papas, and sometimes they find peeces very fiue and pure, like to small round rootes, the which is rare in that mettall, but vsuall in gold. They finde little of this golde in pippin, in respect of the o∣ther kindes. Golde in stone is a veine of gold that gro∣weth or ingendereth within the stone or flint, as I have seene in the mines of Curuma, within the government of Salines, very great stones pierced and intermixed with gold; others that were halfe gold, and halfe stone. The golde which groweth in this manner, is found in pittes or mines, which have their veines like to the sil∣ver mines, but it is very hard to drawe it foorth: Aga∣tarchides writes in his first booke of the Erithrean or red sea (as Phocion reportes in his Bibliotheca) of the man∣ner and fashion to refine golde, drawne out of stones, the which the antient Kings of Egypt were wont to vse, & it is a strange thing to see how that which is written resembles properly to the manner they vse at this day in refining these mettalls of golde and silver. The grea∣test
quantitie of golde which is drawne at the Indies, is that in powlder, the which is found in streames and places wher much water hath passed, because the slouds at the Indies abound in this kinde of golde; As the An∣cients for this occasion did celebrate the river of Tagus in Spaine, Paolus in Asia, and Ganges in the East Indies, and calld the Rmenta auri, the which we others call gole in pwler, and of this sort is the greatest quan∣titie of golde they have at this day. At this present in te lands of Barlovent, Hispaniola, Cuba, and Port Ricco, there hath beene, and is great quantity in the rivers, but they bring little from thence into Spaine, for want of the naturall inhabitants of the country, & the difficul∣tie to drawe it. There is great aboundance in the king∣dome of Chille, of Quitto, and in the new Realme of Grenado. The most famous golde is that of Caranava in Peru, and of Valdivia in Chille, for that it riseth with his al∣loy and perfection, which is twenty three carrats and a halfe, and sometims more. They make accompt like∣wise of the gold of Veraa to be very fine. They bring much golde to Mexico from the Philippines, and China, but commonly it is weake and of base alloy. Golde is commonly found mixt with silver or with copper; but that which is mixed with silver is commonly of fewer carras then that which is mixed with copper. If there ba sie part of silver, 3  Plinie saieth, it is then properly called Fl, which hath the property to shine more at the light of the fire, then fine gold or fine silver. That which is incorporate with copper, is commonly of a higher value. They refine powldred golde in basens, washing it in many waters, vntill the sand falles from it, and the golde as most heavie remaineth in the bot∣tome.
They refine it likewise with quicke-silver and strong water, for that the allume whereof they make this water hath the vertue to separate gold from drosse, or from other mettalls. After it is purified and molten, they make brickes or small barres to cary it vnto Spaine; for being in powlder, they cannot transport it from the Indies, for they can neither custome it, marke it, nor take say, vntill it be molten. The foresaide Hisria grapher reporteth that Spaine above all other Countries of the world, did abound in gold and silver;. 33.  especially Galitia and Portugall, & above all, the Asturias, whence hee saieth they brought every yeere twenty thousand pounds of golde, and that they found not so great a∣boundance in any other place. The which is confirmed in the booke of Macabees, where it is saide, that amon∣gest the great riches of the Romans,1. Macab. 8. they had in their power, the golde and silver of Spaine. At this day the great treasure of Spaine comes from the Indies, wherein the divin Providence hath appoynted one Realme to serve another, which doe imparte their wealth to par∣ticipate their governement for the good the one of the other, in communicating mutually the goodes and graces they doe inioy: wee can not value nor e∣steeme the quantitie of golde that is brought from the Indies; but we may well say, it is much more then that which  reports was brought yeerely from Spaine to Rom. In the fleete where I came, which was in the yere, 1585. the declaratin of the firme land was of of twelve cassons or chests of golde, every casson at the least weied foure Arobes, that is a hundred weight; and a thousand fifty and sixe mares from New Spaine, which was for the King only, besides that which came for Merchants and private men being registred; and
much that came vnregistred. This may suffice touch∣ing the golde of the Indies, and now we will speake of silver. Of the Silver at the Indies. CHAP. 5. WE reade these wordes in the Booke of Iob, Sil∣uer hath certain beginnings and roots in his veins,Iob 28. and golde hath a setled place, where it ingenders and thic∣kens, yron with digging is drawne out of the earth, and stone molten with heate is turned into copper: Hereby he wise∣ly shewes in few words, the nature of silver, golde, y∣ron & copper. We have spoken something of the pla∣ces where golde is ingendered and congealed, which is either of the foresaide stones in the deapth of moun∣taines, and in the bowells of the earth: or in the sand of rivers, and where brookes have runne, or else on the toppes of mountaines, the which golde in powl∣der runnes downe with the water. And this is the com∣mon opinion they holde at the Indies. Wherevppon many of the common sort believe that the deluge (ha∣ving drowned all, even to the highest hills) hath beene the cause that at this day they finde this golde in the ri∣vers, and in places so farre off. Now we wil shew how they discover the mines of silver, their veines; rootes, and beginnings whereof Iob speakes. And first I will say, that the reason why they give sil∣ver the second place among all other mettalles, is, for that it approacheth neerer to golde then any other, be∣ing more durable and lesse indomaged by the fire, and more maniable then any other: yea it passeth golde in brightnesse, beauty and sound, the which is cleere, and agreeable, for the colour is more conformable and re∣sembling
the light, and the sound more percing, more lively, and more delicate. Likewise there are some pla∣ces where they value silver more then golde. It is yet an argument, to iudge that gold is more pretious rhen all other mettalls, for that it is found with greater dif∣ficultie; and Nature seemes more sparing in bringing it foorth (although there be countries as they say of Chine) where they finde golde more easily then silver: yet it is more common and ordinarie, to finde silver with more facilitie and greater abundance then gold. The Creator hath furnished the Weast Indies with so great a treasure of silver, as all that which we reade of in antient Histories, and that which is spoken of the mines of Spaine, and other provinces, is not compara∣ble to that we see in those partes. The mines of silver are commonly found in mountaines, and high rockes very desart, although they have sometimes bin found in Plaines and Champaines. There are two different kindes, the one they call stragling, the other fixed and setled. The straggling, are peeces of mettall found in certaine places, the which drawne away, there is no more found. But the fixed veines, are those which have a continuance in depth and length, like to great branches and armes of trees; and when they find anie one of them, they commonly finde many in the same place. The maner to purge & refine silver which the In∣dians have vsed, was by melting, in dissolving this masse of mettall by fire, which casts the earthly drosse aparte, and by his force separates silver from lead, tinne from copper, and other mettalls mixt. To this end they did build small furnaces in places whereas the winde did commonly blow, and with wood and cole made their refining, the which furnaces in Ptru they call Guayras.
Since the Spaniards entred, besides this manner of re∣fining which they vse to this day: they likewise refine silver with quicke-silver, and draw more by this means then in refining it by fire. For there is some kind of sil∣ver mettall found which can by no meanes be purged, and refined by fire, but onely with quickesilver. But thi kinde of mettall is commonly poore and weake, the which vsually they finde in greatest aboundance. They cl that poore which yields least silver, and great quantitie of other mettall, and that rich which yieldes mst silver. It is strange to see, not onely the difference betwixt the refining of mettall by fire, and without it by quicke-silver, but also that some of these mettalles, which are refined by the fire, can not well be molten with any artificiall winde, as with bellowes; but when it is kindled and blowen with the naturall ayre, or na∣turall winde. The mettall of the mines of Porco is easi∣ly refined with bellowes, and that of the mines of Po∣tozi cannot be molten with bellowes, but only by the breath of their Guayras, which are small furnaces vpon the sides of the mountaines, built expresly where the winde lies, within the which they melt this mettal; and though it be hard to yielde a reason for this difference, yet is it most certaine and approoved by long experi∣ence: so as the greedie desire of this mettall so much valued amongst men, hath made them seek out a thou∣sand gentle inventions and devises, whereof wee will heereafter make mention. The chiefe places of the In∣ds from whence they drawe silver, ae Nw Spain, and Pru; but the mines of Pru farre surpasse the rest; and amongst all others of the worlde, those of Potozi, whereof wee will intreate alittle at leasure, being the most famous and remarkeable things at the Indies.
Of the mountaine or hill of Potozi, and the discovery thereof. CHAP. 6. THe mountaine or hill of Potozi so famous, scituate in the Province of Charcas, in the kingdome of Pe∣ru, distant from the Equinoctiall towardes the South, or Pole Antartike, 21. degrees and two thirds: so as it falles vnder the Tropicke, bordering vpon the bur∣ning Zone, and yet this region is extreamely cold, yea, more then old Castill in the kingdome of Spaine, and more then Flanders it selfe, although by reason it should be hote or temperate, in regard of the height and ele∣vation of the Pole where it is seated. The reason of this so cold a temperature, is the height of the mountaine, whereas colde and intemperate windes continually blow, especially that which they call Thomahavi, which is boistrous and most cold. It raines most com∣monly in Iune, Iulie, and August. The ground and soile of this mountaine is drie, cold, and very vnpleasant, yea altogether barren, which neither engenders nor brings forth any fruite, grasse, nor graine; it is naturally inhabi∣table, for the intemperature of the heaven, and the bar∣rennes of the earth. But the force of silver, which drawes vnto it the desire of all things, hath peopled this mountaine more then any other place in all these Kingdomes, making it so fruitfull of all kindes of meats, as there wantes nothing that can be desired, yea, in great aboundance; and although there be nothing but what is brought by carriage, yet every place aboundes so with fruite, conserves exquisite wines, silkes, & all o∣ther delicats, as it is not inferiour to any other part. This mountaine is of colour darke red, and is in forme plea∣sing
at the first sight, resembling perfectly the fashion of a pavilion, or of a sugar loafe. It exceedes all other hilles and mountaines about it in height. The way whereby they ascend, is very rough and vneven, and yet they go vpon horse-backe. It is round at the top, & at the foote it hath a league in circuite. It containes from the toppe to the bottome 1680. common yardes, the which reduced to the measure of Spanish leagues, makes a quarter of a league. At the foote of this moun∣taine there is another small hill that riseth out of it, in the which there hath beene sometimes mines of met∣tall dispearsed, which were found as it were in purses, and not in fixed or continued veines; yet were they ve∣ry rich, though few in number. This small rocke was called by the Indians Guayna Potozi, which is yong Po∣tozi; at the foote whereof beginnes the dwellings of the Spaniards and Indians, which are come to the ri∣ches and worke of Potozi, which dwelling may con∣taine some two leagues in circuite, and the greatest traf∣ficke and commerce of all Peru is in this place. The mines of this mountaine were not digged nor discove∣red in the time of their Inguas, which were the Lordes of Peru, before the Spaniardes entred, although they had digged and opened the mines of Porco, neere to Potozi, distant onely sixe leagues. The reason might be the want of knowledge thereof, although some do re∣port I know not what fable, that having sometimes la∣boured to open those mines, a voyce was heard, com∣maunding them not to touch it, being reserved for o∣thers. In trueth they had no knowledge of Potozi, nor of the wealth thereof, till after twelve yeeres that the Spaniards were entred into Peru, the discovery where∣of was made in this manner.
An Indian called Gualpa, of the Nation of Chumbi∣bilca, which is a Province of Cusco, going one day to hunt for venison, passing towardes the weast whither the beast was fled, he begne to runne vppe against the rocke, which at that time was covered and plan∣ted with certaine trees, they call Quinua, and with thick bushes, and as he strived to gette vp a way which was somewhat rough and vneasie, hee was forced to lay holde vpon a braunch, which issued from a veine of a silver mine (which since they have called Rich) which he pulled vp, perceiving in the hole or roote thereof, mettall, the which hee knew to be very good, by the experience hee had of the mines of Porco: and after finding vpon the ground, certaine peeces of mettall, which lay broken and dispersed neere to this veine, be∣ing scarse well able to iudge thereof, for that the colour was spoyled and changed by the Sunne and raine. He carried it to Porco to trie by the Guayras (which is the triall of mettall by fire, and having thereby found the great riches and his happy fortune, he secretly digged and drew mettall out of this veine, not imparting it to any man, vntil that an Indian called Guanca, of the val∣ley of Xaura, which is vpon the bordures of the Cittie of Kings, who remaining at Porco, neere vnto Gualpa of Chumbibilca, perceved one day that he made a refining, and that his wedges and brickes were greater then such as were vsually made in those places: and also increa∣sing in his expence of apparrell, having till then lived but basely. For this reason, and for that the mettall his neighbour refined was different from that of Porco, he thought to discover this secret, and wrought so, that al∣though the other kept it as secret as hee could, yet tho∣row importunitie he was forced to carry him vnto the
rocke of Potozi, having enioyed this rich treasure full two months. And then Gualpa the Indian willed Guan∣ca for his part to take a veine, which he had discovered neare to the rich veine, which at this day is called the veine of Diego Centeno, that was not lesse rich, but more hard to digge and to drawe foorth; and so by agree∣ment they divided betweene them the richest rocke in the world. It chaunced after, the Indian Guanca find∣ing some difficulty to digge and drawe foorth his met∣tall, being most hard, and the other Gualpa refusing to impart any of his mine vnto him, they fell at debate; so as Guanca of Xaura grieved therewith, and with some o∣ther discontents, discovered this secret vnto his maister called Villaroel a Spaniard, who then remained at Porco. This Villaroel desirous to vnderstand the trueth, went to Potozi, & finding the riches his Yanacona or servant had discovered vnto him, caused the Indian Guanca to be inrolled, vndertaking with him the saide veine, which was called Centeno, they call it vndertaking, that is as much as to note and marke the mine, and so much ground in circuite for him, which the Lawe graunts vnto those that discover any mine, or vnto those that digge them: by meanes whereof, having discovered them to the Iustice, they remayned Lords of the mine, to dig and drawe foorth the silver, as being their owne, paying only their duties vnto the King, which is a fift parte. So as the first discovery and inregistring of the mines of Potozi was the 21. of April, in the yeare of our Lord, one thousand five hundred fortie five in the ter∣ritorie of Porco, by the saide Villaroel a Spaniard, and Guana an Indian. Presently after they discovered an∣other veine, which they called the veine of Tinne, the which is very rich, although it be rough and very pain∣full
to worke in, the mettall being as hard as slint. Since the thirtie day of August in the same yeere of a thou∣sand five hundred forty and five the veine called Men∣dieta was inrolled, and these are the foure principall veines of Potozi. They say of the rich veine, the first that was discovred that the metall lay above the ground the height of a launce, like vnto rockes, raising the su∣perficies of the earth, like vnto a crest of three hundred foote long, and thirteene foote broade, and that this remained bare & vncovered by the deluge. This veine having resisted the violence and force of the water, as the hardest part. The mettall was so rich as it was halfe silver, and this veine continued in his bounty fiftie or three score stades, which is the height of a man, and then it failed. In this maner the mines of Potozi were discovered by the Divine Providence, who (for the fe∣licitie of Spaine) would have the greatest treasure that e∣ver was in this world, discovered, at such time whenas the Emperour Charles the fift of famous memorie held the Empire, the kingdomes of Spaine, and the Seignio∣rie of the Indies. Presently after that, the discoverie of Potozi was knowne in Peru; many Spaniardes, and the most parte of the Bourgeois of the silver Cittie, which is eighteene leagues from Potozi, came thither to take mines: yea there came many Indians from divers pro∣vinces, especially tha GuayZadores of Porco, so as within a short space it was the best peopled habitation of all the kingdome. Of the treasure which is daily drawne from the rocke or mountaine of Potozi. CHAP. 7. I Have often doubted, if in antient Histories there were found any so rich mines, as those we have seen
in our time in Peru. If there were ever rich mines in the worlde, and famous for this effect, they have bin those of Spaine, which they of Cartbage did inioy, and since, the Romans, the which as I have saide, are not onely fa∣mous and esteemed in prophane bookes, but also, in the holy Scriptures. Hee that maketh most particular mention of these mines, at the least that I have seene, is Plinie,lin. b. 33. c. 6 who writeth thus in his naturall Historie: They finde silver almost in all provinces, but that of Spaine is the best, which growes and ingenders in a barren soile, vppon mountaines and rockes. It is a certaine and infallible thing, that in places where they have once discovered any of these veines, there are others not farre off, which is likewise found in all other mettalls, and for this the Greekes, in my opinion, called them mettalls. It is strange that the pits or holes of these mines of Spaine, the which they beganne to digge in Hanni∣bals time, are at this day, and hold the names of their disco∣verers. Amongst these mines, that which Bebello discove∣red, which holdes his name vnto this day, was very famous; and they say it yeelded so great riches to Hanniball, that ev∣rie day they gathered three hundred pounds weight of silver, and vnto this day they have alwaies continued labouring in this mine, so as it is now digd 15. hundred pases deep into the mountaine. Out of which pits, notwithstanding the deapth, the Gascoins that labour in them drawe out the water, that they may worke with more ease, whilest their candelles and lights last,Gnbra Chonograph. and that in such aboundaunce, as it seemes to be a river. Hitherto are the woordes of Pliny, the which I would set downe word by word, the better to content such as know what mines be, seeing that what is tried at this day, was then in vse. And truely the riches of this mine of Hannibal vpon the Pirrenean hilles, was great and famous, which the Romans possessed, having con∣tinued
the worke even vnto Plinies time, which was a∣bout three hundred yeeres. The deapth of this mine was fifteene hundred pases, which is a mile and a halfe: and it was so rich in the beginning, that it was woorth daily to the maister thereof three hundred poundes, at twelve ounces to the pound. But although this were a great treasure, it did not approach neere to that which in our time hath bin found in Potozi: for as it appear∣eth by the Registers of the house of contraction of that Province, and as many antient men worthy of credite doe testifie, whenas the licentiate Pollo governed that Province, the which was many yeeres after the disco∣very of this mountaine, they did every saterday enter a hundred and fifty and twoo hundred thousand pee∣ces, whereof the Kings fift amounted to thirty and for∣ty thousand peeces; and for every yeere a million and a halfe, or little lesse. So as according to that computa∣tion they didde drawe every day from this mine thirtie thousand peeces,Every eece is worth 13. rialls & a fourth part whereof there came to the King for his fift, sixe thousand peeces a day. There is yet another thing to be spoken of, to shew the riches of Potozi, that the account which hath been made, was only of silver that was marked and customed. And it is wel knowne in Peru, that they have long vsed silver in these Realmes, which they call currant, which was neither marked nor customed. And they holde it for certain which know these mines, that in these daies, the greatest parte of silver drawne at Potozi, was not customed, and this had course amongest the Indians, and much amongst the Spaniardes, as I have seene con∣tinued to mytime; so as it may appeare, the third part of the riches of Potozi, yea the one halfe came not to light, neither was it customed. There is yet a more notable
consideration, in that which Plinie saieth, they hadde digged a fifteene hundred pases in this mine of Bebell; and that continually they found water, which is the greatest hinderaunce they have to drawe foorth theyr mettall. But in this of Potozi, although they have dig∣ged two hundred stades or heights of a man in deapth; yet did they never finde any water, which is the great∣est happinesse of this mountaine. But the mines of Pr∣o, whose mettall is good and very rich, are at this day left for the discommoditie of water, which they have found in their worke; for they are two insupportable labours in searching of the mettall; first to digge and breake the rockes, and then to drawe out the water all together. The first of them, that is, to cut through the rockes, is paine enough; yea very hard and excessive: fi∣nally, at this day the King receives for his fift yeerely, from the mines of Potozi, a million of silver, besides the wealth that growes by quickesilver, and other roy∣all prerogatives, which is a great treasure. Some men of iudgement having cast vp the accomptes, say, that what hath beene brought into the custome house of Potozi, vnto the yeere of our Lord, one thousand five hundred eighty and five, amounteth vnto a hundred thousand millions of peeces of essay, whereof every Peece is woorth thirteene rialls, and a fourth parte, not reckoning the silver which hath bin caried away with∣out custome, or that hath beene entred in other roiall custome houses, or the silver that hath beene wrought in the country, which is not entred, the which is innu∣merable, although the first Registers of Entries are not so exactly kept as at this day; for that in the beginning and first discoveries, they made their receit by Romans, so great was their aboundance.
But by the instructions and remembraunces of Don Francisco de Toledo the Viceroy in the yeare of our Sa∣viour Christ, one thousand five hundred seaventy and foure they find seventy and sixe millions to that yeere: and from that yeare to eighty five inclusive, it appeares by the royall registers, there were thirty five millions more entred. They sent this accompt to the Viceroy from Potozi, in the yeere I have mentioned, being then in Peru; and since the wealth that hath come from Peru by ship, hath amounted to much more. In that fleete where I came, in the yeare one thousand five hundred eighty seaven, there were eleven millions transported in the two fleets of Peru & Mexico, whereof two thirds were in that of Peru, and almost the one halfe for the King. I thought good to set this downe particularly, to shew the power which his heavenly Maiestie hath given to the Kings of Spaine, heaping so many Crowns and Kingdomes vpon them, who (by the especiall fa∣vour of heaven) have ioyned the East with the Weast Indies, invironing the whole worlde with their Power. This digression shall serve to shew the riches of Potozi, we will now shew how they labour in the mines, and how they refine their mettalls. How they labour in the mines of Potozi. CHAP. 8. BOctius complaining of the first inventer of mines,Botius de con∣solat. spake well; Heus primus quis fuit ille, Auri qui ponder a testi. Gemmasque, latere volentes, Preciosa pericula fodit?
Alas, who was the first, So curious and accurst, Who digged out of the mine, Mans minde to vndermind, Heavie weights of golde ore, Better concealde before: And pearle crept into ground, Pale for feare to be found: Galing gold, wringing rings, Precious, but perilous things. With reason he calleth them precious dangers,li. lib. 33. c. 4 for the great labour and perill wherewith they draw out these mettalls, which men so much esteeme. Plinie saies, that in Italie there are many mines, but the Ancients would not suffer their people to worke in them, onely to pre∣serve the people. They brought these mettalls from Spaine, and made the Spaniards labour in the mines as tributaries. The like doth Spaine now with the Indies, for there remaining many mines of mettall yet in Spaine, they will not seeke them, nor suffer any to worke in them, by reason of the inconveniencies which hap∣pen daily, but they bring them from the Indies, where they digge it with much labour and perill. This rocke of Potozi, containes as I have said, foure principall veines, that is, the Rich veine, that of Centeno, that of Tinne,. and that of Mendieta. All these veines are of the East part of the mountaine, as looking to the Sunne rising, for on the West part there is not any. The fore∣said veines runne from North to South, which is from Pole to Pole. In the largest place they have six foote, and in the narrowest a spanne bredth. There are others of divers fashions that runne out of the said veines; like as out of the great armes of trees, there commonly
sprowt foorth lesse. verie veine hath divers mines which are partes and portions of the same, distinct and divided betwixt divers Masters, by whose names they are commonly called. The great mine containes foure∣score yardes, neither may it be more by the law, and the least containes foure. All these mines are at this day very deepe. In the rich mine they reckon 78. mines, which are 80. yards deep, or a hundred stades or height of a man, and in some places two hundred. In the veine of Centeno, are 24. mines, whereof some are 70. or 80. stades deepe, and so of the other veines of this mountaine. For a remedie to this great profun∣ditie, they have invented mines, which they call Socca bones, which are caves or ventes made at the foote of the mountaine, the which go crossing til they incoun∣ter with the veines: for wee must vnderstand, that al∣though the veines runne North to South, as hath been said, yet is it in declining from the toppe to the foote of the mountaine, which may be as they beleeve by coniecture, above twelve hundred stades. And by this account, although the mines extend in such a profun∣ditie, yet there remaines six times as much space vnto the bottome or roote, the which they say, are most rich and aboundant, as the body and spring of all veines. Although vnto this day we have seene the contrary by experience, for the higher the veine is to the superfici∣es of the earth, the more rich they finde it: and the dee∣per it goes, the poorer it is, and of the baser aloy. They then invented the Soccabons, by which they enter to worke in the mines very easily, with lesse charge, paine, and danger. They have eight foote in breadth, and a stade in height, the which they shut with doores. By them they drawe forth their mettall very easily,
paying to the proprietary of the Soccabon, the fift part of all the mettall they draw forth. There are nine alrea∣dy made, and others are begunne. They were twenty and nine yeeres in making of one Soccabon, as they call it, of the venome that flowes from the rich veine. It was begunne in the yeere 1550. the eleventh yeere of the discoverie, and was ended in the yeere 1585. the ele∣venth of August. This Soccabon crossed the rich veine thirtie five stades from the roote or spring, and from thence where it met to the mouth of the mine, were a hundred thirty five stades. So as they must descend all this depth to labour in the mine. This Soccabon con∣taines from his mouth vnto the veine of Crusero as they call it, 250. yardes, in which worke were spent twentie nine yeeres, whereby wee may see what great paines men take to draw silver out of the bowells of the earth. They labour in these mines in continuall darkenes and obscuritie, without knowledge of day or night. And forasmuch as those places are never visited with the Sunne; there is not onely continuall darkenes, but also an extreame colde, with so grosse an aire contrary to the disposition of man, so as, such as newly enter, are sicke, as they at sea. The which happened to me in one of these mines, where I felt a paine at the heart, and beating of the stomacke. Those that labour therein, vse candles to light them, dividing their worke in such sort, as they that worke in the day, rest by the night, and so they change. The mettall is commonly hard, and therefore they breake it with hammers, splitting and hewing it by force, as if they were sintes. After they carry vp this mettall vpon their shoulders, by ladders of three branches, made of neates lether twisted like peeces of wood, which are crossed with staves of
wood; so as by every one of these ladders they mount and discend together. They are ten stades long a peece: and at the end of one, beginnes another of the same length, every ladder beginning and ending at plat∣formes of wood, where there are seates to rest them, like vnto galleries, for that there are many of these lad∣ders to mount by one at the end of another. A man carries ordinarily the weight of two Arrobes of met∣tall vpon his shoulders,Every Arobe is 25. pound. tied together in a cloth in ma∣ner of a skippe, and so mount they three and three. He that goes before carries a candle tied to his thumbe: for (as it is said,) they have no light from heaven, and so go they vp the ladder holding it with both their handes, to mount so great a height, which commonly is above a hundred & fiftie stades: a fearefull thing, and which breeds an amazement to thinke vpon it, so great is the desire of silver, that for the gaine thereof, men in∣dure any paines. And truly it is not without reason, that Plinie treating of this subiect, exclaimes and saies thus, We enter even into the bowells of the earth,Plin. in proem. lib. 33. cap. 6. and go hun∣ting after riches, even to the place of the damned. And after in the same booke he saieth: Those that seeke for met∣talls, performe workes more then Giants, making holes and caves in the depth of the earth, piercing mountaines so deepe by the light of candles, whereas the day and the night are alike, and in many moneths they see no day. So as, often the walles of their mines fal, smothering many of them that labour therein. And afterwardes he addes, They pierce the hard rocke with hammers of yron, waying 150 poundes, and draw out the mettall vpon their shoulders, labouring day and night, one delivering his charge to another, and all in darkenes, onely the last sees the light: with wedges and hammers they breake
the flintes, how hard and strong soever, for the hunger of gold is yet more sharpe and strong. This Plinie saies, who although he speakes as a historiographer of that age, yet doth he seeme to prophecie of this time. Neither is it lesse which Phocion of Agatharchides reports of the great travell they indure, whom they called Chrysios, in drawing out of golde: for as the said Author saieth, gold and silver are as painefull to digge and drawe forth, as they are pleasing to possesse. How they refine the Mettall of Silver CHAP. 9. THe Veines as I have said, where they finde silver, runnes betwixt two rockes, which they call the Chase, whereof the one is commonly as hard as flint, and the other soft and easie to breake. This mettall is not alwaies equal, and of the same bountie, for you shall finde in one and the same veine, one sort of met∣tall very rich, which they call Ccilla, or Tacana, from which they draw much silver; and another is poore, from whence they draw little. The most rich mettall of this mountaine, is of the colour of Amber, and the next is that which inclines to blacke. There is other somewhat red, and other of the colour of ashes: final∣ly of divers and sundrie coloures, which seeme to such as know them not, to be stones of no value. But the miners do presently know his qualitie and perfection, by certaine signes and small veines they finde in them. They carry all this mettall they drawe out of these mines, vpon Indian sheepe, which serve them as Asses to carry it to the milles, the richest mettall is refined by melting in those small furnaces, which they call Guay∣ra, for that is most leadie; by reason whereof, it is most
subiect to melt, & for the better melting therof, th'In∣dians cast in a matter, they call Soroche, which is a mettal ful of lead. The mettal being in these furnaces, the filth and earthie drosse, through the force of the fire, re∣maines in the bottome, and the silver and lead melt; so as the silver swimmes vpon the lead, vntill it be puri∣fied; then after they refine the silver many times, after this maner of melting. They have vsually drawne out of one quintall of mettall, thirtie, fortie, and fiftie pee∣ces of silver, and yet I have seene some most excellent, that have bin shewne me, where they have drawne in the melting two hundred, yea, two hundred and fiftie peeces of silver of a quintall of mettall; a rare wealth, and almost incredible, if we had not seene the tryall thereof by fire, but such mettalls are verie rare. The poorest mettall is that which yeeldes two, three, five, or six peeces, or little more. This mettall hath com∣monly little lead, but is drie, and therefore they cannot refine it with fire. And for this reason in Potozi, there was great store of these poore mettalls, whereof they made no great account, but were reiected like straw, and as the skumme of the good mettall, vntill they found meanes to refine it by quicke-silver, whereby the skumme they called Oquiache was of great profit, for the quicke-silver by a strange and wonderfull pro∣pertie, purifies the silver, and is apt for these mettalls which are drie and poore, wherein they consume lesse quicke-silver then in the richer: for the richer they are, the more neede of quicke-silver they have. At this day the most vsuall maner of refining in Potozi, is by quicke-silver, as also in the mines of Cacatecas, and others of new Spaine. There were in old time vpon the sides and toppes of Potozi, above six thousand Guayras, which
are small furnaces where they melt their mettall, the which were placed like lightes, (a pleasant sight to be∣hold by night,) casting a light a farre off like a flame of fire. But at this day there are not above two thousand, for that (as I have said,) they vse little melting, but re∣fine it by quicke-silver, the which is the greatest profit. And for that the properties of quicke-silver are admi∣rable; and that this maner of refining of silver is remark∣able, I will discourse of quicke-silver, of the mines and worke, and what is requisite for that subiect. Of the wonderfull properties of Quicke-silver. CHAP. 10. QVickesilver, so called by the Latines, for that it runnes and slides suddenly from place to place, amongst all other mettalls hath great and wonderfull vertues. The first is, although it be a true mettall, yet is it not hard, neither hath it any certaine forme nor sub∣sistance like to other mettalls, but is liquide, not like vn∣to gold and silver molten, but of his owne proper na∣ture; and although it be a liquor, yet is it more heavie then any other mettall: and therefore all others swim above and sinke not to the bottome, being more light. I have seene two poundes of yron put into a barrell of quicke-silver, the which did swimme about like vnto wood or corke vpon the water.Pli. lib. 33. ca 6 Plinie gives an excep∣tion heerevnto, saying, that gold alone doth sinke and not swimme above it. I have not seene the experience; but it may be this growes, by reason that quicke-silver by nature doth inviron gold, and covers it, which is one of the most important properties it hath; for it
ioynes with gold in a strange maner, it seekes it where it lies, and invirons it in such sort, as it doth distinguish and seprate it from any other body or mettall where∣with it is mixt: for this reason such take gold as will preserve themselves from the dangerrs and discommo∣dities of quicke-silver. They have vsed a remedie to those (in whose eares they had put quicke-silver, to cause them to die secretly,) to put little plates of gold into their eares, (for that gold hath the vertue to draw out Mercurie,) and after they drew out thefe plates all white with the quicke-silver, it did sticke vnto them. Being one day at Madril, I went to see the exquisite workes which Iacomo de Treco, (a rare worke man of Milan,) made for S. Laurence the Roiall, it was my hap to be there one day, whenas they gilded certaine pee∣ces of a countertable of brasse, which is done with quicke-silver; and for that the fume of Mercurie is mor∣tall, he told me that the worke-men preserved them∣selves from this venome, by swallowing a double duc∣kat of gold roled vp; the which being in the stomacke, drawes vnto it all the quicke-silver that enters in fume by the eares, eyes, nostrilles, and mouth, and by this meanes freed themselves from the danger of quicke-silver, which the gold gathered in the stomacke, and af∣ter cast out by the excrements: a thing truly worthy of admiration. After the quicke-silver hath purified and purged gold from all other mettalls and mixtures, he is likewise seperated from the golde his friend by the heate of the fire, the which purifies it from all quicke-silver. Plinie saies,Plin. lib. 33. c. 6 that by a certaine art and invention they did seperate gold from quicke-silver. It seemes to me the Ancients had no knowledge to refine silver by quicke-silver, which at this day is the greatest vse, and
chiefe profite of quickesilver; for that he saies plainely, that quickesilver ioynes with no other mettall but with gold; and when he makes mention of refining of silver, he speakes onely but of the manner of melting; where∣by wee may inferre that the Ancients had no know∣ledge of this secret. In truth, though there be a league and simpathie betwixt golde and quicke-silver, yet whereas the mercurie findes no gold, it ioynes with sil∣ver, though not in the like maner as with gold; but in the end, it doth clense and purge it from earth, copper, & lead, amongst the which the silver growes, without any neede of fire to melt it: yet must they vse fire to se∣perate it from the silver, as I will shew hereafter. Quick-silver holds no account of other mettalls, but of golde and silver; but contrariwise it doth corrupt them, force and consume them, and flieth from them as much as may be. The which is likewise admirable, and for this cause they put it in earthen vessells, or in beasts skinnes. For if it be put in vessells of copper, of yron, or other mettall, it presently pierceth and corrupts them. And therefore Plinie calleth it the poyson of all things, for that it consumes and spoyles all. We finde quick-silver in the graves of dead men, which after it hath consu∣med the bodies, comes foorth pure and whole. There hath beene likewise found in the bones and marrow of men and beasts, who having received it in fume by the mouth and nosthrills, congeales within them and pier∣ceth even vnto the bones. Therefore it is a dangerous thing to frequent so perillous and mortall a creature. It hath an other propertie, which is, to runne and make a hundred thousand small droppes, whereof not one is lost, be they never so little, but they returne every way to their liquor. It is almost incorruptible, having no∣thing
in a maner that may consume it. And therfore Pli∣nie calles it the eternall sweate. It hath yet another pro∣pertie, that although it dooth separate gold from cop∣per, and all other mettalles, yet they that will guilde copper, brasse, or silver, vse quicke-silver as the meanes of this vnion; for with the helpe thereof they guilde mettalls. Amongest all the woonders of this strange li∣quor that seemes to me most woorthy observation, that although it be the weightiest thing in the worlde, yet is it converted into the lightest of the worlde, which is smoake, and sodainely the same smoake which iss o light a thing, turnes againe into so heavy a substance, as is the proper liquor of quicke-silver, whereinto it is dissolved; for this smoake incountering the mettall on high, being a solide bodie, or comming into a colde region, sodainely it thickens and is converted into quickesilver, and if you set him once againe to the fire, hee dooth likewise returne into smoake, to be resolved againe into quicke-silver. A strange transmutation of so heavy a substance into so light a thing; and of so light into so heavy, the which we may hold for a rare thing in Nature. And therfore the Author of Nature is iust∣ly to be glorified in these and all other strange proper∣ties of this mettall, seeing that all things created doe properly obey their secret and vnknowne lawes. Of the place where they finde quicke-silver, and how they discovered these rich mines in Guanca∣vilca. CHAP. 11. QVicke-silver is found in a kinde of stone, which dooth likewise yeelde Vermillion, which the An∣tients
called Minium, and at this day they call the Ima∣ges of cristall miniades, which are painted with quick-silver. The Antients made great accompt of this Mini∣um or vermillion, holding it for a sacred colour, as Pli∣nie reportes, saying, that the Romans were accustomed to paint the face of Iupiter, and the bodies of those that triumphed in Ethiopia: yea their idolles and their Go∣vernors likewise had their faces coloured with this Mi∣nium. And this vermillion was so esteemed at Rome▪ (which they brought onely from Spaine, where they had many pittes and mines of quickesilver, which con∣tinue there to this day) that the Romans suffered it not to be refined in Spaine, left they should steale some of it, but they carried it to Rome, sealed vp in a masse as they drew it out of the mine. and after refined it. They did yeerely bring from Spaine, especially from Andalusie, a∣bout tenne thousand pound weight, which the Romans valued as an infinite treasure. I have reported all this out of that Author, to the end that those which doesee what passeth at this day in Peru, may have the content to know what chanced in former ages, among the migh¦tiest Lords of the world. I speake for the Inguas kings of Peru, and for the naturall Indians thereof, which have laboured and digged long in these mines of quicke-sil∣ver, not knowing what quicke-silver was, seeking one∣ly for Cinabrium or vermillion, which they call Limpi, the which they esteeme much, for that same effect that Plinie reportes of the Romans and Ethiopians, that is, to paint the face and bodies of themselves and their idolls: the like hath been much practised by the Indians, espe∣cially when they went to the warres, and vse it at this day in their▪ feasts and dauncing, which they call slub∣bering, supposing that their faces and visages so slubbe∣red,
did much terrifie, and at this day they holde it for an ornament and beautifying; for this cause there were strange workes of mines in the mountaines of Guana∣vilca, which are in Peru, neere to the cittie of Guaman∣gu, out of the which they drew this mettal, it is of such a manner, that if at this day they enter by the caves or Soccabones, which the Indians made in those dayes, they loose themselves, finding no passage out: but they re∣garded not quicke-silver, which naturally is in the same substance or mettall of vermillion, neither hadde they knowledge of any such matter. The Indians were not alone for so long a time with∣out the knowledge of this treasure, but likewise the Spa∣niards, who vntill the yeare of the incarnation of our Saviour, one thousand five hundred three score and six, and threescore and seaven (at such time as the licenti∣ate Castro governed in Peru) discovered not the mines of quicke-silver, which happened in this manner. A man of iudgement called Henrique Guares, a Portu∣gall borne, having a peece of this coloured mettall, as I have saide, which the Indians call Limpi, with which they paint their faces, as hee beheld it well, found it to be the same which they call Vermillion in Castille; and for that hee knew well that vermillion was drawne out of the same mettall that quickesilver was, hee coniectu∣red these mines to be of quickesilver, went to the place whence they drew this mettall, to make triall thereof. The which hee found true, and in this sorte the mines of Palcas in the territorie of Guamangua, being disco∣vered, great numbers of men went thither to drawe out quickesilver, and so to carry it to Mexico, where they refine silver by the meanes of quickesilver, where∣with many are inriched. This country of mines which
they call Guancavilca, was then peopled with Spaniards and Indians that came thither, and come still to worke in these mines of quicke-silver, which are in great num∣bers, and very plentifull: but of all these mines, that which they call d' Amador de Cabrera, or of Saintes, is goodly and notable. It is a rocke of most hard stone, interlaced all with quickesilver, and of that greatnesse, that it extendes above foure score Varres or yardes in length, and forty in breadth; in which mine they have many pittes and ditches, of three score and tenne stades deepe, so as three hundred men may well worke toge∣ther; such is the capacity thereof. This mine was dis∣covered by an Indian of Amador of Cabrera, called Na∣vincopa of the village of Acoria, the which Amador of Cabrera caused to be registred in his name. He was in surte against the Procurer fiscall, but the vsufruite was adiudged to him by sentence as the discoverer. Since he solde his interest to another, for two hundred and fifty thousand ducates; and afterwards thinking he had bin deceived in the sale, he commenced an action against the buyer, being worth, as they say, above five hun∣dred thousand ducats; yea, some holde it to be worth a million of golde: a rare thing to see a mine of that wealth. Whenas Don Francisco of Toledo governed in Peru, there was one which had bin in Mexico, and observed how they refined silver with mercury, called Pero Fer∣nandes de Valesco, who offred to refine silver at Potoz, with mercury; and having made triall thereof in the yeare of our redemption, one thousand five hundred seaventy and one, perfourmed it with credite; then beganne they to refine silver at PotoZi with quicksilver, which they transported from Guancavelicqua, which
was a goodly helpe for the mines; for by the meanes of quickesilver they drew an infinite quantity of mettal from these mines, whereof they made no accompt, the which they called scrapings. For as it hath beene said, the quickesilver purifies the silver, although it be drie, poore, and of base alloy, which can not be doone by melting in the fire. The Catholike King drawes from it quickesilver mines, without any charge or hazard, almost foure hundred thousand peeces of a mine, the which are foureteene rialls a peece, or little lesse, besides the rights that rise in Potozi, where it is imployed, the which is a great riches. They doe yearely, one with an∣other, drawe from these mines of Guancavilca, eight thousand quintalls of quickesilver, yea and more. The maner how to drawe out Quicke-silver, and how they refine Silver. CHAP. 12. LEt vs now speake how they draw out Quicke-sil∣ver, and how they refine Silver therewith. They take the stone or mettall where they finde the quicke-silver, the which they put into the fire in pots of earth well luted, being well beaten, so as this mettall or stone comming to melt by the heate of the fire, the quicke-silver seperates it selfe, and goes forth in exhalation, and sometimes even with the smoake of the fire, vntill itincounters some body where it staies and congeales, and if it passe vp higher, without meeting of any hard substance, it mountes vp vntill it be colde; and then congeled, it falles downe againe. When the melting is finished, they vnstoppe the pottes and draw forth the mettall, sometimes staying vntill it be very cold, for if
there remained any fume or vapor, which should in∣counter them that vnstopt the pottes, they were in dan∣ger of death, or to be benumined of their limbes, or at the least, to loose their teeth. And for that they spend an infinite quantitie of wood, in the melting of these mettalls. A Miller called Rodrigo de Tores, found out a profitable invention, which was, to gather certaine straw which growes throughout all those mountaines of Peru, the which they call Ycho, it is like vnto a hard reede wherewith they make their fire. It is a strange thing to see the force which this straw hath to melt and dissolve these mettalls, the which falles out, as Plinie saies, that there is gold which melts more easi∣ly with the flame of straw,Plin. lib. 33. c. 4 then with hote burning coales. They put the quicke-silver thus molten into skinnes, for that it keepes best in lether, and in this sort they lay it into the Kings store-howse, from whence they carry it by sea to Ariqua, and so to Potozi by land vpon their sheepe. There is yeerely spent in PotoZi for the refining of mettalles, about six or seven thousand quintalles of quicke-silver, besides that they drawe from the plates, (which is the earth or drosse of the first washings of these mettalls, which are made in cal∣drons.) The which plates they burne in their furnaces, to draw out the quicke-silver which remaines in them: and there are above fiftie of these furnaces in the Citie of PotoZi, and in Tarpaya. The quantitie of mettalls which they refine, (as some men of experience have made the account,) doth amount yeerely to above three hundred thousand quintalles; from the earth and drosse whereof being molt and refined, they may draw yeerely above two thousand quintalles of quick-silver. We must vnderstand there are divers sortes of mettalls,
for some yeelde much silver, and waste little quicke-silver; others consume much quicke-silver, and yeelde little silver; and there are others which consume much quicke-silver, and yeeldes much silver; and others that consume little quicke-silver, and also yeelde little silver; and as men incounter in these mettalles, so they grow rich or poore in their trafficke. Although commonly the rich mettall yeeldes much silver, and consumes much quicke-silver; and likewise that which is poore, yeeldes little silver, and consumes as little mercurie. They first beat and grinde the mettall very small, with hammers and other instruments, which beat this stone like vnto tanne milles, and being well beaten, they searce it in a copper searce, making the poulder as small and fine, as if it were horse haire: these searces being well fitted, doe sift thirtie quintalles in a day and a night; then they put the poulder of the mettall into the vessels vpon furnaces, whereas they anoint it and mor∣tifie it with brine, putting to everie fiftie quintalles of poulder, five quintalls of salt. And this they do for that the salt seperates the earth and filth, to the end the quicke-silver may the more easily draw the silver vnto it. After they put quicke▪silver into a peece of holland and presse it out vpon the mettall, which goes forth like a dewe, alwaies turning and stirring the mettall, to the end it may be well incorporate. Before the inven∣tion of these furnaces of fire, they did often mingle their mettall with quicke-silver, in great troughes, let∣ting it settle some daies, and did then mix it, and stirre it againe, vntill they thought all the quicke-silver were well incorporate with the silver, the which continued twentie daies and more, and at the least nine daies. Since they discovered (as the desire to get is diligent,)
that to shorten the time fire did much helpe: to incor∣porate silver the sooner with quicke-silver, they in ven∣ted these furnaces, whereon they set vessels to put in their mettall, with salt and quicke-silver, and vnder∣neath they put fire by little and little, in furnaces made for the nonce vnderneath; so as in five or six daies the quicke-silver is incorporate with the silver. And when they finde that the mercurie hath done his part, and assembled all the silver, leaving nothing behinde, but is well imbrued as a spunge doth water, dividing it from the earth, lead, and copper, with the which it is engendered. Then after they seperate it likewise from the quicke-silver, the which they do in this sort; they put the mettall in caldrons, and vessells full of water, where with certaine wheeles they turne the mettall round about, as if they should make mustard, and so the earth and drosse goes from the mettall with the water that runs away: The silver & quicke-silver as most pon∣derous remaining in the botome; the mettal which re∣maines, is like vnto sand: then they take it out and wash it againe in great platters of wood, or keelers full of wa∣ter, still drawing the earth from it, vntill they leave the silver and quicke-silver well clensed. There slippes a∣way also some small portion of silver and quicke-silver with the earth and drosse, which they call washings, the which they after wash againe and draw out the remainder. When the silver and quicke-silver are clen∣sed and beginne to shine, and that there remaines no earth, they put all the mettall into a cloth, which they straine out very forcibly, so as all the quicke-silver passeth out, being not incorporate with the silver, and the rest remaines as a loafe of silver, like to a marke of almonds pressed to draw oyle. And being thus pressed,
the remainder containes but the sixt part in silver, and five in mercurie. So as if there remaines a marke of threescore pounds, ten are of silver, and fiftie of mercu∣rie. Of these markes they make pinnes, (as they call them,) like pine apples, or sugar loaves, hollow within, the which they commonly make of a hundred pound weight; then to seperate the silver from the quicke-sil∣ver, they put it into a violent fire, which they cover with an earthen vessell, like to the mold of a sugar loafe, or vnto a capuchon or hoode, the which they cover with coales, and set fire vnto it; whereby the quicke-silver exhales in smoake, the which striking against the capuchon of earth, it thickens and distills, like vnto the smoake of a potte covered; and by a pipe like vnto a limbecke, they receive the quicke-silver which distills, the silver remaining without changing the forme, but in weight it is diminished five partes of that it was, and is spungious, the which is worthy the observation. Of two of these loaves they make one barre of silver, in weight 65. or 66. markes: and in this sort they carry it to the touch, custome, and marke. Silver drawne with mercurie, is so fine, that it never abates of two thousand three hundred and fourescore of alloy, and it is so excellent, that the worke-men are inforced to a∣lay it, putting some mixture to it, as they do likewise in their mints, whereas their mony is stampt. Silver in∣dures all these martiredomes, (if we may so call it,) to be refined, the which if we consider well, it is a bodie framed where they grinde, sift, kneade, lay the leven, & bake the silver: besides all this, they wash it and wash it againe, they bake it and bake it againe, induring the pestells, sives, troughes, furnaces, caldrons, presses: and finally, by the water and fire. I speake this, for that see∣ing
seeing this art in PotoZi, I did consider what the Scrip∣ture speakes of the iust,Mat. 3. Eccles. 2. Psal. 11 Colabit eos et purgabit quasi argen∣tum: And that which they speake in another part, Sic vt argentum purgatum terra, purgatum sptuplum. So as to purifie silver, to refine and clense it from the earth and stone where it engenders, they purge and purifie it seven times: for in effect it passeth their handes seven times, yea, oftener, vntill it remaines pure and fine; so is it in the word of God, where the soules must be so purified, that shall inioy the heavenly perfection. Of their Engines to grinde the mettall, and of their triall of Silver. CHAP. 13. TO conclude, this subiect of silver and of mettalls, there remaines yet two things to speake of, the one is of their engins and milles, the other of their essay or triall: I have said before, how they grinde their mettal: for the receving of the quicksilver, which is done with diverse instruments and engins, some with horses like vnto hand-milles, others like water-milles; of which two sortes there are great numbers. But for that the water they doe vse commonly, is but of raine, whereof they have not sufficient but three months in the yeare, December, Ianuary, and February: for this reason they have made Lakes and standing Pooles, which containe incircuite about a thousand and six hundred roddes, and in deapth three stades; there are seaven with their sluces: so as when they have neede of any water, they raise vp a sluce, from whence runnes a little streame of water, the which they stoppe vppon holy-dayes. And when the Lakes and Pooles doe fill, and that the yeare
abounds with raine, their grinding dooth then conti∣nue sixe or seaven moneths; so as even for silvers sake men desire a good yeere of raine in Potozi, as they doe in other places for bread. There are some other engins in Tarapaya, which is a valley three or foure leagues di∣stant from Potozi, whereas there runnes a river as in o∣ther parts. The difference of these engins is, that some goe with sixe pestels, some with twelve, and others with foureteene. They grinde and beate the mettall in mor∣ters, labouring day and night; and from thence they carry it to be sifted, vpon the bankes of the brooke of Potozi. There are forty eight water-mills, of eight, ten, and twelve pestells, and foure on the other side, which they call Tanacognugno; in the Cittie of Tarapaya, there are two and twenty engins all vpon the water; besides there are thirty goe with horses in PotoZi, and many o∣thers in diverspartes, so great the desire of man is to get silver, which is tryed by deputies appoynted by the King. To give the alloy to every peece, they cary the bars of silver vnto the Assay maister, who gives to every one his number, for that they carry many at once, he cuttes a small peece of every one, the which he weighs iustly, and puttes them into a cruset, which is a small vessell made of burnt bones beaten; after hee placeth everie crusible in his order in the furnace, giving them a vio∣lent fire, then the mettall melteth, and that which is lead, goes into smoake, and the copper and tinne dis∣solves, the silver remayning most fine, of the colour of fire. It is a strange thing, that being thus refined, al∣though it be liquide and molten, yet it never spilles, were the mouth of the crusible turned downewardes; but it remaynth fixed, without the losse of a droppe.
The Assay maister knoweth by the colour and other signes, when it is refined, then dooth he draw the cru∣sibles from the fire, and weighs every peece curiously, observing what every one wants of his weight; for that which is of high alloy, wastes but little, and that which is baser, diminisheth much; & according to the waste, he sees what alloy he beares, according to the which he markes every barre punctually. Their ballaunce and weights are so delicate, and their graines so small, as they cannot take them vppe with the hand, but with a small paire of pincers: and this triall they make by can∣dle light, that no ayre might moove the ballance. For of this little the price of the whole barre dependeth. In trueth it is a very delicate thing, and requires a great dexteritie,Psal. 65. Prover. 17.27. which the holy Scripture vseth in many pla∣ces, to shew how God prooves his chosen: and to note the differences of the merites of soules, whereas God gives the title of an Assay-maister to the Prophet Iere∣mie, that hee may trie and declare the spirituall vertue of men, and of his workes, which is the proper worke of the Spirite of God, being he that weighs the Soules of men.Ierm. 6. Prover. 1. We will rest content with what we have spo∣ken touching silver, mettalls and mines, and will passe to the two other mixtures, the which are plants and beasts. Of Emeraldes. CHAP. 14. IT shall not be from the purpose, to speake somthing of Emeraldes, both for that it is a pretious thing, as golde & silver, as also for that they take their beginning from mines and mettalls,Pli. lib. 3. ca. 3 as Plinie reportes. The Eme∣rald hath bin in old time in great esteeme, as the same
Author writes, giving it the third place amongst all ie∣welles and pretious stones, that is next to the diamond and pearle. At this day they doe not so much esteeme the Emerald, nor the pearle, for the great aboundance is brought of these two sorts from the Indies, onely the diamond holds the principality, the which can not be taken from it. Next, the rubies come in price and other stones, which they hold more pretious than the Eme∣rald. Men are so desirous of singularities & rare things, that what they see to be common, they do not esteeme. They report of a Spaniard, who being in Italie when the Indies were first discovered, shewed a Emerald to a Lapidary, who asking him the value thereof, after he had well viewed it, being of an excellent lustre and forme, he prized it at a hundred ducats: he then she∣wed him an other greater than it, which he valued at three hundred ducats. The Spaniard drunke with this discourse, carried him to his lodging, shewing him a casket full. The Italian seeing so great a number of E∣meralds, sayde vnto him, Sir, these are well woorth a crowne a peece: the like hath happened both at the Indies and in Spaine, where the stones have lost their e∣stimation, for the great abundaunce they finde of them there. Pliny reportes many excellencies of the Emerald, a∣mongst the which he saith,Plin. lib. 37. c. 5 that there is nothing more pleasing, nor more healthfull for the sight; wherein he hath reason, but his authority importeth little, seeing there is such store.Plin. lib. 9. c. 35 It is reported that Lelia a Romane Dame bestowed vppon a scoffion and a garment em∣broidered with pearle and emerald 400000. ducats, the which at this day might be doone with lesse than forty thousand ducats, yea two such. In diverse partes of the
Indies, and the Kings of Mexico, didde much esteeme them; some did vse to pierce their nosthrils, and hang therein an excellent Emerald: they hung them on the visages of their idolles. The greatest store is found in the New Kingdome of Grenado, and Peru, neere vnto Manta and port Vieil. There is towardes that place a soile which they call, the Land of Emeraldes, for the knowledge they have of aboundance to be there: and yet vnto this day they have not conquered that Land. The Emeralds grow in stones like vnto cristall; I have seene them in the same stone, fashioned like a veine, and they seeme by little and little to thicken and refine. I have seene some that were halfe white, and halfe greene; others all white, and some greene and very perfite. I have seene some of the bignesse of a nut, and there have bin some greater found: but I have not kno∣wen that in our time they have found any of the form and bignesse of the platt or iewel they have at Genes, the which they esteeme (and with reason) to be a iewell of great price, and no relique; yet without comparison, the Emerald which Theophrastus speakes of, which the King of Babilon presented to the King of Egypt, surpas∣seth that of Genes; it was foure cubites long, and three broade, and they say, that in Iupiters Temple, there was a needle or pyramide, made of foure Emeralds stones of forty cubits long, and in some places foure broade, and in others two: and that in his time there was in Tir in Hercules Temple, a pillar of an Emerald. It may be (as Plinie saieth) it was of some greene stone, some∣what like to the Emerald, and they called it a false Eme∣rald. As some will say, that in the Cathedrall Church of Cordoü there are certaine pillars of Emeraldes which remaine since it was a Mesquite for the Kings Mirama∣molins
Moores, which raigned there. In the fleete, the yeare one thousand five hundred eighty and seven, in the which I came from the Indies, they brought twoo chests of Emeraldes, every one weighing at the least foure Arobes, whereby wee may see the aboundaunce they have. The holy Scripture commends these Eme∣ralds as pretious iewells,Exod. 29.39. Apoc. 21. they number them amongest the pretious stones, which the hie Priest carried on his Ephod or breast-plate, as those which did beautifie the walles of the heavenly Ierusalem. Of Pearles. CHAP. 15. NOw that we intreat of the great riches that comes from the Indies, it were no reason to forgette the Pearle, which the Ancients called Marguerites, and at the first were in so great estimation, as none but royall persons were suffered to weare them: but at this day there is such aboundance as the Negres themselves do weare chaines thereof; they growe in shells or oysters, in eating whereof I have found pearles in the middest of them: These oisters within are of the colour of hea∣ven, very lively. In some places they make spoones, the which they call mother of Pearle. The pearles do differ much informe, in bignes, figure, colour and polishing; so likewise in their price they differ much. Some they call Ave Mariaes, being like the small graines of beades; others are Pater nosters, being bigger. Seldome shall you finde two of one greatnesse, forme, and colour. For this reason the Romans (as Pliny writeth) called them Vnions.Plin. lib. 3. c. 3▪ Whenas they doe finde two that are alike in all poyntes, they raise the price much, especially for care∣rings.
I have seene some payres valued at thousands of ducats, although they were not like to Cleopatraes two pearles, whereof Pliny reportes, either of them being woorth a hundred thousand ducats, with the which this foolish Queene wonne a wager she hadde made a∣gainst Marc Anthony, to spend in one supper above an hundred thousand ducats; so at the last course shee dis∣solved one of these pearles in strong vineger, & dranke it vp. They say the other pearle was cutt in two, and placed in the Pantheon at Rome, at th'ares of the image of Venus. Esope reportes of Clovis the sonne of a Come∣dian, who in a banquet presented to every one of his ghests (amongest other meates) a rich pearle dissolved in vineger, to make his feast the more royall and sump∣tuous. These were the follies of those ages, and those at this day are nothing lesse, for that we see, not onely hattes and bandes, but also buskins, and womens pantofles, (yea of base condition) imbrodred all over with pearle. They fish for pearles in diverse partes of the Indies, the greatest aboundaunce is in the south Seas, neere vnto Panama, where the Ilandes of pearles be, as they call them. But at this day they finde greatest store, and the best, in the north Sea, the which is neare to the rive of Hatch. I did see them make their fishing, the which is done with great charge & labor of the poore slaves, which dive sixe, nine, yea twelve fadomes into the sea, to seeke for oysters, the which commonly are fastened to the rockes and gravell in the Sea, they pull them vp, and bring them above the water to their canoes, where the open them, drawing forth the treasure they have within them. The water of the Sea in this parte is verie colde, but yet the labor and toile is greatest in holding
of their breath, sometimes a quarter, yea halfe an houre together, being vnder the water at their fishing. And to the end these poore slaves may the better continue and holde their breaths, they feede them with drie meates, and that in small quantitie, so as covetousnesse makes them abstaine and fast thus against their willes. They imploy their pearles to diverse workes, and they pierce them to make chaines, whereof there is great store in every place. In the yeere of our Lorde one thou∣sand five hundred eighty one I did see the note of what came from the Indies for the King, there were eighteen maces of pearle, besides three caskets, and for parti∣culars, there were twelve hundred threescore and foure marks, and besides them, seaven caskets not pierced, which heeretofore we would have esteemed and helde for a lie. Of the Indian Bread, and of Mays. CHAP. 16. IN our discourse of Plants, wee will beginne with those which are proper and peculiar to the Indies; and after with the rest that are common to the Indies and Europe; and forasmuch as plants were chiefly cre∣ated for the nourishment of man, and that the chiefe (whereof he takes his nourishment,) is bread, it shall be good to shew what bread the Indians vse, and where∣on they live for want thereof. They have (as we have heere,) a proper name, whereby they note and signi∣fie bread, which at Peru, they call Tanta, and in other places by another name. But the qualitie and substance of the bread the Indians vse, differs much from ours: for we finde not they had any kinde of wheat or barly,
nor any other kinde of graine which they vse in Europe o make bread withall: insteede whereof they vsed other kindes of graines and rootes, amongst the which Mays holds the first place, and with reason, in Castile they call it Indian wheat, and in Italie they call it Turkey graine. And even as wheat is the most com∣mon graine for the vse of man, in the regions of the old world, which are Europe, Asia, and Affrike: So in the new found worlde, the most common graine is Mays, the which is found almost in all the kingdomes of the West Indies, as at Peru, new Spaine, in the new kingdome of Granado, in Gautimalla, in Chille, and vpon the maine land. I do not finde that in old time, in the Ilands of Barlovente, as Cuba S. Dominique, Iamaique, and S. Ian, that they vsed Mays: at this day they vse much Yuca and Cacavi, whereof we will presently in∣treate. I do not thinke that this Mays is any thing infe∣riour to our wheat, in strength nor substance, but it is more hote and grosse, and engenders more bloud, wherevpon they that have not bin accustomed there∣vnto, if they eat too much, they swell and become scab∣bed. It growes vpon canes or reedes; every one beares one or two grapes or branches, to the which the graine is fastened, and although the graine be bigge, yet finde they great store thereof, so as in some clusters I have told seven hundred graines. They must plant it with the hand one by one, and not very thicke; it desires a hote and moist ground, and growes in great aboun∣dance in many places of the Indies. It is not strange in those countries to gather 300. Fanegues or measures for one sowen. There is difference of Mays as there is of wheat, one is great and very nourishing, another small and drie, which they call Moroche; the greene leaves
and canes of Mays, is a good foode for their mules and hores, and it serves them for straw when it is dried; the graine is of more nourishment for horses then barly; and therefore in those countries, they vse to water their horses before they eate, for if they should drinke after, they would swell as when they eate wheat. Mays is the Indians bread, the which they commonly eate boiled in the graine hote, and they call it Mote, as the Chinois and Iopponois eate their Rice sodden with the hote water; sometimes they eate it baked. There is some Mays round and bigge, as that of Lucanas, which the Spaniards eate rosted as a delicate meat, and hath a better taste then Buarbenses, or rosted peason. There is another kinde of eating it more pleasant, which is, to grinde the Mays, and to make small cakes of the flow∣er, he which they put in the fire, and then bring them hote to the table. In some places they call them Are∣pa. They make also round bowles of this paste, and so trimme them that they continue long, eating it as a dainty dish. They have invented at the Indies (for friandise and pleasure) a certaine kinde of paste, they doe make of this flowe mixt with sugar, which they call biscuits and mellinders. This Mays serves the Indians, not only for bread, but also for wine: for they do make their drinke thereof, wherewith they are sooner drunke than with wine of grapes. They make this wine of Mays in di∣verse sortes and maners, calling it in Peru Acua, and by the most common name of the Indies Chicha. And the strongest is made like vnto beere, steeping the graine vntill it breake. After they boyle it in such sort, that it growes so strong, as alittle overthrowes a man. In Pe∣ru they call this Sora, it is defended by the Law, for the
great inconveniences that grow thereby, making men drunke. But this Lawe is ill observed, for that they vse it still; yea they spend whole dayes and nights in drin∣king carowse.Plii. 14. c. 22. Pliny reporteth, that this maner of beve∣rage of graine stieped, and after sodden; wherewith they were drunke, was in old time vsed in Spaine, France and other Provinces, as at this day in Flanders they vse ale made of mault. There is another maner of making this Acua or Chicha, which is to champe the mays, and make a leven thereof, and then boile it; yea the Indians holde opinion, that to make good leven, it must bee champed by old withered women, which makes a man sicke to heare, and yet they doe drinke it. The clean∣liest manner, the most wholesome, and that which least harmeth, is to roast the Mays, which the most civil In∣dians doe vse, and some Spaniardes, yea for physicke: For in effect they finde it a very wholesome drinke for the reines, so as you shall hardly finde any one at the Indies complaine of paine in the backe, for that they do drinke of this Chicha. The Spanyards and Indians eate this Mays boyled and roasted for daintinesse, when it is tender in the grape like milke, they putte it into the pot, and make sawces that are good to eate. The buds of Mays are very fatte, and serve insteede of butter and oyle: so as this Mays at the Indies serves both for men and beasts, for bread, wine, and oile. For this reason the Viceroy Don Francisco de Toledo saide, that Peru hadde two things rich, and of great norishment, which were Mays, and the cattell of the countrey. In truth he had reason, for these two things did serve them as a thou∣sand. I will aske sooner than I can answer it, whence Mays was first carried to the Indies, and why they do call this
profitable graine in Italie, Turkie graine? for in trueth I doe not finde that the Antients make any mention of this graine, though that mil (that Plinie writes to come from the Indies into Italie, tenne yeares before he didde write it) hath some resemblance vnto Mays, for that it is a graine, as he saies, that growes in reede, and covers it selfe with the leafe, and hath the toppe like haires, be∣ing very fertile; all which things agree not with mill. To conclude, God hath imparted to ev'ry region what is needefull. To this continent he hath given wheate, which is the chiefe nourishment of man; and to the In∣dians he hath given Mays, which hath the second place to wheate, for the nourishment of men and beasts. Of Yucas, Caçavi, Papas, Chunes, and Ris. CHAP. 17. IN some partes of the Indies they vse a kinde of bread they call Cacavi, which is made of a certaine roote they call Yuca: This Yuca is a great and grosse roote, which they cutte in small morsells, they grate or scrape it, and then put it in a presse to straine, making a thinne and broade cake thereof, almost 'like vnto a Moores target or buckler; then doe they drie it, and this is the breade they eate. It hath no taste, but is healthfull and of good nourishment: For this reason we said, being at S. Dominike, that it was the proper foode for great eat∣ers, for that they might eate much, without any feare of surffetting. They must of necessitie water this Caca∣vi before they eate it: it is sharpe, and easely watered with water or broath, wherein it is very good, for that it swells much, and so they make Capirotades, but it is
hardly stieped in milke, in honny of canes, or in wine, for that these liquors cannot pierce it, as it doth bread made of wheate. Of this Cacavi there is one kind more delicate than any other, which is that they make of the slower called Xauxau, which they do much esteeme in those partes. For my parte, I esteeme more a morsell of bread, how hard & black soever. It is a strange thing that the iuice or water that commeth from this roote when they straine it, which makes the Cacavi is a dead∣ly poison, and killes any that drinkes thereof: but the substance that remaineth, is a very wholesome bread and nourishment, as we have saide. There is another kinde of Yuca, which they call sweet, and hath not this poyson in the iuyce: this is eaten in the roote boyled or roasted, and is good meate. Cacavi will keepe long, and therefore they carry it to sea in steede of biscuit. The place where they vse most of this bread, is at the I∣lands of Barlovente, which are S. Dominicke, Cuba, Port Ricco, Iamaique, and some others thereabouts; for that the soile of these Ilands will neither beare wheate, nor Mays, for whenas they sowe wheate, it comes vp well, and is presently greene, but so vnequally, as they can∣not gather it; for of the seede sowen, at one instant, some is spindled, some is in the eare, and some doth but bud, one is great and an other little, one is in the grasse and another in the graine; and although they have car∣ried labourers thither, to see if there were any tillage or Art to be vsed, yet could they finde no remedy for the quality of the earth. They carry meale from New Spaine or the Canaries, which is so moist, that hardly can they make any profitable bread, or of good taste. The wafer cakes wherewith they say Masse, did bend like to wet paper, by reason of the extreame humiditie
and heate which are ioyntly in that countrey. There is an other extreame contrary to this, which hinders the growing of mais or wheate in some parts of the Indies, as on the height of the Sierre of Peru, and the provinces which they call of Colao, which is the greatest parte of this Realme, where the climate is so colde and drie, as it will not suffer any of these seedes to growe: in steede thereof the Indians vse an other kinde of roote, which they call Papas, these rootes are like to grownd nuttes, they are small rootes, which cast out many leaves. They gather this Papas, and dry it well in the Sunne, then beating it they make that which they call Chuno, which keepes many daies, and serves for bread. In this realme there is great trafficke of Chuno, the which they carry to the mines of Potozi: they likewise eate of these Papas boyled or roasted, there is one sweete of these kindes, which growes in hot places, whereof they do make cer∣taine sawces and minced meates, which they call Locro. To conclude, these rootes are the bread of that land; so as when the yeare is good, they reioyce much, for that oftentimes they freeze in the earth, so great is the cold of that Region: they carry Mays from the valley or sea coast, and the Spaniardes which are dainty, carrie likewise from the same places wheate meale, whereof they doe make good breade, because that the land is drie. In other partes of the Indies, as at the Philippines, they vse Rice insteade of bread, whereof there growes very good, and in great aboundance in all that coun∣trey, and in China, and it is of good nourishment, they seethe it in purcelaines, and after mix it hote with the water amongest other meates. In many places they do make their wine and drinke of this Rice, steeping, and
then after boyling it, as they do the beere in Flaunders, or the Acua in Peru. Rice is a meate not much lesse com¦mon and generall throughout the world, than wheate or mays, and perchaunce more; for besides that they vse it, in China, Ioppon, and the Philippines, and in the greatest parte of the East Indies; it is a graine most com∣mon in Affrike and Ethiopia. It requires a wet ground, almost overflowne like to a medow. In Europe, Peru, and Mexico, where they have the vse of wheate, they eate Rice as a meate, and not for bread; they seethe it with milke or with broth, or in some other sorte. The most exquisite Rice commeth from the Philippines and Chi∣na, as hath beene sayde. And this may suffice to vnder∣stand what they eate generally at the Indies in steade of bread. Of divers Rootes which growe at the Indies. CHAP. 18. ALthough in these parts the Land be more aboun∣dant and fertile in fruites that growes vpon the earth, by reason of the great diversitie of fruite trees, and plants we have; yet for rootes and other things that grow vnder the earth, the which they vse for meates, in my opinion there is greatest aboundance there: for of these kindes of plants, we have readishes, turneps, parsneps, carrots, liekes, garlike, and some o∣ther profitable rootes. But in those countries they have so many divers sortes, as I cannot reckon them; those which I now remember besides Papas, which is the principall, there is Ocas, Yanococas, Camotes, Vatas, Xi∣quimas, Yuca, Cochuha, Cavi, Totora, Mani, and an in∣finite number of other kindes, as the Patattres, which
they eate as a delicate and toothsome meate. They have likewise carried fruites to the Indies from these parts, the which prosper better there, then the Indian plants do, brought into Europe; the reason in my opi∣nion is, for that there is greater variety of temperatures then in these partes, by meanes whereof, the plants in those regions do rise and prosper better, fitting them∣selves to the temperature they require. And the rootes and plants which grow there, and were not transpor∣ted from hence, are better then they be heere; for oni∣ons, garlike and parsnips are not in Spaine, as they be at Peru: and as for turnips, there is so great abundance, as they have increased in so me places in such sort, that as they have affirmed to me,) they could not destroy the aboundance which grew vp, for to sowe corne there. Wee have seene redish rootes as bigge as a mans arme, very tender, and of a good taste, and of these tootes I have spoken, some serve for ordinatie meate, as the Camores, which being rosted, serve as pulse. There are other rootes that serve them for dainties, as the Cochuch; it is a small sweete roote, which some preserve for more delight. There are other rootes fit to coole, as the Piquima, which is in qualitie very cold and moist, and in summer it refresheth and quencheth the thirst; but the Papas and Ocas, be the chiefe for nou∣rishment and substance. The Indians esteeme garlike above all the rootes of Europe, and hold it for a fruite of great force: wherein they want no reason, for that it comforts and warmes the stomacke, for that they eate it with an appetite rawe as it comes out of the ground.
Of divers sortes of greene Hearbes, and Pulses, and of those they call Concombres, Pines, or Pine Apples, small fruites of Chille, and of Prunes. CHAP. 19 SEing wee have begunne with the lesser Plants, I might in few words, touch that which concernes Flowers and Pot-hearbes, and that which the Latines call Arbusta, without any mention of trees. There are some kindes of these shrubbes at the Indies, which are of very good taste. The first Spaniards named many things at the Indies with such Spanish names, as they did most resemble, as Pines, Concombres, and Prunes, althogh they be very different fruites to those which are so cal∣led in Spaine. The Pines, or Pine-aples, are of the same fashion and forme outwardly to those of Castlle, but within they wholy differ, for that they have neither aples, norscales, but are all one flesh, which may be ea∣ten when the skinne is off, it is fruite that hath an ex∣cellent smell, and is very pleasant and delightfull in taste, it is full of iuyce, and of a sweete and sharpe taste, they ate it being cut in morcells, and steeped a while in water and salt. Some say that this breedes choler, and that the vse therof is not very healthfull. But I have not seen any experience thereof, that might breede beleefe. They grow one by one like a cane or stalke, which riseth amongst many leaves, like to the lil∣lie, but somewhat bigger. The apple is on the toppe of every cane, it growes in hote and moist groundes, and the best are those of the Ilands of Barlovente. It growes not in Peru, but they carry them from the Andes, the which are neither good nor ripe. One presented one of these Pine-apples, to the Emperour Charles the fift,
which must have cost much paine, and care to bring it so farre, with the plant from the Indies, yet would he not trie the taste. I have seene in new Spaine, conserves of these Pines, which was very good. Those which they call Concombres, are no trees, but shrubbes, conti∣nuing but one yeere. They gave it this name, for that some of this fruite, and the most part, is in length, and roundnes like to the Concombres of Spaine: but for the rest they differ much, for they are not greene, but vio∣let, yellow, or white, neither are they thornie or rough, but pollished and even, having a very different taste, and farre better then that of Spaine, for they have a sharpe sweete taste, very pleaasant when it is ripe, yet is it not so sharpe as the Pine. They are very coole, full of liquor and of easie digestion, and in time of heate, fit to refresh. They take away the rinde which is white, and all that remaines is meat. They grow in a tempe∣rate soile, and require watering. And although for the resemblance they call them Concombres, yet are there many of them round, and others of a different fashion: so as they have not the figure of Concombres. I do not remember to have seene this kinde of fruite in new Spaine, nor at the Ilands, but vpon the Lanos of Peru. That which they call the little fruite of Chille, is of the same sort, very pleasant to eate, & comes neere the taste of cheries, but in all other things it differs much: for that it is no tree, but an hearbe, which growes little and spreades vpon the earth, casting forth this little fruite, the which in colour and graines, resembles almost the mulbery, when it is white and not ripe, yet is it more rough and bigger then the mulbery. They say this lit∣tle fruite is naturally found in the fieldes of Chille, where I have seene of them. They set it vpon plants
and branches, and it growes like any other shrubbe. Those which they call Prunes, are verily the fruites of trees, and have more resemblance then the rest to our plumbs. There are divers sorts, whereof they call some Prunes of Nicaragua, the which are very red and small, and have little meat vpon the stone, but that little is of an exquisite taste; and of a sharpenes, as good, or rather better then cheries. They hold this fruite to be very holesome, and therefore they give it to sicke folkes, e∣specially to provoke an appetite. There are others that be great and of a darke colour, they have much meat, but it is grosse and of no taste, like to the Chavacanas, which have every one two or three small stones. But to returne to pot-hearbs, I finde not that the Indians had any gardins of divers hearbs and plants, but did onely till the land in some partes for pulses, which they vse, as those which they call Frsolles and Palares, which serve them as our lentils, beanes, or tares: nei∣ther have I knowne that these pulses, or any other kinds that be in Europe, were there before the Spaniards en∣tred, who carried plants and pulses from Spaine thither, where they now grow and increase wonderfully, and in some places exceede greatly the fertilitie of these partes. As if we speake of mellons which grow in the vallie of Yuca, in Peru, whose roote becomes a stalke that continues many yeeres carrying mellons yeerely, and they trimme it like vnto a tree; a thing which I do not know to be in any part of Spaine. But that is more monstrous of the Calibasses or Indian Pompions, and the greatnes they have as they grow, especially those which are proper to the Countrie, which they call Capallos; the which they eate most commonly in Lent, boiled and trimmed with some other sawce. There are
a thousand kindes of Calibasses, some are so deformed in their bignes, that of the rinde cut in the middest and clensed, they make as it were baskets to put in all their meat for their dinner. Of the lesser they make vessells to eate and drinke in, and do trimme them hansomely for many vses. I have spoken this of small plants, wee will now speake of greater; but first of their Axi, which is of the lesser. Of Axi or Indian Pepper. CHAP. 20. THey have not found at the West Indies any kinde of Spices, proper or peculiar to them, as pepper, cloves, cinamon, numegges or ginger, although one of our company, who had travelled much, and in di∣verse partes, tolde vs, that in the desarts of the Iland of Iamaique he had found trees where pepper grewe. But they are not yet assured thereof, neither is there anie trade of these spices at the Indies,. The ginger was car∣ried from the Indies to Hispaniola, and it hath multipli∣ed so, as at this day they know not what to do with the great aboundaunce they have. In the fleete the yeare 1587. they brought 22053. quintalls of ginger to Seville: but the naturall spice that God hath given to the weast Indies, is that we call in Castill, Indian pepper, and in In∣dia, Axi, as a generall worde taken from the first land of the Ilands, which they conquered. In the language of Cusco, it is called Vchu, and in that of Mexico, Chili. This plant is well knowne, and therefore I will speake alittle, onely wee must vnderstand, that in olde time it was much esteemd amongst the Indians, which they carried into places where it grew not, as a marchan∣dise
of consequence. It growes not vpon cold grounds, as on the Sierre of Peru, but in hote valleis, where it is often watered. There is of this Axi of diverse colours, some is greene, some red, some yellow, and some of a burning color, which they call Caribe, the which is ex∣treamely sharpe and biting; there is an other sort not so sharpe, but is so sweete, as they may eate it alone as any other fruit. There is some of it very small and pleasing in the mouth, almost like to the smell of muske, and is very good. That which is sharpe and biting in this A∣xi, be the veines and the graine onely; the rest is not: for that they eate it greene and dry, whole and beaten, in the pot, and in sawces, being the chiefe sawce, and all the spice they have at the Indies. When this Axi is taken moderately, it helps and comforts the stomacke for digestion: but if they take too much, it hath bad effects, for of it selfe it is very hote, fuming, and pierceth greatly, so as the vse thereof is preiudiciall to the health of yong folkes, chiefely to the soule, for that it pro∣vokes to lust. It is strange, that although the fire and heate of it be well knowne by experience, and that eve∣ry man saies, it burnes in the mouth and the stomacke; yet some, yea many holde, that the Indian pepper is not hote, but colde, and well tempered. But I might say to them, the like should be of pepper; though they brought me as many experiences as they woulde of the one and the other: yet is it a very mockery to say it is not hote, seeing it is in the highest degree. They vse salt to temper this Axi, having great sorce to correct it, and so they moderate one with the other by the con∣trarietie that is in them. They vse also Tomates, which are colde and very wholesome. It is a kinde of graine great and full of iuyce, the which gives a good taste to
sawce, and they are good to eate. They have generally throughout the Indies of this Indian pepper, at the I∣lands, new Spaine, Peru, and all the rest that is discove∣red. And as mays is the generall graine for bread, so A∣xi is the most common spice for sawces. Of the Plane tree. CHAP. 21. COmming to the greater plants or trees at the Indies, the first that shall be needefull to treate of, is the Plane or Platano, as the vulgar call it. I have been some∣times in doubt, whether the Plane which the Antients have so much celebrated, and that of the Indies were of one kinde. This well observed, and that which they write of the other, without all doubt they will appeare to be of sundry kindes. The reason why the Spaniards called it Plane, (for the Indians had no such name) was as in other trees, for that they have found some resem∣blance of the one with the other, even as they called some fruites, prunes, pines, and cucumbers, being far different from those which are called by those names in Castille. The thing wherein was most resemblance, in my opinion, betwixt the Planes at the Indies, and those which the Antients did celebrate, is the greatnes of the leaves, for that these have them very great and coole, and the Antients did likewise much esteeme them for the greatnesse and coolenesse of their leaves. It is also a plant that requireth much water, and in a maner con∣tinually, which agrees with the sacred Scripture that saith; Like to the Plane neere the waters. But in truth there is no more comparison nor resemblance of the one with the other, then there is (as the Proverb saith) be∣twixt an egge and a chesnut. For first, the antient plane
carries no fruit, at the least, they made no account the▪ of, but the chiefest reason why they esteemed it, was, for the shadow, for that there was no more Sunne vn∣der a Plane than vnder a roofe. And contrariwise, the reason why they shoulde regarde it at the Indies, yea make great accompt thereof, is by reason of this fruite, which is very good; for they have little shade. More∣over, the antient Plane had the body so bigge, and the boughs so spread,Plin.b. 2. c. 1 that Pliny reporteth of one Licinius a Romane Captaine, who with eighteene of his compa∣nions dined at ease in th'hollow of one of these planes: and of the Emperour Caius Caligula, who with eleven of his ghests feasted vpon the toppe of an other Plane, where he made them a sumptuous banquet. The Indi∣an Planes have neither so great nor hollow bodies, not so broade boughs. He saieth moreover, that the aunti∣ent Planes grew in Italie and in Spaine, although they had beene brought thither from Greece; and first from Asia, but the Indians Planes growe neither in Italy nor in Spaine. I say they growe not there, for although we have seene some at Seville in the Kings gardins, yet they prosper not, nor are of any account. Finally, whatsoe∣ver they find alike betwixt the one and the other, is ve∣ry different. For although the leaves of the auntient Planes were very great, yet were they not such, nor so great as those at the Indies, seeing that Pliny compares it to the leafe of a Vine or Figge tree. Pli. lib. 11. c. 16 The leaves of the Indian Plane, are of a wonderfull bignes, and are, in a maner, sufficient to cover a man from the foote to the head, so as no man can doubt but there is great difference betwixt the one and the other. But put the case that this Indian Plane be diffe∣rent from the ancient, yet deserves it no lesse commen∣dation,
it may be, more, by reason of the profitable qualities it hath. It is a plant that makes a stocke within theearth, out of the which springs many and sundrie siens and sprigges, divided, and not ioyned together. These sprigges grow bigge, every one making a small tree apart, and in growing they cast forth these leaves, which are of a fine greene smooth, and great as I have said. When it is growne to the height of a stade and a halfe, or two, it puttes forth one only bough of fruite, whereon sometimes there are great numbers of this fruite, and sometimes lesse. I have tolde vpon some of these boughs three hundred, whereof every one was a spanne long more or lesse, and two or three fingers bigge; yet is there much difference heerein, betwixt some and others, they take away the rinde, and all the rest is a firme kernell and tender, good to eate, and nou∣rishing. This fruite inclines more to cold then heate. They are accustomed to gather the boughs or clusters, as I have said, being greene, and put them into vessells, where they ripen, being well covered, especially when there is a certaine hearbe mingled with it, which serves for this effect. If they suffer them to ripen on the tree, they have a better taste, and a very good smell, like to Camoisses or sweet apples. They last almost all the yeere, for that there are alwaies yong ones that grow out of this stocke; so as when one endes, another beginnes to yeelde his fruite, the one is halfe ripe and the other be∣ginnes to bud anew, so as one succeedes another, and the fruite continues the whole yeere. In gathering the cluster, they cut the sprigge or stalke, for that it beares but one, and never but once: but as I have saide, the stalke remaines, and castes forth new sienes or stalkes, vntill it growes olde and dies. This Plane continues
many yeares, and requires much moisture, and a very hote ground. They put ashos at the foote of it, for the better tertaining therf, and they make small groves; and very thicke, which are of great profit and revenue vnto them; for that it is the fruite▪ they vse most at the Indies, and is generall in all places, although they say the first beginning comes from Ethiopia. And in trueth the Negros vse them much, and in some places they serve them as bread, yea they make wine of them. They eate this fruite rawe like other fruits; they likewise roast it, and make many sorts of potages, and conserves, and in all thinges it serveth very well. There is a kinde of small Planes, white and very delicate, which in Hispa∣niola they call Dominiques. There are others which are stronger and bigger, and red of colour. There growes none in the kingdome of Peru, but are brought from the Indies, as from Mexico, Cuernavaca, and other val¦lies. Vpon the firme land, and in some Ilands there are great store of Planes, like vnto thicke groves. If this plant were fit for the fire, it were the most profitable of all others, but it is nothing fit, for neither the body no the boughs will burne, and much lesse will it serve for building, being a sappy wood, and without force. Yet Don Alonze Darzilla (as it is said) vsed the leaves of this tree dried, to write a parte of the Auricana, and in truth it may serve for want of paper, seeing that the leafe is as broade as a sheet of paper, or little lesse, and foure times as long. Of Cacao and Coca. CHAP. 22. ALthough the Plane be the most profitable, yet that Cacao is most esteemed at Mexico, and the Coca in
Peru; in which two trees they have great superstition. The Cacao is a fruit little lesse than almonds, yet more satte, the which being roasted hath no illtaste. It is so much esteemed amongest the Indians (yea and among the Spaniards) that it is one of the richest and the grea∣test traffickes of new Spaine: for being a drie fruite, and that keepes long without corruption, they carry whole shippes loaden from the province of Guatimalla. The last yeare an English Pirat did burne in the Port of Gua∣tulco in new Spaine, above a hundred thousand charges of Cacao. They vse it in steede of money, for with five Cacaos they buy one thing, with thirtie an other, and with a hundred an other, without any contradiction; and they vse to give it to the poore that beg for almes. The chiefe vse of this Cacao, is in a drincke which they call Chochlaté, whereof they make great accompt in that Country, foolishly, and without reason; for it is loathsome to such as are not acquainted with it, having askumme or froth that is very vnpleasant to taste, if they be not very well conceited thereof. Yet it is a drinke very much esteemed among the Indians, where∣with they feast noble men as they passe through their Country. The Spaniards both men and women, that are accustomed to the Countrey, are very greedy of this Chocholaté. They say they make diverse sortes of it, some hote, some colde, and some temperate, and put therein much of that Chili; yea they make paste thereof, the which they say is good for the stomacke, and against the Catarre. Whatsoever it be, such as have not been nourished there, are not very curious thereof. The tree whereon this fruite growes, is of reasonable big∣nesse, and well fashioned, it is so tender, that to keepe it from the burning of the Sunne, they plant neere vn∣to
it, a great tree, which serves onely to shadow it, and they call it the mother of Cacao. There are places where they are like to the Vines and Olive trees of Spaine. The province where there is greatest abundance for the traf∣fike of Marchandise, is Guatimalla. There growes none in Peru, but Coca, wherein they hold an other great su∣perstition, which seemes to be fabulous. In trueth the trafficke of Coca in Potozi doth yearely mount to above halfe a million of peeces, for that they vse fourescore and tenne, or foure score and fifteene thousand baskets every yeare. In the yeare, one thousand five hundred eighty three, they spent a hundred thousand. A basket of Coca in Cusco is woorth two peeces and a halfe, and three; and in Potozi it is readily worth foure peeces, and five Tomines, and five peeces tried. It is a kinde of mar∣chandise, by the which all their Markets and Faires are made with great expedition. This Coca whereof they make such account, is a small greene leafe, which grow∣eth vpon small trees about a fadome high, and in hote and moyst grounds; every foure moneths it casts forth this leafe, which they call Tresmitas or Tremoy; it re∣quires great care in planting, beeing very tender, and much more to keepe it, when it is gathered. They laie it in order in long & narrow baskets, and so lade theyr sheepe of the Country, which go in troopes, with one, two, or three thousand baskets of this marchandise. They bring it commonly from the Andes and vallies, where there is an extreame heate, and where it raines continually the most part of the yeare: wherein the In∣dians endure much labour and paine to entertaine it, & often many die; for that they go from the Sierre and colde places to till and gather them in the Andes. And therefore there hath beene great question and diversity
of opinions among learned men, whether it were more expedient to pull vp these trees, or to let them growe, but in the end they remained. The Indians esteeme it much, and in the time of their Kings Inguas it was not lawfull for any of the common people to vse this Coca without licence from the Governor. Their vse is to ca∣ry it in their mouthes, chawing it, and sucking out the iuyce, but they swallow it not. They say it gives them great courage, and is very pleasing vnto them. Many grave men holde this as a superstition & a meere imagi∣nation: for my part, and to speake the truth, I perswade not my selfe that it is an imagination; but contrariwise, I thinke it works and gives force and courage to the In∣dians: for we see the effects, which cannot be attributed to imagination, as to go some daies without meate, but onely a handfull of Coca, and other like effects. The sawce wherewith they doe eate this Coca, is proper e∣nough, whereof I have tasted, and it is like the taste of leather. The Indians mingle it with the ashes of bones burnt and beat into powlder; or with lime, as others af∣firme, which seemeth to them pleasing and of a good taste; and they say it dooth them much good. They willingly imploy their money therein, and vse it as mo∣ney: yet all these things were not inconvenient, were not the hazard of the trafficke thereof, wherein so ma∣ny men are occupied. The Seigniors Inguas, vsed Coca as a delicate and royall thing, which they offered most in their sacrifices, burning it in honor of their idolls. Of Maguey, Tunal, Cochenille, Anir, and Cotton. CHAP. 23. MAguey is a tree of wonders, whereof the Notaries or Chapetons (as the Indians call them) are wont
to write miracles, in that it yeeldeth water, wine, oyle, vineger, honny, sirrope, threede, needles, and a thou∣sand other things. It is a tree which the Indians esteeme much in new Spaine, & have commonly in their dwel∣lings some one of them for the maintenaunce of life; it grows in the fields, and hath great and large leaves, at the end whereof is a strong & sharp point, which serves to fasten little pins, or to sowe as a needle; & they draw out of this leafe as it were a kinde of threed which they vse. They cut the body which is big, when it is tender, wherein is a great hollownesse, by which the substance mounts from the root, and is a liquor which they drink like water, being sweet & fresh. This liquor being sod∣den, turnes like wine, which growes to vineger, suffring it to sowre, and boyling it more, it becomes as hony, & boyling it halfe, it serves as sirrope: which is healthfull enough, and of good taste; in my iudgement it is bet∣ter then the sirrope of raisins. Thus doe they boyle this liquor, and vse it in diverse sortes, whereof they drawe a good quantitie, for that in some season they draw dai∣ly some pots of this liquor. There are also of these trees in Peru, but they are not so profitable as in new Spaine. The wood of this tree is hollow and soft, and serves to keepe fire, like to the match of a harquebuze, and pre∣serves it long; I have seene the Indians vse it to that end. The Tunall is another famous tree in new Spaine: if we may call a tree a heape of leaves gathered together one vpon another, it is the strangest fashiond tree of all other, for first there grows one leafe out of the ground, then another vpon it, and so one vpon one, till it com∣meth to his perfection; but as the leaves growe vp, and on the sides, those vnderneath doe become great, and loose in a manner the forme of leaves, making a bodie
and braunches, which are sharpe, pricking and defor∣med, so as in some places they doe call it a Thistle. There are thistles or wilde Tunalls, the which do carry no fruite, or else it is very pricking without any profit. There are likewise planted Tunalls which yeelde fruite much esteemed amongst the Indians, the which they call Tunas, and they are much greater then Plumbes, and long. They open the shell which is fatte, and with∣in it is meate and small graines, like to those of figges, which be very sweete; they have a good taste, especially the white, which have a pleasing smell, but the red are not vsually so good. There is another sorte of Tunalls, which they esteeme much more, although it yeeldes no fruit, yet it beares an other commoditie and profit, which is of the graine, for that certayne small wormes breede in the leaves of this tree, when it is well husban∣ded, and are therevnto fastned, covered with a certaine small fine web, which doth compasse them in daintily; and this is that Indian Cochenille, so famous, and where∣with they die in graine. They let it drie, and being dri∣ed, carry it into Spaine, which is a great and rich mar∣chandise. The arobe of this Cochenille or graine is worth many ducats. In the fleete, the yeare 1587. they did bring five thousand sixe hundred seventy seven arobes, which amounted to twoo hundred foure score three thousand seven hundred and fifty peeces, & commonly there comes every yeare as great a wealth. These Tunalls grow in temperate grounds inclining to colde. In Peru there growes none to this day, I have seene some plants in Spaine, but they deserve not esti∣mation. I will speake something likewise of the Anir, although it comes not from a tree, but from an hearb, for that it serveth for the dying of cloth, and is a mar∣chandise
which agrees with the graine; it groweth in great aboundance iu new Spaine, from whence there came in the fleete I mentioned 5263. arobes, or there∣abouts, which amounted to so many peeces. Cotten likewise growes vpon small shrubs, and great trees like to little apples, which doe open and yeelde forth this webbe; which being gathered, they spinne to make stuffes. It is one of the things at the Indies of greatest profite, and most in vse; for it serves them both insteed of flaxe and wooll to make their garments. It groweth in a hote soyle, and there is great store in the vallies, and sea coast of Peru, in new Spaine, the Philippines and China. But the greatest store of any place that I know, is in the province of Tucuman, in that of saint Croix of the Sierre, and at Paraguey, whereas Cotten is their chiefe revenue. They carry cotten into Spaine from the Iland of Saint Dominike: and the yeare that I spake of, there came 64000. arobes. At the Indies whereas this cotten growes, they make cloth, which both the men and women vse commonly, making table napkins thereof, yea and sailes for their shippes. There is some course, and other that is fine and delicate; they die it into di∣verse colours, as wee doe by our woollen cloth in Eu∣rope. Of Mameys, Guayavos, and Paltos CHAP. 24. THese Plants we have spoken of, are the most pro∣fitable of the Indies, and the most necessary for the life of man: yet there are many other that are good to eate, among the which the Mameys are esteemed, be∣ing in fashion like to great peaches, and bigger, they have one or two stones within them, and their meate
is some what hard. There are some sweete, and others somewhat sower, and have the rinde hard. They make conserves of the meate of this fruite, which is like to marmelade. The vse of this fruite is reasonable good, but the conserves they make thereof, are better. They grow in Ilands. I have not seene any in Peru. It is a great tree, well fashioned, and a reasonable faire leafe. The Guayavos be other trees which commonly carry an ill fruite, full of sower kernells, and are like to little apples. It is a tree little esteemed vpon the firme land and at the Ilands, for they say it smells like to the Pu∣naises. The taste and savour of this fruite is very grosse, and the substance vnholesome. In S. Dominique and other Ilands, there are whole mountaines full of these Guayavos, and they say, there was no such kinde of trees before the Spaniards came there, but that they broght them they know not from whence. This tree hath multiplied infinitely, for that there is no beast that will eate the kernells or the graine, so as being thus scatte∣red on the earth, being hote and moist, it multiplies in this sort. In Peru, the Guayavos differs from others, for that the fruite is not red, but white, neither hath it any ill smell, but is of a very good taste; and of what sort of Guayavos soever it bee, the fruit is as good as the best of Spaine, especially of those which they call Guayavos de Matos, and of other little white Guayvilles. It is a fruit reasonably holesome, and agrees with the stomacke, being of a strong digestion, and cold. The Paltas com∣monly are hote and delicate. The Palto is a great tree, and carries a faire leafe, which hath a fruite like to great peares: within it hath a great stone, and all the rest is soft meate, so as when they are full ripe, they are as it were butter, and have a delicate taste. In Peru the Paltas
are great, and have a very hard skale, which may be ta∣ken off whole. This fruite is most vsuall in Mexico, ha∣ving a thinne skinne, which may be pilled like an ap∣ple: they hold it for a very holesome meate, and as I have said, it declines a little from heat. These Mamayes Guayavos, and Paltos, be the Indians peaches, apples, and peares; and yet would I rather choose them of Europe. But some others by vse, or it may be by affection, doe more esteeme those of the Indies. I doubt not but such as have not seene nor tasted of these fruites, will take small pleasure to reade this discourse, yea, they will grow wearie to heare it, as I have done in writing it, which makes me to abridge it, speaking of some other sortes of fruites, for it were impossible to intreate of them all. Of Chicoçapote, Amonas, and Capollis. CHAP. 25. SOme desirous to augment thinges at the Indies, have given out that there is no kinde of fruite like vnto Cotignac, or marmelade, and another which tastes like a meate made of almonds and creame, which they call Blanckemanger, for that the taste of them deserves these names, the marmalad is that which they call Ca∣potes, or Chicoçapotes, which have a sweete taste, and neere vnto the colour of marmalade. Some Crollos, (for so they call the Spaniards borne at the Indies,) say that this fruite passeth all the fruites of Spaine in excellency: yet am I not of that opinion, at the least they say, it pas∣seth all other fruites in taste; but I will not dwell vpon this question, for that it doth not deserve it. Those Chicoçapotes or Capotes, wherein there is little difference,
grow in the hotest partes of new Spaine, neither have I knowledge of any such fruite in the firme land of Pe∣ru. As for the Blanckemanger, it is that Annona or Gua∣navana, which growes in the firme land, which is fasho∣ned like vnto a peare, a little sharpe and opened, with∣in it is white, tender and soft like butter, sweete and of a pleasing taste: It is no whit meate, though they call it Blanckemanger, but in truth they have added much vnto it, by giving this name: although it be delicate and of a sawcie and delicious taste, and according to the iudgement of some, it is held for the best fruite of the Indies, yet hath it many blacke kernells within it, and the best which I have seene is in new Spaine, where the Capolies grow, which be like vnto cheries, with a stone, but some what bigger: the forme and shape is like vnto cheries, of a good taste, being sweete and sharpe; but I have not seene any Capollyes in any other Countrie. Of many sortes of fruit Trees, of Cocos, Almondes, of the Andes, and Almonds of Chachapoyas. CHAP. 26. IT were not possible to reckon all the fruites and trees at the Indies, for that I remember not many, and there are many more whereof I have no know∣ledge; and in my opinion, it were troublesome to speake of all those I now remember. There are some grosse fruites, as those which they call Lucumes, (of which fruite they speake in a proverbe, that it is a coun∣terfet price,) The Guanos, Pacayes, Hubos, and the nuttes which they call imprisoned; which fruites seeme to many, to be the same kinde of nuttes we have in Spaine;
yea, they say, if they were often transplanted from place to place, they would carry nuttes altogether like to those of Spaine. And the reason why the fruite is so vnpleasant, is, for that they are wilde. To conclude, we ought well to consider the providence and riches of the Creator, who impartes to so divers partes of the world, such varietie of fruite trees, all for the service of man that inhabites the earth. And it is an admirable thing to see so many different formes, tastes, and ef∣fects vnknowne, whereof we did never heare speake, before the discoverie of the Indies. And whereof Plinie himselfe, Dioscorides and Theophrastes, (yea, the most curious,) had no knowledge, notwithstanding all their search and dilligence. There have beene some curious men of our age, which have written some Treatises of the Indian plants, of hearbes, and rivers, and of their operations for phisicke, to whom they may flie for their better instruction. I onely pretend, (and in few words,) to treate superficially of that which comes to memory touching this subiect; yet do I not thinke it good to passe away vnder silence the Cocos or Indian palmes, by reason of a very notable propertie it hath. I call them palmes, not properly, or that it beares dates, but that they are trees like to other palmes. They are high and strong, and the higher they grow, the broader they stretch out their branches. These Cocos yield a fruit which they likewise call Cocos, wherof they commonly make vessells to drinke in, and some they say have a vertue against poison, and to cure the paine in the side. The nutte and meate being dried, is good to eate, and comes neere in taste to greene chesnuttes. When the Coco is tender vpon the tree, the substance within it, is as it were milke, which they drinke for
daintines, and to refresh them in time of heate. I have seene of these trees in S. Iean de Port Ricco, and other parts of the Indies, and they report a wonderfull thing, that every moneth or Moone, this tree castes forth a new branch of this Cocos; so as it yeeldes fruite twelve times in the yeere, as it is written in the Apocalips: and in truth this seemes like vnto it, for that all the bran∣ches are of different ages, some beginning, others be∣ing ripe, and some halfe ripe. These Cocos, are com∣monly of the forme and bignes of a small melon. There is of another kinde which they call Coquillos, the which is a better fruite, whereof there be some in Chille. They are some what lesse then nuttes, but more round. There is another kinde of Cocos, which have not the kernell so oylie, but within they have a great number of small fruites like almonds, like vnto the graines of a Poungarnet. These almonds are thrice as bigge as those of Castille, and resemble them in taste, thogh they be more sharpe, and likewise moist and oylie. It is a good meate, they vse it also in feasting; for lack of almons to make march∣panes, and such other things. They call them Almonds of the Andes, for that these Cocos growe aboundantlie vpon the Andes of Peru; they are so strong and hard, as to open them, they must beate them with a great stone, when they fall from the tree. If they chance to hit anie one on the head, he hath no more need of any surgeon. It is an incredible thing, that within the hollowe of these Cocos, which are no bigger than the rest, or little more, there are such a multide of these almonds. But as touching almonds and other fruites, all trees must yeelde to the almonds of Chachapos, which I cannot otherwise call. It is the most pleasing, delicate, and
wholesome fruit of all that I have seene at the Indies; yea a learned Physitian did affirme, that amongest all the fruits at the Indies, or in Spaine, none came neere these Almonds in excellencie. There are both greater and lesse than those of the Andes, but all are fatter than those of Castille. They are very tender to eate, and they have much iuyce and substance; and are oylie and very ple∣sant: they grow vpon high trees, bearing great leaves. And as it is a preious thing, so nature hath given them a good covering and defence, being in a huske some∣what bigger, and more pricking than a chesnut. Yet when this huske is drie, they easily drawe foorth the graine. They say, that the Apes who are very greedie of this fruit, and whereof there is aboundance in Cha∣chapoyas of Peru (which is the onely countrey (to my knowledge) where these trees doe growe) fearing they should pricke them, and yet desirous to draw forth the almond, they cast them from the toppe of the tree a∣gainst the stones, and having broken the huske, they open them to eate the fruite at their pleasure. Of many and diverse flowers, and of some trees which yeeld onely a flower, and how the Indians do vse them CHAP. 27. THe Indians are great lovers of flowers, and in new Spaine more than in any other part of the worlde, & therefore they are accustomed to make many kindes of nosegaies, which there they call Suchilles, with such prety varietie and art, as nothing can be more pleasing. They have a custome amongst them, that the chiefest man offer their Suchillos or nosegayes in honour to No∣blemen, and to their ghests; and they presented vs with
such aboundance as we passed through that Country, as we knew not what to doe with them; and at this day they vse the principall flowers of Castill, to that end, for that they growe better there than heere, as gilliflowers, roses, jasmins, violets, orange flowers, and other sortes which they have transported ou f Spaine. The rose tree groweth too fast in some places, so as they beare no roses. It chaunced one day that a rose tree was bur∣ned, and the siens which sprowted out, presently bare aboundance of roses, and thereby they learnd to prune them, and to cut off the superfluous braunches, so as at this day they yeeld reasonable store of ross. But besids these kindes of flowers, which have beene transported from hence. There are many others, whose names I do not know, whereof some are red, blew, yellow, violet and white, with a thousand different colours, which the Indians did vse to carry on their heads, as feathers for ornament. True it is, that many of these flowers are onely pleasing to the sight, having no good savour, ey∣ther they are grosse, or else they have none at all; and yet there be some of an excellent scent. As those which growe vpon a tree termed by them Floripondio or carry flower, which beares no fruit, but onely these flowers, which are greater than the Lillie, and are like to little bells, all white, which have within them small threeds, as we see in the lillie: it leaves not all the yeare to beare these flowers, whose smell is woonderfull sweete and agreeable, especially in the coole of the morning. The Viceroy Don Francisco de Toledo sent of these trees vnto King Philip, as a thing woorthy to be planted in royall gardins. In new Spaine the Indians esteeme much of a flower, which they call Volosuchil, which signifieth flo∣wer of the heart, for that it beares the forme of a heart,
and is not much lesse. There is likewise an other great tree, which beares this kinde of flower, without any fruite; it hath a strong savour, and in my opinion, too violent, the which may seeme to some more pleasing. It is a thing well knowne, that the flower which they call of the Sunne, th the figure of the Sunne, and turnes according to the motion thereof. There are o∣ther kindes which they call gilleflowers of the Indies, the which are like to a fine orange tawnie vellet, or a violet; those have no scent of any account, but onely are faire to the eye. There are other flowers which be∣sides the beaie of the eye, although they have no smell, yet have they a savour like vnto cresses, the which if you shoulde eate with outlooking of them, you would iudge them to be no other. The flower of Gra∣nadille is held for an admirable thing, and they say, it hath in it the markes of the passion, and that therein they note the nailes, the piller, the whips, and crowne of thornes, and the woundes, wherein they are not al∣together without reason, and yet to finde out and ob∣serve these things, it requires some pietie to cause be∣leefe: but it is very exquisite and faire to the eye, al∣though it have no smell. The fruite which they also call Granadille is eaten and drunke; or to speake more properly, sucked, for a refreshing; this fruite is sweete, and too sweete after some opinions. The Indians have vsed in their feasts and dances, to carry flowers in their handes, and the Kings and Noblemen carry them for their greatnes. For this reason we commonly see their ancient pictures with flowers in their hands, as we see heere with gloves. I thinke this sufficient touching flowers. They vse BaZilic to this effect, although it bee no flower, but an hearbe onely, which they were won
to plant carefully in their gardins, but now they regard it not; so as it growes onely about their pooles and ponds, Of Balme. CHAP. 28. THe Soveraigne Creator hath not onely fashioned Plants to serve as meat, but also for recreation, for phisicke, and for the cure of man. I have spoken some∣what of those that serve for nourishment, which is the chiefe, and a little of those that serve for recreation, and now we are to intreate of those which are proper for phisicke, wherein I will speake something. And al∣though all plants are medicinall when they are well knowne and applied, yet there are some things especi∣ally, which wee see directly ordained by the Creator for phisicke; and for the health of man: as liquors, oiles, gummes, and rozines, which come from divers plants and hearbes, and which easily shew by experience whereto they are proper. Above all, Baulme is with reason esteemed for the excellent smell, but much more for the exquisite effect it hath to cure woundes, and divers other remedies, as experience hath taught in the cure of diseases. The Balme which comes from the West Indies, is not of the same kind of right Balme which they bring from Alexandria or Caire, and in old time was in Iudea; which Iudea (as Plinie writeth) did of all the world possesse this greatnesse, vntill the Empe∣ror Vespasian broght it to Rome & into Italie.Pli. lib. 12 c. 15 The reason why I say the liquor of the one and the other are not of one kinde, is for that the trees from whence it comes are very different: for the balme tree of Palestine was small, and fashioned like to a Vine (as Plinic reporteth)
who had seene it, and those that at this day that have seene them in the East, say as much. As also the holy Scripture calles the place where the Balme thickens,Can. 1. Vine of Enguaddy, for the resemblance it hath to vine. At the Indies I have seene the tree from whence they draw the Balme, which is as bigge as a poungarnet tree, and some thing neere the fashion; and if my me∣mory failes me not, it hath nothing common with the vine, although that Strabo writes, that the ancient tree of Balme,Strab. lib. 16. Geograp. was of the bignes of a poungarnet tree. But in their accidents and operations, their liquors are a∣like, as likewise they be in their admirable smells, and in the cure and healing of wounds, in colour and sub∣stance, seeing they report of other Balmes that there is some white, vermilion, greene, and blacke, the which is likewise seene in that of the Indies. And as they drew forth the ancient in cutting and making incisions in the barke, to cause the liquor to distill out, so do they with that at the Indies, although it distilles in greater a∣boundance. And as in the ancient there is one kinde which is pure, the which they call Opobalsamum, which be the very teares that distill, so as there is another sort which is not so exquisite, the which they drawe from the barke and leaves strained and boiled on the fire, the which they call Xilobalssamum. The like is also in the Indian Balmes; there is one pure that distilles from the tree, and others that the Indians draw out by straining and boiling the leaves and wood, yea, they do sophisticate and augment it with other liquors, to make it increase. It is not without reason they call it Balme, for in truth it is so, (although it be not of the same kinde of the ancient,) yet it is much esteemed, and should be more, if the great aboundance were not
the cause as in Emeraldes and Pearles. That which im∣portes most, is the vse wherein it is imployed, for creame and vnctions in the Church, and in such vene∣ration: for that the Apostolike sea hath given libertie to give creame of Balme at the Indies, and that they should vse it in confirmation and other ceremonies which they vse. They bring Balme to Spaine from new Spaine, from the Province of Guatimalla, from Chiappa, and other places where it aboundes most, although the most esteemed be that which comes from the Iland of Tollu, which is vpon the maine land, not farre from Carthagene. This Balme is white, and commonly they holde the white to bee more perfect then the red, al∣though Plinie gives the first place to the vermilion,Pli. li. 12. c. 25 the second to the white, the third to greene, and the last to blacke; but it seemes that Strabo esteemed more the white Balmes as ours doe. Monardes discourseth at large of the Indian Balme in the first and second part, especially of that of Carthagene and Tollu, which is all one. I have not found that the Indians in olde time did much esteeme Balme, nor yet imploy it in any im∣portant vse, although Monardes saieth, that the Indians cured their woundes therewith, and from thence the Spaniardes learned it. Of Amber, and other Oyles, Gums, and Drugges, which they bring from the Indies CHAP. 29. NExt to Balme, Amber holdes the second place: it is another liquor which is likewise sweete and medicinall; but more thicke, and turnes into a paste of a hote complexion, and a good perfume, the which they apply to woundes, bruises, and other necessities;
wherein I will referre my selfe to the Phisitions, espe∣cially to Doctor Monardes, who in his first Part, hath written of this liquor, and many others that are phisi∣call, which comes from the Indies. This Amber comes from new Spaine, which hath that advantage above o∣ther Provinces in goomes, liquors, and iuyce of trees, whereby they have such aboundance of matter, for perfume and phisicke, as is the Animé, whereof there comes great store, Copall, or Suchicopal, which is another kinde, storax and encense, which have excellent opera∣tions, and have a very good smell fit for fumigations. Likewise the Tacamahaca and Caranna, which are also very medicinall. They bring likewise from this Pro∣vince oyle of Aspicke, which the Phisitians and Pain∣ters vse much, the one for plasters, the other to vernish their pictures. They bring also for the Phisitians, Cassia fistule, the which growes plentifully in S. Dominique. It is a great tree, which carries these canes as his fruite. They brought in the fleete wherein I came from S. Do∣minique fortie eight quintalles of Cassia fistule. Salcepa∣reille is not lesse knowne, for a thousand remedies wherein it is vsed. There came in the same fleete fiftie quintalles from the same Iland. There is much of this Saceparille at Peru, and most excellent in the Province of Guaaquill, which is vnder the Line. Many go to be cured into this Province, and it is the opinion of some, that the pure water onely which they drinke, gives them health, for that it passeth by rootes as I have said, from whence it drawes this vertue, so as there needes no great covering or garments to make a man sweate in that countrie. The wood of Guayac, which they call Lignum sanctum, or Indian wood growes aboun∣dantly in the same Ilands, and is as heavie as yron, so
as it presently sinkes in the water, heereof they brought in the same fleete 350. quintalls, and they might have brought twentie, yea, a hundred thousand of this wood, if there were vse for it. There came in the same fleete, and from the same Iland, 130. quintalles of Bre∣sill wood, the which is fierie red, so well knowne, and much vsed in dying and other things. There are at the Indies infinite numbers of other aromaticall woodes, gummes, oyles, and drugges, so as it is not possible to name them all, neither doth it now much import. I say onely, that in the time of the Kings Inguas of Csco, and the Mexicaine Kings, there were many great perso∣nages expert in curing of diseases with simples, and did goodly cures, having the knowledge of the many ver∣tues and properties of hearbes, rootes, woodes, and plants, which grow there, and whereof the Ancients of Europe have had no knowledge. There are a thou∣sand of these simples fit to purge, as the rootes of Me∣choaçan, the Pignons of Punua, the conserve of Guanuc∣quo, the oyle of Fig-trees, and many other things, the which being well applied, and in time, they hold to be of no lesse efficacie then the drugges that come from the East. The which may be seene in reading the dis∣course which Monardes hath made in the first and se∣cond Part, where he treates amply of Tobacco, or Pe∣tum, whereof they have made notable experiences a∣gainst poison. Tobacco is a small tree or plant, common enough, the which hath in it rare vertues, as amongst others it serves for a counterpoison, like to many and divers other plants: for the Creator of all things hath imparted his vertues at his pleasure, not willing that a∣ny thing should grow idle. But it is another soveraigne gift to man, to know them and their proper vses, the
which the same Creator gives to whome hee pleaseth. Doctor Francis Hernandes hath made a goodly worke vppon this subiect, of Indian plants, liquors, and other phisicall things, by the Kings expresse commission and commaundement, causing all the plants at the Indies to be lively painted, which they say are above a thou∣sand two hundred; and that the worke cost above three score thousand ducats: out of which worke the Doctor Nardus Anthonius an Italian Physitian hath made a cu∣rious extract, sending him to the foresaid bookes, that desires more exactly to knowe the plants at the Indies, e∣specially for physicke. Of great forrests at the Indies, of Cedars, of Ceivas, and other great trees. CHAP. 30. ALthough from the beginning the earth did bring foorth plants and trees by the commandement of the Lord, yet hath it yielded more in one place than in another: and besides the plants and trees, which by the industry of man have beene transplanted and carried from place to place, there are many which Nature it selfe hath brought forth. I do beleeve, that of this sort there are more at the new world, which we do call the Indies, either in number or diversitie, than in the olde, as Europe, Asia, or Affrike. The reason is, for that the cli∣mate at the Indies is generally hot and moist, as we have declared in the second Booke, against the opinion of the Auntients, which causeth the earth naturally for to bring foorth an infinit number of wilde plants, where∣by the greatest part of the Indies is inhabitable, being al∣most impossible to travell by reason of the woodes and thicke forrests that are there; which they labour dailie
to cut downe. It hath bin needefull (passing through some partes of the Indies, especially where they newly entred) to make their way, in cutting downe trees, and pulling vp bushes, so that (as some religious men have written that have tried it) they coulde not sometimes have passed above a league in a day. One of our brothers (a man worthy of credite) reported vnto vs, that being straied in the mountaines, not knowing which way he shoulde passe, he fell among such thicke bushes, that he was forced to go vpon them, without setting foote to the ground, by the space of fifteene whole dayes: and to see the Sunne, or to marke some way in this thicke forrest full of wood, he was forced to climbe to the top of the highest trees to discover. He that shall reade the discourse of his travell, how often hee was lost, and the wayes he passed, with the strange adventures that hap∣pened vnto him, the which I have written briefly, be∣ing so worthy the knowledge, and having my selfe tra∣velled alittle over the mountaines at the Indies, were it but the eighteene leagues betwixt Nombre de Dios and Panama, may well iudge what great forrests there are. So as having no winter in those parts, to nip them with colde, and the humiditie of the heavens, and earth be∣ing so great, as the mountaines bring foorth infinit for∣rests, and the plaines which they call Savanas, great plenty of grasse: there is no want of pasture for feeding, of timber building, nor of wood for fewell. It is impos∣sible to set downe the differences and formes of so ma∣ny wilde trees, for that the names of the greatest parte are vnknowne. Cedars in olde time so much esteemed, are there ve∣ry common, both for buildings and shippes, and they are of diverse sortes, some white, and some redde, very
odoriferant. There are great store of Bay trees, very pleasant to beholde vpon the Andes of Peru, vppon the mountaines, in the Ilands of Nicaragua, and in New Spaine. There are also infinite numbers of Palmes and Ceivas, whereof the Indians make their Canoes, which are boates made of one peece. They bring into Spaine from the Havana, excellent timber. In the Iland of Cu∣ba, there are infinite numbers of like trees, as Ebene, Ca∣ovana, Grenadille, Cedars, and other kindes which I do not know. There are great pine trees in New Spaine, though they be not so strong as those in Spaine: they beare no pignous or kernells, but empty apples. The oaks as they cal them of Guaiaquil, is an excelent wood and sweet, when they cut it; yea there are kanes or most high reedes, of whose boughs or small reedes they doe make bottles and pitchers to carry water, and do like∣wise vse them in their buildings. There is likewise the wood of Mansle, or Firre, whereof they make masts for their shippes, and they holde them as strong as yron. Molle is a tree of many vertues, which casteth foorth small boughes, whereof the Indians make wine. In Me∣xico they call it the tree of Peru, for that it came from thence: but it growes also in New Spaine, and better than those in Peru. There are a thousand other trees, which were a superuous labour to intreate of, where∣of some are of an exceeding greatnesse, I will speake on∣ly of one which is in Tlaco Chavoya, three leagues from Guayaca in New Spaine: this tree being measured with∣in, being hollow, was found to have nine fadome, and without, neare to the roote, sixteene, and somewhat higher, twelve. This tree was strooke with lightning from the toppe to the bottom, through the heart, the which caused this hollownesse; they say that before the
thunder fell vpon it, it was able to shadow a thousand men, and therefore they did assemble there for theyr daunces and superstitions: yet to this day there doth remaine some boughes and verdure, but not much. They know not what kinde of tree it is, but they say it is a kind of Cedar. Such as shall finde this strange, let them reade what Plinie reporteth of the Plane of Lidia,Plin. lib. 12. c. 1▪ the hollow whereof contained foure score foote and one, and seemed rather a Cabbin or a house, than the hollow of a tree, his boughs like a whole wood, the shaddow whereof covered a great part of the field. By that which is writen of this tree, we have no great cause to wonder at the Weaver, who hadde his dwelling and loome in the hollow of a chesnut tree; and of another chesnut tree, if it were not the very same, into the hol∣low whereof there entered eighteene men on horse∣backe, and passed out without disturbing one another. The Indians did commonly vse their idolatries in these trees, so strange and deformed, even as did the antient Gentiles, as some Writers of our time doe report. Of Plants and fruits which have bin carried out of Spaine to the Indies. CHAP. 31. THe Indians have received more profit, and have bin better recompensed in plants that have bin broght from Spaine, than in any other marchandise, for that those few which are carried from the Indies into Spaine, growe little there, and multiply not, and contrariwise the great number that have beene caried from Spaine to the Indies, prosper wel & multiplie greatly: I know not whether I shall attribute it to the bounty of the plants
that goe from hence, or to the goodnesse of the soile that is there. Finally, there is at the Indies any good thing that Spaine brings foorth; in some places it is bet∣ter, in some worse, as wheate, barley, hearbes, and all kindes of pulses, also lettuce, colewortes, radishes, oni∣ons, garlike, parsley, turneps, parseneps, Becengenes, or apples of love, siccorie, beetes, spinage, pease, beanes, vetches; and finally, whatsoever groweth heere of anie profite, so as all that have voyaged thither, have beene curious to carry seedes of all sorts, and all have growen, although diversly, some more, some lesse. As for those trees that have most aboundantly fructified, be orange trees, limons, citrons, and others of that sort. In some partes there are at this day, as it were whole woods and forrests of orange trees: the which seeming strange vnto mee, I asked who had planted the fields with so many orange trees▪ they made mee answer, that it did come by chaunce, for that oranges being fallen to the ground, and rotten, their seeds did spring, and of those which the water had carried away into diverse partes, these woods grew so thicke: which seemed to me a ve∣ry good reason. I have saide that this fruite hath gene∣rally increased most at the Indies, for that I have not beene in any place but I finde orange trees, for that all their soyle is hote and moist, which this tree most de∣sires. There growes not any vppon the Sierre or moun∣taine, but they carry them from the vallies or sea coast. The conserve of oranges which they do make at the I∣lands, is the best I have seene anie where; peaches, pres∣ses and apricockes have greatly multiplied, especially in New Spaine. At Peru there growes few of these kindes of fruites, except peaches, and much lesse in the Ilands. There growes apples and peares, yet but scarcely: there
are but few plumbs, but aboundance of figges, chiefly in Peru. They finde quinces in all the country of the Indies, and in New Spaine, in such aboundance, as they gave vs fifty choice ones for halfe a riall. There is great store of pomegranets, but they are all sweete, for the sharp are not there esteemed. There are very good me∣lons in some partes of Peru. Cherries both wilde and tame have not prospered well at the Indies, the which I do not impute to want of temperature, for that there is of all sorts, but to carelesnesse, or that they have not well observed the temperature. To conclude, I do not finde that in those partes there wants any dainty fruite. As for grosse fruites, they have no Beillottes nor ches∣nuttes, neither doe I finde that any have growne there to this day. Almonds growe there, but rarely. They carry from Spaine, for such as are dainty mouthed, both almonds, nuttes, and filberds; but I have not knowne they had any medlers or servises, which importes little. In my iudgement, this may suffice to shew that there wanteth no delightfull fruites. Now let vs speake some∣what of plants that profit, and which have been carried from Spaine, and so will ende that Treatise, beeing too troublesome. Of grapes, vignes, olives, mulberies, and kanes of sugar. CHAP. 32. I Meane by profitable plants, those, which besides that which they eate in the house, bring silver to theyr maisters; the chiefe of these is the vigne, whereof com∣meth wine vinegar, grapes, greene and dry, veriuyce, and sirrope. But the wine is the best. There growes no wine, nor grapes in the Ilandes, nor firme land, but in
new Spaine, there are some vignes which beare grapes, and yet make no wine. The cause is, for that the grape ripens not well, by reason of the raine that falles in the months of Iuly and August, which hinders their ripe∣ning, so as they serve onely to eate. They carry wine out of Spaine, and from the Canaries, to all partes of the Indies, except Peru and the realme of Chillé, where there are vignes that yeelde excellent wine, which increase daily both in quantity, for that it is a great riches in that country, and in beauty, for that they are become with time and practise more expert vignerous. The vignes of Peru are commonly in hote vallies, where there are waters, which they water with the hand, because there falles no raine at all from heaven; and vppon the Lanos and Sierre it comes not in time. There are some places where the vignes are not watered, neither from heaven nor earth, and yet they increase in great aboundance, as in the valley of Yca; and in the ditches that they call VillacuZi, in which places they finde ditches, or th'earth suncke downe amongest the dead sands, which are tho∣rowout the yeare of a woonderfull coolenesse, and yet it raines not there at any time, neither is there any ma∣ner of meanes to water it artificially; the reason is, be∣cause the soile is spongious, and suckes vp the water of the rivers that fall from the mountaine, which moisten these sands, or else it is the moistnesse of the sea, as o∣thers suppose, which passing over this sand, is the cause why it is not barren nor vnprofitable, as the Phi∣losopher teaches. The vignes have so increased there, as for this cause onely the tithes of the Churches are mul∣tiplied five or sixe times double within these twentie yeares. The most fertile vallies for vignes be Victor neare to Arequipa, Yca in the territory of Lima, and Caraguato
in the Countrey of Chuquiavo; they carry this wine to Potozi, Cusco and divers partes, which yeeldes a great revenue: for notwithstanding all the aboundance they have, a bottle or arobe is there woorth five or sixe duc∣kats, and if it be Spanish wine (as they commonly car∣ry in their fleetes) it is woorth tenne or twelve. They make wine like to that of Spaine, in the realme of Chille, being in the same climate; but it corrupteth being carri∣ed to Peru: they eate the grape where they cannot drink the wine. And it is strange, that in the citty of Cusco you shall finde ripe grapes all the yeare long: the reason is (as they say) for that those valleis bring foorth fruits in diverse moneths of the yeare, either for that they cutte their vignes in diverse seasons; or that this varietie pro∣ceedes from the quality of the soyle; but whatsoever it be, it is most certaine, there are some vallies which car∣ry fruit all the yeare. If any one wonder at this, it may be he will wonder much more at that which I shall say, and perchaunce not beleeve it. There are trees in Peru, whereof the one part yeeldes fruit one sixe moneths of the yeare, and the other halfe part yeeldes fruite the o∣ther sixe moneths. In Malla which is thirteene leagues from the Cittie of Kings, there is a figge tree, whereof the one halfe which is towardes the South, is greene, and yeeldeth his fruite one season of the yeare, that is, when it is summer vpon the Sierre, and the other moi∣ty towards the Lanos or sea coast, is greene, and yeeldes his fruite in the other contrary season, when it is sum∣mer vpon the Lanos, which groweth from the diverse temperature, and the ayre which commeth from the one part, and the other. The revenue of wine there is not small, but it goeth not out of the country. But the silke that is made in new Spaine is transported into other
countries, as to Peru. There were no Mulberrie trees in the Indies, but such as were brought from Spaine, and they grow well, especially in the province which they call Mistecqua, where there are silke-wormes, and they put to worke the silke they gather, whereof they make very good taffataes: Yet to this day they have made neythr damaske, sattin, nor velvet. The sugar yet is a greater revenue, for they not only spend it at the Indies, but also they carry much into Spaine, for the canes grow exceeding well in many parts of the Indies. They have built their engins in the Ilands, in Mexico, in Peru, and in other partes, which yeeldeth them a very great reve∣nue. It was tolde me, that the engine for sugar in Nasca, was worth yeerely above thirty thousand peeces of re∣venue. That of Chicama ioyning to Truxillo, was like∣wise of great revenue, and those of new Spaine are of no lesse; and it is a strange thing to see what store they con∣sume at the Indies. They brought from the Iland of S. Dominique, in the fleete wherein I came eight hundred ninety eight chests of sugar, which being (as I did see) shipped at Port Ricco (every chest (in my opinion) wei∣ed eight arobes, every arobes weighing five and twenty pounds, which are two hundred weight of sugar) is the chiefe revenue of these Ilands, so much are men gi∣ven to the desire of sweete things. There are likewise o∣lives and olive trees at the Indies, I say in Mexico and in Peru, yet hath there not beene to this day any mill for oile, for that they eate all their olives, and dresse them well: they finde the charge is greater to make oile than the profit, and therefore they carry all the oyle they do spend from Spaine. And heere we will end with plants, and will passe to such beasts as be at the Indies.
Of Beasts bearing wooll, and of Kine. CHAP. 33. I inde there are three kindes of beasts at the Indies, whereof some have been carried from Spaine, others are of the same kinde we have in Europe, and yet not carried by the Spaniardes; and others are proper to the Indies, whereof there are none in Spaine. Of the first kinde are sheepe, kine, goates, swine, horses, asses, dogs, cattes and other such beasts, for there are of all these kindes at the Indies. The smaller cattell have greatly multiplied, and if they could make profite of their woolls by sending them into Europe, it were one of the greatest riches the Indies had, for there the flockes of sheepe have great pastures, whereas their feeding failes not. In Peru there is such store of pastures and feedings, as no man hath any proper to himselfe, but every man feedes his troupes where he pleaseth. For this reason there is commonly great store of flesh, and very good cheape, and all other things that come from sheepe, as milke, and cheese. For a time they lost their woolles, vntill that some beganne to husband it, and to make cloth and coverings, which hath beene a great helpe for the poorer sort of the countrie, for that the cloth of Castille is very deere there. There are many Clothiers in Peru, but more in new Spaine, yet the cloth that comes from Spaine, is farre better, whether the woll be more fine, or the worke men more expert. In for∣mer times there were men that did possesse threescore and ten, yea, a hundred thousand sheepe, and at this day they have not many lesse. If this were in Europe, it were a very great substance, but in that countrie it is but a meane wealth. In many partes of the Indies, and
I thinke in the greatest part, small cattell do not in∣crease and profite well, by reason that the grasse is high, and the soile so vicious, that they cannot feede so well as great cattell. And therefore there is an infinite num∣ber of line, whereof there are two kindes. Some are ame and go in troupes, as in the Land of Charca, and other Provinces of Peru, as also in all new Spaine: from these tame kine they draw such profite as they do in Spaine, that is, the flesh, butter, calves, and oxen to till the ground. The other kinde is wilde, which live in the mountaines and forrests, and therefore they tame them not, neither have they any master to whom they are proper, both for the roughnes and thickenes of the forrest, as also for the great multitude there is, and he that first killes them, is the master, as of any wilde beast. These wilde kine have so multiplied in S. Dominique, and thereabouts, that they troupe together in the fields and woods by thousands, having no master to whom they appertaine. They hunt these beasts onely for their hides, they go to the field on horse-backe with their weapons to hough them, coursing the kine: and when they have strucken any and staied them, they are their owne, they flea them and carry the hides home, leaving the flesh, which every one neglects for the aboundance there is, so as some have testified in this Iland, that in some places the aire hath been corrupted with the aboundance of these stinking carcases. The hides they bring into Spaine, is one of the best revenues of the Ilands, & of new Spaine. In the fleet the yere 187. there came from S. Dominique, 3444. hides, and from new Spaine, 64350. which they value at 96532. peeces, so as when they discharge one of these fleetes, it is admira∣ble to behold the river of Seville, and in the arcenall
(where they vnlade,) so many hides, and so much mar∣chandize. There are also great numbers of goates, whose cheefe profite is their tallowe, besides their kid∣milke and other commodities, for that both rich and poore vse this tallowe for lightes, for as there is a great quantitie, so do they make very good accoumpt of it; yea, more then of oyle, but all the tallow they vse is onely of the males. They yse their skinnes for shooes, yet I hold them not so good, as those which are carri∣ed from Castill. Horses have multiplied there, and are very excellent in many places; yea in many partes there are races found as good as the best in Spaine, as well for passing of a carrier, and for pompe, as also for travell: and therefore they vse horses most commonly, although there be no want of moyles, whereof there are many, especially where they make their carriages by land. There is no great numbers of asses, having no great vse for them, neither for travell nor service. There are some few camells; I have seene some in Peru, that were brought from the Canaries, and have multi∣plied there alittle. In S. Dominique, dogges have so multiplied in number and bignes, as at this day it is the scourge and affliction of that Iland: for they eate the sheepe, and go in troupes through the fields. Such that kill them are rewarded like to them that kill woolves in Spaine. At the first there were no dogges at the Indies but some beasts like vnto little dogges, the which the Indians call Alco, and therefore they call all dogges that go from Spaine, by the same name, by reason of the re∣semblance that is betwixt them. The Indians doe so love these little dogges, that they will spare their meate to feede them, so as when they travell in the countrie, they carrie them with them vpon their shoulders, or in
their bosomes, and when they are sicke, they keepe them with them, without any vse, but onely for com∣pany. Of some Beasts of Europe, which the Spaniardes found at the Indies, and how they should passe thither. CHAP. 34. IT is certaine that they have carried from Spaine all these beasts whereof I have spoken, of which kindes there were none at the Indies, when they were first dis∣covered about a hundred yeares since; for besides that it may be wel approved by witnesses at this day living. It is also a sufficient argument to see that the Indians in their togue, have no proper words to signifie these beasts, but they vse the same Spanish names, although they be corrupted: for being ignorant of the thing, they tooke the word common to those places from whence they came. I have found this a good rule, to discerne what things the Indians had before the Spa∣niardes came there, and what they had not: for they gave names to those they had and knew before, and have given new names to these that are newly come vnto them, which commonly are the same Spanish names, although they pronounce them after their ma∣ner, as for a horse, wine, and wheate. They found of some sortes of beasts that are in Europe, & were not car∣ried thither by the Spaniards. There are Lions, Tigres, Beares, Boares, Foxes, and other fierce & wilde beasts, whereof we have treated in the first booke, so as it was not likely they should passe to the Indies by Sea, being impossible to swimme the Ocean: and it were a follie to imagine that men had imbarked them with them.
It followes therefore that this worlde ioynes with the new in some part: by which these beasts might passe,Genes. 6. and so by little and little multiplied this world. The li∣ons which I have seene, are not red, neither have they such haire as they vsually paint them with. They are grey, and not so furious as they seeme in pictures. The Indians assemble in troupes to hunt the lion, and make as it were a circle, which they do call Chaco, wherewith they inviron them, and after they kil them with stones, staves, and other weapons. These lions vse to climbe trees, where being mounted, the Indians kil them with launces and crossebowes, but more easily with harque∣buzes. The Tygres are more fierce and cruell, and are more dangerous to meete, because they breake foorth and assaile men in treason: They are spotted, as the Hi∣storiographers describe them. I have heard some report that these Tygres were very fierce against the Indians, yet would they not adventure at all vppon the Spani∣ards, or very little; and that they would choose an Indi∣an in the middest of many Spaniardes, and carry him away. The Beares which in Cusco they call Otoioncos, be of the same kinde that ours are, and keepe in the ground. There are few swarmes of Bees, for that their honnie∣combes are found in trees, or vnder the ground, and not in hives as in Castille. The honny comhes which I have seene in the Province of Charcas, which they call Chiguanas, are of a grey colour, having little iuyce, and are more like vnto sweete strawe, than to hony combs. They say the Bees are litle, like vnto flies; and that they swarme vnder the earth. The hony is sharp and black, yet in some places there is better, and the combes bet∣ter fashioned, as in the province of Tucuman in Chille,
and in Carthagene. I have not seene nor heard speak of wilde boares, but of foxes and other wild beasts that eate their cattell and fowle, there are more than their shepheards would willingly have. Besides these beasts that are furious and hurtfull, there are others that are profitable, and have not beene transported by the Spa∣niardes, as stagges and diere, whereof there is grot a∣boundance in all the forrests. But the greatest parte is a kinde of diere without hornes, at the least, I have ne∣ver seene nor heard speake of other, and all are without hornes like vnto Corcos. It seemes not hard to beleeve, but is almost certain, that all these beasts for their light∣nesse, and being naturally wilde, have passed from one world to an other, by some parts where they ioyne, see∣ing that in the great Ilands farre from the maine land I have not heard that there are any, though I have made diligent inquiry. Of Fowles which are heere, and are at the Indies, and how they could passe thither. CHAP. 35. WEe may more easily beleeve the same of birdes, and that there are of the same kindes that wee have, as partridges, turtles, pigeons, stockdoves, quailes, and many sorts of falcons, which they send from New Spaine, and Peru, to the noblemen of Spaine, for they make great accompt of them. There are also Herons and Eagles of diverse kindes; and there is no doubt but these birds & such like, have sooner passed thither than lions, tygres, and stagges. There are likewise at the In∣dies great numbers of parrots, especially vpon the An∣des of Peru, and in the Ilands of Port Ricco and saint Do∣minique,
where they flee by flockes, as pigeons do here. To conclude, birdes with their wings may goe where they will; and truely many kindes might well passe the gulph, seeing it is certaine, as Plinie affirmeth,Pli. li. 10. c. 23. that there are many that passe the sea, and goe into strange regi∣ons, although I have not read that any fowle hath pas∣sed by flight so great a gulph, as is the Indian Ocean, yet hold I it not altogether impossible, seeing the common opinion of mariners, that you shall finde them twoo hundred leagues and more from the land, And as Ari∣stotle dooth teach, that birdes endure the water easely, having little respiration, as wee see in sea fowle, which dive and remain long vnder the water. Even so we may say, that the fowle which bee at this present vppon the maine land, and in the Ilands at the Indies, might passe the sea, resting themselves in some small Ilands, or vp∣on some land which they discovered by a naturall in∣stinct (as Plinie reporteth of some) or peradventure fal∣ling into the water, when they were weary of flying,Pli. lib. 10. c. 2 and after beganne their flight a new when they had alit∣tle rested. As for the fowles which we see in the Ilands, where there are no beasts, I beleeve certainly that they passed by one of the foresayde meanes. But for other birdes which we finde vppon the maine land, especial∣ly those whose flight is shorte, it is more credible that they came thither as the beasts did, which are of the same kindes that wee have in Europe. For at the Indies there are great birds, very heavy, as Estridges, whereof there are many in Peru; which doe vse sometimes to terrifie the Indian sheepe as they do goe with their bur∣thens. But leaving these birds that govern themselves with∣out the care of man, but onely for hawking, let vs now
speake of tame fowle; I wondered at hennes, seeing there were som at the Indies before the Spaniards came there, the which is well approoved, for they have a pro∣per name of the country, and they call a henne Gualpa, and the egge Pnto, and they vse the same proverb wee doe, to call a coward, a henne. Those that were at the discovery of the Ilands of Soloman, do report that they have seene hennes there like vnto ours: wee may con∣ceive that the henne being so tame a fowle, and so pro∣fitable, men might carry them with them when they passed from one place to another, as we see at this day the Indians in their travel carry their henne with them, or chicken vpon the burthen they have on their shoul∣ders: and likewise they carry them easily in their cages of reedes or wood. Finally, there be at the Indies many kindes of beasts and birdes, such as we have in Europe, as I have specified, and other sortes which I leave to o∣thers to discourse of. How it spould be possible, that at the Indies there should be anie sortes of beasts, whereof the like are no where else. CHAP. 36. IV were a matter more difficult, to shew, and prove, what beginning many & sundry sorts of beasts had, which are found at the Indies, of whose kindes we have none in this continent. For if the Creator hath made them there, wee may not then alleadge nor flie to No∣ahs Arke, neither was it then necessary to save all sorts of birds and beasts, if others were to be created anew. Moreover, wee could not affirme, that the creation of the world was made and finished in sixe dayes, if there were yet other new kinds to make, and specially perfit
beasts, and no lesse excellent than those that are know∣en vnto vs: If we say then that all these kindes of crea∣tures were preserved in the Arke by Noah, it followes, that those beasts, of whose kindes we finde not any but at the Indies, have passed thither from this continent, as we have saide of other beasts that are knowne vnto vs. This supposed, I demand how it is possible that none of their kinde shoulde remaine heere? and how they are found there, being as it were travellers and strangers? Truly it is a question that hath long held me in suspens. I say for example, if the sheep of Peru, and those which they call Pacos and Guanacos, are not found in any o∣ther regions of the worlde, who hath carried them thi∣ther? or how came they there? seeing there is no shew nor remainder of them in all this worlde? If they have not passed from some other region, how were they for∣med and brought foorth there? It may be GOD hath made a new creation of beasts. That which I speake of these Pacos and Guanacos may be said of a thousand dif∣ferent kindes of birdes and beasts of the forrest, which have never beene knowne, neither in shape nor name; and whereof there is no mention made, neither among the Latins, nor Greekes, nor any other nations of the world. We must then say, that though all beasts came out of the Arke, yet by a naturall instinct, and the pro∣vidence of heaven, diverse kindes dispersed themselves into diverse regions, where they found themselves so well, as they woulde not parte; or if they departed, they did not preserve themselves, but in processe of time, perished wholy, as we do see it chaunce in many things. For if we shall looke precisely into it, we shall finde that it is not proper and peculiar alone to the In∣dies, but generall to many other Nations and Provin∣ces
of Asia, Europe, and Affrike, where they say there are certaine kindes of creatures, that are not found in other regions, at the least if they be any where else, they are knowne to be carried from thence. Seeing then these creatures came out of the Arke, as for example, the ele∣phant which we finde only in the East Indies, and from thence have beene imparted to other regions, wee may say as much of these creatures of Peru, and of others of the Indies, which are not found in any other part of the world. Wee may likewise consider well vppon this subiect, whether these beasts differ in kind, and essentially from all others, or if this difference be accidentall, which might growe by diverse accidents, as we see in the lina∣ges of men, some are white, others blacke, some giants, others dwafes: and in apes, some have no taile, others have: and in sheepe, some are bare, others have fleeces; some great and strong with a long necke, as those of Pe∣ru; others weake and little, having a short necke, as those of Castille. But to speake directly, whoso would by this Discourse, shewing only these accidentall differences, preserve the propagation of beasts at the Indies, and re∣duce them to those of Europ, he shal vndertake a charge he will hardly discharge with his honor. For if we shall iudge the kindes of beasts by their properties, those of the Indies are so diverse, as it is to call an egge a chesnut, to seeke to reduce them to the knowne kinds of Europe. Of Fowles that are proper to the Indies. CHAP. 37. THere are many kindes of notable fowles at the In∣dies, eyther of the same sort that ours be, or of dif∣ferent.
They bring certaine birds from China, that have no feete, and all their bodies are almost feathers. They sit not vpon the ground, but hang vpon boughs, by strings or feathers which they have, and so rest them∣selves, like flies or aierie things. In Peru there are birdes which they ll Tómineios, so small, that often times I have doubted seeing them flie, whether they were bees or butter-flies; but in truth they are birdes. Contrari∣wise, those which they call Condores, be of an excee∣ding greatnes, and of such a force, that not onely they will open a sheepe and eate it, but also a whole calfe. Those which they call Auras, and others PoullaZes, (which in my opinion are of the kinde of ravens,) are of a strange lightnes, and have a very quicke sight, be∣ing very fit to clense Citties, for that they leave no carion nor dead thing. They passe the night on trees or vpon rockes, and in the morning they come to the cities and townes, sitting on the toppes of the highest buildings, where they attend their prey. Their yong have white feathers, as they report of ravens, and so change into blacke. The Guacamayac be birdes bigger then Parrets, & re∣semble them somthing; they are esteemed for the vari∣etie of their feathers, which be very faire & pleasing. In new Spaine there are aboundance of birdes with excel∣lent feathers, so as there be not any found in Europe that comes neere them, as we may see by the images of feathers they bring from thence, the which are (with great reason,) much valued and esteemed, giving cause of admiration, that with the feathers of birdes, they should make so excellent a worke, and so perfectly e∣quall, as they seeme properly to be the true coloures of a painter, and have so lively and pleasing a regard, as
the Painter cannot exceede it with his pencill and co∣lours. Some Indians which are good and expert workemen in this Art, will represent perfectly in fea∣thers, whatsoever they see drawne with the pencill, so as the Painters of Spaine, have in this point, no advan∣tage over them. Don Philip the Prince of Spaine, his schoolemaster, did give vnto him three figures or po∣traitures made of feathers, as it were to put in a Brevia∣ry. His Highnes did shew them to King Philip his fa∣ther, the which his Maiesty beholding attentively, said, that hee had never seene in so small a worke, a thing of so great excellency and perfection. One day as they presented to Pope Sixtus quintus, another square big∣ger then it, wherein was the figure of St. Francis, and that they had told him it was made of feathers by the Indians, he desired to make triall thereof, touching the table with his fingers, to see if it were of feathers, for that it seemed strange, to see them so properly fitted, that the eye could not iudge nor discerne whether they were naturall colours of feathers, or artificiall, done with the pencill. It is a goodly thing to see the lustre which a greene, an orange tawny like gold, and other fine colours do cast, and beholding them ano∣ther way they seeme dead colours. They make the best and goodliest figures of feathers in the Province of Mechovacan, and in the village of Pascaro. The manner is with small delicate pinsors they pul the feathers from the dead fowles, and with a fine paste they cunningly ioyne them together. They take the smal & delicate fea∣thers of those birds, which in Peru they call Tmineys, or others like vnto them, which have the most perfect colours in their feathers. The Indians (besides these images,) did vse feathers in many other most excellent
workes, especially for the ornament of Kings and No∣blemen, their Temples and Idolls. There are also other great birdes, which have excellent and fine feathers, whereof they make plumes of sundry colours, especi∣ally when they go to warre, inriching them with gold and silver very artificially, which was a matter of great price. They have the same birdes still, but they are not so curious, neither do they make so many gentill devi∣ses as they were wont. There are other birdes at the In∣dies, contrarie to these of so rich feathers, the which (besides that they are ill favovred,) serve to no other vse but for dung, and yet perchance they are of no lesse profite. I have considered this, wondering at the provi∣dence of the Creator, who hath so appointed, that all creatures should serve man. In some Ilands or Pha∣res, which are ioyning to the coast of Peru, wee see the toppes of the mountaines all white, and to sight, you would take it for snow, or for some white land, but they are heapes of dung of sea fowle which go continually thither: and there is so great aboun∣dance, as it riseth many elles, yea, many launces in height, which seemes but a fable. They go with boates to these Ilands, onely for the dung, for there is no other profit in them. And this dung is so commodious and profitable, as it makes the earth yeelde great aboun∣dance of fruite. They cal this dung Guano, whereof the valley hath taken the name, which they call Limagua∣a, in the valleys of Peru, where they vse this dung, and it is the most fertile of all that countrie. The quinces, poungranets, and other fruites there, exceede all other in bountie and greatnes; and they say, the reason is, for that the water wherewith they water it, passeth by a land compassed with this dung, which causeth the beautie of this fruite. So as these birdes have not only
the flesh to serve for meate, their singing for recreation, their feathers for ornament and beautie, but also their dung serves to fatten the ground. The which hath bin so appointed by the soveraigne Creator, for the ser∣vice of man, that he might remember to acknowledge and be loyall to him from whom all good proceedes. Of Beasts for the Chases. CHAP. 38. BEsides the Beasts of Chase, whereof we have spo∣ken, which be common to the Indies and Europe, there are others which I doe not remember to have seene heere, vnlesse perhappes they have been brought from thence. There are beasts called Sainos, made like small hogges, which have this singular to themselves, to have their navill vppon the ridge of their backes: these go by troupes through the woods, they are cruell and nothing fearefull, but contrariwise they assaile, and have their tallents sharpe as rasors, wherewith they make dangerous wounds and incisions, if such as hunt them put not themselves in safetie. Such as hunt them, (for the more safer killing of them,) they climbe vp into trees, whither the Sainos or hogges come presently in troupes, biting the tree when they cannot hurte the man, and then with their launces they kill what they will. They are very good to eate, but they must of ne∣cessitie cut off the round peece where the navil growes vpon the backe; for otherwise, within a day they cor∣rupt. There is another kinde of little beast like to suc∣king pigges, and they call them Guadatinaias. I am in doubt whether there were any swine at the Indies, efore the Spaniardes came thither, like to these in paine, for that in the discoverie of the Ilands of Solo∣man,
it is said, they found hennes and swine of Spaine. But howsoever it be, it is most certaine, that this cattell hath greatly multiplied at the Indies. They eate the flesh fresh, and hold it to be as holesome and as good, as if it were of mutton; as in Carthagene in some partes, they are become wilde and cruell, the which they hunt like wilde boares, as we see in S. Dominique, and other Ilands where the beasts live in the forrests. In some pla∣ces they feede them with the graine of Mays, and they grow wonderfully fatte, to have the grease, which they vse for want of oyle; in some places they make gmons, as in Tollca of new Spaine, and in Paria at Peru. Retur∣ning then to such beasts as are pecullar there, even as the Sainos are like vnto swine, though somewhat lesse; even so the Dantes resemble small kine, but more vnto mules, having no hornes. The hides of these beasts are much esteemed for jerkins and other coverings, they are so hard as they resist any blow whatsoever. And as the Dantes be defended by the hardnes of their hides, so those which they call Armadillos are by the multi∣tude of their scales, which open and shut as they please like to a curasse. There be litle beasts which go thorow the woods, called Armadillos, by reason of the defence they have hiding themselves within their scales, and opening when they list: I have eaten of them, and doe not holde it for a meate of any great woorth, but the flesh of the Yguanas is a better meate, but more horri∣ble to the eye: for they are like to the very Lizardes of Spaine, although they be of a doubtfull kinde, for that they go to the water, & comming to land they climbe the trees vpon the bankes; and as they cast themselves from the trees into the water, the boates watch vnder∣neath to receive them. The Chinchilles is an other kind
of small beasts, like squirrels, they have a woonderfull smoothe and soft skinne, which they weare as a health∣full thing to comfort the stomacke, and those partes that have neede of a moderate heate; they make cove∣rings and rugges of the haire of these Chinchilles, which are found on the Sierre of Peru, where there is likewise a small beast very common which they call Cuyes, and which the Indians hold for a very good meate, and they are accustomed often to offer these Cuyes in their sa∣crifices. They are like small conies, and have their bo∣rows i the ground, and in some places they have vn∣dermined all the land: some are grey, some white, and some speckled. There are other small animalles which they call Viscachas, and are like to hares, although they be bigger, they hunt them and eate the flesh. Of com∣mon hares there are great store in some parts. There are also connies in the realme of Quitto, but the good are come from Spaine. There is another strange beast, the which for his great heavinesse, and slownesse in moov∣ing, they call Perico-ligero, or the little light dogge, hee hath three nailes to every hand, and mooves both hand and feete, as it were by compasse and very heavily: it is in face like to a monkie, and hath a shrill crie; it cli∣meth trees, and eates Ants. Of Micos or Indian Monkies. CHAP. 39. THroughout all the mountaines, eyther of these I∣lands of the firme land, or of the Andes, there are infinite numbers of Micos or Monkies, which are a kind of apes, but very different, in that they have a taile, yea a very long one. And amongest them there are some kinds which are thrise, yea foure times bigger than the
ordinary; some are all blacke, some bay, some grey, and some spotted. Their agilitie and maner of doing is ad∣mirable, for that they seeme to have reason & discourse to go vpon trees, wherein they seeme to imitate birds. Going from Nombre de Dios to Panama, I did see in Ca∣pira, one of these monkies leape from one tree to an o∣ther, which was on the other side of a river, making me much to wonder. They leape where they list, winding their tailes about a braunch to shake it: and when they will leape further than they can at once, they vse a pret∣ty devise, tying themselves by the tailes one of another, and by this meanes make as it were a chaine of many: then doe they launch themselves foorth, and the first holpen by the force of the rest, takes holde where hee list, and so hangs to a bough, and helpes all the rest, till they be gotten vp. It were long to report the fooleries, trickes, traverses, and pleasant sportes they make when they are taught, which seeme not to come from bruit beasts, but from a manlike vnderstanding. I sawe one in Carthagen in the Governours house, so taught, as the things he did seemed incredible: they sent him to the Taverne for wine, putting the pot in one hand, and the money in the other; and they could not possibly gette the money out of his hand, before he had his pot full of wine. If any children mette him in the streete, and threw any stones at him, he would set his pot downe on the one side, and cast stones against the children till he had assured his way, then would he returne to carry home his pot. And which is more, although hee were a good bibber of wine (as I have oftentimes seene him drinke, when his maister hath given it him) yet would he never touch it vntill leave was given him. They told me moreover, that if hee sawe any women painted, he
would fall vppon them, pull off their attire, and would seeke to bite them. This may be an addition which I have not seene, but I doe not thinke there is any beast in the world approa∣cheth so neare the conversation of a man, as this mon∣key doth. They report so many things, which for feare I shoulde be thought to give credite to fables, or they should be so esteemed, I thinke best to omitte, blessing the Author of all creatures, in that hee would createa kinde of beast, onely for the recreation and delight of man. Some report that they carried these Micos or Monkies to Solomon from the Weast Indies, but for my parte, I holde it was from the East Indies. Of Vicugnes, and Tarugnes of Peru. CHAP. 40. AMongst the most remarkable things at the Indies of Peru, be the Vicugnes, and sheepe of the coun∣trie, as they call them, which are tractable beasts and of great profite; the Vicugnes are wilde, and the sheepe are tame. Some thinke that the Vicugnes are those which Aristotle,Arist. libr. 3. de partib. animal. c. 2. lib. 10. c. 72 Plinie, and other Authors call Capreas, which are wilde goates, and in truth they have some resemblance, for the lightnes they have in the woodes and mountaines, but yet they are no goates, for the Vicugnes have no hornes, as those have, whereof Ari∣stotle makes mention; neither are they the goates of the East Indies, from whom they draw the Bezar stone; for if they be of that kinde, it were a diverse one, as in the race of dogges, the mastie is divers from the grey∣hound. The Vicugnes of Peru are not those beasts which carrie the Bezar stone, in the Province of new Spaine, which there they cal BeZaars, for that they are a kind of
Stagges and Venison; yet do I not know in any part of the world there be any of these beasts▪ but in Peru, and in Chille, which are countries ioyning one to ano∣ther. These Vicugnes are greater then goates, and lesse then calves. Their haire is of the colour of dried roses, somewhat cleerer; they have no hornes like Stagges and Goates. They feede vpon the heighest tops of the mountaines, which they call Pugnas. The snowe nor frost doth not offend them, but contrariwise they seem to delight in it. They goe in troupes, and runne most lightly; when they meete with any travellers or beasts, they fly away, seeming very fearefull, and in flying they drive their yong ones before them. They do not finde that they multiply much: and therefore the Kings In∣guas did defend the hunting of Vicugnes; if it were not for their feasts, or by their commandement. Some complaine, that since the Spaniards entred there, they have given too much libertie to hunt the Vicugnes, and by this meanes they are much diminished. The maner the Indians vse in their hunting, they assemble many men together, to the number of 1000. or 2000. yea, more, and invironing a great circuit of wood, they hunt their game vntill they have compassed it in on all parts, and by this meanes they commonly take three or foure hundred, and so choosing what they list, they let go the rest, especially the females for breede. They are accustomed to sheere these beasts, and of their fleece to make coverings and rugges of great value, for that this wooll is like to white silke, which lastes long: and as the colour is naturall and not died, so is it per∣petuall. The stuffes that are made of this wooll, are ve∣ry fresh & good in summer, and they hold them profi∣table for the inflammation of the reines, & other parts
tempering the excessive heate. This wooll hath the like vertue when it is made in quiltes, and therefore some vse it to that end, for the triall they have made thereof. They say moreover, that this wooll or coverings made thereof, is phisicall for other indispositions, as for the gowt: yet doe I not know that they have made any certaine triall thereof. The flesh of these Vicugnes is not good, although the Indians eate it, and drie it. For the effects of Physicke, I will say what I have seene vppon the Sierre of Peru, comming one night into a Tambo or Inne, being much afflicted with paine in mine eies, thinking they would fall out, (the which dooth com∣monly happen in those partes, for that they passe tho∣row places covered with snow, which is the cause of this accident. Being troubled with this paine, and out of patience, there came an Indian woman which said to me, Father, lay this to thine eies, and thou shalt be cu∣red, it was a peece of the flesh of Vicugnes newly killed & all bloody. I vsed this medicine, & presently the pain ceased, and soone after went quite away. Besides these Chacos which is the most common manner of hunting at the Indies, they have vsed another more private to take them, which is, that comming neere, they do cast certaine lines with plummets of lead, which intangle their legges, so as they cannot runne, and by this means they take the Vicugne. The chiefe reason why this beast is esteemed, is, by reason of the BeZars stone they finde in them, whereof we will intreate heereafter. There is another kinde of beasts, which they call Tarugues, which likewise are wilde, and more nimble than the Vicugnes. They are greater of body, and more hote. They have soft eares and hanging: they goe not in troups as the Vicugnes. I have not seene them but alone,
and most commonly in high places. They also drawe BeZars stones from these Tarugues, which are greater, and have more operation and vertue. Of Pacos, Guanacos, and Indian Mutlons. CHAP. 41. THere is nothing at Peru of greater riches and profit than the cattell of the country, which our men call Indian sheep, and the Indians in their generall language call them Lama. For all things well considered, it is a beast of the greatest profite and least charge of any that I knowe: from them they drawe meate and clothing, as from the sheepe of Spaine. Moreover they have the benefite to carry all things they have neede of, vsing them to beare their burthens: and they have no neede eyther of shooes or saddles, nor yet of oates, but he ser∣veth his maister for nought, feeding on the grasse hee findes in the fieldes; so as God hath furnished them of sheepe and mares, and all in one beast. And as it is a poore nation, so woulde hee in this poynt free them from charge, for that there is much pasture vppon the Sierre: and this kinde of cattell hath no neede of any other charge. There are two kindes of these sheepe or Lamas, the one they call Pacos, or sheep bearing wooll, and the others are bare, and have litle wooll, so are they better for burthen; they are bigger than great sheepe, and lesse than calves, they have a very long necke, like to a cammell, whereof they have good neede: for be∣ing high of stature, they have neede of a long necke, else should they be deformed. They are of diverse co∣lours, some all white, others all blacke, some grey and some spotted, which they call Moromoro. The Indians
had great superstitions in choosing the beasts for sacri∣fices, of what colour they should be, according to the diversitie of seasons and sacrifices. Their flesh is good, although it be hard, but that of their Lambs is the bet∣ter, and the most delicate that can bee eaten: yet they eate not many, for that the chiefe fruite and profit they yielde, is their wooll, to make clothes, and their service to carry burdens. The Indians make stuffs of this wooll wherewith they clothe themselves, the one is grose and common, which they call Hanaca, and the other fine and delicate which they call Cumbi, they make car∣pets and coverings, and other exquisite workes, which last long, and have a very faire lustre, like halfe silke: and that which is most rare, is their maner of weaving their workes, being both sides alike, so as you shall not find any end in a whole peece. The Ingua king of Peru had many chiefe workemen, to make this worke of Cumb▪ and the which, for the most part, were resident in the Province of Capachica, ioyning to the great lake of Ti∣ticaca. They die this wooll into diverse fine colours, with sundry kindes of hearbes, whereof they make ma∣ny sortes of workes both course and fine. All the Indi∣ans, both men and women, woorke in the Sierre, and have their loones in their houses, having no neede to buy any stuffes for their necessary vses. Of the fesh of these sheepe they make Cuschargui, or dried flesh, the which will last very long, whereof they make great ac∣compt. They are accustomed to drive troupes of these sheepe with burthens, and to go in bandes, three hun∣dred, five hundred, yea a thousand in a company, with wine, mays, coca, chuno, quicke-silver, and all other indes of mrchandise, and of silver, which is the best of all. They carry barres of silver from PotoZi to Ariq,
which is three score and tenne leagues. I have often wondered to see these troupes of sheepe laden with a thousand or two thousand barres of silver, and much mre, which is above three hundred thousand ducats, without any other guard o rescort than some Indians, which serve onely to guide these sheepe, and to lade and vnlade them, or at the most, some few Spaniardes: and they sleepe all night in the middest of the fieldes, without other guarde: and yet in so long a way and so weake a guarde, they never finde want or losse of anie thing in so great a treasure of silver, so safe is the way in Peru. The burthen which one of these sheepe dooth commonly carry, is of foure or sixe arrobes:Six arobes  hundred and fifty pounds weight. when their voyage is long they goe not above two, three, or foure leagues at the most on a day. Those that guide those troupes, have their ordinary lodgings, where they are assured to have water and pasture, and there they vn∣lade and set vppe their tents, making fire, and dressing their meates, which is not painefull, although it be a leugmatike and slowe manner of travell. When there is but one dayes iourney, one of these sheepe will beare eight arobes in weight, or more, and beares this bur∣then eight or tenne leagues in a day, as the poore soul∣diers were wont to doe, when they marched through Peru. This kinde of cattell delights most in a cold aire, and for this cause they live vpon the Sierre, and die in the Lanos, by reason of the heate. Sometimes these sheepe are all covered with ice and frost, and yet they continue sound and well. The bare sheepe are pleasant to behold, for they will stay vpon the way, raising vppe their neckes, and will looke vpon any one very wistly, and so they remaine a long time, without mooving or any shew of feare, which giveth occasion of laughter,
seeing them thus to stand. And yet sometimes they do growe amazed sodainely, and runne away with their burthens, even to the highest rockes, so as not being a∣ble to come vnto them, they are constraind to kil them with an harquebuze, lest they should loose their barres of silver, which they sometimes carry. The Pacos will grow reasty vnder their burdens, lying downe, and will endure to be cutte in a thousand peeces before they wil rise when this humor takes them: whereof the proverb growes in Peru, to say that one is reastie, to signifie, he is obstinate; for that when any of these beasts is moo∣die, it is with excesse: the remedy they have is, to stay and sit downe by the Paco, making much on him, vntill the fit be past, and that he rise: and sometimes they are forced to stay two or three houres. They have a disease like to scabbes, which they call Carache, whereof they commonly die. The Antients had a remedy, to bury them quicke that had the Carache, lest they shoulde in∣fect the rest, being a very contagious disease, and goes from one to another. An Indian that hath one or two of these sheepe, is not reputed poore, for one of them is woorth sixe or seaven peeces of assay, and more, accor∣ding to the time and places. Of the BeZaars stone. CHAP. 42. THe Bezaars stone is found in all these beasts before mentioned, which are proper to Peru, whereof some Authors of our time have written whole bookes, which they may reade that desire to have a more parti∣cular knowledge. For the present subiect it shall be suf∣ficient to say, that this stone which they call Bezaar, is found in the stomacke and belly of this beast, somtimes
one alone, sometimes two, three, and foure. They are very different in forme, greatnesse and colour, for that some are small like filberds, & lesse; others like walnuts; some like pigeons egges, and others as bigge as a hens egge: and I have seene some as bigge as an orange; in forme some are round, others in fashion like to lentils, and many other formes. For their colour, som are black, some white, some grey, darke greene, and others, as if they had beene guilded. It is no certaine rule to iudge the best and most fine by the colour or forme. All these stones are made and fashioned of divers films and skins one vpon another. In the province of Xaura and other provinces of Peru, they find these stones in divers kinds of beasts, both wild and tame, as in the Guanacos, Pacos, Vicugnes, and Tarugues, some adde an other kind, which they say are wilde goates, which the Indians call Cypris. These other kindes of beastes are very well knowen in Peru, whereof wee have already discoursed. The Gua∣nacos or country sheepe, or Pacos, have commonly the lesser stones, and blacke, neither are they so much ap∣prooved for the vse of Physicke. They draw the grea∣test Bezaar stones from the Vicugnes, and they are grey, or white, or of a darke greene, which are helde for the better. They esteem those of the Tarugues for the most excellent, whereof there are some reasonable bigge: they are commonly white, inclining to grey; and they have the filmes commonly bigger and thicker than the rest. They finde the Bezaar stone equally both in male and female. All beasts that ingender it, chaw the cuid, and commonly feede vpon the snow and rockes. The Indians reporte & teach by tradition from their fathers and Antients, that in the province of Xaura, and in o∣ther
provinces of Peru, there are many herbs and veno∣mous beasts, which poison the water and the pastures where they eate and drinke, and where they breathe: a∣middest which venomous hearbs there is one very well knowne of the Vicugne, by a naturall instinct, and of o∣ther beasts that ingender the Bezaar stone, which eate this hearb, and by meanes thereof they preserve them∣selves from the poisoned waters and pastures: and they say, that of this hearb the stone is compounded in the stomacke, whence it drawes all the vertue against poy∣son and other woonderfull effects. This is the opinion & tradition of the Indians, discovered by men of great experience in the kingdome of Peru, which agrees with reason, and with that which Plinie reports of the moun∣taine goates,Pli. lib. 10. c. 72 which are nourished and fed vpon poison without suffering any harme. The Indians being de∣maunded, why the sheepe, kine, goates, and calves, such as are in Castille, have not the Bezaar stone, seeing that they feede on the same rockes: their answer is, That they beleeve not, that those beasts of Castille eate of that hearb, or that they have found the Bezaar stone in stags and fallow diere. This seemes to agree with our know∣lege, for that in new Spaine they find the Bezaar stone, although there be no Vicugnes, Pacos, Tarugues, nor Gua∣nacos, but only stags, in some of which they finde these stones. The principall vertue of the BeZaar stone is against poison and venomous diseases, although there bee heerein divers opinions, some hold it for a mockerie, others for a miracle. Howsoever it be, it is most cer∣taine that it is of a great operation, when it is applied in time, & convenient in a maner, as hearbes, and to per∣sons capable and disposed: for there is no medicine
that doth alwaies cure infallibly. In Spaine and Italie, we have seene admirable effects of this stone, against the Tverdette, which is a kinde of plague, but not so muchs in Peru. They do apply it beaten and put into some liquor, which may make it fit for the cure of me∣lancholy, the falling sickenes, pestilent feavers, & many other diseases. Some take it in wine, others in vineger, with water Dezahac, of League de beufe, borrage and o∣ther sortes, as the Phisitians and Apoticaries can tell. The Bezaar stone hath no proper savour, as Rasis the Arabian doth testifie. Wee have seene notable trialls, and there is no doubt but the Author of this vniversall world, hath given great vertues to this stone. The Beza∣ar stones which comes from the East Indies, have the first place of account, they are of an olive colour, the second are those of Peru, and the third those of New Spaine. Since that these stones were in request, they say, the Indians have made artificiall ones; and many when they see these stones greater then the ordinarie, they take them to be false and counterfait: triall and expe∣rience is the best mistres to know them. One thing is worthy admiration, that they grow and are fashioned vpon very strange things, as vpon the tagge of a point, vpon a pinne, or a peece of wood, which they finde in the centre of this stone, and yet do they not hold it false, for that the beast might swallow it, and the stone thicken vpon it, and growes one vpon another, and so it increaseth. I did see in Peru, two stones fashioned vpon Pignons of Castille, which made vs to wonder much, for that in all Peru, we had not seene any pines or Pignons of Castille, if they were not brought from Spaine, which seemes to me very extraordinary. This little may suffice touching the Bezaars stone. They
bring other phisicall stones from the Indies, as the stone of Hyiada, or of Rate, the bloud stone, the stones of milke, and of the sea. Those which they call Cornerina, for the heart, whereof there is no neede to speake, ha∣ving nothing common with the subiect of beastes, whereof we have intreated: which gives vs to vnder∣stand how the great Master and Author of all, hath imparted his benefites and wonderfull secrets, to all partes of the world; for the which he is to be glorified for ever. ({inverted ⁂})
A Prologue to the Bookes following. HAving intreated of the Natural Historie of the Indies, I wil hereafter discourse of the Morall History, that is to say, of the deeds and customes of the Indies. For after the hea∣ven, the temperature, the scituation, & the qualities of the new world; after the elements & mixtures; I mean mettals, plants, & beasts, whereof we have spoken in the former Bookes, as oc∣casion did serve: both Order & Reason doth invite vs to con∣tinue and vndertake the discourse of those men which inha∣bite the new world. And therefore I pretend in the following bookes, to speake what I thinke worthie of this subiect. And for that the intention of this Historie, is not onely to give knowledge of what hath passed at the Indies, but also to conti∣nue this knowledge, to the fruite we may gather by it, which is to helpe this people for their soules health, and to glorifie the Creator and Redeemer, who hath drawne them from the obscure darkenes of their infidelitie, and imparted vnto them the admirable light of his Gospel. And therefore I will first speake in these bookes following, what concernes their religi∣on, or superstition, their customes, their idolatries, and their sacrifices; and after, what concernes their policie and go∣vernment, their lawes, customes, and their deedes. And for that the memorie is preserved amongst the Mexicaine Na∣tion, of their beginnings, successions, warres, and other things worthie the relation: besides, that which shall be handled in the sixt booke, I will make a peculiar Discourse in the se∣venth, shwing the disposition and forewarnings this Nation had of the new Kingdome of Christ our Lord, which should be extnded in these Countries, and should conquer them to himself, as he hath doe in all the rest of the world. The which in truth is a thing worthie of great consideration, to see how the divine providence hath appointe, that the light
of his word should finde a passage in the furthest boundes of the world. It is not my proiect at this time to write what the Spanardes have done in those partes, for there are bookes e∣now written vpon this subiect, nor yet how the Lordes ser∣vants have laboured and profited, for that requires a new labour. I will onely content my selfe to plant this Historie and relation at the doores of the Gospel, seeing it is alreadie en∣tered, and to make knowne the Naturall and Morall things of the Indies; to the end that Christianitie may be planted and augmented, as it is expounded at large in the bookes we have written, De procuranda Indiorum salute. And if any one wonder at some fashions & customes of the Indies, & wil scorne them as fooles, or abhorre them as divelish and inhu∣mane people, let him remember that the same things, yea, worse, have beene seene amongst the Greekes and Romans, who have commanded the whole world, as we may easily vn∣derstand, not onely of our Authors, as Eusebius, of Cesarea, Clement Alexandrine, and others, but also of their owne; as Plinie, Denis Halicarnassis, and Plutarke: for the Prince of darkenes being the head of all Infidelitie, it is no new thing to finde among Infidells, cruelties, filthines, and follies fit for such a Master. And although the ancient Gen∣tiles have farre surpassed these of the new world in valour and naturall knowledge, yet may wee observe many things in them worthie the remembrance. But to conclude, they shew to be barbarous people, who being deprived of the supernatu∣rall light, want likewise philosophie and naturall knowledge.
THE FIFT BOOKE of the Naturall and Morall Hi∣storie of the Indies. That the Pride and Malice of the Divell, hath beene the cause of Idolatrie. CHAP. 1. THE Pride and Presumption of the Divell is so great & obstinate, that alwaies hee seekes and strives to be honoured as God: and doth arrogate to himselfe all hee can; whatsoever doth appertaine to the most high God, hee ceaseth not to abuse the blinde Nations of the world, vpon whom the cleere light of the holy Gospel hath not yet shone.Iob. 41. Wee reade in Iob of this prowd tyrant, who settes his eyes aloft, and amongst all the sonnes of pride, he is the King. The holy Scrip∣ture instructes vs plainely of his vile intentions, and his overweening treason, whereby he hath pretended to make his Throne, equall vnto Gods, saying in Esay, Thou diddest say within thy selfe, I will mount vp to heaven,Esa. 14.
and set my chaire vpon all the starres of heaven, and I will sit vpon the toppe of the Firmament, and in the sides of the North, I will ascend above the height of the cloudes, and will be like to the most High.Ezech. 2. And in Ezechiel, Thy heart was lifted vp, and thou hast said, I am God, and have set in the chaire of God in the midst of the sea. Thus doth Sathan continually persist in this wicked desire, to make him∣selfe God. And although the iust and severe chastise∣ment of the most high hath spoiled him of all his pompe and beautie, which made him grow prowd, being intreated as his fellonie and indiscretion had deserved, as it is written by the same Prophets; yet hath he left nothing of his wickednes and perverse practi∣ses, the which hee hath made manifest by all meanes possible, like a mad dogge that bites the sword where∣with he is strucken. For as it is written, the pride of such as hate God, doth alwaies increase. Hnce comes the continuall and strange care which this enemie of God hath alwaies had, to make him to be worshipt of men, inventing so many kinds of Idolatries, wherby he hath so long held the gretest part of the world in subiection; so as there scarce remaines any one corner for God & his people of Israel.Mat. 12. And since the power of the Gos∣pel hath vanquished and disarmed him, and that by the force of the Crosse, hee hath broken and ruined the most important and puissant places of his kingdome with the like tyrannie; hee hath begunne to assaile the barbarous people and Nations farthest off, striving to maintaine amongst them his false and lying divinitie, the which the Sonne of God had taken from him in his Church, tying him with chaines as in a cage or pri∣son, like a furious beast to his great confusion, & reioy∣cing of the servants of God, as he doth signify in Iob.
But in the end, although idolatrie had beene rooted out of the best and most notable partes of the worlde, yet he hath retired himself into the most remote parts, and hath ruled in that other part of the worlde, which although it be much inferiour in nobilitie, yet is it not oflesse compasse. There are two causes and chiefe mo∣tives, for the which the divell hath so much laboured to plantidolatry and all infidelity, so as you shall hard∣ly finde any Nation where there is not some markes thereof. The one is this great presumption and pride, which is such, that whoso would consider, how hee durst affront the very Sonne of God, and true God in saying impudently, that he should fall downe and wor∣ship him: the which he did,Mat. 4. although he knew not cer∣tainely that this was the very God, yet had he some o∣pinion that it was the Sonne of God. A most cruell and horrible pride, to dare thus impudently affront his God; truely he shall not finde it very strange, that hee makes himselfe to be worshipped as God, by ignorant Nations, seeing hee would seeke to be worshipped by God himselfe, calling himselfe God, being an abho∣minable and detestable creature. The other cause and motive of idolatrie, is the mortall hatred hee hath con∣ceived for ever against mankinde. For as our Saviour saith, hee hath beene a murtherer from the beginning, and holdes it as a condition and inseparable qualitie of his wickednesse. And for that he knowes the greatast misery of man, is to worship the creature for God: for this reason hee never leaves to invent all sortes of Idola∣tries, to destroy man, and make him ennemy to God. There are two mischiefes which the divell causeth in i∣dolatry; the one, that hee denies his God, according to the text, Thou hast left thy God who created thee:Deut. 32. The o∣ther
is, that hee dooth subiect himselfe to a thing baser than himselfe; for that all creatures are inferior to the reasonable, and the divell, although hee be superior to man in nature, yet in estate he is much inferior, seeing that man in this life is capable of Divinitie and Eterni∣tie. By this meanes God is dishonoured, and man lost in all parts by idolatry, wherwith the divell in his pride is well content. Of many kindes of idolatry the Indians have vsed. CHAP. 2. Sap. 14.IDolatry saieth the holy-Ghost by the Wise man, is the cause. beginning, and end of all miseries, for this cause the enemy of mankinde hath multiplied so many sortes and diversities of idolatry, as it were an infinite matter to specifie them all. Yet we may reduce idola∣try to twoo heades, the one grounded vppon naturall things, the other vpon things imagined and made by mans invention. The first is divided into two; for ey∣ther the thing they worship is generall, as the Sunne, Moone, Fire, Earth and Elements, or else it is particu∣lar, as some certayne river, fountaine, tree, or forrest, when these things are not generaly worshipped in their kindes, but onely in particular. In this first kind of ido∣latry they have exceeded in Peru, and they properly cal it Guaca. The second kinde of idolatry which depends of mans invention & fictions, may likewise be divided into two sortes, one which regards onely the pure arte and invention of man, as to adore the Images or sta∣tues of gold, wood, or stone of Mercury or Pallas, which neyther are, nor ever were any thing else but the bare pictures: and the other that concernes that which re∣ally
hath beene, and is in trueth the same thing, but not such as idolatry faines; as the dead, or some things pro∣per vnto them, which men worshippe through vanitie and flatterie, so as wee reduce all to foure kindes of i∣dolatry, which the infidells vse; of all which it behoo∣veth vs to speake something. That the Indians have some knowledge of God. CHAP. 3. FIrst, although the darkenesse of infidelitie holdeth these Nations in blindenesse, yet in many thinges the light of truth and reason works somewhat in them. And they commonly acknowledge a supreame Lorde and Author of all things, which they of Peru called Vnachocha, and gave him names of great excellence, as Pachacamac, or Pachayachachic, which is, the Creator of heaven and earth: and Vsapu, which is admirable, and other like names. Him they did worship, as the chie∣fest of all, whom they did honor in beholding the hea∣ven. The like wee see amongest them of Mexico, and China, and all other infidelles▪ Which accordeth well with that which is saide of Saint Paul, in the Acts of the Apostles, where hee did see the Inscription of an Al∣tare; Ignoto Deo: To the vnknowne God. Where∣vpon the Apostle tooke occasion to preach vnto them, saying, He whome you worship without knowing,Actes. 17. him doe I preach vnto you. In like sort, those which at this day do preach the Gospel to the Indians, find no great difficul∣tie to perswade them that there is a high God and Lord over all, and that this is the Christians God, and the true God. And yet it hath caused great admiration in me, that although they had this knowledge, yet had
they no proper name for God. If wee shall seeke into the Indian tongue for a word to answer to this name of God, as in Latin, Deus, in Greeke, Theos, in Hebrew, El, in Arabike, Alla; but wee shall not finde any in the Cus∣can or Mexicaine tongues. So as such as preach or write to the Indians, vse our Spanish name Dios, fitting it to the accent or pronounciation of the Indian tongues, the which differ much, whereby appeares the small know∣ledge they had of God, seeing they cannot so much as name him, if it be not by our very name: yet in trueth they had some little knowledge, and therefore in Peru they made him a rich temple, which they called Pa∣chacamac, which was the principall Sanctuarie of the realme. And as it hath beene saide, this word of Pacha∣camac, is as much to say, as the Creator, yet in this tem∣ple they vsed their idolatries, worshipping the Divell and figures. They likewise made sacrifices and offrings to Viracocha, which helde the chiefe place amongst the worships which the Kings Inguas made. Heereof they called the Spaniards Virocochas, for that they holde o∣pinion they are the sonnes of heaven, and divine; even as others did attribute a deitie to Paul and Barnabas, cal∣ling the one Iupiter, and the other Mercurie, so woulde they offer sacrifices vnto them, as vnto gods: and as the Barbarians of Melite (which is Malté) seeing that the viper did not hurt the Apostle,Actes. 1. they called him God. As it is therefore a trueth, conformable to reason, that there is a soveraigne Lorde and King of heaven,Pla. in Tim. Arist. c. vlt. 2. metaph. Tresmegist. Diman. & Asclp. whome the Gentiles (with all their infidelities and ido∣latries) have not denyed, as wee see in the Philosophy of Timee in Plato, in the Metaphisickes of Aristotle, and in the Aesculape of Tresmigister, as also in the Poesies of
Homer & Virgil. Therefore the Preachers of the Gospel have no great difficultie to plant & perswade this truth of a supreame God, be the Nations of whome they preach never so barbarous and brutish. But it is hard to roote out of their mindes, that there is no other God, nor any other deitie then one: and that all other things of themselves have no power, being, nor worke∣ing proper to themselves, but what the great and only God and Lord doth give and impart vnto them. To conclude, it is necessarie to perswade them by all meanes, in reproving their errors, as well in that where∣in they generally faile, in worshipping more then one God, as in particular, (which is much more) to hold for Gods, and to demand favour and helpe of those things which are not Gods, nor have any power, but what the true God their Lord and Creator hath gi∣ven them. Of the first kinde of Idolatrie, vpon naturall and vni∣versall things. CHAP. 4. NExt to Viracocha, or their supreme God, that which most commonly they have and do adore amongst the Infidells, is the Sunne; and after, those things which are most remarkable in the celestiall or elementarie na∣ture, as the moone, starres, sea, and land. The Guacas, or Oratories, which the Inguas Lords of Peru, had in greatest reverence, next to Viracocha and the sunne, was the thunder which they called by three divers names, Chuquilla, Catuilla, and Intiillapa, supposing it to bee a man in heaven, with a sling and a mace, and that it is in his power to cause raine, haile, thunder, and all the rest that appertaines to the region of the aire, where the
cloudes engender. It was a Guaca, (for so they called their Oratories,) generall to all the Indians of Pe, offering vnto him many sacrifices: and in Cusco, which is the Court and Metropolitane Cittie, they did sacri∣fice children vnto him, as to the Sunne. They did wor∣ship these three, Viracocha, the Sunne, and Thunder after another maner then all the rest, as Pollo writes who had made triall thereof, they did put as it were a gaunt∣let or glove vpon their hands, when they did lift them vp to worshippe them. They did worshippe the earth▪ which they called Pachamama, as the Ancients did the goddess Tellus: and the sea likewise which they call Mamacocha, as the Ancients worshipped Thetis, or Nep∣tune. Moreover, they did worship the rainebow, which were the armes and blazons of the Ingua, with two snakes stretched out on either side. Amongst the starres they all did commonly worship that which they called Colca, and we heere Cabrille. They did attribute divers offices to divers starres, and those which had neede of their favour did worship them, as the shepheard did sa∣crifice to a starre which they called Vrcuhillay, which they hold to be a sheepe of divers colours, having the care to preserve their cattell; and they imagine it is that which the Astronomers call Tyra. These shepheards worshippe two other starres, which walke neere vnto them, they call them Catchillay, and Vrcuchillay; and they faine them to be an Ewe and a Lambe. Others worshipped a starre which they called Machacuy, to which they attribute the charge and power over ser∣pents, and snakes, to keepe them from hurting of them. They ascribe power to another starre, which they cal∣led Chuguinchinchay, (which is as much as Tigre,) over Tigres, Beares, and Lyons, and they have generally be∣leeved,
that of all the beasts of the earth, there is one alone in heaven like vnto them, the which hath care of their procreation and increase. And so they did observe and worship divers starres, as those which they called Chacana, Topatarca, Mamanan, Mirco, Miquiquicay, and many other. So as it seemed they approached some∣what neere the propositions of Platoes Idees. The Mex∣icaines almost in the same maner after the supreame God, worshiped the Sunne: And therefore they called Hernando CorteZ,) as he hath written in a letter sent vn∣to the Emperour Charles the fift.) Sonne of the Sunne, for his care and courage to compasse the earth. But they made their greatest adoration to an Idol called Vitzilipuztli, the which in all this region they called the most puissant, and Lord of all things for this cause the Mexicaines built him a Temple, the greatest, the fai∣rest, the highest, and the most sumptuous of all o∣ther. The scituation & beautie thereof, may wel be con∣iectured by the ruines which yet remaine in the midst of the Cittie of Mexico. But heere the Mexicaines Idola∣trie hath bin more pernicious and hurtfull then that of the Inguas, as wee shall see plainer heereafter, for that the greatest part of their adoration and idolatrie, was imployed to Idols, and not to naturall things, although they did attribute naturall effects to these Idolls, as raine, multiplication of cattell, warre, and generation, even as the Greekes and Latins have forged Idolls of Phoebus, Mercurie, Iupiter, Minerva, and of Mars. To conclude, whoso shall neerely looke into it, shall finde this manner which the Divell hath vsed to de∣ceive the Indians, to be the same wherewith hee hath deceived the Greekes and Romans, and other ancient Gentiles, giving them to vnderstand that these notable
creatures, the Sunne, Moone, Starres, and Elements, had power and authoritie to doe good or harme to men. And although God hath created all these things for the vse of man, yet hath he so much forgotte him∣selfe, as to rise vp against him. Moreover, he hath imba∣sed himselfe to creatures that are inferiour vnto him∣selfe, worshiping and calling vpon their workes, forsa∣king his Creator. As the Wise man saieth well in these wordes, All men are vaine and abused that have not the knowledge of God,Sap 13. seeing they could not know him, that is, by the things that seemed good vnto them: and although they have beheld his workes, yet have they not attained to know the author and maker thereof, but they have beleeved that the fire, winde, swift aire, the course of the starres, great rivers, with Sunne and Moone, were Gods and governours of the world: and being in love with the beautie of these things, they thought they should esteeme them as Gods. It is reason they should consider how much more faire the Creator is, seeing that he is the Author of beauties and makes all things. Moreover, if they admire the power and effects of these things, thereby they may vnder∣stand how much more mightie hee is that gave them their being, for by the beautie and greatnes of the cre∣atures, they may iudge what the Maker is. Hitherto are the wordes of the Booke of Wisedome, from whence we may draw a good and strong argument, to over∣throw the Idolatrie of Infidells, who seeke rather to serve the creature then the Creator,Rom. 1. as the Apostle doth iustly reprehend them. But for as much as this is not of our present subiect, and that it hath been suffici∣ently treated of in the Sermons written against the er∣rors of the Indians, it shall bee sufficient now to shew that they did worship the great God, and their vaine
and lying gods all of one fashion: for their maner to pray to Viracocha, to the Sunne, the Starres, and the rest of their Idolls, was to open their hands, and to make a certaine sound with their mouthes, (like people that kissed,) and to aske that which every one desired in offering his sacrifices, yet was there great difference betwixt the wordes they vsed in speaking to the great Ticiviracocha, to whom they did attribute the cheefe power and commandement over all things, and those they vsed to others, the which every one did worship privately in his house, as Gods or particular Lords, say∣ing, that they were their intercessors to this great Tic∣civiracocha. This maner of worship, opening the hands, and as it were kissing, hath something like to that which Iob had in horror, as fit for Idolaters, saying, If I have kissed my hands with my mouth,Iob. 31. beholding the Sunne when it shines, or the Moone when it is light, the which is a great iniquitie, and to deny the most great God. Of the Idolatry the Indians vsed to particular things. CHAP. 5. THe Divell hath not beene contented to make these blinde Indians to worshippe the Sunne, Moone, Starres, Earth and Sea, and many other generall things in nature, but hee hath passed on further, giving them for God, and making them subiect to base and abiect things, and for the most part, filthy and infamous. No man needes to woonder at this barbarous blindnes, if hee remember what the Apostle speaketh of Wise men and Philosophers, That having knowne God,Rm. 1. they did not glorifie him, nor give him thankes as to their God, but they were lost in their own imaginations and con∣ceipts,
and their hearts were hardened in their follies, and they have changed the glory and deity of the eter∣nall God, into shews and figures of vaine and corrupti∣ble things, as men, birds, beasts and serpents: we know well that the Egyptians did worship the Dogge of Osi∣ris, the Cow of Isis, and the Sheepe of Ammon: the Ro∣mans did worship the goddesse Februa, of Feavers, and the Tarpeien Goose: and Athenes the wise did worship the Cocke and the Raven, and such other like vanities and mockeries, whoreof the auntient Histories of the Gentiles are full. Men fell into this great misery, for that they would not subiect themselves to the Lawe of the true God and Creator, as Saint Athanasius dooth learnedly handle, writing against Idolatry. But it is wonderfull strange to see the excesse which hath beene at the Indies, especially in Peru: for they worshipped rivers, fountaines, the mouthes of rivers, entries of mountaines, rockes or great stones, hilles and the tops of mountains, which they call Apachitas, and they hold them for matters of great devotion. To conclude, they did worship all things in nature, which seemed to them remarkable and different from the rest, as acknowledg∣ing some particular deitie. They shewd me in Caxamalca of Nasca a little hill or great mount of sand, which was the chiefe Idoll or Guaca of the Antients. I demaunded of them what di∣vinitie they found in it? They answered, that they did worship it for the woonder, beeing a very high mount of sand, in the midst of very thicke mountains of stone. Wee had neede in the cittie of Kings, of great store of great wood; for the melting of a Bell, and therefore they cut downe a great deformed tree, which for the greatnesse and antiquitie thereof had beene a long time
the Oratorie and Guaca of the Indians. And they belee∣ved there was a certaine Divinity in any thing that was extraordinary and strange in his kinde, attributing the like vnto small stones and mettalls; yea vnto rootes and fruites of the earth, as the rootes they call Papas. There is a strange kinde which they call Lallahuas, which they kissed and worshipped. They did likewise woorshippe Beares, Lions, Tygres and Snakes, to thend they should not hurt them: and such as their gods bee, such are the things they offer vnto them in their worshippe. They have vsed as they goe by the way, to cast, in the crosse wayes, on the hilles, and toppes of mountaines, which they call Apachittas, olde shooes, feathers, and Coca chewed, being an hearb they vse much. And when they have nothing left, they cast a stone as an offring, that they might passe freely, and have greater force, the which they say increaseth by this meanes, as it is repor∣ted in a provinciall Counsell of Peru. And therefore they finde in the hie wayes great heapes of stones offe∣red, and such other things.Conil. Limen. 2. p. 2. cap. 99. The like follie id the An∣tients vse, of whome it is spoken in the Proverbs, Like vnto him that offereth stones vnto Mercurie,Prou. 27. such a one is hee that honoureth fooles, meaning that a man shall reape no more fruit nor profit of the second than the first, for that their God Mercury, made of stone, dooth not ac∣knowledge any offering, neyther doth a foole any ho∣nour that is doone him. They vsed another offring no lesse pleasant and ridiculous, pulling the haire from the eyebrowes to offer it to the Sunne, hills, Apachittas, to the winds, or to any other thing they feare. Such is the miseries that many Indians have lived in, and do to this day, whom the divell doth abuse like very Babes, with any foolish illusion whatsoever: So dooth Saint Chry∣sostome
in one of his Homilies compare them, but the servants of God which labour to draw them to salvati∣on, ought not to contemne these follies and childish∣nesse, being sufficient to plunge these poore abused creatures into eternallperdition; but they ought with good and cleere reasons, to drawe them from so great ignorance. For in trueth it is a matter woorthy of con∣sideration, to see how they subiect themselves to such as instruct them in the true way of life. Ther is nothing among all the creatures more beutifull than the sunne, which all the Gentiles did commonly worship. A dis∣creete captaine and good christian told me, that he had with a good reason perswaded the Indians, that the Sunne was no god. He required the Caique or chiefe Lord, to give him an Indian that were light, to carry him a Letter; which doone, he saide to the Cacique, Tel me, who is Lord and chiefe, either this Indian that car∣ries the letter, or thou that dost send him? The Cacique answered, without doubt I am, for he dooth but what I commaud him. Even so replied the Captaine, is it of the Sunne we see, and the Creator of all things: For that the Sunne is but a servant to the most high Lorde, which (by his commaundement) runnes swiftly, giving light to all nations. Thus thou seest it is against reason to yeeld that honour to the Sunne, which is due to the Creator and Lord of all. The Captaines reason plea∣sed them all; and the Cacique with his Indians sayde it was trueth, and they were much pleased to vnderstand it. They report of one of the Kings Inguas, a man of a subtill spirite, who (seeing that all his predecessors had worshipped the Sunne,) said, that hee did not take the Sunne to be God, neither could it be, for that God was
a great Lord, who with great quiet and leasure perfor∣meth his workes, and that the Sunne doth never cease his course, saying, that the thing which laboured so much could not seeme to be God. Wherein hee spake truth. Even so, when they shew the Indians their blind errors, by lively and plaine reasons, they are presently perswaded and yeelde admirably to the trueth. Of another kinde of idolatry vpon the dead. CHAP. 6. THere is an other kinde of idolatry, very different from the rest, which the Gentiles have vsed for the deads sake whom they loved and esteemed: and it see∣meth that the Wise man would give vs to vnderstand, that the beginning of idolatry proceeded thence, say∣ing thus; The seeking of Idolles was the beginning of forni∣cation, and the bringing vp of them is the destruction of life;Wisd. 14. for they were not from the beginning, neither shall they con∣tinue for ever, but the vanitie and idlenesse of men hath found out this invention, therefore shall they shortly come to an end: for when a father mourned heavily for the death of his miserable sonne, he made for his consolation, an Image of the dead man, and bganne to worshippe him as a god, who a little before had ended his daies like a mortall man, comman∣ding his servants to make ceremonies & sacrifices in remem∣brance of him. Thus in processe of time this vngratious cu∣stome waxing strong, was held for a lawe, and Images were worshipped by the commaundement of Kings and Tirantes. Then they beganne to doe the like to them that were absent, and such as they could not honour in presence, being farre off, they did worship in this sort, cansing the Images of Kings to be brought whom they would worship, supplying (by this in∣vention)
their absence whom they desired to flatter. The cu∣riositic of excellent workmen increased this Idolatrie, for these Images were made so excellent by their Art, that the ignorant were provoked to worshippe them, so as by the perfection of their Arte, pretending to content them that gave them to make, they drew Pictures and Images farre more excellent: and the common people, ledde with the shew and grace of the worke, did holde and esteeme him for a God, whome before they had honoured as a man: And this was the miserable er∣rour of men, who sometimes yeelding to their affection and sence, sometimes to the flatterie of their Kings, did attribute vnto stones the incommunicable name of God, worshipping them for Gods. All this is in the booke of Wisedome, woorthy to be noted; and such as are curious in the search of Anti∣quities, shall finde that the beginning of idolatry were these Images of the dead. I say idolatry, which is pro∣perly the worship of Idolles and Images: for that it is not certaine that this other idolatry to worship the cre∣atures, as the Sunne, and the hostes of heaven, or the number of Planets and Starres, whereof mention is made in the Prophets, hath beene after the idolatry of Images,Ier. 10. although without doubt they have made idols in honour of the Sunne,Sph. . the Moone, and the Earth. Re∣turning to our Indians they came to the height of Ido∣latry by the same meanes the Scripture maketh menti∣on of: first they had a care to keepe the bodies of their Kings and Noblemen whole, from any ill scent or cor∣ruption above two hundred yeares. In this sorte were their Kings Inguas in Cusco, every one in his Chappell and Oratorie, so as the Marquise of Canette being Vice∣roy, to root out Idolatry, caused three or foure of their gods to be drawne out and carried to the city of Kings,
which bredde a great admiration, to see these bodies (dead so many yeares before) remaine so faire and also whole. Every one of these Kings Inguas left all his trea∣sure and revenues, to entertaine the place of worshippe where his body was layed, and there were many Mi∣nisters with all his familie dedicated to his service: for no King successor did usurpe the treasures and plate of his predecessor, but he did gather all new for himselfe, and his pallace. They were not content with this Ido∣latry to dead bodies, but also thev made their figures and representations: and every King in his life time caused a figure to be made wherin he was represented, which they called Guaoigui, which signifieth brother, for that they should doe to this Image, during his life and death, as much honor and reverence as to himself. They carryed this Image to the warres, and in processi∣on for rayne or fayre weather, making sundry feastes and sacrifices vnto them. There have beene many of these Idolles in Cusco, and in that territorie, but nowe they say that this superstition of worshipping of stones hath altogether ceased, or for the most part, after they had beene discovered by the diligence of the Licenti∣ate Pollo, and the first was that of the Inguas Rocha, chief of the faction or race of Hanam Cusco. And we find that among other Nations they had in great estimation and reverence the bodies of their predecessors, and did like∣wise worship their Images. Of Superstitions they vsed to the Dead. CHAP. 7. THe Indians of Peru beleeved commonly that the Soules lived after this life, and that the good were in glorie, and the bad in paine; so as there is little diffi∣cultie
to perswade them to these articles. But they are not yet come to the knowledge of that point, that the bodies should rise with the soules▪ And therefore they did vse a wonderfull care, as it is saide, to preserve the bodies which they honoured after death: to this end their successors gave them garments, and made sacrifi∣ces vnto them, especially the Kings Inguas, being ac∣companied at their funeralls, with a great number of servants and women for his service in the other life: and therefore on the day of his decease, they did put to death the woman he had loved best, his servants and officers that they might serve him in the other life. Whenas Guanacapa died, (who was father to Ata∣gualpa, at what time the Spaniards entred,) they put to death aboue a thousand persons of all ages and condi∣tions, for his service to accompany him in the other life, after many songs and drunkennes they slew them; and these that were appointed to death, held them∣selves happy. They did sacrifice many things vnto them, especially young children, and with the bloud they made a stroake on the dead mans face, from one eare to the other. This superstition and inhumanitie, to kill both men and women, to accompanie and serve the dead in the other life, hath beene followed by o∣thers, and is at this day vsed amongst some other bar∣barous Nations. And as Pollo writes, it hath beene in a maner generall throughout all the Indies. The Reve∣rent Beda reportes, that before the Englishmen were converted to the Gospel, they had the same custome, to kill men to accompany and serve the dead. It is writ∣ten of a Portugall, who being captive among the Bar∣barians, had beene hurt with a dart, so as he lost one eye, and as they would have sacrificed him to accom∣pany
a Nobleman that was dead, hee said vnto them, that those that were in the other life, would make small account of the dead, if they gave him a blind man for a companion; & that it were better to give him an atten∣dant that had both his eyes. This reason being found good by the Barbarians, they let him go. Besids this su∣perstition of sacrificing men to the dead, beeing vsed but to great Personages, there is another far more ge∣neral & common in all the Indies, which is, to set meate and drinke vpon the grave of the dead, imagining they did feede thereon: the which hath likewise beene an error amongst the Ancients, as saint Augustine writes, and therefore they gave them meate and drinke. At this day many Indian Infidells, doe secretly draw their dead out of the churchyard, and burie them on hilles, or vpon passages of mountaines, or else in their owne houses. They have also vsed to put gold and silver in their mouth, hands, and bosome, and to apparell them with new garments durable, and well lined vnder the herse. They beleeve that the soules of the dead wandred vp and downe and indure colde, thirst, hunger and travell, and for this cause they make their anniversaries, carry∣ing them clothes, meate and drinke. So as the Prelates, neitheir Synodes, above all things, give charge to their Priests to let the Indians vnderstand, that the offerings that are set vpon the sepulchre, is not to feede the dead, but for the poore and ministers, and that God alone dooth feede the soules in the other life; seeing they neither eate nor drinke any corporall thing, being ve∣ry needefull they should vnderstand it, lest they should convert this religious vse into a superstition of the gen∣tiles, as many doe.
Of the manner of burying the dead among the Mex∣icaine and sundrie other Nations. CHAP. 8. HAving reported what many nations of Peru have done with their dead, it shall not be from the pur∣pose, to make particular mention of the Mexicaines in this poynt, whose mortuaries were much solempnised, and full of notable follies. It was the office of the priests and religious of Mexico (who lived there with a strange observance, as shall be saide heereafter) to interre the dead, and doe their obsequies. The places where they buried them, was in their gardens, and in the courts of their owne houses: others carried them to the places of sacrifices which were doone in the mountaines: o∣thers burnt them, and after buryed the ashes in they Temples; and they buryed them all, with whatsoever they had, of apparel, stones, and jewells. They did put the ashes of such as were burnt into pots, & with them, the jewells, stones, and earerings of the dead, how rich and pretious soever. They did sing the funerall offices, like to answeres, and did often lift vp the dead bodies, dooing many ceremonies. At these mortuaries they did eate and drinke; and if it were a person of qualitie, they gave apparrell to all such as came to the interre∣ment. When any one dyed, they layd him open in a chamber, vntill that all his kinsfolkes and friendes were come, who brought presents vnto the dead, and salu∣ted him as if he were living. And if hee were a King or Lord of some towne, they offered him slaves to be put to death with him, to the end they might serve him in the other world. They likewise put to death his priest,
or chaplaine (for every Noble man had a priest which administred these ceremonies within his house,) and then they killed him, that hee might execute his office with the dead. They likewise killed his cooke, his but∣ler, his dwarfes, and deformed men, by whome he was most served: neyther did they spare the very brothers, of the dead, who had most served them: for it was a greatnesse amongest the Noble men, to be served by theyr brethren and the rest. Finally, they put to death all of his traine, for the entertaining of his house in the other world: and lest poverty should oppresse them, they buried with them much wealth, as golde, silver, stones, curtins of exquisite worke, bracelets of gold, and other rich peeces. And if they burned the dead, they vsed the like with all his servants, and ornaments they gave him for the other world. Then tooke they all the ashes they buryed with very great solemnity. The ob∣sequies continued tenne dayes with songs of plaints, and lamentations, and the priests caried away the dead with so many ceremonies, and in so great number, as they coulde scarce accoumpt them. To the Captaines and Noblemen they gave trophees and markes of ho∣nour, according to their enterprises and valor imploy∣ed in the warres and governements; for this effect they had armes and particular blasons. They carried these markes or blazons to the place where hee desired to be buried or burnt, marching before the body, and ac∣companying it, as it were in procession, where the priests and officers of the Temple went with diverse furnitures and ornaments, some casting incense, others singing, and some sounding of mournefull flutes and drummes, which did much increase the sorrow of his kinsfolkes and subiects. The priest who did the office
was decked with the markes of the idoll which the no∣ble man had represented; for all noble men did repre∣sent idolles, and carried the name of some one: and for this occasion they were esteemed and honoured. The order of knighthoode did commonly carry these fore∣saide markes. He that should be burnt, being brought to the place appoynted, they invironed him with wood of pine trees, and all his baggage, then set they fire vn∣to it, increasing it still with goomie wood, vntill that all were converted into ashes, then came there foorth a Priest attired like a Divell, having mouthes vpon eve∣ry ioynt of him, and many eyes of glasse, holding a great staffe, with the which hee did mingle all the ashes very boldly, and with so terrible a gesture, as hee terri∣fied all the assistants. Sometimes this minister had o∣ther different habites, according to the quallitie of the dead. I have made this digression of obsequies and fu∣neralls, vpon the idolatry and superstition they had to the dead. It is reason to returne now to our chiefe sub∣iect, and to finish this matter. The fourth and last kinde of Idolatry the Indians vsed, especially the Mexicaines to Images and Idolls. CHAP. 9. ALthough in trueth God is greatly offended with these above named Idolatries, where they woor∣ship the creatures; yet the holy-Ghost doth much more reproove and condemne another kind of idolatry, and that is of those that worship Images and figures made by the hand of men, which have nothing else in them but to be of wood, stone, or mettall, and of such forme as God hath given them. And therefore the Wiseman
speaketh thus of such people, They are miserable, whose hopes may be counted among the dead, that have called the workes of mens handes gods, as golde, silver, and the inventi∣on of the likenes of beastes, or a fruitlesse stone, which hath no∣thing more in it than antiquitie.Esa. 44. Ire. 10. Baruch 6. Psal. 113. And hee dooth divinely follow this proposition against this errour and follie of the Gentiles; as also the Prophets Esay, Ieremy, Baruc, & King David doe treate thereof amply. It is convenient and necessary that the Ministers of Christ which do re∣proove the errors of idolatry, should have a good sight, and consider well these reasons which the holy-Ghost doth so lively set downe, being all reduced into a short sentence, by the Prophet Osee,Osee. . Hee that hath made them was a workeman, and therefore can they be no gods, therefore the Calfe of Samaria shalbe like the Spiders webbe. Return∣ing to our purpose, there hath beene great curiositie at the Indies in making of idolles and pictures of diverse formes and matters, which they worshipped for gods, and in Peru they called them Guacas, being commonly of fowle and deformed beasts, at the least, such as I have seene, were so. I beleeve verily that the Divel, in whose honour they made these idolles, was pleased to cause himselfe to be worshipped in these deformities, and in rneth it was found so, that the Divell spake and answe∣red many of these Guacas or idolls, and his priestes and ministers came to these Oracles of the father of lies, and such as he is, such were his counsells and prophesies. In the provinces of New Spaine, Mexico, Tescuco, Tlascalla, Cholula, and in the neighbour countries to this realme, this kinde of idolatry hath beene more pactised than in any other realme of the world. And it is a prodigious thing to heare the superstitions rehersed that they have vsed in that poynt, of the which it shall not be vnplea∣sant
to speake something. The chiefest idoll of Mxic was, as I have sayde, Vitziliputzli. It was an image of wood like to a man, set vpon a stoole of the colour of  zure, in a brankard or litter, at very corner was a pie of wood in forme of a Serpents head. The stoole sig∣nified that he was set in heaven: this idoll hadde all the forehead azure, and had a band of azure vnder the nose from one eare to another: vpon his head he had a rich plume of feathers, like to the beake of a small bird, the which was covered on the toppe with golde burnished very browne: hee had in his left hand a white target, with the figures of five pineapples, made of white fea∣thers, set in a crosse: and from above issued forth a crest of gold, and at his sides hee hadde foure dartes, which (the Mexicaines say) had beene sent from heaven to do those actes and prowesses which shall be spoken of: In his right hand he had an azured staffe, cutte in fashion of a waving snake. All these ornaments with the rest hee had, carried his sence as the Mexicaines doe shew; the name of Vitziliputzli signifies the left hand of a shi∣ning feather. I will speake heereafter of the prowde Temple, the sacrifices, feasts and ceremonies of this great idoll, be∣ing very notable things. But at this present we will on∣ly shew, that this idoll thus richly appareled and deckt, was set vpon an high Altare, in a small peece or boxe, well covered with linnen clothes, iewells, feathers and ornaments of golde, with many rundles of feathers, the fairest and most exquisite that could be found: hee had alwaies a curtine before him for the greater veneration. Ioyning to the chamber or chappell of this idoll, there was a peece of lesse worke, and not so well beautified, where there was another idoll they called T lalos. These
two idolls were alwayes together, for that they held them as companions, and of equall power. There was another idoll in Mexico much esteemed, which was the god of repentance, and of jubilies and pardons for their sinnes. They called this idoll TeZcallipuca, he was made of a blacke shining stone like to Iayel, being attired with some Gentile devises after their manner; it had eare∣rings of golde and silver, and through the nether lippe a small canon of cristall, in length halfe a foote: in the which they sometimes put a greene feather, and some∣times an azured, which made it resemble sometimes an Emerald, and sometimes a Turquois: it had the haire broided and bound vp with a haire-lace of golde bur∣nished, at the end whereof did hang an are of golde, with two firebrands of smoake painted therein, which did signifie the prayers of the afflicted and sinners that he heard, when they recommended themselves vnto him. Betwixt the two eares hanged a number of small herons. He had a iewell hanging at his necke, so great that it covered all his stomacke: vpon his armes brace∣lets of golde; at his navilla rich greene stone: and in his left hand a fanne of pretious feathers, of greene, a∣zure and yellow, which came forth of a looking glasse of golde, shining and well burnished, and that signifi∣ed, that within this looking glasse hee sawe whatsoever was doone in the world. They called this glasse or cha∣ston of golde Irlacheaya, which signifies his glasse for to looke in. In his right hand he held foure dartes, which signified the chasticement hee gave vnto the wicked for their sinnes. And therefore they feared this idoll most, lest he should discover their faults and offences. At his feast they had pardon of their sinnes, which was made every foure yeares, as shalbe declared heereafter. They
held this idoll Tescatlipuca for the god of drought, of fa∣mine, barrennesse and pestilence: And therefore they paynted him in another forme, being set in great male∣sty vppon a stoole compassed in with a red curtin, pain∣ted & wrought with the heads and bones of dead men. In the lest hand it had a target with five pines, like vnto pine apples of cotton: and in the right a little dart with a threatning countenaunce, and the arme stretcht out▪ as if he would cast it; and from the target came foure dartes. It had the countenance of an angry man, and in choler, the body all painted blacke, and the head full of Quailes feathers. They vsed great superstition to this i∣doll, for the feare they had of it. In Cholula which is a commonwealth of Mexico, they worshipt a famous i∣doll which was the god of marchandise, being to this day greatly given to trafficke. They called it Qnetzaal∣coalt. This idoll was in a great place in a temple very hie: it had about it, golde, silver, jewells, very rich feathers, and habites of divers colours. It had the forme of a man, but the visage of a little bird, with a red bill, and above a combe full of wartes, having ranckes of teeth, and the tongue hanging out. It carried vpon the head, a pointed myter of painted paper, a sithe in the hand, and many toyes of golde on the legges; with a thou∣sand other foolish inventions, whereof all had their sig∣nifications, and they worshipt it, for that hee enriched whome hee pleased, as Memnon and Plutus. In trueth this name which the Choluanos gave to their God, was very fite, although they vnderstoode it not: they cal∣led it Quetzaalcoalt, signifying colour of a rich feather, for such is the divell of covetousnesse. These barbarous people contented not themselves to have gods onely,
but they had goddesses also, as the Fables of Poets have brought in, and the blind gentility of the Greekes and Romans worshipt them. The chiefe goddesse they worshipt was called ToZi, which is to say, our granmo∣ther, who as the Histories of Mexico report, was daugh∣ter to the king of Culhuacan, who was the first they sea∣ed by the commaundement of Vitzliputzli, whom they sacrificed in this sot, being his sister, and then they be∣ganne to flea men in their sacrifices, and to clothe the living with the skinnes of the sacrificed, having learn∣ed that their gods were pleased therewith, as also to pul the hearts out of them they sacrificed, which they lear∣ned of their god, who pulled out the hearts of such as he punished in Tulla, as shall be sayd in his place. One of these goddesses they worshipt had a sonne, who was a great hunter, whome they of Tlscalla afterwardes tooke for a god, and those were ennemies to the Mex∣icaines, by whose ayde the Spaniardes wonne Mexico. The province of Tlascalla is very fit for hunting, and the people are much given therevnto. They therfore made a great feast vnto this idoll, whom they painted of such a forme, as it is not now needefull to loose any time in the description thereof. The feast they made was plea∣sant, and in this sort: They sounded a Trumpet at the breake of day, at the sound whereof they all assembled with thei bowes, arrows, netts, and other instruments for hunting: then they went in procession with theyr idoll, being followed by a great number of people to a high mountayne, vpon the toppe whereof they had made a bower of leaves, and in the middest thereof an Altare richly deckt, where-vpon they placed the idoll. They marched with a great bruit of Trumpettes, Cor∣nets, Flutes and Drummes, and being come vnto the
place, they invironed this mountaine on all sides, put∣ting fire to it on all partes: by meanes whereof manie beasts flew foorth, as stagges, connies, hares, foxes, and woolves, which went to the toppe flying from the fire. These hunters followed after with great cries and noyse of diverse instruments, hunting them to the top before the idoll, whither fled such a number of beastes, in so great a prease, that they leaped one vpon another, vpon the people, and vppon the Altare, wherein they tooke great delight. Then tooke they a great number of these beasts, and sacrificed them before the idoll, as stagges and other great beasts, pulling out their hearts, as they vse in the sacrifice of men, and with the like ce∣remony: which done, they tooke all their prey vppon their shoulders, and retired with their idoll in the same manner as they came, and entered the citty laden with all these things, very ioyfull, with great store of mu∣sicke, trumpets, and drummes, vntill they came to the Temple, where they placed their idoll with great reve∣rence and solemnitie. They presently went to prepare their venison, wherewith they made a banquet to all the people; and after dinner they made their playes, re∣presentations, and daunces before the idoll. They had a great number of other idolles, of gods and goddesses; but the chiefe were of the Mexicaine Nation, and the neighbour people as is saide. Of a strange maner of Idolatry practised amongst the Mexicaines. CHAP. 10. AS wee have saide that the kings Inguas of Peru cau∣sed Images to be made to their likenesse, which they called their Guacos or brothers, causing them for
to be honored like themselves: even so the Mexicains have done of their gods, which was in this sorte. They tooke a captive, such as they thought good, and afore they did sacrifice him vnto their idolls; they gave him the name of the idoll, to whome hee should be sacrifi∣ced, and apparelled him with the same ornaments like their idoll, saying, that he did represent the same idoll. And during the time that this representation lasted, which was for a yeere in some feasts, in others sixe mo∣neths, and in others lesse: they reverenced and wor∣shipped him in the same maner, as the proper idoll; and in the meane time he did eate, drincke, and was merry. When hee went through the streetes, the people came forth to worship him, and every one brought him an almes, with children and sicke folkes, that he might cure them, and blesse them, suffering him to doe all things at his pleasure, onely hee was accompanied with tenne or twelve men lest he should flie. And he (to the end he might be reverenced as he passed) sometimes sounded vppon a small flute, that the people might prepare to worship him. The feast being come, and hee growne fatte, they killed him, opened him, and eat him, making a solempne sacrifice of him. In trueth it was a pittifull thing to consider in what sort Sathan held this people in his subiection, and doth many to this day, which commit the like cruelties and abhominations, with the losse of the miserable soules and bodies of such as they offer to him, and he laughes and mockes at the follie of these poore miserable crea∣tures, who deserve well, for their offences, to be forsa∣ken of the most high God, to the power of their adver∣sary, whom they have chosen for their god & support. But seeing wee have spoken sufficient of the Indians
idolatrie: it followes that we treate of their Religion, or rather Superstition, which they vse in their sacrifi∣ces, temples, ceremonies, and the rest. How the Divell hath laboured to make himselfe equall vnto God, and to imitate him in his Sacrifices, Re∣ligion, and Sacraments. CHAP. 11. BEfore wee come to this point, we ought to consi∣der one thing, which is worthie of speciall re∣gard, the which is, how the Divell by his pride hath opposed himselfe to God; and that which God by his wisedome hath decreed for his honour and service, and for the good and health of man, the Divell stives to imitate and to pervert, to bee honoured, and to cause man to be dammed: for as we see the great God hath Sacrifs, Priests, Sacraments, Religious Pro∣phets, and Ministers, dedicated to his divine service and holy ceremonies, so the Divell hath his sacrifices, priests, his kinds of sacraments, his ministers appointed, his secluded and fained holinesse, with a thousand sortes of false prophets. All which will bee pleasant to vnderstand, being declared in particular, and of no sll suite for him that shall remember, how the Di∣vell is the father of lies,hn. 5. as the truth saieth in the Gos∣pl; and therefore hee seekes to vsurpe to himselfe the glorie of God,Ex. 7. and to counterfait the light by his dark∣nes. The Sooth-saiers of Egipt taught by their master Sa, laboured to do wonders, like vnto those of ss and Aron, to be equall vnto them. We reade in the Booke of Iudes of that Micas, Priest of the vaine Idoll, which vsed the same ornaments which were vsed in the Tabernacle of the true God, as the Ephod, the
Seraphin, and other things. There is scarce any thing instituted by Iesus Christ our Saviour in his Lawe of his Gospel, the which the Divell hath not counterfai∣ted in some sort, and carried to his Gentiles, as may be seene in reading that which we hold for certaine, by the report of men worthie of credite, of the customes and ceremonies of the Indians, whereof we will treate in this Booke. Of the Temples that were found at the Indies. CHAP. 12. BEginning then with their Temples, even as the great God would have a house dedicated, where his holy name might be honoured, and that it should be particularly vowed to his service; even so the Divel, by his wicked practices, perswaded Infid to builde him prowd Temples, and particular Oratories and Sanctuaries. In every Province of Peru, there was one principall Guaca, or house of adoration; and besides it, there was one generall throughout all the Kingdome of the Inguas; amongst the which there hath beene two famous and notable, the one which they called Pacha∣mana, is foure leagues from Lima, whereat this day they see the ruines of a most ancient and great buil∣ding, out of the which Francis Pizarre and his people drew infinite treasure, of vessell and pottes of gold and silver, which they brought when they tooke the Ingua Atagul. There are certaine memories and discour∣ses which say, that in this Temple the Divell did speake visibl, and gvan ivers by his Oracle, and that some∣times they did seea spotted snake: and it was a thing very comin n and approoved at the Indies, that the
Divell spake and answered in these fal se Sanctuaries deceiving this miserable people. But where the Gospel is entred, and the Crosse of Christ planted, the father of lies is becom mute, as Plutark writes of his time, Cur ces∣saverit Pithias fondere oracula:Plu. lib. de tract. Iust. in apol. pro clris. and Iustine Martir treates amply of the silence which Christ imposed to divells, which spake by Idolls, as it had been before much pro∣phecied of in the holy Scripture. The maner which the Infidel Ministers & Inchanters had to consult with their gods, was as the Divell had taught them. It was com∣monlyin the night, they entred backward to their idol, & so went bending their bodies & head, after an vglie maner, and so they consulted with him. The answer he made, was commonly like vnto a fearefull hissing, or to a gnashing which did terrifie them; and all that he did advertise or command them, was but the way to their perdition and ruine. There are few of these Ora∣cles found now, through the mercy of God, and great powre of Iesus Christ. There hath beene in Peru ano∣ther Temple and Oratorie, most esteemed, which was in the Cittie of Cusco, where at this day is the mona∣sterie of S. Dominicke. We may see it hath been a good∣ly and a stately worke, by the pavement and stones of the building, which remaine to this day. This Temple was like to the Pantheon of the Romans, for that it was the house and dwelling of all the gods; for the Kings Inguas did there behold the gods of all the Nations and provinces they had conquered, every Idoll having his private place, whither they of that Province came to worship it with an excessive charge of things which they brought for his service. And thereby they suppo∣sed to keep safely in obedience, those Provinces which they had conquered, holding their gods, as it were in
hostage. In this same house was the Pinchao, which was an Idoll of the Sunne, of most fine gold, wrought with great riches of stones, the which was placed to the East, with so great Art, as the Sunne at his rising did cast his beames thereon: and as it was of most fine mettall, his beames did reflect with such a brightnes, that it seemed another Sunne. The Inguas did worship this for their God, and the Pachayacha, which signifies the Creator of heaven. They say, that at the spoile of this so rich a Temple, a souldier had for his part this goodly plate of gold of the Sunne. And as play was then in request, he lost it all in one night at play, whence came the pro∣verb they have in Peru for great gamesters, saying, that they play the Sunne before it riseth. Of the Prowd Temples at Mexico. CHAP. 13. THe Superstitions of the Mexicaines, have with∣out comparison beene greater then the rest, as well in their ceremonies, as in the greatnes of their Temples, the which in old time the Spaniards called by this word Cu, which word might bee taken from the Ilanders of S. Dominique, or of Cuba, as many other wordes that are in vse, the which are neyther from Spaine, nor from any other language now vsuall a∣mong the Indians, as is Mays, Chico, Vaquiano, Chapeton, and other like. There was in Mexico, this Cu, the famous Temple of Vitziliputzli, it had a very great circuite, and within a faire Court. It was built of great stones, in fa∣shion of snakes tied one to another, and the circuite was called Coatepantli, which is, a circuite of snakes: vppon the toppe of every chamber and oratorie where the
Idolls were, was a fine piller wruogh twit hsmall stones, blacke as icate, set in goodly order, the ground raised vp with white & red, which below gave a great light, vpon the top of the pillar were battlements very artificial∣ly made, wrought like snailes, supported by two Indians of stone, sitting, holding candlestickes in their hands, the which were like Croisants garnished & enriched at the ends, with yellow and greene feathers and long fringes of the same. Within the circuite of this court, there were many chambers of religious men, and o∣thers that were appointed for the service of the Priests and Popes, for so they call the soveraigne Priests which serve the Idoll. This Court is so great and spatious, as eight or ten thousand persons did daunce easily in round, holding hands, the which was an vsuall custome in that Realme, although it seeme to many incredi∣ble. There were foure gates or enies, at the East, West, North, and South; at every one of these gates beganne a fire cawsey of two or three leagues long. There was in the midst of the Lake where the Cittie of Mexico is built, foure large cawseies in crosse, which did much beautify it; vpon every portall or entery, was a God or Idoll, having the visage turned to the causey, ight a∣gainst the Temple gate of VitZiliputZli. There were thirtie steppes of thirtie fadome long, and they divided from the circuit of the court by a streete that went be∣twixt them; vpon the toppe of these steppes there was a walke of thirtie foote broade, all plated with chalke, in the midst of which walke was a Pallisado arti∣ficially made of very high trees, planted in order a fa∣dome one from another▪ These trees were very bigge, and all pierced with small holes from the foote to the
top, and there were roddes did runne from one tree to another, to the which were chained or tied many dead mens heades. Vpon every rod were twentie sculles, and these ranckes of sculles continue from the foote to the toppe af the tree. This Pallissado was full of dead mens sculls from one end to the other, the which was a wonderfull mournefull sight and full of horror. These were the heads of such as had beene sacrificed; for after they were dead, and had eaten the flesh, the head was delivered to the Ministers of the Temple, which tied them in this sort vntill they fell off by mor∣cells; and then had they a care to set others in their pla∣ces. Vpon the toppe of the Temple were two stones or chappells, and in them were the two Idolls which I have spoken of, VitziliputZli, and his companion Tlalot. These Chappells were carved and graven very artifi∣cially, and so high, that to ascend vp to it, there was a staire of stone of sixscore steppes. Before these Cham∣bers or Chappells, there was a Court of fortie foote square, in the midst whereof, was a high stone of five hand breadth, poynted in fashion of a Pyramide, it was placed there for the sacrificing of men; for being laid on their backes, it made their bodies to bend, and so they did open them and pull out their hearts, as I shall shewe heereafter. There were in the Cittie of Mexico, eight or nine other Temples, the which were ioyned one to another within one great circuite, and had their private stires, their courts, their chambers, and their dortoires. The entries of some were to the East, some to the West, others to the South, and some to the North. All these Temples were curiously wrought, and compassed in with divers sortes of bat∣tlements and pictures, with many figures of stones, be∣ing
accompanied and fortefied with great and large spurres or platformes. They were dedicated to divers gods: but next to the Temple of VitziliputZli, was that of Tescalipuca, which was the god of penaunce and of punishments, very high and well built. There were foure steps to ascend, on the toppe was a flat or table of sixe score foote broad, and ioyning vn∣to it was a hall hanged with tapistry and curtins of di∣verse colours and works. The doore thereof being low and large, was alwayes covered with a vaile, and none but the priests might enter in. All this Temple was beu∣tified with diverse images and pictures most curiously; for that these two Temple were as the cathedrall chur∣ches; and the rest in respect of them as parishes and her▪ mitages: they were so spatious, and had so many cham∣bers, that there were in them places for the ministerie, colleges, schooles, and houses for priests, whereof wee will intreate heereafter. This may suffice to conceive the divells pride, and the misery of this wretched nati∣on, who with so great expence of their goods, their la∣bour, and their lives, did thus serve their capitall enimy, who pretended nothing more than the destruction of their soules, and consumption of their bodies. But yet they were well pleased, having an opinion in their so great an error, that they were great and mighty gods, to whome they did these services. Of the Priestes and their offices. CHAP 14. WE find among all the nations of the world▪ men specially dedicated to the service of the true God, or to the false, which serve in sacrifices, and de∣clare
vnto the people what their gods command them. Ther was in Mexico a strange curiositie vpon this point. And the divell counterfeiting the vse of the Church of God, hath placed in the order of his Priests, some greater or superiors, and some lesse, the one as Acolites, the other as Levites, & that which hath made me most to woonder, was, that the divel would vsurpe to him∣selfe the service of God; yea and vse the same name: for the Mexicaines in their antient tongue called their hie Priests Papas, as they should say soveraigne Bishops, as it appeares now by their Histories. The Priests of VitZ∣liputzli succeeded by linages of certaine quarters of the Citty, deputed for that purpose, and those of other i∣dolls came by election, or being offered to the temple in their infancy. The dayly exercise of the Priestes was to cast incense on the idolles, which was doone foure times in the space of a naturall day. The first at breake of day, the second at noone, the third at Sunne setting, and the fourth at midnight. At midnight all the chiefe officers of the Temple did rise, and in steade of bells, they sounded a long time vpon trumpets, cornets and flutes very heavily; which being ended, he that did the office that weeke, stept foorth, attyred in a white roabe after the Dalmatike manner, with a censor in his hand full of coales, which he tooke from the harth burning continually before the Altare; in the other hand he had a purse full of incense, which he cast into the censor, and as he entred the place where the idoll was, he incensed it with great reverence, then tooke he a cloth, with the which he wiped the Altar and the curtins. This doone, they went all into a Chappell, and there did a certaine kinde of rigorous and austere penaunce, beating them∣selves, and drawing of blood, as I shall shew in the trea∣tise
of Penance, which the Divell hath taught to his creatures; and heereof they never fayled at these Ma∣tins at midnight. None other but the Priestes might entermeddle with their sacrifices, and every one did imploy himselfe according to his dignity and degree. They did likewise preach to the people at some feastes, as I will shew when we treate thereof. They had reve∣nues, and great offerings were made vnto them. I will speake heereafter of their vnction in Consecrating their Priestes. In Peru the Priestes were entertained of the revenues and inheritance of their God, which they called Chacaras, which were many, and also verie rich. Of the monastery of Virgins which the divell hath invented for his service. CHAP. 15. AS the religious life (wherof many servants of God have made profession in the holy Church, immi∣tating Iesus Christ and his holy Apostles) is very plea∣sing in the sight of his divine maiesty, by the which his holy Name is so honoured, and his Church beutified: So the father of lies hath laboured to imitate and coun∣terfeit him heerein; yea, as it were hath striven with God in the observance and austere life of his ministers. There were in Peru many monasteries of Virgines (for there are no other admitted) at the least one in everie Province. In these monasteries there were two sortes of women, one antient, which they called Mamacom, for the instruction of the yoong; and the other was of yoong maidens, placed there for a certaine time, and after they were drawne foorth, either for their gods or
for the Ingua. They called this house or monastery A∣clguagi, which is to say, the house of the chosen. Eve∣ry monastery had his Vicar or Governour called Appo∣panaca, who had liberty and power to choose whome he pleased, of what qualitie soever, being vnder eyght yeares of age, if they seemed to be of a good stature and constitution. These Virgines thus shut vp into these monasteries, were instructed by the Momacomas, in diverse thinges needefull for the life of man, and in the customes and ceremonies of their gods; and afterwardes they tooke them from thence, being above foureteene, sending them to the Court with suregards, whereof some were appoynted to serve the Guacas and Sanctuaries, keep∣ing their virginities for ever: some others were for the ordinary sacrifices that were made of maidens, and o∣ther extraordinary sacrifices, they made for the health, death, or warres of the Ingua; and the rest served for wives and concubines to the Ingua, and vnto other his kinsfolkes and captaines, vnto whome hee gave them, which was a great and honourable recompence: This distribution was vsed every yeare. These monasteries possessed rents and revenues for the maintenaunce of these Virgins, which were in great numbers. It was not lawfull for any father to refuse his daughters when the Appopanaca required them for the service of these mo∣nasteries. Yea many fathers did willingly offer their daughters, supposing it was a great merit to be sacrifi∣ced for the Ingua. If any of these Momacomas or Acllas were found to have trespassed against their honour, it was an inevitable chasticement to bury them alive, or to put them to death by some other kind of cruell tor∣ment.
The divell hath even in Mexico had some kind of re∣ligious women, although their possession was but  one yeare, and it was in this sorte: Within this gre circuit whereof we have spoken, which was in the prin∣cipall temple, there were two houses like cloystes, the one opposite to the other, one of men, the other of wo∣men: In that of women, they were virgines onely, of twelve or thirteene yeares of age, which they called the Maydes of Penaunce. They wereas many as the men, and lived chastly and regularly, as virgins dedicated to the service of their god. Their charge was, to sweepe and make cleane the temple, and every morning to prepare meate for the idoll and his ministers, of the almes the religious gathered. The foode they prepared for the idoll were small loaves in the forme of handes and feete, as of marchpane: and with this bread they prepared certayne sawses which they cast dayly before the idoll, and his priests did eate it, as those of Baal, that Daniel speaketh of.Dan. 14. These virgins had their haire cutte, and then they let them grow for a certaine time▪ they rose at midnight to the idolls mattins, which they day∣ly celebrated, performing the same exercises the religi∣ous did. They had their Abesses who imployed them to make cloth of diverse fashions for the ornament of their idolls and temples. Their ordinary habite was all white, without any worke or colour. They did their penance at midnight, sacrificing and wounding them∣selves, and piercing the toppe of their eares, they layde the blood which issued foorth vpon their cheekes: and after, (to wash off the blood) they bathed themselves in a poole which was within their monastery. They li∣ved very honestly and discreetly; and if any were found o have offended, although but lightly, presently they
were put to death without remission, saying, shee had polluted the house of their god. They helde it for an augure and advertisement, that some one of the religi∣ous, man, or woman, had committed a fault, when they saw a Ratte or a Mowse passe, or a Bat in the chappell of their idoll, or that they had gnawed any of the vailes▪ for that they say, a Catte or a Bat would not adventure to committe such an indignity, if some offence had not gone before, and then they beganne to make search of the fact, and having discovered the offendor or offen∣dors, of what quality soever, they presently put them to death. None were receyved into this monastery, but the daughters of one of the sixe quarters, named for that purpose: and this profession continued, as I have sayd, the space of one whole yeare: during the which time, their fathers, and they themselves had made a vowe to serve the idoll in this manner, and from thence they went to be married. These virgins of Mexico, especially they of Peru had some resemblance to the Vestall Vir∣gins of Rome, as the Histories shew, to the end wee may vnderstand how the divell hath desired to be served by them that observe Virginitie, not that chastitie is plea∣sing vnto him, for he is an vncleane spirite, but for the desire he hath to take from the great God, as much as in him lieth, this glory to be served with cleannesse and integrity. Of the Monasteries of religious men that the divell hath in∣vented for superstition. CHAP. 16. IT is well knowne, by Letters written by the fathers of our company from Iappon the number and multi∣tude
of religious men that are in those Provin, whome they call Boncos, and also their superstit, customes and lies. Some fathers that have been in those countries, report of these Boncos and religious men of China, saying, that there are many Orders, and of di∣verse sortes, some came vnto them clad in white, bear∣ing hoodes, and others all in blacke, without haire or hoode, and these are commonly little esteemed, for the Mandarins or ministers of Iustice whippe them, as they doe the rest of the people. They make profession, not to eate any flesh, fish, nor any thing that hath life, but onely Rice and hearbes; but in secret they do eate any thing, and are worse than the common people. They say the religious men which are at the Court, which is at Paquin, are very much esteemed. The Mandarins go commonly to recreate themselves at the Narells or mo∣nasteries of these Monkes, and returne in a manner al∣wayes drunke. These monasteries commonly are with∣out the townes, and have temples within their close: yet in China they are not greatly curious of idolles, or of temples, for the Mandarins little esteeme idolls, and do hold it for a vaine thing, and worthy to be laughed at: yea they beleeve there is no other life, nor Paradice, but to be in the office of the Mandarins, nor any other hel, than the prisons they have for offendours. As for the common sorte, they say, it is necessary to entertayne them with idolatry, as the Philosopher himselfe rea∣cheth his Governors:Arist. 12. . and in the Scripture it was an excuse which Aaron gave, for the idol of the Calfe, that he caused to be made; yet the Chinois vsed to tarry in the poupe of their shippes,Exodus 32. in little chapels, a virgin im∣bosst set in a chaire with two Chinois before her kneel∣ing in maner of Angels, having a light burning there
both day and night. And when they are to sette saile, they do many sacrifices and ceremonies, with a great noyse of drummes and bells, casting papers burnt at the poupe. Comming to our religious men, I doe not knowe that in Peru there is any proper houses for men, but for the Priests and Sorcerers, whereof there is an infinite number. But it seemeth, that in Mexico the divel hath set a due observation: for within the circuit of the great temple there were two monasteries, as before hath bin sayd, one of Virgins, whereof I have spoken, the other of yoong men secluded, of eighteene or twenty yeares of age, which they called religious. They weare shaved crownes, as the Friars in these partes, their haire alittle longer which fell to the middest of their care, except the hinder part of the head, which they let growe the breadth of foure fingers downe to their shoulders, and which they tyed vppe in tresses. These yoong men that served in the temple of Vitzliputzli lived poorely and chastely, and did the office of Levites, ministering to the priests and chiefe of the temple, their incense, lights, & garments; they swept and made cleane the holy places, bringing wood for a continual fire to the harth of their god, which was like a lampe that still burnt before the Altar of their idoll. Besides these yong men, there were other little boyes, as novices, that served for manuall v∣ses, as to deck the temple with boughs, roses, and reeds, give the Priests water to wash with, give them their ra∣sors to sacrifice, and goe with such as begged almes to carry it. All these had their superiors, who had the go∣vernement over them, they lived so honestly, as when they came in publike, where there were any women, they carried their heads very lowe, with their eyes to
the ground, not daring to beholde them: they had lin∣nen garments, and it was lawfull for them to goe into the Citty foure or sixe together, to aske almes in all quarters: and when they gave them none, it was lawful to go into the corne fields and gather the cares of corne or clusters of Mays, which they most needed, the Mai∣ster not daring to speake, nor hinder them. They had this liberty, because they lived poorely, and had no o∣ther revenues, but almes. There might not be above fif∣ty live in penance, rising at midnight to sound the cor∣nets and trumpets to awake the people. Every one wat∣ched the idoll in his turne, left the fire before the Altare should die: they gave the censor, with the which the Priest at midnight incensed the idoll, and also in the morning, at noone, and at night. They were very sub∣iect and obedient to their superiors, and passed not any one poynt that was commaunded them. And at mid∣night after the priesthad ended his censing, they retired themselves into a secret place, apart, sacrificing, & draw∣ing blood, from the calfes of their legges with sharpe bodkins: with this blood they rubbed their temples, & vnder their cares: and this sacrifice finished, they pre∣sently washt themselves in a little poole appoynted to that end. These yong men did not annoint their heads and bodies with any Petum, as the Priestes did: their garments were of a course white linnen cloth they do make there. These exercises and strictnesse of penance continued a whole yeare, during which time they lived with great austeritie and solitarinesse. In truth it is ve∣ry strange to see that this false opinion of religion hath so great force among these yoong men and maidens of Mexico, that they will serve the Divell with so great ri∣gor and austerity, which many of vs doe not in the ser∣vice
of the most high God, the which is a great shame and confusion; for those amongst vs that glory to have doone a small penaunce, although this exercise of the Mexicaines, was not continuall, but for a yeare onely, which made it the more tollerable. Of Penance and the Strictnes the Indians have vsed at the Divells perswasion. CHAP. 17. SEeing we are come to this point, it shall bee good both to discover the cursed pride of Sathan, and to confound it, and somewhat to quicken our coldnes and slth in the service of the great GOD: to speake some thing of the rigor and strange penance this mi∣serable people vsed at the Divells perswasion, like to the false Prophets of Baal,3 Rg. 28. who did beate and wound themelves with lancets, drawing forth bloud; or like those that sacrificed their sonnes and daughters vnto loathsome Belphegor, passing them through the fire,Psal. 105. 4. Reg. . as holy Writ testifieth: for Sathan hath alwayes desired to be served, to the great hurte and spoyle of man. It hath beene said that the priests and religious of Mexico, rose at midnight, and having cast incense before the i∣doll, they retired themselves into a large place, where there were many lights; and sitting downe, every one tooke a poynt of Manguay, which is like vnto an awle or sharpe bodkin, with the which, or with some other kindes of launcets or rasors, they pierced the calfes of their legges neare to the bone, drawing foorth much blood, with the which they annoynted their temples, & dipt these bodkins or lancets in the rest of the blood, then set they them vpon the battlements of the Court, stickt in gloabes or bowles of strawe, that all might see
and know the penance they did for the people: they do wash off the blood in a lake appoynted for that pur∣pose, which they call Ezapangue, which is to say, water of blood. There were in the Temple a great number of bod∣kins or lancets, for that they might not vse one twice. Moreover, these Priests and Religious men, vsed great fastings, of five or ten daies together, before any of their great feastes, and they were vnto them as our foure em∣ber weekes: they were so strict in continence, that some of them (not to fall into any sensualitie,) slit their members in the midst, and did a thousand thinges to make themselves vnable, lest they should offend their gods. They drunke no wine, and slept little, for that the greatest part of their exercises were by night, commit∣ting great cruelties and martiring themselves for the Divell, and all to bee reputed great fasters and peni∣tents. They did vse to discipline themselves with cordes full of knottes, and not they onely, but the people also vsed this punishment and whipping, in the procession and feast they made to the idoll TeZcalipuca, the which (as I have said before,) is the god of penance; for then they all carried in their hands new cordes of the threed of Manguey a fadome long, with a knot at the end, and therewith they whipped themselves, giving great la∣shes over their shoulders. The Priests did fast five daies together before this feast, eating but once a day, and they lived apart from their wives, not going out of the Temple during those five daies, they did whip them∣selves rigorously in the maner aforesaid. The Iesuites which have written from the Indies, treate amply of the penances and exceeding rigor the Boncos vse, all
which was but counterfait, and more in shew, then in trueth. In Peru to solemnize the feast of the Yta, which was great, all the people fasted two daies; during the which, they did not accompany with their wives, ney∣ther did they eate any meate with salt or garlike, nor drinke Chica. They did much vse this kinde of fasting for some sinnes, and did penance, whipping themselves with sharpe stinging nettles, and often they strooke themselves over the shoulders with certaine stones. This blinde Nation, by the perswasion of the Divell, did transport themselves into craggy mountaines, where sometimes they sacrificed themselves, casting themselves downe from some high rocke. All which are but snares and deceites of him that desires nothing more then the losse and ruine of man. Of the Sacrifices the Indians made to the Divell, and whereof. CHAP. 18. IT hath beene in the aboundance and diversitie of Offrings and Sacrifices taught vnto the Infidells for their idolatrie, that the enemy of God and man, hath most shewed his subtiltie and wickednes. And as it is a fit thing and proper to religion, to consume the sub∣stance of the creatures, for the service and honour of the Creator, the which is by sacrifice: even so the fa∣ther of lies hath invented the meanes to cause the cre∣atures of God to be offered vnto him, as to the Author and Lord thereof. The first kinde of sacrifices which men vsed, was very simple: for Caine offered the fruites of the earth, and Abell the best of his cattell, the which likewise Noe and Abraham did afterwardes, and the o∣ther Patriarkes,Gen. 15. vntil that this ample ceremony of Levi
was given by Moses, wherein there are so many sortes and differences of sacrifices of divers things, for divers affaires, and with divers ceremonies. In like sort, among some Nations, hee hath beene content to teach them to sacrifice of what they had: but among others hee hath passed farre▪ giving them a multitude of customes and ceremonies vpon sacrifices, and so many obser∣vances, as they are wonderfull. And thereby it ap∣peares plainely, that he meanes to contend and equall himselfe to the ancient law, and in many things vsurpe the same ceremonies▪ Wee may draw all the sacrifices the Infidells vse into three kindes, one of insensible things, another of beasts, and the third of men. They did vse in Peru to sacrifice Coca, which is an hearb they esteeme much, of Mays, which is their wheate, of co∣loured feathers, and of Chaquira, which otherwise they call Mollo, of shelles or oysters, and sometime gold and silver, being in figures of little beasts. Also of the fine stuffe of Cumbi, of carved and sweete wood, and most commonly tallow burnt. They made these offerings or sacrifices for a prosperous winde, and faire weather, or for their health, and to be delivered from some dan∣gers and mishappes. Of the second kinde, their ordi∣nary sacrifice was of Cuyes, which are small beasts like rabbets, the which the Indians eate commonly. And in matters of importance, or when they were rich men, they did offer Pacos, or Indian sheepe, bare, or with wooll, observing curiously the numbers, colours, and times. The maner of killing their sacrifices, great or small, which the Indians did vse according to their an∣cient ceremonies, is the same the Moores vse at this day, the which they call Alquible, hanging the beast by the right fore legge, turning his eyes towards the Sun,
speaking certaine wordes, according to the qualitie of the sacrifice they flew: for if it were of colour, their wordes were directed to Chuquilla, and to the Thun∣der, that they might want no water: if it were white & smoothe, they did offer it to the Sunne with certaine wordes: if it had a fleece, they did likewise offer it him with some others, that he might shine vpon them and favour their generation: If it were a Guanaco, which is gray, they directed their sacrifice to Viracocha. In Cusco they did every yeare kill and sacrifice with this ceremo∣ny, a shorne sheepe to the Sunne, and did burne it, clad in a red waste-coate, and when they did burne it, they cast certaine small baskets of Coca into the fire, which they call Vilcaronca; for which sacrifice, they have both men and beasts appointed which serve to no other vse. They did likewise sacrifice small birdes, although it were not so vsuall in Peru as in Mexico, where the sa∣crificing of quailes was very ordinarie. Those of Peru did sacrifice the birdes of Puna, (for so they call the de∣sart when they should go to the warres, for to weaken the forces of their adversaries Guacas. They called these sacrifices Cuzcovicca, or Contevicca, or Huallavic∣ca, or Sophavicca, and they did it in this maner: they tooke many kindes of small birdes of the desart, and gathered a great deale of a thornie wood, which they call Yalli, the which being kindled, they gathered to∣gether these small birdes. This assembly they cal∣led Quio, then did they cast them into the fire, about the which the officers of the sacrifice went with cer∣taine round stones carved, whereon were painted ma∣ny snakes, lions, toades, and tigres, vttering this word, Vsachum which signifies, let the victorie be given vnto vs, with other wordes, whereby they sayed the forces
of their enemies Guacas were confounded. And they drew forth certaine blacke sheepe, which had beene kept close some daies without meate, the which they called Vrca, and in killing them they spake these words; As the hearts of these beasts be weakened, so let our enemies be weakned. And if they found in these sheep that a certaine peece of flesh behind the heart were not consumed by fasting and close keeping, they then held it for an ill augure. They brought certaine black dogs, which they call Appuros, and slew them, casting them into a plaine, with certaine ceremonies, causing some kinde of men to eate this flesh, the which sacrifices they did, lest the Ingua should be hurt by poison: and for this cause they fasted from morning vntill the stars were vp, and then they did glut and defile themselves like to the Moores. This sacrifice was most fit for them to withstand their enemies gods: and although at this day a great part of these customes have ceased, the wars being ended, yet remaines there some relikes, by reason of the private or generall quarrels of the Indians, or the Caciques, or in their Citties. They did likewise offer and sacrifice shelles of the sea, which they call Mollo, and they offered them to the fountaines and springs, say∣ing, that these shells were daughters of the sea, the mo∣ther of all waters. They gave vnto these shells sundrie names, according to the color, and also they vse them to divers ends. They vsed them in a maner in all kinde of sacrifices, and yet to this day they put beaten shells in their Chica, for a superstition. Finally they thought it convenient to offer sacrifices of every thing they did sow or raise vp. There were Indians appointed to doe these sacrifices to the fountaine, springs, and rivers, which passed through the townes, or by their Chacras,
which are their farmes, which they did after seede ime, that they might not cease running, but alwaies water their groundes. The sorcerers did coniure, to know what time the sacrifices should be made, which being ended, they did gather of the contribution of the people, what should be sacrificed and delivered them to such as had the charge of these sacrifices. They made them in the beginning of winter, at such time as the fountaines, springs, and rivers, did increase by the moistures of the weather, which they did attri∣bute to their sacrifices. They did not sacrifice to the fountaines and springs of the desarts. To this day con∣tinues the respect they had to fountaines, springs, pooles, brookes, or rivers, which passe by their Citties or Chacras, even vnto the fountaines and rivers of the desarts. They have a speciall regard and reverence to the meeting of two rivers, and there they wash them∣selves for their health, anointing themselves first with the flower of Mays, or some other things, adding there∣vnto divers ceremonies, the which they do likewise in their bathes. Of the Sacrifices they made of men. CHAP. 19. THe most pittifull disaster of this poore people, is their slavery vnto the Devill, sacrificing men vnto him, which are the Images of God. In many nations they had vsed to kill (to accompany the dead, as hath beene declared) such persons as had been agreeable vn∣to him, and whome they imagined might best serve him in the other world. Besides this, they vsed in Peru, to sacrifice yong children of foure or six yeares old vn∣to
tenne: and the greatest parte of these sacrifices were for the affaires that did import the Ingua, as in sickenes for his health: and when he went to the warres for vi∣ctory, or when they gave the wreathe to their new In∣gua, which is the marke of a King, as heere the Scepter and the Crowne be. In this solemnitie they sacrificed the number of two hundred children, from foure to ten yeares of age, which was a cruell and inhumane specta∣cle. The manner of the sacrifice was to drowne them and bury them with certaine representations and cere∣monies: sometimes they cutte off their heads, annoin∣ting themselves with the blood from one eare to an o∣ther. They did likewise sacrifice Virgines, some of them that were brought to the Ingua from the monasteries, as hath beene saide. In this case there was a very great and generall abuse: If any Indian qualified, or of the common sorte, were sicke, and that the Divine tolde him confidently that he should die, they did then sacri∣fice his owne sonne to the Sunne, or to Virachoca, desi∣ring them to be satisfied with him, and that they would not deprive the father of life. This cruelty is like to that the holy Scripture speakes of, which king Moab vsed in sacrificing his first borne sonne vpon the wall, in the sight of all Israel, to whome this act seemed so mourn∣full, as they would not presse him any further, but re∣turned to their houses. The holy Scripture also shewes that the like kinde of sacrifice had beene in vse amongst the barbarous nations of the Cananeans and Iebuseans and others, whereof the booke of Wisedome speakes, They call it peace to live in so great miseries and vexations as to sacrifice their owne children, or to doe other hidden sacri∣fices, as to watch whole nights, doing the actes of fooles, and
so they keepe no cleanenesse in their life, nor in their marria∣ges, but one through envy takes away the life of an other, an other takes away his wife and his contentment, and all is in confusion, blood, murther, theft, deceipt, corruption, infideli∣tie, seditions, periuries, mutinies, forgetfulnesse of God, pollu∣tion of soules, change of sexes and birth, inconstancie of mar∣riages, and the disorder of adultery and filthinesse: for ido∣latry is the sincke of all miseries. The Wise man speaketh this of those people of whome David complaines,Psal. 105. that the people of Israel had learned those customes, even to sacrifice their sonnes and daughters to the divell, the which was never pleasing nor agreeable vnto God. For as hee is the Authour of life, and hath made all these things for the commoditie and good of man, so is hee not pleased that men should take the lives one from an∣other; although the Lord did approove and accept the willingnesse of the faithfull patriarke Abraham, yet did hee not consent to the deede, which was, to cut off the head of his sonne: wherein wee see the malice and ty∣ranny of the divell, who would be herein as God, tak∣ing pleasure to be worshipt with the effusion of mans blood, procuring by this meanes, the ruine of soule and body together, for the deadly hatred he beareth to man, as his cruell enemy. Of the horrible sacrifices of men which the Mexi∣caines vsed. CHAP. 20. ALthough they of Peru have surpassed the Mexi∣caines in the slaughter and sacrifice of their chil∣dren, (for I have not read nor vnderstood that the Me∣xicaines vsed any such sacrifices) yet they of Mexico have exceeded them, yea all the nations of the worlde,
in the great number of men which they had sacrificed, and in the horrible maner thereof. And to the end we may see the great miserie wherein the Divell holdes this blind Nation, I will relate particularly the custome and inhumane maner which they have observed: First the men they did sacrifice were taken in the warres, neyther did they vse these solemne sacrifices but of Captives: so as it seemes therein they have followed the custome of the Ancients. For as some Authors say, they called the sacrifice Victima, for this reason, be∣cause it was of a conquered thing: they also called it Hostia quasi ab hoste, for that it was an offering made of their enemies, although they have applied this word to all kindes of sacrifices. In truth the Mexicaines did not sacrifice any to their idolls, but Captives, and the ordinarie warres they made, was onely to have Cap∣tives for their sacrifices: and therefore when they did fight, they laboured to take their enemies alive, and not to kill them, to inioy their sacrifices. And this was the reason which Moteçuma gave to the Marquise du Val, when he asked of him, why being so mighty, and having conquered so many kingdomes, hee had not subdued the Province of Tlascalla, which was so neere▪ Moteçuma answered him, that for two reasons hee had not conquered that Province, although it had beene easie, if he would have vndertaken it: the one was for the exercise of the youth of Mexico, left they should fall into idlenes and delight: the other and the chiefe cause why he had reserved this Province, was, to have Captives for the sacrifices of their gods. The maner they vsed in these sacrifices, was, they assembled with∣in the Palissadoe of dead mens sculles, (as hath beene said,) such as should be sacrificed, vsing a certaine cere∣mony
at the foot of the palisado, placing a great guard about them. Presently there slept foorth a Priest, atty∣red with a shorte surplise full of tasselles beneath, who came from the top of the temple with an idoll made of paste of wheate & mays mingled with hony, which had the eyes made of the graines of greene glasse, and the teeth of the graines of mays, hee descended the steppes of the temple with all the speede he could, and mounted on a great stone planted vpon a high terrasse in the midst of the court. This stone was called Quaux∣icalli, which is to say, the stone of Eagle, whereon he mounted by a little ladder, which was in the fore part of the terrase, and descended by an other staire on the other side, still embracing his idoll. Then did he mount to the place where those were that should be sacrificed, shewing this idoll to every one in particular, saying vn∣to them; this is your god. And having ended his shew, he descended by the other side of the staires, and all such as should die, went in procession vnto the place where they should be sacrificed, where they sound the Ministers ready for that office. The ordinary manner of sacrificing was, to open the stomake of him that was sacrificed, and having pulled out his heart halfe alive, they tumbled the man downe the staires of the Tem∣ple, which were all imbrewed and defiled with blood: And to make it the more plaine, sixe sacrificers beeing appoynted to this dignitie, came into the place of sa∣crifice, foure to holde the hands and feete of him that should be sacrificed, the fift to holde his head, and the sixt to open his stomacke, and to pull out the heart of the sacrificed. They called them Chachalmua, which in our tong is as much, as the ministers of holy things. It was a high dignitie, and much esteemed amongest
them, wherein they did inherite and succede as in a  simple. The minister who had the office to kill, which was the sixt amongest them, was esteemed and honou∣red as the soveraigne Priest and Bishop, whose name was different, according to the difference of times and solemnities. Their habites were likewise divers when they came foorth to the sacrifice, according to the di∣versitie of times. The name of their chiefe dignitie was Papa and Topilzin, their habite and robe was a red cur∣tin after the Dalmatike fashion, with tasselles belowe, a crowne of rich feathers, greene, white, and yellow vp∣on his head, and at his eares like pendants of golde, wherein were set greene stones, and vnder the lip vpon the middest of the beard hee had a peece like vnto a small canon of an azured stone. These sacrifices came with their faces and handes coloured with a shining blacke. The other five had their haire much curled, and tied vp with laces of leather, bound about the mid∣dest of the head: vpon their forehead they caried small roundelets of paper painted with diverse colours, and they were attired in a Dalmatike robe of white, wroght with blacke. With this attire they represented the ve∣ry figure of the Divell, so as it did strike feare and terro into all the people, to see them come forth with so ho∣rible a representation. The soveraigne priest carried a great knife in his hand, of a large and sharpe flint: ano∣ther priest carried a coller of wood wrought in forme of a snake: All six put themselves in order, ioyning to this Piramidall stone, whereof I have spoken, being di∣rectly against the doore of the Chappell of their idoll. This stone was so pointed, as the man which was to be sacrificed, being laid there on, vpon his backe, did bend in such sort, as letting the knife but fall vpon his sto∣macke
it opened very easily in the middest. When the sacrificers were thus in order, they drew forth such as had beene taken in warre, which were to be sacrifi∣ced at that feast, and being accompanied with a guard of men all naked, they caused them to mount vp these large staires in ranke, to the place where the Ministers were prepared: and as every one of them came in their order, the six sacrificers tooke the prisoner, one by one foote, another by the other, and one by one hand, ano∣ther by the other, casting him on his backe vpon this pointed stone, where the fift of these Ministers put the coller of wood about his necke, and the high priest o∣pened his stomacke with the knife, with a strange dex∣teritie and nimblenes, pulling out his heart with his hands, the which he shewed smoaking vnto the Sunne, to whom he did offer this heate and fume of the heart, and presently he turned towardes the idoll, and did cast the heart at his face, then did they cast away the body of the sacrificed, tumbling it downe the staires of the Temple, the stone being set so neere the staires, as there were not two foote space betwixt the stone and the first steppe, so as with one spurne with their foote, they cast the body from the toppe to the bottome. In this sort one after one they did sacrifice all those that were appointed. Being thus slaine, and their bodies cast downe, their masters, or such as had taken them, went to take them vp, and carried them away: then having divided them amongest them, they did eate them, ce∣lebrating their feast and solemnitie. There were ever forty or fifty at the least thus sacrificed, for that they had men very expert in taking them. The neighbour Nations did the like, imitating the Mexicaines in the customes and ceremonies of the service of their gods.
Of another kind of sacrifices of men which the Mexi∣caines vsed. CHAP. 21. THere was an other kinde of sacrifice which they made in divers feasts, which they called Racaxipe VelitZli, which is as much as the eaing of men. They call it so, for that in some feasts they tooke one or more slaves, as they pleased; and after they had flead him, they with that skinne apparelled a man appoynted to that end. This man went dauncing and leaping tho∣row all the houses and market places of the cittie, eve∣ry one being forced to offer something vnto him: and if any one failed, hee would strike him over the face, with a corner of the skinne, defyling him with the congealed blood. This invention continued vntill the skinne did stinke: during which time, such as went ga∣thered together much almes, which they imployed in necessary things for the service of their gods. In many of these feasts they made a challenge, betwixt him that did sacrifice, and him that should be sacrifyced thus: they tied the slave by one foote to a wheele of stone, giving him a sword and target in his handes to defend himselfe: then presently stept foorth hee that sacri∣ficed him, armed with anther sword and target: if he that should be sacrificed defends himselfe valiantly a∣gainst the other, and resisted him, hee then remayned freed from the sacrifyce, winning the name of a fa∣mous Captaine, and so was reputed: but if hee were vanuished, they then sacrifyced him on the stone wherevnto he was tyed. It was an other kinde of sacri∣fyce, whenas they appoynted any slave to be the re∣presentation of the idoll, saying that it was his picture:
they every yeare gave one slave to the Priests, that they might never want the lively image of their idoll. At his fyrst entry into the office, after hee had beene well washed, they attyred him with all the ornaments of the idoll, giving him the same name. Hee was that whole yeare reverenced and honoured as the idoll it selfe, and had alwayes with him twelve men for his guarde, lest hee should flie, with which guarde they suffered him to goe freely and where hee would: and if by chaunce he fled, the chiefe of the guarde was put in his place to represent the idoll, and after to be sacri∣ficed. This Indian had the most honourable lodging in all the temple, where he did eate and drincke, and whither all the chiefe Ministers came to serve and honour him, carrying him meate after the manner of great persona∣ges. When hee went through the streetes of the citie, hee was well accompanyed with noble men, he carri∣ed a little flute in his hand, which sometimes he soun∣ded, to give them knowledge when he passed: Then presently the women came forth with their little chil∣dren in their armes, which they presented vnto him, saluting him as god. All the rest of the people did the like: at night they put him in a strong prison or cage, left he should flie; and when the feast came, they sa∣crificed him, as hath beene sayde. By these and manie other meanes hath the Divell abused and entertained these poore wretches, and such was the multitude of those that had beene sacrificed by this infernall cruel∣ty, as it seems a matter incredible, for they affirme there were some dayes five thousand or more, and that there were above twenty thousand sacrifyced in diverse pla∣es. The divell to intertaine this murther of men, vsed
a pleasant and strange invention, which was, when it pleased the priests of Sathan they went to their Kings, telling them how their gods died for hunger, and that they should remember them. Presently they prepared themslves, & advertised one another, that their gods required meate, and therefore they should command their people to be ready to goe to the warres; and thus the people assembled, and the companies appoynted went to field, where they mustred their forces; and all their quarrell and fight was to take one an other for sa∣crifice, striving on either side to take what captives they could, so as in these battells they laboured more to take, then to kill, for that all their intention was to take men alive, to give them to their idolls to eate, for after that maner brought they their sacrifice vnto their gods. And wee must vnderstand, that never king was crowned vntill he had subdewed some province, from the which hee brought a great number of captives for the sacrifices of their gods, so as it was an infinit thing to see what blood was spilt in the honour of the Di∣vell. How the Indians grew weary, and could not endure the cruelty of Sathan. CHAP. 22. MAny of these Barbarians were nowe wearied and tyred with such an excessive cruelty, in sheading so much blood, and with so tedious a tribute, to be al∣wayes troubled to get captives, for the feeding of their gods, seeming vnto them a matter supportable, yet left they not to followe and execute their rigorous lawes, for the great awe the ministers of these idols kept them in, and the cunning wherewith they abused this poore
people. But inwardly they desired to be freed from so heavy a yoke. And it was a great providence of God; that the first which gave them knowledge of the Lawe of Christ, found them in this disposition: for without doubt it seemed to them a good law, and a good God, to be served in this sorte. Heerevpon a grave religious man in New Spaine tolde me, that when he was in that Country hee had demaunded of an auntient Indian, a man of qualitie, for what reason the Indians hadde so soone received the Lawe of Ieus Christ, and left their owne, without making any other proofe, triall, or dis∣pute thereon, for it seemed they had changed their re∣ligion, without any sufficient reason to moove them. The Indian answered him, Beleeve not Father, that we have embraced the Law of Christ so rashly as they say, for I will tell you, that we were already weary and dis∣contented with such things as the idolls commaunded vs, and were determined to leave it, and to take an o∣ther Law. But whenas we found that the religion that you preached had no cruelties in it, and that it was fit for vs, & both iust and good, we vnderstood and belee∣ved that it was the true Law, and so we received it wil∣lingly. Which answer of this Indian agrees well with that we read in the first Discourse, that Fernand Cortez sent to the Emperour Charles the fift, wherein hee re∣portes, that after he had conquered the citty of Mexi∣co, being in Cuyoacan, there came Ambassadors to him from the province and commonwealth of Mechoacan, requiring him to send them his law, and that he would teach them to vnderstand it, because they intended to leave their owne, which seemed not good vnto them, which Cortez graunted, and at this day they are the best Indians, and the truest Christians that are in New
Spaine. The Spaniards that saw these cruell sacrifices, resolved with all their power to abolish so detestable and cursed a butchering of men, and the rather, for that in one night before their eies they sawe threescore or threescore and tenne Spaniards sacrificed, which had beene taken in a battell given at the conquest of Mexi∣co: and another time they found written with a cole in a chamber in TeZcusco these wordes; Hecre such a mi∣serable man was prisoner with his companions whom they of Tezcusco did sacrifice. There happened a very strange thing vpon this sub∣iect, and yet true, being reported by men worthie of credite, which was, that the Spaniards beholding these sacrifices, having opened and drawne out the heart of the ustie yong man, and cast him from the toppe of the staires, (as their custome was,) when hee came at the bottome, he said to the Spaniards in his language, Knightes, they have slaine me, the which did greatly moove our men to horror and pittie. It is no incredi∣ble thing, that having his heart pulled out, hee might speake, seeing that Galen reportes that it hath often chanced in the sacrifice of beasts, after the heart hath beene drawne out,Gte. lib. 2. de Hip. & Platon. . cap. 4. and cast vpon the altar, the beasts have breathed, yea, they did bray and cry out alowde, and sometimes did runne. Leaving this question how this might bee in nature, I will follow my purpose, which is, to shew how much these barbarous people did now abhorre this insuportable slaverie they had to that insernall murtherer, and how great the mercy of the Lord hath beene vnto them, imparting his most sweete and agreeable law.
How the Divell hath laboured to imitate and counter∣faite the Sacraments of the holy Church. CHAP 25. THat which is most admirable in the hatred and presumption of Sathan, is, that he hath not onely counterfaited in idolatry and sacrifices, but also in cer∣taine ceremonies, our sacraments, which Iesus Christ our Lord hath instituted, and the holy Church doth vse, having especially pretended to imitate, in some sort, the Sacrament of the Communion, which is the most high and divine of all others,) for the great error of Infidells which proceeded in this maner. In the first moneth, which in Peru they called Rayme, and answe∣reth to our December, they made a most solemne feast, called Capacrayme, wherein they made many sacrifices and ceremonies, which continued many daies: du∣ring the which, no stranger was suffered to bee at the Court which was in Cusco. These daies being past, they then gave libertie to strangers to enter, that they might be partakers of the feastes and sacrifices, ministring to them in this maner. The Mamacomas of the Sunne, which were a kinde of Nunnes of the Sunne, made little loaves of the lower of Mays, died and min∣gled with the bloud of white sheepe, which they did sacrifice that day; then presently they commanded that all strangers should enter, who set themselves in order, and the Priests which were of a certaine linage, discending from Liuquiyupangui, gave to every one a morcell of these small loaves, saying vnto them, that they gave these peeces, to the end they should be vni∣ted and confederate with the Ingua, and that they ad∣vised them not to speake nor thinke any ill against the
Ingua, but alwaies to beare him good affection, for that this peece should be a witnesse of their intentions and will, and if they did not as they ought, he would disco∣ver them and be against them. They carried these small loaves, in great platters of gold and silver appointed for that vse, & all did receive & eate these peeces, thanking the Sunne infinitely for so great a favour which hee had done them, speaking wordes and making signes of great contentment and devotion: protesting that du∣ring their lives, they would neither do nor thinke any thing against the Sunne nor the Ingua: and with this condition they received this foode of the Sunne, the which should remaine in their bodies for a witnesse of their fidelitie which they observed to the Sunne and to the Iugua their King. This maner of divelish com∣municating they likewise vsed in the tenth moneth called Coyarayme, which was September, in the so∣lemne feast which they called Cytua, doing the like cere∣monies. And besides this communion (if it be lawfull to vse this word in so divelish a matter,) which they imparted to all strangers that came, they did likewise send of these loaves to all their Guacas, sanctuaries, or idolls, of the whole Realme, and at one instant they found people of all sides, which came expresly to re∣ceive them, to whom they said (in delivering them,) that the Sunne had sent them that, in signe that hee would have them all to worship and honour him, and likewise did sende them in honour of the Caciques. Some perhappes will hold this for a fable and a ficti∣on: yet is it most true, that since the Ingua Yupangi, (the which is hee that hath made most lawes, customes, and ceremonies, as Numa did in Rome:) this maner of com∣munion hath continued, vntill that the Gospel of our
Lord Iesus Christ thrust out all these superstitions, gi∣ving them the right foode of life, which vnites their soules to God: whoso would satisfie himselfe more amply, let him reade the relation which the Licentiate Pollo did write, Don Ieronimo de Loaysa Arch-bishop of the Cittie of Kings, where he shall finde this and many other things which he hath discovered and found out by his great dilligence. In what maner the Divell hath laboured in Mexico to counterfaite the feast of the holy Sacrament and Communion vsed in the holy Church. CHAP. 24. IT is a thing more worthy admiration, to heare speak of the Feast and solemnitie of the Communion which the Divell himselfe the Prince of Pride, orday∣ned in Mexico, the which (although it bee somewhat long,) yet shall it not be from the purpose to relate, as it is written by men of credite. The Mexicaines in the moneth of Maie, made their principall feast to their god VitzliputZli, and two daies before this feast, the Virgins whereof I have spoken, (the which were shut vp and secluded in the same Temple, and were as it were religious women,) did mingle a quantitie of the seede of beetes with rosted Mays, and then they did mould it with honie, making an idoll of that paste, in bignesse like to that of wood, putting insteede of eyes, graines of geene glasse, of blue, or white; and for teeth, graines of Ms, set forth with all the ornment and furniture that I have said. This being finished, all the Noblemen came and brought it an exquisite an rich garment, like vnto that of the idol, wherewith they did
attyre it. Being thus clad and deckt, they did set it in an azured chaire, and in a litter to carry it on their shoul∣ders. The morning of this feast being come, an houre before day, all the maidens came forth attired in white, with new ornaments, the which that day were called the Sisters of their god VitzliputZli, they came crowned with garlands of Mays rosted and parched, being like vnto azahar or the flower of orange, and about their neckes they had great chaines of the same, which went bauldricke-wise vnder their left arme. Their cheekes were died with vermillion, their armes from the elbow to the wrist, were covered with red parrots feathers. And thus attyred, they tooke the idoll one their shoul∣ders, carrying it into the Court, where all the yoong men were, attyred in garmentes of an artificiall re, crowned after the same maner, like vnto the women. Whenas the maidens came forth with the idoll, the yong men drew neer with much reverence, taking the litter wherein the idoll was, vpon their shoulders, car∣rying it to the foote of the staires of the Temple, where al the people did humble themselves, laying earth vpon their heads, which was an ordinarie ceremonie which they did observe at the chiefe feast of their gods. This ceremony being ended, all the people went in proces∣sion with all the diligence and speede they could, go∣ing to a mountain which was a league from the city of Mexico, called Chapulteper, & there they made sacrifices. Presently they went from thence with like diligence, to go to a place neere vnto it, which they called, Atla∣cuyavaya, where they made their second station: and from thence they went to another Burgh or Village a league beyond Cuyoacan, from whence they parted, returning to the Citie of Mexico, not making any other
station. They went in this sort above foure leagues in three or foure houres, calling this procession, Ypayna Vitzliputzli. Being come to the foote of the staires, they set downe the brancard or litter with the idoll, tying great cordes to the armes of the brancarde, then with great observance and reverence, they did drawe vp the litter with the idoll in it to the top of the Tem∣ple, some drawing above, and others helping belowe, in the meane time there was a great noise of fluites, trumpets, cornets, and drummes. They did mount it in this manner, for that the staires of the Temple were very steepe and narrow, so as they could not carry vp the litter vpon their shoulders, while they mounted vp the idoll, all the people stoode in the Court with much reverence and feare. Being mounted to the top, and that they had placed it in a little lodge of roses, which they held readie, presently came the yong men, which strawed many flowers of sundrie kindes, where∣with they filled the temple both within and without. This done, all the Vigins came out of their convent, bringing peeces of paste compounded of beetes, and rosted Mays, which was of the same paste whereof their idoll was made and compounded, and they were of the fashion of geat bones. They delivered them to the yong men, who carried them vp and laid them vp and laide them at the idolls feete, wherewith they filled the whole place, that it could receive no more. They called these morcels of paste, the flesh and bones of VitziliputZli. Having layed abroade these bones, presently came all the Ancients of the Temple, Priests, Levites, and all the rest of the Ministers, according to their dignities and antiquities, (for heerein there was a strict order amongst them, one after another, with
heir vailes of diverse colours and workes, every one ac∣cording to his dignity and office, having garlands vpon their heads, and chaines of lowers about their neckes: after them came their gods and goddesses whom they worshipt of diverse figures, attired in the same livery, then putting themselves in order about those morsells & peeces of paste, they vsed certaine ceremonies with singing and dauncing. By meanes whereof they were blessed and consecrated for the flesh and bones of this idoll. This ceremony and blessing (whereby they were taken for the flesh and bones of the idoll) being ended, they honoured those peeces in the same sorte as their god. Then came foorth the sacrificers, who beganne the sacrifice of men, in the manner as hath beene spo∣ken, and that day they did sacrifice a greater number than at any other time, for that it was the most solemne feast they observed. The sacrifices being ended, all the yoong men and maides came out of the temple attired as before, and being placed in order and ranke one di∣rectly against another, they daunced by drummes the which sounded in praise of the feast, and of the idoll which they did celebrate. To which song all the most ancient and greatest noble men did answer, dauncing about them, making a great circle as their vse is, the yoong men and maides remayning alwayes in the mid∣dest. All the citty came to this goodly spectacle, and there was a commaundement very strictly observed throughout all the land, that the day of the feast of the idoll Vitziliputzli, they should ae no other meate, but this paste with hony, whereof the idoll was made. And this should be eaten at the point of day, & they should drincke no water nor any other thing till after no one:
they held it for an ill signe, yea for sacrilege, to doe the contrary: but after the ceremonies ended, it was law∣full for them to eate any thing. During the time of this ceremony, they hid the water from their litle children, admonishing all such as had the vse of reason, not to drinke any water; which if they did, the anger of God would come vpon them, and they should die, which they did observe very carefully and strictly. The cere∣monies, dancing, and sacrifice ended, they went to vn∣clothe themselves, and the priests and superiors of the temple tooke the idoll of paste, which they spoyled of all the ornaments it had, and made many peeces, as well of the idoll it selfe as of the tronchons which were consecrated, and then they gave them to the commu∣nion, beginning with the greater, and continuing vn∣to the rest, both men, women, and little children, who received it with such teares, feare, and reverence, as it was an admirable thing, saying that they did eate the flesh and bones of God, wherewith they were grieved. Such as had any sicke folkes demaunded thereof for them, and carried it with great reverence and venerati∣on. All such as did communicate, were bound to give the tenth of this seede, whereof the idoll was made. The solemnitie of the idoll being ended, an olde man of great authoritie stept vp into a high place, and with alowde voice preached their lawe and ceremonies. Who would not wonder to see the divell so curious to seeke to be worshipped and reverenced in the same ma∣ner that Iesus Christ our God hath appoynted and also taught, and as the holy Church hath accustomed? Hereby it is plainely verified what was propounded in the beginning, that Sathan strives (all he can) to vsurp
and chalenge vnto himselfe the honor and service that is due to God alone, although he dooth still intermixe with it his cruelties and filthinesse, being the spirite of murther and vncleanenesse, and the father of lies. Of Consessors and Consession which the Indians vsed. CHAP. 25. THe father of lies would likewise counterfeit the sa∣crament of Confession, and in his idolatries seeke to be honored with ceremonies very like to the maner of Christians. In Peru they held opinion, that all disea∣ses and adversities came for the sinnes which they had committed: for remedy whereof they vsed sacrifices: moreover they confessed themselves verbally, almost in all provinces, and had Confessors appoynted by their superiors to that end, there were some sinnes reserved for the superiors. They received penaunce, yea some. times very sharpely, especially when the offendor was a poore man, and had nothing to give his Confessour. This office of Confessor was likewise exercised by wo∣men. The manner of these confessors forcerers whom they call Ychuiri or Ychuri, hath beene most generall in the provinces of Collasuio. They holde opinion, that it is a heinous sinne to conceale any thing in confessi∣on. The Ychuyri or confessors discovered by lottes, or by the view of some beast hides, if any thing were con∣cealed, and punished them with many blowes, with a stone vpon the shoulders, vntill they had revealed all, then after they gave him penaunce, and did sacrifice. They doe likewise vse this confession, when their chil∣dren, wives, husbands, or their Caciques be sicke, or in a∣ny great exploite. And when their Ingra was sicke, all
the provinces confessed themselves, chiefly those of the province of Collao. The Confessors were bound to hold their confessions secret, but in certaine cases limi∣ted. The sinnes that they chiefly confessed, was first to kill one another out of warre, then to steale, to take another mans wife, to give poison or sorcery to doe a∣ny harme: and they helde it to be a grievous sinne, to be forgetfull in the reverence of their Guacas, or Orato∣ries, not to observe the feasts, or to speake ill of the In∣gua, and to disobey him. They accused not themselves of any secret actes and sinnes. But according to the re∣port of some Priests, after the christians came into that Countrey, they accused themselves of their thoughts. The Ingua confessed himselfe to no man, but onely to the Sunne, that hee might tell them to Virachoca, and that he might forgive them. After the Ingua had been confessed, hee made a certaine bath to cleanse himselfe in a running river, saying these words: I have told my sinnes to the Sunne, receive them, O thou River, and carry them to the sea, where they may never appeare more. Others that confessed, vsed likewise these baths, with certaine ceremonies very like to those the Moores vse at this day, which they call Guadoy, and the Indians call them Opacuna. When it chaunced that any mans children died, he was held for a great sinner, saying that it was for his sinnes that the sonne died before the fa∣ther. And therefore those to whom this had chanced, after they were confessed, they were bath'd in this bath called Opacuna, as is saide before. Then some deformed Indian, crookebackt, and counterfet by nature, came to whippe them with certaine nettles. If the Sorcerers or Inchaunters by their lots and divinations affirmed that any sicke body should die, the sicke man makes no dif∣ficulty
to kill his owne sonne, though he had no other, hoping by that meanes to escape death, saying that in his place he offered his sonne in sacrifice. And this cru∣eltie hath beene practised in some places, even since the Christians came into that countrey. In trueth it is strange, that this custome of confessing their secret sinnes, hath continued so long amongest them, and to doe so strict penances, as, to fast, to give apparell, gold and silver, to remaine in the mountaines, and to receive many stripes vpon the shoulders. Our men say, that in the province of Chiquito, even at this day they meete with this plague of Confessors or Ychuris, whereas ma∣ny sicke persons repaire vnto them: but now, by the grace of God, this people beginnes to see cleerely the effect and great benefite of our confession, wherevnto they come with great devotion. And partely this for∣mer custome hath beene suffered by the providence of the Lord, that confession might not seeme tedious vn∣to them. By this meanes the Lord is wholy glorified, and the Divell (who is a deceiver) deceived. And for that it concerneth this matter, I will reporte the manner of a strange confession the Divell hath invented at Iapp, as appeares by a letter that came from thence, which faith thus: There are in Ocaca very great and high and stiep rockes, which have prickes or poynts on them, above two hundred fadome high. Amongest these rockes there is one of these pikes or poyntes so terribly high, that when the Xamabusis (which be pilgrimes) doe but looke vp vnto it, they tremble, and their haire stares, so fearefull and horrible is the place. Vpon the toppe of this poynt there is a great rod of yron of three fadome long, placed there by a strange devise, at the end of this
rodde is a ballance tied, whereof the scales are so bigge, as a man may sit in one of them: and the Goquis (which be divells in humane shape) commaund these pilgrims to enter therein one after another, not leaving one of them: then with an engine or instrument which moo∣veth, by meanes of a wheele, they make this rodde of yron whereon the ballance is hanged, to hang in the aire, one of these XamabuZisbeing set in one of the scales of the ballaunce. And as that wherein the man is sette hath no counterpoise on the other side, it presently hangeth downe, and the other riseth vntill it meetes with and toucheth the rodde: then the Goqnis telleth them from the rocke, that they must confesse them∣selves of all the sinnes they have committed, to their re∣membrance, and that with a lowde voyce, to th'end that all the rest may heare him. Then presently hee be∣ginneth to confesse, whilest some of the standers by do laugh at the sinnes they doe heare; and others sigh, and at every sinne they confesse, the other scale of the bal∣lance falles alittle, vntill that having tolde all his sinnes, it remaines equall with the other, wherein the sorrow∣full penitent sits: then the Goquis turnes the wheele, and drawes the rodde and ballance vnto him, and the Pil∣grime comes foorth, then enters another, vntill all have passed. A Iapponois reported this after hee was christ∣ned, saying that he had beene in this pilgrimage, and entred the ballance seaven times, where he had confes∣sed himselfe publikely. He saide moreover, that if anie one did conceale any sinne, the empty scale yeelded not: and if hee grew obstinate after instance made to confesse himselfe, refusing to open all his sinnes, the Go∣quis cast him downe from the toppe, where in an in∣stant he is broken into a thousand peeces. Yet this chri∣stian,
who was called Iohn tolde vs, that commonly the feare and terrour of this place is so great to all such as enter therein, and the danger they see with thei to fall out of the ballance, and to be broken in peeces, that seldome there is any one but discovers all his sins. This place is called by another name Sangenotoro, that is to say, the place of Confession: wee see plainely by this discourse, how the Divell hath pretended to vfurp vnto himselfe the service of God, making confession of sinnes (which the Lord hath appoynted for the reme∣dy of man) a divellish superstition, to their great losse and perdition. He hath doone no lesse to the Heathe of Iappon, than to those of the provinces of Colla in Peru. Of the abhominable vnction which the Mexicaine prieste and other Nations vsed, and of their witchcraftes. CHAP. 26. GOd appoynted in the auntient Lawe the manner how they should consecrate Aarons person, and the other Priests, and in the Lawe of the Gospel, wee have likewise the holy creame and vnction which they vse when they consecrate the Priestes of Christ. There was likewise in the auntient Lawe a sweete compositi∣on, which God defend should be employed in anie other thing then in the divine service. The Divel hath sought to counterfet all these things after his manner, as hee hath accustomed, having to this end invented things so fowle and filthie, whereby they discover we who is the Author. The priests of the idolles in Mexico were annoynted in this sort, they annointed the body from the foote to the head, and all the haire likewise,
which hung like tresses, or a horse mane, for that they applyed this vnction wet and moyst. Their haire grew so, as in time it hung downe to their hammes, so hea∣vily, that it was troublesome for them to beare it, for they did never cut it, vntill they died, or that they were dispensed with for their great age, or being employed in governments or some honorable charge in the com∣monwealth. They carried their haire in tresses, of sixe fingers breadth, which they died blacke with the fume of sapine, or firre trees, or rosine; for in all Antiquitie it hath bin an offring they made vnto their idolls, and for this cause it was much esteemed and reverenced. They were alwayes died with this tincture from the foote to the head, so as they were like vnto shining Negroes, and that was their ordinary vnction: yet whenas they went to sacrifice and give incense in the mountaines, or on the tops thereof, or in any darke and obscure caves, where their idolles were, they vsed an other kinde of vntion very different, doing certaine ceremonies to take away feare, and to give them courage. This vnc∣tion was made with diverse little venomous beastes, as spiders, scorpions, palmers, salamanders and vipers, the which the boyes in the Colledges tooke and gathered together, wherein they were so expert, as they were alwayes furnished when the Priestes called for them. The chiefe care of these boyes was, to hunt after these beasts; if they went any other way, and by chaunce met with any of these beasts, they stayed to take them, with as great paine, as if their lives depended thereon. By the reason whereof the Indians commonly feared not these venomous beasts, making no more accomp than if they were not so, having beene all bred in this exercise. To make an ointment of these beastes, they
took them all together, and burnt them vpon the hrt of the Temple, which was before the Altare, vntill they were consumed to ashes: then did they put them in morters with much Tobacco or Petum (being an hearbe that Nation vseth much, to benumme the flesh, that they may not feele heir travell) with the which they mingle the ashes, making them loose their force; they did likewise mingle with these ashes, scorpions, spiders and palmers alive, mingling all together, then did they put to it a certaine seede being grownd, which they call Ololuchqui, whereof the Indians make a drinke to see visions, for that the vertue of this hearbe is to deprive man of sence. They did likewise grinde with these ashes blacke and hairie wormes, whose haire only is venomous, all which they mingled together with blacke, or the fume of rosine, putting it in small po, which they set before their god, saying it was his meae. And therefore they called it a divine meate. By mea of this oyntment they became witches, and did see and speake with the Divell. The priestes beeing slubbered with this oyntment, lost all feare, putting on a spirit of cruelty. By reason whereof they did very boldely kill men in their sacrifices, going all alone in the night to the mountaines, and into obscure caves, contemning all wilde beasts, and holding it for certayne and appro∣ved, that both lions, tigres, serpents, and other furious beasts which breede in the mountaines, and forrests, fledde from them, by the vertue of this Petum of their god. And in trueth though this Petum had no power to make them flie, yet was the Divelles picture sufficient whereinto they were transformed. This Petum did al∣so serve to cure the sicke, and for children; and therfore
called it the Divine Physicke and so they came fro all partes to the superiors and priests, as to their saviors, that they might apply this divine physicke, wherewith they anoynted those parts that were grieved. They said that they felt heereby a notable case, which might be, for that Tobacco and Ololuchqui have this propertie of themselves, to benumme the flesh, being applied in ma∣ner of an emplaister, which must be by a stronger rea∣son being mingled with poysons, and for that it did ap∣pease and benumme the paine, they helde it for an ef∣fect of health, and a divine virtue. And therefore rann they to these priests as to holy men, who kept the blind and ignorant in this error, perswading them what they pleased, and making them runne after their inventions and divellish ceremonies, their authority being such, as their wordes were sufficient to induce beliefe as an ar∣ticle of their faith. And thus made they a thousand su∣perstitions among the vulgar people, in their maner of offering incense, in cutting their haire, tying small flo∣wers about their necks, and strings with small bones of snakes, commaunding them to bathe at a certaine time; and that they should watch all night at the harth, lest the fire should die, that they should eate no other bread but that which had bin offered to their gods, that they should vpon any occasion repaire vnto their witches, who with certaine graines tolde fortunes, and divined, looking into keelers and pailes full of water. The sor∣cerers and ministers of the divell vsed much to besmere themselves. There were an infinite number of these witches, divines, enchanters, and other false prophets. There remaines yet at this day of this infection, althogh they be secret, not daring publikely to exercise their sa∣crileges, divelish ceremonies & superstitions, but their
abuses and wickednes are discovered more at large and particularly in the confessions made by the Prelates of Peru. There is a kinde of sorcerers amongst the Indians allowed by the Kings Inguas, which are as it were sooth-saiers, they take vpon them what forme and fi∣gure they please, flying farre through the aire in a short time, beholding all that was done. They talke with the Divell, who answereth them in certaine stones or o∣ther things which they reverence much. They serve as coniurers, to tell what hath passed in the farthest partes, before any newes can come. As it hath chanced since the Spaniardes arrived there, that in the distance of two or three hundred leagues, they have knowne the mu∣tinies, battailes, rebellions, and deaths, both of tyrants, and of those of the Kings partie, and of private men, the which have beene knowne the same day they chanced, or the day after, a thing impossible by the course of nature. To worke this divination, they shut themselves into a house, & became drunk vntil they lost their sences, a day after they answered to that which was demanded. Some affirme they vse certaine vncti∣ons The Indians say, that the old women do common∣ly vse this office of witch-craft, & specially those of one Province, which they call Coaillo, and of another towne called Manchey, and of the Province of Guarochiri. They likewise shew what is become of things stolne and lost. There are of these kindes of Sorcerers in all partes, to whom commonly doe come the Anacona, and Cyva, which serve the Spaniardes, and when they have lost any thing of their masters, or whn they de∣sire to know the successe of things past or to come, as when they goe to the Spaniardes citties for their pri∣vate
affaires, or for the publike, they demaund if their voyage shall be prosperous, if they shall be sicke, if they shall die, or returne safe, if they shall obtaine that which they pretend: and the witches or coniurers answer, yea, or no, having first spoken with the Divell, in an obscure place: so as these Anaconas do well heare the sound of the voyce, but they see not to whom these coniurers speake, neither do they vnderstand what they say. They make a thousand ceremonies and sacrifices to this ef∣fect, with the which they mocke the Divell and grow exceeding drunke, for the doing whereof, they parti∣cularly vse an hearbe called Villea, the iuyce whereof they mingle with their Chica, or take it in some other sort, whereby we may see how miserable they are, that have for their masters, the ministers of him whose of∣fice is to deceive. It is manifest that nothing doth so much let the Indians from receiving the faith of the holy Gospel, and to persever therein, as the confer∣rence with these witches, whereof there have bin, and are still, great numbers, although by the grace of the Lord, and diligence of the Prelates and Priestes, they decrease, and are not so hurtefull. Some of them have beene converted and preached publikely, discovering and blaming themselves, their errors and deceites, and manifesting their devises and lies, whereof wee have seene great effects: as also we vnderstand by letters from Iappon, that the like hath arrived in those parts: all to the glory and honour of our Lord God. Of other Ceremonies and Customes of the Indians, which are like vnto ours. CHAP. 27. THe Indians had an infinite number of other ce∣remonies and customes, which resembled to the
ancient law of Moses, and some to those which the Moores vse, and some approached neere to the law of the Gospel, as their bathes or Opacuna, as they call them: they did wash themselves in water, to clense them from their sins. The Mexicaines had also amongst them a kinde of baptisme, the which they did with ce∣remony, cutting the eares and members of yong chil∣dren new borne, counterfaiting in some sort the cir∣cumcision of the Iewes. This ceremony was done prin∣cipally to the sonnes of Kings and Noblemen: present∣ly vpon their birth the priestes did wash them, and did put a little sword in the right hand, and in the left a tar∣get. And to the children of the vulgar sort, they put the markes of their offices, and to their daughters instru∣ments to spinne, knit, and labour. This ceremony con∣tinued foure daies, being made before some idoll. They contracted mariage after their maner, whereof the Licentiate Pollo hath written a whole Treatise, and I will speake somewhat thereon heereafter. In other things their customes and ceremonies have some shew of reason. The Mexicaines were married by the handes of their priestes in this sort. The Bridegroome and the Bride stoode together before the priest, who tooke them by the hands asking them if they would marrie, then having vnderstoode their willes, hee tooke a cor∣ner of the vaile wherewith the woman had her head covered, and a corner of the mans gowne the which he tied together on a knot, and so led them thus tied to the Bridegroomes house, where there was a harth kindled, and then he caused the wife to go seven times about the harth, and so the married couple sate downe together, and thus was the mariage contracted. The Mexicaines were very iealous of the integritie of their
wives: so as if they found they were not as they ought to be, (the which they knew eyther by signes or disho∣nest wordes,) they presently gave notice thereof to their fathers and kinsfolkes of their wives, to their great shame and dishonor, for that they had not kept good guarde over them. But they did much honour and respect such as lived chastely, making them great banquttes, and giving great presentes both to her and to her kinsfolkes. For this occasion they made great offerings to their gods, and a solemne banket in the house of the wife, and another in the husbands. When they went to house they made an invento∣ry of all the man and wife brought together, of pro∣visions for the house, of land, of iewells and ornaments, which inventories every father kept, for if it chanced they made any devorce, (as it was common amongest them when they agree not,) they divided their goods according to the portion that every one brought, eve∣ry one having libertie in such a case, to marry whom they pleased: and they gave the daughters to the wife, and the sonnes to the husband. It was defended vpon paine of death, not to marry againe together, the which they observed very strictly. And although it seeme that many of their ceremonies agree with ours, yet differ they much for the great abhomination they mingle therewithall. It is common and generall to have vsual∣ly one of these three things, either cruelty, filthines, or slouth: for all their ceremonies were cruell and hurte∣full, as to kill men and to spill blood, are filthy and beastly, as to eate and drinke to the name of their I∣dolls, and also to pisse in the honour of them, carrying them vpon their shoulders, to annoint and besmeere themselves filthily, and to do a thousand sortes of vil∣lanies,
which were at the least, vaine, ridiculous, and idle, and more like the actions of children, then of men. The cause thereof is the very condition of this wiced spirit, whose intention is alwaies to do ill, provoking men still to murthers and filthines, or at the least to vanities and fruitelesse actions, the which every man may well know, if he duly consider the behaviour and actions of the Divell, towardes those he sets to deceive. For in all his illusions we finde a mixture of these three, or at least of one of them. The Indians themselves (since they came to the knowledge of our faith,) laugh and mocke at these fooleries and toyes, in the which their gods held them busied, whom they served more for feare, least they should hurte them, in not obaying them in all things, then for any love they bare them. Although some, yea, very many lived, abused and de∣ceived, with the vaine hope of temporall goods, for of the eternall they had no knowledge. And whereas the temporall power was greatest, there superstition hath most increased; as we see in the Realmes of Mexi∣co and Cusco, where it is incredible to see the number of idolls they had: for within the citty of Mexico there were above three hundred Mango Ingua Yupangu, a∣mongst the Kings of Cusco, was hee that most augmen∣ted the service of their idolls, inventing a thousand kindes of sacrifices, feasts, and ceremonies. The like did King Iscoalt in Mexico, who was the fourth king. There was also a great number of superstitions and sacrifices in other Nations of the Indians, as in the Province of Guatimala, at the Ilands in the new Kingdome, in the Province of Chille, and others that were like Common∣wealthes and Comminalties. But it was nothing  re∣spect of Mexico and Cusco, where Sathan was in ome,
or in his Ierusalem, vntill he was cast out against his will, and the holy Crosse planted in his place, and the King∣dome of Christ our God occupied, the which the ty∣rant did vsurpe. Of some Feast celebrated by them of Cusco, and how the Divell would imitate the mysterie of the holy Trinitie. CHAP. 28. TO conclude that which concernes Religion, there restes something to speake of the feasts and solem∣nities which the Indians did celebrate, the which (for that they are divers and many) cannot be all specified. The Ingnas Lords of Peru, had two kindes of feasts, some were ordinarie, which fell out in certaine mo∣neths, of the yeere: and others extraordinary, which were for certaine causes of importance, as when they did crowne a new King, when they beganne some warre of importance, when they had any great neede of water or drought, or other like things. For the ordi∣nary feasts, we must vnderstand, that every moneth of the yeare they made feasts, and divers sacrifices, and al∣though all of them had this alike, that they offered a hundred sheepe, yet in colour, and in forme, they are very divers. In the first moneth which they call Rayme, which is the moneth of December, they made their first feast, which was the principall of all others, and for that cause they called it Capacrayme, which is to say, a rich and principall feast. In this feast they offered a great number of sheepe and lambs in sacrifice, and they burnt them with sweete wood, then they caused gold and silver to be brought vpon certaine sheepe, setting vppon them three Images of the Sun, and three of the
thunder, the father, the sonne, and the brother. In these feasts they dedicated the Inguas children, putting the Guaras or ensignes vpon them, and they pierced their eares: then some olde man did whip them with slings, and annoynted their faces with blood, all in signe that they should be true Knights to the Ingua. No stranger might remaine in Cusco during this moneth, and this feast, but at the end thereof they entred, and they gave vnto them peeces of the paste of mays with the blood of the sacrifice, which they did eate in signe of confe∣deration with the Ingua, as hath bin said before. It is strange that the Divell after his manner hath brought a trinitie into idolatry, for the three images of the Sunne called Apomti, Churunti, and Intiquaoqui which signifi∣eth father and lord Sunne, the sonne Sunne, and the brother Sunne. In the like maner they named the three Images of Chuquilla, which is the God that rules in the region of the aire, where it thunders, raines and snows. I remember, that being in Cuquisaca, an honourable priest shewed me an information, which I had long in my handes, where it was prooved that there was a cer∣taine Guaca or Oratory, whereas the Indians did wor∣ship an idoll called Tangatanga, which they saide was one in three, and three in one. And as this Priest stood amazed the reat, I saide that the Divell by his infernall and obstinate pride (whereby he alwayes pretendes to make himselfe God,) did steale all that he could from the trueth, to imploy it in his lyings and deceits. Com∣ming then to the feast of the second moneth, which they called Camey, besides the sacrifices which they made, they did cast the ashes into the river, following five or sixe leagues after, praying it to carry them into the sea, for that the Virochoca should there receive this
present. In the third, fourth and fift moneth, they offe∣red a hundred blacke sheepe, speckled, and grey, with many other things, which I omitte for being too tedi∣ous. The ixt moneth is called HatcuZ qui Aymorey, which answereth to Maie, in the which they sacrificed a hundred sheepe more, of all colours: in this moone and moneth, which is when they bring Maie from the fieldes into the house, they made a feast, which is yet very vsuall among the Indians, and they doe call it Ay∣morey. This feast is made comming from the Chacra or farme vnto the house, saying certaine songs, and pray∣ing that the Mays may long continue, the which they call Mamacora. They take a certaine portion of the most fruitefull of the Mays that growes in their farmes, the which they put in a certaine grenier which they doe call Pirua, with certaine ceremonies, watching three nightes: they put this Mays in the richest gar∣ments they have, and beeing thus wrapped and dres∣sed, they worship this Pirua, and hold it in great vene∣ration, saying it is the mother of the mays of their inhe∣ritances, and that by this means the mays augments & is preserved. In this moneth they make a particular sa∣crifice, and the witches demaund of this Pirua, if it hath strength sufficient to continue vntill the next yeare: and if it answers no, then they carry this Mays to the farme to burne, whence they brought it, according to every mans power; then make they another Pirua, with the same ceremonies, saying, that they renue it, to the end the seede of Mays may not perish, and if it answers that it hath force sufficient to last longer, they leave it vntill the next yeare. This foolish vanitie continueth to this day, and it is very common amongest the Indians to
have these Piruas, & to make the feast of Aymorey. The seaventh moneth answereth to Iune, and is called A∣caycuZ qui Intiraymi, in it they made the feast that is cal∣led Intiraymi, in the which they sacrificed a hundred sheepe called Guanacos, and saide it was the feast of the Sunne. In this moneth they made many Images of Quinua wood carved, all attired with rich garmentes, and they made their dancings which they do call Cayo. At this feast they cast flowers in the high wayes, and thither the Indians came painted, and their noblemen had small plates of golde vpon their beards, and all did sing; wee must vnderstand that this feast falleth almost at the same time, whenas the Christians observe the so∣lempnitie of the holy Sacrament, which doth resemble it in some sort, as in dauncing, singing and representa∣tions. And for this cause there hath beene, and is yet among the Indians, which celebrated a feast somewhat like to ours of the holy Sacrament) many superstitions in celebrating this ancient feast of Intiaymi. The eight month is called Chahua Huarqui, in the which they did burne a hundred sheepe more, all grey, of the colour of Viscacha, according to the former order, which month doth answer to our Iuly. The ninth moneth was called Yapaguis, in the which they burnt an hundred sheepe more, of a chesnut colour; and they do likewise kill and burne a thousand Cuyes, to the end the frost, the ayre, the water, nor the sunne should not hurt their farmes: and this moneth doth answer vnto August. The tenth moneth was called Coyarami, in the which they burnt a hundred white sheepe that had fleeces. In this month which answereth to September, they made the feast called Situa in this manner: They assembled together the first day of the moone before the rising thereof: and
in seeing it they cryed aloude, carrying torches in their handes, and saying, Let all harme goe away, striking one an other with their torches. They that did this, were called Panconcos: which being doone, they went to the common bath, to the rivers and fountaines, and every one to his own bath, setting themselves to drink foure dayes together. In this moneth the Mamacomas of the sunne made a great number of small loaves with the blood of the sacrifices, and gave a peece to every stranger; yea they sent to every Guaca throughout the realme, and to many Curacas, in signe of confederati∣on and loyaltie to the Sunne and the Ingua, as hath bin said. The bathes drunkennesse and some relickes of this feast Situa, remaine even vnto this day, in some places, with the ceremonies a little different, but yet very se∣cretly, for that these chiefe and principall feasts have ceased. The eleventh moneth Homaraymi Punchaiquis, wherein they sacrificed a hundred sheepe more. And if they wanted water, to procure raine, they set a black sheepe tied in the middest of a plaine, powring much Chica about it, and giving it nothing to eate, vntill it rained, which is practised at this day in many places, in the time of our October. The twelfth and last month was called Aymara, wherein they did likewise sacrifice a hundred sheepe, and made the feast called Raymican∣tara Rayquis. In this moneth which aunswered to our November, they prepared what was necessary for the children that should be made novices, the moneth fol∣lowing, the children with the old men made a certaine shew, with rounds and turnings: and this feast was called Ituraymi, which commonly they make when it raines too much, or too little, or when there is a plague.
Among the extraordinary feasts which were veryma∣ny, the most famous was that which they called . This feast Ytu hath no prefixed time nor season, but in time of necessitie. To prepare themselves thereunto, all the people fasted two dayes, during the which they did neyther company with their wives, nor eate anie meate with salt or garlicke, nor drinke any Chica. All did assemble together in one place, where no straunger was admitted, nor any beast: they had garments and or∣naments, which served onely for this feast. They mar∣ched very quietly in procession, their heades covered with their vailes, sounding of drummes, without spea∣king one to another. This continued a day and a night; then the day following they daunced and made good cheere for twoo dayes and two nights together, saying, that their prayer was accepted. And although that this feast is not vsed at this day, with all this antient ceremo∣ny, yet commonly they make another which is verie like, which they call Ayma, with garmentes that serve onely to that end, and they make this kind of proces∣sion with their Drummes, having fasted before, then after they make good cheere, which they vsually doe in their vrgent necessities. And although the Indians forbeare to sacrifice beasts, or other things publikely, which cannot be hidden from the Spaniardes, yet doe they still vse many ceremonies that have their begin∣nings from these feasts and auntient superstitions: for at this day they do covertly make this feast of Ytu, at the dances of the feast of the Sacrament, in making the daunces of Lyamallama, and of Guacon, and of others, according to their auntient ceremonies, wherevntowe ought to take good regarde. They have made more large Discourses of that which concerneth this matte
for the necessary observation of the abuses and super∣stitions the Indians had in the time of their gentility, to the end the Priestes and Curates may the better take heede. Let this suffice now to have treated of the ex∣ercise wherewith the divell held those superstitious na∣tions occupied, to the end, that against his will wee may see the difference there is betwixt light and dark∣nes, betwixt the trueth of Christ and the lies of the Gentiles, although the ennemy of God and man hath laboured with all his devises to counterfet those things which are of God. Of the feast of Iubilee which the Mexicaines celebrated. CHAP. 29. THe Mexicaines have beene no lesse curious in their feasts and solemnities, which were of small charge, but of great effusion of mans blood. Wee have before spoken of the principall feast of VitZiliputZli, after the which the feast of Tezcalipuca was most solempnized. This feast fell in Maie, and in their Kalender they cal∣led it Tozcolt: it fell every foure yeeres with the feast of Penaunce, where there was given full indulgence and remission of sinnes. In this day they did sacrifice a cap∣tive which resembled the idoll Tezcalipuca, it was the nineteenth day of Maie: vpon the even of this feast, the Noblemen came to the Temple, bringing a new gar∣ment like vnto that of the idoll, the which the Priest put vpon him, having first taken off his other garments, which they kept with as much, or more reverence than we doe our ornaments. There were in the coffers of the idoll many ornaments, iewelles, earerings, and other riches, as bracelets and pretious feathers which served
to no othervse, but to be there, and was worshipped as their god it selfe. Besides the garment wherewith they worshipped the idoll that day, they put vpon him cer∣taine ensignes of feathers, with fannes, shadowes and other things, being thus attired and furnished, they drew the curtaine or vaile from before the doore, to the end he might be seene of all men: then came forth one of the chiefe of the temple, attired like to the idoll, carrying flowers in his hand, and a flute of earth, ha∣ving a very sharpe sound, and turning towards the east, he founded it, and then looking to the west, north and south he did the like. And after he had thus sounded to∣wards the foure parts of the world (shewing that both they that were present and absent did heare him) hee put his finger into the aire, and then gathered vp earth, which he put in his mouth, and did eate it in signe of a∣doration. The like did all they that were present, and weeping, they fell flat to the ground, invocating the darkenesse of the night, and the windes, intreating them not to leave them, nor to forget them, or else to take a∣way their lives, and free them from the labors they in∣dured therein. Theeves, adulterers, and murtherers, and all others offendors had great feare and heavinesse, whi∣lest this flute sounded; so as some could not dissemble nor hide their offences. By this meanes they all de∣manded no other thing of their god, but to have their offences concealed, powring foorth many teares, with great repentaunce and sorrow, offering great store of incense to appease their gods. The couragious and va∣liant men, and all the olde souldiers, that followed the Arte of Warre, hearing this flute, demaunded with great devotion of God the Creator, of the Lorde for whome wee live, of the sunne, and of other their gods,
that they would give them victorie against their enne∣mies, and strength to take many captives, therewith to honour their sacrifices. This ceremonie was doone ten dayes before the feast: During which tenne dayes the Priest did sound this flute, to the end that all might do this worship in eating of earth, and demaund of their idol what they pleased: they every day made their prai∣ers, with their eyes lift vp to heaven, and with sighs and groanings, as men that were grieved for their sinnes and offences. Although this contrition was onelie for feare of the corporal punishment that was given them, and not for any feare of the eternall, for they certaine∣ly beleeved there was no such severe punishment in the other life. And therefore they offered themselves voluntarily to death, holding opinion that it is to all men an assu∣red rest. The first day of the feast of this idoll TeZcali∣puca being come, all they of the Citty assembled toge∣ther in a court, to celebrate likewise the feast of the Ka∣lender, whereof wee have already spoken, which was called Toxcoalth, which signifies a drie thing: which feast was not made to any other end, but to demaund raine, in the same manner that we solemnise the Roga∣tions: and this feast was alwayes in Maie, which is the time that they have most neede of raine in those coun∣tries. They beganne to celebrate it the ninth of Maie, ending the nineteenth. The last day of the feast the Priestes drew foorth a litter well furnished with curtins and pendants of diverse fashions. This litter had so ma∣ny armes to holde by as there were ministers to carry it. All which came forth besmeered with blacke and long haire, halfe in tresses with white strings, and attyred in the livery of the idoll. Vpon this litter they set the
personage of the idoll, appoynted for this feast, which they called the resemblance of their God TeZcalip, and taking it vpon their shoulders, they broght it open∣ly to the foote of the staires: then came forth the yong men and maidens of the Temple, carrying a great cord wreathed of chaines of roasted mays, with the which they invironed the Litter, putting a chaine of the same about the idolles necke, and a garland vppon his head. They called the cord Toxcalt, signifying the drought and barrennesse of the time. The yoong men came wrapped in redde curtines, with garlands and chains of roasted mays. The maides were clothed in new gar∣ments, wearing chaines about their neckes of roasted mays; and vpon their heads myters made of rods co∣vered with this mays, they had their feete covered with feathers, and their armes and cheekes painted. They brought much of this roasted mays, and the chiefe men put it vpon their heads, and about their neckes, taking flowers in their handes. The idoll beeing placed in his litter, they strewd round about a great quantitie of the boughes of Manguey, the leaves whereof are large and pricking. This litter being set vpon the religious mens-shoul∣ders, they carryed it in procession within the circuite of the Court, twoo Priests marching before with cen∣sors, giving often incense to the idoll; and every time they gave incense, they lifted vp their armes as high as they could to the idoll, and to the Sunne, saying, that they lifted vp their praiers to heaven, even as the smoke ascended on high. Then all the people in the Court turned▪round to the place whither the idoll went, eve∣ry one carrying in his hand new cords of the threed of manguey, a fadome long, with a knotte at the end, and
with them they whipped themselves vppon the shoul∣ders; even as they doe heere vppon holy Thurseday. All the walles of the Court and battlements were full of boughs and flowers, so fresh and pleasaunt, as it did give a great contentment. This procession being en∣ded, they brought the idoll to his vsual place of abode, then came a great multitude of people with flowres, dressed in diverse sortes, wherewith they filled the tem∣ple and all the court, so as it seemed the ornament of an Oratory. All this was putte in order by the priests, the yoong men administring these things vnto them from without. The chappell or chamber where the idoll re∣mayned was all this day open without any vaile. This done, every one came and offered curtines, and pendants of Sandally, precious stones, iewells, in∣sence, sweete wood, grapes, or eares of Mays, quailes: and finally, all they were accustomed to offer in such solemnities. Whenas they offered quailes, (which was the poore mans offering,) they vsed this ceremonie, they delivered them to the priestes, who taking them, pulled off their heads, and cast them at the foote of the Altare, where they lost their bloud, and so they did of all other things which were offered. Every one did of∣fer meate and fruite according to their power, the which was laid at the foote of the altar, and the Mini∣sters gathered them vp, and carried them to their chambers. This solemne offering done, the people went to dinner, every one to his village or house, lea∣ving the feast suspended vntill after dinner. In the meane time, the yong men and maidens of the temple, with their ornaments, were busied to serve the idoll, with all that was appointed for him to eate: which meate was prepared by other women, who had made
a vow that day to serve the idoll. And therefore such as had made this vow, came by the point of day, offe∣ring themselves to the Deputies of the Temple, that they might command them what they would have done, the which they did carefully performe. They did prepare such varietie of meates, as it was admirable. This meate being ready, and the houre of dinner come, all these virgins went out of the Temple in procession, every one carrying a little basket of bread in her hand, and in the other, a dish of these meates; before them marched an old man, like to a steward, with a pleasant habite, he was clothed in a white surples downe to the calves of his legges, vpon a dublet without sleeves of red leather, like to a iacket, hee carried wings insteede of sleeves, from the which hung broade ribbands, at the which did hang a small Calibasse or pumpion, which was covered with flowers, by little holes that were made in it, and within it were many superstitious things. This old man thus attyred, marched very hum∣bly and heavily before the preparation, with his head declining: and comming neere the foote of the staires, he made a great obeisance and reverence. Then going on the one side, the virgins drew neere with the meate, presenting it in order one after another, with great re∣verence. This service presented, the old man returned as before, leading the virgins into their convent. This done, the yong men and ministers of the Temple, came forth and gathered vp this meate, the which they carri∣ed to the chambers of the chiefe Priests of the Temple; who had fasted five daies, eating onely once a day, and they had also abstained from their wives, not once go∣ing out of the Temple in these five daies. During the which, they did whippe themselves rigorously with
cordes, they did eate of this divine meate, (for so they called it,) what they could, neither was it lawfull for a∣ny other to eate thereof. All the people having dined, they assembled againe in the court to see the ende of the feast, whither they brought a captive, which by the space of a whole yeare, had represented the idoll, being attyred, decked, and honoured, as the idoll it selfe, and doing all reverence vnto him, they delivered him into the handes of the sacrificers, who at that instant pre∣sented themselves, taking him by the feete and handes. The Pope did open his stomacke, and pull out his hart, then did he lift vp his hand as high as he could, shew∣ing it to the Sunne, and to the Idoll, as hath beene said. Having thus sacrificed him that represented the idoll, they went into a holy place appointed for this purpose, whither came the yong men and virgins of the Tem∣ple, with their ornaments, the which being put in or∣der, they danced and sung with drummes and other instruments, on the which the chiefe Priests did play and sound. Then came all the Noblemen with en∣signes and ornaments like to the yong men, who dan∣ced round about them. They did not vsually kill any other men that day, but him that was sacrificed, yet every fourth yeare they had others with him, which was in the yeare of Iubile and full pardons. After Sun set, every one being satisfied with sounding, eating, and drinking, the virgins went al to their convent, they took great dishes of earth full of bread mixt with hony, co∣vered with small panniers, wrought and fashioned with dead mens headsand bones, and they carried the collation to the idoll, mounting vp to the court, which was before the doore of the Oratorie: and having set them downe, they retired in the same order as they
came, the steward going still before. Presently came forth all the yong men in order, with canes or reedes in their handes, who beganne to runne as fast as they could to the toppe of the staires of the Temple, who should come first to the dishes of the collation. The El∣ders or chiefe Priests observed him that came first, se∣cond, third, and fourth, without regarding the rest. This collation was likewise all carried away by the yong men, as great Relicks. This done, the foure that arrived first were placed in the midst of the Antients of the Temple, bringing them to their chambers with much honour, praising them, and giving them orna∣ments; and from thence forth they were respected and reverenced as men of marke. The taking of this collati∣on being ended, and the feast celebrated with much ioy and noise, they dismissed all the yong men and maides which had served the idoll; by meanes whereof they went one after another, as they came forth. All the small children of the colledges and schooles, were at the gate of the court, with bottomes of rushes and hearbes in their hands, which they cast at them, mock∣ing and laughing, as of them that came from the ser∣vice of the idoll: they had libertie then to dispose of themselves at their pleasure, and thus the feast ended. Of the Feast of Marchants, which those of Cholutecas did celebrate. CHAP. 30. ALthough I have spoken sufficiently of the service the Mexicaines did vnto their gods, yet will I speak something of the feast they called Quetzacoaalt, which was the god of riches, the which was solemnised in this maner. Fortie daies before the Marchants bought a
slave well proportioned, without any fault or blemish, either of sickenes or of hurte, whome they did attyre with the ornaments of the idoll, that he might repre∣sent it fortie daies. Before his clothing they did clense him, washing him twice in a lake, which they called the lake of the gods; and being purified, they attyred him like the idoll. During these forty daies, hee was much respected for his sake whom he represented. By night they did imprison him, (as hath beene said,) left he should flie, and in the morning they tooke him out of prison, setting him vpon an eminent place, where they served him, giving him exquisite meates to eate. After he had eaten, they put a chaine of flowers about his necke, and many nosegaies in his hands. Hee had a well appointed guard, with much people toaccom∣pany him. When he went through the Cittie, he went dancing and singing through all the streetes, that hee might bee knowne for the resemblance of their god, and when hee beganne to sing, the women and little children came forth of their houses to salute him, and to offer vnto him as to their god. Two old men of the Antients of the Temple, came vnto him nine daies be∣fore the feast, and humbling themselves before him, they said with a low and submisse voyce, Sir, you must vnderstand that nine daies hence the exercise of dan∣cing and singing doth end, and thou must then die; and then he must answer, in a good houre. They call this ceremony, Neyolo MaxiltleZtli, which is to say, the ad∣vertisement: and when they did thus advertise him, they tooke very carefull heede whether hee were sad, or if he danced as ioyfully as he was accustomed, the which if he did not as cheerefully as they desired, they made a foolish superstition in this maner. They pre∣sently
tooke the sacrificing rasors, the which they wa∣shed and clensed from the blood of men, which remai∣ned of the former sacrifices. Of this washing they made a drinke mingled with another liquor made of Cacao, giving it him to drinke; they said that this would make him forget what had beene said vnto him, and would make him in a maner incensible; returning to his former dancing and mirth. They said moreover, that he would offer himself cheerefully to death, being inchanted with this drinke. The cause why they sought to take from him this heavinesse, was, for that they held it for an ill augure, and a fore telling of some great harme. The day of the feast being come, after they had done him much honor, sung, and given him incense, the sacrificers tooke him about mid-night and did sa∣crifice him, as hath beene said, offering his heart vnto the Moone, the which they did afterwardes cast against the idoll, letting the bodie fall to the bottome of the staires of the Temple, where such as had offered him tooke him vp, which were the Marchants, whose feast it was. Then having carried him into the chiefest mans house amongst them, the body was drest with divers sawces, to celebrate (at the breake of day,) the banquet and dinner of the feast, having first bid the idoll good morrow, with a small dance, which they made whilst the day did breake, and that they prepared the sacrifice. Then did all the Marchants assemble at this banket, especially those which made it a trafficke to buy and sell slaves, who were bound every yeare to offer one, for the resemblance of their god. This idoll was one of the most honoured in all the land: and therefore the Temple where hee was, was of great authoritie: There were threescore staires to ascend vp vnto it, and
on the toppe was a court of an indifferent largenesse, very finely drest and plastered, in the midst whereof, was a great round thing like vnto an Oven, having the entrie low and narrow: so as they must stoope very low that should enter into it. This Temple had cham∣bers and chappells as the rest, where there were con∣vents of Priests, yong men, maides, and children, as hath beene said: and there was one Priest alone resident continually, the which they changed weekely: For al∣though there were in every one of these temples, three or foure Curates or Ancients, yet did every one serve his weeke without parting. His charge that weeke, (af∣ter he had instructed the children,) was to strike vp a drumme every day at the Sunne setting, to the same end that we are accustomed to ring to evensong. This drumme was such as they might heare the house sound thereof throughout all the partes of the Cittie, then e∣very man shut vp his merchandise, and retired vnto his house, and there was so great a silence, as there seemed to be no living creature in the Towne. In the morning whenas the day beganne to breake, they beganne to sound the drumme, which was a signe of the day be∣ginning, so as travellers and strangers attended this sig∣nall to beginne their iournies, for till that time it was not lawfull to goe out of the cittie. There was in this temple a court of a reasonable great∣nes, in the which they made great dances, & pastimes, with games or comedies the day of the idolls feast; for which purpose there was in the middest of this court a theatre of thirty foote square very finely decked and trimmed, the which they decked with flowers that day, with all the arte and invention that mought be, beeing invironed round with Arches of divers flowers and fea∣thers,
and in some places there were tied many small birds, connies, and other tame beasts. After dinner all the people assembled in this place, and the players pre∣sented themselves, and played comedies, some coun∣terfeit the deafe, and the rheumatike, others the lame, some the blinde, and without handes, which came to seeke for cure of the idoll: the deafe answered confu∣sedly, the rheumatike did cough, the lame halted, tel∣ling their miseries and griefes, wherewith they made the people to laugh; others came foorth in the forme of little beasts, some were attired like snailes, others like toades, and some like lizardes: then meeting together, they tolde their offices, and every one retyring to his place, they founded on small flutes, which was pleasant to heare. They likewise counterfeited butterflies and small birdes of diverse colours, and the children of the Temple represented these formes, then they went in∣to a little forrest planted there for the nonce, where the Priestes of the Temple drew them foorth with instru∣ments of musicke. In the meane time they vsed many pleasant speeches, some in propounding, others in de∣fending, wherewith the assistants were pleasantly inter∣tained. This doone, they made a maske or mummerie with all these personages, and so the feast ended: the which were vsually doone in their principall feasts. What profit may be drawne out of this discourse of the Indians superstitions. CHAP 31. THis may suffice to vnderstand the care and paine the Indians tooke to serve and honour their Idolls▪ or rather the divell: for it were an infinite matter, and of small profit, to report every thing that hath passed,
for that it may seeme to some needlesse to have spoken hus much: and that it is a losse of time, as in reading the fables that are fained by the Romaines of Knight∣hoode. But if such as holde this opinion will looke wel into it, they shall finde great difference betwixt the one and the other: and that it may be profitable for many considerations, to have the knowledge of the cuoms and ceremonies the Indians vsed: first this knowledge is not only profitable, but also necessary in those coun∣tries where these superstitions have beene practised, to the end that Christians, and the maisters of the Law of Christ, may know the errours and superstitions of the Antients, and observe if the Indians vse them not at this day, either secretly or openly. For this cause many learned and worthy men have written large Discour∣ses, of what they have found: yea the Provinciall coun∣sells have commaunded them to write and print them, as they have doone in Lima, where hath beene made a more ample Discourse than this. And therefore it im∣porteth for the good of the Indians, that the Spani∣ardes being in those parts of the Indies, should have the knowledge of all these things. This Discourse may likewise serve the Spaniards there, and all others wher∣soever, to give infinite thankes to God our Lord, who hath imparted so great a benefite vnto vs, giving them his holy Lawe, which is most iust, pure, and altoge∣ther profitable. The which we may well know, com∣paring it with the lawes of Sathan, where so many wretched people have lived so miserably. It may like∣wise serve to discover the pride, envy, deceipts, and am∣bushes of the Divell, which he practiseth against those hee holdes captives, seeing on the one side hee seekes to imitate God, and make comparison with him and his
holy Lawe, and on the other side: hee dooth mingle with his actions so many vanities, filthinesse and cruel∣ties, as hee that hath no other practise but to sophis∣cate and corrupt all that is good. Finally, hee that shall see the darkenes and blindenes wherein so many Pro∣vinces and Kingdoms have lived so long time, yea and whein many Nations, and a great part of the world live yet, deceived with the like trumperies, he can not (if he have a Christians heart) but give thankes to the high God, for such as hee hath called out of so great darkenes, to the admirable light of his Gospel: besee∣ching the vnspeakeable charitie of the Creator to pre∣serve and increase them in his knowledge and obedi∣ence, and likewise be grieved for those that follow still the way of perdition. And that in the end hee beseech the Father of Pitty, to open vnto them the treasures and riches of Iesus Christ, who with the Father and Holy-ghost raignes in all Ages; Amen.
THE SIXT BOOKE of the Naturall and Morall Hi∣storie of the Indies. That they erre in their opinion, which holde the Indians to want iudgement. CHAP. 1. HAving treated before of the religion the Indians v∣sed, I pretend to discourse in this Booke of their cu∣stoms, policy, and govern∣ment, for two considera∣tions: the one is to con∣fue that false opinion ma∣ny doe commonly holde of them, that they are a grose and brutish people, or that they have so little vn∣derstanding, as they scarce deserve the name of anie: So as many excesses and outrages are committed vpon them, vsing them like bruite beasts, and reputing them vnworthy of any respect; which is so common and so dangerous an errour (as they know well who with any
zèale and consideration have travelled amongst them, and that have seene and observd their secrets and coun∣sells;) And moreover, for the small regard many me of these Indians, who presume to knowe much, and yet are commonly the most ignorant and presumptu∣ous. I finde no better meanes to confound this perni∣cious opinion, then in relating their order and maner, whenas they lived vnder their owne lawes, in which (although they had many barbarous things, and with∣out ground, yet had they many others worthy of great admiration, whereby wee may vnderstand, that they were by nature, capable to receive any good instructi∣ons: and besides, they did in some things, passe many of our common-weales. It is no matter of marvell if there were so great and grose faults amongst them, see∣ing there hath been likewise amongst the most famous Law givers and Philosophers (yea without exception, Lycurgus and Plato) and amongest the wisest common∣wealths, as the Romanes and Athenians, where wee may finde things so full of ignorance, and so worthy of laughter, as in trueth if the commonweales of the Mex∣icaines, or of the Inguas, hadde beene knowne in those times of the Romans and the Greekes, their lawes and governements had been much esteemed by them: But we at this day little regarding this, enter by the sword, without hearing or vnderstanding; perswading our selves that the Indians affaires deserve no other respect, but as of venison that is taken in the forrest, and broght for our vse and delight. The most grave and diligent, which have searched and attained to the knowledge of their secrets, customs and antient governement, holde another opinion, and admire the order and discourse that hath been betwixt
them. Of which number is Polo Ondeguardo, whome I vsually followe in the discourse of matters of Peru, and for these of Mexico Iohn de Toüar, who had a Prebend in the Church of Mexico, and is now of our company of Iesuites, who by the commaundement of the vice∣roy Don Martin Enriques, have made a diligent and a large collection of the Histories of that nation, and ma∣ny other grave and notable personages, who both by word and writing have sufficiently informed me of all those things I shall here set downe. The other end, and the good which may followe by the knowledge of the lawes customes and government of the Indians, is, that wee may helpe and governe them with the same lawes and customes, for that they ought to be ruled accord∣ing to their owne lawes and priviledges, so farre foorth as they doe not contradict the Lawe of Christ, and his holy Church, which ought to be maintained and kept as their fundamentall lawes. For the ignorance of laws and customes hath bred many errours of great impor∣taunce, for that the Governours and Iudges, knowe not well how to give sentence, nor rule their subiects. And besides, the wrong which is doone vnto them, a∣gainst reason, it is preiudiciall and hurtefull vnto our selves; for thereby they take occasion to abhorre vs, as men both in good and in evill alwayes contrary vnto them. Of the supputation of times, and the Kalender the Mexicaines vsed. CHAP. 2. ANd to beginne then by the division and supputa∣tion of times which the Indians made, wherein truely wee may well perceive the great signes of their
vivacitie and good vnderstanding. I will first shew in what sorte the Mexicanes counted and divided their yeere, their moneths, their kalender, their computati∣ons, their worldes and ages. They divided the yeare into eighteene moneths, to which they gave twentie dayes, wherein the three hundred and three score days are accomplished, not comprehending in any of these moneths the five dayes that remaine, & make the yeare perfect. But they did reckon them aparte, and called them the dayes of nothing: during the which, the peo∣ple did not any thing, neither went they to their Tem∣ples, but occupied themselves only in visiting one an∣other, and so spent the time: the sacrificers of the Tem∣ple did likewise cease their sacrifices. These five dayes being past, they beganne the computation of the yeare, whereof the first moneth and the beginning was in March, when the leaves beganne to growe greene, al∣though they tooke three dayes of the moneth of Fe∣bruary; for the first day of their yeere was, as it were, the sixe and twentie day of February, as appeareth by their kalender, within the which ours is likewise com∣prehended and contained with a very ingenious Arte, which was made by the antient Indians that knew the first Spaniardes. I have seene this Kalender, and have it yet in my custody, which well deserveth the sight, to vnderstand the discourse and industry the Mexicaine Indians had. Every one of these eighteene monethes had his proper name, and his proper picture, the which was commonly taken of the principall feast that was made in that moneth, or from the diversitie of tymes, which the yeere caused in that moneth. They had in this Kalender certaine dayes marked and distinguished for their feasts. And they accompted their weekes by
thirteene dayes, making the dayes with a Zero or ci∣pher, which they multiplied vnto thirteene, and then beganne to count, one, two, &c. They did likewise marke the yeares of these wheeles, with foure signes or figures, attributing to every yeare a peculiar signe, whereof one was of a house, an other of a conny, the third of a reede, and the fourth of a flint. They painted them in this sort, noting by those figures the yeare that did runne, saying of so many houses, of so many flints of such a wheele, happened such a thing. For we must vnderstand that their wheele, which was an age, con∣tained foure weekes of yeares, every weeke containing thirteene yeares, which in all made fiftie twoo yeares. In the midst of this wheele they painted a Sunne, from the which went foure beames or lines in crosse to the circumference of the wheele; and they made their course, even as the circumference was divided into foure equall partes, every one with his line, having a distinct colour from the rest, and the foure colors were, greene, blew, red, and yellow: every portion of these foure had thirteene separations which had all their signes or particular figures, of a house, a conny, a reed, or a flint, noting by every signe a yeare, and vppon the head of this signe they painted what had happened that yeare. And therefore I did see in the Kalender mentioned the yeare when the Spaniards entered Mexico, marked by the picture of a man clad in red, after our manner, for such was the habite of the first Spaniard, whome Fernand Cortes sent, at the end of the two & fifty years, which finished the wheele. They vsed a pleasant cere∣mony, which was, the last night they didde breake all their vesselles and stuffe, and put out their fire, and all
the lights, saying, that the worlde should end at the fi∣nishing of one of these wheeles, and it might be at that time: for (said they) seeing the worlde must then end, what neede is there to provide meate to eate, and ther∣fore they had no further neede of vessel nor fire. Vpon this conceit they passed the night in great feare, saying it might happen there would be no more day, and they watched very carefully for the day; but when they saw the day beginne to breake, they presently beat manie drummes, and sounded cornets, flutes, and other instru∣ments of ioy and gladnesse, saying, that God did yet prolong the time with another age, which were fiftie two yeares. And then beganne an other wheele. The first day and beginning of this age they took new fire, and bought new vesselles to dresse their meate, and all went to the high Priest for this new fire, having first made a solemne sacrifice, and given thanks for the com∣ming of the day, and prolongation of an other age. This was their manner of accounting their yeares, mo∣neths, weekes, and ages. How the Kings Inguas accounted the yeares and moneths. CHAP. 3. ALthough this supputation of times practised a∣mongest the Mexicaines, bee ingenious enough and certaine, for men that had no learning; yet in my opinion they wanted discourse and consideration, ha∣ving not grounded their computation according vnto the course of the moone, nor distributed their months accordingly, wherein those of Peru have far surpassed them: for they divided their yeare into as many dayes, perfectly accomplished as we do heere, and into twelve
moneths or moones, in the which they imployed and consumed the eleven daies that remaind of the moone as Polo writes. To make the computation of their yeare sure and certaine, they vsed this industry; vppon the mountaines which are about the citty of Cusco (where the Kings Inguas held their court, beeing the greatest sanctuary of those realmes, and as we should say an o∣ther Rome) there were twelve pillars set in order, and in such distaunce the one from the other, as every month one of these pillers did note the rising and setting of the sunne. They called them Suceanga, by meanes where∣of they taught and shewed, the feasts, and the seasons fitte to sowe and reape, and to do other things. They did certaine sacrifices to these pillars of the sunne. Eve∣ry month had his proper name, and pecular feasts. They beganne the yeare by Ianuary as wee doe. But since, a king Ingua called Pachacuto, which signifies a reformer of the Temple, beganne their yeare by December, by reason (as I coniecture) that then the Sunne returneth from the last poynt of Capricorne, which is the tropike neerest vnto them. I know not whether the one or the other have observed any Bisexte, although some holde the contrary. The weekes which the Mexicaines did reckon, were not properly weekes, being not of seaven dayes: the Inguas likewise made no mention thereof which is no wonder, seeing the account of the weeke is not grounded vpon the course of the sunne, as that of the yeare, nor of the moone, as that of the month; but among the Hebrewes i is grounded vpon the cre∣ation of the world, as Moyses reporteth; and amongest the Greekes and Latins vpon the number of the seven planets, of whose names the dayes of the weeke have taken their denomination; yet was it much for those
Indians, being men without bookes and learning, to have a yeare, seasons, and feasts, so well appoynted as I have sayd. That no nation of the Indies hath beene found to have had the vse of letters. CHAP 4. LEtters were invented to signifie properly the words we do pronounce, even as woordes (according to the Philosopher) are the signes and demonstrations of mans thoughtes and conceptions. And both the one and the other (I say the letters and words) were ordai∣ned to make things knowne. The voyce for such as are present, and letters for the absent, and such as are to come. Signes and markes which are not properly to signifie wordes, but things, cannot be called, neyther in trueth are they letters, although they be written, for wee can not say that the Picture of the sunne be a wri∣ting of the sunne, but onely a picture; the like may be saide of other signes and characters, which have no re∣semblance to the thing, but serve onely for memorie: for he that invented them, did not ordaine them to sig∣nifie wordes, but onely to note the thing: neyther do they call those characters, letters, or writings, as indeede they are not, but rather ciphers, or remembraunces, as those be which the Spherists or Astronomers do vse, to signifie divers signes or planets of Mars, Venus, Iupi∣ter, &c. Such characters are ciphers, and no letters: for what name soever Mars may have in Italian, French, or Spa∣nish, this character doth alwaies signifie it, the which is not found in letters: for although they siguify the thing, yet is it by meanes of words. So as they which know
not the tongue, vnderstand them not: as for example, the Greekes nor the Hebrews, cannot conceive what this word Sol doth signifie, although they see it written; for that they vnderstand not the Latine word: so as writing and letters are onely practiced by them, which signifie words therewith. For if they signifie things me∣diately, they are no more letters nor writings, but ci∣phers and pictures: whereby we may observe two no∣table things. The one, that the memory of histories and antiquities may bee preserved by one of these three meanes, either by letters and writings, as hath beene vsed amongst the Latines, Greekes, Hebrews, and many other Nations; or by painting, as hath beene vsed almost throughout all the world, for it is said in the se∣cond Nicene Counsell, Painting is a booke for fooles which cannot reade: or by ciphers and characters, as the cipher signifies the number of a hundred, a thousand and o∣thers, without noting the word of a hundred, or a thou∣sand. The other thing we may observe thereby, is that which is propounded in this chapter, which is, that no Nation of the Indies discovered in our time, hath had the vse of letters and writings, but of the other two sortes, images, and figures. The which I observe, not onely of the Indies of Peru, and new Spaine, but also of Iappon, and China. And although this may seeme false to some, seeing it is testified by the discourses that have beene written, that there are so great Libraries and V∣niversities in China, and Iappon, and that mention is made of their Chapas, letters, and expeditions, yet that which I say, is true, as you may vnderstand by the dis∣course following.
Of the fashion of Letters, and Bookes; the Chinois vsed. CHAP. 5. THere are many which thinke, and it is the most common opinion, that the writings which the Chinois vsed, are letters, as those we vse in Europe, and that by them wee may write wordes and discourses, and that they only differ from our letters and writings, in the diversitie of caracters, as the Greekes differ from the Latines, and the Hebrews from the Chaldees. But it is not so, for they have no Alphabet, neither write they any letters, but all their writing is nothing else but painting and ciphering: and their letters signifie no partes of distinctions, as ours do, but are figures and re∣presentations of things, as of the Sunne, of fire, of a man, of the sea, and of other things. The which appears plainely, for that their writings and Chapas, are vnder∣stood of them all, although the languages the Chinois speake, are many and very different, in like sort as our numbers of ciphers are equally vnderstooode in the Spanish, French, and Arabian tongues: for this figure 8. wheresoever it be, signifies eight, althogh the French call this number of one sort, and the Spaniards of ano∣ther. So as things being of themselves innumerable, the letters likewise or figures which the Chinois vse to sig∣nifie them by, are in a maner infinite: so as he that shall reade or write at China, (as the Mandarins doe,) must know and keepe in memory at the least fourescore and five thousand characters or letters, and those which are perfect herein, know above sixscore thousand. Astrange and prodigious thing; yea, incredible, if it were not testified by men worthy of credite, as the fathers of our company, who are there continually, learning their
language and writing, wherein they have studied day and night above tenne yeares, with a continuall labour; for the charitie of Christ, and the desire of salvation of soules, prevailed in them above all this labour and difficultie. For this reason learned men are so much e∣steemed in China, for the difficultie there is to conceive them: & those only have the offices of Mandarins, Go∣vernours, Iudges, and Captaines. For this cause the fa∣thers take great pains to instruct their children to reade and write. There are many of these schooles where the children are taught, where the masters teach them by day, and the fathers at home by night: so as they hurt their eyes much, and they whippe them often with reedes, although not so severely as they doe offenders. They call it the Mandarin tongue, which requires a mans age to be conceived. And you must vnderstand, that although the tongue which the Mandarins speake, bee peculiar and different from the Vulgar, which are many, and that they studie it, as they doe La∣tine & Greeke heere, and that the learned only throgh∣out all China, do vnderstand it: so it is notwithstanding that all that is written in it, is vnderstood in all tongues: and although all the Provinces doe not vnderstand one another by speaking, yet by writing they doe: for there is but one sort of figures and characters for them all, which signifie one thing, but not the same word and prolation: seeing (as I have said,) they are onely to denote the things, and not the worde, as we may easily vnderstand by the examples of numbers in ciphering. And they of Iappon & the Chinois, do reade and vnder∣stand well the writings one of another, although they be divers Nations, and different in tongue and lan∣guage. If they speake what they reade or write, they
should not bee vnderstood. Such are the letters and bookes the Chinois vse, being so famous in the world. To make their impressions, they grave a boord or plank with the figures they will print, then do they stampe as many leaves of paper as they list, of the same sort as they have made their pictures, the which are graven in copper or wood. But a man of iudgement may aske, how they could signifie their conceptions by figures, which approached neere or resemble the thing they would represent? As to say, the Sunne heats, or, that he hath beheld the Sunne, or, the day is of the Sunne. Fi∣nally, how it were possible to denote by the same fi∣gures, the case, the coniunction, and the articles, which are in many tongues and writings? I answer therevnto, that they distinguish and signifie this vari∣etie by certaine points, strikes, and dispositions of the figure. But it is difficult to vnderstand how they can write proper names in their tongue, especially of stran∣gers, being things they have never seene, and notable to invent figures proper vnto them. I have made triall thereof being in Mexico with the Chinois, willing them to write this proposition in their language, Ioseph Aco∣sta is come from Peru: and such like: wherevpon the Chi∣nois was long pensive, but in the end hee did write it, the which other Chinois did after reade, although they did vary a little in the pronountiation of the proper name. For they vse this devise to write a proper name: they seeke out something in their tongue, that hath re∣semblance to that name, and set downe the figure of this thing. And as it is difficult among so many proper names, to finde things to resemble them in the prola∣tion, so is it very difficult and troublesome, to write such names. Vpon this purpose, father Allonso SancheZ
told vs, that when he was in China, being led into divers Tribunall seates, from Manderin to Manderin, they were long in putting his name in writing in their Chapas, yet in the end they did write it after their maner, and so ridiculously, that they scarce came neere to the name: and this is the fashion of letters and writings which the Chinois vsed. That of the Iapponois appro∣ched very neere, although they affirme that the No∣blemen of Iappon that came into Europe, did write all things very easily in their language, were they of our proper names: yea, I have had some of their writings shewed me, whereby it seemes they should have some kinde of letters, although the greatest part of their wri∣tings, be by the characters and figures, as hath bin saide of the Chinois. Of the Schooles and Vniversities of China. CHAP. 6. THe fathers of our company say, that they have not seene in China, any great schooles or vniversities of Philosophie, and other naturall sciences; beleeving there is not any, but that all their studie is in the Man∣darin tongue, which is very ample and hard, as I have said: and what they studie, bee things written in their owne tongue, which be histories of sects, and opinions, of civill lawes, of morall proverbes, of fables, and many other such compositions that depend thereon. Of di∣vine sciences they have no knowledge, neither of na∣turall things, but some small remainders of straied pro∣positions, without art or methode, according to e∣verie mans witte and studie. As for the Mathema∣tikes, they have experience of the celestiall motions, and of the starres. And for Phisicke, they have know∣ledge
of herbs, by means wherof, they cure many disea∣ses, & vse it much. They write with pensils, & have ma∣ny books writen with the hand, and others printed, but in a bad order. They are great plaiers of come dies, the which they perform with great preparation of theaters, apparel, bels, drums, and voices. Some fathers report to have seene comedies which lasted ten or twelve dayes and nights, without any want of comedians, nor com∣pany to beholde them. They doe make many different sceanes, and whilst some act, the others feede and sleep. In these comedies they do commonly treate of morall things, and of good examples, intermingled with plea∣sant devises. This is the summe of that which our men report of the letters and exercises of them of China; wherein wee must confesse to be much wit and indu∣strie. But all this is of small substance, for in effect all the knowledge of the Chinois, tendes onely to reade and write, & no farther: for they attaine to no high know∣ledge. And their writing, and reading, is not properly reading, and writing; seeing their letters are no letters that can represent wordes, but figures of innumerable things, the which cannot be learned, but in a long time and with infinite labour. But in the end with all their knowledge, an Indian of Peru or Mexico, that hath lear∣ned to reade and write, knowes more then the wisest Mandarin that is amongst them: for that the Indian with foure and twentie letters which he hath learned, will write all the wordes in the world: and a Mandarin with his hundred thousand letters, will be troubled to write some proper name, as of Martin, or Alonso, & with greater reason he shalbe lesse able to write the names of things he knowes not. So as the writing in China, is no other thing but a maner of painting or ciphring.
Of the fashion of letters and writings which the Mex∣icaines vsed. CHAP. 7. WE finde amongest the Nations of New Spaine a great knowledge and memorie of antiquitie; and therefore searching by what meanes the Indians had preserved their Histories, and so many particulari∣ties, I learned, that although they were not so subtill and curious as the Chinois, and those of Iappon, yet had they some kinde of letters and bookes amongest them, whereby they preserved (after their manner) the deeds of their predecessors. In the province of Yu-lata, where the Bishopricke is, which they call de Honduras, there were bookes of the leaves of trees, folded and squared, after their manner, in the which the wise Indians con∣tained the distribution of their times, the knowledge of the planets, of beasts and other naturall things, with their antiquities, a thing full of great curiositie and dili∣gence. It seemed to some Pedant that all this was an in∣chantment & magicke arte, who did obstinately main∣taine, that they ought to be burnt, so as they were com∣mitted to the fire. Which since, not onely the Indians found to be ill done, but also the curious Spaniards, who desired to know the secrets of the countrey. The like hath happened in other things: for our men thin∣king that all was but superstition, have lost many me∣morialls of an ancient and holy things, which might have profited much. This proceedeth of a foolish and igno∣rant zeale, who not knowing, nor seeking to knowe what concerned the Indians, say preiudicately, that they are all but witchcrafts, and that all the Indians are but drunkards, incapable to know or learne any thing.
For such as would be curiously informed of them, have found many things worthy of consideration. One of our company of Iesuites, a man very witty and wel ex∣perienced, did assemble in the province of Mexico, the Antients of Tescuco, of Talla, and of Mexico, conferring at large with them, who shewed vnto him their books, histories and kalenders, things very woorthy the sight, bicause they had their figures and hierogliphicks, wher∣by they represented things in this maner: Such as had forme or figure, were represented by their proper ima∣ges, and such as had not any, were represented by cha∣racters that signified them, and by this meanes they fi∣gured and writ what they would. And to observe the time when any thing did happen, they had those pain∣ted wheeles, for every one of them contained an age, which was two and fifty yeares, as hath beene said; and of the side of those wheeles, they did paint with figures and characters right against the yeare, the memorable things that happened therein. As they noted the yeare whenas the Spaniards entred their Countrey, they painted a man with a hatte and a red ierkin, vpon the signe of the reede, which did rule then, and so of other accidents. But for that their writings and characters were not sufficient as our letters and writings be, they could not so plainly expresse the words, but onely the substance of their conceptions. And forasmuch as they were accustomed to reherse Discourses and Dialogues by heart, compounded by their Oratours and auntient Rhethoritians, and many Chapas made by their Poets (which were impossible to learne by their Hierogli∣phickes and Characters) the Mexicaines were very cu∣rious to have their children learne those dialogues and compositions by heart. For the which cause they had
Schooles, and as it were, Colledges or Seminaries, where the Auncients taught children these Orations, and many other things, which they preserved amongst them by tradition from one to another, as perfectly, as if they had beene written; especially the most famous Nations had a care to have their children (which had any inclination to be Rhetoritians, and to practise the office of Orators) to learne these Orations by heart: So as when the Spaniardes came into their Country, and had taught them reade and write our letters, many of the Indians then wrote these Orations, as some grave men doe witnes that had read them. Which I say, for that some which shall happly reade these long and elo∣quent discourses in the Mexicaine Historie, will easilie beleeve they have beene invented by the Spaniardes, and not really taken and reported from the Indians. But having knowne the certaine trueth, they will give cre∣dite (as reason is) to their Histories. They did also write these Discourses after their manner, by Charac∣ters and Images: and I have seene for my better satis∣faction, the Pater noster, Ave Maria, and Simboll, or ge∣nerall confession of our faith, written in this manner by the Indians. And in trueth whosoever shall see them, will won∣der thereat. For, to signifie these wordes, I a sinner do confesse my selfe, they painted an Indian vppon his knees, at a religious mans feete, as one that confesseth himselfe: and for this, To God most mighty, they painted three faces with their Crownes, like to the Trinitie, and To the glorious Virgine Marie, they painted the face of our Lady, and halfe the body of a little childe: and for S. Peter and S. Paul, heads with crowns, and a key with a sword: and whereas images failed, they did set cha∣racters,
as Wherein I have sinned, &c. whereby wee may conceive the quickenesse of spirite of these Indians, see∣ing this manner of writing of our prayers and matters of faith hath not beene taught them by the Spaniards, neither could they have done it, if they had not had an excellent conception of that was taught them. And I have seene in Peru, a confession of sinnes brought by an Indian, written in the same forte with pictures and characters, painting every one of the tenne Comman∣dementes, after a certaine manner, where there were certaine markes like ciphers, which were the sinnes hee had committed against the Commaundements. I no∣thing doubt but if any of the most sufficient Spaniards were imployed to make memorialles of the like things by their images and markes, they would not attaine vn∣to it in a whole yeare, no not in tenne. Of Registers and the manner of reckoning which the Indians of Peru vsed. CHAP. 8. BEfore the Spaniardes came to the Indies, they of Peru had no kinde of writing, either letters, chara∣cters, ciphers, or figures, like to those of China and Mex∣ico: yet preserved they the memory of their Antiqui∣ties, and maintaine an order in all their affairs, of peace, warre, and pollicie, for that they were carefull obser∣vers of traditions from one to another, and the yoong ones learned, and carefully kept, as a holy thing, what their superiors had tolde them, and taught it with the like care to their posteritie. Besides this diligence, they supplied the want of letters and writings, partely by painting, as those of Mexico, (although they of Peru
were very grose and blockish) and partely, and most commonly by Quippos. These Quippos are memorialls or registers, made of bowes, in the which there are diverse knottes and colours, which do signifie diverse things, and it is strange to see what they have expressed and represented by this meanes: for their Quippos serve them insteede of Bookes of histories, of lawes, ceremo∣nies, and accounts of their affaires. There were officers appointed to keepe these Quippos, the which at this day they call Quipocamayos▪ the which were bound to give an account of every thing, as Notaries and Registers doe heere. Therefore they fully beleeved them in all things, for according to the varietie of businesse, as warres, pollicie, tributes, ceremonies and landes, there were sundry Quippos or braunches, in every one of the which there were so many knottes little and great, and strings tied vnto them, some red, some greene, some blew, some white; and finally, such diversitie, that e∣ven as wee derive an infinite number of woordes from the foure and twenty letters, applying them in diverse sortes, so doe they drawe innumerable woordes from their knottes, and diversitie of colours. Which thing they doe in such a manner, that if at this day in Peru, a∣ny Commissary come at the end of two or three yeares, to take information vppon the life of any officer, the Indians come with their small reckonings verified, say∣ing, that in such a village they have given him so many egges which hee hath not payed for, in such a house a henne, in an other, two burdens of grasse for his horse, and that he hath paied but so much mony, and remain∣eth debtor so much. The proofe being presently made with these numbers of knottes and handfulls of cords, it remaines for a certaine testimony and register. I did
see a handfull of these strings, wherein an Indian wo∣man carried written a generall confession of all her life, and thereby confessed herselfe, as well as I could have done it in written paper. I asked her what those strings meant that differed from the rest: she aunswered mee, they were certaine circumstaunces which the sin requi∣red to be fully confessed. Beside these Quippos of thred, they have an other, as it were a kinde of writing with small stones, by meanes whereof, they learne punctu∣ally the words they desire to know by heart. It is a plea∣sant thing to see the olde and the impotent (with a wheele made of small stones) learne the Pater noster, with another the Ave Maria, with another the Creede; and to remember what stone signifies, Which was concei∣ved by the holy-ghost, and which, Suffered vnder Pontius Pilate. It is a pleasant thing to see them correct themselves when they doe erre; for all their correction consisteth onely in beholding of their small stones. One of these wheeles were sufficient to make mee forget all that I do knowe by heart. There are a great number of these wheeles in the Church-yardes for this purpose. But it seemes a kinde of witchcraft, to see an other kinde of Quippos, which they make of graines of Mays, for to cast vp a hard account, wherein a good Arithmetitian would be troubled with his penne to make a division: to see how much every one must contribute: they do drawe so many graines from one side, and adde so ma∣ny to another, with a thousand other inventions. These Indians wil take their graines, and place five of one side, three of another, and eight of another, and wil change one graine of one side, and three of another: So as they finish a certaine account, without erring in any poynt:
and they sooner submitte themselves to reason by these Quippos, what every one ought to pay, then we can do with the penne. Hereby we may iudge if they have a∣ny vnderstanding, or be brutish: for my parte, I think they passe vs in those things, wherevnto they do apply themselves. Of the order the Indians holde in their writings. CHAP. 9. IT shalbe good to adde heerevnto what we have ob∣served, touching the Indians writings: for their ma∣ner was not to write with a continued line, but from the toppe to the bottome, or in circle-wise. The La∣tines and Greeks do write from the left hand vnto the right, which is the vulgar and common manner we do vse. The Hebrewes contrariwise beganne at the right to the left, and therefore their bookes beganne where ours did end. The Chinois write neither like the Greeks nor like the Hebrews, but from the toppe to the bot∣tome, for as they be no letters but whole wordes, and that every figure and character signifieth a thing, they have no neede to assemble the parts one with an other, and therefore they may well write from the toppe to the bottome. Those of Mexico, for the same cause did not write in line, from one side to another, but contra∣rie to the Chinois, beginning below, they mounted vp∣ward. They vsed this maner of writing, in the account of their daies, and other things which they observed: Yet when they did write in their wheels or signes, they beganne from the middest where the Sunne was figu∣red, and so mounted by their yeeres vnto the round and circumference of the wheele. To conclude, wee
finde foure different kindes of writings, some writte from the right to the left, others from the left to the right, some from the toppe to the bottome, and others from the foote to the toppe, wherein wee may disco∣ver the diversity of mans iudgement. How the Indians dispatched their Messengers. CHAP. 10. TO finish the maner they had of writing, some may with reason doubt how the Kings of Mexico and Peru had intelligence from all those realmes that were so great, or by what meanes they could dispatch their affaires in Court, seeing they had no vse of any letters, nor to write pacquets: wherein we may be satisfied of this doubt, when we vnderstand, that by wordes, pic∣tures, and these memorialles, they were often adverti∣sed of that which passed. For this cause there were men of great agilitie, which served as curriers, to goe and come, whome they did nourish in this exercise of run∣ning from their youth, labouring to have them well breathed, that they might runne to the toppe of a high hill without wearines. And therefore in Mexico they gave the prize to three or foure that first mounted vp the staires of the Temple, as hath beene said in the for∣mer Booke. And in Cusco, when they made their so∣lemne feast of Capacrayme, the novices did runne who could fastest vp the rocke of Ynacauri. And the exercise of running is generall; much vsed among the Indians. Whenas there chaunced any matter of importaunce, they sent vnto the Lordes of Mexico, the thing painted, whereof they would advertise them, as they did when the first Spanish ships appeared to their ight, & when
they tooke Topanchan. In Peru they were very curious of footemen, and the Ingua had them in all parts of the realme, as ordinary Posts called Chasquis, whereof shall be spoken in his place. Of the manner of governement, and of the Kings which the Indians had. CHAP. 11. IT is apparant, that the thing wherein these barba∣rous people shew their barbarisme, was in their go∣vernement and manner of commaund: for the more that men approch to reason, the more milde is their go∣vernement and lesse insolent; the Kings and Lords are more tractable, agreeing better with their subiects, ac∣knowledging them equall in nature, though inferiour in duetie and care of the commonwealth. But amongst the Barbarians all is contrary, for that their government is tyrannous, vsing their subiects like beasts, and seek∣ing to be reverenced like gods: For this occasion many nations of the Indies have not indured any Kings, or absolute & soveraigne Lords, but live in comminalties, creating and appointing Captains and Princes, for cer∣taine occasions onely, to whome they obey during the time of their charge, then after they returne to their for∣mer estates. The greatest part of this new world (where there are no settled kingdomes, nor established com∣monweales, neither princes nor succeeding kings) they governe themselves in this manner, although there be some Lordes and principall men raised above the com∣mon sort. In this sorte the whole Countrey of Chille is governed, where the Auracanes, those of Teucapell and others, have so many yeeres resisted the Spaniardes.
And in like sort all the new kingdome of Grenad, that of Guatimalla, the Ilandes, all Florida, Bresill, Ls and other countries of great circuite: but that in some places, they are yet more barbarous, scarcely acknow∣ledging any head, but all commaund and governe in common, having no other thing, but wil, violence, in∣dustry and disorder, so as he that most may, most com∣maunds. At the East Indies there are great kingdomes, well ordered and governed, as that of Sian, Bisnaga, and others, which may bring to field when they please, a hundred or two hundred thousand men. As likewise the Kingdome of China, the which in greatnes and power, surpasseth all the rest, whose kings, (as they report,) have continued above two thousand yeares, by meanes of their good order and govern∣ment. But at the West Indies, they have onely found two Kingdomes or setled Empires, that of the Mexi∣caines in new Spaine, and of the Inguas in Peru. It is not easie to be said, which of the two was the mightiest Kingdome, for that Motecuma, exceeded them of Peru, in buildings, and in the greatnes of his court: but the Inguas, did likewise exceede the Mexicaines, in treasure, riches, and greatnes of Provinces. In regarde of anti∣quitie, the Monarchie of the Inguas, hath the advan∣tage, although it be not much, and in my opinion, they have beene equall in feates of armes and victories. It is most certaine, that these two Kingdomes have much exceeded all the Indian Provinces, discovered in this new world, as well in good order and government, as in power and wealth, and much more in superstition and service of their idolls, having many things like one to an other. But in one thing they differed much, for among the Mexicaines, the succession of the kingdome,
was by election, as the Empire of the Romans, and that of Peru, was hereditarie, and they succeeded in bloud, as the Kingdomes of Fraunce, and Spaine. I will therefore heereafter treate of these two governments, (as the chiefe subiect and best knowne amongst the Indians,) being fit for this discourse, leaving many and tedious things which are not of importance. Of the Government of the Kings and Inguas of Peru. CHAP. 12. THe Ingua which ruled in Peru, being dead, his law∣full sonne succeeded him, and so they held him that was borne of his chiefe wife, whome they called Coya. The which they have alwaies observed since the time of an Ingua, calld Yupangui, who married his sister: for these Kings held it an honour to marry their sisters. And although they had other wives, and concubines, yet the succession of the Kingdome appertained to the sonne of the Coya. It is true, that when the King had a legitimate brother, he succeeded before the sonne, and after him his nephew, and sonne to the first. The Curacas, and Noblemen, held the same order of succes∣sion in their goods and offices. And after their maner they made excessive ceremonies, and obsequies for the dead. They observed one custome very great & full of state, that a King which entred newly into his King∣dome, should not inherite any thing of the movables, implements, and treasure of his predecessour, but hee must furnish his house new, and gather together gold, silver, and other things necessarie, not touching any thing of the deceased, the which was wholy dedicated for his Oratorie or Guaca, and for the entertainment of the family he left, the which with his of-spring, was
alwaies busied at the sacrifices, ceremonies, and service of the deceased King: for being dead, they presently held him for a god, making sacrifices vnto him, images, and such like. By this meanes, there was infinite trea∣sure in Peru: for every one of the Inguas, had laboured to have his Oratorie and treasure surpasse that of his predecessors. The marke or ensigne, whereby they took possession of the realme, was a red rowle of wooll, more fine then silke, the which hung in the middest of his forehead: and none but the Ingua alone might weare it, for that it was as a Crowne and royall Dia∣deme: yet they might lawfully weare a rowle hanging on the one side, neere vnto the eare, as some Noblemen did, but onely the Ingua might carry it in the middest of his forehead. At such time as they tooke this roule or wreathe, they made solemne feasts, and many sacri∣fices, with a great quantity of vessell of gold, and sil∣ver, a great number of small formes or images of sheep, made of gold and silver, great abundance of the stuffes of Cumby, well wrought, both fine and courser, many shells of the sea of all sortes, many feathers, and a thou∣sand sheepe, which must be of divers colours. Then the chiefe Priest tooke a yong child in his handes, of the age of six or eight yeares, pronouncing these wordes with the other ministers speaking to the image of Vi∣racocha, Lord we offer this vnto thee, that thou maiest main∣taine vs in quiet, and helpe vs in our warres, maintaine our Lord the Ingua in his greatnes and estate, that hee may al∣waies increase, giving him much knowledge to governe vs. There were present at this ceremony and oath, men of all partes of the Realme, and of all Guacas and San∣ctuaries. And without doubt, the affection and reve∣rence this people bare to their Kings Inguas, was very
great, for it is never found that any one of his subiectes committed treason against him, for that they procee∣ded in their governments, not only with an absolute power, but also with good order and iustice, suffering no man to be oppressed: The Ingua placed governours in divers Provinces, amongst the which, some were su∣periors, and did acknowledge none but himselfe, others were of lesse commaund, and others more particular, with so goodly an order, and such gravitie, as no man durst bee drunke, nor take an eare of Mays from his neighbour. These Inguas held it for a maxime, that it was necessary to keepe the Indians alwaies in action: and therefore we see it to this day, long cawseies and workes of great labour, the which they say were made to exercise the Indians, lest they should remaine idle. When he conquered any new Province, he was accu∣stomed presently to send the greatest part, and the chiefe of that Country into other Provinces, or else to his Court, and they call them at this day in Peru, Miti∣mas, and in their places hee sent others of the Nation of Cusco, especially the Orciones, which were as Knights of an ancient house. They punished faultes rigorously. And therefore such as have any vnderstanding heereof, hold opinion, that there can be no better government for the Indians, no more assured, then that of the Inguas. Of the distribution the Inguas made of their Vessell. CHAP. 13. TO relate more particularly what I have spoken before, you must vnderstand, that the distribution which the Inguas made of their vessells, was so exact
and distinct, as he might governe them all with great facilitie, although his realme were a thousand leagues long: for having conquered a Province, he presently reduced the Indians into Towns and Comminalties, the which he divided into bandes, hee appointed one to have the charge over every ten Indians, over every hundred another, over every thousand another, & over ten thousand another, whom they called Humo, the which was one of the greatest charges. Yet above all in every Province, there was a Governour of the house of the Inguas, whom all the rest obeyed, giving vnto him every yeare in particular account of what had pas∣sed, that is, of such as were borne, of those that were dead and of their troups and graine. The Governors went every yeare out of Cusco, where they remained, and returned to the great feast of Rayme, at the which, they brought the tribute of the whole Realme to the Court; neither might they enter but with this condi∣tion. All the Kingdome was divided into foure partes, which they called Tahuantinsuyo, that is, Chinchasuyo, Collasuyo, Andesuyo, & Condesuyo, according to the foure waies which went from Cusco, where the Court was re∣sident, and where the generall assemblies of the realme were made. These waies and Provinces being answe∣rable vnto them, were towards the foure quarters of the wold, Collasuyo to the South, Chinchasuyo to the North, Condesuȳo to the West, and Andsuyo to the East. In every towne and village, there were two sortes of people, which were of Hanansaya, and Vrinsaya, which is as much to say, as those above, and those below. When they commanded any worke to be done, or to furnish any thing to the Ingua, the officers knew pre∣sently how much every Province, Towne, and Family,
ought to furnish: so as the division was not made by e∣quall portions, but by cottization, according to the qualities and wealth of the Countrie. So as for exam∣ple, if they were to gather a hundred thousand Fan∣gues of Mays, they knew presently how much every Province was to contribute, were it a tenth, a seventh, or a fift part. The like was of Townes and Villages, Ail∣los, or Linages. The Quipocamayos, which were the of∣ficers and intendants, kept the account of all with their strings and knottes, without failing, setting downe what every one had paied, even to a hen, or a burthen of wood, and in a moment they did see by divers regi∣sers what every one ought to pay. Of the Edifices and maner of building of the Inguas CHAP. 14. THE Edifices and Buildings which the Inguas made in temples, fortresses, waies, countrie hou∣ses, and such like, were many in number, and of an ex∣cessive labour, as doth appeare at this day by their ru∣ines and remainders, both in Cusco, Tyaguanaco, Tambo, and other places, where there are stones of an vnmea∣surable greatnes: so as men cannot conceive how they were cut, brought, and set in their places. There came great numbers of people from all Provinces, to worke in these buildings and fortresses, which the Ingua cau∣sed to be made in Cusco, or other partes of the Realme. As these workes were strange, and to amaze the behol∣ders, wherein they vsed no morter nor ciment, neither any yron, or steele, to cut, and set the stones in worke. They had no engines or other instruments to carrie them, and yet were they so artificially wrought, that
in many places they could not see the ioyntes: and ma∣ny of these stones are so big, that it were an incredible thing, if one should not see them. At Tiaguanaco, I did measure a stone of thirty eight foote long, of eighteene broade, and six thicke. And in the wall of the fortresse of Cusco, which is of Moallon, there are stones of a gea∣ter bignes. And that which is most strange, these stones being not cut nor squared to ioyne, but contrariwise, very vnequall one with another in forme and great∣nes, yet did they ioyne them together without ciment, after an incredible maner. All this was done by the force of men, who endured their labour with an invin∣cible patience. For to ioyne one stone with an other, they were forced to handle and trie many of them of∣ten, being vneven. The Ingua appoynted every yeare what numbers of people should labour in these stones and buildings, and the Indians made a division amon∣gest them, as of other things, so as no man was oppres∣sed. Although these buildings were great, yet were they commonly ill appoynted and vnfit, almost like to the Mosquites or buildings of the Barbarians. They could make no arches in their edifices, no morter or cyment to builde them withall: when they saw arches of wood built vpon the river of Xaura, the bridge being finished, and the wood broken downe, they all beganne to runne away, supposing that the bridge which was of stone should presently fall; but when they found it to stand firme, and that the Spa∣niards went on it, the Cacique saide to his companions; It is reason we should serve these men, who in trueth seeme to be the children of the Sunne. The bridges they made were of reedes plaited, which they tied to the bankes with great stakes, for that they could not make any bridges
ofstone or wood. The bridge which is at this day vp∣on the current of the great lake Chiquitto in Collao is ad∣mirable, for the course of that water is so deep, as they can not settle any foundation, and so broade, that it is impossible to make an arch to passe it: so as it was alto∣gether impossible to make a bridge eyther of wood or stone. But the wit and industry of the Indians invented a meanes to make a firme and assured bridge, being on∣ly of strawe, which seemeth fabulous, yet is it very true: For as we have said before, they did binde toge∣ther certaine bundles of reedes, and weedes, which do grow in the lake that they call Torora, and being a light matter that sinkes not in the water, they cast it vppon a great quantity of reedes, then having tyed those bun∣dles of weedes to either side of the river, both men and beasts goe over it with ease: passing over this bridge I have woondered, that of so common and easie a thing, they had made a bridge, better, and more assured than the bridge of boates from Seville to Triane. I have mea∣sured the length of this bridge, and as I remember, it was above three hundred foote; and they say that the depth of this current is very great: and it seemes above, that the water hath no motion, yet they say, that at the bottome it hath a violent and very furious course. And this shall suffice for buildings. Of the Inguas revenues, and the order of Tributes they imposed vpon the Indians. CHAP. 15. THe Inguas riches was incomparable, for although no king did inherite the riches and treasure of his predecessor, yet had he at commaund, all the riches of
his realmes, aswell silver and gold, as the stuffe of Cum∣bi, and cattell, wherein they abounded, and their grea∣test riches of all, was their innumerable number of vas∣salles, which were all imployed as it pleased the King. They brought out of every province what he had cho∣sen for tribute. The Chicas sent him sweete and rich woods; the Lucanas sent Brancars to carry his Litter; The Chumbilbicas, dauncers; and so the other provin∣ces sent him what they had of aboundaunce, besides their generall tribute, wherevnto every one contribu∣ted. The Indians that were noted to that end, labored in the mines of golde and silver, which did abound in Peru, whom the Ingua intertained with all they needed for their expences: and whatsoever they drew of gold and silver, was for him. By this meanes there were so great treasures in this kingdome, as it is the opinion of many, that what fell in the handes of the Spaniardes, (although it were very much) as wee know) was it not the tenth part of that which they hid and buried in the ground, the which they could never discover, not∣withstanding all the search covetousnesse had taught them. But the greatest wealth of these barbarous peo∣ple, was, that their vassalles were all slaves, whose la∣bour they vsed at their pleasure: and that which is ad∣mirable, they imployed them in such sorte, as it was no servitude vnto them, but rather a pleasing life. But to vnderstand the order of tributes which the Indians payed vnto their Lordes, you must knowe, that when the Ingua conquered any citties, he divided all the land into three partes, the first was, for religion and ceremo∣nies, so as the Pachayachaqui, which is the Creator, and the Sunne, the Chuquilla, which is the Thunder, the Pachamana, and the dead, and other Guacas and sanctu∣aries,
had every one their proper lands, the fruits wher∣of were spoyled and consumed in sacrifices, and in the nourishing of ministers and priests; for there were In∣dians appoynted for every Guaca, and sanctuary, and the greatest parte of this revenue was spent in Cusco, where was the vniversall and generall sanctuarie, and the rest in that cittie, where it was gathered: for that af∣ter the imitation of Cusco, there were in every Citie, Guacas, and Oratories of the same order, and with the same functions, which were served after the same man∣ner and ceremonies to that of Cusco, which is an admi∣rable thing, and they have found it by proofe in above a hundred townes, some of them distant above twoo hundred leagues from Cusco. That which they sowed or reapt vpon their land, was put into houses, as greni∣ers, or store-houses, built for that effect, and this was a great parte of the Tribute which the Indians payed. I can not say how much this parte amounted vnto, for that it was greater in some partes than in other, and in some places it was in a manner all: and this parte was the first they put to profite. The second parte of these lands and inheritances was for the Iugua, wherewith he and his housholde were entertained, with his kinsfolks, noblemen, garrisons and souldiers. And therefore it was the greatest portion of these tributes, as it appear∣eth by the quantity of golde, silver, and other tributes, which were in houses appoynted for that purpose, be∣ing longer and larger than those where they keepe the revenues of the Guacas. They brought this tribute very carefully to Cusco, or vnto such places where it was needefull for the souldiers, and when there was store, that kept it tenne or twelve yeares, vntill a time of ne∣cessitie. The Indians tilled and put to profite the In∣guas
lands, next to those of the Guacas; during which time they lived and were nourished at the charges of the Ingua, of the Sunne, or of the Guacas, according to the land they laboured. But the olde men, women, and sicke folkes were reserved and exempt from this tribute, and although whatsoever they gathered vpon those lands were for the Ingua, the Sunne, or the Gua∣cs, yet the property appertayned vnto the Indians and their successors. The third parte of these landes were given by the Ingua for the comminaltie, and they have not yet discovered, whether this portion were greater, or lesse, than that of the Ingua or Guacas. It is most cer∣taine they had a care and regarde, it might be sufficient for the nourishment of the people. No particular man possessed any thing proper to himself of this third por∣tion, neither didde the Indians ever possesse any, if it were not by speciall grace from the Ingua: & yet might it not be engaged nor divided amongest his heires. They every yeare divided these landes of the commi∣naltie, in giving to every one, that which was needfull for the nourishment of their persons and families. And as the familie increased or diminished, so did they en∣crease or decrease his portion, for there were measures appoynted for every person. The Indians payed no tri∣bute of that which was apportioned vnto them: For all their tribute was to till and keepe in good order the landes of the Ingua, and the Guacas, and to lay the fruits thereof in their store-houses. When the yeare was bar∣ren, they gave of these fruits thus reserved to the needy, for that there is alwayes superaboundance. The Ingua did likewise make destribution of the cattell as of the landes, which was to number and divide them; then to appoynt the pastures and limites, for the cattell be∣longing
to the Guacas, and to the Ingua, and to everie Towne: and therefore one portion of their revenues was for religion, another for the Ingua, & the third for the Indians themselves. The like order was observed among the hunters, being forbidden to take or kill any females. The troups of the Inguas and Guacas, were in great numbers and very fruitfull; for this cause they called them Capaëllama, but those of the common and publike, were few in number and of small valew, and therfore they called them Bacchallama. The Ingua took great care for the preservation of cattell, for that it hath beene, and is yet, all the wealth of the Countrey, and as it is sayd, they did neither sacrifice any females, nor kill them, neither did they take them when they hun∣ted. If the mangie or the scurvie which they call Cara∣che take any beast, they were presently commaunded to bury it quicke, lest it should infect others. They did sheare their cattell in their season, and distributed to e∣very one to spinne and weave stuffes for the service of his familie. They had searchers to examine if they did employ themselves in these workes, and to punish the negligent. They made stuffes of the wooll of the In∣guas cattell, for him and for his family, one sorte very fine, which they called Cumbi, and another grosser, which they likewise called Abasca. There was no cer∣taine number of these stuffes and garments appointed, but what was delivered to every one. The wooll that remayned was put into the storehouses, whereof the Spaniards found them ful, and with all other things ne∣cessary for the life of man. There are few men of iudge∣ment but doe admire at so excellent and well settled a governement, seeing the Indians (being neyther reli∣gious, nor christians) maintained after their manner,
this perfection, nor to holde any thing proper, and to provide for all their necessities, entertaining with such aboundance matters of religion, and that which con∣cerned their King and Lord. Of artes and offices which the Indians did exercise. CHAP. 16. THe Indians of Peru had one perfection, which was, to teach their young children all artes and occupa∣tions necessary for the life of man; for that there were no particular trades-men, as amongest vs, taylers, shoo∣makers, weavers, and the rest, but every one learned what was needefull for their persons and houses, and provided for themselves. All coulde weave and make their garments, and therfore the Ingua furnishing them with wooll, gave them clothes. Every man could till the ground, and put it to profite, without hyring of a∣ny labourers. All built their owne houses, and the wo∣men vnderstoode most, they were not bred vppe in de∣lights, but served their husbands carefully. Other arts and trades which were not ordinary and common for the life of man, had their proper companies and work∣men, as goldsmiths, painters, potters, watermen, and players of instruments. There were also weavers and workemen for exquisite workes, which the noblemen vsed: but the common people, as hath beene said, had in their houses all things necessary, having no need to buy. This continues to this day, so as they have no need one of another for things necessary: touching his per∣son and family, as shooes and garments, and for their house, to sowe and reape, and to make yron woorkes, and necessary instruments; the Indians heerein doe i∣mitate
the institutions of the lesse auntient, whereof is intreated in the life of the Fathers. In trueth it is a peo∣ple not greatly covetous, nor curious, so as they are con¦tented to passe their time quietly, and without doubt, if they made choise of this manner of life, by election, and not by custome or nature, we may say that it was a life of great perfection, being apt to receive the doc∣trine of the holy Gospel, so contrary an enimy to pride, covetousnes and delights. But the preachers give not alwayes good example, according to the doctrine they preach to the Indians. It is woorthy observation, al∣though the Indians be simple in their manner and ha∣bites, yet do we see great diversitie amongest the pro∣vinces, especially in the attire of their head, for in some places they carried a long peece of cloth which went often about, in some places a large piece of cloth, which went but once about, in some parts as it were litle mor∣ters or hattes, in some others as it were high and round bonets, & some like the bottome of sacks, with a thou∣sand other differences. They had a straight and invio∣lable lawe, that no man might change the fashion of the garments of his province, although hee went to live in another. This the Ingua held to be of great importance for the order and good governement of his realme, and they doe observe it to this day, though not with so great a care as they were accustomed. Of the Posts and Chasquis the Indians did use. CHAP. 17. THere were many Posts and couriers which the In∣gua maintened throughout his realme, whom they called Chasquis, and they carried commaundements
to the Governours, and returned their advises and ad∣vertisements to the Court. These Chasquis were placed at every course, which was a league and a halfe one fro an other in twoo small houses, where were foure Indi∣ans of every country, and they were changed month∣ly. Having received the packet or message, they ranne with all their force vntill they had delivered it to the o∣ther Chasquis, such as were to runne, being ready and watchfull. They ranne fifty leagues in a day and night, although the greatest parte of that countrey be very rough. They served also to carry such things as the In∣gua desired to have with speede. Therefore they had always sea-fish in Cusco, of two dayes old or litle more, although it were above a hundred leagues off. Since the Spaniardes entred, they have vsed of these Chasquis, in time of seditions whereof there was great need. Don Martin the viceroy appoynted ordinary posts at everie foure leagues, to carry and recarry dispatches, which were very necessary in this realme, though they runne not so swiftly as the auntients did, neither are there so many, yet they are well payed, and serve as the ordi∣naries of Spaine, to whom they give letters which they carry foure or five leagues. Of the iustice, lawes, and punishments which the In∣guas have established, and of their mar∣riages. CHAP. 18. EVen as such as had done any good service in warre, or in the governement of the common-weale were honoured and recompensed with publike charges, with lands given them in proper, with armes and titles of honour, and in marrying wives of the Inguas linage:
Even so they gave severe punishments to such as were disobedient and offenders. They punished murther, thes and adultery, with death, and such as commit∣ted incest with ascendants or descendants in direct line, were likewise punished with death. But they held it no adultery to have many wives or concubines, ney∣ther were the women subiect to the punishment of death, being found with any other, but onely she that was the true and lawfull wife, with whome they con∣tracted marriage; for they had but one whome they did wed and receive with a particular solempnitie and ceremony, which was in this maner: the bridegroome went to the brides house, and led her from thence with him, having first put an Ottoya vppon her foote. They call the shooe which they vse in those partes Ottoya, be∣ing open like to the Franciscan Friars. If the bride were a mayde, her Ottoya was of wooll, but if she were not, it was of reedes. All his other wives and concubines did honour and serve this as the lawfull wife, who alone af∣ter the decease of her husband caried a mourning weed of blacke, for the space of a yeare; neither did she marry vntill that time were past; and commonly she was yon∣ger than her husband. The Ingua himselfe with his own hand gave this woman to his Governors and captains: and the Governors or Caciques, assembled all the yong∣men and maydes, in one place of the Citty, where they gave to every one his wife with the aforesaide ceremo∣ny, in putting on the Ottoya, and in this manner they contracted their marriages. If this woman were found with any other than her husband, shee was punished with death, and the adulterer likewise: and although the husband pardoned them, yet were they punished, although dispensed withall from death. They inflicted
the like punishment on him that did committe with his mother, grandmother, daughter, or grand∣childe▪ for it was not prohibited for them to ma to∣gether, or to have of their other kinsfolkes for concu∣bines; onely the first degree was defended, neither did they allow the brother to have the company of his si∣ster, wherein they of Peru were very much deceived, beleeving that their Inguas and noble men might law∣fully contract marriage with their sisters, yea by father and mother: for in trueth it hath beene alwayes helde vnlawfull among the Indians, & defended to contract in the first degree; which continued vntill the time of Topa Ingua Yupangui father to Guaynacapa, and grand∣father to Atahualpa, at such time as the Spaniards ente∣red Peru, for that Topa Ingua Yupangui, was the first that brake this custome, marrying with Mamaoello, his sister by the fathers side, decreeing that the Inguas might marry with their sisters by the fathers side, & no other. This he did, and by that marriage he had Guaynaca∣pa, and a daughter called Coya Cussillimay: finding him∣selfe at the poynt of death, hee commaunded his chil∣dren by father and mother to marry together, and gave permission to the noble men of his country, to marrie with their sisters by the fathers side. And for that this marriage was vnlawful, and against the lawe of nature, God would bring to an end this kingdome of the I∣guas, during the raigne of Guascar Ingua, and Atalmalpa Ingua, which was the fruite that sprang from this mar∣riage. Whoso will more exactly vnderstand the man∣ner of marriages among the Indians of Peru, lette him reade the Treatise Polo hath written, at the request of Don Ieronimo Loaisa Archbishop of Kings: which P made a very curious search, as he hath doone of diers
other things at the Indies. The which importes much to be knowne to avoyde the errour and inconvenien∣ces whereinto many fall (which know not which is the lawfull wife or the concubine among the Indians) cau∣sing the Indian that is baptized to marry with his con∣cubine, leaving the lawfull wife: thereby also wee may see the small reason some have had, that pretended to say, that wee ought to ratifie the marriage of those that were baptized, although they were brother and sister. The contrary hath beene determined by the provinci∣all Synode of Lyma, with much reason, seeing among the Indians themselves this kind of marriage is vnlawful. Of the Originall of the Inguas Lords of Peru, with their Conquests and Victories. CHAP. 19. BY the commandement of Don Phillip the Catho∣like King, they have made the most dilligent and exact search that could be, of the beginning, customes, and priviledges of the Inguas, the which was not so perfectly done as was desired: for that the Indians had no written recordes: yet they have recovered that which I shall write, by meanes of their Quippos and re∣gisters. First there was not in Peru in olde time, any King or Lord to whome all obeyed, but they were comminalties, as at this day there be in the realme of Chille, and in a maner, in all the Provinces which the Spaniards have conquered in those westerne Indies, except the realme of Mexico. You must therefore vn∣derstand, that they have found three maner of govern∣ments at the Indies. The first and best, was a Monar∣chie, as that of the Inguas, and of Moteçuma, although
for the most part they were tyrannous. The second was of Comminalties, where they were governed by the advise and authoritie of many, which are as it were Counsellors. These in time of warre, made choise of a Captaine, to whome a whole Nation or Province did obey, and in time of peace, every Towne or Com∣minaltie did rule and governe themselves, having some chiefe men whom the vulgar did respect, and sometimes, (though not often,) some of them assemble together about matters of importance, to consult what they should thinke necessary. The third kinde of go∣vernment, is altogether barbarous, composed of Indi∣ans without law, without King, and without any cer∣taine place of abode, but go in troupes like savage beasts. As farre as I can conceive, the first inhabitants of the Indies, were of this kinde, as at this day a great part of the Bresillians, Chiraguanas, Chunchos, Ysoycingas Pilcocones, and the greatest part of the Floridians, & all the Chichimaquas in new Spaine. Of this kind the other sort of government by Comminalties was framed, by the industrie and wisedome of some amongst them, in which there is some more order, holding a more stai∣ed place, as at this day those of Auracano, and of Te∣pell in Chille, and in the new kingdome of Grenado, the Moscas, and the Ottomittes in new Spaine: and in all these there is lesse fiercenes and incivilitie, and much more quiet then in the rest. Of this kinde, by the valure and knowledge of some excellent men, grew the other go∣vernment more mightie and potent, which did insti∣tute a Kingdome and Monarchie. It appeares by their registers, that their government hath continued above three hundred yeares, but not fully foure, although their Seigniorie for a long time, was not above five or
leagues compasse about the Citty of Cusco: their ori∣ginall and beginning was in the valley of Cusco, where by little & little they conquered the lands which we call Peru, passing beyond Quitto, vnto the river of Pasto towardes the North, stretching even vnto Chille, to∣wardes the South, which is almost a thousand leagues in length. It extended in breadth vnto the South sea towardes the West, and vnto the great champains which are on the other side of the Andes, where at this day is to be scene the Castell which is called the Puca∣ra of the Ingua, the which is a fortresse built for the de∣fence of the frontire towards the East. The Inguas ad∣vanced no farther on that side, for the aboundance of water, marshes, lakes, and rivers, which runne in those partes. These Inguas passed all the other Nations of Amarica, in pollicy and government, and much more in valour and armes, although the Canaries which were their mortall enemies, and favoured the Spaniardes, would never confesse it, nor yeelde them this advan∣tage: so as even at this day, if they fall into any discourse or comparisons, and that they be a little chased and incensed, they kill one another by thousands vpon this quarrell, which are the most valiant, as it hath happe∣ned in Cusco. The practise and meanes which the In∣guas had to make themselves Lords of all this Coun∣trie, was in faining that since the generall deluge, (whereof all the Indians have knowledge,) the world had beene preserved, restored, and peopled by these In∣guas, and that seven of them came forth of the cave of Pacaricambo, by reason whereof, all other men ought them tribute and vassalage, as their progenitors. Be∣sides they said and affirmed, that they alone held the true religion, and knew how God should be served and
honoured: and for this cause they should instruct all men. It is a strange thing, the ground they give to their customes and ceremonies. There were in Cusco above foure hundred Oratories, as in a holy land, and all pla∣ces were filled with their mysteries: As they continued in the conquests of Provinces, so they brought in the like ceremonies and customes. In all this realme the chiefe idolls they did worship, were Viracocha, Pachy∣acachic, which signifies the Creator of the world, and after him, the Sunne. And therefore they said, that the Sunne received his vertue and being from the Crea∣tor, as the other idolls do, and that they were interces∣sors to him. Of the first Ingua, and his Successors. CHAP. 20. THe first man which the Indians report to be the beginning and first of the Inguas, was Mangocapa, whom they imagine, after the deluge, to have issued forth of the cave of Tambo, which is from Cusco about five or six leagues. They say that he gave beginning to two principall races or families of the Inguas, the one was called Hanancusco, and the other Vrincusco: of the first came the Lords which subdued and governed this Province, and the first whom they make the head and steame of this family, was called Ingaroca, who founded a family or Aillo, as they call them, named Vi∣çaquiquirao. This although he were no great Lord, was served notwithstanding in vessell of gold and silver. And dying, he appointed that all his treasure should be imployed for the service of his body, and for the fee∣ding of his family. His successor did the like: and this
grew to a generall custome, as I have said, that no Ingua might inherite the goods and house of his predecessor, but did build a new pallace. In the time of this Ingua∣rca, the Indians had images of gold; and to him suc∣ceeded Yaguarguaque, a very old man: they say, he was called by this name, which signifies teares of blood, for that being once vanquished and taken by his enemies, for griefe and sorrow he wept blood. Hee was buried in a village called Paullo, which is vpon the way to O∣masugo: he founded a family called Aocuillidanaca. To him succeeded his sonne Viracocha Ingua, who was ve∣ry rich, and made much vessell of gold and silver: hee founded the linage or family of Ccopanaca. GonZales PiZarre sought out his body, for the report of the great treasure was buried with him, who after he had cruelly tormented many Indians, in the end he found it in Xaquixaquana, whereas they said PiZarrewas af∣terwards vanquished, taken, and executed by the Presi∣dent Guasca. Gonsales Pizarre, caused the body of Vira∣cocha Ingua to be burnt; the Indians did afterwardes take the ashes, the which they preserved in a small ves∣sell, making great sacrifices therevnto, vntill Pollo did reforme it, and other idolatries which they committed vpon the bodies of their other Inguas, the which hee suppressed with an admirable diligence and dexterity, drawing these bodies out of their hands, being whole, and much imbalmed, whereby he extinguished a great number of idolatries which they committed. The In∣dians tooke it ill, that the Ingua did intitle himselfe Vi∣racocha, which is the name of their God: and he to ex∣cuse himselfe, gave them to vnderstand, that the same Viracocha appeared to him in his dreame, commanding him to take this name. To him succeeded Pachacuti
Ingua Yupangui, who was a very valiant conquerour, a great Polititian, and an inventer of a great part of the traditions and superstitions of their idolatrie, as I will presently shew. Of Pachacuti Ingua, Yupangui, and what happened in his time vnto Guaynacapa. CHAP. 21. PAchacuti Ingua Yupangui, rained seventy yeares, and conquered many Countries. The beginning of his conquests, was by meanes of his eldest brother, who having held the government in his fathers time, and made warre by his consent, was over-throwne in a battle against the Changuas, a Nation which inha∣bites the valley of Andaguayllas, thirty or forty leagues from Cusco, vpon the way to Lima. This elder brother thus defeated, retyred himselfe with few men. The which Ingua Yupangui, his yonger brother seeing, de∣vised and gave forth, that being one day alone and me∣lancholie, Viracocha the Creator spake to him, complai∣ning, that though he were vniversall Lord and Crea∣tor of all things, and that hee had made the heaven, the Sunne, the world, and men, and that all was vnder his command, yet did they not yeelde him the obedience they ought, but contrariwise did equally honour and worship the Sunne, Thunder, Earth, and other things, which had no virtue but what he imparted vnto them: giving him to vnderstand, that in heaven where hee was, they called him Viracocha Pachayachachic, which signifieth vniversall Creator; and to the end the Indi∣ans might beleeve it to be true, he doubted not althogh he were alone, to faise men vnder this title, which
should give him victory against the Changuas, although they were then victorious, and in great numbers; and make himselfe Lord of those realmes, for that he would send him men to his aide invisibly, whereby he preva∣led in such sort, that vnder this colour and conceit, hee beganne to assemble a great number of people, where∣of he made a mighty armie, with the which he obtay∣ned the victorie, making himselfe Lord of the whole Realme, taking the government from his father and brother. Then afterwardes he conquered and over∣threw the Changuas, and from that time commanded that Viracocha should be held for vniversall Lord, and that the images of the Sunne and Thunder, should do him reverence and honour: And from that time they beganne to set the image of Viracocha above that of the Sunne and Thunder, and the rest of the Guacas. And although this Ingua Yupangui had given farmes, landes, and cattell to the Sunne, Thunder, and other Guacas, yet did he not dedicate any thing to Viracocha, saying, that he had no neede, being vniversall Lord and Crea∣tor of all things. He informed his souldiers after this ab∣solute victory of the Changuas, that it was not they a∣lone that had conquered them, but certaine bearded men, whome Viracocha had sent him, and that no man might see them but himselfe, which were since conver∣ted into stones; it was therefore necessary to seeke them out, whome he would know well. By this meanes hee gathered together a multitude of stones in the moun∣taines, whereof he made choice, placing them for Gua∣cas, or Idolls they worshipped and sacrificed vnto; they called them Pruraucas, and carried them to the warre with great devotion, beleeving for certaine, that they had gotten the victory by their help. The imagination
and fiction of this Ingua was of such force, that by the means thereof hee obtained goodly victories: He foun∣ded the family called Yuacapanaca, and made a great i∣mage of golde, which hee called Indijllapa, which hee placed in a brancard of golde, very rich, and of great price, of the which gold the Indians tooke great store to carry to Xaxamalca, for the libertie and ransome of Atahulpa, when the Marquise Francis PiZarre held him prisoner. The Licentiate Polo found in his house in Cus∣co, his servants and Mamacomas, which did service to his memorie, and found that the body had beene trans∣ported from Patallacta to Totocache, where the Spani∣ards have since founded the parish of Saint Blaise. This body was so whole and preserved with a certaine rosin, that it seemed alive, he had his eyes made of a fine cloth of golde, so artificially set, as they seemed very naturall eyes, he had a blowe with a stone on the head, which he had received in the warres, he was all grey and hairy, having lost no more haire than if hee had died but the same day, although it were seaventy and eight yeares since his decease. The foresaid Polo sent this body with some others of the Inguas, to the cittie of Lima, by the viceroyes commaund which was the Marquise of Ca∣nette, and the which was very necessary to root out the idolatry of Cusco. Many Spaniards have seene this bo∣dy with others in the hospitall of Saint Andrew, which the Marquise built, but they were much decayed. Don Phillip Caritopa, who was grand-childe or great grand-childe to this Ingua, affirmed that the treasure hee left to his family was great, which should be in the power of the Yanaconas, Amaro, Toto, and others. To this Ingua succeeded Topaingua Yupangui, to whom his son of the same name succeeded, who founded the family called Cupac Aillo.
Of the greatest and most famous Ingua called Guaynacapa. CHAP. 22. TO this latter Ingua succeeded Guaynacapa, which is to say, a yoong man, rich and valiant, and so was he in trueth more than any of his predecessors, or suc∣cessors. Hee was very wise, planting good orders tho∣rowout his whole realme, hee was a bold and resolute man, valiant, and very happy in warre. Hee therefore obtained great victories, and extended his dominions much farther then all his predecessors had done before him; he died in the realme of Quitto, the which he had conquered, foure hundred leagues distant from his court. The Indians opened him after his decease, leav∣ing his heart and entrailes in Quitto, the body was carried to Cusco, the which was placed in the renow∣med temple of the Sunne. We see yet to this day ma∣ny cawseies, buildings, fortresses, and notable workes of this king: hee founded the familie of Teme Bamba. This Guaynacapa was worshipped of his subiects for a god, being yet alive, as the olde men affirme, which was not doone to any of his predecèssours. When he died, they slew a thousand persons of his housholde, to serve him in the other life, all which died willingly for his service, insomuch that many of them offered them∣selves to death, besides such as were appoynted: his ri∣ches and treasure was admirable. And forasmuch as the Spaniards entred soone after his death, the Indians la∣boured much to conceale all, although a great parte thereof was carried to Xaxamalca, for the ransome of Atahulpa his sonne. Some woorthy of credite affirme that he hadde above three hundred sonnes and grand∣children
in Cusco. His mother called Mamaoella was much esteemed amongst them. Polo sent hir body with that of Guaynacapa very well imbalmed to Lima, root∣ing out infinite idolatries. To Guaynacapa succeeded in Cusco a sonne of his called Titocussigualpa, who since was called Guaspar Ingua, his body was burned by the captaines of Atahulpa, who was likewise sonne to Guay∣nacapa, and rebelled in Quitto against his brother, mar∣ching against him with a mighty armie. It happened that Quisquits and Chilicuchi captains to Atahulpa, took Guaspar Ingua in the cittie of Cusco, being received for Lord and king (for that hee was the lawfull successor) which caused great sorrowe throughout all his king∣dome, especially in his Court. And as alwayes in their necessities they had recourse to sacrifices, finding them∣selves vnable to set their Lord at libertie, as well for the great power the captaines had that tooke him, as also, for the great army that came with Atahulpa, they re∣solved (some say by the commaundement of this In∣gua) to make a great and solemne sacrifice to Viracocha Pachayachachic, which signifieth vniversall Creator, desiring him, that since they coulde not deliver their Lord, he would send men from heaven to deliver him from prison. And as they were in this great hope, vpon their sacrifice, news came to them, that a certaine peo∣ple come by sea, was landed, and had taken Atahulpa prisoner. Heerevpon they called the Spaniards Viraco∣chas, beleeving they were men sent from God, as well for the small number they were to take Atahulpa in Xa∣xamalca, as also, for that it chaunced after their sacri∣fice done to Viracocha, and thereby they began to call the Spaniards Viracochas, as they doe at this day. And in truth, if we had given them good example, and such
as we ought, these Indians had well applied it, in saying they were men sent from God. It is a thing very well worthy of consideration, how the greatnesse and pro∣vidence of God, disposed of the entry of our men at Peru, which had beene impossible, were not the dissen∣tion of the two brethren and their partisans, and the great opinion they hadde of christians, as of men sent from heaven, bound (by the taking of the Indians countrey) to labour to winne soules vnto Almightie God. Of the last Successours Inguas. CHAP. 23. THe rest of this subiect is handled at large by the Spa∣nish Writers in the histories of the Indies, and for that it is not my purpose, I will speake only of the suc∣cession of the Inguas. Atahulpa being dead in Xaxamal∣ca, and Guascar in Cusco, and Francis Pizarre with his people having seised on the realme, Mangocapa sonne to Guaynacapa besieged them in Cusco very straightly: but in the end he abandoned the whole Countrey, and retired himselfe to Vilca Bamba, where he kept himselfe in the mountaines, by reason of the rough and diffi∣cult accesse, and there the successors Inguas remained, vntill Amaro, who was taken and executed in the mar∣ket place of Cusco, to the Indians incredible griefe and sorrow, seeing iustice doone vpon him publiquely whome they helde for their Lorde. After which time, they imprisoned others of the linage of these Inguas. I have knowne Don Charles grand-childe to Guaynacapa, and son to Polo, who was baptized, and alwayes favou∣red the Spaniards against Mangocapa his brother, when the Marquise of Canette governed in this Countrey,
Sarritopaingua, went from Vilcabamba, and came vpon assurance to the citty of Kings, where there was given to him the valley of Yucay, and other things, to whom succeeded a daughter of his. Beholde the succession which is knowne at this day of that great and rich fami∣lie of the Inguas, whose raigne continued above three hundred yeeres, wherein they reckon eleaven succes∣sors, vntill it was wholy extinguished. In the other li∣nage of Vrincusco, which (as we have said before) had his beginning likewise from the first Mangocapa, they reckon eight successors in this sort: To Mangocapa suc∣ceeded Cinchoraca, to him Capac Yupangui, to him Llu∣qui Yupangui, to him Maytacapaest Tarcogumam, vnto whome succeeded his sonne, whome they name not, to this son succeeded Don Iean Tambo, Maytapanaça. This sufficeth for the originall and succession of the Inguas, that governed the land of Peru, with that that I have spoken of their Lawes Governement, and manner of life. Of the manner of the Mexicaines common-weale. CHAP. 24. ALthough you may see by the historie which shalbe written of the kingdome, succession, & beginning of the Mexicaines, their maner of commonweale and governement, yet will I speake briefly what I shall thinke fitte in generall to be most observed: Whereof I will discourse more amply in the historie. The first point whereby we may iudge the Mexicaine governe∣ment to be very politike, is the order they had and kept inviolable in the election of their king: for since their first, called Acamapach, vnto their last, which was Mote∣çuma,
the second of that name, there came none to the crowne by right of succession, but by a lawfull nomi∣nation and election. This election in the beginning was by the voyce of the commons, although the chiefe men managed it. Since in the time of Iscoalt the fourth king, by the advise and order of a wise and valiant man, called Tlacael, there were foure certayne Electours ap∣poynted, which (with two lordes or kings subiect to the Mexicaine, the one of Tescuco, and the other of Tu∣cuba) had power to make this election. They did com∣monly choose yoongmen for their kings, because they went alwayes to the warres, and this was in a manner the chiefe cause why they desired them so. They had a speciall regard that they shoulde be fit for the warres, and take delight and glory therein. After the election they made twoo kindes of feasts, the one in taking pos∣session of the royall estate, for the which they went to the Temple, making great ceremonies and sacrifices vppon the harth, called Divine, where there was a con∣tinuall fire before the Altare of the idoll, and after some Rhethoritians practised therein, made many O∣rations and Speeches. The other feast, and the most so∣lempne, was at his coronation, for the which he must first overcome in battell, and bring a certaine number of captives, which they must sacrifice to their gods; he entred in triumph with great pompe, making him a solempne reception, aswell they of the Temple, who went all in procession, sounding on sundry sortes of instruments, giving incense, and singing like Secular men, as also the Courtiers, who came forth with their devises to receive the victorious king. The Crowne or royall ensigne was before like to a Myter, and behinde it was cut, so as it was not round, for the fore parte
was higher, and did rise like a poynt. The king of Tes∣cuco had the privilege to crown the king of Mexico. The Mexicaines have beene very duetifull and loyall vnto their kings: and, it hath not beene knowne that they have practised any treason against them; onely their Histories report, that they sought to poison their king called Ticocic, being a coward, and of small account: but it is not found that there hath beene any dissenti∣ons or partialities amongest them for ambition, thogh it be an ordinary thing in Comminalties: but contra∣riwise they reporte, as you shall see heereafter, that a man, the best of the Mexicaines, refused this realme, seeming vnto him to be very expedient for the Com∣mon-weale to have an other king. In the beginning when the Mexicaines were but poore and weake, the kings were very moderate in their expenses and in their Court, but as they increased in power, they increased likewise in pompe and state, vntill they came to the greatnesse of Moteçuma, who if hee had had no other thing but his house of beasts and birds, it had beene a prowde thing, the like whereof hath not beene seene: for there was in this house all sortes of fish, birds of Xa∣camamas, and beasts, as in an other Noahs Arke, for sea fish, there were pooles of salt-water, and for river fish, lakes of fresh-water, birds that do prey were fedde, and likewise wilde beasts in great aboundaunce: there were very many Indians imployed for the keeping of these beasts: and when he found an impossibilitie to nourish any sort of fish, fowle, or wilde beast, hee caused the i∣mage or likenesse to be made, richly cutte in pretious stones, silver, or golde, in marble, or in stone: and for all sortes of entertainements, hee had his severall hou∣ses and pallaces, some of pleasure, others of sorrowe
and mourning, and others to treate of the affairs of the realme. There was in this pallace many chambers, ac∣cording to the qualitie of noble men that served him, with a strange order and distinction. Of the titles and dignities the Indians vsed. CHAP. 25. THe Mexicaines have beene very curious, to divide the degrees and dignities amongst the Noble men and Lords, that they might distinguish them to whom they were to give the greatest honour. The dignity of these foure Electors was the greatest, and most honou∣rable, next to the king, and they were chosen present∣ly after the kings election. They were commonly bro∣thers, or very neare kinsmen to the king, and were cal∣led Tlacohecalcalt, which signifies prince of darts, the which they cast, being a kind of armes they vse much. The next dignitie to this, were those they doe call Tla∣catecati, which is to say, circumcisers or cutters of men. The third dignitie were of those which they called E∣Zuahuacalt, which signifies a sheader of blood. All the which Titles and Dignities were exercised by men of warre. There was another a fourth intituled, Tlilan∣calqui, which is as much to say, as Lord of the blacke house, or of darkenesse, by reason of certaine incke wherewith the Priests annoynted themselves, and did serve in their idolatries. All these foure dignities were of the great Counsell, without whose advise the king might not doe any thing of importance: and the king being dead, they were to choose another in his place out of one of those foure dignities. Besides these, there were other Counsells and Audiences, and some say
there were as many as in Spaine, and that there were divers seates and iurisdictions, with their Counsellers and Iudges of the Court, and ohers that were vnder them, as Corrigidors, chiefe Iudges, captaines of Iustice, Lievetenants, and others, which were yet inferiour to these, with a very goodly order. All which depended on the foure first Princes that assisted the king. These foure onely had authoritie and power to condemne to death, and the rest sent them instructions of the sen∣tences they had given. By meanes whereof they gave the king to vnderstand what had passed in his Realme. There was a good order and settled policie for the revenues of the Crowne, for there were officers divi∣ded throughout all the provinces, as Receivers and Treasurers, which received the Tributes and royall re∣venews. And they carried the Tribute to the Court, at the least every moneth; which Tribute was of all things that doe growe or ingender on the land, or in the water, aswell of iewells and apparrell, as of mear. They were very carefull for the well ordering of that which concerned their religion, superstition, and ido∣latries: and for this occasion there were a great num∣ber of Ministers, to whom charge was given to teach the people the custome and ceremonies of their Lawe. Heerevppon one day a christian Priest made his com∣plaint that the Indians were no good Christians, and did not profite in the lawe of God; an olde Indian an∣swered him very well to the purpose in these termes: Let the Priest (saide hee) imploy as much care and dili∣gence to make the Indians christians, as the ministers of I∣dolles did to teach them their ceremonies; for with halfe that care they will make vs the best christians in the worlde, for that the lawe of Iesus Christ is much better; but the Indians
learne it not, for want of men to instruct them. Wherein hee spake the very trueth, to our great shame and con∣fusion. How the Mexicaines made Warre, and of their Orders of Knighthood CHAP. 26. THe Mexicaines gave the first place of honour to the profession of armes, and therefore the Noble∣men are their chiefe souldiers, and others that were not noble, by their valour and reputation gotten in warres, came to dignities and honours, so as they were held for noblemen. They gave goodly recompences to such as had done valiantly, who inioyed priviledge that none else might have, the which did much incou∣rage them. Their armes were of rasors of sharpe cutting flints, which they set on either side of a staffe, which was so furious a weapon, as they affirmed that with one blow, they would cut off the necke of a horse. They had strange and heavy clubbes, lances, fashioned like pikes, and other maner of dartes to cast, wherein they were very expert; but the greatest part of their combate was performed with stones. For defensive armes they had little rondaches or targets, and some kind of morions or head-peeces invironed with fea∣thers. They were clad in the skinnes of Tigres, Lions, and other sauage beasts. They came presently to hands with the enemie, and were greatly practised to runne and wrestle, for their chiefe maner of combate, was not so much to kill, as to take captives, the which they vsed in their sacrifices, as hath beene saide. Moteçuma set Knighthood in his highest splendor, ordaining certaine militarie orders, as Commanders, with certaine markes
and ensignes. The most honourable amongest the Knightes, were those that carried the Crowne of their haire, tied with a little red ribband, having a rich plume of feathers, from the which, did hang branches of fea∣thers vpon their shoulders, & roules of the same. They carried so many of these rowles, as they had done worthy deedes in warre. The King himselfe was of this order, as may be seene in Chapultepec, where Moteçuma and his sonnes were attyred with those kindes of fea∣thers, cut in the rocke, the which is worthy the sight. There was another order of Knighthood, which they called the Lions and the Tigres, the which were com∣monly the most valiant and most noted in warre, they went alwaies with their markes and armories. There were other Knightes, as the grey Knightes, the which were not so much respected as the rest: they had their haire cut round about the eare. They went to the war with markes like to the other Knightes, yet they were not armed, but to the girdle, and the most honourable were armed all over. All Knightes might carry golde and silver, and weare rich cotton, vse painted and gilt vessell, and carry shooes after their maner: but the com∣mon people might vse none but earthen vessell, ney∣ther might they carry shooes, nor attyre themselves but in Nequen, the which is a grosse stuffe. Every order of these Knightes had his lodging in the pallace noted with their markes; the first was called the Princes lodg∣ing, the second of Eagles, the third of Lions and Ti∣gres, and the fourth of the grey Knightes. The other common officers, were lodged vnderneath in meaner lodgings: if any one lodged out of his place, he suffred death.
Of the great order and dilligence the Mexicaines vsed to instruct their youth. CHAP. 27. THere is nothing that gives me more cause to ad∣mire, nor that I finde more worthy of commenda∣tions and memory, then the order and care the Mexi∣caines had to nourish their youth: for they knew well, that all the good hope of a common-weale, consisted in the nurture and institution of youth, whereof Plato treates amply in his bookes De Legibus: and for this reason they laboured and tooke paines to sequester their children from delights and liberties, (which are the two plagues of this age,) imploying them in ho∣nest and profitable exercises. For this cause there was in their Temples, a private house for childeren, as schooles, or colledges, which was seperate from that of the yong men and maides of the Temple, whereof we have discoursed at largee. There were in these schooles a great number of children, whom their fa∣thers did willingly bring thither, and which had tea∣chers and masters to instruct them in all commendable exercises, to be of good behaviour, to respect their su∣periors, to serve and obey them, giving them to this end, certaine precepts and instructions. And to the end they might be pleasing to Noblemen, they taught them to sing and dance, and did practise them in the exercise of warre; some to shoote an arrow, to cast a dart or a staffe burnt at the end, and to handle well a target and a sword. They suffered them not to sleepe much, to the end they might accustome themselves to labour in their youth, and were not men given to
delightes. Besides the ordinary number of these chil∣dren, there were in the same colledges, other children of Lordes and Noblemen, the which were instructed more privately. They brought them their meate and ordinary from their houses, and were recommended to antients and old men to have care over them, who continually did advise them to be vertuous and to live chastely; to be sober in their diet, to fast, and to march gravely, and with measure. They were accustomed to exercise them to travell, and in laborious exercises: and when they see them instructed in all these things, they did carefully looke into their inclination: if they found any one addicted to the war, being of sufficient yeares, they sought all occasions to make triall of them, sen∣ding them to the warre, vnder colour to carry victualls and munition to the souldiers, to the end they might there see what passed, and the labour they suffered. And that they might abandon all feare, they were laden with heavy burthens, that shewing their courage therein, they might more easily be admitted into the compa∣ny of souldiers. By this meanes it happened, that many went laden to the Armie, and returned Cap∣taines with markes of honour. Some of them were so desirous to bee noted, as they were eyther ta∣ken, or slaine: and they held it lesse honourable to re∣maine a prisoner. And therefore they sought rather to be cut in peeces, then to fall captives into their ene∣mies hands. See how Noblemens children that were inclined to the warres were imployed. The others that had their inclination to matters of the Temple; and to speake after our maner, to be Ecclesiastical men, having attained to sufficient yeares, they were drawne out of the colledge, and placed in the temple, in the lodging
appointed for religious men, and then they gave them the orders of Ecclesiasticall men. There had they pre∣lates and masters, to teach them that which concerned their profession, where they should remaine being de∣stined therevnto. These Mexicaines tooke great care to bring vp their children: if at this day they would fol∣low this order, in building of houses and colledges for the instruction of youth, without doubt Christianitie should florish much amongst the Indians. Some godly persons have begunne, and the King with his Coun∣sell have favored it: but for that it is a matter of no pro∣fit, they advance little, and proceede coldly. God open our eyes, that we may see it to our shame, seeing that we Christians do not that which the children of darke∣nes did to their perdition, wherin we forget our duties. Of the Indians feasts and dances. CHAP. 28. FOrasmuch as it is a thing which partly dependes of the good government of the Common-weale, to have some plaies and recreations when time serves; it shall not be from the purpose, to relate what the Indi∣ans did heerein, especially the Mexicaines. We have not discovered any Nation at the Indies, that live in com∣minalties, which have not their recreations, in plaies, dances, and exercises of pleasure. At Peru I have seene plaies in maner of combats, where the men of both sides were sometimes so chafed, that often their Paella (which was the name of this exercise,) fell out to be dangerous. I have also seene divers sortes of dances, wherein they did counterfait and represent certaine trades and offices, as sheepheards, laborers, fishers, and
hunters, and commonly they made all those dances, with a very grave sound and pase: there were other dances and maskes, which they called Guacones, whose actions were pure representations of the divell. There were also men that dance on the shoulders one of ano∣ther, as they do in Portugall, the which they call Paellas, The greatest part of these dances, were superstitions, and kindes of idolatries: for that they honoured their idolls and Guacas in that maner. For this reason the Prelates have laboured to take from them these dances, all they could: but yet they suffer them, for that part of them are but sportes of recreation, for alwaies they dance after their maner. In these dances, they vse sun∣dry sortes of instruments, whereof, some are like flutes, or little Canons, others like drummes, and others like cornets: but commonly they sing all with the voyce, and first one or two sing the song, then all the rest an∣swer them. Some of these songs were very wittily com∣posed, contayning histories, and others were full of su∣perstitions, and some were meere follies. Our men that have conversed among them, have laboured to reduce matters of our holy faith to their tunes, the which hath profited well: for that they imploy whole daies to re∣hearse and sing them, for the great pleasure and con∣tent they take in their tunes. They have likewise put our compositions of musicke into their language, as Octaves, Songs, and Rondells, the which they have ve∣ry aptly turned, and in truth it is a goodly and very ne∣cessary meanes to instruct the people. In Peru, they commonly called dances, Tagui, in other Provinces, Areittos, and in Mexico, Mittottes. There hath not beene in any other place, any such curiositie of plaies and dances, as in new Spaine, where at this day we see In∣dians
so excellent dancers, as it is admirable. Some dance vpon a cord, some vpon a long and straight stake, in a thousand sundrie sortes, others with the soles of their feete and their hammes, do handle, cast vp and receive againe a very heavy blocke, which seems incredible but in seeing it. They do make many other shewes of their great agilitie, in leaping, vaulting, and tumbling, sometimes bearing a great and heavie bur∣then, sometimes enduring blowes able to breake a barre of yron. But the most vsuall exercise of recreati∣on among the Mexicaines is the solemne Mittotte, and that is a kinde of daunce they held so brave and so ho∣norable, that the king himselfe daunced, but not ordi∣narily, as the king Don Pedro of Arragon with the Bar∣ber of Valencia. This daunce or Mittotte was common∣ly made in the Courts of the Temple, and in those of the kings houses, which were more spatious. They did place in the midst of the Court two instruments, one like to a drumme, and the other like a barrell made of one peece, and hollow within, which they set vppon the forme of a man, a beast, or vpon a piller. These two instruments were so well accorded toge∣ther, that they made a good harmony: and with these instruments they made many kinds of Aires, & Songs. They did all sing and dance to the sound and measure of these instruments, with so goodly an order and ac∣cord, both of their feete and voices, as it was a pleasant thing to beholde. In these daunces they made twoo circles or wheeles, the one was in the middest neere to the instruments, wherein the Auntients and Noble∣men did sing and daunce with a softe and slowe mo∣tion; and the other was of the rest of the people round about them, but a good distance from the first, where∣in
they daunced two and two more lightly, making di∣verse kindes of pases, with certaine leapes to the mea∣sure. All which together made a very great circle. They attired themselves for these dances with their most pre∣tious apparrell and iewelles, every one according to his abilitie, holding it for a very honorable thing: for this cause they learned these daunces from their infancie. And although the greatest parte of them were doone in honor of their Idolles, yet was it not so instituted, as hath bin said, but only as a recreation and pastime for the people. Therefore it is not convenient to take them quite from the Indians, but they must take good heed they mingle not their superstitions amongest them. I have seene this Mittotte, in the court of the Church of Topetzotlan, a village seaven leagues from Mexico: and in my opinion, it was a good thing to busie the Indians vpon festivall dayes, seeing they have neede of some recreation: and because it is publike, and without the preiudice of any other, there is lesse inconvenience, than in others which may be done privately by them∣selves, if they tooke away these. We must therfore con∣clude, folowing the counsel of pope Gregory, that it was very convenient to leave vnto the Indians, that which they have had vsually of custom, so as they be not min∣gled nor corrupt with their antient errors, & that their feasts and pastimes may be to the honor of God and of the Saints, whose feasts they celebrate. This may suf∣fice in generall of the maners and politike customes of the Mexicaines. And as for their beginning, increase, and Empire, for that it is an ample matter, and will be pleasant to vnderstand from the beginning, we will in∣treate thereof in the Booke following.
THE SEVENTH BOOKE of the Naturall and Morall Hi∣storie of the Indies. That it is profitable to vnderstand the actes and geasts of the Indians, especially of the Mexicaines. CHAP. 1. EVery History wel written is profitable to the reader: For as the Wise man saith, That which hath bin, is,Eccles. . and that which shall be, is that which hath beene: Humane things have much resem∣blance in themselves, and some growe wie by that which happneth to others. There is no Nation, how barbarous soever, that have not something in them, good, and woorthy of com∣mendation; nor Commonweale so well ordered, that hath not something blame-worthy, and to be nrol∣ld.
If therefore there were no other fruite in the Hi∣storic and Narration of the deedes and gests of the In∣dians, but this common vtilitie, to be a Relation or Histori of things, the which in the effect of truth have happened, it deserveth to be received as a profitable thing, neither ought it to be reiected, for that it con∣cernes the Indians. As we see that those Authors that treate of naturall things, write not onely of generous beasts, notable and rare plants, and of pretious stones, but also of wilde beasts, common hearbs, and base and vulgar stones, for that there is alwayes in them some properties worthy observation. If therefore there were nothing else in this Discourse, but that it is a Historie, and no fables nor fictions, it were no unwoorthy sub∣iect to be written, or read. There is yet an other more particular reason, which is, that wee ought heerein to esteeme that which is woorthy of memorie, both for that it is a Nation little esteemed, and also a subiect dif∣ferent from that of our Europe, as these Nations be, wherein wee should take most pleasure and content, to vnderstand the ground of their beginning, their maner of life, with their happy and vnhappy adventures. And this subiect is not onely pleasant and agreeable, but also profitable, especially to such as have the charge to rule and governe them; for the knowledge of their acts in∣vites vs to give credite, and dooth partely teach howe they ought to be intreated: yea it takes away much of that common and foolish contempt wherein they of Europe holde them, supposing that those Nations have no feeling of reason. For in trueth wee can not cleere this errour better, than by the true report of the actes and deedes of this people. I will therefore as briefely as I can, intreate of the beginning, proceedings and
notable deedes of the Mexicaines, whereby wee may know the time and the disposition that the high God woulde choose, to send vnto these Nations the light of the Gospel of Iesus Christ his only sonne our Lord, whome I beseech to second our small labour, that it may be to the glory of his Divine greatnes, and some profite to these people, to whome hee hath imparted the lawe of his holy gospel. Of the antient Inhabitants of New Spaine, and how the Navatlacas came thither. CHAP. 2. THe antient and first Inhabitants of those provinces, which wee call New Spaine, were men very barba∣rous and savage, which lived onely by hunting, for this reason they were called Chichimecas. They did neither sowe nor till the ground, neither lived they together; for all their exercise was to hunt, wherein they were very expert. They lived in the roughest partes of the mountaines beastlike, without any pollicie, and they went all naked. They hunted wilde beasts, hares, con∣nies, weezles, mowles, wilde cattes, and birdes; yea vn∣cleane beasts, as snakes, lizards, locusts and wormes, whereon they fed, with some hearbs and rootes. They slept in the mountaines, in caves and in bushes, and the wives likewise went a hunting with their husbandes, leaving their yoong children in a little panier of reeds, tied to the boughs of a tree, which desired not to suck ntill they were returned from hunting. They had no superiors, nor did acknowledge or worship any gods, neyther hadde any manner of ceremonies or religion. There is yet to this day in New Spaine of this kinde of people, which live by their bowes and arrowes, the
which are very hurtfull, for that they gather together in troupes to doe mischiefe, and to robbe: neither can the Spaniards by force or cunning reduce them to any policie or obedience: for having no townes nor pla∣ces of residence, to sight with them, were properly to hunt after savage beasts, which scatter and hide them∣selves in the most rough and covered places of the mountaines. Such is their maner of living eve to this day, in many Provinces of the Indies. In the Bookes De procuranda Indiorum salute, they discourse chiefly of this sort of Indians, where it is saide that they are to be constrained and subiected by some honest force, and that it is necessary first to teach them, that they are men, and then to be Christians. Some will say, that those in New Spaine, which they call Ottomies, were of this sort, being commonly poore Indians, inhabiting a rough and barren land, and yet they are in good num∣bers, and live together with some order, and such as do know them, find them no lesse apt and capable of mat∣ters of christian religion, than others which are held to be more rich and better governed. Comming there∣fore to our subiect, the Chichimecas and Ottomies which were the first inhabitants of New Spaine, for that they did neyther till nor sowe the land, they left the best▪ and most fertile of the country vnpeopled, which, Na∣tions that came from farre did possesse, whome they called Navatalcas, for that it was a more civill and po∣litike Nation; this word signifies a people that speakes well, in repect of other barbarous nations without rea∣son. These scond peoplers Navatalcas, came from o∣ther arre countries, which lie toward the north, where now they have discovered a kingdome they call New Mexico.
There are two provinces in this countrey, the one called AZtlan, which is to say a place of Herons: the o∣ther Tuculhuacan, which signifies a land of such, whose grandfathers were divine. The Inhabitants of these provinces have their houses, their lands tilled, gods, cu∣stomes, and ceremonies, with like order and governe∣ment to the Navatalcas, and are divided into seaven Tribes or Nations: and for that they have a custome in this province, that every one of these linages hath his place and private territory. The Navatalcas paint their beginning and first territory in figure of a cave, and say that they came forth of seaven caves to come and peo∣ple the land of Mexico, whereof they make mention in their Historie, where they paint seaven caves and men comming forth of them. By the supputation of their bookes, it is above eight hundred yeeres since these Na∣vatalcas came foorth of their country, reducing which to our accompt, was about the yeere of our Lord 720. when they left their country to come to Mexico, they stayed foure score yeares vpon the way; and the cause of this their long stay in their voyage, was, that their gods (which without doubt were divells, and spake vi∣sibly vnto them) had perswaded them to seeke new lands that had certaine signes. And therefore they came discovering the whole land, to search for these tokens which their Idolls had given them; and in places where they found any good dwellings, they peopled it, and laboured the land, and as they discovered better coun∣tries, they left those which they had first peopled; lav∣ing still some, especially the aged, sicke folkes, and the weary; yea they did plant and build there, whereof we see the remainders at this day. In the way where they passed, they spent fourescore yeares in this manner of
leisurely travell, the which they might have done in a moneth. By this meanes they entred the land of Mexi∣co, in the yeare nine hundred and two, after our com∣putation. How the six Linages of Navatlacas peopled the land of Mexico. CHAP. 3. THese seaven Linages I have spoken of, came not forth all together: the first were the Suchimilcos, which signifie a Nation of the seedes of flowers. Those peopled the bankes of the great lake of Mexico towards the South, and did build a cittie of their name, and many villages. Long time after came they of the se∣cond linage called Chalcas, which signifies people of mouthes, who also built a cittie of their name, dividing their limmits and territories with the Suchimilcos. The third were the Tepanecans, which signifies people of the bridge: they did inhabite vpon the banke of the lake towards the West, and they increased so, as they called the chiefe and Metropolitane of their Province, AzcapuZalco, which is to say, an Ants nest, and they continued long time mighty. After them came those that peopled Tescuco, which be those of Culhua, which is to say, a crooked people: for that in their Countrey there was a mountaine much bending. And in this sort this lake was invironed with these foure Nations, these inhabiting on the East, and the Tepanecas on the North. These of Tescuco, were held for great Courti∣ers, for their tongue and pronountiation is very sweete and pleasant. Then arrived the Tlalluicans, which signi∣fies men of the Sierre or mountaine. Those were the most rude and grosse of all the rest, who finding all the
plaines about the lake possessed even vnto the Sierre, they passed to the other side of the mountaine, where they found a very fertile, spatious & warme countrey, where they built many great villages, calling the Me∣tropolitane of their province Quahunachua, which is as much to say, as a place that sounds the voice of an E∣gle, which our common people call by corruption, Quernavaca, and at this day they call this province, the Marquisate. Those of the sixt generation, which are the Tlascaltecans, which is to say, men of bread, passed the mountaine towards the east, crossing all the Sierre, or mountaine of Menade, where that famous Vulcan is be∣twixt Mexico and the citty of Angells, where they did finde a good country, making many buildings. They built many townes and citties, whereof the Metropo∣litane was called by their name Tlascala. This is the na∣tion which favoured the Spaniards at their entrie, by whos help they did winne this country, and therefore to this day they pay no tribute, but enioy a generall ex∣emption. When all these Nations peopled these coun∣tries, the Chinchimecans being the antient inhabitants, made no resistance, but fledde, and as people amazed, they hid themselves in the most obscure of the rockes. But those that inhabited on th'other side of the moun∣taine where the Tlascaltecans had planted themselves, did not suffer them in quiet, as the rest of the Chichime∣cans had done, but they put themselves in defnce to preserve their country, and being giants as the Histo∣ries report, they sought to expell the last commers, but they were vanquisht by the policy of the Tlascaltecans, who counterfetting a peace with them, they invited them to a great banquet, and when they were busiest in their drunkennes, there were some laide in ambush,
who secretly stole away their weapons, which were great clubbes, targets, swords of wood, and other suc armes. Then did they sodainely set vpon them, and the Chichimecas seeking to defend themselves, they did want their armes, so as they fled to the mountaines and forrests adioyning, where they pulled downe trees, as if they had beene stalkes of lettices. But in the end, the Tluscaltecans being armed, and marching in order, they defeated all the giants, not leaving one alive. We must not holde this of the giants to be strange, or a fable; for at this day we finde dead mens bones of an incredible bignes. When I was in Mexico, in the yeare of our Lorde, one thousand five hundred eighty sixe, they found one of those giants buried in one of our farmes, which we call Iesus du Mont, of whom they brought a tooth to be seene, which (without augmenting) was as big as the fist of a man, and according to this, all the rest was pro∣portionable, which I saw and admired at his deformed greatnes. The Tlascaltecans by this victory remained peaceable, and so did the rest of the linages. These six linages did alwayes entertaine amitie together, marry∣ing their children one with another, and dividing their limites quietly: then they studied with an emulation to encrease and beautifie their common-weale. The bar∣barous Chichimecans, seeing what passed, beganne to vse some governement, and to apparrell themselves, be∣ing ashmed of what had passed: for till then they had no shame. And having abandoned feare by their com∣munication with these other people, they beganne to learne many things of them, building small cottages, having some pollicie and governement. They did also choose Lordes, whom they did acknowledge for their
superiours, by meanes whereof they did in a manner quite abandon this brutish life, yet did they alwayes continue in the Mountaines divided from the rest. Notwithstanding I hold it for certaine, that this feare hath growne from other Nations and Provinces of the Indies, who at the first were savage men, who li∣ving onely by hunting, piercing the rockie and rough countries, discovering a new world, the inhabitants whereof were almost like savage beasts, without cove∣rings or houses, without tilled landes, without cattell, without King, Law, God, or Reason. Since, others see∣king better and new lands, inhabited this fertile Coun∣trey, planting pollitike order, and a kinde of common∣weale, although it were very barbarous. After the same men, or other Nations, that had more vnderstanding then the rest, laboured to subdue and oppresse the lesse mighty, establishing Realmes and great Empires. So it happened in Mexico, at Peru, and in some partes where they finde Citties and Common-weales planted a∣mong these Barbarians. That which confirmes me in my opinion, (whereof I have amply discoursed in the first booke,) that the first inhabitants of the West Indies came by land, and so by consequence, that the first continent of the Indies, ioynes with that of Asia, Europe, and Afsrike, and the new world with the old, although they have not yet discovered any countrey that tou∣cheth and ioynes with the other world; or if there be a∣ny sea betwixt the two, it is so narrow, that wilde beasts may easily swim over, and men in small boates. But lea∣ving this Philosophie, let vs returne to our history.
Of the Mexicaines departure, of their iourney and peopling the Province of Mechovacan. CHA. 4. THree hundred and two yeares after the former two linages had left their Country, to inhabite new Spaine, the Country being now well peopled, and reduced to some forme of government. Those of the seaventh cave or line arrived, which is the Mexicaine Nation, the which like vnto the rest, left the Province of AZtlan, and Teuculhuacan, a pollitike, courtlike, and warlike Nation. They did worship the idoll VitZliputZ∣li, whereof ample mention hath beene made, and the divell that was in this idoll spake, and governed this Nation easily. This idoll commanded them to leave their Country, promising to make them Princes and Lords over all the Provinces which the other six Nati∣ons did possesse, that hee would give them a land a∣bounding with gold, silver, pretious stones, feathers, and rich mantells: wherevpon they went forth, car∣rying their idoll with them in a coffer of reedes, suppor∣ted by foure of their principall priests, with whom he did talke and reveale vnto them in secret, the successe of their way and voyage, advising them of what should happen. He likewise gave them lawes, and taught them the customes, ceremonies, and sacrifices they should observe. They did not advance nor moove without commandement from this idoll. He gave them notice when to march, and when to stay in any place, where∣in they wholy obeyed him. The first thing they did wheresoever they came, was to build a house or taber∣nacle for their false god, which they set alwaies in the
middest of their Campe, and there placed the Arke vp∣pon an altare, in the same manner as they have vsed in the holy Christian Church. This done, they sowed their land for bread and pulses, which they vsed: and they were so addicted to the obedience of their god, that if he commanded them to gather, they gathered, but if he commanded them to raise their campe, all was left there for the nourishment of the aged, sicke, and wearie, which they lest purposely from place to place, that they might people it, pretending by this meanes, that all the land should remaine inhabited by their Nation. This going forth and peregrination of the Mexicaines, will happily seeme like to that of Egypt, and to the way which the children of Israell made, see∣ing that they, as well as those, were warned to go forth, and to seeke the land of promise, and both the one, and the other, carried their god for their guide, consulted with the arke, and made him a tabernacle, and he advi∣sed them, giving them lawes and ceremonies, and both the one, and the other, spake many yeares in their voy∣age to their promised land, where we observe the re∣semblance of many other things, as thehistories of the Mexicaines do report, and the holy scripture testifie of the Israelites. And without doubt it is a true thing, that the Divell the prince of pride, hath laboured by the superstitions of this Nation, to counterfaite & imitate that which the most high God did with this Nation: for as is said before, Satan hath a strange desire to com∣pare and make himselfe equal with God:so as this mor∣tall enemy hath pretended falsely to vsurpe what com∣munication and familiaritie he hath pleased with men. Was there ever divell found so familiarly conversant with men, as this divell VitzliputZli? We may wel iudge
what he was, for that there was never seene nor heard speake of customes more superstitious, nor sacrifices more cruel and inhumane, then those which he taught them. To conclude, they were invented by the ene∣my of mankinde. The chiefe and Captaine whome they followed, was called Mexi, whence came the name of Mexico, & of the Mexicaine Nation. This people mar∣ching thus at leisure, as the other six Nations had done, peopling and tilling the land in divers partes, whereof there is yet some shewes & ruines: & after they had en∣dured many travells and dangers, in the end they came to the Province of Mechovacan, which is as much to say, as a land of fish, for there is great abundance in goodly great lakes, where contenting themselves with the sci∣tuation and temperature of the ground, they resolved to stay there. Yet having consulted with their idoll vpon this point, and finding him vnwilling, they de∣manded license to leave some of their men to people so good a land, the which he granted, teaching them the meanes how to do it, which was, that when the men and women should be entred into a goodly lake called Pascuaro, to bathe themselves, those which re∣mained on land, should steale away all their clothes, and then secretly raise their campe, and depart with∣out any bruite, the which was effected, and the rest which dreamt not of this deceit, (for the pleasure they tooke in bathing,) comming forth and finding them∣selves spoiled of their garments, and thus mocked and left by their companions, they remained discontented and vexed therewith: so as to make shew of the hatred they had conceived against them, they say that they changed their maner of life and their language. At the least it is most certaine, that the Mehovacans have been
alwaies enemies to the Mexicaines, and therefore they came to congratulate the Marquise De Valle, after his victory obtained when he had conquered Mexico. Of that which happened in Malinalco, Tula, and in Chapultepec. CHAP. 5. FRom Mechovacan to Mexico, are above fifty leagues, and vpon the way is Malinalco, where it happened, that complaining to their idoll of a woman that was a notable witch, which came in their company carrying the name of their sister to their god, for that with her wicked artes she did them much harme, pretending by certaine meanes to be worshipped of them as their goddesse: the idoll spake in a dreame to one of those old men that carried the arke, commaunding him to comfort the people, making them new and great pro∣mises, and that they should leave this his sister with her family, being cruell and bad, raising their campe at mid-night in great silence, leaving no shew what way they passed. So they did, and the witch remaining a∣lone with her family, in this sort peopled a towne which they call Malinalco, the inhabitants whereof, are held for great sorcerers, being issued from such a mo∣ther. The Mexicaines for that they were greatly dimi∣nished by these divisions, and by the number of sicke & wearied persons, which they had left behind, meant to repaire themselves, and to stay in a place called Tula, which signifies a place of reedes. There their idoll com∣manded them to stoppe a great river, that it might co∣ver a great plaine, and by the meanes he taught them, they did inviron a little hill called Coatepec, making a great lake, the which they did plant ound about with
willows, elmes, sapines and other trees. There beganne to breede much fish, and many birdes came thither: so as it became a very pleasant place. The scituation of this place, seeming pleasant vnto them, and being wearied with travell, many talked of peopling there, and to passe no farther: wherewith the divell was much displeased, threatning the priests with death, comman∣ding them to returne the river to hir course, saying that he would that night chastise those which had beene disobedient as they had deserved. And as to do ill is proper to the Divell, and that the divine Iustice doth often suffer such to be delivered into the hands of such a tormentor, that choose him for their god; It chanced that about mid-night they heard a great noise in one part of the campe, and in the morning going thither, they found those dead that had talked of staying there. The maner of their death, was, that their stomackes were opened, and their hearts pulled out. And by that meanes, this good god taught these poore miserable creatures, the kindes of sacrifices that pleased him, which was, in opening the stomacke, to pull out the heart, as they have since practised in their horrible sa∣crifices. Seeing this punishment, and that the plaine was dried, the lake being emptied, they asked counsell of their god what to doe, who commanded them to passe on, the which they did by little and little, vntill they came to Chapultepec, a league from Mexico, famous for the pleasantnes thereof. They did fortisie them∣selves in these mountaines, fearing the Nations which inhabited that Country, the which were opposite vn∣to them, especially for that one named Copill, sonne to this sorceresse, left in Malinalco, had blamed and spoken ill of the Mexicaines: for this Copill by the commande∣ment
of his mother, awhile after followed the Mexi∣caines course, labouring to incense the Tapanecas, and other neighbours against them, even vnto the Chalcas: so as they came with a strong army to destroy the Mex∣icaines. Copill in the meane space stoode vpon a little hill in the middest of a lake called Acopilco, attending the destruction of his enemies, and they by the advise of their idoll, went against him, tooke him suddenly, and slew him, carrying his heart to their god, who commanded them to cast it into the lake, faining that thereof did grow a plant called Tunal, where since Mexico was built. They came to fight with the Chalcas, and other Nations, having chosen for their Captaine, a valiant man called Vitzilonilti, who in an incounter, was taken and slaine by the enemies. But for all this, they were not discouraged, but fought valiantly; and in dispight of their enemies they brake the squadrons, and carrying their aged, their women, and yong chil∣dren in the midst of their battaile, they passed on to At∣lacuyavaya, a towne of the Culhuans, whom they found solemnising of a feast, in which place they fortified. The Chalcas nor the other Nations did not follow them, but grieved to be defeated by so small a number of men; they being in so great multitudes retyred to their townes. Of the Warres the Mexicaines had against them of Culhuacan. CHAP. 6. THe Mexicaines, by the advise of their idoll, sent their messengers to the Lord o Culhuacan, to de∣mand a place to dwell in, who after he had imparted it to his people, granted them the place of Ticaapan,
which signifies white waters, to the end they should all perish there, being full of vipers, snakes, and other veno∣mous beasts which bred in a hill neere adioyning. But being perswaded and taught by their divell, they ac∣cepted willingly what was offered, and by their dive∣lish art, tamed these beastes, so as they did them no harme; yea, they vsed them as meat, eating them with delight and appetite. The which the Lord of Culhuacan seeing, & that they had tilled and sowed the land, he re∣solved to receive them into the Cittie, and to contract amity with them. But the god whom the Mexicaines did worship, (as he is accustomed to do no good, but ill,) said vnto his priest, that this was not the place where he would have them stay, and that they must go forth making warres. Therefore they must seeke forth a woman, and name her the goddesse of Discord. Wherevpon they resolved to send to the King of Cul∣huacan, to demand his daughter to be Queene of the Mexicaines, and mother to their god, who received this Ambassage willingly, sending his daughter presently gorgeously attyred and well accompanied. The same night she arrived, by order of the murtherer whome they worshipped, they killed her cruelly, and having flad her artificially as they could do, they did clothe a yong man with her skinne, and therevpon her appar∣rell, placing him neere their idoll, dedicating him for goddesse and the mother of their god, and ever after did worship it, making an idoll which they called To∣cy, which is to say, our grandmother. Not content with this crueltie, they did maliciously invite the King of Culhuacan, the father of the yong maid, to come and worshippe his daughter, who was now consecrated  goddesse, who comming with great presents, and well
accompanied with his people, he was led into a very darke chappell where their idoll was, that he might of∣fer sacrifice to his daughter that was in that place. But it chanced that the incense that was vpon the harth, ac∣cording to their custome, kindled in such sort, as hee might discerne his daughters haire, and having by this meanes discovered the crueltie and deceit, hee went forth crying alowde, and with all his men he fell vpon the Mexicaines, forcing them to retyre to the lake, so as they were almost drowned. The Mexicaines defended themselves, casting certaine little darts, which they vsed in the warres, wherewith they much galled their enne∣mies. But in the end they got land, and leaving that place, they coasted along the lake, very weary and wet; the women and little children crying and making great exclamations against them and their god that had brought them into this distresse. They were inforced to passe a river that could not be waded through, and therefore they advised to make small boates of their targets and of reedes, wherein they passed. Then after∣wardes, having left Culhuacan, they arived at Iztacalco, and finally to the place where the hermitage of Saint Anthonie now is, at the entry of Mexico, and to that quarter which they now call S. Paul. During which time their idoll did comfort them in their travells and incoraged them, promising great matters. Of the Foundation of Mexico. CHAP. 7. THe time being now come, that the father of lies should accomplish his promise made to his peo∣ple, who could no longer suffer so many turnings, tra∣vells,
and dangers, it happened that some old priests or sorcerers, being entred into a place full of water-lillies, they met with a very faire and cleere current of water, which seemed to be silver, and looking about, they found the trees, medowes, fish, and all that they beheld to be very white: wondring heereat, they remembred a prophecie of their god, whereby he had given them that for a token of their place of rest, and to make them Lords of other Nations. Then weeping for ioy, they returned to the people with these good newes. The night following, VitzliputZli appeared in a dreame to an antient priest, saying, that they should seeke out a Tunal in the lake, which grew out of a stone, (which as he told them, was the same place where by his com∣mandement they had cast the heart of Copil, sonne to the sorceresse their enemy,) and vpon this Tunal they should see a goodly Eagle, which fed on certaine small birdes. When they should see this, they should beleeve it was the place where their Cittie should be built, the which shuld surmountal others, & be famous through∣out the world. Morning being come, the old man as∣sembled the whole people, from the greatest to the least, making a long speach vnto them, how much they were bound vnto their god, and of the Revelation, which (although vnworthy,) hee had received that night, concluding that all must seeke out that happie place which was promised them; which bred such de∣votion and ioy in them all, that presently they vnder∣tooke the enterprise, and dividing themselves into bandes, they beganne to search, following the signs of the revelation of the desired place. Amiddest the thickest of these water-lillies in the lake, they met with the same course of water they had seene the day be∣fore,
but much differing, being not white, but red, like blood, the which divided it selfe into two streames, whereof the one was of a very obscure azure, the which bred admiration in them, noting some great mistery as they said. After much search heere and there, the Tunal appeared growing on a stone, whereon was a royall Eagle, with the wings displaied towards the Sunne, receiving his heat. About this Eagle were many rich fethers, white, red, yellow, blew, and greene, of the same sort as they make their images, which Eage held in his tallants a goodly birde. Those which sawe it and knew it to be the place fore-tolde by the Oracle, fel on their knees, doing great worship to the Eagle, which bowed the head looking on every sidehen was their great cries, demonstrations, and thankes vnto the Crea∣tor, and to their great god Vitzliputzli, who was there father, and had alwaies told them truth. For this reason they called the cittie which they founded there, Te∣noxtiltan, which signifies Tunal on a stone, and to this day they carry in their armes, an Eagle vpon a Tunal, with a bird in his tallant, and standing with the other vpon the Tunal. The day following, by common con∣sent they made an hermitage adioyning to the Tunal of the Eagle, that the Arke of their god might rest there, till they might have meanes to build him a sump∣tuous Temple: and so they made this hermitage of flagges & turfes covered with straw; then having con∣sulted with their god, they resolved to buy of their neighbours, stone, timber, lime, in exchange of fish, frogges, and yong kids, and for duckes, water-hennes, courlieus, and divers other kindes of sea fowles. All which things they did fish and hunt for in this Lake, whereof there is great aboundance. They went with
these things to the markets of the Townes and Citties of the Tapanecans, and of them of Tescuco their neigh∣bours, and with pollicie they gathered together by lit∣tle and little, what was necessary for the building of their Cittie: so as they built a better Chappell for their idoll of lime and stone, and laboured to fill vp a great part of the lake with rubbish. This done, the idoll spake one night to one of his priests in these tearmes, Say vn∣to the Mexicaines, that the Noblemen divide themselves everie one with their kinsfolkes and friends, and that they divide themselves into foure principall quarters, about the house which you have built for my rest, and let every quar∣ter build in his quarter at his pleasure. The which was put in execution: and those be the foure principall quar∣ters of Mexico, which are called at this day S. Iean, S. Mary the round, S. Paul, and S. Sebastian. After this, the Mexicaines being thus divided into these foure quar∣ters, their god commanded them to divide amongest them the gods he should name to them, and that they should give notice to every quarter, principal of the o∣ther foure particall quarters, where their gods should be worshipped. So as vnder every one of these foure principall quartrs, there were many lesse comprehen∣ded, according to the number of the idolls which their god commanded them to worship, which they called Calpultetco, which is as much to say, as god of the quar∣ters. In this manner the Cittie of Mexico Tenoxtiltan was founded, and grew great. Of the sedition of those of Tlatelulco, and of the first Kings the Mexicaines did choose. CHAP. 8. THis division being made as afore-said, some olde men and Antients held opinion, that in the divi∣sion,
they had not respected them as they deserved: for this cause, they and their kinsfolke, did mutine, and went to seeke another residence: and as they went tho∣rough the lake, they found a small peece of ground or terrasse, which they call Tloteloli, where they inhabited, calling it Tlatellulco, which signifies place of a terrasse. This was the third division of the Mexicaines, since they left their Country. That of Mechovacan being the first, and that of Malinalco the second. Those which seperated themselves and went to Tlatellulco, were fa∣mous men, but of bad disposition: and therefore they practised against the Mexicaines their neighbours, all the ill neighbourhood they could. They had alwaies quarrells against them, and to this day continues their hatred and olde leagues. They of Tenoxtiltan, seeing them of Tlatellulco thus opposite vnto them, and that they multiplied, feared that in time they might sur∣mount them: heerevpon they assembled in counsell, where they thought it good to choose a King, whome they should obey, and strike terror into their enemies, that by this meanes they should bee more vnited and stronger among themselves, and their enemies not pre∣sume too much against them. Being thus resolved to choose a King, they tooke another advise very profita∣ble and assured, to choose none among themselves, for the avoyding of diffentions, and to gaine (by their new King) some other neighbour nations, by whom they were invironed, being destitute of all succours. All well considered, both to pacifie the King of Culhua∣can, whom they had greatly offended, having slaine and flead the daughter of his predecessor, and done him so great a scorne, as also to have a King of the Mex∣icaine blood, of which generation there were many
in Culhuacan, which continued there since the time they lived in peace amongst them; they resolved to choose for their King, a yong man called Acamapixtli, sonne to a great Mexicaine Prince, and of a Ladie, daughter to the King of Culhuacan. Presently they sent Ambassadors with a great present to demand this man, who delivered their Ambassage in these tearmes, Great Lord, we your vassalls and servants, placed and shut vp in the weedes and reedes of the Lake, alone and abandoned of all the Nations of the world, led onely and guided by our god to the place where we are, which falles in the iurisdiction of your limits of Ascapusalco, and of Tescuco. Although you have suffered vs to live and remaine there, yet will we not, neither is it reason to live without a head and lord to com∣mand, correct, and governe vs, instructing vs in the course of our life, and defending vs from our enemies: Therefore we come to you, knowing that in your Court and house, there are children of our generation, linckt and alied with yours, issued from our entrailes, and yours, of our blood and yours, among he which we have knowledge of a grand-child of yours and ours, called Acamapixtli. We beseech you there∣fore, to give him vs for Lord, we will esteeme him as hee de∣serves, seeing hee is of the linage of the Lords of Mexico, and the Kings of Culhuacan. The king having consulted vppon this poynt, and finding it nothing inconvenient to be alied to the Mex∣icaines, who were valiant men, made them answer, that they should take his grandchilde in good time, adding therevnto, that if he had beene a woman, hee woulde not have given her, noting the foule fact before spo∣ken of, ending his discourse with these wordes, Let my grand-childe go to serve your God, and be his lievetenant, to rule and govrne his creatures, by whom we live, who is the
Lord of night, day, and windes: Let him goe and be Lord of the water and land, and possesse the Mexicaine Nation, take him in good time, and vse him as my sonne and grand-child. The Mexicaines gave him thanks, all ioyntly desiring him to marry him with his owne hand, so as he gave him to wife, one of the noblest Ladies amongst them. They conducted the new King and Queene with all honour possible, and made him a solemne reception, going all in generall foorth to see the king, whom they led into pallaces which were then but meane; and ha∣ving seated them in royall throanes, presently one of the Antients and an Orator much esteemed amongest them, did rise vp, speaking in this manner, My sonne, our Lord and King, thou art welcome to this poore house and citty, amongest these weedes and mudde, where thy poore fa∣thers, grandfathers, and kinsfolkes, endure what it pleaseth the Lord of things created. Remember Lord thou commst hither to be the defence and support of the Mexicaine Nati∣on, and to be the resemblance of our God Vitzliputzli, wher∣vpon the charge and governement is given thee. Thou know∣est we are not in our country, seeing the land we possesse at this day is anothers, neither know we what shall become of vs to morrowe, or another day: Consider therefore that thou com∣mest not to rest or recreate thy selfe, but rather to indure a new charge vnder so heavie a burden: wherein thou must conti∣nually labour, being slave to this multitude, which is fallen to thy lotte, and to all this neighbour people, whome thou must strive to gratifie, and give them contentment, seeing thou knowest we live vpon their lands, and within their limites. And ending, hee repeated these wordes; Thou art wel∣come, thou and the Queene our Mistris, to this your realme. This was the speech of the old man, which with other orations (which the Mexicaine histories do celebrate)
the children did vse to learne by hart, and so they were kept by tradition, some of them deserve well to be re∣ported in their proper termes. The king aunswering, thanked them, and offered them his care and diligence in their defence & aide in all he could. After they gave him the othe, and after their mane set the royall crown vpon his head, the which is like to the Crowne of the dukes of Venice: the name of Acamapixtli their first king signifies a handfull of reeds, and therfore they carry in their armories a hand holding many arrows of reedes. Of the strange tribute the Mexicaines paied to them of Azcapuzalco. CHAP. 9. THe Mexicaines happened so well in the election of their new king, that in short time they grew to have some form of a common-weale, and to be famous among strangers; wherevpon their neighbours moved with feare, practised to subdue them, especially the Ta∣paneans, who had Azcapuzalco for their metropolitane citty, to whome the Mexicaines payed tribute, as stran∣gers dwelling in their land. For the king of AzcapuZalco fearing their power which increased, soght to oppresse the Mexicanes, and having consulted with his subiects, he sent to tel king Acamapixtli, that the ordinary tribut they payed was too little, and that from thencefoorth they should bring firre trees, sapines, and willowes for the building of the citty, and moreover they shoulde make him a garden in the water planted with diverse kindes of hearbes and pulses, which they should bring vnto him yearely by water, dressed in this maner, with∣out failing; which if they did not, he declared them his enemies, and would roote them out. The Mexicaines
were much troubled at this commaundement, holding it impossible: and that this demaund was to no other end, but to seeke occasion to ruine them. But their god Vitzliputzli comforted them, appearing that night to an olde man, commaunding him to say to the king his sonne in his name, that hee should make no difficultie to accept of this tribute, he would help them and make the meanes easie, which after happened: for the time of tribute being come, the Mexicanes carried the trees that were required, and moreover, a garden made and floating in the water, and in it much Mays, (which is their corne) already grained and in the eare: there was also Indian pepper, beetes, Tomates, which is a great sappy and savourie graine, french pease, fgges, gourds, and many other things, al ripe, and in their season. Such as have not seene the gardines in the lake of Mexico, in the middest of the water, will not beleeve it, but will say it is an inchantment of the Divell whom they wor∣ship: But in trueth it is a matter to be done, and there hath beene often seene of these gardens floating in the water; for they cast earth vpon reedes and grasse, in such sort as it never wastes in the water; they sowe and plant this ground, so as the graine growes and ripens very well, and then they remove it from place to place. But it is true, that to make this great garden easily, and to have the fruites grow well, is a thing that makes men iudge there was the worke of VitziliputZli, whome o∣therwise they call Patillas, specially having never made nor seene the like. The king of Azcapuzalco wondred much when he sawe that accomplished which he held impossible saying vnto his subiects, that this people had a great god that made all easie vnto them, and hee sayd vnto the Mexicaines, that seeing their God gave them
all things perfit, hee would the yeare following, at the time of tribute, they shoulde bring in their gardine a wilde ducke, and a heron, sitting on their egges, in such sorte, that they should hatch their yoong ones as they should arrive, without failing of a minute, vpon paine of his indignation. The Mexicans were much troubled and heavy with this prowde and strict commaunde: but their god, as he was accustomed, comforted them in the night, by one of his priests, saying that he would take all that charge vpon him, willing them not to fear, but beleeve that the day would come, whenas the Az∣capuzalcos should pay with their lives this desire of new tributes. The time being come, as the Mexicans carri∣ed all that was demaunded of their gardins, among the reeds and weeds of the gardin, they found a ducke and a heron hatching their egges, and at the same instant when they arived at AzcapuZalco their yong ones were disclosed. Whereat the king of AzcapuZalco wondring beyond measure, he said againe to his people, that these were more than humane things, and that the Mexicans beganne as if they would make themselves lordes over all those provinces. Yet did he not diminish the order of this tribute, and the Mexicans finding not them∣selves mighty enough, endured this subiection and sla∣very the space of fifty yeeres. In this time the king A∣camapixtli died, having beautified the Citty of Mexico with many goodly buildings, streets, conduits of wa∣ter, and great aboundance of munition. Hee raigned in peace and rest forty yeares, having bin alwayes zea∣lous for the good and increase of the common-weale. As hee drew neare his end, hee did one memorable thing, that having lawfull children to whom he might leave the succession of the realme, yet would he not do
it, but contrariwise hee spake freely to the common∣weale, that as they had made a free election of him, so they should choose him that should seeme fittest for their good government, advising them therein to have a care to the good of the common-weale, and seeming grieved that he left them not freed from tribute & sub∣iection, hee died, having recommended his wife and children vnto them, he left all his people sorowfull for his death. Of the second King, and what happened in his raigne. CHAP. 10. THe obsequies of the dead king performed, the An∣tients, the chiefe of the realme, and some part of the people assembled together, to choose a King, where the Antients propounded the necessitie wherein they were, and that it was needefull to choose for chiefe of their citty, a man that had pity of age, of widows, and orphans, and to be a father of the commonweale: for in very deede they should be the feathers of his wings, the eie-browes of his eyes, and the beard of his face, that it was necessarie he were valiant, being needefull shortly to vse their forces, as their god had prophesied. Their resolution in the end was to chuse a sonne of the predecessor, vsing the like good office in accepting his sonne for successor, as hee had done to the common∣weale, relying thereon. This young man was called Vitzilovitli, which signifieth a rich feather, they set the royall crowne vpon his head, and annointed him, as they have beene accustomed to doe to all their Kings, with an ointnt they call Divine, being the same vn∣ction wherewith they did annoynt their Idoll. Pre∣sently
an Orator made an eloquent speech, exhorting him to arme himselfe with courage, and free them from the travells, slavery and misery they suffered, being op∣pressed by the AzcapuZalcos: which done, all did him homage. This king was not married, and his Counsell helde opinion, that it was good to marry him with the daughter of the king of Azcapuzalco, to have him a frind by this aliance, and to obtain some diminution of their heavy burthen of tributes imposed vpon them, and yet they feared lest he should disdaine to give them his daughter, by reason they were his vassalls: yet the king of AzcapuZalco yeelded therevnto, having humbly re∣quired him, who with curteous wordes gave them his daughter, called Ayanchigual, whom they ledde with great pompe and ioy to Mexico, and performed the ce∣remony and solemnity of marriage, which was to tie a corner of the mans cloke to a part of the womans vaile in signe of the band of marriage. This Queene broght foorth a sonne, of whose name they demaunded ad∣vise of the king of AzcapuZalco, and casting lots as they had accustomed (being greatly given to soothsayings, especially vpon the names of their children) he would have his grand-childe called Chimalpopoca, which sig∣nifies a target casting smoke. The Queene his daughter seeing the contentment the King of AzcapuZalco had of his grand-child, tooke occasion to intreat him to re∣leeve the Mexicaines of the heavy burthen of their tributes, seeing he had now a grand-child Mexicaine, the which the King willingly yeelded vnto, by the advise of his Counsell, granting (for the tribute which they paid,) to bring yeerely a couple of duckes and some fish, in signe of subiection, and that they dwelt in his land. The Mexicaines by this meanes, remained
much eased and content, but it lasted little. For the Queene their Protectrix died soone after: and the yere following likewise Vitzilovitli the king of Mexico died, leaving his sonne Chimalpopoca tenne yeares olde, hee raigned thirteene yeeres, and died thirty yeeres old, or little more. Hee was held for a good king, and carefull in the service of his gods, whose Images hee held kings to be; and that the honour done to their god, was done to the king who was his image. For this cause the kings have beene so affectionate to the service of their gods. This king was carefull to winne the love of his neigh∣bours, and to trafficke with them, whereby hee aug∣mented his citty, exercising his men in warrelike acti∣ons in the Lake, disposing them to that which he pre∣tended, as you shall see presently. Of Chimalpopoca the third king, and his cruell death, and the occasion of warre which the Mexicaines made. CHAP. 11. THe Mexicaines for successor to their deceased king did choose his sonne Chimalpopoca, by common consent, although he were a child of tenne yeeres old, being of opinion that it was alwayes necessary to keepe the favor of the king of AzcapuZalco, making his grand∣childe king. They then set him in his throane, giving him the ensignes of warre, with a bowe and arrowes in one hand, and a sword with rasours (which they com∣monly vse) in the right, signifying thereby (as they do say) that they pretended by armes to set themselves at liberty. The Mexicaines had great want of water, that of the Lake being very thicke and muddy, and there∣fore ill to drincke, so as they caused their infant king to
desire of his grandfather the king of Azcapuzalco, the water of the mountaine of Chapultepec, which is from Mexico a league, as is saide before, which they easely obtained, and by their industry made an aqueduct of faggots, weeds and flagges, by the which they brought water to their citty. But because the Cittie was built within the Lake, and the aqueduct did crosse it, it did breake forth in many places, so as they could not inioy the water, as they desired, and had great scarcitie: wher∣vpon, whether they did expresly seeke it, to quarrell with the Tapanecans, or that they were mooved vppon small occasion, in the end they sent a resolute ambassage to the king of AzcapuZalco, saying, they could not vse the water which he had gratiously granted them, and therefore they required him to provide them wood, lime, and stone, and to send his workmen, that by their meanes they might make a pipe of stone and lime that should not breake. This message nothing pleased the king, and much lesse his subiects, seeming to be too pre∣sumptuous a message, and purposely insolent, for vas∣sals to their Lord. The chiefe of the Counsell disdain∣ing thereat, said it was too bold, that not content with permission to live in an others land, and to have water given them, but they would have them goe to serve them: what a matter was that? And whereon presumed this fugitive nation, shut vp in the mud? They would let them know, how fit they were to worke, and to a∣bate their pride, in taking from them their land and their lives. In these termes and choller they left the king, whom they did somwhat suspect, by reason of his grandchild, and consulted againe anew, what they were to doe, where they resolved to make a generall proclamation,
that no Tapanecan should have any commerce or traf∣ficke with any Mexicaine, that they should not goe to their Cittie, nor receive any into theirs, vpon paine of death. Whereby we may vnderstand that the king did not absolutely commaund over his people, and that he governed more like a Consul, or a Duke, than a King. although since with their power, the commaund of Kings increased, growing absolute Tyrants, as you shal see in the last Kings. For it hath beene an ordinarie thing among the Barbarians, that such as their power hath beene, such hath beene their commaund; yea in our Histories of Spaine, we finde in some antient kings that manner of rule which the Tapanecans vsed. Such were the first kings of the Romans, but that Rome decli∣ned from Kings to Consuls, and a Senate, till that after they came to be commaunded by Emperours. But these Barbarians, of temperate Kings became tyrants, of which governements a moderate monarchy is the best and most assured. But returne we now vnto our histo∣rie. The king of Azcapuzalco seeing the resolution of his subiects, which was to kil the Mexicans, intreated them first to steale away the yong king his grand-childe, and afterwards do what they pleased to the Mexicans. All in a manner yeelded heerevnto, to give the king con∣tentment, and for pitty they had of the child; but two of the chiefest were much opposite, inferring, that it was bad counsell, for that Chimalpopoca, although hee were of their bloud, yet was it but by the mothers side, and that the fathers was to be preferred, and therefore they concluded that the first they must kill was Chimal∣popoca king of Mexico, protesting so to doe. The king of AzcapuZalco was so troubled with this contradiction,
and the resolution they had taken, that soone after for very griefe he fell sicke, and died. By whose death the Tapancans finishing their consultation, committed a notable treason; for one night the yong King of Mex∣ico sleeping without guard, or feare of any thing, they of Azcapuzalco entred his pallace, and slew him sodain∣ly, returning vnseene. The morning being come, when the Nobles wnt to salute the King, as they were accu∣stomed, they found him slaine with great and cruell wounds; then they cried out and filled all their cittie with teares: and transported with choller, they present∣ly fell to armes, with an intent to revenge their Kings death. As they ranne vppe and downe full of fury and disorder, one of their chiefest knightes stept foorth, labouring to appease them, with a grave admonition: Whither goe you (saide hee) O yee Mexicaines, quiet your selves, consider that things done without consideration ar not well guided, nor come to good end: suppresse your griefe, considering that although your king be dead, the noble blood of the Mexicaines is not extinct in him. Wee have children of our kings deceased, by whose conduct, succeeding to the realme, you shall the better execute what you pretend, having a leader to guide your enterprise, go not blindely, surcease, and choose a king first, to guide and encourage you against your e∣nmies: In the meane time dissemble discreetly, performing the funeralls of your deceased king, whose body you see heere present, for heereafter you shall finde better meanes to take re∣vnge. By this meanes the Mexicans passed no farther, but stayed to make the obsequies of their King, where∣vnto they invited the Lords of Tescuco, and Culhuacan, reporting vnto them this foule and cruell fact, which the Tapanecans had committed, moving them to have pitty on them, and incensing them against their enne∣mies,
concluding that their resolution was to die, or to bee revenged of so great an indignitie, intreating them not to favour so vniust a fact of their enemies; and that for their part, they desired not their aide of armes or men, but onely to bee lookers on of what should passe, and that for their maintenance, they would not stoppe nor hinder the comerce, as the Tapanecans had done. At these speeches they of Tescuco and Culhuacan made them great shewes of good will, and that they were well satisfied, offing them their citties, and all the commerce they desired, that they might provide vittaile and munition at their pleasure, both by land & water. After this, the Mexicanes intreated them to stay with them, and assist at the election of their King; the which they likewise granted, to give them con∣tentment. Of the fourth King called Izcoalt, and of the warre against the Tapanecans. CHAP. 12. THe Electors being assembled, an old man that was held for a great Orator, rose vp, who (as the histo∣ries report,) spake in this manner, The light of your eyes O Mxicaines is darkened, but not of your hearts: for al∣though you have lost him that was the light and guide of the Mexicaine Common-weale, yet that of the heart remaines: to consider, that although they have slaine one man, yet there are others that may supply with advantage, the want we have of him: the Mexicaine Nobilitie is not extinguished thereby, nor the blood royall decaied. Turne your eyes and looke about you, you shall see the Nobilitie of Mexico set in order, not one nor two, but many and excellent Princes, sonnes to Aca∣mapixtli,
our true and lawfull King and Lord. Heere you may choose at your pleasure, saying, I will this man, and not that. If you have lost a father, heere you may finde both fa∣ther and mother: make account O Mexicaines, that the Sunne is eclipsed and darkened for a time, and will returne suddenly. If Mexico hath beene darkened by the death of your King, the Sun will soone shew, in choosing another King. Looke to whom, and vpon whom you shall cast your eyes, and towards whom your heart is inclined, and this is hee who your god Vitzliputzli hath chosen. And continuing a while this discourse, he ended to the satisfaction of all men. In the end, by the consent of this Counsell, Izco∣alt was chosen King, which signifies a snake of rasors, who was sonne to the first King Acamapixtli, by a slave of his: and although he were not legitimate, yet they made choyce of him, for that he exceeded the rest in behaviour, valour, and magnanimitie of courage. All seemed very well satisfied, and above all, these of Tes∣cuco, for their king was mrried to a sister of Iscoalts. Af∣ter the King had beene crowned and set in his royall seat, another Orator stept vp, discoursing how the king was bound to his Common-weale, and of the courage he ought to shew in travell, speaking thus, Bhold this day we depend on thee, it may be thou wilt let fall the bur∣then that lies vpon thy souldiers, and suffer the old man and woman, the orphlin and the widowe to perish. Take pittie of the infants that go creeping in the ayre, who must perish if our enemies surmount vs: vnfold then, and stretch forth thy cloake, my Lord, to beare these infants vpon thy shoulders, which be the poore and the common people, who live assured vnder the shadowe of thy wings, and of thy bountie. Vtte∣ring many other words vpon this subiect, the which, (as I have said,) they learne by heart, for the exercise of
their children, and after did teach them as a lesson to those that beganne to learne the facultie of Orators. In the meane time, the Tapanecans were resolute to de∣stroy the Mexicaines, and to this end they had made great preparations. And therefore the new King tooke counsell for the proclaiming of warre, and to fight with those that had so much wronged them. But the common people, seeing their adversaries to exceede them farre in numbers and munition for the warre, they came amazed to their King, pressing him not to vndertake so dangerous a warre, which would destroy their poore Cittie and Nation: wherevpon being de∣maunded what advise were fittest to take, they made answer, that the King of AzcapuZalco was very pittifull, that they should demand peace, and offer to serve him, drawing them forth those marshes, and that he should give them houses and lands among his subiects, that by this meanes they might depend all vppon one Lord. And for the obtaining heereof, they should carry their god in his litter for an intercessor. The cries of the peo∣ple were of such force, (having some Nobles that ap∣proved their opinion,) as presently they called for the Priests, preparing the litter and their god, to performe the voyage. As this was preparing, and every one yeel∣ded to this treatie of peace, and to subiect themselves to the Tapanecans, a gallant yong man, and of good sort, stept out among the people, who with a resolute countenance spake thus vnto them, What means this O yee Mexicaines, are yee mad? How hath so great cowardise crept in among vs? Shall we go and yeeld our selves thus to the Azcapuzalcans. Then turning to the King he said, How now my Lord, will you endure this? Speake to the people, that they may suffer vs to finde out some meanes for our ho∣nour
and defence, and not to yeelde our selves so simply and shamefully into the hands of our enemies. This yong man was called Tlacaellec, nephew to the King, he was the most valiant Captaine and greatest Counsellor that e∣ver the Mexicaines had, as you shall see heereafter. Iz∣coalt incouraged by that his nephew had so wisely spo∣ken, retained the people, saying they should first suffer him to try another better meanes. Then turning to∣wards his Nobilitie, he said vnto them, You are all heere, my kinsmen, and the best of Mexico, hee that hath the cou∣rage to carrie a message to the Tapanecans, let him rise vp. They looked one vpon another, but no man stirred nor offered himselfe to the word. Then this yong man Tlacaellec rising, offered himselfe to go, saying, that see∣ing he must die, it did import little whether it were to day or to morrow: for what reason should he so care∣fully preserve himselfe? he was therefore readie, let him command what he pleased. And although all held this for a rash attempt, yet the King resolvd to send him, that he might thereon vnderstand the will and dispo∣sition of the King of Azcapuzalco and of his people; holding it better to hasten his nephws death, then to hazard the honour of his Comon-weale. Tlacaelies being ready, tooke his way, and being come to the guards, who had commandement to kill any Mexi∣caines that came towards them, by cunning or other∣wise: he prswaded them to suffer him to passe to the king, who wondered to see him, and hearing his ambas∣sage, which was to demand peace of him vnder ho∣nst conditions, answered, that hee would impart it to his subiects, willing him to returne the next day for his answer, then Tlacallec demanded a pasport, yet could he not obtaine any, but that he should vse his best skill:
With this he returned to Mexico, giving his words to the guards to returne. And although the King of Az∣capuzalco desired peace, being of a milde disposition, yet his subiects did so incense him, as his answer was open warre. The which being heard by the messenger, he did all his King commanded him, declaring by this ceremony, to give armes, and anointing the King with the vnction of the dead, that in his Kings behalfe he did defie him. Having ended all, the King of Azcapuzalco suffering himselfe to be anointed and crowned with feathers, giving goodly armes in recompence to the messenger, wishing him not to returne by the pallace gate, whereas many attended to cut him in peeces, but to go out secretly by a little false posterne that was o∣pen in one of the courts of the Pallace. This yong man did so, and turning by secret waies, got away in safetie in sight of the guards, and there defied them saying, Tapanecans and Azcapuzalcans, you do your office ill, vn∣derstand you shall all die, and not one Tapanecan shall re∣maine alive. In the meane time the guardes fell vpon him, where he behaved him selfe so valiantly, that hee lew some of them: and seeing many more of them come running, hee retyred himselfe gallantly to the Cittie, where he brought newes, that warre was pro∣claimed with the Tapanecans, and that hee had defied their King. Of the battell the Mexicaines gave to the Tapanecans, and of the vitorie they obtained. CHAP. 13. THe defie being knowne to the Commons of Mexi∣co, they came to the king, according to their accu∣stomed
cowardise, demaunding leave to departe the Citty, holding their raigne certaine. The king didde comfort and incourage them, promising to give them libertie if they vanquished their enemies, willing them not to feare. The people replied. And if we be vanqui∣shed, what shall we doe? If we be overcome (aunswered the king) we will be bound presently to yeeld our selves into your hands to suffer death, eate our flesh in your dishes and be re∣venged of vs. It shall be so then (saide they) if you loose the victorie, and if you obtaine the victorie, we do presently offer our selves to be your Tributaries, to labour in your houses, to sowe your ground, to carrie your armes and baggage when you goe to the warres for ever, wee and our descendants after vs. These accordes made betwixt the people and the nobilitie (which they did after fully performe, eyther willingly, or by constraint, as they had promised) the king namd for his captain generall Tlacaellec, the whole campe was put in order, and into squadrons, giving the places of captaines to the most valiant of his kinsfolkes and friends: then did hee make them a goodly speech, whereby he did greatly incorage them, being now wel prepared, charging all men to obey the commaunde∣ment of the Generall whome he had appoynted: he di∣vided his men into two partes, commanding the most valiant and hardie, to give the first charge with him, & that all the rest should remaine with the king Izcoalt, vnil they should see the first assaile their enemies. Mar∣ching then in order, they were discovered by them of Azcapuzalco, who presently came furiously foorth the citty, carrying great riches of gold, silver, and armes of great value, as those which had the empire of all that country. IZcoalt gave the signall to battaile, with a lit∣tle drumme he carried on his shoulders, and presently
they raised a general showt, crying, Mexico, Mexico, they charged the Tapanecans, and although they were farre more in number, yet did they defeate them, and force them to retire into their Cittie; then advaunced they which remained behinde, crying, Tlacaellec, victorie, victorie, all sodainely entred the Citty, where (by the Kings commandement) they pardoned not any man, no not olde men, women, nor children, for they slew them all, and spoyled the Citty being very rich. And not content heerewith, they followed them that fled, and were retired into the craggy rocks of the Sierres or neere mountaines, striking and making a great slaugh∣ter of them. The Tapanecans being retired to a moun∣taine cast downe their armes, demaunding their lives, and offering to serve the Mexicans, to give them lands and gardins, stone, lime and timber, and to hold them alwayes for their Lordes. Vpon this condition Tlaca∣ellc retired his men and ceased the battell, graunting them their lives vpon the former conditions, which they did solemnely sweare. Then they returnd to Az∣capuZalco, and so with their rich and victorious spoiles to the cittie of Mexico. The day following the king as∣sembled the nobilitie and the people, to whom he laid open the accord the Commons had made, demaund∣ing of them, if they were content to persist therin: the Commons made answer, that they had promised, and they had well deserved it, and therfore they were con∣tent to serve them perpetually. Wherevpon they tooke an othe, which since they have kept without contra∣diction. This done IZcoalt returned to Azcapuzalco, (by the advise of his counsell) he divided all the lands & goods of the conquered among the conquerours, the chiefest
part fell to the King, then to Tlacaellec, and after to the rest of the Nobles, as they best deserved in the battell. They also gave land to some plebeians, having beha∣ved themselves valiantly; to others they distributed the pillage, making small account of them as of cowardes. They appointed lands in common for the quarters of Mexico, to every one his part, for the service and sacrifi∣ces of their gods. This was the order which after they alwayes kept, in the division of the lands and spoyles of those they had vanquished and subdewed. By this meanes they of AzcapuZalco remained so poore, as they had no lands left them to labor, and (which was worse) they tooke their king from them, & all power to chuse any other then him of Mexico. Of the warre and victory the Mexicans had against the Cittie of Cuyoacan. CHAP. 14. ALthough the chiefe Cittie of the Tapanecans, was that of AzcapuZalco, yet had they others with their private Lordes, as Tcuba and Cuyoacan. These seeing the storme passed, would gladly that they of Az∣capuzalco had renewed the warre against the Mexicans, and seeing them danted, as a nation wholy broken and defeated, they of Cuyoacan resolved to make warre by themselves; to the which they laboured to draw the o∣ther neighbor nations, who would not stirre nor quar∣rell with the Mexicans. In the meane time the hatred and malice increasing, they of Cuyoacan beganne to ill intreate the women that went to their markets, mock∣ing at them, and doing the like to the men over whom they had power: for which cause the king of Mexico de∣fended, that none of his should goe to Cuyoacan, and
that they should receive none of them into Mexico, the which made them of Cuyoacan resolve wholy to warre: but first they would provoke them by some shamefull scorne, which was, that having invited them to one of their solemne feasts, after they had made them a good∣ly banquet, and feasted them with a great daunce after their manner, they sent them for their fruite, womens apparell, forcing them to put it on, and so to returne home like women to their cittie, reproching them, that they were cowards and effeminate, and that they durst not take armes being sufficiently provoked. Those of Mexico say, that for revenge they did vnto them a fowle scorne, laying at the gates of their Cittie of Cuyoacan certaine things which smoaked, by meanes whereof many women were delivered before their time, and many fell sicke. In the end, all came to open warre, and there was a battell fought, wherein they imploy∣ed all their forces, in the which Tlacaellec, by his cou∣rage and policie in warre, obtained the victory. For ha∣ving left king IZcoalt in fight with them of Cuyoacan, he put himselfe in ambush with some of the most valiant souldiers, and so turning about, charged them behind, and forced them to retire into their Citty. But seeing their intent was to flie into a Temple, which was verie strong. He with three other valiant souldiors, pursued them eagerly, and got before them, seising on the tem∣ple & firing it, so as he forced them to flie to the fields, where hee made a great slaughter of the vanquished, pursuing them two leagues into the Countrey, vnto a litle hill, where the vanquished casting away their wea∣pons and their armes acrosse, yeelded to the Mexicans, and with many teares craved pardon of their overwee∣ning follie, in vsing them like women, offering to bee
their slaves: so as in the end the Mexicaines did pardon them. Of this victory the Mexicanes carried away very rich spolles of garments, armes, gold, silver, iewells, and rich feathers, with a great number of captives. In this battaile there were three of the principals of Cul∣huacan that came to aide the Mexicaines, to winne ho∣nour, the which were remarkable above all. And since being knowen to Tlasaellec, and having made proofe of their fidelitie, he gave them Mexicaine devises, and had them alwayes by his side, where they fought in all places very valiantly. It was apparant that the whole vi∣ctory was due to the Generall, and to these three; for among so many captives taken, two third partes were wonne by these foure, which was easily knowen by a policie they vsed: for taking a captive, they presently cut off a little of his haire, and gave it to others, so as it appeared that those which had their haire cut, amoun∣ted to that number, whereby they wonne great repu∣tation and fame of valiant men. They were honoured as conquerors, giving them good portions of the spoils and lands, as the Mexicans have alwayes vsed to doe, which gave occasion to those that did fight, to become famous, and to winne reputation by armes. Of the warre and victorie which the Mexicans had a∣gainst the Suchimilcos. CHAP. 15 THe Nation of the Tapanecans being subdewed the Mexicaines had occasion to do the like to the Suchi∣milcos, who (as it hath beene saide) were the first of the seven caves or linages that peopled this land. The Mex∣ians sought not the occasion, although they might pre∣sume as conquerors to extend their limits, but the Su∣chimilcos
didde moove them, to their owne ruine, as it happens to men of small iudgement that have no fore∣sight, who not preventing the mischefe they imagined, fall into it. The Suchimilcos held opinion, that the Mex∣icans, by reason of their victories past, should attempt to subdue them, and consulted heereon among them∣selves. Some among them thought it good to acknow∣ledge them for superiors, and to applaude their good fortune, but the contrary was allowed, and they went out to give them battel: which IZcoalt the king of Mex∣ico vnderstanding, he sent his General Tlacaelec against them, with his army: the battell was fought in the same field that divides their limites, which two armies were equall in men and armes, but very divers in their order and manner of fighting; for that the Suchimilcos char∣ged all together on a heape confusedly, and Tlacaellec divided his men into squadrons with a goodly order, so as he presently brake his ennemies, forcing them to retire into their cittie, into the which they entred, fol∣lowing them to the Temple whither they fled, which they fiered, and forcing them to flie vnto the moun∣taines: in the end they brought them to this poynt, that they yeelded with their armes acrosse. The Generall Tlacaellec returning in great triumph, the priests went foorth to receive him, with their musicke of flutes, and giving incense. The chiefe Captaines vsed other cere∣monies and shews of ioy, as they had bin accustomed to doe, and the king with all the troupe went to the Temple, to give thanks to their false god, for the divell hath alwayes beene very desirous hereof, to challenge to himselfe the honor which he deserves not, seeing it is the true God which giveth victories, and maketh them to rule whome he pleaseth. The day following,
king Izcoalt went vnto the Citty of Suchimilco, causing himselfe to be sworne king of the Suchimilcos: and for their comfort he promised to doe them good. In to∣ken whereof hee commaunded them to make a great cawsey stretching from Mexico, to Suchimilco, which is foure leagues, to the end there might bee more com∣merce and trafficke amongest them. Which the Suchi∣milcos performed, and in shorte time the Mexicaine go∣vernement seemed so good vnto them, as they helde themselves happy to have changed their king and com∣monweale. Some neighbors pricked forward by envy, or feare, to their ruines were not yet made wise by o∣thers miseries. Cuitlavaca was a citty within the lake, which though the name and dwelling be chaunged, continueth yet. They were active to swimme in the lake, and therefore they thought they might much indomage and annoy the Mexicaines by water, which the King vnderstand∣ing, hee resolved to send his army presently to fight a∣gainst them. But Tlacaellec little esteeming this warre, holding it dishonorable to lead an army against them, made offer to conquer them with the children onely: which he performed in this maner: he went vnto the Temple & drew out of the Covent such children as he thought fittest for this action, from tenne to eighteene yeeres of age, who knew how to guide their boates, or canoes, teaching them certaine pollicies. The order they held in this warre, was, that he went to Cuitlava∣ca with his children, where by his pollicy hee pressed the ennemy in such sorte, that hee made them to flie; and as he followed them, the lord of Cuitlavaca mette him and yeelded vnto him, himselfe, his Citty, and his people, and by this meanes he stayed the pursuite. The
children returned with much spoyle, and many cap∣tives for their sacrifices, being solemnely received with a great procession, musike and perfumes, & they went to worshippe their gods, in taking of the earth which they did eate, and drawing blood from the forepart of their legges with the Priests lancets, with other super∣stitions which they were accustomed to vse in the like solemnities. The children were much honoured and incoraged, and the king imbraced and kissed them, and his kinsmen and alies accompanied them. The bruite of this victorie ranne throughout all the country, how that Tlacaellec had subdued the city of Cuitlavaca with children: the news and consideration whereof opened the eyes of those of Tescco, a chiefe and very cunning Nation for their manner of life: So as the king of Tes∣cuco was first of opinion, that they should subiect them∣selves to the king of Mexico, and invite him therevnto with his cittie. Therefore by the advise of his Coun∣sell, they sent Ambassadors good Orators with hono∣rable presents, to offer themselves vnto the Mexicans, as their subiects, desiring peace and amitie, which was gratiously accepted; but by the advise of Tlacaellec he vsed a ceremony for the effecting thereof, which was that those of Tescuco should come forth armed against the Mexicans, where they should fight, and presently yeelde, which was an act and ceremony of warre, with∣out any effusion of bloud on either side. Thus the king of Mexico became soveraigne Lord of Tescuco, but hee tooke not their king from them, but made him of his privie counsell; so as they have alwayes maintained themselves in this manner vntill the time of Motecuma the second, during whose raigne the Spaniards entred. Having subdued the land and citty of Tescuco, Mexico
remained Lady and Mistris of all the landes and citties about the Lake, where it is built. Izcoalt having enioy∣ed this prosperitie, and raigned twelve yeeres, died, leaving the realme which had beene given him, much augmented by the valour and counsell of his nephew Tlacaellec (as hath afore beene saide) who held it best to choose an other king then himselfe, as shall heereaf∣ter be shewed. Of the fift King of Mexico, called Moteçuma, the first of that name. CHAP. 16. FOrasmuch as the election of the new King, belon∣ged to foure chiefe Electors, (as hath been said,) and to the King of Tescuco, and the King of Tacu∣bu, by especiall priviledge: Tlacaellec assembled these six personages, as he that had the soveraigne authoritie, and having propounded the matter vnto them, they made choise of Moteçuma, the first of that name, ne∣phew to the same Tlacaellec. His election was very pleasing to them all, by reason whereof, they made most solemne feasts, and more stately then the former. Presently after his election, they conducted him to the Temple with a great traine, where before the divine harth, (as they call it,) where there is continuall fire, they set him in his royall throne, putting vpon him his royall ornaments. Being there, the King drew blood from his eares and legges with a griffons tallents, which was the sacrifice wherein the divell delighted to be ho∣noured. The Priests, Antients, and Captaines, made their orations, all congratulating his election. They were accustomed in their elections to make great feasts and dances, where they wasted many lightes. In this
Kings time the custome was brought in, that the King should go in person to make warre in some province, and bring captives to solemnize the feast of his coro∣nation, and for the solemne sacrifices of that day. For this cause King Moteçuma went into the province of Chalco, who had declared themselves his enemies: from whence (having fought valiantly,) he brought a great number of captives, whereof he did make a no∣table sacrifice the day of his coronation, although at that time he did not subdue all the province of Chalco, being a very warlike nation. Many came to this coro∣nation from divers provinces, as well neere as farre off, to see the feast, at the which all commers were very bountifully entertained and clad, especially the poore, to whom they gave new garments. For this cause they brought that day into the Cittie, the Kings tributes, with a goodly order, which consisted in stuffes to make garments of all sorts, in Cacao, gold, silver, rich feathers, great burthens of cotten, cucumbers, sundry sortes of pulses, many kindes of sea fish, and of the fresh water, great store of fruites, and venison without number, not reckoning an infinite number of presents, which other kings and Lords sent to the new king. All this tribute marched in order according to the provinces, and before them the stewards and receivers, with di∣vers markes and ensignes, in very goodly order: so as it was one of the goodliest things of the feast, to see the entry of the tribute. The King being crowned, he imploied himselfe in the conquest of many provinces, and for that he was both valiant and vertuous, hee still increased more and moe, vsing in all his affaires the counsell and industry of his generall Tlacaellec, whom he did alwaies love and esteeme very much, as hee had
good reason. The warre wherein hee was most trou∣bled and of greatest difficultie, was that of the pro∣vince of Chalco, wherein there happened great matters, whereof one was very remarkable, which was, that they of Chalcas, had taken a brother of Moteçumas in the warres, whome they resolved to choose for their king, asking him very curteously, if he would accept of this charge. He answered (after much importunity, still persisting therein,) that if they meant plainely to choose him for their king, they should plant in the market place, a tree or very high stake, on the toppe whereof, they should make a little scaffold, and meanes to mount vnto it. The Chalcas supposing it had beene some ceremony to make himselfe more apparent, pre∣sently effected it: then assembling all his Mexicaines a∣bout the stake, he went to the toppe with a garland of flowers in his hand, speaking to his men in this maner, O valiant Mexicaines, these men will choose mee for their King, but the gods will not permit, that to be a King I should committee any treason against my countrie, but contrariwise, I wil that you learne by me, that it behoveth vs rather, to in∣dure death, then to ayde our enemies. Saying these words, he cast himselfe downe, and was broken in a thousand peeces; at which spectacle, the Chalcas had so great hor∣ror and dispits, that presently they fell vpon the Mexi∣caines and slew them all with their launces, as men whom they held too prowde and inexorable, saying, they had divelish hearts. It chanced the night follow∣ing, they heard two owles making a mornefull cry, which they did interpret as an vnfortunate signe, and a presage of their neere destruction, as it succeeded: for King Moteçuma went against them in person with all his power, where he vanquished them, and ruined all
their kingdome: and passing beyond the mountaine Meade, hee conquered still even vnto the North sea. Then returning towards the South sea, hee subdued many provinces: so as he became a mighty King: all by the helpe and counsell of Tlacaellec, who in a manner conquered all the Mexicaine nation. Yet hee held an opinion, (the which was confirmed,) that it was not behoovefull to conquer the province of Tlascalla, that the Mexicaines might have a fronter enemy, to keepe the youth of Mexico in exercise and allarme: and that they might have numbers of captives to sacrifice to their idols, wherein they did waste (as hath beene said,) infinite numbers of men, which should bee taken by force in the warres. The honour must be given to Mo∣teçuma, or to speake truly, to Tlacaellec his Generall, for the good order and policy setled in the realme of Mex∣ico, as also for the counsells and goodly enterprises, which they did execute: and likewise for the numbers of Iudges and Magistrates, being as well ordered there, as in any common-weale; yea, were it in the most flou∣rishing of Europe. This King did also greatly increase the Kings house, giving it great authoritie, and appoin∣ting many and sundry officers, which served him with great pompe and ceremony. Hee was no lesse remarka∣ble touching the devotion and service of his idolls, in∣creasing the number of his Ministers, and instituting new ceremonies, wherevnto hee carried a great re∣spect. Hee built that great temple dedicated to their god Vitziliputzli, whereof is spoken in the other booke. He did sacrifice at the dedication of this temple, a great number of men, taken in sundry victories: finally, in∣ioying his Empire in great prosperitie, hee fell sicke,
and died, having raigned twenty eight yeares,  to his successor Ticoci, who did not resemble him, nei∣ther in valour, nor in good fortune. How Tlacaellec refused to be King, and of the election and deedes of Ticocic. CHAP. 17. THE foure Deputies assembled in counsell, with the lords of Tcscuc & Tacuba, where Tlacaellec was President in the election, where by all their voices Tla∣caellec was chosen, as deserving this charge better then any other. Yet he refused it, perswading them by perti∣nent reasons, that they shuld choose another, saying, that it was better, and more expedient to have another king, and he to be his instrument and assistant, as hee had beene till then, and not to lay the whole burthen vpon him, for that he held himselfe no lesse bound for the Common-weale, then if hee were king. It is a rare▪ thing to refuse principalitie and commaund, and to in∣dure the paine and the care, and not to reape the ho∣nour. There are few that will yeeld vp the power and authority, which they may hold, were it profitable to the common-weale. This Barbarian did heerein ex∣ceed the wisest amongst the Greekes and Romans, and it may be a lesson to Alexander and Iulius Caesar, where∣of the one held it little to command the whole world, putting his most deere and faithfull servants to death vpon some small iealosies of rule and empire: and the other declared himselfe enemy to his country, saying, that if it were lawfull to do any thing against law and reason, it was for a kingdome: such is the thirst and de∣sire of commaund. Although this acte of Tlacaele might well proceede from too great a confidence of
himselfe, seeming to him, though he were not king, yet in a maner, that he commanded kings, suffering him to carry certaine markes, as a Tiara or ornament for the head, which belonged onely to themselves. Yet this act deserves greater commendation, and to be well considered of, in that he held opinion to be better able to serve his Common-weale as a subiect, then being a soveraigne Lord. And as in a comedie he deserves most commendation, that represents the personage that im∣portes most, bee it of a sheepheard or a peasant, and leaves the King or Captaine to him that can performe it: So in good Philosophy, men ought to have a special regard to the common good, and apply themselves to that office and place which they best vnderstand. But this philosophie is farre from that which is practised at this day. But let vs returne to our discourse, and say, that in recompence of his modestie, and for the respect which the Mexicaine Electors bare him, they deman∣ded of Tlacaellec, (that seeing hee would not raigne,) whom he thought most fit: Wherevpon hee gave his voice to a sonne of the deceased king, who was then very yong, called Ticocic: but they replied that his shoulders were very weake to beare so heavy a burthen. Tlacaellec answered, that his were there to helpe him to beare the burthen, as he had done to the deceased: by meanes whereof, they tooke their resolution, and Tico∣ic was chosen, to whom were done all the accustomed ceremonies. They pierced his nosthrils, and for an ornament put an Emerald therein: and for this reason, in the Mexi∣cane bookes, this king is noted by his nosthrills pier∣ced. Hee differed much from his father and predeces∣sor, being noted for a coward, and not valiant. He went
to make warre for his coronation, in a province that was rebelled, where he lost more of his own men then hee tooke captives; yet he returned, saying, that hee brought the number of captives required for the sacri∣fice of his coronation, and so hee was crowned with great solemnitie. But the Mexicaines discontented to have a king so little disposed to warre, practised to ha∣sten his death by poison. For this cause hee continued not above foure yeares in the kingdome: whereby wee see that the children do not alwaies follow the blood and valour of their fathers; and the greater the glorie of the predecessors hath beene, the more odious is the weakenes and cowardise of such that succeed them in command, and not in merit. But this losse was well repaired by a brother of the deceased, who was also sonne to great Moteçuma, called Axayaca, who was like∣wise chosen by the advice of Tlacacllec, wherein hee happened better then before. Of the death of Tlacaellec, and the deedes of Axayaca the seventh King of Mexicaines. CHAP. 18. NOw was Tlacaellec very old, who by reason of his age, he was carried in a chaire vpon mens shoul∣ders, to assist in counsell when busines required. In the end hee fell sicke, whenas the king (who was not yet crowned,) did visit him often, sheading many teares, seeming to loose in him his father, and the father of his countrie. Tlacaellec did most affectionately recom∣mend his children vnto him, especially the eldest, who had shewed himselfe valiant in the former warres. The king promised to have regard vnto him, and the more to comfort the olde man, in his presence he gave him
the charge and ensignes of Captaine Generall, with all the preheminences of his father; wherewith the olde man remained so well satisfied, as with this content he ended his daies. If hee had not passed to another life, they might have held themselves very happy, seeing that of so poore and small a cittie, wherein hee was borne, he established by his valour and magnanimitie, so great, so rich, and so potent a kingdome. The Mex∣icans made his funerall as the founder of that Empire, more sumptuous and stately, then they had done to a∣ny of their former kings. And presently after Axayaca, (to appease the sorrow which all the people of Mexico shewed for the death of their captaine,) he resolved to make the voyage necessary for his coronation. Hee therefore led his army with great expedition into the province of Tequantepec, two hundred leagues from Mexico, where he gave battaile to a mighty army and an infinite number of men assembled together, as well out of that province, as from their neighbours, to op∣pose themselves against the Mexicans. The first of his Campe that advanced himselfe, to the combate, was the King himselfe, defying his ennemies, from whome hee made shewe to fly when they charged him, vntill he had drawne them into an ambuscadoe, where many souldiers lay hidden vnder straw, who suddenly issued forth, and they which fled, turned head: so as they of Tiquantepec remained in the midst of them, whom they charged furiously, making a great slaughter of them: and following their victory, they razed their citty and temple, punishing all their neigh∣bours rigorously. Then went they on farther, and with∣out any stay, conquered to Guatulco, the which is a port at this day well knowne in the South sea. Axayaca re∣turned
to Mexico with great and rich spoiles, where he was honourably crowned, with sumptuous and state∣ly preparation of sacrifices, tributes, and other things, whither many came to see his coronation. The Kings of Mexico received the crowne from the hands of the King of Tescuco, who had the preheminence. He made many other enterprises, where he obtained great victo∣ries, being alwaies the first to leade the army, and to charge the enemy; by the which hee purchased the name of a most valiant captaine: & not content to sub∣due strangers, he also suppressed his subiects which had rebelled, which never any of his predecessours ever could doe, or durst attempt. We have already shewed how some seditious of Mexico had divided themselves from that common-weale, and built a cittie neare vnto them, which they called Tlatelulco, whereas now saint Iaques is. These being revolted, held a faction aparte, and en∣creased and multiplied much, refusing to acknowledge the kings of Mexico, nor to yeeld them obedience. The king Axayaca sent to advise them, not to live divi∣ded, but being of one bloud, and one people, to ioyne together, and acknowledge the king of Mexico: where∣vpon the Lorde of Tlatelulco made an aunswere full of pride and disdaine, defieng the king of Mexico to sin∣gle combate with himselfe: and presently mustred his men, commaunding some of them to hide themselves in the weeds of the Lake; and the better to deceive the Mexicans, he commaunded them to take the shapes of ravens, geese, and other beasts, as frogs, and such like, supposing by this meanes to surprise the Mexicans as they should passe by the waies and cawsies of the Lake. Having knowledge of this defie, and of his adversaries
policie, he divided his army, giving a part to his gene∣rall, the sonne of Tlacaellec, commaunding him to charge this ambuscadoe, in the Lake; and he with the rest of his people, by an vnfrequented way, went and incamped before Tlatelulco. Presently hee called him who had defied him, to performe his promise, and as the two Lordes of Mexico, and Tlatelulco advaunced, they commaunded their subiects not to moove, vntill they had seene who should be conquerour, which was done, and presently the two Lordes incountered vali∣antly, where having fought long, in the end the Lorde of Tlatelulco was forced to turne his backe, being vn∣able to indure the furious charge of the king of Mexico. Those of Tlatelulco seeing their captaine flie, fainted, & fled likewise, but the Mexicans following them at the heeles, charged them furiously; yet the Lord of Tlate∣lulco escaped not the hands of Axayaca, for thinking to save himselfe, he fled to the toppe of the Temple, but Axayaca folowed him so neere, as he seised on him with great force, and threw him from the toppe to the bot∣tome, and after set fire on the Temple, and the cittie. Whilest this passed at Tlatelulco, the Mexicane generall was very hote in the revenge of those that pretended to defeate him by pollicie, & after he had forced them to yeelde, and to crie for mercy, the Generall sayde he would not pardon them, vntil they had first performed the offices of those figures they represented, and ther∣fore he would have them crie like frogges and ravens, every one according to the figure which he had vnder∣taken, else they had no composition: which thing he did to mocke them with their owne policie. Feare and necessitie be perfect teachers, so as they did sing and crie with all the differences of voyces that were com∣maunded
them, to save their lives, although they were much grieved at the sport their enimies made at them. They say that vnto this day, the Mexicans vse to ieast at the Tlatelulcans, which they beare impatiently, when they putte them in minde of this singing and crying of beasts. King Axayaca tooke pleasure at this scorne and disgrace, and presently after they retourned to Mexico with great ioy. This King was esteemed for one of the best that had commaunded in Mexico. Hee raigned eleaven yeares, and one succeeded that was much infe∣riour vnto him in valour and vertue. Of the deedes of Autzol the eight King of Mexico. CHAP. 19. AMong the foure Electors that had power to chuse whome they pleased to be king, there was one in∣dued with many perfections, named Autzol. This man was chosen by the rest, and this election was very plea∣sing to all the people: for besides that he was valiant, all held him curteous and affable to every man, which is one of the chiefe qualities required in them that com∣maund, to purchase love and respect. To celebrate the feast of his coronation, hee resolved to make a voyage, and to punish the pride of those of Quaxulatlan, a very rich and plentifull province, and at this day the chiefe of new Spaine. They had robbed his officers and ste∣wards, that carried the tribute to Mexico, and therwith∣all were rebelled. There was great difficulty to reduce this Nation to obedience, lying in such sort, as an arme of the sea stopt the Mexicans passage: to passe the which AutZol (with a strange device and industry) caused an Iland to be made in the water, of faggots, earth, and
other matter; by meanes whereof, both hee and his men might passe to the enemy, where giving them bat∣tell, he conquered them, and punished them at his plea∣sure. Then returned hee vnto Mexico in triumph, and with great riches, to bee crowned King, according to their custome. Autzol extended the limites of his king∣dome farre, by many conquests, even vnto Guatimalla, which is three hundred leagues from Mexico. He was no lesse liberall than valiant: for whenas the tributes arrived, (which as I have saide) came in great aboun∣daunce, hee went foorth of his pallace, gathering to∣gether all the people into one place, then commaunded he to bring all the tributes, which hee divided to those that had neede. To the poore hee gave stuffes to make apparrell, and meate, and whatsoever they had neede of in great aboundaunce, and things of value, as golde, silver, iewels, and feathers, were divided amongest the Captaines, souldiers, and servants of his house, accord∣ing to every mans merite. This AutZol was likewise a great polititian, hee pulled downe the houses ill built, and built others very sumptuous. It seemed vnto him that the city of Mexico had too litle water, and that the Lake was very muddy, and therefore hee resolved to let in a great course of water, which they of Cuyoacan vsed. For this cause he called the chiefe man of the cittie vnto him, being a famous sorcerer, having pro∣pounded his meaning vnto him, the sorcerer wished him to be well advised what hee did, being a matter of great difficulty, and that hee vnderstoode, if he drew the river out of her ordinary course, making it passe to Mexico, hee would drowne the citty. The king suppo∣sed these excuses were but to frustrate the effect of his desseigne, being therefore in choler, he dismissed him
home; and a few dayes after hee sent a provost to Cu∣yoacan, to take this Sorcerer: who having vnderstand∣ing for what intent the kings officers came, hee caused them to enter his house, and then he presented himself vnto them in the forme of a terrible Eagle, wherewith the provost and his companions being terrified, they returned without taking him. AutZol incensed herewith sent others, to whome hee presented himselfe in forme of a furious tygre, so as they durst not touch him. The third came, and they found him in the forme of a hor∣rible serpent, whereat they were much afraide. The king mooved the more with these dooings, sent to tell them of Cuyoacan, that if they brought not the sorcerer bound vnto him, he would raze their citty. For feare whereof, or whether it were of his owne free will, or being forced by the people, he suffered himselfe to be led to the king, who presently caused him to be strang∣led, and then did he put his resolution in practise, for∣cing a chanell whereby the water might passe to Mex∣ico, whereby hee brought a great current of water into the Lake, which they brought with great ceremonies and superstitions, having priests casting incense along the banks, others sacrificed quailes, and with the bloud of them sprinckled the channell bankes, others sound∣ing of cornets, accompanied the water with their mu∣sicke. One of the chiefe went attired in a habite like to their goddesse of the water, and all saluted her, saying, that shee was welcome. All which things are painted in the Annales of Mexico: which booke is now at Rome in the holy Library, or Vaticane, where a father of our company, that was come from Mexico, did see it, and other histories, the which he did expound to the keeper of his Holinesse Library, taking great delight to vnder∣stand
this booke, which before hee could never com∣prehend. Finally, the water was brought to Mexico, but it came in such aboundaunce, that it had welneere drowned the cittie, as was foretold: and in effect it did ruine a great parte thereof, but it was presently preven∣ted by the industry of Autzol, who caused an issue to be made to draw foorth the water: by meanes where∣of hee repaired the buildings that were fallen, with an exquisite worke, being before but poore cotages. Thus he left the citty invironed with water, like another Ve∣nice, and very well built: hee raigned eleaven yeares, and ended with the last and greatest successor of all the Mexicans. Of the election of great Moteçuma, the last king of Mexico. CHAP. 20. WHen the Spaniards entred new Spaine, being in the yeare of our Lorde one thousand five hun∣dred and eighteen, Moteçuma second of that name, was the last king of the Mexicaines, I say the last, although they of Mexico, after his death, chose another king, yea in the life of the same Moteçuma, whome they decla∣red an enemy to his country, as we shall see heereafter. But hee that succeeded him, and hee that fell into the hands of the Marquise de Valle, had but the names and titles of Kings, for that the kingdome was in a maner al yeelded to the Spaniards: so as with reason we account Moteçuma for the last king, and so hee came to the pe∣riode of the Mexicaines power and greatnesse, which is admirable being happened among Barbarians: for this cause, and for that this was the season, that God had chosen to reveale vnto them the knowledge of his
Gospel, and the kingdome of Iesus Christ, I will r▪ late more at large the actes of Moteçuma, then of the rest. Before he came to be king, he was by disposition, ve ry grave and stayed, and spake little, so as when he gave his opinion in the privy counsell, whereas he assi∣sted, his speeches and discourses made every one to ad∣mire him, so as even then he was feared and respected. He retired himselfe vsually into a Chappell, appointed for him in the Temple of Vitziliputzli, where they said their Idoll spake vnto him; and for this cause hee was helde very religious and devout. For these perfections then, being most noble and of great courage, his ele∣ction was short and easie, as a man vpon whom al mens eyes were fixed, as woorthy of such a charge. Having intelligence of this election, hee hidde himselfe in this chappell of the Temple, whether it were by iudge∣ment, (apprehending so heavy and hard a burthen) as to governe such a people) or rather as I beleeve throgh hypocrisie, to shew that he desired not Empery: In the end they found him, leading him to the place of coun∣cell, whither they accompanied him with all possible ioy: hee marched with such a gravitie, as they all sayd the name of Moteçuma agreed very wel with his nature, which is as much to say, as an angry Lord. The electors did him great reverence, giving him notice, that hee was chosen king: from thence he was ledde before the harth of their gods, to give incense, where he offered sacrifices in drawing bloud from his eares, & the calves of his legges, according to their custome. They attired him with the royall ornaments, and pierced the gristle of his nosthrils, hanging thereat a rich emerald, a barba∣rous & troublous custome, but the desire of rule, made
all paine light and easie. Being seated in his throne, he gave andience to the Orations and Speeches that were made vnto him, which according vnto their custome were eloquent and artificiall. The first was pronoun∣ced by the king of Tescuco, which being preserved, for that it was lately delivered, & very worthy to be heard, I will set it downe word by word, and thus hee sayde: The concordance and vnitie of voyces vpon thy election, is a sufficient testimonie (most noble yong man) of the happines the realme shall receive, as well deserving to be commaunded by thee, as also for the generall applause which all doe shew by meanes thereof. Wherein they have great reason, for the Empire of Mexico doth alreadie so farre extend it selfe, that to governe a world, as it is, and to beare so heavie a burthen, it requires no lesse dexteritie and courage, than that which is resident in thy firme and valiant heart, nor of lesse wisedome and iudgement than thine. I see and know plainely, that the mightie God loveth this Cittie, seeing he hath given vnder∣standing to choose what was fit. For who will not beleeve that a Prince, who before his raigne had pierced the nine vaultes of heaven, should not likewise nowe obtaine those things that are earthlie to releeve his people, aiding himselfe with his best iudgement, being therevnto bound by the duetie and charge of a king. Who will likewise beleeve that the great cou∣rage which thou hast alwaies valiantly shewed in matters of importance, shuld now faile thee in matters of greatest need? Who will not perswade himselfe▪ but the Mexicane Empire is come to the height of their soveraignetie, seeing the Lorde of things created hath imparted so great graces vnto thee, that with thy looke onelie thou breedest admiration in them that beholde thee? Reioyce then, O happy land, to whom the Crea∣tor hath given a Prince, as a firme pillar to support thee, which shall be thy father and thy defence, by whom thou shalt be suc∣coured
at neede, who wil be more than a brother to his subiects, for his pietie and clemencie. Thou hast a king, who i regard of his estate is not inclined to delights, or will lie stretched out vpon his bed, occupied in pleasures and vices; but contrari∣wise in the middest of his sweete and pleasant sleepe, hee will sodainely awake, for the care he must have over thee, and will not feele the taste of the most savourie eates, having his spi∣rites transported with the imagination of thy good. Tell me then (O happie realme) if I have not reason to saie that  oughtest reioyce, having found such a King: And th ∣ble Yong man, and our most mightie Lorde, be confident, and of  good courage, that seeing the Lorde of things crea∣ted hath given thee this charge, hee will also give thee for and courage to mannage it: and thou maiest well hope, th he which in times past hath vsed so great bountie towardes thee, wil not now denie thee his greater gifts, seeing he hath given thee so great a charge, which I wish thee to enioy ma yeares. King Moteçuma was very attentive to this Dis∣course, which being ended, they say he was so troub∣led, that indevouring thrice to answer him, hee could not speake, being overcome with teares, which ioy and content doe vsually cause, in signe of great humi∣litie. In the end being come to himselfe, he spake brie∣ly, I were too blinde, good king of Tescuco, if I didde not know, that what thou hast spoken vnto me, proceeded of meere favour, it pleaseth you to shew me, seeing among so mnie no∣ble & valiant men within this realme, you have made ch of the lest sufficient: and in trueth, I finde my selfe so inca∣pable of a charge of so great importance, that I know not what to doe, but to beseech the Creator of all created things, that hee will favour mee, and I intreate you all to pray vnto him for me. These wordes vttered, hee beganne againe to weepe.
How Moteçuma ordered the service of his house, and of the warre hee made for his coronation. CHA. 21 HE that in his election made such shew of humilitie and mildenes, seeing himselfe king, beganne pre∣sently to discover his aspiring thoughts. The first was, he commaunded that no plebeian should serve in his house, nor beare any royall office, as his predecesfours had vsed till then; blaming them that would be served by men of base condition, commaunding that all the noble and most famous men of his realme shoulde live within his pallace, and exercise the offices of his court, and house. Wherevnto an olde man of great authoritie (who had sometimes beene his Schoolemaister) oppo∣sed himselfe, advising him, to be carefull what hee did, and not to thrust himselfe into the danger of a great in∣convenience, in separating himselfe from the vulgare and common people, so as they should not dare to looke him in the face, seeing themselves so reiected by him. He answered, that it was his resolution, and that he would not allow the plebeians to goe thus mingled among the Nobles, as they had do one, saying, that the service they did, was according to their condition, so as the kings got no reputation, and thus he continued firme in his resolution. Hee presently commanded his counsell to dismisse all the plebians from their char∣ges and offices, as well those of his houshold as of his court, and to provide Knightes, the which was done. After he went in person to an enterprise necessary for his coronation. At that time a province lying farre off towards the North Ocean, was revolted from the
crowne, whether he led the flower of his people, well appointed. There hee warred with such valour and dexteritie, that in the end he subdued all the province, and punished the rebells severely, returning with a great number of captives for the sacrifices, and many other spoiles. All the cities made him solemne recep∣tions at his returne, and the Lords thereof gave him water to wash, performing the offices of servants, a thing not vsed by any of his predecessors. Such was the feare and respect they bare him. In Mexico, they made the feasts of his coronation with great preparati∣ons of dances, comedies, banquets, lights, and other in∣ventions for many daies. And there came so great a wealth of tributes from all his countries, that strangers vnknowne came to Mexico, and their very enemies re∣sorted in great numbers disguised to see these feasts, as those of Tlascalla, and Mechovacan: the which Moteçu∣ma having discovered, he commanded they should be lodged and gently intreated, and honoured as his own person. He also made them goodly galleries like vnto his owne, where they might see and behold the feasts. So they entred by night to those feasts, as the king him∣selfe, making their sportes and maskes. And for that I have made mention of these provinces, it shall not be from the purpose to vnderstand, that the inhabitants of Mechovacan, Tlascalla, and Tapeaca, would never yeelde to the Mexicans, but did alwaies fight valiantly against them; yea, sometimes the Mechovacans did vanquish the Mexicans, as also those of Tapeaca did. In which place, the Marquise Don Ferrand Cortes, after that he and the Spaniards were expelled Mexico, pretended to build their first cittie, the which he called (as I well re∣member,) Segura de la Frontiere: But this peopling con∣tinued
little: for having afterwards reconquered Mex∣ico, all the Spaniards went to inhabite there. To con∣clude, those of Tapeaca, Tlascalla, and Mechovacan, have beene alwaies enemies to the Mexicans, although Mo∣toçuma said vnto Cortes, that he did purposesy forbeare to subdue them, to have occasion to exercise his men of warre, and to take numbers of captives. Of the behaviour and greatnes of Moteçuma. CHAP. 22. THis King laboured to be respected, yea, to be wor∣shiped as a god. No Plebeian might looke him in the face; if he did, he was punished with death: hee did never set his foote on the ground, but was alwaies car∣ried on the shoulders of Noblemen; and if he lighted, they laid rich tapestry whereon he did go. When hee made any voyage, hee and the Noblemen went as it were in a parke compassed in for the nonce, and the rest of the people went without the parke, invironing it in on every side; hee never put on a garment twice, nor did eate or drinke in one vessell or dish above once; all must be new, giving to his attendants that which had once served him: so as commonly they were rich and sumptuous. He was very carefull to have his lawes observed. And when he returned victor from any wae, he fained sometimes to go and take his plea∣sure, then would he disguise himselfe, to see if his peo∣ple (supposing if he weare absent,) would omitte any thing of the feast or reception: If there were any ex∣cesse or defect, he then did punish it rigorously. And also to discerne how his ministers did execute their offices, he often disguised himselfe, offering guistes and
presents to the iudges, provoking them to do in iustice. If they offended, they were presently punished with death, without remission or respect, were they Noble∣men, or his kinsmen; yea, his owne bretheren. He was little conversant with his people, and seldome seene, retyring himselfe most commonly to care for the go∣vernment of his realme. Besides that, hee was a great iusticier and very noble, hee was very valiant and hap∣py, by meanes whereof, hee obtained great victories, and came to this greatnes, as is written in the Spanish histories, whereon it seemes needelesse to write more. I will onely have a care heereafter to write what the bookes and histories of the Indies make mention of; the which the Spanish writers have not observed, having not sufficiently vnderstood the secrets of this country, the which are things very worthy to be knowne, as we shall see heereafter. Of the presages and strange prodigies which happened in Mexico before the fall of their Empire. CHAP. 23. ALthough the holy Scripture forbids vs to give credite to signes and vaine prognostications,Deut. 28. and that S. Ierome doth admonish vs not to feare tokens from heaven,Ier. 10. as the Gentiles do: Yet the same Scrip∣ture teacheth vs, that monstrous and prodigious signes are not altogether to bee contemned, and that often they are fore-runners of some generall changes and chasticements which God will take, as Eusebius notes well of Cesarea:Lib. 9. de demo. Evan. demon. 1 For that the same Lord of heaven and earth, sendes such prodiges and new things in heaven, in the elements, in beasts, and in his other creatures,
that this might partly serve as an advertisement to men, and to be the beginning of the paine and chastisement, by the feare and amazement they bring. It is written in the second booke of Macabees, that before that great change and persecution of the people of Israel:2. Mac. 5. which was caused by the tyranny of Antiochus surnamed E∣piphanes, whome the holy Scriptures call the roote of sinne, there were seene for forty dayes together tho∣rowout all Ierusalem, great squadrons of horsemen in the ayre, who with their armour guilt, their lances and targets, and vppon furious horses, with their swordes drawne did strike,1. Mat. 1. skirmish and incounter one against the other: and they say that the Inhabitants of Ierusa∣lem seeing this, they prayed to our Lord to appease his wrath, and that these prodegies might turne to good. It is likewise written in the booke of Wisedome,Sap. 17. That when God would drawe his people out of Egypt, and punish the Egyptians, some terrible & fearefull visions appeared vnto them, as fires seene out of time in hor∣rible formes. Ioseph in his booke of the Iewishwarres, sheweth many and great wonders going before the de∣struction of Ierusalem, and the last captivitie of his wic∣ked people, whome God iustly abhorred:Euseb. lib. 1. de eccle. hist. and Eusebius of Cesarea, with others, alleadge the same texts, autho∣rizing prognostications. The Histories are full of like observations in great changes of states and common∣weales, as Paulus Orosius witnesseth of many: and with∣out doubt this observation is not vaine nor vnprofita∣ble; for although it be vanitie, yea superstition, defen∣ded by the lawe of our God, lightly to beleeve these signes and tokens: yet in matters of great moment, as in the changes of nations, kingdoms, and notable laws. It is no vaine thing, but rather certaine and assured, to
beleeve that the wisedome of the most High dooth dis∣pose and suffer these things, fo retelling what shoulde happen, to serve (as I have saide) for an advertisement to some, and a chasticement to others, and as a witnes to all, that the king of heaven hath a care of man: who as he hath appointed great and fearefull tokens of that great change of the world, which shall bee the day of iudgement, so doth it please him to send wonderful signes to demonstrate lesser changes in divers partes of the world, the which are remarkeable, whereof he dispo∣seth according to his eternall wisedome. Wee must al∣so vnderstand, that although the divell be the father of lies; yet the King of Glorie makes him often to con∣fesse the trueth against his will, which hee hath often declared for very feare,Mat. 1. Luke. 4. as hee did in the desart by the mouth of the possessed, crying, that Iesus was the Sa∣viour come to destroy him, as he did by the Pythonisse, who saide that Paul preached the true God,Act. 26. as when he appeared and troubled Pilates wife, whom he made to mediate for Iesus a iust man. And as many other hi∣stories besides the holy Scripture gave diverse testimo∣nies of idols, in approbation of christian religion, wher∣of Lactantius, Prosperus, and others make mention. Let them reade Eusebius in his bookes of the preparation of the Gospel; and those of his demonstrations where he doth amply treate of this matter. I have purposely spo∣ken this, that no man should contemne what is writ∣ten in the Histories and Annales of the Indies, touching Presages and strange signes, of the approching end and ruine of their kingdome, and of the Divelles tyranny, whom they worshipped altogether. Which in my o∣pinion is worthy of credite and beliefe, both for that it chanced late, and the memory is yet fresh, as also for
that it is likely, that the Divell lamented at so great a change, and that God by the same meanes beganne to chastice their cruell and abhominable idolatries. I will therefore set them downe heere as true things. It chan∣ced that Moteçuma having raigned many yeers in great prosperity, and so pufft vp in his conceit, as hee cau∣sed himselfe to be served and feared, yea to be worship∣ped as a god, that the Almighty Lord beganne to cha∣stice him, and also to admonish him, suffering even the very Divelles whome he worshipped, to tell him these heavy tidings of the ruine of his kingdome, and to tor∣ment him by visions, which had never bin seen; where∣with hee remained so melancholy and troubled, as hee was voyde of iudgement. The idoll of those of Cholola, which they called Quetzacoalt, declared, that a strange people came to possesse his kingdomes. The king of Tescuco (who was a great Magitian, and had conference with the Divell) came one day at an extraordinarie house to visite Moteçuma, assuring him that his gods had tolde him, that there were great losses preparing for him, and for his whole realme: many witches and sorcerers went and declared as much, amongst which there was one did very particularly foretell him what should happen: and as he was with him hee tolde him that the pulses of his feete and hands failed him. Mote∣çuma troubled with these news, commanded all those sorcerers to be apprehended: but they vanished pre∣sently in the prison, wherewith hee grewe into such a rage, that hee might not kill them, as hee putte their wives and children to death, destroying their houses, and families. Seeing himselfe importuned and trou∣bled with these advertisements, he sought to appease the anger of his gods: and for that cause hee laboured
to bring a huge stone, thereon to make great sacrifices: For the effecting whereof hee sent a great number of people with engins and instruments to bring it: which they could by no meanes moove, although (being ob∣stinate) they had broken many instruments. But as they strove still to raise it, they heard a voyce ioyning to the stone, which said they laboured in vaine, and that they should not raise it, for that the Lorde of things created would no more suffer those things to be doone there. Moteçuma vnderstanding this, ommaunded the sacri∣fice to be perfourmed in that lace, and they say the voyce spake againe: Have I not told you, that it is not the pleasure of the Lord of things created, that it should be done: and that you may well know that it is so, I will suffer myselfe to be transported alittle, then after you shall not moove mee. Which happened so indeede, for presently they carri∣ed it a small distance with great facility, then afterwards they could not moove it, till that after many prayers, it suffered itselfe to be transported to the entry of the cit∣ty of Mexico, where sodainly it fel into the Lake, where seeking for it, they could not finde it, but it was after∣wards found in the same place from whence they had remooved it, wherewith they remayned amazed and confounded. At the same time there appeared in the element a great flame of fire, very bright, in the forme of a Pyramide, which beganne to appeare at midnight, and went still mounting vntill the Sunne rising in the morning, where it stayed at the South, and then vani∣shed away. It shewed itselfe in this sort the space of a whole yeare, and ever as it appeared the people cast foorth great cries as they were accustomed, beleeving it was a presage of great misfortune. It happened also that fir tooke the Temple, whenas no body was with∣in
it, nor neare vnto it, neither did there fall any light∣ning or thunder: wherevpon the guardes crying out, a number of people ran with water, but nothing could helpe, so as it was all consumed; and they say the fire seemed to come forth of peeces of timber, which kind∣led more by the water that was cast vpon it. There was a Comet seene in the day time, running from the west to the east, casting an infinite number of sparkles, and they say the forme was like to a long taile, having three heads. The great lake betwixt Mexico and Tescuco, without any wind, earthquake, or any other apparant signe, be∣ganne sodainely to swell, and the waves grewe in such sort, as all the buildings neare vnto it fell downe to the ground. They say at that time they heard many voices, as of a woman in paine, which sayde sometimes, O my children, the time of your destruction is come, and other∣whiles it sayde, O my children, whither shall I carry you, that you perish not vtterly? There appeared likewise ma∣ny monsters with two heads, which being carried be∣fore the king, sodainely vanished. There were two that exceeded all other monsters, being very strange; the one was, the fishers of the lake tooke a bird as bigge as a Crane, and of the same colour, but of a strange and vnseene form. They caried it to Moteçuma, who at that time was in the pallace of teares and mourning, which was all hanged with blacke, for as he had many palaces for his recreation, so had he also others for times of af∣fliction, where with hee was then heavily charged and tormented, by reason of the threatnings his gods had given him by these sorrowfull advertisements. The fi∣shers came about noone setting this bird before him, which had on the toppe of his head a thing bright and
transparent, in forme of a looking glasse, wherein he did behold a warrelike nation comming from the east, armed, fighting, and killing. He called his Divines and Astronomers (whereof there was a great number) who having seene these things, and not able to yeelde any reason of what was demaunded of them, the bird va∣nished away, so as it was never more seene: wherevp∣on Moteçuma remained very heavy and sorrowfull. The other which happened, was a laborer, who had the re∣port of a very honest man, came vnto him, telling him, that being the day before at his worke, a great Eagle flew towardes him, and tooke him vppe in his talants, without hurting him, carying him into a certaine cave, where it left him; the Eagle pronouncing these words, Most mightie Lorde, I have brought him whome thou hast commaunded me: This Indian laborer looked about on every side, to whome hee spake, but hee sawe no man. Then he heard a voyce which sayde vnto him, Doost thou not knowe this man, whome thou seest lying vp∣on the ground: and looking thereon, he perceived  man lie very heavy asleepe, with royall ensignes, floures in his hand, and a staffe of perfumes burning, as they are accustomed to vse in that countrey, whome the la∣bourer beholding, knew it was the great king Moteçu∣ma, and answered presently: Great Lord, this resembles our King Moteçuma. The voyce saide againe, Thou saiest true, behold what he is, and how he lies asleepe, carelesse of the great miseries and afflictions prepared for him. It is nowe time that hee pay the great number of offences hee hath doone to God, and that he receive the punishment of his tyrannies, and great pride, and yet thou seest how carelesse hee lies, blinde in his owne miseries, and without any feling. But to the end thou maiest the better see him, take the staffe of perfumes hee
holdes burning in his hand, and put it to his face, thou shalt then find him without feeling. The poore laborer durstnot approach neere him, nor doe as he was commaunded, for the great feare they all hadde of this king. But the voyce saide, Have no fare, for I am without comparison greater than this King, I can destroy him, and defend him, doe therefore what I commaund thee. Wherevpon the la∣borer took the staffe of perfumes out of the kings hand, and put it burning to his nose, but he mooved not, nor shewed any feeling. This done, the voice said vnto him, that seeing hee had found the king so sleepy, he should go awake him, and tell him what he had seene. Then the Eagle by the same commandement, tooke the man in his tallents, and set him in the same place where he found him, and for accomplishment of that which it had spoken, hee came to advertise him. They say, that Moteçuma loo∣king on his face, found that he was burnt, the which he had not felt till then, wherewith he continued excee∣ding heavy and troubled. It may be, that what the la∣borer reported, had happened vnto him by imagina∣ry vision: And it is not incredible, that God appointed by the meanes of a good Angell, or suffered by a bad, that this advertisement should be given to the labourer for the kings chasticement, although an infidell, seeing that we reade in the holy Scriptures, that infidells and sinners have had the like apparations and revelations, as Nabucadonosor, Balaam, and the Pithonisse of Saul.Dan 2. Num. 22. 3. Reg. 28. And if some of these apparations did not so expresly happen, yet without doubt, Moteçuma had many great afflictions and discontentments, by reason of sundry & divers revelations which he had, that his kingdome and law should soone end.
Of the newes Moteçuma received of the Spaniards ar∣rivall in his Country, and of the Ambassage he sent them. CHAP. 24. IN the fourteenth yeare of the raigne of Moteçuma, which was in the yeare of our Lord 1517. There ap∣peared in the North seas, shippes, and men landing, whereat the subiects of Moteçuma wondred much, and desirous to learne, and to be better satisfied what they were, they went aboord in their canoes, carrying many refreshings of meats and stuffes to make apparrell, vpon colour to sell them. The Spaniards received them into their shippes, and in exchange of their victualls and stuffes, which were acceptable vnto them, they gave them chaines of false stones, red, blew, greene, and yel∣low, which the Indians imagined to be precious stones. The Spaniards informing themselves who was their king, and of his great power, dismissed them, willing them to carry those stones vnto their lord, saying, that for that time they could not goe to him, but they would presently returne and visit him. Those of the coast went presently to Mexico with this message, car∣rying the representation of what they had seene, pain∣ted on a cloth, both of the shippes, men, and stones which they had given them. King Moteçuma remained very pensive with this message, commanding them not to reveale it to any one. The day following, he assem∣bled his counsell, and having shewed them the painted clothes, and the chaines, he cousulted what was to be done: where it was resolved to set good watches vpon all the sea coastes, to give present advertisement to the king of what they should discover. The yeare follow∣ing,
which was in the beginning of the yeare 1518. they discovered a fleete at sea, in the which was the Marquise of Valle Don Fernande Cortes, with his com∣panions, a newes which much troubled Moteçuma, and conferring with his counsell, they all said, that without doubt, their great and antient Lord Queztzalcoalt was come, who had saide, that he would returne from the East, whither he was gone. The Indians held opinion, that a great Prince had in times past left them, and pro∣mised to returne. Of the beginning and ground of which opinion shall be spoken in another place. They therefore sent five principall Ambassadors with rich presents, to congratulate his comming, saying, they knewe well that their great Lord QueztZalcoalt was come, and that his servant Moteçuma sent to visit him, for so hee accounted himselfe. The Spaniards vnder∣stood this message by the meanes of Mara, an Indian woman whom they brought with them, and vnder∣stoode the Mexicane tongue. Fernande Cortes finding this a good ocasion for his entry, commanded to deck his chamber richly, and being set in great state and pompe, he caused the Ambassadors to enter, who o∣mitted no shewes of humilitie, but to worshippe him as their god. They delivered their charge, saying, that his servant Moteçuma sent to visit him, and that he held the coun∣try in his name as his lievetenant, that he knew well it was the Topilcin which had beene promised them ma∣ny yeares since, who should returne againe vnto them. And therefore they brought him such garments as he was wont to weare, when hee did converce amongst them, beseeching him to accept willingly of them, of∣fering him many presents of great value. Cortes recei∣ving
the presents, answered, that he was the same they spake of, wherewith they were greatly satisfied, seeing themselves to be curteously received and intreated by him (for in that, as wel as in other things, this valiant captaine deserved commendations) that if this course had beene continued, to win them by love, it seemed the best occasion was offered that might be devised, to draw this country to the Gospel by peace and love: but the sinnes of these cruel homicides and slaves of Satan, required punishment from heaven, as also those of ma∣ny Spaniards, which were not in small number. Thus the high iudgements of God disposed of the health of this nation, having first cutte off the perished rootes: and as the Apostle saieth,Rom. 11. the wickednes and blindenes of some, hath beene the salvation of others. To con∣clude, the day after this Ambassage, all the Captaines and Commders of the fleete, came vnto the Admi∣rall, where vnderstanding the matter, and that this realme of Moteçuma was mightie and rich; it seemed fit to gaine the reputation of brave and valiant men a∣mong this people, and that by this meanes, (although they were few,) they should bee feared and received into Mexico. To this end they discharged all their ar∣tillerie from their shippes, which being a thing the In∣dians had never heard, they were amazed, as if heaven had fallen vpon them. Then the Spaniards beganne to defie them to fight with them: but the Indians not da∣ring to hazard themselves, they did beate them and in∣treate them ill, shewing their swordes, lances, pertui∣sans, and other armes, wherewith they did terrifie them much. The poore Indians were by reason heereof, so fearefull and amazed, as they changed their opinion, saying, that their Lord Topilcin came not in this troup.
But they were some gods, (their enemies) came to de∣stroy them. Whenas the Ambassadors returned to Mexico, Moçua was in the house of audience; but be∣fore he would heare them, this miserable man com∣manded a great number of men to be sacrificed in his presence, and with their bloud to sprinkle the Ambas∣sadors, (supposing by this ceremony, (which they were accustomed to do in solemne Ambassages,) to re∣ceive a good answer. But vnderstanding the report and information of the maner of their shippes, men, and armes, he stoode perplexed and confounded: then ta∣king counsell thereon, he found no better meanes, thn to labour to stoppe the entrie of these strangers, by coniurations and magicke Artes. They had accusto∣med often to vse this meanes, having great conference with the divell, by whose helpe they sometimes obtai∣ned strange effects. They therefore assembled together all the Sorcerers, Magitians, and Inchanters, who being perswaded by Moteçma, they tooke it in charge to force this people to returne vnto their country. For this consideration, they went to a certaine place which they thought fit for the invocation of their divells, and practising their artes, (a thing worthy of considerati∣on.) They wrought all they could; but seeing nothing could prevaile against the Christians, they went to the king, telling him that they were more then men, for that nothing might hurt them, notwithstanding, all their coniurations and inchantments. Then Moteçuma advised him of another pollicie, that faining to be very well contented with their comming, he commanded all his countries to serve these celestiall gods that were come into his land. The whole people was in great heavinesse and amazement, and often newes came that the Spaniards inquired for the King, of his maner of
life, of his house & meanes. He was exceedingly vexed herewith: some of the people & other Negromanciers advised him to hide himselfe, offering to place him whereas no creature should ever finde him. This see∣med base vnto him, and therefore he resolved to attend them, although it were dying. In the end he left his houses and royall pallaces to lodge in others, leaving them for these gods as he said. Of the Spaniards entrie into Mexico. CHAP. 25. I Pretend not to intreate of the acts and deedes of the Spaniards, who conquered New Spaine, nor the strange adventures which happened vnto them, nor of the courage and invincible valour of their Captaine Don Fernando Cortes: for that there are many histories and relations thereof, as those which Fernando Cortes himselfe, did write to the Emperour Charles the fift, although they be in a plaine stile, and farre from arro∣gancie, the which doe give a sufficient testimony of what did passe, wherein he was worthy of eternall me∣ry, but onely to accomplish my intention: I am to re∣late what the Indians report of this action, the which hath not to this day beene written in our vulgar tong▪ Moteçuma therefore, having notice of this Captaines victories, that he advanced for his conquest, that hee was confederate and ioyned with them of Tlascalla, his capitall enemies, and that he had severely punished them of Cholola his friends, he studied how to deceive him, or else to try him in sending a principall man vn∣to him, attyred with the like ornaments and royall en∣signes, the which shuld take vpon him to be Moteçuma, which fiction being discouered to the Marquise by them of Tlascalla, (who did accompany him,) he sent him backe, after a milde and gentle reprehension, in
seeking so to deceive him: wherevpon Moteçuma was so confounded, that for the feare thereof, he returned to his first imaginations and practises, to force the chri∣stians to retyre, by the invocation of coniures and witches. And therefore he assembled a greater number then before, threatning them, that if they returned without effecting what he had given them in charge, not any one should escape, wherevnto they all promi∣sed to obey. And for this cause, all the divells officers went to the way of Chalco, by the which the Spaniards should passe, when mounting to the top of a hill, Tez∣calipuca, one of their principall gods, appeared vnto them, as comming from the Spaniards campe, in the habite of Chalcas, who had his pappes bound about eight folde with a cord of reedes, hee came like a man beside himselfe, out of his wits, and drunke with rage & furie. Being come to this troupe of witches and coniurers, he staied, and spake to them in great choller, Why come you hether, what doth Moteçuma pretend to doe by your meanes? He hath advised himselfe too late: for it is now determined, that his Kingdome and honour shall be ta∣ken from him, with all that he possesseth, for punishment of the great tyrannics he hath committed against his subiects, having governed not like a Lord, but like a traitour and ty∣rant. The inchanters and coniurers hearing these words, knew it was their idoll, and humbling them∣selves before him, they presently built him an altar of stone in the same place, covering it with flowers which they gathered thereaboutes, but he contrariwise, ma∣king no account of these things, beganne againe to chide them, saying, What come you hether to do O yee trai∣tours? Returne presently and behold Mexico, that you may vnderstand what shall become thereof. And they say, that turning towards Mexico to behold it, they did see it fla∣ming
on fire. Then the divell vanished away, and they not daring to passe any farther, gave notice thereof to Moteçma, whereat hee remained long without spea∣king, looking heavily on the ground; then he said, what shall we doe if god and our friends leave vs, and con∣trariwise, they helpe and favour our enemies? I am now resolute, and we ought all to resolve in this point, that happen what may, we must not flie nor hide our selves, or shew any signe of cowardice. I onely pittie the aged and infants, who have neither feete nor hands to de∣fend themselves. Having spoken this, he held his peace, being transported into an extasie. In the end, the Mar∣quie approaching to Mexico, Moteçuma resolved to make of necessitie a vertue, going three or foure leagues out of the cittie to receive him with a great maty, carried vpon the shoulders of foure Noblemen, vnder a rich canapie of gold and feathers: when they mette, Moteçuma discended, and they saluted one another very curteously. Don Fernando Cortes said vnto him, that he should not care for any thing, and that he came not to take away his real me, no to diminish his authoritie. Moteçuma lodged Cortes and his companions in his royall pallace, the which was very stately, and he him∣selfe lodged in other private houses. This night the souldiers for ioy discharged their artillery, wherewith the Indians were much troubled, being vnaccustomed to heare such musicke. The day following, Cortes cau∣sed Motçuma and all the Nobles of his Court to as∣semble in a great hall, where being set in a high chaire, he said vnto them, that hee was servant to a great prince, who had sent them into these countries to doe good workes, and that having found them of Tlscalla to be his friends, (who complained of wrongs and greevances done vnto them daily by them of Mexico,)
he would vnderstand which of them was in the blame, and reconcile them, that heereafter they might no more afflict and warre one against another: and in the meane time, he and his bretheren (which were the Spaniards,) would remaine still there without hurting them: but contrariwise, they would helpe them all they could. He laboured to make them all vnderstand this discourse, vsing his interpterers & truchmen. The which being vnderstoode by the King and the other Mexicane Lords, they were wonderfully well satisfied, and shewed great signes of love to Cortes & his compa∣ny. Many hold opinion, that if they had continued the course they began that day, they might easily have dis∣posed of the king & his kingdome, and given them the law of Christ, without any great effusion of bloud. But the iudgements of God are great, and the sins of both parties were infinite: so as not having followed this course, the busines was deferred: yet in the end, God shewed mercy to this nation, imparting vnto them the light of his holy Gospel, after he had shewed his iudge∣ment, and punished them that had deserved it, and odi∣ously offended his divine reverence. So it is, that by some occasions, many complaints, griefs, and iealosies grew on either side. The which Cortes finding, & that the Indians mindes began to be distracted from them, he thought it necessary to assure himself, in laying hand vpon king Moteçuma, who was seazed on, and his legs fettered. Truly this act was strange vnto all men, & like vnto that other of his, to have burnt his ships, and shut himselfe in the midst of his enemies, there to vanquish or to die. The mischiefe was, that by reason of the vn∣expected arrival of Pamphilo Narvaes at the true crosse, drawing the country into mutiny, Cortes was forced to
absent himselfe from Mexico, & to leave poore Motecu∣ma in the handes of his companions, who wanted dis∣cretion nor had not moderation like vnto him: so as they grew to that discention, as there was no meanes to pacifie it. Of the death of Moteçuma, and the Spaniards departure out of Mexico. CHAP. 26. WHenas Cortes was absent from Mexico, he that remained his lievetenant, resolved to punish the Mexicans severely, causing a great number of the nobi∣litie to be slaine at a maske which they made in the pal∣lace, the which did so far exceede, as all the people mu∣tined, & in a furious rage, tooke armes to be revenged and to kil the Spaniards. They therefore besieged them in the pallace, pressing them so neere, that all the hurt the Spaniards could do them with their artillery and crosse-bowes, might not terrifie them, nor force them to retyre from their enterprise, where they continued many daies, stopping their victualls, nor suffering any one to enter or issue forth. They did fight with stones, and cast dartes after their maner, with a kinde of lances like vnto arrowes, in the which there are foure or six very sharpe rasors, the which are such, (as the histories report,) that in these warres, an Indian with one blow of these rasors, almost cut off the necke of a horse, & as they did one day fight with this resolution & furie, the Spaniards to make them cease, shewed forth Motcuma, with another of the chiefe Lords of Mexico, vpon the top of a platform of the house, covered with the targets of two souldiers that were with them. The Mexicanes seeing their Lord Moteçuma, staied with great silence.
Then Moteçuma caused the Lord to advise them to pa∣cifie themselves, and not to warre against the Spaniards, seeing that (hee being a prisoner,) it could little profite him. The which being vnderstood by a yong man cal∣led Quicuxtemoc, whom they now resolved to make their king, spake with a loude voice to Moteçuma, willing him to retyre like a villaine, that seeing he had bin such a coward, as to suffer himselfe to be taken, they were no more bound to obey him, but rather should punish him as he deserued, calling him woman for the more reproach, and then hee beganne to draw his bowe and to shoote at him, and the people beganne to cast stones at him, & to continue their combate. Many say that Motecuma was then hurt with a stone wherof he died. The Indians of Mexico affirme the contrarie, & that he died as I will shew hereafter. Alvaro & the rest of the Spaniards seeing themselves thus pressed, gave intelligence to Captaine Cortes, of the great danger they were in: who having with an admirable dexteritie & valour, given order to Narvaes affaires, and assembled the greatest part of his men, he returned with all speede to suc∣cour them of Mexico, where observing the time the Indi∣ans rest, (for it was their custom in war, to rest every fourth day:) He one day advanced with great policy & courage, so as both he and his men entred the pallace, whereas the Spaniards had fortefied themselves: they then shewed great signes of ioy, in discharging their artillery. But as the Mexicans furie increased, (being out of hope to defend themselves,) Cortes resolved to passe away secretly in the night without bruite. Having therefore made bridges to passe two great and dangerous passages, about mid-night they issued forth as secretly as they could, the greatest part of his people having passed the first bridge, they were dis∣covered by an Indian woman before they could passe.
The second who cried out their enemies fled, at the which voice all the people ran together with a horrible furie: so as in passing, the second bridge, they were so charged and pursued, as there remained above three hundred men slaine & hurt in one place; where at this day there is a smal hermitage, which they vnproperly cal of Martyrs. Many Spaniards (to preserve the gold & iewells which they had gotten,) perished, & others staying to carry it away, were taken by the Mexicans, & cruelly sacrificed to their idols. The Mexicans found king Moteçuma dead, & wounded as they say with poiniards, and they hold opinion that that night the Spaniards shew him with other Noblemen. The Marquise in his relation sent to the Emperour, writes the contrary, & that the Mexicans killed him that night with a son of Moteçuma, which he led with him amongst other noblemen, saying, that all the treasure of gold, stones, and silver, fell into the lake & was never more seene. But how∣soever, Moteçuma died miserably, & paied his deserts to the iust iudgement of our Lord of heaven for his pride & ty∣ranny: his body falling into the Indians power, they would make him no obsequies of a king, no not of an ordinarie person, but cast it away in great disdaine & rage. A servant of his having pittie of this Kings miserie, (who before had bene feared and worshipped as a God) made a fier there∣of, and put the ashes in a contemptible place. Returning to the Spaniards that escaped, they were greatly tyred and turmoiled, the Indians following them two or three daies very resolutely, giving them no time of rest, being so di∣stressed for victualls, as a few graines of Mays were divided amongst them for their meate. The relations both of the Spaniards & Indians agree, that God delivered them here miraculously, the Virgin Mary defending them on a little hill, whereat this day three leagues from Mexico, there is a
Church built in remembrance thereof, called our Lady of succour. They retyred to their antient friends of Tlascalla, whence (by their aide, & the valour & pollicie of Cortes,) they returned afterwards to make war against Mexico, by water and land, with an invention of brigantines, which they put into the lake, where after many combates, and a∣bove threescore dangerous battailes, they conquered Mex∣co, on S. Hippolitus day, the 13. of August, 1521. The last king of the Mexicans, (having obstinately maintained the wars,) was in the end taken in a great canoe, whereinto he fled, who being brought with some other of the chiefest noblemen before Fernando Cortes, this pettie king with a strange resolution and courage, drawing his dagger, came neere to Cortes, and said vnto him, Vntill this day I have done my best indevour for the defence of my people: now am I no far∣ther bound, but to give thee this dagger to kill me therewith. Cor∣tes answered, that he would not kill him, neither was it his intention to hurt them: but their obstinate folly was guil∣tie of all the misery & afflictions they had suffered, neither were they ignorant how often he had required peace and amity at their hands. He then commanded them to be in∣treated curteously. Many strange & admirable things chan∣ced in this conquest of Mexico: for I neither hold it for an vntruth, nor an addition, which many write, that God fa∣voured the Spaniards by many miracles: for else it had bin impossible to surmount so many difficulties, without the favour of heaven, and to subiect this nation with so few men. For although we were sinners, & vnworthy so great a favour, yet the cause of our God, the glorie of our faith, the good of so many thousands soules, as were in these countries, whome the Lord had predestinate, wrought this change which wee now see, by supernaturall meanes, and proper to himselfe which calles the blinde and
prisoners, to the knowledge of himselfe, giving them light and libertie by his holy Gospel. And to the end you may the better vnderstand this, and give credite therevnto, I will aleadge some examples which in my opinion are fit for this history. Of some miracles which God hath shewed at the Indies, in favour of the faith, beyond the desert of those that wrought them. CHAP. 27. SAint Croix of the mountaine, is a very great province, and farre from the Kingdome of Peru, neighbour to diverse infidell nations, which have not yet any know∣ledge of the Gospel, if since my departure, the fathers of our company which remane there, have not instructed them. Yet this province of S. Croix is christned, and there are many Spaniards, and great numbers of Indians bapti∣zed. The maner how Christianitie entred, was thus. A souldier of a lewd life, resident in the province of Char∣cas, fearing punishment, being pursued for his offences, went farre vp into the countrie, and was received curte∣ously by this barbarous people. The Spaniard seeing them in a great extremity for water, and that to procure raine, they vsed many superstitious ceremonies, according to their vsuall maner, he said vnto them, that if they would do as he said, they should presently have raine, the which they willingly offered to performe. Then the souldier made a great crosse, the which he planted on a high and e∣minent place, commanding them to worship it, and to de∣mand water, the which they did. A wonderful thing to see, there presently fel such aboundance of raine, as the Indians tooke so great devotion to the holy crosse, as they fled vn∣to
it in all their necessities, and obtained all they deman∣ded: so as they brake downe their idolls, and beganne to carry the crosse for their badge, demanding preachers to instruct, and to baptise them. For this reason, the province to this day hath beene called S. Croix de la Sierre. But to the end we may see by whom God wrought these mira∣cles, it shall not be vnfit to shew how that this souldier af∣ter he had some yeares done these miracles, like an Apo∣stle, and yet nothing reformed in his lewd course of life, left the province of Charcas, and continuing in his wicked courses, was publikely hanged at Potozi. Polo (who knew him wel) writes all this, as a notable thing happened in his time. Cabeca de Vaca, who since was governour of Para∣guey, writes what happened vnto him in his strange pere∣grination in Florida, with two or three other compani∣ons, the onely remainder of an army, where they conti∣nued ten yeares with these Barbarians, traveling and sear∣ching even vnto the South sea, being an author worthy of credite: he saieth, that these Barbarians did force them to cure certaine diseases, threatning them with death if they did it not; they being ignorant in any part of phisicke, and having nothing to apply, forced by necessitie, made evan∣gelicall medicines, saying the praiers of the Church, and making the signe of the crosse, by meanes whereof, they cured these diseases, which made them so famous, as they were forced to exercise this office in all townes as they passed, the which were innumerable, wherein our Lord did aide them miraculously, and they themselves were thereat amazed, being but of an ordinarie life; yea, one of them was a Negro. Lancero was a souldier of Peru, of whom they knew no other merit, but to be a souldier: he spake certaine good wordes vpon wounds, and making the signe of the crosse, did presently cure them: so as they
did say, (as in a proverbe,) the psalme of Lancero. Being examined by such as held authority in the Church, his of∣fice & works were approved. Some men worthy of credite report, (and I have heard it spoken,) that in the cittie of Cusco, whenas the Spaniards were besieged and so straight∣ly pressed, that without helpe from heaven, it was impos∣sible to escape, the Indians casting fire on the tops of the houses, whether the Spaniards were retyred, (in which place the great Church is now built,) & although the co∣vering were of a kind of straw, which they call Chicho, and that the fire they cast, was of the wood of fat & slimy firre∣trees; yet nothing was set on fire, nor burnt, for that there was a woman did quench it presently, the which the Indi∣ans did visibly see, as they confessed afterwards being much amazed. It is most certaine by the relations of many, and by the histories which are written, that in divers bat∣tailes which the Spaniards had, as well in New Spaine, as in Peru, the Indians their enemies did see a horse-man in the aire, mounted on a whit horse, with a sword in his hand, fighting for the Spaniards, whence comes the great reverence they beare at the Indies to the glorious Apostle Saint Iames. Other whiles they did see in some battailes, the image of our Ladie, from whom the Christians have received in those partes incomparable favours and bene∣fites: if I should particularly relate all the workes of hea∣ven, as they happened, it would make a very long dis∣course. It sufficeth to have said this, by reason of the favour which the Queene of glorie did to our men, when they were pressed and pursued by the Mexicans, the which I have set downe, to the end we may know how our Lord hath had a care to favour the faith and Christian religion, defending those that maintained it, although happily by their workes they deserved not so great favours and be∣nefites
from heaven. And therefore we ought not to con∣demne all these things of the first Conquerours of the In∣dies, as some religious and learned men have done, doubt∣lesse with a good zeale, but too much affected: For al∣though for the most part they were covetous men, cruell, and very ignorant in the course that was to be observed with the Infidels, who had never offended the Christians, yet can we not deny, but on their part there was much ma∣lice against God and our men, which forced them to vse rigor and chastisement. And moreover, the Lord of all (although the faithfull were sinners,) would favour their cause and partie, even for the good of the Infidells, who should bee converted vnto the holy Gospel by this meanes, for the waies of God are high, and their paths ad∣mirable. Of the maner how the Divine providence disposed of the Indies, to give an entrie to Chri∣stian Religion. CHAP. 28. I Will make an end of this historie of the Indies, shewing the admirable meanes whereby God made a passage for the Gospel in those partes, the which we ought well to consider of, and acknowledge the providence and bountie of the Creator. Every one may vnderstand by the relation and discourse I have written in these bookes, as well at Peru, as in New Spaine, whenas the Christians first set footing, that these Kingdomes and Monarchies were come to the height and period of their power. The Inguas of Peru, possessing from the Realme of Chille be∣yond Quitto, which are a thousand leagues, being most aboundant in gold, silver, sumptuous services, and other things: as also in Mexico, Moteçuma commaunded from
the North Ocean sea, vnto the South, being feared and worshiped not as a man, but rather as a god. Then was it, that the most high Lord had determined that that stone of Daniel, which dissolved the Realmes and Kingdoms of the world, should also dissolve those of this new world. And as the lawe of Christ came whenas the Romane Monarchie was at her greatnes: so did it happen at the West Indies, wherein we see the iust providence of our Lord: For being then in the world, I meane in Europe but one head and temporall Lord, as the holy Doctors do note, whereby the Gospel might more easily beim∣parted to so many people and nations. Even so hath it happened at the Indies, where having given the know∣ledge of Christ to the Monarkes of so many Kingdomes▪ it was a meanes that afterwards the knowledge of the gospell was imparted to all the people: yea, there is here∣in a speciall thinge to bee observed, that as the Lordes of Cusco and Mexico conquered new landes, so they brought in their owne language, for although there were (as at this day) great diuersitie of tongues yet the Courtlie speeche of Cusco, did and doth at this day runne above a thousand leagues, and that of Mexico did not extend farre lesse, which hath not beene of small importance, but hath much profited in making the preaching easie, at such a time, when as the preachers had not the gift of many tongues, as in olde tymes. He that woulde knowe what a helpe it hath beene for the conversion of this people in these two greate Empyres, and the greate difficultie they haue founde to reduce those Indians to Christ, which ac∣knowledge no Soueraigne Lorde, let him goe to Florida, Bresill, the Andes and many other places, where they have not prevailed so much by their preaching in fiftie yeares, as they have done in Peru and newe Spaine in lesse then
five. If they will impute the cause to the riches of the countrie: I will not altogether denie it. Yet were it impos∣sible to have so great wealth, and to bee able to preserve it if there had not beene a Monarchie. This is also a worke of God in this age, when as the Preachers of the gospell are so colde and without zeale, and Merchants with the heat of covetousnes and desire of commaund, search and discouer newe people whether wee passe with our commodities, for as Saint Austin saith, the Prophesie of Esaie is fulfilled, in that the Church of Christ is extended,August. lib. 2. de ovang. . 36. not onely to the right hand, but also to the left: which is, (as he declareth,) by humaine and earthly meanes, which they seeke more commonly then Iesus Christ. It was also a great providence of our Lord, that whenas the first Spa∣niardes arrived there, they founde ayde from the Indians them selves, by reason of their partialities and greate diuisions. This is well knowne in Peru, that the division betwixt the two brothers Atahulpa and Guasca, the great King Guanacapa their father being newly dead, gave entry to the Marquise Don Francis Pizarre, and to the Spaniards, for that either of them desired his alliance being busied in warre one against the other. The like experience hath beene in New Spaine, that the aide of those of the pro∣vince of Tlascalla, by reason of their continuall hatred against the Mexicaines, gave the victory and siegniory of Mexico, to the Marquise Fernando Cortes and his men, and without them it had beene impossible to have wonne it, yea, to have maintained themselves within the coun∣try. They are much deceived that so little esteeme the In∣dians, and iudge that (by the advantage the Spaniards have over them in their persons, horses, and armes, both
offencive and deffencive,) they might easily conquer any land or nation of the Indies. Chille standes yet, or to say better, Aranco and Tupel, which are two citties, where our Spaniards could not yet winne one foote of ground, although they have made warre there above five and twenty yeares, without spa∣ring of any cost. For this barbarous nation, having once lost the apprehention of horse and shotte, and knowing that the Spaniards fall as well as other men, with the blow of a stone or of a dart, they hazard themselves des∣perately, entring the pikes vppon any enterprise. How many yeares have they levied men in New Spaine, to send against the Chychymequos, which are a small number of naked Indians, armed onely with bowes and arrowes: yet to this day they could not bee vanquished, but con∣trariwise, from day to day they grow more desperate and resolute. But what shall wee say of the Chucos, of the Chi∣raguanas, of the Piscocones, and all the other people of the Andes? Hath not all the flower of Peru beene there, brin∣ging with them so great provision of armes and men as we have seene? What did they? With what victories re∣turned they? Surely they returned very happy in saving of their lives, having lost their baggage and almost all their horses. Let no man thinke (speaking of the Indians,) that they are men of nothing; but if they thinke so, let them go and make triall. Wee must then attribute the glory to whom it appertaines, that is, principally to God, and to his admirable disposition: for if Moteçuma in Mexiço, and the Ingua in Peru, had bin resolute to resist the Spani∣ards, and to stoppe their entrie, Cortes and Pizarre had prevailed little in their landing, although they were ex∣cellent Captaines. It hath also beene a great helpe to in∣duce the Indians to receive the law of Christ, the sub∣iection
they were in to their Kings and Lords, and also the servitude and slaverie they were helde in by the di∣vells tyrannies and insupportable yoake. This was an ex∣cellent disposition of the Divine Wisedome, the which drawes profite from ill to a good end, and receives his good from an others ill, which it hath not sowen. It is most certaine that no people of the West Indies have beene more apt to receive the Gospel, then those which were most subiect to their Lords, and which have beene charged with the heaviest burthens, as well of tributes and services, as of customes and bloodie practises. All that which the Mexicane Kings and those of Peru did possesse, is at this day most planted with Christian reli∣gion, and where there is least difficultie in the govern∣ment and ecclesiasticall discipline. The Indians were so wearied with the heavy and insupportable yoake of Sa∣thans lawes, his sacrifices and ceremonies, whereof wee have formerly spoken, that they consulted among them∣selves, to seeke out a new law, and another God to serve. And therefore the law of Christ seemed vnto them, and doth at this day seeme iust, sweete, cleane, good, and full of happinesse. And that which is difficult in our law, to beleeve so high and soveraigne Misteries, hath beene easie among them, for that the Divell had made them comprehend things of greater difficultie, and the selfe-same things which he had stolen from our Evangelicall law, as their maner of communion and confession, their adoration of three in one, and such other like, the which against the will of the enemy, have holpe for the casie receiving of the truth by those who before had imbraced lies. God is wise and admirable in all his workes, vanquishing the adversatie even with his owne weapon, hee takes him in
his owne snare, and kills him with his owne sword. Fi¦nally, our God (who had created this people, and who seemed to have thus long forgot them,) when the hour was come, hee would have the same divells, enemies to mankinde, whom they falsly held for gods, should give a testimony against their will, of the true law, the power of Christ, and the triumph of the crosse, as it plainely ap∣peares by the presages, prophesies, signes, and prodiges, heere before mentioned, with many others happened in divers partes, and that the same Ministers of Sathan, Sor∣cerers, Magitians, and other Indians have confessed it. And we cannot deny it, (being most evident and knowne to all the world,) that the Divell dareth not hisse, and that the practises, oracles, answers, and visible apparitions, which were so ordinary throughout all this infidelitie, have ceased, whereas the Crosse of Christ hath beene planted, where there are Churches, and where the name of Christ hath beene confessed. And if there be at this day any cursed minister of his, that doth participate there∣of, it is in caves, and on the toppes of mountaines, and in secret places, farre from the name and communion of Christians. The Soveraigne Lord be blessed for his great mercies, and for the glory of his holy name: And in truth, if they did governe this people temporally and spiritually, in such sort as the law of Iesus Christ hath set it downe, with a milde yoake and light burthen, and that they would impose no more vppon them then they can well beare, as the letters pattents of the good Emperour of happy memorie doe command, and that they would imploy halfe the care they have to make profite of these poore mens sweats and labours, for the health of their soules, it were the most peaceable and happy Christan part of all the world. But our sinnes are often an occasi∣on
that God doth not impart his graces so aboundantly as he would. Yet I will say one thing which I holde for truth, that although the first entry of the Gospel hath not beene accompanied (in many places,) with such since∣ritie and christian meanes, as they should have vsed: yet God of his bountie hath drawne good from this evill, and hath made the subiection of the Indians, a perfect remedie for their salvation. Let vs consider a little, what hath beene newly converted in our time to the Christi∣an Religion, as well in the East, as in the West, and how little suretie and perseverance in the faith and Christian Religion there hath beene, in places where the new con∣verted have had full libertie to dispose of themselves, ac∣cording to their free will. Christianitie without doubt augments and increaseth, and brings forth daily more fruite among the Indian slaves: and contrariwise decrea∣seth and threatens a ruine in other partes, where have beene more happy beginnings. And although the be∣ginnings at the West Indies have beene laboursome, yet our Lord hath speedily sent good worke-men and his faithfull Ministers, holy men and Apostolicall, as Friar Martin of Valence, of the order of S. Francis, Friar Domi∣nicke de Gerancois, of the order of S. Dominicke, Friar Iohn de Roa, of the order of S. Austen, with other servants of our Lord, which have lived holily, and have wrought more then humaine things. Likewise, Prelates and holy Priests, worthy of memory, of whom we heare famous miracles, and the very acts of the Apostles: yea, in our time we have knowne and conferred with some of this qualitie. But for that my intention hath beene onely to touch that which concernes the proper history of the Indians themselves, and to come vnto the time that the father
of our Lord Iesus Christ would communicate the light of his word vnto them. I will passe no farther, leaving the discourse of the Gospel at the west Indies for another time, and to a better vnderstanding: Beseeching the Sove∣raigne Lord of all, and intreating his servants, humbly to pray vnto his Divine Maiestie, that it would please hi of his bountie, often to visit and to augment by the guifts of heaven this new Christendome, which these last ages have planted in the farthest boundes of the earth. Glory, Honour, & Empery be to the King of worlds for ever and ever. Amen. FINIS.
