981 99840206 4682
A meruailous com∣bat of contrari∣eties. Malignantlie striuing in the mē∣bers of mans bodie, allegoricallie representing vnto vs the enuied state of our florishing Common wealth: wherin dialogue-wise by the way, are touched the ex∣treame vices of this pre∣sent time. VVith an earnest and vehement exhortation to all true English harts, couragiously to be readie prepared against the enemie. by W. A. Concordia paruae res crescunt, discor∣dia maximae dilabuntur. Printed by I. C. for Thomas Hacket, and are to be solde at hys shop in Lomberd streete▪ vnder the signe of the Popes heade. Ann. D. 1588.
To the Right Hono∣rable Mister George Bonde, Lord Maior of London, much health, and happy successe through out hys whole gouernment. I Haue reade right Honourable, Ʋirtutem esse bonum commune pa∣triac, that virtue is the common profit of our Countrie, and that he is not to bee honoured with the noble name of virtue, which doth not wholy apply his mind freely to profit manie, and to seeke the cōmoditie of others: which made Cicero to say, that if there were a question, or comparison, to whom wee ought to shew most duetie, our Countrey & Parents ought chief∣lie to be regarded, vnto whom we are bound by many bene∣fits: And Cicero did not alone say it, but by his owne exam∣ple confirmed it, when beeing Consul of Rome, through his singular diligence, and painfull watchfulnes, he both preser∣ued the Cittie from the secret conspiracies of Catiline, and also repressed his violent attempts, that fully purposed the ouerthrow of his Countrey: so that hee might iustly say of himselfe as hee did, O fortunatam natam me Consule Roma; O happie Rome in the time that I was Consul. Your selfe (right Honorable) may in these dangerous daies, and doubt∣ful times, worthily deserue Ciceros praise, that are so careful∣lie occupied, painfully busied, and watchfully prepared, not onlie to preuent by warie foresight all priuie attempts that noisome vipers, and hurtful Traytors, either by night or day
shall practise against this honorable and famous Cittie, but are ready bent valiantly to defendet, though with losse of your owne life, rather then it should in the least part bee harmed, or the inhabitants thereof  wayes iniuried. The valour of your antique predecessors, are yet to bee seene in the armes of your honorable Cittie, and shall for e∣uer remaine in the minds of all posteritie, whose glorie wee see you emulate, and to which, your watchfulnes and pain∣full diligence will make you equiualent, if in these stormie tempesteous times, you shall (like a warie and heedfull Pi∣lot) skilfully (as you haue begunne) continue to holde the helme in this Ship of your gouernment, and happily guide it from blustering vvindes, and wallovving vvaues of secret malicious enemies: which the more they are, dooth make you more carefull, and the more secret, farre more watchful. The time wherein you gouerne, may wel be compared to the time of Catiline, but that in this point it is far more dan∣gerous, for that we haue not one Catiline that purposeth the ruine of our Cittie, but manie: & as Cicero sayd at that time, Crescit in dics singulos hostium numerus, so may we say, the nū∣ber of our enemies doo still encrease, yet vvill not we stande vppon that vvhich he did, neither doe I thinke you of his mind, that either our nightly watches (vvhich God knowes are but slender) the garrison of our Cittie, the strength of our people, the vnitie of our mindes, the counsels of your Senate, or such like can preserue vs, but that our God, euen for the glory of his name, and for his mercy sake will defend vs, that neither their counsels or conspiracies shall euer bee able to hurt vs. And albeit they doe intestinam aliquam quoti∣die perniciem reipublicae moliri, deuise dailie some secret and deadlie destruction of our common vvealth, yet I doubt not but first by Gods mercie, and then through the prouident care of you and our Magistrates, not alone this Cittie, but the whole land shalbe preserued from their malice, and they thēselues fall into the pit that they haue digged for others,
as Catiline did, with his conspiratours. I haue printed your Honors name in the forehead of this my Booke, not because I wanted patrons to defend it, (for vvho in this time will not esteeme the faithfull good vvill of a louing Subiect, that zealously seeketh the profit of hys Countrey) but for that I heare and see your honors care, & vvatchfulnes deserues it, & to depriue the vertuous of their praise, vvere nothing els but meere enuie and secret malice. Wherefore as I vvillinglie dedicate this vnto your Honor: so I beseech you gratefully accept it, and defend it against all the malitious tongues of enuious and slaunderous Papists, vvhose mouthes either I desire the Lorde God to stop, and conuert their harts, or els confound them, that they may ne∣uer see their desires. And so wishing your Honour to prosper in all your counselles and that you take in hand. I cease to trouble you a∣nie further. Your Honours in all duety to commaunde, William Auerell.
To the friendlie and Chri∣stian Reader. THREE sorts of people (courteous Reader) I knowe there are, that will dislike, and discommend that which I shall write, the first are our proude Dares, that are as farre in loue with themselues as Narcissus, and our wanton wiues and mincing minions, that all day pranke themselues at the Glasse, like daintie Misteris Acco. The second are our gluttonous Sanctrae that for their feeding and vnmeasurable drinking, may better be called Beotians then Englishmen: and the third are our couchant Pa∣pists that priuilie lurke in corners, to bring euery thing in disgrace, that is not for their purpose, nor serues (as we say) for their tooth. These peraduenture beeing gauled, cannot abide to haue their sore rubbed, like to Phillip of Macedon that because he had but one eye himselfe, was angry when any man talked of a Cyclop, or na∣med a gogle eye, or spake of any that had but one of his eyes: Or like Hyrmeas, that beeing himselfe an Eunuch, coulde not abide to heare of a Raser, or a knife, or anie man that was cutte, because he was himselfe a gelding. Wherfore if we touch these men, it must be figurate but not aperte, closelie and cunninglie, not openly nor plainely, for if we doe, we vtterly lose their good wil, but as for these I count not, onely I wish them better mindes, with a sound amend∣ment of their liues. The rest that are well disposed, I earnestlie desire to beare with whatsoeuer faultes haue eyther hastilie scaped my handes in wryting, or the Printers presse in printing. I am not Roscius in Scena, I knowe manie coulde better haue handled this Theame, yet I friendly request thy patience,
and gentle acceptance of that I haue written, knowing that if thou haue iudgment, thou wilt not be a Lynx, in prying too narrowlie into my ouer-sights, but rather a Mole, in not seeing mine infir∣mities. That I haue written hath beene for thy profit and plea∣sure, my selfe in labouring haue felt the payne, all the reward I de∣maunde is thy good worde, which if I may haue I am satisfied, and so reposing my selfe thereon I ende, wyshing thee health and long life, with the fruition of heauenlie ioyes. Farewell. (∴)
¶A Dialogue, wherin the extreame vices of this present age are dysplayd against Traytors and Treasons. The Tongue. DEare Brethren and fellowe mem∣bers, by what authoritie or right, rather with what boldnes, dare our Brethren the Belly and Back oppresse vs, and so Lord∣like commaund vs? it is a shameful thing, extreame folly, and a thing very vnséemly, when the seruaunt ruleth, and the Lorde obeyeth, the slaue commaundeth, and the Maister serueth: truelie we are worthy of the greatest torments, that lyke drudges will become a scoffe and scumme to others. Like fooles we haue made the Belly and Backe our Lords, with great labour we get and prouide al things may please them: poore soules we haue no rest, sometime the Belly commaū∣deth one, sometime the Backe another, one saith to y• Foote, arise sluggard, awake, the other to the hand, bestirre thée a∣pace, get me some meate, prepare mee some dainties, fetch me some wine, lay the Table, the day passeth, the time go∣eth, and I haue eaten nothing: Hunger and Thirst my two enemies come & threaten my death, the one on the one side, the other on the other, and therfore except yée spéedely help me I die, and these are their daielie and vsuall complaints. The Hande. Syster, you saie trueth, and amongst the rest no one hath more cause to cōplaine of them both then I, for I labor sun∣dry waies to maintaine thē. In the Winter I suffer cold, in the Summer I endure heat, my ioynts are benummed with the one, and dryed with the other, I labor day & night to pro∣cure for thē both what I can & yet they are neuer satis-fied.
The Tongue. I knowe it, but yet your toyle is not equall with myne, for I am often a common Paratour and solicitour for them both. Manie times I am faine to braule for them, when I haue small thanks for my labour, somtimes I am a Patrone or rather a Latrone to robbe the Ministry by selling of ly∣uings, sometimes a Iudge, and eftsoones a witnes, somtimes a Counseller, otherwhiles a Merchant, and then after a re∣tailour of wares, I counterfait Lawes, I tell lyes, I sewe seditions, I stirre vp Traytors, I slaunder Princes, vnder cullour of trueth I beguile and deceiue, I weare and for∣sweare, I breake promise, I allure to whoredome, to theft, to murder, and to all mischiefe: I make no account so I may get them ought, whether per fas or nefas, by right or wrong. If I come among Princes, I flatter, if among the noble or ritch, I sooth them vp with swéete wordes, Si airt aio, si ne∣gant nego, looke what they say I affirme it, and all this I doe, that by flatteries I may féede the Belly dailie, & clothe the Back brauelie. The Hande. And I praie you is my toyle any lesse? are my deceites inferiour vnto yours? am I not forced through their pro∣curements (if I may without shame open my follies) to picke and steale, sometimes by priuie filching to make all fish that comes to net? sometimes by open robbing violent∣ly, to lay hands vpon others? What treasons, what poyso∣nings, what murder is it or what wickednes, that I doo not for their sakes accomplish? whose goods haue I spared? whose bloode haue I not spilled, to serue the turne of these my Lordlie Maisters? Haue I spared the Prince, the Father, the Childe, the Sister, the Brother, the Husbande, the Wife? Nay what age, or see haue I pittied, to please these ouerruling & com∣maunding Lords? I want no examples to confirme my say∣ings,
yet least you should imagin me to say more then I can proue, I will sette downe a fewe for the maintainaunce of my cause. And first to begin with Traytors, did not Curio (at first Caesars enemy, yet afterward to maintain the Bel∣lie and Back) sell vnto Caesar for 26000. crownes the Cit∣tie of Rome? How vnfaithfully did Polymnestor of Thrace murder Polydorus King Priamus some, and all for his gold to maintaine his brauerie, and to sette him one degrée high∣er in his Kingdome. Aul. Posthumius Albinus, béeing sent to ouerthrow Iugurtha, was corrupted with money, and in stead of warre most shamefully concluded a peace. How did Standley and Yorke, two English Traytors in Flaunders, deale with the most vertuous and famous Quéene of Eng∣land, whom God preserue long to raigne ouer vs to the con∣fusion of all forraine and domesticall Traitors. When the Romaines warred against the Latines, Cassius a standerdbearer fue Crassus Brutus his sonne, because for money he would haue betrayd his Father, and opened the Gates to the enemies. Heraclius the Emperour, slewe Phocas his Father to maintaine himselfe in the brauerie of an Empire. Richard the third, reaching with ambition of a crowne, most vnnaturally slew his two little Nephewes, his hart contriued it, but I performed it. Frotho the King of Denmark had thrée sonnes, Halda∣nus, Roe, and Scato, who when their Father was deade, stroue all togeather for the Kingdome, by meanes of which, Haldanus the elder, slew y• two yonger, that hee alone might sway the Kingdome. Semiramis hauing obtained of her Husband Ninus, to sit but one day in the princelie seate, and for that day to sway the Kingdome, imprisoned her Husband, & afterward slewe him, that she alone might liue in all daintines and brauerie. These and infinit other, haue the Belly and Backe me to destroy, making me as a slaue to serue their appetites.
The Foote. Séeing each of you haue iustly made your complaints, as Nature hath placed me lowest, so giue me leaue at last to declare my griefe: I acknowledge the Tongue is greatly enforced, the Handes meruailously troubled, and the other members wonderfully oppressed, to serue the turne of two, not Maisters by Nature, but Monsters by abuse, yet consi∣der my trauaile, and you shall find it nothing lesse then the rest. How doo I trott vp and downe, and as a Porter togea∣ther with my fellow, am forced to beare vppe the rest of the members. Whatsoeuer must be had, I am the Messenger to fetch it, is there any dish to féede the Belly? then must I runne to buy it, is there any fine apparrell fashionable for the Backe? be it neuer so farre, I must trudge for it. And al∣beit y• the waight of the members which nature hath gyuen be sufficient to charge & ouerburden my féeble force, yet must I haue a loade deuised by arte, to oppresse the weakenes of my slender ioynts, so that I thinke my burden heauier then Aetna, or the waight of the Heauens vpon the shoulders of Atlas, with griefe héerof my boanes consume, my synnowes shake, my humors dry vp, and my ioynts quake, like as when two weake Pillars beare vppe the burden of a heauie house. Besides, neither can the Tongue come to vtter her spéech, nor the hands to execute their purpose, without it be by my help and furtheraunce, so that if the Belly bidde the Tongue deceiue, I poast out to performe it, if y• Back com∣maund the Hands to steale, or shed blood, then I haste to make them finish it, so that in all actions I am a seruaunt in most vile slauery to these vniust oppressors, and therefore haue as much cause to complaine of their tyranny in euerie thing, as either of you in any thing. The Tongue. Certaine it is we all doo serue them dilligently, we la∣bour for them painefully, and yet are rewarded slenderlie.
The Tyrants of Sicilia neuer oppressed their subiects with more violence, then they do vs with their exactions, and yet we haue thereby no benefit, for had wee any recompence, it woulde asswage the burthen of our trauaile, and make our labour swéete, but such is the condition of these two, that al∣beit we dailie giue them, hourelie labor and continually pro¦uide for them, yet they neuer cease complayning, that wee giue them nothing. The Hande. Yea, for though I labour to day to féede the one, and tra∣uaile to morrow to clothe the other, yet if I doo not the next day, and the next day also giue them stil, they complayne of myne idlenes, of mine vniustice & negligence: saying I am vnnaturall, vnkinde, slothfull, and giuen to ease, and that I forget the ende wherefore I was made, which is, (they say) to serue them in all necessities, what said I? nay rather in all superfluities. The Foote. In the same state am I, and so they deale also with mée, for though I nowe fetch them in things not wholy needfull, but for the most part curious, it may bee that a while they will be contented, but shortly after they crie it is too little, and except I procure the one varietie of dainties, and the o∣ther diuersitie of sutes, they are neither contented, so varia∣ble are they, and ful of alteration, so that I cannot tell what to compare them to, except to the lake in the furthest part of Affrick, among the people Trogloditae, which is thrise in a day bitter and salt, and yet anone pleasant and sweete. The Tongue. Nay rather they are like the gaping Gulfe in Sicil, na∣med Charybdis, which euer deuoureth, & is neuer satis-fied,
or like the fire, that the more it hath, the more it still consu∣meth: for Polypus had neuer more shifts, then y• Back hath suites, nor the Camelion more cullers then y• Belly Cookes. The Hande. I thinke the Crocodil is not more gréedy then the Bel∣lie, nor the Leopard more variable then the Backe. Theyr nature is like y• stone Siphnius, which heated in Oyle war∣eth hard, but let alone becommeth soft. The more we plea∣sure them, the more they displease vs, and the more wee be∣stowe vpon them, the more they are vnthankfull. The Tongue. Will you sée the patterne of a gluttonous Pantrey, then looke vpon the Bellie, for he is a smoking Kitchin of varia∣ble viands, Gurmandse is his Porter, and Gluttony hys Cooke, the lustfull Lyuer like a flaming fire, boyleth vnder the great Kettle & Cauldron of the stomack, the breathing Lunges, like blowing bellowes,  by the Liuer as by a Forge, the Wealand pype as it were a Cestern, bringeth in liquor to dresse the cates, and the entrayles like a sinck con∣uay the filth downe the Fundament. Nowe all this while who fareth the better for theyr cokery, nay which of vs are not the worse for the Bellyes vntemperancie, and which of vs smarteth not for the Backs prodigalitie? Wherefore Bretheren, and fellow members, let vs not be subiect to two such Cormorants, which regarde not our benefit, but theyr owne profit, consider the seruillity, they haue long kept vs in, what labour and paine, what carke and care, they haue continually put vs to, if we cast off their yeake, we shall bee freed from slauerie, if not, wee liue in continuall drudgery, they rule not by reason but by rigour, their lust is a law, and their will a warrant, and therfore to stake off their oppressi∣on, were wisdome, and to liue at liberty, wilbe our onelye happines.
The Hand. Sister, I promise for my part, to yéeld to your perswa∣sion, and whereas in times past I haue wrought full harde for the maintenaunce of these my iolly Maisters, I purpose now to take mine ease, thinking it better to liue at rest, thē to toyle and haue no thank for my labour, and therefore let them worke for themselues if they wil, for I neither meane to féede the one, nor clothe the other. The Foote. Neither will I step ouer the threshold, to fetch in anie thing for the sustenaunce of the one, or maintainance of the other, but meane to take my rest in mine Inne, expecting howe these that haue so long ruled as Lordes, can become nowe seruaunts to themselues. The Tongue. In this dooing wee shall abate their pride, and plucke downe their Peacocks plumes, so that though nowe they holde theyr heades full high, yet within these two or thrée dayes, I am sure my gluttonous Maister the Belly, wyll sing a newe song, for I promise for my part to be no instru∣ment to feede, nor no seruaunt to serue him, and as for our gallant youth the Back, I doo not doubt but y• want of your seruice, will make him in short time after beshrew himselfe. But hushe, Lupus est in fabula, behold where they both come of whom we haue long talked, let vs shrinke a side to heare their communication, till opportunity serue for vs to speake. The Belly. What greater misery can happen in this life, then when as in a naturall body, where the members should serue each others necessitie, and mutually helpe & succour one another,
they shall not onely denie their ayde vnto the body, but con∣spire also the death of the same: by meanes of which, not the body alone dooth consume and pine away, but the mem∣bers themselues doo consequently perish: and yet are they so blinded with enuie, and ledde on with selfe loue, that they cannot perceiue their destruction at hand, till present perrill doo teach them, and their owne smart doo warne them, what folly it is to be led by enuie, whereby to make a mutinie in a naturall bodie, in which there ought to be a cordiall con∣sent of amitie, and a tuneable harmonie of loue. I knowe not what hath mooued my fellow members to this conspiracie, for my part I haue naturally fedde them, and louingly nourished them all, yet they complaine, and not of me alone, but of the proude Back also, whose pride & pro∣digalitie, hath oftentimes (indéede) depriued both them and me of our due sustenaunce and naturall nourishment, euen this statelie and lordly Backe, the pyllar of pryde, the wa∣ster of wealth, and the window opening to all wickednes, a leader vnto luxurie and vncleane leacherie, a bulwarke to beate backe chastitie, & the roote from whence all presump∣tuous pride dooth growe, for whose faults, it is no reason I should suffer the malice of the members, that not onelie in mine office foster y• rest, but am neerest to him in all things. The Backe. Brother, I haue hearde your vnbrotherly spéeches, in which, though you would to cleare your selfe, make me the cause of y• members variance, yet if you iustly examine your owne condition, you shall finde that your gluttony, and vn∣temperancie, doth not onely distemper the members, but al∣so consume that should serue for my maintenaunce: & ther∣fore good cause haue the rest of our Brethren to condemne your excesse, and dislike your extortion: for they serue an e∣uill Maister, who is alwaies crauing and neuer contented, euer feeding, and neuer filled, for what is more vnsatiable
then the Bellie? that is this day crammed, and to morowe crauing? Who when he is full, can dispute of temperance and continencie, yet presently after doth shake handes with all vertue. You saie that I am the pillar of pride, but it hap∣peneth then through your vntemperaunce, you affirme that I am the waster of wealth, but you forget your owne delica∣cie, that consume more at one banquet in a day, then I doe vppon apparrell in a yéere. You make mee a leader vnto all leacherie, but you remember not that Sine Cerere et Baccho friget Ʋenus, and that I am but the effect, you the cause, I the flame, you the Oyle, I the meane, but your self the mat∣ter, you say I am the bulwarke to beate back chastitie, but you consider not that y• full Bellie is not able to kéepe con∣tinencie, you make me the roote of pride, but it is your selfe that is both roote and trunck, to foster the brauest branches of pride, and to cherish all wickednes, and vice: and therfore you suffer not for mee, but for your owne faultes, and your disorder in féeding, hath made the members breake, and my garments bare. The Tongue. Now the matter beginnes to worke, when Théeues at∣tache one another, true men come by their goods, but of both, there is neither barrell better Herring. The Bellie Why, had euer Prometheus more shapes, then the backe sutes? or y• Hydra more nw heads then the back new Gar∣ments? not so variable for their matter, as changable for their fashion: this daie French, to morrowe English, the next day Spanish, to daie Italianate, to morrow for fashion a deuill intarnat, O tempora, o mores! To daie you shine in sutes of silke, to morrow you iet it out in cloth of Golde, one daie in blacke for show of grauitie, an other daie in white
in token of brauerie, this day that cullour, the next day ano∣ther, nowe short wasted, anon long bellied, by and by after great Buttoned, and straight after plaine laced, or els your Buttons as strange for smalnes, as they were monstrous before for greatnes, this yéere bumbd like a Barrell, the next shottend like a Herring, nowe your hose hang loose like a bowe case, the next daie as straite as a pudding skinne, one while buskind for lacke of stocks, another while booted for want of shooes, and thus from you that are the graund Mai∣ster, doo the inferious members fetch their fashions, & these be the mutabilities of men. As for women, you make them through your pride in lookes like Lais, in fashions like Flora, in maners like Thais, more wauering then the wind, and more mutable then the Moone: in Gate & iesture most daintie, in the Church most angelicall, in the stréetes modest & amiable, abroade among men in finenes superficiall, but at home by themselues most sluttish and bestiall. Yet I meane not all but the worst, and such as entertaine your pride, who from the top to the toe, are so disguised, that though they be in sexe Women, yet in attire they appeare to be men, and are like Androgini, who counterfayting the shape of either kind, are in déede neither, so while they are in condition women, and woulde séeme in apparrell men, they are neither men nor women, but plaine Monsters. Their heads set out with strange hayre, (to supply na∣ture that waie defected, or rather by their periwigges infec∣ted) do appeare like the head of Gorgon, sauing that they want the crawling Snakes of Medusa, to hang sprawling in their haire along their faces, & yet they retaine the pro∣pertie of this Daughter of Phorcus, for they turne a num∣ber of their beholders into stones, who while they affectio∣natlie gaze on their painted pride, doe lose the reason of men and become like stones, without anie féeling of a vertuous mind, the onelie Image of a man. But as they are Venerian Dames, euen so in their flat∣teries
to beguile fooles, they imitate the nature of the Cypri∣an women, who comming into Syria and seruing in ye Court, would coure downe and become footestooles for the Ladies, thereby to ascend into their Coaches, for which cause they were called Climacidae, of Climaca, which ye Assirians name a Ladder: but héerin onelie they differ, in that our Phrynae, and Cytherean Damsels, become not Ladders for Women, but footestooles, yea and pillowes for Men. And therefore it is not without cause that Tyresias saide, (béeing chosen an Arbiter betwéene Iupiter and Iuno,) that there were In vi∣ro, tres amoris vnciae, in femina, nouem, in a man three ounces of lust, in a woman nine: for what meaneth els their outward tricking and daintie trimming of their heads, the laying out of their hayres, the painting and washing of their faces, the opening of their breasts, & discouering them to their wastes, their bents of Whale bone to beare out their būmes, theyr great sléeues and bumbasted shoulders, squared in breadth to make their wastes small, their culloured hose, their varia∣ble shooes, and all these are but outward showes. As for the rest, least their rehearsall might rather hurt, then profit the honest eares, I will couer them with silence, but all these are your prouocations, these are the fruites of your pride, the signes of your waste, and the abridgment of my fare, for while you spend so fréelie vpon your Backe, the least share falles to the Bellie, nay▪ I am faine oftentimes to ast, to beare out the prodigalitie of your pride, and then anting nourishment to féede the members, I am complained on for your fault. The Backe. I perceiue you can Arcem facere ex cloaca, and Lapidem e sepulchro venerari pro Deo, make much of your painted sheath, and make a Mountaine of a Molehill. You can loue your selfe best, & spie a mote in anothers eye, forgetting the beame in your own, I am not so variable in my sutes, as you
are in dainties of diuers sorts, nor so sumptuous and gorgi∣ous in garments, as you are costly in cates, but you count al too much that goes besides your owne bellie, and thereunto you bend the summe of your talke, like Pithonicus, y• when he gaue answer of the Oracle, so spake, as the voice see∣med not to come from his tongue, but from his belly. What should I speake of your two greatest Gods and , gluttonous féeding and excessiue drinking, by which you make a number not men but beastes, that haue their soules but in stedde of salt, to kéepe their bodies from noysome stincke, who though they appeare men, are indeede but Ventres, that place their pleasure in long feeding, and their delight in strong drinking. I am not so changable in fashions, as you are choyse in dishes, what boyling, what baking, what roasting, what stewing, what curious and daintie conseruing, what Syr∣ropes, what sauces, with a thousand deuices to moue an ap∣petite without necessitie, and charge nature without néede. Did you not make Demetrius Phalerus consume euery yere two hundred talents, in néedlesse stuffing of your bottomles bagge? And howe mooued you Heliogabalus at euery sitting downe, to spend no lesse then an hundred Sestertij? Made you not Philoxenus to wish that he had ye neck of a Crane, that in féeding on delicate meate, and drinking swéet wine, he might feele the greater pleasure? With this you made the Sodomites to abound,Ezech 16 which was the cause they were consumed with fire. You made the Isralites héerin to offend,Exod 32 that after they had glutted their bellies fell to Idolatry. You infected Esau with this greedines,Gene, 25 that he sold his birth-right for a messe of pottage, yea, infinite others haue perished by the Belly, and more by the Belly then ye sword. The King of the Cookes (that is the Bellie) ouerthrew the walles of Ierusalem, (saith Gregorie,) for while the Bel∣lie is farced with Gluttonie, the vertues of the soule are de∣stroyed
by Leacherie, for Ʋicina sunt venter et genitalia. There can be no order in liuing, where there is no measure in féeding, and as a wild Horse if he haue the bridle wil cast his ryder, or carrie him whether he listeth, so an vntempe∣rate Belly, leadeth the soule to all sinne, and the members to sicknes and sorrowe. Or as the Earth by too much rayne becommeth barraine of all good fruites, and bringeth foorth nothing but thistles and thornes, so the Belly ouercharged with two much foode, is vtterly voide of all vertue, & wholly barraine in well dooing, producing nothing but pricking thi∣stles of ill example to hurt others, or choking thornes of beastly life to destroy it selfe. How manie doth the Bellie make Epicures, that say, Ede, bibe, post mortem nulla voluptas, eate and drink,Philip. 3 there is no pleasure after death, who make their Belly their Gods. Such are like Acephalus, whome the Mathematicians place before one of the wandering starres, with his head and mouth kissing his bellie. Or the Fish named Asinus, who alone of all liuing things (as Ari∣stotle saith) hath his hart in his bellie, a number of which Asses the Belly maketh, that eate not to liue, but liue to eate. As for vnmeasurable drinking, Authors haue written, and experience dooth tell vs dailie, that through abuse there∣of▪ manie not onely liue not out halfe their daies, but therein consume that which should serue to clothe both me and the members. Archesilaus Pytaneus dyed by excessiue drinking of wine. Andebuntus a King of England at a Supper drank so much wyne, that béeing ouercome with the aboundaunce thereof, in casting and strayning himselfe he suddainly died. Anacreon the Poet, a louer of wine, was suddenly stran∣gled with a Grape. And many wee sée through your surfet∣ting and swilling, are rouled into the graue before their na∣turall time, that els might liue in happines and health. But nowe I remember Cato the elder, when he accused y• glut∣tonie and laciuiousnes of the people of Rome, sayde it was very harde verba ventra facere  non habet, to talke to
the bellie that hath no eares, or els I might tell of a greate manie more, that indulgentes abdomini farcing their bellies out with fat, through fulnes of féeding by daie, and gorging their guts ful of wine with late drinking by night, are right Antipodes that neuer behold the sunne in his rising, nor see him in his going downe: such doe viuere ad faces et cereos, spend their time by torche light, while they consume ye night among their cups, and snorte all day vpon their beddes. And these are your Lucifugi, or Lychnob, that liue contrary to Nature, who are as well knowne by their cullours, as the gluttonous Estriche by his feathers, some of them beeing more pale through distemperature, then those that are sicke of a feuer, others more ruddie then the Rubie, and more dée∣per in die then the reddest Grape, but with the most pinguis aqualiculus prepense sesquipede extet: their fat paunches like a water trough standes out a foote and a halfe. I talke not of other effects that accompany your glut∣tonous bellie whē it is farst wt wine. What lasciuiousnes in wordes, what wantonnes in gestures, what filthines in deedes, what swearing and blaspheming, what quarrelling and brawling, what murder and bloodshed, nay what wic∣kednes is not an vntemperat belly subiect to, and most rea∣die to accomplish? Besides, howe doth your gluttonie chaunge Natures cō∣lines, into foule deformednes? how doo the eyes flame with flerines, the face flush with rednes, the hands shake wyth vnstedfastnes, and the féete réele through drunkennes? the head swimmes, the eyes dazell, the tongue flammers, the stomack is ouercharged, the body distempered, and the féeble legges ouerburdened, which, béeing not able to beare an vn∣rulie Lord,  lay him in ye durt like an an ouer ruled slaue, and so through your distemperature, your selfe not alone weakened, but the other members so diseased, as to reckon vppe the sicknesses and sores, of which the Bellie is cause, were to purge the stables of Augea King of Elis, or to sette them downe which were neuer knowne to Auicen, Galien,
Hippocrates, nor all the Phisitions that euer liued, so that by these meanes it may be saide, that a gluttonous Bellye makes rich Phisitions and fat Churchyardes. The Bellie I had not thought the Backe had béene so good an Ora∣tour: you haue taken great paines to decipher my gluttony, forgetting your owne pride and prodigalitie, but you knowe the morrall of Esops Ante & his Flye, he that speakes what he will, must heare what he will not, I will not say ye Backe is a Monster, that can carrie vppon his shoulders, Landes, Castles, and Townes. The Backe Nor I showe, howe the Belly deuoureth, not onelie Lordships, Reuenewes, and great possessions, but whatsoe∣uer flyeth in the ayre, is bredde on the earth, or engendred in the Sea, all is too little to fill the vnsatiable Belly. The Belly Your shining out in Silkes, hath brought many a man into the Mercers Bookes, and wrapt more in the Vserers bandes. Howe many hath the Backe made Banqueroutes, that to maintaine their outward iollitie, haue béene fayne to gage not Landes alone, but plate, goods, or whatsoeuer was ought worth, and in the end, either to take Ludgate for their lodge, or some worse prison for their harbour, and then their Wiues, Children and houshold liue after in pennury, through your former pride and prodigalitie, yea I and the other members hunger for that, which the Backe hath be∣fore most vainly spent. Besides, you make the Landlorde to maintain your brauery, so stretch his poore Tenant in rent, that to serue your turne the Belly must fast, the Handes
labour, the féete to trudge, and the other members toyle to their greate gréefe and sorrowe. The Backe But thinke you that the Backe alone is cause of al this miserie? no no, the Belly hath héerein his portion, and that the greater part, how soeuer you would shift the matter vp¦pon me, for although (as Plinius sayth) Simplex cibus corpori vtilissimus, the simplest meate is most profitable for the body, yet the Belly béeing not herewith contented, must haue dy∣uers and daintie sortes of fruites, beasts of the earth, foules of the ayre, fishes of the Sea, and those not cōmon but rare, besides, banquetting dyshes of sundry sortes, made of swéete conceits to please your appetite. Moreouer, golde & cullours to adorne them, and swéete spices to sauour them, then the fattest and fairest, the yongest & sweetest, a cunning Cooke must be sought to dresse thē, and daintilie to prepare them, who turneth the substaunce into an accident, and nature in∣to arte, that the full belly may become hungry, and the stuf∣fed stomack renew his appetite, and while all these thinges must be prouided, the stocke wastes, the Landes are gaged and morgaged, and rather then the Belly shall want his su∣perfluities, the Backe and members shall want their neces∣saries, so shortly after followeth a topsituruey downefall of the whole state, which must be layd vpon the Backe, though wrought by the Belly, and shifted to mée though chéefely ef∣fected by your selfe. But beholde where they are, who can giue equall iudgment whether of vs twaine doo most excéede or procure greatest wrong to the members. Doe you not sée them? The Belly Yes full well, and better shoulde I thinke of their com∣pany were it not for the malicious tongue, who hath contra∣ry to nature made them enemies to me, that am by nature a friend vnto them.
The Tongue. We are espied, wherefore to decide this controuersie we will goe to them, as though we came but now within theyr hearing, but it shall not neede, for they approche to vs. The Bellie. Deare Brethren and fellow members well met, I cannot choose but meruaile, what hellish furie worse than Megaera hath sturred you vp to be at enmitie with me, that haue al∣wayes tenderly loued you, and what shoulde moue you to withdrawe from me my nourishment, that am a seruant to feede you all, in ministring to euerie one so much as nature requireth. The Tongue. Because rather thou art a lawlesse Lord (howsoeuer thou couer thy extortion with the colourable glose of a seruant) alwayes crauing and euer commaunding, still feeding, and neuer leauing, thou art a bottomlesse whirlepoole of all glut∣tonie, an vnsatiable sea of ceaselesse gourmandie, a rauenous cormorant that greedely deuoureth, an idle creature that ne∣uer laboureth, thou settest the whole world vpon vntempe∣raunce, making the rich a Nabuzardan, that rather bestowe more vpon Cookes to fill the belly, than on the learned to in∣struct the mind. Thou teachest the poore  not , to liue after their lust, not according to vertue, cōsuming without care, not onely what shoulde maintaine their fami∣ly, but that also that might otherwise paie their debtes, O bellie most beastial, thou causest all vncleannesse: O monster most vnreasonable, that workest all filthinesse: through thee come murthers, robbing and théeuerie: through thée come contentions, treasons and villany: through thée Kings reach at others crownes to increase their treasure, and Popes at
Princes rule to inlarge their honour, through thée comes pride, warre, and deceit, enuie, hatred, and slaunder, to con∣clude, thou art the chaser awaie of all vertues, and the haler in of all vices, and in thée as in a Troiane horse, is included not the ouerthrowe of one Citie, but the ruine of infinite Countries and innumerable people, thou art the bellows to kindle all lust, and the sacke that containeth all filth, the plague of vs the members, and the vtter ouerthrowe of the soule it selfe. The backe. She hath nipt you verie neere, and méetelie well painted out your gluttonie. The Tongue. And as much may I saie to thée thou proude pecocke, the porter of pride, the baite of bauderie, the lure of lecherie, thou roote of all riot, and beginning of all iniquitie, thou art the sturrer of strife to maintaine thy pride, and the nource of warre and all sedition, through thée Countries fall at iarre, and kingdomes are turned topsituruie, for thy brauerie false subiects forsake their Prince, and vilanous traitours betray their Countrie, thy leaprosie infecteth all the world, corrup∣teth euery age, and defileth euery sexe, thy pride maketh the rich loath the poore, the child disdaine the Father, the neigh∣bour contemne his neighbors, the wife despise her husband, and the seruant to make no account of his maister, all which being trickt vp in thy ornaments, thinke that Ʋestis virum facit, Apparell makes a man, but they forget Simia est simia, etiamsi aurea gestet insignia, that an Ape is an Ape, though hée be clothed in golde, to conclude, what vice is it whereof thou art not cause, nay what sinne whereof thou art not the be∣ginning, the midst, and the end.
The bellie. As well hath she decyphered your pride, but what should I saie vnto the tongue, as I haue patientlie hearde her, so déere brethren and fellowe members, giue me leaue to aun∣swere her agayne. You knowe deare brethren, that the tong is but a little member, but it is nimble, and quickly slideth, yea, hardly may it be restrained, & therefore hath it no mea∣sure in talking, for of a spark it will make a flame, and of one coale kindle a great fire, her wordes are but light, because they lightlie flie, and although they flie swiftlie, yet they wound deeplie, sting grieuously, & pearce inwardly, she may well be called Lingua, for she can Lingere adulando, smoothlie flatter, as she hath done you, but she hath bitterly bitten and slaunderouslie belied me, she perswadeth you that I am your Lord, and she telleth you that I am your enimy, but I know I am your seruant, and entirely loue you as a friende, the great creator of all things when he framed the world of one lumpe, made both you and me one substance, and ioyned vs together in one bodie, knitting vs in mutuall league, to the end we should be linked in friendly loue, he woulde haue all things common amongst vs, that none should challenge any thing proper to himselfe, so far as concerneth the vse of these naturall things, hee hath giuen vs euerie one our proper of∣fice, to be helpers and ayders one to another, hee hath made me your seruaunt, and ordayned me your cooke to dresse for you that should serue for your nourishment, for as the Cooke by his arte doth make the meate méete for the mouth, so doe I by my naturall heate, boyle the same méete for the mem∣bers. I conserue (at his pleasure) both your life and mine, and little is it that I kéepe for my selfe, hauing ministred to you that which is néedful, if you giue me ought, I take it, and whatsoeuer it is I am therewith contented, I digest it, and diuide to euerie one of you his portion, what is néedfull, that I retayne, what is hurtfull, that I cast out▪ I am your poore seruant, and therefore can giue you nothing, for except you
giue me, my purse is alwayes emptie, it is not much that I demaund, neither doe I by nature desire that is daintie, for as I am placed in the middest, so doe I naturally loue mea∣sure, if you giue me too much, your selues are cause of my di∣stemperance, and of your owne sorow, if you ouercharge me you driue me to belching, to dronkennesse, to lecherie, to sick∣nesse, and many diseases, if you giue me too little, you make me an image of death, my lookes heauie, my face pale, my skinne loose, and my bodie weake. If sufficient, a chéerefull countenance, a merrie and sober minde, a happy life, a quiet rest, and a sound bodie. Therfore ye rich must beware of too much, & ye poore prouide for a little, and that little will serue me, for Natura paucis contenta, nature is content with a little, wherefore yée must take héede of measure being temperate, and sparing in gi∣uing vnto me, for I distribute according to the quantity and qualitie you giue. I knowe the tongue will perswade you that I am neuer content, but that you alwayes giue mee, but it is for your owne cause, you giue me often, for that you wil be often fed, for héereby you liue & haue your health, if you keepe me long fasting, then I desire no meate, but as the Phisitions say, I drawe from the entrailes and bowelles certaine filthie va∣pours, of which matter are ingendered wormes, yea the gall is thereby troubled, and spreadeth his bitternesse through the inward parts, by this meanes in thinking to profite, you hurt your selues. But whatsoeuer ye hateful Tongue saith, good brethren regarde her not, for she is the sower of dis∣sentions, and the causer of all discorde, she is more slippery than an eele, more pearcing than an arrowe, she delighteth to make strife betwéene friendes, and to make all men eni∣mies, she raiseth braules, procureth bloudshed, causeth warres, stirreth vp treasons, and prouoketh traitours, it is she that setteth the subiects agaynst their lawfull Prince, and maketh mutinies in a peaceable gouernment, it is shée that would ouerthrowe a happy state, in making the mem∣bers
at deadly variaunce, but deare brethren, though ye bée simple as doues, yet be as wise as the serpent Aspis, that to auoide the charmer clappeth one eare vpon the ground, and her taile vpon the other, so hearken not you to her perswasi∣ons, but stoppe your eares against her flatteries: for if you continue in this hatred towarde mee, you will spéedely pro∣cure your owne destruction. And me thinkes euen this smal time wherein you haue denied my nourishment, hath made you heauy, faint, and slothfull. The Hand. Brother, I sée thy reasons are good, and I perceiue nowe the malitious tongue hath lead vs awry, I well vnderstand that thou art no Lord, but in truth a seruant to the meanest of vs all, and that which hath most force to perswade me, is, the féeblenesse and faintnesse that I now féele, I know now that without thée we cannot continue, but that thou art the nourisher and féeder of vs all, wherefore I hate the bitter∣nesse of the tongue that hath so vniustly accused thée, and I well finde by experience, that thou art no troublesome credi∣tour, but art content with a litle, if we giue thée that which we ought, not so as much as we can: but what can the Back say in his behalfe? The Backe. As the Belly hath proued, and by reason declared that he hath bene malitiously accused of the Tongue, shewing that in déede he is a seruant, no Lord, a natural friend, no enimy, a preseruer of you all, no destroyer of any, if you moderatlie minister to his necessitie, and doe not ouercharge him with superfluitie, so I say, that the tongue hath enuiously touched and falsely burthened me with vntruths, for albeit in déede I cannot alleadge so much for my selfe as the Belly, by rea∣son he hath a greater charge, and therfore deserues the more
praise, yet cannot mine office bee wanting, nor my seruice missing in many respects, wherby it shal appeare that I am no Lord, but a helping seruaunt to you all, for as we sée that in a politique state diuerse men haue diuerse duties, where∣of some are of greater importaunce than the other, for some are wrought by subtiltie of wit, others by agilitie of the mē∣bers, others by strength of the bodie: so in a naturall bodie, each member hath his seuerall dutie, and one may serue to diuerse and sundrie ends, the head as it is the highest, is oc∣cupied in matters of wit, and is therefore a guide to the rest of the members, hauing the most of the senses placed about it, to the end it should warilie prouide for the profite & com∣moditie of the others. The handes are busied in labouring, and ordayned to worke for such things as may serue to the maintaynance of the whole man. The féet made to trauaile & with their agilitie quickly to fetch what so is néedfull, yet hath not nature giuen them such strength as she hath pla∣ced and setled in me, that where the other members cannot for feeblenesse, there I with my force doe beare out theyr weaknes. Beside, whereas the tongue woulde perswade you that I am the author of pride, & causer of all wantonnesse, I would deare brethren, you should knowe that it is not in me, but in your selues, for looke what you put vppon mee I weare, and am therewith contented, I séeke not for that is curious, but that which is necessarie, Crimen non est in rebus sed in vsu a∣gentis, I take no pride in silkes, no more than in cloth, if any pride be, it is not in me nor in the garments, but in the va∣nitie of the eie and the lust of the heart, that are better plea∣sed with the one than the other. If you giue me that wil de∣fend me in the winter from colde, and in the Summer from heate, I am pleased, but if you withdrawe from me to couer my nakednesse, the one of those my two enemies will not onely bring mee to sicknesse, but you all in like case to death it selfe, and therefore deare friends and fellow members be∣léeue not the vnfaithfull tongue, that swelleth with enuy at
your peace, and therefore would faine disturbe your tranqui∣litie, not caring to harme her selfe, so she may hurt you, ther∣by to bring destruction to you all, her allurementes haue al∣readie wrought you some smart, enfeebling your selues by withdrawing from the belly and me our necessaries, so that without you returne vnto your former amitie, there is no∣thing to be expected but present death. The Foote. Brethren, the deceitfull tongue hath beguiled vs all, and hath intended thereby nothing but our ouerthrow, and that doe I too well féele in my feeble fainting ioynts, that through want of strength are scant able to beare vp the bodie, wher∣fore let vs renue our former friendship with the Bellie, by whome we haue hetherto maintained our health, and with∣out whome we cannot continue, let vs not hereafter be lead by the tongue, but as Nature hath inclosed her in with a double wall, and shut her vp as in a prison, so let vs charge the téeth and lippes to lock her vp, and according to their of∣fice set a bolt before her for walking at large, and if these cannot containe her in dutie, then will we make the handes helpers by violent force to holde her in, & not without cause doth it behoue vs so to do, for by her meanes we sée (through this contention) the hands are weakned, the head bedulled, and the face apalled, the heart panteth, yea the Tongue her selfe is silent, what will followe now but a finall ende of vs all, if we doe not speedely minister to the Belly wherewith to féede vs, and to the Backe to kéepe vs warme, and there∣fore I promise for my part, as fast as my fainting lims will serue, to trudge for somewhat for their maintainance. The Hande. And as readie am I to reléeue them, as I was before for∣ward to pull from them, being sorie that I lent anie eare to
the dissentious Tongue, wherby to displease natural friends, promising hereafter not to forsake them, for the perswasi∣ons of any craftie enimie. The Bellie Then deare brethren bestirre ye, prouide some thing with spéede, and you shall finde how I will refreshe your fainting members, for as Nature hath made me your seruant, so wil I not faile in doing my dutie, and let this your smart warne you hereafter to liue together in mutuall loue, that as wee are all fellowes and members of one bodie, so we may vio∣lently and voluntarily withstand all subtill entisementes of vnnaturall enimies, that shal go about to disquiet our peace, so shall our amitie in a natural harmonie be maintained, our bodily health the longer preserued, our quietnesse and peace still established, and our hatefull enimies inwardly grieued, to our continuall ioy, and their vnspeakable griefe. The application, briefelie declaring the summe of this Dialogue. THis excellent frame and most beautifull order of visible things in the worlde, this position and placing of bodies, the heauens, the aire, and the earth, enuironed and spread about with the great Ocean, this order of heauenlie mouings, which maketh ye cour∣ses and change of times and sea∣sons, dayes and nights, Summer and Winter, to conclude, the whole forme pertaining to the
heauenly and elementarie nature, is called among the Gre∣cians , a greater world, or more excellent beautie, and from thence haue the Latines named it Mundus, of the neatnesse & comelinesse of these visible creatures, which frame beareth in his naturall harmonie, an apt similitude of a politique magistracie, and therefore they were sayde a∣mong the Lacedemonians , that bore a kind of office or authoritie in the common wealth. In this order we knowe there is a continuall Sympathie, no shew of contrarietie, for if there were, it could be no order but a disorder, no Sympa∣thie but an Antipathie, so yt ye whole course of natural things should either be dissolued, or vnnaturally be meruailously confounded, and therefore as this order hath bene created of God, so is it still conserued of him, to teach man (being , a lesser world, in respect of the greater, participating both of the heauenly and terrestriall matter, and bearing al∣so a simililtude of the heauens and elements likewise) what a natural agréement there should be among the fellowships of men, to the making vp of a politique bodie, knit together in the vnitie of mindes. A meruailous concord is there among the heauenlie bo∣dies, for as the writers of nature teach, if our grose eares could heare their surpassing harmonie, wrought by theyr e∣qual and orderly motions, we should finde their tunable me∣lodie farre aboue the sweetnesse of anie mired musicke. No lesse ought the vnitie of mens minds to be tuneable in ami∣tie, without anie iarre of dissonāt discord, because they beare a liuely similitude of the heauens, in their terrestrial bodies, for as the heauen which they call Coelum Empireum, contay∣neth and includeth within it the Angels & Saintes of God: so the bodie of man concludeth and shutteth in it the soule, and heauenly vertues, memorie, vnderstanding, and will. Wherefore as in the heauenly creatures there is with men a plaine resēblance, so ought there among earthly creatures to be a heauenly representation in agréement of minds, and hearts.
As in the Firmament bee seuen Planettes and foure Elements, so in the head of man be seuen holes or issues, and and in the bodie foure principall members. As the Sun & Moone are two lights placed in the heauens: so are there two eyes made for lights in the head. The bodie carrieth a sumilitude of the elementarie mat∣ter, for the heart hath a strie spericke likenesse, beeing most excellent of the members, and the seate of the liuing soule. The breast of man is as the aire, wherein the vapours of the stomack and bellie being congealed, do cause coughs and yexings, with such like. The stomacke is like a great sea, in which arise all grie∣uous diseases, as it were flowing tempests, and to which the humours of the whole bodie, as all the riuers of the earth, do eb and flow. The féete as the centerie of the heauens and elementes, beare vp the waight of the bodie, and thus wee sée what a fit similitude there is betwéene the greater world and the les∣ser, betweene the superiour creatures, and mans earthlie members. This consent hath God left in nature betwéene the hea∣uens with their elements, and our humane members, that wee might learne what agréement ought to bee among our selues, that are tied together in a politique state. For looke what similitude is betweene these twaine, the like may bée and is in most pointes betwéene the naturall bodie and a ei∣uill pollicie, maintained in a well ordered Citie, or wise go∣uernment of a common wealth. For as the head is by nature placed in the top of the body, so ought the Prince to haue the highest roome ouer all cau∣ses in her common wealth and Country, being superior and supreame head of all others, not excepting Popes or theyr authoritie: and as nature hath garded the heade wish most of the senses, s doth she teach vs what defence we ought to yéelde to our Queene, and howe to succour her in all extrea∣mities.
The heart being the place of vnderstanding, and onelie seate of wisedome is inclosed and fenced about with the bo∣die, to instruct vs▪ y• in our politique gouernment, wee ought stoutly also to countergard our nobles, counsaylours, and ma∣gistrates, from whome we receiue through their wisedome, the peaceable state of our happy pollicy, as the members re∣ceiue their life from the heart. The whole trunke of the bodie, may be compared to the state of the bodie of the common wealth, vnto which nature hath conioyned and combined two strong members, the armes and handes, to helpe and defend both the head and it from all harts and dangers, which declareth that this ought to haue a strong defence & succour, for that the ruine of this is the ouerthrow of all the rest. The legges and féete as the lower and poorer sort, though not indued with pollicie as the head, nor stored with vnder∣standing as the heart, nor able to execute the function of the hands, are yet furnished with greatest strength, because they beare vp the whole masse and frame of the bodie, as also the other members therevnto pertaining: and teach vs thus much, that as they are onely indued with most might and naturall strength, so they ought to be gouerned by the other members, (who by their pollicie can rule, by their wisedome direct, and their agilitie further thē, in that they know not.) And to aid them also with their strength agaynst them that shall attempt the ruine of the whole state. Where this con∣sent remayneth, and naturall harmonie hath place, there as in the bodie, so in a common wealth or Countrie, if one bee ioyfull, they all generallie reioyce, if one be sorrowfull, they altogether lament, for as if the finger be hurt or grieued, the heart presently feeleth paine, or when the head is troubled, the other members are disquieted: so in a common wealth there ought to be that vnitie, that the Princes ioy should be the delight of his commons, and the commons grones should bee the Princes griefe, which GOD bee thanked, as a mu∣tuall
amitie we inioy among vs. But as there is no body wherin are not some infirmities, so is there no common wealth wherein there are not some enimies: yet among all the enimies of a common wealth, there is none more pernitious than the enuious tongue of false and lying Papists, who when they cannot by their opē practises preuaile to harme or impugne our happie gouern∣ment, go thē about by false lying spéeches, not alone to slan∣der our state, & to perswade others to dislike of our gouern∣ment, but also labour by surmising reportes and couloured lies, to strike a terrour in the hearts of the common people, or else to make them dislike of those that are in authoritie, whereby to steale awaie theyr heartes from faithfull loue and reuerence of those, whome for theyr trustie hearts and noble vertuous mindes, wee ought to esteeme and ho∣nour. Thus played the Tongue as you haue heard, with the members of the bodie, in seducing them one to enuie & ma∣ligne another, thus would our Papists deale with vs, to set vs among our selues at variance, especially to bring vs in disliking of our magistrates, but it shall be profitable for vs. If we take this oath with our selues, which the youth of A∣thens were wont to take, which for the pithinesse thereof and the state of our time is  agreeing to our purpose, and that euerie one may know it thereby, to be instructed, I wil record it as I haue found it written. I will speake no euil of these wars, but count them sacred: I will not forsake my Captaine to whome I shall bee ap∣pointed: I wil fight for religion, and also for these things we haue in common among vs, whether I be alone or in com∣panie with others: I wil not forsake my Countrie, nor leaue it in a worse state, but in a better than I founde it, if I can. I will euer obey my Prince and Magistrates, which are iustly ordayned ouer me: I will obey and yeeld to the lawes, and whatsoeuer decrees set down by consent and
of the commons. If anie goe about to breake these lawes of my Countrie, or will not obey them, I will not yéeld to him, but will reuenge him euen by my selfe, though I haue no companie or helpe of others, these things to performe, I call the Gods to witnes. If wée haue as much care in kéeping our vowe made in Baptisme, wherein wee promise to fight agaynst all e∣nemies of our Religion, as the Athenians had in perfour∣ming theyr Paganish oathe. If wee bee as duetifull in o∣beying our Magistrates, whose authoritie is confirmed vnto vs out of the holie Scriptures, as they were care∣full in honouring theirs, although the force thereof procee∣ded but from custome and instinct of nature. If wee bee as readie to defende the Lawes of our Countrie, as they were willing to maintayne theyrs, there is no tray∣torous tongue of anie subtill slie Papiste, which shall bee a∣ble to disturbe our state, or empayre our quiet gouernment, but that wee shall bee as safe from all theyr conspiracies, as the young Storkes vnder the winges of theyr dammes. And rather than our aduersaries shall hurt vs, if wee liue together in vnitie, and agrée in one heart and minde, fea∣ring GOD, bewayling our sinnes, and amending our wicked liues, wee shall bée more sure and safe than if wee were enclosed about with the strongest bulwarkes, or en∣uironed rounde with inuincible rampiers, nay rather than the subtiltie or spite, fraude or force of our enemies shall wrong vs, our deare redeemer Christe Iesus, who loueth vs as the henne doth her chickens, will saue vs in all ex∣tremities from theyr rage and violence, and if he see our enemies still pursue vs, will doe with vs as the Whale doeth with her young ones, who perceiuing them, fierce∣lie followed, and not by anie meanes to escape, doeth swal∣lowe them vppe into the wide chambers of her spacious bellie, and so will Christe to preuent the tyrannie of our enemies, rather than they shall too farre execute their ma∣licious
purposes on vs, take vs into his owne tuition, and hide vs in his owne bosome, which hee graunt for his name sake, Amen. ❧ TO ALL TRVE ENG∣lish heartes, that loue God, their Queene, and Countrie. I Know you are not ignorant deare Coun∣trymen, of the fable of Icarus, who presu∣ming vpon his waxen wings beyond his reach, had them melted with the Sunne, & so was drowned in the sea. But more presumptuous may I appeare, that with¦out wings, (I meane without know∣ledge) dare flie so farre into your conceites, as that I dare presume vpon your fauors in acceptance of this my rude ex∣hortation to be friendly fauoured, & generally taken in good part: yet relying vpon the goodnesse of your natures I haue pend this Pamphlet (most louing & naturall Countrimen) not with suspition, much lesse knowledge of anie discorde a∣mong you, for with vnspeakable ioy I knowe it, you are fast linked in loue, and tied together with infringeable faithful∣nesse, the cords of which your concord shall be so hard for the enemie to breake, as I hope they shall breake their heartes (before they vnioynt your handes) that woulde goe about to
disturbe your peace: but for because I sée, and you all do ge∣nerally heare, what seedes of sedition are heere daily sowen amongst vs, and to be more and more dayly expected, as sent ouer by pelting Priests from that pedler ye Pope, that con∣tinually vnleadeth his pack to make some sale with vs of his Popish trash, whereby to increase his mart, as he hath late∣ly done with his Bulles, brought hether by some of Balaams calues, with other Libels most slaunderous to our state, dan∣gerous to our peace, and infamous for their vntruth: I haue therefore (most kinde Countrimen) as it were by the waie put in a caueat by this my Exhortation, to warne you to be circumspect hereafter, as you haue ben warie before, that no subtiltie of the enimie shake your amity, nor secret new per∣swasion, alter you ancient loue and sincere religion, but that as you haue bene in time past, stable in religion, and stedfast in loue, whereby your foes haue beene afraide, so your conti∣nual vnitie may daunt the enimy, and be your strongest bul∣warke of defence, agaynst both their secrete pollicies and o∣pen violence. The things that I would perswade you to (louing Coun∣trie men) are, constancie in your vnitie, and courage agaynst your enemie, fewe thinges in number, but greate in nature, small in sight, but of much force in effect. For as touching concord, it is a certaine infringeable band and fast tying to∣gether of mens mindes in agreement of truth, the cause of which is that diuine loue, being a fire to burne vp the stub∣ble of dissention, a light to illuminate the mind with peace, the honie and swéetnesse of mans life, a comfortable wine to cherish the heart, and the chéerefull Sunne, that not onelie gladdeth euery eie to behold it, but that norisheth euerie one yt retaynes it. From this as from a fountaine of happinesse flowe infinite benefites to mans life, for hereby are king∣domes maintayned, common weales gouerned, houses and priuate families well ordered, riches and treasures increa∣sed, health and long life prolonged, and both the the foraine and domesticall enemie grieued. If I had as much arte
as Zeuxes in paniting Penaelope, Tymantes in coulouring I∣phigenia, Appelles in drawing Venus, or Amulius in coun∣terfaiting Minerua, I could then portray forth to your sight the amiable face, & passing excellencie of concord, the swéete∣nesse of whose countenance, though she were naked without ornaments, were able to allure you to persist in encrease of your friendly loue, and the maiestie of her vertuous lookes enough to moue you to inward hatred against al dissentious enemies. But what should I neede so to doe, for the present happinesse you doe now and haue long felte, vnder the most vertuous Ladie of concord and conseruer of peace, your gra∣cious Quéene, hath for these thirtie yeeres made you famous for your gouernment, happie for your peace, a wonder to the world, and gauled your enemies with enuie at your state, in which so long as you continue, it shall bée a brasen wal to de∣fend you, and a strong fortresse to shroude you from all their Popish rage and tyrannie. Agesilaus king of the Lacedemo∣nians, being demanded why the Citie Sparta wher he was resident, was not enclosed with walles, shewed his Citizens Armatos and Vnanimes ready armed to fight, and all of one heart and minde, these (sayth he) are the walles of Sparta▪ meaning that a Country or common wealth cannot haue a∣nie surer defence than the courage and concorde of the Citi∣zens. Lycurgus thus answered his Citizens that sent to know how they might repel the force of their enemies, if (saith he) you shall couer your riches by faining pouertie, and lay aside contentions, entertaining concorde. Knitting vp in a worde that greate riches, and especially discorde, are meanes to worke the ruine and ouerthrowe of Countries. But what should I multiplie examples, the experience of the contrarie in other Countries, is yet manifest vnto your eyes. What miserie hath discord & dissention brought the flou∣rishing Countries of France & Flanders vnto? It is a com∣mon saying, Happie are they whom other mens harmes can
make to beware. But from what root hath growen the fruit of their mishap? Hath it not sprong from the same pestilent root (the Pope) that would faine plant it selfe euen amongst vs? O deare Countriemen, beware of Papistes, hate their conspiracies, auoide their counselles, they will make you be∣léeue they are friendes, but they are deadly enemies, Non possunt esse veri amici qui religione dissentiunt. They cannot bée true friendes that doe differ in religion: there is no beast more like a Mule than an Asse, nor none more like a friend than a Papist, but Nunquam te fallunt agni sed vulpe Litentes, Dulci sub melle, saepe Ʋenena latent. Beware the Foxe that shape of lambe retaines, In honie sweete there poison oft remaines. They would be shéepe, but they are wolues couered in shéepes skinnes, who although they same simplicity, like the shéep, yet are they knowen first by their voice, for they houle and rore against the heauens, in seeking to destroy ye Saints of God, when the shéepe bleateth downe to the ground: next they delight themselues in bloud, wherewith they loue to be∣smeare their téeth, the shéepe reioyceth in no such food, but is content to féede vpon the gréene grasse. These counterfaite shéepe, these papisticall Iesuites, or rather apisticall Iebu∣sites, are dispenst with by ye Pope to weare sundrie habites, you cannot knowe them by their Priestly garmentes, for sometimes they iet in Lions skins, but you may discry them by their asses eares, péeping out from vnder their hoodes. They will faine vnto you outward holinesse, when inward∣ly they are verie hypocrites, they will perswade you they séeke the saluation of your soules, when they meane to be∣witch you with that inchantment, that hath alredy wrought the destruction of their owne. They will giue you Popishe bookes, and poisoned Pamplets, but at first make squeamish and daintie to lend them, praising them for their goodnesse, godlynes, and learning, when within them there is nothing but mischiefe, poperie, and errour, they will incense you that
you haue no Quéene, no common wealth, no Church, no go∣uernment, but (deare friends) beléeue not their perswasions. You are all knit together in one common wealth, as it were members in a naturall bodie, beware therefore of the enui∣ous tongue that laboureth still to confounde your peace, and learne to knowe these subtill Seminaries and priuie Pa∣pists, and knowing them lay hands vpon them, let them bée discouered, examined, imprisoned, and if they bee obstinate, presently dispatched, so shall you haue no vipers to gnawe your sides, nor no gréedy wolues to lap your bloud, whom as your Countrie by nature will not bréede, nor féede, so doe not contrarie to nature nourish anie of a forraine broode, especi∣ally Romish, for they are in nature most rauenous. Then deare Countrimen, being thus minded, friendly and brotherly to ioyne together in concord and vnity one with an other, that your enemies may haue no gap wherby to enter, adde to you concord, courage, & fortitude to your friendship. Consider the auncient fame you haue often won in the field, when your Kings haue bene crowned in foraine lands, and you renowmed for your martiall prowesse, where are nowe the noble heartes that haue so much honoured your English land? Shall the enemie thinke they are gone, and chaunged from their wonted nature? No, no, they shall I hope finde them redoubled in increase of their former déeds, to their ig∣nomie, and your continuall glory. You are called Angli quasi Angeli,Psal 7. 8 and in déede you are as it were Angels,Iohn. 6. for the Lord hath fed you with Angels food, he hath giuen you Christ & the pure knowledge of his word,1. Cor. 10. euen the true bread that came downe from heauen, long haue you had it and inioyed it among you, which is a singu∣lar token of Gods mercie, wherefore take vnto you the faith of Angels, as you retayne the hearts of men, stedfastly trust in the Lord, and stoutly fight for the defence of his worde. The Almond trée the older it is, the more fruitfull, so the longer you haue had the word, bee you the more faithfull. If you die in the defence of this, you shall liue for euer, if you
liue without this, you die euer. Strangers haue written in the description of your coun∣trie, that you are in bello intrepidi, vnfearefull in warre, that you will dimicare ad internitionem alterius partis, fight it out to the last man, and that you only séeke after victorie, then adde your valour to their censure, and let your courage shew your Countrie. Plinius writeth, that the noblenesse of the Lion is best séene in daungers, for being persued of the hunters, and hard folowed by the hounds, he hides not his head in holes, nor shroudes himselfe among bushes, but gets him into the open fields, & there most noblie expecteth his enemies. Lo∣uing Countrimen, you know the princely lion, is the armes of your famous Countrie, retaine then his nature, and kéepe his courage, faint not nor flie from your enemies, but most valiantly beard them to their faces, that they may knowe the Lion will not shrinke in daungers, nor English hartes faint in troubles. Againe, there is this Antipathia, betwéene the Lion and the Wolfe, that the Lion is an enemie vnto him by nature, & will soonest of al others teare him in péeces, according to ye verse, Torua leaena lupum sequitur, &c. You haue now rightly to deale with wolues couered humana specie, they seeke your bloud, and not yours alone, but of your wiues and children, wherefore like Lions encounter them, and as like wolues they thirst for bloud, so let them iustly wallow in their own. Doubt not of victorie, it is Gods quarrell, the Lion of Iuda will be your helper, you shall but holde the weapon, hée will giue the stroke, you shall but giue the onset, he will prosper the end, onely be faithfull and doubt not. You haue had a long peace, God will try you nowe with warre, you haue had much pleasure, he will proue you nowe with paine, you haue had the swéete, now taste some sower, Dulcia non meruit qui non gustauit amara. He not deserues the swéete, that will not taste the sower. The great & long pros∣peritie you haue inioyed, hath ben vnworthily bestowed vp∣pon you, if now you cannot be content with a little aduersi∣tie.
The Eagle tryeth her birdes by opposing them agaynst the Sunne open eyed, so God trieth his children by the eyes of their faith firmely set vppon Christ, wherefore like noble Eagles, fasten the eyes of your soule vpon this true Sonne of righteousnesse, and first with repentant heartes for your sinnes, and then with assured hope of the promises of God in Christ, perswade your selues of most happie victory. Defend your most gracious and soueraigne Quéene, by whose meanes you haue happily inioyed a long and flourish∣ing peace, vnto whome in respect of naturall clemencie, and passing motherly loue, you owe your selues, your liues, and all you haue: Let no traitour nor enemie, either forraine or domesticall doe her wrong, or but goe about to thinke her il, whose bloud you would not be willing to shed, though with losse of your own liues: she is your most lawfull Quéene, and therefore lawfully to be defēded, not vnlawfully to be wron∣ged by anie traitors, or their complices whether forraine or domesticall. She is your true and naturall Quéene, bred, borne and brought vp amongst you, and as shee hath naturally loued you euen from the beginning of her raigne, so doe you most naturally like English men, lyke true harted English men, like couragious English men, defende her, fight for her, and not onely gard her with daunger of your liues, but also aide her with your landes and liuinges, and as God hath blessed you by her meanes with gold and siluer, which are but a red and white earth, and nothing in comparison of a gracious & vertuous Quéene, so willingly, not constraynedly, fréely, not whiningly, liberally, not niggardly, open your purses and bestowe largely vpon her nowe in time of warre, by whome you haue filled your cofers richly in time of peace. Consider to what end God hath inriched you, and wherefore you haue more lent you than other mē. If you hoord it vp now in time néede, you shal haue not onely your consciences to accuse you of vnthankfulnesse, and vnworthinesse of so good a Quéene, but Gods iudgements one day to light vpon your selues and
your riches, so that it shall not foyson with your heires, that was so vniustly detayned from your natural and most louing Soueraigne, through whom you haue receiued so many and infinite benefites. Remember howe many daungers her sacred person hath sustayned and often endured, for defending both you & yours from Popery, and kéeping you stil in peace and tranquilitie. What forcible inuasions haue bene proued? What secrete treasons attempted, not onely to diuest her Maiestie from crowne & dignitie, but to bereaue her Highnesse also of life: wherefore as she hath ventured her life, crowne, and honor in defence of you and that you haue, so bountifully, kindly, and thankfully, doe you agayne naturally requite her, and manfully defend her, with liues, landes, and goods, that shee may thinke her selfe happie of so good subiectes, and you not vnworthie of so gracious a Quéene, that hath béene a louing mother vnto you in her carefulnesse, and a diligent nurse in continuall painfulnesse. You are not ignorant, Neruos et robur belli omnes pecu esse. That money is the sinowes and strength of warre, and as Demosthenes that famous Oratour and wise Captaine sayd to the Athenians, Pecunia certe opus est, nec quicquam sie ea in bello perfici potest, Certainly money is néedfull, neyther may anie thing be done in warre without it. Wherefore as you sée the necessitie thereof in this action, and the opportu∣nitie of the time, so be not slacke to bestow that, which may be not alone the defence of her roiall person, but the ordina∣rie meane also for safegard of your owne liues. Pugnate pro patria, fight for your country, your dearest coun∣trie, wherein you haue ben bred, borne, nourished, & brought vp, toward which you ought to bee as inwardly affected, as you are naturally moued to your mothers. It is your natiue soile, and therefore most swéete, for what may bee dearer or swéeter than your Countrie? No gold nor siluer comparable to your Countrie, no pleasures nor delightes like to your Country, for what so is néerest to nature, that thing is swée∣test
to life, and as Plato sayth in Critone, Et patri et matri et progenito bus omnibus patriam esse anteponendum, Our Coun∣trie ought to be preferred before Father, Mother, or els our auncestours: for though our fathers, mothers, and kindred die, yet our Countrie doeth nourish vs, cherish and preserue vs. When the people of Tegea in Arcadia made warre with them of Pheneum, the battaile being set and ordered on each side redie to ioyne together, they tooke counsaile each to send thrée brethren valiant and stout men, who shoulde contend for the victory They of Tegea sent the sonnes of Rhexima∣chus, they of Pheneum of Demonstratus, these sixe met, and in fight two of Rheximachus sonnes were slaine, & the third named Critolaus ouercame his enemies with this strata∣gem, he fained to flie, and as each of the other pursued him, he seuerally slew them all, and returning with victorie was ioyfully receiued of all saue of his sister Demodice, & though he had saued the Citie by his valour, yet because hee had by chance slaine her louer, shee enuied at his victorie, and reioy∣ced not at his triumph, which the young man disdayning, as an enimie of her Countrie, he slew her, and beeing after ac∣cused of his mother, was notwithstanding by the Citizens fréed. If there be anie among vs that be such enuious traitors, that regard rather theyr owne pleasures or commodities, more than the safegard of their country, be they fathers, mo∣thers, sisters, or brothers, I would they had the rewarde of Demodice: and famous haddest thou bene Critolaus, in the memorie of all ages, that preferredst thy Countrie before thy kinne, and the honor thereof before thine owne life, had∣dest thou not filed thy hands in womanish bloud. Into this your Countrie your enemies boast to set foot, they count vpō your riches and treasures, your landes and possessions, your wiues and fayrest daughters, and to dispossesse you not one∣ly of your pleasures, but of your dearest liues, but I remem∣ber the fable of Hermogenes, that the Apes séeing the com∣modities
that men had by Cities, how the couerings of their houses and penteises kept out the raine and winde in Win∣ter, and shut out the hot Sunne in Summer, their walles and doores shut out théeues, and their defenced townes and great gates defended them from wilde beasts and enemies: certaine of them (especially those that liked this ciuill life,) concluded to call a counsell, and in open assemblie (as the na∣ture of Apes is apt to imitate euery action) they perswade to take from men a péece of ground, whereon they would build Cities as men doe, they reckon vp the commodities, that the walled townes would kéepe out wolues, & their houses wind and wether, but they adde this, that they would build theirs more commodiously, for they would haue their orchards and gardens all within their Cities, the fruites whereof should maintain them: Also they would haue their Theaters and playes for pleasure, but they should be al within their wals, this they perswaded, the counsel was liked, and with the re∣membrance hereof they were delighted, it was soone contri∣ued in thought and easie to be spoken, but not so soone done, for when the wood was to bée hewed, the stones to bee squa∣red, the boords to be sawed, and euerie other thing to be pre∣pared, they sawe then their Apish counsel was frustrate and too hard for them to accomplish: euen so the proude Spani∣ards like Hermogenes Apes haue consulted, and determined to enter your Iland, and therein to inioy both their pleasure and commoditie, but I doubt not (deare Countrimen) when it shal come to the push of the pike and dint of the sword, but that our God wil so frustrate their purpose, as through your valiant mindes and hardie déedes, they shal finde their coun∣sell but vaine, and returne home again like Apes without tailes. They play with vs as Iulianus the Apostate did with the Christians in his time, who (as Theodoritus in his 6. booke and 44. Chapter telleth) after the Parthian warres, made great preparation against the Christians, whō he scornfully tearmed Galilaeans, threatning he would race them out, and
set vp deuillish images in their Churches. At that time Li∣banius a singular Sophist, but an enemie to the truth, and a follower of Iulian, looking and longing after his maisters vi∣ctory in regard of his threates, came to a godly Schoolemai∣ster and teacher of youth in Antiochia, & scoffing at his reli∣gion, scornfully asked him, Fabri filius quid nunc putas agit? What thinkest thou nowe doeth the Carpenters sonne? But hee inspired with the spirite of GOD, foretolde that which presently followed, saying, O thou Sophist, the crea∣creator of all things, whom thou callest the carpenters son, Loculum Juli o concinnat, is making a coffin for Iulian, and in deede (according to his prophesie) within few dayes after, this Apostate died, was put in a coffin, and being laide in the graue, for all his swelling pride, came short of that which he proudly threatned. I might tell of Sancherib, of the Philistines against Saul, and diuerse others that haue threatned the Saints of God,2 Chr. 32. which because they boasted agaynst the Lorde,1. Sam. 17. were ouer∣throwen. But because I haue fallen in hand with Iulian, I will not let passe the apt Antithesis, that is betwéene the Spaniards and Iulian with his followers. They bragged to ouerthrowe the Galilaeans (as they tearmed them) so doe the Spaniards the Protestants, or the Lutherans as they name them, they threatned to set vp Idols, so doe the Spaniardes images, they protested to root & race out Christians, so do the Spaniards the true professors, they threatned to shed their bloud most spitefully, so do the Spaniards beast to spil ours most cruelly, but doubt not louing Countriemen, but that Christ Iesus whom you serue, is making their coffins, and that eyther the sea or a straunge lande shal be their graues, that cannot be contented with their owne, but proudly séeke to oppresse the Saints of God. Therefore I exhort you, as Hezechia did those of Iuda, Be strong and couragious: feare not, neither bee afraide for the force of Spaniards, nor for al the multitude that is with them, for there be more with vs than with them, with them
is an arme of flesh, but with vs is the Lord our God to helpe vs, and to fight our battailes. They doe , fight agaynst God, wee do fight in defence of his word, they seek after spoyle, we after the buil∣ding of Gods Church, they séeke wretchedly to rent from vs that is not their owne, wee seeke valiantly to defende our owne. Thinke therefore (swéete Countrimen) vpon true re∣ligion, your Countrie, your wiues and children, your landes and riches, your friends and kinsfolkes, and vpon your owne liues, let the cowards buy it dearely, and with price of theyr bloud that they get. Fall downe vpon your knees before the Lord, humble your hearts in his sight, come vnto him with fasting and prayer, in sackcloth & ashes, let euerie one turne from his wicked wayes. Let our Priests leaue pride, coue∣tousnesse, and snie: let Lordes and Magistrates rule by iustice, not vsurpe authoritie: let stinking pride cease to bee called pretinesse, and whoorish lust forsake the name of lo∣uingnesse: let gréedie auarice be no more tearmed warines, let the gluttonous bellie eate but that which sufficeth, the dronken throte deuour no more than néedeth, pluck from the backe to cloath the naked, & from the belly to féede the hun∣gry, weepe for your sinnes, and lament for your misdéedes, amend your liues and doe no more amisse, flie vnto God in Christ Iesus, and stedfastly comfort your selues in his mer∣cie, then rise with boldnesse, méete your enemies with cou∣rage, let there come thousands and ten thousands, they shall fal vpon your right hand and vpon your left, and neuer be a∣ble to doe you harme: and that this may so come to passe, let vs all begge it at the hands of God for Christs sake, that hée will forgiue vs our sinnes, and giue vs grace to amende our liues: that he will defend his little flocke, that he will fight our battayles both by sea and lande: that neither the fraude nor force of our enemies hurt vs: that he will aduaunce his Gospel and giue it the vpper hand, that the wild Bore wast not his vineyard, nor the bloudie wolfe deuour his flock, but that we may stil heare the Trumpet sound in Sion, and the
goldē bels ring in his Sanctuarie, that our gracious Quéene may long liue among vs, perfectly to restaure his decayed Temple, that her aged counsaylours may counsayle wisely, to the glorie of God and benefite of our Countrie, that the Ministers and Preachers may vtter the worde zealously, and performe it in their liuing also effectually, that our com∣mon people may embrace penitencie, and faithfully liue to Gods glorie, so that wee may praise him for euer in his congregation, to the propagation of his truth, and confusion of Antechrist, A∣men.
❧ A MOST NEEDFVLL Praier for this trouble∣some time. HOW are wee able (most deare Father) to render due thankes vnto thée for thy won∣derfull blessings bestowed vppon our sinfull land? Our tongues are not able to vtter, nay our harts cannot thinke, the excéeding mer∣cies whiche thou haste from time to time poured out in full measure vpon vs, who by the multitude of our transgressions haue not deserued thy fauor, but iustly merited thy wrath and indignation, to consume vs vtterly from the face of the earth. For albeit in pride we excéede all nations, & in dronken∣nesse, whooredome, and couetousnesse, with other vices, sur∣passe all others in our time, so that our sinnes may be mat∣ched with Sodome and our iniquities with Gomorah,Gen, 19. (for who is it among vs that doth not abuse himselfe in pride & abundance) yet hast thou not as a rigorous iudge executed thy iustice in our condemnation,Esay. 3. but as a mercifull Father spared vs, when we deserued not an easie rod gently to cor∣rect vs, but a smarting whip seuerely to scourge vs, nay, e∣ternal death and hell fire to torment vs, with a most iust de∣priuation of all fatherly benefites: Notwithstanding thou hast hetherto blessed vs with the fruition of thy holy word, sincerely and cléerly sounded forth as from a siluer trumpet, thou hast purged our stinking channels of Popery, thou hast taken awaie our stinking waters of Nilus,Iere, 1. and giuen vs the
christal stremes of the cleane water of life:Iohn. 7 The golden bels of thy Gospell ring euerie day in our eares:Apo. 21. superstition & errour are bannished our Churches,Exod. 28. so that wee may all serue thée in puritie of spirit. Thou hast giuen vs a most re∣ligious, vertuous, and gracious Quéene, who as she hath till this time bene a mother in England, and like a Deborah in Israel,Iudg 4. so we beséech thée make her a Iael to foyle Sisera, a Iu∣dith to vanquish Holophernes,Iudg. 5 and an happie Ester, to con∣found proud traitorous Haman with his posteritie.Iudith 13. Thou hast bestowed on vs a godly,t. 7. graue, wise, & prudent counsel, whō we humbly intreate thee to make to her Maie∣stie,2 Sam 7. as Nathan to Dauid in counsell,1. Sam. 18. or Ionathas in comfort and loue.1. Sam. 20. Thou hast endued vs with faithfull & zealous Ministers,2. Tim. 2 that rightly diuide vnto vs the worde of truth, who as they are to vs the messēgers of light,Mat. 5 so we beseech thée their light of good life may shine in such sorte vnto others, that they sée∣ing their good workes may glorifie thée our Father which art in heauen. We haue had a long and prosperous peace, wherein euerie man hath eaten of his owne vine, & drunke the water of his owne well,Esay. 36. wee haue had no warre in our gates, nor danger in our houses, but that we might each man sit vnder his vine and vnder his figge tree, and eate the labours of his hands in peace.Mich. 4. And when thou scourgedst other nations about vs, thou fatherly sparedst,Psal. 128. and mercifullie with-heldest from vs thy rod. These thy blessings (deare Father) we haue not re∣garded, nor thought vpon the afflictions of our brethen: and now for our vnthankfulnesse thou shakest thy rodde against vs, and shewest vs the signes of thy displeasure, thou hast brought against vs the Moabites, Ammorites, & Agarims, they haue consulted together and made a league against thée and vs,2 Chr 20. they haue gaped on vs with theyr mouthes,Psal. 83 they haue sharpned their tongues like a serpent, they haue lai∣ed a snare for vs,Psal. 140. and spread a net with cordes in our waie, they haue bent their bowes, whet their swords, and go bar∣king
at vs like dogges,Psal. 59 they haue laide waite euen for our soules,Psal. 79. but Lord how long wilt thou be angrie, O let not thy iealousie burne like fire, let our sighings come before thee, and according to thy mercy and mightie power, preserue vs that are but children of death.Psal. 108 O giue vs helpe in these our troubles, for vaine is the helpe of man, remember not our sinnes and our iniquities,Psal. 79. but let thy mercie preuent vs: O let not our enemies saie where is their God: saue vs from the hands of bloudie Papists, and from Spanish enemies that rise vp against vs, for we put not our trust in the bow, neither can our swordes saue vs,Psal. 44. but saue thou vs from our aduersaries, and put them to confusion that hate vs: suffer not the wicked to haue their desire, but keepe vs from theyr snares, and from the grinnes of these workers of iniquitie, make them to fall into their owne nettes,Psal. 141. while wee escape their bloudie deceits, so will wee praise thy name for euer, and laude thy mercies in thy congregations, so shall they see it and be ashamed that go about to ouerthrow thy truth, so shall they confesse thy power, and stand in feare to rise a∣gainst vs, & we thy seruants will neuer forget thy mercies, but sound forth dayly new songs of thanksgiuing: graunt O deare Father, these our petitions, not for our merits, but for thy mercies in Christ Iesus. To whome with thee and the holie Ghost, be al honor & glory, world with∣out ende, A∣men. FINIS.
