A262 99826499 30902
AN ACCOUNT OF THE CEREMONY OF INVESTING His ELECTORAL HIGHNESS OF BRANDENBƲRGH; WITH THE Order of the Garter. PERFORM'D At Berlin on the 6th of June, 1690. By James Johnston Esq His Majesties Envoy extraordinary to His Ele∣ctoral Highness, and Principal Commissioner. And Gregory King Esq the other Commissioner for this Investiture. With the Speeches made at this Solemnity by the said Mr. Johnston, and Monsieur Fulks, Minister of State to his Electoral Highness. WE arrived here on Tuesday the 27th of May, Old stile, with Mr. Johnston, His Majesties Envoy extraordinary; and Mr. King, Commissioner for the Investiture. The The Elector came hither Post on the Saturday there∣after, from Coningsberg. On Monday following, being the second of June, the Commissioners had a privat Audience; at which they delivered the Credential Letters and Book of Statutes; after which they put on the Elector the Ribbon-Garter and George. —They had likewise a privat Audience
of Her Electoral Highness, of the Princess Electress, and of the Mar∣graff, and two other Princes, the Elector's Brothers. This they did for the dispatch, and that they might have the freedom of going to Court, and seing the adjusting of the States, and the putting of all other things in Order, against the time of the Solemn Investiture. But they could not have a publick Audience, nor could the Ceremony of Investiture be performed, till the Elector's Court, and his Coaches and Horses should arrive; which hapned on Thursday night. In the mean time all other things were made ready, and the next day, being Friday the 6th of June, was appointed both for the publick Audience, and the Cere∣mony of Investiture. The Commissioners were willing that these two should be joined together, that no time might be lost, nor the Elector's Journey to the Rhine stopt so much as one moment, upon the account of the Solemnity. On Friday morning the Baron of Shiarm, the eldest Privy Counsel∣lor, or Minister of State (as they speak here) came from Court, ac∣companied with a great many other Gentlemen, and particularly with Monsieur Bescat, (whose Office it was to regulat the Ceremony) all in Rich Cloaths, with six of the Elector's Coaches, and six Horses in each of them, and carried the Commissioners and their Retinue to Court; twenty four Trabants, or Horse-Guards, walking along all the way on both sides of the Coaches: Not to mention a great many of the Elector's Servants that did also attend them. At Court they were re∣ceived with Double Guards, and Colours Displayed, Twenty four Trumpets, and two pair of Kettle-Drums sounding all the while. The Commissioners Coach passed through the Inner-Court of the Castle; at the foot of the Stairs the Commissioners were received by the Grand Marshal, with his Silver Staff of Office: At the head of the Stairs they were met by the Elector's Great Chamberlain, the Count of Denherff, and so were conducted to the Elector's Chamber; all the Rooms, as they pass along, being full of the Nobility and Gentry of the Court, and the Trebants making the Guard up the Stairs, and along the two first Rooms. From the Elector's Apartment, they went to an Audience of the Electrice, where were all the Princes and Princesses of the Family, and the Ladies of the Court, richly dressed: Then they were conducted to the Rooms where the Robes of Order were before placed, where all
things being in readiness, they went to another Room near adjoining, in which his Electoral Highness was, and thence began the Procession to the Great Hall, which is one of the noblest Rooms that is to be seen any where, being above 100 foot long, and above 50 foot broad, adorn'd all about with the Marble Statues of the Electors of the Fa∣mily, and the Roof richly painted. They went in this Order: First, The Nobility and Officers of the Court in great number; The Grand Marshal and Marshal with their Silver Staves of Office, being the last of them. Next came two belonging to the Commissioners, one of them carrying the King's Commission, and the other the Cap and Feather; then followed Mr. Gregory King in the Mantle of the Kings at Arms, bearing the Habit and Ensigns of the Order on a Velvet Cushion. Next came Mr. Johnston alone; and in the last place his Electoral Highness, attended by the Prince of Anhalt, and the Grand Chamberlain. Thus they went through a long Gallery (having the Trabants on each side) into the Hall, and so into the Rails which divided the up∣per end of the Hall, that was raised four Steps, making the due Re∣verences to the Soveraign's State; the Electrice, with the Princesses and Princes Ladies, and publick Ministers, having before taken their places within the Rails. The Elector being placed under his State, and the Robes being laid on a Table near his Highness, the two Commissioners seated themselves in two armed Chairs, and the Trumpets and Musick ceasing, Mr. Johnston made a Discourse in English. But not to oblige the Elector to stand, because of an hurt in his Leg, the Expedient fallen upon was this; That in stead of four Discourses (as the Custom is) two by one of the Commissioners, and two by one belonging to the Elector; that one only should be made by Mr. Johnston in the beginning, and ano∣ther at the end of the Ceremony by Monsieur Fulks, one of the Elector's Ministers of State. And therefore Mr. Johnston having put his two Discourses into one, and having only told the substance of them in En∣glish, he presented a Translation in High Dutch to the Elector, which he ordered his Chief Secretary to read; the Elector and the Commissi∣oners having stood during the pronouncing of the English, but sitting when the Dutch Copy was read. Then they presented the King's Com∣mission to the Elector, which he gave to a Minister of state, who  it to the Secretary to be read, the Elector and all others stand∣ing
up; which being again delivered to the Elector, his Highness gave it to Mr. King; After which, the Commissioners having taken off his Highness'▪ Coat, Sword, Belt, Ribbon George and Garter, Mr. John∣ston invested the Elector with the Diamond Garter, the Surcoat, the Sword and Belt, the great Mantle, the Hood, and at last the great Collar and George, in the order as they were delivered to him by Mr. King; who pronounced in Latin the usual Forms of Admonitions u∣pon Mr. Johnston's putting on the Elector each Ensign. Then they presented to his Electoral Highness the Book of Statutes under the great Seal of the Order, and he delivered them Letters certifying his recep∣tion of the Order, and containing an Engagement to observe the Statutes with the usual Exceptions. These Letters had already his Sign, and Seal at them, yet his Electoral Highness had a Pen given him, and he made a shew of writing his Name. Next they presented him with the Cap and Feather, which his E∣lectoral Highness had enriched with Diamonds to the value of above 50000 l. one of the stones cost above 10000 l. Then Mr. King did congratulate his Electoral Highness, and proclai∣med the Soveraigns and New-Knights Titles, upon which the Trumpets sounded, and the Drums beat, and Musick play'd. This being over, Mr. Johnston did also congratulate his Highness in in a short Complement, and then Monsieur Fulks made an handsome Speech to the praise of the Soveraign and the Order. This Speech was in High-Dutch, that it might be understood by the whole Assembly; and a Copy of it being given to Mr. Stepney, Mr. Johnston's Secretary, he read it publickly, the Elector and Commissioners sitting all the while that Monsieur Fulks spoke, and that the Copy was read. Then they presented the Stars or Glories, and the Riboon of the Order; and returning to their Chairs, the Drums beat, the Trumpets sounded, and the Cannon round the Town was thrice discharged. Then the Elect∣or and Commissioners returned in procession as they came, and Mr. Norton, Collonel Norton's Grandson, he had the honour to carry the E∣lector's Train. A little after this, they came back to the Hall again to Dinner, where his Electoral Highness and the two Commissioners only did sit at the Table, his Highness being in the Robes, and the Court attending: The Elector began first the King's Health; 2dly, the Queen's; 3dly
Knights of the Order; 4thly, Prosperity to the English Nation; 5thly, Success to the Campaign. Mr. Johnston began first the Elector's Health; 2dly, the Electorices; 3dly, the Electoral Families; the Elector and Com∣missioners stood up, and the Guns were discharged at every Glass. After Dinner the Commissioners were carried home in the same manner as they were brought in the morning; at night they returned to Court in two Coaches with six Horses, and supp'd with the Elector, the Electrice, and the Princess, where many of the same Healths were drunk again with the same Ceremony of firing, and standing up. After supper the Fire-works began, and were much admired by eve∣ry one, considering they had only three days to prepare them: There were many Rockets of all sorts, and four great Fire-works of 40 or 50 foot high, the chief burnt blew, and was composed of the representati∣on of a Garter, having within it these four Letters, V. W. M. R. sig∣nifying Vivant Willielmus Maria Reges; and without the Garter were the supporting Crown and Crest of England. The other three were Pyramids burning in bright white fire, with Crowns on the tops of them; the middlemost having the Letter B. and the other two, F. and H. sig∣nifying Britannia, Francia, Hibernia. The Elector hath ordered the Garter to be put on the Plate. Ever since the publick Audience, we have been entertained at our Lodgings at the Elector's charge, and at∣tended by his Officers. Both the Commissioners have received Rich Presents, the principal Commissioners being double the value of what was given to the other. The Servants of the first, to the number of 16, and those of the other Commissioner, 3, had all considerable Presents according to their several Offices. In a word, every thing was done for the honour of the Soveraign of it, and of the new Knight; and in a manner more noble than it could have been expected the shortness of time would have allow'd. Mr. Johnston's Speech to his Electoral Highness. May it please Your Electoral Highness, NOthing excites in men the desire of Glory so much as signal and lasting marks of Honour. For to Noble and Generous Minds, Honour is certainly the greatest Reward, and such marks are the most acceptable  of it to wit, a publick acknowledgment that men .
Of these marks, the most eminent have been appropriated to Chevalry. Religion hath its Treasury above. Justice, and the other peaceable Vir∣tues without Arms, would be of little or no use. Therefore Military Glory, as most necessary, hath been preferr'd to all others; besides, it is acquired with greater danger, and is founded on nobler Passions. Amongst all incitements to it, nothing hath proved so effectual as the Institution of the Orders of Knights, Companions and Brethren. Such Orders do engage Princes by the strictest Ties of Honour, to give in their own Persons an example of Military Virtue, as also the highest Incouragement imaginable to follow it: For by these Fraterni∣ties they descend from their Greatness, and consent, that brave and gallant Men should be brought into a sort of Equality with themselves. Amongst Military Orders, there are none that can dispute either An∣tiquity or Dignity with that of the Garter; which may indeed be cal∣led the Mother Order, For the other great Orders have sprung out of this Root, being formed upon the Model of it. Such Institutions, like other things of the same nature, in their first conceptions use to be imperfect, and calculated for receiving the Refor∣mations that time only brings: But the Rules of this Order were from the beginning so well digested, that they have admitted of few or no material Changes. To the Antiquity and Wisdom of the Institution, I may add the Chastity of the Order: The Knights have at no time exceeded the first foundation of Twenty six, contrary to the fate of other Orders, of which none have supported their Dignity as this hath done, considering joint∣ly the smal number, and singular eminency of those that have been of it, viz. Four hundred ninty seven only. And yet amongst these, there have been eight Emperors (of whom two, Sigismond, and Charles the Vth went to England and received it there, so much did they value the Honour of being of it;) Forty five Kings, including those of England; and above sixty Princes, for the most part Soveraigns; Not to mention that the others generally deserving to be Princes, were therefore by the Order in a manner made such. The Qualities of Edward III. who founded this Order, gave a pecu∣liar Lustre to it; He was the Greatest and Bravest Prince of his Time, in the opinion of all others, as well as of the Germans, who first made Him Vicar-General of the Empire, and afterwards offered  perial Diadem.
He claimed the Crown of France as his Just and Lawful Inheritance, and studied by the Institution of this Order, to engage the most mar∣tial Spirits of the Age, in his Quarrel. It was with his Garter that he gave the Signal at the Battel of Cressey; remembering, it seems, that which was reported of one of his Predecessors, Richard the 1st, That he had upon a like occasion, with great Success, made use of a Garter. In this Battel the whole Power of France fell before Him; upon which Augury he made the Garter the chief Sign of the Order. Richard the 1st, is also said upon such an account to have had the same design. Be∣sides, a Garter is the Symbol and Badg of Unity, and therefore most proper to signifie these Bonds of Amity and Affection, into which all the Companions were to reckon themselves knit. He delighted much in Devices, and chose for the Device of the Or∣der, these words, Honi soit qui mal y Pense; in English, May he be a∣shamed that thinks ill (or does not approve) of it. That is, either of the Order it self, or of his Title to the Crown of France, which gave occasion to the Institution. He made Blew the chief Colour, that being the Colour of the Field of the Arms of France, which, with the Title he had about that time as∣sumed to himself, his Successors have ever since used: Besides, Blew denotes the Sublime and Celestial Temper of those who were to be of the Order. The Pilgrims that returned from the Holy Land, brought over such an account of St. George (then the Christian Mars) particu∣larly of his Tutelary care of the English in that War, that according to the Persuasions of those Times, he made him the Patron of the Order, as well as of the Nation. He wisely considered that other Sovereign Princes might think it a lessening of them, to come into an Order subject to the Laws and Go∣vernment of England; therefore he intirely separated its Concerns, and made it a distinct Body with Seals and Officers, and Statutes peculiar to it; over which the Seals and Laws of England have no sort of Autho∣rity. This is the Order, Sir, so deservedly famous over all Christendom, these Three hundred and forty Years, of which we have now the Ho∣nor, in the Name of the King our Master, to Present Your Electoral Highness the Ensigns. The same Order which His Highness, Your Il∣lustrious Father, desired so much, and received as a great Honour done
him, and to which he did great Honour: He wore it in a time of Acti∣on, when the Fate not only of the North, but of the whole Empire; nay, I may add, of all Europe, turned according to the Measures that he took, and which is more, turned often with the approbation of all good men. It was thus that he run his Career, which he finished with an happiness that might be called the obtaining of the Prize, if that were to be done here; For he being full of Honour and Years, in Peace and Quiet, Belov'd and Esteem'd by the better part of Mankind, died; leaving behind him the only Two things to be left, a Great and Good Name, and a Glorious Successor. It is also the same Garter, as well as the same Order, with which we are to invest your Highness. This I should call a happy Omen, that the Order is still to receive the same Honour: But your Highness hath not left the World to Divination and Conjecture; you have begun your Regence in a way worthy of the Son of such a Father, and already given Mankind real instances of that which they may expect: And now this day you are to put the Order in possession of the Honour which you have, as it were, advanced to it, and to which the Order hath a Na∣tural Claim, your Highness having acquired the same, as the Founder did his, by defeating the acient Enemies of both Nations. For this Reason, I suppose, the King, my Master, as well as for doing your Highness greater Honour, hath sent you a Sword, amongst the En∣signs of the Order, which hitherto was never done to any other. Sir, Nothing is more evident than that this Society was instituted for carrying on a War with France, in which War, the Emperor, the Princes of Brandenburg, Bavaria, Lorrain, and many others, were en∣gaged by a Confederacy with the Founder of this Order, as your High∣ness, and others, their Successors, are now with the present Soveraign of it. It seems in all Ages it hath been the Wisdom of Great Princes to have no other thing to do with that Crown. Sure that which hath hapned in this Age, doth not alter the Case; nay, the present Con∣federacy is a Demonstration, that it is the Sense of Mankind, that the Publick quiet can be no longer secured by the Faith of Treaties; and therefore, that a firm Peace is only to be obtained by a thorough War: For Men that having enriched themselves by Violence, are fallen in love with it, will love on till they lose by it, then it will be seasonable. To trust to Treaties, the incapacity such Men shall be in to break them, .
Edward the 3d designed a Conquest, and succeeded in it: But there is here place for yet a more Noble Design, that of a Redemption. The Work of an Hero is not to mind his own Business only, much less to do hurt, to plunder the World with Alexander, or ruine his own Countrey with Caesar; but to do good chiefly to others; to chain up the Di∣sturbers of the Publick Peace, to set Bounds to Exorbitant Power, and the Will of Man; and so to deserve the Blessings of those that were ready to perish. All this the King, my Master, hath done, by redeeming his own Countrey from Ruine, and other Countreys from the danger of it, in suffer∣ing them to become his own: Thus endeavouring every where to stem the Inundations of the present Times, as his Ancestors did those of theirs. But to this, not only the Example of the Soveraign invites those of the Order, but the Order it self, in a particular manner, engages them, Pugnare pro jure & tuitione oppressorum & indigentium, To fight for the relief of the poor and the oppressed. This, Reason, Humanity, common Christianity, and Interest too, requires of all Men, much more of Princes, that are to act as Gods Vicegerents, who Glories in nothing oftner than in his firm purposes to avenge and Protect Widows and Orphans, and such others, the Inno∣cent, though Unfortunate part of Mankind, to wit, by commanding all those that have power to do it, to punish their Oppressors. Thus it is here, That a Capacity to do good, not only gives a Title to it, but makes the doing of it a Duty. It is strange, That among Christians in all Times there should have been some who doubted of this, and have had narrower Thoughts of Heroical Enterprizes than either the Jews or Heathens had; nay, of whom some have believ'd all War to be unlawful, since the Design of Christianity was to exalt our Natures to a higher and sublimer pitch of Perfection, and not to stifle and un∣do, with specious pretences, that which is most Commendable in them, the Inclinations and Ties we may have to do one another good. The Jews of old had so Noble an Opinion of such Performances, that they imputed them to Inspiration; they thought, that without extra∣ordinary Assistances, Men had neither Goodness nor Largeness of Soul sufficient for them. It is true, several among them endeavoured thus to defend the Irregu∣larities that sometimes did accompany such Actions, and supposed an express Order from God▪ as necessary to justifie them. Yet Rules and
Laws are means for obtaining the ends which they relate to, and in that relation cannot be too well observed; but they are not the ends them∣selves which must still be pursued, tho in another way, if the ordinary way fails. No doubt the Letter of the Law, that upon great occasions opposes it self to the publick Safety, which is intended by all Laws, must needs be the Letter that kills. This those high Pretenders came at last to understand (and to fight even on their Sabbaths) tho their Laws were given them by God; and that it was their humour to swallow Camels, and strain at Gnats; to let go the Substance for the Law, and perish in defence of the Letter of it. The true standing Character in all Ages and Nations, and ordinarly the Fate too, of Weak, and Warm, and Obsti∣nate (tho often Well meaning) Men. Those Jews are much more in the right, who ascribe great Events more particularly to God, because of that which is singular (as well as of his Concern) in them. Thus they would, no doubt, judge of the late Revolution in Britain, where we have an Illustrious Example of such sorts of Events. In which the concurrence of great Dangers, of an unexpected Opportunity to be delivered from them; of the Capacity and Circumstances of the Deliverer, as if they had been given for this End; of the evident infatuation of those, whose Interest (and in whose Power) it was to have prevented it; of a multitude of meer Accidents previous and absolutly necessary to it, which by Humane Wisdom could neither have been forseen nor procured: In aword, of a Chain and Co∣incidency of various, and often, in appearance Cross Events, yet in effect, so well agreeing with the Methods resolved on, that Divine Goodness and Humane Prudence seem to have had a Correspendence. All this, with the sudden vanishing of Difficulties that had appear'd, in a manner insuperable, and a Success worthy of the Care of Providence (such as History cannot parallel) without Blood, Danger, or Disorder; So  Publick Peace and Quiet seemed rather not interrupted than restored; as if no change had hapned, except in our Hearts and Thoughts. All this I say, does compleat an Event so much above the ordinary course of things, that whoever believes, that God does at all concern himself in Humane Affairs (much more such as believe, that the Hairs of our Heads are numbred), must needs conclude, that this whole business was (to speak so) laid and concerted by him. Sed praestat de Cartha∣gine, ut aiunt, silere quam pauca dicere. And therefore to return to my Subject.
The Heathens went yet further in doing Honour to the Authors of such great Undertakings; They thought they could not do too much to encourage Men to venture upon them: And therefore upon such ac∣counts they Defied their Hero's; Men seemed to them in the perfor∣mance so like their Gods, that they could not abstain from Honouring the Copies with the Names of the Originals. The Heathens consider∣ed the Publick Good that was done; for as their Hero's became their Gods for chastising Oppressors, in their Opinions the Enemies of Man∣kind, so others became their Hero's for destroying Monstrous Beasts of the same Temper, if we may not rather believe, as no doubt we may, that the Poets, the Historians of those Times, meant Men (and to them gave the other borrowed Name, as more proper than their own) whose Souls, by Success in their Passions, were become as Monstrous as they describ'd the Shapes and Voracity of those Beasts to have been. Sir, How great and noble Thoughts would those Jews and Hea∣thens have of the present Undertaking in which the King, my Master, your Electoral Highness, and so many other Princes are engaged? An Undertaking such as Humane Nature requires, where Honour, and Duty, and Interest go hand in hand together: And the most necessa∣ry thing to be done, is the greatest and best thing that can be done. In particular, it is an Undertaking that will transmit your Highness Name glorious to Posterity: for you first gave life and motion to it, by saving the Town of Cullen, and that whole Electorat, by taking Keiserswert, Rhinberg and Bonn; by routing the Forces sent to assist them, and so delivering the Lower Rhine from the Chains that in time must have prov'd those of the Empire. Sir, You have thus out-done the Enemy in Diligence, their most commendable Quality, if it were well imploy'd: You have overcome them, where they themselves, and others too, think them most invin∣cible, behind Walls: You have defeated their Troops, neither by num∣ber nor surprize; Advantages are to be taken; but it is greater not to stand in need of them. Thus your Highness hath begun the War, where it must end with Victory, and taken to your self a share in it suitable to the Dignity of your Family, and the importance of the Conjuncture, which gave your Highness the opportunity to Signalize the beginnings of your Regence by doing the publick such eminent Services; as if Providence, in com∣pliance
with the Integrity of your Intentions, took care, that no sooner you should be in a capacity to do good, but that the Publick should require and receive the benefit of it, to signifie to your Highness, that the good of the Publick ought to be the end of your Greatness, and to others, That it is the end, and will be so. Sir, The great Power that God has put in your Hands, can at no Time be better imployed. Without Controversie, the Peace and Hap∣piness of Europe, during this Age, depends upon the Success of this War. All Laws, Divine and Humane, of Peace and War, the Fences of the publick Sufety are broke thorough; Those eternal Dictates of Reason, the obligations of Honour, Humanity, Oaths, Promises, Religion, as well as the Customs of Nations, which the Necessities of Humane Affairs have rendred inviolable, and without which the great Society of Man∣kind can no more subsist, than privat Societies can without Rules and Laws: All these have been openly and avowedly trampled on. Now if the Ambition, and other Passions of Men that have done such things, have carried them so far, notwithstanding the just apprehensi∣ons which, no doubt, they had of a general resentment; whither will the same passions not carry them, if the present Confederacy should hap∣pen to be frustrated, and there should remain nothing more for them to be afraid of. But better things, no doubt, are reserved for this Age. The Cha∣riot Wheels of those that have asked Brick, and forbid Straw, begin already to move heavily. And provided the easterly Wind continue to blow steady, and neither little privat Interests, (sure little in com∣parison) nor certain points of Honour (only tolerable when Inno∣cent) disorder the present Harmony, the event is infallible. Sir, Nothing can contribute more to this than the happy Union that is between the King my master, and your Electoral Highness, which states His Majesty, and your Highness, in the best Circumstances ima∣ginable for preventing or removing differences. This, among other Reasons, gives ground to hope, that the Confe∣deracy is not to be broke, since the Union I speak of cannot be dissolv∣ed. It is strong, by all that is Sacred amongst men, the Ties of Honour, Religion, Blood, Friendship, Obligations, Engagements, and I may add of the same Interests and Designs, with relation to the Publick.
To so many Ties it may seem there needed no addition of a new one. But His Majesty was resolved not to lose any opportunity of giving publick Instances of the great Affection and esteem that he hath for your Electoral Highness: And the Knights Companions were unanimously of Opinion, That his Majesty could not better dispose of the greatest Ho∣nour that he can give, than by sending it to your Electoral Highness; from whom the Order may expect the greatest return of Honour that it can at present receive. Monsieur FULCKS, Minister of State, His Speech. SIR, HIS most Serence Highness, the Elector of Brandenburg, our Gracious Prince, receives the Honour his Royal Majesty of Great Britain has been pleased to confer on him, in sending him the Badges of the most Noble Order of the Garter, with all due Respect and Esteem. For whether its Antiquity be regarded, it being Three Hun∣dred Thirty Nine Years since its first beginning, or the glorious Founder of it, Edward the Third, together with his Royal Qualities, especially his unheard of Courage, and the Happiness that at∣tended him; or whether the Splendor and Excel∣lency of those that have been honour'd with the most Noble Order be considered; amongst whom are reckon'd several great Monarchs, and what is wonderful, Eight Emperors, Five and Forty Kings, Sixty Electors and Princes, vested with Soveraign Power, besides a great many others Hero's re∣nowned both by their Birth and Actions; or whether the design of the Institution be looked on, which was the defence of Justice, the reliev∣ing the oppressed, and the encouragement of true Vertue, 't will be found, that it gives place to no Order in the World, but on the contrary does far excel them all. The Excellency whereof is visible, by those two things that are absolutely re∣quired in every true Knight, which are, not to have been tainted of any Baseness, or of any Cowardize. But the Dignity of this Order his been so fully shewn by His Majesties Envoy, that 'twold be superfluous to add any thing to what
he has said. Indeed in the ancient Histories of the Greeks and Romans, many Examples may be found, where Kingdoms and Provinces have been given away to others by the Possessors thereof; but Desert and Right were not always the Cause of such Do∣nations. They were oftner made by blind Chance or Favour, or else Reasons of State were the oc∣casions of them. But that Honour which is found∣ded only on Merits, and which proceeds from a true and solid consideration of Worth only, is to be preferred above Scepters and Crowns. And the conferring of this Noble Order must be thus looked upon, since it is done by a King who does nothing but with an exact knowledge and mature deliberation. For altho his Electoral Highness could not but have always thought it an Honour to have been of this Order, yet he looks upon it as greater still in this, That the Dignity is conserred upon him by his present Majesty of Great Britain. The Diamonds and Gold which shine on the Badges thereof, receive yet a greater lustre from so glorious a Hand, which the Divine Providence has made choice of to render this Age famous even for Miracles, to be a terror and chastisment to Tyrants, to deliver the oppressed, raise up those that were fallen, restore those that are driven out, to stablish Tottering Crowns, and which having already freed Two Kingdoms, will in all probabi∣lity gloriously recover a Third in a short time. Things that come from such an august hand can∣not but be of excellent Vertue and Effect. His in∣comparable Valour and Courage, and the blessing of Heaven, have had this great effect, that the most Famous Nations in the World, have put Four Crowns on his Head, and on that of his Royal Con∣sort, adorned likewise with all the same Vertues and Perfections. Which Crowns, in stead of ad∣ding any Ornament to the Persons that are pos∣sessed of them, become more Illustrious from the heads of those that wear them. His Electoral Highness was the first of any Forreign Prince that has received this Noble Token of Favour from His Royal Majesty. From whence his Highness cannot but acknowledge, That tho His Royal Ma∣jesty, and his Electoral Highness, were before nearly Related, His Royal Majesty has thought fit to make still a closer Union, 'Tis not to be question'd but that it proceeds from the Secret Providence of God; That as this Order was instituted by Edward the Third, especially against the French, who then, as at present, began to strive for the Universal Monarchy, so now is conferr'd by Wil∣liam the Third, on Frederwick the Third, at a
time when they Two first of all displayed their Colours for the Freedom of Europe, and with U∣nited Forces, opposed Themselves to that mon∣strous and dreadful Enemy, rendring the Thing more Ominous, by the Badge which this Order∣makes use of, Honi soit qui maly pense. Let him perish shamefully who dares rashly despise this inseparable Alliance. To this without doubt, His Royal Majesty had regard, when He sent the Sword to His Electoral Highness, which otherwise relates not to the Badges of the Order, and was never before conferred on any Knight; and with which he would have him girt with so great Solem∣nity, that he might make use of it in his Wars, for the asserting the Freedom of Europe. His Ele∣ctoral Highness certainly designs to do that which His Majesty intended by conferring this Honour on him, and will always think himself so strictly united to His Majesty, that no Force nor Artifice shall ever be able to break the Union: But he will e∣steem whatever Fortune whether bad or good, that attends his Majesty, to be the same as if it hap∣pen'd to his Highness, making no other difference betwixt his Majesties Concerns and his own, than to give those of his Majesty the first place. More∣over, his Electoral Highness will never render himself unworthy the Honour conferred, or for∣get the Statutes of the Order. And because his Electoral Highness is now become one of the Members of the Order, instituted amongst the English Nation, his Highness will always endea∣vour to promote their Interest and Glory, Lastly, His Highness thanks the Commissioners, in that they have been pleased to undertake the confer∣ring this Noble Present on him, and thanks his Royal Majesty for having chosen them for this Solemnity, to whom his Electoral Highness will on all occasions shew all Favour and Esteem.
SErenissimus Princeps, Elector Brandenburgious, Dominus Noster Clementissinus, debito cum respectu at{que} aestimatione acceptat honorem, quo Re∣gia Majestas Magnae Britanniae condecorare ipp∣sum voluit transmissis insignibus toto Orbe cele∣bratissimi Ordinis Equitum Divi Georgli Anreae Periscetidis. Sive enim respiciamus Antiquita∣tem inclytissimi Ordinis, qui jam trecentos trigin∣ta novem annos à primis suis incunabulis numerat; seu gloriam Fundatoris, Edvardi tertii, cum om∣nibus to fastigio dignis Virtutibus, tùm impri∣mis inusitatâ sortitudine ac selicitate clarissimi Regis; sive Splendorem ac praestantiam corum queis istius Ordinis bonos obtigit, inter quos multi sub∣limes Monarchae, & quod jamjam non sine admira∣tione audivimus, Octo Imperatores Romani, qua∣draginta quin{que} Reges, Sexaginta Electores, & ut plurimùm Supremo Imperio gaudentes Principes, praeter plurimos alios non minus Splendore Nataeli∣um, quàm rerum gestarum gloria celeberrimos He∣roes numerantur; sive etiam scopum instituti qui praecipnè ad desensionem Justitiae, sublevationem oppressorum, & cultum virae at{que} infucatae Vir∣tutis tendit; manifessò deprehendetur, isthune nul∣li alteri ejus generis Ordini toto Orbe concedere, multis autem rebus alios longe antecellere. Cujus praestantiae infallibile documentum perspicitur in duobus palmariis genuini Equitis requisitis, ut quod turpisugâ tergum hosti obverterit, infila∣ti potuerit. Sed quae ad dignitatem kujus Ordi∣nis
spectant, ea jam à Domino Legato itae lucu∣lenter ac solide deducta sunt, ut superfluum sue∣rit eidem aliquid superaddere velle. Equi∣dem in Antiquâ Historia Graecorum com∣primis & Romanorum multa licet videre Exem∣pla. Regnorum ac insignium Provinciarum à Pos∣sessoribus in alios collatorum. Sed tantorum mu∣nerum causa non semper meritum ant jus reperitur: Saepe ista caeca fortuna, aut enormi favori deben∣nur, aut quia Reipublicae rationes ïsta per alios potius possideri suaserunt. Ast qui solo Virtutis merito utitur, & ex verâ solidâque praestantiae aestimatione promanet honos ipsisSceptris Core∣nisque longè praestabilior habendus. Atque eodem modulo quoque collatio inclyti hujus Ordinis mensuranda est, imprimis cum ea proficiscatur à Rege, cui nil nisi praeviâ exacta cognitione & ma∣turo judicio suscipitur. Quanquem enim Sereni∣tas sua Electoralis semper sibi decorum babitura fuerat illustrissime huie Ordini adscrib. Quod tamen id à Regiâ Majestate Magnae Britanniae, quae nunc rerum potitur, fiat, id multis modis gaudium, quo ipsius mens ex tá-perfunditur, adau∣get. Quin ipsi Adamantes & Aurum, qutis in∣signia Ordinis radiant, multò vividiorem Splen∣dorem mutuantur à manu tam gloriosi collatoris, quam Manum Divina Providentia elegit ad Se∣culum hoc Miraculis insigniendum, quae Tyrannis Terrorem incutit, torumque insolentiam castigat & solo affligit, quae Oppressos liberat, & è rui∣nis sublevat, spoliatos estituit, titubantes Core∣nas stabilit, immo quae adhuc calet ab admiran∣da liberatione duorum Regnorum, cui & de ter∣tio propediem trophaeum statuendum Auguramur. Quae à tam Augustâ menu dantu singulari Vir∣tute & effectu vacua esse non possunt velut quae incomparabili suâ fortitudine animique constan∣tiâ, ac coelitùs prosperate successu effecit, ut ce∣leberrima toto orbe Natio quatuor Coronas ipsins & serenissimae Consortis Reginae, omnium Virtu∣tum ac gratiarum Matris, capiti exornando por∣rexerit: Quibus Corenis tamen divinum Lumen quo caput isind circumsunditur, plus splendoris af∣fert quam ab iisdem Accipit. Quo & illud Ac∣cedit, quod serenitas sua Electoralis inter exter∣nos Principes prima fit, quam Regia sua Maje∣stas illustri bocce aestimationis ac benevolentiae sua signo muneravit. Ex quo & eadem agnoscit, quòd licet jam antea Regia sua Majestas & sere∣nitas sua Electoralis sanctissimo sanguinis & pro∣pinquae cognationis vinculo divinitùs sint com∣binaiae, Regiae tamen Majestas isthane necessitu∣dinem isthoc ordinis ligamine arctius adbue ad∣stringere praeclarum duxerit.
Nec dubitare fas est, quin & istud ex occultâ operations Divinae providentiae promanâ it, ut cùm bie Ordo primum ab Edvardo tertio institutus fuerit, & quidem praecipuè contra Gallos, qui jam tum insolentiam & dominands libidinem, quâ nunc totum foè Orbem subversum eunt, parturithant, idim nunc à Guiliclmo tertio in Fridericum tertium confera∣tur, & to quidem tempore, quo bi duo primi signum ad excutiendum, quod Europae cervicibus imminebar, jugum fustulerunt, ac junctis animis viribusque immani ac truculento isti hosti sese ob∣jecerunt, anspicatissimis victoriarum monumentis simboli, quô bic ordo utitur, Omen firmaturi, Hony solt qui mal y pense, dedecore obrutus pereat, qui insolubilem hanc conjunctionem con∣temnere, aut temerare Awus suerit. Quò e∣tiam, sine dubio, prosolitâ sibi Sapientiâ, re∣spexit Regia Sacra Majestas, cùm Serenttati suae Electorali Gladium, qui aliàs cum Ordinis in∣signibus transmitti non solet. Ad insignia Or∣diois haud spectat, & antea nemini Equitum oblatus fuit, Offerri, todem{que} illam in tantâ Solennitate accingi jusserit; ut nimirum eadem in Belli & Periculorum Societate; ad afferen∣dam Europae Libertatem à jugo Gallico utere∣tur. Sanè Serenitas sua Electoralis Regia Suae Majestatis scopum, ad quem delato hocce Ho∣nore collimat, ex asse implebit. Eadem its ar∣ctè Regiae suae Majestati sese obstrictam judica∣bit, ut nulla vis aut fraus ad eam divellen∣dam valitura fit: Quaecun{que} Regiae Sua Ma∣jestati, prospere aut secùs eveneriut, sibi quo∣que accidisse judicabit. Deni{que} Regiaesuae Ma∣jestatis & proprias rationes non alio discri∣mine habebit, quam quod istis exra priorque locus deforendus sit. De caesero, Serenitas sua Electoralis delato bocce. Honore nunquam sese indignum reddet, ac Statuta Ordinis Memori semper mente tenebit. Et quia Serenitas sua Electoralis nunc inter Membra Ordinis recepta est, ab intlytâ Natione Anglicana instituti, bujus Gloria & Emolumentum eidem semper quam maxime cordi trunt: Ad Extremum Serenitas sua Electoralis Dominis Legatis Gratias agit, quod officium tam egregii & acceptissimi Muneris offerendi in se suscipere voluerunt: Eidem gratissimum est à suà Regia Majestatá istos potissimùm huic Functioni obeundae delectos, quos & quâ Aestimatione & Affectu Sua Serenitas Electoralis prosequatur, nulla occasione demonstrare omittet.
LICENS'D G. SARƲM. Chancellor of the Order. July 15. Printed at London, and Re-Printed at Edinburgh, by the Heir of An∣drew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties, 1690.
