A3280 13618221 100805
AN ANSWER IN Just vindication of some religious and worthy Gentlemen of Pembrokeshire. Against a scandalous Pamphlet publish∣ed in print by one Iohn Poyer late Mayor of Pembroke. Set forth by such as have been eye-witnesses of of the affairs of that County, from the beginning of these unnaturall warres, who love Truth and Justice, hate Oppression and Falshood. Auritis denis oculatum testibus unum Cur praefers? audis nam, Poyer, ipse malè. As also the Petition of Mr. Nathaniel Cradock, a very godly Preacher to the Honourable Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament concerning plundered Ministers, of intolerable abuses done him by the said John Poyer, with severall Orders, Certificates, and Letters concerning that businesse. London Printed, 1646.
To the Reader. THe following Vindication was drawn up and finished within three dayes after sight of the Relation, and was presently intended for the Presse; but there being a rumour of a second part to be set forth by another hand within few dayes, it was thought fit to expect that also for prevent∣ing trouble of a second Impression. This second hath not yet appeared, and therefore it is requi∣site no longer to defer the dis-abusing of them that have seen and read the Relation, who by this time perchance have passed their verdict, and taken all for granted, because not gainsay∣ed. The Author of the Relation hath had notice of this Answer: and the Reader is moved in ar∣rest of Judgement to peruse the Vindication be∣fore
sentence. 'Tis hoped this motion will easi∣ly be granted by the moderate Intelligencer, who this week hath begunne to deliver his opi∣nion in this matter upon hearing of one side. It is presumed the case being truly stated, and both parties with their proofs heard, will both alter his opinion in this matter, and keep him within the limits of moderation, which is very much desired.
An Answer, in just vindication of some Religious and Worthy Gentlemen of Pembrokeshire. IN pursuance of the Relation, as it lies, this follow∣ing Discourse must passe through these two Stages, Truth, and Impartiall Dealing, (both which are baw∣ked by the Relator in every line) so that if the Rea∣der please to cast his eye upon the Relation first, and then peruse this Vindication, he will finde every thing in charge either convinced of untruth, parti∣ality, or both. It was long after the beginning of these unhappy differences betweene King and Parliament, that the Marquesse of Hertford came to Carmarthen, the Battell of Edghill be∣ing then fought in Octob. 1642. at which time the Gentry were by him first summoned to appeare; nor were the Summons otherwise then by particular Letters directed, only to some few Gentlemen of that Coun∣ty; whereby it is evident, no generall appearance was intended. The Marquesse declared, his Majesty had received Supplies of Men, Armes, and Money, out of all other Shires of Wales, except that County, and therefore required the like Complyance. To which answer was retur∣ned by the Sheriffe (a discreet man, now a Colonell in the Army,) and those few Gentlemen present, That the Irish Rebels did daily in∣fest their Coast, and therefore neither men nor Armes could be spa∣red; and to the Money they pleaded losses by Sea, and non ability. With which Answer, the Marquesse not satisfied, commands the She∣riffe to summon the Country to Haverford, where Contribution being motioned by the Sheriffe, in pursuance of his Lordships Commands, nothing was concluded, all Parties declined, and the Marquesse went for England. That negotiation thus finished, a calme continued seve∣rall months after; nor was there any such labouring or intreaties for gayning parties to either side, as the Relator pretends, nor was
there any party at all, or division for a long time after; nor any Com∣mission of Array published or executed; nor Master Elliot Commissio∣ner, or Master Lort, Treasurer of that Committee, there being then no Committee in that County. Neither was there any such thing executed by them, or any such Warrants thundred forth, as is injuriously rela∣ted: the said particulars being no other then a fardle of untruths. And here doth the Relator (to save his credit) slip over a great hiatus and intervall of time (almost a whole yeare) without mentioning one syl∣lable of a Treaty, Agreement, and Subscription to an Association with Carmarthen and Cardigan Shires; wherein to prevent the Lord Herberts Command over those Counties, (who was a notorious Papist, and had Commission from the king to be Lord Lieutenant of South Wales) the Earle of Carbery was made Commander in Chiefe by the consent and Subscription of all the Justices of Peace, and Gentry of that Coun∣ty, except only two or three Officers of the Souldiery, who kept with∣in the strong Towne and Castle of Pembroke. And now see how the Designe was laid and carried; some of these Gentlemen who had sub∣scribed the Association, betooke themselves into Pembroke about May▪ 1643. and (not intending at first to be seene in the head of any Party themselves) they set up one Poyer, a man of meane birth and education, brought up by Master John Mevrick, Customer of Milford, first a boy in his Kitchin, then Groome of his Stable, after in the Trade of a Glo∣ver, one of such impudent rudenesse, that few Gentlemen (though de∣sirons to have served the Parliament, and have made their abode in that Town) could indure his insolency. Now was Poyer made forthwith Deputy-Mayor of Pembroke, (though the Mayor himselfe resided in Towne) he commands all, first violates the Peace, goes with some Horse to Tinby, a Towne then well affected, and (pretending a friend∣ly visit) seizes upon the Ordnance, drives the Townesmen into the Stee∣ple, then departs jeering at their distracted feares, without any Guard left for preserving the Towne for the Parliament. Hence the source and fountaine of that Counties calamity, and of Poyers rising. Hereup∣on the Mayor and Aldermen of Tinby (thus affrighted) call a Councell, where is resolved, that two of them, (viz.) Thomas Wyat Mayor, and Evan Longe Alderman, should ride to the Earle of Carbery, who accord∣ingly did the day following, and procured him to send down two Com∣panies of Foot, which are received, and Tinby Garrisoned for the King. All this was so suddenly done, in the midst of Harvest, 1643. that the whole County stood amazed in great perplexity; the occasion where∣of proceeded meerly by that ill carriage of the Deputy Mayor of Pem∣broke,
yet by the Relation injuriously cast upon Master Lort and Master Elliot, who were then many miles absent, and in no wise privy to any part of the designe. After this, not many daies passed before the Earle of Carbery and Judge Jenkins came with Supplies of Horse and Foot to Tinby, the Judge being sent (as was conceived by many that knew the Earles carriage and inclination) of purpose to observe the others acti∣ons and demeanor: The Judge frames the Warrants, and the Earle subscribes the Summons, first to the Gentry, after to the rest of the County. Some of the Gentlemen (that had formerly subscribed the Association) appeare either there or at Haverford; some few of the Sub∣scribers keepe in Pembroke, yet with correspondence, relation of friend∣ship, and presents to the Earle at Tinby. In October following, Poyer (rai∣sed from his deputation to be Mayor Paramount) subscribes an Instru∣ment, whereto he affixes the Towne Seal, in haec verba. (viz.) WE the Mayor, Bayliffs, Burgesses and Inhabitants of the Town of Pembroke, whose names are subscribed, do sincerely, on the faith of loyall Subjects, declare, That we will, with our lives and fortunes, de∣fend his Majesty, his royall person, Crowne and Dignity; and for the Towne and Castle of Pembroke, we do further declare on the like faith, That we shall to the utmost of our endeavour, preserve and defend the same, against all such as shall force a Garrison on the said Towne and Castle, and all other Forces under the name of King and Parliament, or any other. And we do further declare, That we will keep the Town and Castle for his Majesty, and no other; And we doe heartily desire the wonted Trade and Commerce with the County and Towns there∣in, and our neighbouring Counties and Townes, as also a free Trade and Commerce by Sea and Land. For assurance whereof we have fix∣ed, &c. Which Instrument was by him sent to the said Earle at Tinby, to be presented his Majesty, which was done accordingly. Thus was the state and condition of that County in October, 1643. before the Oxford journey, which is not mentioned in the Relation, till after a preposte∣rous insertion of some of the Mayors vaine glorious acts and atchieve∣ments; by which method, as well as by the stile of the Relation, parti∣ality of the discourse, and by the dispersing the Books with his owne hand to his acquaintance in London, the reader may perceive, the late Mayor of Pembroke doth appeare himselfe to be the notorious Relator. To proceed, therefore to unveile the naked truth, and wipe off the
fucus he hath put upon his seeming glorious actions. Whatsoever the Re∣lator saith to the contrary, Pembroke had both Walls and Gates repai∣red long before, Tinby, Haverford West, and Carew, were secured; nor were those places secured, but by the said Earles and Judge Jenkins meanes, and by their Forces, after the taking of Tinby. Nor were the said Walls or Gates repaired at the charges of the said late Mayor, the mentioned Ship being not his, but properly belonging to one Jenkins of Cowbridge, and the decayed Walls were repaired by the Inhabitants re∣spectively, as every part fronted their Burgesses. Captaine Swanley, at his first comming, paid for what Victuall he had of the Country, and was forced to depart for want of more. The Ship so much discourst of in the Relation, for the rare manner of surprisall, was indeed no prize at all, but the Vessell afterwards restored (by Order) to the owners, and the valiant surprize was in truth by drinking the Captaine drunke, which the Relation attributes to Gods blessing and the Mayors vertue. Then followes the second adventure upon another small Ship without Guns, related to be taken by Vollyes of two small Peeces of Ordnance and Musketeers in two Boats, which indeed was a remarkable piece of gallant service: This Vessell (now furnished with men and Arms, having none before) takes another, laden with Salt; and all this his owne every groat, no part accounted for to the State, ei∣ther of Ship or Goods, yet hath he the face now to petition the Parlia∣ment, for no lesse then foure thousand pound disbursments, which is desired may appear in particulars, that the State be not cozened; as also what Receipts in ballance. But to proceed, The Relation sets forth these gallant actions, done before the going of Sir Richard Philips, Ma∣ster Lort, Master Elliot, and Master Bowen, to Oxford, which is as true, as that they had presented the King with great summes of money, and de∣sired a Commander in chiefe, &c. then which never was printed Story of lesse truth; for these Gentlemen, with Sir Hugh Owen, Burgesse of the Parliament for Pembroke, and Master Lewis Barlow, (whom the Relator partially mentions not) were compelled much against their frequent and earnest desires, with threats of present imprisonment, and losse of their Estates (then in the Enemies power) to go with the Earle in nature of disaffected persons to his Majesty, as appeared by the Kings confinement of them at first sight, and their great expence and long continuance at Oxford, before they could be discharged, having not carried with them so much money as did defray their eating charges. Where, during their abode, they were all frequently reviled openly, called Traytors and Roundheads, and otherwise abused; and yet they would not pay any
Fines, nor take pardons as some others of that County did, and im∣portuned them to do the same. And touching a Commander in chief, the Association long before Subscribed, had determined that, and the Earl of Carbery was Com∣missioned accordingly, and did execute the place some Months before the Oxford journey; but the sending of Shipping with Ordnance and Ammunition from Bristoll to secure the Harbour of Milford, was done by Sir John Pennington, one whom they never knew, nor had any know∣ledge of, nor action in, that designe, as the Relator falsly and mali∣ciously suggesteth. And now the Relator mentions Mr. Lorts House garrisoned, which in truth was no other then by his own Servants, not a Souldier of the Kings party there; and this defence made for preser∣vation of his Goods, occasioned by the Mayor of Pembrooks threats of plundering and actuall taking away of his Cattell. Mr Bowens House was not garrison'd by him, but by the Earl of Car∣bery, yet charged upon Mr Bowen in the relation: which is as true as that five hundred pound was proffered for the Mayor of Pembrooks head: Credat Judaeus Apella: for those that knew the Mayor can assure the Reader, the Enemy might have had him theirs soul and body bet∣ter cheap. Now comes Captain Swanley into the relation and Harbour the second time, at whose arrivall (and not before) the Relator begins to mention Major Generall Laugharns first motion in the Parliaments service, and his Commission of Collonel from the Earl of Essex, who joyning with the Relator (mark the arrogance) and some few Seamen, stormed the Houses of Stackepool and Trelloyne. Thus the Relation. But the truth is, Admirall Swanleys arrivall (whom the Relator slightly mentions here, and disgracefully elsewhere) was the prime instru∣mentall cause of the Parliaments Successes in those parts. And his Sea∣men under the Command of Captain Whitty had the mannagery of the active part of the Service in taking of the two mentioned Houses, and Pill, and Tinby. Nor was there any atchievement in those times where∣in the Seamen had not at least their equall share of Honour: witnesse the Relations in Print. As for the Author of this new Relation, he was not at the taking either of the Houses, or the Pill Fort, as is untruly by him alledged, but was then safe within the walls of Pembrook Town and Castle: indeed at Tinby Siege he at last appeared, where when he saw the Enemy give fire, he was observed to duck his head. But the Re∣lation proceeds to Trelloyne House, whch was taken not by Storme, as is related, but by Composition; nor was the House of Mr Lort Stormed; but taken by a wyle, and plundered while Mr Lort was in Tinby de∣tained,
and confined within that Town by the then Governor thereof; because he would not declare himself for the King against the Parlia∣ment, and admit a Garrison of the Kings Souldiers into his House of Stackepool. Shortly after the advance to Carmarthensheire, Laugharn Castle taken by the Mayor of Pembrook, is related as a speciall note of his Service done in absence of the Generall (a most valiant piece) there being then neither Enemy nor resistance. And now from Laugharn at the March to Carmarthen, he wonders where the Pembrooksheire Gentlemen are, when surely he cannot, without malicious blindnesse, but see all pre∣sent that were able to march. And Sir Richard Phillips with his two sons: and Mr Elliot in the head of a Reserve of Horse at the conflict, before the Town was gained: onely Mr Lort being extreamly plunder∣ed of his Horse, and Arms, &c. was before the advance bound for London, with Admirall Swanley, who was then sent for home by the State. Here the Relator maliciously upbraids Captain Swanley for feasting and entertaining Mr. Lort a Shipboard after his voluntarie coming in, according to the Declaration of both Kingdoms, and ta∣king the Nationall Covenant, who since that time hath served the Par∣liament with all faithfulnesse and integrity, and in conformity to their Ordinances and Commands: Whereas the Mayor of Pembrook in Sep∣tember last did feast the Cavaliers upon a Fast-day, and drink himself and them drunk in a beastly manner, but must be past by in filence. He proceeds to relate the coming down of Gerrard, where he inserts him∣self as well in the defensive as the active part of that War, whereas in truth he seldom stirred out of Pembrook, (where the Enemy came not all that Summer) nor did ever charge any Enemy in his own person. He talks of buying Arms at unreasonable rates out of the Ships for the men he entertained, which Arms he afterwards compelled the poor Countrey Neighbours to pay for, at more unreasonable rates then he bought them. A little after he fals upon Captain Swanley again, and Captain Smith, enviously jeering at their Gold-chains, falsly and arro∣gantly terming himself the Actor, them but Assistants to the service of those parts. All which, how varying from truth, let the reducing of Pill-Fort, and Tinby demonstrate, with the Action wherein Captain Smith was slain. In the same page with the like impudence, he charges Mr Elliot, Mr Lort, and Mr Bowen, with the chiefest delinquency in that County. And first saies they were sworn to the Kings party; whereas in truth they never took any Oath at all but the Nationall Covenant, and as
Committees of Parliament since these Wars began. Secondly, that they were the causers of all the bloodshed of those parts; which is a thing so notoriously false, that an invention purely hatcht in Hell cannot adde to the forgery; nor can any instance be given, wherein any of them were at any time the cause of shedding blood. The succeeding Narration is hammered in the same forge; he tels the Reader that (af∣ter Captain Swanleys last arrivall) the new Committee questions him at Haverford, by what Authority he raised the Forces in Pembrook: Whereas this Question was never raised by the new Committee at Haverford or elsewhere; but by the old Committee at Pembrook (long before Captain Swanleys last return) upon the motion and desire of the Generall there in person. To which the Mayor replyed, that the Com∣mittee had no power to examine him, or to sit in that Town; and though the Ordinance of Parliament was then read, and shewed unto him, he would not obey. Whereby the Committee were compelled to depart, and to keep their residence at Haverford, within three miles of Gerrards head-quarter. Whereupon the Major Generall collecting the Relators ayme to be independent to his Commission, makes Lieute∣nant Jones Captain of the Troop which formerly went under the Re∣lators Command. And now he sets forth in his Relation that the troops of Horse and Dragoons, with the Arms, were his own proper Goods; whereas the contrary is a known truth, that both Horses and Arms were taken up by him out of that County without any consideration given (to this day) by him or any other. And for the payment of these men, their proportion did many times exceed the other Souldiers pay, even to the hazard of mutiny. As for the Committees carriage in that County, it hath been without self-ends, their attendance in the Service being hi∣therto wholly upon their own private purse, and not upon the publick Charge. They have not been backward in laying summes upon them∣selves particularly for the publick use, besides the payments of their proportion respectively in every Generall rate with the Countrey. Nor hath any Committee in England more willingly engaged their estates for the maintenance of this Cause; as appears by severall great sums borrowed by them of severall persons in London, and elsewhere, for the service of the State. For which alreadie some of them have been im∣prisoned here, and others (if not prevented by the State) like to suffer. What Committee of other Counties have willingly given so much free quarter in their own Houses as they have done to the Souldier in that County? This and much more will be made appear, to the shame of
the false and scandalous aspersions of the impudent Relator. Upon the second advance to Laugharn it is also most untrue, that the provisions sent from Pembrook to the Army were any other then the Countrey Store. The Ammunition likewise related to be purchased by the Mayors purse, was of Captain Swanleys Ship provision, and the States goods; whereof the Relator hath yet great quantities left un∣spent, and none hitherto accounted for; and though he hath been by Warrant sent for to that end by the Committee of Accounts, yet hath he contemptuously disobeyed, run out of Town, and made no appea∣rance. In the next place, one falshood again appears in the neck of another: First, he saies Laugharn Castle was taken by Storme: how was it then, that the Governour and Souldiers departed upon quarter? Secondly, the Relator saies he marched to Cardigan with the Army, and there took both Town and Castle by Storme; How came it then to passe that he did not come within twenty miles of the Town and Castle of Cardigan from the first to the last of that Seige? but perfideously attemp∣ted to draw the Souldiers home to Pembrook from the Major Generals Army, because he was not permitted by the Souldier to carry away the plunder he had ingrossed at Laugharn. As touching the Commit∣tees sending to the Relator to deliver up Carew Castle to Sir Richard Phillips, it is answered, they did it upon good grounds, and by con∣sent of the Major Generall; but that Sir Richard had formerly deliver∣ed it up to the Enemy is most abusively false. In the next Section he acquaints you, that he had exhausted his own Stock by clothing, paying, and maintaining his men. His own stock before these Wars could not be exhausted, being no visible thing, either in Land or Goods; and the truth is, the clothes his men had, were received by him of the Committee, and the money which he pay∣ed them (if any) was out of Rents belonging to the State collected by him, and refused to be accounted for; which was the cause that (by generall Vote of the Committee) he was stayed by Captain Swanley: yet to this day hath he obstinately refused to account. Concerning the stopping of his man and Letters to the Parliament, there was no such stop or directions from the Committee, but both man and Letters did passe without contradiction; Nor had Captain Swanley reason to de∣liver him clothes and Salt, or what else of the States Goods by him de∣sired, without Order of the Committee, which was by the Relator scorned and despised: yet now the Relator desireth, whatsoever hath been acted by him without order (though maliciously, and of set pur∣pose)
may not be interpreted by the Parliament to be done in contempt of their power; but rather to impute it to his want of knowledge and necessity: and then appeals to his Actions (which if you will beleeve him) were chiefly for the publick good; when in truth his endeavours were for self-ends meerly, and to colour rapine. Thus hath he brought the Story down to Gerrards return in April last, and skipping over his losse of Carew Castle, fals upon the Com∣mittee (his old friends) who instead of assisting him (he tels you) some ran to the Enemy (these would be known) others ran a shipboord (these could do no lesse) the Relators abusing of them a little before, and the drunken rule he kept in Pembrook, was motive sufficient to a∣void coming thither: but more of that anon. The correspondence with Gerrard, and the Committees leaving word at their Houses, that they were prisoners aboord the Ships, with Captain Swanleys not af∣foording Ammunition, while to be spared, is the Relators own fiction. But that some of the Committees aboord betook themselves to London, seeing the Countrey fired by the Enemy, is confest, yet not acknow∣ledged an offence, because they had the consent of most of the rest of their fellows to go thither, and to represent the sad condition of the County to the State, who did accordingly solicite for relief and pro∣cur'd it. Good reason had they (at their coming to London) to com∣plain of the Relator for beating, and thereby expelling their Ministers out of the Countrey, and for other publick and personall abuses; his tyranny over the well affected being not inferiour to Gerrards cruelty. Now follows in the Relation the Seige and defence of Pembrook, where assuming all to himself, he mentions not the Major Generall un∣till Colby-moore Victory, and there would share in the honour of that Action too, although many miles absent from the place. After this he tels you of the reducing of some places, and leaving his men with the Major Generall (no small favour you'l say) passing many dangers in his journey, he at last arrives in London; where no sooner come, but he presently boggles at the Committee of Pembrookesheire. Then he talks of (he knows not whom) but still they are of the Committee, that sure, 'twas they that called him out of his name at the Parliament-doore, though none of them there: yet resolved it is, it must be they or no body. And the Lord Mountnorris, a person of known eminent integri∣tie and impartialitie in the wayes of publick Justice, and opposition of tyranny and oppression (because father in law to Mr Lort) is brought in by the Relator in a parenthesis stuft with untruth; wherein he falsly sets down that Mr Lort was forced by him to a compliance with the
Parliament; whereas the Relator appeared not in any Service out of the Town of Pembrook untill after Mr Lort took the Nationall Covenant, who came in voluntarily to Captain Swanley, and was received by the Admirall and Committee, according to the Declaration of both King∣doms, in Febr. 1643. But the Relation sets forth that the thing object∣ed by the Committee, and their friends here against the Relator, is, that he is a mean man, and hath acted without Commission, not fit to be trusted; which whether true or false, let the impartiall Reader passe sentence upon perusall of this vindication. And now for a farewell, he bids defiance to his accusers in proving any disservice to the publick, though he confesses some faults, but in implicite terms. Here shall issue be joyned with the Relator, and now having run through the substance of the whole Relation, the Reader is desired to peruse the Epitome of the Relators behaviour in that County laid down briefly thus. The manner of his Rise is already set forth; his indeavour since hath alwayes been to ingrosse plunder in all places to the advance of his private interest, whereof nothing hath come amisse of what kind soe∣ver, though contrary to Order, (viz.) Arms, Iron, Lead, &c. in August 1644. great store of Wheat, Mault, and other provision brought into the Garrison of Pembrook, he converts it into Bisket and drink, sels it to his own use. The like he did with Corn brought in by the Coun∣trey for provision of Carew Garrison, and when he had sold it, billetted the Souldiers of that Garrison abroad on the poore adjacent Inhabi∣tants upon free Quarter. If at any time he heard the Committee had sequestred (according to Ordinance of Parliament) any Malignants estate neer Pembrook, thither would he go with Armed men, carrie away, and sell the wood, corn, cattell, &c. in meer contempt of Parlia∣ment, and for his own private unjust gain. If he could learn where any Money was to be had in the neighbourhood, he commands the party, though well affected, into Pembrook, imprisons him untill he payes what summe he imposes. This hath he done since a Committee settled there by Ordinance, and thereby hath gotten great summes of money. At other times he playes the Freebooter, takes away all he can lay hands upon, makes men buy their Freedom, then takes them the se∣cond time, terms them Bumkins, and puts them to ransome as often as he pleases. Abuses the Committee of Parliament, cals them Common theeves, imprisons five of them at once, one at another time, runs at them with his Sword, strikes Admirall Swanley to the effusion of his Blood, while he was in Command there by Ordinance of Parliament; shamefully beats two Orthodox godly Ministers preserred to two Li∣vings
in that County by this Parliament; stirs up the Souldiers to mu∣tiny against the Committee, for Money, who with Pistols, Spans, and Matches lighted, threaten to have their hearts blood, and after abuses their persons in severall places of the Countrey; He feasts the Cavaliers prisoners in Pembrook upon the Fast-day in September last, receives the Sacrament, and drinks himself drunk with the prisoners the same day. Another time rides up and down the Countrey between Haverfordwest and Pembrook, and presents his Pistols at all the poore people he meets in his way, compels them to fall down upon their knees and beg their lives of him, then rides on in triumph; These are some of the Relators Services, who before these Wars began had neither Lands nor Goods of value, now hath neer 400 head of Cattell, and is grown rich; yet demands foure thousand pound more of the Parliament, and so would injure and deceive the Parliament as he hath done the Countrey. All which particulars are truths that will be manifested by clear and apparent proofs upon oath, and have been with many more misde∣meanours presented in Articles by the publick Agent of that County to the Honourable House of Commons in July last, and shortly after to the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms. Now let the Reader judge whether this man hath made good his defiance of any disservice done by him to the State. In the conclusion of his Pamphlet the Relator blushes not to term himself the mouth of that County to the Parliament, and desires if he hath done amisse, the Countrey may not be blamed, who have hoped they have served the Publick in serving him, Os durum, A mouth indeed! who can read this without blushing or indignation that knows the person or qualities of the man? There is a Gentleman (whom he pleases to traduce in his Relation) Mr Elliot by name, who is by generall con∣sent of the Committee of that County chosen Agent for those parts (whose merit transcends the Relators obloquy) having lost his whole Estate in Service of the Parliament, his house (a fair mansion) with his houshold-stuffe, together with eight houses of his Tenants burnt to ashes in August, 1644. At Gerrards first coming with his Army into Pem∣brookesheire, himself and his two sons taken prisoners by the Enemy, and (himself being afterwards exchanged) his eldest Son was indited of Treason for bearing Arms against His Majestie, and adjudged at Carmarthen by David Jenkins to be hanged. This Gentleman served the Parliament faithfully, and hath been one of the Committee of the three Counties of Pembrook, Carmarthen, and Cardigan-shiers for almost three yeers, and hath had two Sons constantly in the Service of the
Parliament, under Command of Major Generall Laugharn. The Baronet (whom the Relator traduces) gave sufficient testimony of his integri∣tie, and good affection to the Parliament, at the time the Earl of Carbery with his Forces was possest of the whole County of Pembrook, except Castlematen Hundred and Pembrook Town, by sending a private Message to the prime Gentlemen then in Pembrook, to desire them speedily to send some Foot to garrison his Castle of Pictown, intimating his Gates should be open to receive them, and that they might with conveniency come up by water. Which being neglected, shortly after the Enemy took possession thereof for the King without his privity or consent. To conclude, this Noble Barronett, with Mr. Elliot and the other two gen∣tlemen, (viz.) Mr. Lort, and Mr. Bowen, so often mentioned in the Re∣lation, did joyntly lay hold of the Declaration of both Kingdoms in February 1643. and took the Nationall Covenant, contributed to the service of the Parliament proportionally to their abilities, and were made of the Committee for that and other Counties; wherein they have served the Parliament with all integritie, and for that Service have had their Houses burnt by Gerrards Forces, and lost their personall estates to a greater value then any ten of the Gentrie in those parts. Now let the world judge whether in these times of professed and Co∣venanted Reformation, this Relator, quondam Mayor of Pembrook, be a man fit to have any trust, power, or authority over any who desire to be called Christians; and let them who have countenanced and de∣fended him peruse this following Scripture: Prov. 17. 15. He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just, even they both are abhomination to the Lord. At the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament, concerning plundred Ministers, Novemb. 29. Ann. Dom. 1644. IT is this day ordered by the said Committee, that Nathaniel Craddock, Master of Arts, a Learned and Orthodox Divine, shall preach twice every Lords day in the Parish Church of Pembrook, in the County of Pembrook, and shall have for his pains therein fourscore pounds per Annum out of the profits and revenues of the Bishoprick of St Davies to be quarterly payed. The first payment to begin at the Feast of the Annunciation of St Mary the blessed Virgin next: And the Farmors and Tenants of the said Bishoprick are hereby required to pay the said fourscore pounds per Annum to the said Master Craddock, as they
will answer the contrary at their perills, and the Committee for the said County are required to see this Order observed. Iohn White. To the honourable Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament, concerning plundered Ministers, The humble Petition of Nathanael Craddock, Minister of Gods Word. MOst humbly shewing, that your Petitioner having for above twentie yeares continued a constant Preacher of Gods word, in the parish of Egloyskimmin in Countie of Car∣marthen in South-Wales, upon the lands of the Right Ho∣nourable the Lord Viscount Valentia; in which place the Pe∣titioner did according to his poore abilities, faithfully dis∣charge his dutie, to the good contentment of all his Parishio∣ners, and adjoyning neighbours, as he hopeth, untill hee was by the cruell Enemy plundred of his books, and all his other goods, and forced to flie (for safe-guard of his life) into Pem∣broke-shire, where this Honourable Committee taking notice of his distressed condition, were pleased by their Order dated the 29 of November 1644, to appoint him to preach twice everie Lords day in the Parish Church of Pembroke, and to have fourescore pounds per annum out of the profits and reve∣venues of the Bishop of St. Davids, to be quarterly paid unto him, as by a Copie of the said Order hereunto annexed may appeare: and this Petitioner making his repaire the 24 of April 1645, to Mr. Iohn Poyer then Mayor of Pembroke, and in all respectfull manner acquainting him with the Parliaments de∣signing him to be Lecturer there, desiring his countenance and
protection of him, the rather (with which I acquainted him) in that the day before I riding thorow the Towne, had a great stone of about three pound weight purposely throwne at mee, which striking my horse, I narrowly escaped: Hee at the verie first charged mee to bee a mischievous worker in the King∣dome, revileth me, calling mee stinking Rascall, and stinking Scab, using many other reproachfull and menacing speeches, pulleth me from off my horse, not only trampling my hat un∣der his horses feet, but used his uttermost endeavour to ride over me; not herewith contented, he draweth his sword, and with his whole might smiteth me on the head, and then over the shoulders, and held the point of his naked sword for some while to my throat, swearing and threatening to kill mee, if I would not go along with him; by which meanes, being in feare of my life, he enforced me againe to take horse, and swea∣ring, rageing, and reviling of me, he laboureth my horse with his naked sword, and thus driveth mee as fast as my horse was able to go before him, inscornfull and reproachfull manner to Pembroke. Being thither come, I took Sanctuarie in a pri∣vate house, for safetie of my life, from his furie; from thence, notwithstanding all possible mediation of friends, that hee would forbeare mee till the next day, being then verie faint, sore, and feeble by his evill usage, hee sends, and fetcheth mee to his house with his Souldiers in most disgracefull manner: Being come before him, and giving him all due respects, and standing in humble wise uncovered before him, hee threw my hat twice at severall times about the House, calling me againe stinking Scab, with a furious and wrathfull countenance, using many other ignominious and threatening speeches, to my great terrour and publike disgrace; and at last by mediation I was dismissed, and being forced for some time after, to keep my bed, and not able to write, I used the hand of another, to shew my sufferings to the Parliament-Committee of that Countie, praying releefe, but could get none there; but was necessita∣ted
to depart thence by shipping to London, where your Peti∣tioner hath, and doth still continue in a distressed and misera∣ble condition, being by the cruell beating and barbarous usage of the said Iohn Poyer, ever since verie greatly disabled in body and mind, not only unto the publike Ministerie, but likewise unto his private studies, and thereby unfitting for publike em∣ployment, becoming thereby (unto his more than ordinarie griefe) verie little usefull for the present in the Church of God; and however your Petitioner, most innocent of the least offence, suffered all these injuries, and many more too tedious and irksome to relate; yet the authoritie of Parliament was herein most affronted, in as much as the only cause of all his being thus cruelly used, was his signifying unto the said then Mayor of Pembroke, the Order of Parliament for his being Lecturer there. Wherefore hee holds himselfe bound in dutie, to make knowne to this Honourable Committee, these both so great contempts of so high Authoritie, and so violent outrages and disgraces causelesly offered to him, Gods poore and persecuted Minister, to the great scandall of Religion and publike Justice, so much wanting in those parts; and humbly beseecheth, that in Gods holy Name, feare and way, there may be such pro∣ceeding against so notorious a Delinquent, and for vindication and reparation of your poore Petitioner, as you in your Wis∣domes and Justice shall think fit. And he shall ever pray, &c. A briefe relation of John Poyer late Major of Pembrook, his bea∣ting Mr. Evan Roberts a godly Minister. MAster Evan Roberts coming into Pembrook Ferrie-boat, hee sitting in one end of the boat, and John Poyer in the other; after the boat had passed some part of the Channell,
high words passed betweene M. Poyer and the boat-men, a while after before the boat came neare the shore, Poyer did strike one of the boat-men divers blows, so that he drew blood out of the mans brow with his cane, which M. Roberts seeing, intreated M. Poyer not to contend with the men in the boat, least they should all miscarry; and told him, that if they offe∣red him any injurie, he might soon right himselfe when they came to shore: so soone as M. Roberts had spoken thus to him, hee presently struck M. Roberts two or three blowes with his cane, which hee warded as well as he could, but not without some hurt, and great feare; and hasting to go out of the boat, the said Poyer struck him again a blow on the head, thereupon M. Roberts was compelled to hasten away from him, for fear of further danger. The copy of a Letter written by a godly person to M. Nathanael Craddocke from Pembrook, the 28. of October, 1645. WOrthy Sir, I salute you in the Lord, I hope of your kind acceptance of these my rude lines, though you might marvell, having no acquaintance with you, yet your goodnesse being such, as will not refuse any friend, that de∣sires the furtherance and enlargement of the Gospell of Christ, and the suppressing the Enemies thereof: you were of late gi∣ven us for our Pastour by that pious House of Parliament, but opposed by that vitious man who hates all goodnesse, and good men, that hee feares will reprove his wicked courses, which is abhominable, and rather growes worse then any way mends; for he that hates to obey God and his Word, will surely hate Gods Servants, and Ministers, he hath manie times
rejected the good admonitions of our reverent late deceased M. Jesop, he shewed his wickednesse towards him to the end. I need not repeat it, for you know it, and for your abuses, it was not onely to you, but to us who have had a great losse by his wickednesse (I meane John Poyer) he is the subject of my discourse, who drove you from us, and now we are left with∣out a Teacher, and have not had a Sermon in foure or five weekes, but one the last Wednesday in September, which was used to bee our Fast-day, according to the command of Parliament, but was left quite by Poyer long since; but as I said before, on the last Wednesday in September, hee going out of his Office shortly, would leave some shew of piety, he thought, caused warning thereof the Lords day before, of the Fast, and a Sacrament on that Wednesday, and brought Mr. Rud a notable Cavalier, to preach, who commended them for keeping the Book of Common Prayer, and not using the Directory that was out, and wisht them to hold fast that Booke: So Sermon being ended, and the Sacrament, hee for∣got his humiliation and feasted his Preacher, but especially some Cavalier Captaines, and Commanders, that are prisoners here, them he kept untill it was verie neere night, drinking Sack and strong Beer, (as they themselves reported) but were so drunken, that they could scarce go, but did reel in the street and ready to fall, scarce able to get to their lodging from Poy∣ers house: It was a great grief to me, and some of my friends that saw it, how Gods Word and Ordinance, is made a cloak for his villany, and now he is going for London to get to be Governour of this Towne, which if he gaines, not any that beares the name of an honest Christian shall be able to live heere. Therefore I beseech you in the name and for the mer∣cies of Jesus Christ, withstand it as much as you may, and acquaint the Parliament of his unjust carriages, and wee shall not faile in our prayers for you, and that you may be given us to the building of us in Christ, which the Lord of mercy,
for his Son Jesus Christs sake grant us, and keep you and us, to whose almighty tuition I leave you, and rest, Pembroke, 28. October. Your loving Friend in the Lord. I Francis▪ Viscount Valentia, doe hereby testifie to all to whom these presents shall come, that I have known M. Na∣thanael Craddocke to be a constant painfull Preacher of Gods Word, upon my Lands, in the Parish of Egloyskimmin, in the County of Carmarthen, above twenty years, and that he hath alwaies had the reputation and esteeme of as powerfull, reli∣gious, and godly a Preacher, both in his owne Parish, and in other places, as any in those parts: a man of an humble and meek spirit, and of godly life and conversation, beyond all exception; and for such a one esteemed by all honest men, who know him. He was plundered of all his bookes and o∣ther goods by the enemy, and forced to fly, for the safety of his life, into Pembrokeshire, where the Committee of Parli∣ament for plundered Ministers recommended him to be Lectu∣rer in the Towne of Pembroke, but hee was there so inhu∣manely beaten, vilified, and reproached, as he was inforced to take shipping for London, where he now remaines in much want and miserie, being (by the cruell beating and barbarous usage which he received in Pembroke-shire) ever since very greatly disinabled, not only unto the publike Ministerie, in the exercise whereof he was verie laborious, but likewise unto his private studies, and thereby fitting of himselfe for pub∣like imployment, becoming thereby (unto his more then ordi∣narie griefe) verie little usefull for the present in the Church of God; for whose reliefe in his distressed condition, I am an humble suitor to those who have power and meanes to
grant it, and doe conceive it cannot be better placed upon any Divine within the Dominion of Wales. In witnesse whereof, I have hereunto subscribed my hand, this first of October. 1645. Fra. Valentia. The Certificates of the honourable Sir Robert Harley, Knight of the Bath, Mr. Stephen Marshall, and Mr. Richard Vines concerning Mr. Nathaniel Craddocke. I Have long knowne M. Nathanael Craddocke, and am per∣swaded that he is a godly man and a good preacher. Ro. Harley. BEing desired to certifie my knowledge of Nathanael Crad∣docke, I can do no lesse then certifie all whom it may con∣cerne, that I have been acquainted with him above twenty yeares, and that while he lived in these parts, hee was a godly, painfull humble man, and have often heard, that he so continu∣ed and walked, since his going into Wales. Stephen Marshall. I Doe know M. Nathanael Craddocke, to bee a verie godly man. Richard Vines. Imprimatur. Gilbert. Mabbott, Deputat. Joh. Rushworth.
