A3992B 10521823 45183
SATAN IN Samuels Mantle, Or the cruelty of GERMANY acted in JERSEY. Containing the Arbitrary, Bloody, and Ty∣rannical proceedings of John Mason, of a bap∣tised Church, Commissionated to be a Colonel, and sent over into the Island of Jersey Governour, July last, against several Officers and Soul∣diers in that small place. As also his earnest endeavours to continue and encourage the Army in England, Jersey and Garnzey in their rebellion against the Parliament, with the merits of the Officers forced out of their imployments by him, and the principles and abominable practises of the chief favourites he brought over, and countenanced there, both Islanders and English. Humbly presented to the Parliament, and published by Thomas Ashton Master of Arts, late fellow of Brasen-Nose Colledge in Oxford, and Chaplaine to the Forces there, a chief sufferer in his Relations, Reputation, Salary, &c. by his unjust persecution. Ezek. 22. 9. In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood (or men of slanders. Hebr.). LONDON, Printed, by T. R. Anno Dom. 1659.
To the Right Honourable the mem∣bers of the Parliament sitting at Westminster. Right Honourable, IT having pleased the Lord once more to bring you together by a wonderful hand of his pro∣vidence, contrary to the expectation and de∣sires of very many, and to put a price into your hands (if you have hearts to it) of being repairers of our breaches, and restorers of paths to dwell in, of healing these bruised, broken, distracted, and almost destroyed Nations; and I looking upon you as the onely visible Authority amongst us, able to relieve the sufferings of the distressed, not doubting of your mercy, ac∣cording to the merit of the cause and innocency of the persons; in all humility make bold to lay before you greater abominati∣ons then ever I have heard or known acted in so short a time, and in so small a place as the Island of Jersey. It pleased this honourable Assembly in the place of Colonel Robert Gibbon to give a Commission, June the 28. last, signed by the Right Honourable the Speaker to John Mason, to be a Colonel and Governour of that Island, he was called there the Baylies, and Dr. Cartarets Governour, by whose eminent inte∣rest with the late Lieutenant General Fleetwood, I verily believe he obtained that preferment, supposed by them a fit instrument to countenance and smother their illegal actings there. I have
often admired how Dr. Cartaret crept into a place of such trust, as Judge Advocate of England, being not only dipt poli∣tically, but being by birth a French man, who naturally sucks in with his mothers milk a hatred to the English: but shall wonder much more if he continue in that honourable employment, having been so active of late for the Army, against the Par∣liament, supposed to be the Penman of most of the papers printed to bespatter them, and having declared his judgement publickly, that if the Army were worsted, it was their interest to declare for King Charles, rather then let the Parliament sit againe. His Governour Mason was of late years an apprentice to Mr. Iohn Wedge, a Coach-harnesse-maker at the Dolphin and Hoop in Cow-lane, which I should account no disgrace, but rather an honour, had his actions of courage and valour discovered that a generous and noble soul lodged under his mechanicks lea∣ther apron, but how sparing of his flesh and blood, and how careful he hath been all along the Wars to preserve his life, I have been informed by several Members of the Army, and I have observed that they who have fought least have gained most; those Officers who have lost their blood and estates, be∣ing still by degrees weeded out of the Army by an insinua∣ting, undermining Generation, who were within these twenty years the very scumme of the Nation, and all this under a knack and pretence of Reformation and Religion. However Governour he was, and Captain Richard Yardley a discreet, honest, and valiant Gentleman, and of a considerable estate, who had adventured both it, and his life in several engage∣ments in England, and reducing that Island, immediately laid down his Commission, though courted by the late Lieutenant General Fleetwood to have it renued, supposing it much below him to be Deputy to so inferior a person. Not long after Dr. Cartarets wife, the late Colonel Hewsons daughter arrives in Jersey, as the so erunner of our new Go∣vernour, her party monopolize all the news to themselves, having taken care since the death of Oliver Protector to stop the most of the Letters directed to the commission Officers, as I have found out since I came to London; the most that we heard was, that they would whip all the Officers our of the
Island (for that was the disgraceful terme they used) but espe∣cially my self to propagate their Church with the more facility: for at their first meeting in Saint Obins Fort, their exercise be∣ing ended, and Mistris Cartaret perceiving their Congregati∣on to be very small, demanded whether there were all their number, and whether their friends had not increased in her absence, reply was made, they were never like to encrease as long as Mr. Ashton staid in the Island, thereupon they voted my removal as soone as they could effect it, and in order thereto whispered that some misdemeanours were put in against me at Wallingford house. Not long after, to wit July the 16. last, about nine of the clock at night, our expected Governour arrived at Elizabeth Castle, accompanied with Mr. John Gosnold, Mr. Thomas Pennel, Mr. Miller, and Mr. Rutlidge (whose principles and practises follow) news being sent to Saint Hillaries next day, that there would be a Sermon in the Castle at the opening of the Bridge in the afternoon, very many flocked thither both English and Islanders to see the new Governour, and to heare his Chaplain, he courteously, and with a smiling countenance, and very faire words saluted the Officers and chief of the Islan∣ders, which put many in a confidence that a sweet disposition lodged under so promising a countenance, but since we have had reason to recant our errour, and to apply that of the Psal∣mist, Psal. 55. 21. The words of his mouth were smoother then butter, but war was in his heart: his words were softer thn oile, yet were they drawn swords. Should I trouble your Honour with the firing of the great Guns in the Castles, and Parishes for joy of his arrival, or with the sumptuous feasting of him, I should probably discourage you in reading what follows. I cannot forget these particu∣lars. 1. His party laid it as a grosse scandal upon us, that we feasted up and down the Island, and they in two moneths feasted at more places then we did in six years, for Colonel Mason scarce eat six fet meals in his own lodgings all that time. 2. They laid it as a grosse scandal upon us, that we kept the Cavaliers of the Island company, and Colonel Mason eat and drank with those that we did, and with those that we never eat
and drank with, witnesse Mr. Bagot a casheered Jurate, and Mr. Hilgrove, who was in armes against Colonel Heane when he reduced the Island, and still hath been the most inveterate enemy against the English of any man in the Town, as Colo∣nel Heane, Colonel Gibbon, and Captaine Yardley alwayes found. 3. Although Colonel Mason resolved speedily to reduce Lieutenant Joseph Underwood from the Government of Orguile Castle, yet he was graciously pleased before he did it, to en∣courage him to feast him and his followers, which put him to considerable charges. Hitherto all seems to be quiet and serene, but within a few dayes Colonel Mason pickes up a society of English and Islan∣ders, such a pack as no man living can equalize in all the Island (their names, principles and practises follow) who being his privy Councel, he drives on furiously. 1. July the 23. he casheered Captaine Hugh Gerhard by his sole power, and charged Lieutenant Joseph Underwood to keep him out of Orguile Castle. 2. Within a few dayes after he cashered Anthony Reade, an old souldier, who had adventured his life in England, and an estate worth fourty or fifty pounds a year, and was a Trooper under the valiant Colonel Heane at the reducing of Jersey. 3. He imprisoned them both a considerable time, and released them by his sole power, never giving a reason of any of these actions, nor calling a Court Martial, which is humbly con∣ceived to be contrary to the Lawes and Ordinances of Warre. But alas this is nothing to what follows, he begins with the souldiers but his aime is at the Officers. 1. He sends for Lieurenant Joseph Underwood from his com∣mand in Orguile Castle to Saint Hillaries Town, a Gentleman ingaged in the Wars from the beginning, in defence of the pri∣viledges of Parliament, in the capacities of Captain Lieutenant of Horse, Cornet, and Lieutenant of Foot, in all which he had been faithful, and adventured his life both in several engage∣ments in England, and reducing the Island of Jersey, had lost in the Wars, with Holland as many goods as cost him two
hundred & fourscore pounds, part being taken by the Hollanders and part being cast away, notwithstanding all this, he dismisses him of his command and Lieutenants place, gives possession of the Castle to brother Meech, a creature of his own judgement, denies the Lieutenant the liberty to go into the Castle to remove his moneys and goods, or to go into Eliza∣beth Castle, or Saint Obins Fort, keeps him in the Island as pri∣soner several weeks, charges him to provide himself to go out of the Island when he went, and not to return without his pass, carries him in the nature of a prisoner to St. Malo's in France, and thence to England, promises him he would pro∣cure his Commission renewed for Jersey, or as good employ∣ment elsewhere: but instead of this he stops all his arreares to satisfie an old debt due to Major Salwey, and although his wife came to London a hundred miles, and solicited his favour with much diligence, the best answer she received was, that she was engaged to him, that he did not hang her husband, for he de∣served it, and it was in his power to hang him; in a word, the poor Gentlewoman having waited and wept a week in Town, had wanted moneys to have carried her to Dorchester, being denied her husbands expected pay, had not Colonel Masons favourite, Mr. Pennell solicited earnestly for a moneths pay, which with some difficulty he obtained, and when Colonel Ma∣son paid it, he told her he bestowed it clearly out of charity, for her husband was never to have any account of his pay. This he dealt with a faithful and honest Lieutenant, never bringing him to any legal trial, though he petitioned him several times to do it. 2. Ensign John Cook comes upon the stage, whom I will do that right as to affirme, that I verily believe the foundation of hating him was his relation to Colonel Gibbon our late Gover∣nour, whose wife is his Sister, for I still observed when Colonel Mason was pleasant, he had still a jeer in pickle for Colo∣nel Heane and Colonel Gibbon his more valiant predecessors, witness the jeer of the old woman in his own lodgings, too ri∣diculous to insert here; this party plotting how to out Ensign Cook, Brother Meech offers a Collation to any who would swear that he was in Colchester, but by chance finding no English man who would perjure himselfe, and pawne his soul for an
Ordinary, John Esthoe Articles against him, Humphrey Bennet and William Bradford having discoursed with him about the af∣faires of England and London; the charge was, that he told them, trading was so dead in London, that the streets were al∣most as empty as St. Hillaries, and that he knew of the late ri∣sing before he came thence, upon this information Colonel Mason sends for him by John Guppy the Trooper, examines him, he confesses what was alledged, Colonel Mason asked him why he did not reveal what he knew, he said he discovered it to Colonel Gibbon: notwithstanding this satisfactory answer, Colonel Mason makes a warrant to imprison him closely in Orguile Castle, as a mutineer, and a dangerous seditious person, threatens to carry him to London, and try him for his life, some perswade him he will die for it; he is forced to give a bond of five hundred pounds, not to act nor speak against the Parliament, is not suffered to wear a sword, nor to go into either of the Ca∣stles or Fort; although his wife lived in Elizabeth Castle, and was past her accounts end, he was not permitted to go in to see her, but she must either come to the Town, where she was likely to cry out several times, or else they must meet on a rock to converse and feed together, and in fine, at Colonel Masons coming for England, Ensigne Cook was affrighted and trepanned out of his employment, laying down for feare of death which was threatned, upon condition to have his bond cancelled, which Colonel Mason still keeps; this unchristian dealing brought his wife to that desperate condition that she lay seven weeks in child-bed, and escaped death with much dif∣ficulty, although before she was as hearty and strong, as women usually are in her condition. In a word, to manifest Colonel Masons tyranny, and Ensign Cooks innocency in this matter, I cannot conceal what one related to me from Collonel Gibbons mouth, that he would vindicate his brother, and that his relati∣on of what he had heard was the greatest insight they had of the intended insurrection, 3. Sargeant Adams is turned out of his Sutlers place in Or∣guile Castle, a woman there pretending he would have forced her coming from the market a long time before, and although he petitioned the Governour several times to examine such witnesses as he could produce to cleare his innocency, yet he
would not do that, but left him to the Civil Law, and promi∣sed him a Troopers place, but instead of the hopes of the Court and the Troopers place, Colonel Mason at his coming for England, left an order with the Baily not to permit him to have any justice in the Court, but speedily to banish him out of the Island. This Adams is as stout a Souldier as treads on En∣glish ground, and hath done very good service both in England, and reducing the Island of Jersey, I could advise Colonel Ma∣son to be careful of fighting for the Army, when this fellow fights for the Parliament, lest he fall into his clutches. 4. Sarjeant Bartlet, his wife, and several poor small children are turned out of Orguile Castle, and he not permitted to be a private souldier there, although he petitioned it, for no other reason that ever I heard, but because he was Captain Yardleys servant, and he loved him, and because Colonel Mason was in∣formed his wife was a scold. This Bartlet had been an old soul∣dier, and adventured his life in England several times, and in reducing the Island of Jersey. 5. I come to his dealings with my self, with whom he begun and ended his bloody pranks in Jersey, he had not been many dayes in the Island, but Ensigne Meech, Humphrey Bennet, Thomas Cooch, and William Bro ford (as I am credibly inform∣ed) went to him, acquainted him that I was a great hinder∣ance to the increase of the Anabaptists in the Island, being of another judgement, and petitioned he would remove me, to whom he replied, the Parliament intended to remove no Officer for his judgement, but if they could find any Articles against me (the old trick to out honest men) it might easily be effected, they said they would diligently enquire, and doubt∣ed not to accomplish their ends. I perceiving a constant cloud in his countenance, resolved to close with the first op∣portunity, to enquire of his intentions concerning me, which I did, July the 26. I acquainted him that upon the Articles of marriage, I was to remove with my family to keep house, Sep∣tember the 4. next following, and that Captain Yardley had pro∣mised me convenient lodgings in Orguile Castle, but since he had laid down his Commission, I requested I might have the Deanes Lodgings in Elizabeth Castle, which properly belong to the Chaplain, I informed him how faithful I had been to my
trust, and painful in my place; he replyed that the Lord Fleet∣wood was informed by the good people of the Island, that I was very unfit for the place of Chaplain there, I requested him to advise me what way I might take to clear my innocency, and vindicate my self from what aspersions were cast upon me, he told me he onely came over to see how affaires were, and had not so much power as to call a Court Marshall, but believed that upon his report of the affairs of the Island, Commissi∣oners would be appointed to examine such matters, and that upon their report at London, things would be ordered ac∣cordingly, I desired his advice whether it were not conve∣nient for me to draw up a Testimonial, and to try at the heads of the Companies the next muster day, who would sign it, for I assured him I was confident that all the Officers and souldiers, excepting five or six of his judgement would give ample testi∣mony of my doctrine and conversation to my advantage, he re∣plied that it was altogether too ostentatious, and believed it would not be advantagious at all. To crush this designe of my testimonial, a Petition is spee∣dily drawn up by Colonel Masons advice, and privity, to be pre∣sented to him to request him to procure Mr. Gosnold to be their Chaplain, John Bayly, Goodman Banckes, and Blethin the Schoolmaster go about for hands to it, telling the Islanders and souldiers, that except they subscribed, they should be forbidden to come to hear him preach, they should lose Colonel Masons favour, and be casheered out of their places, these baits terrified many to subscribe, I never saw it, nor could procure a Copy of it, I onely heard the beginning, which was in these termes. Whereas we have been led in darkness and hell, &c. which I wondered any one durst signe who had any conscience, I having not been absent out of the Island three moneths in almost three years, having preached when I was refident for the most three times every week, and foure times every fourth week and pub∣lickly declared, that if any one were unsatisfied in any thing they heard me preach, they might freely come every Thursday after Lecture, and I would endeavour to give them satisfaction. All these are the beginnings of sorrows. This Generation wanting witnesses to swear to something material against me, contrive a way to seduce my servant John
Miller from me, whom Captain Yardley had mustered in his Company of Foot, to this end Meeches agents perswade him to come to Orguile Castle, and do his duty himself, that he was none of my servant, but a souldier, and Meech himself promises him, that if he would come from me, he should never want, these allurements so prevailed with him (being a runnagate (having run from his Master where he was an Apprentice three times) and a bloody, cursing, debauched, prophane swearing boy, having been like to kill Captain Swans children several times, especially once having struck the breath out of his youngest son Williams body by a paire of bellows which he vio∣lently threw at him) that on Monday, August the 15. he ran away from me, although Captain Swan, my self, and wife in∣treated him to stay, he was so uncivil in his carriage to my wife, that when she came up to me, she looked as if she would have swounded, and told me, he had done her more hurt then ever he was able to do her good, he left his breeches and doublet, and some other rags behinde him, which it seems was done by advice and premeditation, for he told one as he went to the Town, that he was advised, that if he did leave his cloaths behinde him, his Master could not recover what he owed him, nor any of his pay which was due to him: next day I went to Colonel Mason, whom I desired to send home my hired ser∣vant, or secure the money he owed me, but he gave me very uncivil language, unfit to expresse, took my servant from me, sent him to do his duty at Orguile Castle, deny'd to pay the money I had laid out of my purse for him, stopt all his pay which was due to me in Meeches hands to encourage and main∣taine this runaway, charged me to prepare to go for England when the Convoy came, I told him that I was not afraid nor ashamed to go thither, but intended to stay till I could leave my wife in a secure condition, she drawing neer the time of her appointed sorrows; when I told him with tears in my eyes, how uncivil my servant had been to her, how much dejected and weak she was, and how afraid I was his ill-favoured carriage, and other circumstances would go near to bring her to her grave, he jeered at it, and laughed me to scorn. But alas what precedes is but a flea-biting to the fury which follows, the cruelty of this generation seldome ends but in
blood and murther, the saddest part of the Tragedy is still to be acted, September the 12. last in the afternoon the Kent Fri∣got arrives in Sentwon-bay, about nine of the Clock that night Colonel Mason sends two Troops, Mr. Christopher Cotton, and Mr. Thomas Brightman to Captain Swans, where I lived, with a letter, wherein he summoned me to be ready the next day to go for England, having read the contents to them, my poor wife (being brought very low before by the unchristian carriage of several persons, and three dayes past her accounts end, and they having reported in the Island that I was sure to be hanged when I came to London, which was told her at din∣ner a few dayes before) was ready to swound away, but I and the family comforted her as well as we could, I promised her I would not go into England, until she were delivered, unlesse Colonel Mason forced me away, which I verily believed he would not be so unchristian as to do, considering her condi∣tion, I went early the next morning, acquainted him that I could not leave my wife in safety, she expecting every houre the pangs of her travel, but as soon as she were delivered, and in a way of recovery, I would make hast to England by Garnzey or the way of France, and if he would not take my engagement, I offered to procure security of the best in the Island in five hundred or a thousand pounds bond for my appearance there; that the winde could not car∣ry them to any Port of England, but they must go to Saint Malo's in France, therefore I hoped to be in England as soone as he, he told me he durst not leave me in the Island with secu∣rity, having acquainted the Lord Fleetwood that he would bring me to London, I replied that if there was no other remedy but I must be carried away by force, I must obey his commands, I went home, comforted my poor wife (who was ready to cry out) as well as I could, put up some things fit for my voyage, I had not been at home three houres, nor could I have time to refresh my self with meat, but he sent a messenger to hasten me away, how dreadful my parting was, God alone knows (but they may guesse somewhat who have such wives as she was, and know how to prize so great a blessing as a good wife given from the Lord) truth is I very much feared what the Lord in my ab∣sence brought upon her. Although the wind (as before) could
not carry us to any Port of England, yet he hasted on ship∣board, having left an Order with Captain Lieutenant Austin Buckler, that if Captain Yardley, my self, or Lieutenant Under∣wood should come to Jersey without his passe, we should not be permitted to go to see our relations or friends in the Island, but be speedily sent on board again, his deputy, but now men∣tioned was very careful lest the prisoners (my self, and Lieu∣tenant Underwood) should stay behind, for he road triumphant∣ly to the boat wherein we were, and enquired whether all were aboard who must go, about twelve that night we set saile, ar∣rived at St. Malo's in France about the same houre the next day, staid till Tuesday following, set sail, and came to Ports∣mouth Thursday, I conceiving my self to be a prisoner, went up to Colonel Mason, and asked him what he would command me, he replied, Sir now you may go which way you please, I told him God willing I would ait on him Monday following, which I did, and shewed him this Petition following, which immediately after I presented to the Lord Fleetwood. To the Right Honourable Charles Lord Fleetwood, Lieutenant General of the Forces belonging to the Common-wealth of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland, and their dominions, and to the Councel of Officers sitting at Wallingford House or elsewhere. The most humble Petition of Thomas Ashton, Master of Arts, and late Fellow of Brasen-Nose Colledge in Oxford. Sheweth, THat your Petitioner was intrusted with a Commission from Oliver late Protector in the year 1656. to be Chaplain to the English Forces in Jersey, whereupon he resigned his Fellow-ship, and since hath remained for the most part there, diligently and faithfully doing his duty by constant preaching the Gospel, and walking before his charge in all good conversation. That since the foure prisoners cam thither, to wit, January the 19. 1657. Your Petitioner hath several times declared to the most of the Commis∣sion Officers, his disatisfaction with, and disaffection to the pro∣ceedings of the Protector, and his expectation of a change in the Government, which also appeared by his publick praying for Ma∣gistracy only in general termes, his advice to the Deputy, Gover∣nour
and Commission Officers not to proclaim Richard Protecter untill they received an absolute command from the Councel, his refusing to be present at his Proclamation, and hindring an Ad∣dress intended by some to be presented to him; for all which he received severall publick checks, and lastly by his hearty rejoyce∣ing in the last change, demonstrated by his active and effectual moving the Officers and Souldiers to a speedy Address and De∣claration, in which he was especially instrumental. All which considered, your Petitioner humbly prayes your Honour to renew his Commission, in the execution of which he engages himselfe to use all diligence and faithfulness: or if any thing be objected against him respecting his Doctrine or Conversation, he may be brought to a speedy tryal by witnesses, either in Jersey or London before able, conscientions, honest English men: That in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established, And your Petitioner as in duty bound shall ever pray, &c. THO. ASHTON. THE Lord Fleetwood having read it, according to his con∣stant custome gave me sweet words, and asked me whether there were any Articles against me, I replyed, I knew not what Colonel Mason would object, but was certain, I was free from any crime which might forfeit my Commission; in a day or two Colonel Mason shewed a paper to him, and Mr. Walter Strick▪ to whom he bespattered me as well as he could, I made a friend to the Secretary to have had a copy of it, but could ne∣ver obtain it, it seemed he durst not adventure so precious a Jewel out of his own possession. I went to the Lord Fleet∣wood again to petition for a speedy tryal, he directed me to goe to D. Cartaret, who adviced me to let it fall to the ground, he conceiving it impossible to procure my Commission renewed whiles Colonel Mason opposed it, this advice being backed by many other eminent friends, who assured me that the Lord Fleetwood and Colonel Mason were all one, and that it was the Anabaptists design to casheere all out of the Army who were not of their Judgement, especially the Chap laines, and that if with much industry I procured my commission renewed, I should live a most hellish life under a Governour who hated
me, so prevailed, that I went to Colonel Mason, and told him, I would not return to Jersey, but decline soliciting after my place, but withal requested him several times to give me a copy of the charge against me, or let me see it, either to pay me the moneths pay due to me as Chaplain, out of an hundred and six∣ty pounds of Colonel Gibbons he keeps in his hands, or to pay me what pay was received for my man which is my own, and the debt he ows me, all which amount to neer twenty pounds, or to lend me some moneys upon my bill to repay it, I having been long in Town, living at great charges, and being then in great want of money, but he absolutely refused all these. To return and mind your Honour of my poor wife, from whom I was so suddenly snatched as before, she sorrowed sadly at my departure, and no marvel, considering what she had heard of the malicious desires and intentions of my enemies towards me; two days after I was gone shee fell into Travel, was deli∣vered, but the bitterness of her throwes being seconded with the frequent consideration of what she had heard concerning me, so afflicted her, that she fel into a distracted condition, still crying out, Colonel Mason hath carryed my poor husband up to London to hang him; these pains and sorrows within a fortnight brought her so weak, that she expected death every moment, and some of her last words were these to several per∣sons of quality who came to visit her, Colonel Mason hath bro∣ken my heart, and is the only cause of my death. Thus shee dyed, or rather was murthered by that man of blood, for 'tis well known, she was before he came into the Island, as cheer∣full, hearty, and as likely to live as every any one was in her con∣dition. Right Honourable, do not these things affect your heart, at the writing of which my heart bleeds, and my eyes weep; The voice of my wives blood cryes unto the Lord and to you from the ground for Justice. 'Tis not my Judgement alone, but all who knew the passages, person and place, and have heard this story truly related, that her blood lies at his door, and I confidently believe that word will be accomplished on him or his, Gen. 9. 6. Who so Adeddeth mans blood by man shall his blood be shed. Once more, the blood thirsty generation of Anabaptists were not satisfied with my being carried like a criminal out of the Island
(though for no reason I know yet, but because I am not of that perswasion) and with the death of my dear wife, but they brag among themselves, and conclude, that questionless I am either prisoner here at London, or banished, or silenced for ever preaching in England, and yet 'tis well known (blessed be the Lord who hath still raised me friends) that I have preached publickly in as large and learned Churches as are in this City, and am elected by a unanimous Vestry to be Minister where there is a comfortable subsistence within twenty miles of it, but no marvel that they speak thus of me who amalive, who derided, laughed and scoffed at the innocent creature my wife when she was dead and buried. But let them take heed, lest Their mis∣chief return upon their own heads, and their violent dealings come down upon their own pates, Psal. 7. 16. By these short passages your Honour may perceive I am rob∣bed of my credit, livelihood and wife (as hopefull, religious and vertuous, young Gentlewoman as lived in that Island, at whose burial as I am informed from thence there were more weeping eyes then had been seen on that occasion seven years before, in a word, of all that is dear and near unto me; what remains but that they take away my life also, and the lives of my poor babes, which questionless they would massacre as greedily as they have their mother, were we at their mercy. Good Lord! What would become of the poor Ministers, and all the upright ones in the Nations, should this generation long rule over us, whose tender mercies are cruelty. I shall close up the sad relation of my own sufferings with a passage of a Gentleman of very great quality to an Officer here in London concerning my wives death. Present my kind love to Mr. Ashtor, and if he have not heard of it before, acquaint him that his wife is dead, but manage the business with all the discretion you can: I cannot but think that the just God will require her blood at the hands of those who would not suffer her husband to stay with her: I heard she was delivered, but never injoyed her self. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God hath touched me, Job. 19, 21. Thus farre of Colonel Masons actions in less then two moneths in the Island of Jersey.
I shall crave leave to mind your Honour of what he acted in London. 1. Mr. William Sowton a Chichester Gentleman, very well known in that place, and to several Members of Parliament to be a godly, honest, religious, and ober person, ingaged for the Parliament from the beginning of the Wars, for whose service he hath set out three Dragooners, and a great horse, and lent a considerable sum of money, as will appear by his publick bills yet unsatisfied, and lost a very great estate at sea by the enemies of the Common-wealth; yet Colonel Mason dismisses him of his place of Commissary and provost Marshal in Jersey, which he had diligently and faithfully discharged, and would not suffer him to go over to perfect his accounts untill he went thither himself, which is likely to prove very much to his damage: he put one Thomas Cooch into his place Mr. Sowtons Deputy to gratifie him for his intended perjury against me (as will appear hereafter) and all this he did by his own sole power, without any order at all, for no cause that ever I heard, but because Mr. Sowton went not over with him into Jersey, although he was at Portsmouth to have waited on him at his punctual appointed time, but Colonel Mason was gone before he came thither. 2. He dismisses Mr. Robert Sidney, Corporal of the Horse, who had adventured his life in England, Scotland, Ireland, and reducing the Island of Jersey in the capacities of Captain of Foot, and Cornet of horse, had lost a considerable estate in the rebellion of Ireland, a Gentleman beloved by all Officers, Souldiers and others who knew him, being as civil, courteous, loving and sweet dispositioned person as treads upon the earth, of a strict and unblamable conversation, a constant observer of his duty, who had continued in Jersey above seven years after it was reduced (which I believe no Officer besides himself did) his horse being old and unfit for the States ser∣vice, he sold him by the Governors order, and by the same order came over to buy another, and to dispatch some other oc∣casions he had, the Lord visited him with so sore a sickness that he was generally supposed a dead man, he was newly re∣covered when Colonel Mason went over Governour into Jer∣sey, of whom he requested leave to stay till the next Convoy to
dispatch his business, which his sickness had hindered, which he granted, but upon his return, he addressing himself to know his Commands, he plainly told him he was respited the Muster Roules for absence, and that another was put in his place, although Corporal Sidney urged that his sickness put him in an absolute incapacity of returning sooner, and that he had both his own and his Predecessors leave, Colonel Gibbon to stay so long, yet there was no remedy but out he must, Corporal Sidney perceiving it in vain to contest with so migh∣ty a man at that time, desired his pay, of which sum he gave him a clear and punctual account, notwithstanding which one Ladington a brother of his profession, whom he sent o∣ver as Ensign into jersey, and intrusted with five moneths pay for the Garrison, cheats him of a moneths pay, which he puts into his own pocket, in which Colonel Mason hath so much incouraged him that Corporal Sidney hitherto hath not had one farthing refunded, although he hath cleared the matter, and petitioned Colonel Mason several times for Justice: more∣over Colonel Mason refused to pay him his due, unless he went to Winchester for it, which he was forced to do, and to hire a horse, which with his charges in that journey amounted to neer fifty shillings. Colonel Mason promised to consider his extraordinary charges by every ones contributing according to what money he received which J urged, and according to my proportion of forty six pounds, left five shillings in his hands to that purpose, which he kept in his own hands, and never allowed Corporal Sidney, nor the rest ingaged in that jorney any consideration at all. The Lord Fleetwood hath sent into this honest and worthy Gentlemans place one of Colonel Masons Judgement, or whom I have received this information, that he is the most debauched person that ever came into the Island, being almost every day drunk: In one of his fits of drunkenness he drew his knife against one of the best Gentlemen in the Island, and swore by the Lord God he would stab him: In another fit he was so sawcy that Master George Pinson was forced to give him due correction, which I hear he did with such discretion, that the Gentleman retired himself, and kept out of company several dayes. 3. Although he had promised Mr. William Swan to assist his friends at London in procuring his Commission of Quarter∣master
renewed, yet when he came thither, he was the on∣ly hinderer of it, scandalizing him to his friends and kind∣dred, and bespattering him with several Articles (which with his answer I intend God willing to make publick) This Gentleman hath been engaged from the beginning of the Wars in the Offices of Captain Lieutenant of Foot, Captain both of Horse and Foot at the same time, Governour of Achclisse Fort, and Deputy Governor of Dover Castle: in all which places he hath carried himself faithfully to the trust re∣posed in him, & more particularly in the last, being the only dis∣coverer of that considerable and great plot against Dover Castle; he having a Commission sent him from the King to be Governour of it, which he speedily brought up to London, and was promised a gratuity by the Lord General, which he very well deserved, but never yet received any; He lost all his goods (his family being taken by the Hollanders in the wars) to the value of three hundred pounds at least. How faithfull he hath been in Jersey, and how generally beloved and re∣spected, all men there know. Notwithstanding all his good service and great sufferings, Colonel Mason (not satisfied with the innocent blood of his eldest daughter, Mrs. Bridget Ashton, whom he hath most barbarously murthered, as I have before related, which hath almost brought both him and his poor weak aged wife to their graves with sorrow) that he might ruine Captain Swan, and his family, and break his wifes heart as he did mine, sent for him over, and had undoubtedly outed him, as he did the rest by his arbitrary sole power, and (as 'tis reported) procured his place for Mr. Francis Cartaret common∣ly called Captain, had the Army been able to persist in their late defection. From such cruel blood thirsty persons good Lord deliver us. O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but establish the just, for the righteous God trieth the hearts and reins, Psal. 7. 9. Colonel Mason having been so great a Persecutor of those who have adventured their lives and fortunes in the service of the Common-wealth, it cannot be expected he should be a greater favourer of the publick body, then he hath been of the Members of it: His spirit hath sufficiently appeared since the last interruption of the Parliament in these particulars.
1. He constantly sate among the Councel of Officers at White-Hall and Wallingford house in opposition to the Parlia∣ment, and was accounted by all I met with a most active in∣strument in perswading the Lord Fleetwood to continue to the last what he had begun, being not only exceedingly intimate with him, but the most rigid and rigorous Anabaptist in all the Army. 2. He was appoiunted by the Committee of Safety, one of the Commissioners for regulating the Militia of Westminster, for the Army against the Parliament, in which I believe it will ap∣pear upon examination and enquiry he was sufficiently active. 3. His hand is at all or most of the papers sent to the several Regiments to move them to engage for the Army against the Parliament. 4. He sent Letters to Jersey and Garnzey (Colonel Bingham's command) by which he procured the subscriptions of the Of∣ficers and Souldiers in both Islands, for the Army against the Parliament, trepanning many honest hearted and true friends to the Common-wealth, who knew no more of affaires in En∣gland then he writ in his mis-informing letters. 5. He abjured the Parliaments Commission signed by your Honour, and received Commissions for himself and his new Officers in Jersey from the late Lieutenant General Fleetwood, which he hath carried over with him, and I am bold to affirme, he would, if he durst, keep that Island for the Army against the Parliament, but I believe he will not adventure to do it, being a man of small courage and valour. Lastly, your honour may a little judge of Colonel Masons disposition and temper by the principles and abominable practi∣ses of his chief favourites, which I shall briefly lay before you. First, they who came over with him out of England were, 1. Mr. John Gosnold, a Batchelor of Arts of Cambridge, rebap∣tised about seven years before, Teacher to a people consisting of about six-score neer Smithfield, this was as his Chaplain, or ghostly Father, his chief favourite, one who seldome had the Tobaccho-pipe out of his mouth, except he were eating, drink∣ing, riding, praying, or preaching, he gave out that himself was some great one, and seemed to be somewhat, he brought over some pocket Sermons with him, which as soon as he had preach∣ed,
he was extreamly weary of the Island, and earnest to be in England, and that he might shift off preaching designed to take a voyage to Malo's in France (as he called it) but was prevent∣ed by the speedy arrival of the Convoy which carried us away: although I perceived by his discourse that it was his judgement not to hear any one preach except he were of his perswasion, yet I found by his own preaching, that he had read the Sermons of others, and got them without book, the heads and illustrati∣ons of his first Sermon at Elizabeth Castle on Phil. 1. 27. Onely let your conversation be as becometh the Gospel of Christ. I found when I was on board the Kent Frigot in Mr. Burroughs his Trea∣tise on that Text, entituled Gospel Conversation. The heads and illustrations of his six Sermons preached in St. Hillaries Town are known very well to be stollen out of Mr. Loves fifteene Sermons on the same Text, being 2 Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore the ra∣ther brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure. By these I guesse where the rest were stollen, I cannot say but he added many extravagant expressions of his own, I know (said he) a thousand souls in hell, who have been brought thither by the evil example of others. I hope he was never there, although he affirmed the matter upon his certain knowledge, I omit the rest for brevity sake: he had an excellent faculty in condemn∣ing his adversaries to the torments of the bottomlesse pit, pa∣ving hell with Priests sculls, sentencing Sir George Boothe, & his Countrey-men to do die without mercy, and palliating the a∣bominations of his brethren with the candid Characters of in∣firmities and slips. But I leave him. 2. Mr. Thomas Pennil Surgion to the Garrison, the Officers had intrusted him, and sent him over into England upon their charges to present their Addresse and Declaration to the Par∣liament, but (as I conceive) Colonel Mason intending to out the most of the Officers who subscribed it, as hath appeared since, would not suffer it to be presented, to that end they two juggled together to suppress it, which appears hy their contrary stories, Mr. Pennel told us in Jersey, that Colonel Mason had forgotten to present it, but he minding him of it as they were going down in the Coach, Colonel Mason sent it to the Lord Fleetwood by an Officer who was going to London, and Colonel Mason told me he delivered it to Mr. Pennel at his first being
in London to present it with his own hands, however between them two it was never delivered. As to the principles of Mr. Pennels religion, I am apt to believe they are uncertain, he's a Presbyterian in the morning, an Independent at noon, an E∣piscopal man in the evening, and at midnight a Quaker, as to his education and conversation, he was an Apprentice to a Chirurgion in Germany, thence he went into Scotland, where he practiced the profession of a Barber-Chirurgion, there he in∣veigled the Gentlewoman he lives with, he carried her from place to place, at last to London, where he practised the Barber and Tooth-drawer, and set up Bills to cure several diseases, at last procured a commission to be Chirurgion in Jersey, where∣upon he left his reputed wife in a most miserable poor condi∣tion in London, likely to be starved, his former carriage had made her distracted two or three times before that; he came into Jersey, talked much of Chirurgery and Physick, and yet he is neither Anatomist, Ghymist, Herbalist, nor Latinist, by his faire speeches he crept into the Officers favour, he remo∣ved his family into Jersey, for which he provides most mise∣rably, he abuses, kicks and pinches his reputed wife, as civil and good a Gentlewoman as lives, he haunts Taverns and Tipling houses day and night, is a common curser, a common drunkard, a common swearer (for which I have often reproved him) and some in London have said they can prove he's a whore∣master, he hath used his Apprentice, Mr. Robert Horton liker a dog then a Christian, not allowing him either meat, drink or cloathes convenient, although he had a considerable summe of money with him, more-over at Mr. Pennells coming out of Jersey last, he went about to procure subscriptions from several persons against the young Gentleman, and took the hand of Edmund his other Apprentice, hopeing (as he said himself) to prove a forfeiture of his Indentures, and to recover a hundred pounds from his father: he hath abused his best friends, to in∣stance in the worshipful Captain Richard Yardley, who out of meer Christian charity, considering his great charge, had mu∣stered one of his men in the party of Horse, and done him all the favours imaginable, yet the best language he had for him when he came into Jersey with Colonel Mason was, Yardley is out, he will never be any thing again, Colonel Mason cannot
abide him, will not let him come near him, I believe he will be sequestred, and the like. Once more Mr. Pennel hath told se∣veral persons of quality near London, that he was never married to the Gentlewoman by whom he hath foure children now li∣ving, and that she is none of his wife, but his whore. O abomi∣nable adultery! my heart trembles to think of it, and yet this is he that bragged when he was last in London, that all the Com∣mission Officers were turned out except himself, and that he only was Colonel Masons favourite, and good reason too, for I believe he can scarce finde such a toole for his turn in all the three Nations and their Dominions. But enough of him. 3. Mr. Millar, a rebaptized brother, and one of the Protectors sect, and then of the Parliaments Life-guard, this fellow told Colonel Mason all that he saw, heard, or knew, and a great deal more, if a man did but break wind backward the Governour should know it for fear of a plot, as to his conversation, he loved a glass of wine very well, which he would take of soundly; in that short time of his stay in Jersey, he was once so drunk at one of their feasts, that coming home he was not able to guide his horse, but road through the hedges, and tore his hand almost from about his neck, Colonel Mason promised to make this hopeful blade his Captain Lieutenant, but he went into the North with the late Lord Lambert in that expedition against General Monk and since I heard nothing of him, his wife here in London runs out sufficiently against Colonel Mason. 4. Mr. Rutlidge of the same principle, and in the same ca∣pacity as the former, he was the only person I looked upon among all that Generation there, as a down-right, honest-heart∣ed, sincere, upright man, if I be mistaken I hope I shall be par∣doned for my charity. These four are the Gentlemen he brought over with him, his favourites he closed within the Island are these which follow. 1. Of the Islanders. 1. Michael Lempriere the Bayly, and his wife, his principle is to come to Sermon sometimes, where I believe he hath scarce been these twenty years without sleeping, and still to be highest in all changes, had not the scale turned when it did, he had come in to Sir George Cartaret, and been a King card, but it pleased God to reserve him to be a scourge to that Island, by chance
he was on the right side as it proved, and is sole Potentate in that Island, he was once most zealous for this present Parlia∣ment, as high for Oliver Protector, more earnest for proclaim∣ing his son Richard, being so forward that he would not stay till he received the Councel of States Order, but proclaimed him without it, and would have had all persons hanged or worse that were not present at that solemnity, since that he was very for∣ward again to joyn with the English Officers and Souldiers in their Address and Declaration to your Honours, and as fiery since (as I am informed) for the Army against your Honours, he's as corrupt a judge as breaths upon the earth, making his passion and will the rule of all his actions, so that no man ex∣pects any Law or Right except he bribe and feast him and the Jurates, what is voted by them as Law this day, you cannot ex∣pect it to be so to morrow, the flesh and blood of the Islanders is eat & drunk in endlesse arbitrations, he's a common tipler and drunkard, being usually ten or twelve times a day at the Ta∣verne, and many times till twelve of the clock at night, he hath been so overcome with drink, that he could not go nor stand without the help of the wall; he is blemished with whoring, and 'tis muttered he hath two bastards in the Island, which I can scarcely believe, being he hath no child by his own wife, though a very likely Gentlewoman, and of a good stock, some offer to prove he was a whore-master when he was in London, but per∣haps his native aire, and age together have cured that disease; there is a Gentlewoman in the Island with whom he hath been observed to be more familiar then ordinary, and one time espe∣cially at Orguile Castle there were such wanton actions between them, that his dear friend Major Harding concluded they could not be honest, that there was something more then ordinary among them is manifest by this, that soon after Mr. Bayly was married he went to this Lady, clasped her close in his armes, called her his dear Mall, cryed her mercy, and asked forgiveness, promised that if she would pardon him that one fault, she and hers should never want, but he would be as good a friend to her as before. I shall say nothing against his Lady, she having mis∣fortune enough to co-habite with such a bundle of bones and crooked lame old person, the worst I know of her is, that she is his wife, and Dr. Cartarets sister, which two I stedfastly believe
designed and plotted all our ruines, if she assisted them, the Lord forgive her, for I heartily desire to forgive all my enemies. 2. Dr. Fiat, this Gentleman was a constant attendant on Co∣lonel Mason, although he be near thirty years of age, and pre∣tends to be Dr. of Physick at Oxford, yet 'tis reported he lies every night in the same bed with his mother, a Gentle∣woman of about threescore years of age, and here in London his name is up for a whore-master, how true it is God knows. 3. Mr. Francis, or Captain Cartaret, his principle I will not take on me to judge of, in his practise he is a common swear∣er, he sware by the blood and heart of God in Captain Yarlys chamber, which made some Islanders scosfingly to say the Par∣liament Officers could swear; a common tipler, for he was tipled or drunk almost every night at St. Malo's in France at our co∣ming over, where I was told he was a whore-master, if he be, God vouchsafe him repentance unto life, this Gentleman him∣self reported that had not his friends failed, he should have gone into Jersey Commander of the Horse. 4. Mr. Charles Marret the Receiver, his principles and pra∣ctises are so well known to all the Island, that I shall not spend paper in them; for my own particular, I confess I am more o∣bliged to him then to any Gentleman of that Island. 5. Mr. Lempriere, the Jurate of St. Johns, commonly called Captain Lempriere, the most filthy profane wretch in all the Island, an inveterate hater of the Church, Ministers and Ordi∣nances, never goes to any Sermon, prophanes the Lords day by setting it apart to visit and feast his friends; at the reducing of Jersey he eased himself upon the Communion Table, and in the Pulpit of a Church or two in the Island, Colonel Mason feasted chearfully at the House of this abominable person. As for other of his Island Favourites, Mis. Fiat commonly called Madam Bring-bell, or the devils Foot-post, one who lives in the fire of contention, being always in the Court, who whi∣ned her son into a Fellowship at Exeter Colledge in Oxford, and cried a hundred or two of pounds from the Parliament and Oxford Visitors, and her brother little pimping Messeroy, the Master of the Ceremonies and his wife, and such like, I shall not trouble paper with them, all the Island knowing them to be dissembling hypocrites.
Thirdly, his favourites of the English Nation follow, 1. Captain Lieutenant Austin Buckler and his wife, I want not matter in my butchet concerning them, I looked upon both as my friends, but have been informed he was the worst enemy I had in the Island, looking upon the informer as of small cre∣dit, though supposed a cunning Politician, I shall write neither evil nor good, but let them alone till the next Court day, that they adored the rising Sun, and undervalued us sufferers in our distress is what honest men expect from the wise ones of the world, who are like Reuben, Gen. 49. 4. Unstable as water. At the first I verily believed Colonel Mason intended small good to this Gentleman, but was forced to depute him upon necessi∣ty in his absence, but when I found he had mustered him in Captain Yardleys place, and heard that he was so careful and kind as to carry over a Commission from the Lord Fleetwood for him, I plainly saw a devil in the business, Colonel Mason either really loving him, or like a man with the plague-sore up∣on him, desiring the other may die and fall with him, and be a partner in his ruine. 2. Ensign Henry Meech, and his wife, he is one of Colonel Masons judgement, and his right hand, a Teacher of that rout. (1) He is very well known to the most of the souldiers to be a cheating, couzening oppressor of them, in selling them com∣modities for three times as much as they cost him, for which he was once before a Court Marshall, received a rebuke only and was dismissed, because he was a professor, this is he that brought in the unconscionable account of fourry shillings for washing of Linens, which he charged upon the soldiers pay, and forced them to allow it, he was partner with a brother which follows, when bullets were put into the souldiers bread, because it wanted weight, I have a story by the end how he cheated the Garrison of twelve pounds six shillings in transporting fifty pounds, but the plaine particulars I have not yet obtained. (2) He is a debauched drunken person, which appeares by these particulars. (1) When he lodged at Dorchester, some women came to visit him in the night, although he was in bed, and it was somewhat late, yet he rose out of his bed, and danced with them in his shirt a great part of the night.
(2) An Inne-keeper in London told one whom I can produce, that Enfign Meech was the best guest that ever he had in his life, for he would sit up and drink all night, if any one would sit with him, and that many times he had much ado to get out of his company. I am apt to think the Garrison of Jersey bare his charges that bout. (3.) He was so drunk at St. Obins (as I have heard) that he could scarce stand: however 'tis very well known to many in Jersey, that June 29. last, he went to Orguile Castle to enquire how the souldiers would like him to be their Lieutenant, drank heartily in the Sutlers, and three quarts of white-wine without the gates after he was mounted, he was so drunk that he reel'd to and fro, being scarce able to sit his horse, insomuch that the boys hooted him from Longuevile to the Town, crying after him there rides the English Quaker drunk, he fel his hat in Hillaries Town, but was not able to dismount to take it up again. His wife was always esteemed in England to be a grain too light, she followed a Sarjeant up and down night and day, and (as he said) would not let him be quiet, how familiar one Scot was with her in Jersey is publickly known, once she and several others drank at Tizards in St. Hillaries three or four pints a sack a piece, till they were so drunk that they knew not the reckoning, but quar∣relled about it, and threw the pots up and down the room. These two were as dear to Colonel Mason as the apple of his eye, he put this scandalous person into the place of honest Lieu∣tenant Joseph Underwood. 3. Sarjeant Ash and his wife, a couple well met, for neither of them will go to the Church and hear Gods Word, but both will be drunk both at home and abroad, he usually sits tipling in St. Hillaries once or twice a week from morning till night, pro∣phaning the Scriptures over a glasse of liquor, and she every Saturday steels her nose with a large draught of strong water, yet these were his chief favourites, he made this profane fellow Sutler in Orguile Castle in Sarjeant Adams place. 4. Humphrey Bennet and his wife, two rebaptised persons, but as idle and lazy as live upon the earth, were the Apostles rule put in practise which he commanded, 2 Thes. 3. 10. That if any would not work, neither should he eat; they and their children would starve, he is so common and notorious a liar, that no
one believes what he says, he coyned Sols marks so long till se∣veral persons threatned to question him for it, which forced him to leave off the trade, he is turned Speaker, his wife goes as if lice dropped off her, she moves and turnes as slowly as the Sovereign ship, these two were Colonel Masons favourites, brother Meech promised to make him Armourer, which he be∣ing unable to perform, they give him titles of knave and rogue. 5. Francis Burrage and his wife, of what religion he is would puzzle Bellarmine, were he alive, he hath been the notablest whore-master in his Country, his wife seldom lay in child-bed, but he got her servant maid with child, he hath two bastards still living about Axmister, he lay with his Landlords maid in St. Lawrence Parish, what need I write more of him, whores have ruined his estate; his wife is dipt, that she is an hypocrite, and and an idle lazy tatling Gossip is no slander, her husbands bro∣ther's blood lies at their door, whom they cheated of his estate, engaging to keep him as long as he lived, which was not long, for they starved him to death, as 'tis well known in Jersey, these were Colonel Masons favourites, Brother Meech promised him an Ensigns place but not performing it as yet, they curse him, and give him his due, calling him cozening knave. 6. John Bayly and his wife, two persons brought up by the almes of the Parish, carrying pedlars packs, and selling rabbet skins, he will be commonly as drunk as a Lord, he was so full of the creature in Colonel Masons being in the Island, that he lost his hanger (for which he was privately handled in his own house) and gave five shillings to have it again; in another drun∣ken fit he cut Mr. Giles Welsh in the head in his own house, and was like to kill him, his wife is the most impudent hypocrite and—in the Island, she lay with him who is now her husband before they were married, she clapt her hand upon a Gentle∣mans parts, which modesty forbids me to name, and said, there are they which must get me with child, if ever I have any, O a∣bominable impudence! she beats her husband and hath run from him several times, the last time she ran away from him into in∣to England, she abused all the Officers, forsware it when she returned, but confessed it in Colonel Masons time, when it was for her advantage. These two were the Governours, and Mr. Gosnolds favourites in chief, I have seen the former take her
familiarly by the hand, a fit companion in Jersey, his wife being big in London, I hear they are both rebaptised since I came away, so that whether her name is Esther, or Ursula I cannot tell, but hope the salt water may cure the disease in her legs. 7. Roger Clark and his wife, he was accounted at Weymoth a common drunkard (as I have heard) and the souldiers in Eliza∣beth Castle offered to swear that he was once so drunk that he could not find his own door, and that he committed fornication with another woman while his own wife watched the door (this last clause I never had the confidence to believe) she is of Mr. Thornes Church of Milcomb, a great Professor, and I hope a good woman, I wish she be not guilty of spiritual pride, I had once an high esteem of, and great respect for her, but her cen∣suring others, neglect of my wife when I was first in England, and (as I thought) her too familiar converse with Tom Cooch, he telling her once before me, that he thought she looked fairer and younger then she used to do, stroking her face, &c. made me cold at the last. These two were Col. Masons secret counsellors. 8. John Esthoe, a baptized Brother, Dr. Cartarets wife told Col. Mason she had very much comfort in him, and good rea∣son, for he is the most notorious drunkard of all the party of Horse, he was so drunk at St. Obins, that riding home he fell over his horses head, was scarce able to rise from the ground, not able to mount again, he put his foot into the stirrup several times, but still fell down, he held himself by his horses neck, and was thereby supported about half a mile, then he fell down, lay and slept about half an houre on the sands, at last he mounted and recovered St. Hillaries Town, in his fall he hurt his face and his head very much. Not long before Col. Mason cme to Jersey, he was so drunk with wine and sugar, that he stirred the vessel in which it was with hand and glove, and since I came away I have heard he was so drunk that he could neither go, stand, nor help himself; This Gentleman with his partner brother Meech baked bread for the souldiers, the souldiers com∣plaining it wanted weight, it was weighed, to make it the hea∣vier he put bullets into the loaves, which being discovered, all the answer he gave was he had rather be a knave then a fool; Brother Meech promised this favourite, that he should be Sutler in Elizabeth Castle, but he failing in it, he calls his brother knave and rogue.
9. Matthew Blethin, his religion is unknown, he was the Scribe of all the Papers presented to Col. Mason, and went a∣bout to procure hands to the Petition for Mr. Gosnold, he's a common drunkard, he was so drunk that he could scarce reade the Petition he had writ with his own hand, I declare that I was very much mistaken in him. 10. Goodman Bancks, a man hanging toward Col. Masons Religion, accounted as errant an old Canary-bird as sings in the Island, this blade borrowed thirty shillings in Garnzey, and gave a Bill under his hand to pay it, the man accordingly came into Jersey and demanded his money, he denyed his hand, un∣til the man was going up to complain to the Governour, then he ran after him, staid him, and paid him his money. This old—went about for hands, upon which good service he sate cheek by jowle with Col. Mason in his chamber. 11. Thomas Cooch, of what religion is not known, for he changes, and is still of the same the Governour is, whatsoever it be, right or wrong, this was Secretary to Mrs. Gibbon, and Mr. King my Predecessor, a very fit Chaplain for that valiant and wise Gentleman the late Lieutenant General Fleetwood, he was so drunk at a feast at Lehuge when I was in England, that he could scarce get home, as he cheated the prisoners, so he was unfaithful to the Common-wealth, although the Governour ordered that all Letters should be viewed which the prisoners sent and received, yet this fellow was so bold as both to send and receive Letters inclosed in his own, and deliver them pri∣vately to them, he was hired with the Commissary Mr. Sowtons place to forswear himself against me, and was abused by Col. Mason with the title of Mr. whereupon he wore a Gold ring (which he was very careful to shew in all company) and silver lace, this was a chief grand favourite. 12. William Brodford, a baptized brother, was a Cavalier, and fought against Weymoth under a Papist, he is a most horrid blas∣phemer, he hath publickly denyed the omniscience of God the Son, saying, that when Jesus Christ, Mark 10. 19. commanded the young man to keep the Commandments, he did it only to try what was in him, as if he did not know that before, he blas∣phemed God the holy Ghost, saying on the guard, that he had no roome for the word Ghost, except he should put it in the
crown of his hat, and that if he should see a Ghost, he would trample it under his feet, that he hoped that word would shortly be blotted out of the Bible, crying frequently in derision, O the word Ghost, and many other expressions like these, he calls the publick meeting-place in derision a steeple house, and the Church the whore, Brother Meech promised to prefer him also, but failing, he also rails on him, this was a chief favourite, a presenter of the grievances of the souldiers to Col. Mason. 13. Sarjeant Thomas, his religion God knows, that he is profane enough, appears by this short story, one telling him he had great rea∣son to blesse God who raised him friends whatsoever Governour came, tush (replied he) if the devil came to be Governour, I shall still have a friend. I believe many in that Island think, that if a worse Governour come then Col. Mason, the devil will come indeed: this is Brother Meeches Disciple and favourite. 14. I shall conclude with John Scovill, the most ridiculous person in that Island, he would willingly be a knave, were he not a fool, he said he had hanged towards the Anabaptists way these three yeares, this was Col. Masons jester to make him merry, and drive away me∣lancholly, to whom he told the learned Romantick story of Bro∣ther you are bob'd, and why should the poor mare suffer? I will not trouble your Honour with his valour in playing at the foiles and wrestling, I remember one story which comprehends both his folly and profaneness, he began the Kings health at John Gally's, having loosed his knee-strings, and pulled off a Merchants shooe, he drank it kneeling on his bare knees at the end of the Table, and after kissed the Merchants great toes, which ended they went to Capt. Gerhards a Tavern, and having laid the plot with his Normandy-maid, she looked under the Table for some money, which one of them pre∣tended he had lost, coming near Scovell, she cries out, and com∣plaines that he put his hand under her coats, runs away pretending to complain of the abuse to the Bayly, Scovell pursues her with his knife drawn, she runs under Capt. Gerhards bed to save her self, Mrs. Gerhard leaps out of the bed in a fright, they part for that night, next morning Scovell is perswaded that he was so drunk as to meddle with that bagage, and gives the company five shillings in wine to conceale and smother the matter, lest his wife should never own him. Consider the subject of this foolish story, and par∣on my relating of it. This was a favourite, was dipt in the sea in
jest at our going aboard, but I partly believe is dipt in earnest since I came away. From all which particulars I humbly propose to your Honours serious consideration. 1. Whether the honest Officers removed foure moneths since by Col. Masons sole power without any order, ought not in justice to have their Commissions renewed, except some cause can be shewed to the contrary, and their pay continued notwithstanding his respitin them in the muster rowles since July last. 2. Whether Col. John Mason be a fit person to be imployed in any place of trust, having acted so vigorously against the Parliament, and the faithful servants of it, or rather ought not to be brought to exemplary punishment for his arbitrary actions, and bloody cruelty and murder. 3. Whether his abominable associates and favourites can be ex∣pected to be good servants to the Common-wealth, being so de∣bauched and vitious persons. If these be once expulsed the Island, I engage my self to suffer death, if any man living can pick out such another crew out of near threescore thousand reasonable souls suppo∣sed to be there. POSTSCRIPT. THe shortnesse of my time in penning these lines (being but two days) have made the matter more immethodical, and the stile lesse polite and smooth then I could have wished, the truth of all the particulars I doubt not but I shall be able to prove by testimony upon Oath, when I shall be called thereto; if any person thinks himselfe lashed or netled, let him answer either in general, or to his own par∣ticular, and put his name to it as I have done mine, and he shall not want a reply, but I intend not (except I be abundantly at leasure) to trouble my self with such anonymous scurrilous Libels, as those a∣gainst the Worshipful Colonel Robert Gibbon, and Capt. Rich. Yardley. FINIS.
