B2961 13160909 98178
READER, THis Pamphlet was torn from me by those who say they cannot rob, because all is Theirs. They found it where it slept many years forgotten; but they 'waken'd it, and made false Transcripts. They Exciz'd what they liked not; so mangled and Reform'd, that 'twas no Character of an Assembler, but of Themselves. A Copy of that Reformling had crept to the Press. I seiz'd and stopt it, unwilling to father other mens sins. Here therefore you have it (as 'twas first scribled) without addi∣tion of a syllable; I wish I durst say here's nothing lopt off. but Men and Manners are chang'd, at least they say so. If yet this Trifle seem born with Teeth, you know whose hands were knuckle-deep in the bloud of that renowned Chancellour of Oxon (Archbishop LAUD) though when they cut up that great Martyr, his two greatest Crimes were the two greatest Glories Great Britain can boast of, St Paul's Church and the Oxford Library. Where you find no coherence, remember this Paper hath suffer'd Decimation: better Times have made it worse, and that's no fault of J. B.
THE Assembly-man; Written in the Year 1647. . i. e. He seditiously stirr's up men to fight: he'll teach others the way whereof himself is most ignorant; and perswades men to take an Oath, because himself had sworn it before. LONDON: Printed for Richard Marriot, and are to be sold at his shop under St. Dunstans Church in Fleet-street, 1662/3.
THE Assembly-man. AN Assembler is part of the States' Chat∣tels: nor Priest, nor Burgess, but a Participle that shark's upon both. He was chosen, as Sir Nathaniel, because he knew least of all his Profession: not by the Votes of a whole Diocese, but by one whole Parliament-man. He ha's sate four years towards a new Religion, but in the interim left none at all: as his Masters, the Commons, had a long Debate whether Candles or no Candles, but all the mean while sate still in the Dark: And therefore when the Moon quits her old Light, and has ac∣quir'd no new, Astronomers say she is in her Synode. Shew me such a Picture of Judas as the Assembler, (a griping, false, Reforming Brother; rail's at Wast spent upon the Anointed; persecutes most those Hands which Ordein'd him; brings in men with swords and staves; and all for Money from the Honourable Scribes and Pharisees:) One Touch more (a Line tyed to his Name-sake Elder-tree) had made him Judas Root and Branch. This Assembly at first
was a full Century; which should be reckon'd as the Scholiast's Hecatomb, by their Feet, not Heads: or count them by Scores, for in things without Heads Six-core to go to an Hundred. They would be a New Septuagint; the Old translated Scripture out of Hebrew into Greek, these turn it to four shillings a day. And all these Assemblers were begot in one day, as Hercules's fifty Bastards all in one night. Their first List was sprinkled with some names of Ho∣nour (Dr. Sanderson, Dr. Morley, Dr. Hammond, &c.) But these were Divines; too worthy to mix with such scandalous Ministers, and would not Assemble without the Royal Call. Nay, the first List had one Archbishop, one Bishop, and an Half, (for Bishop Brownrigg was then but Elect.) But now their Assembly (as Philosophers think the World) consists of Atoms; petty small Levites, whose Parts are not perceptible. And yet these inferior postern Teachers have intoxicated England, (for a man sometimes grow's drunk by a Glister.) When they all meet, they shew Beasts in Africk by promiscuous coupling ingender Monsters. Mr. Sel∣den. visit's them (as Persians use) to see wild Asses fight: when the Commons have tyr'd him with their new Law, these Brethren refresh him with their mad Gospel: They lately were gravell'd 'twixt Jerusalem and Jericho; they knew not the distance 'twixt those two places; one cry'd twen∣ty
miles, another ten, 'twas concluded seven, for this reason, that Fish was brought from Jericho to Je∣rusalem market: Mr Selden smil'd, and said per∣haps the Fish was salt fish, and so stopp'd their mouths. Earl Philip goes thither to hear them spend; when he heard them toss their NATIONALL, PROVINCIALL, CLASSICALL, CONGREGATIO∣NALL; he swore damnably, that a pack of good Dogs made better Musick: His Allusion was proper since the Elder's Maid had a four-legg'd Hus∣band. To speak truth, this Assembly is the two Houses Tiring-room, where the Lords and Commons put on their Visards and Masques of Religion. And their Honors have so sifted the Church, that at last they have found the Bran of the Clergy. Yet such poor Church-menders must Reform and shuffle, though they find Church-Government may a thousand wayes be chang'd for the worse, but not one way for the better. They have lately publish'd ANNOTATIONS on the Bible, where their first Note (on the word CREATE) is a Libel against Kings for creating of Honors. Their Annotation on Jacob's two Kids, is, that two Kids are too much for one mans supper: but he had (say they) but one Kid, and the other made Sauce. They observe upon Herod, what a Tyrant he was, to kill Infants under two years old, without giving them a
legal Tryal that they might speak for themselves. Commonly they follow the Geneva Margin, as those Sea-men who understood not the Compass crept along the Shore. But I hear they threaten a second Edition, and in the interim thrust forth a paultry Catechism, which expounds Nine Command∣ments, and eleven Articles of the Creed. Of late they are much in love with Chronograms, because (if possible) they are duller than Anagrams; O how they have torn the poor Bishops names to pick out the number 666! little dreaming that a whole Bakers dozen of their own Assembly have that Beastly Number in each of their Names, and that as exactly as their Solemn League and Covenant consist's of 666 words. But though the Assembler's Brains are Lead, his Countenance is Brass; for he damn'd such as held two Benefices, while himself has four or five, besides his Concubin. Lecture. He is not against Pluralities, but Duali∣ties; He say's 'tis unlawful to have Two of his own, though Four of other mens; and observes how the Hebrew word for Life has no Singular number Yet 'tis some Relief to a Sequester'd Person to see two Assemblers snarl for his Tithes; for of al kind of Beasts none can match an Assembler bu an Assembler. He never enters a Church by the Door, but clambers up through a Window of Se∣questration,
or steals in through Vaults and Cel∣lars by clandestine Contracts with an Expecting Patron. He is most sure no Law can hurt him, for Lawes dyed in England the year before the Assembler was born. The best way to hold him, is (as our King Richard bound ths King of Cyprus) in silver chains. He love's to discourse of the new Jerusalem, because her streets are of fine gold; and yet could like London as well; were Cheapside pav'd with the Philosophers stone. Nay, he would say his Prayers with Beads, if he might have a Set made all of Dia∣monds: This, this is it which tempts him to such mad Articles against the Loyal Clergie, whom he dresse's as he would have them appear; just as the Ballad of Dr. Faustus brings forth the Devil in a Friars weed. He accus'd one Minister, for saying the Blessed Virgin was the Mother of God, (, as the Ancients call her.) Another he charg'd for a common Drunkard, whom all the Countrey knows has drunk nothing but Water these six and twenty years. But the Assembler himself can drink Widows Tears though their Husbands are not dead. Sure, if Paracelsus's Doctrine were true, (that to eat creatures alive will perpetuate mans life) the Assem∣bler were immortal, for he swallows quick Men, Wives, and Children; and devours Lives as well as Livings; as if he were born in that Pagan Province
where None might marry till he had kill'd twelve Christians. This makes him kneel to Lieutenant General Cromwell (as Indians to the Devil;) for he saw how Oliver first threw—, then—, and can with a wink do as much for—: like Milo in the Olympicks, by practising on a Calf grew strong enough for a Bull, and could with ease give a lift to an Asse. The Great Turk was sending his Am∣bassador, to congratulate the Assembly's Proceed∣ings against the Christians; He Order'd them Thanks for Licencing his Alcoran to be printed in English; but hearing Ottoman Cromwell had talk'd of marching to the walls of Constantinople, that Embassy was stopt. The onely difference 'twixt the Assem∣bler and a Turk, is, that one plant's Religion by the power of the Sword, and the other by the power of the Cymetar. Nay, the greatest strife in their whole Conventicle, is who shall do worst; for they all intend to make the Church but a Sepulchre, having not onely plunder'd, but anatomiz'd all the true Clergy; whose Torment is heightned in being destroy'd by such dull Instruments; as the Pro∣phet Isaiah was sawn to pieces with a wooden Saw. The Assembler wonder's that the King and his Friends live still in Hope; he thinks them all in St. Clemens case, drown'd with an Anchor tyed about his neck. He has now got power to Visit
the Universities; where these blinking Visitors look on eminent Scholars (as the Blind-man who saw Men like Trees) as Timber growing within the Root-and-Branch Ordinance. The Assembler has now left Scholars so poor, they have scarce Raggs wherewith to make Paper. A man would think the Two Houses intend to transport the Universities, since they load Asses with Colledge-revenues. For though these Assemblers made themselves Heads, they are rather the Hands of Colledges, for they all are Takers, and take all. And yet they are such creeping Tyrants, that Scholars are expell'd the two Universities, as the old Thracians, forc'd from their Countrey by Ratts and Mice. So that Lear∣ning now is so much advanc'd, as Arrowsmith's Glasseye sees more than his Natural. They never ad∣mit a good Scholar to a Benefice, for the Assembly's Balance is the Lake of Sodom, where Iron swims and Feathers sink. Their Divinity-Disputations are with Women or Lay-men; and 'tis onely on one Question (Episcopacy) where the Assembler talks all that he and his friends can say, (though his best medium to prove Presbyters more ancient than Bi∣shops, is, that Scribes, Pharisees, Priests and Elders were before the Apostles;) Yet if a Scholar or good Argument come, he flie's them as much as if they were his Text. This made him curse Dr. Steward,
Dr. Laney, and Dr. Hammond; and had he not had more Brass in his Face then in his Kitchin, he had hang'd himself at Uxbridge, and ended with that Treaty. For he has naught of Logick, but her clutch'd fist, and rail's at Philosophy as Beggars do at Gentle∣men. He has very bad luck when he deals in Phi∣lologie, as one of them (and that no mean man) who, in his Preface to the Reader, sayes, that St. Paul had read Eustathius upon Homer, though the Apostle dyed a thousand years before Eustathius was born. The Assembler's Dyet is strangely different, for he dines wretchedly on dry Bread at Westminster, four Assemblers for thirteen pence: But this sharpens and whets him for Supper, where he feeds gratis with his City-Landlord, to whom he brings a huge Stomach and News; for which cramm'd Capons cram him. He screw's into Families where there is some rich Daughter or Heir; but whoever takes him into their bosom, will dye like Cleopatra. When it rain's he is Coach'd (a Classis of them together) rowling his Eyes to mark who beholds him. His shortest things are his Hair and his Cloak. His Hair is cut to the figure of 3; two high Cliffs run up his Temples, whose Cape of shorn hair shoot's down his Forehead, with Creeks indented, where his Ears ride at Anchor. Had this false Prophet been carried with Habbakuk, the Angel had caught
fast hold of his Ears, and led him as he leads his Au∣ditory. His Eyes are part of his Tithe at Easter, which he boyles at each Sermon. He has two Mouthes, his Nose is one, for he speaks through both. His Hands are not in his Gloves, but his Gloves in his Hands, for 'twixt Sweatings, that is, Sermons, he handles little else, except his dear Mammon. His Gown (I mean his Cloak) reache's but his pockets: when he rides in that Man∣tle, with a Hood on his shoulders and a Hat above both, is he not then his own Man of sin with the Triple Crown? you would swear some honest Car∣penter dress'd him, and made him the Tunnell of a Country Chimney. His Doubles and Hose are of dark Blew, a grain deeper than pure Coventry: but of late he's in Black, since the Loyal Clergy were per∣secuted into Colours His two longest things are his Nayles and his Prayer. But the cleanest thing about him is his Pulpit-Cushion, for he still beats the Dust out of it. To do him right, commonly he weares a pair of good Lungs, whereby he turns the Church into a Belfry, for his Clapper make's such a Din, you cannot hear the Cymball for the Tinkling. If his Pulpit be large, he walk's his Round, and speaks as from a Garrison, (his own Neck is Palizado'd with Ruff) When he first enters his Prayer before Sermon, he wink's and gasp's, and gasp's and wink's, as if he
prepar'd to preach in another world: He seems in a Slumber, then in a Dream; then rumbles awhile; at last he sound's forth, and then throw's so much Dirt and Non-sense towards Heaven, as he durst not offer to a Member of Parliament. Now because Scri∣pture bids him not curse the King in his Thought, he do's it in his Pulpit by word of mouth; though Heaven strike him dumb in the very Act, as it did Hill at Cambridge, who while he pray'd, Depose Him, O Lord, who would depose us, was made the dumb Devil. This (one would think) should gargle his foul mouth. For his only hope why God should hear him against the King, is the Devil himself (that great Assembler) was heard against Job. His whole Prayer is such an irrational Bleating that (without a Metaphor) 'tis the Calves of his Lipps: And commonly 'tis larded with fine new words, as Savingable, Muchly, Christ-Jesusness, &c. and yet he has the face to preach against Prayer in an unknown Tongue. Sometimes he's foun∣der'd, and then there is such hideous Coughing! But that's very seldom, for he can glibly run over Non-sense, as an empty Cart trundles down a Hill. When the King girt round the Earl of Essex at Lestythiell, an Assembler complain'd that God had drawn his People into the Wildernesse, and told Him, He was bound in honour to feed them; for, Lord, said he, since thou giv'st them no Meat, we pray thee, O Lord, to give them no Stomachs. He tore
the Liturgie, because, forsooth, it shackled his Spirit, (he would be a Devil without a circle;) and now if he see the Book of Common Prayer, the Fire sees it next, as sure as the Bishops were burn'd who compil'd it. Yet he has mercy on Hopkins and Sternhold, because their Meeters are sung without Authority (no Statute, Canon, or Injunction at all;) only, like himself, first crept into private Houses, and then into Chur∣ches. Mr. Rous mov'd those Meetres might be Seque∣stred, and his own new Rithmes to enjoy the Seque∣stration; but was Refus'd, because John Hopkins was as ancient as John Calvin; Besides, when Rous stood forth for his Trial, Robin Wisdom was found the bet∣ter Poet. Tis true they have a Directory, but 'tis good for nothing but Adoniram, who sold the Original for 400 l. And the Book must serve both England and Scotland, as the Directory Needle point's North and South. The Assembler's only Ingenuity is, that he pray's for an ex tempore Spirit, since his Conscience tell's him he has no Learning. His Prayer thus en∣ded, he then look'd round, to observe the Sex of his Congregation, and accordingly turn's the Apo∣stle's Men, Fathers, and Brethren into Dear Brethren and Sisters. For, his usual Auditory is most part Female; and as many Sisters flock to Him, as at Paris on Saint Margaret's day, when all come to Church that are or hope to be with child that year. He divides his Text
as he did the Kingdom, make's one part fight against another: or as Burges divides the Dean of Paul's House, not into Parts, but Tenements, that is, so as 'twill yield most money. And properly they are Te∣nements; for each Part must be dwelt upon, though himself comes near it but once a Quarter; and so his Text is rather Let out than Divided. Yet sometimes (to shew his skill in Keckerman,) he Butcher's a Text, cut's it (just as the Levite did his Concubine) into many dead Parts, breaking the Sense and Words all to pieces, and then they are not Divided, but shatter'd, like the Splinters of Don Quixot's Lance. If his Text be to the Occasion, his first Dish is Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver; yet tells not the People what Pi∣ctures those were. His Sermon and Prayer grin at each other, the one is Presbyterian, the other Independent, for he preaches up the Classes, yet pray's for the Army. Let his Doctrine and Reason be what they will, his Use is still to save his Benefice and augment his Lecture. He talks much of Truth, but abhors Peace, lest it strip him as naked as Truth; and therefore hates a Personal Treaty, unlesse with a Sister. He has a rare simpring way of expression; he call's a Marryed Couple Saints that enjoy the Mystery; and a man Drunk, is a Brother full of the Creature. Yet at Wedding Sermons he is very familiar, and (like that Picture in the Church at Ley∣den) shew's Adam and Eve without Fig-leaves. At Fu∣nerals
he gives infallible Signs that the Party is gone to Heaven; but his chief Mark of a child of God, is to be good to God's Ministers. And hence 'tis he call's his Preach∣ment Manna, fitted not to his Hearers Necessity, but their Palat, for 'tis to feed Himself, not them. If he chance to tire, he refreshes himself with the People's Hum, as a Collar of Bells do chear up a Pack-horse. 'Tis no wonder hee'l preach, but that any will hear him; (and his constant Auditors do but shew the length of their Ears;) For he is such an , that to hear him make's good Scholars sick, but to read him is death. Yet though you heard him three hours hee'l ask a fourth, as the Beggar at Delph craves your Charity because he eats four pound of Bread at a Meal. 'Twas from his Larum the Watch-makers learn'd their infinit Skrew. His Glasse and Text are equally hand∣led, that is, once an hour: nay sometimes he sally's and never returns, and then we should leave him to the Company of Lorimers, for he must be held with Bit and Bridle. Who ever once has been at his Church can never doubt the History of Balaam. If he have got any new Tale or Expression, 'tis easier to make Stones speak than him to hold his peace. He hates a Church where there is an Eccho, for it robs him of his dear Repetition, and confounds the Auditory as well as he. But of all Mortals I admire the Short-hand∣men, who have the patience to write from his Mouth:
had they the art to shorten it into Sense, they might write his whole Sermon on the back of their Nail. For his Invention consist's in finding a way to speak Nothing upon any thing; and were he in the Grand Seigniors power, he would lodge him with his Mutes; for Nothing and Nothing to purpose are all one. I won∣der in conscience he can preach against Sleeping at his Opium-Sermons. He preaches indeed both in season and out of season; for he rayl's at Popery, when the Land is almost lost in Presbytery, and would cry out Fire, Fire, in Noah's Flood. Yet all this he so act's with his Hands, that in this sense too his Preaching is a Handicraft. Nor can we complain that Playes are put down while he can preach, save only his Sermons have worse Sense, and lesse Truth. But he blew down the Stage and preach'd up the Scaffold. And very wise∣ly, lest men should track him, and find where he pilsers all his best Simile's, (the only thing wherein he's commendable, St. Paul himself having cull'd Sentences from Menander's THAIS, though 'twas his worst, that is, unchast Comedy.) Sometimes the Assembler will venture at the Original, and then (with the Translator of Don Quixot) he mistake's Sobs and Sighs for Eggs and Collops. But commonly (for want of Greek and Latin) he learns Hebrew, and streight is illu∣minated; that is, mad; his Brain is broke by a Brickbat cast from the Tower of Babel. And yet this
empty windy Teacher has Lectur'd a War quite round the Kingdom: he has found a Circulation of Bloud for Destruction (as famous Harvey for Preservation) of Mankind. 'Twas easie to foresee a great Mortality when Ravens were heard in all Corporations. For, as Multitude of Froggs presage a Pestilence, so croak∣ing Lecturers foretold an Assembly. Men come to Church, as the Great Alexander went to Sacrifice, led by Crows. You have seen a small Elder-tree grow in Chinks and Clefts of Church-walls; it seems rather a Weed than a Tree; which, lend it growth, make's a Rent in the Wall, and throw's downe the Church. Is not this the Assembler? grown from Schismes (which himself begot,) and if permitted, will make the Church but a Floor or Church-yard. Yet, for all this, he will be call'd Christ's Munster and Saint, as the Rebels against King John were the Army of God. Sure when they meet, they cannot but smile; for the dullest among them needs must know that they all cheat the people: such grosse low Impostors, that we die the death of the Emperor Claudius, poyson'd by Mushromes. The old Hereticks had Skill and Lear∣ning (some excuse for a Seduced Church,) Those were Scholars, but these are Assemblers; whose very Brains (as Manichaeu's skin) are stuff'd with Chaff. For they study little, and preach much, ever sick of a Diabete: nor do they read, but weed Authours, picking up
cheap and refuse Notes, that with Caligula they ga∣ther Cockle-shells, and with Domitian retire in∣to their Studie to catch Flies. At Fasts and Thanksgivings the Assembler is the States' Trumpet; for then he doth not preach, but is blown; proclaims News, very loud, the Trumpet and his Forehead being both of one metal. (And yet, good Man, he still prayes for Boldness.) He hackney's out his Voice like a Crier; and is a kind of Spiritual Agi∣tant, receives Orders, and spreads them. In earnest the States can't want this Tool, for without him the Saints would scarce Assemble. And if the Zealots chance to fly out, they are charm'd home by this Sounding Brass. There is not on earth a baser Syco∣phant; for he ever is chewing some Vote or Ordi∣nance; and tells the People how savoury it is; like him who lick'd up the Emperour's spittle and swore 'twas sweet. Would the two Houses give him Cathe∣dral Lands, he would prove Lords and Commons to be Jure Divino: but should they offer him the Self-denying Ordinance, he would justifie the Devil and curse them to their faces, (his Brother Kirk-man did it in Scotland.)' Tis pleasant to observe how finely they play into each others hands; Marshall procures Thanks to be given to Sedgwick (for his great pains) Sedgwick obtains as much for Marshall, and so they all pimp for one another. But yet (to
their great comfort be it spoken) their whole seven-years Sermons at Westminster are now to be sold in Fetter-lane and Pye-corner. Before a Battail the Assem∣bler ever speaks to the Souldiers; and the holding up of his hands must be as necessary as Moses's against the Amalekites: For he prick's them on, tells them that God loves none but the valiant: but when Bullets flye, Himself runns first, and then cry's All the sonns of Adam are cowards! Were there any Metem∣psychosis his Soul would want a Lodging; no single Beast could fit him, being wise as a Sheep and in∣nocent as a Wolf. His sole comfort is, he can∣not out-sin Hugh Peters: Sure, as Satan hath possessed the Assembler, so Hugh Peters hath possessed Satan, and is the Devil's Devil. He alone would fill a whole Herd of Gadarens. He hath suck'd Bloud ever since he lay in the Butcher's Sheets; and now (like his Sultan) has a Shambles in his Countenance; so crimson and torrid, you may there read how St. Lawrence dyed, and think the three children were delivered from his face. This is St. Hugh, who will Levell the Assembler, or the De∣vil's an Asse. Yoke these Brethren; and they two couple like a Sadducee and a Pharisee, or a Turk and a Persian, both Mahumetans. But the Assem∣bler's deepest highest Abomination, is his Solemn League and Covenant; whereby he strive's to damn or
begger the whole Kingdom; out-doing the Devil, who onely perswades, but the Assembler force's to perjury or starving. And this (whoever live's to observe it) will one day sink both him and his Faction: for he and his Oath are so much one, that were he half-hang'd and let down again, his first word would be Covenant! Covenant! But I forget a Character should be brief: (though tedious Length be his best Character.) There∣fore I'll give yee (what He denyes the Sequester'd Clergy) but a Fifth Part. For weigh him single, and he has the Pride of three Tyrants, the Forhead of six Gaolers, and the Fraud of twelve Brokers. Or take him in the Bunch, and their whole Assembly is a Club of Hypocrites, where six dozen of Schis∣maticks spend two hours for four shillings apiece. FINIS.
