B3581 12616575 64410
THE POETS RECANTATION, having suffered in the Pillory. the 2. of Aprill 1642. With a penitent submis∣sion of all things, that have beene written against the King and State. In an humble Petitionary descrip∣tion, obsequiously commended to the Honorable and High Court of PARLIAMENT. IOHN BOND. Scribimus, & scriptus consumitur igne Libellus. London Printed for T. A. and Ioseph Wren. 1642.
THE Poets Recantation, having suffered on the Pillorie. THe inumerable multitude of Pamphlets, which have beene surreptitiously inserted above this twelve months and halfe to the ignominious scandall of the State, did not only exasperate his Majesties just indignation against them, but also highly incensed his Parliament a∣gainst the same. Who to give plenary satisfacti∣on as well to the whole kingdome in generall, as also to his Majestie in particular, intended to in∣flict an exemplary punishment on the Authors thereof. And it being my hard fortune, or rather misfortune to bee found culpable in one peculiar Letter; (though thousand more scandalous Libils, and more invective against the State have beene published, whereof I am innocent) yet I was ex∣posed publico dedecore, to the publike shame of the world; as the sole contriver of them all. I con∣fesse impartially, I acknowledge the sublimity of my crime, and errour, without which there is noe
man living: for according to the grave, and pru∣dent (I had almost said oraculous) sentence of Cato, Neme sine crimine vivit. It was not with∣standing no voluntary Act of criminall offence in me, but rather an astimulation, and inducement of impendent, and urgent necessitie, et ingens telum necessitas est. Moreover I speake before God, and the whole world, I was suggested to write the same by a calumnious instigator. In all which, my cogitations in the compositing thereof may per∣spicuously bee conceived to bee innocent though it is not innocence that I must plead now so much as penitence. Artificis scelus est, arte perire suâ. Thus Perillus invented and made a brazen Bull, which was the sole cause of his owne destruction, thus Daedalus haveing framed an irremiable Labor∣ynth, was first exposed thither himselfe. So that which was extracted out of mine owne braine, (as Minerva was from Ioves, though she was more divinely guided, and inspired) was the prime cause of my miserie, whereupon I am involved in that Condoleable Laborynth of durance, that unlesse I be reduced by the Ariadnaean thread of Compassi∣sonate mercy, and Commiseration Actum est de me et de fortunis meis, would I had bene Pythagoras his Schollar, for then et labiorum ostia stricto silentii ob∣dideram pessulo, et simul effrenatam Calami licentiam cohibuissem, et tum in catenatis hisce miseriarum vora∣ginibus
nunquam illapsus essem. But sero sapium Phry∣ges, we are wise, when 'tis too late: and had I ma∣turely Considered, and presupposed the subsequent casualities, which were incident, I might have pre∣vented that danger wherin I am now involved. But I wonder with a repercussive amazement, that the Muses, and Graces did not discend their auxiliary asistance unto me, whom I will invocate respect∣ively, to know really whither or no they have di∣vorced themselves asonte Pegasaeo from the pegasean fountaine.
Where are those Dames, from Aganippe's Spring, That to their lovers a Protection bring, Gainst inauspicious fate; where are the Peeres, Of all Poetck wits; who hearks? or heares? Where is Pol'ymnia, or Appollo gon? What have they all forsaken Helicon? Poore helpelesse I must then exposed be In publick shame unto the Pillorie. But stay, retract that word my Muse, my Pen, Let it not passe, but call it backe agen. The Pillorie? Prodigious word! Have I Trespass'd, offended, or transgress'd so high? Let me plough through my workes, if I can find What can be artickled against my mind. Now I perceive the Cause, hence doth distill, That I have beene too sawcy in my Quill. 'Tis not expedient that a Vulgar eye, Should gaze upon superiour Maiestie. 'Twas that, which dazled my dull Muse, I see, 'Twas that involv'd her in this miserie. Was Phaeton too bold, into the ayre Whose thoughts aspir'd, to sit in Phoebus Chayre? As rash, as temerarious then was I Who touched Charles his Wayne too loftily. 'T was not for periurie, that I have beene Thy Captive, Pillorie, nor was there seene Hereticke thoughts in me: oh then forbeare Or to dissect my nose or geld mine eare. Thy ostentation most sublime may be, Which boast of That: A Poet honour'd Thee.
Since I perceive that the Muses have all forsaken me henceforth I will never dip my pen in Helicon to embroyder my words with Poeticall elocutions: I will rather soake my Quill in Acharon, that all thinges (what soever I have written either dependent, have∣ing any reference, or against the state) may be obli∣terated with oblivion. But it is very stupendious, that those thinges, which naturally discend from any man, should oppresse him with misery. Thus a Viper Produceth young, and she is macerated and sometimes killed by those, which she did once bare in her owne wombe. Thus Cassiodora was betrayed by the Crying of her owne Child: And thus I was both introduced into this deplorable estate by the crying of my owne Poetick babe, promulgated by the street-cantors, and also wrapt up in this indigence by the same. The Capitolium was delivered, and se∣cured from conspirative machinations by the irregu∣lar, and tumultuous noyse of Geese, that frequented there: but in a meere antipathy and Contradictory Mytholagie I was betrayed by a Goose quill, so that both fortune, time, and example did all conspire a∣gainst me. First fortune was mine enemy, that I should be induced to do that by the palpable, and Parasiticall incitements of others, which now is like to subvert both me and my fortunes also. Se∣condly time was malevolent, in regard it was done in the period of things, when they were all question∣able, and amongst the the rest, that this espetially should reflect on mine owne detriment. Thirdly ex∣ample conspired against me, for in respect such a
multitude of Libels being published, whereof there were many Authors, that my fate espetially should be so disastrous to suffer exemplarily for all. And now I do most submissively recant in all humility, and what I have offended in I am heartily sory, and peni∣tent for the same. Yet I was never invective either against the state or distressed Delinquents: only I confesse some times I was conversant in innocent things: and I hope the apprehensive eye of the world will not mis-interpretate what I have don. And I doe with all obsequious devotion implore forgivenesse and absolution of the whole world, for what I am re∣puted culpable in, and peccant: but more espetially I most humbly supplicate the propitious reflection of the high Court of Parliaments mercy, and Com∣miseration, promising hereafter before God, and their Honours an absolute Reformation in my pen hereafter. FINIS
