B3838 99825560 29944
Die Lunae 6 Junii, 1642. The Copy of a Letter sent from Sir Jo: Bourchier, to Sir Thomas Barrington Knight and Baronet, from YORK. SIR, YEsterday being at Heworth-Moor, I observed one reading something, so as I drew neer to him, and by inquiry, I found that it was a Petition that was to be presented presently to His Majestie; those that heard it read, approved of it: meeting with a friend, I enquired of him if he had not the Petition, or a Copy of it; which he told me he had: I in∣treated him that he would lend me it, which accordingly he did; and having read part of it, my Lord Savill came with a great company in a furious manner, and de∣manded what I did there, and told me that I was reading some Pamphlet to the Peo∣ple, and that I was labouring to sow some seeds of Sedition, to seduce the Kings Sub∣jects: whereupon I told him it was a Petition that I was reading privately to my self, which I upon his approach put in my pocket. My Lord Savill in an imperious manner demanded of me to deliver it to him, which I refused; then his Lordship laid his hand on the belt of my sword, and almost pulled me off my horse, and forced me to deliver the Petition to him, least otherwayes some greater mischief might have come to him; for his Lordship told me, If we loved fighting, we should have fight∣ing enough. I told his Lordship, I came this day to labour for peace. And imme∣diatly before his Lordships departure, he told me that he knew me wel enough; then I told his Lordship, that I hoped he knew no ill by me: Many that were with his Lordship held up their Canes in a terrifying manner; and one of them said, Hold your prating, it were good to Cane you: and when his Lordship and the rest were gone, one of them turned back, and bid me be quiet, or else I should be Caned, and said that it were a good deed to put me in the Stocks. Afterwards there was one Ca∣ptain Blague, who was one of my Lord Savills company, came in an intruding man∣ner into my companie, and I being discoursing with Sir Rich: Darley and some other; and telling them how I was affronted even now by my Lord Savill, and formerly, having fire thrown into my Coach, and some other affronts done unto me, which I have formerly told you on; this Captain told me I did ill to lay aspersions upon per∣sons of Honour: Whereupon I told him I did not lay it upon my Lord, but that I was so abused and affronted; upon due consideration, I verily believe hee came to make some quarrell. Sir, upon my parting from you, you desired to hear from me; here I thought good to let you know thus much concerning my self. Thus, with my service to you and my Lady, I rest York, 4. June. 1642. Your affectionate Cozen to serve you, JO: BOƲRCHIER. Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Letter shall be forthwith printed and published. Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. Iune 7. 1642.
