B3945 99826341 30742
A DISCOURSE OF Things ABOVE REASON. INQUIRING Whether a Philosopher should ad∣mit there are any such. By a Fellow of the Royal Society▪ To which are annexed by the Publisher (for the Affinity of the Subjects) Some ADVICES About judging of Things said to Transcend REASON. WRITTEN By a Fellow of the same Society. LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in S. Paul's Church-Yard. 1681.
An Advertisement. THe Later of the two follow∣ing Dialogues is but a part of a Discourse, consisting of some Conferences, whereof, that was neither the First, nor the Last. This 'twas thought fit the Reader should have notice of, that he may the more easily guess upon what ac∣count it is, that some Clauses in the first Page, (and perhaps a few o∣ther Passages elsewhere) contain somewhat that appears not altoge∣ther the same it would have done, if there had been no need to make any alteration at all in that Page. But because, tho there was a connection between that Dialogue and the rest of the Papers from which 'tis dis∣membered, yet it's dependency upon the others, is not so very great, but that the Publisher thought the divulging of it might be useful and seasonable: and there∣fore finding that want of Leisure,
and much Diffidence, made the Au∣thor unwilling to revise, and part with the other Papers that accom∣panied this which now comes forth; he prevail'd with him to suffer that Dialogue to take its Fortune, which the Publisher hopes may be such, as may incourage the Author to com∣municate what he has further medi∣tated upon such Subjects. ERRATA. Pag. 3. lin. 3. read Arnobius. p. 9. l. 5. r. how. p. 25. l. 20. r. continui. p. ib. l. 21. r. hucusque superata. p. 38. l 20. for near read above. p. 56. l. 18. r. deny. p. 60. l. 5. r. sight. p 84 l. 7. r. men of. p. 86. l. ult. r. us; for. p. 92. l. 22. r. Time will. p 93. l. 12. r. do. P. 4 l. 12. r. bare repetition. p. 34. l. 6. r. Body. p. 41. l. 3. r. instance▪ p. 43. l. 10. r. gy. p. 48. l. 26. r. soners. p. 50. l. 3. r. thing. p. 62. l. 1. r. evidence of.
A DISCOURSE OF Things ABOVE REASON. ENQUIRING, Whether a Philosopher should admit there are any such. The Speakers are, Sophronius, Eu∣genius, Pyrocles, and Timotheus. Euge. THE Seriousness you yet retain in your looks, and the po∣sture we found you in at our entrance, makes me fear these two Gentlemen and I are un∣seasonable
intruders, that are so un∣happy as to disturb your Meditati∣ons. Sophron. Instead of doing that, you will much promote them, if you please to accompany me in them: For the subject that busied my thoughts is both so abstruse and so important, that it needs more than one to consider it, and deserves that He should be a far better con∣siderer than I, who therefore must think my self far less fit for that task than you. Eug. I will punish the flattery of these last words, by declining to make any Return to it. Pyrocl. And I, Gentlemen, to prevent the loss of time and words between you, shall without farther Ceremony ask Sophronius, what his thoughts were employed about when we came in. Sophr. I was then musing upon a
Subject, that was newly proposed to me by our common Friend Arno∣biut, who would needs have my opi∣nion, Whether, and if at all, how far, we may employ our reasonings a∣bout things that are above our Rea∣son, as Christians grant some my∣steries of their Religion to be. Euge. If, by things above Reason, be meant only those, that are undis∣coverable by Reason without Reve∣lation; I should not hesitate to say, that there may be divers things of that kind: For the free Decrees of God, and his determinations con∣cerning the Government of the World, and the future state of man∣kind (to name now no others) are things which no humane Reason can pry into, but must owe the funda∣mental discovery it makes of them, to the Revelation of him, whose purposes they are. But if, by things above Reason, be meant such, as though delivered in words, free from darkness and Am∣biguity, are not to be conceived,
and comprehended by our Rational Faculty, I shall freely confess, that I scarce know what to say upon so unusual and sublime a subject. Pyrocl. For my part, Gentlemen, I think it were very requisite to be sure in the first place, that the sub∣ject of our Discourses is not Chime∣rical, but that we can really know, that there are things we cannot comprehend, though they be pro∣posed to us in expressions no less clear than such, as would suffice to make other things intelligible to us. Sophr. Your cautiousness, Pyro∣cles, must not be rejected by me, who when, before you came in, I was putting my thoughts into some order, judg'd it unfit to consider, either how one might know what things were to be look'd on as above Reason, how far we may discourse of them, or whether or no any su∣pernaturally revealed Propositions, such as Divines call Articles of Faith,
ought to be reckoned among them, till I should have first seriously en∣quir'd, whether in general we ought to admit any such Objects of our Contemplation, as these, and the like Questions suppose. Euge. I hope then that this being the first thing you purposed to en∣quire into, we may, without too much boldness, desire to know what came into your mind about it. Sophr. If I had brought my con∣siderations to an issue upon that sub∣ject, I should with less reluctancy acquaint you with them; but I since I have yet made but an imper∣fect progress in my enquiry, instead of delivering any positive opinion upon so abstruse a subject, I shall on∣ly tell you, that as far as I could yet discern, it seemed to me that among the Objects, our reason may con∣template there are some whose Na∣ture we cannot comprehend, others whose Attributes or Actions are such, as that we cannot understand
how they should belong to the Sub∣ject, or else that we cannot conceive how they should consist with some acknowledged Truth. Euge. So that if I apprehend you right, you do not only admit some things to be above Reason, but make no less than three sorts of them. Sophr. If you will needs have two of them to be coincident, I shall not much contend, but I think the num∣ber you have named may, without any great inconvenience, be admit∣ted: For by things above Reason, I here understand (not false or ab∣surd ones, but) such, as though the In∣tellect sees sufficient cause (whether on the score of Experience, Au∣thentick Testimony, or Mathema∣tical Demonstration) to assent to; yet it finds it self reduc'd when 'tis conversant about them, to be so with a notable and peculiar disadvantage: And this disadvantage does usually proceed either from the nature of the thing proposed, which is such,
that we cannot sufficiently compre∣hend it, or from our not being able to conceive the manner of its exist∣ing and operating; or from this, that it involves some notion or pro∣position, that we see not how to re∣concile with some other thing, that we are perswaded to be a truth. The first of these three sorts of things, may, for brevity and distinction sake be called Incomprehensible, the se∣cond Inexplicable, and the third Un∣sociable. But for fear lest the short∣ness I have used in my expressions, may have kept them from being so clear, I shall somewhat more expli∣citly reckon up the three sorts of things that seem to me above Rea∣son. The first consists of those whose Nature is not distinctly and ade∣quately comprehensible by us: To which sort perhaps we may refer all those intellectual Beings (if it be granted that there are such) as are by nature of a higher order than hu∣mane Souls. To which sort some the Angels (at least of the good
ones) may probably belong; but more than probably we may refer to this Head, the Divine Author of Nature, and of our Souls, Almigh∣ty God, whose perfections are so boundless, and his Nature so very singular, that 'tis no less weakness than presumption to imagine, that such finite Beings as our Souls, can frame full and adequate Idea's of them: We may indeed know by the consideration of his works, and particularly those parts of them that we our selves are, both That he is, and in a great measure What he is not; but to understand throughly What he is, is a task too great for any but his own infinite Intellect: And therefore I think we may truly call this immense Object, in the newly declared sence, supra-Intel∣lectual. Euge. I suppose I may now ask what is the second sort of Things above Reason? Sophr. It consists of such, as
though we cannot deny that they are, yet we cannot clearly and sa∣tisfactorily conceive, how they can be such as we acknowledge they are. As how Matter can be infinitely, (or which is all one, in our present dis∣course, indefinitely) divisible: And how there should be such an incom∣mensurableness betwixt the Side and Diagonal of a Square, that no mea∣sure, how small soever, can ade∣quatly measure both the one and the other. That Matter is endlesly divisible, is not only the assertion of Aristotle and the Schools, but generally em∣braced by those rigid Reasoners, Geometricians themselves; and may be farther confirm'd by the other in∣stance of the Side and Diagonal of a Square, whose incommensurable∣ness is believed upon no less firm a proof, than a demonstration of Eu∣clid, and was so known a truth a∣mong the Ancients, that Plato is said to have pronounced him rather a Beast than a Man, that was a stran∣ger to it. And yet if continued
quantity be not divisible without stop, how can we conceive but that there may be found some determi∣nate part of the side of a Square, which being often enough repeat∣ed, would exactly measure the Di∣agonal too. But though Mathema∣tical Demonstrations assure us, that these things are so, yet those that have strained their Brains, have not been able clearly to conceive how it should be possible, that a Line (for instance) of not a quarter of an inch long, should be still divisible into lesser and lesser portions, without ever coming to an end of those sub∣divisions; or how among the innu∣merable differing partitions into ali∣quot parts, that may be made of the side of a Square, not one of those parts can be found exactly to mea∣sure so short a Line as the Diagonal may be. Euge. There is yet behind, So∣phronius, the third sort of those things, which, according to you, surpass our Reason.
Sophr. I shall name that too, Eu∣genius, as soon as I have premised that some of the Reasons that mo∣ved me to refer some instances to this head, do not so peculiarly be∣long to those instances, but that they may be applicable to others, which 'twas thought convenient to refer to the second or first of the foregoing Heads: And this being once inti∣mated, I shall proceed to tell you, that the third sort of things that seem to surpass our Reason, consists of those, to which the Rules and Axioms and Notions, whereby we judge of the truth and falshood of ordinary, or other things, seem not to agree. This third sort being such as are incumbred with Difficulties or Ob∣jections, that cannot directly and satisfactorily be removed by them that acquiesce in the received Rules of subordinate Sciences, and do rea∣son but at the common rate, such Objects of Contemplation as this third sort consists of, having some∣thing belonging to them, that seems
not reconcilable with some very manifest, or at least acknowledged Truths. This it may here suffice to make out by a couple of Instances, the one of a Moral, the other of a Ma∣thematical Nature: And first, that Man has a free will, in reference at least to civil matters, is the general confession of Mankind: All the Laws that forbid and punish Mur∣der, Adultery, Theft, and other Crimes, being founded on a Sup∣position, that men have a power to forbear committing them, and the sense men have of their being pos∣sest of this power over their own actions, is great enough to make Malefactors acknowledg their pu∣nishments to be just, being no less condemned by their own Conscien∣ces, than by their Judges. And yet (some Socinians, and some few others excepted) the ge∣nerality of Mankind, whether Chri∣stians, Jews, Mahometans, or Heathens, ascribe to God an infalli∣ble Prescience of humane Actions,
which is supposed by the belief of Prophecies, and the recourse to O∣racles, by one or other of which two ways the Embracers of the se∣veral Religions newly mentioned, have endeavoured and expected to receive the informations of future things, and such as depend upon the Actings of men. But how a certain fore-knowledg can be had of contingent things, and such as depend upon the free will of man, is that which many great wits that have solicitously tryed, have found themselves unable clearly to com∣prehend, nor is it much to be ad∣mired that they should be puzled to conceive how an infinitely per∣fect Being should want Prescience, or that their will should want that liberty, whereof they feel in them∣selves the almost perpetual exer∣cise. The other instance I promised you, Euge. is afforded me by Geo∣metricians: For these (you know) teach the divisibility of Quantity in infinitum or without stop, to be
Mathematically demonstrable. Give me leave then to propose to you a strait line of three foot long divided into two parts, the one double to the other. I suppose then, that ac∣cording to their doctrine a line of two foot is divisible into infinite parts, or it is not: If you say it is not, you contradict the demonstra∣tions of the Geometricians; if you say that it is, then you must confess either that the line of one foot is di∣visible into as many parts as the line of two foot, though the one be but half the other, or else that the infi∣nite parts, into which the line of one foot is granted to be divisible, is exceeded in number by the parts, into which the line of two foot is divisible, and consequently that the line of two foot has a multitude of parts greater than infinite. Which Reasonings may let us see that we may be reduced either to reject In∣ferences legitimately drawn from manifest or granted Truths, or to admit conclusions that appear ab∣surd; if we will have all the com∣mon
Rules whereby we judge of o∣ther things to be applicable to In∣finites. And now, Gentlemen, having acquainted you with what sorts of things seem to be above Reason, I must, to prevent mistakes, desire you to take along with you this Ad∣vertisement: That though the no∣bleness and difficulty of so unculti∣vated a Subject, inclined me to of∣fer something towards the elucida∣ting of it, by sorting those things into three kinds; yet I shall not, and need not in this Conference, insist on them severally, or lay any stress on this partition. For though I have above intimated, that a Propo∣sition may speak of somewhat that is supra-intellectual, or else contain somewhat which we cannot con∣ceive how it may be true, or lastly teach us somewhat for a truth, that we cannot reconcile with some o∣ther thing, that we are convinced is true; yet if but any one of these have true Instances belonging to it, That may suffice for my main pur∣pose
in this place, where I need only shew in general, that there may be things that surpassour Reason, at least so far, that they are not to be judg∣ed of by the same measures and rules, by which men are wont to judge of ordinary things, for which reason I shall often give them one common name, calling them Pri∣viledg'd Things. Euge. Methinks that to manifest the Imperfections of our Reason, in reference to what you call Privi∣ledg'd Things, you need not have recourse to the unfathomable Abys∣ses of the Divine Nature, since for ought I know, Pyrocles, as well as I, may be non-plus'd by an instance that came into my mind de Compo∣sitione continui. Timoth. Since Sophronius has not thought fit to give us any of the Ar∣guments of the contending party's, I shall be glad to know what diffi∣culty occurr'd to you. Euge. Suppose a great Circle di∣vided
into its three hundred and six∣ty degrees, and suppose that as great a number as you please or can conceive, of strait lines, be drawn from the several designable parts of some one of these degrees, to the Centre, 'tis manifest that the degrees being equal, as many lines may be drawn from any, and so from every one of the others, as from that degree which was pitch∣ed upon. Then suppose a Circular Arch, equal to the assumed degree, to be further bent into the circumference of a little circle, having the same Centre with a great one, it follows from the nature of a Circle, and has been geometrically demonstra∣ted, that the semi-diameters of a Circle how many soever they be, can no where touch one another but in the Centre. Whence 'tis e∣vident, that all the lines that are drawn from the circumference to the Centre of the greater Circle▪ must pass by differing points of the circumference of the smaller, (for
else they would touch one another before they arrive at the Centre) and consequently that as many lines soever as can even mentally be drawn from the several points of the circumference of the great Cir∣cle to the common Centre of both Circles, must all pass through dif∣ferent points of the little Circle, and thereby divide it into as many parts (proportionably smaller) as the greater Circle is divided into: So that here the circumference of the lesser Circle presents us with a curve line, which was not possibly divisible into more parts than an Arch of one degree, or the three hundred and sixtieth part of the Circumference of the greater Cir∣cle, and yet without being length∣ned, becomes divisible into as ma∣ny parts as the whole circumfe∣rence of the same greater Circle. And though we should suppose the circumference of the internal Cir∣cle not to exceed one inch, and that of the exterior Circle to exceed the circumference of the Terrestrial
Globe, or even of the Firmament it self, yet still the demonstration would hold, and all the lines drawn from this vast Circle, would find distinct points in the lesser, to pass through to their common Centre. Timoth. Though I will not pre∣tend to confirm what Sophronius has been proving, by adding Argu∣ments a priori; yet I shall venture to say, that I think it very agreea∣ble both to the nature of God and to that of man, that what he has endeavoured to prove true should be so; for we men mistake and flat∣ter Humane Nature too much, when we think our faculties of Un∣derstanding so unlimited, both in point of capacity and of extent, and so free and unprepossest, as many Philosophers seem to suppose: For, whatever our self-love may incline us to imagine, we are really but created and finite Beings (and that probably of none of the highest orders of intellectual Creatures) and we come into the world, but such, as it pleased the Almighty and most
free Author of our Nature to make us. And from this dependency and limitedness of our Natures, it fol∣lows not only that we may be (for I now dispute not whether we are) born with certain congenit Notions and Impressions and Appetites or Tendencies of Mind; but also that the means or measures which are furnished us to employ in the searching or judging of Truth, are but such as are proportionable to Gods designs in creating us, and therefore may probably be suppo∣sed not to be capable of reaching to all kinds, or if you please of Truths, many of which may be unnecessary for us to know here, and some may be reserved, partly to make us sen∣sible of the imperfections of our Natures, and partly to make us as∣pire to that condition, wherein our faculties shall be much enlarged and heightned. It seems not therefore unreasonable to think, both that God has made our faculties so limi∣ted, that in our present mortal con∣dition there should be some Objects
beyond the comprehension of our Intellects (that is) that some of his creatures should not be able perfect∣ly to understand some others, & yet that he has given us light enough to perceive that we cannot attain to a clear and full knowledge of them. Pyrocl. I think, Sophronius, that I now understand what you mean by Things above reason, or as you (not unfitly) stiled them, priviledg∣ed things: But I presume you need not be told, that to explain the sence of a Proposition, and to make out the truth of it, (unless in common Notions, or things evident by their own light) are always two things, and oftentimes two very distant ones. Sophr. I need not scruple, Pyro∣cles, to grant the truth of what you say, but I must not so easily admit your application of it; for among the examples, I have been propo∣sing, there are some at least, that do not only declare what I mean by things above reason, but are instan∣ces,
and consequently may be proofs that such things there are. And to those I could have added others, if I had thought it unlikely, that in the progress of our Conference, there may be occasions offered of mentioning them more opportune∣ly. Pyrocl. I have long thought that the wit of man, was able to lay a fine varnish upon any thing that it would recommend; but I have not till now found Reason set a work to degrade it self, as if it were a noble exercise of its power to establish its own impotency: And indeed 'tis strange to me, how you would have our Reason comprehend and reach things, that you your sel confess to be above Reason, which is methinks, as if we were told that we may see things with our eye that are invisible. Sophr. I do not think, that 'ti to degrade the understanding, to refuse to idolize it, and 'tis not a injury to Reason, to think it a limited faculty, but an injury to th
Author of it, to think man's un∣derstanding infinite, like his. And if what I proposed be well ground∣ed, I assign Reason its most noble and genuine Exercise, which is to close with discovered Truths, in whose embraces the perfection of the Intellect too much consists, to suffer that perfective action to be justly disparaging to it: And a sin∣cere understanding is to give, or refuse its assent to propositions ac∣cording as they are or are not true, not according as we could or could not wish they were so; and me∣thinks it were somewhat strange, that Impartiality should be made a disparagement in a Judge. But, Pyrocles, leaving the reflection with which you usher'd in your Objecti∣on, I shall now consider the Argu∣ment it self, which being the weightiest that can be framed a∣gainst the opinion you oppose, I shall beg leave to offer some consi∣derations, wherein I shall endea∣vour to answer it both by proving my Opinion by experience, and by
shewing that experience not to be disagreeable to Reason. Pyrocl. I shall very willingly lis∣ten to what you have to say on such a subject. Sophr. I shall then in the first place alledge the experience of ma∣ny persons, and divers of them great Wits, who have perplexed themselves to reconcile, I say, not the Grace of God, but even his Pre∣science to the liberty of mans will, even in bare moral actions: And I have found partly by their Wri∣tings, and by discourse with some of them, that the most towring and subtle sort of Speculators, Meta∣physicians, and Mathematicians, perchance after much racking of their brains, confess themselves quite baffled by the unconquerable difficulties they met with, not only in such abstruse subjects, as the na∣ture of God, or of the humane Soul, but in the nature of what belongs in common to the most obvious Bo∣dies in the world, and even to the least portions of them: You will ea∣sily
guess that I have my eye on that famous controversie, Whether or no a continued quantity (which e∣very body, as having length, bredth, depth, must be allowed to have) be made up of Indivisibles. Of the perplexing difficulties of this Con∣troversie, I might give you divers confessions, or complaints made by a sort of men too much accustomed to bold assertions and subtle Argu∣ments, to be much disposed to make acknowledgments of that kind: But I shall content my self with the te∣stimony which one of the more fa∣mous modern Schoolmen gives both of himself and other learned men, and which if I well remem∣ber, he thus expresses. Aggredi∣mur comtinus compositionem,Ovied contr. 17. Phys. cujus hu∣jusque non separata difficultas omnium Doctorum male ingenia vexavit, ne∣que ullus fuit qui illam non pene insu∣perabilem agnoscat. Hanc plerique terminorum obscuritate, illorumque replicatis & implicatis distinctioni∣bus, & subdistinctionibus obtenebrant, ne aperté capiantur desperantes rem
posse alio modo tractari neque rationis lucem sustinere, sed necessario confu∣sionis tenebris obtegendum, ne argu∣mentorum evidentiâ detegatur. And though he had not been thus candid in his confession, yet what he says might be easily concluded by him, that shall duly weigh with how great, though not equal force of Arguments, each of the conten∣ding parties imputes to the opinion it opposes, great and intolerable absurdities as contained in it, or le∣gitimately deducible from it. Eug. I have not the vanity to think that the weakness of my Rea∣son ought to make another diffident of the strength of his: But as to my self, what Sophronius has been say∣ing cannot but be confirm'd by se∣veral tryals, wherein having exert∣ed the small abilities I had to clear up to my self some of the difficul∣ties about Infinites: I perceived to my trouble, that my speculations satisfied me of nothing so much, as the disproportionateness of those abstruse subjects to my reason. But,
Sophronius, may it not be well ob∣jected, that though the Instances you have given, have not been hi∣therto cleared by the light of Rea∣son; yet 'tis probable they may be so hereafter, considering how great progress is, from time to time, made in the discoveries of Nature, in this learned Age of ours. Sophr. In answer to this questi∣on, Eugenius, give me leave to tell you first, that you allow my past discourse to hold good for ought yet appears to the contrary: Whence it will follow, that your Objection is grounded upon a hope, or at most a Conjecture about which I need not therefore trouble my self, till some new discoveries about the things in question, engage me to a new consideration of them. But in the mean while, give me leave to represent to you in the second place, that though I am very willing to believe, as well as I both desire and hope it, that this inquisitive Age we live in, will produce discoveries that will explicate divers of the
more hidden mysteries of Nature, yet I expect that these discoveries will chiefly concern those things, which either we are ignorant of for want of a competent History of Nature, or we mistake by reason of erroneous Prepossessions, or for want of freedom and attention in our speculations. But I have not the like expectations as to all Meta∣physical difficulties, (if I may so call them) wherein neither matters of Fact, nor the Hypothesis of sub∣ordinate parts of Learning, are wont much to avail. But however it be, as to other abstruse Objects, I am very apt to think, that there are some things relating to that in∣finite and most Monadical Being (if I may so speak) that we call God, which will still remain incom∣prehensible even to Philosophical understandings. And I can scarce allow my self to hope to see those Obstacles surmounted, that pro∣ceed not from any Personal infir∣mity, or evitable faults, but from the limited nature of the Intellect:
And to these two considerations, Eugenius, I shall in answer to your question, add this also: That as mens inquisitiveness may hereafter extricate some of those grand diffi∣culties, that have hitherto perplex∣ed Philosophers; so it may possibly lead them to discover new difficul∣ties more capable than the first, of baffling humane understandings. For even among the things where∣with we are already conversant, there are divers which we think we know, only because we never with due attention, tryed whether we can frame such Ideas of them, as are clear and worthy for a rational seeker and lover of truth to acqui∣esce in. This the great intricacy that considering men find, in the notions commonly receiv'd of space, time, motion, &c. and the difficul∣ties of framing perspicuous and sa∣tisfactory apprehensions even of such obvious things, may render highly probable. We see also that the Angle of Contact, the Doctrine of Asymptotes, and that of surd num∣bers
and incommensurable Lines, all which trouble not common Ac∣comptants and Surveyors, (who though they deal so much in num∣bers and lines, seldom take notice of any of them) perplex the great∣est Mathematicians, and some of them so much, that they can ra∣ther demonstrate, that such affecti∣ons belong to them, than they can conceive how they can do so: All which may render it probable, that mens growing curiosity is not more likely to find the solutions of some difficulties, than to take no∣tice of other things, that may prove more insuperable than they. Tim. This conjecture of yours, Sophronius, is not a little favoured by the Rota Aristotelica; for though the motion of a Cart-wheel is so obvious and seems so plain a thing, that the Carman himself never looks upon it with wonder; yet after Aristotle had taken notice of the difficulty that occurr'd about it, this trivial Phaenomenon has per∣plex'd divers great Wits, not only
Schoolmen, but Mathematicians, and continues yet to do so, there being some circumstances in the progressive motion and rotation of the circumference of a Wheel, and its Nave, or of two points assigned, the one in the former, and the o∣ther in the latter, that have appear∣ed too subtle (and even to modern) Writers, so hard to be conceived and reconciled to some plain and granted Truths, that some of them have given over the solution of the attending difficulties as desperate, which perchance, Pyrocles, would not think strange, if I had time to insist on the intricacies that are to be met with in a speculation, that seems so easie as to be despicable. Sophr. Your Instance, Timotheus, must be acknowledged a very preg∣nant one, if you are certain that a better account cannot be given of the Rota Aristotelica, than is wont to be in the Schools, by those Peri∣pateticks that either frankly con∣fess the difficulties to be insoluble, or less ingenuously pretend to give
solutions of them, that suppose things not to be proved, or perhaps so much as understood (as Rarefa∣ction and Condensation strictly so called) or lose the question and per∣haps themselves, by running up the dispute into that most obscure and perplexing Controversie de compo∣sitione continui. Eugen. I am content to forbear pressing any further at present an Objection; much of whose force depends on future contingents, and I shall the rather dismiss the proof drawn from experience, that I may the sooner put you in mind of your having promised us another Argu∣ment to the same purpose, by ma∣nifesting the opinion to be agreea∣ble to Reason. Sophr. I understand your plea∣sure, Eugenius, and shall endeavour to comply with it, but the difficul∣ty and intricateness of the Subject of our discourse, obliges me to do it by steps; and for fear we should want time for more necessary things, I will not now stay to exa∣mine
whether all the things that hitherto have appeared above Rea∣son, be impenetrable to us, because of an essential disability of our un∣derstandings, proceeding from the imperfection and limitedness of their nature, or only because of some other impediment, such as may be especially the condition of the soul in this life, or the infirmi∣ties resulting from its state of union with a gross and mortal body. Forbearing then to discourse how this came into my mind, and what thoughts I had upon it, I shall pro∣ceed in my considerations; and to clear the way for those that are to follow, I shall in the first place ob∣serve to you, that whatever be thought of the faculty in abstracto, yet Reason operates according to certain Notions or Ideas, and cer∣tain Axiomes and Propositions, by which as by Prototypes or Models, and Rules and Measures, it con∣ceives things, and makes estimates and judgments of them. And in∣deed when we say that such a thing
is consonant to Reason, or repug∣nant to it, we usually mean that it is either immediately or mediate∣ly deducible from, or at least con∣sistent with, or contradictory to one or other of those standard No∣tions or Rules. And this being premis'd, I con∣sider in the next place, that if these Rules and Notions be such, as are abstracted only from finite things, or are congruous but to them; they may prove useless or deceitful to us, when we go about to stretch them beyond their measure, and apply them to the infinite God, or to things that involve an Infiniteness either in multitude, magnitude, or littleness. To illustrate and confirm this no∣tion, give me leave to represent in the third place, that in my opinion all the things that we naturally do know or can know, may be divided into these two sorts: The one such as we may know without a Medium▪ and the other such as we cannot at∣tain to, but by the intervention of
a Medium, or by a discursive act. To the first belong such Notions as are supposed to be connate, or if you please innate, such as that Two contradictories cannot be both together true. The whole is greater than a∣ny part of it; Every (entire) num∣ber is either even or odd, &c. And also those other Truths, that are assented to upon their own account without needing any medium to prove them; because that as soon as, by perspicuous terms, or fit ex∣amples, they are clearly proposed to the understanding, they discover themselves to be true so manifestly by their own light, that they need not be assisted by any intervening Proposition, to make the Intellect acquiesce in them; of which kind are some of Euclids Axioms, as that, If to equal things equal things be added, the totals will be equal; and that two right lines cannot include a space. To the second sort of things knowable by us, belong all that we acquire the knowledge of by Ratio∣cinations, wherein by the help of
intervening Propositions or Medi∣ums, we deduce one thing from a∣nother, or conclude affirmatively or negatively one thing of another. This being supposed, and we being conscious to our selves, if it were but upon the score of our own infir∣mities and imperfections, that we are not Authors of our own nature; for ought we know it may be true, and all the experience we have hi∣therto had, leads us to think it is true, that the measures suggested to us either by sensations, the re∣sults of sensible observation, or the other instruments of knowledge, are such as fully reach but to finite things or Beings, and therefore are not safely applicable to others. And divers of those very Principles that we think very general, may be (if I may so speak) but gradual notions of truth, and but limited and re∣spective, not absolute and univer∣sal. And here give me leave, as a far∣ther consideration, to take notice to you, that though perfect Syllogism
be counted the best and most regu∣lar forms that our Ratiocinations can assume, yet even the laws of these are grounded on the doctrine of Proportions: For even between things equal there may be a propor∣tion (namely that of equality) upon which ground I suppose it is, that Mathematical Demonstrations have been publickly proposed of the grand Syllogistical Rules. And in consequence of this, I shall add that Geometricians will tell you, that there is no proportion betwixt a fi∣nite line and an infinite,Rationem habere inter se quantita∣tes dicuntur quae possunt multiplica∣tae, sese mu∣tuo superare. because the former can never be so often taken, as to exceed the latter, which according to Euclid's definition of Proportion, it should be capable to do.Definit. 5. Of which Premises the use I would make is to perswade you,Elem. V. that since the understanding ope∣rates but by the Notions and Truths 'tis furnished with,Euclidis. and these are its instruments by proportion to which it takes measures, and makes judgments of other things; these Instruments may be too dispropor∣tionate
to some Objects to be secure∣ly employed to determine divers particulars about them: So the eye being an instrument which the un∣derstanding employs to estimate distances, we cannot by that safely take the bredth of the Ocean, be∣cause our sight cannot reach far e∣nough to discover how far so vast an object extends it self. And not only the common instruments of Surveyors that would serve to mea∣sure the height of an house or a stee∣ple, or even a Mountain, cannot e∣nable them to take the distance of the Moon; but, when Astronomers do, by supposition, take a chain that reaches to the Centre of the Earth, (and therefore is by the Moderns judged to be near four thousand miles long) even then I say, though by the help of this and the Paral∣laxes, they may tolerably well mea∣sure the distance of some of the neerer Planets, especially the Moon yet with all their great industry they cannot by the same way (o perhaps any other yet known) wit
any thing tolerable acurateness, measure the distance of the fixed Stars; the Semidiameter of the Earth, bearing no sensible propor∣tion to that of so vast a Sphere as the Firmament, whose distance makes the Parallaxes vanish, it being as to sence all one, whether at so great a remove, a Star be observ'd from the Centre, or from the surface of the Earth. Eug. In a matter so abstruse, a little Illustration by examples, may be very proper and welcome. Sophr. 'Tis scarce possible to find very apposite examples, to illustrate things of a kind so abstruse and he∣teroclite as those may well be sup∣pos'd, that do surpass our Rea∣son. But yet some assistance may be borrowed from what we may ob∣serve in that other faculty of the mind, which is most of kin to the Intellect, I mean the Imagination: For when, for instance, I think of a Triangle or a Square, I find in my fancy an intuitive Idea (if I may so
call it) of those figures that is a Pi∣cture clear and distinct, as if a fi∣gure of three sides or four equal sides, and Angles were placed be∣fore my eyes. But if I would fancy a myriagon, or a figure consisting of ten thou∣sand equal sides, my Imagination is overpowered with so great a mul∣titude of them, and frames but a confused Idea of a Polygon with a very great many sides: For if (to speak suitably to what the excel∣lent Des Cartes has well observed in the like case) a man should endea∣vour to frame Ideas of a Myriagon or a Chiliagon, they would be both so confused, that his Imagination would not be able clearly to discri∣minate them, though the one has ten times as many sides as the other. So if you would imagine an Atome, of which perhaps ten thousand would scarce make up the bulk of one of the light particles of dust, that seem to play in the Sunbeams when they are shot into a darkned place, so extraordinary a littleness
not having fallen under any of our Senses, cannot truly be represented in our imagination. So when we speak of Gods Primity (if I may so call it) Omnipotence, and some o∣ther of his infinite Attributes and Perfections, we have some conce∣ptions of the things we speak of, but may very well discern them to be but inadequate ones: And though divers Propositions relating to things above Reason, seem clear enough to ordinary Wits, yet he that shall with a competent mea∣sure of attention, curiosity, and skill, consider and examine them; shall find that either their parts are inconsistent with one another, or they involve contradictions to some acknowledged or manifest Truths, or they are veil'd over with dark∣ness and incumbered with difficul∣ties, from whence we are not able to rescue them. Thus when the side and Diagonal of a Square are proposed, we have clear and di∣stinct Ideas of each of them apart, and when they are compared, we
may have a conception of their in∣commensurableness. But yet this negative notion, if it be throughly considered, and far enough pursu∣ed, clearly contains that of a strait lines being divisible in infinitum; and that divisibility is incumbred with so many difficulties, and is so hard to be reconciled to some con∣fessed dictates of Reason, that (as we have seen already) Philosophers and Geometricians that are con∣vinc'd of the truth, are to this day labouring to extricate themselves out of those perplexing intrica∣cies. I will not trouble you with the puzling, if not insuperable difficul∣ties, that incumber the doctrine of Eternity, as 'tis wont to be propo∣sed in the Schools of Divines and Philosophers, lest you should al∣ledge that these difficulties spring rather from the bold assumptions and groundless subtleties of the Schoolmen, than from the nature of the thing it self: But I will pro∣pose somewhat that cannot be
denyed, which is, that some sub∣stance or other, whether, as I be∣lieve, God, or as the Peripateticks say, the World, or as the Epicure∣ans contend, Matter, never had a beginning, that is, has been for e∣ver. But when we speak of an e∣ternity à parte ante (as they call it) we do not speak of a thing where∣of we have no conception at all, as will appear to a considering person, and yet this general notion we have is such, that when we come atten∣tively to examine it, by the same ways by which we judge of almost all other things, the Intellect is non-plus'd: For we must conceive, that the time efflux'd since Adam (or any other man as remote from us as he is said to have been) began to live, bears no more proportion to the duration of God, or of Mat∣ter, than to those few minutes I have imployed about mentioning this instance. Nay if we would be Aristotelians, the same thing may be said as to those men, that lived many thousand millions of years
before the time we reckon that A∣dam began to live in: For each of these times being finite and measu∣rable by a determinate number of years, can bear no proportion to that infinite number of years (or somewhat that is equivalent) which must be allowed to a duration that never had a beginning. And as there are some things whose nature and consequences pose our Facul∣ties, so there are others, whereof though we have a notion, yet the modus operandi is beyond our com∣prehension; I do not mean only the true and certain modus operandi, but even an intelligible one. As, though divers learned men, especially Car∣tesians, and that upon a Philoso∣phical account, assert, that God created the world; yet how a sub∣stance could be made out of no∣thing (as they, and the generality of Christians confessedly hold) I fear we cannot conceive. And though all Philosophers, very few excepted, believe God to be the Maker of the World (out of pre∣existent
matter) yet how he could make it but by locally moving the parts of the Matter it was to consist of, and how an incorporeal sub∣stance can move a body, which it may pass through without resist∣ance, is that which I fear will be found hardly explicable: For if it be said, that the Soul, being an im∣material substance, can never the less move the Limbs of the humane Body rightly dispos'd, I shall an∣swer that it does not appear that the rational Soul doth give any mo∣tion to the parts of the Body, but only guide or regulate that which she finds in them already. Timoth. May it not then be ra∣tionally said, that by making ob∣servations of such things that are the proper Objects of our faculties, and by making legitimate deducti∣ons from such observations, and from our other knowledges whe∣ther innate or acquired, we may come to be certain, that some things are, and so have general and dark Ideas of them, when at the same
time we are at a loss to conceive how they can be such, or how they can operate and perform what they do, supposing the Truth and suffi∣ciency of some other things we are convinced of. To be short, nega∣tive apprehensions we may have of some priviledged things, and posi∣tive, but indistinct apprehensions we may have of others, and that is enough to make us in some sort understand our selves, and one ano∣ther, when we speak of them, though yet when we sufficiently consider what we say, we may find that our words are not accompa∣nied with clear, distinct, and sym∣metrical conceptions, of those ab∣struse and perplexing things we speak of. And since, as hath been already shewn, we find by expe∣rience, that we are unable suffici∣ently to comprehend things, that by clear and legitimate consequen∣ces may be evinc'd to be, why should not this cogently argue, that some of our conceptions may be of things, to which somewhat belongs
that transcends our Reason, and surpasses our comprehension? And if I would play the Logician with Pyrocles, I would tell him that his Objection destroys his Opinion: For since he talks to us of what is incomprehensible, that term must or must not be attended with some suitable Idea: If it be not, let him consider, whether in his own Phrase he speaks sence and not like a Par∣rot; but if it be, let him then con∣fess, that one may have some kind of Idea of a thing incomprehensi∣ble. But, Pyrocles, whether or no you think I prevaricate in this, you will not, I hope, suspect me of doing it, in adding that when na∣tural Theology had taught men, (as well Philosophers as others) to believe God to be an infinitely per∣fect Being, we ought not to say that they had no Idea of such a Being, because they had not a clear and ad∣equate one. And since Aristotle discourses ex professo and prolixly enough, de infinito, and cites the ancienter Philosophers for having
done so before him, and since (be∣sides his Commentators and Fol∣lowers) Democritus, Epicurus, fol∣lowed by Gassendus and other late Philosophers, maintain either that the world is boundless, or that space (real or imaginary) is not finite in extent, or that the world consists of Atoms infinite in number; I hope you will not put such an affront up∣on all these great persons, as to think they said they knew not what, when they discoursed de infinito, as they must have done, if they spake without Ideas of the things they spake of, though it may be justly supposed, that the Subject being infinite, the Ideas they framed of it, could not be comprehensive and accurate. Eug. So that according to you, Sophronius, it may be said, that by reason we do not properly perceive Things above Reason, but only per∣ceive that they are above Reason, there being a dark and peculiar kind of Impression made upon the understanding, while it sets it self
to contemplate such confounding Objects, by which peculiarity of impression, as by a distinct and un∣wonted kind of internal sensation, the understanding is brought to di∣stinguish this sort of things (name∣ly) transcendent or priviledg'd ones from others, and discern them to be disproportionate to the powers with which it uses throughly to penetrate Subjects, that are not im∣pervious to it. As when the Eye looks into a deep Sea, though it may pierce a little way into it, yet when it would look deeper, it dis∣covers nothing but somewhat which is dark and indistinct, which affects the sensory so differingly from what other more genuine ob∣jects are wont to do, that by it we easily discern, that our sight fails us in the way before it arrives at the bottom, and consequently that there may be many things conceal'd there, that our sight is unable to reach. Timoth. I guess, Gentlemen, by the silence you seem to conspire in,
after so long a debate, that you have now said as much as at present you think fit to say for and against this Proposition, that there are Things above our Reason. Sophr. I shall not, for my part, cross your Observation, Timotheus, but instead of adding any new proofs, shall only desire you to look back upon those I have present∣ed you already, and to let me re∣mind you, that of the two Argu∣ments by which I attempted to shew that there are some things above Reason, the first and chiefest was suggested by Experience, and the other which was drawn from the nature of things and of man, was brought as 'twere, ex abundanti, to illustrate and confirm the former, and give occasion to some hints a∣bout priviledg'd Subjects. And therefore though I hope what has been discours'd by these Gentlemen and me, may be able to perswade Pyrocles, that the acknowledgment that some things are above Reason may fairly comply with the di∣ctates
of it, yet whatever he thinks of the cogency of our discourse, the truth of the main conclusion may be sufficiently evinc'd by our first Argument drawn from experi∣ence: For if we really find, that there are things which our Reason cannot comprehend, then whether the account these Gentlemen and I have given, why our faculties are insufficient, for these things be good or not; yet still some true ac∣count or other there must be of that insufficiency. And as we should very thankfully receive from Pyro∣cles, any better account than what we have propounded, so if he can∣not assign any better, I hope he will joyn with us in looking upon this, as very agreeable to our Hypothe∣sis; since hereby some things must appear to us so sublime and ab∣struse, that not only we find we are not able to comprehend them, but that we are unable to discern so much as upon what account it is that they cannot be comprehended by us.
Eug. I am not averse, Sophroni∣us, from your Paradox about gra∣dual notions, and I am the more in clin'd to think, that some of the Axioms and Rules that are reputed to be very general, are not to be in differently extended to all Subject and cases whatsoever; when I con∣sider the differing apprehension that the mind may frame of the same object, as well according to the vigour or (if I may so call it rank of the understanding, as ac∣cording to the differing informati∣on 'tis furnished with: For if on should propose to a child, for instance, of four or five years old the demonstration of the one hudred and seventeenth Propositio of Euclid's tenth Book, wherein proves the side and Diagonal a Square to be incommensurble, thongh possibly he may be ble to read the words that expre the Theorem, and though he ha eyes to see the Scheme imploy for the demonstration, yet if should spend a whole year about
you would never be able to make him understand it, because 'tis quite above the reach of a Childs capaci∣ty: And if one should stay till he be grown a man, yet supposing him to have never learned Geome∣try, though he may easily know what you mean by two incommen∣surable lines, yet all the reason he has attained to in his virile age, would but indispose him to attain to that demonstration; for all the experience he may have had of lines, will but have suggested to him as a manifest and general truth, that of any two strait lines we may by measuring find how ma∣ny Feet, Inches, or other determi∣nate measure, the one exceeds the other. And though one that has been orderly instructed in all that long train of Propositions, that in Euclid's Elements precede the one hundred and seventeenth of the tenth Book, will be also able to ar∣rive at an evidence of this truth, that those two Lines are incommensu∣rable; yet (as Sophronius formerly
noted) how it should be possible that two short Lines being propo∣sed, whereof each by it self is easi∣ly measurable among those innu∣merable multitudes of parts into which each of them may be men∣tally divided, there should not be any one capable of exactly measu∣ring both, is that which even a Geometrician that knows it is true is not well able to conceive. But Gentlemen, that you may not ac∣cuse my digression, I shall urge these comparisons no further, my scope in mentioning them being to observe to you, that for ought w know to the contrary, such a difference of intellectual Abilities as i but gradual in Children and Men may be essential in differing rank of Intellectual Beings. And so may be, that some of those Axiom that we think general, may, whe we apply them to things whereo they are not the true and prope measures, lead us into error, thoug perhaps Intellects of an higher oder may unriddle those difficulti
that confound us men, which con∣jecture I should confirm by some things that would be readily grant∣ed me by Christians, if I thought it proper to play the Divine in a discourse purely Philosophical. Pyrocl. You, Gentlemen, have taken the liberty to make long dis∣courses, and I shall not much blame you for it, because 'tis a thing as more easily, so more speedily done, to propose difficulties than to solve them; yet methinks amongst you all, you have left one part of my Objection unanswer'd, not to say untouch'd. Sophr. I suppose, Pyrocles, you mean what you said about discern∣ing invisible things with the Eye, but I purposely forbore to take no∣tice of that, because I foresaw it might be more seasonably done, after some other points had been clear'd: Wherefore give me leave now to represent to you, as a Co∣rollary from the foregoing discour∣ses, that nothing hinders but that we may reasonably suppose, that
the great and free Author of hu∣mane nature, God, so framed the nature of Man, as to have furnish'd his Intellective Faculty with a light, whereby it cannot only make esti∣mates of the power of a multitude of other things, but also judge of its own nature and power, and dis∣cern some at least of the limits be∣yond which it cannot safely exercise its act of particularly and perem∣ptorily judging and defining. And now that God, who (as I said) is a most free Agent, may have given the mind of Man such a limited nature, accompanied with such a measure of light, you will not I presume deny but the question is, you will tell me, whether he hath done so? But I hope what has been formerly discoursed by these Gen∣tlemen and me, has put that almost quite out of question. However, I shall now invite you to observe with me, that the Rational Soul does not only pass judgments about things without her, but about her self, and what passes within her:
She searches out and contemplates her own spirituality and union with the Body. The Intellect judges wherein its own nature consists, and whether or no it self be a di∣stinct faculty from the Will; and to come yet closer to the point, be pleased to consider, that Logick and Metaphysicks are the works of the Humane Intellect, which by fra∣ming those disciplines, manifests, that it does not only judge of Ra∣tiocinations, but of the very Prin∣ciples and Laws of Reasoning, and teaches what things are necessary to the obtaining of an Evidence and Certainty, and what kind of Me∣diums they are from whence you must not expect any demonstrative Arguments, concerning such or such a subject. To these things it is agreeable, that if we will com∣pare the bodily Eye with the Un∣derstanding, which is the Eye of the Mind, we must allow this dif∣ference, that the Intellect is as well a Looking-glass as a Sensory, since it does not only see other things but
it self too, and can discern its own blemishes or bad conformation, or whatever other infirmitiesit labours under. Upon which consideration, we may justifie the boldness of our excellent Verulam, who when he sets forth the four sorts of Idols (as he calls them) that mislead the stu∣diers of Philosophy, makes one of them to be Idola Tribûs, by which he means those Notions, that tho' radicated in the very nature of mankind, are yet apt to mislead us, which may confirm what I was say∣ing before, that the Soul, when duly excited, is furnished with a light, that may enable her to judge even of divers of those original No∣tions, by which she is wont to judge of other things. To be short, the Soul upon tryal may find by an in∣ward sence, that some things sur∣pass her forces, as a blind man that were set to lift up a rock would quickly find it too unweildy to be manag'd by him, and the utmost exercise of his strength would but convince him of the insufficiency
of it, to surmount so great a weight or resistance; so that we do not pretend that the Eye of the Mind should see Invisibles, but only that it shall discern the limits of that Sphere of Activity, within which Nature hath bounded it, and con∣sequently that some Objects are dis∣proportionate to it. And I remem∣ber that Aristotle himself says, that the eye sees both light and darkness, which expression, though some∣what odd, may be defended by say∣ing, that though since darkness is a Privation, not a Being, it cannot properly be the object of sight, yet it may be perceived by means of the Eye, by the very differing affection which that Organ resents, when it is imprest on by luminous or en∣lightned Objects, and when it is made useless to us by darkness. Timoth. What you have said, Sophronius, has in great part pre∣vented one thing that might be said to strengthen Pyrocles his objection, namely, that whereas when we see with our bodily eyes, there is be∣sides
the outward Organ an inter∣nal and rational faculty, that per∣ceives by the help of the eye, that which is not directly the object of sight in the Eye of the Mind, the Intellect, there is but one faculty to perceive and judge: For accord∣ing to your notion, it may be well answered, that the Intellect being capable by its proper light, to judge of it self and its own acts as well as of other things, there is no need of two Principles, the one to perceive and the other to judge, since one is sufficient for both those purposes. Pyrocl. When I have time to re∣flect on all that I have heard alledg'd amongst you, Gentlemen, I shall consider how far your Arguments ought to obtain my assent: But in the mean while I must tell you, that they will scarce have all the success I presume you desire, unless you add somewhat to free me from what yet sticks with me of a scruple, that is much of the nature of that which I formerly proposed, being this; How we can justifie our presuming to
discourse at all of things transcending Reason? For I cannot understand how a man that admits your opi∣nions, can intelligibly speak (and to speak otherwise mis-becomes a rational creature) of what is infi∣nite or any thing that surpasses our reason; since when we discourse of such things, either our words are, or are not accompanied with clear and distinct Ideas or concepti∣ons of the things we speak of: If they be not, what do we other than speak nonsence, or (as hath been already said) like Parrots entertain our Hearers with words, that we our selves do not understand; and if they be, then we do in effect com∣prehend those things, which yet you would have me think to be on some account or other, Incomprehensible. Sophr. I acknowledge this diffi∣culty, Pyrocles, to be a great one; but yet I think it not so great as that it ought to interdict us all discour∣sing of things above Reason: And this would perhaps appear probable enough, if, as your objection bor∣rows
much of what you have for∣merly alledg'd, so I may be allowed, as well to repeat some things as pro∣pose others, in making answer to it. Timoth. I for my part shall not only give you my consent to do so, but make it my request that you would do it, for when I look back upon our conference, methinks I plainly perceive that partly the ob∣jections of Pyrocles, and partly some (I fear impertinent) interpositions of mine, have kept your discourse from being so methodical as other∣wise you would have made it, and therefore to be reminded of some of the chief points of your doctrine, as well as to connect them with those you shall judge fit to strength∣en or illustrate them, may much conduce to make us both under∣stand it more clearly, and remem∣ber it better. Eug. I am much of your mind, Timotheus, but though my inter∣positions have been far more fre∣quent and much less pertinent than yours, yet I am not troubled that
the method of our conference has been so much disturb'd; because I think such a free way of discoursing, wherein emergent thoughts if they be considerable, are permitted to appear as they arise in the mind, is more useful than a nice method in a debate about an uncultivated and highly important subject, in which I think we should aim at first rather to inquire than to resolve, and to procure as many hints and conside∣rations as we can, in order to our fuller information against our next meeting, without suppressing any that is true or useful, only because it agrees not so well with a regular method, as it does with the design of our conference. Sophr. Without reflecting upon either of those Gentlemen that have been pleased to accuse themselves, I shall readily comply with the mo∣tion made by Timotheus, and after having proposed some distinctions make application of them. And the better to clear this mat∣ter in reference to Pyrocles's objecti∣on,
I shall first take the liberty to make some distinctions of the No∣tions or conceptions of the Mind, and for brevity sake give names to those I have now occasion to em∣ploy. I consider then, that whether the conceptions or Ideas we have of things be simple or compounded, they may be distinguished into such as are particular or distinct, and such as are only general, dark, and confus'd, or indistinct: So when a Navigator to unknown Countries first gets a sight of Land, though he may be satisfied that it is Land, yet he has but a very dark and confus'd picture of it made in his eye, and cannot descry whether or no the shore be rocky, or what Creeks or Harbours (if any) it have in it▪ much less whether the Coast be well inhabited, and if it be, what kind of buildings it has; all which he may plainly and distinctly see upon his going ashore. And this mention of the Sea puts me in mind to point at another distinction, which is that of some things we
have an adequate, of others, but an inadequate conception; as if we sup∣pose the Navigator I was speaking of, should look towards the main Sea, though he might see a good way distinctly, yet at length it would appear so darkly and confu∣sedly to him, that at the verge of the sensible Horizon, his sight would make him judge that the Sea and Sky come together, and yet he would conclude that the utmost part of the Sea he could descry, was but a part of the Ocean, which may, for ought he knows, reach to a vast extent beyond the visible Ho∣rizon. To our confused, and often also to our inadequate conceptions, be∣long many of those that may be called Negative, which we are wont to imploy when we speak of Privations or Negations, as Blind∣ness, Ignorance, Death, &c. We have a positive Idea of things that are square and round, and black and white, and in short of other things, whose shapes and colours make
them the objects of our sight: Bu when we say, for instance, that Spirit or an Atome is invisible those words are attended with a negative conception, which is commonly but dark and confused because 'tis indefinite, and remove or lays aside those marks, by whic we are wont clearly to perceive an distinguish visible substances: An when we say that such a thing impossible, we have some kind o conception of what we speak of, b 'tis a very obscure and indistinc one at best, exhibiting only a general and very confused representaton of some ways, whereby on might think the thing likely to b effected if it were at all performble, accompanied with a percepton of the insufficiency of tho ways. There is yet another diffrence in the notions we have things, which though not wont be observed, is too important to here pretermitted, and it is thi That of some things we have knowledg, that for want of a fit
term may be called primary or di∣rect, and of some other things the knowledge we have is acquired but by inferring it from some more known or clearer truth; and so may be called inferr'd or illative knowledge. As when a Geome∣trician defines to me an Hyperbole, I quickly gain a clear and distinct Idea of it, but when he proves to me that this Hyperbole may have such a relation to a strait line which he calls Asymptote, that this line being continued still comes nearer and nearer to the prolonged side of the Hyperbole, and yet how far so∣ever both be drawn, 'twill never come to touch it, his subtil demon∣strations present me with an infer'd or illative truth, at which we ar∣riv'd not but by the help of a train of ratiocinations, and on which if we exercise our imagination, we shall find this factitious truth, if we may so call it, accompanied but with a very dim and confused Idea. To the foregoing distinctions, give me leave to add but this one more,
which belongs chiefly to the notons we have of true or false propostions, namely, that of our conceptons of things, some are Symmetrici (if I may so call them) or every wa consistent, by which I mean th that have these two qualification the one that all the parts are consient among themselves, and the ther that the entire Idea is consient with all other truths; and so are Chymerical or Asymmetrical, which I understand those that a either self-destroying by the contrriety of the parts themselves th are made up of, as if one sho talk of a triangular square, or a shiny night; or being extravaga lead to some manifest absurdit that may be legitimately inferr from them, or into inextrica difficulties, or involve a real repnancy to some acknowledg'd tru or rule of Reason. To what I have hitherto said must add these two observation▪ The First, that the mind of Ma so framed, that when she is
instructed and is not wanting to her self, she can perceive a want of light in her self for some purposes, or of clearness and completeness in the best Idaeas she is able to frame of some things, and on this account can so far take notice of the extent and imperfection of her own facul∣ties, as to discern that some objects are disproportionate to her; As when we attentively consider the dimensions of space, or (if the Car∣tesians judge aright, that body is nothing but extended substance) those of the Universe, we may by tryal perceive that we cannot con∣ceive them so great, but that they may be yet greater, or if you please may exceed the bounds, how re∣mote soever, which our former conception presum'd to assign them; which may be illustrated by what happens to the eye, when it looks upon the main Sea; since we easi∣ly grow sensible that how far soever we can discover it, yet our sight falls far short of the extent of that vast object. And 'tis by the sense
which the mind has of her own lmitedness and imperfection on certain occasions, that I think we ma estimate what things ought no and what ought to be looked upo as Things above Reason; for by th Term, I would not have you thin I mean such things as our ration faculty cannot at all reach to, has not any kind of perception for of such things we cannot in paticular either speak or think li men: But my meaning is this, th whereas the rational Soul is conscous to her own acts, and feels, th she knows divers sorts of thin truly and clearly; and thereby july concludes them to be within compass of her faculties; when contemplates some few things th seem to be of another order, she convinc'd that however she stra her power, she has no such Ide or perception of them, as she or may have of those objects th are not disproportionate to her culties: And this is my first Obsevation.
The other thing that I was to ob∣serve about the nature of the Mind is, that 'tis so constituted, that its faculty of drawing consequences from known truths, is of greater extent than its power of framing clear and distinct Idaeas of things; so that by subtle or successive infe∣rences, it may attain to a clear con∣viction that some things are, of whose nature and properties (or at least of some of them) it can frame no clear and satisfactory concepti∣ons. And that men should be bet∣ter able to infer propositions about divers things, than to penetrate their nature, needs the less be won∣dred at, both because 'tis oftentimes sufficient for our uses to know that such things are, though that know∣ledge be not accompanied with a clear and distinct Idaea; and because oftentimes the Rules (such as, what∣ever is produced must have a cause; and, from Truth, nothing rightly fol∣lows but Truth) are clear and easie that enable the Mind to infer con∣clusions about things, whose nature
is very dark, and abstruse. Eug. I know, Sophronius, that you have not laid down these preli∣minary distinctions and remarks without designing to make use of them, which the little time that now remains to manage our confe∣rence in, calls upon you to proceed to do. Sophr. I was just going to say, Eugenius, that after what I have premised, I hope it may now be sea∣sonable to apply the newly deliver∣ed Notions to the three sorts of things that I formerly represented as being in some sence above reason. For I consider, that there are some objects of so immense and peculiar a nature, that (if I may so speak) by an easie view of the mind, that is without any subtle and laborious disquisition, the Soul discerns, and as it were feels the Object to be dis∣proportionate to her powers: And accordingly if she thinks sit to try, she quickly finds her self unable to frame conceptions of them fit to be acquiesc'd in, and this sort of Ob∣jects
I do upon that account call in∣conceivable, or (on some occasions) supra-intellectual. But when by attentively consi∣dering the attributes and operati∣ons of things, we sometimes find that a thing hath some property be∣longing to it, or doth perform somewhat, which by reflecting on the beings and ways of working that we know already, we cannot discern to be reducible to them or derivable from them, we then con∣clude this property or this opera∣tion to be inexplicable; that is, such as that it cannot so much as in a ge∣neral way be intelligibly accounted for, and this makes the second sort of our things above Reason. But this is not all, for the Rational Soul that is already furnished with in∣nate, or at least primitive Idaeas and Rules of true and false, when she comes to examine certain things and make successive inferences a∣bout them, she finds (sometimes to her wonder as well as trouble) that she cannot avoid admitting some
consequences as true & good which she is not able to reconcile to some other manifest Truth or acknow∣ledged Proposition: And whereas other Truths are so harmonious, that there is no disagreement be∣tween any two of them, the Hete∣roclite Truths I speak of appear not symmetrical with the rest of the body of Truths, and we see not how we can at once embrace these and the rest, without admitting that grand absurdity which subverts the very foundation of our reasonings, That Contradictories may both be true. As in the controversie about the endless divisibility of a strait line, since 'tis manifest that a line of three foot for instance is thrice as long as a line of one foot, so that the short∣er line is but the third part of the longer, it would follow that a part of a line may contain as many parts as a whole, since each of them is divisible into infinite parts, which seems repugnant to common sence, and to contradict one of those com∣mon Notions in Euclid, whereon
Geometry it self is built. Upon which account I have ventured to call this third sort of things above Reason Asymmetrical or Unsociable, of which eminent instances are af∣forded us by those controversies (such as that of the compositio conti∣nui) wherein which side soever of the question you take, you will be unable directly and truly to answer the objections that may be urged to show that you contradict some primitive or some other acknow∣ledged truth. These, Eugenius, are some of the considerations by which I have been induced to distinguish the things that to me seem to over∣match our Reason, into three kinds. For of those things I have stil'd Un∣conceivable, our Idaeas are but such as a moderate attention suffices to make the mind sensible that she wants either light or extent enough to have a clear and full comprehen∣sion of them: And those things that I have called Inexplicable, are those which we cannot perceive to de-
upon the Idaeas we are furnished with, and to resemble in their man∣ner of working any of the Agents whose nature we are acquainted with: And lastly, those things which I have named Unsociable, are such as have Notions belonging to them, or have conclusions deduci∣ble from them, that are (for ought we can discern) either incongruous to our primitive Idaeas, or when they are driven home, inconsistent with the manifest Rules we are fur∣nished with, to judge of True and False. Eug. I presume, Sophronius, that by sorting things above Reason into three kinds, you do not intend to deny but that 'tis possible one object may in differing regards be refer∣red to more than one of these sorts. Sophr. You apprehend me very right, Eugenius, and the truth of what you say may sufficiently ap∣pear in that noblest of Objects, God. Timoth. We owe so much to God, the most perfect of Beings,
not only for other blessings, but for those very Intellects that enable us to contemplate him, that I shall be very glad to learn any thing that may increase my wonder and vene∣ration for an Object, to whom I can never pay enough of either. Sophr. You speak like your self, Timotheus, and I wish I were as able as I ought to be willing, to satisfie your desire: But since we are now discoursing like Philosophers, not Divines, I shall proceed to speak of that gloriousest of Objects, But as his Nature or some of his Attributes afford me instances to the purpose, for which I presum'd to mention him. When God therefore made the World out of nothing, or (if Pyrocles will not admit the Creati∣on) when he discerns the secretest thoughts and intentions of the Mind, when he unites an immate∣rial Spirit to a humane Body, and maintains, perhaps for very many years, that unparallel'd union with all the wonderful conditions he has annex'd to it; when, I say, he doth
these and many other things, that I must not now stay to mention, he supplies us with instances of things that are Inexplicable: For such ope∣rations are not reducible to any of the ways of working known to us; since our own Minds can but modi∣fy themselves by divers manners of thinking; and as for things with∣out us, all that one body can do to another by acting on it, is to com∣municate local motion to it, and thereby produce in it the natural consequences of such motion; in all which there is no action like any of those I just now ascrib'd to God. And if we consider that the praescience of those future events that we call contingent, being a perfection, is not to be denyed to God; who is by all acknowledged the perfectest of Beings and that yet the greatest Wits that have la∣boured to reconcile this infallible praecognition with the liberty of mans will, have been reduced to maintain some thing or other, that thwarts some acknowledged truth
or dictate of Reason: If we duly consider this (I say) it will afford us an instance of truths, whose consistency and whose symmetry with the body of other truths, our Reason cannot discern, and which therefore ought to be referred to that sort of things above Reason, that I call Unsociable. And now I come to the third sort of these things which is that I formerly men∣tion'd, first under the name of In∣comprehensible or supra-intellectual: which Title, whether or no it be∣longs to any other Object, (which I will not now enquire) doth cer∣tainly belong to God, whose Nature comprehending all perfections in their utmost possible degrees, is not like to be comprehensible by our minds, who altogether want divers of those perfections, and have but moderate measures, (not to call them shadows) of the rest. We are indeed born with, or at least have a power and divers occasions to frame an Idaea of a Being infinitely perfect, and by this Idaea we may
sufficiently discriminate the Origi∣nal of it, God, from all other Ob∣jects whatsoever. But then, when we come to consider attentively & minutely what is contained in the notion of Omnipotence, Omnisci∣ence, Eternity, and those other divine Attributes that are all united in that great confluence and abys of perfections, God; we may be sure to find, that our faculties are exceedingly surmounted by the vastness and gloriousness of that unlimited and unparallel'd object about which, as we can discove that it exists, and that it possesse all the perfection we can conceive so we may at the same time discern that it must have degrees of perfecti∣on, which because of the inferiority of our Nature, we are not able to conceive. And yet this discovery of God Incomprehensibleness may be mad without subtle disquisitions, an without trains of consequences though not without due attention by a direct view of the Mind (if
may so term it;) who finds her self upon tryal as unable fully to measure the divine perfections as the dimensions of space, which we can conceive to be greater and greater, without ever being able to deter∣mine any extent beyond whose li∣mits they cannot reach. Pyrocles. I suspected Sophron. by the tenour of your Discourse that the last Questions these Gen∣tlemen asked you, diverted you from saying somewhat more than you did by way of application of your preceding Discourse. Sophron. I was then indeed a∣bout to make, as I now shall, this use of what I had been saying; that I readily acknowledge that 'tis an arrogance to talk of infinite or of priviledg'd things, with the same confidence, or to pretend to do it with the same clearness, wherewith knowing men may speak of things unquestionably within the compass of our Intel∣lect: But that this need not hinder us from speaking, nor doth
disable us from speaking rational∣ly of priviledg'd things themselves. For all the notions that are allow∣able are not of the same sort or order; and if none were to be ad∣mitted but those that enable us to comprehend the Object, that is, which give us a clear and distinct knowledge of all that it contains or that belongs to it, I must con∣fess that we have no good Notions of priviledg'd things in particular▪ but then I must add, that I fear we have few or none even of ma∣ny things that we think our selves very knowing in. And when we speak of things as being above Rea∣son, though we have no clear, di∣stinct and adequate Notion o them, yet we may have a general confus'd and inadequate Notion of them, which may suffice to make us discriminate their respective Ob∣jects from all else, and from one another; as may be observ'd in se∣veral, Idaeas that are negatively fram'd, such as those we have o invisible, incomprehensible, and
in others which I formerly call'd Inferr'd; because they accompa∣ny the remote Inferences whereby one truth is concluded from ano∣ther: as when Geometricians infer from some propositions in Euclid that any strait line may be divided farther and farther without stop. For of this and some other propo∣sitions about priviledg'd things, we are not quite destitute of allowa∣ble Notions; as may appear by some of the admirably ingenious Speculations of Mathematicians a∣bout the Affections of surd Num∣bers, and about incommensurable Magnitudes; about some of which we have no such clear and symme∣trical Conceptions as we have of many other things, that are of a nearer and more intelligible order. And on this occasion I shall not scru∣ple to acknowledge, that partly by my own Experience, and part∣ly by the Confessions of others, and by their unsuccesful Attempts, I am induc'd to think that God, who is a most free Agent, having
been pleas'd to make Intelligent Be∣ings, may perhaps have made them of differing Ranks, or Orders, where∣of Men may not be of the Princi∣pal; and that whether there be such Orders or no, he hath at least made us Men, of a limited nature (in general) and of a bounded Ca∣pacity. Congruously to this I think also, that he hath furnished man either with certain innate Ideas or Models and Principles, or with a Faculty or Power and Disposition easily to frame them, as it meets with occasions (which readily oc∣cur) to excite them: But because that (as I lately noted) God intend∣ed the mind of Man but of a limi∣ted Capacity, his Understanding is so constituted that the inbred or easily acquir'd Idaeas and primitive Axioms wherewith it is furnish∣ed, and by Relation or Analogy whereunto it judges of all other Notions, and Propositions, do not extend to all knowable Objects whatsoever; but reach only to such as have a sufficient Affinity,
or bear some proportion to those Primary Idaeas and Rules of Truth, which are sufficient if duly im∣prov'd, to help us to the attain∣ment, though not of the perfect knowledge of truth's of the high∣est Orders, yet to the Competent Knowledge of as much truth as God thought fit to allow our minds in their present (and perchance laps'd) Condition, or state of Uni∣on with their mortal Bodies. Eugen. Your Opinion, Sophron. if I apprehend it aright, contains two very differing Assertions; one that it is allowable to contemplate and even to discourse of things a∣bove Reason, since we may have some Conceptions of them, though they be but very dim and imper∣fect: and the other, that we ought not to look upon, or speak of such Objects as things that we compre∣hend, or have even such a measure of knowledge of, as we have of things that are not priviledg'd. For of these we are not to speak but with a peculiar Wari∣ness,
and modest Diffidence. Sophron. You have express'd my thoughts Eugen. since I Intend not to injoyn silence, or disswade Curiosity, but yet forbid presump∣tion, in reference to priviledg'd things. Timoth. And truly Sophron. I see no Reason to repine at the li∣mits which your late Discourse hath in imitation of the Author of nature himself, assign'd to human Knowledg. For the number of priviledg'd things is altogether in∣considerable in comparison of the multitude of other things, to which our knowledge may be improv'd to reach; and which it far more concerns us to know well, than it doth to resolve puzling Questions about things incomprehensible; there being within the compass of those truths, enough to employ, and reward our Curiosity without straining and tiring our Reason a∣bout Objects that transcend it. And yet even about these, some disqui∣sitions may be allow'd us, for an
object that on the account of some of its properties may be a privi∣ledg'd one; may have divers o∣ther things belonging to it, that do not surpass our Reason, and whose knowledge may therefore be at∣tain'd, by the due employment of it. Thus we usefully study the na∣ture of Bodies, which make up the Object of the Excellent Science of Natural Philosophy; though the true Notion of Body in general be a thing so difficult to frame, that the best of our Modern Philoso∣phers can by no means agree about it. Which I do not wonder at; because if we pursue the notion of a Body to the uttermost; 'twill lead us to the perplexing controversie, De compositione continui, and there you will not deny, but that the under∣standing will be left in the dark. Thus Surveyors, Carpenters, Ar∣chitects, and many others know divers Affections of the square Fi∣gure that are of great use to them in their respective Employments,
though that property of the square, that its side and diagonal are incom∣mensurable, be unknown to most of them; and if they were told of it, and would prosecute the Speculation, would involve them in exceeding great and probably insuperable difficulties. Sophron. To confirm what you have been telling us, Timoth. I shall venture to add, that even a∣bout priviledg'd things, our inqui∣ries, if modestly and discreetly manag'd, may not only be allow∣able but sometimes profitable. For even of such Subjects a studious search may bring us to know more than we did, though not so much as we would, nor enough to be ac∣quiesc'd in. So that such enquiries may probably teach us, to know the Objects better, and our selves better too; by giving us such a sensible discovery of the insuffici∣ency of our Understandings to comprehend all sorts of things, as may be very useful, though not pleasing, and may richly recom∣pence
us, for the pains that end∣ed in so instructive a disappoint∣ment. And let me add to the per∣tinent instances that have been mention'd, the noblest that can be given; I mean the Contemplati∣on of God himself. For he hath so ordered all things, that 'tis scarce possible for us, to be destitute of an Idaea of him, which will at least represent him as an existent Being, and more perfect than any other Being; and yet when we come with sufficient Application of mind to pry into the wonderful Attri∣butes of this most singular and a∣dorable Being, we are, as was lately observ'd, sure to find our selves unable to comprehend so un∣bounded an Object. Which yet ought not to discourage us from so noble a Study, since we are allow'd the great contentment and honour to make further and further dis∣coveries of the excellentest of Ob∣jects, by that very immensity of his perfections, that makes it impos∣sible for us to reach to the bounds
of his Excellency, or rather to disco∣ver that it has any bounds at all. But, Gentlemen, I perceive I have been so transported by the men∣tion of this vast and divine Subject, in whose Contemplation 'tis so ea∣sie, and so pleasant to lose ones self, that I have forgot the notice Eugen. gave me, a pretty while since, that the time allotted for our present conference was then near expiring. And therefore I shall leave you to pick out of the Ex∣cursions to which your interpositi∣ons tempted (not to say oblig'd) me, the Applications, that I in∣tended to make more methodically of the distinctions I laid down. And I am the less troubled to be hindred from proposing to you my thoughts about the way of distin∣guishing priviledg'd things from others, because we have a dome∣stick Monitor, or a kind of an inter∣nal Criterium always at hand to help us. For I think it may well be said, that the wise Author of Nature has endued the Under∣standing
with such a quick, though internal, Sensation (if I may so call it) that when due attention is not wanting, it can feelingly discern between other Objects, and those that are disproportionate to its a∣bility. As even in Beasts, the eye is so fram'd (according to the institution of Nature) that if it be obverted to the bright noon-day-Sun, there needs no Monitor, but the operation of the same Sun, to make it wink; (and perhaps water) and thereby discover it self to be dazled and overpowr'd by the disproportionate Object. Pyroc. I confess your Discourses, Gentlemen, have made an unex∣pected Impression upon me; but whether that will amount to a Conviction will scarce appear till our next Conference. Only thus much I shall tell you now, that it would much facilitate our agree∣ment in Opinion, if you did not contend for altogether so much; but would be pleas'd to leave it undertermin'd, whether Man's in∣tellectual
Faculty it self is unca∣pable by the help of any degree of light, to discover and know those things, which you call above Reason? and would content your selves to say, That there are some things belonging to these Subjects, which we must confess we have less clear and distinct Notions of, than we have even of the difficult∣est of those things, that are ac∣knowledg'd not to surpass our Rea∣son: And that if we will take upon us, to determine positively and par∣ticularly about these transcendent things, we must employ ways of Reasoning, congruous to their pe∣culiar natures. Sophron. I shall readily consent not to expect your final Resolution, before our next meeting, having no cause to fear that time, will be unfriendly to her Daughter Truth. Timoth. And in the mean while, Pyrocles, I am glad to find by the last part of what you just now said, that you seem to be no longer in∣dispos'd to admit some things, that
(at least in our present state) do some way or other surpass our Reason. For I think that instead of exalting that faculty, we in∣jure and defraud it, if we do not freely allow it, as much enjoy∣ment of Truth as we are able to procure it: And consequently if Geometry, or Revelation, or Ex∣perience, assure us of divers things of which we can know but That they are, and what they do, not, what they are, and how they act, we must neither refuse, nor neglect the study of such Truths, any more than we would refuse to look into any other Objects, than those that we can look through; And there∣fore to enrich the Intellect as much as we are able, we must enter∣tain, not only those Truths, that we can comprehend, but those also, how sublime soever, that we can have any certain, though but a ve∣ry imperfect Knowledge of, Espe∣cially since those remote and ab∣struse Subjects may be as much more noble as more dark than o∣thers,
and thereby render an im∣perfect Discovery of them, more desirable, than a far clearer one of Inferior things. FINIS.
ADVICES IN JUDGING OF Things SAID TO TRANSCEND REASON. The Speakers Arnobius, Eugeni∣us, Pyrocles and Timotheus. Arnob. I Was very glad, Gen∣tlemen, to learn this morning of Sophro∣nius some things, whence 'twas easie to conclude, that by the Discourse you had with
him last night, he has made it al∣lowable for me to demand, and ra∣tional for you to grant, nay to prof∣fer me, a Dispensation of the Task you imposed on me at our last mee∣ting. For tho' he spake with the mo∣desty that became him of your Con∣ference, and gave me, but a hasty and imperfect Account of what pass'd between you; yet I think I may presume, that by his Discourse Pyrocles himself was at least inclin'd, and you two, Gentlemen, fully per∣swaded to admit, that there are Things above Reason; which was the main point about which you expected at our last Congress that I should entertain you, at our then next, or now present meeting. Eugen. I deny not, that Sophro∣nius's Considerations were preva∣lent on Timotheus and me; and have, I hope, made a good im∣pression on Pyrocles himself; but that ought not to hinder us from coming, as we now do, to claim your promise of entertaining us a∣bout things above Reason. And if
you will needs be dispens'd with from repeating those Considerati∣ons that Sophronius has employed already, (tho' I doubt not but by repeating them, you would both strengthen and advance them;) we will not be rigid Exactors of our Right: but yet we must not remit your Task, tho' we are con∣tent to change it. For I question not but these Gentlemen will consent with me, to discharge you of your promise of discoursing of the Arguments that may infer some things to be above Reason, if you will please to afford us your Thoughts, about the ways of avoid∣ing to be imposed on by our selves or others, when such sublime Sub∣jects are treated or discours'd of. Arnob. Tho' in the recital of your Conference, Sophronius did but touch on several Subjects where∣on it would be proper for me to insist, in the Discourse you seem to expect from me; yet I am apt to fear, that he has so prevented me in what I should say, that he
has left little or nothing for me to do, but to make Repetitions of what you have heard already much better express'd: which will be an Employment far enough from being grateful, either to you or me. Eugen. Your Modesty, Sir, is not like to defeat our Curiosity; and that you may not think your self hardly used, or condemned to bear Repetitions; be pleased to take notice, both that, what we desire as a Favor, we might claim as a Compensation, and that the things we expect from you now, are not Arguments to make out that there are things above Reason, but that you would afford us some Rules and Directions how to re∣gulate the Ratiocinations we make; and estimate those we meet with, about such Transcen∣dent Subjects. Arnob. I hope Eugenius, you do not in earnest think me so vain as to pretend to frame a Logick a∣bout things above Logick; or ma∣gisterially
to deliver Rules about things that are as Anomalous, as they are either Remote or Abstruse. Besides that all you have said, do's not exempt me from a fear, that by reason of Sophronius's omitting divers points of his Discourse, and my imperfect Remembrance of those he transiently and summari∣ly mention'd, he has anticipated much of what were otherwise proper for me to say. But yet be∣cause 'tis possible that his thoughts and mine, may have lead us, to have made some Reflections that are not at all the same; and that even when others happen to be co∣incident, it may be not altoge∣ther useless, that I should endea∣vour to inlarge some things that he has but hinted, and illustrate or vindicate some others that will not be prejudic'd by being cleared, or confirm'd; and above all this, be∣cause I would shew you, that I am willing to comply with you some∣what to the hazard of my Discre∣tion, I shall not refuse to offer you
some, not Rules, but Advices; provided you freely interrupt me, when I begin to trouble you with the Repetition of any thing that you have, tho' I have not heard before; and provided too, that you look not on these Advices so much as directions to find the truth in such abstruse matters, as Cautions that may chance to as∣sist you to avoid some Errors and Mistakes. Eugen. We are not so scrupu∣lous but that we shall upon your own terms gladly receive your thoughts, whatever names you please to give them. Arnob. I shall then without fur∣ther preamble comply with your Commands, and propose as my First Advice. That about Priviledg'd Subjects them∣selves, we do not admit any (af∣firmative) assertion without such proofs, to evince it, as are suffici∣ent in their kind.
I hope Gentlemen that Sophro∣nius has so far declar'd to you, what is to be meant by Priviledg'd things, that though it be a new term, yet I need not solicitously explain it; and may think it sufficient to intimate in few words that they are things of a very Heteroclyte and Abstruse Nature, and have belonging to them such peculiar Affections and Attributes, as require that in judg∣ing and reasoning of them we should employ Notions and Rules congruous to their particular Condi∣tion; some of them superadded to, & others perhaps differing from, those that men generally & safely enough make use of about common & fami∣liar things, that are of a nature less impervious to our Understandings. And if the shortness of this Sum∣mary Description, should leave it less clear than I hope you find it; I foresee there will divers occasi∣ons of illustrating it, by instances and other ways, occur in the Se∣quel of our Discourse: In order to which I shall, after this short
and necessary Digression, return to the lately given First Advice; and tell you that 'tis grounded up∣on this Consideration, that 'tis not reasonable to give assent to any thing as a Truth, but upon a suf∣ficient Reason of that Assent. And tho' we may well grant in the gene∣ral, that a thing which urpasses our Reason may have belonging to it some affection that is also above Reason; yet we are not in parti∣cular to believe that this or that Affection doth belong to it, with∣out particular and competent proof. For since about a Priviledg'd thing, as well as about any other, Propo∣sitions may be fram'd, and often are so, that are contrary to one a∣nother; to assent to both, were to be sure to believe one falsity, if not two. And if we will assent but to one, we must either judge at Ad∣ventures, or allow our selves to ex∣amine the Mediums of Probation, employed on both sides, and there∣upon judge, why one of the Pro∣positions is to be assented to, and the other rejected.
Pyrocles. I am glad Arnobius, that you allow your self and us this manly freedom without which our Understandings were lyable to be impos'd on in matters of the high∣est Concernment: For there scarce ever did, or I fear ever will, want some men who either out of Igno∣rance and passive Delusion, or out of self-Confidence, or out of Design, take upon them, with great bold∣ness, to affirm what they please about priviledg'd Subjects, and when they are opposed in their Extravagan∣cies by Ratiocinations they cannot answer, they urge, that these things being above Reason, are not to be judged of by it: But of such men as these I usually demand whether their own Assent to the things they would have us believe, be ground∣ed upon some Rational Argument, or not: If they say, 'tis not, they are fools to believe it themselves; and I should add to the number of fools, if after this acknowledg∣ment, I should believe them: But if they say they do, I desire them
to produce their Argument; for since 'tis fram'd by a Human Un∣derstanding, the force of it may be also comprehended & judg'd of by a Human Understanding: And 'tis to no purpose to say, that the Subject surpasses Human Reason; for if it do so indeed, it will surpass theirs as well as mine, and so leave us up∣on even terms. And let the thing assented to, be what it will, the assent it self ought to be founded upon a sufficient Reason, and con∣sequently upon one that is intelli∣gible, to the Human Intellect that is wrought on by it. Eûgen. I willingly allow, that there is a great difference between the being able and oblig'd to know the nature or cause of a thing, and the being able to give an in∣telligible account of the motives that induce our assent to it; and without such motives the assent may by chance be given to what is a truth, but that will not hinder it from being an irrational Assent. Timoth. I was not ill pleas'd Ar∣nobius,
with the Caution you em∣ploy'd in the close of your Advice, where, by saying that the positive Proofs you require to evince an Assertion about a priviledg'd thing, must be sufficient in their Kind, you plainly intimate that you do not ex∣act rigid Demonstrations of such Assertions: And indeed it were not reasonable you should; for since 'tis manifest, that there are many Truths, such as Historical and Politi∣cal ones, that by the nature of the things are not capable of Ma∣thematical or Metaphysical De∣monstrations, and yet being real∣ly Truths, have a just Title to our Assent, it must be acknowledg'd, that a rational Assent may be foun∣ded upon Proofs that reach not to rigid Demonstrations, it being sufficient that they are strong e∣nough to deserve a wise mans Ac∣quiescence in them. And there∣fore if any things can be made out to be reveal'd by God concerning his own Nature, or Actions, or De∣crees, we ought firmly to believe
them, because that, of some of those things, as his Praescience, Mercy, &c. We can have no bet∣ter Proofes; and of others, as what he did before our World was made; and what he will do with us after we are dead, we can have no other considerable Proofes at all. And the Objection made by Pyro∣cles against the assenting to auda∣cious Propositions fram'd by im∣posing Men, will not reach our Case: for there is no reason to think, that because an Object sur∣passes an humane Understanding, it must therefore surpass the Di∣vine Intellect it self. And even in things that are transacted in the Mind of Man himself; I may learn from another that is not my Su∣perior, what I can by no means at∣tain to know, unless he be pleased to discover it to me. As that he was at such a time, thinking of the Creation of the World, or re∣solving how to dispose of his Son, and what Recompence he designs to give a Servant that he has not yet entertained.
Pyrocles. About things of such a kind as you now mention, Timo∣theus, I shall not dissent from you; because these are things, that tho' not discoverable by our Reason till we be informed of them, are yet clearly knowable by our Reason, when we are informed of them. But that there should be things, which tho' perspicuously proposed, should not be comprehensible by our un∣derstanding, is such an affront to that noble Faculty, that I confess it has much indisposed me to grant (what I am yet unwilling peremp∣torily to deny,) that there are, as Sophronius would have us think, not only some priviledged things, but more than one kind of them; which if we do admit, it will place such narrow Limits to our Understand∣ings, that we must despair of the desireablest knowledge of all, name∣ly that which is conversant about the noblest and sublimest Objects. Eugenius. Leaving to Sophroni∣us the management of a Point he has studied, and which I have not
now time solemnly to Argue; I shall only tell you in general that I see no necessity, That Intelligibility to a humane Understanding, should be necessary to the Truth or Exist∣ence of a thing; any more then that Visibility to a Humane Eye, should be necessary to the Exist∣ence of an Atome, or of a Cor∣puscle of Air, or of the Effluvi∣um's of a Loadstone, or the Fra∣grant Exhalations of Ambergris, and Musk from a perfumed Glove; I might here observe, that even by the same Sence some Creatures may discern things that may not be perceptible to others: as no at∣tention or application of the Organ (or the Nose) will inable a man to perceive the Effluvia expiring from the stale Footsteps of a hunt∣ed and unseen Hare or Dear, tho' Hounds, and especially Blood∣hounds, will have a vivid Precep∣tion of such Odours, and by their help, trace and persue the flying and unseen Beast. This, I say, may be observed in Favour of my pre∣sent
Argument; but 'twill perhaps be a more proper illustration to re∣present, that the natural Incapaci∣ty of a Childs Intellect, to under∣stand the abstruse Affections of Pa∣rabola's, Hyperbola's and the incom∣mensurable Lines of a Square, hinders not those Figures, from be∣ing contained in rerum naturâ, or their Affections from being true and demonstrable. And tho' we do admit some priviledged things in the Sence above declared, yet, (to say somewhat to obviate Pyrocles's Fear) there is no necessity that we should be interdicted all Know∣ledge of those sublime Objects, in which there are many things, whereof, or of their Consequences, we must confess our selves igno∣rant. Thus elder Geometricians knew very well what a Rectangu∣lar Triangle was, when they con∣ceived it to be a Figure consisting of three strait Lines, two of which comprize a right Angle; though probably for a great while they did not know so much as all its chief
Properties or Affections: since for ought appears, before Pythagoras, (who offered a Heccatombe to the Muses in gratitude for the Disco∣very) it was not known that the Square of the Hypothenusa is equal to the Squares of both the other Sides; and much more likely it is, that they were not able to solve those Difficulties (that continue to perplex even our Age) which attend that endless divisibility of Lines, that is inferrible from that Equali∣ty of the two Squares to the single Square. And besides the inscrutable Per∣fections of God, some of his Works are such, that, notwithstanding the compleat Knowledge of them sur∣passes our Forces; yet there re∣mains so many things, as well wor∣thy to be known, as possible to be attained by us, that they will allow Exercise enough to the Wits of all the Philosophers in the World. And besides that, as I have been saying, even about these priviledg∣ed Subjects themselves, divers con∣siderable
things may be discovered, if they were altogether impene∣trable by our Understandings, yet their Number is so small, that they would leave a large Scope for hu∣man Knowledge to diffuse and im∣prove it self. For 'tis not every thing that is hard to be understood or contrary to the common Rules of Probability, that has a right to pass for a priviledged thing, for so the Paradoxes about Srud Quantities, of Isoperimetal Fi∣gures; duplicate and triplicate Proportion, and divers other sur∣prising Doctrines that are capable of Mathematical Demonstrations, would be priviledged things. Nor are all those worthy of this Title that are by many proposed and embraced as Philosophical Myste∣ries, for, such are the Peripateticks Substantial Forms, which really are not priviledged things, but Scholastic Chimeras. But tho' I shall not presume positively to set down the discriminating Bounds and Signes of priviledged things,
yet most if not all of them being such, as are either primary in their kind, as God himself, and the things whose Nature flows immediately from him, or else things that if thorowly inspected, do necessarily involve the consideration of some kind of Infinitum, or else are such that tho' in some main Questions about them one side must be taken, both sides are encombred with ab∣surdities, or scarce superable Dif∣ficulties: Those I say being all (or some of them) the usual marks that belong to priviledged things, you will easily grant, that their Number is not near so great as their abstruseness; and that therefore Pyrocles and his Philosophical Friends need not fear to want em∣ployment for their Curiosity. And for farther Answer to his Objection I shall add that we must regulate our Belief by our Perceptions, not our Wishes, and must not conclude, that because 'twere desirable for us, that all things were penetra∣ble to our humane Understandings,
there is really nothing that is not so: and we can no more conclude that we are as knowing as An∣gels, because we wish we were so, than that we are as immortal as they, because we would ne∣ver die. But as for those few things that have belonging to them, Properties so extraordinary, as to make it probable, even at the first sight, that their Nature must be very abstruse and difficult be fully discover'd by us, I hope Pyrocles will allow, that things of so Heteroclite a Nature may challenge an exemption from some of the rules imployed about common things; And that really such Rules as I mean, and some also of the vulgar Notions cannot always be safely extended to such Subjects, I forbear to shew in this place; only because I would not too long at once interrupt Arno∣bius; and I expect to have a good opportunity to speak again of this Subject, before our Conference be ended.
Tim. You may then, I pre∣sume, Arnobius, as soon as you please, favour us with your se∣cond Advice. Arnob. I shall readily obey you, Timotheus, by proposing it thus: The Second Advice, or Rule. That we be not hasty to frame Ne∣gatives about Privileg'd Things, or to reject Propositions or Ex∣plications concerning them; at least, as if they were absurd or impossible. 'Tis easie to observe in the Spe∣culation of natural things them∣selves, how unsafe 'tis not only to affirm, but in divers Cases also reject opinions, before men have any thing near a competent Hi∣storical Information of what be∣longs to the Subject they take up∣on them peremptorily to judge of. And therefore it must in reason be thought much more unwary
to be forward to resolve upon Ne∣gative Propositions about things which we our selves acknowledge to be above the reach of Human Reason, which since they are, 'twill become us at least to for∣bear a rude and insulting way of rejecting the opinions of Learned Men that dissent from us about such things; since the sublimity of the Subject should make mistakes about them the more easie to be pardon'd, because they are diffi∣cult to be avoided; and our own sharing in the disability of pene∣trating such abstruse things, should keep us from being over-confident, that we also may not be mistaken, and incline us to to∣lerate other mens opinions about matters wherein we our selves have but opinion, not science. Pyr. But have not you for∣merly advised us not to suffer our selves to be impos'd upon by proofless Assertions, even about privileg'd things? Arnob. I did so, and do so still:
but there is a great deal of diffe∣rence between believing a proof∣less affirmation about things which the affirmer does not know to be true, and framing Negative Conclusions against Opinions, which, for ought we yet clearly know, may be true: and there∣fore my present advice is very con∣sistent with my former: for here I counsel only, either a suspen∣sion of Judgment, when there appears no proof on either side sufficient to sway the Intellect; or such a wary and unprejudic'd as∣sent to opinions that are but faint∣ly probable, that the mind may be ready to receive, without ei∣ther obstinacy, or surprise, any better argument that shall con∣clude the contrary of the opini∣on we favour'd before. Eugen. But methinks 'tis hard to avoid the framing of Conje∣ctures, even about those sublime Subjects, concerning which we can frame but conjectures, and those often very slight ones.
Arnob. I confess an absolute suspension of judgment is a very uneasie thing, nor do I strictly require you should entertain no conjectures; but only that we should consider that we may be easily mistaken in them, and by further information see cause to lay them down, and perhaps ex∣change them for contrary ones: my thoughts of this matter may be perchance somewhat illustra∣ted by supposing that we four were walking in a High-way, and discover'd as far off as our eyes could reach, some erected and moving body of human stature; tho we should by its shape and walking safely enough conclude that 'twere no other animal than a man, yet what manner of man he were, as old, or young, handsome, or ugly; we should not be able to discern, and conse∣quently, could have no sufficient ground to determine. And as if I should affirm him to be a young man or handsome, you may justly
censure me of rashness; so if be∣cause I cannot prove my conje∣cture, you should resolutely deny that he is a young man or hand∣some, I should think you guilty, tho not of an equal, yet of a cen∣surable unwariness, because, for ought you know to the contrary, he may be what I guess'd him to be. And tho we are naturally so uneasie under fluctuation of mind, that for my part I confess (and it may be you may be subject to the same Infirmity) I should scarce forbear resembling in my thoughts the man we speak of to some body or other that I knew, yet I should justly think that Con∣jecture to be very fallible, and both expect that when I should come to have a nearer and clearer view of him, I might see cause to dismiss my first Idea for that which this new and better pro∣spect would afford me, tho it were quite differing from that I ad formerly entertain'd, and should represent him, that my
forward thought perhaps resem∣ble, to a young man of my ac∣quaintance with black curl'd hair, and a ruddy complexion, to be pale and wrinckled, with grey hair curl'd like a pound of Can∣dles. The Application, I suppose, I may spare. But Gentlemen, I would not be understood in the preceding Dis∣course, as if I were against all framing of Negative Propositions about privileg'd Things; my de∣sign being but to dissuade from hasty ones: For sometimes 'tis much more easie and safe to deny things, than to affirm them to belong to a Subject that sur∣passes our Reason. And the ob∣servation may be of use, especi∣ally in two cases; one, when the Negative we assert is grounded not upon Axioms taken from the usual course of Nature, or upon Propositions dubious, or remote from the first Principles of know∣ledge, but upon either Catholick and Metaphysical Axioms, or else
upon Truths manifestly flowing from some clear, tho inadequate notion we have of the nature of the things we treat of. The o∣ther Case is, when we have a clear and sufficient proof by Re∣velation, or otherwise, of the po∣sitive Attributes of the things we contemplate; for then we may safely deny of that Subject any other thing that is really inconsi∣stent with that positive Attribute. Upon which account it is, that tho we do not fully comprehend what God is, yet knowing by the clear Light of Nature (and if we be Christians) believing it upon the account of Revelation, that he is a Being Intelligent and infinitely perfect, we may safely deny against Epicurus, Vorstius, and Mr. Hobbs, that he is a Cor∣poreal Substance, as also that he is Mortal, or Corruptible. Pyrocl. I shall not trouble you, Arnobius, to inlarge upon your last Advice, but willingly receive the avour of your next.
Arnob. Which shall be this: The Third Advice, or Rule. That a matter of Fact or other Truth about Privileg'd Things being prov'd by Arguments competent in their kind, we ought not to deny it meerly because we cannot explain, or perhaps so much as conceive the Modus of it. 'Tis no very difficult Task to justifie this Advice; but I may do it the better, if you give me leave to frame and premise a Di∣stinction, for want of which I have observed a want of Clear∣ness in several Discourses, where the term Modus has been em∣ployed: for sometimes we would deny so much as a possibillity, that one thing can belong to, or be truly said of another; as when we say we understand not how one Creature can create another; or how there can be a Line that is
neither straight, nor crooked; or a finite (whole) number that is neither even nor odd. But most commonly we mean by our not understanding the Modus of a thing, that we do not clearly and distinctly conceive after what manner the Property or other Attribute of a Subject belongs to it, or performs its operations. The first kind of Modus may, for distinctions sake, be called a possible Modus; and the other, an actual modus. Now in both the foregoing Acceptions of the term Modus, we may find Instan∣ces fit for our present purpose. For we cannot imagine, How a short Line or other finite Quan∣tity can be endlesly divisible, or (on the contrary) how Infinite Parts should make but a Finite Total: and yet Geometry con∣strains us to admit, That it is so. But tho there be but few Instances of this kind, yet of the other sort of our Nescience of the Mo∣dus of things, there may be found
more Instances than we could wish there were; for even in na∣tural and corporeal things the ea∣ger disputes of the acutest Philo∣phers, and the ingenuous Confes∣sions of the most judicious and moderate, sufficiently manifest, that as yet we know not the man∣ner of operating whereby several Bodies perform what we well know they bring to pass. And not to enter into those nice and tedious Disputes of the cause of the Cohesion of the parts of mat∣ter in the smallest, most principal, and most primary Bodies, per∣haps without going out of our selves, the way whereby the Ra∣tional Soul can exercise any pow∣er over the humane body, and the way whereby the Under∣standing and the Will act upon one another, have not yet been intelligibly explain'd by any. And the like I may say of the Phaenomena of the Memory, espe∣cially in those in whom that facul∣ty is eminent. For 'tis a thing
much more fit to be admired, than easie to be conceived, how in so narrow a compass as part of a Human Brain, there should be so many thousand distinct Cells or Impressions as are requisite to harbour the Characters or Signa∣tures of many Languages, each of them consisting of many thou∣sand differing Words, besides the Images or Models of so many thousand Faces, Schemes, Build∣ings, and other sensible Objects, and the Ideas of so many thou∣sand Notions and Thoughts, and the distinct Footsteps of almost in∣numerable multitudes of other things: and how all these shall in so narrow a compass have such deep and lasting Impressions made for them, and be oftentimes lodged so exactly in the order wherein they were at first com∣mitted to the memory (and that perhaps many years before) that upon a sudden command of the Will, or a slight casual Hint, a whole set of Words, Things and
Circumstances will in a trice, as it were, start up and present them∣selves even in the very Series, or∣der and manner that so long be∣fore belong'd to them. And I doubt not, but that besides those abstruse things, about the Modus, of which the more candid Philo∣sophers have confessed their Igno∣rance, there would many others have been taken notice of, if we did but as seriously and imparti∣ally inquire into the Nature of all the things we are pleased to think we know. And when I reflect on the yet depending Disputes be∣tween Philosophers and Mathe∣maticians about the nature of Place and Local Motion, which are things so obvious and familiar to us, I should, tho I had no other Inducements, be inclin'd to think, that we should find difficulties e∣nough in many other Subjects wherein we do not now take no∣tice of any, if we particularly studyed their nature; and that our acquiescence in what we have
learned about many things pro∣ceeds not from our greater know∣ledge of their nature, but from our having exercised less curiosity and attention in considering it. And if in things Corporeal, that are the familiar objects of our Sen∣ses, we are often reduc'd to con∣fess our Ignorance of the Modes of their inexisting or operating, I hope it will not be denyed, that to a Being wholly unapproachable by our Senses, natural Theology may be allowed to ascribe some things whose Modus is not attain∣able by our understanding: As the Divine Prescience of future Contingents; which as 'twere im∣pious, to deny as to the truth of the thing; so I fear 'tis impossible to explicate as to the Modus of it. Eugen. If it were at this time proper for me to meddle with things of that kind, I should not much scruple to say in favour of the Christian Religion, that di∣vers Tenents granted both by Christians, Jews, and Heathens,
as parts of natural Theology, to me seem as difficult to be coniv∣ed, as divers of those Mysteries that for their unintelligibless are fiercely opposed in Reveal'd Theo∣logy. I will not take upon me to judge of others; but for my part I confess, I do not much better understand, how an Intel∣lect and a Will and Affections are distinctly inexistent in God, in such sort as they are wont to be attributed to him, than how in him there can be a Trinity; sta∣ted, not as some Schoolmen ex∣plicate, or rather darken it, but as the Gospel delivers it: I can as little explain by any thing in Na∣ture, how God, who is an im∣material Substance, can move Matter, as how he can create it: nor would it at all satisfie me to tell me, that a Rational Soul moves a Human Body; for I do not allow, that it gives any motion to the Body, but only guides that which other Agents have put the parts of it into. And tho it did
produce motion in the Body, my scruple would yet remain; for the Cartesians themselves confess, that the power the Soul has of so much as determining the motion of the Body belongs to it, not upon any Physical Account, but by the particular Appointment and immediate Power of God, who would have that Power one of the Conditions or Properties of the Union of the Soul and Body. So that to me, who de∣sire to have it explained how an immaterial Substance can move Matter, and consequently, how God can do it, it will be no sa∣tisfaction to say, that the Ratio∣nal Soul can move the Body 'tis joyned to, since that Power is re∣ferred merely to God's Appoint∣ment: And the question is, how God himself can be conceived to move matter. Arnob. I know not whether upon the same Grounds which I do not disallow, I may not add, that whereas by many 'tis looked
upon as an inconceivable thing that God should see mens Thoughts, to me it appears as lit∣tle intelligible how he can know their outward Actions: For since we have no way of discerning the particular motions of Mens Bo∣dies, but by some of our Senses, especially our sight; and since those Sensations themselves neces∣sarily require Organs duly consti∣tuted, that is, made up of divers parts, fram'd and joyn'd after such a determinate manner, I see not how we can explain the Percepti∣on of visible Objects without an Eye, or so much as any Corporeal Organ, or Substance; especially since 'tis, and that very justly, asserted, that the Deity is not u∣nited to any portion of matter, as the Human Soul is to the Human Body. And to these Instances, others to the same purpose might be added, but that I think it fit∣ter to mind you, that of those it al∣ready mention'd amongst us, there are some that I presume you will
judg referable to that which I late∣ly called a possible Modus; since it seems, toto genere, as they speak, inexplicable, how the Attribute inexists in the Subject, and after what manner the Cause can pro∣duce the Effect ascribed to it. Tim. I know you too well, Gen∣tlemen, to suspect, you mean, by this, to deny to God either the power of moving matter, or that of perceiving all its motions. Arnob. You may well take that for granted, and you may remem∣ber, that to prevent mistakes, I was careful in proposing my Ad∣vice to except those things for which there is some positive proof competent in its kind. Pyrocl. One may then, with∣out surprising you, ask what kind of proofs those may be? Arnob. A full Answer to that Question would take up too much of that little time that is allowed us before it grow dark, to go tho∣row the Advices that yet remain unspoken of. But yet to comply
with you as far as my haste will permit, I shall name two or three kinds of positive proofs, that may be employed on such occasions as we speak of. And first, if there be an effect that we discern must proceed from such a Cause, or Agent, we may conclude that such a Cause there is, tho we do not particularly conceive how, or by what operation 'tis able to produce the acknowledg'd effect: Thus, tho a man otherwise of a good Judgment, being wholly a stranger to the Mathematicks, cannot conceive how a skillful A∣stronomer can many years before hand fore-tell Eclipses to a day and hour, and perhaps to a few minutes; yet when the success does, as it often happens, verifie such Predictions, he will be satis∣fied, that the maker of them had the skill to foreknow the things foretold in them. And so the generality of Learned Men among us, who are not so much acquaint∣ed with that part of Navigation,
which some Moderns have by a Greek Name called Limen-Eure∣tica, or the Art of steering to Harbours, cannot well conceive how a Ship, that is, for instance, in the vast Atlantick Ocean above a thousand miles from any shoar, should be so directed as to arrive just at a little Harbor not Cannon-shot over, which perhaps neither the Pilot, nor any other in the Ship ever saw. And yet as little as we can distinctly conceive how such an Art of finding Ports can be framed, we scruple not to al∣low there is such an one, because Navigators to the East and West Indies, could not without the Guidance of such an Art find the remotest Ports they are bound for. A second sort there is of po∣sitive proofs consisting of those Consequences that are clearly and legitimately inferr'd from any manifest acknowledg'd, or alrea∣dy demonstrated Truth. To this sort belong divers Mathematical
Propositions and Corollaries, which tho being nakedly propo∣sed they seem incredible to the generality of Learned Men, and sometimes to Mathematicians themselves, are yet fully assented to, because they clearly follow from either manifested or demon∣strated Truths. Thus many can∣not conceive how 'tis possible there may be a million, for in∣stance, of Circles, (or as many more as you please) whose Cir∣cumferences shall each of them come nearer and nearer to one a∣nother, and to a straight Line as∣sign'd, and yet none of them either touch, much less cut, ei∣ther any other Circle, or that Line but in one and the same point. And yet this is one of the odd Propositions that Geometers have rightly deduc'd as Corolla∣ries from the sixteenth of Euclid's third Element. And tho we can∣not clearly conceive how two Lines, that at their remotest ends are but little distant from each o∣ther,
should perpetually incline towards each other without ever concurring; yet Geometricians, that is, the rigidest Reasoners that we know of, have been compell'd admit this in the Linea Conchoides of Nicomedes, to name no more. But tho, (not to touch the same strings too often) I thought fit to mention these Instances; yet whether you judge them suffici∣ent or no, you will allow that which may be taken from the endless divisibility of a Line: For tho, if I misremember not, So∣phronius told me, he took notice to you how unable we are to have a satisfactory apprehension, how a short line as well as a long, can be divided into more and more parts without any stop; yet Geo∣metricians generally admit this, because it may be clearly deduc'd from some Geometrical Truths, and particularly from the incom∣mensurableness of the Side and Diagonal of a Square: And if you will allow me to have once
more recourse to Divine Presci∣ence, I may add another acknow∣ledg'd instance by representing, that Philosophers have admitted that, because they judged it clear∣ly to follow from the infinite Perfections of God; tho, how he can foresee Contingency the most judicious and modest of them did not pretend their Reason was able to conceive. Timoth. To these two kinds of positive proofs mention'd by Ar∣nobius, I doubt not but he will give me leave to add Divine Re∣velations, if competently attest∣ed ones can be produc'd; and therefore I will not by going a∣bout to evince this, spend any of the time he reserves for the re∣maining Rules, to which he may, for me, advance assoon as he thinks fit. Arnob. I accept the Liberty you offer me, Timotheus, to proceed to my next Advice; which is this.
The Fourth Advice, or Rule. That when we treat of Privileg'd Subjects, we are not bound al∣ways to think every thing false, that seems to thwart some re∣ceived Dictate of Reason. As great a Paradox as this may at first blush appear, yet it will need little more to make it out than the application of some things already delivered on occa∣sion of the two foregoing Ad∣vices, of which this is indeed lit∣tle more than a Corollary. For it being evident, that as a great part of the Dictates of Reason are Negative, so Negative Pro∣positions do usually spring from the repugnancy we judge that some things have to some positive Dictate of Reason; if those po∣sitive Dictates contain but gradu∣al and limited Truths (to bor∣row Sophronius his Terms;) and come to be unduly extended to
privileg'd Subjectss it may very possibly happen, that a thing may be really true, that yet must appear false, if it be judg'd of by its congruity to one of those limi∣ted, and but respective Dictates of Reason. 'Tis also clear, that not only in Philosophy, but natu∣ral (as well as reveal'd) Theolo∣gy the usual ground on which we reject many things is, that we judge them unintelligible. And I censure not the practice in ge∣neral, but I think it may easily mislead us, when it is extended to things that we may discern to transcend our Reason, as for ought yet appears, some of the Modus's even of things Corporeal are found to do. And we think we have made complete Enumerati∣ons of the several ways of inex∣istence of an Attribute in a Sub∣ject, or of the operation of one thing upon another, when indeed we have overlook'd one or other, and perhaps that which we have thus pretermitted may be the true
one; tho it may be also that no attention and diligence of ours could in some Cases have served our turn, the Modus inquired af∣ter being not conceivable to us, tho it may be too a higher than a human Intellect. Pyrocles. The School-Philoso∣phers for many Ages in the Cata∣logues they made of the ways of a Bodies working upon another at a distance; did not think of the true ways by which Odors and Sounds are communicated to us, and therefore had recourse to cer∣tain unintelligible things, which they were pleas'd to call Species Intentionales. Whereas those modern Naturalists that philoso∣phize freely, acknowledge, that Odors are communicated by Ef∣flviums, exhaling from the odo∣rous Body, and fitted to affect our Nostrils, and Sounds are trans∣mitted to the Ear by the undula∣ting motion which the Air is put into by the impulse of the vibra∣ting, or otherwise agitated parts of the sonorous Body.
Timoth. Methinks we need not go out of our selves to find In∣stances of both the parts of what Arnobius was last saying, if we admit, as I question not but we rationally may, this Tenet of the generality of Philosophers, both ancient and modern, That the Reasonable Soul is an immaterial Substance: For then; whereas men think they have sufficiently enumerated the ways of deter∣mining the motion of a Body, by saying, that the determinati∣on must be made either in the Line wherein the Impellent that put it into motion made it move, or in the Line wherein it was de∣termined to move by the situati∣on of the resisting Body that it met with in its way; the motions of the animal Spirits, if not also some other internal parts of the Body, may, the Body being duly disposed, be determined by the human Will; which is a way quite differing from the other. And how this Attribute, I mean
the power of determining the motion of a Body, without any power to impart motion to that Body, should belong to an imma∣terial Creature, which has no Corporeal Parts to resist the free passage of a Body, and thereby change the Line of its Motion, is not yet, nor perhaps ever will be in this life, clearly conceived by us men, tho there is no doubt, but that he, who indowed the Soul with this Attribute or Pow∣er, perfectly understands, both how it exists in the Soul, and how the Soul by exerting it, ope∣rates on the Body. Pyrocles. But can any thing seem more unreasonable than to embrace opinions that contradict the Rules of Reason; which pra∣ctice, if it be once allowed, why should we trouble our selves to investigate what is congruous or incongruous to Reason, since the making a discovery, that an o∣pinion is repugnant to it, will not assure us of that opinions being false.
Arnob. A person less knowing and equitable than Pyrocles would have spared this double Objecti∣on, if he had remembred, what hath been formerly said, appli∣cable to our present purpose, and what kind of things they are that we are discoursing of: But to re∣mind him a little of them, I shall desire him to consider with me, that I no way disallow the re∣jecting of Opinions that are found contrary to those Rules of Rea∣son, at the framing of which the things opin'd about were duly ta∣ken into consideration: But in Cases not thought on when such Rules were devised, we are not always bound to submit to be judged by them; and to maintain an opinion unconformable to such a Rule, may be not to oppose a ge∣nuine and absolute dictate of Rea∣son, but to rectifie one that is erroneously thought so, by shew∣ing, that the Rule is expressed in more Catholick and Indefinite Terms than it ought to have been.
And of two opinions you will not deny that that is the most ratio∣nal that is most agreeable to those Rules of Reason, that are framed upon the fullest Information. Eugen. 'Tis not difficult to ga∣ther from what you have said, Arnobius, that in the Rule you proposed to us; very few of the Cases that occur in ordinary dis∣course, or even in that of Philo∣sophers, will be at all concern'd. And in these few Cases wherein you intend the Rule should take place, you are careful to obviate inconveniences by a double cau∣tion. The first that you suppose, that the opinion that claims an exemption from the common Rules, is not an arbitrary or pre∣carious Tenet, but suffici∣sufficiently made out by proper Arguments. And the second, by declaring, that 'tis not to contra∣dict right Reason, but bad Rea∣soners to give limitation to Rules that have been too hastily fram'd and conceiv'd in too ge∣neral
Terms, by men, who ei∣ther were not competently in∣form'd of the variety of Particu∣lars, when they took upon them to make Analyses and Enumera∣tions; or else presum'd to infer, that a thing was not, because they did not understand the Mo∣dus of its existence or operation. Arnobius. You take my sense right, Eugenius, and I have of∣ten thought, that the causes of the great clamor that is made a∣gainst some men for not obsequi∣ously submitting to, what some others call the Rules of Reason, are, that men do not sufficiently understand the nature of things and themselves, but entertain too narrow conceptions of the for∣mer, and too high an opinion of the later. Pyrocles. The Dictates of Rea∣son being the surest, if not the only safe Rules, that Nature has given us to frame our Discourses and Ratiocinations by; I confess I am, tho not fully resolv'd, yet
very unwilling, to allow any Con∣clusion that is not conformable to them: or to admit that any thing should be so highly privileg'd, as to be exempted from the Juris∣diction of Reason, whose genuine Declarations they are. Eugenius. This Objection, Py∣rocles, seems to me to be ground∣ed rather upon an ambiguity of Terms, than the true nature of Things. For Reason is often∣times taken for a Set of Notions and Propositions employ'd and ac∣quiesc'd in by this or that sort of Reasoners, that are wont to have names given them from this or that particular Discipline, as A∣stronomy, Chymistry, Opticks, &c. of whose receiv'd Doctrines they are supposed to be entirely maintainers. But it is also with at least as much propriety, used to signifie the rational faculty it self; furnished with the light that accompanies it when it is rightly disposed and informed. In the first of these two Senses it seems
but reasonable to allow, that some things ought to have the privi∣lege to be exempted from being judg'd by some of the same Rules that are employ'd to judge of o∣ther things by; for some of these Rules were fram'd upon a slight consideration of common and familiar things, either by the vulgar, or by men that for want of skill or application of mind did not critically consider the di∣stinct natures of things, and yet presum'd to settle Rules that other mens inadvertence or laziness has made them receive for certain Dictates of Reason: whereas o∣ther natures should have been then considered as well as those: and by reason of their not having been so, the Rules I speak of are not always proper and safe, when they are applyed to these over-looked natures. Thus Successive Beings, as Time and Local Mo∣tion, do in some Cases require to be estimated by other measures than Substances, whether materi∣al,
or incorporeal▪ And so also the more nice Metaphysicians, e∣specially among the Moderns, have thought themselves obliged to discourse of Moduses, Relati∣ons, Privations, Extrinsecal De∣nominations, &c. in a very diffe∣ring way from that which be∣longs to Bodies and Spirits; tho the unskilful (even among other∣wise learned men) have been wont, and still are apt, to con∣found all these Subjects; by ap∣plying to them indiscriminately the same Rules, or, as they think them, Dictates of Reason. But besides what may be said of these long unregarded or un∣distinguished natures, there are other entities that are more gene∣rally and familiarly taken notice of, wherein I may think one may find instances more applyable to my present purpose. For I ob∣serve, that tho all other actual Beings are compounded (to speak in the language of the Schools) of Essence and Existence; yet ac∣cording
to the notion of Meta∣physicians as well as Divines, it must be acknowledg'd, that the simplicity of the Divine Nature is such as to exclude from God e∣ven this kind of composition. And indeed the notion we have of a Being infinitely perfect, imports, that, tho in no other Being, yet in this, those two are inseparable; for actual existence being a per∣fection, must needs belong to the Nature of a Being infinitely per∣fect. The generality of Philo∣sophers, after Aristotle, conceive Place to be the immoveable and immediately contiguous concave Surface of the ambient Body, so that 'tis a kind of Vessel that eve∣ry way contains the Body lodg'd in it; but with this difference that a Vessel is a kind of move∣able place, as when a Bottle of Wine is carried from the Cellar to the Table; but place is an im∣moveable Vessel, or a Vessel con∣sidered as immoveable: now sup∣posing with: Aristotle, and the
generality of Philosophers, the plenitude of the world, it may be truly said, that all Plants, Ani∣mals, Minerals, Stars and other Bodies are each of them in such an Aristotelian place as has been de∣scrib'd; whence it has been usu∣ally said by Philosophers, that what is in no place (I hope they meant it only of Bodies) is not at all; yet it appears not how the outermost Heaven, whether that be the Firmament, or no, I need not here inquire, can be properly said to be in a place, since these Philosophers asserting the World to be finite, must grant there is no ambient body without it to con∣tain it. And I shall add on this occasion, that if the outermost Heaven should be impell'd by the irresistible power of God in a straight line this way, or that way, there should ensue a motion with∣out change of place, for the outermost Heaven was in none be∣fore, and does not by its progres∣sion come to be contain'd by a
new ambient Body. And in this case even according to those mo∣dern Favourers of Aristotle that approve Des' Cartes his definition of local motion (which indeed is far more intelligible than Aristo∣tle's) the world may be said to move without changing of place; for it does not pass from the Neighbourhood of some Bodies to that of others; since compri∣sing all Bodies, and yet being bounded, there is no body for it to leave behind, nor any beyond it for it to approach to; and tho the Cartesians in their Hypothesis of the indefinitess of the World do partly avoid the force of what I have been saying; yet besides what may be rationally urg'd to shew, that if the world be not more than indefinite, it must be really finite; I consider that the Cartesians, tho upon grounds of their own, must allow what I was observing, namely, that tho eve∣ry particular body in the Uni∣verse is naturally capable of Lo∣cal
Motion. Yet the Universe it self is not; and tho every par∣ticular body in the world have some determinate Figure; yet the world it self, being indefinite, has not so. Whereas Aristotle and the Phi∣losophers that have lived since his time, have generally admitted the division establish'd by him, of all Entities, into Substance, and Accident, and accommodated their Rules to one of them, or both: The Learned Gassendus and his Followers, have intro∣duc'd a third sort of things, as not being either Substances, or Acci∣dents: and these if you will ad∣mit, you will I presume, admit too, that they may be privileg'd from their Rules calculated for other Natures. Of this kind of things, the Gassendists make Place or Space to be. For they will not allow it to be a Substance, because it is neither body, nor spirit, but only somewhat that has a capacity to receive or contain bodies, and
would subsist, tho God should an∣nihilate all the Substances he has created. And for the same rea∣son it is not to be called an Acci∣dent, since that necessarily re∣quires a Substance to reside in (according to that received Axi∣om) Accidentis esse, est inesse, whereas in case of the annihilation of the world it self, and conse∣quently all Substances that com∣pose it, their place or space would still remain, and be capable of admitting a new world of the same extent, if God should be pleased to create it; whence Gas∣sendus wittily infers, that Bo∣dies are rather accidental in re∣spect of place, than space in re∣spect of Bodies. But without staying to examine this Paradox, I shall venture to say in general, that he who shall with an heed∣ful, and unprejudiced eye, sur∣vey the several Hypotheses, or Systems, maintain'd by the dif∣fering Sects of Philosophers, may find, that tho the Instances will
not be all of them the same; yet there is none of these Systems in which one may not observe some thing or other, to which every one of the Rules that reach to the other Snbjects treated of in that Philosophy, cannot safely be ap∣ply'd. And indeed the mind of man being naturally far more de∣sirous to know much, than to take the pains requisite to exa∣mine, whether he does so or not, is very prone to think that any small number of things that it has not distinctly considered, must be of the same nature and condi∣tion with the rest that he judges to be of the same kind. For by thus attaining to the knowledge of things, by way of Inference, the mind gratifies at once both its vanity, and its laziness; looking upon these Conclusions, as marks of the excellency of its rational faculty, whilst they rather pro∣ceed from a want of the due exer∣cise of it. Pyrocles. But if the receiv'd
Dictates of Reason be not always safe grounds to proceed upon in our Discourse, I would gladly know by what Rules we shall judge of those Rules, and disco∣ver them to be erroneous, in case they be so, and by what measures we shall estimate truth and false∣hood, in those things wherein the use of those Rules must be laid aside. Arnobius. Your double obje∣ction, Pyrocles, I confess to be weighty enough to deserve a con∣siderate answer, and to give you the sum of mine in few words, I shall tell you, that in my opini∣on, since there is no progress in infinitum in the Criteria of truth, and that our faculties are the best instruments that God has given us to discover, and to examine it by, I think a clear light or evidence of perception shining in the under∣standing, affords us the greatest assurance we can have, (I mean in a natural way) of the truth of the judgments we pass upon
things, whether they be other things, or the vulgar rules of reasoning, or subjects that claim a privilege from those rules. And here give me leave to consider, that it is not by inducti∣on, but by evidence, that we know, that ex vero nil nisi verum sequi∣tur. By which it appears, that the innate light of the rational faculty is more primary, than the very Rules of Reasoning, since by that light we judge even of the lately mention'd Axiom which is it self the grand principle of Ra∣tiocinations made by Inference. Eugenius. This matter may be perchance somewhat illustrated by observing that, as the under∣standing is wont to be look'd up∣on as the eye of the mind; so there is this Analogy between them, that there are some things that the eye may discern (and does judge of) organically, if I may so speak, that is, by the help of instruments: as when it judg∣es of a Line to be streight by the
applicasion of a Ruler to it, or to be perpendicular by the help of a Plumb-line, or a Circle to be perfect by the help of a pair of Compasses: But there are other things which the eye does per∣ceive (and judge of) immedi∣ately and by intuition, and with∣out the help of Organs or Instru∣ments; as when by the bare evi∣dence of the perception it knows that this colour is red, and that o∣ther blue, and that Snow is white, not black, and a Char-coal black, not white; and such a Picture is very like, or another unlike to the face it was drawn to repre∣sent. For thus there are some things that the Intellect usually judges of in a kind of Organical way, that is, by the help of cer∣tain Rules, or Hypotheses, such as are a great part of the Theo∣rems and Conclusions in Philo∣sophy and Divinity. But there are others which it knows with∣out the help of these Rules more immediately, and as it were in∣tuitively
by evidence or percep∣tion; by which way we know ma∣ny prime notions and Effata, or Axioms Metaphysical, &c. as that Contradictory Propositions cannot both be true; that from truth nothing but truth can legiti∣mately be deduc'd; that two things that are each of them equal to a third thing, are equal to one ano∣ther; that a whole number is either even or odd. And 'tis also upon this evidence of perception; that we receive with an undoubted as∣sent many primitive Ideas and no∣tions, such as those of extended Substance or Body, Divisibility, or Local Motion, a streight Line, a Circle, a right Angle, and ma∣ny other things that it would be here superfluous to mention. Arnobius. I think the internal Light that the Author of Nature has set up in mans Intellect qua∣lifies him, if he makes a right use of it, not only to apply the Instruments of Knowledge, but also to frame, and to examine
them. For by the help of this Light, the Understanding is ena∣bled to look about, and both to consider apart, and compare to∣gether, the natures of all kinds of things; without being ne∣cessitated to employ in its Specu∣lations, the Rules or Dictates of any particular Science or Disci∣pline; being sufficiently assisted by its own Light, and those ge∣neral Axioms and Notions that are of a Catholick Nature, and perpetual truth; and so of a higher order, than the Dictates, or Rules of any particular or sub∣ordinate Science or Art. And by these means the Understanding may perceive the imperfection and falsity of such Rules or Theo∣rems, as those men that look no higher, nor no further than their own particular Science or Art, embrace for certain and unque∣stionable. Thus when Philoso∣phers observ'd that they could frame a clear notion of a thing without considering whether it
were actually in being or not; or even when they suppose that 'tis not actually in being; as we can frame a clear conception of a Rose in Winter, when there are none to be found growing; and have a clear notion of a Myriagon, tho 'tis very like there is no such Fi∣gure really existent in the world. They have generally concluded, that the essence of things is dif∣fering and separable from their existence. And yet when we consider that God is a Being infi∣nitely perfect, and that actual existence being a perfection, must belong to Him; we may by the same light of Reason that dictated Essence & Existence to be two se∣parable things in all other Beings, discern that they must be insepa∣rable in God; and consequently that the forementioned Rule, tho more general than almost any o∣ther, is not absolutely universal: but must be limited by the light of Reason. And thus also Phi∣losophers, considering that not
only all sorts of Bodies, but the immaterial Souls of Men, (and Angels themselves, supposing such Beings) are all endowed with Qualities which are Acci∣dents, have included it in the ve∣ry notion of a substance, to be the subject of Accidents, or as the Schoolmen speak, substare Ac∣cidentibus; and accordingly sub∣stantia is wont to be derived à substando: But the infranchised Intellect, finding in it self a no∣tion of an absolutely perfect, and therefore existent Being; and considering that to be the subject of Accidents, is not a thing a∣greeable to the highest perfecti∣on possible; it concludes, that in God there are no Accidents. And this Conclusion has been embra∣ced as a part, not only of Chri∣stian, but of Natural Theology; and maintain'd by divers Philoso∣phers themselves, upon Meta∣physical and other meerly ratio∣nal grounds. In short, the na∣tive light of the mind may enable
a man, that will make a free and industrious use of it, both to pass a right judgment of the extent of those very Dictates that are commonly taken for Rules of Reason, and to frame others on purpose for priviledg'd things, so far forth as they are so. But I fear, Gentlemen, the fourth Ad∣vice I have ventured to offer you, has by its tediousness, made you justly impatient of being detain'd by it so long: and therefore I shall advanced to the Fifth; which imports, The Fifth Advice, or Rule. That where Privileg'd Things are concern'd, we are not always bound to reject every thing, as false, that we know not how to reconcile with some thing that is true. Pyrocl. You may call this an Advice, but I doubt others will style it a Paradox, and possibly,
think it one of the greatest that ever was broach'd. Arnob. Yet perhaps you will find by and by, that it may be in great part made good by what has been already discoursed, and by you admitted. I think it will not be doubted, but that there are, or may be conceived streight Lines, whereof one is a hundred or a thousand times longer than another: 'Tis also generally granted, that a longer Line con∣sists of, or may afford more parts than a shorter; for a Line equal to the shorter, being taken out of the longer, and consequently just as divisible as it, there will re∣main of the longer Line another Line, perhaps many times ex∣ceeding the shorter Line: And lastly, 'tis generally acknow∣ledged, that no Number can be greater than infinite; since if the lesser number were capable of ac∣cession (as it must be, if it fall short of another number) it would need that accession (or a
greater) to make it infinite, which yet 'tis supposed to be al∣ready. Pyrocl. I see not yet to what all this may tend. Arnob. You will quickly per∣ceive it, when I shall have desired you to reconcile these Propositi∣ons with the demonstrations of Geometers of the endless Divisi∣bility of all streight Lines; whence they deduce, that tho they be very unequal among themselves, yet the shortest of them contains, or may afford infi∣nite parts. Pyrocl. But is there any thing more clear to humane under∣standing, or more supposed in al∣most all our Ratiocinations, than that two Truths cannot be con∣tradictory to each other. Arnob. Tho I am far from af∣firming, that one Truth can really contradict another truth; yet I think that which is but a gradual or limited truth, may in some few cases not be reconcile∣able
by Us, to an absolute and u∣niversal Truth. For, I think we may (with Sophronius) distin∣guish those Propositions we call true, into Axioms Metaphysical, or Universal, that hold in all Ca∣ses without reservation; and Axioms collected or emergent; by which I mean such as result from comparing together many particulars that agree in some∣thing that is common to them all. And some of these, tho they be so general, that in the usual Sub∣jects of our Ratiocinations they admit of no exceptions; yet may not be absolutely and unlimitedly true; of which I know not whe∣ther I formerly gave you an in∣stance, even in that Axiom which (almost) all meerly Natural Philosophers have supposed and built on, that, ex nihilo nihil fit, which, tho at least one of the highest of gradual or collected Truths, may yet be not univer∣sally true, since, for ought we know, God that is acknowledged
to be a Being that is infinitely per∣fect, may have, and may have exercised, the power of Crea∣ting. And in such Cases as this, not to be able to reconcile a truth concerning a privileged thing with a Proposition that generally passes for true (and in other Ca∣ses is so indeed) will not present∣ly oblige us to reject either Pro∣position as false, but sometimes, without destroying either, only to give one of them a due limita∣tion, and restrain it to those sorts of things, on which 'twas at first grounded, and to which 'twas, because of mans ignorance, or inconsiderateness, that 'twas not at first confin'd. And if the Mi∣racles vouch'd either for the Chri∣stian, or for any other Religion, be any of them granted to be true; (as almost all mankind agrees in believing in general, that there have been true Miracles;) it cannot well be deny'd but that Physical Propositions are but li∣mited, and such as I called Col∣lected
Truths, being gathered from the settled Phaenomena of Nature, and are lyable to this li∣mitation or exception, that They are true, where the irresistible power of God, or some other supernatu∣ral Agent is not interpos'd to alter the course of Nature. Pyrocl. But do you think, there are no inconsistent Propositions that you would call Truths, wherein you cannot shew that one of them is but a gradual or e∣mergent Truth? Arnob. 'Tis one thing to in∣quire whether men have yet di∣scerned, or I am able to make out, that one of the Propositions you speak of is but a limited truth; and another, to inquire, whe∣ther speaking absolutely and uni∣versally, it may to any Intellect appear to be no more than such. For first I consider, that the Rea∣son why we judge things to be re∣pugnant, Being, that the Noti∣ons or Ideas we have of them seem to us inconsistent, if either
of these notions be wrong fra∣med, or be judged of by an unfit Rule, we may think those Pro∣positions, to be contradictory that really are not so; as, if you heed∣fully mark it, you shall find, that those that are wont to employ their imaginations about things that are the proper Objects of the Intellect, are apt to pronounce things to be unconceivable, only because they find them unimagin∣able; as if the Fancy and the Intellect were Faculties of the same extent: Upon which ac∣count some have so grosly err'd, as to deny all immaterial Sub∣stances, and chose rather so far to degrade the Deity it self, as to impute to it a Corporeal Nature, than to allow any thing to have a Being that is not comprehensible by their Imagination, which themselves acknowledge to be but a Corporeal Faculty. But be∣sides this mistake of things re∣pugnant, which arises from the mis application or mis-manage∣ment
of our discerning Faculties, I consider in the next place, that there may be another that pro∣ceeds from the Imperfection and Limitedness of our Understand∣ing, which being unable to judge of privileged things at the same rate that it does of other Objects, may sometimes be unable to dis∣cover that reconcileableness that a more illuminated and penetra∣ting Faculty may discern. This may be illustrated by what usu∣ally happens at Sea, (for there mens Prospect is the most free) when looking towards the Main, the Sky and the Waters seem to meet at the edge of the (sensible) Horizon, tho indeed they are as far distant as Heaven is from Earth; and on the other side if you skillfully mix together the dry and fine powder ef Orpi∣ment, and that of Indico, you will produce a green colour, as is known to Painters, and the eye takes notice but of an uni∣form mixture, in which it sees
neither blew nor yellow: But if, (as experience shews) you look on this mixture with a very good Microscope, the emergent colour will disappear; and you will plainly see instead of it, blew and yellow grains of the pow∣ders distinct from one another. Which Instances may serve to shew the imbecillity of our visive Faculty; and the later of them may teach us, that a thing may appear one and differing, as 'tis looked upon by a more or less di∣scerning sight. But an instance more home to our present pur∣pose may be afforded by yellow Diamonds, which because of their Colour, not only other Men, but the generality of Gold∣smiths (in whose error I have sometimes shared) take to be counterfeit Gems, or at best but right Topazes, whereas very skillful Lapidaries, will by sure signs discover and acknowledge them to be true Diamonds, not∣withstanding their seeming dif∣ference
from unquestion'd ones, and account them to be of the same nature with that noblest kind of Jewels. Whence we may learn that a more skillful Judge may discern an agreement in things that almost all other men think they see manifestly to be of di∣stant natures. Eugenius. Give me leave, Gentlemen, to say on this occa∣sion, that I have several times ob∣served, that men judge some things to be irreconcileable, not only when they are both of them represented to the understanding in the form of Propositions; but when one of them is but a notion, or a current difinition. For di∣vers of these notions do contain in them a Proposition, or are equi∣valent to it; As when a Circle is defin'd to be a Figure contain'd in a Line, all whose parts are e∣qually distant from the middle-most Point or Center, this defi∣nition contains an affirmation of the essential property of a Circle;
and by the generality of Geome∣tricians is therefore discriminated from that Conick Section which they call an Ellipsis, tho that be also a Figure terminated by one curve Line. And because you are versed in Mathematicks, I shall on this oc∣casion shew you by a Geometri∣cal Instance, that if a man have not genuine and adequate noti∣ons of the things he judges of, he may confidently, and even upon very probable grounds, judge things to be inconsistent, that in reality, are not so. For if an or∣dinary Cultivater of Mathemati∣cal Disciplines should hear one man say, that such a Figure is an Ellipsis, and another affirm it to be a Circle, he would think their assertions to be inconsistent, ha∣ving his mind prepossessed with an Ellipsis's, being a Conical Se∣ction, whose properties must therefore (he supposes) be very differing from those of a Circle; whereas such wary Geometri∣cians
as the Learned Doctor WallisSee his Treatise de Sectioni∣bus Conicis. will tell him, that the vulgar notions of Conick Secti∣ons are not adequate to the Fi∣gures producible by them: For when a right Cone is cut quite through by an inclining Plane, the figure produced by the Secti∣on agrees well with the received notion of an Ellipsis, in which the Diameters are of unequal length; yet if the Plane cut the Cone parallel to the Basis, that Conick Section will be a true Circle, having all its Diameters equal. 'Tis indeed an uncommon and unheeded account, but such an one upon which I have observed not only Logicians, but Philoso∣phers themselves to err about judging things reconcileable or inconsistent; that if a man be not sufficiently acquainted with the nature of any of the two things under consideration (and much more if he be ignorant of, or mistaken about both) he may
think there is a contradiction be∣tween things, wherein a Superior or more piercing Intellect may discern a consistency; for taking it for granted, that he knows one thing to be a truth, if some o∣ther thing be affirm'd to be so, which he has not understanding or skill enough to see how to re∣concile to it, 'tis no wonder, that how well soever this may be e∣vinced, he should as little know how to admit, as how to reject it. This may be partly illustrated, and partly prov'd by instances drawn from the Mathematicks themselves: For a Novice in A∣rithmetick, for example, finding That, according to his Rules, there is not one mean proportional number between 4 and 32, will scarce be able to reconcile that Proposition to this other, That there are two mean proportio∣nals between the mentioned numbers; For he may with great appearance of Reason ask, how, if there be not so much as one
mean proportional, there can be two? Whereas those that are acquainted with the nature of Ranks or Series of numbers pro∣ceeding in Geometrical Propor∣tion, will easily discern that be∣tween those two recited, both the number 8, and the number 16; are mean proportionals. Timotheus. Tho I disallow not your Instance, Eugenius, yet I shall be willing to hear one or two others of a less abstracted Na∣ture. Eug. To obey you, Timotheus, I shall add, that if an old School-Philosopher, or a Mathematici∣an not acquainted with the later Discoveries made by Telescopes, should hear one man say, that the Moon is the most enlightned, when she appears full to us, and another affirm that she is more in∣lightned at the New Moon than at the Full, he would readily con∣clude, upon the supposition (which he makes no doubt of) that the Moon receives all her
light immediately from the Sun, that the affirmation of the later (Astronomer) cannot be true; which yet he would not conclude, if he knew (what is discovered by Telescopes) that the Moon is as well inlightned by the Earth, as the Earth by the Moon; upon which score, whereas at the Full she receives but those Beams that come to her directly, from the Sun, at the Change she receives both them in that part of her Bo∣dy that is obverted to him, and those other Beams of his that are reflected from the Terrestrial Globe to that part of the Moon that is nearest to us. And to the foregoing Instance, I shall add one more, that seems apposite enough to Arnobius's Purpose, and 'tis, that before Pythagoras, not only the vulgar of the Greeks, but their Philoso∣phers and Mathematicians too, observing oftentimes that a bright Star preceded the Rising Sun, and that frequently also (on other
days) after Sun-set, another Star appear'd, that was none of the fix'd ones; they confidently concluded from the so distant times of Appa∣rition, that the Sun was attended by two differing Stars, to which accordingly they gave two differ∣ing names: But Pythagoras, who was a far better Astronomer (as may be guessed, among other things, by his maintaining in those early times the motion of the earth about the Sun) under∣took to disabuse them, and effect∣ed it. Now if one that had ob∣served Venus only in the morn∣ings, should have affirm'd, that besides the six known Planets, there was but a seventh (namely the Phosphorus) which preceded the Rising Sun; and another, (that had taken notice notice of her only in the Evenings) should assert, that besides the same six known ones, the only seventh was that called Hesperus, which sometimes appear'd after his Set∣ting; a By-stander would pre∣sently
have concluded, that their Assertions were not reconcileable, either to one another, or to the truth; which (in his judgment) was, that there must be no less than eight visible Planets; and yet Pythagoras, who had more skill, and more piercing wit, did, (as was lately noted) discern and teach, that these two Phaenomena were produc'd by one and the same Planet Venus, determined by its peculiar motion (about the Sun) to shew it self near our Horizon, sometimes before he ascends it, and sometimes after he had left it. Such instances as these, tho offered but as illustra∣tions, may perswade us from be∣ing too forward to reject every proposition, that we see not how to reconcile to what we take for a truth; provided the distrusted proposition be such as we would acquiesce in, if we could recon∣cile it to that supposed Truth. Timotheus. From this Dis∣course, Eugenius, and that of
Arnobius, which preceded it, I think one may gather, that ac∣cording to you two, when two Propositions are laid down, whereof one is made evident to us by Experience, or by Rea∣son, acting within its own Juris∣diction or Compass; and the o∣ther is sufficiently proved by be∣ing mathematically demonstra∣ted, or duly attested by Divine Revelation, we ought not to re∣ject either of these propositions, as no truth, meerly because we do not yet know how to reconcile them: but we should rather think, that the collected Proposition, is but a gradual, or limited truth; or else we should consider, that we knowing but so imperfectly as we do the particular natures of privileg'd Subjects, for ought we know a superior Intellect may be able to discern a friendly agree∣ment between what is deliver'd about that Subject, and the affir∣mation that seems repugnant to it, tho we are not quick-sighted
enough to perceive this Agree∣ment. And this, how strange soever you may think it, Pyrocles, may not only be countenanc'd by such things as Eug. lately said, but both you your self, and almost all mankind do de facto seem to pra∣ctise it, in the case of the Divine Prescience of mans free Actions. Eugenius. What you contend for, Gentlemen, may perhaps be thought the more receivable, if one should argue thus: First either the Propositions said to be repugnant, are both really true, or they are not; If it be answer∣ed, that they are not, the diffi∣culty is at an end: for there is none at all to conceive a true Proposition, should contradict a false one. But, secondly, if both the Propositions be supposed to be true, it must be affirm'd, either that they are reconcileable, or that they are not; if it be said, they are not, then Pyrocles his objection is out of doors; for it cannot then be reasonable to say,
that the two Propositions, tho in∣consistent with one another, must necessarily be one or other of them inconsistent with the truth. But this I presume he will by no means assert, and consequently, must say, that the Propositions are reconcileable. Upon which answer I shall demand, how that can be, unless a superior Intellect, such as unquestionably the Di∣vine is, can discover an agree∣ment between Propositions wherein we cannot discern it. For our not being able to discern it, is you know professedly sup∣posed in the case we discourse of. Pyrocles. But, Arnobius, will not this Doctrine make us very liable to have falsities imposed on us at the pleasure of bold and dictating men? Arnob. Not, if it be limited to the subjects wherein alone I would have it admitted; for if neither of the things treated of be a privileg'd one, but both in the jurisdiction of ordinary rea∣son,
I do not only consent, but (in my first Advice) require, that the Propositions fram'd about them be estimated according to the common Dictates of Reason. And even in cases where one of the Propositions is about a privi∣leg'd thing, I do not at all think fit, that it should be received in spite of its being repugnant to the gradual truth delivered in the o∣ther, unless it can by some other Argument sufficient in its kind be proved to be true; and in that case, that, what I plead for, ought to be admitted, is implyed by the suffrage of almost all mankind, in that case, which was just now per∣tinently mentioned by Timotheus: for tho men know not how to re∣concile the Liberty of mans will, with the infallible knowledge that God has of those Actions that flow from it, yet they have una∣nimously judged it reasonable to believe both Free-will and Prescience; the former, because they felt it in themselves; and
the later, partly because the fore∣knowledge of things being ma∣nifestly a perfection, ought not to be denyed to God, whom they looked upon as a Being supreme∣ly perfect; and partly because some actions and events that they all judg'd to flow from mens free-will, were, as the generality of men believ'd, foretold by Pro∣phetick Oracles. But except in such cases as I have been naming, I am altogether of Pyrocles's mind, that since we have scarce any way of discovering a Falsity, but by its being repugnant to somewhat that is true; to deny, that in cases within the juridicti∣on of ordinary Reason, the re∣pugnancy of a Proposition to any manifest truth, ought to sway our Judgments, were to deprive us of the usefullest Criterion to dis∣criminate between Falshood and Truth. Timoth. For my part, who believe with many Philosophers, as well Heathen as Christian, that
humane Souls owe their origine to God, and with almost all Phi∣losophers, (for I know what the Stoicks held) that as he is the su∣preme Being, so he is a most free Agent, I see not why, as he has given to Corporeal Beings divers Qualities, very differing in their degrees of Nobleness; so he might not give to the Intelligent Productions of his Power and Will, various degrees of Intel∣lectual Capacities as well as a li∣mitedness of Nature. And as it will not follow, that because we can see with our eyes very small Objects, and imagine such as are yet much smaller, either the eye, or the imagination can ever reach to so small an Object as an Atome; so it will not follow that because we are able to frame Conceptions of immaterial Beings, we must therefore be able to understand the nature of God, and the Har∣mony of all his Monadical At∣tributes. A little Boy may have a clear notion of three, four,
five, or other smaller numbers, and yet may be unable to frame good conceptions of Triangular and other Polygon Numbers (as some call them) and much more of the abstruse affections of surd Numbers, and the Roots of the higher Algebraical Powers. To discern particular Truths is one thing, and to be able to discover the Intercourse and Harmony be∣tween all Truths, is another thing, and a far more difficult one; as a Traveller may upon the English Shoar know that he sees the Ocean, and upon the Coast of Affrick be made to do the like, and at the East Indies also he may know that he sees the Ocean; and yet not know how those so distant Seas communicate with each o∣ther, tho that may be manifest enough to a Cosmographer. Arnob. What you say brings into my mind, that I have some∣times thought God and men enjoy Truth, as differingly as they do Time. For we men, as we enjoy
time but by parcels, and always leave far the greatest part of it unreach'd to by us; so we know but some particular Truths, and are always ignorant of far more than we attain to. Whereas God, as his eternity reaches to all the portions of time (or mea∣sured Durations) so his Omnisci∣ence gives him at one view a pro∣spect of the whole extent of Truth: (As if a man could see the whole River of Nilus with all its turnings and windings from its hidden Springs to its entrance into the Sea.) Upon which ac∣count he sees all particular Truths, not only distinct, but in their Sy∣steme, and so sees a Connexion between those that to us seem'd the most distant ones. Arnob. There remains now, Gentlemen, but one part more of your penance to be under∣gone; for 'tis high time, I should hasten to the relief of a Patience I have so long distress'd, and therefore I shall give it but one
exercise more, and conclude your Trouble with some reflections on this last Advice. The Sixth Advice, or Rule. That in Privileg'd Things we ought not always to condemn that opini∣on which is liable to ill Conse∣quences, and incumbred with great inconveniencies, provided the positive proofs of it be suffi∣cient in their kind. That this Advice may be the more easily admitted, I shall se∣parately suggest three things, which I desire may be afterwards considered all together. First, that clear positive proofs, proportionate to the nature of things, are genuine and proper motives to induce the understand∣ing to assent to a proposition as true; so that 'tis not always ne∣cessary to the evidence and firm∣ness of an Assent, that the Intel∣lect takes notice of the Conse∣quences that may be drawn from it, or the difficulties wherewith
it may be incumbered. This is plain in those Assents which of all others, at least that are meerly na∣tural, are by knowing men thougt to be the most undoubted and the best grounded; I mean the Assents that are given to the Truth of Geometrical Demon∣strations: And yet, Euclid, for instance, in all his Elements of Geometry, in some of which surprising Paradoxes are deliver∣ed, (as in the sixteenth propositi∣on of the third Book, and the 117th of the tenth Book, to name no more) contents him∣self to demonstrate his Assertions in a Mathematical Way, and does not, that I remember, an∣swer or take notice of any one Objection: and the Geometrici∣ans of our days think they may safely receive his Propositions upon the Demonstrations annex∣ed to them, without knowing or troubling themselves about the subtleties employed by the Sce∣ptick Sextus Empiricus, or others
of that Sect in their writings a∣gainst the Mathematicians, and all Assertors of assured knowledge. The second thing I would offer to your consideration, is, that the former part of our Discourse has manifested, that there are some things which our humane and imperfect understandings ei∣ther cannot, or at least do not, perfectly comprehend: and that nevertheless men have not re∣frain'd from presuming to dog∣matize and frame Notions and Rules about such things, as if they understood them very well. Whence it must needs come to pass, that if they were mistaken (as in things so abstruse, 'tis very like they often were) those that judge by the Rules they laid down, must conceive the Propositions opposite to their mistakes, to be liable to very great, if not insupe∣rable Difficulties and Objections. And this second Consideration, in conjunction with the first, will make way for the third, as a na∣tural
production of them, which is, That, as we need not wonder that privileged things, which are wont to be so sublime as to have been out of the view of those that fram'd the Rules whereby we judge of other things, should be thought liable to great Objections by them who judge of all things only by those Rules; so we should not require or expect more evi∣dence of a Truth relating to such things, than that there are for it such sufficient positive Reasons, as notwithstanding Objections and Inconveniences, make it, upon the whole matter, worthy to be embraced. Pyrocles. But can that be wor∣thy to be assented to, which is li∣able to Objections and Inconveni∣ences, which the maintainers confess they know not how to avoid? Does not your Euclid him∣self in some of his Demonstrati∣ons imploy that way of reasoning which some of his Latine Inter∣preters call Deductio ad Absur∣dum?
Arnob. Euclid indeed (as well as other Mathematicians) be∣sides that more satisfactory way of direct probation, which per∣haps he might have oftner im∣ployed than he did, has some∣times where he thought it need∣ful, made use of the  you speak of. But in these cases he never goes out of the Discipline he treats of, and confining him∣self to Arguments drawn from quantity, he urges nothing as absurd, but what is undeniably repugnant to some Truth he had already demonstrated, or to those clear and undisputed Defi∣nitions, Axioms, or Postalata, which he supposes to have been already granted by those he would convince. But tho he thus ar∣gues to prove that his Readers cannot contradict him without contradicting themselves; yet we find not that he was at all solici∣tous to clear those Difficulties that so quick-sighted a man could not but know some of his Theorems
to be attended with: but con∣tents himself to demonstrate the incommensurableness of the Side and Diagonal of a Square, with∣out troubling himself to take no∣tice of the Difficulties that attend the endless Divisibility of a Line, which would follow from what he demonstrated. But, Pyrocles, to look back to the first part of your Objection, tho what you say will hold in ordinary Cases, yet such peculiar ones, as we are speaking of, deserve a particular Consideration. About some pri∣vileged things there are, and a∣bout some others there may be contradictory Opinions (taking that term in a strict sense) main∣tain'd. Now as both of these cannot be true, so one of them must be so: as, tho it be hotly disputed whether Quantity be endlesly divisible, yet certainly it either must, or must not be divi∣sible without end: And as was formerly observed which side so∣ever you take, the Inconveniencies
will be exceeding great, and per∣haps there will lye Objections scarce to be directly answered. And since one of the two oppo∣site Opinions must be true, it will not always be necessary, that an opinion must be false, which is incumbred with great difficulties, or liable to puzzling Objections. And therefore if the positive proofs on one side be clear and co∣gent, tho there be perplexing Difficulties objected by the o∣ther; the truth ought not for their sake to be rejected; because such difficulties proceeding usu∣ally either from notions that men presume to frame about things a∣bove their reaches, or from Rules that were not made for such points as are in dispute, the Ob∣jections are not to be judged so well founded, as is that acknow∣ledged Principle in Reasoning, that from Truth, nothing but truth can be legitimately inferr'd. Eugen. I confess I have always thought it reasonable in such Ca∣ses
to compare, as well the posi∣tive proofs of one opinion with those of the other, as those Obje∣ctions that are urg'd on either side; and there make my esti∣mate upon the whole matter; tho with a peculiar regard to that opinion that has a great advan∣tage in point of positive Argu∣ments; Because, as Arnobius observ'd, those are the proper Inducements to the Assent of the Intellect: And then the Obje∣ctions may well enough be su∣spected to proceed from the ab∣struse nature of privileg'd things, and the over-great narrowness of the Rules that men are wont to judge of all things by. For we may have a sufficiently clear proof that a thing is, whilst we have no satisfactory conception of its manner of existing or opera∣ting; our illative knowledge, if you will allow me so to speak, be∣ing clearer, and extending fur∣ther than our intuitive or appre∣hensive knowledge.
Arnob. But even about things that we cannot sufficiently under∣stand, we may in some cases exer∣cise our Reason, in answering ob∣jections that are thought not to be at all answerable, because they are not directly so. For we may sometimes shew, by framing in a∣nother case a like Argument, which, the Adversary must con∣fess, does not conclude well, that neither does the Argument that contains his Objection conclude aright. This I could exemplifie (tho that may seem no easie Task) but that I fear I should want time to propose Examples, whose being very paradoxical would make them need much proof; which you who I fear are quite tired al∣ready, would want patience to hear. Wherefore I shall rather recommend to you one Observa∣tion, which I take to be of no small moment and use, when we contemplate things of the nature of those we have been discoursing
of: and it is this, that we must not expect to be able, as to privi∣leg'd things, and the Propositi∣ons that may be fram'd about them, to resolve all Difficulties, and answer all Objections; since we can never directly answer those, which require for their so∣lution a perfect comprehension of what is infinite: as a man cannot well answer the Objections that may be made against the Antipo∣des, the Doctrine of Eclipses, that of the different Phases of the Moon, and of the long days and nights of some months apiece, near the Poles, (not now to name that more abstruse part of Astro∣nomy, the Theory of the Planets) unless he understand the nature of the Sphere, and some other Prin∣ciples of Cosmography. FINIS.
