B4528 15272083 103334
A BREIF And Full ACCOUNT OF Mr. Tate's and Mr. Brady's New VERSION OF THE PSALMS. By a true Son of the Church of England. LONDON: Printed for Joseph Wild, at the Elephant at Charing-Cross, M DC XCVIII.
TO All the Learned and Pious PATRONS AND PROMOTERS OF THE New VERSION OF THE PSALMS, This small TREATISE SHEWING That the Vse of them in Churches, Chappels, and Congregations, Having the Royal Allowance of His Majesty in Council, and the Recommendation of several of the Bishops, is agreeable to the Constitu∣tions of the Church of England, and the Authority of Convocations. Is Humbly Dedicated by Their Most obedient Servant,
A Modest Vindication OF THE New VERSION OF THE PSALMS. THE fond Affection which Men re∣tain for ancient Customs, is gene∣rally so very powerful and prevai∣ling, that a Reformation even from the most prejudicial of them is hardly obtain'd, without putting an ungrateful task upon Humane Nature; for by lonḡ acquaintance they insinuate themselves so insensibly into our Love and Esteem, that they frequently blind our Reason, inslave and captivate our Inclinations, and we can never release our
selves from their Tyranny, without mighty Strugling and Reluctance. 'Tis to these pre∣judices mainly, that the various false Religions in the World owe their maintenance and sup∣port; and to these likewise must be ascrib'd all those several Heats and Contests, which so grievoufly disturb'd these Nations at the time of our Reformation from the gross Er∣rors of the Church of Rome. And to what else but these can we more candidly impute those unexpected Endeavours that have been used against the New Version of the Psalms? Which design'd to retreive that part of our Devotion from the many palpable Absurdities which were in the Old Translation, and has been so lasting a reproach to the Honour of our Church. However, it is hoped that this unhappy Objection may at length be taken off, and nothing retain'd in our publick Service, which may be matter of just offence to any; and that therefore we shall not indulge any Error, when we have so fair an opportunity of seeing it Corrected. And that I may vin∣dicate our Church from such as asperse her in this particular, and are willing to impeach her Credit, and impair her Reputation by alledging that the Anciens Psalms of Sternhold and Hopkins were injoyn'd as part of her
publick Devotion, I must crave leave to cor∣rect this great Mistake, and do acquaint them that the Old Version never had any particular Recommendation either from the King, or Bishops, or Convocation; and that this New Translation is that which has obtain'd both the Allowance and Recommendation of Authority. And after I have given them a short account of its Rise and Proḡress, will endeavour to let them see that the publick use of it in our Churches is agreeable to Reason, conformable to the Constitutions of our Church, and the Authority of Convocations, and sub∣servient to the Advancement and Increase of Piety. And therefore that this fmall Tract does hereupon humbly presume to bespeak the Favour of all such persons as have any regard for Reason, or Devotion, or the Go∣vernment in Church or State. But First, I will endeavour to give some ac∣count of the Rise and Progress of this New Version; which has been thought by some of the greatest Men of the times to be a Work so well perform'd, and so favourable a Provi∣dence has all along attended it, that they seem to promise it a very kind Reception and Encouragement in the World; and it has al∣ready met with considerable Encouragement. The Undertakers at first propos'd this pious
Design between themselves, but in a little time it was Communicated, and as speedily Receiv'd and Nourish'd by Persons of the Highest Rank, and principal Authority in the Nation, both in Church and State. Whose Abilities being agreeable to the Emi∣nence of their Quality, gave them an ad∣vantageous prospect into all the convenience and necessity of so good a Work, and what a dissusive and opportune Blessing it was like∣ly to prove to the Reform'd Church of these Dominions, particularly in removing those daily Exceptions which are made against this part of our publick Devotion. Where∣upon the late Queen of Blessed and Im∣mortal Memory, was pleas'd to promise it Her Royal Countenance. And the late Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, whose excellent En∣dowments were so suitable to the Dignity of his Station; did freely acquaint the Transla∣tors, That he was glad so useful a Work was carrying on in his Days. After the Kingdom had sustain'd so consi∣derable a loss by the Death of those two E∣minent Persons, who were such Ornaments to the Nation, the present Arch Bishop, who was chosen to succeed in the See of Canterbu∣ry, and acquits himself so well in that weigh∣ty Charge which he has in the Church, was
pleas'd to look favourably upon this Religious Design, and support that Patronage which they had promis'd it. And many more of the learned and judicious Prelates, who were unwilling that a Design so Pious and Useful should meet with any Obstruction, gave it likewise their Encouragement. Besides these, Sir John Sommers, now Lord High-Chance∣lour of England, the Earl of Pembroke, Lord Privy-Seal, the Earl of Dorset and Middle∣sex, and the Right Honourable Charles Moun∣tague Chancellour of the Exchequer, all Persons of singular and shining Parts; were the great support of the Undertaking, and the mighty Patrons and Promoters of this diffi∣cult and Religious Work. Among whom there are not wanting Persons of such accu∣rate Judgment in all Poetick excellence, and of such skill in that Language wherein the Psalms were originally writ, that the very mention of their Names in such a Work as this, is sufficient to Recommend it effectually to all this part of the Ingenious World, and their Stamp upon it, to make it pass currant for Standard Verse, with all the best Masters of Poetry among us, The Translators, who attempted it, were sufficiently known to them for their Qualifications and Abilities, who were neither Ignorant of the Nature
and Genius of true Poetry, nor Strangers to the Learned Languages. And such as are absolute Judges in this matter, do justly own the near Relation there is between the English and the Original. When the Work was finish'd, and had pass'd the Censure of his Grace the Arch-Bishop, and several more of his Brethern the Right Reverend Prelates, who vouchsaf'd to peruse it, and give in their Alterations and Remarks; a Petition was presented to His Majesty in Council for allowing the liberty of a publick Reception of it in all Churches, Chappels, and Congregations; which was accordingly granted, and is now Printed be∣fore the Book, and runs thus, At the Court at KENSINGTON. December, 3. 1696. Present, The King's Most Excellent Majesty in COUNCIL. UPON the humble Petition of Nicholas Brady, and Nahum Tate, this Day
read at the Board, setting forth, that the Peti'ioners have, with their utmost Care and Industry, compleated A New Version of the Psalms of David, in English Metre, fitted for Publick Use; and humbly praying His Majesty's Royal Allowance that the said Ver∣sion may be used in such Congregations as shall think fit to receive it. His Majesty taking the same into His Royal Consideration, is pleas'd to Order in Council, That the said New Version of the Psalms in English Merre be, and the same is hereby Allowed and Permitted to be Vs'd in all Churches, Chappels, and Congregations, as shall think fit to receive the same. W. Bridgman. And because a matter of this Universal Moment and Concern requir'd all imagina∣ble Care and Industry for qualifying it for so publick an End as it was Design'd for; and that no caution might be omitted for bring∣ing this Work to full Maturity and Pertecti∣on, the Translators invited all their Friends been in City and Country to supervise and correct what was amiss, fearing least an over∣weening partiality to their own Endeavours
might bribe their Judgments, and warp their Sentiments into too favourable an Opinion of their own Performances, for knowing the variety of Humours it was to struggle with, and the great difficulty of suiting a Poem to every Temper which this was to engage, they thought of no Method so likely for mastering this Discouragement, as to try the Bent of every Genius; what Thoughts and Apprehensions they had of it, before it was permitted to venture abroad. Transcribing herein that excellent Rule of Horace in his Book de Arte Poetica, wherein he advises us to submit our Performance to the severest Censure. — — Si quid tamem olim Scripseris, in Meci descendat Judicis aures. Yet if it ever be your Fate to write, Let your Productions pass tbe strictest hand. Roscom. Transl. Which is a Method whereby any Author may give a remarkable Instance of his Wis∣dom and Humility, tho he cannot always of his Ingenuity.
After it had been thus Corrected by the Bishops, and the Translators friends, and the Work it self, with the usefulnes of it, had been so fairly represented to His Majesty in Council, by his Grace the Lord Arch bishop of Canterbury and others, that it gain'd a publick Approbation by His Majesty's Roy∣al Indulgence: The Lord Bishop of London thought fit to send out his circular Letters of Recommendation to all his Clergy within his Diocess: For that worthy Prelate did in this case nothing deviate either from his Native or additional Honour; but after the very first time that he promis'd this Version his Fa∣vour, he was so cautious of giving the least Umbrage of suspition that he was unmind∣ful of his Word, that he spread it, as much as lay in him, universally. And at the same time gave an Instance of that Respect which was due both to his Sovereign and himself, and shew'd that he was as little capable of neglecting so reasonable a thing, which his Prince had countenane'd, as he was of violating his own voluntary Obligation. And no sooner came his Lordships Letter abroad, but it was chearfully receiv'd by several of his Clergy within the City; but no where sooner, as I am inform'd, than in that learned Auditory in Serjeants Inn in Fleetstreet, where
it was very much approv'd of, but more es∣pecially by the Right Honourable the Lord Chief Justice Treby, whose Judgment and Ingenuity are so unquestionable. Much about the same time the Grave and Judicious Members of Lincolns-Inn, appoin∣ted it to be Sung in their Chappel the follow∣ing Term, as a Mark of the publick Appro∣bation of that Honourable Society. And several of the Bishops reading my Lord of London's Letter, found it a thing so thorow∣ly weigh'd, and such excellent Reasons given for the dispersing it universally, that without any further Hesitation, they resolv'd to make that the Original for them to Copy after, and the Standard of their Direction; and therefore transcrib'd it without any alteration but that of their Names, and afterward scat∣ter'd it throughout their respective Diocesses. Upon which his Grace the Lord Arch-Bishop of York, whom all Mankind so justly Respect and Honour, acquainted the Authors of this Version, by a Letter which he sent up to his Brother in the City, that he was then going his Visitation, and would re∣commend it to all his Clergy as he went a∣long; and that already some of them, pleas'd with so pious a Proposal, had sent to the City for Books for their Congregations: For
his Grace was pleas'd to acquaint the Tranfla∣tors some time ago, that whenever they could obtain any Encouragement from the Govern∣ment, he would endeavour to disperse it throughout his Province. Having proceded thus far in the History of this New Translation, and declar'd its O∣riginal, and that favour able Entertainment it has met with from Persons of such Un∣questionable Judgment and Authority, of such Eminent Piety and Learning, by whose Kindness and Encouragement it has made such Steps and Progress not only in this fam'd Metropolis, but in some of the remotest parts of the Nation; I will now proceed to give some Reasons for the Vindication of that En∣couragement which it has already met with, or hereafter may receive, and endeavour like∣wise to answer such Objections as may be made, either against the Patrons or Promo∣ters of this Work. Not that I can mistrust the Reception of it in an Age so Religious and refin'd as This, but only because some persons, who can endure nothing but what is Old, may be startled at its Novelty; and look upon it, as some do upon New Fashions, which tho' never so decent, and proper, and convenient for us to use, yet they cannot bear the sight of them, because
neither they, nor their Fore-Fathers were ever accustom'd to them. And that it is only this unreasonable prejudice which thus imposes upon them, and so inslaves them to Antiquity in this matter, this very Argu∣ment will I hope make evident, which is, that if this New Version had been so long en∣tertain'd in our Churches, as the Old One has been, and Sternhold and Hopkins had now offer'd their Compositions instead of it, they would certainly be rejected by all de∣grees of Men, with the utmost contempt. But I will hasten to the Arguments which as I told you I design'd to make use of, to pro∣mote a general Reception of this Translation; which we e the agreeableness of this Design with Reason; the Conformity of it with the Constitutions of our Church, and the Authority of Convecations; and its subserviency to the Advancement and Increase of Piety. By all which I will endeavour fairly to represent the Vsefulness of this Pious and Laborious Work, friendly to remove those prejudices that may be rashly taken up against either the Design it self, or the Favourers of it, and amicably to reconcile the unbias'd Reader to a candid and kind Opinion of it. For I think the best Argument loses ground, when it looks ill natur'd or severe.
First therefore, I will endeavour to let you see the Agreableness of this Design with Reason. And both this, and the other Ar∣guments which I have chosen to insist upon are plainly intimated in the Letter of the Bishops, which is this, HIS Majesty having allow'd and permit∣ted the Vse of a New Version of the Psalms of David, by Mr. Brady and Mr. Tate, in all Churches, Chappels and Congregati∣ons; I cannot do less, than wish a Good Suc∣cess to this Royal Indulgence: For I find it a Work done with so much Judgment and In∣genuity, that I am persuaded, it may take off that unhappy Objection, which has hitherto lain against the Singing Psalms; and dispose that part of Divine Service to much more Devotion. And I do heartily Recommend the Vse of This Version, to all my Brethren within My Diocess. Now in this Letter there are three Rea∣sons given, why their Lordships were in∣duc'd to Recommend so cordially this Trans∣lation to their several Ministers. The first is the Respect they bore to His Sacred Ma∣jesty, as the Supreme Head and Governour of this Church, who having the
fulness and Convenience of this Religious Performance, and the necessity of introducing it into the Church, represented to him by the Lords of his most Honourable Privy Coun∣cil, was pleas'd by the Authority with which he is Vested in these Matters, to grant it forthwith His Royal Allowance. Upon which, the Bishops finding how much His Majesties Care for the well-fare of of the Church was interested in this Case, thought that their Zeal and Concern ought to be no less, and therefore they seconded his Indulgence with their own hearty Re∣commendation. And because upon this, some scandalous Libels were publish'd in the City, in derogation of this Laudible Under∣taking, and contempt of that Authority which was pleas'd to appear in its Approbation; Therefore his Grace the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, with others of their Excel∣lences the Lords Justices, thinking not fit that a Work so beneficial to the Publick should be obstructed in its Progress; or that the sawcy Reflections upon that Encourage∣ment which it had from Authority, should pass unpunish'd, order'd a Messenger of the Press to search out the Authors and Prin∣sers of the Libels, that they might be pro∣ceeded against according to Law.
The next Reason taken notice of by the Bishops in their Letter is the Judgment and Ingenuity of the Work, which appearing not only to their Lordships, but to others of the most refin'd Parts of the Age, I suppose this Argument is unquestionable, especially with Men of Candor and Judgment. And for such whose capacities are too low to find out those Perfections, they ought to acquiesce in the Sentiments of such as are qualified for it; since nothing is so true a Judge of Sense, as Sense. The third and last Reason which is men∣tion'd in this Letter, is, that the vse of this Version (as they own they are persuaded) may take off that unhappy Objection which has hitherto lain against the Singing Psalms, and dispose that part of Divine Service to much more Devotion. But of this I shall speak nothing at present, but refer it to the last particular of this Discourse, where it more porperly falls in, because it is an Argument drawn from Piety and Devotion. And now for the Reason of using this New Version, which is so well approv'd of; I think nothing more equitable, and there∣fore more rational than that this Translation should be favourably receiv'd, since, it has been so publickly allow'd of, and with good
Authority recommended, meerly upon the account of that civil Observance and Respect which is due to our Superiors, both in Church and State. For unless some deference be paid to their Judgments, and that Authori∣ty which they have over us, even in those things wherein they do not interpose an Ab∣solute Command, we shall never shew so much Ingenuity, as to conform to their Counsels and Advice freely, but put them always upon the uneasiness of dragging us to our Duty, and making use of their co∣ercive Power over us, because we will do nothing but by constraint. And what thanks is due to my Obedience, when I find I can∣not help it, if I resisted the Authority as long as I was able, and would have baffl'd it if I could? For, Certainly were my love and respect to my Superiors as cordial as they ought to be; Obe∣dience to their Advice, would be my true satis∣faction, and compliance with their Counsels, my great Delight; I should be so far from disputing, or opposing their pious Admoniti∣ons, that I should constantly hearken to them chearfully, and obey them with a ready Mind. Nay, should think it my Duty to comport my self quietly and respectfully towards every one in that Order and Degree
wherein they are plac'd; and not lessen their Authority by obstructing their Directions, or interrupting the Progress of their rea∣sonable and pious Designs; for he that pra∣ctices the contrary, and disputes each punctilio of Advice with his Superiors, is rather a Disturbance than a Blessing to either Pub∣lick, or Domestick Societies; and by a per∣verse and litigious temper does as much as in him lies to weaken the reins of Govern∣ment, eclipse that Respect which is due to Power, and turn that Civility which should be paid to the mature Advice of our Supe∣riors out of the World. And certainly would Men but make this Case their own, and consider with what Patience and Equanimity they themselves would bear such usage as this from their Inferiors, what a derogation it would be to their Authority to have it slighted and o∣verlook'd, by such as Nature of Providence had plac'd under them? They would not be so easily induc'd to transgress in this par∣ticular, nor openly infringe the natural Rights of Superiority, which are Laws of common Justice betwixt Man and Man. As for Instance, Would any Master of a Family think it proper in a Servant to choose out his
own Task, and prescribe to himself his own Work, when he had directed him to the contrary? Would any Tutor be pleas'd with his Pupil for reading such Books as humour'd his own Fancy, when he had ad∣vis'd him to such as were much more in∣structive and beneficial? And would it not be extreamly indecent, and apt to grieve and incense an Indulgent Parent, to see his Child refractory to his Admonitions, and advance his own Opinion in direct oppo∣sition to his wise and kind Advices? 'Tis certain that all Men in these circum∣stances do expect both Love and Obedience, both Duty and Respect to be paid them by their Inferiors. What Reason therefore is there that they should not shew as willing a Mind to give, as receive this Observance and Veneration, in all matters that are e∣quitable and just? And I am persuaded that there are few of those Persons who would evade a compliance with the Advice of their Superiors in this particular, but would be apt to resent the like repulse from other Men, were they advanc'd to so high a Sta∣tion as would qualifie them for recommen∣ding it themselves. They would I believe be apt to think that there was but little ei∣ther of Modesty, Justice, or Ingenuity in such
behaviour towards them; as little indeed as if the Dean of a Cathedral should ac∣quaint his Quire, that such a New Anthem he thought might very properly be Sung, and they, notwithstanding, should Tune their Voices to an old One, and tell him that they thought themselves more capable of judging what was fit to be Sung than he. Nor can I think that the Patrons of this Work are any more culpable for encourageing it, than a Dean would be for Designing a New Anthem; nor the Promoters of it any more to blame, than the Quire would be had they chearfully obey'd him. For these Reasons it was that a person of Honour in this Nation, living in a Parish where the Bishops Recommendation came to the Minister, and finding it neglected, spoke to his Pastor to this effect. Sir, How can you expect that your Parishioners should pay a due respect to you; when you pay so little to your King, and your Diocesan? Or, rea∣dily comply with that Advice that you give, when you hearken so little to that which is sent you by your Superiors? And for this Reason it is that so many Reverend and Devout Persons are heartily dispos'd to∣wards the promoting this Design, because they are loath to expose the Authority of
their Superiors to contempt, which they judge they must incur by a careless or violent Opposition to it. And which they sancy would amount to little less than this, viz. When their Lordships tell them, they cannot do no less than wish a good Success to this Royal Indulgence; should they con∣temn it, it would be in effect to tell their Lordships, nor we do less than wish it no Success at all When their Lordships say, they sind it a Work done with so much Judg∣ment and Ingenuity. Should these decry and run it down, it would look as if they should answer, we could never find out where either the Judgment or Ingenuity lay. And when the Bishops affirm, that they are persuaded it may take off that unhappy Obje∣ction which has hitherto lain against the Singing Psalms. Should these Men after this make use of the Old Ones, would it not be to tell the World, that they think the Objection is very frivolous, and the Old Psalms are a laudable part of our Devo∣tion? Thus they argue for their just compli∣ance, and should they be of a contrary Opi∣nion, this would be to magnifie their own Judgment in Opposition to that of their
Superiors. Whereas the tender Regard and Veneration they have for the Reputation and Advice of their Ecclesiastical Governours, and the fear of exposing their Counsels to contempt, especially in an Age so licenti∣ous and wild as this, binds them within the Rules of a filial Obedience, and ingages them not to be too remiss in paying Honour, to whom such Honour is due. This there∣fore shall serve for the first Argument I have chosen for the Use of these Psalms, being drawn from Reason, which is always willing to support Government, to pay a due respect to Superiors, and a chearful complyance to their good Advice. The Second Argument I propos'd to insist upon, for Vindicating the Design of the Pa∣trons and Promoters of this Work of in∣troducing it into the Churches, was deriv'd from the Conformity of it to the Constituti∣ons of our Church, and the Authorit of Convoca∣tions. And so it plainly appears as much as it is allow'd of by the King and recommeded by the Bishops. For in the Rubrick before the Sentence at the Offertory are these Words; And nothing shall be proclaim'd, or publish'd in the Church during the time of Divine Service, but by the Minister; nor by him any thing, but what is prescrib'd in
the Rules of this Book, or enjoyn'd by the King, or the Ordinary of the place. Where by the way, thus much we may observe, that no Clark of a Parish can Sing in the Church, but as he is directed by his Minister, and as he Acts as his Deputy. But against the strength of this Rubrick I fore-see you may thus argue; That this New Version is neither enjoyn'd by the King, nor the Ordinary of the Place, as the Ru∣brick specifies, and therefore it can receive no Countenance or Authority from thence. And so far I confess the Objection seems to be valid; but yet, tho' neither the King, nor the Ordinary literally enjoyn, yet they allow and recommend these Psalms, and that Ru∣brick which impowers them to enjoyn, does much more impower them to allow and recommend; for, Omne majus in this case includit minus. And tho' 'tis true, I confess, that by this Authority these Psalms are not enjoyn'd to be Sung. Yet by the Authority of this Rubrick none else can be Sung, be∣cause none else are expresly allow'd of and re∣commended by the King, and the Ordinary. Now we must remember that the Rubrick contains in it the Power and Force both of a Convocation and an Act of Parliament, be∣cause it is Establish'd by both their Autho∣rities.
And tho' in its Original it was only a Canon, yet was it confirm'd as a Law: And therefore this Version coming abroad, recommended by the Anthority of this Ru∣brick, which impowers both the King and the Ordinary not only to enjoyn, but much more to allow and recommend, comes abroad stampt with the Approbation both of Convo∣cation and Act of Parliament. And he seems to vacat both their Authorities who opposes that Encouragement which it has already receiv'd from His Majesty and the Bishops; and endeavours to enervate all their Efficacy and Strength by rendring them useless and in∣significant. And since it has been thought fit that the Persons Constituting that Learned Body of the Convocation should have their Vote for approving at least what was sit to be us'd in the several Parts of the Publick Service; and since this very Society, have by their own voluntary Consent allow'd that the King or the Bishops, may enjoyn, or recommend what is fit, or decent upon occa∣sion; whoever therefore it is that contra∣dicts this Authority which they have freely consented should be vested in the King and the Bishops, seems directly to oppose the Power of that Sacred Body, and to be a direct Enemy to the Rights and Priviledges of a Convocation. Besides,
By vertue of that Authority which is vested in our Kings, K. James the I. Issued out his Royal Commission for that New Translation of the Bible, which is now daily read in Churches. Nor can I find that ever any Convocation since that time have thought that Commission an Infringe∣ment of their Rights and Liberties, but rather an Allowance and a sign of the Ra∣tification of them. And certainly it is none of the least Honours and Felicities that our Convocations have reason to boast of, when Kings are pleas'd thus to act by their Ca∣nons, and to be directed by their Constituti∣ons; so making good the Prophetick Character given of them, that they should be nursing Fathers of the Church, Isa. 49. 23. If then the present Version of the Bible be thought sit to be used upon all occasions in our Churches, Chappels, and Congregatious, by the Au∣thority of the King which is backt by that of Act of Parliament and Convocation; I can see no reason why the same Authority should not interpose, and be allow'd of, which has appear'd in the Approbation of this New Translation of the Psalms. And as for that Version which has hitherto been used, it never found that Encouragement from any persons legally vested with Authority in
spirituals, that this new one has been favour'd with, no not from a Convocation it self, and sor the rest of the late ones they cannot pre∣tend to it. And the silence of so many Con∣vocations since the Reformation is so far from being an Argument for the Old One, that on the contrary it is a presumptive Evidence, that that Religious Assembly thought it their Prudence not to interpose their Influences, in encouraging such a thing as in their Opinion did not deserve it. Whoever therefore it is that opposes that Authority which the New Translation has obtain'd, seems plainly to de∣prive the Convocation of those Signal Ho∣nours and Immunities appertaining to them, which the Parliament has been pleas'd to confirm, and the King and the Bishops are pleas'd to Act by, who have the executive Power, of those Laws and Constitutions which the other fram'd, confer'd on them. As appears in that Order which was given by King Charles II. for using the three Forms of Prayer, which are annext to the Common Prayer-Book. CHARLES R. Our Will and Pleasure is, That these three Forms of Prayer, and Service made for the 5th. of November, the 30th. of January,
and the 29th. of May, be faithfully Printed and Publish'd, and for the future annext to the Book of Common Prayer, and Liturgy of the Church of England, to be used yearly on the said Days in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Chappels, in all Chappels, Col∣leges and Halls within both our Vniversities, and of our Colledges of Eaton and Winchester, and in all Parish Churches and Chappels, with∣in our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed. Given at our Court at Whitehall, the 2d day of May, in the 14th Year of our Reign. By His Majesty's Command. Edw. Nicholas. And what is more observable, these very Forms were, with such Alterations as were then necessary, receiv'd and us'd in the Church, by virtue of a like Order from the late Queen of ever blessed Memory. For the Right that is attributed by our Laws to our Kings, is lodged in the Constitution of our common Laws, and is an Original Contract between the King and the Estates of this Realm, and that upon a civil Incorporation of the Church, and its Powers and Ordinances into the Civil State and Secular Authority Municip. Eccles. p. 136.
But still you'l say, that tho' by this Ru∣brick, which I lately mention'd, the Use of any Psalms but the New Ones is forbid, be∣cause they only are approv'd of, and by Au∣thority recommended; yet are we not enjoyn'd to Sing these publickly, and there fore it is at our liberty to forbear in our Churches all Psalmody, if we please. But in Answer to this, I only desire that that solemn Ingage∣ment which was made to the Bishop at the Time of Ordination may be consider'd. For then the Bishop asks the Person that is to be ordain'd Priest this Question. Will you re∣verently obey your Ordinary, and other chief Ministers, unto whom is committed the Charge and Government over you; following with a good Mind and Will their godly Admonitions, and submitting your self to their godly Judg∣ments? Answ. I will do so, God being my helper. Where it is plain, that the Priest obliges himself by a Solemn and formal Pro∣mise, reverently to obey his Ordinary, and sub∣mit himself to his godly Judgment. there∣fore if any one reject this New Translation of the Psalms recommended to him by his Bishop, I cannot see how he can avoid the Censure of casting a scandalous Reproach upon the godly Judgment of his Ordinary and palpably violating that religious obligation which he
solemnly enter'd into at the time of his Ordina∣tion, before the Bishop, the Priests, and all the Congregation. But I fancy the Persons are but few who will be so hardy against their own Conscience, and cancel all that Veneration which is due both to their Dioce∣san and themselves, if they hope that God should be their Helper. However it is apparent that the Use of this New Version is conformable to the Consti∣tution of our Church, which lays upon all her Sons a very strict Ingagement of acting suita∣bly to her pious Intentions. And therefore those that encourage and promote it, tell us this in their own vindication; that till a civil complyance with our Governors must pass for an instance of factious Obedience, and the Observance of the Constitutions of the Church, and the Authority of Convocations in a thing lawful and commendable, is Vncano∣nical. Till it be prov'd that the Governours in Church and State, have countenanc'd a thing impious or unlawful, or have recom∣mended a thing for which they had no just Au∣thority, this New Translation cannot easily be rejected by them. 2. And they justly think it cannot be in∣veterately oppos'd by any, unless it be by some few persons who may envy the producti∣on,
because it is not their own, or because it has met with such good Success; or those that are prejudic'd against the Royal Allowance, because William R. is on the Front of it; or such as look upon the recommendatory Let∣ter of a Diocesan, as only a meer matter of Form; or lastly those who are such zealous Admirers of Antiquity, that they will ob∣ject against any thing, barely for its being New. The third Argument for the reception of the New Psalms, is, That they are subservient to the advancement of Piety and Devotion. And this arises from the genuine Excellence and Composure of this New Version, which by many degrees surpasses the Old. But if any will vindicate the Old, and think them preferable to these, their Judgment, it seems, runs quite counter to that of the Govern∣ment, which would never have thought fit to encourage this New Version, had it not e∣steem'd it far Superiour. And that the Wis∣dom of the Government was not herein, if any one imagin it, mistaken, I appeal to the Sense of all Mankind, who will please (as the Patrons and Promoters of this Version have done) impartially to peruse and com∣pare them; and I could easily make appear by several Instances taken from such Old
Psalms as are esteem'd the most unexceptiona∣ble among them: But I rather choose to cast a Veil upon their Infirmities, and since they formerly liv'd in some Repute, to let them die without exposing their weaknesses. Whereas in the Translation which is recom∣mended, we commonly find such devout and shining Sense, as makes them fit to be Sung in the Beauty of Holiness; such hea∣venly Expressions, as are apt to inflame and inspire the Soul, and raise it to David's se∣raphick pitch; and with such a mixture of Majestick Gravity, as fully represents the sacred Genius of the Royal Prophet. And certainly such a spirit of Piety, and admira∣ble variety of pathetick Devotion runs through the Body of these Psalms, that tho' they were not hallow'd by a solemn Dedication to the Use and Service of the Church, yet would they demand a very religious veneration from us upon the account of that abundant Matter which they plentifully supply for all the Exigences and Occasions of a Family, or a Closet Devotion. However, as the best of Men are not free from obloquy and aspersion; so neither are the best performances exempt from Cavils and Objections. And therefore notwithstanding all the Encouragement and Applause which this Version has met with
from so many persons eminent for their Lear∣ning, Piety, and Ingenuity, yet still there are some few scruples rais'd against it, which I intend in the next place to consider. First, they say, These New Psalms are too Poetical, and yet I am certain that none of them are more Poetical, than the Original or have bolder Expressions, or more lofty and exalted Metaphors, or more lively Flights of Fancy than those of David; as for Instance, Psa. 18. v. 10.  he did fly upon the Wings of the Wind. Ps. 65. v. 14.  the Vallies also are covered over with corn, they shout for joy, they also Sing. Psa. 98. v. 8.  let the Floods clap their hands, in the Greek it is , let the Sea be moved. Ps. 114. v. 3.  the Sea saw and fled. v. 4.  the Mountains skipped like Rams, and the little Hills like Lambs; or as the Septua∣gint Version has it, , as the Lambs of Sheep; which indeed comes nea∣rer the Hebraism the Children of Sheep. The next Objection is, That the com∣mon People do not understand them. But certainly they are as intelligible as the
obsolete and improper expressions of Sternhold and Hopkins. And if some Parts are ob∣scure, is not the Prose Translation so too? Otherwise what need was there of so many learned Commentators to explain it? And yet, this I am sure of, that this new Version is in many Places more intelligible than the Prose, and may serve for a good Comment upon it. As for Instance, Ps. 119. ver. 83. in the Prose it is, I am become like a bottle the Smoke. In the Version, My Skin like shrivel'd Parchment shews, which long in Smoke is set. Because in the Eastern Countries, before the Invention of Glass, their Bottles were made of Skins, and dried in the Smoke. Ps. 12. v. 8. The Prose is thus, The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted. Which the Version renders much more intelligible in explaining the walking aside of the wicked men, by [not knowing which way to fly] and the vilest men, by [such as they despis'd and Vex'd.] Then shall the Wicked be perplex'd, Nor know which way to fly;
When those whom they despis'd and vex'd, Shall be advanc'd on high. Psa. 108. V. 9. The Prose runs thus, Moab is my Washpot over Edom will I cast out my Shooe. Upon which the Version is a clear Comment in these words, Moab I'll make my servile Drudge, On vanquisht Edom tread. And in several places where the Sense in the Prose is very obscure by seeming broken and unconnected, this takes care to render it more plain, by maintaining the Connexion. And if any one will argue either that the Old Psalms express the Difficulties more clear∣ly than these, or that in the main they come nearer to the Original, I am certain that the Original must then abound with great Im∣proprieties of Speech, and in many places with very little Sense. But if the Vulgar must needs decide in this matter, and the Affairs in this World must be absolutely regulated by them, is not this to Vote for the Feet that they should dictate to the Head? To make a Mans self a Servant to those who should look upon him to be their Master, Is not
not this to appoint Ignorance the Judge of Sciences? And to comply with the unrea∣sonable Demands of Inferiours, the better to evade those just Regards which we owe to our Superiours. Psalmody, when it is celebrated with that Decency both in Words and Actions, which so solemn a Part of Worship does require, is in it self very heavenly; and as it is fed with that Celestial Fire which is darted from above, so 'tis always restless and impa∣tient till it ascends thither again. Upon this Account it has ingratiated it self so much with the Reformation, not only here in Eng∣land, but in France, as that the French King jealous of that Piety and Devotion which it fostered in the Hugonots, published a Prohi∣bition of it (as I am inform'd) with very severe Penalties. Nay, to shew what In∣fluence this Psalmody daily had upon his o∣ther Subjects the Romanists, he was forc'd to countenance and encourage the Use of profane Songs and Ballads, the better to countermine that noble and heavenly Exer∣cise. And therefore notwithstanding the Weakness and Imperfection of the old Ver∣sion, the Benefits which formerly rose to the Church from it, have been, I consess, considerable.
But since the numerous Defects of it are now grown so obvious that they are disco∣vered by every weak Eye, and disliked by the most common Judgment: Since the most ordinary Capacity can discern them, and the Vulgar themselves have now found out the Meanness of the Expressions, and converted them into Proverbs of Contempt to our Service, methinks we should scarce be so tenacious of them, were we truly tender of the Honour of our Church, and consider'd with what singular Veneration, and profound Respect the awful Majesty of Heaven and Earth should be approach'd. For this Reason it was that the Reverend Dr. Burnet, now Lord Bishop of Salisbury, speaking of the Old Version, gives it this Character in his History of the Reformati∣on. But as the Poetry then was low, and not rais'd to that justness to which it is now brought; so this Work, which then might pass for a to∣lerable Composure, has not been since that time so review'd or chang'd, as perhaps the thing requir'd: Hence it is that this part of Divine Worship, by the meanness of the Verse, has not maintain'd its due E∣steem. From whence we may observe how this Judicious Historian (tho' so long ago) agree'd
with his Brethren the Reverend Bishops, that there was a necessity of a New and better Version, in order to rescue that part of Di∣vine Service from that contempt which in the Opinion of this Learned Prelate it then lay under. From hence likewise it is, that several In∣genious Persons, who are well dispos'd to the Liturgy of our Church, yet frequently absent themselves from it, in Honour to Al∣mighty God, because it is rather a Contempt, they say, than a Respect, to pay their Ho∣mage, directly contrary to what his Holy Word prescribes, both in Psalm 47. 7. Sing ye praises with understanding. And 1 Cor. 14. 15. I will Sing with the Spirit, and I will Sing with the Vnderstanding also. So that if our Zeal be never so warm, and our Spi∣rits be never so active in Devotion, yet if this noble part the Understanding be wan∣ting, the sacrifice will be very lame and imperfect, and unacceptable unto him, who requires the Homage, not only of the Heart, but of the Head too. And hence likewise it is, that several sen∣sible Persons are aw'd into Silence at the singing such Expressions in the old Psalms, as would directly lead them into that Error which Solomon warns them to avoid in the
of God, and would cause them to give the Sacrifice of Fools. Eccles. 5. 1. Which how rashly soever other ignorant Per∣sons pronounce, and make bold with the Almighty, by such improper and foolish Phrases; yet they infallibly incurr his Dis∣pleasure by it, they affront him to his very Face, and consider not that they do evil, as the Wise Man tells them in the same Place. And I am confident that should any Minister address himself to his Congregation in such Language as may be met with in the old Version, which I am too tender to instance in, that the Auditors would not only think it time ill spent to hearken to him, but like∣wise conclude that his Design was no∣thing else but plain Abuse. And is it fit that this should be retai∣ned as a proper Oblation to the Almigh∣ty Majesty of Heaven and Earth? Must the meanest of our Services be grateful unto him, who requires the very choicest from us? And will he be so tame and weak, as to delight in that, which any Man of common Ingenuity would con∣temn? But offer it unto thy Governour, and see whether he will accept of it; as the Prophet very fitly expostulated
upon such an Occasion, Mal. 1. 8. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? Offer it now to thy Governour, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, saith the Lord of Hosts? Nothing less than the most perfect Oblations that we have to offer are valuable in the Sight of this Univer∣sal and Omnipresent Sovereign, and he that offers him the Affection of the Heart, and retains the bright Faculty of the Understanding, offers him the blind in the very worst Sense. But besides the many obvious Absur∣dities, there is another great Error in Sternhold and Hopkins, which no Art can rectifie, unless by a wonderful Me∣tempsychosis a new Soul and Spirit were diffus'd throughout the whole Composure; And it is this; the very same low Stile and Genius runs throughout the whole Work, and are no more rais'd at a Psalm of Triumph and Exultation, than they are at a Psalm of Mourning and Distress. And both the 18 and 51, the 89 and the 119 Psalms, with many more, which are so vastly different in their Majesty and Hu∣mility, are writ in the very same poor
and lifeless Strains in the old Translation. And yet these Psalms in the Original are compos'd in as various a Stile, and Di∣versity of Thought, as the lofty Expressions of the Prophet Isaiah, and the plain ones of the Prophet Amos. And therefore, to dress these Psalms in the same common Garb of Speech, is altogether as absurd, as for a Painter, who design'd to give us a Portraiture of King David, to re∣present him in the same mean Appea∣rance, when he was seated upon the Throne of Israel, as when he was fee∣ding his Father's Sheep. This would be as absurd, as to confound the Scepter and the Pastoral Crook, his Shepherd's Garments and his Robes of State. Which Incongruities, as they are none of the least, so the New Translators have endeavour'd to avoid them; and as for such Psalms as re∣late the Prosperity of the Church or State, those they have attempted to fill with Life and Spirit, and have given them an Air of Joy and Triumph. But such as were compos'd on Occasions of any publick or private Calamities, or are Matter of plain Precept, there their Expressions are fa∣miliar and decent, and the Lines are temper'd with doleful Words and melan∣choly
Accents, which is a noble and difficult Piece of Work, that none but a perfect Master of Verse can conquer and accomplish. And, without which, none can ever pretend to a just Translation of David's Psalms. Since then the Reason of the thing, and the Rubrick of our Church, encourage the Use of this new Version; since the highest Powers in Church and State acknow∣ledge the Usefulness of it in Publick, and the solemn Ingagement of obeying the godly Admonition of the Diocesan, loudly calls for a Compliance herein; if People will still refuse to conform under all these In∣gagements, what a mighty Scandal may it prove to the pious and ingenious Dis∣senter! And how may it seem to justifie his not conforming with us! who being well convinc'd of the vsefulness of Psal∣mody, might otherwise perhaps be brought to join with us in this part of our De∣votion, if he found that perform'd as our reasonable Service, and our selves con∣formable to the pious Judgment of our Superiours. And then as to the profane and pro∣fligate Part of this World, how can we expect from them a Reformation in
their Morals, when they see us so loath to make the least Reformation in our Sence? How can we blame them for their ill Customs, when they find us so tenacious of ours. Till therefore the Nature of our Lan∣guage is tarnished again with its ancient Barbarities, and the Politeness of the Age is sully'd with an untractable Obstinacy and Perversness; till Men have unlearnt their Sentiments of good Sence, and lost their Affections for fit and decent Expres∣sions in God's Service, the Old Translation, tho' formerly they may have well de∣serv'd, may take their Repose, and then be allow'd to flourish again. FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT. THE Certainty of a Futur State, or, an Occasional Let∣ter concerning Apparitions. By J. Roe. A. M. And Chaplain to the Right Honourable Charles Earl of Burlington. The Second Edition. Price sticht 1 s. The Useful and easie double List, containing the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the last Parliament, be∣gun at Westminster, Nov. the 22d. 1695. and of this Present Parliament, begun the 24th of August, 1698. In a New and ready Mtehod; shewing Alphabetically the Names of all those Members of the late Parlia∣ment now left out of this. Price 2 d. Printed for Joseph Wild, at the E∣lephant at Charing-Cross: Where may be had the New Psalms ready bound any manner of way.
