B6397 15643494 104290
Horae Subsecivae: OR, Some Long-Vacation Hours Redeem'd, For the Discovery of the True SAL VOLATILE OLEOSUM OF THE Ancient Philosophers. Now happily regain'd to the MATERIA MEDICA: AND Distinguish'd from all other Preparations, partly by the Senses; but more effectually by its Medicinal Performances, totally extirpating the Saline Stem of Acids (the Root of most Diseases) and inferring the Volatile Oleose Temper, The Standard of Health in Humane Bodies. By T. Bysield, M. D. and Fellow of the College of Physicians in DƲBLIN. LONDON, Printed: And are to be Sold by J. Whitlook near Stationers-Hall. M DC XC V.
THE VOLATILE OLEOSE TEMPER, THE Standard of Health IN HUMANE BODIES. MAN, the accomplish'd Draught of the Universe, Prince of all Creatures and of the Lower World; for his super-cele∣stial and divine Soul has an immortal Ray of the Divine Light, reflected to the same, by the sharp Sight and soaring Contemplations of his Mind, which shew he is a dependent Spirit on the Fa∣ther of the Spirits of all Flesh. And for his Body he has a beautified Compo∣sure of the Elements, a perfect mixture in Life, illuminated with an undiscernable Spark of Cele∣stial Fire, the Form of a mixt Body, first sur∣rounded with a Radical Moisture, then bound to
an Elementary Body, by the Mediation of the Spi∣rit, giving it individual Being. And Life thus deriv'd is the most supream and compleat Act of Nature. For the Souls of Living Creatures are vastly distant from the dark and earthy Matter of their Bodies, till by this subtile mean of an Aetherial Spirit they are fastned to 'em by the strictest Tye in Nature. The former of these two Souls I leave to the Conduct of Divines; the latter falling within my Sphere, I'll endeavour to direct into an harmonious Union with the Body, by the help of the Spirit, which is a small portion of the purest Air, a mid∣dle Nature betwixt the Body and Soul; light and invisible, temper'd with Fire, Volatile, and a most pure Substance, begetting Vital Spirits. Its first Cloathing is with an Universal Sperm be∣got on Sulphureo-Saline Exhalations drawn up into the Air, rowling up and down in the Belly of the Wind, till it takes up its proper Residence in the Seeds of Things. And thus descending to the Lower Region, it assumes the Moisture of a watery Vapour, and by degrees the Element of Water, which is a mean betwixt the Air and Earth; a passive yielding Nature, assuming multi∣plied Shapes, apt to mix with things, delighted
much in motion; fit to receive and preserve every thing that's subtile; capable of the heavenly Influ∣ences, and to convey 'em thro' the Pores of our Earth, which is an empty place, into which all the other Elements project their Virtues, a proper Re∣ceptacle for the Spiritual Elements, a convenient hiding place to conceal the Principles and Opera∣tions of Nature. Here I may take notice, how the four Elements, which upholds the Fabrick of the World, continually acting one upon the other, beget and bring to light the fundamental Princi∣ples of Nature and Philosophy. The Fire acting on the Air produces Sulphur: The Air acting on the Water brings forth Mercury: The Water acting on the Earth brings forth Salt: The Earth having nothing to work upon, brings forth nothing: So that we must take up with three Principles out of the four Elements. But I must not enter into so large a Field, since I design but a short Lecture, not so much for Theory, as to demonstrate a rational Practice from my Sal Volatile sulphureum, which is the most sensible and beneficial Performance. I shall therefore consider, that the joyning of the Principles well or ill together makes up a per∣fect or imperfect Body. And that the prime Agent is the Fire that is plac'd in mixt Bodies,
and hath chosen the Radical Moisture as its proper seat, the principal residence of which (in Man) is in the Heart, the Centre of the little World, the prime Organ of Life, altho' it be diffus'd thro' all the parts of the Body. But there commanding from its Castle, doth move concordantly all the Faculties and Organs, and breath Life into the Spirits, Humours, and the whole elementary Mass. Its Food is a viviical Spirit flowing down from the Superiour Natures thro' the Air, which be∣comes a natural oleose ferment and food of Life, without which, neither Man, nor any living Crea∣ture, cou'd subsist: for Man lives not by Bread alone, but by the heavenly Food of Air. Yet the Lamp must be fed with the nutritious Juices of corruptible Bodies, which have in 'em a fixt Fire: But the less we partake of those Meats and Drinks which have lost their supple nourishing Particles, the more evenly we feed our vital flame: For salt Meats, sour Drinks, firy Wines, and strong Drams, are like so many fire-works thrown into the Ma∣gazeen of the Heart, which will blow up the Man. 'Tis of dangerous consequence to enrage our Cali∣dum innatum, making flushings of Wild-fire to run about our Bodies, like flashes of Lightning from the Heavens.
As the Sun is the Centre amongst the Spheres of the Planets, and scatters its beams downward by its motion; so is the Heart the Centre of the Body, which by its perpetual Motion (in Conjun∣ction with the Air in circulating the Blood) sends heat to the Superficies of the Body, which we allay from day to day with Liquids that penetrate our Pores, and cool it: In imitation of the Air and Clouds, which flying round the World, temper and mitigate the heat of the heavenly Sun. For as the heat of the Sun would destroy all things, and nothing produc'd in Nature, if the Air and Clouds did not intervene: so wou'd the invisible central fire of Bodies consume 'em, if balmy Sulphurs and watery Vapours coming betwixt did not pre∣vent it. 'Tis the universal Fire thro' the medium of the Air that governs all the subordinate sixt Fires of Bodies: for Air hath ingress into Air, and they join themselves together, Nature being delighted in Nature. And by how much the greater are the Pores, by so much the better the Body may be pu∣rify'd. Thus beams of Light incircled with radi∣cal moisture are our spiritual Nourishment: But that will not support us without corporeal Nu∣triment; the former will avail but little without the latter. We stand in need therefore of Food,
that the natural Spirits may be recruited, which do continually slide forth thro' the Pores; for thus we must maintain a successive repair of the loss of Nature. Our nourishing Juices are made by the more succulent substance of our Meat, whereby the Parts and Humours of the Body are reinforc'd. The radical Moisture is renewed out of the purer Particles of Blood, with the celestial Influences in∣termingling with 'em by Respiration. Thus the natural Ferment of Man's Body, as well from his spiritual as his corporeal Diet, seems to consist in a Sulphureo-Saline Temperament, which Vital Union becomes more inbodied in oleose Salts, and then assumes a greater Corporeity. The spiritual Sulphurs are exalted with the Vo∣latile Salts, and beget a mild and easie Ferment in the happy Concentration of the Principles; from whence the fix'd parts receive their vivid Impregna∣tions, and the insite Fire is fed with its proper Pabulum, and kept from rebelling. In all things, near the Principle of Life, is a smooth, supple, oily Substance: in all Seeds we find it more or less, therefore from so small Bodies as Seeds, Oils are drawn. The Substance of all animal Sperms, that of Eggs, and many other things, will help to demonstrate that 'tis an oleose Body that early covers the Principles of
Life, till they are cloathed with our Bodies, as our Bodies are cover'd with Cloaths. But when the inbred fire is harsh and inrag'd, thro defect of this Balsom and Union, and by the contra∣ry abounding of Acids; then the Spirits are inflam'd, the Oil burns, the Stamina Vitae shake: At length the purer Flements fly the Texture, the mixt Body dis∣solves, and the Corruption of the frail Elements come to a loss: The Aetherial Nature returns to its native home, and there is nothing left in the Carcass, but a perturbation and confusion of the corruptible Ele¦ments, having lost their Governour. Then reigns Corruption, Death, and Darkness, in the deprived Matter; until the virtue of Heaven does again slow down into it, and summoning the wandring Elements re-inkindles the weak light of a new Form, and re∣assumes the Elements into the methodical composure of a new mixture. Life is an harmonious Copulation of Matter and Form, constituting the perfect Being of an individual Nature; the Health of that Life is a regular Assum∣ption of the Principles into magnetick Love, where∣in our natural Fire, retain'd by spiritual Sulphurs, lies well beded in Oleity, rightly season'd with Nitro-aereal Salts; not lock'd up, deprest, or drawn out beyond its Centre. And this I call the Salino-sulphu∣reous Temperament, which to preserve or restore, is the Scope of Medicine, the Design of Physick and Physicians.
I am warranted in this rational Conjecture from some experimental Observations, which is as near as humane sight can penetrate. 'Tis true, these things in their own nature, are invisible and transacted in se∣cret, which makes em not understood by the gene∣rlity of Men, who know not the occuls, much less to make it manifest; and are altogether unaccustom'd to such Contemplations and Experiments. Neverthe∣less they are not to be look'd upon as Dreams and Fan∣cies; no more than the Spirit of Life which animates 'em. For altho' Nature is not visible, yet she acts visibly from a volatile sulphureous Spirit, which exe∣cutes her Office in Bodies. 'Tis generally granted, that Life lies eminently in the Blood; and so I say, and that from its abounding with a pure Sulphur and a volatile Salt, which are demonstrable. Sulphur illuminates, gives Tincture and Centrality; What Red more beautiful and more vivid than in good Blood? and what a sibrous Con∣sistence has it? That there is plenty of volatile Salts appears to an Artist, who can extract em; besides, 'tis evident to all, by Sweat and Urine, both which abound with volatile Salts. But some may say, the Ingesta of Meats and Drinks may supply those: no, it cannot be, for these Discharges are larger than they amount to. Be pleas'd to make the Experiment of living with Bread and Water for one Week, and use hard Labour, yet you'll find your Sweat and Urine
well impregnated with Salts; very few of which proceeded from your Dyet. The great Repairer of these is the ambient Air in which both are eminently, and therefore plentifully convey'd in breathing thro the Lungs to the Blood, helping it to sanguisie the new Access of Chyle, in bestowing vital Ferment and a vivid Colour. I'll take it for grant, that by this time we are agreed on the Point, viz. That the healthful juvenile Tem∣per of our Bodies consists in the Harmony of our spi∣ritual Sulphurs and volatile Salts, which magnetical ly join to the subjected Natures, and gives 'em their proper seasoning: These tun'd with vital Air rarisie and illuminate our Bodies, still preserving a due Re∣gimen of our inbred Fire, and a healthful Govern∣ment of the whole Oeconomy. This Temperament presery'd, is an Antidote against all Diseases and Decay. 'Tis true, 'tis very nice to hit and keep it, because we deal so low in the corruptible World, and depend so much on corporeal Supplies for our Subsistance, and are liable to so many changes of Seasons, Weather, and Chance, that 'tis no won∣der so few make up a competent number of Years: Yet 'tis good to know the Standard of Health, that we may still be aiming at that Mark, some near Ap∣proaches to which, will preserve Life, altho' it is not acted with that Satisfaction and Pleasure the com∣pleatly healthy do enjoy. But to lye under riveling
Acids, scorbutick Wildfires, Stones in wrong places, Tartar in Joints, rambling and fixt Pains, and forty more troublesome Distempers, which make the Bo∣dy such a Clog to the Soul, that to a generous mind 'tis the greatest Punishment in the World to attend upon it, in blowing its Nose, wiping its Breech, dressing, undressing, washing, combing, cleaning, and colouring it, in order only to the eating of Wa∣ter-gruel and drinking Small beer with him. Who would not rather be at some Pains, and Cost too, to make him a little better Company for himself and his Friends, by introducing that smooth, oleose Tem∣per I have already describ'd. And where that does bear sway, the Saline Stem of Acids cannot set up to play its Pranks. The inbred Fire is kept so truly delighted and entertained with those Solar Guests, that it can't turn sour or ill-natur'd. For the Sharp∣ness of all Salts arises from the insite Fire of Mixts: And the more the fixt Fire is urg'd, the greater the Sharpness; from both the Blood's corrupted, and ma∣ny Diseases are deriv'd throughout the whole Body, which exercise the utmost Skill of Physicians, and notwithstanding all their Cunning, they are often buffled by 'em. So great is the Energy of Acids, that it preys upon all the Sulphureity in the Blood, till it has devour'd its whole Tincture, and left it sizy, or turn'd it into Matter, at least several Colours; but robb'd it of its
Life; and transmuted the other Juices into a Vitrio∣lick Tartness. Such Acids will corrode Metals, eat Holes in Iron, and make the Sulphurs putrid and stink, to the offending of your Nose. But I'll shew in particular Distempers some of the many Mischiefs that arise from this Root of Acids. the grand Enemy of Man's Health. Our natural Fire divested of its vital Allay grows burning and scorch∣ing; and being fed with the Fires of mixt and di∣sturb'd Elements, at length puts on a raging Fit and sharpens all the Humours; and when 'tis more intense, enkindles the Aetherial Spirit, and becomes a strong Fever, more difficult to cure than putrid ones, and when it becomes mortiferous, usually ends in Convul∣sions: if it be not timely understood, and supply'd with proper Alkali's in the method, and often enough repeated to correct the Acids. But when by good Conduct you get it to a Remission and then an Inter∣mission, it is like to issue well. For in the Intervals you have time to apply Alkali's, which abate the Fire by absorbing the acid Fuel: for Acids commonly cause this Fire, and this Fire creates Acids. This seems to be the Reason of the use of Jesuits Powder: Tis freely given in Intermissions, serving to good Purpo∣ses, because impos'd so long, till it shall do something. Not but that other Alkali's may do as well, nay, it may be better in some Cases, if administred in as large Doses, as often repeated, and as long continu'd, and
I doubt not to say, with less injurious Consequences. But Jesuits Bark at present is got in fashion, and must be so, because it sometimes does the Feat, tho seldom consider'd how it comes about; but reverent∣ly look'd upon among the occult Qualities, which to examine is reckon'd unmannerly, because difficult. In continued Fevers of pure accension, Blood-letting is proper in the beginning, and a close Application of Alkali's, and there are of such sort as may be se∣curely given, although the Fever neither intermit or remit. But the Jesuit must not be so us'd, he plays Tricks in a Paroxysm: for besides his Alkalisate ab∣sorbing Quality, he has a churlish Roughness and Stipticity, which at sometimes recommends him, but at other times makes him very ill Company. Where the Fever comes Aguishly, or intermittingly, with Cold and Heat by turns, thro' the abundance of indigested roapy Humours; here Jesuits Powder, by its Astringency, Roughness, and Bitterness Sut∣generis, besides its Alkalious Quality, becomes a very good common Remedy, if well apply'd. But in all Fevers arising from Faetid Sulphurs, which are to determine in seasonable Separations to the Supersicies, there Jesuits Powder is altogether improper: but the Variety in these sort of Fevers is so great, that 'tis not at present to be medled with. The Rise of the Scurvy proceeds from the Blood impoverisht and separated; for when the lively vi∣nous
Spirits are exhul'd, what remains divides into two parts, a wateny and a thick Substance; which latter being of a Tartarous Nature, is impower'd with a faculty of turning the Juices into Acids. The watery part conveys to the Glands, and by them to the Su∣perficies a firy, sharp, thin Humour, which stets and corrodes the Gums and Skin, sometimes break∣ing out on the Hands and Legs, and will run a great quantity of clear and limpid, but sharp Water: and from the Tantarous Fund this is supply'd, which still transmutes the thinner parts of your Aliment into this sort of Acid Liquor. Until the Blood shall be again brought to its due Mixture, by the Addition of a sweet Sulphureous Spirit, the Jively Principle that gives Tincture and keeps it in a just Consistence, and makes it perfect. And thus it becomes a Mediclnal Fountain from which all parts are supply'd, according as they differ, each by its attractive quality drawing Nourishment peculiar to its kind. From this decay of lively Principles, and Separation of the Blood, tho' with some Alteration, where the slegmatick Humour more abounds, and the Tartarous Body less, proceeds those Overflowings and inundations of the Dropsie, which tho' of fatal consequence, if confirm'd, yet ta∣ken in time, by proper Medicines and Methods, may be prevented. The Gout is a Distemper that owes its Original to Tartar, which in the extraordinary undue Ferment
of the Blood is work'd off into the extream parts, thro▪ small Meandets, and lodg'd in the Interstices of Joints, from whence it can't return: and by re∣peated Ferments increases its Mass to a visible chalky Substance, which is of a dry stiptick Nature, that by degrees drinks up the Joint-water, and loading the Socket, renders the part crooked and useless: tho▪ in all it does not come to this height; nor needs it, if timely care be taken. The Stone differs but little from it, unless in Scituation. Many other Diseases are de∣riv'd too from this general Root. But because the Mischiefs from Acids and sick Blood are more obvious than their Remedies, I shall therefore betake my self to the Description of a Universal Noble Medicine, abundantly qualified to bring about the great Design of Health, and rescue Life from the innumerable Dangers wherewith it is surrounded.
The True SAL VOLATILE OLEOSUM OF THE Ancient Philosophers. FRom what I have said already it may appear that the Volatile Oleose Temper is the most natural to our Bodies, and governs best our Calidum innatum; contrary to the Saline Stem of Acids, which divides and precipitates, enraging the insite Fire, scattering it up and down, scorching the Body, till it has one way or other ruin'd it; like slashes of unbounded consuming Fire from the Heavens. In order therefore to the preventing of such De∣struction, I have laid my Design in Physick, and liberally expended in preparing two general noble Remedies; a Panacea, which I formerly treated of, and this Sal Volatile Oleosum; for extraordinary Dire∣ctors whereby lesler or greater Aberrations may be reclaim'd to a due state of Health.
For altho▪ all Persons that are declin'd from a just Temper, are not immediately turn'd out of their Beings; yet so many live in pain, decaying, and wasting away, that 'tis grievous to a Physician, besides a great Reproach to Art, to hear 'em com∣plaining and crying out their very Lives are bur∣thensome. There are indeed some wonderful strong Bodies that will hold out thro' courses of Excess to great Ages. But hundreds, for one such, go early to the Grave; and they too, with such hail Consti∣tutions (in all probability) might have liv'd much longer with Temperance: I'm sure they ought to have liv'd to much better purposes. But 'tis not my business to disturb such tranquil Souls, who risque their Lives in a perpetual Tickle of Sensuality, aways stimulated with the wild fires of Wines and Drams, to the committing of very odd Actions. Thus the glare of borrowed ights present phan∣tastical Ideas which to represent in Figures to the view of others require the nicest Artifice of the Sensual Man for their Equipment. Then appear∣ing very taking with such as are led by the snares of their Senses, no wonder so many dance after these Ignes fatui, willing rather (than to be at the pains of serious Thinking) to run secundo flumine, with the Croud, chaft and heated with Desires: As tho▪ the Fall of Man had been their Happiness,
and 'twere a Divine Blessing thus to be brutify'd. But I'll betake my self to the assistance of the Infirm, and such as thro' the want of bodily Health know how to value that. And here, if persons will but contribute one quarter of that Care about them∣selves, which I have done faithfully to preserve and serve em, abundance of complaints wou'd soon be remedied on very easie terms. I appeal to every one, whether 'tis not a fair design in Medicine, to aim at the right Amendment of the Spirit of Life, which animates the mighty lump of Matter, the Body. Alas! what are We without it? and by what small invisible Power is so great a mass of Matter lightly mov'd about at pleasure? When the Spirits are rich and well uni∣ted, how supple, gay, and vivid, are all the Sen∣ses and Organs of the Body, how concordantly, do they move in all their just Dependencies? no one griev'd on aicted to abait the Harmony. Now a true Sal  Osum is the fairest Medicine to lay down for these purposes: Because every one may be a Judge of what he takes, and of what is true from false: And to help 'em in this Discovery, and a little elucidate this Universal Remedy, is my present Business▪ But first 'twill be necessary to preamble the great Difference there is between Comps and Mst, the one being a Conjunction of Bodies in place,
the other in quality and consent; the one imper∣fecte mista, a Confusion, the other a Union. Compositio is the joining of Bodies without a new Form, Mistio is the joining or putting together of Bodies under a new Form. For the new Form is Commune Vinculum. Natural Philosophers know that Compositio is Opus hominis, and Mistio, Opus Naturae. Man makes a fit Application of Bodies together; but the per∣fect Fermentation and Incorporation of 'em must be left to Nature, to make that Continuum which otherwise is but Contiguum. 'Tis therefore a great turn of Thought, to find out the Art of compounding in Life; so that Mix∣tures at first troubled, may grow after clear and settled, by the benefit of Rest, Time, &c. The due Contemplation of Nature, as well above as below, and some competent Knowledge how the superiour act on inferiour Bodies, seems to me altogether needful. For the Heavens do not enrich themselves by the Earth and Seas; nor keep no dead stock, nor untouch'd Treasures of that they draw from below: but what they do take up, they return and spend in Dew and Showers impregnated with Life and Power. This Consent in Nature, and some other luckey Hints, have prov'd sufficient to beget my Sal Vo∣latile Oleosum, which is a Nitro-aereal volatile
Salt magnetically ty'd (by the Knot of Love in Nature) to a luminous Sulphur. 'Tis more Phi∣losophical to call it Sal Volatile Sulphureum. But to speak it at once, 'tis Spirit of Air, and the best seasoning in the whole World of Animal Bodies in Life. For by Philosophick Management, the truest, purest, and most wholsome Volatile Salt may be extracted from the Air; and the first be∣gotten Oleity in the World; which transparent radical Moisture (prior to all specifick Lives) has some portion of the universal Form that animates it: And this may properly be call'd a luminous Sulphur, which is the root of all Oleity; for I wou'd have it take the Name Oleose when the Sulphurs are cloath'd upon more bodily; and thus you may descend to the more gross Bodies of Oils and Fats. But to comply with the common Mean∣ings of Men, I'll call my Medicine no more than Sal Volatile Oleosum, but then it must be consider'd as perfectionate. And without doubt 'twas some quondam great Philosopher (favour'd with a propi∣tious Birth) that first discover'd this Union in Nature: And some learned Doctor searching into Sacred Remains, an Admirer of the Disguis'd Learning of the Ancients, that robb'd the Philoso∣pher of the Name, but not the Secret, and hand∣ed it down to our Age. How cou'd else so many agree in the name, and not understand the reason
or truth of the Medicine. Yet every one can talk of a Sal Volatile Oleosum, and every little Process∣monger can make it. That I expect in a little while to hear it cry'd about the Streets like Elixirs made of Brandy, Jalop, Seeds, and Licorish. Whenas by the name Elixir, the Philosophers of old mentioned their most Venerable Secret; but now 'tis profan'd and affix'd to a parcel of murder∣ing Trash. And the World finding such sorry Stuff under the highest Titles in Philosophy, have of late damn'd and ridicul'd the whole Science. But I admire the Wisdom of the Ancients in vail∣ing such glorious Knowledge under their Hiero∣glyphical Figures and Aenigmatical Expressions, to secure it from barbarous and profane hands. No, let all their Followers, the true Sons of Art, be∣come worthy of useful Rarities, by imitating their Piety and Honesty: then I wish they may find Ariadnes Thread to conduct 'em thro' the delusive Windings of this intricate Philosophy. 'Tis one of the greatest Misfortunes of latter times, that all Medicinal Experiments are put out to making. The Physician must by no means now-a-days know more than half of his Art, ha∣ving nothing to shew but multitudo librorum. The compleatest Medicine wou'd stigmatize him with Quackery, altho' it is the Accomplishment of all his Learning.
Nothing's more difficult than to hit a Curiosity aright, which the best of Authors have difficultly enough discover'd: And he's a very sensible person that can correct twenty mistakes in a Preparation, and by them grow wise enough to bring about his end. And 'tis not a low educated person can thus improve, he will take quid pro quo, and if the Physitian is not experimentally skillful he must be put upon, and consequently his Patients: Thus we become full of Medicines but no Remedies. For if any one can but raise a Volatile Salt from Horns or Bones, and join therewith some Aroma∣tick Oils, which for Odour and Thinness couple to the best advantage with his Salt, then he cries out presently, 'tis a Sal Volatile Oleosum, altho 'tis no more a Medicine than a gilt Shilling is a Gui∣nea. And Mistakes herein are of fatal consequence to them that rely on such Preparations: for they are at once banter'd out of their money, the time of helping themselves, and thus by delay out of Life too sometimes. affirm, 'tis not from Horns, Hoofs, nor Bones, which abound with Salts; no, nor from Sal Armoniac that this Remedy can be drawn. For altho' there be plenty of Volatile Salts, which Chymists call so, that by the force of Fire will come over the Helm; yet they bring with 'em somewhat of Fixity, petrifying Dispositions, and
caustic Qualities. And as for Horns and Bones, they are endow'd with very faetid, corporal Oils: so that from these they borrow only a little pun∣gent Salt dilated in a Phlegm, which is so poor a Vehicle, that the Salts will drop through to the bottom of the Glass. Now having made a shift for his Salt, the Chymist is to seek for the Spiri∣tual Sulphurs or oleose part, which constitutes the Medicine. Here he's at a loss in Philosophy, and bluntly takes an oily body to join to his Salt; and because he finds the grosser bodies of Oil are grea∣sie, and wont mix well, he wittily turns one Thought to the purer Oils of Seeds or Aromaticks, and there he gets a Scent too, and finding they will hang about his Salts, he then pronounces ore rotun∣do that 'tis the right Sal Volatile Oleosum of Silvius de le Boe, or of some other cry'd-up Doctor, whose Reputation can support it; not regarding Science, or the Medicinal Virtues, so long as 'twill pass for a Commodity in Trade. I must confess, 'tis very difficult, and a great piece of Art, to prepare this Medicine, so as to answer learned Tests and Physical Intentions. For the Salts, as well as the Sulphurs, are deeply conceal'd in Nature, and their Union is a great mystery, as nice as the Subtile mixtions in Life; not to be received into one another by the Philoso∣phers adjoining, altho' he must have a hand in the
business, till his Design is wrought about by Art. The Sulphurs must be spiritualiz'd that mix with Volatile Salts, and be united by the mean of an Aetherial Spirit, and held to view illuminated and perfectly united. As in sine fermented Ale the Water, Malt, and Hop, are so entirely one, that Art can never more shew the Ingredients apart; all three make up one thing, call'd Ale. I have well consider'd the Vegetable nature, and in the Mineral Kingdom have much pleas'd my self with fine Sulphurs, difficultly enough obtain'd from Antimony; but yet am disappointed in both. Animals methinks shou'd seem to yield the best Sulphureous Volatile, as nearest of kin to our Na∣tures: but so subtile are the Spiritual Elements, that they wing away with Life in one quintessenti∣al form to the Aereal Mansions, and leave you only their corruptible Natures to work upon. I cannot imagine where to apply my self in Na∣ture for a very wholsom Salino-Sulphureous Volatile, unless it be from the Atmospherical Air, where Nature forms the Universal Sperm of the World by her heavenly fire on the gentle and soft Sublima∣tions of the purer Elements, and incorporates 'em to your hand, beyond the profoundest skill of the most inquisitive Philosopher, altho' he have la∣minated the greatest part of Nature on Vulcan's Anvil.
For amidst all the Variety of Salts and Sulphurs in the World, which are as many as there be Species of things, none can be more agreeable than what's drawn from this general Bank of Nature; whence I borrow not only my Matter, but there∣with some portion of the Universal Form, and that's a lively Touch indeed. And since I can find here what I want, why need I look any farther. I have rov'd and search't as well as others, but reckon I have anchor'd well at last, considering I had no Pilot. And he will prove a luckey man that hits my Knack, or rather discovers such a Terra incognita in Philosophy, al∣tho' I give him here that aim which I never receiv'd. But shou'd he find my Bait, yet one half of the Skill does not lie in catching my starry Volatiles: for I do assure him, he must well understand, and have long labour'd in Experimental Philosophy, before he shall be Master of this Rarity in Nature. Dii omnia laboribus vendunt. However, 'tis curious to know the Operation of Nature, and how she produceth things by her Workings which requires subtilness and quickness of Mind; for she is not perceived by vulgar eyes. 'Tis necessary to learn first with the Brain and Ima∣gination, if 'twere but to save labour and charges in Fires and Glasses. Besides, there is no pleasure in the dull composition of things. Give me vital
Principles wreath'd together by a magnetic Virtue, whence they become a sure food of Life, and securi∣ty from the hasty separation by Death, which is no∣thing else but Life separating it self, by its self, from a Corruptible Body. But if any petulant Sophister, stiff in his Opinion, shall oppose these Experi∣ments, let him know, that what he assumes on Trust, I make good by Tryal. Now in describing more particularly the Virtues and Use of this Remedy, I'll begin from its first entrance into the Body. In the Stomach these Sulphureo-Saline Volatiles do loosen and cleanse away all viscid clammy Humours and ill Digesti∣ons; they correct the austere and acid Ferment, which gives Heart-burn, Sourness, Pains in the Stomach, Flatulencies, Collicks, Convulsions, and ill Vapours offending the Head. And they bring in that Oleose Volatile Temper, which cau∣ses a good Digestion, well govern'd Bowels, and a right nutritious Chyle wherewith the Body is sup∣ply'd throughout with wholsome Juices. The food precipitated and hardned by Acids sticks to the folds of the Stomach like Glue, and being too long de∣tain'd, turns putrilaginous and austere, becoming a Load on Nature, to the great disturbance of the Spirit of Life and Temperies of the part; from whence great Oppressions, Strugglings, Faintings, Flushings of Heat, Palpitations, and sometimes
very dangerous and sudden Mischiefs ensue but if they do not arise to such hasty destruction, yet these Acids will by degrees so debauch the true de∣sign of the Stomach, and corrupt all your Aliment, that instead of a well-digested wholsome Nourish∣ment, you must be supply'd with sharp, corrosive Juices throughout the whole Body. Till at length you'll find the Blood and all things spoilt, and all the Bowels and Organs griev'd. And then supply your Bodies with the softest things in Nature, and the greatest Art in Cookery, all is presently spoil't in this vitiated Stomach. But here you may again remedy these contrary Ferments and abounding Acids, and vanquish the Root of 'em: and not only so, but in lieu thereof regain a well-condition'd Stomach, oily Bowels, a true natural Ferment; and a Supply of Oleose Volatile Particles, which mixing with the Chyle renders it not barely nutritious, but medicinal and balsamic. And this is not all, for they give a la∣sting Vigor and Strength to all the nervous Tex∣ture, causing a round Ability of the whole Body. Besides, pleasing Gas's ascend the Brain and recre∣ate the Senses, instead of cloudy noxious Fumes. And because so many Diseases are to be remedi∣ed in the first Digestion, from a well-govern'd Stomach. And that it is the most sociable and entertaining Organ: I must have one Bout at him
more; but first shew, that the Glandules glutted with these Sulphureous Volatiles, convey in chew∣ing a very wholsome Saliva into the Stomach with your Food, instead of a Scorbutic, Vitriolic Flegm. And that these subtile Particles enable the Stomach to such pleasant agreeable Actions, that he plays the Wanton with all his Pabulum. This Medicine keeps the Orifice of the Stomach clean, and as tite as that of the Anus, folds up all the expanded Wrinkles, reimpregnates remaining Food, and gives a thousand pretty pleasing Touch∣es (besides substantial Services) to the whole Bo∣dy. It suffers no canine Appetite which ravenously devours what it can't concoct, sometimes to dis∣gorging; but gives a well-bred Desire, which will equip you for all the Dainties of a Luxurious Ta∣ble, and warrant the decent carrying off thr Lar∣gesses of Friendship. The Lungs, and all its Pipes, are herewith cleans'd of tough foul Spittings, thickned by a prae∣ternatural Heat, which causes Consumptive Phi∣sical Coughs, Asthmatick Weasings, and straitness of the Chest, not to be reach'd by Syrups, Oils, Licks, Slops, or Lozenges, which offend the Sto∣mach, and feed the unnatural Fire. But this Sal Volatile Oleosum subtilly and sweetly insinuates it self by the Blood, and thro the Pores, into the minutest Passages, and there nobly and evidently displays its Virtues.
'Tis the greatest Antiscorbutick yet discover'd, which is obvious to every one that considers how it deals with the Saline Stem, and all its Producti∣ons. It meets with it in every Form, by its power∣ful penetrating Nature, closely pursuing the most malign Atoms, clipping the wings of all fiery fly∣ing Acids, which sting the Body, and deface it. But my Paper will not admit of enlarging on every Distemper. In all Fluxes of Blood by the Nose, Lungs, or downwards, occasion'd from Acids, tis the most prevailing Medicine. 'Tis a powerful Dissolvent of petrify'd tartarous Salts, therefore of singular benefit to such as are afflicted with Goul and Stone; for herewith they may (at least) prevent the In∣crease of either, and keep off the Fits of both. And I have reason to believe, waste away the petrify'd Matter already lodg'd. For that teizing Distemper call'd Vapours among the Ladies, and Hypocondriac Flatus and Stretchings among the Gentlemen, 'tis a non pareil in their Claret, Cyder, Ale, or other Liquors drank ad libitum. 'Tis a great Restorative of Age, from Rheums and Wind, Decay, and Wear and Tear. 'Twou'd save a thousand Children in a Year from dying of Convulsion-Fits.
'Twill secure from, or cure all the Diseases of the Brain, as Coma, Lethargy, Carus, Apoplexy, Palsie, Falling-sickness, Vertigo, Madness, Ca∣tarihs &c. All Aguish Distempers, Rheumatisms, Drop∣sies, Jaundies, &c. are Remedied herewith. But I hate to enumerate Diseases at this rate: 'Tis so rank Quackish. I need not here mention the ma∣ny Cases in Chirurgery that are deriv'd from such an unwholsom Fountain, not to be cur'd by the Plaister-box only, without eradicating this Saline Stock, and renovating the Blood, by some such balmy Medicine, that disposes all the dependent Juices, Flesh and Organs to healing. I shall only say in general, that to restore the Vital Sulphurs of the Blood is absolutely necessary to a sound and speedy Cure of Wounds, Ulcers, and other sharp Eruptions on any parts of the body, of whatsoever Name or Nature they be. And if I suggest this Sal Volatile Oleosum as a prime Remedy for such internal Services, it may be taken by the by, for a friendly Item. For all the Drinkers of Bath, Tunbridge, or Ep∣som waters, or any others, 'tis a worthy Compani∣on. And so it is for all engag'd in long Journeys or Voiages, aptly suiting every Climate. Useful to all the World of whatsoever Language, Nation, or Country, provided they are Animal Bodies,
and not Stooks or Stones, or condens'd Air. 'Tis useful from the birth to a hundred years of Age, to cherish and uphold that vital Congruity we desire to maintain with the Superiour Natures. All shagreen Constitutions and Tendencies to Cor∣rutpion, à quaque causa, may be releiv'd hereby. In the great variety of acute cases, it manifestly shews its power in its homogeneal Virtues, standing by Life in all the Attacks of mortiferous Diseases. But 'tis impossible I should here, at a random guess, prescibe the proper Seasons, Doses and Re∣petitions of the Medicine, altho' I may pronounce it the most effectual Remedy: I protest, I know not what to Substiute in its place. And I may be thought as competent a Judge of good Medicine as any other, having been many Years very curious in the Materia Medica. After all, I care not Nine∣pence for the Opinion of those that decry what they cannot understand. I shall content my self to be the sole Possessor of so excellent a Remedy. Fare∣wel. Excuse him however, who desires to deserve well. And so, long may ye enjoy these my La∣bours to the Glory of God. From my House in Great Carter-Lane near St. Paul's. FINIS.
