C3586 R35969 15584210 103939
HONI · SOIT · QVI · MAL · Y · PENSE DIEV · ET · MON · DROIT By the King. A PROCLAMATION Touching Mariners, Sea-men and Souldiers, which are to serve in His Majesties Navy. CHARLES R. WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, for many weighty and important rea∣sons, hath prepared a Royal Navy, which is now ready to set to Sea, and to be employed on such designs as His Majesty, by the Advice of His Council, hath or shall direct, for the Honour and Safety of His Majesties Realms and Dominions. And whereas by the Laws of this Realm, every Mariner, Sea-man and Soul∣dier, receiving Press-money to serve the King in any of His Ships, and after re∣fusing to serve, or absenting himself at the time and place appointed unto him for his Service, doth incur the danger and penalty of Felony, and is to be punished, and forfeit as a Felon. Nevertheless His Majesty is informed that several Mariners, Sea-men and Souldiers Pressed for His Service, and having received Press-money, do neglect to repair to, and disert the said Service, whereby His Ships may be unfurnished, and His Service disappointed, to the Dishonour of His Majesty, and danger of His People, especially in this time when Foreigners are ready prepared to infest His Dominions, and deprive His Subjects of their priviledge of Trade, and
other Interest. His Majesty therefore in His Princely Wisdom and Providence, foreseeing the incon∣veniences which may ensue, hath thought fit, with the Advice of His Privy Council, to publish this His Royal Proclamation, and doth hereby straitly Charge and Command all Mariners, Sea-men and Souldiers, who are, or shall hereafter be Pressed for His Service in any Ships or Vessels belong∣ing to the said Navy, and have received, or shall receive Press-money for that purpose, That they duely repair and come to the places, and at the times appointed unto them, and there continue in the Service unto which they are or shall be respectively Commanded, upon pain of death, and all such other Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, as by the Law can be inflicted or imposed upon them: And for the speedy and effectual prosecution of such Offenders, His Majesty hath thought fit, and doth intend forthwith to issue Commissions of Oyer and Terminer for their Legal Tryal and Punishment according to Iustice. And for the better execution of this His Royal intention, doth hereby Charge and Command all and singular Lieutenants, Deputy-Lieutenants, Mayors, Sheriffs, Iustices of the Peace, Bayliffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and other His Officers, Ministers and Subjects whatsoever, within any of His Realms or Dominions, with all care and diligence to make search for, discover and appre∣hend all and every person and persons offending as aforesaid; and such as shall be apprehended, forth∣with to Commit, or cause to be Committed to the next Goal of the County, City, or place where they shall be so apprehended, there to remain until they shall be duely proceeded against, and delivered by course of Law: And that the names of the persons so Apprehended and Committed, be forthwith sent to His Majesty or Privy Council, that care may be taken for their speedy prosecution accordingly. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 23d day of November, 1664. in the 16th year of His Majesties Reign. God save the King. LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1664.
