c4366a r43100 26813815 109803
THE CIVIL WARS OF BANTAM: OR, AN Impartial Relation OF ALL THE BATTELS, SIEGES, and other Remark∣able TRANSACTIONS, REVOLUTI∣ONS and ACCIDENTS that happened in the late Civil Wars BETWEEN THAT KING AND HIS ELDEST SON, COMMONLY CALLED BY THEM, The Young King, GIVING A Particular Account of the Circumstances and Manner of the Siege and taking of the City of Bantam, and the English Factory there, by the Young King, with the Help and Assistance of the Dutch; In several Letters from a Gentleman Residing for the East-India-Company at Bantam, to a Merchant in London. LONDON, Printed by H. C. for Tho. Malthus at the Sign of the Sun in the Poultrey, MDCLXXXIII.
THE CIVIL WARRS OF BANTAM: OR, An Impartial Relation of all the Bat∣tels, Sieges, and other Remarka∣ble Transactions, Resolutions and Accidents which happened in the late Wars between the KING and His Eldest SON, Common∣ly Called by them, The YOUNG KING. SIR, THE Sudden and Ʋnexpected Breach which hath happened here, between the King of Bantam and His Eldest Son; together with the considerable Dammage which the English Merchants have sustained thereby, in the Loss of their Factory, and a good part of their Trade, hath been Matter of much Wonder and Amazement to us
here; and (I suppose) no less, but rather much more to you in England: which doth (I imagine) render you desirous to learn the Occasion and Manner of it; which I herewith send you, hoping it will give you full Satisfaction; for although to be present at, and be a Sufferer in the Extremities of War, and the Com∣mon Calamities which always attend the Besieging and Storming of Cities, yet the hearing thereof at a di∣stance, or the reading the written Relations of it, usu∣ally afford abundance of Pleasure and Delight especi∣ally when there is any thing extraordinary in the Occa∣sion, or in the Manner of Prosecuting and Managing the War: somewhat of both which you will find in the following Relation. Bantam, March 16. 1681/2 THE 11th. Instant, this Ship was in readi∣ness To Sail, but was retarded by the King of Bantam's Letter to His Majesty of England, it not being ready till the 13th. when at Midnight he sent it on Board. The next Morning, by Break of Day, the Dutch with Sloops and small Boats attempted to Land their Men at the Rivers Mouth (which is about a Musket-Shot distant from our Factory) so that we could not send off our Dispatch. They lay there all that day, and the Javas Ar∣my close by them, who had positive Orders from the King of Bantam, not to begin first. The Dutch durst not venture farther, see∣ing a great Number of Men ready to oppose them,
with far greater Courage than they (or indeed we our selves) did expect; towards Break of Day yesterday, the Water flowing, and their Vessels off the Ground, they all repaired thereto, and stood a little distance from the Rivers Mouth; when a∣bout Nine of the Clock in the Morning, they be∣gan the War with their great Guns from their great Ships and Hulks that were moored with their Broad-Sides to the Shoar, for the said purpose; and con∣tinued Firing as fast as ever they could till after Sun∣set: The Javas manfully kept the Shoar the whole day without much loss of Men, and fired several great Guns from the Walls, some of which did exe∣cution on their Ships; and the Dutch this Morning have drawn all their small Vessels from the Shoar, We are in hopes all their future Attempts will be in vain; the Javas manifesting a resolute Intention of defying them, rather than come under their Yoke, and are not a little animated with Courage, to see the Dutch retreat. Our Factory standing in harms way, we receiv∣ed great Shot in abundance; my own, and several others Chambers, each receiving one: But God be thanked, not a Soul in them hurt: We believe the Dutch sent many of them, knowing our Nation to have supplied this King with most of his Am∣munition, and to animate to our power the Javas against them: whereby we may partly guess the Kindness they will shew us if they come on Shoar. Their Fleet remains still in Harbor, and whether they will attempt further, none knows; we are bound to see the Event; and I hope, happen the
worst, we shall save our Lives. Sir, I thought it expedient to give you this Account, though the Bearer can satisfie you more largely; yet for what passed on Shoar, he has it himself by hear-say. Yours, S. G. Batavia, September 17. 1682. Honoured Sir, I wrote you two Letters by the Scipio African; and in that of the later Date, advised more par∣ticularly the Condition we were then in; which I shall not repeat, but continue the Doleful Subject to the present time. The Dutch the Morning before her Departure, being opposed Landing, rested quiet in their Ships till the 28th of March; when, before Day, with a fresh Supply of Forces, they Landed half a Mile distant from our Factory, soon Routed all the Ja∣vas, and received a welcom Admission into the Fort of the Young King (then drove to so great a streight by the Siege of his Fathers Army, that he could not have held out many days longer, and that with the loss of not above forty or fifty Men) they im∣mediately hoysed their Standard, and what remain'd undestroyed by the Old King's Forces, they that day mostly burnt, and Marched in Triumph through every part of the Town: We kept our Factory Gates shut, and were by them unmolested; as like∣wise the French, Danes and Chineses: But the same
Evening, about Five of the Clock, after we had so∣laced our selves with hopes of Security, a Report was spread abroad that the Young King design'd to cut us all off that very Night, being incensed at the conceived Assistance of Men and Ammunition afforded his Father by us during his being besieged; and thereupon, most of the Chineses, who had for the security of their estates, brought great part thereof into our Factory, like so many Bees flocked about us, to take the same out. It was Night, and we had only on small Ships Boat on shoar, so we were necessitated to stand the event; and sent her to give notice thereof to our Ships, with Orders to loose their Sails, get their Anchors apeak, and be gone, and if we were as∣saulted, to give Tidings what became of us; not a man of us departing the Shoar that belonged to the Factory; then we put our selves in a posture of de∣fence, hoping, without the Assistance of the Dutch, to make our part good against all the People the Young King had; dividing our selves into two Watches, my Lot being in the first. After Midnight, I went to Rest with somewhat better Hopes than those that had the first Sleep; as conceiving, if they had any real Design upon us, we should have heard of it before that time. Repose made the remaining hours short; and the first Salute to my waking eyes, was the Glad∣som Day; when by a Sign (as appointed) with our Flag, the Ships Boats came on shoar; and soon af∣ter the Dutch Chief from the Fort, with a File of Souldiers, and several Carpenters came to their Factory, into the Yard whereof we had two
Galleries and several Windows, acquainting us in the most imperious manner he could express himself, That it was the King's Order to cut down the one, and stop up the other; which if we did not imme∣diately do, his People should: An Action of no∣thing but Insultation and Spite, design'd to increase our Fears and Amazement; their Factory being at that time uninhabited, and indeed almost ruined; yet we were forced to comply: The said Chief having lived many years in Bantam, and been our intimate Companion, induced us to believe his Morosity might be the effect of his Superiors Or∣ders, and that from him we might possibly under∣stand the Reality of the reported Massacre the night before, and whether still design'd; therefore was my self sent down to him, who told me it was really in∣tended, and a going to have been put in execution by the young King, but by their Major he was hin∣dred, and diswaded therefrom; which, though we believe a Truth, yet next to the Divine Mercy, we can impute it only to the (by them feared) ill Consequences, who by reason of the small number of the King's People, could not have acquitted themselves of being accessary thereto, if not by their Assistance, at least by their Permission, in∣asmuch as it was they that incens'd him against us, by their aggravating all our Actions what possibly they could to our Disadvantage. Upon this we resolved, and accordingly went to the King, to congratulate his safe Delivery out of his late Troubles, that if he had any thing to say to us, we might clear our selves: Before whom,
when come, we found no such angry Aspect up∣on his brow, as by what was reported to us, we had reason to expect; he reproached us with our assist∣ing his Father, contrary to our Engagement of stand∣ing Neuter; and what most aggravated, was, that three of our Company came the day before the Landing of the Dutch, to the Camp, close under his Wall, to instruct his Fathers Souldiers how to plant their Great Guns against him; I was my felf one in person, with Mr. George Chowne, then of Council, and Mr. Rich. Burnby, formerly Chief of Siam, who went, (as we acquainted him) only out of curiosity to see the place, upon an Invitation of the Captain that lay there; and as a proof of our Innocency and unthought of giving occasion of Displeasure or Di∣strust of his Majesty, we came within Call of his Soldiers on the Wall, without any other defence, save our confidence that we not medling or making on ei∣ther side, they would not hurt us (but it shall be a warning to me for ever exposing my self to so great a danger upon any such like Considerations so long as I live) and that what Supplies we otherwise af∣forded his Father, we were necessitated to, as being wholly under his Power, and himself then inclosed in his Fort, and unable to protect us. He interpreted all as excuses, acquainting us that tho' it was in his power to cut us off, yet out of that respect he had to our King and Company, would desist therefrom; a Lesson learnt him by the Dutch. Being dismist, we were the 31st con∣stantly affrighted with his Men in Arms, coming to our Factory, under the conduct of one or other of his three great Ministers of State he had left him, or a Dutch Re∣negado, by him highly advanced, whom we knew not
how to trust, neither durst deny Admittance; when in the evening, the Chief of the said Ministers, he that has been above two years underhand with the Dutch, contriving to bring the Design about of get∣ting Bantam, came to us with a Paper written in the Mallay Language, said to be sent us from the King; being an Order to us, with all possible speed to get our Goods aboard our Ships, and depart his Coun∣trey; he pressing us to the most speedy compliance possible therewith, as we stood in awe of the Kings Displeasure. We were since informed that there was a great Dispute between the King and the Dutch Major, before he could be brought to Order us out of his Countrey, well considering how great a Support to, and Inrichment of his Kingdom our Trade had been: But being wholly under the Dutch Power, he was forced to comply, and we to his Commands; and so purposed with all possible speed to get off our Goods, and depart for Batavia. But our Ships being most of them nigh full, we were necessitated to request a Ship of near five hun∣dred Tuns, of the Dutch Major, to export them; so the next Morning we wrote a Letter to him, which we sent by four of the Companies Servants, to deliver; who coming to the Fort, the Captain of the Guard told them he was asleep: Where∣upon they left it with him, and returned home. But whilst we were expecting of an Answer, the same evening comes to us the abovesaid Minister and Votary to the Dutch, with the said Letter unopen∣ed, seating himself at the upper end of our Table, and filling our Great Hall with his followers, cal∣ling
for Mr. Barwell, and some others of the Coun∣cil, who coming before him, he takes forth the Let∣ter, and tells us with Rage, the King had sent him to know the meaning of that Papers being found on the Ground under the Fort-Walls, aggravating it as a Cause of the highest Suspition, now in time of War; and when we had told him what it was, and laboured to make him sensible that it was our Europe Custom to signifie our Minds in Writing, and that our Meaning therein was most innocent, he replied, he admired how we durst presume to write to the Major without first acquainting the King; and all this with so much Passion and Fury, that nothing could look more like a Prologue to a Massacre; till at length he mildly advised us the next morning to go and ask the King's Pardon. Many other Circumstances of Amazement in this Business did pass, too tedious to represent: But by what we have said, you may imagine the baseness of the Dutch, who were the whole Contrivers and Au∣thors of this Business, as did plainly appear by that Letter being delivered into their hands, and the King's not mentioning one word to us about it, the next Morning, notwithstanding we never offered to ask him Pardon. But this is but little to their succeeding Treatments, as you will see by what follows: That day we had sent off two of our Ships Boats full of Broad∣cloath, which without the Rivers Mouth were fol∣lowed by a Dutch Pinnace, ordering, them back again, or else they would fire at them. Their Return surprized us; but not knowing but its being late at night, might be the occasion, we sent them
again the next morning, when they were again stopped by the Dutch Souldiers quartering a little below our Facto∣ry, who told us they had Orders to suffer no loaden Boat of ours to go out of the River: we complained to the Major, who told us it was the King's Order; who, alas poor man! had so Ʋn-King'd himself, that he could Com∣mand no further than stood with the Pleasure of the Dutch; but many hours did not pass before we understood the depth of the Design, by one Jacob de Roy, a Lieutenant in the Dutch Army, who had been with the King all the time of his being besieged in the Fort, coming some few Months before, under pretence of being a Baker to Ban∣tam, who brought us a Charge of about ten thousand Ri∣als 8/8 for Jewels and Plate of his in the Dutch Factory, which at the time of the Old King's entering the Town, he said we had plundered and taken into ours, which till we satisfied, none of our Goods should be permitted to go on board, where by the way, you may observe, first, their de∣sign so far to amaze and affright us, that we might upon any Terms be willing to leave the shoar; and then having so prepared us, to enrich themselves with the Companies and our Estate. Indeed this Business at that time start∣led us, and made us very thoughtful concerning them, much fearing some ill Designes upon us, we laboured by Presents to the King's Ministers, to learn the depth of the Design, and divert it; but in conclusion found them too much the Dutch Votaries, to be our Friends: insomuch that we were wholly to seek what to do: Whilst to perplex us yet further, comes a Message to us, that the King was jea∣lous of our assisting his Fathers Boats with Powder from our Ship in the Road, therefore desired us to deliver up all on Board them, which, when we departed, should be faith∣fully restored.
We replied, That when we delivered our Powder, we delivered our Ships, they being without it whol∣ly defenceless, therefore would upon no Terms do it, but would our selves go speak with the King, which accordingly we did; when coming into his presence were prevented saying any thing to him, he immediately sending for a Letter wrote in Por∣tugueze and directed to the English as from one of the Old Kings Sons, which he ordered to be read to us; the Contents were, That we the French the Danes, and the Portugueze, should at a certain time be in readiness for their Assi∣stance, but where or how, we knew not; which he aggravated highly against us, not per∣mitting to speak in our defence, or to say any thing concerning the stoppage of our Goods, or our Powder being demanded out of our Ships, and bid us be gone; from whom being departed, we went to the Dutch Major, making known our Grievance to him, who smilling, told us, All was by Order of the King, though done by their Souldiers, and seem'd ignorant of the Letter, tho nothing more probable than that it was of their own framing; and promised in ge∣neral Terms to assist us to his power: so took our leaves, and being return'd to our Factory, we heard the Portugueze Ship was seized on by the Dutch and Javas together, with an Account of the said Letter, and that the French had ta∣ken out of her of theirs 4 Chests of Money, ha∣ing put the same on board of her for security in the time of the Siege: And that the aforesaid
Jacob de Roy with some other Souldiers of the Dutch and Kings, went to the Honourable Com∣panies Ship the Tywan Frigat, acquainting the Commander they had Orders to search for Powder; who telling them they had none, neither could permit thereof without Orders from us ashore: They were about to enter the Ship, he immediately gave the word for his Men to stand to their Arms, where∣upon they desisted, gave him good words, and desired that only Jacob de Roy and one Ja∣va Man, might be permitted to look between Decks for satisfaction of the King, which being granted they departed. This News I say, with our Treatment with the King and Major, seem'd almost to confirm to us some evil Designs, if not upon our Lives, at least upon the Companies and our Estates. But it being no time to sit still, we concluded immediately to dis∣patch away the Formosa Frigat (a small Ship of the Companies) to Batavia, to make our Com∣plaints to the General and Council there, but chiefly to secure the Honourable Companies Treasure, which was the thing they seem'd to gape at, My self and Mr. George Chowne were sent upon her, and indeed it was our de∣sires to go, having had notice that the King had been solicited by the Dutch Renegado (a Villain fitted for the worst of Actions) to come to our Factory and kill us in particular, upon account of our being seen in his Enemies Camp at the time of his being besieged; to which altho he
declin'd condiscending, who knew what the importunity of such a Villain in time might a∣mount to. We departed the Shore in a small Boat, about half an hour before Sun set, with Order for all the Companies Treasure on board the Companies other Ships, to be put on board her in the dark, and with the smallest noise possible to weigh Anchor, lest we should have been discovered by the Dutch Ships. There ac∣companied us the Agents Lady, Mr. Thomas James late Chief of Tonkeene, Mr. Rich. Burn∣by, and Mr. Samuel Griffith, who being out of the Company's Service, had kept themselves aboard Ship for their security, which made our passage seem shorter, being of it self a little long, even four days, before we arrived at Ba∣tavia, where Mr. George Chowne the same day we arrived died: I went to the General, and was appointed the next day to be heard; when being admitted before him and all the Lords sit∣ting in Council, I made a Relation of our Treatments at Bantam, requesting a Ship of a∣bout 500 Tons Burthen, for the Exportation of our Goods, and their Orders to their people there, to permit them to be brought off; with their permission to hire an house in Batavia, and land our Goods, to Export them as we had occasion, Custom free; to all which we received then lit∣tle reply, being deferred for Answer till next day, when another of the Honourable Companies Ships, to wit, the Returne, arriv'd with Mr. Ed∣ward Barwell, to whose turn by lot it came to come away (so willing were all the Gentlemen
left there of Council to come away, that they could no other ways agree who should) the Dutch at Bantam not having any of our Goods at his departure to be brought off. And their pro∣ceedings being such, under Colour of the Kings Orders, as forced our people to take care to se∣cure what Estate the Company had already off the Shore, he and I again waited on the General, who told us, That we might hire an House where we pleas'd, that he would order a Ship or two, if occasion was, by the first opportunity; as likewise, that our Goods should be all safely brought avvay, and for vvhat vve had further requested, vvould after they had debated it, give Ansvver: But before his Order reached Bantam, the Dutch there seeing two of our Ships gone a∣way in the Night time, and imagining in them to be the chiefest Treasure, permitted them to load the other small one and Sloop there remain∣ing, putting the King upon hastening our peo∣ple away, with all speed imaginable, seizing all the Provisions in the Factory, that they were forced to live the day before they left the Shore upon the Charity of the Chiness. And on the 12th of April arrived here the Tywan Frigat, vvith all our People from Bantam, except one Factor, who as if by mistake stayed behind to have an Eye to their Actions. At their departure they sealed up all the Companies Ware-houses, leaving a Register of their Effects and Factory (be∣ing as near as vve could guess about the value of 22000 Royals of Eight) vvith one of the Dutch
Commissioners to be delivered, the Major being here arrived, the General desired us, to send back in their Ships three or four Factors to take care of the Shipping of our Goods, which was done accordingly, but in so confus'd a manner, as what the Dutch pleased to restore us, we can on∣ly call ours: So ended the Honourable Compa∣nies antient Factory of Bantam, where the Eng∣lish have been settled, and have had a constant Trade about this 70 years. I cannot say they departed thence like Hannibal out of Africk, accusing both Gods and Men, with imprecations on themselves for any omissions of their own; but truly did severely repine at the Kings ingratitude to (as I may call us) the Nurses and Fathers of his Country, the English being by his Father and all the Inhabitants generally so acknowledged; and not undeservedly, having by their Trade en∣rich'd it, and brought it to what it was. And so great was our rage against the Dutch, as had our power been consonant to our will, I am con∣fident should have treated them much worse than the Javas. Since our departure, they have had some Skirmishes with the Old Kings people; with the loss thereby and Sickness (as is report∣ed) 7 or 800 White Men, as yet have not been able to proceed further than the Fort and Town of Bantam. But their Ships being now arrived from Europe with a supply of near 1000 fresh Souldiers, 'tis reported they design speedily to March for Tertiassa the Residence of the Old King, about 20 Miles distant from Bantam: What their success will be time will shew. By
Sea the Old Kings Forces has done them several Damages, taken 16 or 17 Sloops and small Ves∣sels, and 'tis said burnt a Ship of near 800 Tons; so that they are forced to send Convoys with their Fleet of small Vessels to and from the Coast of Java. But leaving them to their Hostility a∣gainst each other, I shall proceed to a short Re∣lation of our Treatment since our Arrival here, where as I said we had liberty to hire an House. But as to Matters of Trade were deferr'd An∣swer, and that for nigh four Months, the Ge∣neral telling us every time we came into his pre∣sence we should have Answer sometimes to mor∣row, sometimes in few days; and this they did to perplex and intreague our Affairs, having, Ships arrived from Europe, designed for the Northward, that required a speedy dispatch, and till received an Answer, were not permitted to bring any Goods on shore, neither suffered they any of their people to go on board us: so that we were forced to put Goods from one Ship to the o∣ther, in order to dispatching them, with so much trouble as can scarce be imagined, and at last (Eymay being lost) sent two for Canton, one for Tywan, one for Tonkeene, and the Oacklander making a 9 Months passage, with the loss of all her Men but 7, was thereby disabled from proceeding to Canton, and forced with most black. Saylors to go for Surrat in Company with the Return: At last comes an Answer to our several Letters and Requests, that in this long Attendance we had presented to the General and Council. The Contents are too tedious to recite, but conclud∣ing
with an Order to us, our Residence here not consisting with their Interest, with all possible speed to with-draw our Ships and all our people to some of our own settled Factories, as Siam, Surrat, Persia, the Coast of Cormandell, Bangall, or where we thought best, and the Season of the year would best permit, except all parts belong∣ing to the King of Bantam, who they said had for a reciprocal kindness, by Contract made over all his Terretories to them; stiling the Old King his Father a Rebel against him: by which means there was no place left for us in these parts, where we could attend the Arrival of our Europe or Northward Ships, till the Company were made sensible of the loss of Bantam, and had taken some Order about their Affairs in these parts. This was a pretty unexpected Story indeed, which made us laugh, but on the wrong side of our Mouths, as the Saying is. The Companies Af∣fairs and our own too highly requiring our long∣er stay here, we were forced to give Answer to their Letter more modestly than we should o∣therwise have done; representing the unspeaka∣ble damage will occurr to our Masters Affairs, by their forcing us off; humbly Requesting per∣mission to abide here till they were acquainted in what condition their Trade in these parts was, and had taken some Order thereabout; to which as yet we have received no Answer, and have hopes they will not urge our departure. If they do, we must do as well as we can, we are bound to see it, and to sit dovvn and repine at our Infelici∣ties, vvill not help us. But the Season is novv
so far spent, that if so, England of necessity must be our next Port, unless we can find some place in the Streight of Sundy to shelter our selves. In the mean time we sit idle, and unable to turn a Penny; the time of our abode here, is so much time wholly lost: For my particular, could my Affairs have permitted, I should have return'd to you by this Ship; but having the Books of the Charge I had in Bantam to make up, and my Stock all abroad, that it cannot be in readiness till the latter Ship, which may depart about January next; when if I can be permitted, I de∣sign home. The last thing I have to advise you, is the loss of the Johanna, bound for Bangall, who run ashore in the Night upon a Ridge of Rocks, between the Cape of Good Hope, and Cape Agullis, where in 12 hours time she broke in two pieces; 'twas about two Miles distant from the shore, where all the Men but seven arrived, some in Boats, some on Rafts, some on the Rack of the Ship, but were 21 days travelling before they arrived where the Dutch Inhabited; they all came from Batavia in Dutch Ships, and the Captain and some others take their passage home in this Ship. The Company lost 72000 l. Sterling Treasure, beside other Merchandize. I fear you will think me somewhat tedious in relating these sad and tragical Stories, but I was willing to give you a full Relation of all Occurrances. I could wish the Subject had been more plea∣sant, and less tragical; but we must submit to the Divine Will. Yours E. G. FINIS. Advertisement. I. A Most Learned Treatise, Entituled, Fundamental Law the true Security of Sovereign Dignity, and the Peoples Liberty. By a Person of Honour. Octavo. Price, One Shilling six pence. II. The Romish Mass-Book, faithfully Translated into English with Notes and Observati∣ons thereupon plainly Demonstrating the Idolatry and Blasphemy thereof: Containing, 1. The Cautelae, or Cavears of the Mass. 2. The Canon of the Mass. 3. The History of the Mass; shewing when, how, and by whom it was patched together; with a Curious Copper Cut prefixed, representing the Priest saying Mass; with unanswerable Arguments proving it no Service of God: Published at this juncture to Prevent the Designs of those that are Endeavouring to Introduce Popery amongst us: Dedicated to the Right Reverend Father in God, Henry, Lord Bishop of London. Price One Shilling. III. Vates Astrologicus, or Englands Astrological Prophet, Foretelling what is likely to befall Great Britain and Ireland, particularly the Great and Famous City of London, as also France, Holland, Spain, Germany, Poland, Italy, Sicily, Apulia, Bohemia, Turky, and indeed all Europe, but more especially the See of Rome, for twenty years together, beginning March 10. 1683. Ending March. 10. 1702. likewise Astrological Judgments of the Effects of that famous Triple Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, being thrice re∣peated in that Regal sign Leo; the Great Dignities of the Sun and Jupiter: also some Remarks upon the Eclipses, and more especially upon that great and famous visible E∣clipse of the Sun, July 2d. 1684 with twenty years Predictions from some of the most Eminent mutual Aspects of the Planets: and Eclipses of the Luminaries, and Annual Re∣volutions of the Sun: with many Hieroglyphicks, representing the future State and Chang∣es of the world: By Richard Kirby Student in Astrology. Price One Shilling. All Sold by Thomas Malthus, at the Sign of the Sun in the Poultrey. 1683.
