C506 13687136 101351
AN ANSWER To a PAPER importing a PETITION OF THE Archbishop of CANTERBURY, AND Six other BISHOPS, TO His Majesty, Touching their not Distributing and Publishing THE LATE DECLARATION FOR Liberty of Conscience. Vide, utrum Tunica filii tui sit, an non? Quam cum cognovisset pater, ait, Tunica filii mei est, fera pessima comedit eum. Gen. xxxvii. Ver. 32, 33. With Allowance. London, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the Kings Most Ex∣cellent Majesty, for His Houshold and Chappel; And are to be sold at his Printing-house on the Ditch-side in Black-Friers. 1688.
AN ANSWER TO A Paper importing a Petition of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Six other Bishops, to His Majesty, &c. NOT to amuse my Reader with any Reasons or Excuse for this Underta∣king, let this suffice for both; That several Copies of this Paper, instead of distributing His Majesty's Decla∣ration for Liberty of Conscience ha∣ving been privately dispers'd thro' most Counties of England, I thought it every man's Duty, and (among the rest) mine, to undeceive them who have not the same Brains, but more Ho∣nesty and Loyalty, than those that sent it, and be∣stow some Ink upon the Tetter, that it spread no further. In order to which, and that every man may at once see the Whole before him, and thereby
come to the truer Conclusion, I shall take my Rise from the Occasion of this Paper, and thence proceed to the Matter of it. Now the Occasion was thus. His Majesty finding it had been the frequent endea∣vors of the four last Reigns to reduce this Kingdom to an exact Conformity in Religion, and how little the Success had answer'd the Design, but rather de∣stroy'd Trade, depopulated the Country, and dis∣courag'd Strangers; and being resolv'd to establish His Government on such a Foundation as might make His Subjects happy, and unite them to Him by Inclination as well as Duty, on the 4th of April, 1687. issued His most Gracious Declaration for Li∣berty of Conscience, thereby declaring, That He will Protect and Maintain His Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, and all other His Subjects of the Church of England, in the free Exercise of their Religion, and full Enjoyment of their Possessions and Proper∣ties, as now Established by Law, without any Mo∣lestation, &c.—That all Execution of Penal Laws for matters Ecclesiastical, as Nonconformity, &c. shall be, and are thereby suspended.—That all His Subjects have leave to Meet and Worship God in their own way, without disturbance.—And forasmuch as the benefit of the Service of His Subjects is by the Law of Nature inseparably annex'd to, and inherent in His Royal Person, and that no one for the future may be under any Discouragement or Disability, by reason of some Oaths or Tests usually administred; That no such Oaths or Tests shall be hereafter requi∣red of them; And that He would dispense with them, &c. And because several Endeavors had been made, to
abuse the easiness of the People, as if He might be persuaded out of what He had so solemnly declared, His Majesty, as well to stop the mouth of Gainsayers, as to shew his Intentions were not changed since the said 4th of April, by a second Declaration of the 27th of April last past, enforces and confirms the said former Declaration, conjures His loving Subjects to lay aside all private Animosities and groundless Jea∣lousies, and to choose such Members of Parliament as may do their part to finish what he has begun, for the Advantage of the Monarchy over which God hath plac'd Him, as being resolv'd to call a Parliament that shall meet in November next at furthest. This Declaration was forthwith printed, and by Order of Council required to be distributed, publish∣ed, and read in the respective Churches thro' the Kingdom: And in that it was not enjoyn'd to be read in any the Congregations thereby permitted, what greater Evidence can there be of His Majesty's real Intentions to the Church of England, when, how∣ever He suffer'd others, He own'd not yet any Esta∣blish'd National Church but the Church of England? Upon this the ensuing Paper was on the 18th of May following (between the hours of Nine and Ten at night) presented to His Majesty by the Six Bishops the Subscribers.
To the King's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of William Archbishop of Canterbury, and of divers of the Suffragan Bishops of the Province, now present with him, in behalf of themselves, and others of their absent Brethren, and of the Clergy of their respective Dioceses. Humbly sheweth, THat their great Averseness they find in them∣selves to the Distribution and Publication in all their Churches of your Majesties late De∣claration for Liberty of Conscience, proceedeth neither from any want of Duty and Obedience to your Majesty, our Holy Mother the Church of En∣gland being both in her Principles, and constant Practices, unquestionably Loyal, and having to her great Honor been more than once publickly acknow∣ledg'd to be so by your Majesty; nor yet from any want of due tenderness to Dissenters: In relation to whom, they are willing to come to such a Temper, as shall be thought fit, when that Matter shall be Con∣sider'd and Setled in Parliament and Convocation. But among many other Considerations, from this especially, because the Declaration is founded upon
such a Dispensing Power, as has been often de∣clar'd Illegal, in Parliament, and particularly in the Years 1662, 1672, and in the beginning of your Majesties Reign, and is a Matter of so great Mo∣ment and Consequence to the whole Nation, both in Church and State, that your Petitioners cannot in Prudence, Honor, and Conscience, so far make them∣selves Parties to it, as the Distribution of it all over the Nation, and Reading it, even in God's House, and in the time of his Divine Service must amount to, in common and reasonable Construction. your Petitioners therefore most humbly and earnestly beseech your Majesty, that you will be Graciously pleas'd not to insist upon the Distribution and Reading your Maje∣sties Declaration. Canterbury. St. Asaph. Bath and Wells. Chichester. Peterborough. Ely. Bristol.
And here also for Methods sake, and before I come to the Matter of it, I hold it requisite that I speak somewhat to the Persons the Subscribers, and the Time of their Presenting it. As to the First, the Holy Scripture styles Bishops, The Angels of their Churches; And by the Common Law of England the Archibishop of Canterbury is Primus Par Angl.4 Inst. 5. Idem 362. The Bishops, Lords Ecclesiasti∣cal Secular,—and Sit in Parliament Jure Episcopa∣tus, which they hold per Baroniam.—The Statute 25 E. 3. c. 24. (pro Clero) calls them Peers of the Realm.—That of Queen Elizabeth, One of the greatest States of the 8 Eliz. c. 1. Realm.—They have Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical Causes, and are not bound to obey any Mandate but 1. Inst. 134. the King's: And by reason of all this, presum'd to have a more than ordinary Influence upon the Peo∣ple. Our Saviour calls his Disciples, The Salt, and Light of the World. And why? But that they should season others with their Doctrin, and guide them by their Example, into the way of Peace. His Name is, The Prince of Peace: His Sermon on the Mount was, The Gospel of Peace: The Blessings in it, are to The Poor in Spirit, The Meek, The Merciful, The Peace-makers, &c. His Life was one continued Pra∣ctise of it; And his last Legacy to his Disciples, was Peace. He gave to Caesar the things that were Caesars; and that Tribute, which yet was the product of an Absolute Power, he not only paid it without dispu∣ting the Authority, but commanded it to others: And tho' the Imperial Power after his Death was of the same Absoluteness, yet St. Paul says not, the Se∣nate had declar'd it Illegal, but calls it The Ordinance of God, and enjoyns Subjection to it. What the
Apostles in their time were, the same ever, and now challenge the Governors of all Churches; next, and under Kings, they are in the stead of God to the People; and where they make a false Step, what wonder if the unthinking People forget the Precept, and take after the Example? They see nothing but (sub imagine lusca) by twilight, and conceive accord∣ing to the colour of those Rods are cast before them; They hear a noise, but know not whence it cometh, or whether it goeth, and run away the Cry, without so much as laying a Nose to the Ground for't. What made the People set up Adoniah against David's disposition of the Crown to Solomon? Abiathar the High Priest was in the Head of them. What made the Nobles break the Yoak? The Prophets had Prophesi'd falsly, the Priests applauded it with their Hands, and a foolish People lov'd to have it so. Or what made the Jews who had so often acknowledg'd our Savior, turn head against him, and crucifie him? The Chief Priests, the Scribes and Elders had pos∣sess'd the People, that the Romans would come, and take away their City. Thus we see what Influence Great Men have upon the heedless Multitude; and therefore how wary ought they to be, how they give them the least Example of Disobedience; for it is seldom seen, but where the one Disputes, the other Cavils; and where their Leaders make but a Shrug at the Government, the People think it high time to be Mending it: Our own Histories are as one Exam∣ple of it; or if they run narrow, Tacitus may be be∣liev'd of his, Erant in Officio, qui mallent mandata. Im∣perantium interpretari, quam exequi. There were (saith he) some in Power, that were more for Commenting, than
Executing the Emperor's Directions. Nor are Disputes or Excuses of less danger; for it is a kind of shaking off the Yoke, and an Essay of Disobedience; especially Lord Bacon's Essay of Sub∣jection. if in those Disputings, they which are for the Dire∣ction speak fearfully and tenderly, and those that are against it, audaciously. And if by such means a Fire break out in the State, 'twill want no Fuel, when 'tis kindled from the Altar. And for the Time of their Presenting it, I shall consider it as it may respect the present Circumstan∣ces of the Kingdom, or that half scantling of time they gave his Majesty to consider of their Excuses. As to the former, the glut of Reformers in Edward the Sixth's time was great, and the Qualifications so indifferent, that the Church of England has ever since labor'd under it, and the same Elements that compounded her, half destroy'd her: For as the Laws, not the Doctrin, brought them first together, they no sooner found themselves streightned in the One, than they made it up with the Other, and Themselves somewhat in the Broils, that were otherwise nothing in the Peace of the State. These Humors, during Her, and King James's Reign, lay fermenting in the Body, but in his Son's broke out into a Pestilence. The Crown sell, the Church follow'd it, and the most diligent Enquirer might have sought England in her self, yet miss'd her; till at last it pleas'd Him, whose only it is to still the raging of the Sea, to say to the Madness of the People, Huc usque, nee ultra. His late Majesty King Charles the Second was Re∣stor'd; and so little averse were the Catholic Lords to the Church of England, that their Votes, which otherwise might have kept them out, brought them
once more into the House of Peers: nor were they scarce warm in their Seats, before the Act of Uni∣formity was pass'd, and driven with that Violence, that it had like to have overturn'd all agen. The Dissenters were not fit for Employ, they had Mony in their Purses, and the World was wide enough: The Catholic Lords were less to be trusted, they cumber'd the Ground, and 'twas but fit they were down: There remain'd nothing but to cast out the Heir, and then the Inheritance would be the easier divided. And here also it pleas'd God to appear in the Mount: He pluck'd him out of the deep Waters, and set him on the Throne of his Ancestors: And as he came to the Crown thro' the greatest of Difficul∣ties, he has been preserv'd in it by no less a Provi∣dence. He stifl'd two Serpents in the Cradle of his Empire, and in a three-years Government conquer'd all Example, in His own. And now, when our troubl'd Waters had begun to settle again, what need of whistling up the Winds for another Storm? When the Wounds of the Kingdom were almost clos'd, what Charity was it to unbind them too soon, or under pretence of easing the Patient, to set them bleeding afresh? In a word, when the Brands of our late Rebellions lay smother'd in their almost forgotten Embers, what prudence was it to rake them into another Flame? I see little of the Dove in it, and am loth to say, too much of the Serpent. And for that half scantling of time they gave his Majesty to consider of their Excuses, it seems here al∣so, that the Spirit of Direction (like Baal in the Kings) was some way or other out of the way. The De∣claration was no new thing, it had been published
the 4th of April 1687, and his Majesty had receiv'd the general Acknowledgments of the Kingdom for it; which argu'd their Satisfaction in it. The Corn was in the Ground, and now, if ever, was the time to sow Tares; and therefore, to prevent their choak∣ing it, His Majesty the 27th of April 1688, (which was one full year, and three weeks after) enforces his first Declaration, and commands it to be read in all Churches within Ten miles of London, on the 20th and 27th of May, and in all other the Churches thro' the Country, on the 3d and 10th of June fol∣lowing; time enough (one would think) to have consider'd the Matter, so as to have given the King some time to have advis'd. Whereas on the contrary, they make no scruple of it, till the 18th of May, about 10 at Night, and then (the 19th being a Day ap∣pointed for Hunting) they present the Paper be∣fore mention'd, as well knowing, that if his Majesty had an Inclination of Countermanding his Declara∣tion, he was so straitned in time, that he could not do it, for it was to be read the Day after. And what can be rationally interpreted from it, but that they had been all that while numbring the People, to see whither the Party were strong enough? And I am the rather inclin'd to it, for that since the time of the first Declaration, the Doctrin of Non-Resistance has not been so much in Vogue, as it was formerly; it would keep cold for another time, and to have pressed it now, who knows but the People might have believ'd it? In short, Nathan, Zadoc, &c. had some pretence for opposing Adoniah; Me thy Ser∣vant, and Zadoc the Priest, he hath not called. So Core, Dathan, and Abiram, were Ecclesiastical Princes, and
thought they might have as much right to Govern as Moses: But when the Church of England (found∣ed on the Law of England) acknowledges the King Supreme in all Causes; Themselves, Glan. l. 7. c. 1. Tract. l. 5. 427.infra aetatem, & in custodia Domini Regis; when the King by his De∣claration has secur'd them in their Religion, Possess∣ons and Properties, and by vertue of his Royal Prero∣gative (and for the Quiet of the Nation) only indulg'd it to others, (yet making no doubt of the Parliaments concurrence in it) is it just that Their Eye be evil, because the King's is good? or must the Kingdom of Heaven be confin'd to a Party? I never heard that Disobedience was any Qualification for it; and there∣fore, if they will not enter themselves, why do they shut it against others, that would enter? But perhaps the Petition (if yet there can be any reason for the breach of a Duty) may give us the reason of it. The Title says, In behalf of themselves, and others of their absent Brethren, and of the Clergy of their respective Dioceses. Which makes good what I before hinted, that instead of Distributing and Pub∣lishing His Majesty's Declaration to be read in their respective Dioceses, as in bounden Duty to their Supreme Ordinary the King, they ought to have done; and the Clergy, in respect of their Canonical Obedience to them, must have obey'd under the pain of Suspension, and in case of Contumacy of Depriva∣tion: they had been feeling the Pulse of their Clergy, and finding little return from them, but speak, Lord, for thy Servant heareth, they concluded the Flock would follow the Shepherd; and consequently, if the Party were not strong enough, the Multitude of the Offenders might make it dispunishable; whereas
it has been seen, that a Ferry-boat's taking in too many Passengers, to increase the Fare, has been of∣ten the occasion of sinking all together. And if the Loyalty of the Church of England receive any ble∣mish by it, what can she say, but that she was wound∣ed in the House of her Friends? For by the same Reason that a Metropolitan refuses the Injunctions of his Supreme Ordinary the King, by the same Reason may a Diocesan refuse his Metropolitan, and every inferior Clergy man his Diocesan; and when the Chain is once broken, you may dispose the Links as you please. But the Petition says, It was neither from any want of Duty and Obedience to His Majesty. No? Then why was it not comply'd with? Shew me thy Faith by thy Works, saith St. James; nor will it be possible to clear that Son of Disobedience, that said I go, but went not. A Bishop (as before) is not bound to obey any Mandate but the King's; which Exception proves the Rule, and that he is inexcusably oblig'd to obey the King's: For all Bishops are subject to the Imperial Power, who is to be obey'd against the will of the Bishop. Mauritius the Emperor (says Bi∣shop Ductor dub. fol. 606. Taylor) commanded St. Gregory to hand an un∣lawful Edict to the Churches; the Bishop advis'd the Prince, that what he went about was a sin, did what he could to have hinder'd it, and yet obey'd. It was the Case of Saul and Samuel: The King desires Samuel to joyn with him in the Service of the Lord; He, with the liberty of a Prophet, refus'd at first, but afterwards joyn'd with him: Whereupon the said Bishop in the same place further says, That even the Ʋnlawful Edicts of a Lawful Prince may be published
by the Clergy: How much more then those that are Lawful? And that this Declaration is such, I shall shew presently, when I come to speak to their word Illegal. In short, the Archbishop of Canterbury is Heylin's Life of A. B. Laud. 209. Ordinary of the Court, and a Bishop's private Opi∣nion may be warrant enough for him to speak when he is requir'd, but not to reprove a Prince upon pre∣tence Id. Ductor Dub. 608. of Duty. Our Holy Mother the Church of England being both in her Principles and constant Practises unquestionably Loyal. Nor have they hitherto appear'd other; and, if not Religion, moral Gratitude must have oblig'd them to it. All the Bishoprics of England (but Sodor 4 Inst. 285. in Man, which was instituted by Pope Gregory the Fourth) are of the Foundation of the Kings of Eng∣land, 1 Inst. 94, & 97. and those in Wales of the Prince of Wales: Nor is it less than reason, that they look up to the hand that fed them; Or to whom more justly ought they have paid the Tribute of Obedience, than to Him that took them from the Flock, and sate them among Princes? In a word the late War was Bellum Episcopale; and if King Charles the First would have confirm'd the Sale of Church Lands, he had sav'd Himself: And why then do they reproach the King His Son with their Loyalty, when they instance the contrary in so small a trial of that Obedience; espe∣cially when, were the matter doubtful, the Pre∣sumption were for Obedience, and even unjust Com∣mands may be justly obey'd? For as we fear the thing is unjust, so have we reason to fear the evil of Disobedience, for we are sure that is evil; and there∣fore we are to change the Speculative Doubt into a Id. Duct. Dub. f. 136, & 531. Practical Resolution, and of two Doubts take the su∣rest
part, and that is to obey; because, in such Ca∣ses, Reumfacit Superiorem, iniquitas Imperandi; inno∣centem Subditum, ordo serviendi: The Evil (if there be any) is imputed to him that Commands, not him that Obeys, who is not his Prince's Judge, but Servant; and they that are under Authority are to Obey, not Dispute; nor shall any thing done by vertue thereof be said to be contra pacem. David com∣manded 9 Coke 68. 10 Coke 70. Joab to put Ʋriah in the Head of the Battle, to the end that he might fall by the Enemy: Joab obeys; Ʋriah is kill'd; and yet not Joab, who might have prevented it, but David, who commanded it, is charg'd with the Murther. In a word, to pretend Loyalty for a common Principle, and yet make Dis∣puting and Disobedience the Practice of it; what is it, but a drawing near with the Mouth, when the Heart is farthest from it? The Voice (perhaps) may be the Voice of Jacob, but the Hands are the Hands of Esau. And having to her great Honor been more than once publickly acknowledg'd to be so by your Majesty. And do's his Majesty less than acknowledge it in this Declara∣tion? He has in the Word of a King secur'd to them their Religion, Possessions and Properties; And why? but to assure them, He repented not the Character. And it was their Interest, if not Duty, to keep it up; nay, the Honor of their Church de∣pended on it, inasmuch as Men value things, accor∣ding to the present Good or Evil they do in the World; and what Advantage can that Religion give us to another Life, when it shall be found mis∣chievous, or destructive to this? They have (I said) the Word of a King for their Security; but if they
force him in his own defence, to secure against it, whom can they blame but themselves, who first made the Challenge? Abiathar's Service to David, was acknowledg'd by Solomon, but when he once began to boggle, he forgave, but remov'd him. And our Bishop Bonner, tho' he got his Bishoprick by thwart∣ing the Pope, yet he lost it agen by opposing the King. In a word, The Holy Spirit in the Apocalyps, acknowledges the good works of the Seven Churches of Asia, but bids some of them remember, whence they had fall'n, and repent, and do the first works, or he would remove their Candlestick. Nor yet from any want of due tenderness to Dissen∣ters. No? Why then have those Penal Laws been executed with so much rigor against them? Or why are they so averse from having them eas'd at pre∣sent? What brought them into this Kingdom, I have touch'd before, and what turn'd them out a∣gain, and our Trade with them, is demonstrable enough in the late Protestants of France. I will not say but they might have been kept out at first; but being settl'd, and embodied into a People, it may seem ill Policy to remove any Greater Number to gratifie a Lesser. It is not the Nobility, or the Gen∣try, that are the Traders; nor is it the Gown that enriches more than particular persons: but the Trade of the Merchant, and the Industry of the Middle sort, that enriches a Nation, and without which Vena porta, let a Kingdom have never so good Limbs, it will have but empty Veins. It was Trade gave England its first Credit abroad, and the Manufacture at home found mater to it; the One drein'd other Kingdoms to water our own, and the Other brought
a Ballance to it, in making the Export come up to the Import, and both together secur'd the Dominion of the Sea, and made the Wealth of either Indie a kind of Accessary to it; and all this carry'd on by the Middle-sort of People. Take our Sea-Ports, and the Sea-Man is but here and there a true Church-of-Eng∣land man: The Merchant that employs him not much better at Heart: The Artisan thro' the Kingdom has more than a Spice of the Disease; and the Body of the People not least infected with it. However, let them be quiet within themselves, and they dispute no Authority; but when they are uneasie, and mew'd up at home, what wonder if they change it for a freer Air? What makes us complain of the want of Trade? That our Neighbors have gotten into our Manufacture? That our Ships are not so well Mann'd as formerly? And the Rents of Lands fallen? The Reason is obvious: Our selves have cut off our own Hands. The Merchant sits down with what he has, or turns Builder; The Work-man carries his Art with him; The Sea-man will have his Opinion, as well as his Pay; And the Lump of the People their Consciences, or Good-night Landlord! Whereas, since his Majesties late Indulgence, Trade is visibly encreased, Building stops of it self, the Kingdom be∣gins to People agen, and the numerous Addresses on this occasion, speak so general a Satisfaction, that if such be the Dawn, what may there not be expected from its full Day? And is there no Equity, that the Catholic also come in for a share, tho' the word Dissenter seems not (in proper Speech) to compre∣hend him; for neither the Law of England, or themselves, ever knew him by that Name? How∣ever,
that some tenderness might be due to them, may be gather'd from the English Litany. The Church of England knows, the King professes the Faith of Rome; And therefore when they beseech God, That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshiping of thee, in righteousness and holiness of Life, they Servant James our most gracious King and Governor, what do they mean by it? if after the way which some of them call Idolatry, so worships he the God of his Fathers, and they beseech God to keep and strengthen him in the true worshiping of him, they imply that Worship to be a true Worship; and if they do not believe it, and yet use the words, how will they avoid a Sin? for whatever is not of Faith, is Sin. In a word, The King has made a Ge∣neral Indulgence to all his Subjects, The Catholics fall under no particular Exception, in it; And there∣fore, the Law of Reason, as well as the Law of the Land, gives them the benefit of it. In relation to whom, they are willing to come to such a Temper, as shall be thought fit, when that Matter shall be Consider'd and Setled in Parliament and Convocation. What the Temper hitherto has been, is but too sen∣sible already, and what it is like to be for the future, may be guess'd by what's past. The King (who by the Law of England is Supremus in Ecclesiasticis) has Thought fit, Consider'd, and Setled the Matter; and were a Parliament now Sitting, the King is sole 22 E. 3. 3. Judge, all the rest but Advisers. The Royal Prero∣gative is a part of that Law of the Land, and by that Stan. Pl. Cor. 162. Authority, the King has Setled it; and therefore it becomes no Man to be wiser than the Law. Nor is 1 Inst. 97. the Advice of Ignatius to his Clergy forreign to it,
Epist. 12.Nolite Principes irritare ut acerbentur, ne ansam detis iis qui illam contra vos quaerunt. Provoke not Princes (saith he) to become bitter, lest ye hand an Occasion to those that seek one against ye. But supposing it a matter only cognisable in Parliament, why could not they have held till then, and in the mean time o∣bey'd? especially, when the King had by the same Declaration, declar'd his Resolution of calling a Par∣liament in November next at farthest; and our Law says, 4 Inst. 11.Extra Parliamentum nulla petitio est grata, licet necessaria. No Petition, how necessary soever, is grateful out of Parliament. Or how then could the Convocation be concern'd in it? for (besides that the Matter is meerly Political, and singly respects the Quiet of the Kingdom) if the King, who is Supreme Ordinary of all England, may by the ancient Laws of this Realm, and without Parliament, make Ordi∣nances and Constitutions for the Government of the Clergy, and deprive them for Non-obedience there∣unto, as has been more than once resolv'd, He may; Crook Jac. 37. Moore 755. what have the Convocation to be consulted in it? Especially when they have so often, in Henry the Third, Edward the Second, and Edward the Third's 4 Inst. 322. time, been commanded by the King's Writ, That as they love their Baronies, (which they hold of the King) That they intermeddle with nothing that con∣cern'd the King's Laws of the Land, his Crown and Dignity, his Person, or his State, or the State of his Council or Kingdom: (Scituri pro certo quod si fece∣rint, Rex inde se capiet ad Baronias suas) willing them to know for certain, That if they did, the King would seize their Baronies. And by the Statute of Henry 25 H. 8. c. 19. the Eighth it is provided, That no Canons or Con∣stitutions
should be made, or put in Execution by their Authority, which were contrariant, or repug∣nant to the King's Prerogative, the Laws, Customs, or Statutes of the Realm. In a word, the King has commanded, they have disobey'd, and by their ill Example perverted others, and are yet very uncon∣descending (for so the People word it) themselves. And what would Henry the Eighth have done in such a Case; made use of his last Argument, or thrown up the Game for a few cross Cards? But among many other Considerations, from this especi∣ally, because the Declaration is founded upon such a Dispen∣sing Power, as has been often declared Illegal in Parlia∣ment: And what were those Considerations? If a Man should put an ill Construction upon them, it may be said, their Lordships never intended it; and if they intended not to amuse the People, why did they not speak plain English, and specifie those Considerati∣ons? inasmuch as all Petitions ought to contain Cer∣tainty, and Particularity, so as a direct Answer may be given to them; which could not be here: For whatever the King's Answer might have been, some∣what more also might have been hook'd in from the words; And Alexander would have given it a short Answer, (Aut Ligna inferte, aut Thus.) Either made it a Chimney or an Altar. But it seems it mov'd in sun∣dry places, tho' the best Scripture for this pretended Illegality, be a Declaration in Parliament: Their Lordships instance nothing beyond their own time; but I conceive it not impossible to bring them those of elder times, that have been so far from doubting the King's Dispensing Power, that they held it un∣questionable.
The Stat. 1. H. 4. cap. 6. says, The King is content∣ed to be concluded by the Wise Men of his Realm, touching the Estate of Him and his Realm; saving always the King's Liberty, i. e. His Prerogative of varying from that Law, as he should see cause. In the Parliament-Roll, 1 H. 5. N. 22. the Sta∣tutes Serj. Rolle's Abridg. 2 part. Ti'. Prerog. 180. against Provisors are confirm'd; and that the King shall not give any Protection or Grant against the Execution of them: Saving to the King his Pre∣rogative. And what was meant by that, may appear by a prior Roll of the same year, N. 15. where the Com∣mons' pray, That the Statutes for the putting Aliens Id. Tit. Prerog. out of the Kingdom may be held and executed: The King consents, saving his Prerogative, and that he dispense with such as he shall please. Upon which the Commons answer, That their intention was no other, and by the help of God never shall be. Queen Elizabeth had dispens'd with the ancient Form and Manner of Investing and Consecrating of Bishops, and the Parliament of the 8th of her Reign, cap. 1. declares it Lawful, as being done by her Inherent Prerogative. And when by the same Prerogative or Privilege, and Royal Authority, (for so it is worded) she dispens'd with the Universi∣ties, &c. so Popish a thing as Latin Prayers, and which their Lordships the Bishops still use in Con∣vocations, though it be directly contrary to the Sta∣tute 1 Eliz. c. 1. for using the Common-Prayer in the Vulgar Tongue only: what is meant by it, but that the Queen might lawfully dispense with that Statute? for if otherwise, there is no Ecclesiastical
Person in the Kingdom, but would have found the Temporal Censures too heavy for him, when it had been too late to have ask'd a Parliamentary Conside∣ration, whether Legal or not. And in particular in the years 1662 and 1672, and in the beginning of Your Majesty's Reign. As to the first of which, matter of Fact stands thus: King Charles the Second, by his Declaration from Breda, had declar'd Liberty for tender Consciences, and that no man should be disquieted for difference in Opinion in matters of Religion, which did not di∣sturb the Peace of the Kingdom. And in his Decla∣ration of the 26th of December following stood firm to it, but that no such Bill had been yet offer'd him. While it thus lay, an Act of Indempnity, and one other of Uniformity, were pass'd: The first regene∣rated Themselves; and the second, with the old In∣gredient, The Growth of Popery, was a probable way to exclude Others. The 25th and 26th of February the Commons come to some Resolves against That, and Dissenters; which, with the Reasons of them (wherein yet they declare not the Declaration Ille∣gal) they present His Majesty on the 28th in the Ban∣quetting House. The King complies; and it was too soon after a Rebellion to have done otherwise: However, if they had declar'd it Illegal, it was but the single Opinion of the Commons, wherein the Lords made no concurrence: And therefore to say, This Dispensing Power was in the Parliament of 1662 declar'd Illegal, when (in common and rea∣sonable Construction) a Declaration in Parliament is intended of both Houses of Parliament; why may it not be as well urg'd, That those other Votes and
Resolves of the Commons, touching the Bill of Exclu∣sion, were a Legal Declaration in Parliament, when yet the Lords swept their House of it? Then, for that other of 1672, the King in the In∣terval of Parliament was engag'd in a War with the Dutch; and, to secure Peace at home while he had War abroad, had put forth a Declaration for Indul∣gence to Dissenters: The Parliament meet, grant a Supply of Twelve hundred thirty eight thousand seven hundred and fifty thousand Pounds; and, without charging the Declaration with Illegality, pray His Majesty to recall it. The Argument pre∣vail'd, and the King did it: Which shews, that it was in the King's Option not to have done it, or done it. And lastly, for that other in the beginning of His Majesty's Reign. That also (without declaring it Il∣legal) was but some Heats of the Commons. There were at that time two open Rebellions; the King (who is sole Judge of the danger of the Kingdom, and how to avoid it) had granted Commissions to certain persons not qualified according to the Sta∣tute 25 Car. 2. The Commons offer to bring in a Bill for the Indempnifying those persons: The King knew his own Authority, and ended the Dispute. And if any man doubts the Legality of the King's dispensing with that Statute, a subsequent Judg∣ment Trin. 2. Jac. 2. in B. R. (in the Case of Sir Edward Hayles) has de∣termin'd the Point; And that the Power of dispensing with Penal Laws, upon Necessity, or urgent Occasi∣ons, of which the King is sole Judge, is an insepa∣rable Prerogative in the King, not given Him in Trust, or deriv'd from the People, but the ancient
Right of the Crown, innate in the King, and unal∣terable by them. And that this has been the ancient Judgment of the Judges from time to time, I shall meet with the occasion of shewing it in the next Pa∣ragraph. And is a matter of so great Moment and Consequence to the whole Nation, both in Church and State. And so indubitably is it, that nothing can be more: For the best of Laws being but good Intentions, if a Prince should be ty'd up to such unalterable Decrees, as in no case whatever he might vary from them, it might so happen, that what at one time was intended for the Good of Church and State, may at another prove the Destruction of both, if not as timely pre∣vented. The present Case is a pregnant Instance of it: One would have thought, that the frequent En∣deavors of the four last Reigns, for the reducing this Kingdom to an exact Conformity in Religion, might have answerd the Design; but (if His Majesty in his Declaration had not told us His thoughts of it) our own Experience might have taught us, the Ef∣fects thereof have in a manner brought the Kingdom to nothing: And what should the King have done in this Case; sate still, and expected a Miracle, or in∣terpos'd his Royal Authority for the saving it? The Question answers it self: And if the Power of Dis∣pensing with Penal Laws, were not inseparably and unalterably in Him; how could he have done it? What elder Parliaments have declar'd in it, I have already shewn; and that the Judges successively have gone with it, is, or may be, obvious to every man.
Such was the Resolution of all the Justices in the Exchequer-Chamber, 2 R. 3. 12. And that the King might grant License, against a Penal Statute. And what is that, but a dispensing with it? In like man∣ner, by all the Justices in the same place, 2 H. 7. 6. That the King may grant a Non obstante to a Penal Statute, tho' the Statute say, such Non obstante shall be meerly void; and such was the Case there.—The 13 H. 7. 8. to the same purpose.—Allow'd for good Law. Plowd. Com. 502.—Confirm'd by Sir Edward Coke, 7 Coke 36.—and 12 Coke 18, 19. And lastly, by a Judgment in His now Majesty's Reign, of which before. And if so necessary a part of the Government, so solemnly determin'd by Parliaments and Judges, is fit to be slighted, or not obey'd, which amounts to the same, I leave it to every man. That Your Petitioners cannot in Prudence, Honor, and Conscience, so far make themselves Parties to it, as the distribution of it all over the Nation, and reading it even in God's House, and in the time of His Divine Ser∣vice, must amount to in common and reasonable Constru∣ction. And on the other hand I conceive, that both in Prudence, Honor, and Conscience, they were highly oblig'd to it: For what is Prudence, but the active Fa∣culty of the Mind, directing Actions morally good to their immediate Ends? That this Declaration is mo∣rally good appears by the purport of it; and that is, His Majesty's desire of Establishing His Government on such a Foundation, as may make His Subjects happy, and unite them to Him by Inclination as well as Duty. And what greater Prudence could there have been, than by their Lordships distributing that Declaration
as enjoyn'd to them, and by their Pastoral Authority requiring it to be read in all Churches, &c. to have directed it to its immediate Ends, which were the Establishing the Government, and making the Sub∣jects happy? Or, if Wisdom must come in for a share, the Offices of That are Election and Ordination; the choice of right means for, and ordering them aright to their End. The right means of quieting the Na∣tion was before them; and I think it no question, whether their Lordships not distributing it, has or∣der'd it aright to the end. The King had enjoyn'd it to be publish'd, and Wisdom in this Case (like Scrip∣ture) is not of private Interpretation, but lies in Him that has the Power of commanding, not in him whom Conscience binds to obey. In a word, if Obedience in Subjects is the Prince's Strength, and their own Security, what Prudence or Wisdom could it be, by weakning the Power of Commanding, to lessen their own Security? Then for Honor and Conscience, tho' in this place, they seem to mean the same thing, and may be both resolv'd into Nil conscire sibi,—yet I'll take them severally. And how stands it with the Honor of the Church of England, both in Principles, and constant Practises, unquestionably Loyal, and to her great Honor, more than once so acknowledg'd by His Majesty, to start aside in this Day of her trial? Both the last Armagh's, Usher, and Bramhal; Bishop Sanderson, Bishop Mor∣ley, &c. have all along by their Doctrin, and Practi∣ces, beat down that other, of Resisting Princes, in that the Church of England held no such Custom: nor have the most eminent of her Clergy, Dr. Sherlock, Dr. Scott, and others, until this last uncomplying,
Compliance, taken any other Measures. And ought not their Practise now, to have made good their Prin∣ciples? Or that Advice of the present Bishop of Ely to the Church of England, to have been consider'd, and follow'd? Let her be thankful (saith he) to God, His Corona∣tion Sermon, pag. 27. for the Blessings she hath, and unto the King, under whom they will be continu'd to her; And take heed of overturn∣ing, or undermining the Fabrick, because she cannot have the Room that she would choose in it. And what greater Assay to it can there be, than Disobedience? inas∣much as he that thinks his Prince ought not to be o∣bey'd, will from one thing to another, come at last to think him not fit to be King. Nor must the Anni∣versary of the now Bishop of Chester, be past in si∣lence. Tho' the King (saith he) should not please, or humor us; tho' he rend off the Mantle from our Bodies, His Sermon on that occa∣sion, p. 13, 14. (as Saul did from Samuel) nay tho' he should Sentence us to death (of which, blessed be God and the King, there is no danger) yet if we are living Members of the Church of England, we must neither open our Mouths, or lift our Hands against him, but honor him before the Elders, and People of Israel. And having instanc'd in the Ex∣amples of The Prophets, our Saviour, his Disciples, and Christian Bishops under Heathen Persecutors, and de∣manded, whether ever the Sanhedrim question'd their Kings? Nor must we (saith he) ask our Prince, why he Governs us otherwise, than we please to be Govern'd our selves: We must neither call him to account for his Re∣ligion, nor question his Policy, in Civil Matters; for he is made our King by God's Law, of which the Law of the Land is only Declarative. In a word, this and the like has been the Doctrin of the Church of England, and when on that ground, his Majesty has more than
once acknowledg'd her Loyalty, who in Honor more oblig'd to make it good, than those that serve at her Altar? unless (perhaps) they coin a Distinction to Salve it, And that the Church may be of one Opini∣on, and the Church-men of another. And then in Conscience, their Obligation was high∣er; for besides what I said before, that the People are apter to follow Example than Precept, every Man (and even their Lordships with the rest) is Party, and privy, to an Act of Parliament, and bound in Conscience, to the observance of it: Nor is there ei∣ther Bishop, or Clergy-man in the Church of En∣gland, who has not subscrib'd to the lawfulness of this Declaration's being read in the Church, during the time of Divine Service. As thus: Every Clergy∣man at the time of his Institution, subscribes (in a a Book kept for that purpose) That the King's Ma∣jesty Ecclesiastical Canons 16. Art. 36. under God, is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm: And that the Book of Common-Prayer containeth nothing in it, contrary to the Word of God. Now, the Book of Common-Prayer, as it is now used in and thro' the Church of England, is En∣acted by Authority of Parliament, to be read in such Order and Form, as is mentioned in the said Book: And the Rubrick, i. e. the Order and Form, how those Prayers shall be read, is to all intents and purposes, as much Enacted as the Book its self; And in that Ru∣brick, next after the Nicene Creed (in the Communion Service) follow these words: Then shall the Curate de∣clare nto the People what Holy-days, or Fasting-days are in the Week following to be observed, &c. And nothing shall be proclaimed or published in the Church, during the time of Divine Service, but by the Minister; Nor by him
anything, but what is prescribed by the Rules of this Book, Or enjoyned by the King, or by the Ordinary of the Place. Now when all Clergy-men have subscribed, That the Book of Common-Prayer, containeth no∣thing in it, contrary to the Word of God; and that the King has enjoyned, That his Declaration be read in all Churches, during the time of Divine Service; these Subscriptions of theirs (besides the Authority of King and Parliament) conclude themselves, from offering any thing against the Lawfulness of reading it, as it had been enjoyn'd to them, and the Rubrick, requir'd of them. And being so, what Excuse can there be, why they did not read it? Or suppose that Clause, Or enjoyned by the King, had not been in the Rubrick, (as it was first inserted in this Act of Uniformity, and every Man that was of the Convocation of 1661, knows by whom:) were none of the King's Declarations ever read in Churches (and that, during the time of Di∣vine Service) before that time? I think there were, and (amongst many others) that of the Declaration for Sports, for one. Or that the Ordinary of the Place had enjoyn'd the contrary, ought not the King, the Supreme Ordinary, and as their Subscriptions far∣ther acknowledge, The Supreme Governor of this Realm under God, to have been first obey'd? I think he ought; for the Authority of the Greater, Super∣sedes the Lesser; nor is there any Power in his Domi∣nions, but what is deriv'd from him. And what∣ever Station the King has given them in the Church, it is not to be presum'd, he thereby lock'd out him∣self. Nor must a Remark of the said Bishop of Chester, in his Sermon before mention'd, be forgotten
here: The Jews (saith he) say, That the Keys of the Pag. 15. Temple were not hung at the High Priest's Girdle, but laid every night under Solomon's Pillow, as belonging to his Charge. The Moral of it holds true; for when a Prince shall have little Authority in the Church, it is not to be expected he should have much better in the State. And Lastly, for their Lordships so far making them∣selves Parties to it, as the Distribution and Reading of it, &c. must amount to, in common and reasonable Con∣struction. A Clergy-man's meerly Reading the Com∣mon Prayer in his Church, is no giving his Assent to it, unless after his so Reading it, he shall publickly, and openly, before the Congregation there assembled, declare his unfeigned Assent, and Consent, to all and every thing contained, and prescribed in and by the said Book, Entituled, The Book of Common-Prayer, &c. Vid. Act of Uniformity before every Common-Prayer-Book. Par. 3, 4. which necessarily implies, that neither the Distri∣buting, nor Reading it, &c. can in common and rea∣sonable Construction amount, to the making the Publisher, or Reader of it, a Party to it. The Apostle says, Submit your selves to every Or∣dinance of Man for the Lord's sake. And upon this, the Bishop of Hereford grounds his Judgment, for the Reading this Declaration. The King (saith he) His late Di∣scourse on this occasion. expresly commanding it to be read in all Churches, without requiring him that reads it, to declare either his Consent, Assent, Allowing, or Liking it; I would gladly know how this is contrary to the Word of God? Shew it me. Or, if, as it is said, this Dispensing Power be contrary to the Laws of the Land, as is declared in the Parliament 1662, and 1672, is it contrary to the Law of God? Shew it me. (pag. 5, 6.) Or that to read any thing in the House
of God, is declaring my Consent to it? (pag. 8.) No cer∣tainly; (pag. 9.) for in the reading this Declaration there is no Doctrin taught, only matter of Fact declared, and perchance, to try my Obedience. (pag. 10.) And done out of pure Obedience to my King, upon God's Command, and to so good an End, as the preserving Truth and Peace among us. Which if we lose on this Occasion, they will have much to answer for who are the Authors of it. (pag. 13.) Besides whom, there are several other Bishops of the Church of England, who have o∣bey'd his Majesty's Commands in it, albeit they may not have so publickly declar'd it. And having said so much to the Matter of the Paper, I think I may well pass the Prayer of it, That his Majesty will be Gra∣ciously pleas'd not to insist upon the Distribution, and Reading that Declaration. And therefore upon the whole, If this Declaration had not been thought fit to have been distributed, as enjoyn'd, less ought the said Paper to have been di∣spersed privately, and by such previous disposition, stoll'n the Form of the Design into the Matter it was to work on: And considering the Evils we had pass'd, and that the Kingdom wanted a Lenitive, not a Cor∣rosive, least of all ought The People on the wall to have been har'd with new Jealousies: The People (I say) who need more a Ballance than a Fly, somewhat to moderate, not multiply their Motion. In short, Trust is the Sinew of Society, which is the right Object of true Policy; and Distrust, a dis∣banding of it. The King, as he has more than once acknowledg'd the Church of England's Loyalty, has as often declar'd, that He will Protect, and Maintain, His Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, and all other His Sub∣jects
of the Church of England, in the free Exercise of their Religion, as by Law Established: And in the quiet, and full Enjoyment of all their Possessions, with∣out any Molestation or Disturbance whatsoever. The King has said it, and shall he not perform it? He has pledg'd his Royal Word, and shall we doubt the Truth of it? It is not with God, that he should lye; nor with his Vicegerent, that he should be chang'd. And therefore, let us (as his Majesty by this his Declaration Conjures us) lay aside all private Ani∣mosities, and groundless Jealousies: Let us Fear God, and Honor the King, and not discover the falsness of our own Hearts, by distrusting our Prince's. In a word, Let every Man in his Station, contri∣bute (his Mite) to the Peace, and Greatness of his Country: Let him shew his Love to God, in his O∣bedience to his Prince: And let no Man, by setting up Conscience against Duty, run the hazard of dash∣ing the First Table against the Second. FINIS.
