D2007 R18874 12396403 61192
THE RESTITUTION OF PROPHECY; THAT Buried Talent to be revived. By the Lady Eleanor. John 16. He shall glorifie me; for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew unto you. Printed in the Year, 1651.
To the Reader: THis Babe, object to their scorn, for speaking the truth, informing of things future, notwithstanding thus difficult to be fathered or licensed. That incission to the quick, hath under gone; with∣out their Benediction, in these plain Swathe-bands, though commended unto thy hands. No spurious off-spring of Da∣vids, but the Son of peace. This Oblivions Act, Messenger thereof. Be of good cheer, O my people, (Isai. 40.) O ye Prophets, saith your God, Tell
her, That her Travel is at an end; Her Offence is pardoned, our Jubiles deliverance: Sirs, to be plain, as in the first place, His Commission. He first of the new Prophet; so his and hers both: She the last of the old. Confesseth likewise, or beareth record of his presence, Born in the flesh; of whose Kingdom no end. Although not in a Stable brought forth, yet a place like restless; a hard choice between extreams or streits of that kinde to distinguish. No Inferior Prison, or of obscure Deno∣mination; whereof that street car∣rieth the name: not the least, honor∣ed with no less then the Temple for one. VVhere belonging to passages of Inns; The one frequented all Hours,
and Drinking, not more free then the others darksom grates close; famished there no few. But requisit Bridges, and the like, the true Nar∣row way (by suffering) that leads to life: From him a proper passage or mention. Straits of the Virgins-Womb had passed; besides Seafaring-persons his followers in that way not unexperienced, afore arrive the wel∣come Haven. And so far Reader, for these ex∣cluded their Approbation, where parallel'd the Broad-way, Ebrieties leading to destruction: Those Gates put into the reckoning, and such holds chained up, &c. and for this nonplus also; unwilling to transgress the bounds of a Preface, Shewing as by those Vigilent Shepherds (pub∣lished)
a Saviour: Their peace then required likewise a pass for these from ours, as appears, witnessed thus, I give thee charge in the sight of God, which quickneth all things, &c. That thou keep the Commandment until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; which appearing in his time, he shall shew, That he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, (1 Tim. 6.) So in an∣other place, For the testimony of Jesus, is the Spirit of Prophecy, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Holy Spirits presence namely: But ar∣rogancy begetting incureable blind∣ness, these savored but as non-scence, not material. Galio cared for none of these matters, &c. December 25. The Fleet. Postscript. But blessed is he not offended, &c.
MATT: 25. The Book of the Restitution of Pro∣phesie: the great Account, &c. THe secrets of the Gospel under Allegories covered and Parables, precious Leaven, generality or scope whereof reflects, although on the day of Judgements severe account, unknown day and hours reserve: Nevertheless, days preceding their proper Lesson, a warning piece for them. Which Unum Necessarium inesti∣mable Pearl, the Kingdom of Heavens purchase, that Manna, the unknown Bdellium likened to: who sold all to compass it, requires Artificials none ei∣ther, presumes cannot be frustrate, or by all troden under foot: of which an essay as ensues tendred, as to watch all
or wait: so to beware if wise, how they quench the Spirit, where not unlike his dream of good consisted and bad, both because the thing Established repealable not, then their Decree, much less to be changed, &c. Dan. That consists not in meat and drink those Externals, unto a wedding likened so many Handmaids, his Kingdoms E∣pitomy at hand, or forthwith to appear Virgins, their's the priority: five per∣fection of Numbers: Her quickning time, till when concealed, &c. (Luke) a prime period, alluding to the Sences. Five were wise, other five were foolish; no lame similitude, ten in num∣ber, its full time (as it were) or reckon∣ing had gone out: To whom how befel those that were out of the way, saying, Our Lamps are out or quenched,
dreamt not an answer that way insuffi∣cient a point of what consequence to say, They had not thought or supposed, &c. cast in the teeth with Spiritual Chand∣leries an Item thereof. In what obscurity all without the Spi∣rit manifesting without contradiction as appears: The Bridegroom while tar∣ried all slumbred and slept, bidden be watchful: Therefore watch, for ye know neither the day nor hour, &c. as that for another, Could ye not one hour refrain: our caveat bids sleep on, who allow the Spirit not transmit∣ted beyond the Primative bounds, what real demonstration soever, as if any thing impossible with him: and thus the blinde conducting the blinde, emblems what posture Synods and Church-men found in: How provided of the wedding
garment: when that summons, Come now for all things are ready: The Spirit and Bride, saying, Come, gates of Paradice wide open, no more curse, &c. the Tree of Life, attain'd its Maturity, living waters grates Au∣rum Potabile as free, no longer to be fasting then. And so much for their farewel rest∣less good night, Lord, Lord, &c. knows their voices as much as they dis∣cern (read by them) the Prophets theirs, &c. unworthy of the oderiffrous Mari∣age-gloves, or a taste of those transcen∣dant Confections, even departed from the faith: Depart ye follish Galati∣ans, who hath bewitched you: where∣with verily, The Kingdom of Heaven expresly unto what Nation or King∣dom to be revealed obvious as those So∣lemnities:
under the notion of a Wed∣ding, Revels not returnable often: Whenas some supernatural anointings or Conception, as by that Mid-nights Alarm shaddowed forth, in due time ad∣ministred: After the way of old illustra∣ted, when the Word of the Lord came unto them, Recorded in such a Year of their Reign, and in what Moneth; point∣ed to a Jubile's moiety, Five times five. The years prime Anniversary Feast, blessed throughout all Generations: her VVedding-day, faithful Hand∣maid the Virgin Mary, her Five and twentieth of the Moneth, as bears date 1625. Year of Grace: His very Proclaimed Reign, Corona∣tion accompanied with unhappy Nuptials: He aged 25. she Fifteen, &c. graceless voice, Twenty four
from the Conquests Bastared Gene∣ration (compleat Anno 24.) matched witha Yoak-fellow, and could not come: five Yoke of Oxen of his Oxford Commons an Item, must at∣tend on her Ladiship, roaring Sab∣baths Mid-nights works: No Stran∣ger subject to be unmaskt, and Far∣mer Bishopricks weekly Alarms. VVhile she as free with her impo∣stures to communicate our Heavenly Saviors homage to Idol blocks doted on painted Popets, for whose name, wo to the House suffices the Dogs in the same place licking his Blood: Moreoveras in this Maps Circumfe∣rence contained, of unappy memory, Her five years Fiery Bloody days, of the name such knows none charm∣ing Letanies (good Lord, good Lord)
they know not what, ave gratia, &c. Pater Noster and Creed alike intel∣ligible, to her sorrow Matched in her after days. By her Virgin Sister succeeded, in the Five and fortieth of whose un∣matchable Reign was Interred at the Virgins Annunciation, &c. those plen∣tious times farewel: The Bridegroom Sun and his Virgin Spouse, parting the hours ushering the Obsequies. So proceeding with the subsequent parable, whose Divine Nature as de∣fcended to a habit of Flesh: So by this way of Domestique Affairs, un∣to the vulgar capacity condescends the Kingdom of Heavens Title to coroberate, presidents produces of the present the fire Talents (to wit) in what Reign.
VVhere those three of no obscure quality: Their Lord as though re∣turned from a far Country, had ac∣quired some great Prize or Victory, otherwise some Merchants return. Called in the first place a prime Peer of the Land, so highly pre∣ferred Audeley E: of Castlehaven, even to hold up his Hand at the Bar, with two of his Servants Arraigned and Eexcuted all three on this wise. He charged with the Rape, a Page protested at the last cast, a Virgin came into his Lords Service, and went away a Virgin thence. The o∣ther an Irish Papist, a Vagrant: The Footman said, had he thought Lords of the Councel bade him speak for the King, have served him so, would otherwise been advised for his Par∣don
called on St. Dennis, whose Oath taken contrary to Law and Iu∣stice, refusing an Oath of Allegiance: As Hers not at all, upon whose Ac∣cusation before the Privy Counsel; taken away her Husbands life, that in Court appeared neither that day. Anne Strange Heretrix, of that extirpated House, Isle of Man: In which preferred Bill, this long Proces wherein shuned, Anatomized that mankinde Grandams mery, and hers like Daughter, &c. As shews in the day of his wrath, wounding even Kings, &c. Sit thou on my right, &c. thy Sentence (as much to say) until upon them be ac∣complished (Revel. 13.) Even the brutish Beast wounded in the head, his mortal wound: And Hers (Rev. 17.)
where one of the seven Angels which had the seven vials (namely the last of them) saying, Come, I will shew thee the Judgement of the great Whore or great bellied Harlot sitting on many wa∣ters: The Cities Bridge on Arches, this Map as displayed person, and place, Circumstances none more ne∣cessary: And some Haven Town from whence derives her Title of Honor. So from the Title great in∣fers a Grand-mother. Then that im∣perious Hell-hound, more Mother Jezebels then one. And with the Holy Spirit moving on the waters: Thus proceeding dispelling Mists and Darkness, say∣ing, Wherefore dost thou wonder, or marvel'st thou (as it were) at this Sea-Monster, not more strange
then true, The Mother, &c. I will shew thee the Mystery of the Wo∣man. And the Beast that beareth or carrieth her, &c. Expresly Herals their Mystery which demonstrates: And present Century the seventeenth. As behold whose Arms? And they shall eat her Flesh and burn her with Fire, besides hers some four-footed rather. Skull, palms and feet, no Dog would touch, in reference to Feasts. VVhat Bruit or Flesh of Beast in most re∣quest, Eaten, &c. Points to so many Stags Heads born in a Bend, or their Skulls, &c. Touching whose Arms suffices so much refer'd to Sign Posts: the Red Deer that Scarlet Beast also; and Babe in its scrimson bearing Clothe, a Relique to these days; in her custo∣dy: VVho cried out as much as she
(Gen.) him solicited daily: By whom his garment laid up, &c. And so what dost thou here Eli∣jahs enlightning days, founded in whose, Our Capital City LONDON, of old called TROY, A compound of Babylon the Great: As written Son in her Forehead or Frontis∣piece. VVhere from His Greatness or Lord Mayorship, not onely derived Title of Great Cuckold; but Great Britain its addition; since exchanged Anglia for Brute, no less then undone, most proper from him (one change pursuing another) embrewed in that way of his Hounds and restless Hunting to prefer the Beasts name, accords but with his Minions that of Buckin∣gham. So running with him Ahimaz,
The way of the Plain or present Wa∣veing Gothes, Sarazens, and Knights of Rhodes out of date, and Romes sci∣tuation remote: As they to their Fa∣ther. See whether this thy sons coat, &c. whose City on a River no slen∣der one, with its Appurtenances (from which Allegory of carrying) Ships called Bears and Tygers, Sea-Horses, fraught with Tyerian in Grain, Pearls, Precious Stones, Gold, and Wines in that abundance, &c. VVith Her Cup of poyson arayed Cleopatra like, sitting on Seven Head∣ed Nilus: The Beast with so many Heads and Horns. The Woman and Beast with so many Heads and Horns, &c. Church, Court, and Cities descrip∣tion, with Kings, their obeisance to
her; beside in what Century: Also his Seventeen years Reign, until (Anno 41) Lead away not unknown, by what means: our Domitians days: in whose, this City made an open example: As behold whose Bridge fired, shunning the fire to cast them∣selves into the water, forced; Eaten by fish, their flesh. Since when others suffering, no few. The Towers Blow for an other, with Lightnings and Thunder claps, like Dooms-day, &c. the Bridge at the same time Burnt: when she no ordinary Whore, char∣ged with a Husband, Blood: worthy of no other Cup, Naked and Burnt. Credible Witness of the Churches A∣postacy, Figures in her later Days what a faithful Spouse; sealed with Sabba∣tical Heads of the Scarlet coloured
Beast (Cruelties Character) with Ox∣ford and Cambridge, no mean Strum∣pets, whose Denomination interrest∣ed in the Ten Horns: Their Tithe an Assembly sitting at Westminster; also carried by VVater in their Gowns, belongs thereto. Furthermore, as this Cities Feasti∣vals and Funerals all set upon this reckoning, such flocking then to be∣hold her Pomp, stiled, The great Whore with her Cup of Drugs: Carri∣ed in what State, By Cerberus Headed Hounds, her black Steeds. She sit∣ing on the Waters, Her Habitation or Title: By Kings at Arms and others, To give attention to Preaching Pa∣rasites: whereas compared to the Block-headed Beast going to the slaughter. Man in Honor, as easie
for a Camel to go through an Needles eye, as for such to enter, &c. VVhen made notwithstanding the Beasts I∣mage: Laid before them: Adored Obsequies for costly Blacks bought at such a price. VVelcome Image of the Beast, Saint, or Devil, Whore, &c. Honored a like, Sackcloth when more seasonable then Muld Sack of late. Of which Sexes more remarkables then one deceased. So withal (part of the Bag and Baggage) of Saints-days abused as much by the rotten Whore: Eaten, &c. That Mistress of mischief, and her Servant the roaring Beast wel-matcht: Vermillian Livery in Grain, then Simon and Judes Com∣memoration: The Floods doings ra∣ther and Sodoms; crowed on both
sides, as though never seen afore or heard their Horn-pipes attended; whose going by water retained to these very days Trojean Games: a world of Coaches, Belconies filling and VVindows, Spectators and to be seen; because Jacobs Flock spotted, like marks by the foul spirit set on them: the tokens imitated, Churches by Pastors thus prepared; a like for Theators and his Temple. Varnished with poysonous spells, or paint (she trodden underfoot) her accursed Pictures; or some carted like dasht, &c. fit Guests, &c. On the other side restless-swearing Cooks about Firs, and other like Catch-poles; appurte∣nances of the Scarlet Beast, for this narrow Table too voluminous: Also Christmas-boles, All-nights Game∣boles;
Dancing and Dicing, scored on the Horns, with Goldsmiths-hall and Skinners, from the Cup of beaten Gold; a health to them too. Through whose streets formerly carried in state by Scarlet Liveries, from all parts flowing to have sight of her person or presence: Totally stript of Purple array, Margaret Pen∣dants, Bracelets and Chains: some Kings Daughter as though, or one of the Blood: became as deformed, dis∣picable and desolate: Hated as former∣ly, followed with their Leopard skins, the naked House of Lords, concerned not lest; beside plundered Pay: Houses, Kings and Lords, those. As moreover, she none of the lest, that mother of Witchcrafts, branded for a Baud, whose Babel-Pyramid
fired. Fictions of fresh edi∣tion, Ʋniversity Excrements daily, whereby oppressing Shops and Presses with them: overflowing too shame∣ful, whilest Close-Stools set to sale, lined through with Scriptures old and new: VVhen Turks, lest Gods name therein, refrain to set their foot on a leaf of Paper, whose Alcoran Ma∣homets the false Prophets, Cum Pri∣vilegio, &c. Accursed Jerocho's re∣edified Gates, in the mean while Jerusalems VValls, waste, &c. So sends greeting Pathmos Isle, to this Islands City. He when un∣experienced in those Hieroglyphick Demonstrations Saints dayes, signi∣fying beyond Paganism Rites cele∣brated. St. John stricken or transpor∣ted with such admiration and marvel
(O strange) and ugly: VVhat Strum∣pet, Baud, &c. As points to that ficti∣on: of ravished Europia, carried on the Bull into the Sea: true as the others Rape, &c. in Maps and Ta∣pistries ordinary; so to another not long since no fiction on this River. Those Brace of Spaniels, Her Graces swimming match. And Knight Er∣rand, no small Bull: supported by his Hand; laid upon her, &c. Re∣quisit as any in our Cities Map to be displayed. That Esprit Order, con∣jured up again, entered in them as in∣to that Cities Swine: because the good Spirit moved on the waters also A∣pishlike by the evil spirit, and Witches, those, &c. VVith his Venetian, she free of the aforesaid three Stags Heads; the Horns his too, &c. with
her Cup of Viper Wine, that never awakned, whether Drunken or no, &c. The Floods days not equivo∣lent. All which copied out by that Piece, when his butcherly birth-day kept, bound himself, &c. Instructed by her Mother Baud, dancing her lacivious Jigs and Tricks: behead∣ed the Baptist; late by her, and her Ladies not onely Hermophrodite acting mankinde; but sworn by his precious, &c. And wounds by their base Players. Let us eat and drink, to morrow is our last: More true then aware of, notwithstanding a Mote in anothers Eye perceive, so return∣ing to his last account, made even, or confession on Tower-hill, arrived the Haven above. This day be thou with
me, &c. Enter thou into thy Lord and Masters joy. Easter Term, An. Dom. 31. Between those twain Sacrificed, he charged but as an accessary: Had the honor nevertheless, of first en∣trance. Next Term theirs Bradway the innocent Page, and the other, &c. VVho in those times thought full little of (Jud.) Bradshaw. VVhen thirsted after his Vineyard, Mervin Earl of Castlehavens. So many Manor Houses, to few or none inferior: This Kingdoms forerunner; or what should him befal: His E∣nemies likewise those of his own house (to his last) swearing at every word cursing, &c. This man never once charged with Oath, other then truly and verily: Taxt with injustice neither, or owing
unto any: Paid and rewarded all. By means of alteration in his Religion, as much disclaimed; and mismatching himself: scandalized by others misdemeanor. They who worst reproached him, was, That he had the best things in him, of any man, as well as the worst. Stumbled at the Church upon point of Antiquity: By reason whereof stood in Poperies defence, or Romes. That Fathers aspersion under∣gone, Origens, That when he wrote well, none could do better; when he wrote ill, no man so bad. Envied among them, Court Moti∣ons that ever distasted, stiled to be Pharoahs Son, or accounted the Crea∣ture of Fortune; to whose potent ad∣versaries, no slender or mean advant∣age.
Cast by a Jury of Peers: His unnatural Iury of Brethren, as sold him, figure of the Lamb, called the Dreamer: scorned and stript of his Garment. Also between those two, through her lust. Blood of the Grape, as sealed the ones pardon the life therein. So the other the heavy Famins forerunner hanged up: by Birds betokened on the Wing, his flight, &c. In the end tasted Egyptian slavery, themselves Straw-gathers: Types of the scattered Jews not onely; but of a spiritual Famin, proceeding from forgetfulness, &c. Parables, consist∣ing of a twofold-like Construction; as those aforesaid Fellow-servants, in one day said to have their Heads lifted up both, who advanced so. All knees to
bowe, &c. Afterward biding them not be sad; for their preservation sent thither: So much for the word throughout all ages, and the world through. Also touching his leave ta∣ken at Tower-hill, so highly reward∣ed. Well done good and faithful ser∣vant. Follows the second a Lieutenants turn next of Ireland, Strafford no shallow Brain-piece, over-powered by the old Serpents policy. Papist by reason in highest Offices, had his quietus est, Easter Term (Anno 41.) Sealed with no ordinary Arms, the Ax: Neither wanting after his ability of what Faith or Belief, Kingdoms slippery places, as unto her a second Eve; for her forwardness, ye know not what ye ask: VVhilest on the
other side as backward. This piece interlined, as shews, when presented the Lord General herewith, a Manu∣script prayed to be priviledged, by him referred to the Bar: Lodging in Ax-Alley, where about three weeks space waited on. Other use of which (as though) had not made, returned them, not vouchsafest the value of a word. No Babe in long Coats, though bewrayes, barbarous alike, not to bless where they ought, and to contemn or curse: No less then cowardize also in a high degree, what should be impro∣ved to Hide, &c. In the mean time unburied Lord Deputy Iretons, sad welcome rung out, landed, whose Corps. Farther giving to understand, had advertiz'd him what befel immedi∣ately
afore, signed with Whitehals Powder mischance. Bidden to shake of their dust, that have but ears for a shew: How in the same moneth October, &c. about the same hour at Night, &c. wherein delivered to His Excellency by her a Book, Enti∣tuled, Babylons Hand-writing, bear∣ing date Anno 1633. Printed beyond Sea; by the same token with Specticles put on, read by him. That watch word superscribed, Is a Candle to be put un∣der a Bed, &c. (useless and unsafe) He that hath Ear hear this Piece. Contents of the said Book (Dan. 5.) contained in a sheet of Paper, some∣time served on the late K. C. after his return from Scotland, Anno 33. Crowned, &c. concluded with Charls Be, from his name, attended
with his Riotous Lords, Belsha∣zer the last (to wit) Beheaded, &c. to beware his Banquetting Houses sa∣lutation; Great Babylons exchanged Feast, into such confusion, instead of kissing hands, stampt a hand writ∣ing, subscribed, Great Britains La∣mentation Mourning and Wo. VVhereupon like his killing and slaying Decree, Dan. 2. &c. She to appear and answer forthwith, as by that Babylonian reference annext, Signed Sydney, Mountagne, for pre∣suming to prefer and imprint, That detestable, &c. An. Dom. 1633. October, Whitehals no petty Trespass. Of which Babylonish Garment hidden as it were in his Tent to this day. So much by the way for that, and
of his Kingdoms no delay admitting, as by the foresaid Advertisement to the speechless Dr. Ba. Balams mad∣ness reproved, when served or suffi∣ced from those Ears. Did I ever serve thee so before: put to silence by the dumb Ass: all as swift that way; but Midas Ears, their long Hair hides not, or Perwigs either. And thus in reference to the pre∣mises, from a Wedding, its late hour. That cry also after a long time his return, of a cried Court-day. Officers they called to appear, called Thou flothful servant Dr. Laud, as appears, He the last Arch. B. of Canter∣bury. The one Talent even bu∣ried by his hand, Achans graceless Scholar. In the Earth: he buried in the
Valley of Achor: a heap of Stones Dunghil-like; his Monument and theirs consenting thereto: Had not alone troubled Joshua, expostulating in rent clothes: VVherefore, &c. Root of all Evil, filthy lucre con∣fesses did covet: Thus and thus, &c. In the Valley of Trouble, took up his Lodging. Sign of the Spade, fitter for it. And thus after a verbatim way, for our hiding days in season: Ser∣vants such of Mammon or Money. Weeping and howling their Portion: Of the Spiritual Calling, or Clergy voice, as follows: Called Thou sloath∣ful, &c. One in ten theirs, reaped where sowed not; gathered where had not strawed. A severe or hard man, counted every Sheaf, &c. Tythe
gatherers (to wit) far and near, with usury ten in the hundred; not want∣ing their Trade; known in others Name. In relation to whose Name these, even the Beast out of the Loathsome pit ascended (Rev. 17.) And they shall wonder whose names not in the Book of life, &c. (or Church-book) namely, That of Canterbury derived from some Grace-makers occupation, be∣low the Dung-hils office. As at first every Creature after its properly. As hence appears how had occu∣pied, &c. That digged and interred, shrowded it in the ominous Napkin to their Napery pointing, or ghostly array withal. And one thus unfolding another, as that farewel of his. Bidden, the dead
to bury the dead. Either because rich and concealed it, or might allude to his name: In like case as Canterbury or Salisbury. The Title of Grace Buried, nei∣ther in silence or forgetfulness. That Paradox for another, as implies. His own bare measure meted or returned him; he without excuse, knew his Lords severness neverthe∣less: Lo there, That is thine, &c. As from him that hath not, saying, Even that he hath shall be taken away. Of Parentage obscure, as much to say, His Graceship digraded shall be (Jan. 10.) a day and hour not aware of, to Preach his own Funeral Sermon, not mentioned in his Diary. That Fridays Christmas Cup, gnashing of Teeth: VVho hated the light, de∣pended
upon the former days provis∣sion, Star-Chamber Decrees and Ar∣ticles, was cast into the prison of utter-darkness; besides Extortion added to Ʋsury; Covetousness very Idolatry, also with Gluttony charged: Emblem'd the Napkin, their ex∣cess and concealed Bags; so of which one Talent assigned; in short thus, saying, Lord he hath ten: Dis∣puted as though some other better deserved it; answered, He that hath, more shall be given him, or shall have abundance, &c. Even Anno Dom. 1631. Easter, (to wit) had the super∣abundant honor to be the heavenly Lamb; ancient of days Figure, fore∣shewing by a Harlot Spowse, Remon∣strates not onely Romish Massacres, that Smoaking Clarret; but by Pro∣testants,
how? to the brim filled, &c. VVherewith a word of the said Prisoners present release, by the figure Ironia, recommended, &c. delivered by His Majesties Chaplains, His gracious Message and royal Fa∣vor toward him. He whereas was to have suffered as a common person should die, now like a Peer of the Land, beheaded, &c. appointed to sift him, no others admitted, having been under Inqui∣sition so long; upon their informati∣on, had thrice taken the Sacrament upon it, was innocent of those crimes for which adjudged to lose his life: whereupon thanks not omitted, re∣plied, Would esteem it a coller of pre∣cious Stones should draw him up to
him, embraced the Tree, to his Feet. And by these Jews, our High Priests, in what Execrable maner Crucified on their Altars, prepared for that purpose; roaring with one consent, Sacrifice and Eat, both one, or indifferent; also Altar and Table. Like as in Golgotha, That fatal Fridays dismal day, (end of the week) bowed then the knee. Chams accursed seed, by whom a Giant-cru∣cifix Goliah like, not the value of a Napkin to cover, &c. Horrible to behold, eclipsed light, covered the Ten Commandments, under colour of an Altar Hanging, wanting no nail∣ing either: Of course Woollen, Pur∣ple, &c. fastned down, lest those precious Tables an eye sore.
VVhilest mounted over the Lords Table, to kneel before it, with the Centurion: No Dwarf mounted on his Courser or Beast, to be worship∣ped to, superscribed a true Copy, brought over by Father, &c. in his Holiness Chappel done thereby; Lietchfield Minster for one, were forced afterward for fear of the Par∣liament Forces, those Clerk-Vicars, to bury it in the Dunghil, not one would harbor it. As this added, the very hidden Talent, his Lords buried Goods, accords with the Tables of the Law, from no causeless jea∣lousie, as Extant in our Bibles or∣dered, except the Book of Apoca∣lyps, and other like, least edifying, may be best spared; allow others read every Sabbath, &c.
Besides how many silenced impri∣soned, other some Crucified on Pilla∣ries, whilest he and his Panders, eat∣ing and drinking with the drunken. Item, Oxfords Roast, three hundred Dowes or Deer at a Chancellorships dinner, with Spiritual Courts abomi∣nable Bribery taking on both Hands from those stripped of their liveli∣hood, Widows, but Tenants for life; no Commiseration for such, especial∣ly, present pay, or else turned out. Unto which annext his vow of Chastity, stiled, Pater in Christi, &c. Verily, false Christs shall deceive many, whose names not written from the foundation, &c. (Rev.) Exchange commodities; those Virgins Canonized in his Tables admire, Laud his name, &c. the apprehended old
Serpent, alias Satan, whose false Keys, as though his succession. Iron Gates opened of their own accord, were in their custody (Apoc. 20.) The Key whereas of the sealed Abbyss, whose proper Seal. And thus proceeding, a compleat Jury, their Verdict with one consent, Prophets and Apostles; Touching our Nations story. English, Irish, Scotish and French, every one as heretofore heard in their proper Lan∣guage, fulfilling nothing so secret and covered, that shall not be revealed and made manifest. Including withal Times reign or reckoning, Five thousand five hun∣dred years compleat since the Creation. Secondly, Two thousand years before the Law, and Two thousand under the
Law. Lastly, Compleat One thou∣sand under the Gospel, from those in∣trusted Servants account, which would have amounted (had not he faln short) to One thousand years more, or had it not happened into slothful hands. The Three Ages o∣therwise equally Two thousand years unto each allotted. VVhereof thus (Apoc. 17.) con∣cerning place, time and persons conco∣mitants: Five are faln; one is, the other is not yet come: And when he cometh, shall continue a short space: Namely, the sifteenth century past and gone; the sixteenth bears the name, the other not compleat to be, but shortned. Here is the minde that hath Wisdom (viz.) to number the time, Psal. reflects on King James the Sixth.
Others as weak as he wise, From a Parliament called by himself, to absent his person, here signified, Of one minde, called by write; others by most voices, Chosen ones. And as rewarded for the most part after∣ward, who hate the Whore and make her desolate: A Widow, as much to say, Ʋtterly stript of all, by the Ten Horns, fulfilling such a time, a∣mounting to ten years space. As moreover, For God shall put into their hearts, to fulfil his will, &c. repented as it were; alluding to which words, Have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts, &c. or Write thy Laws in our hearts we beseech thee; where acts against Idolatry and Adultery, made death that act, put into the list of the aforesaid ten Horns, so many years fulfilling.
And so proceeding with his rela∣tion hereof, who wrote to her stiled so highly, The Elder, To the Lady Ele: &c. in our British Language, as to the full exprest, Apoc. where accompanied with insatiable Tyrant Times Mystery (Eating all things) his displayed Arms: also the Stuarts Arms or Coat; The Bulls-head bla∣zoned, that sign in Taurus, giving to understand farther of Europes Apo∣state Churches, returned to wallow in the mire, all from her sitting on the waters of Babylon, with inlarged skirts, those of hers as afore shewed; computed by the floods execrable Age, Hearts as Buff: Signed and sealed with Babylons Great Seal, The Beasts heart: That fulfilled se∣ven times, not to be Cancelled either.
How long afore his reason to him re∣turned a Jubiles seven times seven, where included. Lastly, VVhat affinity between them, fixt place as signified from her sitting posture, &c. So restless time by the weary Beast. Names written on both their foreheads, That City Mistress as upon Hers, Mystery Ba∣bylon or London: Also Mars, Mer∣cury, Venus, &c. Names of Blasphe∣my on his, all her most humble Ser∣vants. The Scarlet Beast, Anno E∣tatis, &c. when her downfal withal. By persons represented of no ob∣scure decent: Namely, House of Derby, matcht with the House of Oxford, armed on both sides with the Horns: no secret, either he bear∣ing the Stags heads metamorphized
into a Bear: Father of him who suffered. On all four acting in their likeness; and other of that kinde on Stages in Pastorals, tumbling to the admiration, &c. A blessing by the mothers side: So wherefore wonderest thou at signs, &c. Rev. 17. And sotish Bathe, another like odium of the Beast, forerunners of Great Britains unlucky derivation, not onely from Brute, but of Cities names their sympathizing, called after theirs, or participating. And so far for these literally pre∣figured, The present Age sent to School to the Ox, Ass, and Camel; In their Litter knows its owner, better observes the time, and for times Mystery and Seasons. The weaker Sex preferred more proper
for them, requisit for former days neither: To whose Disciples not a little earnest (answered) A thing not in his dispose, he was but the Word; but his Fathers where he pleased, a Conception; as much to say, By special Grace: VVitnessed to be by them though. And shunning Circumlocution, where like theirs under terms Enig∣niatical, concealed by way of Num∣bers and Figures numberless. VVho∣soever understands any one, serves for the master Key to that hidden Treasure or Quintesence. Of the third or last similitude, as follows, The last days dreadful alarm likened unto that Sessions day, at∣tended with a guard of Angels, by a King sitting on his throne: On the
right hand faithful to him that stood in defence of the cause; on the left that took up Arms against him: which remarkable days of ours com∣pared to a Shepherd, Jacobs separating the sheep from goats. Our Nations prime Commodity, Wool, Sheep, no mean fence against Hunger and Cold; also pointing to such a year and season: viz. The distance between the Suns entrance into Aries, the crowned Ram; probable when as the Worlds Creation. And that of the Tropick Capricorn, the Hoary bearded Goat: Character of Spring and Winters ap∣proach; whereby slaughtered sheep as betokens an execution day, at hand; from the fold to the scaffold, &c. So foreshewed to be the very year, aforehand revealed.
His sinister reign shadowing forth from 1625. March, until his arraignment after Christmas, the late Charls his doleful note, imprisoned, harborless, not worth a House: A Stranger (to wit) of another Nati∣on, where by way of retaliation as he had close imprisoned others, un∣resisted The blessed Lambs voice, and Decembers, &c. Made it his own case, in as much, Had not visited the least of those his Lambs, Hunger, Starved and Cold: For any mercy on their part, Rebels proclaimed to his Kingdom, alluding to the flaming sword; That Doomsday when they expelled thence, whose Valediction depart, &c. The never departing sword and smoake their portion. The Righteous on the other side, or Round∣heads
pointing to Paradice their re∣turn to peace: As those Thunder∣claps then, and Lightnings, August 23. Ao 51. So much for mittigating this Mit∣timus to Hell, exprest by way of Terror, his Judgement day, the Scape Goat, no Purgatory pardon: whose Funeral attended with those three, Hamilton and Holland, &c. made by them; No private Account, Ex∣tends to oppressed Prisoners Christ∣mas Cry, Verily Sterved and Rotting, so over charged those Penfolds; un∣der any colour or pretence buried quick, by accursed Cut-throats daily, and imprisoned Anno 45. VVhose Twenty three years Reign, from Anno 25. until Anno 48. The Scepter when resigned the Hand: Table of
bounty turned to a blow; as by the Fruitless fatal Tree Mythologised, of three years standing afore came under the heavy lash; besides a Lease of three years more ex-pired; Also a warning to Churches, his House, for usurped Keys resignation. Enemy to the Nations cure, the Tree of Life: Scepter and Keys both. The Epilogue or End of which sub∣ject or excommunication, concluded with his voice, The inthroned Lamb in Bethlehems Manger, concerning othersome in this burthensome age; as unto those groaning restless Com∣panions, overcharged by their unmer∣ciful owners. Come unto me also ye heavy laden, and (your intolerable Tax) I will ease you, and insupporta∣ble Bonds, those Yokes, saying, Be∣hold
I come quickly: Whose righteous∣ness like the strong Mountains, &c. Judgements like the great deep, to be manifested, &c. Thus much for their Analogy or likeness, unexpectedly also come upon us unto the last great days ac∣count likened. And for this Anti∣christian Beasts sevenfold names of blasphemy, namely Saturn and Ju∣piter, &c. Days of the week christ∣ned in theirs, and Moneths in their commemoration Ethnicks; after Julius C and August, containing VIC∣LVVVI. Those Members no inferi∣or ones of the Roman breed, Hours of the Moneth 666, whose number also pointing to the days of Noah 1656. By so many Moneths amount∣ing unto 55 years and a half. Then
Treasure lyable to Plunder, of more consequence to count those at hand, including his reign of 55 years and odde Moneths succeeded him, wounded not least by his begotten Brutus. So then how passes for current, or accords together, that such taking upon them to be qualified with humility and fear of God, do prohibite swearing in others and blaspheme themselves. Make Laws for strict keeping the Sabbath, notwithstand∣ing so stupid and carnal, stop the ear against his Word and Law, Thou shalt have no other gods. VVhilest the simple deluded by assumed Titles of Saviours, and the like; called Defenders of the Christian Faith, An Antichristian Authority
otherwise called, The Blood thirsty devouring Beast, rising out of the Water in the Lambs Rose coloured Robe; wounded (as it were) with the Crown of Thorns: whose Bap∣tism and Sabbaths exercise, edifying as their Bells, Feasts and Fasts, part of the Forty and two Moneths reck∣oning; and breathing the Holy Ghost, witness the three abominable Frogs for another; with the gift of healing, Miracles by succession, the Image of the Beast worn, &c. So of Elias A∣larm, Fire causing to come down, &c. (Apoc. 13.) in the sight of men by lightning as burnt so many Barns, last Harvest fulfilling; also the Har∣vest great, but Laborers few: Put to their Heels for the Press then, not to be forgotten. Subscribed I am A
& O, &c. And have the keys, &c. As our Liberty proclaims; and the Holy Ghosts reign for evermore, sent in his name the Spirit of truth, otherwise called The Lamb; like∣wise by their Synagogouges how con∣fined within Iron gates: VVhose Angelical presence signifies, as de∣clares, He was in prison; Depart ye cursed: So blessed are they, called unto Lambs marriage supper. Qui se humiliaverat, ipse exaltabit. Ele: Da. & Do. Fleet. Candlemas. Her Purification. 1651. Principium & Finis.
