D258 R3966 11954048 51491
Let this Breviary be Printed and Practised by the Mili∣tia of Middlesex, under my Command. Bedford.
A BREVIARY OF Military Discipline, Compos'd and Published for the Use of the MILITIA. CONTAINING Explanations how to perform the Postures of Pikes and Musquets; also the several Facings, Di∣stances, Doublings, Wheelings, and the Uses thereof. The manner of Drawing up and forming Battalions, the Posts of the Officers in Line, and march, with Directions for Orders of Battle, and various ways of Firing on divers Forms; also Dire∣ctions for passing Bridges, or Defiles with other use∣full Observations. Whereunto is added the Exercise of the HORSE. By Captain Leiutenant JOHN DARKER, Adjutant of the Westminster Militia Regiment. London, Printed and Sold by D. Brown at the Swan without Temple-Bar, T. Fox in Westminster-Hall, and F. Sanders in the New Exchange, and most other Booksellers, 1692. Price bound one Shilling.
To the Right Honourable William Earl of Bedford, Lord Russel, and Lord Russel of Thornhaugh, Lord Leiute∣nant of Middlesex, Knight Companion of the most noble Order of the Garter, and one of their Majesties most Honourable Privy Council. My Lord, IN this Happy Reign where Ho∣nour is the Reward of Vertue, if the Greatness of the Trust can recommend the Merit that holds it,
possibly a fairer Post is not possess'd than your Lordships in the Leiute∣nancy of Middlesex. Their present Majesties, there∣fore (whom God preserve) ha∣ving placed your Lordship Lord Leiutenant of the aforesaid Coun∣ty, a Person descended from an Ho∣nourable and Ancient Family, in∣dowed with such Heroick Eng∣lish Courage, that feared not with Extremity of Danger to withstand the Fury of Domestick Enemies to our Religion and Liberties, but have also bravely opposed the proud Insolence of those whose Minds where filled with Envy, as their Sails where with Wind; hoping to re∣duce
the Freedom we enjoy to the Tyrannical Slavery they Pos∣sess. Those excellent Vertues which continually flow from your Lord∣ship, together with the Honours and Favours your Lordship has con∣ferred on me, Embolden'd me humbly to present your Lord∣ship, with some Considerations for the Service of the Militia, by which I have endeavoured to state a Form of Exercise which is now Published, and I hope will con∣tribute to the effect for which it is designed, viz. to make the Milita (so great a part of which is under your Lordships Com∣mand)
more serviceable to the Kingdom. I am, My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient and Humble Servant, JOHN DARKER.
TO THE READER. Especially to those Gentlemen that are lovers of that Noble Science, the Art Military. Fellow Soldiers, AS neither Ambition on the one hand, nor Self-interest on the other, but a General advantage, hath induced me to publish this Treatise; so I must expect the usual Fate that commonly happens to those that appear pub∣lick in this Nature, to be censured by Men of different Humors. As the old English Proverb saith. The An∣gry Man speaks well of nothing, so the Am∣bitious is for Muddying all Waters wherein he doth not Angle. While the Critick is ad∣miring
himself for raising Structures out of the Chimera of his one Brain, that the Ʋnskillful may applaud his pretended Rhetorick. But the Ingenious as they are Capable to di∣stinguish bewixt Error in Judgment, knwing there are different ways of Expressing some words of Command which direct to the same end, so they will pass a favourable Construction on such things as do not altogether suit their own Genius, en∣couraging all publick Ʋndertakings that are in∣tended for a publick Good. Though I was not willing to swell into a large Volume, yet the Ingenious Reader with good Ob∣servation, may find as much contained (though briefly) in this small Tract, as have been in larger Volumes of this Nature. It is a general Maxim amongst Soldiers, that Discipline animates Courage, in both which the English have been Famous. That the true Courage of English Men is ap∣plauded through the Ʋniverse, is undeniable by
several Demonstrations in all Ages; the glorious Enterprizes of most of our Nobility and Gentry, being not only famed on Record, but bearing as a signal Honour the Remarks thereof in Shields of Arms. These latter years have produced as Honour∣able Actions, being influenced by the Heroick Example of his present Majesty King William, whose head may providence ever Crown with Lawrels. That a general form of Exercise in an Army has been thought very necessary, appears by the several Books set forth on that Accompt; which Books differing from each other, the alterations are easily attained to by well disciplined Forces under constant Exercise. The Militia of England, for whose use this Tract is designed, not having such frequent Ex∣ercise, cannot admit of such Alterations. It hath been observed (that though in the same Regiment) the Officers have exercised
various ways, the inconveniency of which will ap∣pear (though too late) when they are drawn into a formidable Body for Exercise or Service. To prevent which out of my own Inclination for the publick Benefit, and at the Request of se∣veral worthy Gentlemen; I have with as much Brevity as may be, composed this following Trea∣tise for the use aforesaid, wherein any Alterati∣ons (which are very few) are made contrary to the usual Methods; it is not done to make the Exercise less serviceable, but the better to suit the genius of the Persons for whom it is design∣ed.
Observations on a Soldier's Professi∣on and Duty. A Soldier's Profession as it is warrantable by the word of God, so it is Famous and Honourable among Men; Emperors and Kings have accounted that Profession a great Honour under God. It rules or over-rules the greatest part of the World. It is allowed that warlike Discipline and good Fortune were the Raisers of the Roman Empire, and it is not length of Life or number of Years, that teacheth the Art of War, but continual Di∣scipline and Meditation of Arms, with Study and Labour therein, for upon this Foundation is grounded the form of perfect skill. Ʋnjust Wars are unwarrantable in them that create them, yet to defend your just Possessions, or recover them being lost, your Laws, Liber∣ties or Religion being in imminent Danger, go on and prosper.
He that useth that Profession, Honour must be his greatest Wages, and his Enemies his surest Pay-masters. Emulation of Honour, and hopes of Licence to do Evil, makes Men desirous of this Profes∣sion; as the Aims of the first are Vertuous, so will their service be good; the others by strict Discipline may be brought to good, which if neglected may prove the ruin of an Army. Let a Soldiers courage be never so great, e∣ven in the day of Battle, yet if he cannot endure the tediousness that attends warlike Designs, he is not fit for Enterprize. The two chief parts of a Soldier being Va∣lour and Sufferance; it is as great Honour to suffer want Patiently, as to fight Courageously; the Atchievement may be equally esteemed, be∣cause many Men will more willingly look Death in the Face than endure hardship with Patience. The Virtue of Obedience in a Soldier is the greatest thing wherein the force of Discipline con∣sisteth.
Let a Soldier with extremity of Valoure op∣pose imminent Danger, and overcome Fury with a high Resolution. Let him esteem Honour, and the Publick Good above his own Safety, fearing nothing but God and Dishonour, Arming himself with Hope and Courage, for Providence lyeth through Crook∣ed ways, and the fainting heart is the forerunner of future Misfortunes.
The Index of Commands. GEneral Observations. page 1 Of Facings. p. 3 Of Distance. p. 4 Of the Postures of the Musquet. Ibid. Of the Postures of the Pike. p. 5 Of the Exercise of the Pikes and Musquets to∣gether. p. 6 Of Doublings ibid. Of Files ranking, and Ranks filing. p. 9 Of Wheelings. ibid. Explanation of Performance. p. 11 Of Facing. p. 12 Of Distance. p. 13 Of the Posture of the Musquet. p. 18 Postures of the Pikes. p. 26. The Exercise of the Pikes and Musquets toge∣ther. p. 30 Of Doublings. p. 35 Of Files ranking, and Ranks filing: p. 43 Of Wheelings. p. 44 Of Front Firings. p. 46 Of Rear Firings. p. 49
Of Flank Firings. p. 50 Of Street or Lane Firings. p. 51 Of A running Firing. p. 53. Of the Fore-fronted Battle with the hollow Square. p. 55 Rules for forming Regiments or Battalions, and Posting the Officers. p. 62 Of Saluting Standing. p. 67 Of Battalions Marching, and the Officers Post p. 71 Of Salutes Marching. p. 73 Of passing Defiles. p. 75 Of Wheeling into Ranks to make a Guard or Line a Hedge. p. 76 Of Marching Battalions by single Companies. p. 78 Directions for Orders of Battle. p. 80 The Exercise of the Horse. p. 85 Of the Postures of their Arms. p. 86 Of Wheelings. p. 92 Of the Exercise of a Squadron. p. 93 Of Detached Parties. p. 95 Of Forcing a Pass. p. 96
By mistake, this being omitted betwixt Page 66 and 67, in reading consider it in the aforesaid place. When a Battalion is to be formed, the Major, Adjutant, or who is appointed to perform the same, after Silence is Commanded, proceeds thus: Musquetteers, face to the Flanks. Pikes, face to the Center. Interchange Ground. March. At which words the Musquetteers on the flanks are to stand, the rest to March interchanging Ground, that the Musquetteers may be on the Flanks and the Pikes in the Center, the Pikes al∣ways Passing towards the Front of the same ranks they ranged with, and having performed the Mo∣tion, they stand in, then Command. To your Leader. Reduction. Command. Musquetteers, face to the Center. Pikes, face to the Flanks. Interchange Ground. March. At which word the Musquetteers on the Flanks are to stand, the others, both Musquetters and Pikes, are to Interchange Ground as before, and possess their former places. Command. To your Leader. Note. The Officers and Colours are to move as their Soldiers move.
A BREVIARY OF DISCIPLINE, Compos'd for the Use of the MILITIA. THE manner of forming Regiments, or Battalions, and the placing Officers, with general Observations thereof, are ex∣plained at large in the latter part of this Book. Militia Companies being large, it will be bet∣ter to Exercise by Companies, than by Battali∣ons; because, the Officers may better inspect the performance. I shall therefore in the following Method of Mi∣litary Discipline, treat of Companies. The same Exercise is to be Practised by Battalions.
The drawing up of a Foot-Company is so ge∣nerally known, that it will be time mispent to Treat thereof. The Company being drawn up, great care must be taken by the Serjeants to make the Ranks and Files even; and in all Exercise, especially, at the conclusion of every Motion, well to observe the same. The Soldiers must stand with a straight Body, their Heads upright, their Feet at a small pace di∣stant from each other, their Heels in a straight line, their Toes burned a little outwards with a lively Motion, and with their Eyes and Ears well observing the Commander, that they may per∣form their Exercise in time and manner grace∣fully. After each word of Command is given, let the Soldiers stop so long as a leasurely Step may be taken; by this means, they will be more capable of performing together, which must be well ob∣served throughout the Exercise. In all Exercise, let no Soldier move from his Place, untill the last word of Command is fully delivered, then perform it exactly. The several words of Command following, be∣ig placed Successively, are only named first; and afterwards explained at large how each Command is to be performed. The Commanding Officer being at the Head of the Company, the other Officers being placed as all be thought fit to be most useful to see the
Exercise best performed, the Soldiers having their Arms at Order. After Silence is Commanded, which must be well observed, Command, Soldiers, take care of your Exercise, and carry your Arms well, keeping due time. Command. Advance your Pikes. Poise your Musquets. Shoulder your Musquets. Next proceed to Facings. Command. Face to the right four times. Face to the right about as you were. Face to the left four times. Face to the left about as you were. Face to the Flanks as you were Face to the midst of Files as you were
Proceed to Distance. Command. Files close to the Right to close Order March. Ranks close to the Front to close Order March. Ranks open from the Rear to Order March. Files open from the Right to Order March. Ranks open from the Front to open Ord. March. Files open from the Left to open Order March. Files close to the midst of Files to Order March. Ranks close to the Front to Order March. Order your Pikes. The Exercise of the Musquet. Musquetteers take care of your Exercise. At which word, the Musqueteers are to pull off their right hand Gloves an tuck them in their Belts. Command. Musquetteers, Lay your right hands on your Mus∣quets. Poise your Musquets Cock your Musquets Present Fire Half cock your Musquets Handle your Primers Shut your Pans Cast about to Charge Rest your Musquets. Guard your Musquets. Recover your Arms. Clean your Pans. Level and Prime. Blow your Pans. Handle your Chargers
Uncap your Chargers Load with Balls Draw your Rammers Shorten 'gainst your Wasts Ram down your Charges Hold them up Return your Rammers Order your Musquets. Charge with Powder. Place your Wads. Hold them up Place them in your Barrels. Withdraw your Ram∣mers. Shorten against your Wasts Poyse your Musquets The Exercise of the Pikes. Command. Pikemen take care Advance your Pikes. To the Front Charge. To the Right Charge four times. To the Right about Charge. As you were Charge. To the Left Charge four times. To the Left about Charge As you were Charge Advance your Pikes Shoulder Port Comport Charge to the Front Trayl Charge Advance Order your Pikes
The Exercise of the Pikes and Musquets together. Advance your Pikes Poise your Musquets Soulder your Musquets Make all ready. To the Front Charge. To the Right Charge four times. To the Right about Charge As you were Charge To the Left Charge four times. To the Left about Charge. As you were Charge. Advance your Pikes Half cock your Musquets Poise your Musquets Order your Arms. Pikes to your Inside Order Lay down your Arms Quit your Arms To the Right about March. To your Leader Draw your Swords. Return to your Arms Return your Swords Handle your Arms Recover your Arms. Pikes to your outside Order. Advance your Pikes Poise your Musquets. Shoulder your Musquets. Proceed to Doublings. Command. Files, open from the left to open Order. March. Ranks, to the right hand double to the Front. March. Ranks, as you were. March. Ranks,
Ranks, to the left hand Double to the Front. March. Ranks, as you were. March. Files, close to the left to Order. March. Ranks, open from the Front to open Ord. March. Files, to the right hand Double. March. Files, as you were. March. Files, to the left hand Double. March. Files, as you were. March. Files, open from the Right to open Ord. March. Ranks, close to the front to Order. March. Rear half files, to the right hand Double the Front. March. Rear half files, as you were. March. Rear half files, to the left hand Double the Front. March. Rear half files, as you were. March Files, close to the Right to Order. March. Rear half files, double the Front upon the Right entire. Rear half files, face to the Right March clear. Halt. To your Leader. Make good the Front. March. Rear half files, that doubled to the Right about. March clear. Hair. To the Right. Make good your Rear. March. To your Leader. Rear half files, double the Front upon the left entire. Rear half files, face to the left. March clear.
Halt. To your Leader. Make good your Front. March. Rear half files, that doubled to the left about, March clear. Halt. To the left. Make good the Rear. March. To your Leader. Rear half files, double the front by Division. Rear half files, face to the Flanks. March clear. Halt. To your Leader. Make good the Front. March. Rear half files, that doubled, face to the Rear. March clear. Halt. Face to the midst. Make good the Rear. March. To your Leader. Rear half files, double the Front inwards entire. Front half files, face to the Flanks. Rear half files, to the midst. Close to close Order. March. To your Leader. Make good the Front. March. Half files that Doubled, To the Right about. March clear. Halt. Front half files, Face to the midst. Rear half files, Face to the Flanks. Open as you were. March. To your Leader. Ranks, open from the Front, to open Order. March. Left half ranks, to your right hands, double the Right. Left half ranks, face to the Right.
March. Halt. To your Leader. Left half ranks, as you were. March. Halt. To your Leader. Right half ranks, to your left hands, double the left. Right half ranks, Face to the left. March. Halt. To your Leader. Right half Ranks As you were. March. Halt. To your Leader. Ranks, close to the Front to Order. March. Of Files Ranking, and Ranks Filing. Command. Files, open from the Right to 10 foot Distance. Face all to the left. March. Halt. To your Leader. Ranks, close to the Front to close Ord. March. Files, rank upon the Right into the Front. March. Files, as you were. March. Files, rank upon the left into the Front. March. Files, as you were. March. Of Wheeling by Ranks. Command. Ranks open from the Front Rear to what distance shall be named.
Files, Close to the Right Left to close Order. Wheel your Ranks to the Right. March. Ranks, as you were. March. Wheel your Ranks to the left. March. Ranks, as you were. March. Ranks, close to the Front to close Order. March. Of Wheeling Battalions, or smaller Bodies. Wheel to the Right. March twice. Wheel to the Right about. March. Wheel to the Left March twice. Wheel to the Left about March. Ranks, open from the Front to open Ord. March. Files, open from the Right to Order. March. The Exercise being ended If the Officer please to march away his Company, He may Command, Shoulder your Pikes. If he pleases to troop away, his Pikes being advan∣ced, Command, Club your Musquets.
Here follow the words of Command with the Explanations at large, how each Command is to be performed. Command. Advance your Pike.Explanation. RAise you Pike upright, with your right hand as high as you can reach, keeping your Pike close by your side; take your Pike between your Finger and Thumb of your left Hand against your Waste, the Palm downwards, your Fingers extended; then bring down your right hand and place the But of the Pike in the Palm; place your left hand straight down your side, the back out∣wards, as must be observed at all times, when you place either hand down by your side. Command. Poise your Musquet. Explanation. Slip your right hand down your Musquet as low as you can, without constraint; keep your Mus∣quet between your Fore-finger and Thumb, raise your Musquet with your right hand, before you bring your right hand even with your Brest;
at the same time with your left hand, take hold of your Musquet just-above the Lock, turning the Lock to the Front, your Elbows extended; for∣sake your Musquet with your right hand, raising your Musquet with your left hand to the same height; place your right hand under the Lock, bearing your Thumb upwards against the Stock; take your left hand from your Musquet, and place it straight down by your side, your right Elbow close to your Body bearing your Musquet upright. Clear of your Face. Shoulder your Musquet. Explanation. Place your left hand below your right, turn your Barrel to the Front, your Musquet upright, clear off the left side of your Face, your Elbows extended; place it on your left shoulder, the guard close to your Brest, forsake it with your right hand, placing it down by your side, your right Elbow almost close to your Body, keep your Thumb upon the Stock in the Hollow. Of Facings. The use whereof is to alter the aspect as oc∣casion shall require. Observ. Keep your Bodies upright, your left Heels fixed, raising up your left Toes that they may turn clear; perform your Facings, keeping time as before expressed, but with a quick Moti∣on,
taking care to keep your Pikes upright to pre∣vent Clattering: The Musquetteers must bring there left Elbows close to their sides, which will cause the Muzles to mount, that in turning they may not hit each others Arms; this rule must be observed in all Facings, especially at close Order. The several Facings being mentioned before, I shall here omit them. Of Distance. The use whereof is to direct such Distance as is convenient to strengthen the Body, by closing or doubling such parts as the Officer shall think fit. Note, Close Order is 1 foot and a half, in rank and file. Order is 3 foot, in rank and file. Open Order is 6 foot, in rank and file. Observ. Other Distances of 8 or 10 foot, or what Distance the commanding Officer pleases, may be named at Discretion. Of the several Distances. Files, open from the Right Left midst of Files to Order. open Order. or what Distance shall be named.
Files, close to the Right Left midst of Files to open Order. Order. close Order. Ranks, open from the Front Rear midst of Ranks to Order. open Order. or what Distance shall be named. Ranks, close to the Front Rear midst of Ranks to open Order. Order. close Order. Observ. In opening or closing Files to close Order, Order, open Order, Take this General Rule. After the Command is given, and the word March, the Soldiers must step side-ways in a straight line, beginning the Motion with the Leg to the Hand, named without Altering the Aspect; moving straight with their Leaders. For Instance. Command. Files, open from the left to open Order. March.
Explanation. The right hand File begins the Motion, stretch∣ing their right legs in a straight line to the right, making a large step, but without constraint, then bring their left foot to the right, and so continue till they have attained their Ground. The next File to the Right, must not move till the right hand file is 6 foot from them, so the rest succes∣sively. The same Rule is to be observed in opening your files, from the right or midst of files. Also the Ranks, opening from the Front, Rear, midst of Ranks, observing their right hand Men marching forwards or backwards. The same Method is to be used in closing Files or Ranks in the several Commands before menti∣oned, with this Observation; that what part they are to close to, the extent of the closing part, are to stand, the rest to close to the Distance com∣manded. For Instance. Command. Ranks, close to the Rear to close Order. March.
Direction. The rear Rank is not to move, the rest are to close to the Rear moving Backwards, and to stop at a foot and a half Distance. Note, When the Ranks close or open backwards, the Soldiers must half face to the Right, that they may the better see the Rank behind them, always beginning the Motion with their right Legs. Observ. If the Ground be uneven, or you are to open your Ranks or Files to a large Distance, it is best done by Facing. For Instance. Suppose you are to open the files from the left to twelve foot Distance. Command. Files, open from the left to twelve foot Distance. Face to the left. March. Explanation. The Facing being performed, and the word March given, which must be after the Facing is ended, keeping time as before is expressed; the right hand File being become the Leaders in this Motion, are altogether to stretch forth their right Legs, and March in a straight line; the next file must not advance till the other be 12 foot before
them, and then to March, the others doing the same successively, except the left hand file who is to stand their ground. Care must be taken as soon as the file that was next on the right of the left hand file, is advanced 12 foot from the left hand file, to Command (Halt): at which word the Sol∣diers are all to stand. To your Leader. Note, When any Facings are performed, and the Command is (to your Leader) you are to Face to the contrary hand you faced before. Instance. If the Command was face to the left about, and the word is given, to your Leader, you are to face to the right about. The same way must be done by opening Files from the Right, or midst of Files; also in ranks opening. From the Front, Rear, midst of Ranks. Care must be taken in all Marchings, that as soon as the Soldiers have attained their Ground, to Command, Halt. At which they are to stop all together.
Of the Postures of the Musquet. The uses thereof are to instruct the Soldiers to handle their Arms gracefully, and in such decent manner, that they may neither clatter their Arms, nor be in danger by accident of doing mischief to their fellows. Command. Lay your Right hand on your Musquet. Direction. Slip your Musquet a little forwards, turn your Lock upwards, your Elbows extended, your right hand open behind the Lock, the Palm from you. Poise your Musquet. Grasp your Musquet hard with your right hand, raise it from your Shoulder, placing your left hand straight down your side close to your Body, bearing your Musquet upright, clear off your Face. Rest your Musquet. Join your left hand to your Musquet, upon the place where your Rammer goes into the Stock, turn the Barrel towards you; fall back with your
right Leg, turning your right Toe to the right, sink the Butt to the inside of the top of your right Knee, placing your Thumb over the Cock, your Fingers behind the Trigger. Cock your Musquet. Draw back your Cock to the full Bent, keeping your Thumb and Finger as before. Guard your Musquet. Keeping your hands as before, bring up your right Foot, placing your right Heel near the hol∣low of your left Foot, the Toe outwards; at the same time raise your left hand even with your face, keeping your Musquet upright, your Elbows ex∣tended, your Musquet clear of your Body. Present. Place your Thumb behind your Cock, your Fore-finger before your Trigger, at the same time fall back with your right Leg a short step, your right Heel a little to the right of your left Heel; raise your Butt, place it hard against your Shoul∣der, extending your Elbows, bending your left Knee a little standing strong, your Muzels brest high.
Fire. Taking Aim, draw all your Triggers together, and stand steddy. Recover your Arms. Bring up your right Leg, at the same time, sink your Butt, and stand as when you Guarded your Musquets. Half Cock your Musquets. Stand as at rested, and draw your cock to a half bent. Clean your Pan. Press the Ball of your Thumb into the Pan and wipe it, then place the back of your hand be∣hind your Lock, holding only your Thumb on the Lock, your Fingers extended. Handle your Primer. Take it between your two Fore-fingers and Thumb, the great end from you; hold it even with the Pan. Level and Prime. At which word you are to sink your Muzels, at the Barrel be on a straight line, then to prime:
take care not to fill your Pan full, because your Hammer may press it, and by that means the fire not take but rowl off. Shut your Pan. Drop your Primer, then placing your Thumb behind your Cock, your two Fore-fingers on the Hammer, draw down your Hammer, then place your right hand under your Lock, your Thumb only over the Stock, bringing your right leg and your Musquet as at Recover. Blow your Pan. Keep your Head and Body upright, bring your Pan near your Mouth, blow a strong Blast toge∣ther, and return your Arms back. Cast about to Charge. Keeping your Musquet upright, turning the Barrel from you, inclining your Musquet a little to the left, step strait forwards with your right Leg, directing your right Toe to the Front; at the same time, sink your Musquet with your left hand, your left hand straight down your side, place your right hand near the Muzel, your Thumb upwards against the Rammer, keep your Musquet a small distance from your Body straight to the Front.
Handle your Charger. Bring your Musquet close to your Body, take your Charger in a full hand, hold it under your Barrel an Inch below the Muzel, your Thumb a∣gainst the Cap. Ʋncap your Charger. Keep your Head and Body upright, and uncap with your Teeth, place your Thumb on your Charger, and return as before. Charge with Ponder. Put your Ponder in the Barrel, and place your Charger as before. Load with Ball. Take your Ball out of your Pouch or Mouth, put it in your Barrel, placing your hand near your Muzel, as when you cast about to Charge. Place your Wad. With your two Fore-fingers and Thumb, take your Wad from your Hat or Girdle, place it in the Muzel, then place your hand as before.
Draw your Rammer. Clench your Fingers, hold your Thumb straight, raising the middle joint of your Fore-finger even with the end of your Thumb; take your Rammer between your Thumb and Fore-finger, draw it forth as far as you can reach, then turn your Hand, the Palm from you, and take your Rammer between your Fore-finger and Thumb, and draw it forth, holding it as you hold a Pen; hold your Arm straight, your Rammer level, which will be done by keeping the small end close to your Arm. Hold them up. Keeping your Arm straight, sink the great end of your Rammer, hold your Rammer upright in a full hand, bearing your Thumb upright against your Rammer. Shorten against your Wast. Place the great end of your Rammer against your Girdle place, slip your hand down upon your Rammer within a handful of the end, keeping it upon the same range with your Musquet; one Inch is too little to hold in while you slip your hand, as hath been practised.
Place them in your Barrel. Put the great end into the Barrel, then slip your right hand up your Rammer as high as you can reach, and holding it in a full hand, bring your hand to your Muzel, then slip your hand to the top of your Rammer, and bring it to your Muzel, as before, placing your Thumb on the end of your Rammer. Ram down your Charges. Stretch out your right Arm as far as you can, holding fast your Rammer, and ram down hard. With-draw your Rammers. Stretch out your right Arm as far as you can, holding fast your Rammer; forsake the end, and slip your hand to the Muzel, turn the Palm from you, and hold your Rammer between your Thumb and Fore-finger, then draw it forth, holding it as you hold a Pen, keeping it level, the great end against your Arm. Hold them up. Keeping your Arm straight, sink the small end of your Rammer, hold it upright in a full hand, bearing your Thumb upright against your Ram∣mer.
Shorten against your Wast. Place the small end of your Rammer against your Girdle place, slip your hand down your Rammer within two handful of the end, keeping it on the same range with your Musquet; one handful is too little to reach to your first Loop, as formerly used. Return your Rammer. Bring your Rammer round your Muzel, and place it within your first Loop, your hand upon your Muzel, slip your hand as high as you can, and draw down your Rammer, holding it in a full hand, slip your hand to the top, and placing your Thumb on the end of the Rammer draw it down into its place; then take hold of your Musquet with a full Hand, your Thumb upright even with the Muzel, bearing your Musquet clear of your Body. Poise your Musquet. Raise your Musquet upright, and at the same time, forsake it with your right hand, falling back with your right Leg into an even Line, bring your Mus∣quet in your left hand straight before you, raising your left hand even with your Chin, the Lock from you, place your right hand under your Lock,
your Thumb upright against your Stock, and Poise as before. Order your Musquet. Turn the Barrel towards you, at the same time join your left hand to your Musquet, holding it with a full hand just below the place where the Rammer goes into the Stock, sink your left hand and Musquet together, as low as you can without constraint, bearing it towards your right side, pla∣cing your right hand near the Muzel, your Thumb it upright even with your Muzel against the Barrel, forsaking with your left hand; sink it easily down till the Butt be within a handfull of the ground a little to the outside of your right Toe, then or∣der all together. The Exercise of the Pikes. Observ. In all Charges, bring down your Pikes with a quick Motion, a little on the Right of your immediate Leader, charging brest high, then draw them close to your Leader, making a straight line. Command. Advance your Pike. As before explained.
To the Front. Place your left hand on your Pike, level with your right shoulder, fixing your Pike between your Thumb and Fore-finger, your hand open, the Palm downwards; bring your Pikes before you, draw∣ing your right Heel near your left Instep, the Toe outwards, clenching your left Hand, the Thumb upright, keeping your Pikes upright at a conveni∣ent distance from your Body, without constraint. Charge. Fall back with your right Leg, placing your Toe outward, your right Instep even with your left Heel; at the same time opening your left hand that the Pike may fall between your Thumb and Fore-finger, resting on the hollow of your left Arm, your left hand against your Brest, the Butt in the Palm of your right Hand, extended brest high, your left Toe right forwards, bring down your Pike at a Convenient distance from your immediate Leaders, and close to them when charg∣ed. Note, When you have Charged, and the Word is, to the Right, bring up your right Leg, and at the same time raise your Pike, facing to the Right, but do not Charge before you have the Word. This rule must be observed in the several
charges before mentioned, which for brevity sake are hear omitted. Advance your Pikes. Stretch your right Leg on an even Line, a large pace from your left, bring your Pike close to your right side, the Butt-end in your right hand down∣wards, the left hand to your right Shoulder, for∣sake with your left hand and stand advanced as before. Shoulder your Pikes. Join your left hand to your Pike, and bring your Pike before you as in the Recover; forsake it with your right hand, holding it fast in your left hand, fall back with your right Leg as in the Charge, extend your right hand back, casting your Eyes back to the Spear of your Pike, slooped in a straight line, forsaking it with your left hand, bring up your right Leg, laying your Pike on your right Shoulder, your Elbow close to your Body, the Butt a foot from the Ground, just before your Body, inclining a little to the Right hand. Port. As charging to the Front only, sink not the Spear so low, but rest your Pike between your Thumb and Fore-finger of your left hand, your Elbow close to your side.
Comport. Slip your left hand as forward as you can, for∣sake your Pike with your right hand, and bring your Pike in your left hand close to your Body, stretch your right hand as far forward as you can, and take hold of your Pike; forsake it with your left hand, bringing your right hand to your side; at the same time bring up your right Leg even with your left, mounting the Spear more than six foot high. Charge to the Front. Step forward with your right Leg, at the same time extend your right Arm as forward as you can; take hold of your Pike with your left hand close to your right side, forsaking your Pike with your right hand, step back with your right Leg and take the Butt of your Pike in your right hand and charge brest high. Traile. Forsake your Pike with your right hand, and facing to the right about, let your spear drop leasurely to the Ground, your Pike lying between the Fore finger and Thumb of your left hand, and in the hollow of your left Arm, your left hand ad∣vanced even with your Shoulder.
Charge. Face to the left about as you were, and take the Butt-end in your right hand, charge as before, taking care not to toss your Spear above brest high. Advance as before. Order your Pikes. Join your left hand to your Pike even with your right Soulder, hold your Pike between your Fore∣finger and Thumb of your left hand, your Fingers extended, the Palm downwards, sink down your left Hand and Pike together, and raise your right Arm as high as you can without constraint; for∣sake your Pike with your left hand, and sink the Butt leasurely within a handful of the Ground, then order together. The Exercise of the Pike and Musquet together. Command. Advance your Pikes, as before explained. Poise your Musquets, as before explained. Shoulder your Musquets, as before explained. Make all Ready. At which word the Pikes are to recover to the Front as is before shewed at the beginning of the Charges of the Pikes.
And the Musquetteers, are to Poise, Rest, Cock and Guard their Musquets, as before expressed. Note, When the Command is given, Charge, the Pikes are to Charge, and the Musquetteers are to Rest. And at the word face, whether it be to the Right Left or Right Left about the Soldiers, both Musquetteers and Pikes, must bring their Arms before them (as at to the Front) then face all together and stand, expecting the Command to Charge. Perform the several Charges as before expressed; which being ended, Command, Advance your Pikes. Poise your Musquets. Half cock your Musquets Order your Arms. Pikes, to your inside Order. Explanation. Raise your Pikes a little from the Ground, turn∣ing your right Toe to the Right, and place the Butt of your Pikes in the hollow of your right foot. Lay down your Arms. At which word the Soldiers are to Slip down their right hands as low as they can without con∣straint,
placing their left hands down by their sides, the Musquetteers must turn their Barrels to∣wards their Bodies; that when they lay them down, the Locks may lie upwards, then stepping forward their left Legs altogether, lay down their Arms in a straight Line, continuing in that Posture. Command. Quit your Arms. At which word the Soldiers must raise their Bodies together, and bring back their left Legs to their former place. To the right about. March. When they March from their Arms, they must step all together with their left Legs, and March straight in the Interval between the Arms. Observ. At the word of Command, fireing a Pistol, or beat of Drum, the Soldiers are to draw their Swords, holding them upright in their right hands, the Hilt even with their Faces; at the same time to face about with a quick Motion, making a Huzza, and run immediately to their Arms. Where being placed as before,
Command. Return your Swords. When they have returned their Swords, which must be all at one Motion, they must stand upright at their Arms, facing straight to the Front. Handle your Arms. Explanation. Cast your right hand back, turning it upwards by your Face, not too far extended; at the same time the Pike-men must turn their right Toes out∣wards, that the hollow of their right Feet be placed at the Butt of their Pikes; step forwards with your left Legs, taking hold of your Arms e∣ven with your left Toes. Recover your Arms. Raise your Arms all together and stand upright, slip your right hands upwards, as at Order. Command. Pikes, to your outside Order. Raise your Pikes a little, and turn your right Toe more forwards, placing your Pikes as at Or∣der.
Command. Advance your Pikes, poise your Musquets, Shoulder your Musquets; as before. Club your Musquets. At which word the Musquetteers are to lay their right hands on their Musquets and Poise, then face to the right, sinking down their right hands to the extent; at the same time, sinking their Mus∣quets, the Muzle towards the Front, into their left hands, being even with their Swords, placing their left hands a large handful before the Lock, keep∣ing their left hands fixed; put forwards the Butt∣end, then quit it with your right hands, turn the Butt upright and place your right hand a foot be∣low your left, bringing up your right Leg, the Lock to the Front, even with your face; forsake it with your left hand, raising your right hand a∣gainst your Brest, placing your left near the Mu∣zle, lay it castly on your Soulder, the Barrel from you, place your right hand down by your side. Note, The Soldiers are in a posture to Troop, if the Officer shall think fit.
Reduction. Poise your Musquets. Slip forward your left hand, turn your Barrel upwards, take hold with your right hand near your Shoulder, raise your Musquet upright, bring it before your Face, the Butt upwards, the Bar∣rel to the Front, sink your Musquet down in your right hand, and place your left hand the back to∣wards you, even with your face, a handful under the Lock; fall back with your right Leg at the same time, turn your Muzle forwards towards the Front by your right Shoulder, sinking your Butts placing your right hand under the Lock as at rest, bring forwards your right Leg and Poise. Observ. From Poise, you may shoulder, or Or∣der at Discretion. Of Doublings. The uses whereof are to strengthen the Front, Rear, and Flanks at the Officers Discretion. Note, Care must be taken that there be due distance given to receive the Doubling part. For Instance. If you are to double Ranks, Files, or half Ranks, or half Files, the part doubled must be at open
Order; but if they be entire Doublings, there must be distance proportionable to receive the number that are to double; as will appear by the following Explanations. Of Doubling Ranks, and half Ranks. Note, The files must be at open Order. Command. Ranks, to the right hand double to the Front. March. Explanation. The even Ranks from the Front must double the odd; namely, the Second, Fourth and Sixth, double the First, Third and Fifth, beginning their motion at the same time with their right hand men, keeping their Ranks even, making a large step: First, with their right Feet inclining to the Right, that their next step with their left Feet may pos∣sess the ground upon the right of their immediate Leader, bringing up their right Feet even with their left, they possess their ground facing to the ront. Reductions. Command. Ranks as you were. March.
Explanation. The Ranks that double are to turn to their left hands, take a large step with their left Feet, di∣recting their Toes to their former place; then moving their right Feet into their former Ground, turn upon their right Heels to the right about. The same Method is to be used in doubling Ranks to the left, performing all to the contrary hand. In Doubling of half Ranks. Command. Left half Ranks, to your right hands double the right. Left half Ranks, face to the right. March. At which word, the left half Ranks begin the motion, steping together with their right Legs, placing themselves in the Intervals behind their right hand men; so march sileways to the right Flank, placing themselves successively in the files of the right half Ranks. Command. To your Leader.
Reduction. Left half Ranks As you were. March. Here, the left half Ranks that doubled are to face to the left. The Soldiers must step all together with their right Legs, and march into their former Ground, each Man turning one step to the right, at the end of the standing Ranks, being marched clear. Command. Halt. To your Leader. The same way your right half Ranks may dou∣ble the left, by naming the Commands to the con∣trary hand. Of Doubling Files. Note, The Ranks must be at open Order. Command. Files, to your right hands Double. March. Explanation. The even files are to double the odd, namely, the next file to the right hand, being the second or even file from the right, so the fourth, sixth, and
so on, are to double the odd files thus; as soon as the word March is given, the Soldiers are together to stretch forth their right Legs a large step at the same time facing to the right directing their Toes towards the right hand man, in the next Rank behind them, then placing their left feet behind their right hand men, turning toge∣ther to the left, bringing up their right feet, they take the midst of the Intervals behind their right hand Men. Reduction. Files, as you were. March. Here the Files that doubled are to stretch forth their left Legs together, and return to their places as in ranks Doubling. The same is to be performed to the left, by naming the word of Command to the contrary hand. Note. If there be an odd file, it must be drawn of. Of doubling Rear half files, which are performed divers ways, of which some short Directions to explain the whole. Command. Rear half files, to the right hand double the Front March.
Direction. The fourth Rank being the half file Leaders, begins the Motion, stepping all together, with their Right Legs, marching up the Intervals upon the Right of their Leaders, the rest following suc∣cessively, placing their Leaders in the Front, the rest even with the other Ranks. Reduction. Rear half files, as you were. March. At which words they are to face to the left a∣bout, and to step together with their right Legs, marching to the former Ground. Command. Halt. To your Leader. At which word they are to face to the right a∣bout, turning upon their right Heel. The same method may be used to the left, by the contrary words of Command. Of Entire and Divisionable Doublings. They are to the right or left entire. Or to the right or left by Division, or inwards entire.
Observ. Some short general Rules to explain the whole. In Divisional Doublings, if there be an odd file, you must always give the odd file to the right, and so you must observe the same method in doubling half Ranks, allowing the odd file to the right half Ranks. Command. Rear half files, Double the Front on the left entire. Rear half files, face to the left. March clear. At which Command, they are to step all toge∣ther with their left Legs and March straight, clear of the standing part. Care must be taken by the Officer as soon as they are clear of the standing part, to Command, Halt. At which the Soldiers are immediately to stop. To your Leader. Here the Soldiers are immediately to face to the Right. Command. Make good your Front. March. The Soldiers are to move up into the Front, ma∣king their Ranks even.
Reduction. Rear half files, that doubled to the left about. March clear. Perform it as is before expressed. Halt. Face to the left. Make good your Rear. March. Perform this as when you made good the Front. To your Leader. Here they are together to face to the left. The same method is to be used in Doubling rear half files entire on the right, by expressing the words of Command to the contrary hand; also in doubling rear half files by Division, or inwards entire with this. Observ. In Doubling by Division or inwards entire, instead of facing to the Right and left, use face to the Flanks or midst, as it is exprest in the first part of this Book before the Explanations. I shall conclude the Doublings with this short Observation. In all Doublings, whether in Ranks, half Ranks, or half Files, let care be taken for the Doubling part, that there be distance for them that they may move clear; let the Soldiers take care to step all together, if the doubling be to the Right, to begin
with their right feet; if to the left, with the left feet, Marching in Rank and File, observing well the Command; and at the Reduction of each Com∣mand in Ranks, half Ranks, Files, or half Files (entire and Divisionable Doublings excepted, in which they are always to face about towards the Flank) let them face about to the contrary hand they doubled: also observe all these Doublings to the Front: the same is to be performed to the Rear, by facing to the Rear, and using the same words of Command. Of Files Ranking and Ranks Filing. The use is to open from the Front to prevent the danger of the Enemies great Shot, and to close again as occasion shall require; the performance must be thus. Command. Files, open from the Right Left to 12 foot distance. March. Ranks, close to the Front to close Order. March Files, Rank into the Front. March. At this Command, each man is to move into the Front, and place himself on the hand named of his Leader, if the word be to rank on the Right, each man must place himself in the Front on the right of his leader, and so on the left, if the Com∣mand be to the left.
Reduction. Files, as you were. March. The Soldiers must turn to the contrary hand they ranked upon, and facing towards the Rear, must march and take their former places. Instance. Suppose you ranked on the left into the Front to reduce, you must face to the right, and stretch your right Leg a good step, directing your Toe almost to the Rear, that at the bringing up your left foot you may attain to face to the ground you stood on before; so March and place your selves there, turning on your left Heel, and facing to the Front. The same Method use to the contrary hand, performing all accordingly. Of Wheelings by Plattoons or Divisions, or in large Bodies, the uses thereof are to alter the Front at Discretion, either to gain the advantage of the Wind or Sun, or to give opportunity to face the Enemy properly in their Approaches, which may be performed to the right or left, or right or left about. For Instance. Command. Wheel to the Right. March.
At which words the Soldiers wheel from the left to the right, the right hand Man in the Front, being as it were the hing on which the Motion depends, turns with a slow Motion on his right Heel, the left hand Men March quicker according to their Distance from the Right, observing in the Motion to keep your Ranks even, and at close Order in Rank and File; the succeeding Ranks inclining to the left in such proportion that they keep straight after their Leader in due distance. The same to the left or to the right or left a∣bout. Also, by wheeling Ranks to the right or left, the use whereof is to form them quick into one Rank, to make a Gaurd or line a Hedge. It must be also observed in marching. Note. The Anguler Man must turn upon his right Heel, when he wheels to the right, and on his left Heel when to the left. Here, observe if it may not be convenient to gain or lose Ground, you must face about to the right or left, and wheel to the contrary hand that brings you to your former Ground. But when you Wheel by single Ranks on a March, let the right or left hand Man of each rank, according to the hand they are to wheel (the Serjeant placing his Halbert Directing to the proper place) make a sudden stop, the others in the rank quickening the Motion according to their distance from the Wheeling hand, as before di∣rected; and having performed the Motion, March
together, the next Rank marching in a straight line into the same place, then wheel as the first did, and this is to be observed by all succeeding Ranks. Of Firings and the several ways to perform them. Time, number of Men, and conveniency of Ground being various, Discretion must be the Commanders chiefest Guide to proportion his Bo∣dy to assault or oppose his Enemy. An Army Embattelled is better in small than large Divisi∣ons, being more capable of speedily supplying by the Reserves, such parts as shall be most furiously attacked by the Enemy; as also to Wheel on all occasions, and give opportunity to outfront their Enemy, which is a very great advantage. Let not your Divisions be too large to cause con∣fusion, nor too small to be over-powred; equiva∣late your Numbers as occasion requires. Of Front Firings, either in Line or advanced Parties, as shall be most convenient, which may be performed by one, two, or three Ranks together. Command. Close your Ranks forwards to close Order. March.
Command. First Rank, two Ranks or three Ranks. Make ready. Direction. If you fire two ranks, the first is to stoop to give opportunity for the following rank to fire brest high. If by three Ranks, the first is to kneel, which they are to do by falling back with their right Legs, not moving their left Legs, keeping low that the others may fire over them, the second to stoop as beforesaid, the last Rank keeping upright. When the Command is given for the first to kneel, the second is to stoop at the same line with∣out Order. The Officer or Officers in the head of the Divi∣sion or Battalion, retire at the same time into the intervals, just behind the Rank or Ranks of the Soldiers that are preparing to fire. Command. Present. Note, The Officers with the Pikemen ought to have their Arms conformable to the Pikes, and those with the Musquetteers are to kneel as they do. Note, At all times in a standing Body, when the Musquetteers are commanded to make ready, the Pikemen are to make ready to the Front, when the Musquetteers present; the Pikemen are to Charge.
Command. Fire. Recover your Arms. At which word of Command, Musquetteers and Pikes are all to recover their Arms, raising their Bodies upright, and to advance their Pikes and Poise their Musquets; the Musquetteers immedi∣ately wheeling off to the Right, Left, or by Divisi∣on, as shall be most convenient; the Serjeants being ready upon the Flank or Flanks to lead them of and place them in the Rear. Note, If the Officer will maintain his Ground, he may lead the next rank into the same Ground, the other Ranks possess'd. If gain ground, he may advance as much for∣wards as shall be necessary. If losing Ground, he need not lead up the Ranks to the former Ground, but fire them on the Ground they stand without advancing: the Pikes are to advance or retreat accordingly. If it be thought not convenient to fire three Ranks together, he may Command the two last Ranks, Present, Fire; and afterwards the same Com∣mand to the first rank, which may prove a surprize to the Enemy, if they shall advance upon them to receive Shot unexpected, and if the Officer pleases, he may perform this Firing the Depth of a whole File; the five first Ranks kneeling, the rear Rank Present, Fire, the fifth Rank stand up, Present,
Fire, and so the rest; this may be performed by one, two, or three Ranks kneeling, and stooping as before. In all Firings, the Musquetteers are to charge again presently, to be in a readiness against the next word of Command. Of Rear Firings. This is a retreating Firing to be performed Marching. Command. Rear Ranks of Musquetteers, make ready. This is to be done Marching and at the Word, Pre∣sent; they are to face to the right about, Present, and Fire, without any other Command; as soon as they have fired, they are to recover their Arms, marching to the right and left, with a swift Mo∣tion, and placing themselves in the front of their own Musquetteers, as soon as the last Rank is bid Present, the next rank is immediately to make ready, but not to face to the rear till they have the word, Present. At which word, they are to face about as the others did, and having fired to place themselves in the Front as before, the rest successively. Note. During this Firing, the whole Body is upon a March, except the Rank that is presented.
Of Flank Firings. Which may be performed if a Body be attacked upon a March to the right, left, or both Flanks, pla∣cing your Musquetteers accordingly. Instance. Suppose you were to Fire to both Flanks. Command. Right and left hand files of Musquetteers, make ready; which they are to do marching. Command. Present. At which word they are to face outwards, and fire without any other Command; so soon as they have fired, they are to face to the Rear, where the Serjeant is to lead them a cross with a quick motion, and place them between the Pikes and their own Divisions; the next files upon the right and left, when the other is bid Present are to make ready, marching not to face till they have the word Present; at which time they are to face and fire as the others did, and so be led of accor∣dingly.
This firing may be performed upon the Right or left Flank in the same manner, by placing the Musquetteers accordingly as aforesaid, and may be continued as occasion requires. Note. In this way of firing, the Soldiers are to fall back with their right feet, and not step for∣ward their left. Care must be taken that the Musquetteers keep 6 foot clear of the Pikes, that there may be room to receive the last file that fired, which is to be done by inclining to the right or left in the March. Of Street or Lane Firings. If you are to defend a Street, Lane, or Bridge or narrow Pass against the Horse; the way to perform it is thus. Command. Advance your Pikes. Rear half files of Pikes, to the right hand dou∣ble your Front. March. Musquetteers, face to the right about. March clear. Musquetteers, face inwards. March. To your Leader. By this means the Pikes which are supposed to be fewest in Number, will equally front your Mus∣quetteers.
The Captains are to be placed in the first rank of Pikes, the Leiutenants with the Musquetteers, the Colours and Drums between the Pikes and Musquetteers. Command. Port your Pikes. The two first ranks of Musquetteers make ready. March. At which word they are to face to the right or left, as must be before directed: A Serjeant or more being ready to lead them fileways by the Flank, marching cross the Front under the Pikes, carrying their Musquets steady, taking care they neither hit the Pikes nor injure their Fellows, and being placed under the Pikes without any word of Command, they are to face to the Front, falling back with their right Legs; the first rank is at the same time to kneel, keeping their Arms upright before them. Here they may fire the first Rank or both Ranks together, as may be thought convenient, taking care as soon as they have fired without any Command to recover their Arms, facing as before the Serje∣ant with a quick motion, must lead them away by the contrary Flank they came up, and place them in the rear of the Musquetteers facing to the Front; care must be taken that two Ranks more be ready up∣on the Angle immediately to possess the Front as the others draw of, where being placed, they are to per∣form the same Firing, and March off quick as the o∣thers
did, two ranks more possessing their ground. This firing may be thus continued at Discretion. Note. When the Musquetteers are Commanded to Present, the Pikes are to Charge without any command; and as soon as they have fired, to raise their Pikes as before. Observ. If your Street or Lane be very broad, your Front being wide, by which means so much time will be spent in marching cross the Front, that may give the Horse opportunity to press up∣on you, by your long intermission between your firings; to prevent which, besides the passages by the Flanks, there must be an Interval of six foot in the midst of your Files, that your Ranks may be lead on by half Ranks up the Flanks, and after fir∣ing down the Interval to the Rear. Reduction. Musquetteers face outward. March clear. Halt. To your Leader. Make good your Front. March. Rear Half files of Pikes. As you were. March. Which done, the Officers Colours and Drums post themselves as before. How to perform a running Firing. Which may be begun on the right or left, but commonly on the right.
Command. Files open from the Right Left or midst of Files to open Or. Command. Face to the Right Left or Flanks March. Halt. To your Leader. Rear half files, to the left hand double the Front. March. Perform your Firing thus. Command. Musquetteers, make all ready, Present high. The Officer on the right, Orders the right hand Man to begin the Firing (speaking softly) be∣cause if the word be given aloud, they will all take it and fire a Volley instead of a running Peal. Every file Leader is to fire as quick as 'tis pos∣sible after his right or left hand Man, and every file is to take care to fire with their file-Leader.
The manner how to form the four fronted Battle with a hollow Square in the Center, with any number of Men, wherein may be placed Field Pieces, Carriages, &c. SUppose your Musquetteers to be two thirds, and your Pikes one third, which are the usual numbers of each Arms. If you would form a large Battalion into the aforesaid Battle. Suppose your Battalion consists of 120 Files, you will have 40 Files of Musquetteers on each Wing, and 40 Files of Pikes in the Center. The words of Command are, Rear half files of the 20 inmost files of Pikes, face to the right about. The inmost files of Pikes. March. Halt. To your Leader. Ensigns and Drums into the Center. March. Pikes in the Flanks, open your Ranks from the midst, to open order. March. Pikes in the Flanks, by half Ranks double out∣wards. March. 20 Files of Musquetteers on the left, face to the left about. 20 Files of Musquetteers on the right and left. March.
Halt. Face to the left. March. Halt. To your Leader. Musquetteers in the Flanks, March. Halt. Face to the Rear. Wheel inwards to your Pikes. To your Leader. Face Square. Explanation, how to perform each Command. When the rear half files of the inmost files of Pikes are faced about, and the Command is for the inmost files of Pikes to March, they must March, that they be 12 foot clear of the Flanks. Then the Ensigns and Drums are all together to March, and place themselves in the Center of the Pikes. Next, the Pikes on the flanks open their Ranks, the first 3 Ranks open forwards, the other back∣wards to open Order, whereby they attain the An∣gles of the Front and Rear Divisions. Then Command. Pikes, in the Flanks by half Ranks double out∣wards. At which Command, the left half ranks of Pikes in the right Flank, face to the right, the right half ranks on the left; at the same time face to the left, and at the word March: They pass through the Intervals towards the flanks, placing themselves in the other files.
Then having faced 20 files of Musquetteers on the left, to the left about. Command. 20 files of Musquetteers on the right and left. March. At which they are to March clear of the Pikes in Front and Rear: then Command Halt. Face to the left. March. At which they must march and place themselves in the Front and Rear of the Pikes. To your Leader. Musquetteers in the Flanks. March. Which they must doe till the rear of them are even with the Front of their one Pikes. Then Command. Halt. Face to the Rear. At which word, the right wing face to the right about, and the left wing to the left about, then to wheel inwards to thir Pikes, by which they will bring their file Leaders to be on the Flanks. To your Leader. Face square. At which word they face to Front, Rear and Flants. The rear Devision to the right about, and the Divisions on the Flanks, to the right and left outwards; according to this Method, you may form any large Battalions into this figure.
If your number of Men he not exactly Equiva∣lent, your Square may be somewhat oblong, which to object at, will more become a Critick than a Soldier. The manner of placing the Officers, is thus: The first Captain at the Proper Front. The second Captain in the Rear. The third Captain on the right Flank. The fourth Captain on the left Flank. The fifth Captain on the right Angle in the Front. The sixth on the left Angle in the Rear. The seventh on the right Angle in the Rear. The eighth on the left Angle in the Front. If there be more Captains, they must be placed on the right and left Angles on the Flanks; but if fewer omitted, giving preference first to the Front, then to the Rear, next to the Right, &c. The Leiutenants are to be equally disposed of in the four Angles, as also the Serjeants. The Ensigns having their Colours advanced and flying, must be posted within the Square, thus, If there be twelve Ensigns, the first three on the right against the proper Front, the three next against the right Flank, the three next against the left Flank, the three on the left against the Rear. But if there be but Ten, then three against the Front, two on the right, two on the left, and three against the Rear: If but eight, then two
to each place: if six, two to the Front, one to each Flank, and two to the Rear, giving prefe∣rence as beforesaid. The Drums must divide and close to the Colours, to make as much room in the Square as may be to receive the Carriages, Field pieces, or otherways the Officers must keep their Posts, facing and marching as the Soldiers do. Reduction. Command. To your proper Front. Musquetteers, on the Flanks, face outwards. Wheel as you were. March. Musquetteers in front, face to the right. Musquetteers in the rear, face to the left. Musquetteers in front and rear, March clear of the Flanks. Halt. Face to the right. Make good your Flanks. March. To your Leader. Half ranks of Pikes that doubled. As you were. March. To your Leader. Pikes in the Flanks close your ranks as you were. March. Officers and Drums take your former posts. Pikes in the front, to the right about. Pikes in Front and Rear. March. To your Leader.
In this Figure you may march Facing and Fi∣ring to such part as occasion requires; to Front, Rear, or Flanks, or standing Facing Square, you may fire to all or any part as necessity requires; the firings may be performed by one, two, or three Ranks, or fileways on the Flanks, as is shew∣ed in the several ways of firing before mentioned. If you would strengthen your Angles more than by your Officers posted therein, the ready way is to cause a file or two of Musquetteers on the Flanks of each Division, to rank themselves in a Parallel line, or lines from the point of one Angle, to the point of the other, their Pikes placing themselves in the rear of them. If you would perform the aforesaid Figure with a single Company, it is performed with fewer words of Command. Suppose your Company consists of sixteen files of Musquetteers and eight files of Pikes. The words of Command are, Rear half files of the four inmost files of Pikes face to the right about. The inmost files of Pikes. March clear. Halt. To your Leader. Drums and Colours into the Center. March. The four outmost files of Musquetteers on the left face to the left about. Four outmost files of Musquetteers on the right and left, march clear, Halt; face to the left, March,
being placed in the Front and Rear, command to your Leader, face Square. Reduction. Command, to your proper Front. Musquetteers in the front, face to the right. Musquetteers in the Rear, face to the left. Musquetteers in Front and Rear, March clear of the Flanks, face to the Right, make good the Flanks, March, to your Leader. Officers and Drums, take your former Posts. Pikes in the Front, to the right about. Pikes in Front and Rear, March, to your Lea∣der. By the aforesaid Method, may the hollow square Battle be made with any number of Men, placing half your files of shot in Front and Rear of what number soever; the rest on the Flanks, if the Bat∣talion be large, the half ranks of Pikes must be doubled to compleat them twelve Deep, to make the square more regular, then the Musquetteers must be wheeled as before Directed, to reduce them to six Deep when faced square, as before mentioned (but in a single Company) the half Ranks doubling, and the wheeling may be omit∣ted, because the body will be more regular with∣out it.
Rules for forming Regiments or Battalions of any numbers whatsoever, and the posting the Officers. IT hath been the former practice to place the several Companies by a Rule of Dignity, ma∣king as near as might be, Front, Rear, right and left, Equivalent by numbers. Which practice being laid aside, not only in our Army, but all other places, using a more easie and plainer method by Succession; which also hath as much of Dignity in the Officers Posts (though in a different way of Estimation) as the other, I shall therefore Treat only of the way now practised in all European Armies. In the following method, I shall by Figures thus number the several Companies according to their Dignity. The Colonel's Company being the first, is num∣ber (1) The Leiutenant Colonel number (2) The Major (3) The first Captain (4) The se∣cond Captain (5) so the rest Successively. The Companies that are to form a Battalion are to be placed thus. The Colonel or first Company, on the right. The Leiutenant Colonel or second Company, on the left. The Major or third Company, on the left of the Colonel.
The First Captain, or fourth Company, on the right of the Leiutenant Colonel. The second Captain or fifth Company, on the left of the Major. The third Captain or sixth Company, on the right of the first Captain. So the other Companies are to be placed succes∣sively, that the youngest may be in the Center. Because it may be convenient for large Regi∣ments to divide into two or three Battalion, I shall therefore treat of them distinctly. Observ. The first Battalion is to be led by the Colonel; if there be two Battalions, the second must be led by the Leiutenant Colonel; but if there be three Battalions, the third must be led by the Major. Note. Where there are three Battalions, the Major's Battalion must march next after the Co∣lonel, and the Leiutenant Col. Battalion in the rear. Here it may do well to observe the reason gi∣ven, why the Leiutenant Colonel leads the se∣cond Battalion and not bring up the Rear, where there are more than one Battalion? It is this, tho they belong to one Regiment, yet being formed into two Battalions, they are supposed two di∣stinct Bodies; consequently a better Post to lead than bring up, the former Battalion being brought up by other Officers, and the Major in the rear of them, where there are but two Battalions, it be∣ing the better Post to bring up to the Colonel.
Because in many places a Regiment of Militia may not have Room to drawn in one line, it may be convenient to draw up the several Companies of each Battalion in their due Places at their first coming to the General Parade. I shall therefore observing, the general Rule be∣fore prescribed, begin with a Regiment of Ten Companies, and so proceed downwards to a Re∣giment of six Companies, dividing them into two and three Battalions, placing the Companies By Figures as before Expressed. Note. The same Rule prescribed before of a Regiment (placing the first Company on the right, the second on the left, and so successively that the youngest be in the Center) must be observed in each Battalion. First of a Regiment of Ten Companies. 1Col. 3Maj. 5Cap.2 7Cap.4 9Cap.6 10Cap.7 8Cap.5 6Cap.3 4Cap.1 2Leiut. Col. Front. In two Battalions thus. 1 5 9 7 3 2 6 10 8 4
Front. In three Battlions thus. 1 7 10 4 3 9 6 2 8 5 Front. Of a Regiment of Nine Companies in two Battalions. 1 5 9 7 3 2 6 8 4 Front. In three Battalions thus, 1 7 4 3 9 6 2 8 5 Front. Of a Regiment of Eight Companies in two Battalions. 1 5 7 3 2 6 8 4 Front.
Of a Regiment of Seven Companies in two Battalions. 1 5 7 3 2 6 4 Front. Of a Regiment of Six Companies in two Battalions. 1 5 3 2 4 6 Front. Of Five Companies. 1 Battalion 2 Battalions 1 3 5 4 2 1 5 3 2 4 Front. Of Four Companies. 1 Battalion 2 Battalions 1 3 4 2 1 3 2 4 Front.
The Battalion being formed, and the Ensigns placed according to the foregoing Rule, the Of∣ficers must be placed accordingly, observing that the Officers keep to their Battalion where their Ensigns are; namely, the Colonel places himself before the Center of the Pikes or Colours twelve Foot, the Leiutenant Colonel six Foot behind the Colonel, and six Foot before the Ensigns. The Captains one half on the head of the right Wing, the other on the left; the Leiutenants ac∣cordingly betwixt them, and the Ensigns making all one even line, six Foot before the Soldiers; the Serjeants are to be placed one on the right and left of each Rank, or at the least three on each Wing, the rest making a line in the Rear. The Drums are to be disposed of thus: one third part of them on the right Wing, another third part on the left Wing on the same line with the first Rank of Musquetteers, the other third part, between the Ensigns and Pikes. Of Saluting standing. The Officers are to stand with their Pikes as at Order, onely their Arms stretched out with their Pikes, the Butt ends of them at the same distance from their Feet, keeping their Pikes up∣right.
To perform the Salute. Fall back with your right Arm and Leg, let∣ting the Spear sink directly towards the Rear, to the height as when a Soldier's Pike is Shouldred, your left Toe straight to the Front, the hollow of your right Foot against your left Heel; stretch your left Hand forwards, taking hold of your Pike, turning your Pike with your right Hand forwards, quit your right Hand and take hold of the Butt therewith, letting the Spear sink near the ground without touching, keeping your Fin∣gers extended of both Hands, that the Pike rest between your Thumb and Fingers, then raise your Pike falling back as before; bringing up your right Leg, place your Pike at the order as before, taking care to time your Salute so that your Hat may be off just as the Person who is to be Saluted comes against you, taking care to stand faced directly to the Front, or that way the Soldi∣ers face. When the King is to be Saluted, and draws near, all the Drums beat a March, the Musquet∣teers being Shouldred, and the Pikes advanced, are to rest their Musquets, and the Pikes to charge, that their Spears be Brest-high, and so to conti∣nue till his Majesty be past the Battalion. The Offiers are to Salute as before directed but not all together; each Officer beginning hi Salute when the King is three or four paces Di∣stant,
that he may return his Pike and Salute with his Hat in time, as before expressed. But the Ensigns being placed together, are to Salute all together, laying down their Colours, and standing with their Hats in their left hands, are so to continue till the King be clear of them; and then having put their Hats on, are to raise their Colours all together, and to return to their for∣mer posture. The Serjeants are to stand with their Halber at Order, and to Salute onely with their Hats o, hanging them on their Halberts. When the King passeth into the Rear of the Battalion, no Officers nor Colours must move from their Posts, nor Salute, the Serjeants only placing themselves in the Rear, the Offiers and Soldiers facing to the Rear, and the Musquetteers rested, and Pikes charged as before. If you Salute any other Person of the Royal Fa∣mily, the Officers Salute as before; but the En∣signs onely make a wefte with their Colours, and so return them as before, the Pikes being advan∣ced, and Musquetteers rested. If you Salute the General, Leiutenant General, or your Lord Leiutenant, the Colonel, Leiutenant Colonel, nor the Colors must not Salute onely with their Hats, the other Officers as before, the Soldiers their Pikes advanced, and Musquets rested.
No Person is to be Saluted onely in the Front, though they pass into the Rear of the Battalion, the Officers are to keep their Posts, both Officers and Soldiers, facing to the Rear, the Soldiers per∣forming the same postures as to the Front, onely the Srjents in the Rear may Salute with their Hats. No Soldier must offer to Bow or Move his Hat in any Salute. The Battalion being to Exercise, the Colonel during the time of Exercise, is to be in the head of the Battalion; the Leiutenant Colonel and o∣ther Officers at the first beat of Drum, face to the right about, and at the second notice by the beat of Drum advance their Arms and March through the Battalion, placing themselves in the Rear, in the same order they were in the Front, the Leiu∣tenant Colonel placing himself in the Rear of the Captains; the Officers are to continue thus during the Exercise. At the same time the Serjeants and Drums are to March from the Flanks into the Rear, and place themselves on the same line with the Serjeants that were in the Rear, the Drums on the right and left of them, the Drums that were placed betwixt the Colours, and the Pikes, are to move also into the Rear, and place themselves in the same manner. The Major, Aid-Major or Adjutant, who is to take care that all be at their due Posts, may place himself betwixt the Colonel and the head of
the Battalion, that he may be ready to receive such orders as may be appointed. If the Exercise is to be directed by beat of Drum, the Drums that were in the Center of the Pikes, may be posted behind the Major, that they may be ready against any sign is given for the beat of Drum. After the Exercise is ended, and notice thereof given by beat of Drum, the Officers advance their Arms and march through the Battalion, placing themselves in their former Posts; as also the Serje∣ants and Drums place themselves on the Wings as before. Thus much of a Battalion in Line or Exercise, and the posting the Officers and Salutes standing. Of a Battalion Marching, the posting the Officers, and of Salutes Marching. IF the Battalion be to March in three Divisions, two of Musquetteers, and one of Pikes, one half of the Captains at the Head of the right Di∣vision of Musquetteers, the other half in the rear of the lft Division of Musquetteers; one half of the Leiutenants at the head of the left Division of Musquetteers, the other half in the rear of the right Division of Musquetteers: the Colours are to march at the head of the Pikes.
The Serjeants are to march with their Halberts shouldred, the Butt-end upwards, and to March on the Flanks, observing that the Soldiers keep th ir Ranks and Files straight and even, and that they keep their Distance of nine Foot in Ranks, and their Sub-Divisions at twice that Distance, taking care in wheeling by Ranks, to place down the Butt-end of their Halberts at the ground they are to wheel at, on the Angle of that hand they are to wheel to, there to continue till all the Di∣vision is marched, taking care the Ranks march straight to the Ground, the others wheeled on, then to wheel all together, as is shewed in Ranks wheel∣ing. The Drums are to be equally Divided to each Division, and to march between the second and third Ranks. That the Officers may not alter their places by continual moving to and fro, the Captains and Lieutenants are to remain on the Wings where their Musquetteers are, and there Post themselves according to their Commissions, the Eldest out∣wards, and the Youngest in the Center. The Leiutenants are to place themselves accor∣dingly; namely, the Lieutenants of those Captains in the Front must bring up the Front Division of Musquetteers, and the Leiutenants of those Cap∣tains in the Rear lead the rear Division of Mus∣quetteers. If your number of Officers be not Equivalent, or there shall be Captains wanting, you must give preference first to the Front.
Instance. Suppose you have an odd number, as seven Cap∣tains, there must be four in the Front and three in the Rear. But the Leiutenants, if there be seven, there must be four to lead the rear Division of Mus∣quetteers, and three to bring up the Front: By this Method, when you come to draw in a line, those Officers that were in the rear of the Divisi∣ons, marching through and placing themselves in the Front just as they marched, the Officers will be all in there proper Posts in a line, the Eldest Captain on the right and left of each Wing, their Leiutenants inwards placed accordingly, the Co∣lours in the same method in the Center of the Battalion. In all Marching. The Colonel, Leiutenant Colonel, and all other Officers must have their Pikes Comported, not drooping the Spears too much, but keep them steddy without much swinging there hands. Of Salutes Marching. As soon as they are near the King or Person to be saluted, they must shoulder their Pikes: the Colonel or Commander in chief first Salutes, the
Captains next, but do not begin to Salute before the first Officer hath ended his Salute. The Officers in a Rank must Salute all together as one Man. Great care must be taken, neither to quicken nor abate, but to march the same pace, and not to do the motion too quick. Also, to time the Salute, so that their Hats may be off just as they come against the Person to be Saluted. The Ensigns, if the person is to be Saluted with the Colours (which is expressed in the Salute stan∣ding) must bring their Colours down together without waving to either hand, and so raise toge∣ther without standing or quickening their March. As soon as the Officers have Saluted, they must put off their Hats and carry them in their Hands without bowing till they be past a convenient di∣stance, then to put them on and bring their Pikes under hand as before. The Serjeants are to March with their Halberts shouldred, the Butt-end upwards, and are to march by the Person to be Saluted with their Hats off. This the Serjeants are to do also to any Person that comes to view the Battalion, whether the Of∣ficers Salute or no. This is supposed to be to a Person in Command or Quality: none is to Salute but once to one Per∣son standing or marching.
No Serjeant or Corporal is at any time to carry or hold the Colours in the Ensigns absence, but on∣ly a Pikeman, most proper the leader of the right hand file The Officers that lead a Battalion or Company are always to march shouldred before a Guard, or by the head of a Battalion. The Salute marching is almost the same way performed as the Salute standing, only this is to begin from the shoulder, casting back your right hand and stretching fowards your left hand, rai∣sing the Spear to the height a Soldiers Pike is when shouldred, and so performed as the Salute standing, but keeping marching and reduce again to your shoulder instead of Order. If on the March you must pass a narrow Defile, the quickest way to perform and draw up again, is to cause the Ranks to file marching. Thus, If to the right, the right hand man pas∣seth first, the next to him following as close as may be, so the rest successively; as soon as that Rank is past, they must rank as they were, the rest doing the same. If you fle to the left, the left hand man be∣gins, the rest perform the same to the contrary hand. If the Ranks be great, they may perform by two or three a Brest, beginning with their outer∣most file Leaders. For larger Defiles, it may be done by ranking of the half Ranks, as is before shewed; or as the way will easily receive.
When a Body of Men is marching, and there be occasion on a sudden to form them into one Rank, whether it be to make  Guard, or Line a Hedge, it will be quickest done by wheeling, and that to either the right or left, forwards or back∣wards, as the Officer finds most Convenient. First, of wheeling Ranks forwards The words of Command will be Ranks to the Right Left Wheel. March. This is to be performed as is shewed in Ranks wheeling to reduce. Command. Ranks as you were. Wheel. March. This way of wheeling is properest to line a Hedge, because you maintain the ground on the Flank you wheel to, as is generally used on that occasion. Note. When you give the Command, Ranks, wheel to the right or left, It is always to wheel forwards, unless the word be to the con∣trary. In these wheelings into one Rank, the Colours are to wheel in before the Ranks, the Drums and Serjeants to place themselves on the right and left.
To wheel Ranks backwards is most proper to make a Guard, because the Soldiers will close to the sides of a Street or Lane, and leave the Passage larger, facing towards the midst of the way. The Commands are. Ranks, to the Right Left Wheel backwards. March. Which is to be performed as the other wheelings are, only the Soldiers wheel backwards as in the other wheelings forward. The Officers, Drums and Serjeants place them∣selves as before. Reduction. Ranks, as you were. Wheel. March. If you would wheel by half Ranks, these fol∣lowing Directions are to be observed. The number of Men ought to be even in every Rank. But, If there be an odd Man, the odd man must be allowed to the right hand in the first Rank, the odd man in the second Rank to the left, the third to the right, the fourth to the left, and so on; then your Ranks when wheeled will be of an equal num∣ber.
The Command is. By half Ranks, wheel to the right and left back∣wards. March. At which Command the half Ranks wheel to the right and left outwards, marching backwards towards both Flanks, separating and making two ranks in opposition to each other. The Officers and Colours are to separate accor∣dingly, and to take their Posts before the Soldiers to make a Guard. Reduction. Half Ranks, wheel to the Right and left in∣wards. March. When a Battalion is Commanded to march by the King in Companies, the commanding Officer of each Company must march at the head of his Company, the Colonel included. The Companies must march as they are placed in Battalion, the Company on the right marching first, then the next Company on the left of that Company, so the rest successively, that the Com∣pany on the left march last. The Officers are to Salute marching, though they Saluted standing before. The Piles must be advanced when they march by the King, or to be viewed by any other Person.
The like is to be observed in their drawing up at all times. When a Battalion is to march by single Com∣panies out of the Field or Place where they are drawn up, to their respective quarters, they must observe this Method. The Eldest Company being on the right, marches first. The next Eldest being on the left Marches next. Then the next eldest Company, and so the rest, that the youngest being in the Center are the last that March. The Captains, Leiutenants and Ensigns of Foot are to wear their Gorgets when they are upon Duty or in Arms with their Companies. When a Company Troops away, the Pikes must be always in the Front. When the Drums beat a Troop, the Pikes with∣out any Command are to advance.
Some General Directions for Orders of Battle. THere being many various circumstances as number of Men, Time, Situation of Place and other Accidents, which prevent a certain rule for Battle; yet some short directions may for an Example be very proper to shew the nature of the thing, with which I shall close the foot Ex∣ercise. And because I would be as particular as I can, I shall confine my self within the compass of one Battalion. First, command Silence, which must be well observed. The Files must be at three foot distance, and the Ranks at four or five, that the Soldiers may have room to load and fire with ease, if occasion be, as they march. They must march slowly observing the right, and preserving the Intervals, which must be sixty Paces or more, if the ground will permit, that Bodies of fifty or sixty Files may pass through with ease. It having often in Battle proved very preju∣dicial, having not room allowed to wheel or march bodies or bring up reserves to support as occasion requires.
None is to speak but the Commander in chief, or the Major, or Aid Major, who is always to attend his Commands. To a Battalion of Ten Companies, besides the Colonel and Leiutenant Colonel, there are sup∣posed to be eight Captains, who are to be posted thus. The Colonel, Leiutenat Colonel, and the fifth Captain at the head of the Pikes. First and third Captains at the head of the right Division of Shot. Second and fourth Captains at the head of the left Division of Shot. Sixth Captain in the rear of the Pikes. Seventh Captain in the rear of the left wing of Shot. The Eight Captain in the rear of the right wing of Shot. First and third Leiutenants at the head of the right wing of Shot. Second and fourth Leiutenants at the head of the left wing of Shot.
Fifth Leiutenant on the right Flank. Sixth Leiutenant on the left Flank. Seventh Leiutenant in the rear of the Pikes. Eighth Leiutenant in the rear of the left wing of Shot. Ninth Leiutenant in the rear of the right wing of Shot. Which Method is to be observed by placing the eldest Captain in the Front, the youngest of which with the Colonel and Leiutenant Colonel, or in their absence the eldest Captains, so pro∣ceeding in the rule before mentioned; the young∣est being in the rear, unless it shall be command∣ed otherways by the Commander in chief. If you advance against the Enemy, being out of Musquet shot, the Officers at the head of the Bat∣tallion are to march in a line two paces before the Front, their Pikes comported, often looking back to see there be no disorder, of which great care must be taken in marching against an Enemy. When the Musquetteers come within Shot and march with their Musquets guarded, the Ranks must be closed forwards to three Foot or less, and the distance of files preserved. When the first rank is commanded to present or knel, the Officers must all retreat into the Inter∣vals
of the files, yet so as to see the right and left of the Battalion. When the Musquetteers kneel, the Officers must stoop and comport themselves as near as they can to their method, yet so as to see all well perfor∣med, as hath been shewed in firing before. The Commanders in the rear are to observe, That the Battalion keep marching and close for∣wards without Noise or Confusion, and to keep the Pikes even with the wings of Shot, least the wings advance and form an half Moon; by which means the Pikes must be pressed, and so fall into confusion, which if kept up equal cannot be dis∣ordered in the march. Care must be taken to preserve the distance in Ranks and files as before shewed. It will be best for the Pikes to be Shouldred or Ported, to prevent as much as may be the Ene∣mies shot from breaking them, which will be more liable to be done at advance than otherways, be∣cause Shouldered or Ported, lays them much lower and more slanting for the Shot to glance off, if any hit them. When an Army is drawn up, the usual distance betwixt the lines is 300 paces, but those things are to be used at Discretion. The Commander in chief may be on Horseback, the better to observe and give order; but coming within shot, and the Musquetteers preparing to fire, must alight and charge the Enemy with his Pike in his hand.
Thus I have with as much brevity as I could, ex∣plained a Method for order of Battle, whereby the Reader well observing, may without much difficul∣ty inspect into the Rule which may inform him how to perform orders of Battle with various num∣bers.
THE EXERCISE OF HORSE. THe Horse Exercise as it consisteth of fewer words of Command than the Foot, can∣not possibly be reduced into so many seve∣veral forms; therefore the alterations in their Ex∣ercise is, nor can be little altered, consequently more generally known: I shall therefore treat as briefly of it as may be.
When a Troop or Squadron of Horse is to Exercise, their Carbines and Pistols being loaden, care being taken by the Corporals, that they be properly placed in their Ranks, and are in a rea∣diness: The Officer in chief commands silence, which must be well observed, then proceeds as followeth. Command. Ranks close to the Crupper: at which the Ranks close forwards, that their Horses heads be ad∣vanced to the Cruppers of their Leaders. Command. Lay your right hands on your Swords. Explanation. Quit your Bridles, slipping the Buttons of the Reins down to the Manes, that you may be the more ready to recover them again; and turning your right hands backwards with a Compass, bring your right hands, placing them on the handles of your Swords, your left hands on the Scabbards. Command. Draw your Swords.
Explanation. Perform it all together with a quick Motion, holding your Swords upright before you, that you may see them as it were betwixt your Horses Ears at the same time, siezing your Bridles with your left hands. Command. Place your Swords in your Bridle-hands. Explanation. Turn the Edges of your Swords towards your left hands, and place the Blades just above the Hilts in your left hands, your Thumbs against the lat of the Blades. Command. Lay your hands on your Pistols. Explanation. Bring your hands with a Compass, but without Constraint, your Elbows extended; take hold of your Pistols in a full hand.
Command. Draw your Pistols. Explanation. Draw them forth all together, holding them upright, your hands even with your Girdle Places. Command. Cock your Pistols. Explanation. Sink your Pistols, that the Butt-ends may rest against your Thighs; at the same time place your Thumbs on the Cocks, and draw them to a full bent. Command. Hold up your Pistols. Explanation. Raise your hands even with your Foreheads, holding your Pistols upright, quit your Cocks and place your Fore-fingers before your Triggers.
Command. Fire. Explanation. Draw your Triggers all together, and having fired, keep your Hands and Pistols in the same Po∣sture. Command. Return your Pistols. Explanation. Drop the Muzels towards your left hands, and raising your Elbows, turn your Muzels downwards, and place them in your Holsters as before. The same command is to be used for the other Pistols, which being performed, Command, Lay your hands on your Carbines. Explanation. Lay your right hands on the Stocks, grasping them fast in a full Hand, your Thumbs over the stocks in the hollows thereof.
Command, Advance your Carbines. Explanation. Raise the Barrels close by your Horses necks, advancing to that height that you place the Butt∣ends of them on your thigh, the Barrels towards you. Command. Cock your Carbines. Explanation. Without moving your Carbines, lay your Thumbs on the Cocks, and draw them to a full bent. Command. Present your Carbines. Explanation. Quit your Cocks, and advancing your Carbines that your hands be even with your Brests, the Bar∣rels towards you.
Command. Fire. Explanation. Draw your Triggers all together, keeping your Carbines in the same Posture. Command. Let fall your Carbines. Explanation. Let your Muzels sink forwards down by your Horses necks, then quit your Carbines with your right hands, and let them hang down your sides as before. Command. Take your Swords from your Bridle hands. Explanation. Place your right hands on the handles of your Swords, quitting them with your left hands, raising them as before. Command. Return your Swords.
Explanation. With a flourish to the right turn your Swords, directing the points towards the Scabbards; at the same time forsaking your Bridles, take your Scabbards in your left hands, put up your Swords, then sieze your bridles with your left hands, sit∣ing in the former Posture. Command. Rein back as you were. Explanation. The Soldiers are all to draw their Horses back into their former Ground and stand in even ranks. The Officers must take care to see that each Mo∣tion be performed exactly and together, therefore the words of Command must be given leasurely. When a body of Horse is drawn up, the Com∣mander in chief must be a Horse length before the other Officers who are to be as near their Men as may be, the same distance must be observed in marching. In wheelings it must be observed thus. If your Command is to wheel to the right, the right hand Men keep their ground, turning their Horse-heads to the right, whilst the left comes about, in which motion they must observe their left hand Men.
Care must be taken not to close to the left (as was formerly practised) more than absolute ne∣cessity requires, because it is apt to put the ranks out of order. The same way you may perform wheelings to the left. If you face your Horses about, which is necessary to practice; it is best done to the left about, unless necessity requires otherways. It may be Convenient in exercise to divide your Troop or Squadron into Divisions, and let them charge each other by firing their Pistols and clash∣ing their Swords, for it will much embolden their Horses. Also let them endeavour each party to break through the other, the Soldiers will know the better how to keep themselves in order to receive or encounter an Enemy. When two bodies of Horse are to charge each other, it is best to do it with their Swords in their hands without Pistols or Carbines. The two chief parts of Exercise in a body of Horse against an Enemy are Wheelings and Dou∣blings; I shall treat of each of them briefly, as al∣so in some general rules explain the way to form a body on several occasions. If you are in danger of being attacked by an Enemy in the Front or Rear, you may order small Parties to be advanced as Forelorns, or be pla∣ced in the rear as Reserves; they may be also very usefull to secure the flanks if occasion be, marching them at a convenient distance that your body may
be clear, and they are in a readier Posture to wheel to defend any part where most occasion may require. These Parties may be by files from the flanks at the Officers discretion. But if it be thought not Convenient to lessen the Front, it may be performed by the Rear-ranks doubling, which will first inlarge the front, and then they may be detached as occasion requires, or if you are in danger to be outwinged by the Ene∣my, you may keep them together. The way for the Rear-rank to double the Front, is to be performed to the right or left, or right and left, thus. Suppose your Rear-rank is to double the Front upon the right. Command. Rear-rank to the right hand double the Front, at which word the rank in the Rear turn to the right and March, then turn to the left, placing themselves thus: The right hand man of the Rank placing himself in the Front, on the right of the right hand Man, the next Soldier placing himself in the rear of him, the third on the right of the first, the fourth in the rear of him, and so the rest; thus they will be two deep as the rest of the body. To reduce them.
Command. Ranks as you were. Here it must be observed, those that concluded the Motion, must march again first, by which they will attain their former Ground. The same Method may be used to the left, or by Division, giving the Command accordingly. The same may be performed to the Rear, fa∣cing the body about, which then makes it a Front accidental. Also to the right or left wing, wheeling your body to the right or left, makes them Fronts acci∣dental. The body being thus disposed, you may detach as beforesaid for Forlorns or Reserves, by larger or smaller Parties, or more or less of them or to such distance as may be necessary; in these Cases discretion must be the Commanders Guide. These parties may also be very useful in the passing a Bridge to divert an Enemy while the body can come up, or prevent a sudden onset in a strait place, being capable to discover, if any surprise he designed by the Enemy, before they are too far advanced, and can give notice by firing a Pistol to cause a Halt, and retreat to their main body with ease and safety. Also to secure the rear till they be all passed and then to follow them, for small bodies can be quicker in Motion and March than large Squadrons can.
But if you are passing a Street or Lane, and the Enemies foot are possess'd thereof, and you intend to force your way, you command three or four files, or what you think necessary, from the right and left to file off on both sides and march in two files towards the Enemy, and after the body have re∣ceived the Enemies Shot, let those files rank in∣wards and charge the Enemy, being seconded by the main body. If you are marching through a Street or Lane, where the King or General is to pass, you com∣mand thus: To the right and left hand file: at which word the Ranks file to the right and left outwards Marching, so become two files; but if the Ranks are so large that there be not room to receive the others in the Intervals, they must keep two abrest or more on the right and left, the others placing themselves behind them in the like numbers successively. To Reduce them. Command. Ranks as you were. By what is here briefly hinted at may be obser∣ved, the Method of all Exercise or Service for Horse, so far as may reasonably be explained, espe∣cially in so small a Tract. FINIS.
