D2509 R5207 12270177 58214
THE Duke of Monmouth's CASE, WITH ALL The very strange Crimes, and great Misdemeanors Al∣ledged against his Grace, in a whole Dozen of Ar∣ticles. THE Tories have always the ill luck to over-do and ill time their Business; their Malice and Rage is so great against the Protestant Religion, that it blinds them, or else they never would have made an Information of a Riot committed by a Person of that Rank, Bloud and Fortune, as the Duke of Monmouth is, in spite of all their abusive Instruments, Machinations and Disgrace, continues his Loy∣alty to his Prince, together with his Love to his Religion, Country, and the English Nation: I say, had they not been blinded with Rage, Folly and Mad∣ness, they would not have accused such a Person on so frivolous occasions. O blessed Act of Parliament! that secures the English Liberties, and renders an Englishman Bailable, that he may not be sent to the Tower, or Newgate, or any other Prison upon every objected Crime. God defend our Prince, and our Laws, our Religion, and our Liberties, and continue both Nobles, Gentry and Commonalty in their Obedience and Loyalty: We need not fear whilst we have so good and Gracious a King; and yet some things seem strange to the Christian World, that the meanest of the Rascality dare abuse the Royal Bloud, and that others are permitted to alledg on so groundless an occasion, a Riot upon a Person that has born so great a Figure in the World, that has Commanded an Army, that has shewd invincible Courage and Bravery; that has the Bloud of Charles the Good and the Great running in his Veins—Some would fain render him Absalom a Traitor, who is rather like the young Scipio, ready with his Sword to rescue his Father from the danger of his Ene∣mies, or like Aeneas, ready to carry him in his Arms from amidst the flame of a burning City; and who is ready, together with his Prince, to defend his Country, and the Established Religion of the Land. Hence rises the Hatred, the Malice, the Rage of undermining Enemies, for the sake of his Religion, and because he is beloved by the People; and tho nothing in all his Actions can be pick'd out to render this Noble and Loyal Person Criminal, or that by the severest of our Laws tends any ways to it; yet rather than not shew their Malice to his Grace, whom some think they may tread upon with impu∣nity, they have drawn up Articles purporting a Riot, which Allegations for the satisfaction of the World are here Printed.
The strange Crimes and Misdemeanors alledged against His Grace James Duke of Monmouth. IMprimis, That the Lord Colchester had caused to be hired fifteen Post-Hor∣ses for the Duke of Monmouth and his Retinue, to ride to an Horse-Match beyond Chester. 2dly. That the Lord Colchester was seen to whisper with another Gentleman for almost half an hour. 3dly. That his said Grace was met by several Companies of People on the way, as he passed along, to the number of some Thousands, and most highly broke the Peace, in crying, God bless the King, the Protestant Religion, and the Protestant Duke. 4thly. That he had willingly assented to be most splendidly Treated by all the truly Loyal Gentlemen of the Country, to the great grief and sorrow of heart among all the Tories. 5thly. That on the same day his Grace won the Plate at Walesie, several Per∣sons made Bonfires at Chester, and drank the Kings Health with great Joy and Acclamations, tho some of the dis-affected Tories flang Chamber-Pots on their Heads, for which the others returned a Volley of Stones at their Windows, in requital of their rudeness. 6thly. That divers Gentlemen met together to Dine without any Braces of Bucks sent them by Mr. C—ch; and did highly derogate from the Princi∣ples of the Tories, in drinking the Kings Health before the Duke of York's. 7thly. That some Persons in his Graces Company was heard to affirm, that a Popish Successor was no very good expedient for the establishment of the Protestant Religion. 8thly. That his Grace should ride with several Tory Gentlemen for the Plate at Walesie, and win it from them to the great grief of the Nation. 9thly. That the said James Duke of Monmouth should be heard to declare, that he would willingly lay down his Life in Preservation of His Majesties Per∣son and Government, as by Law established. 10ly. That his Grace believed there was a Popish Plot, and no Protestant or Presbyterian Plot whatsoever, as the Tories would fain have the People be∣lieve. 11thly. That in like manner he did not believe the Five Jesuits and Coleman, Executed at Tyburn, died Martyrs. 12thly. That he should declare, he would never consent or assent to the establishing Popery here in England. To all which Articles and Allegations, his Grace was told he must give in Sureties for the Peace, or otherwise stand Committed to the Serjeant at Arms till he should be released by due Course of Law. His Grace found Noblemen and Gentlemen enough to be his Bail very readi∣ly, and accordingly his Grace gave sufficient Bail, whose Names are here In∣serted, Viz. The Lord Russel. Lord Clare. Lord Gray. Esquires. Leviston Gower. John Offly. London, Printed for J. C.
