D380 12952045 95946
CANTUS, Songs and Fancies, To Three, Four, or Five Parts, Both apt for Voices and Viols. With a brief Introduction to Musick, As is taught by Thomas Davidson, in the Musick-School of Aberdene. Second Edition, Corrected and Enlarged. ABERDENE, Printed by JOHN FORBES, and are to be sold at his shop, Anno Domini. M.DC.LXVI.
Insignia Vrbis abredonie BON ACCORD
Unto the Right Honorable GILBERT GRAY Lord Provest. ROBERT FORBES Bailie ALEXANDER ALEXANDER Bailie IOHN BURNET Bailie THOMAS MITCHELL Bailie WALTER ROBERTSON Dean of Gild, ROBERT SKENE Treasurer, And to the rest of the Honorable Counsel of the City of ABERDENE. RIGHT HONORABLE, A few years ago, that I might approve my self no less an ob∣servant Citizen, then a provident Parent, being invited by the desires of some,
allured by the kindness of others, and encouraged by the expectation and good hopes of the usefulness of the thing it self to the Place; I did lay down my First-born as a fondling, at the feet of Your Honorable Bench; solemnly engaging, that as it re∣ceived its being from BON-ACCORD, and its growth from Your Goodness, so it should period its stature with Your Pleasure. This Promise hath pressed me, that my Press might always bear the Impress of Your Vertues; and express (though in a smal type) my thankfulness, according to the laudable custom of Votaries in all Ages, after a few years growth, to represent the same to Your Sanctuary, that it may be confirmed in Your favor. For that I may confess ingenuously when I looked deliberatly on this my first Mephibosheth, I offered the same as an object of pity, being so mank and maim in its chiefest parts, like a pittiful Embleme of Or∣pheus teared by the Thracian women, its vigor seemed to wither, its tender hands to dry up, and whole body to vanish in a consumption; had I not called a Tymous Counsel of the most Expert in this Place, who diligently turning over their old Records, and rifling the labors of their Ancestors, unanimously and so chearfully did contribute all their pains, that now being fred of all the noxious humors that were preying on its vitals, its wants are made up, defects supplyed, its dryed hands received moisture, and strength diffused so thorow the whole limbs, that it dare show it self to the Publick on its own leggs, if Your Wisdoms command; yea, run to the Schools to warble the Anthems of Your Liberality. Seeing it is natural to children to lisp out first their Parents names, why should it be singular? If it did so when on the Nurse breasts, why not in the flower and prime of its youth?
Though it be silent, it hath a voice, and could sing its own pedegrie, and the fruitfulness of its Mother Science; yea, with Strabo, Pindarus, Plutarch, Aristotle, and all Antiquity demonstrate, how much brutes, as well as men, are born obse∣quious subjects to this Queen, whose charming Melody was only able to enchant Barbaritie, civilize Savages, secure Societies, and so give matter to the significant Apologues of Amphion, Linus, Orpheus, and the building of the Theban walls, were it not the fear of being tedious, it would not be afraid to assert with Divine Plato, and his Followers; that the Heavenly Soul by which the Vnivers is animate, doth owe its Origen to this Lady; and narrate how much the great Solon, that Sun of Greece, bestowed on his Nephew, for teaching him one Sa∣phick Tune: and how much pains the wise Socrates, though full of years, did gree∣dily bestow upon the Lute; and how much that greatest Captain, and Magi∣strat of Athens Themistocles, after he had accomplished himself in all Vertue, and most of Arts, was dashed with the sharp Sarcasme of a fellow Magistrat: How can he keep men in Harmonie, and people in Concord, who hath not learned as yet to tune a Citeron? It were no difficultie to show how much the Ancients used this Science, as a remedy and amulet against all Fascinations: as the Harp of Da∣vid, to alley the fury of Saul; and the greatest auxiliarie also in time of Battle, so that the famous Stratonicus did discern the courage of his Souldiers, by the musi∣cal and saliant motion of their Bodies; and therefore, bearing a Citeron in his En∣signe, did adde this motto, Adversus male canentes Cythera; as if none deserved Victory and Triumph but Musicians.
And now, seeing it hath pleased Providence in Your Wisdoms Persons, to bless the Bench of BON-ACCORD with such an Harmonious Consort, of as many Musitians as Magistrats, that all under Your Magistracie may descant on Your Labors, and Posteritie sing Your Praises to coming Ages: Admit this Poor Pre∣sent to Your Acceptance; its Breath and Being depends on Your Brow, being willing to receive its Sentence from the same, whether it shal be smothered in the Birth, or view the Publick under Your Patrocinie: However, that the best Blessings and Out-bearing of the ALMIGHTY, may accompany Your Wisdoms in all Your Honorable Designs, Shal be the dayly Prayer of YOUR HONORS Own Servant, Iohn Forbes.
Table of the Songs contained in this Book. AWake, sweet Love xxiij Away vain world xxxv BRave Mars begins to rouse xxxvij Begone, sweet night xl Behold a wonder here xliv COme Love, let's walk xiv Come sweet Love xxxij Care away goe thou from me l EVen Death, behold I breath xxiv FAin would I wed liij Flow my tears lv HOw should my feeble body xv How now Shepherd xlviij IF care do cause men cry i Intil a mirthful May iij In a garden so green iv If floods of tears could xiij I love great God above xxvj Ioy to the person of my Love xxxiv Iry came to lebus-Salem xxxviij LEt not, I say, the sluggish xj Like as the dumb Solsequium xviij L ike as the Lark within xxv MY bailful breast xxij My complaining is but xlij NOw is the month of x No wonder is suppose xvj O Lusty May, with Flora ij Over the mountains xlv REmember, O thou Man ix Remember me, my Dear xlvij SAthan, my foe, full of xij Sleep wayward thought xx Sweet Kate, of late, ran xxxiij Shepherd, saw thou not lij THe thoughts of men j The gowans are gay The lowest trees have tops xij Though your strangeness j There is a thing that much is ij There was a time when silly ess j WHen as the Greeks v When chile cold age vii What if a dry, or a month xvij When Father Adam xvj Where ar thou, Hpe xxviij Who doth behold my Mistris xxx Wo worth the time xxiv When May is in her prime xxxvj White as Lillies was her ace xxxi With my Love my life was xliij When from my Love I look xlvj Will said to his Mamie xli YOu Lovers all that love vj You minor Buties liv The Pleugh-Sg. Three Voices. All sons of Adam. Trip and go hey. FINIS.
Guidonian hand
The SCALE of the GAM. The Treble keyes. ee la la In Space. The midle keyes. dd lasol sol la In Rule, The Bass keyes. cc sol fa fa sol In Space. bb fami mi fa In Rule. aa la mi re re mi la In Space. g sol re ut b quarre. ut re sol{G-clef} In Rule. f faut b molle. ut fa In Space. e la mi mi la In Rule. d la sol re re sol la In Space. c sol fa ut Properchant. ut fa sol{C-clef} In Rule. b fami mi fa In Space. a la mi re re mi la In Rule. G sol re ut b quarre. ut re sol In Space. F fa ut b molle. ut fa{F-clef} In Rule. E Ia mi mi la In Space. D sol re re sol In Rule. C faut Properchant. ut fa In Space. B mi mi In Rule. A re re In Space. ut b quarre. ut In Rule.
An Exposition of the Gam, and Cliefs. FOR the understanding of this fore-going Scale, you must begin at the lowest word, Gam-ut, and so go upwards to the end, still ascending. Then ye must get it perfectly without book, to say it forewards and backwards. Secondly, you must learn to know the parts of it, and wherein every key standeth; that is, whether in Rule, or in Space. Third∣ly, how many Cliess, and how many Notes every key containeth. And lastly, the properties of the Gam. Q. How many parts is in the Gam? A. Two. Q. Which ? A. Bass and Alt. Q. Which is Bass, and which is Alt? A. All from Gam-ut, to C-sol-fa-ut, is Bass; and all from C-sol-fa-ut, to E-la, is Alt. Q. C-sol-fa-ut, whether is it Bass, or Alt? A. It is neither Bass nor Alt, but betwixt the two. Q. What call you a Clief, and what a Note? A. A Clief is a character set on a Rule at the begin∣ning of a verse, showing the height and lowness of every Note standing on the same Verse, or in space (although use hath taken it for a general rule, never to let any Clief in the Space, except the ♭ Clief) and every Space, or Rule, not having a Clief set in it, hath one understood, being only omitted for not pestering the Verse, and sa∣ving of labor to the writer: but here it is taken for a let∣ter beginning the name of every Key, and are they which you see on the Scale set at the beginning of every word. Q. How many Cliefs hath every Key? A. Every Key hath but one Clief, except ♭-fa--rul, which hath two Cliefs. Q. How many Cliefs are there? A. There be in all seven Cliefs, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, but in use in singing there be but four; that is to say, the F-fa-ut Clief, which is commonly in the Bass, or lowest part, being formed or made thus {F-clef} The C-sol-fa-ut Clief, which is common to every part, and is made thus {C-clef}. The G-sol-re-ut Clief in Alt, which is commonly used in the Treble, or highest part, and is made thus G. And the B Clief which is common to every part, and is made thus ♭, or thus ♯. The one ♭ signifying the half Note, or flat singing, the other ♯ the whole Note, or sharp singing. Q. How many Notes is there in Musick? A. There are but six Notes, which are called, and are commonly set down thus,  ut re mi fa sol la For the better understan∣ding of this, you shal observe the C-sol-fa-ut Clief stan∣ding on the fourth Rule from beneath, then you must reckon down from the Clief, as though the Verse were the Scale of the Gam, assigning to every Scale and Rule a several Key; & you shal find that the first Note standeth in C-fa-ut, and the last in A-la-mi-re in Bass.
Another Example. ut re mi fa sol la la sol fa mi re ut Q In how many several Keys may you begin the six Notes? A. These three Keys of the following Example. But what is done in these Notes may be also done in their Octoes; as what is done in am-ut, may also be done in G-sol-re-ut in Bass, and likewise in G-sol-re-ut in Alt. And what in C-fa-ut, may be also in C sol-fa-ut, and in C-sol-fa. And what in F-fa-ut in Bass, may also be done in F-fa-ut in Alt. But these be the three principal Keys containing the three nature or properties of singing. Q. How many Keys is in the Gam? A. Twenty: ten in Rule, and ten in Space. Q How many Notes are in these twenty Keys? A. Two and fourty Notes; viz. seven Uts, seven Re's, seven Mi's, seven Fa's, seven Sol's, and seven La's. Q. Which are the three properties of Musick? A. B-quare, Properchant, and B-mole. Q. How many of these Vts sings B-quare, how many Properchant, and how many B-mole? A. Three B-quare, two Properchant, and two B-mole. Q. Which are the three uts that singeth B-quare. A. The ut of Gam-ut, the ut of G-sol-re-ut in Bass, and the ut of G-sol-re-ut in Alt. Q. Which are the two uts that singeth Properchant? A. The ut of C-fa-ut, and the ut of C-sol-fa ut. Q. Which are the two uts that singeth B-mole? A. The ut of F fa ut in Bass, & the ut of -fa ut in Alt. Q. You have spoke of the uts, but how doth the other Notes sing? A. As every ut singeth, so doth the rest of the Notes likewise sing which ascendeth from that ut. As for example, the ut of Gam-ut singeth B quare, therefore the re of -re, the mi of -mi, the fa of C-fa-ut, &c. doth sing likewise B-quare. Likewise the ut of C-fa-ut singeth Properchant, therefore the re of D-sol-re▪ the mi of -la-mi, the fa of F-fa-ut, and the sol of G-sol-re-ut, &c. singeth likewise Proprchant: & the ut of F-fa-ut singeth B-mole, therefore the re of G-sol-re-ut, the mi of A-la-mi-re, the fa of B-fa--mi, must likewise sing B-mole; because the Notes doth arise from these uts, as you may plainly see on the Scale: and so forth of the rest. Of the MOODS. Q. HOw many Moods in there? A. Four. Q. Which four? A. Perfect the More, and Imperfect the More; Per∣fect the Less, and Imperfect the Less.
The first Mood. Q. Perfect the More, whereby know ye it? A. By my Figure and my Number. Q. How know ye it by your Figure? A A round circle with a prick {timeperf-prolatperf} Q How know ye it by your Number? A. They go all by threes, except Crochets, Quavers, and Semi-quavers. Q. How go they? A By twoes. Q. Number that Mood. A. Three Minims to the Semi-brief, so is the Semi-brief three; three Semi-briefs to the Brief, so is the Brief nine; three Briefs to the Long, so is the Long seven and twenty; three Longs to the Large, so is the large four score and one. The Example of the first Mood. Perfect the More. The second Mood. Q. Imperfect the More, whereby know ye it? A. By my Figure and my Number. Q How know ye it by your Figure? A. Half a Circle with a prick, {timeimperf-prolatperf} Q. How know ye it by your Number? A. They go all by twoes, except Minims. Q. How go they? A. By threes. Q. Number that Mood. A. Three Minims to the Semi-brief, so is the Semi-brief three: two Semi-briefs to the Brief, so is the Brief six: two Briefs to the Long, so is the Long twelve: two Longs to the Large, so is the Large four and twentie. The Example of the second Mood. Imperfect the More.
The third Mood. Q. Perfect the Less, whereby know ye it? A. By my Figure and my Number. Q How know ye it by your Figure? A. A round Circle without a prick, {timeperf-prolatimperf} Q. How know ye it by your Number? A. They go all by twoes, except Semi-briefs. Q. How go they? A. By threes. Q. Number that Mood. A. Two Minims to the Semi-brief, so is the Semi-brief two: three Semi-briefs to the Brief, so is the Brief six: two Briefs to the Long, so is the Long twelve: two Longs to the Large, so is the Large four and twenty. The Example of the third Mood. Perfect the Less. The fourth Mood. Q. Imperfect the Less, whereby know ye it? A. By my Figure and my Number. Q. How know ye it by your Figure? A. A half Circle without a prick{timeimperf-prolatimperf} Q. How know ye it by your Number? A. They go all bv twoes. Q. Number that Mood. A. Two Minims to the Semi-brief, so is the Semi-brief two: two Semi-briefs to the Brief, so is the Brief sour: two Briefs to the Long, so is the Long eight: two Longs to the Large, so is the Large sixteen. The Example of the fourth Mood. Imperfect the Less. The DEGREES. Q. HOw many Degrees goeth to every Mood? A. Three Q Which three? A. Mood, Time, and Prolation. Q. What is Mood? A. It is a measuring of Longs by Larges, and Briefs by Longs, and is either greater or lesser. Q. What is the greater Mood. A. It is a measuring of Longs by Larges, and is either Perfect or Imperfect. Q. What is the greater Mood Perfect? A. Three Longs to the Large. Q What is the greater Mood Imperfect? A. Two Longs to the Large. Q What is the lesser Mood? A. It is a measuring of Briefs by Longs, and is either Perfect or Imperfect.
Q. What is the lesser Mood Perfect? A. Three Briefs to the Long. Q. What is the lesser Mood Imperfect? A. Two Briefs to the Long. Q. What is Time? A. It is a measuring of Semi-briefs by Briefs, and is either perfect or imperfect. Q. What is perfect Tyme? A. Three Semi-briefs to the Brief. Q. What is imperfect Tyme? A. Two Semi-briefs to the Brief. Q. What is Prolation? A. It is a measuring of Minims by Semi-briefs, and is either perfect or imperfect. Q. What is perfect Prolation? A. Three Minims to the Semi-brief. Q. What is imperfect Prolation? A. Two Minims to the Semi-brief. Q Perfect the More, {timeperf-prolatperf} how goeth it in Mood, Time, and Prolation? A. Perfect great Mood, perfect less Mood, perfect Time, and perfect Prolation. Q Imperfect the More, {timeimperf-prolatperf} how goeth it in Mood, Time and Prolation? A. Imperfect great Mood, imperfect less Mood, im∣perfect Time, and perfect Prolation. Q. Perfect the less, {timeperf-prolatimperf} how goeth it in Mood, Time and Prolation? A. Imperfect great Mood, imperfect less Mood, per∣fect Time, and imperfect Prolation. Q Imperfect the less, {timeimperf-prolatimperf} how goeth it in Mood, Time and Prolation? A. Imperfect great Mood, imperfect less Mood, im∣perfect Time, and imperfect Prolation. The CONCORDS. Q. WHat is a Concord? A. It is a mixt sound compact of diverse voices, entring with delight in the ear, and is either perfect, or imperfect. Q. What is a perfect Concord? A. It is that which may stand by it self, and of it self maketh a perfect harmony, without the mixture of any other. Q. VVhat is an imperfect Concord? A. It is that which maketh not a full sound, and nee∣deth the following of a perfect Concord, to make it stand in the harmony. Q. How many Concords is there? A. Nine. Q. VVhich nine? A. An Unisone, a third, a fifth, a sixth, an octo, a tenth, a twelfth, a thirteenth, and a fifteenth. Q. How many of them are perfect, and how many imperfect? A. Five perfect, and four imperfect. Q. VVhich are the five perfect? A. An unitone, a fifth, an octo, a twelfth, and a fif∣teenth. Q. VVhich are the four imperfect? A. A third, a sixth, a tenth, and a thirteenth with their octoes. Q. VVhat mean you by their octoes? A. Because their octoes are but the self same kind. As for example, An octo is the kind of an unisone, a tenth is the kind of a third, & a twelfth the kind of a fifth, &c. Q. VVhat needs so many Concords seeing there are so few kinds?
A. Albeit their kinds be one, yet the sounds are di∣verse. As an octo hath another sound then an unisone, and a tenth hath another sort of sound then a third, and a twelfth hath another sort of sound then a fifth, &c. As likewise it giveth bounds to the composer, or setter of parts. The Scale of Concords. Discords. Perfect. Imperfect. Perfect. Imperfect. Notes, their Names, Number, and Proportions. Example. Large. {large note} Long. {long note} Brief. {breve note} Semi. {semibreve note} Min. {minim note} Crotch. {crotchet note} Quav. {quaver note} Semi-qu. {semiquaver note} Rests, or Pauses, of Prick, and Notes of Syncopation. Example. Large. 8. {large rest} {large note} Long. 4. {long rest} {long note} Brief. 2. {breve rest} {breve note} Semi-br. 1. {semibreve rest} {semibreve note} Min. {minim rest} {minim note} Crotchet. {crotchet rest} {crotchet note} Quaver. {quaver rest} {quaver note}
A further Example of the Prick-Notes, wherein you see your Measure of the Time barred, according to the Semi-brief, both by prick Semi-briefs, Minims, and Crochets. Example. Pric Long. {long note}. Pric Brief. {breve note}. Pric Semi. {semibreve note}. Pric Minim. {minim note}. Pric Crotchet. {crotchet note}. Pric Quaver. {quaver note}. Followeth now to speak of Ligatures. Q. VVhat is a Ligature? A. It is a combination or knitting together of two or more Notes, altering by their situation and order, the value of the same, holding out if your first Note lack a tail, the second descending, it is a long.
As in this Example. A second Example. If the first Note have a tail on the left side hanging downward: the second ascending or descending, it is a Brief. Example. Of final Notes in Ligatures. Every final Note of a Ligature descending, being a square Note, is a long. Example.
THE FIRST SONG. IF care doth cause men cry, Why do I not complain? If every wight bewails his woe, Why do I not the same? Since that amongst them all, I dare well say is none So far from joy, so full of woe, Nor hath more cause to mourn. For all things living hath Sometime a quyet rest; The drawing Ox, the bearing Asse, And every other beast. The Peisand and the Post, Which are at all assayes, The Ship-boy and the Galey slave, Hath time to take their ease.
Save I, poor wretch, whom care Dath so me now constrain, To wail the day, and weep the night, Continually in pain. From painfulness to pain, From pain to bitter tears, From tears to painful pain again, And so my life it wears. Each thing under the Sun, That I can hear or see, It makes me to bewail my woe, And cruel destinie. When I see men rejoice, Seeing I cannot so, I take more pleasure in my pain, It doubles but my woe. Or when I see men have Their most desired sight, Alace! I think all men are well, Save I, poor woful wight. Or when I hear the sound Of Song or Instrument, I think all thing that joyful is, Doth cause me to lament. Even as the stricken Dee Withdraws himself alone, So seek I then some secret place, Where I may make my moan. Although that for the time Doth much appease my grief; Yet doth it breed me further pain, To cause me more mischief. THE SECOND PART. SInce that amongst them all, I dare well say is none More grievous sinner nor I am, And hath more cause to moan. My youthful years mispent In health and ignorance; Not caring how I spent my time, In sloath and negligence. Even like a wandring sheep, Long have I gone astray: Lord, bring me to thy flock again, And guide me the right way. Grant me thy grace to rise, And stand in time to come, That I may mend my wretched life, And mourn for time by-run. Call me not to accounts Of former faults misdone: But let my Saviors bloody wounds, Be ransome for my sin. In mercy, Lord, my God, Receive me home to thee; That I may walk in thy true ear, And praise thy Name trulie. Relieve my burthen great Of sin and worldly care; That I may in thy Sanctuary Sing praises everm ir. FINIS. THE II. SONG. O Lusty May with Flora Queen, The balmy drops frō Phebus sheen,
Prelusant beams before the day, before the day, the day. By thee Diana groweth green, Through gladness of this lusty May, Through gladness of this lusty May. Then Aurora that is so bright, To woful hearts he calls great light, Right pleasantly before the day, &c And shows and sheds forth of that light, Through gladness of this lusty May, Through gladness of this lusty May. Birds on their beughs of every sort, Sends sorth their notes, and makes great mirth, On banks that blooms on every bray, &c. And fares and flyes ov'r field and firth, Through gladness, &c. All Lovers hearts that are in care, To their Ladies they do repare, In fresh mornings before the day, &c. And are in mirth ay more and more, Through gladness, &c. Of every moneth in the year, To mirthful May there is no peer; Her glistring garments are so gay, &c. You Lovers all, make merry cheer, Through gladness of this lusty May, Through gladness of this lusty May. FINIS. THE III. SONG. INto a mirthful May morning, As Phebus did upspring, I saw a May
both fair and gay, Most goodly for to see: I said to her, Be kind To me that was so pyn'd, For your love truly. First therefore whē I did you know, thirl'd my heart so low your Grace: but now in case, through false report: hope, and I trow, for to speak with you, s doth me comfort. Wherefore, I pray, have mind on me, True Love, where ever you be: Where ever I go, both too and fro, You have my heart alright. O Lady! fair of hew, I me commend to you, Both the day and night. Since Fortune false, unkind, untrue, Hath exyl'd me from you; By sudden chance I shal advance Your honor and your fame. Above all earthly wight, To you my truth I plight, In earnest, or gain. FINIS. THE IV. SONG. IN a Garden so green, in a May morning, Heard I my Lady pleen of paramours. Said she, My Love so sweet, come you not
yet, nor yet; Heght you not me to meet amongst the flowrs? Elore, Elore, Elore, Elore, I love my lusty Love, Elore, Lo. The skyes up springeth, the dew down dingeth, The sweet Larks singeth their hours of prime. Phebus up sprenteth, joy to rest wenteth, So lost is mine intents, and gone's the time. Elore, Elore, Elore, Elore. I love my lusty Love, Elore, Lo. Danger my dead is, alse fortune my eed is, And languor my leed is: but hope, I dispair. Disdain my desire is, so strangeness my fear is: Deceit out of all ware. Adew, I fare. Elore, Elore, &c. Then to my Lady blyth, did I my presence kyth; Saying, My Bird, be glad: am I not yours? So in my armes two, did I the lusty jo; And kissed her times mo, then night hath hours. Elore, Elore, &c. Live in hope, Lady fair, and repel all dispair: Trust not that your true Love shal you betray. When deceit and langor, banisht is from your bowr▪ I'le be your paramour, and shal you please. Elore, Elore, &c. Favor and duty, unto your bright beauty, Confirmed hath lawty, obliedg'd to truth: So that your soverance, heartly but variance, Mark in your memorance, mercy and ruth. Elore, Elore, &c. Yet for your courtesie, banish all jealousie: Love for love lustily, do me restore: Then with us Lovers young, true love shal rest and reign: Solace shal sweetly sing for evermore, Elore, Elore, Elore, Elore. I love my lusty Love, Elore, Lo. FINIS.
THE V. SONG. WHen as the Greeks did enterprise, To Troyes town in armes to go, they choosed a counsel sage and wise, Apollos answer for to know, How they should speed and have success, In that so great a business. Then did they send the wisest Greeks, Apollos answer for to know, Who with the tears upon their cheeks, But and the fiery flames of wood, With all such rites as was the guise, They did their great God sacrifice. When they had done thus their request, And solemnly their service lone, And drank the wine, and slew the beast, Apollo gave them answer soon: That Troy and Troyans have they should, To use them fully as they would Which answer made them not so glad, That they should thus victorious be, As even the answer which I had, Did also joy and comfort me▪ For thus then said Apollo mine, All that thou seeks, it shal be thine. FINIS.
THE VI. SONG. YOu Lovers all that love would prove, Come learn to know true love indeed. First, love the Lord your God above, From whom all goodness doth proceed: Pray to him faithfully, To grant his Sp'rit to thee, Thy sins to mortifie, And that with speed. Als love thy neighbor heartfully, Wishing his welfare night and day: Dealing with all then faithfully, As to thy self thou wouldst alway▪ Beseech the Lord of might, His Sp'rit to guide thee right▪ His precepts day and night, For to obey. Since that the time is here but short, That we in earth are to indure; Rejoice in God and have comfort, In Christ his Son that boght us dear. Pray to the Trinitie, One God, and Person three, To serve him faithfully, With heart intiere.
The sacrifice of laud and praise, Sing to the Lord both day & night: With thanksgiving to him always, For all his benefits so bright. Thy time in vertue spend: Remember on thy end; See thou thy life amend, With all thy might. Then shalt thou at the latter day, When Christ thee to accoūt shal call, Rejoice in God, and not affray For fear of any sudden fall. Therefore live merrily In Love and Charity, Thanking thy God truly, What may besal. Now let us all still watch & pray, Still waiting on that day and hour, When Christ shal come without delay, To judge all earthly creature. Then be prepar'd therefore, With lamps and oyl in store, To meet that King of glore, That comes for ay. FINIS. THE VII. SONG. ̄THe thoghts of men do daily chage As fantasie breeds in their breasts, And now their nature is so strange, That few can find where friendship rests: For double dealing bears such sway, That honest meaning, that honest meaning doth decay.
The stedfast saith that friends profest, Is fred from them, and seldom us'd: He who a faithful friend proest, Doth make his friendship now abus'd. Where one is found a friend indeed, A score there be, a score there be, that fail at need. For barren trees will bloom right fair, As well as those that fruit will yeeld, Whose bark and branches seems as fair, As any tree within the field. As simple looks the subtil man, As he that no, as he that no, kind falshood can. A friend of words where deeds be dead, Is like a spring that water wants: And he that with fair words is fed. Doth hope for fruit of wither'd plants: But who can judge by hew of eye, Since deeds are dead, since deeds are dead, where truth should be. The fairest way that I can find, Is first to try, and then to trust▪ So shal affections not be blind: For proof will soon spy out the just: And tryal knws who means deceit. And bids us be, and bids us be ware of their bait. Without good proof be not too bold, If thou my counsel list to take: In painting words there is no hold, They be but leave, that wind do shake: But where that words and deeds agree, Accept that friend, accept that friend, and credit me. FINIS. THE VIII. SONG. WHen chyle cold age shal cease upon thy blood, And hoary hairs do show the winters fall: Thy joints which first in full perfection stood,
now sick and weak▪ makes thee thou mayst not crawle. O then, I say, for all thy passed pleasure, A conscience clear is worth a world of treasure. When on thy bed in anguish thou do'st ly, In some hard feaver, striving still for breath: Thy wife and children then upon thee cry: Some wishing life, yet most for goods thy death. O then, I say, for all thy passed pleasure, A conscience clear is worth a world of treasure. When oul sin shal appear in its own weed, Shal thy distracted senses so affright, In recordation of thy former deed; Nothing thou'st have but dolor for delight. O then, I say, for all thy passed pleasure, A conscience clear is worth a world of treasure. FINIS. THE IX. SONG. REmember, O thou man, O thou man, O thou man, Remember, O thou man, thy time is spent. Remember, O thou man, how
thou was dead and gone, And I did what I can, therefore repent. Remember Adams fall, O thou man, O thou man. Remember Adams fall, from heaven to hell. Remember Adams fall, how we were condemned all, In hell perpetual, therein to dwel. Remember Gods goodness, O thou man, O thou man▪ Remember Gods goodness, his promise made. Remēber Gods goodness, how he sent his Son doubtless, Our sins for to redress: be not afraid. The Angels all did sing, O thou man, O thou man. The Angels all did sing, on the shepherds hill. The Angels all did sing praise to our heavenly King, And peace to man living, with a good will. The shepherds amaz'd wa, O thou man, O thou man▪ The shepherds amaz'd was, to hear Angels sing. The shepherds amaz'd was, how it should come to pass, That CHRIST our MESSIAS, should be our King. To Bethlem did they go, O thou man, O thou man. To Bethlem they did go, the shepherds three. To Bethlem they did go, to see if it were so or no; Whether Christ was born or no, to set man free. As th' Angels before did say, O thou man, O thou man. As th' Angels before did say, so it came to pass. As th' Angels before did say, they ound a Babe where he lay In a manger, wrapt in hay, so poor he was. In Bethlem he was born, O thou man, O thou man. In Bethlem he was born, for mankinds sake. In Bethlem he was born, for us that was forlorn, And therefore took no scorn, our flesh to take. Give thanks to God always, O thou man, O thou man. Give thanks to God always, most joyfully. Give thanks to God always, for this our happy day. Letall now sing and say, Holy, Holy. FINIS. THE X. SONG. NOw is the month of maying, When merry Lads are playing, Fa la
la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Each with his bony Lss, Upon the greeny grass. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la fa la. The Spring clad all in gladness. Doth laugh at Winters sadness, Fa la la, &c. And to the Bag-pipes sound, The Maids tread out their ground, Fa la la, &c. Fy the, why are we musing, Youths sweet delight refusing? Fa la la, &c. Say, dainty Nymphs, and speak, Shal we play batley-break? Fa la la, &c. FINIS. THE XI. SONG. LEt not, I say, the sluggish sleep close up thy waking eye, Until that thou with judgement deep, thy dayly deeds do try. He that
one sin in conscience keeps, while he to quyet goes; More venterous is then he that sleeps with twenty mortal foes. Wherefore at night call into mind, how thou the day hath spent: Praying to God, if ought thou find, and then in time repent. And since thy bed a patern is of death and fatal tears, Bedwart it shal not be amiss, this to record in verse. My bed is like the grave so cold; and sleep which steeks mine eye, Resembleth death; cloathes which me old, declare the mould so dry: The isking sleas, resembleth well the wringing worm to me, Which with me in the grave shal dwel, when I no light shal see. The mighty bell which I hear knel, when I am laid in bed, Most like a bitter trumpet sell, ev'r shouting in my head My rising in the morn likewise, when sleepy night is past, Puts me in mind that I must rise to Judgement at the last. FINIS THE XII. SONG. SAtan, my foe, full of iniquity, Thy subtil snares of sin assaulteth
me, Against my Lord and Maker to rebel, With sweet allurements leads the way to hell. CHRIST. O sinful man, since God hath creat thee A living soul, to serve him faithfullie; And from the hell he thee redeem'd again: Obey my voice, and from thy sins refrain. SINNER. Alace! Satan, the world, and flesh also, All three in one conspired hath my woe, Me to intrape in sinful pleasures here, Through sin and sathan, death and endless fear. CHRIST. Believe my word, and in thy heart imprint My suffrings for thy sake, and do repent. Pray to our Father for the Sp'rit of grace: To mend thy life, God grant thee time and space. SINNER. Alace! my fore-said foes full craftily Doth me entise from thy precepts to fly; And follow pleasures of my flesh and sin, The which is sweet to pass my time therein. CHRIST. O careless man! that sweetness brings no gain, But in the end eternal woe and pain. Fly sin therefore, the Sabbath day thou keep: My Word will draw thee from that sinful sleep. SINNER. Alace! my Lord, I fight continually Against the Devil, the world, and flesh, all three: So that my wits and senses are grown dumb, Clogged with worldly things, almost ov'rcome. CHRIST. Cast first thy care to conquer heaven above, Through faith in me, and godly works in love▪ Thy Father who doth know thy present need, Will thee supply of worldly things with speed. SINNER. Prosperity makes me sometimes misknow: Adversity makes me despair and low. Whiles with the one and other am torment, Which marr my mind, and makes me mal-content. CHRIST. If riches grow, set not thy heart thereon, Lest that it make thee like the rich Glutton. Riches well us'd, Gods blessing doth procure▪ If cr with want, then Lazarus was .
SINNER. Betwixt these two, I crave to stand content, If so it please my God for to consent: Praying therefore I seek to please his will, And be brought home, thy flock and fold until. CHRIST. Thou art not able for to run that race, To please his will, without his Sprit of grace: Therefore beseech his divine Majestie, To banish sin, and grant his Sp'rit to thee. SINNER. I shal beseech my Lord and God of might, The Father, Son and Sp'rit, to guide me right, That I may walk in thy true fear and love, And at the last attain thy joyes above. CHRIST. If so thou do, thy prayer snal be heard, And in the heavens for thee a place prepar'd. Then serve thy God, and praise his holy Name: Obey my voice, and still with me remain. FINIS. THE XIII. SONG. IF floods of tears could change my follies past, Or smoaks of sighs could sacrifice for sin: If groaning cryes could free my fault at last, Or endless moa for ever pardon win; Then would I weep, sigh, cry, and ever
groan, For follies, faults, faults, for sins and errors done. I see my hopes are blasted in their bud: And find mens avors are like fading flowrs: I find too late that words can do no good, But loss of time, and languishing of hours. Thus since I see, I sigh, and say therefore, Hopes, favors, words, begone, begone, beguile no more. Since man is nothing but a mass of clay, Our days not else but shadows on the wall: Trust in the Lord, who lives and lasts for ay; Whose favor sound will neither fade nor fail. My God, to thee I resign my mouth and mind: No trust in youth, in youth, nor faith in age I find. FINIS. THE XIV. SONG. COme Love, let's walk in yonder spring, Where we shal hear the Black-bird sing, The Robin red-breast and the Thrush, The Nigh- tingale in thorny bush: The Mavis sweetly caroling, This to my Love,
this to my Love Content will bring. In  dale grows slagrant flowrs, With many sweet and shady bowrs: A pealy  whose  streams Are beautd with Phbus beams, Still ealing  the trees so fair; Because , because Diana, theth her there. Behold the Nymph with all her train, Comes tripping through the  amain, And in this Grove se here will stay, A Batley break toort and play; Where we shal  down, and see Fair beauty mixt, fair beauty mixt With Chastitie. All her delight is, as you see, Here for to sport, and here to be, Delighting in this silver stream, Only to bath her self therein: Until Acton her espy'd, Then to the Thicket, then to the Thicket She her hyed. And there by Magid: Art she wrought, Which in her heart she first had thought, By secret speed away to flee, Whilst he a Hart was turn'd to be. Thus whilst he view'd Dianas train▪ His lie he lost, his life he lost, Her love to gain. Another to the same. COme, Lord, let's walk on Sion Hill, There to remain for ever still; Where Prophets, postles, and just folk, With Martys on a w do walk, The Angels sweetly caroling: This to my soul, this to my soul, Content sal bring. In Gods house many mansions are, Which Christ is gone for to prepare For his Elect, and own dear friends; Where joy remains, and never ends. Gods Saints shal thither all repair; Because the Lamb, because the Lamb Or God reigns there. We shal behold the Lord amain, Come through the clouds with Angels train: And in the twinkling of an eye▪ We shal ascend up through the sky; Where we shal sit us down and sing Sweet Psalms of praise, sweet Psalms of praise To Jeho ah King. FINIS.
THE XV. SONG. LOw should my feeble body fure, The double dolour that I indure: The mourning and the great malure, cannot define. It doth my baleful breast combue, To see another have in cure, that should be mine. For well I wot was never wight, That could inforce his mind & might To love and serve his Lady bright, and want her sine: As I do mattyr day and night, Without that only thing of right, that should be mine. Were I of puissance for to prove My lowly and my heartly love, I should her mind to mercy move, with such propine. Were all the world at my behove, She should it have at her behove, for to be mine. Now whō to shal I make my moan? For truth nor constancy is none▪ For all the faithful love is gone, of feminine. It would oppress an heart of stone To see my loss, for her alone that should be mine. Who shal my dulled spirits raise, Since not for love my Lady goes? For if good service might her please, she should incline. I die in dolour and disease, And others hath her as they please, that should be mine. I may perceive right well by this, That all the blythness, joy and bliss, The lusty wanton life I wish of love, is ine.
What remedy since so it is▪ But patience, suppose I miss that should be mine. For Nobles hath not ay renown, Nor Gles ay the gayest gown: They cary victuals to the town that worse doth dine. So busily to busk I bown, And others bears the berry down, that should be mine. Who can the rage of youthhood daūt Let him to Lovers Court go haunt, And him as Venus subject grant, and keep her ine; Perchance he shal find mercy skant▪ And able his reward to want, as I do mine. FINIS. THE XVI. SONG. NO wonder is suppose my weeping eyes Be blinded with the rainy cloud of wo, And with the sword of sharp adversies. My dooul heart thus pierced been in two. Alace! sweet heart, all comfort is ag  is Lord, good hope is in exile; That ev'r I lov'd, alace! this sory while.
As with the wind oppressed is the corn, The stone thirled with rainy drops great; And with the  th scarlerent and shorn; So is my heart overthirl'd and overset: My salt tears are mingled with bloody sweat, Pale is my face, and aded is my bew, Of Loves lair, alace! that ever I knew. I seek remead unto my deadly wound, As fire in yee, and heat in marble stone: I find a quadrant in a figure round, A deaf Sophist a probleme to expound; I seek the truth in heart where there is none: As who would ih upon the mountains hie, Or go to gather bries in the sea. Now is my care through old occasion, Old is my wound, my paines are very sore; The more I seek for consolation, My heaviness increaseth more and more: I love, alace! and all my love is lore: More wo I wish dread never man on eard: Such is my chance, such is my hapless weard. I have enough and more for to complain Of every care that may my dool distress: How may my tongue or hand express the pain? Because the truth unable is to guess. I love, alace! not with those cares express'd, My deadly ghost: but rather with the dart, Bereave my life, as thou hast done my heart. FINIS. THE XVII. SONG. WHat if a day, or a month, or a year Crown thy delights with a May not the change of a night or an hour, Cross thy delights with as thousand wisht contentings. Fortune, honor, beauty, youth, Are but blossoms many sad tormentings. Wanton pleasures, doting love, Are but shadows
dying. All our joyes, are but toyes, Idle thoughts deceiving. flying. None hath power of an hour, Of his lives bereaving. Th'earth's but a point of the world, and a man Is but a point of the Earths compared enture: Shal then the point of a point be so vain, As to triumph in a silly points adventure. All is hazard that we have, Here is nothing byding: Days of pleasure are as streams Through fair meadows glyding. Well or wo, time doth go, Time hath no returning. Secret Fates guides our States, Both in mirth and mourning. What if a smile, or a beck, or a look Feed thy fond thoughts with many vain conceivings: May not that smile, or that beck, or that look, Tell thee as well they are all but alse deeivings. Why should Beauty be so proud, In things of no surmounting? All her wealth is but a shrewd, Nothing of accounting. Then in this, there's no bliss, Which is vain and idle Beauties flowrs have their hours, Time doth hold the bridle. What if the World with a lure of its wealth, Raise thy degree to great place of hi advancing. May not the World by a check of that wealth, Bring thee again to as lo despised changing▪ While the Sun of wealth doth shine, Thou shalt have friends plenty; But mwant, they then repine, Not one abides of twenty. Wealth and friends holds and ends, As thy fortunes use and fall: Up and down, smile and riown, Certain is no state at all. What if a grip, or a strain, or a sit, ch thee with pain of the feeling pangs of sickness May not that grip, or that strain, or that s, Show thee the form of thine own true perfect likeness, Healt is but a glance of joy, Subject to all changes; Mitth is but a lly oy, Which mishap stranges. Tell , silly man, Why art thou so weak of wit, As to be in jeopardie, When thou mayst in quiet sit. FINIS.
THE XVIII. SONG. LIke as the dumb Solsequium, with care ov'r come, Doth sorrow when the Sun goes out of gt: Hangs down her head, and drops as dead▪ and will not spread; But ks elaves through langor of the night, Till foolish Phaëton rise with whip in hand, To clear the cristal skyes, and light the land. Birds in their bour, waits for that hour, And to their King a
glad good-morrow gives From thence that flowr likes not to lour, But laughs on Phbus op'ning out her leaves. So stands't with me, except I be where I may see My lamp of light, my Lady and my Love: When she departs, ten thousand darts from sundry airts, Thirles through mine heart but rest or roove: My countenance declares mine inward grief, And Hope almost dispairs to find relief. I die, I dwine, love doth me pine: I loath on every thing I look, alace! Till Titan mine upon me shine, That I revive through favor of her grace. Fra she appear into her Sphear, begins to clear The dawning of my long desired day: Then Courage cryes on Hope to rise, fra she espyes The noysom night of absence went away: No wo can me awake, nor yet impesh, But on my stately stalk I flourish fresh: I spring, I sprout, my leaves break out; My color changeth in an heartsom hew: No more I lout, but stands up stout, As glad of her, of whom I only grew. O happy day! go not away, Apollo stay Thy cart from going down into the West: Of me thou make thy Zodiack, that I may take My pleasure to behold whom I love best. Her presence me restores to life from death, Her absence also shores to cut my breath: I wish in vain, thee to remain, Since Primum mobile doth say me nay. At least, my wane, haste soon again. Fare-well, with patience perforce, till day. FINIS.
THE XIX. SONG. THe Gowans are gay, my jo; the Gowans are gay: They make me wake when I should sleep, the first morning of May. About the fields as I did pass, the Gowans are gay: I chanc'd to meet a proper Lass, the first morning of May. Right busy was that bony Maid, the Gowans are gay: And I thereafter to her said, the first morning of May. O Lady fair, what do you here: the Gowans are gay: Gathring the dew, what needs you spear? the first morning of May. The dew, quoth I, what can that meā? the Gowans are gay: She said, To wash my Lady clean, the first morning of May. I asked father at her sine, the Gowans are gay: To my will if she would incline, the first morning of May. She said her erand was not there, the Gowans are gay: Her maiden-head on me to ware, the first morning of May. Thus lest I her, and past my way, the Gowans are gay: Into a garden me to play, the first morning of May. Where there were birds singing full sweet, the Gowans are gay: Unto me comfort was full meet, the first morning of May. And thereabout I past my time, the Gowans are gay: While that it was the hour of Prime, the first morning of May. And then returned home again, the Gowans are gay: Pansing what Maiden that had been, the first morning of May. FINIS.
THE XX. SONG. SLeep wayward thoughts, and rest you with my Love: Let not Touch not proud hands, lest you her anger move: But pine my love be with my love diseas'd. Thus while she sleeps, I sorrow for her you with my longings log displeas'd. sake: So sleeps my Love, my Love, and yet my Love doth wake. But, O the fury of my restless fear! The hidden anguish of my flesh desires The glories and the beauties that appear Betwixt her brows, near Cupids closed sires. Thus while she sleeps moves sighing for her sake; Se sleeps my Love, my Love, and yet my Love doth wake My Love doth age, and yet met Love doth rest: Fear in my Love, and yet my Love secure: Peace in my Love, and yet my Love opprest: Impatient, yet of perfect temperatour. Sleep, dainty Love, while I sigh for thy sake. So sleeps my Love, my Love, and yet my Love doth wake. FINIS.
THE XXI. SONG. WHen Fa - ther A - dam first did flee, From presence of the His cloathes was short scarce cover'd his knee, The great God cry'd, and Lord his face, Stay Adam ij saith the Lord, Where art thou, Adam? held him in chace. I was a-fraid to hear thy voice, And na-ked thus to turn thee and stay: Who hath reveal'd to thee, That naked thou shouldst be; Or come in thy way: hast thou eaten of the tree, Which I cōmanded thee, It touch'd it should not be; Therefore beginneth thy miserie, O Adam! poor Adam! I pity thee.
The Woman which thou gave to me To be my helpe, as I thought, Did eat, and also counsel'd me, Which now, alace! is dearly bought. The Serpent false hath me beguil'd, That rebel to thy Majesty; For to have us and ours exyl'd, With his rebellious company. That is no excuse To leave the Lord, and use The counsel of thine enemie; Blest freedom to refuse, Soul and body to abuse: Pity, O Adam! I pity thee. O Adam! poor Adam! I pity thee. Yet for thy fault thou punisht shalt be▪ And in place of pleasure and ease, Nothing but labor shal be to thee: Thy meat win with sweat and disease. And thou, O Eve! in stead of mirth▪ And pleasant Paradice preclair, In grievous pains shal be thy birth, With many a sigh and groan rull air: Yet from thine enemie, And Satans cruelty, I will surely ay set thee free, If thou wilt turn to me, Obey and thankful be: Surely thou shalt be dear to me: O Adam! poor Adam! dear shalt thou be. But thou, the Serpent that did go So siely up upon the field, Shal on thy belly  also, The dust shal be thy meat and bield: Cursed shalt thou be for ever, Enemy to the womans seed: He shal prevail, but thou shalt never; For he shal bruise thee on the head; And shal restore again, From death and endless pain, My servant David to be with me, Where he shal ay remain With me his Soverain, In joy and bliss eternally: O Adam! O Adam! thus shal it be. Away went Satan most discontent, Christ being promis'd for to reign: And metamorphos'd his intent, Through power of his mighty King. Our freedom, Lord, we have from thee, That bowels of mercy powred out Upon thy whole posterity, Of thy free grace withoutten doubt. Therefore we all humbly Intreat thy Majestie, That we may ever thankful be: And for our sins contrite: Praying to thee most sweet, O Jesus! dear Jesus! have pity on me. O Adam! dear Adam! I pity thee. FINIS.
THE XXII. SONG. MY bailful breast in blood all bruist, And all my corps, alacel in pain, That force nor strength have I no maughts To use themselves as they were mine. My body doth but dayly dwine In deadly wo, without offence: My heart it hath no Medicine, Since I must pass from her presence, Since I must pass from her presence.
Uncertain of the time and place, When that we two should meet again: No force of all yet gave her grace, Would once relieve me of my pain. Alace! fair words are but a train, And serves thy body but a space, Without good hope, time's spent in vain: I say no more, but oft, helas! Alace! that ever I saw her face, Or had it in rememberance. Alace! that ever I knew the place, Where first we made our acquaintance. Wo worth the love of ignorance, To love where no love can abide. Wo worth the framed ignorance, Since dol'rous death must be my guide. Albeit as yet I suffer pain, Not all is vain, my time is spent: For she that hath my faithful heart, Would heart out of my bowels rent, And alter many wits content. Who lists to look on her a space, Was nev'r beauty more excellent, But may be seen into her face. And yet suppose my heart were free At liberty but any pain, It were impossible to me, But it would soon return again To her with whom it did remain, Above all earthly wigth alive. Sweet heart, relieve me of my pain: Relieve me, or I end my life. FINIS. THE XXIII. SONG. AWake, sweet Love, thou art return'd: My heart which long in Let Love which ne - ver absent dyes: Now live for e - ver absence mourn'd. Lives now in perfect joy. Only her self hath see in her eyes, Whence came my first annoy. Dispair did make me wish
med fair, She only I could love, She only drew me to dispair, When to die, That I my joys might end. She only which did make me flee, My she unkind did prove. state may now a - mend. If she esteem thee now ought worth, She will not grieve thy love henceforth Which so dispair hath prov'd. Dispair hath proved now in me, That love will not unconstant be, Though long in vain I lov'd. If she at last reward my love, And all my harmes repair. Thy happiness will sweeter prove, Rais'd up from deep dispair: And if that now thou welcome be, When thou with her do'st meet; She all this while but play'd with thee, To make thy joyes more sweet. FINIS. THE XXIV. SONG. EVen Death, behold I breath; My breath procures my pain; Else
dolor after death, should slack when I am slain. But destinies disdain, so span my froward threed, But mercy to remain a Martyr quick and dead. O cruel deadly feed! O rigor but remorse! Since there is no remead, Come patience perforce. The Fates, my froward Fates, With wicked wierds have wrought My state of all estates, Unhappiest to be thought. Have I offended ought, Or wrought against their will; But mercy then they might Conclude my corps to kill: But as they have no skill Of reason, nor regard, The innocent and ill, Receive a like reward. My heart but rest or rove, Ruth, reason or respect, With fortuns death and love, Is keeped under check, That now there is no neck, Nor draught to make debate; But needs must burst and break, For love must have his mate: Relief, alace! is late, Since I am sorc'd to sie; I stand in strange estate, I love, I dwyn, I die. Yet time shal try my truth, And painful patient part; Though love would tage but reuth, And death with deadly dart Should stay to cure my smart, On fortunes sickle wheel, All shal not change my heart, Which is as true as steel: I am not like an Eel, To slip away and slide; Love, fortune, death, farewel, Where I am bound, I'le bide. FINIS.
THE XXV. SONG. LIke as the Lark within the Marleons foot, With piteous voice doth chirk her yeelding lay; Even so do I, since is no other boot, Ren- dring my Song unto your will obey. Your vertue mounts above my force so hie, That with your beauties seas'd I am so sure, That there remains resistance none in me; But patiently your pleasure to endure. And in your will my fancie shal depend, My life and death consists into your will: I rather would my life were at an end, Then in dispair this way continue still. Wounded I am, with deadly darts dint, Fetter'd with fetters, dispairing of relief; Lying in langor as careful captive tint, And ye the cause of all my wo and grief. And since there is no pity more in place, But that your cruelty doth thrist my blood: I am content to have no other grace, But let it out, if it may do you good. FINIS.
THE XXVI. SONG. I Love great God above, I'm not opprest with love; But dayly may remove, When liketh me. Be she for my behove, I list for no reprove: Ay when I list to love, I may let be, And choose another love that wil love me. I see Lovers anew, That are both trust and true, For love changes hide and hew, And blaikned be, When she lists not to rew, Why should I more pursue? Ay when I list to love, I may let be, And choose another Love that will love me. Since wicked variance, And false dissimulance, And double inconstance Beareth the gree: Since faithful observance, Can get no recompence: Ay when I list to love, I may let be, And choose another Love that will love me. Since saith cannot be sound, Nor pity can abound▪ Why should I run on ground, And cannot flee? As good love lost as found, Far better loose then bound: Ay when I list to love I may let be, And choose another Love that will love me. Since I am not her mease, She is so ill to please, Love doth her most disease, That cannot slee. Since as good comes as goes, My heart yet shal I raise: Ay when I list to love, I may let be, And choose another Love that will love me. FINIS.
THE XXVII. SONG. THe lowest trees have tops, the ant her gall, The flee her splen, the little spark its heat: The slender hairs cast shadows, tho but smal: and bees have stings, although they be not great. Seas have their course, and so have little springs; And love is love in beggers as in Kings. Where waters smoothest are, deep are the foords: The dyal sturs, yet none perceives it move: The firmest faith is in the fewest words: The turtles cannot sing, and yet they love: True hearts have eyes and ears, no tongue to speak; They hear, and see, and sigh, and then they break. The Answer. Bushes have tops, but the Cedar greater: A hair casts shadow less then Pharaohs towr: The spark calls heat, but greater heat the fire. A bee can sting, not like a scorpions power.
Seas have their course, and so have little sprins: So beggers love, but greater love have King. Rough are deep seas, when smooth  shallow foords. The ratt makes noise, before th yalmove. The firmest saith is still cofirm'd with words. And  looing of their love. It hearts have eyes and ears, the tongue can speak They I hear, and see, and sigh before they' break. FINIS. THE XXVIII. SONG. WHere art thou, hope, that promis'd me relief? Come hear my doom Come, traitor hope, that all men doth mischief, Come here let see, pronounced by disdain. Alace! sweet hope, where is thy scope? Or where and ease me of my pain: Why flees thou me, to make me die? Wilt thou shalt thou remain? Since hope is gone, and cannot me remead, In bondage thus not come again? I must bide fortunes fead, I must bide fortunes fead.
I had a heart, and now I heartless go: I had a mind that dayly was opprest: I had a friend that's now become my fo. I had a will, yet can I get no rest. What have I now? nothing I trow, But spite where I What am I then? a heartless man: Should love me thus destroy? I love and serve one wom I do regard, Yet for my love, disdain is my reward. If promis'd faith, and secret love intend, And choose but doubt, I thought I had done well. If fixed eye and inward heart do bind A man in love, as now my heart doth feel; What pain is love? Or what may move A man for to dispair? Nothing so great as hie despite Of his sweet Lady fair: Such is my chance, as now I must confess: I love a Love, though she be merciless. What pain can pierce a heart that I do want, If love be pain that doth any subdue? What pain can force a body to be faint? If love be pain, how can I pain eschew? Since I am fast, knit to the mast, This torment to indure, And have no might, by law nor right, My Lady to procure: What shal I say, since will gain-stands the law? I have a will, yet will makes me stand aw. Where shal I go to hide my weary face? Where shal I find a place for my defence? Where is my love, who is the meetest place Of all the earth that is my confidence She hath my heart, till I depart, Let her do what sh lit; I cannot mend, but still depend, And dayly to insist To purchase love, if love my love deserve; If not for love, let love my body sterve. Come here, ye Gods, and judge my cause aright; Hear my complaint before ye me condemn: Take you before my Lady most of might: Let not the wolf devore the silly lamb. If she may say, by night or day, That ev'r I did her wrong, My mind shal be, with cruelty, To ly in prison strong; Then shal ye save sakeless man from pain. Try well my cause, and then remove disdain. O Lady fair, whom I do honor most, Your name and fame within my breast I have: Let not my love and labor thus be lost; But still in mind, I pray you, to ingraff, That I am true, and shal not rue A word that I have said: I am your man, do what ye can, When all these playes are play'd; Then save your ship unbroken on the sand, Since man and goods are all at your command. Then choose to keep or loss that ye have done, Your friendly friend doth make you this request: Let not friends come us Lovers two between, Since late detests caus'd you me to detest,
Keep hope in store, you to deplore, Conquer you friend indeed: Remember ay, will come the day, When friends a friends will need: You have a friend so friendly and so true. Keep well your friend: I say no more. Adieu. THE XXIX. SONG. WO worth the time and eke the place That she was to me known; For since I did behold her face, My heart was never mine own, mine own jo, mine own, My heart was never mine own. Sometime I liv'd at liberty, But now I do not so: She hath my heart so faithfully, That I can love no mo, no mo jo, no mo, That I can love no mo. To be refus'd of love, alace! All earthly things adew. My Mst is she is merciless, And will not on me rue, me rue jo, me rue, And will not on me rue. Now am I left all comfortless, And no remead can ave: My pains they are remeadiless, And all the wite you have, you have jo you have, And all the wite you have. FINIS.
THE XXX. SONG. WHo doth behold my Mistris face, And seeth not good hap Who hears her speak & marks her grace, Shal think none e-ver spake hath she: In short, for to resound her praise, She is the fairest, the fairest but she. the fairest, the fairest of her days. Who knows her wit & not admires, Shal think himself void of all skill: Her vertues kindles strong desires, In those who think upon her still. In short, for to resound her praise, She is the fairest, the fairest, the fairest, the fairest of her days. Her red is like unto the rose, When from a bud unto the Sun: Her comely colors doth disclose The first degree of ripeness won. In short, for to resound her praise, She is the fairest, the fairest, the fairest, the fairest of her days. And with the red is mixt a white, Like to the same of fair Moon-shine, That doth upon the water light, And makes the color seem divine. In short for to resound her praise, She is the fairest, the fairest, the fairest, the fairest of her days. FINIS.
THE XXXI. SONG. THough your strangeness frets my heart. Yet must I not complain: You perswade me it's but arte, Which secret love must fain. If another you affect, It's but a toy to avoid suspect; Is this fair excusing? O no, O no, O no, O no, O no, no, no, no, no, all is abusing. When your wisht sight I desire, Suspicion ye pretend, Causless ye your self retire, Whilst I in vain attend: Thus a Lover, as you say, Still made more eager by delay, Is this fair excusing? O no, O no, O no, O no, O no, no, no, no, no, All is abusing. When another holds your hand, You'l swear I hold you heart: While thy Rival closs doth stand, And I sit far apart, I am nearer yet then they, Hid in your bosom, as you say: Is this fair excusing? O no, O no, O no, O no, O no, no, no, no, no, All is abusing. Would a Rival then I were, Or else your secret friend; So much less should I you fear, And not so much attend: They enjoy you every one, Yet must I seem your friend alone▪ Is this fair excusing? O no, O no, O no, O no, O no, no, no, no, no, All is abusing. FINIS.
THE XXXII. SONG. COme, sweet Love, let sorrow cease, Banish frowns, leave off dis∣Loves warr makes the sweetest peace, Hearts u - niting by con∣cention: Sun-shine follows after rain; Sorrows ceasing, this tention: After sorrow cometh joy. Trust me, prove me, try is pleasing, All proves fair again. me, love me, This will cure annoy. Winter hides his frosty face, Blushing ever to be more moved: Spring returns with pleasant grace. Flora's treasures are renewed. Lambs rejoice to see the Spring; Leapping, skipping, sporting, tripping: Birds for joy do sing. Let your springs of joy renew: Colling, clapping, kissing, blessing, And give Love his due. See this bright shine of thing eyes Clouded now with dark disdaining: Shal such stormy tempess rise, To set Loves faire day a raining▪ Men are glad the sky being clear▪
Lightly toying, sporting, joying With their lovely pier: But are sad to see the shour Sadly dropping, louring, pouting, Turning sweet to sour. Then, sweet Love, disperse this cloud, Which procures this woful toying: When each creature sings aloud, Killing hearts with over-joying: Every Dove doth seek her mate; Iointly billing, she is willing, Sweets of love to take. With such warts let us contend, Wooing, doing, wedding, bedding, This our strife shal end. FINIS. THE XXXIII. SONG. SWeet Kate, of late, ran away, and left me plaining; Tee, hee, Abide, I cry'd, or I die with thy disdaining. Never hee, quoth she, gladly would I see Any man to die for loving. any yet d'yd of such a fit, Neither have I fear of proving. Unkind, I find, thy delights in tormenting, Abide, I cry'd, or I die with thy disdaining. Tee, hee, hee, quoth she, make no fool of me; Men, I know, will have oaths at pleasure: But their hopes at end, they bewray their fain'd, And their oaths are kept at leasure. Her words like swords, cut my sory heart asunder. Her flouts with doubts, keep my heart affectios under. Tee, hee, hee, quoth she, what a fool is he Stands in aw of once denying? Cause I had enough, to become more rough, So I did a happy trying. FINIS.
THE XXXIV. SONG. IOy to the person of my love, Although she me disdain: Fixt are my thoghts, & may not move, But yet I love in vain. Shal I loose the sight Of my joy & hearts delight? Or shal I leave my sute? Shal I strive to touch? Oh! no, it were too much; She is the forbidden fruit. Oh! wo is me, that ever I did see, The beauty that did me bewitch: Yet out, alace! I must forgo that face, The treasor I esteem'd so much. O! shal I range into some dale▪ Or to the mountains mourn? Sad echoes shal resound my tale: Or whether shal I turn? Shal I buy that love, No life to me will give, But deeply wounds my heart▪ If I flee away, She will not to me say, stay, My sorrows to convert. O no, no, no, she will not once say so; But comfortless I must be gone: Yet though she be so thrawart unto me. I'le love her, or I shal love none.
O! that I might but understand The reasons of her hate, To him would be at her command, In love, in life, in state: Then should I no more In heart be griev'd so fore, Nor sad with discontent. But since that I have lov'd A Maid that so hath prov'd Unworthy, I do repent. Something unkind hath setled in her mind, That caused her to leave me so. Sweet, seem to me but half so kind to be, Or let me the occasion know. Thousand fortuns fall to her share, Though she rejected me, And fill'd my heart full of dispa, Yet shal I constant be. For she is the Dune My tongue shal  name, Fair branch of modestie, Chaste of heart and mind. Oh! were she half to kind, Then would she pity me. Sweet, turn at last, be hind as thou art chaste, And let me in thy bosom dwel; So shal we gain the pleasure of loves pain: Till then, my dearest Love, Farewell. FINIS. THE XXXV. SONG. AWay, vain world, bewitcher of my heart: My sorrows shows my sins makes me to smart: Yet will I not dispair, But to my God
repa. He hath mercy ay, therefore will I pray: He hath mercy ay, and loves me, Though by his humbling hand he proves me. Away, away, too long thou hast me snar'd: I will not spend more time: I am prepar'd. Thy subtil slights so ssie, they have deceived me: Though they sweetly smile, sliely they beguile: Though they sweetly swile, forget them: The simple silly soul rejects them. Once more, away, though loath the world to leave, Biddeth oft away with that hellish slave. Loath am I to forgo, that sweet alluring so. Though thy ways be vain, shal I thee retain▪ Though thy ways be vain, I quite thee: Thy pleasure shal no more delite me. FINIS. THE XXXVI. SONG. WHen May is in her prime, Then may each heart rejoice. When May the lively sap creeps up In-to the blooming thorn. The flowrs
is busk'd with branches green, Each bird sets forth her voice: All natures imps from cold is present kept, Doth laugh the frost to scorn. triumphs while joyful May doth last. Take May in time, when May is gone, The pleasant time is past. May makes the chearful hew. May breeds and brings new blood. May marcheth throghout every limb. May makes the merry mood. May pricketh tender hearts, Their warbling notes to tune. Full strange it is that some we see, Do make their May in Iune. Those things are strangely wrought, While joyful May doth last. Take May in time, when May is gone, The pleasant time is past. Take May in time, when May is gone, The pleasant time is past. All ye that live on earth, And have your May at will, Rejoice in May, as I do now, And use your May with skill: Use May when that ye may, For May hath but a time. When all the fruit is gone, it is Too late the tree to climb. Your liking and your lust, Is fresh while May doth last. Take May in time, when May is gone, The pleasant time is past. Take May, &c. The Second Part. WHen time and space is spent, Then may each heart be fear'd: Whē beyōd time the Judge shal come In wrath, what strength can bear't: Then Iudges all perverse, Shal sigh that they were born, When cast in ever lasting fire, Because the truth they scorn. All Nature imps shal mourn, When wealth and ase is past. Take time in time, when time is gone, Eternity comes last. Take time in time, when time is gone, Eternity comes last. In time well spent, rejoice, For that's the way to rest. Time is that point wherein the Lord Hates evil, and loves the best. Pray for a tender heart: Bear here your grief and pain:
For time it is that many are, Who spend their life in vain. That things be strangely wrought, Before all time is past. Though time be now, it shal not be, Eternity comes last, Though time, &c. All ye that be in time, And hath your time but short, Redeem your time, as God comands, I humbly you exhort: Use time while ye have time, For time will have an end: When all your life-time shal be spent, It is too late to mend. Your liking and your lust Shal ceass when time is past: Spend well your time, when time is gone, Eternity comes last. Spend well your time, when time is gone, Eternity comes last. FINIS. THE XXXVII. SONG. BRave Mars begins to rouse, and he doth bend his brows. Bo- He that may loose the field, yet let him ne-ver yeeld, Though reas bursts out in blows, great Etnaes fire. When canons are roaring, and thousands should be kill'd, let souldiers try it. bullets are flying, He that would honor win, must not fear dying.
Though Constantin be dead, who left us honor, And taught brave Christian Kings, under his banner. Pagans amazed stood, in a great wonder, To see brave Christians come, like claps of thunder. When Canons, &c. Rais'dare the Worthies nyne, and now ascending; Ev'n by a power divyne, now peace is ending: So many Christian Kings with them to enter, Against their fiercest foes: that's brave adventure, When Canons, &c. Souldiers with swords in hands, to the walls coming, Horse-men about the streets, ryding and running: Sentinells on the walls, arme, arme, a crying, Pittards against the ports, wyld fire a flying. When Canons, &c. Trumpets on turrets hye, these are a sounding, Drums beating out alowd, echoes resounding: Alarm-bells in each place, they are a ringing, Women with stones in laps, to the walls bringing. When Canons, &c. Captains in open fields, on their foes rushing, Gentlemen seconds them, with their Picks pushing, Ingyniers in the trench earth, earth uprearing, Gun-powder in the mynes, Pagans upblowing. When Canons, &c. Portculzies in the ports they are down letting, Burgers comes flocking by, too their hands setting: Ladders against the wall, they are uprearing, Women great timber bogs to the walls bearing. When Canons, &c. FINIS. THE XXXVIII. SONG. IUrie came to Iebus-Salem, All the world was taxed then: Blessed
Mary brought to Bethlchem, More then all the world again: A gift so blest, so good, the best That e're was seen, was heard, or done: A King, a Christ, Prophet, and Priest; Iesus to us, to God a Son. O, happy night! a day was never Half so happy, sweet and fair: Singing souldiers, blessed ever, Fill the skyes with sweetest air. Amaz'd men fear, they see, they hear, Yet doubt, and ask, How that was done? 'Twas bid, Be bold; it is fore-told, This night God hath himself a Son. 'Twas upon a Comets blazing, Cuma to Augustus said, This fore-snows an act amazing, Of a mother, still a maid, A Bbe shal bear, which all must fear, And suddenly it must be done. Yea, Cesar thou, to him must bow; Hee's Jesus, God, a Man, a Son. Subtil Herod sought to find him, With a purpose black as hell: But a greater power combyn'd him, And his purpose did repell. Who should betray, do all obey, As fitting was it should be done. They all adore, and kneel before This Jesus, God, a Man, a Son. There appear'd a golden Usher, Kings attending on the train: The bright Sun could not out-bluser; Such a sta rne're shone again. Behold it stays, seeming it says, Go in and see what there is done: A Babe, whose birth leagues heaven and earth: Jesus to us, to God a Son.
Was not this a blessed wonder, God was man, and Man was God: Foolish Jews mistook the thunder Should proclaim their King abroad. Angels they sing, Behold the King, In Bethlehem where this was done. Then we as they, rejoice and say, We have a Savior, God a Son. The Second Part. TUrn your eyes which are affixed On this worlds deceiving things, And with joy and sorrow mixed, Look upon the King of Kings; Who left his Thron, with joys unknown; Took flesh like ours, like us drew breath: For us to die, here fix your eye, And think upon his precious death. See him in the garden praying, While his sad Disciples slept: See him in the garden sweating Drops of blood, and how he wept. As man he was, e wept, alae! And trembling fear'd to loose his breath; Yet to heav'ns will, he yeelded still: Then think upon his precious death. See him by the souldiers taken, When with Ave, and a kiss, He that heav'n had quite forsaken, Had betray'd him, and with this, Behold him bound, and guarded round, To Caiphas brought to loose his breath: There see the Jews, heavns King abuse: And think upon his precious death. See him in the hands of Pilate, Like a base oender stript. See the moan and tears they smile at, While they see our Savior whipt. Behold him bleed, his purple weed, Record while ye have life and breath: His taunts and scorns, his crown of thorns, O! think upon his precious death. See him in the hour of parting, Hanging on the bloody Cross. See his wounds, conceive his smarting, And our gain, by his liss loss. On either side, a fellow dy'd, The one derides him, leaving breath; The other prays, and humbly says, Lord, save me by thy precious death. See as in those pangs he thristed, And that to cool him he did call: How these Jews, like Judas cursed, Bring him vinegar and gall. His Spirit then, to heav'n again, Commending with his latest breath: The world he leaves, which men deceives▪ Lord, keep us by thy precious death. FINIS.
THE XXXIX. SONG. WHite as Lillies was her face, When she smiled, she beguiled, Quiting faith with foul disgrace. Vertues service thus neglected, Heart with sorrows hath infected, Quiting faith with foul disgrace. Vertues service▪ thus neglected, Heart with sorrows hath infected. When I swore my heart her own, She disdained, I complained, Yet she left me overthrown; Careless of my bitter groaning, Ruethless bent to no relieving. Vows and oaths, and faith assured, Constant ever, changing never, Yet she could not be procured, To believe my pains exceeding, From her skant neglect proceeding. O! that Love should have the art, By surmises, and disguises, To destroy a faithful heart; Or that wanton looking women, Should reward their friēds as fo-men.
All in vain is Ladies love, Quickly choosed, shortly loosed; For their pride is to remove. Out, alace! their looks first wins us, And their pride hath straight undone us. To thy self, the sweetest fair, Thou hast wounded, and confounded Changeless faith with foul dispair, And my service hath envied, And my succours hath denied. By thine error thou hast lost Heart unfained, truth unstained, And the Swain that loved most: More assured in love then they, More despised in love then any. For my heart, though set at nought, Since you will it spoil, and kill it, I will never change my thought: But grieve that Beauty e're was born, To banish love with froward scom. FINIS. THE XL. SONG. BEgone, sweet night, and I shal call thee kind: Where dost thou dwel, since not upon mine eyes? It's more then time that I my way should find. Begone, and when the night shal come, come twice. Away, away. For I must go and meet my Love by the peep of day; But thou to death, thou
art too nigh of kin, To come or go, as thy desires have been. Arise, bright Day, it's time to claim thy right; Disperse the clouds, and with thy golden beams, Both comfort me, and strike the churlish Nigarht That would not go and yeeld me pleasant dreams. Arise, arise. And with thy rosie fingers point me where she lyes: Teach me but once, and put me in her sight, That I may know who gives the greatest light. Stay, gentle Night, lest thou prove more unkind, To leave us languish. who enjoys our love: Go not away, but let us here confin'd, Not part us from these pleasures which we prove. But stay: oh! stay: For I must go, and love my Love, if you peep Day: And if you do, you turn so soon again, That our desires may feel no worlds disdain. Let never rising Day bereave thee of thy right, Who can betray thee with his golden beams. Let us enjoy thee still, sweet gentle Night, That we may surit in those pleasant dreams. Advise, advise: And never let the light of Day shine where she lyes: But if thou dost, or let me in her sight, There is no doubt, she gives the greater light. And if thou wilt to Day resign thy due, And so divorce me from my sweetest Dear, In secret silence shal my heart so rue, Wishing the Day were done, if you were there; That the, that she, And I, may spend the silent Night where we would be▪ Where pratling Day dare never more appear, Nor yet present to wrong my dearest Dear. FINIS. THE XLI. SONG. THere is a thing that much is us'd, It's called Love, with men abus'd:
They wrigh, and sigh, and swear they die; When all is done, they know they lie. But let them swear by faith and truth, I'le swear they care not for an oath. They first must have a Mistris fair, And then her favor for to wear: And so they go to flatteries school, And calls her wife, they know a fool: But let them swear by faith and truth, I'le swear they care not for an oath. It is a practise in this Age, To lay their credit into gage, By wit, by vowes, by near attive, To conquest that they most desire. But let them swear by faith and truth, I'le swear they care not for an oath. THE XLII. SONG. MY complaining is but faining, All my love is but in jest, Fa, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la.
And my courting is but sporting; In most showing, meaning least. La, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la. Outward sadness, inward gladness, Representing in my mind, Fa, la, la, &c. In most faining, most obtaining, Such good faith in love I find, Fa, la, la, &c. Towards Ladies, this my trade is, Two minds in one breast I wear, Fa, la, la, &c. And my measure at my pleasure, Yee and flame my face doth bear, Fa, la, la, &c. FINIS. THE XLIII. SONG. WIth my Love, my life was nested, In the Sun of happiness: From my Love, my life was wrested To a world of heaviness. O let love my life remove, Sith I live not where I love. O let love my life remove, Sith I live not where I love,
Where the truth once was, and is not, Shadows are but vanities. Showing want, that help they cannot, Are but slaves of miseries. Painted meat no hunger feeds, Dying life each death exceeds. O! true Love, since thou hast left me, Mortal life is tedious: Death it is to live without thee: Death of all most odious. Turn again, and take me with thee, Let me die, or live you with me. FINIS. THE XLIV. SONG. BEhold a wonder here, Love hath receiv'd his sight, Which many hundred, hundred, hundred years, Hath not beheld the light. Such beams infused be By Cynthia in his eyes, As first have made him see, And then have made him wise. Love now no more will weep For them that laugh the while; Nor wake for them that sleep, Nor sigh for them that smile. So powerful is the Beauty, That Love doth now behold, As Love is turn'd to duety, That's neither blind not bold. This Beauty shows her might To be of double kind, In giving Love his sight, And striking Folly blind. FINIS.
THE XLV. SONG. OVer the mountains, and under the caves; Over the fountains, and under the waves; Under waters that are deepest, Which Neptun still obey: Over rocks that are the steepest, Love will find out his way. Some may esteem him a childe by his force, Or some may deem him a coward, that's worse: But if she whom he doth honor, Be consenting to play, Set twenty guards about her, Love will find out his way. May do loose him by proving unkind; Or some may suppose him, poor heart, to be blind: But if ne're so closs ye wall him, Do the best that ye may: Blind Love, if ye do call him, He will grape out his way. Well may the Eagle stoup down the first, Or nets to inveagle the Phenix of the East: With tears ye may move the Tyger To give over his prey; But never stop a Lover: Love will find out his way. It th'earth doth part them, hee'l soon course 're;
If seas do thwart them, hee'l swim to the shore: If his Love became a swallow, In the air for to stay, Love will find wings to follow, And swift lee out his way. Where is no place for the glow-worm to ly, Where is no trace for the seat of a ee, Where the gnat dare never venture, Lest her self fast she lay: But if I ove come, hee'l enter, And will find out his way. There is no shining to oss his intent, There is no contriving his plots to prevent; but if once the meage great him, That his true Love doth stay, Though Demons come and meet him, He will go on his way. FINIS. THE XLVI. SONG. WHen from my Love I look'd for love, and kind affections due; Too well I found her vows to prove most faithless and untrue. For when I did ask her, Why? most sharply she did reply, That she with me did ne're
agree to love, but jestingly. Mark but the subtil policies that female lovers find, Who loves to fix their constancies, like feathers in the wind. Although they swear and do protest, they love you chiefly best, Yet by and by, they'l all deny, and say, It was but jest. FINIS. THE XLVII. SONG. REmember me, my Dear, I humbly you require; For my request that loves you best, With faithful heart intire, My heart shal rest within your breast, Remember me, my Dear. Remember me, alace! And let all rigor pass, That I may prove in you some love, To my joy and solace. True love to move, I must behove; Remember me, alace! Remember me in pain, With unkindness now slain: That through delay of cruel way,
That in you doth remain, Remit, I say, alace! away: Remember me in pain. Remember on me, dear Heart, That of pains hath my part: Your words unkind, sinks in mymind And doth increase my smart: Yet shal ye find me true and kind: Remember on me, dear Heart Remember on me in thral, Ready when I do call: With true intent I do consent, Heart▪ mind, body and all: Never to repent, but to consent: Remember on me in thal. FINIS. THE XLVIII. SONG. HOw now, Shepherd, what means that? Why wearst thou willows in thy hat? Are thy scarffs of red and yellow, Turn'd to branches of green willow? They are changed, so am I; Sorrows lives when joys do dye: It is Phylis only she, That makes me wear the willow tree▪
Is't the Lass that lov'd thee long! Is it she that doth thee wrong! She who lov'd thee long and best, Is her love now turn'd to jest? She who lov'd me long and best, Bids me set my mind at test: She loves a new Love, loves not me, Which makes me wear the willow tree▪ Come now, Shepherd, let us join, Since thy Love is like to mine; For even she I thought most true, Hath also changd me for a new. Herds-man, if thy hap be so, Thou art partner of my wo; Thy ill hap doth mine appease, Company doth sorrow ease. Is it she who lov'd thee now, And swore her oath with solemn vow? Faith and truth so truely plight, Cannot be so soon neglect. Faith and truth, vows and oaths, Are forgot and broken both: Cruel Phylis false to me, Which makes me wear the willow tree: Courage man, and do not mourn For her who holds thy love in scorn: Respect not them who loves not thee, But cast away the willow tree. For thee shal I live in pain? Phylis once was true Love mine, Which shal ne're forgotten be, Although I wear the willow tree. Shepherd, be thou rul'd by me, Cast away the willow tree; For thy sorrow's her content, And she is pleas'd if thou lament. Herds-man, I'le be rul'd by thee, Here lyes grief and willow tree: Henceforth I will be as they, That loves a new Love every day. FINIS. THE XLIX. SONG. WILL said to his Mammie, That he would go woo: Fain would he Soft a while, my Lammie, Stay and yet abide. He like a
wedd, But he wist not how. Indeed I'le have a wife, a wife, a wife. fool as he was, reply'd. O what a life do I lead, For a wife in my bed? I may not tell you. O there to have a wife, a wife, a wife, O! it's a smart to my heart, It's a rack to my back, And to my belly too. Scarcely was he wedded Full a fourt-nights space, For that he was in a heavy case; Largely was he headed, And his cheeks look'd thin: And to repent, he did thus begin; A fig for such a wife, a wife, a wife: O! what a life do I lead, With a wife in my bed? I may not tell you. O! there to have a wife, a wife, a wife. O! it's a smart to my heart; It's a rack to my back, And to my belly too. All you that be Batchelors, Be learn'd by crying Will: When ye are well, to remain so still. Better for to tarry, And alone to ly, Then like a fool with a fool to cry, A fig for such a wife, a wife, a wife: O! what a life do I lead, With a wife in my bed? I may not tell you O! there to have a wife, a wife, a wife: It's a smart to my heart, It's a rack to my back, And to my belly too. FINIS.
THE L. SONG. CAre, away, go thou from me; For I am not fit match for thee. Thou bereaves me of my wits: Wherfore I hate thy frantick fits. Therefore I will care no more, Since that in cares comes no restore: But I will sing, Hey down a down, a die, And cast care away, away, from me. If I want, I care to get: The more I have, it doth me fret: Have I much, I care for more: The more I have, I think I'm poor: Thus doth grief my mind oppress, In wealth or wo, finds no redess. Therefore I'le care no more, no more in vain, For care hath cost me mikle grief and pain. Is not this world a slippry ball? And thinks men strange to catch a fall. Doth not the sea both eb and flow? And hath not Fortune a painted show? Why should men take care or grief, Since that in care comes no relief? There's none so wise but may be o're-thrown, The careless may reap what the careful hath sown.
Well then, learn to know thy self And care not for this worldly pel Whether thine estate be great of smal, Give thanks to God, what e'te beal; So shalt the then live at ease, No sudden  thee displease Then mayst thou sing, Hey down a down; , When thou hast cast all care and grief from ther. FINIS. THE LI. SONG. THere was a time when silly Bees did speak; And in that time, I was a silly Bee; Who fed on Time, until my heart did break, Yet never found that Time would favor me. Of all the swarm, I only did not thrive, Yet brought I wax and honey to the hyve.
Th , vet Time no say would give. Why  yto me be dry, Since by the  the  don doth live, The wap, the , the at, the butter-ie? , I Kneeled on my knees, And ths complained to the King of Bees. My Lie lge, God rant thy Time may never end, And  hear my plnt of Time: The  sound to have a friend, Yet , while  do climb. The Prince reply'd, and said, Peace, pievish Bee, Thou it made to serve the Time, the Time not thee. FINIS. THE LII. SONG. SHepherd, saw thou not my fair lovely Phylis, Walking on you She is gone this way to Dianaes fountain, And hath left me mountain, or on yonder plain. Ay, she is so fair, and without compare: wounded with her high disdain. Love is full of fears; love is full of cares: Sorrow comes to sit with me. Thus my passions pains me, And my Love hath Love without this cannot be. Pray to Cupids mother, For I know none
slain me, Gentle Shepherd play a part. other, That can ase me of my smart. Shepherd, I have seen thy fair lovely Phylis, Where her  are seeding by the river side: Ah! I much admire, she is fai exceeding, In surpassing beauty, should surpass in pride: But, alace! I find they are all unkind: Beauty knows her power too well: When they list they love, when they please they move; Thus they turn their heaven to hell: Where their fair eyes glancing, Like to Cupids dancing, Rules well for to deceive us, With vain hopes deluding, Still their praise concluding, Thus they love, thus they leave us. Thus I do dispair, love her I shal never, If she be so coy, lost is all my love: But she is so fair, I will love her ever. All my pain is joy, which for her I prove. If I should her love, and she should deny, Heavy heart with me would break: Though against my will, tongue thou must be still, For she will not hear thee speak: Then with kisses move her, They shal show I love her: Lovely Love, be thou my guide: But I'le sore complain me, She will still disdain me; Beauty is so full of pride. FINIS. THE LIII. SONG. FAin wold I wed a fair yoūg Maid, that day & night could please me, Whē my mind or bodie's griev'd, that had the power to ease me.
Maids are full of longing thoughts, which breeds a pain - ful sickness: And that oft I hear men say, is on-ly cur'd throgh quickness. Oft I have been wooed, and pray'd, yet never could be moved. Many for a day or two, I have most dearly loved: But this  mind of mine, straight loathes the thing resolved. I'o love be sin in me, that sin is soon absolved. Surely, I think, I shal at last flie to some holy Order; When I am once setled there, I then can flie no farther: Yet I would not die a Maid, because I had a mother: As I was by one brought forth, I would bring forth another. FINIS. THE LIV. SONG. YOu minor beauties of the night, Which poorly satisfies our eyes, More by your number then your light, As cōmon Officers in the skyes; What are you? what are you? What are you, when the Moon doth rise?
You wandring Chanters of the wood, That fills mine ears with natures layes, Thinking your In weaker accents, what What's your praise? what's When P'hilomel her notes doth But, ah! pure light, pure voice, pure smel, What are you when my Mistriss shine? Moon, Violet, and Philomel, Adore her all, cause she's divine, She's divine, she's divine, The quintessence of women kind. You Violets that first appear Your pride in purple garments shown, Taking possession of the year, As if the Spring were all your own; What are yon? what are you? What are you, when the roses bloom? The Second Part. YOu minor beauties of the night, That shows your signs erlestial; More is your number then your light, Although you were terrestrial; What are you? what are you? What are you, when the Moon doth rise? You etring stars, what do you mean To ob bright Phebus of his ? Or to  his princely , Turning his day in darksom night? Leave on in time, learn to be wise, Leave of your foolish enterprise. You mustut number as the sand, And some clear light you do command: But what are you when that your Queen With borrowed light begins to What are you both when Phebus plays Upon the centure of his rays? Should little streams command great Or little ants the nging bees? Should little birds with eagles soar? Or little beasts with lyons roar? No, no, not so, it is not meet, The head should stoup down to the feet. Finis. THE LV. SONG. FLow my tears, fall from your springs; Exil'd for ever let me Down vain lights, shine you no more. No nights at dark enough for
mourn, Where nights black bird her sad infamy sings: There let me live forlorn. those That in dis - pair their last fortuns deplore. Light doth but shame disclose. Never may my woes be re - lie - ved, since pitty is fled; And tears, and From the highest Sphear of contentment, my fortune is thrown; And fear, and sighs and groans, my weary days, my weary days, of all joys have deprived: grief and pain, for my deserts, for my deserts are my hopes since hope is gone Hek you shadows that in darkness dwel▪ learn to contemn light. Happy, happy they that are in heaven, feel not the worlds despight. FINIS.
Pleugh-Song. Cantus. Three Voices. MY heartly service to you, my Lord, ecom: mend, as should ac-cord; Cord; There is an ox into your pleugh, it is right so, ye say the sooth, And he no longer may be drawn, but he be led, But he was never half so thrawn, but goeth backward: Now is he weak and wonder sweer▪ I take on me, suppose ye brod him while he die, while he die, while he die.
2. Yet  it were that some remead were found in time ere he be dead, For causes and staring of other mens nowrs, And I am wo your pleugh should ly, and I might come, and be near by, to yoak another in his stead, To drug and draw whie he be dead, out of an uncouth fair leasure, To do your Lordship more pleasure. And if it be your proper wil, gar ca the hyndis all you till, Higgin and Habken, Hankin and Rankin, Nicol and Collin, Hector and Aikin,
Martin Mawer, Mchel▪ and Morice false lips, Fergus, Rynaud and Guthia, Or- phus and Arthur, Morice, Davie, Richard, Philpie Foster and Macky Millar, Ruffie Tasker and his marrows all, Straboots, Taboyes and Ganze: All that has most domination and pastorie of your cōmon, ij before you, one and one present, And thereto show them your intent. ij ij ij ij ij ij ij 3. Require them all if they will be apleased for to
mell with me, And make me als so fast and sicker, As I were bound on with a wicker; For to deliver me, be the hide, the old ox tryp-free, he be dead: Then shal I come with God his cocks, and bring with me my fair fresh ox, with all that belongs to the pleugh, soms of yron stark enough: The cowter and the pleugh-, head sok-sheet and mowdie bread, Rack, rest, and the gluts, and the sle-band: The missel and the pleugh-bowl, the pleugh-staff, the pleugh-shoone, the mell
and the stilt and the beam▪ and the heel wedge: The check, the yoak, the ring, the sling, mine oxen bows is wreathed and pid, this whole year saw no sun nor wind. The gad-wand is both light and sharp, to brod his belly while he start. Hey, call about, with a shout, wind about, brandie, trow belly, trow belly, chow bullock, chow bullock, white horn, wind marrow garie, I shal brod him while he rair: The red sto, & the dun▪ wind about, hold, draw him forth, in the Roods name,
In all Scotland is there such eight. And if ye please this plegh of mine, tell me shortly into time, ere I contract and hyred be, with others that desireth me: Not else, but the Trinity, conserve you into charity. ij. A- men. Finis. ij CANTUS. Three Voices. ALL sones of Adam, rise up with me, Go praise the blessed Trinitie.
Go praise the blessed Trinitie. Cry Kyrie, with Hosanna, sing Alleluja now. Save us all, Emanuel. Then spake th' Archangel Gabriel, said, Ave Mary mild, the Lord of Lords is with thee, now shal you go with child: Ecce ancilla Do-. mini. Then said, the Vir - gin, As thou hast said so mat it be, ij Welcom be heavens King, welcom be heavens King. There comes a ship far sailing then, Saint Michel was the stieres-man: Saint Iohn sate in the horn: Our
Lord harped, our Lady sang, And all the bells of heaven they rang, On Christs Sunday at morn, On Christs Sonday at morn. Then sang the Angels all & some, Lauda Deum tuum, Si - on. The sons of Adam answered, then sang, Glore be to the God and man, the Father and the Sprite, Also with honor and perpetual joy, with honor and perpetual joy.
CANTUS. Three Voices. TRip and go, hey: How should I go? How: It is the guyse of France, How that ye should sing and play, With us to stuff our joly dance. Hey that ye should sing and play, With us to stuff our joly dance. How now, let us sing with Christs leave, Our mery song, no man to grieve, Ioly under the green wood tree, Ioly under the green wood tree. Be soft and
sober, I you pray, my Lady will come here away; Go graith you in your glan. sand geer, To meet my Lady pair and▪ pair, With harps and lutes and guittrons gay, My Lady will come here away, With harps and lutes and gulttrons gay, My Lady will come here away. Hey oly, loly, love is joly a while, while it is new: When it is old, it groweth full cold: Wo worth the love un - true, underneath the green wood tree: There the good love bideth the frisca. Ioly polland the floe
she doth ago, singing so merrily. ij I saw three Ladies fair singing, Hey and how, upon yon leyland, hey. I saw three mariners singing, Rumbelow, upon yon see strand, hey. The pypers drone was out of tune, sing young Thomlin, be merry, be merry, and twise so merry, with the light of the Moon, hey, hey down, down a down: Alleluja, now, now sing we all: Be merry, be merry. The Malt's come down, be merry, be merry: The Malt's come down, hey
tronlyloly loly. Three birds on a tree, three and three, and other three, The boniest bird come down to me, The boniest bird came down to me. What will you, my joy, on the green at the dansing gay Ladies fair? Many man did I, I saw Peggy, and with her spake, by my faith did she. By our sweet Lady, I ferly of that, And by our sweet Lady, I ferly of that, hey down adown, adown, adown, down adown, hey down adown, adown. The ring of the rash, of the gowan, in the cool of the
night, came my leman home, a and yealow hair above her brows My joly tail how comes you now, now, now, now, now: My joly tail how comes you now. So dinckly as her hair was decked, So lustily she did also both wink & blink, and twinkle too: So fresily she did ago. She ran like a Roe, she tript like a Doe: I would have caught her by the toe: With that she vanisht, & home did go, hey. Sing silver wood & thou were mine; Sing joly love, one line, hey▪ There should nothing
within thee gow but a Hart and a Hynd, hey; but a Hart and a Hynd. Now here how the Frier had on a coule of red, He spyed the pretty wench keaming her head. He prinked, he luked, he lour'd: To see as he jouked, it was a good bourd. The pretty wech all alone alone, alone. The Frier had on a belt of knots, He spyed the pretty wench filling the cups: He priked, he lurked, e lourd: To see as he jouked it was a good bourd. The prety wench all alone, alone, alone. Ever.
alace! to: shame alone; A joly young Frier hes raised my womb. That ever I did it, ever I did it, ever I did it, did it, did it, ever I did it, ever I did it, ever, alace! for earthly shame. Betrayed am I uncourtously, alone, alone, alone, hey how, hey how, hey how. Meet we your maidens, meet we your maidens all in array, with silver pins and virgin lay. We be all of maiden land, maidens ye may see. Come in our ring then saith Pleasance; Give us your hands, let us go dance. Hey, sing
dedillum. Will good lamy pill tail wisker, to thy supper derecundam. Come rake me the rowing thee. Come row to me round about, bony dowy, Robin, Robert, joly Ianet, & who plays on your pen, joly Robert, your gimpinot plays the tirl, the tirl, your gimpinot plays the tirl, hey, sing did dow, ridil dow. And like ye not play with me. And can ye dance on a peat, play lutcock & light the gate futtikinton sisters, adew: sisters, adew. The heav'n is full of mirth and joy, adew. Farewel, now will we go. FINIS.
