E2794 11889767 50406
THE DECLARATION OF THE LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, In and about the Cities of LONDON and WESTMINSTER, Assembled at GUILDHAL, 11 Dec. 1688. WEE doubt not but the World believes that, in this Great and Dangerous Conjuncture, VVe are heartily and zealously concerned for the Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties and Properties of the Subject. And VVe did reasonably hope, that the King having Issued His Pro∣clamation, and VVrits for a Free Parliament, VVe might have rested Secure under the Expectation of that Meeting: But His Majesty having with∣drawn Himself, and as VVe apprehend, in order to His Departure out of this Kingdom, by the Pernicious Counsels of Persons ill Affected to Our Nation and Religion, VVe cannot, without being wanting to Our Duty, be silent under those Cala∣mities, wherein the Popish Counsels which so long prevailed, have miserably involved these Realms. VVe do therefore Unanimously resolve to apply Our Selves to His Highness the Prince of Orange, who with so great Kindness to these Kingdoms, so vast Expence, and so much hazard to his own Person, hath Undertaken, by endeavouring to Procure a Free Parliament, to rescue Us, with as little Effusion, as possible, of Christian Blood from the imminent Dangers of Popery and Slavery. And VVe do hereby Declare, That VVe will, with our utmost Endeavours, assist his Highness in the obtaining such a Parliament with all speed, wherein Our Laws, Our Liberties and Properties may be secured, the Church of England in particular, with a due Liberty to Protestant Dissenters, and in general the Protestant Religion and Interest over the whole VVorld may be Supported and Encouraged, to the Glory of God, the Happiness of the Established Government in these Kingdoms, and the Advantage of all Princes and States in Christendom, that may be herein concerned. In the mean time, VVe will Endeavour to Preserve, as much as in Us lies, the Peace and Se∣curity of these great and populous Cities of London and Westminster, and the Parts Adjacent, by taking Care to Disarm all Papists, and Secure all Jesuits and Romish Priests who are in or about the same. And if there be any thing more to be performed by Us, for promoting His Highness's Generous Intentions for the Publick Good, VVe shall be ready to do it as occasion shall Require. W. Cant. Tho. Ebor. Pembroke. Dorset. Mulgrave. Thanet. Carlisle. Craven. Ailesbury. Burlington. Sussex. Berkeley. Rochester. Newport. Weymouth. P. Winchester. W. Asaph. Fran. Ely. Tho Roffen. Tho. Petriburg. P. Wharton. North and Grey. Chandos. Montague. T. Jermyn. Vaughan Carbery. Culpeper. Crewe. Osulston. WHereas His Majesty hath privately this Morning withdrawn Himself, We the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, whose Names are Subscribed, being assembled at Guildhal in London, having agreed upon, and Signed a Declaration, Intituled, The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in and about the Cities of London and Westminster, assembled at Guildhal, 11 Dec. 1688. Do desire the Right Honourable the Earl of Pembroke, the Right Honourable the Lord Viscount Wmouth, the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of Ely, and the Right Honourable the Lord Culpeper, forthwith to attend His Highness the Prince of Orange with the said Declaration, and at the same time acquaint His Highness with what We have further done at that Meeting. Dated at Guildhal the 11th of December, 1688. To Edward Jones Printer at the Savoy. WE the Peers of this Realm, being assembled with some of the Lords of the Privy Council, Do hereby Order and Require You forthwith to Print and Publish the Declaration herewith sent unto You. At the Council-Chamber in Whitehal, the 12th of December, 1688. Tho. Ebor. Halifax. Kent. Anglesey. Carlisle. Ailesbury. Sussex. Berkeley. Nottingham. P. Winchester. Tho. Petriburg. Tho. Roffen. North and Grey. Chandos. T. Jermyn. Crewe. Osulston. In the SAVOY: Printed by Edward Jones. MDCLXXXVIII.
