E2955A 15724922 104534
Englands day of Ioy and Reioycing, Or, Long lookt for is come at last. Or the true manner of proclaiming CHARLS the Second King of Eng∣land, &c. This Eighth day of this present May; to the ever honored praise of General Monck, being for the good of his Country, and the Parliament. To the Tune of, Jockey. CHear up your heart kind Country-men, , for we have them, déed Be  osd, but , though you have had, need, For  Foxes once were chief, A often with you laid the Thief, But  he is come, And  all to the run, Though  so long a time have sot, About this and that, and I know not what, Now General Monck hath done the thing, And proclaimd Charls our royal King. Then let us for his welfare pray, both night and day, as on the way, We passe along, That his Enemies may be trapand, that holds up hand, or gives command, To do him wrong, For there is two many now adays, That if they might but have their ways, Both King and Kingdome would destroy, So they themselves might it inioy, But let all those now have a care, Lest they fall into the hang-mans snare, For it is General Monck that has done the thing And proclaimed, &c. Now I will in brief declare, therefore be ware, and you shall hear, Before you go, Though he so longtime hath béen crost, and often tost, like to a post, Both too and throw, Yet now to England he must come, For to redéem all those from doom, That hath béen kept under command, And give them fréedom in the land, And be sure he will know all those, Who are his friends, and who were his foes, Then let his friends all merrily sing, that Charls is proclaim'd, &c. Though the Foxes father did destroy, with much anoy, that he might not inioy, His own, Now let King Charls now have his right, both day and night, in the despite Of any one, For it would have angered any one, For to have béen kept from their own So long as young Charls he hath béen This seaven long years durst not be séen, So was the Duke of York likewise▪ But now the country people It is General Monck has done and proclaimed Charls, &c. The second Part, To the same Tune. ANd now a Frée Parliament doth sit, with honour great, all men compleat, To settle peace now in the land, I pray to God they may prevail, with fervent zeal: and not to fall, What they have in hand, And for to settle right the laws, And to maintain the good old cause, As heretofore time hath béen, In Elizabeths days our maiden Quéen, For we no good laws have had, This twenty years to make us glad, But now General Monck has done the thing And proclaimed Charls our royal King. Now all the Hanters and the Quakers, and the Shakers, and their Partakers, must go down, So must the Anabaptist too, unto their o, no more must go Aspein up and down, Though they  houses rch, Yet now they must reair to the Church, No more private méetings they must have, Nor yet no speaker them to save, For they too long their wicked courses have run And many poor people hath almost undon, But now General Monck will have no such thing For he has proclaimd, &c. The Quakers had the land over-run, and it undone, if Monck had not come, their fury to swage, For when that Lambert he went forth, unto the North, then they were in wrath, and in great rage. The Ministers they would destroy, If that they would not them obey, And the Protestants they would have foold, But Monck their courage hath quickly cool'd, They raised Armies in the West, For to destroy both man and beast, But Monck an alteration did bring, And hath proclaimed, &c. Then let us all pray to God, with one accord, that his true word may with us remain, And it is a thing to be considered on, and thought upon, what Monck hath done, without destroying honest men: To carry all thing, so uprightly as he hath done, For the good of the Country since first he begun, Without any shedding or spilling of blood, Though he had many enemies that him withstood, Yet God was on his side, you may very wel know That helpt him to beat down the Protestants foes It is General Monck that has done this thing, And has proclaimed, &e. And now you Country men all, both great and small, unto you all, I send this song, Hoping your taxes shall be fréed, which you have much néed, and indéed Have paid it for so long, For if Lambert and Fleetwood, in their ways had gone, The poor protestants had béen quite undone, Lambert was for the Baptist as I did hear, & Fleetwood for the Quakers as it doth appear, So they two would have agréed with high renown, That ye poor Protestant should all hade gone down But Monck an alteration did with him bring, And has proclaimd, &c. And now I wish that all those, who are his foes, or about goes, him to destroy, That they may be striken blind or lame, unto their shame, that séeks his fame, for to annoy. For if brave General Monck had not stood our friend For of sorrow and woes, we should never had an end But decrit and delusions more and more, True loving friends they turnd out of door, And now you kind Countrymen be not in hast. For though you have long lookt for it, it is come at last, For General Monck has done the thing, And so God save Charls our royal King. The true manner of proclaming Charles the second King of England, &c. by the too Houses of Parliament, Lords and Commons from Westminster, through all the streets of London, and accompanied by the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, and Common-Counsel of the City of London, with all the City Trained-bands for their Gard, and many thou∣sands of Citizens on Horse-back. London, Printed for W. Gilbertson, at the sign of the Bible in Giltspur-street.
