E3027 R218203 99829814 34258
ENGLAND'S Remarques: Giving an Exact Account of the Several Shires, Counties, and Islands in ENGLAND and WALES. In every of which you have, I. How the County is bounded. II. The Length, Breadth, and Circumference. III. The Temperature of the Air, and Fertility or Barrenness of the Soil. IV. What Commodities each Shire or County af∣fordeth. V. In what Diocess, and how many Parishes in it. VI. The Number of Parliament-Men, Hundreds, and Market-Towns. VII. In every Shire you have the Name of the City or Shire-Town, with the Latitude thereof, and how it bears, with the reputed and measured distance of the same from London, the Road to the same; how Governed, and the Coat of Arms, and what other things are therein Remarkable. VIII. You have the Names of such Noble Families as have been Dukes or Earls of each County since their first Constitution. IX. Whatsoever is Eminent or Remarkable thorow∣out the whole Kingdom. To which is added a Travelling Map, describing the Principal Roads thorow-out England. London, Printed for Langley Curtis in Goat-Court upon Ludgate-Hill, and sold by Tho. Mercer at the Half Moon under the South-east Corner of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1682.
TO THE READER. THE Apophthegme of Chi∣lo, One of the Seven Wise-Men of Greece (Nosce teipsum) was not unwor∣thily Consecrated to Apollo at Del∣phos. None being a competent Judge of others, who doth not first know himself; and no person can judge of another Countrey, unless he knows his Own: Therefore Nosce Patriam is as necessary an Adage (espe∣cially to those whose Ample Fortunes and Natural Inclinations call them into Foreign Countreys) As Chi∣lo's APOPHTHEGME is to all
Persons whatsoever. Many in this Age travel into France, and other Adjacent Countreys, and perhaps at their Return are able to give you an Account how many Provinces, &c are contained in the Countrey they have Travelled, when at the same time they scarce know any more Land in England than their Fathers or their own Inheritance. But here (as in a Map) you may at first View give an Account of any thing Remark¦able in England, be the Question asked either in England or Foreign Parts; Which by perusing this Little Manual you will soon find.
The Names of the several Counties in England. BArkshire. Pag. 1 Bedfordshire. Pag. 5 Buckinghamshire. Pag. 8 Cambridgeshire. Pag. 11 Cheshire. Pag. 15 Cornwall. Pag. 20 Cumberland. Pag. 27 Derbyshire. Pag. 31
Devonshire. Pag. 33 Dorsetshire. Pag. 40 Durham, the Bishoprick and City. Pag. 45 Essex. Pag. 48 Gloucestershire. Pag. 52 Hantshire. Pag. 58 Hertfordshire. Pag. 63 Herefordshire. Pag. 67 Huntingtonshire. Pag. 72 Kent. Pag. 75 Lancashire. Pag. 84 Leicestershire. Pag. 90 Lincolnshire. Pag. 94
Middlesex. Pag. 99 Norfolk. Pag. 133 Northamptonshire. Pag. 140 Northumberland. Pag. 145 Nottinghamshire. Pag. 149 Oxfordshire. Pag. 153 Rutlandshire. Pag. 159 Shropshire. Pag. 162 Somersetshire. Pag. 166 Staffordshire. Pag. 174 Suffolk. Pag. 179 Surrey. Pag. 185 Sussex. Pag. 189
Warwickshire. Pag. 194 Westmoreland. Pag. 200 Wiltshire. Pag. 204 Worcestershire. Pag. 211 Yorkshire. Pag. 215 The Names of the Counties in Wales. ANglesey. Pag. 226 Brecknockshire, Pag. 229 Cardiganshire. Pag. 232 Caernarvanshire. Pag. 235 Caermardenshire. Pag. 238
Denbyshire. Pag. 241 Flintshire. Pag. 244 Glamorganshire. Pag. 248 Merionethshire. Pag. 251 Monmouthshire. Pag. 254 Montgomeryshire. Pag. 258 Pembrokeshire. Pag. 261 Radnorshire. Pag. 266
Of the Islands about England. THe Isle of Man. Pag. 268 The Isle of Wight. Pag. 271 The Isle of Jersey. Pag. 273 The Isle of Garnsey. Pag. 275
engraving of England with part of Ireland, part of Scotland, and part of France Engraved by the elder Thomas Cross An Exact Map of England with the Roads from London, to all the other parts of this Kingdome. T. Cross Sculpsit N Counties Names. 1 Bark. sh 2 Bedford. sh 3 Buckingham. sh 4 Cambridge. sh 5 Cheshire. 6 Cornwall. 7 Cumberland. 8 Derby. sh 9 Devon. sh 10 Dorset. sh 11 Durham. 12 Essex. 13 Glocester. sh 14 Hant. sh 15 Hertford. sh 16 Hereford. sh 17 Huntington. sh 18 Kent. 19 Lancashire. 20 Leicester. sh 21 Lincoln. sh 22 Middlesex. 23 Norfolk. 24 Northampton. sh 25 Northumberland 26 Nottingham. sh 27 Oxford. sh 28 Rutland. sh 29 Shrop. sh 30 Somerset. sh 31 Stafford. sh 32 Suffoll. 33 Surrey. 34 Sussex. 35 Warwick. sh 36 Westmorland. 37 Wilt. sh 38 Worcester. sh 39 York. sh 40 Anglesey. Ish 41 Brecknock. sh 42 Cardigan. sh 43 Carnarvan. sh 44 Carmarden. sh 45 Denbigh. sh 46 Flint. sh 47 Glamorgan. sh 48 Merioneth. sh 49 Monmouth. sh 50 Montgomery. sh 51 Pembroke. sh 52 Radnor. sh
It is divided into Twenty Hundreds, viz. Farington. Ganfield. Hormer. Oake. Wanting. Shrivenham. Lainborn. Kentbury. Westisle. Morton. Faircrosse. Braye. Reading. Charlton. Sonning. Cookham. Wargrove. Bernersh. Riplessmore. Theale. And in these Hundreds are Twelve Market-Towns, viz. Abbington M. and Fr. Wallingford Tu. and F. Faringdon Tu. Ockingham Tu. Maiden-Head W. Hungerford W. East-Isley W. Newberry Th. New-Windsor Sa. Wanting Sa. Reading Sa. Lainborne. This Shire hath formerly had in it six Castles, of which there now remains only that magnificent one of Windsor, one of his Majesties Palaces — In this Castle the Victorious Prince Edward the third was born — In it is instituted the most honourable Order of the Garter of St. George, a signal of Martial Prowess— And in the Chappel of this Castle there lye interred the
Bodies of Henry the 6. Edward the 4th. Henry the 8th and (as is supposed) of King Charles the First. The first Institution whereof was in Anno Dom. 1350. And those that first received the order were, Edward the 3d. Edward Prince. Henry Duke of Lan∣caster. Tho. Earl of War∣wick. Captain de Bonch. Ralph Earl of Staf∣ford. W. Mountecut E. of Sal. Roger Mert' Earl of March. John de Lisle Knight. Tho. Burwash K. Jo. Beauchamp K. John de Mohun K. Hugh Courtney K. Tho. Holland K. John Grey K. Ri. Fitz-Simon K. Miles Stapleton K. Tho. Wall K. Hugh Wrothsley K. Nele Loring K. John Chandos K. James de Andley K. Otho. Holland K. Henry Eme King. Zanchet Dabridg Will. Paganell K. The Chief Town is Reading, lying in the La∣titude of 51 degrees, 28 min. And West from London, and is distant therefrom 32 Miles, viz. To Cole-Brooke 15, to Maiden-head 22, to Read∣ing 32, but by more accurate and late Admea∣surement, it is found to be 44 Miles, distant from London. The Town of Reading is Governed by a Mayor and Aldermen.
The Arms of the County: The Field is Argent, three Castles Gules, over the middlemost a Bucks Face erect of the second Horned Or,—On a chief Vert, between the Bucks Horns the Arms of Eng∣land and France Quartered. Remarkable things in this Shire. In the year of our Lord 1387. And in the 11 year of Richard the 2d. At Radcot-bridge, The Duke of Glocester, the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, Derby and Nottingham: Encountered with Robert Vere Duke of Ireland, maintained against them by King Richard the 2d. Where the said Duke was put to flight, who with swimming over the Thames hardly escaped drowning. In this Encounter in the Dukes behalf Sir Tho. Molineux Constable of Chester, with many others lost their lives. In the year 1100. At Enchamsteed in this shire a Well boyled up with streams of Blood for 1 days together, the Water of this Spring making red all other Water where it came. In this Shire is the Vale of White-Horse one of the Fruitfullest Vales of England.
Bedford-shire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Hertford-shire and Cambridge-shire — On the West by Buckingham-shire — On the South by Hertford-shire —On the North by North∣ampton-shire and Huntington-shire. It containeth in length 24 miles — in breadth 12 miles — in Circumference 72 miles. The Air in this Shire is very Temperate and hath very plenteous Soyl in the North part there∣of, occasioned by the watering of the River Ouse, which often overfloweth it, the Southern part is not so fertile, but is made to be so by industry, and it yieldeth the best Barley in England,— The Country is generally Champion, but in many places intermixed with Meadow and Pasture-grounds. The Chief Commodities are Corn, Cattle, But∣ter, Cheese and Poultry. It is in the Diocess of London, and hath in it 116 Parishes, and out of this Shire are elected 4 Members to sit in Parliament, Knights 2 Bedford 2
It is divided into Nine Hundreds, viz. Stodden. Willy. Barford. Redbornspike. Wixamtree. Biggleswad. Clifton. Flitt. Manshead. And in these Hundreds are 10 Market-Towns, viz. Luton, Monday. Bedford, Tu. and Sa. Leighton, Tu. Biggleworth, Tu. Dunstable, Wed. Ampthil, Th. Woburn, Fr. Shefford, Fr. Tuddington, Sa. Patton, Sa. In this Shire were some Castles, viz. Woodhill, Eaton, Temsford and Ampthil, an Honour now be∣longing to the Crown. The Chief Town in this Shire is Bedford, lying in the Latitude of 52 degrees 10 m. and bears N. W. by N. from London, and is distant there∣from 40 Miles, viz. Thus, From London to Barnet 10. To St. Albans 20. To Luton 28. To Barton Clay 33. To Bedford 40. but by a more accurate Admea∣surement it is found to be 48 miles distant from London. Through the Town of Bedford runneth the Ri∣ver Ouse, having a Stone-bridge over it — This Town is governed by a Major, Two Bay∣liffs, two Chamberlains; a Recorder, a Town-Clerk and 3 Serjeants with Maces. The Arms of the Town of Bedford, is a Demy-Eagle, the Wings displayed over a Castle upon a Hill, all Proper.
The Names of those honourable Families which have the Titles of Dukes and Earls of Bedford. Dukes. John Plantaginet. George Nevell. Earls. Ingelram Covey. John Russell. On New-years day 1399 (just before the War between the two Houses of York and Lancaster be∣gan) the above mentioned River Ouse sudainly ceased its Course, and stood still, so that men did pass three Miles together on foot in the depth of the Channel, and backwards the Waters swelled up to a very great height. It is storied that once in Bedford Town K. Offa's Leaden Tomb hath often appeared to such that look not after it, but to them that seek for it, it never appears. At Aspel Gowiz in this Shire near Woburn, is a certain Earth which turneth Wood into Stone, and that a Wooden Ladder was to be seen in a Monastery neer adjoyning, which having lain a good while covered with this Earth, was digged out again all stone. Dunstable a Town in this Shire standing upon a Chalkey-Hill, hath 4 streets in it, and in each of them a Pond, which are fed only with Rain (for they have not a Well in the Town less than 24 Cubits deep) and yet these Ponds are never dry.
Buckingham-Shire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Bedford-shire and Hertford-shire — On the West by Oxford-shire — On the South by Bark-shire — And on the North by Northampton-shire and Bedford-shire. It containeth in Length 39 Miles — In breadth 18 — and in Circumference 138. The Air in this Shire is very pleasant, whole∣some and temperate, yielding good content, both to mind and body. — The soyl is Rich, Fat and Fruitful, yielding abundance of Grass, Corn, and Cattle, for it maintains an infinite number of Sheep whose Fleeces are much admired for their fineness through the whole Turkish Empire. The Shire is chiefly divided into two parts by the Chiltren Hills which run through the Middle thereof — The Vale below is Plain and Cham∣pion, a Clay stiff and rough Soyl, naked of Wood, but abounding in Meadow, Pasture, and Tillage. It is in the Diocess of London, and hath in it 185 Parishes, and out of this Shire are Elected
Fourteen Members to sit in Parliament. Knights 2 Buckingham 2 Cheping-Wiccomb 2 Aylesbury 2 Agmondesham 2 Wendover 2 Merlow 2 It is divided into Eight Hundreds, viz. Newport. Buckingham. Cotstowe. Ashenden. Aylesbury. Burnham. Disborough. Stocke. And in these Hundreds are 15 Market-Towns, viz. Oulney, Mond. Amersham, Tu. Cole-brooke, W. Chesham, W. Winslow, Th. Wendover, Th. Baconfield, Th. Stony Stratford, Fr. Ivingoe, Fr. High Wickham, F. Buckingham, S. Newport, Sat. Alisbury, Sa. Risborough, Sa. Great Marlow, Sa. This Shire hath been strengthened with 4 Ca∣stles now all demolished. The Chief Town in this Shire is Buckingham, lying in the Latitude of 52 degrees 2 minutes, and bearing from London N. W. by W. and is distant therefrom 44 Miles, viz. From London to Acton 6. To Uxbridge 15. To Amersham 24. To
Wendover 30. To Aylesbury 34. To Bucking∣ham 44. but by more accurate Admeasurement 60 Miles. This Town is pleasantly seated upon the River Ouse, which circuites the Town on eve∣ry side saving the North, and over it are 3 Stone-Bridges — The names of these Honourable Families who have born the Titles of Earls of Bedford. Walter Gifford, Earl. Richard Stanbow, Earl. Thomas of Woodstoke, Earl. Humphry Stafford, Earl. The Town of Buckingham is governed by a Bailiff, and 12 Principal Burgesses. The Arms of the Town of Buckingham is Party per Pale, Gules and Sable, over all a Swan Ar∣gent Crowned and chained Or. Remarques in this County. There is little remarkable in this Shire, only in it grows abundance of Beech in the Chalky part of it, — The Sheep bred in the Vales have exceeding fine Fleeces, and where their Land is worn out (as about Marlow) they inrich it again by Chalking of it, so that it bears Corn abundantly.
Cambridge-Shire. IS bounded on the East by Suffolk and Nor∣folk — On the West by Bedford-shire and Huntington-shire — On the South by Essex and Hertford-shire — And on the North by Lincoln-shire. This Shire containeth in Length 35 Miles — In Breadth 20 Miles — And in Circumference 130 Miles. Cambridge-shire cannot be commended for a serene or wholesome Air, especially the Northern parts thereof, for that the Fens do so infect the Air thereabout. Their chief Commodities are Cattle, Malt and Saffron. It is in the Diocess of Ely, and hath in it 163 Parishes — And out of this Shire are elect¦ed to sit in Parliament. Knights 2 Ʋniversity of Cambridge. 2 Town of Cam∣bridge. 2
It is divided into Seventeen Hundreds, viz. Wisbich. Girvij or Wichford. Ely. Staplehow. Cheveley, Raddesley. Stane. Chelford. Flendish. Northstowe. Chesterton. Papworth. Stow. Wetherlee. Arningford. Tripelow. Witlesford. And in these Hundreds are Eight Market-Towns, viz. New-Market, Tues. Caxton, Tues. Royston, Wed. Linton, Thurs. March, Frid. Cambidge, Saturd. Wisbich, Saturd. Ely, Saturd. The Principal Town in this Shire is Cambridg, which (as Robert de Reymington tells us) was made a University in the Reign of King Edward the First; but far more ancient, if it be true that is said, it was built by Cantabar a Spaniard, 375 years before the Birth of Christ. However, This University is situate in the Latitude of 52 deg. 12 min. and lies N. by E. from London, and is distant therefrom 44 Miles: As from London to Waltham 12 Miles; to Ware 20. to Puckeridge 25. to Barkway 32. to Cambridge 44— But by a more accurate Admeasurement, the distance of Cambridge upon the Road is 52 Miles.
The University of Cambridge consisteth of these several Colledges and Halls, viz. Colledges and Halls Founded by Anno Domini St. Peters-House. Hugh de Balsham, B. of Ely. 1284. Clare-Hall. Richard Badow, C. of the Uni. 1326. Pembrook-Hall. Mary St. Paul. 1343. Convile and Cajus. Edmund de Genn and Cajus. 1348. Trinity-Hall. Will. Bateman, B. of Norwich. 1350. Corpus-Christi. H. of Monmouth, D. of Lancaster. 1351. Kings-Colledge. K. Henry the VI. 1441. Queens-Colledge. Margaret, Wife to K. Henry the VI. 1448. Katharine-Hall. Robert Wood, Lord Chan. of the Uni. 1475. Jesus-Colledge. John Alcock, Ch. of England. 1496. Christ's and S. John's. Margaret, Coun∣tess of Richmond 1505. 1508. Magdalen. Tho. Andley, Chan. of England. 1519. Trinity. K. Henry the VIII. 1546. Emanuel. S. Walter Mildmay, C. of the Exch. 1582. Sidney. Sussex. Francis Sidney, Chan. of Sussex. 1598.
The Town of Cambridge is Governed by a Mayor and Aldermen. Cambridge-Arms: The Field is Gules, a Bridge with three Wall-Towers on it Proper—In Chief a Flower-de-luce Or, between two Roses Argent. The Names of the Earls of Cambridge since the first Constitution. William, Brother to Ra∣nulph, E. of Chester. John of Benand, Uncle to Philip, Q. to Edw. III. William, Marquess of Juers. Edmund of Langley, D. of York. Edward, D. of York. Richard, E. of Cambridge. Richard, D. of York. James D. Hamlinton. Charles Stuart, Duke of York. Sussex and Sidney, Col∣lateral. Remarques in this County. The Herb called Scordium (or Water-German∣der) groweth very plentifully in the Fens, of which the Cordial Diascordium is made. Water-Fowl are so plentiful about the Fens, that (saith Mr. Speed) five Men may be well sa∣tisfied with that kind of food for less than an half-penny. In the Fen-Grounds also, when they have mow∣en their Grass (or Lie, as they call it, which is very rank) so much as will serve their turns, they do in November set fire on the rest, and the season following it comes up again in abun∣dance.
Cheshire. IT is bounded on the East by Darbyshire and Staffordshire — On the West by Denbyshire and Flintshire — On the South by Shropshire and Denbyshire — On the North by Lancashire. It containeth in Length 45 Miles — In Breadth 32 Miles — And in Circumference 145 Miles. The Air for temperature and the Soil for fer∣tility is inferior to none, and far exceeding the neighbouring Counties; although the Climate be cold, yet the warmth of the Irish Seas melt the Snow sooner than in other Countries, and the Inhabitants are generally long liv'd. The chief Commodities are Corn, Cattle, Sheep, Fish, Fowl, Mil-stones, and Cheese plenty, and the best in all England. It is in the Diocess of Chester, and hath in it 85 Parish-Churches, and 38 Chappels of Ease — And out of this Shire are Elected 4 Members to sit in Parliament. Knights 2 Chester 2
It is divided into Seven Hundreds, viz. Wicehall. Eddesbury. Broxton. Bucklow. Northwich. Macclesfield. Nantwich. And in these 7 Hundreds are 13 Market-Towns. Malpas, Monday. Maxfield, Monday. Altrincham, Tuesday. Tarvin. Frodsham, Wednes. Sanbich, Thursday. Northwich, Friday. Stopford, Friday. Nantwich, Saturday. Middlewich, Saturd. Congleton, Saturday. Huntsford, Saturday. West-Chester, Wednesday and Saturday. The principal Town in this Shire is the City of Chester, lying in the Latitude of 53 deg. 16. min. — bearing from London North West, and distant therefrom 140 Miles, thus — To Bar∣net 10 — To St. Albans 20 — To Dunstable 30 — To Brickhil 37 — To Stony-Straford 44 — To Tocester 50 — To Daventry 60 — To Coventry 82 — To Colesil 90 — To Lich∣field 102 — To Stone 120 — To Wich 135 — To Chester 150. This City was raised from the Fort of Ostorius, Lieutenant of Britain for the Emperor Claudius— Over the River Dee is a Stone-Bridge built upon 8 Arches, at either end thereof is a Gate, and from them Gates issue the Walls of the City in a Quadrangular form high and strongly built. In
this Wall are 4 Gates, 3 Posterns and 7 Watch-Towers. On the South part of the City is a state∣ly Castle built in a Circular form, and a Court∣yard about it enclosed with a circular Wall — In the North part is the Minster the Bishop's See — This City was incorporated by K. Henry the 7th; and is yearly governed by a Maior with Sword and Mace before him, 2 Sheriffs, 24 Al∣dermen, a Recorder, a Town-Clerk and a Serge∣ant of Peace, 4 Sergeants and 6 Yeomen. The Arms of the County Palatine of Chester is, Azure, Three Garbs or Wheatsheaves Or. A Dagger Erect Proper. The Arms of the City of Chester is, In Pale dexter Gules, Three Demy Lyons Guardant, Or. The Nobility of this County, namely the Earls of Chester, since the Norman Conquest. Hugh Lupus. Richard the Son of Hugh. Ranulph Meschines. Ranulph Gernones. Hugh Cevelioc. E. S. Ranulph Blundevil. John Scot, Earl. Things remarkable in this County. In the River of Dee is great plenty of Sal∣mon — This River upon the fall of much Rain riseth but little; but if the South-Wind beat long up∣on
it, it swells and overflows the Grounds ad∣joyning. In the lower places of this County, on the South-side of Cheshire, by the River Wever, Trees are oftentimes found by digging under ground, which People think have lain hidden there ever since Noah's Flood. At Nantwich, Northwich, and at Middlewich, are the famous Salt-Pits of this County. It is reported, That there are Trees that float in Bagmeer, against the death of any of the Heirs of the Breretons; and after the Heir is dead, they sink, and are seen no more till the next occasi∣on—Mr. Cambden affirms, That the bodies of these Trees swim for certain days together, and may be seen of any body — And he se∣conds this Story with another to the like pur∣pose — Leonardus Vairus (saith he) re∣ports, That near the Abby of St. Maurice in Bur∣gundy is a Fish-Pond, into which are put a num∣ber of Fishes, equal to the number of Monks of that Place; and if any of the Monks happen to be sick, there is one of these Fishes seen to float and swim above water as half dead; and if the Monk shall die, the Fish will also die some few days before. In the Parish of Bickley in this County, upon the 8th of July 1657. about 3 of the Clock, was heard a very great noise like Thunder afar off. Upon the hearing whereof, two Townsmen going into a Field called the Lay-Field, found a very great Bank of Earth, which had many tall Oaks growing on it, quite sunk under the ground, Trees and all, and the Earth for about 20 yards round about it was so shattered and broken, that they durst not go near the place where the Bank sunk;
but since that time, by Ropes some have adven∣tured to go to the brink to see the bottom, which is Water, about 30 yards from the brink; and since the Earth about for 16 yards compass is sunk, with 3 tall Oaks, a tall Awber, and other small Trees, not one sprig of them to be seen; more Land is like to fall daily, and when any falls, it is much like the Report of a Cannon. It is said concerning the Nature and Conditi∣on of the People of this County, by Lucian the Monk, That — In Feasting they are friend∣ly — At Meat chearful — In Enter∣tainment liberal — Soon angry, and as soon pleased — Lavish in Words — Impati∣ent of Servitude — Merciful to the Afflicted — Compassionate to the Poor — Kind to their Kindred — Spare of Labour — Void of Dissimulation — And far from dangerous Practices — And this more is added by Speed, That — This Shire hath never been stained with the blot of Rebellion, but ever stood true to their King and his Crown.
Cornwal. THis County is bounded on the East by De∣vonshire — On the West and North by the Irish or Virginian Sea — And on the South by the British Sea. It containeth in Length 70 Miles — In Breadth 35 Miles — And in Circumference 150 Miles. The Air of this County is mightily cleansed by the sharp Gales which blow over it from the se∣veral Sea-Coasts, making it very pure and subtil, and consequently very healthful; the County in general (except the East end thereof) troubled by violent blasts, many times leaving their Hou∣ses without covers. The Soil in most places is hilly, separated one from another by narrow Valleys — The su∣perficies or upper part of the Land in general is very barren, but the inner parts thereof very rich, by reason of the great quantities of Tin and Cop∣per-Mines, which County continues best stored with that Merchandise of any part of the World besides. The Commodities of this County are Copper, Tin, Fish, and Fowl in abundance, but Corn and Cattel not so plentiful — And besides the Tin and Copper-Mines, whose Vein in the lower
Valleys at low water may be seen above the ground; there are also in some Rocks found Gold and Silver, and Diamonds also shaped and polish∣ed by nature, which Diamonds are not inferior to those so much esteemed, save only in blackness and hardness, but then they exceed them in mag∣nitude, for there are of them found as big as Walnuts. It is in the Diocess of Exceter, and hath in it 161 Parishes — And out of it are elected 44 Members to sit in Parliament. Knights 2 Dunhivid, alias Lanceston. 2 Leskard 2 Loswithell 2 Truroe 2 Bodmyn 2 Helston 2 Saltaishe 2 Camelford 2 Port-Pigham, a∣lias, Welstow 2 Graw-pound 2 Eastlow 2 Penryn 2 Tregoney 2 Bossiney 2 St. Ives 2 Fowey 2 St. Germins 2 Michell 2 Newport 2 St. Mawes 2 Killington 2 It is divided into 9 Hundreds, viz. Penwith. Kirri. Powder. Pider. West. Trig. Lesnowth. East. Stratton.
In which are 21 Market-Towns, viz. Stratton, Tuesd. Truroe, We. & Sa. Penrin, W. F. & S. St. Ives, We. & Fr. St. Colomb, Thurs. Falmouth, Thurs. Market Jew, Th. Penzanch, Thurs. St. Germans, Frid. Camelford, Frid. Listhyel, Frid. Foy, Sat. East Looe. Saltash. Padstow, Sat. Grampond, Sat. Tregnye, Sat. Helston, Sat. Launston, Sat. Liskard, Sat. Bodman, Sat. The chief Town is Launston, lying in the La∣titude of 50 deg. 42 min. — Bearing from London W. S. W. and distant therefrom 170 Miles, thus — From London to New Brain∣ford 8. To Stanes 12. To Hartley-Row 28. To Basing Stoke 36. To Andover 52. To Salisbury 70. To Shaftsbury 88. To Sherbourn 100. To Ax∣minster 119. To Honiton 126. To Excester 138. To Launston 170. But by more accurate Admea∣surement 216. The Dukes and Earls of Cornwal since the first Constitution are, Robert de Morton. Regnald, base Son of William the Con∣queror.
John, Son to K. Henry the II. Richard E. of Cornwal, and K. of Romans. Edward, Son to K. Eward I. Pierce Gaveston, Earl of Cornwal. John of Eltham, Earl of Cornwal. Edward P. of Wales, D. of Cornwal, and 2d of Chester. Things remarkable in this County. The Men of this County are more hardy and strong, and so consequently addicted to more boisterous Sports, as Wrestling, Carrying, Pitch∣ing the Bar, and the like, than any English men besides. To instance in some few particulars— One John Brag carried at his back at one time, (for the quantity of a Butt length) almost 6 Bushels of Wheaten Meal (reckoning 15 Gallons to the Bushel) and the Miller's Man also (a stout fellow of 20 years of age) at the same time — Also one Kiltor, who lying upon his back in Laun∣ceston Castle-Green, threw a Stone of some pounds weight over the top of one of the high Towers of that Castle — These Countreymen are very healthful and long liv'd, 80 and 90 years is ordinary — One Polzew lived 130 years, a Kinsman of his 112 — One Beaucham 106, and one Brown a Bowyer 100 —And in one Parish (in Q. Elizabeth's time) there died in 14 Weeks space four People, whose ages ad∣ded together made 340 years — And far∣ther — One Mr. Chamond, who lived at
Stratton in this County, was Uncle and Great Uncle to (at least) 300 Persons. There is a Stone found here upon the Moors and waste Grounds, which they call Moor-stone, with which they make Chimney-Pieces, Door-Cases and Windows — Also another of the colour of grey Marble — And the Pebbles here cast upon the Shore, are by their working wrought naturally to a round form —They have also here of Slate 3 sorts, viz. Bley, Sage-Colour and Grey. In Q. Elizabeth's time a flock of Birds came into Cornwal about Harvest, a little bigger than a Sparrow, which had Bills thwarted cross-wise at the end, with which they would cut an Apple in two at one snap, eating only the Kernels, which Fowl made a great waste among Apple-trees. Almost every Hill in this County sendeth forth Springs of very pleasant and wholsom Water. These Countreymen are excellent Archers, they commonly shoot 24 score, their Arrows being a full yard long, wherewith they will pierce any ordinary Armour — One Robert Arundel would shoot 12 score out of his right hand, with his left hand behind his head — And one Rob. Bone shot at a little Bird sitting upon a Cow's back, and killed the Bird without touching the Cow. Edcomb-House by Plimouth is very rare: First, For the brave Eccho about it; and Secondly, For that by it they dig a Stone that serveth for Building, Lime, Marl and all. Some Gentlemen in this County have salt Wa∣ter-Ponds about their Houses, into which if you cast Boughs of Trees, Oysters will grow upon them.
At Saltash is a Well, the Water of which will never boyl Pease to an eatable softness. The Cement or Mortar of the Walls of Tinto∣gel-Castle, resist the fierceness of the Weather more than the Stones themselves. In St. Cleere's-Parish in Cornhil there are upon a Plain 6 or 8 Stones, such as are upon Salisbury-Plain, which (like them too) will be mistaken in their telling, so that when they are told over again, they will be found either more or less than before. At Hall near Foy is a Fagot all of one piece of Wood, naturally grown so, and it is wrapped about with a Band, and parted at the ends into 4 Sticks, one of which Sticks is subdivided into two others. It was carefully preserved many years by the Earl of Devon, being reckoned as a fore-token of his Progeny; for his Estate is now come into the hands of 4 Cornish Gentlemen, one of whose Estates is divided between two Heirs. In Landers Park there grows an Oak that bears Leaves speckled with white, and another the like in East Hundred, called Painters Oak. There are 2 Lakes near St. Agnes Hill, in one of them Fish will live and thrive, but not in the other. By Helford is a great Rock lying upon the ground, the top whereof is hollow which holdeth water, and ebbs and flows as the Sea doth. Mainamber a very great Rock in this Shire, lyes or resteth upon other smaller Rocks, and the push of a finger will sensibly move it to and fro, but all the force which men can use cannot move it from its place. About 40 years since upon the Shore of this Shire, was found by a Fisherman a huge mass of Ambergrease.
Among the many Ports Bays and Havens, this Countrey hath about it, that of Falmouth is so co∣pious, that 100 Ships may therein ride at Anchor apart by themselves, so that from the tops of their highest Masts they shall not see each other, and yet lye all safe under wind. At Boskenna is a Trophy erected, which are 18 Stones placed round, pitched 12 foot each from other, and another in the Centre far bigger than the rest, to shew some Victory there obtained by the Romans or K. Athelston. In many Places hereabouts are pieces of Ar∣mour both for Horse and Man digged out of the ground.
Cumberland. IS bounded on the East by Northumberland and Westmorland,—On the West by the Irish Sea— On the South by Westmorland and Lancashire— and on the North by Scotland. It containeth in length 56 Miles,—in breadth 32 Miles—and in Circumference 173 Miles. The Air is sharp and piercing, but is much mitigated by the Northern Hills, which break the Storm, and falling Snow. The Soil is fertile for the most part, both for Corn and Cattle, and the Maritime places are well furnished with Fish and Fowl, and the Ri∣vers bear a kind of Muscle that beareth Pearl. The chief Commodities are Sheep, Copper, Brass, Cole, Fowl, Fish, Cloath, and Black Lead. It is in the Diocess of Chester and Carlisle; and hath in it 58 Parishes. Out of it are Elected 6 Members to sit in Parliament.
Knights 2 Carlisle 2 Cockermouth This County is not divided into Hundreds the former. In it are contained 15 Market-Towns. Cockermouth, Mond. Wigton, Tuesday. Brampton, Tuesday. Perith, Tuesday. Bootle, Wednesday. Whitehaven, Thurs. Ireby, Thursday. Kirk-swald, Thurs. Longtown, Thursday Aston Moor, Saturday Carlisle, Saturday. Egremont, Saturday Ravenglas, Saturday Keswick, Saturday Abbeyholm, Saturday The chief City in this Shire is Carlisle, lying in the Latitude of 55 deg. 0 min.—Bearing from London N. N. W. and distant therefrom 2 Miles. Thus,—To Warington 136. To Lanca 187. To Kendall 203. To Carlisle 235. But  more accurate admeasurement upon the Ro 301 Miles. This City is pleasantly seated betwixt the  Rivers Eden, Petterell and Cand. In the days  Egfrid K. of Northumberland was walled about and again defaced by the Danes, and so con¦nued 200 years, till the time of K. Rufus, w rebuilt the Castle, and placed therein a Colo of Flemings. This County hath formerly been strengthen with 25 Castles, which were dissolved by K Henry the 8th.
The Earls of Carlisle since the first Constitution, are, Hen. Clifford Earl of Cumberland. Marcatus, Earls of Carlisle. Ron. Meschems, Earls of Carlisle. Andrew Harkley, Earls of Carlisle. James Hay, Earls of Carlisle. Charles Howard, Earls of Carlisle. Prince Rupert, Duke of Cumberland. The Coat Armor of the City Carlisle is, Argent, a Castle between two Roses Or, In a Chief Gules, a Lyon Passant Gardant of the second. The Base Wavy Argent and Sable. The Principal things remarkable in this County, are The Picts Wall extending through the main Land from Sea to Sea, built all of Stone, it was 8 foot broad and 12 high, and from the West Seat to the mouth of Tine, in length near 100 Miles, ascending and descending over great Crags and high Hills, the track whereof in many places is yet to be seen. At the end of every thousand Paces there was erected a Watch-Tower, in which Soldiers were kept for the securing of the same. At Salcelds upon the River Eden, is a Trophy of Victory erected, called by the Inhabitants, Long Meg and her Daughters. This Monument con∣sists of 77 Stones, each 10 foot high above ground,
and one of them, namely Long Meg, is 15 foot high. Skiddaw-Hill riseth up with two mighty high heads, and beholds Scruffell-Hill in Scotland; By the mists rising and falling upon this Hill, they foresee the change of weather, and signifie the same by this Proverb: If Skiddaw have a Cap, Scruffell wots full well of that. In this County there are two other exceeding high Hills, viz. Lavvellin and Casticand. Upon the Shore of this Shire Trees are many times at Low water discovered (by the blowing of the Wind) which at other times are covered with Sand. And Trees without Boughs are often digged out of the mossy places, which (in the Summer time) the Countrey People discover by the direction of the dew, for the dew never stands upon those places under which these Trees lye. Upon the Picts Wall grow Vulnerary Plants, which the Scotch Chirurgeons make annual jour∣nies to gather, which they suppose were first planted by the Romans.
Derbyshire. IS bounded on the East by Nottinghamshire. On the West by Staffordshire. On the South by Leicestershire. And on the North by Yorkshire. It containeth in length 34 Miles. In breadth 26. And in Circumference 130 Miles. The temperature of the Air of this Shire (as most of the Inland Counties of England are) is ve∣ry wholsom. The Soyl in the South and East Parts very rich, but the North and West Parts very hilly, with a black and mossy barren ground: These two different Soils are severed by the River Der∣went, the Water whereof (in some places) is made black by the Earth it passeth by. The Commodities of this Shire are Milstones, Crystal, Alabaster, Whetstones. And in the Peak, Pit-Cole, Iron and Lead. It is in the Diocess of Lichfield and Coventry, and hath in it 106 Parishes. Out of it are elected 4 Parliament Men. Knights 2 Derby 2
Its Division is into Six Hundreds, viz. Highis Peak Hund. Scarsdale Hund. Workesworth Hund. Appletree Hund. Ofap Hund. Reppington Hund. And in these Hundreds are 10 Market-Towns, viz. Alfreton, Monday. Bakwell, Mond. Wirksworth, Tuesd. Tideswall, Wednesd. Dronfield, Thursday. Derby, Friday. Bolsover, Friday. Chesterfield, Saturday. Ashbourn, Saturday. Drawfield. In this Shire have been formerly 7 Castles. The Principal or Shire-Town is Derby, afford∣ing the best Ale in England, which they say makes them long liv'd. It lyeth in the Latitude of 52 deg. 58 min. Bearing from London N. by W. and is distant therefrom 98 miles. Thus, From London to Northampton 54. To Leicester 78. To Loborough 86. And to Derby 98. But by ex∣act measure upon the Road, it is found to be 122 miles and a half. This Town of Derby is seated upon the West Bank of Derwent, where also a small Brook runneth through the Town under 9 Bridges. Besides these, there is another Bridge built all of Free Stone over Derwent, and upon it is a fair Stone Chappel, called St. Maries Chappel. In this Town is S. Alhallows Bell-Tower, which is both lofty and beautiful, it was built at the Charges of Young Men and Maids. It is a Town-Corporate, with the yearly Government of two Bailiffs, which are elected out of 24 Bre∣thren,
besides as many Burgesses of Common Council, a Recorder, Town-Clerk, and two Ser∣geants with Maces. The Earls of Derby since the Norman Conquest are, William Ferres, Earl of Derby. Edward, E. of Lancaster, Earl of Derby. John of Gant, D. of L. Earl of Derby. Thomas Stanly, Earl of Derby. Things remarkable in this County are, At Buxton in this County, Nine Springs arise out of a Rock in the compass of 24 foot, Eight of which are warm, and the Ninth very cold. These Springs run from under a fair Square Building of Free Stone, and about 300 foot off receive another hot Spring, from a Well in∣closed with 4 flat Stones; near unto which ano∣ther very cold Spring bubbleth up. These Waters are experimentally found good for the Stomach and Sinews, and good to Bath in. There is a Cave called Eldenhole, which is very spacious, but hath but a low and narrow entrance, but the Waters which trickle from the top thereof do congeal into Stone, and hang like
Isicles in the root thereof. Some are hollow within and grow taperwise, they are very white, resembling Crystal. In the Peak-Forrest is a Well that Ebbs and Flows four times in an hour; keeping its just Tides. The Arms of Derby is, a Hart cumbant upon 2 Hill in a Park Paled, all Proper.
Devonshire. THis County is bounded on the East by Somer∣setshire and Dorsetshire. On the West by Cornwall. On the South by the Brittish Sea. And on the North by the Severn. It containeth in length 52 miles. In breadth 47 miles, and in Circumference 202 miles. The Air of this County is sharp and wholsom. The Soil is Hilly and Woody. The chief Commodities are, Tin, Lead, Ker∣sies, Serges, Bone-Lace, Corn in abundance in the Valleys, and Load-stones of good value have been found upon Dartmore Rocks. This Shire is in the Diocess of Excester, and hath in it 394 Parishes. Out of it are elected 26 Members which sit in Parliament.
Knights 2 Exeter 2 Totnes 2 Plimouth 2 Oakehampton 2 Barnstable 2 Plymton 2 Honiton. 2 Tuvistock 2 Ashburton 2 Clifton, 2 Dartmouth, and 2 Hardress, 2 Beralston 2 Tiverton 2 Its Division is into 33 Hundreds, viz. Branton H. Sherwell, Hartland, Shebbe, Fremington, South Moulton. Black Torrington, Lifton, Tavestoke, Roborough, Plimpton, Armington, Witheridge, Crediton, Woonford, Tingbridge, Heytor, Colridge, H. Stanborough, Exmister, Budley, Halberton, Tyverton, Bampton, Hemyocke, Axmister, Culliton, Hayrudge, Clifton, North Tauton, Shebbeate, Winckley, St. Mary Otery.
And in these Hundreds are 32 Market-Towns. Plymouth, Mo. & Th. Bediford; Tuesday. Tiverton, Tues. Ottery, Tues. Excester, Wen. & Fri. Dodbrook, W. Newton Abby, W. Medbury, Thurs. Chulmleigh Bower, Th Colliton, Thurs. Hatburly, Friday. Barnstable, Friday. Kings Bridge, Sat. Plimpton, Sat. Totnesse, Sat. Ashburnton, Sat. Chidley, Sat. Morton, Sat. Dartmouth, Fri. Okehampton, Sat. Tavestock, Sat. Houlsworth, Sat. Torrington, mag. Sat. South Molton, Sat. Columpton, S. Crediton, S. Honicon, S. Axminster, S. Plimpton, S. Ilforcombe— Bradnidge— Sidmouth— The Principal place in this Shire, is the City of Excester, lying in the Latitude of 50 deg. 43 min. It bears from London W. S. W. and is distant from it 138 miles. Thus, To Hounslow 10. to Stanes 15. to Hartley-Row 31. to Basing-stoke 39. to Andover 55. to Salisbury 70. to Shaftsbury 85. to Sherburn 97. to Crookham 107. to Axminster 116. to Excester 138. But by more accurate measure upon the Road, the distance hath been found to be 172. In this Shire are several good Harbours for Shipping, the chief are Tamer and Tore, but the
Principal of all is Ex, upon which this Town is seated, and from whence it took its name of Excester. This City is Governed by a Mayor, 24 Bre∣thren, a Recorder, a Town-Clerk, and other Officers, their Attendants. Earls of Devonshire, and Dukes and Mar∣quesses of Excester since the Norman Conquest. Richard Rivers, Earl of Devonshire. Hugh Courtney, Earl of Devonshire. Humphrey Stafford, Earl of Devonshire. Charles Blount, Earl of Devonshire. Will. Cavendish. Earl of Devonshire. John Holland, Dukes of Excester. Thomas Beaufort, Dukes of Excester. Henry Courtney, Marquesse of Excester. Thomas Cecil, Earl of Excester. Things remarkable in this Shire, are One Ordulphus this Countrey-man, was of a Gyant-like stature and strength; for he would break the Iron Bars of Gates, and stride 10 foot. Upon Exmore are huge Stones confusedly placed like those on Salisbury Plain; and one of them hath Danish Letters upon it, directing Passengers their way.
At Hubblestow in this Shire, was a Battle fought by the Danes, where their Banner called Reafan (in which they reposed much confidence of Victory) was taken, and Hubba their Cap∣tain slain. When Excester was (in the late Wars) besieged by the Parliament-Forces, an infinite number of Larks came flying into the Town, and setled in a void green place within the Walls, where they were killed by the besieged in huge quantities and eaten. The Arms of Excester are, Party per Pale Gules and Sable, A Castle Triple towred Or.
Dorsetshire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Hant∣shire. On the West by Devonshire and So∣mersetshire. On the South by the Brittish Sea. And on the North by Wiltshire. It contains in length 54 miles. In breadth 30 miles, and in Circumference 170 miles. The Air of this Shire is healthful, and the Sea yieldeth the Shrub called Isidis Plocamos, growing without Leaves like Coral, it is most plentiful about the Island of Portland. The Soil is fat, affording many Commodities, and pleasant in her situation, being watered with many fresh and running Springs. The chief Commodities of this Shire, are Cat∣tel, Sheep, Corn, Wool, Kersies. It is in the Dioeess of Bristol, and hath in it 248 Parishes. Out of this Shire are elected 20 Parliament men.
Knights 2 Poole 2 Dorchester 2 Lyme Regis 2 Weymouth 2 Welcomb Regis 2 Bridport 2 Shafton 2 Wareham 2 Corf Castle 2 Its Divisions are five, viz. Division. Sherbourn Bridport Shafton Dorchester Blanford And in these 5 Divisions are 29 Hundreds, viz. White-Church H. Bemister, Redohave, Tollerford, Lowsbarrow, Eggardon, Ʋgscomb, Sherbourn, Yeatminster, Buckland, Redlane, Brownsell, Whitway, H. Puddletown, Winfrith, Beere, Rushmore, Cogdeane, Badbury, Knowlton, Ʋpwinborn, Newton, George, Rowbarrow,
Hasler, H. Craneborne, Culliford, Totcomb, H. Pimpern. And in these Hundreds are 19 Market-Towns, Middleton, Mon. Pool, Mond. & Thur. Weymouth, & Mel∣com Reg. Tu. & F. Cerne Abbas, Wed. Cranborn, Wed. Abbots Bury, Thurs. Sherbourn, Th. & Sat. Corse Castle, Th. Sturminster, Th. Frampton, Th. Wimborn Minster, Fr. Dorchester, Sat. Shaftsbury, Sat. Blandford, Sat. VVorham, Sat. Lime,— Bird Port,— Bemyster,— Everstwit,— The Chief and most remarkable place in this Shire is Dorchester, lying in 50 deg. and 35 min. of North Latitude. It bears from London S. W. by W. and is distant therefrom 85 miles, thus, To Basing-stoke 39. to Stockbridge 55. to Dunk∣ton 67. to Cranburn 76. to Blandford 85. to Dor∣chester 97. but by measure on the Road 112 miles. This City is situate on the South-side of Frome, and hath formerly been Walled about, part of which Wall upon the West and South side, yet remaineth. Not far from which there remaineth the Tract and Trench almost meeting the River, a Fortification of Earth trenched about and mount∣ed above the ordinary plain 150 foot, and con∣tains
about five Acres of Ground, wherein plenty of Corn grows. This City is Governed by 2 Bailiffs, elected out of 8 Magistrates or Aldermen, a Recorder, Town-Clerk, and 2 Sergeants attending them. The Earls and Marquesses of Dorchester since the first constitution, are Osmond, Earl of Dorset. John Beaufort, Marquess of Dorchester. Thomas Grey, Marquess of Dor. Thomas Sackvile, Earl of Dor. Things remarkable in this Shire. At Pool in this County, upon the 20th of June 1653. it is reported that it rained warm Blood. In the Haven of Pool, the Sea (contrary to all other Ports in England) Ebbs and Flows four times in 24 hours, viz. First, at a S. E. and N. W. Moon, and the Second time at a S. by E. and a N. by W. Moon. In Anno 1582. and 1583. upon the 13th of January, at Hermitage in the Vale of White Hart, a piece of Ground of 3 Acres removed from its old place, and was carried over another Close where Alders and VVillows grew, the distance of 40 Rod or Perches; stopping up the VVay to Cerne Abbas, and yet the Hedges and Trees that enclosed it before, enclose it still, the Trees growing upright, and the place
where this Ground was before, is left as a great Pit. The Portland Men are Excellent good Slingers. In the Isles of Purbeck, are Veins of Marble running under the Earth. The Arms of the City of Dorchester is, Gules, a Castle Argent, in its Front the Arms of Eng∣land and France Quartered.
Durham: THE BISHOPRICK and CITY. THis Bishoprick and City is bounded on the East by the German Ocean. On the VVest by Westmorland and Cumberland. On the South by Yorkshire. And on the North by Northum∣berland. It containeth in length 35 miles. In breadth 30 miles. And in Circumference 105 miles. The Air of this Countrey is sharp and piercing. The Soil on the Eastern part of it is Richest, the South is Moorish but most inhabited, the VVest all Rocky, affording neither Grass nor Grain, but only it feeds Cattle, and is well stored with Coal, as the whole Countrey is. The Eastern part which I said before was the Richest, yieldeth great plenty of Coal, and where it hath plenty of Coal, it is notwithstanding very fruitful and good Land.
The Commodities of this Countrey are Coles, Lead and Iron. It is in the Diocess of Durham, and hath in it 118 Parishes. Out of it are elected 4 Members for Parlia∣ment men. Knights 2 Durham 2 The Division of it is not into Hundreds, but VVakes, which are Four. In this Bishoprick are 6 Market-Towns. Darlington, Monday. Barnard Castel, Wed. Bishop Ankland, Th. Sunderland, Friday. Durham, Saturday. Stainthorp— The Principal place in the County is the City of Durham, lying in the Latitude of 54 deg. and 50 min. It bears from London N. by W. and is distant therefrom 200 Miles. Thus, From London to Waltam Cross 12. to Hodsdon 17. to Ware 20. to Buntingford 27. to Royston 33. to Caxton 42. to Huntington 48. to Stamford 69. to Grantham 85. to Newark 95. to Tuxford 105. to Doncaster. 123. to Wentbridge 130. to Tadcaster 142. to York 150. to Borrowbridge 163. to North∣allerton 176. to Dorlington 186. to Durham 200. But the same way being measured upon the Road, it will be found to contain 262 miles. Of this County the Bishops have had the Roy∣alty of Princes, and the Inhabitants have pleaded Priviledges (in time of War) not to pass over the River Tyne.
The Arms of Durham are, Azure, a Cross Flooree Or, between four Lyons Rampant Argent. Remarques in this County. In the upper part of the City of Durham, William the Conqueror erected a Castle upon a high Hill for her defence, which is almost encom∣passed about with the River Were. In the year of our Lord 1346. and in the 20th of Edward the 3d. upon the 20th of October, at Nevel's Cross near Durham, a Battel was fought be∣twixt the English and the Scots, wherein David Brush K. of Scotland, with many of his Nobility were taken Prisoners by Queen Phillip Wife to K. Edw. 3. who was in person present in the Field: The Battel was managed by the Lords, Moubray, Percy, and Nevil. At Oxenhall, near unto Dorlington in this County, are three Pits wonderful deep, called Hell Kettles. They are thought to come of an Earthquake that hapned Anno 1179. For our Chronicles make men∣tion that on Christmas-Day, at Oxenhall the ground heaved up aloft like a Tower, and so continued all that day till evening, and then fell in, making a very horrid noise, and the Earth swallowed it up, and made in the place three great holes. Bishop Tunstall of this Diocess, took a Goose and marked it, and put it into one of these Pits, and the same Goose was found afterwards in the River Tees. At Batterby near Durham, within the River Weer, in the Summer time there issues a salt reddish wa∣ter from the sides of certain Stones at the Ebb and Low water, which the Sun calcines to whiteness, and growing thick becomes Salt, and the Inhabi∣tants thereabouts do use it for Salt.
Essex. THis County is bounded on the East by the German Ocean. On the West by Hartford∣shire and Middlesex. On the South by Kent. And on the North by Suffolk. It contains in Length 45 miles. In Breadth 38 miles. And in Circumference 148 miles. The Air of this Shire is temperate, but down in the Hundreds towards the Sea-side it is very Aguish. The Soil for the most part is good, and in some parts so fruitful, that after 3 years Glebe o Saffron, the Land for 18 years more will yield plenty of Barly without any manuring with dung or the like, and then bear Saffron again. One Acre of this Ground (which is most in the North part of the County) will yield 80, or 100 weight of moist Saffron in a year, which when dryed will be worth about 20 l. sterling. The principal Commodities of this Shire are, Cloaths, Stuffs, Hops, Saffron, Oysters, &c. It is in the Diocess of London, and hath in it 415 Parishes. Out of it are elected 8 Members to sit in Par∣liament.
Knights 2 Colechester 2 Harwich 2 Malden 2 Its Division is into 20 Hundreds, viz. Ʋtlisford, H. Clavering, Waltham, Becontre, Ongar, Dunmow, Freshwell, Hingkford, Whittham, Chelmsford, Barstable, H. Lexden, Winstree, Thurstable, Dengie, Rotchford, Tendering, Havering, Harlow, Chafford, And in these Hundreds are 21 Market-Towns, viz. Harwich, Tuesd. Manytree, Tu. Billerakey, Tu. Waltham Abby, Tu. Braintree, Wednes. Rumford, Wed. Brentwood, Th. Epping, Th. & Fr. Haulsteed, Fr. Thaxted, Fr. Chelmsford, Fr. Colchester, Sat. Maldon, S. Cogshall, S. Walden, S. Dunmore, S. Hatfield, S. Raleighe, S. Hornden, S. Barkin, S. Cheping Onger, S.
In this County are 5 Castles, and as many Ha∣vens, and two of His Majesties Mannors. The Principal place in this County is Colchester, lying in the Latitude of 51 deg. 58 min. It bears from London N. E. And is distant from it 43 miles, Thus, From London to Rumford 10. to Burnt-Wood 15. to Chelmsford 2. to Colchester 43. But being measured upon the Road it is distant 50 miles. This City of Colchester is situate upon the South side of the River Coln, and is walled about, raised upon a high Trench of Earth, now defaced, it hath 6 Gates of entrance, and 3 Posterns in the West wall, and 9 watch-Towers for defence. The City is said to be Built by Collus the Brit∣tish Prince, Anno Christi 124. and in it were born Lucius, Helena, and Constantine, the first Christian King, Empress and Emperor in the World. It is Governed by Two Bailiffs, 12 Aldermen, all wearing Scarlet, a Recorder, a Town-Clerk, and 4 Sergeants at Mace. The Arms of this City of Colchester is Azure, a Cross Trunked Argent between 3 Coronets, Or. The Earls of Essex since the first Constitution. Geffrey Mandevile, E. Humphrey Bohun, E. Thomas Woodstock, E. Henry Bourcheir, E. Tho. Cromwell, Earl. Will. Par, E. Walter Euren, and Arthur Capell.
Things remarkable in this County. The Place of greatest Antiquity and Note in this County is Camolodunum, now Maldon, the seat of Cunobelin, King of Trinobantes, as by his Mo∣ney therein Minted appears. Near Tilbury there are Pits of 12 fathom deep in a Chalky ground. The Salt Water about Harwich, makes all their Springs Brackish. At Barklow grows an Herb called Dane-wort very plentiful, that beareth Red Berries, the people there say, that it sprang from Danes blood. Walfleet in this County, produceth the best Oysters that come to London. In the East part of this Countrey, in the time of Richard the 2d. huge Teeth were found, and not far from the same place in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, extraordinary large Bones were digged up. They are thought to have been the Bones and Teeth of some Elephant who had been buried there by some loving Roman who was his Master. About the beginning of November 1580. An Army of Mice so over-run the Marshes in Denge Hundred, that they eat up the Grass to the very Roots, and so poisoned it with their Teeth, that a great Murren fell upon the Cattle that grazed there. But at length, a great number of strange Painted Owls came (no man knows whence) and devoured the Mice.
Gloucester-Shire. IS bounded on the East by Warwickshire and Oxfordshire. On the West by Monmouthshire. On the South by Wiltshire and Somersetshire. And on the North by Worcestershire. It contains in length 60 miles. In breadth 26 miles. And in Circumference 190 miles. The Air is very pleasant and wholsom. For the Soil, the Hilly part of this Country affords fine Wool, which proceeds from a small Sheep long necked and square of Bulk and Bone. The lower part is exceeding fruitful, and rich in Grain almost of all sorts, so that Mr. Cambdes says, it returns an hundred for one. About Bri∣stol is store of Coals. The Northern part abounds in fruit, so that the Trees which grow in the very Hedges without grafting, do naturally bear not only Fruit, but such that for beauty and taste exceeds all other, and will keep till a new supply, and some sorts will not wither in a whole year. Farthermore, this Shire hath many Vineyards in
it which produce Grapes that make Wine little inferior to that which comes from France. The chief Commodities of this Shire are, Corn, Wool, Cloath, Steel, Timber, Sider and Perry. It is in the Diocess of Gloucester, and hath in it 280 Parishes. Out of this Shire are elected 8 Parliament-Men. Knights 2 Gloucester 2 Tewkesbury 2 Cirencester 2 Its Division is into 30 Hundreds, viz. Cleeve, Hundred. Tibolston, Cheltenham, Tewksbury, Westminster, Slaughter, Berkley, Grombaldash, Langley & Swinshed, Dirburst, Kistage, Kings Borton, Pockle Church, Henbury, Thornbury, Dudstone, H. Blidestoe, S. Briovels, Westbury, Botloe, Crothern, Rapsaye, Whitston, Britles Barrow, Bradley, Longtree, Bisteigh, Barton, Wotton, Gloucester.
And in these Hundreds are 26 Market-Towns, viz. Dean Magna, Mon. Wickware Mon. Cirencester, M. & Fr. Panswick, Tues. Minchinghamp∣ton, Tu. Horton, Tu. Marshfield, Tu. Letchlad, Tu. Campden, W. Bristoh W. & Sat. Blackley, W. Tedbury, W. Gloucester, W. & Sat. Stow on the Would, Th. Cheltenham, Thurs. Dursley, Th. Chipping Sudbury, Th. Fair Ford, Th. Newent, Friday. Newham, Fr. Stroud, Fr. Woottton underedge F Tewksbury, Saturday. Winchcombe, Sat. Leonards Stanley, Sat. Thornbury, Sa. The Principal Place in this County, is the City of Gloucester; being in the Latitude of 51 deg. 53. min. it bears from London W. by N. and is distant therefrom 81 miles. Thus, From London to Brainford 8. to Colebrook 15. to Maiden∣head 22. to Nettlebed 33. to Abbingdon 45. to Farringdon 55. to Perrors Bridge 69. to Glou∣cester 81. But the distance upon the Road is 102. This City is seated upon the River Severn, about the middle of the Shire, it was first built by the Romans. It hath formerly been walled about with a strong wall, except that part which lyes against the Severn, some reliques whereof
in many places yet remain visible to witness their strength. This City is not great, but is wholsomly seated upon a Hillock, the Streets every way descend∣ing from the Cross. It is Governed by a Maior, 2 Sheriffs and 12 Aldermen, having a Sword and Maces born be∣fore them. The Arms of the City of Gloucester are, Or, three Cheavornets Gules. The Earls and Dukes of Gloucester since the first Constitution, are Robert Fitz Hammon, Earl of Gloucester. William Mandevile, Earl of Gloucester. Robert de Millant, Earl of Gloucester. Richard de Clair, Earl of Gloucester. Ruff. Monthorner, Earl of Gloucester. Hugh Spencer, Earl of Gloucester. Hugh de Audley, Earl of Gloucester. Tho. of Woodstock, Earl of Gloucester. Humphrey, Dukes of Gloucester. Richard, Dukes of Gloucester. Besides the chief City of Gloucester from whence the County taketh its name, we have the fair City of Bristol, built upon the Rivers Avon and Frome; Competitor for Merchandize (almost) with London, and with York for beauty. It standeth partly in this County and partly in Somersetshire; but being a County of it self, will acknowledge obedience to neither.
Things remarkable in this County. In the year 1471. At Tewksbury was fought the Battel between K. Edward 4. and K. Hen. 6. wherein P. Edward the General was slain, Q. Margaret taken Prisoner. Tho. Earl of Devon∣shire, John Mardosset, L. Wenlake, and Ed. D. of Somerset taken and Beheaded. In the Quire of the Cathedral Church of Gloucester, in an Arch thereof, is a Wall built in form of a Semicircle, but very full of Corners, and if a man speak with a very low Voyce at the one side or end of it, and another lay his Ear to the other, he may very easily hear every syllable that the other pronounces, though the distance be very considerable. At Stroud in this County they Die Scarlet, the Water there having a peculiar quality to give the right tincture. And about Radminton no Snakes or Adders are to be found; yet there are holes there called Swallow-holes, where the Waters after great Rain, or in VVinter when the Springs run, fall into the bowels of the Earth, and are no more seen; nor is it known whither ever they rise again. At Alderley 8 miles from the Severn upon the Hills there to this day, are found Cockles, Peri∣winkles and Oysters of solid Stone. These Stones are found near the surface of the Earth, and if you dig any depth you find none of them. At Lassington a mile from Gloucester, are found Stones called Star Stones, they are about the thickness of a half Crown, but no broader than a
Silver peny. They are flat, and five pointed, like a Star or Mullet. They are of a Grey colour, and on the flat sides naturally engraven in fine works, as one Mullet within another. I have seen many of them joyned together flat to flat, like Columbs 2 or 3 inches long. These single Stones being put into Vinegar, have a motion as other Astroits have, though not so lively. At Puckle Church, are digged Stones natural broad, blewish and hard, about half a foot thick, square and flat, fit for Tomb-stones. They lye in Beds, 6 or 8 one above another. The upper∣most Bed near the surface of the Earth, insomuch that near the Town, in the High-way (for 10 Perches or more) you may ride upon a Pave∣ment (as it were) of one continued Stone, so near do these Beds joyn together.
Hantshire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Sussex and Surrey. On the West by Dorsetshire and Wiltshire. On the South by the Brittish Sea. And on the North by Berkshire. It containeth in Length 66 miles. In Breadth 30 miles. And in Circumference 176. The Air is Temperate but thick, by reason of the Vapours arising from the Sea and Rivers, whose plenty of Fish and their increase do plen∣tifully satisfie the injuries they sustain by the Vapours. The Soil is rich for Corn and Cattle, plentiful for Wood, and pleasant for Pasturage, and happy in all Commodities either for Sea or Land. In it are four Principal Havens, viz. Portsmouth, Titchfield, Homble, Southampton. all of them commodious both to let in and loose out Ships of very great burthen. The chief Commodities of this Shire are Corn, Cattle, Iron, Wool, Honey and Kersies.
It is in the Diocess of Winchester, and hath in it 253 Parishes. Out of it are elected 26 Members to sit in Parliament. Knights 2 Winchester, 2 Southampton, 2 Portsmouth, 2 Yarmouth, 2 Petersfeild, 2 Newport, alias Medena, 2 Stockbridge, 2 New-town, 2 Christ-Church, 2 Whitchurch, 2 Limington, 2 Andever, 2 Its Division is into 39 Hundreds, viz. Evinger, Kingscleer, Holshot, Odiham, Crandall, Alton, Barmanspit, Chutley, Basingstoke, Overton, Parstow, Andevor, Wherewell, Micheldever, Buntesborow, Sutton, Selborn, Eastermeane, Meanestoke, and Suberton, Fawley, Buddlesgate, Kingsunborn, Bartonstacy, Thornegate, New Forrest, Fordingbridge, Ringwood,
Christ-Church, Redbridge, Waltham, Mansbridge, Tichfield, Portsdown, Portsmouth, Bosmere, Hailing, Fartham, Finchdean. And in these Hundreds are 16 Market-Towns, viz. Southampton, Tu. & F Kingsclere, Tues. Winchester, W. and S. Basing-Stoke, W. Ringwood, W. Alceston, Th. Petersfield, S. Alton, Sat. Odiam, S. Andover, S. Ramsey, S. Lamington, S. Portsmouth, Th. & S. Newport in Isle of Wight, W. and Sa. Christ-Church, White-Church. In the Shire are many Strong Castles, as Hurst, Calshot, Southampton, St. Andrews, Worth, Por∣chester, and the South Castle, besides Bulworks and Blockhouses for the Countries defence. In this County is the City of Winchester; And the Arms of this City are, Gules, a Castle between two Lyons of England in Fess, and between four other Castles in square, all Or. The Principal Town in this Shire is Southamp∣ton, lying in the Latitude of 50 deg. 56 min. It bears from London S. W. by W. and is distant therefrom 60 miles, thus, From London to New Brainford 8. to Stanes 15. to Bagshot 25. to Alton
39. to Alesford 47. to Twiford 54. to Southamp∣ton 60. But the distance measured upon the Road is 78 miles. This Town of Southampton is Populous, Rich, and Beautiful, most strongly Walled about with Square Stone. The Honours of this Shire are dignified by Marquesses, and afterwards Earls of Winchester and Southampton. The Names of which since the first Constitution are as followeth, 1. Cliton a Saxon, Earl of Winchester. 2. Sear Quincy, Earl of Winchester. 3. Hugh Spencer, Earl of Winchester. 4. Lodowick Bruget, Earl of Winchester. 5. William Pawlet, Marquess of Winchester. 6. Bogo or Beavous, Earl of Southampton. 7. William Fits William, E. of Southampton. 8. Thomas Wriotheosley, E. of Southampton. Remarkable things in this Shire. At Portsmouth they boyl Salt out of Salt water; which is our Bay Salt, which by boyling again they make exceeding white. Out of the Walls of Silcester, a decayed Town in this Shire, grow huge Oaks, containing 10 Loads (or 500 solid foot) of Timber a piece. The Isle of Wight is in this Shire, the Air whereof is very wholsom, and the Inhabitants
live long; It yields plenty of Corn, and fine Wool. As also Conies, Hares, Pheasants, Par∣tridges, &c. In the year 1176. it rained in this Island a Shower of Blood for two hours together. At Wickham in this Shire, are Medicinal Waters. About Portsmouth are bred a Race of small Dogs like Beagles, which they use there to hunt Moles with, which they hunt as their natural Game. In this County are these Castles, Midwood, Win∣chester, and Odiam; which were so strong, that in the time of King Jobn, Thirteen Englishmen defended the Fort for fifteen days against Lewis of France, who with a great Force assaulted it.
Hertfordshire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Essex. On the West by Buckingham and Bedford∣shire, On the South by Middlesex. And on the North by Cambridgeshire. It containeth in length 30 Miles,—in breadth 28 Miles—and in Circumference 130 Miles. The Temperature of the Air is sweet and healthful, and is seated in a Climate neither too hot nor too cold, occasioned by the many Rivers which run through this Shire. The Soil is Rich, Plenteous and Delightful, and yields abundance of Corn, Cattle, Wool and Grass, and is destitute of nothing that is either Pleasant or Profitable to the Life of Man. The Principal Commodities are Wheat, Barley, and Malt. It is in the Diocesses of London, Chichester, and Lincoln, and hath in it 120 Parishes. Out of it are Elected 6 Members which sit in Parliament.
Knights 2 St. Albans 2 Hertford 2 Its Division is into 8 Hundreds, viz. 1. Odsey, 2. Edwinstreet, 3. Branging, 4. Brodewater, 5. Hitching, 6. Dacor. 7. Hertford, 8. Caisho. And in these Hundreds are 18 Market-Towns, Barnet, Mon. Barkhamsted, M. Buntingford, M. VVatford, Tues. Ware, Tues. Hitching, Tues. Sabsworth, Wed. Hempsted, Thurs. Hatfield, Th. Hodsdon, Th. Bishop Stafford, Th. Baldock, Th. Stevenedge, Frid. Tringe, Frid. Stondon, Fr. Hertford, Sat. S. Albans, Sat. Rickmanswortb, Sat. Stevenedge and Redbourn, 2 new Markets. The Principal Town in this Shire is Hertford, lying in the Latitude of 51 deg. 50 min. bearing from London N. by W. and is distant therefrom 20 Miles, Thus, From London to Barnet 10. to Hertford 20. But the way upon the Road is 22 miles measured.
This Town of Hertford (though the Shire-Town) is not the richest, the turning of the way through Ware, having much hindred Tra∣vellers from going through it: It hath been for∣merly a Baliwick, but is now governed by a Mayor, nine Burgesses, a Recorder, and Two Serjeants, their Attendants. The Arms of Hert∣ford is, A Hart in a Field Proper. The Earls of Hertford, are, Roger, Earl of Clare and Hertford. Edward Senior Earl of Hertford. In this County, three remarkable Battels of Ci∣vil dissention in England have been fought, viz. The First on the 23d of May, 1455. in the Town of St. Albans, by Richard D. of York, the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, and Lords of Fow, Cambridge and Cobham, against K. Henry the 6. In whose defence, Edw. D. of Somerset, Henry E. of Northumberland, and John Lord Clif∣ford, with 5000 more lost their Lives: The King himself wounded in the Neck with an Arrow, the D. of Buckingham and Lord Sudley in their Faces, Humphrey E. of Stafford in his right Hand, and the E. of Dorset almost slain. There were on the Dukes part only 600 slain. The King by them was brought to London, and a Reconciliation made by their advancements unto Dignities and Offices. The Second Battel was also fought at St. Al∣bans on the 17th of February being Shrove-Sunday, by Q. Margaret, against the Dukes of Norffolk and Suffolk, the Earls of Warwick and Arundel, who
by force kept the King her Husband with them, and by constraint he held, and on their side fought, till the Field was lost, and the Lords fled; when with great joy he was received by his Queen, and young Prince Edward. The Third Battel was fought in Anno 1471. upon the 14th of April being Easter-Day, near High Barnet, by the Earls of Warwick and Ox∣ford, and Marquesso Mountaculo against K. Edw. 4. who led with him K. Henry the 6th. (his Prisoner) unto that Field, and that day obtained the Vi∣ctory against his Enemies. There were Slain in this Battel, Richard Nevil, the stout E. of War∣wick, with his Brother the Marquess, and the E. of Oxford put to flight, and the Duke of Excester sore wounded, and left in the Field for Dead. On the King's part were Slain the Lords Cromwell, Bowcher and Barns, and on both parts the num∣ber of 10000 Men. Remarques in this County. Near Fishpool-Street in St. Albans (saith Camb∣den) in our remembrance have Anchors of a great weight been digged up. There is near St. Albans a Brook called Wo∣mere, which never breaketh out, but it foretelleth dearth or scarcity of Corn, or else some danger suddenly to ensue. At Ashwell in this County rise so many Sour∣ses of Springs together, that they presently drive a Mill, and become a pretty big River.
Herefordshire. IS bounded on the East by Gloucestershire and Worcestershire. On the West by Radnorshire. On the South by Monmouthshire. And on the North by Shropshire. It containeth in length 63 Miles. in breadth 36 Miles. And in Circumference 101 Miles. The Air is very healthful, temperate and wholsom. The Soyl of this County is exceeding Rich for Corn and Cattle, and about Lemster is the finest Wool in all England. The Chief Commodities of this County are Syder, Corn, Wood, and the best Wool in any part of England. It is in the Diocess of Hereford, and in it are 176 Parishes. Out of it are elected 8 Parliament Men.
Knights 2 Hereford 2 Lemster 2 VVeobly 2 Its Division is into 11 Hundreds, viz. 1 Wignore, 2 Wolsey, 3 Broxash, 4 Stretford, 5 Radlow, 6 Grimsworth, 7 Greytree, 8 Webtree, 9 Ewjaslacy, 10 Wormelow, 11 Huntington. In these Hundreds are 8 Market-Towns, viz. Branyeard, Monday. Pembridge, Tues. Lidbury, Tuesd. Kyneton, Wedn. Webley, Thurs. Rosse, Thurs. Lemster, Friday. Hereford, Wed. Friday, and Saturday. The most eminent place in this County is the City of Hereford, lying in the Latitude of 52 deg. 12 min. and bearing W. N. W. from London, and distant therefrom 101 miles, thus, From London to Maidenhead 22. to Nettlebed 33. to Alington 46. to Farrington 56. to Perrors-bridge. 69. to Gloucester 81. to Rosse 91. to Hereford 101. But according to a more accurate admeasurement upon the Road, it is distant from London 130 miles.
The City of Hereford is Walled about, having six Gates for entrance, and 15 Watch-Towers for defence. It is yearly Governed by a Mayor, cho∣sen out of one of the 30 Citizens, which are called the Election, whoever after is known for an Alderman, and cloathed in Scarlet, the four eldest Aldermen are Justices of the Peace, and graced with a Sword-bearer, a Recorder, a Town-Clerk, and 4 Sergeants with Maces. The Arms of the City of Hereford are, Gules, three Lyons Passant Guardant, Or. The Earls of Hereford since the first Constitution, are, William Fitz Osbourn, Earl. Robert Bossue, Earl. Miles, Consta. of England. Henry Bohun, Earl. Henry Bullingbrook, D. Stafford. Walter D'Evreux, Visc. Heref. Upon the 2d of February being Candlemas-Day, in the year 1461. near Ludlow, a great Battel was fought between Jasper E. of Pembrook, and James Butler E. of Ormond and Wiltshire, against Edward E. of March, in which 3800 men were Slain. The two Earls fled, and Owen Tenther taken and beheaded. Before this Battel began, there appeared visible in the Heavens, 3 Suns, which after a while all joyned together, and be∣came One as before. This caused Edward after∣wards
to give the Sun in his Glory for his Badge and Cognizance. Things remarkable in this County. By Snodhill Castle, is a Quarry of Exellent Marble. By Richards Castle, is a Well called Bone-Well, wherein are continually found little Fishes Bones, but not a Fin to be seen; which Well being wholly cleansed of them, yet will the like come again. But (saith Mr. Speed) no man knows whether they be produced naturally, or brought thither in Veins through the Earth. In the year 1571. Marsley Hill in the East part of this Shire, with a roaring Noise remo∣ved it self from the place where it stood, and for three days together travelled from its old Seat: It began this Motion on Saturday the 17th of February, about 6 of the Clock at Night, and by 7 of the Clock the next Morning, it had gone about 200 foot, carrying with it Sheep in their Coats, Hedge-rows and Trees, whereof some were overthrown, and those that stood upon the Plain, are now firmly growing upon the Hill. Those that were East are turned West, and those in the West are turned East. In this remove it overthrew Kinnaston Chappel, and turned two High ways near 300 foot from their old Paths.
The Ground that thus removed was about 26 Acres, which opening it self (Rocks and all) bore the Earth before it for about 1200 foot without any stay; leaving Pasturage in the place of Tillage, and Tillage overspread the Pasturage. Thus overwhelming its lower parts, it mounted to a Hill 12 Fathom high, and there rested after three days Travel.
Huntington-Shire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Cam∣bridgeshire. On the West by Northampton∣shire. On the South by Lincolnshire. And on the North by Northamptonshire. It containeth in length 23 Miles. In Breadth 18. And in Circumference 65 Miles. The temperature of the Air of this County is not so good as in other parts of England, in re∣spect of the great quantity of Meers in it; yet the Natives that dwell about them, are healthful and live very long; but Strangers are subject to much Sickness. For the Soyl, the Hilly part is for the Plough, and the Valley for Pasture, which is accounted as good as any in England. The Chief Commodities are Corn, and Cattle. It is in the Diocess of Lincoln, and hath in it 79 Parishes.
Out of it are elected 4 Parliament Men. Knights 2 Huntingdon 2 Its Division is into 4 Hundreds, viz. Norman Cross, Hurstingstone, Leightenstoned, Toltan. And in these Hundreds are 6 Market-Towns, viz. St. Ives, Mond. Yaxley, Tuesd. Ramsey, Wedn. St. Neots, Thurs. Kimbolton, Friday. Huntingdon, Sat. The Principal Town in this County is Hunting∣don, lying in the Latitude of 52 deg. 21 min. It bears from London N. by W. And is distant therefrom 48 miles. Thus, From London to Ed∣monton 6. to Waltham-Cross 12. to Ware 20. to Puckeridge 24. to Royston 33. to Huntingdon 48. But by more accurate admeasurement upon the Road, it is found to be 57 miles. By Charter from K. John, this Town hath a peculiar Coroner, Profit by Toll and Custom, Recorder, Town-Clerk, and 2 Bailiffs annually Elected. The Seal of this Town, is in a Ring, a Hunts∣man, with Dog, Staff, &c. all Proper.
The Earls of this County since the first Constitution are, Waldeof, E. of Huntingdon. Simon de St. Lizio, E. Henry Prince of Scotland, E. William Clinton, E. Guyford Angolesme, E. John Holland, F. Thomas Gray, E. William Herbert. George Hastings. Things remarkable in this Shire. At Aleyceston in this Shire, are two little Springs, the one Fresh, the other somewhat Brackish; The latter is good for Leprosie and Scabs, and the other for dim Sights. Wittlesmere-Lake, and other Meers near it in this Shire, do sometimes in fair and calm wea∣ther, suddenly rise tempestuously with Water∣quakes; by reason of Vapours breaking violently out of the Earth.
Kent. KEnt is bounded on the East by the Narrow Seas. On the West by Surrey. On the South by Sussex. And on the North by Essex. It contains in length 60 miles. In breadth 30. And in Circumference 170 miles. The Air of this County is neither so serene nor wholsom, as other parts of England are, which is occasioned by the many Vapours that arise from the Sea and River of Thames, which almost en∣compass the same, making it a kind of Peninsula. And as it is not so healthy and clear, neither is it so cold as other parts of England, especially in the lower places near the Sea, for the Snow upon a Thaw in the Winter, will sooner be dissolved in the Valleys, than on the Hilly parts of this County. For the Soil, thus much in general may be said: The Weald for Wood. East-Kent for Corn. Rumney for Meadow. Tenham for an Orchard. Sheppey and Reculver for Wheat. Thannet for Barley. And Hedcorn for the Brood of big, fat and commended Capons.
The chief Commodities of this County, are Corn and Fruit. It is in the Diocesses of Canterbury and Roche∣ster, and hath in it 408 Parishes. Ten Members are elected out of it to sit in Parliament. Knights 2 Canterbury 2 Rochester 2 Maidston 2 Queenborough 2 Its Division is into 5 Lathes, & 67 Hundreds, viz. 1 Sutton. Black Heath, Bromeley, Lesnes, Axtane, Rookesly, Godsheath, Westerham, Somerden. 2 Aylesford. Ho, Shamele, Toltingtroe, Chetham, Wortham, Larkfield, Littlefield, Twyford, Tunbridge, Watchlingston, West Bamfield, Brenchley, Marden, Eghorne, Maidstone. 3 Scray. Milton, Tenham, Feversham, Becton, Felbore, Chart, Wye, Byircholt,
Galehill, Ashford, Blackborne, Tenderden, Barkley, Cranbrooke, Rolvenden, Selbrightenden, East Barnfield, Newyndene. 4 St. Augustine. Ringslow, Blengate, Whitestable, Westgate, Downchamford, Preston, Bredge, Kinghamford, Seasalter, Wingham, Eastry, Corniloe, Bewksbrough, Longport. 5 Shepway. Folkestane, Lovingborne, Stowting, Heane, Byrcholtsran. Streats, Worth, Ham, Langfot, S. Martin, Newchurch, Alowsbridge, Oxney. In these Hundreds are contained 29 Market-Towns, viz. Eltham, M. Wrotham, Tu. Lenham, Tu. S. Mary Cray, W. Westram, W. Gouldhurst, Wye, Yhurs. Rumney, Th. Lydd, Th. Fockestone, Th.
Bromley, Th. Maidstone, Th. Rochester, Fr. Tunbridge, Fr. Tenderden, Fr. Smarden, Fr. Woolwich, Fr. Malinge, Sa. Milton, Sa. Cranbrooke, Sa. Hyth, Sa. Bartford, Sat. Sevenoke, Sat. Gravesend, W. & S. Feversham, W. & S. Canterbury, W. & S. Dover, W. & S. Sandwich, W. & S. Appledoor.— This County aboundeth with Navigable Ri∣vers, that of Medway which divideth the County being the chief. In this County are also four Cinque-Ports, viz. Dover. Rumney. Sandwich. Winchelsey. Of these four, Dover with the Castle is the chief, and by ancient Authors hath been accoun∣ted the Lock and Key to the whole Realm of England. This County hath the happiness to be possessed of two Cities and Bishops Sees, viz. Canterbury and Rochester; strengthened with 27 Forts and Castles, and graced with 8 of the Kings Palaces, and beautified with many Stately Buildings. The chief and principal City in this County is Canterbury, the See of the Metrapolitan of England. It lyeth in Latitude of 51 deg. 17 min. And bears East from London, being distant there∣from
44 miles, Thus, From London to Dartford 12. to Rochester 23. to Sittingborn 31. to Can∣terbury 44 miles. But being measured upon the Road, its distance from London is found to be 56 miles. This City was (as Historians record) built 900 years before the Nativity of our Saviour, and was the first erected School for Education in Arts and Sciences, and was the motive which in∣duced Sigibert King of the East Angles, to lay his foundation for Cambridge University. In this City were Married K. John and Isabella his Wife, and also with the Marriages of K. Henry the Third, and K. Edward the First. And with the Interments of Edward the Black Prince; Henry the Fourth and Joan his Wife. And at Feversham were interred K. Stephen, and Maud his Queen. After divers afflictions by the Danes, this City was at length fortified by Richard the Se∣cond, and afterwards Walled about by Simon Sadbury, Arch-Bishop of that See. Next to Canterbury, Rochester requires the pre∣heminence of all the other Towns. Historians report that this City was first built by Julius Caesar. How or by whom these two Cities are Governed, I do not find; But the Arms of Can∣terbury is, Gules Martlets in a Chief Argent, a Lyon Passant Guardant, Or. And the Arms of Rochester is Argent, a Plain Cross Gules, with an R in the Centre Or. In Chief a Lyon of England.
The Earls since the first Constitu∣tion, are, Odo, Bishop of Boyen. Will. Iprese E. of Flan. Hubert de Burgh. Edmond Woodstock. Tho. Holland. Edmond Graye. Things remarkable in this County are, The Medicinal Wells at Tunbridge, the Vir∣tues of the Waters of them are sufficiently known. At Egerton is a Spring whose Water turns Wood into Stone. Three miles South from Tunbridge on the edge of Sussex in a white sandy Ground, are divers huge craggy Stones of strange forms, whereof two of the greatest stand so close together, (and yet are divided with so streight a Line) as one would think they had been sawn asunder. The River of Medway loseth it self under ground, and riseth again at Loose, not far from Cox-Heath. There are three Ridges of Hills in Kent, viz. The first is that which runs by Boxtey, Dettling, Hellingborn, &c. and is called Health without Wealth. The second is, that which runs by Suttton∣ulcomb, Booton, Malherf, &c. and is called Health and Wealth. The third is that which runs by Tenderden, and is called Wealth with∣out Health.
At Motingham, 8 miles from London, in Anno 1585. August the 4th, after a violent Tempest of Thunder and Rain, the Ground suddenly began to sink, and three great Elms growing upon it were carried so deep into the Earth, that no part of them could any more be seen; The com∣pass of the hole is said to be 240 foot about, and a Line of 50 Fathom plummed down into it, finds no bottom. In Tenderden-Steeple about the Belfrey, there is a Stone, which as the Rain falls upon it out of the Air, or the Rain drippings from other Stones about it, grows in about 5 or 6 years very manifestly: which having been pared away with an Instrument, grows up again as high as before. Upon the Shoars of the Isle of Sheppey, are found weighty Stones, out of which Brimstone and Coperas are tryed, by boyling them in a Fur∣nace for that purpose. Near unto Feversham are Pits of great depth, narrow at the mouth, and very broad below, which have distinction of Rooms or Chambers within them, and Pillars of Chalk as it were to support them. Great store of Samphire grows on the Cliffs, between Deal and Dover. At Dengenesse, for a mile and more together, do naturally grow abundance of hollow Trees, among nothing but Beach and Pebbles. And Westward from this place Pease grow naturally in Clusters as Grapes do, which differ but little in taste from Field Peasen. Also between Thnet Isle and Sandwich a kind of Hops grow natural y among the Beach and Pebbles. In the Isle of Sheppey there are no Moles, and if
any be carried over thither, they suddenly dye. The River Stowre that runs through Canter∣bury, breeds the best Trouts in the South-east parts of England. At Boxley-Abby about 2 miles from Maidstroe, is a Spring the water whereof in 9 days will turn Sticks and small Wood into Stone. In the year 1596, upon the 18th of December, a mile and half from Westram Southward (and not many miles from Motingham) Two Closes lying together separated with a Hedg of hollow Ashes, then was found a part thereof about 12 Perches long to be sunk six foot and an half deep, the next morning 15 foot more, the third morn∣ing 80 foot more at least, and so daily that great Trench of Ground containing in length about 80 Perches, and in breadth 28 Perches, began, with the Trees and Hedges on it, to loose it self from the rest of the Ground lying round about it, and withal to move and shoot Southward day and night for Eleven days. The Ground of two water Pits, the one 6 foot deep, the other 12 foot deep, and about 4 Perches over in breadth, ha∣ving sundry Tuffs of Alders and Ashes growing in the bottom with a great Rock of Stone under them were not only removed out of their places, and carried towards the South, at least 4 Perches apiece, but withal mounted aloft and became hilly with their Sedge, Flags, and black mud up∣on the tops of them, higher than the face of the Water (which they had forsaken) by 9 foot, and in the place from which they were removed; o∣ther Ground which lay higher is descended, re∣ceiving the Water which lyes upon it. Moreover, in one place of the plain Field, there is a great hole made by sinking of the Earth to the depth
of 30 foot at the least, being in breadth (in some places) 2 Perches over, and in length 5 or 6 Perches. Also there is a Hedge 30 Perches long, carried Southward, with his Trees 7 Perches at the least. Divers other Sinkings there be in several other Places, viz. One of 60 foot, another of 47, and another of 34 foot. By means of which confusion it is come to pass, that where the highest Hills were, there be the deepest Dales, and the lowest Dales are become the highest Hills. The whole measure of breaking was about 10 Acres. In the year 1651. in the Parish of Lenisham 6 miles from London, a Medicinal Water was found out, and is much frequented.
Lancashire. IS bounded on the East by Yorkshire. On the West by the Irish Sea. On the South by Cheshire. And on the North by Cumberland and Westmorland. It contains in length 57 miles. In breadth 32 miles. And in Circumference 65 miles. For the Temperature of the Air, it is thin and piercing, and not troubled with gross Mysts or Fogs. The People are very Comely, Strong, Healthful, long liv'd, and not subject to Novel Diseases. For the Soil, It is not very fruitful; yet it breeds a great number of Cattel, and those of a very great proportion, having goodly Heads, and large spread Horns. It yieldeth great store of Coles, and a competent increase of Flax. The Plain of this County is very good for Wheat, and Barley; but that which lyes at the bottom of the Hills, is best for Oats. The chief Commodities that this County affords, are Cole, Cattel, Fowl, Fish and Flax. It is in the Diocess of Chester, and hath in it 61 Parishes.
And out of it are elected 14 Members to sit in Parliament. Knights 2 Lancaster 2 Preston 2 Newton 2 Wigan 2 Clitherow 2 Liverpoole 2 Its Division is into 6 Hundreds, viz. Loynsedale, Amounderne, Blackburn, Laisand, West Darbie, Salford. And in these Hundreds are 26 Market-Towns, viz. Boulton, Mon. Blackborn, M. Wigan, M. and Fr. Poulton, Mon. Cartmill, Mon. Hornby, Mon. Haws-head, Mon. Rochdale, Tues. Charley, Tu. Ormek rk, Tues. Kirkham, Tues. Prescot, Tues. Hslington, Wed. Coln, Wed. Warington, W. Preston, W. F. & S. Bury, Thurs. Gastinge, Th. Ʋlverston, Th. Lancaster, Sa. Manchester, Sa. Clitheroe, Sa. Leverpoole, Sa. Dalton, Sa. Leigh — Great Eccleston—
The Shire-Town in this County is Lancaster, lying in the Latitude of 54 deg. 10. min. And it beareth from London N. W. by N. and is di∣stant therefrom 187 miles. Thus, From London to Barnet 10. to St. Alban 20. to Dunstable 30. to Stony Stratford 44. to Toceter 50. to Daven∣try 60. to Coventry 74. to Lichfield 94. to Ruge∣ley 99. to Stone 110. to Newcastle 116. to War∣rington 136. to Newton 141. to Wiggan 148. to Preston 162. to Garstang 172. to Lanca∣ster 187. But by a more exact admeasurement upon this Road, it is found to be distant from London 232 miles. This Town is very pleasantly situate, but the Inhabitants thereof do not much abound in Wealth. It is built on the South-side of the Ri∣ver Lon: The principal Glory of this Town con∣sisteth in the Church, the Castle and the Bridge, and in it are many fair and long Streets. To this Town K. Edward the Third granted a Mayor and two Bailiffs, which are elected out of 12 Brethren, assisted by 24 Burgesses, by whom it is yearly Governed, with the supply of 2 Cham∣berlains, a Recorder, Town-Clerk, and 2 Ser∣geants at Mace. The Arms of this Town is, Party per Fesse Vert and Gules, in Chief a Quadrangle of Castles walled Argent, and in Base a Lyon of England. The Earls and Dukes of this County are, Edmond Croukback Earl. John of Gaunt, D.
The Kings of England of the House of Lancaster, were, Henry the IV. Henry the V. Henry the VI. Henry the VII. Those of the House of York. Edward IV. Edward V. Richard III. After many Battels and conflicts, at length by the happy Marriage of Henry the 7th. K. of Eng∣land, next Heir to the House of Lancaster, with Elizabeth Daughter and Heir to Edward the 4th. of the House of York, the Red and white Roses were United. Although Lancaster be the Shire Town, yet the Town of Manchester far exceedeth it, which is famous (not only for the Church, Colledge and Market-Place, but) for the great resort to it for Cloathing. It was by Anthony the Emperour called Mancunium, and was made the Fort and Station of the Romans. Bible Chester also in this County (though but a little Town) hath been esteemed and called The Richest Town in Christendom.
Things Remarkable in this County. Along the Sea side (in many places) lye heaps of Sand, upon which the People pour Water till it contract a Saltish humour from the Sand, and this they boyl with Turff till it become White Salt. Not far from Fourness Fells, is the greatest standing Water in England, of a wonderful depth, and stretching it self out for the space of 10 miles together, all Paved in the bottom with Stone. This Water is called the Miander Meer, and there breeds in it a kind of Fish called a Chare, which is no where else to be found. The Mosses in this Shire are very unwholsom, but the upper Coat of this Mossy Earth being pared away, it yields a fat Earth for Fuel: And in divers places under this mossy Earth, good Marl is found to inrich the Land. On the Banks of the River Irwell there is found a reddish Stone. And about Manchester are Quarries of very good Stone. By Chatmosse is a low moisy Ground, very large, a great part of which (saith Cambden) the Brooks swelling high, carried quite away with them, whereby the Rivers were corrupted, and a number of fresh Fish perished. In this place now lyes a low Vale, watered with a small Brook where Trees have been digged up lying along. The Wood of these Trees burns very bright, so that some think them to be Fir Trees: But Camb∣den questions whether they be not Subterraneous Trees growing under Ground as well as Plants, and other Creatures.
Upon the very top of Pendle Hill, grows a pe∣culiar Plant called Clowdesberry, as coming out of the Clouds. This Hill lately did the Countrey near it much harm by abundance of water gush∣ing out of it. And this is remarkable, for when∣soever the top of it is covered with a Myst, it is an infallible sign of Rain. Besides this Hill, there are (not far from it) two others, viz. Ingleborrow and Penigent, which seem to touch the Clouds. In the River Lune near Cockerfand Abby, is great store of Salmon.
Leicestershire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Lincoln∣shire. On the West by Warwickshire. On the South by Northamptonshire. And on the North by Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire. It containeth in length 30 miles. In breadth 26 miles. And in Circumference 100 miles. The Air of this Shire is mild and wholsom, making the Inhabitants very healthy and long liv'd. The Soil is good for the production of Corn, Cattle, and Coles. The principal Commodities are Pease, Beans, Cattle, and Wool. It is in the Diocess of Lincoln, and hath in it 192 Parishes. Out of it are elected 4 Parliament Men. Knights 2 Leicester 2
Its Division is into 6 Hundreds, viz. West Goscote, Sparkingho, Goodlaxton, Gartrey, East Goscote, Framland. And in these Hundreds are 12 Market-Towns, viz. Hinckley, Mon. Mont Sorell, Mon. Melton Mowbrey, Tu. Harborough, Tu. Bsworth, Wednes. Loughborow, Th. Waltham Would, Th. Hallaton, Th. Lutterworth, Th. Billesden, Frid. Leicester, Sat. Asby de la Zouch, Sa. The Principal Town in this Shire is Leicester, lying in the Latitude of 52 deg. 41 min. It beareth from London N. N. W. and is distant therefrom 78 miles. Thus, From London to Barnet 10. to St. Albans 20. to Dunstable 30. to Stony-Stratford 44. to Nor∣thampton 54. to Haverborough 66. to Leicester 78. But by more accurate admeasurement along the Road 98 miles. This Town is said to be built by King Leir, who lived 844 years before the Birth of Christ. By whom this City is annually Governed, I do not find; but the Arms of the Town seem to be the same with that of Robert de Bellemont who was first Earl thereof; which is Gules, a Cinquefoil Ermine, pierced of the Field.
The Earls of Leicester since the first Con∣stitution, are, Robert de Bellemont. Simon de Montefort. Ranulph, Earl of Chester. Simon de Montefort. Edmond Crouchback. Will. de Bavar. E. of Holland. John of Gaunt, D. of Lancaster. Robert Dudley. Things remarkable in this County. Near Bosworth upon Redemore, the last of the 13 Battels between the two Houses of York and Lancaster was fought: whose dissention spent Eng∣land more Blood than did the winning of France. In which Battel Richard the Tyrant and Usurper, by Henry Earl of Richmond with 4000 men were slain, and but 10 only on the Earl's part lost their Lives. The Corps of the Dead King being ragged and torn, and the next day was laid all naked upon a Horse, and trussed like a Hog be∣hind a Pursevant at Arms, and was as homely Buried in the Grey Fryers in Leicester, after whose Ruine, his Grave rests as obscure, being all over∣grown with Weeds and Nettles: but the Stone Chest in which he was laid was preserved, and is now made use of for a Trough in a common Inn for Horses to drink in. This Battel was fought the 22 of August, 1485. Near Lutterworth, is a spring so cold, that with∣in
a short time it turneth straws and small sticks into Stone. In the North part of this Shire are store of Pit-Coals, which are of the nature of hardned Bitumen. The People of Carleton cannot pronounce their words well; but almost all of them have a natu∣rable kind of Speech, fetching their words (with much ado) deep out of their Throats. In the Rocks about Belvoir Castles are some∣times found the Astroits or Star-Stones, resembling little Stars joyned one to another, wherein are to be seen at every corner 5 beams, and in every beam in the middle is small hollowness. At Barrow is digged the best Lime-stone in all England, being extraordinary strong. In St. Martin's Church in Leicester, lyeth the Body of Mr. Robert Herricke, one of the Aldermen of Leicester, and Elizabeth his Wife, he was three times Maior of that Corporation; they lived fifty two years together, and seldom or never had un∣der twenty in family, and never in that time Buried either Man, Woman, or Child; and lived to see their Children, and their Childrens Chil∣dren, and their Children, to the number of One Hundred forty and two.
Lincolnshire. LIncolnshire is bounded on the East by the German Ocean. On the West by Leicester∣shire. On the South by Cambridge and Northamp∣tonshire. And on the North by Yorkshire. It containeth in length 60 miles. In breadth 44 miles. And in Circumference 170 miles. The Temperature of the Air, upon the East and South part, the Air is thick and foggy by reason of the Fen-Grounds thereto adjoyning; but withal very moderate and pleasing. The Soil of this County on the North and West parts is abundantly fertile, pleasant and Rich, stored with Pasturage, Arable and Mea∣dow Grounds. The East and South parts is Fenny and Brackish, and for Corn barren: But for Fowl and Fish, no County in the Kingdom can compare with it. The Chief Commodities that this Shire afford∣eth, are Wool, fat Cattle, Fish, Fowl, Horses, Flax and Alabaster. It is in the Diocess of Lincoln, and hath in it 630 Parishes.
Out of it are elected 12 Members which sit in Parliament. Knights 2 Lincoln 2 Boston 2 Grimsby 2 Stamford 2 Grantham 2 The Shires Division is into three parts, viz. Lindsey. Kesteven. And Holland. And these 3 Divisions contain 30 Hundreds, viz. Lindsey Division. Manlie, Yarborough, Brodley, Ludbrough, Walchcroft, Aslacoe, Carringham, Well, Lawris, Wraggoe, Gartrie, Loutheask, Calceworth, Candleshy, Hill, Bullingbrook, Horn-Castle. Kesteven Liberty. Lanyo, Boothby, Loveden, Flaxwell, Ashwardburn, Wivebridge, Grantham, Aveland, Beltisloe, Nesse. Holland Division. Shirbeck, Kirton, Ellowe,
And in these Hundreds are 35 Market-Towns, viz. Barton, Mon. Caster alias Spils∣by, Mon. Salsby, M. Market-Stanton, M. Stamford, M. & Fr. Sleaford, M. Gainsbury, Tuesd. Barton, Tu. Market Rasen, Tue. Bullingbrook, Tues. Spalding, Tues. Alford, Tues. Grinsby Mag. W. Binbrook, W. Lowthe, W. and Sa. Boston, W. and Sa. Glamford, Thurs. Burgh, Th. Market-Deeping, Th. Folkingham, Th. Holbich, Th. Wragby, Th. Naverby, Th. Lincoln, Friday. Tatershall, Fr. Kirton, Sat. Thongcaster, Sa. Waynfleet, S. Horn-Castle, S. Bourn, S. Grantham, Sa. Demington, Sa. Saltfleet,— Croyland,— Barwell,— The principal Place in this Shire, is the famous and ancient City of Lincoln. Lying in the Lati∣tude of 53 degrees. It bears from London N. by W. And is distant therefrom 103 miles. Thus, From London to Waltham 12. to Ware 20. to Buntingford 27. to Royston 33. to Huntingdon 48. to Stilton 57. to Peterborough 62. to Market-Deep∣ing 70. to Sleaford 88. to Lincoln 103.
In the time of the Normans this was one of the best Cities of England, being the chief place to which Merchants did resort and Traffick. In this City did K. Edward the Third ordain his Staple for the Mart of Wools, Leather and Lead. The Government of this City is annually com∣mitted to a Maior, 2 Sheriffs, 12 Aldermen in Scarlet, a Sword, a Hat of Estate, a Recorder, Sword-bearer, and 4 Sergeants with Maces. The Arms of this City are Argent, on a plain Cross Gules, a Flower-de-luce, Or. The Names of the Earls of Lincoln since the Norman Conquest. William de Romar. Gilbert de Gant. Randal, E. of Chester. Robert de Quiney. John de Lacy. Tho. E. of Lancaster. John of Gaunt. John de la Poole. Henry Brandon. Edward Clynton. Things remarkable in this Shire. Upon the 5th of September 1140. In the City of Lincoln was fought the great Battel between Randolph E. of Chester, and Robert E. of Gloucester, against K. Stephen, in defence of Maud the Em∣press; where K. Stephen was taken Prisoner and carried to Bristol, and there kept in Irons. Again, in this Shire on the 19th of May, 1217. A Battel was fought by K. Henry the 3d, against his Disloyal Barons, who aided Lewis Dolphin
of France, in which Conflict, the French were put to flight, and therein dyed the E. of Perch, with 400 Knights of that party. And divers Earls and Persons of Note taken Prisoners. In the Fens in this County, have in Nets been taken at one Draught in the Month of August, 3000 Mallards, and other Fowl of the like kind. The Ground about Crowland in this Shire is so rotten, that one may thrust a Pole into it 30 foot deep. And in a place called Holland there, the Ground is so wet, that as one stands upon it the Earth will shake under his feet, and he will be ready to sink into it. Here are also many Quick-Sands, which have a wonderful force both to draw to them, and to hold fast that which they have drawn. The In∣habitants of those parts have no fresh water, only Rain-water, and that in Pits, which if they be deep, turns the water brackish presently: And if they be shallow, they dry up as soon. About Barton, upon Humber, are abundance of Pewets, Godwits, Knotts and Dottrels, a simple kind of Bird, yet much given to imitating; which Birds are caught by Candle-light in this manner. The Fowler stands before the Bird, and if he put out an Arm, the Bird stretches out a Wing; if he set forward a Leg, or put forward his Head, the Bird doth the like, and imitates the Fowler's gesture so long, till he drawing nearer and nearer by degrees, at length casts his Net over him and takes him.
Middlesex. MIddlesex is bounded on the East by Essex. On the West by Buckinghamshire. On the South by Kent and Surrey. And on the North by Hertfordshire. It containeth in length 24 Miles. In breadth 18 Miles. And in Circumference 95 Miles. The Air of this County is very healthful (as being all a Gravel.) The Soil whereof is very Rich, it lying in a Vale, having some Hills also, and some of them of good ascent, from whose tops the Prospect of the whole is seen like unto Zoar in Egypt, or rather (saith Speed) like a Paradise or Garden of God. The Chief Commodities are Corn and Cattel. It is in the Diocess of London, and hath in it (besides those in London and Westminster) 73 Parishes. Out of it are Elected 8 Members to sit in Par∣liament.
Knights 2 Westminster 2 LONDON 4 In it 5 Princely Houses inheritable to the English Crown, are seated in this County, viz. Enfield, Hanworth, White-Hall, St. James, and Hampton-Court. The last whereof is rather a City in Shew, than a Princely Palace only, the which for stately Port, and gorgeous Building not inferiour to any in Europe. Its Division is into 7 Hundreds, viz. Edmonton, Goare, Finisbury, and Wenlaxeburn, Osriston, Elthorne, Istleworth, Spelthorn, In it are 4 Market-Towns (besides those in London and Westminster) viz. Brainford, Tues. Edgware, Thurs. Ʋxbridge, Thurs. Stanes, Friday.
The Principal Places in this County, are the two Famous Cities of London and Westminster, lying in the Latitude of 51 deg. 32 min. Of which two Cities we shall speak more anon. Things remarkable in this County. At Barnet in this County, are Medicinal Waters of late discovery, and very famous. Heston, a little Village near to Istleworth, is very remarkable for yielding the best Flower, and the purest for Manchet. The Waters of Crowders-Well by Cripplegate in London, and that at the Postern by Tower-Hill, have a very pleasant taste like that of New Milk, and are very good for Sore Eyes: But Crowders-Well is the better of the two. And it is said, that the Water of the Postern Spring on Tower-Hill, being let stand for several days to settle, will have in the bottom of it a yellow Sediment, much resembling Brimstone, both in colour and substance. The Stews by the Bank-side in Southwark, lying on the South side of London, over the River Thames (says Cambden) were made to make Pikes and Tench fat, and to scour them from their muddy Fennish taste. And I have seen (saith he) Pikes Paunches opened with a knife to shew their fatness, and presently the Wounds have come together again by the touch of Ten∣ches, and by the help of their glewy slime, being perfectly healed up.
In the River of Thames, there oftentimes happens a strange shifting of the Tides, which is generally accounted a great Prodigie, be∣cause it happens but seldom: A recital of all those which I hear History makes mention of, I shall here repeat. Upon the 12th of October 1411. The Thames flowed thrice in one day. Upon the 17th of December 1550. The Thames Flowed and Ebbed 3 times in 9 hours below Bridge. Upon January the 26th. in the year 1564, at night, were two Tides in 2 hours. The next day likewise were two in the morning, and two at night. Upon the 6th of November 1574, in the morning there happened two great Tides, at London; The one of Course, and the other within an hour after; which over∣flowed the Marshes, and drowned many ad∣joyning Cellars. Upon the 19th of February 1608/9, when (of course) it should have been dead low Water at London-Bridge, it was high Water, and pre∣sently it Ebbed almost half an hour to a foot depth; and then suddenly it Flowed a∣gain, almost 2 foot higher than it did before, and then Ebbed again till it came near the right course. Upon the 6th of February 1609/10, was another strange shifting of the Tides; but the particulars I cannot gain. Upon the 3d of January 1622/3, in the morn∣ing: The Thames shifted four Tides within four
hours, viz. Two Floods, and two Ebbs, and then kept its right course. Upon Candlemas-Day, the 2d of February, in Anno 1653/4, The Thames Ebbed and Flowed twice in 3 hours. And the like shifting of the Tides, at the same time was observed too by Seamen to be in the Maritine places of Kent. Upon the 4th of October 1656, The River of Thames Ebbed and Flowed twice in 3 hours.
The Description follow∣ing being too large to be inserted in its due place (according to the Course of the rest of the Counties) I have at the end by way of Supplement, added this Brief DESCRIPTION OF LONDON, K. Charles his Augusta, or City Royal. And of the City of WESTMINSTER, the Borough of SOƲTHWARK, and their Suburbs, &c. LONDON, the Epitome and Glory of all Britain, was the Seat of the British Em∣pire, as now the Royal Chamber of our Kings. Who was the first Founder of Her, Writers do much differ about, some say Brute the Trojan, others not: but all agree that
it was re-edified and enlarged by King Lud, in Anno Mundi, 5131. Antiquity. For Antiquity, London is very honourable, as may appear by what A. Marcellinus says of her, That she was called an Ancient City in his time, which is above 1200 years ago; and Cornelius Ta∣citus, 300 years before that, gives her this Cha∣racter, viz. London for multitude of Merchants and Commerce, is very much renowned. Situation. This Noble City is seated on a gentle rising Bank, in a healthful Air, and no less pleasantly than commodiously on the River Thames; so that whosoever was the Founder, he shewed much prudence in the choice of its Situation; and her successful estate hath given proof, that built she was for long life and continuance. Wall and its Gates. The City is begirt with a Wall, as is said, by Constantine the Great; which giveth entrance at seven principal Gates, besides Posterns of later erection: On the West side are two, Ludgate and Newgate, both which serve for Prisons; the first for such Debtors as are Freemen of the City; the other for Malefactors both of the City and Country; as also the County-Goal for Debt: Northwards, those of Aldersgate, Cripplegate, Moorgate, and Bishopsgate; and Eastward, Aldgate. Besides these principal Gates, there are several
Posterns. Also toward the River of Thames, many Docks and Harbours for Vessels, several Water∣gates, for the better security of the City, and Advancement of Trade. Its Extent. But now, as contemning Bondage, this City hath enlarged her self on all sides with spacious Suburbs, insomuch that she hath joyned her self Westward with another City, to wit, Westminster; and extending her Building Eastward as far as Black-wall; so that now the City is of great ex∣tent, being in length, from Black-wall in the East, to Tuttle-fields in the West, about six miles; and in breadth, one, two, and in some places al∣most three miles; and in circuit 'tis computed about 14 or 15 miles; in which are numbred above 500 Streets and Lanes, and 75000 Dwel∣ling-Houses. Of WESTMINSTER. This City, or part of London, I shall first speak of, being the Noblest, and taken up by the King, the Nobility, Gentry, and such as depend on the Court and Law; was formerly called Thorney or Dorney, and was an Island encompassed by the Thames, overgrown with Briers and Thorns; but now graced with fair stately Houses and Palaces, both publick and private. The chief among which are, First, The Pala∣ces of the King, Whitehall and St. James; the first being the Residence of His Sacred Majesty, the other of his Royal Highness James Duke of York;
to which is joyned a delightful Park so called, in which is a Pall-Mall, said to be the best in Europe. Secondly, the Courts of Judicature, and Houses of Parliament, now known by the Name of West∣minster-Hall, a large Structure, which was an∣ciently the Palace of the Kings of England. Thirdly, Its Collegiate Church of Westminster, which was the Temple of St. Peter, raised out of the Ruines of a former, dedicated to Apollo, where the Trinobants did Sacrifice to Diana Tauropolia. This Temple of St. Peter was destroyed by the Danes, and re-edified by Dunstan Bishop of Lon∣don, in the year 960. Fourthly, King Henry's Chappel, being a most magnificent and curious Edifice, beautified with the stately Tombs of the Kings and Queens, with many of the Nobility of England, renowned for the inauguration of our Kings and Queens, now a Collegiate Church. Fifthly, Somerset-House, a large and stately Structure belonging to the King, situate upon the Thames. Sixthly, The New-Exchange, a place well stored with variety of Shops and Goods; to which may be added, Seventhly, The several Houses of the Nobility, as Wallingford-House, the Seat of the Earl of Arlington. Northumberland-House, the Residence of the Countess of Northumberland. York-House belonging to the Duke of Bucking∣ham, but now turned into smaller Buildings, and made new Streets of Houses. Salisbury-House, belonging to the Earl of Salis∣bury, converted into a New-Exchange, and a Street of smaller Houses.
Worcester-House, to the Marquess of Worcester. The Savoy, formerly an Hospital, now the Habitation of several Families, where they have their Houses apart: and here is His Majesties Wardrobe kept. Arundel-House, belonging to the Duke of Nor∣folk; and Essex-House to the Duke of Somerset, now also turned into small Buildings, and made a Street to the Thames side. Then Exeter-House, Bedford-House, Clarendon-House, Leicester-House, Southampton-House, with divers others, too many to be mentioned in this small Discourse. The Limits of this City ends at Temple-Bar, where the Liberty of London beginneth, which we shall next speak of. Of LONDON. This City within the Walls and Freedom, is divided into 26 Parts or Wards, governed by a Lord Mayor, so many grave Aldermen, and two Sheriffs; the yearly Choice of which was granted them by Patent from King John; to these Henry the Third added some Aldermen; these Aldermen take charge of the 26 Wards aforesaid, and called from them Aldermanries. The names of the Wards are thus called, viz. 1. Tower-street. 2. Portsoken. 3. Aldgate. 4. Limestreet. 5. Bishopsgate. 6. Broadstreet. 7. Cornhil. 8. Langhorn. 9. Billingsgate. 10. Bridgwater with∣in. 11. Candlewick.
12. Walbrook. 13. Dowgate. 14. Vintrey. 15. Cordwainer. 16. Cheap. 17. Coleman-street. 18. Basinghall. 19. Aldersgate. 20. Cripplegate. 21. Farringdon within. 22. Faringdon without. 23. Breadstreet. 24. Queenhithe. 25. Castle-Baynard. 26. Bridgwater without, viz. the Burrough of Southwark. 1. Towerstreet Ward, so termed from the Tower; unto this Ward belongs Sydon-lane, or Seething-lane, part of Mark-lane, Minchen-lane, and Beer-lane, Water-lane, then Harp-lane: in this Lane is the Bakers-Hall; then the two Lanes called Church-Lanes, and next to them Foul-lane, then the Church of St. Dunstan's in the East, the Custome-house and Key, now bravely rebuilt and adorned. 2. Portsoken Ward, the East part of the Tower is in it; then the Hospital of St. Katharine, then East-Smithfield and Tower-hill, where is the Store-house for keeping Provisions for the Navy Royal, called the Slaughter-house; the Merchant-Tay∣lors have in this Ward Alms-houses for 14 Wo∣men; next the Minories, then the Church of St. Buttolph, then is Hoglane near Goodmans-fields; the Ward ending at Petticoat-lane. 3. Aldgate Ward, so named from the Gate; the chief Street beginneth at the Gate, betwixt the Gate and Limestreet; in it is Bricklayers-Hall,
then Billeter-lane, then Fenchurch-street, till you come to Culver-alley; then Crossed or Crouched-Friars, Woodroof-lane, Hart-street, the North end of Mark-lane, where the Ward endeth. 4. Limestreet Ward; here stands Leaden-Hall, formerly a Storehouse for Provision for the Poor, now a Market-place for Butchers, Tanners, Meal∣men, and Wool; no Market in the World for variety of Provision able to stand in competition with it: Tere is no Parish-Church, or place for Divine Service in this Ward. 5. Bishopsgate Ward; part is without the Gate, from St. Mary Spittle to Bishopsgate, which Lanes and Alleys of note are, Bethlehem East of the New Postern, West by Moorfields, and almost half of Houndsditch; in this Ward is the Church of St. Buttolph without the Gate, Fishers-folly, the old Artillery-ground, St. Mary-Spittle: within the Gate is Bishopsgate-street, so called of the Gate, unto the East end of St. Martins-Outwitch, where is Gresham-Colledg; then by the West corner of Leaden-hall, down that was called Grass-street, to the Corner over against the Church, great St. Hellens, and little St. Hellens, where is Leather-sellers-Hall. 6. Broadstreet Ward, so named from the Street; in it is Throgmorton-street, Threadneedle-street, half Finch-lane, and Scalding-alley; in it is Alhallows in the Wall, Winchester-street, Carpenters-Hall, Winchester-house, the Hall between Winchester-street and Broad-street, called the Glass-house; in Broad-street are Sir Thomas Gresham's Alms-houses; here standeth St. Peters the Poor, of which Parish was formerly made this Rhime,
In the Parish of St. Peters the Poor, There's no Ale-house nor Tavern, nor Sign at a door. The Case is altered now, quoth Ploydon. The St. Augustine-Friers, now the Dutch Church; in this Ward is Drapers-Hall, the House formerly of Cromwel Earl of Essex, Bartholomew-lane, and Merchant-Taylors-Hall in Threadneedle-street. 7. Corn-hil Ward, so called from a Corn-Market formerly kept there; the chief Ornaments of this Ward, are a famous Monument erected by Sir Thomas Gresham, who named it the Burss, afterwards by Queen Elizabeth called the Royal-Exchange; it is the Place of publick meeting for Merchants, whereunto they twice every day re∣sort, between twelve and one at Noon, and six and seven at Night, a stately Structure, now said to be the best in the known World, built qua∣drangular of Free-stone, with a lofty Tower at the South entrance, and Walks round the main Building, over which are above 200 Shops for rich Wares, and well stored with variety of all sorts. The Church of St. Peter, accounted the oldest Church in London; the Church of St. Mi∣chael now rebuilt and bravely adorned; also the South end of Finch-lane, and the North end of Burching is in this Ward. 8. Langborn Ward, so termed of a Bourn or Brook of sweet Water that ran in it; in which is Fenchurch-street, Lombard-street, half of Lime-street, in which was Pewterers-Hall; Dionys Back-church, half of Birching-lane, some few Houses in Philpot∣lane, St. Clements-lane down to St. Clements
Church, St. Nicholas-lane down beyond St. Nicho∣las Church; a small portion of Abchurch-lane, part of Beerbinder-lane, Alhallows-Lombard-street, St. Mary Wolnoth. 9. Billingsgate Ward; the Ornaments of this Ward are Billingsgate, that giveth name to the Ward; then Somers-key, Smarts-key, and Boss-alley, St. Mary hil-lane, in which is the beautiful Church of St. Mary on the Hill, St. Margaret-Pattens-lane, or Rood-lane, Pudding-lane, Love-lane, St. Andrews-Hubbart in Eastcheap, Buttolph-lane. 10. Bridg Ward within; the Streets and Orna∣ments of this Ward, are Fish-street, the Church of St. Magnus, St. Margarets New Fish-street, where is the New Column or Monument erected, near the place where the dreadful Fire began, Sept. 2. 1666. This Monument, St. Leonard-Eastcheap, Grass-church-street, the Old Swan, Fish∣mongers Hall, Drinkwater-wharf, Fresh-wharf, anciently so called; part of St. Martins-lane in Thames-street, part of St. Michaels-lane, and all Crooked-lane. 11. Ward is Candlewick Ward; in this Ward is Eastcheap, a Flesh-market for Butchers, a little part of St. Clements-lane, a great part of St. Ni∣cholas-lane, Abchurch-lane almost wholly of this Ward, St. Martins-lane most part of this Ward, St. Lawrence Poultney-lane. 12 Ward is Wallbrook Ward; in this Ward is St. Swithins-lane, next Salters Hall, Walbrook, the Stocks Market, four or five Houses up into Lombard-street, Beerbinder-lane, part of Bucklers-bury. 13. VVard is Dowgate Ward; in it is the High-street Dowgate, here is Skinners Hall, Tallow-chandlers Hall; then Elbow-lane, in which was
Innholders Hall, Chequer-lane or Alley; Fryer-lane, in it was Joiners Hall; Grantham-lane, the Steel-yard, Church-lane, Alhallows the Great, Haywharf-lane, Alhallows the Less, Cold-Harbor, Dyers Hall, Ebgate-lane, Bush-lane, Suffolk-lane; in it is Mer∣chant-Taylors Free-School. 14. The Vintry Ward; in this Ward is Three-Cranes-lane, then Church-lane, Broad-lane, in this is Parish-Clerks Hall; Stodies-lane, in this is Vint∣ners Hall; Anchor-lane, here is the Plummers Hall; then is Worcester-place, in this is the Fruiterers Hall; Royal-street, and Colledg-hill; the Tower-Royal, that giveth the name to the Street; Horse∣bridg-street, in this is the Cutlers Hall; Knight-Riders-street, Ipres-Inn, Kerion-lane. 15. Ward is Cordwayner Ward; in this Ward is Budg-Row, Turn-base-lane, part of Wringwren-lane, Cordwayners-street, Bow-lane, Basing-lane, St. Sithes-lane, the South side of Needlers-lane, the South end of Soper-lane, Goose-lane in Bow-lane, the South part of Watling-street. 16. Ward is Cheap Ward; in which is the Poultery, and here also is the Poultery-Compter; Cony-hoop-lane, at the end stood Grocers Hall, part of Old Jewry, Bucklersbury, Needlers-lane, part of Soper-lane; Cheapside, here was a great Market for all sorts of Provisions, which is now removed to Hony-lane Market; the Mercers Chappel and Hall, then Ironmongers-lane, in which is Blossoms-Inn; next Honey-lane, Cateaten-street, in this is Guildhall, wherein the Courts for the City are kept. 17. VVard is Coleman-street VVard, part of Old Jewry is in this Ward; Lothbury, in this Street is St. Margarets Church, and Founders Hall; in Old Jewry, the Church of St. Olaves
Upwel; then Coleman-street, in this Street is the Armorers Hall. 18. Ward was Basinghal Ward; here stands the Masons Hall, the Weavers Hall, the Girdlers Hall; Blakwell Hall, a Market for all sorts of Woollen Cloaths, whereto all Country-men bring their Woollen Manufacture; then the Coopers Hall. 19. VVard, Cripplegate Ward; in this Ward are these Streets, Aldermanbury, Milk-street, Gayspur-lane, part of West-Cheap, Love-lane, Lad-lane, Wood-street, Addle-street, Philip-lane, Huggen-lane, Maiden-lane, the East side of Guthorns-lane, Stain∣ing-lane, Silver-street, the North-east side of Monkswel-street; these within the Walls were the bounds: Moor-lane, with all the Alleys, Little Moorfields are of this Ward; more than half of Grub-street, Whitecross-street to Beech-lane, Redcross-street, with a part of Golding-lane, Beech-lane, and Barbican-street, more than half thereof to∣wards Aldersgate-street; Sion Colledg, in which there was a stately Library, and Alms Houses founded for 24 poor People, by Doctor Thomas White, and his Executor Mr. John Simpson; the Parish-Church of St. Alphage (not consumed) the Counter, Wax-Chandlers Hall, Haberdashers Hall in Maiden-lane. 20. Ward is that of Aldersgate; Lillypot-lane, the West side of Guthorns-lane, Kery-lane, St. Mar∣tins, Aldersgate-street without the Gate, where is Peter-house (the Bishop of London's Seat) and Little Britain; Goldsmiths Hall; without the Gate in Aldersgate-street on the East side, is Cooks Hall: in this Ward are many stately Houses for Noble Men and Gentry.
21. Ward is Faringdon Ward within; in this Ward is Gunthrams-lane, in which is Embroide∣rers Hall, Sadlers Hall, Fosters-lane, and St. For∣sters Church rebuilt, Barber-Chirurgiens Hall in Monkswel-street near Cripplegate, Pentecost-lane, Butchers-Hall-lane, in which was Butchers Hall, Christ-Church, the West side of Friday-street, the Old Change, the North Church-yard of St. Pauls, and the Cathedral it self, the School of St. Pauls, Pater-noster-Row, the West side of Ave-Mary-lane, Creed-lane; on the North of Ave-Mary-lane is Sta∣tioners Hall, Physicians Colledg, Martins Church by Ludgate, Black-fryers, Panyer-alley, Ivy-lane, Warwick-lane, Blowbladder-street, Newgate-market, and Newgate. 22. Ward is Bread-street Ward; wherein is Bread-street, the East part of Friday-street, Watling-street, part of Knight-Riders-street, Distaff-lane in which is Cordwainers Hall 23. Ward is Queen-hith Ward; in this Ward is Trinity-lane, or Spooners-lane, called also Huggen-lane, Breadstreet Hill, Fye-foot-lane, Desborn-lane; Little-Trinity-Lane, where is Painterstainers Hall, Old Fish-street, Lambert-Hill, Pyel-lane, Towns-end-lane, Queen-hith, Salt-Wharf, Stew-lane, Brook-Wharf, Broken-Wharf, Triglane, and Bull-Wharf. 24. Is Castle-Baynard Ward; in this Ward is Creed-lane, the Fast part of Ave-Mary-lane, part of Pater-noster-Row, the East side of Warwick-lane, Peters-hill-lane, Pauls-Wharf, Addle-hill, Carter-lane, Do-little-lane, Sermon-lane, the South Chain of Pauls Churchyard, and the South part of the Churchyard it self, St. Peters Pauls-wharf, Baynards-Castle, where was the Kings great Wardrobe; here is also the Heralds Office, Doctors Commons, and Blacksmiths Hall.
25. Ward is Faringdon Ward without; in this is Guilt-spur-street, the Church of St. Sepulchres, Pye-corne, Cock-lane, Holborn-Conduit; West-Smith-field, in it standeth the Hospital of St. Bartholo∣mew, Duck-lane, St. Bartholomews Close, part of Long-lane, part of Chick-lane, Smithfeld Pond, Cow-lane, Snow-hill, to the Bishop of Elie's House, Furnivals-Inn, Staple-Inn, Barnards-Inn, Fetter-lane, Thavies-Inn, Shooe-lane, the Church of St. Andrews in Holborn; then Old Baily, where is the Sessions House for London and Middlesex; and also Fleet River, formerly a small Ditch or Rivolet, but now made a Navigable River to Holborn Bridg, with spacious Streets on both sides; on the East side of which is Fleet-lane, and the Fleet Prison, St. Dunstans in the West, Cliffords-Inn, the South end of Chancery-lane, Sergeants-Inn, even to the Rolls Liberty, and Jackanapes-lane West, part of Shear-lane the two Temples, White-Fryers, Water-lane, Salisbury-Court, St. Bridgets or Brides Church, Bridewel-lane, and Bridewell. 26. Ward is Bridg Ward without; in this are long Southwark, St. Georges Church, St. Olave-street, Bermondsey-street, Kent-street, Blackman-street: the Antiquities of it are Bermondsey, an Abbey of Black Monks, St. Mary Overies, a Priory of Ca∣non Regulars; St. Thomas, an Hospital for the Poor; the Lock, a Lazire House in Kent-street; there be in it these five Prisons, the Clinck, the Compter, the Marshalsey, the Kings-bench, the White-lion: Here is Winchester-house, Battail-bridg, the Bridg-house, the Store-house of Grain for the Service of the City, and the Bear-Garden.
Every Ward hath a peculiar Alderman, as an Overseer or Guardian assigned thereunto, who hath a greater latitude of Power than any ordi∣nary Justice of Peace. This Alderman hath one Deputy, and in some Wards more; there are also a certain number of Common-Council-Men, Constables, Men of the Ward-Mote-Inquest, Scavengers, some more, some less, with Beadles belonging to every Ward. This last Ward dif∣fers from all the rest in this, That the Alderman appointed here hath three Deputies, but no Common-Council-Man. In this Ward is a Bay∣liff also, for execution of Legal Process, and other Affairs under the Government of the City of London. This City, for Divine Worship (before the late dreadful Conflagration, on Sunday the se∣cond of September 1666, and continued until Wednesday following; in which space of time two thirds within its Wall and Freedom was consu∣med) had 125 Parish-Churches, the most stu∣pendious Fabrick of which, was the Cathedral of St. Pauls, founded by Ethelbert King of Kent, 610. It was the Bishops Sea of London, endowed with fair Revenues and Livings; the proportion of this Building was, 690 foot in length, 130 foot in breadth; the height of the West erected Roof from the ground 102, the new Fabrick from the ground was 88 foot; this was the only remaining Work of the English Saxons in London, the which is now rebuilding. The Inns of Court and Chancery belonging to this City are twelve, viz. the Inner and Middle Temple, Grays Inn, and Lincolns Inn, which are called Inns of Court; and these Inns are taken up by the Benchers, Barresters, and Students at
Law. There are also two other Inns of Court, which are called Sergeants Inn, one in Chancery-lane, the other in Fleet-street, where the Judges and Sergeants have their Lodgings. The Inns of Chancery are, Cliffords Inn, Clements Inn, Staple Inn, Furnivals Inn, Lions Inn, Bernards Inn, and Thavies Inn; all which are inhabited by Attorneys and Sollicitors at Law. The Courts belonging to the City of London. The Hustings Court, is the House of Causes or Pleadings; this Court preserveth the Laws, Rights, Franchises, Customs and Dignities of the City; this Court is held Tuesday as formerly. The Court of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, a most ancient Court of Record for all Matters of Law and Equity: There is the Inner Court, where the Lord Mayor and Aldermen sit in Council on Tuesday and Thursday weekly; and the Outer Court, held every day (but Holydays, and certain other times of the year) for Pro∣ceedings at Law. The Court of Orphans. The two Sheriffs Courts, one for each Compter, Wednesday and Friday for Tryal of Wood-street, and Thursday and Saturday for the Poultrey. The Court of Common Council, for making of Laws, and transacting of other Matters of pub∣lick concernment to the state of the City. The Sessions of Peace, held ordinarily once a month throughout the year. The Court for the Conservation of the Water and Rivers of Thames and Medway.
The Court of the Coroner and the Easchetor. The Chamberlains Court for Apprentices. The Court of Requests, commonly called the Court of Conscience; All which Courts are kept within the Guildhal, London. The Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, and Goal-delivery of Newgate, for the City of London and County of Middlesex, holden at Justice-Hall in the Old Baily; whereof the Lord Mayor is the Chief Judg, and hath power of Repriev∣ing, &c. The Court of the Tower of London; held within the verge of the City before the Steward by pre∣scription, of Debt, Trespass, and other Actions. All which Courts are kept within the Guildhall London; a fair and large Structure for the nego∣tiating of the Affairs of the City. The Court of Policies and Assurances to Mer∣chants that Venture and Traffick on the Seas, where Ships and Goods are Ensured at so much in the Hundred, in the Royal Exchange. The Court of Halmote, or Hall-Court for every Company in London, appropriate to each Hall they belong. The Court of Wardmote, or Wardmote Inquest, for every VVard; the Inquest consisteth of twelve or more, as the custom of the VVard is, chosen in each VVard St. Thomas's day. Besides these Structures are several others, as the Charter house, or Sutton's Hospital, a fair and large Building, being one of the noblest Hospitals in England, in which are constantly maintained 80 old Men and 40 Boys, who have generous Education bestowed on them, and after disposed of, either to the University or to Trades.
Doctors Commons, the Habitation of the Civi∣lians that practise the Civil Law. The Heralds Office, or Colledg, for pre∣serving Genealogies of Families, Coats of Arms, &c. The Colledg of Physicians, a fine new built Stru∣cture; in which Colledg there is a President, four Censors, and eight Elects, to whom the management of Affairs of the said Society is com∣mitted. The Halls belonging to the several Compa∣nies, which are most of them very fair and large Structures. There are four Free-schools in this City; The Free-school of St. Pauls, now built in ample manner, and richly endowed Anno 1512, by Dr. Colet Dean of St. Pauls, for 153 poor Mens Children, for which there was a chief Master, and Usher, and Chaplain ordained. Moreover, in the year 1553, after the Erection of Christ's Hospital, which arose out of the ruins of the Grey Fryers, that stood there; a great num∣ber of poor Children of the City taken in, and a fair School appointed at the Charge of the City, though Edward the Sixth bears the name of the Patron: Also another School was founded in Christ's Hospital, at the Charge of the Lady Ramsey. There is also another lately erected, by his Majesties Liberality, for the instructing of forty Boys in Geometry, Navigation, and other parts of the Mathematicks, yearly, for ever. Anno 1561, the Merchant-Taylors of London founded a School in the Parish of St. Lawrence Poultney, near Thames-street. Anno 1579, Sir Thomas Gresham gave the Royal Exchange, with all the Buildings thereunto ap∣pertaining,
viz. the one Moiety to the Mayor and Commonalty of London, and their Successors; and the other moiety to the Mercers, to find four to read Lectures of Divinity, Astronomy, Musick, and Geometry, within that dwelling in Bishopsgate-street, called Gresham-House or Colledg, and to bestow 50 pounds per Annum to every Reader: the Mercers also are to find three Readers in the same place; that is, the Civil Law Reader, Phy∣sick and Rhetorick, and every Reader to have 50 pounds yearly stipend. These Lectures are to be read every day in the week in Term-time (Sundays excepted) at nine a clock in the Morn∣ing, in Latine, and at two of the clock in the Afternoon in English; only the Musick Lecture is at ten on Saturday in the Morning, and at three in the Afternoon. Sir John Cutler also set up a Lecture for Mechanicks, at two of the clock, on so many Fridays after the Term, as there is weeks in the Term. All which are fair & large Buildings. Its House of Correction, Bride∣wel, for Vagabonds and Idle Persons. Its Sessions House for Malefactors. And its New Bethlehem in Moor∣fields, for Lunaticks. Another Glory of the City of London, which must not be omitted, is the River of Thames. This famous River taketh the Head or Spring out of the flank of a Hill in Cotswol-Downs, about a mile from Tetbury; from hence by many Me∣anders, and meeting with other Streams, she
arrives to Oxford, then to Abington, to Walling∣ford, Reading, Marlborough, Maidenhead, Windsor, Eaton, Chersey, Stains, Kingston, Richmond, Brain∣ford, Mortlack, Putney, Chelsey, Lambeth, Westmin∣ster, and so to London, and thence to Gravesend; and thus she comes sporting along from her first source, about nine-score miles, before she em∣bosoms her self in the Arms of Neptune; to which we may add her convenient distance from the Sea; the wholsomness of her Water; her mul∣titude of Ships, and smaller Vessels; her stately Palaces on both sides of her Banks; her variety of all sorts of Fish; and the infinite number of Families that are maintained by this River. Of London Bridge. Quite over the River of Thames, near unto the Tower, there is built a most sumptuous and magnificent Bridg, built upon nineteen Arches of Stone, containing in length one quarter of a mile; upon which there are most sumptuous Houses builded on both sides, and a Draw-Bridge in the middle; large Vessels, when they have struck Sail, may pass under the Arches. This Bridge hath been several times rebuilt, and hath twice in this Age been in part con∣sumed by Fire; yet the magnificence there∣of exceeds all the Bridges that Story makes mention of.
Of the Tower. The stately and strong Tower of London, it's a strong Fort or Citadel, which secures both the City and the River; it serves not only to Defend but to Command either upon occasion; It is the Treasury for the Jewels and Ornaments of the Crown; the great Archieve which conserves all the old Records of the Courts of Justice at West∣minster; it is the place for the Royal Mint, for the Coynage of Gold and Silver; it is the chief Magazine and Armory, or Arsenal of the whole Land for Martial Engines and Provi∣sion: In it also is the Brake or Rack: And lastly, It is a great Ornament both to the River and the City. Of Fresh Water Rivers, Aqueducts, Con∣duits, Fountains, &c. belonging to the City of London. Before the Conquest, and long after, London was watered with a Water called Wallbrook, run∣ning through the midst of the City, now a Street, receiving the same name; and by ano∣ther Bourn or Water running through Langborn VVard, watering the East part. In the Suburbs VVestward, was another great Water called Old Bourn, now Holborn. In the other part of the Suburbs were three principal VVells, viz. Holy Well, Clements Well, Clarks well; and near unto this five smaller VVells. In West-Smithfield there was Horse-Pool, and by Cripplegate Church
Crowders Well; but most of these are now stopped up: and by the admirable VVork of Sir Hugh Middleton, the VVater being brought from Am∣wel Spring by Ware to London, it runs in Pipes through all the Streets of the City, and by smaller Pipes into almost every Man's House. To which we may add the several VVaterhouses built by the Thames, which serve to convey VVater to their adjacent places. The Inhabitants of London are sufficiently fur∣nished with Provisions, for besides the several Shambles every where dispersed up and down, there are these Markets, Leaden-hall Market, the Stocks Market, Hony-lane Market, Newgate Mar∣ket, Clare Market, Southampton Market, St. James Market, Westminster Market, and Ratcliff Market. To conclude, London is a City of great fame for its Trade and Commerce with all Nations in the known VVorld; and if we consider its Antiquity, Riches, Jurisdiction, Situation, its Populousness, its good Government, the inge∣nuity of its Inhabitants in Arts, Manufactures, and Martial Affairs; It may deservedly be com∣pared with any City of the highest rank in the whole VVorld.
By this brief Description of these two Famous Cities of London and Westminster and River of Thames, you may conceive of its magnitude in some measure, as Hercules may be judged by his Foot; But if you would have a farther inspection into them, there is lately Engraven a Map in Copper, and Printed in a large sheet of Royal Pa∣per, in which is accurately described, all the Streets, Lanes, and Common passages in these two Cities, viz. From St. James's to Black Wall, as they are now made nnd altered since the late Dreadful Fire. The Price of which Map is but 12 d. and is to be had at Mr. Robert Mordens, at the Sign of the Atlas in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange in London. Memorable Casualties, and other Remarkable Things and Pas∣sages hapning in London. In the 20th year of William the Conqueror, so great a Fire hapned in London, that from the West Gate to the East, i. e. from Ludgate to Aldgate it consumed all Churches and Houses,
together with the Cathedral Church of St. Paul. In the 4th year of Will. Rufus, on the 18th of October (being St. Luke's Day) about 600 Houses were thrown down with Tempest, and the Roof of Bow Church in Cheapside was raised, so that in the fall, six of the Beams being 27 foot long a piece, were driven so deep into the ground (the Street being then not Paved) that not above 4 foot remained above ground in sight, and yet the whole frame kept together in the same order as they were placed (by the Workmen) on the Root it self. In the year 1186. and in the Reign of Henry the 2d. London was Paved. In the 10th year of Richard the First, was London first Governed by a Mayor and Sherifts. In the year 1209. and in the Reign of K. John, London Bridge was built with Stone. In the 17th year of Henry the 3d. Five Suns appeared at one time together, after which fol∣lowed so great a Dearth, that People were con∣strained to eat Horseflesh and Barks of Trees, and in London 20 Thousand were starved for want of Food. In the 27th year of Edward the First, the Kings Palace at Westminster and the Monastery adjoyning were Burnt. In the same 27th year of his Reign, an Act was made by the Common-Council of London (with the King's consent) concerning the price of Victuals, viz. A fat Cock three half-pence. 2 Pullets the same. A Goose 4 d. A Mallard 3 half-pence. A Pheasant 4 d. A Heron 6 d. A Plover 1 d. A Swan 3 s. A Crane 1 s. 2 Wood-Cocks 3 halfpence. A fat Lamb (from Christmas to
Shrovetide) 16 d. and all the year after for 4 d. And VVheat this year was so plentiful, that a Quarter was sold for 10 Groats. In the 8th year of Edward the 2d. was so great a Dearth, that Horses and Dogs were eaten, and Thieves in Prison plucked those in pieces that newly came in amongst them, eating them half alive; this Famine continued 3 years, and brought in the end such a Pestilence, that the living scarce sufficed to Bury the dead. In this Kings Reign digging a Foundation of a Work about St. Pauls in London, was found above 100 head of Oxen and Kine. In the year of our Lord 1348. a Plague began in London about Alhallontide, and continued till the year 1357. (which is 9 years) where it was observed, That those that were born after the be∣ginning of this Mortality had but 28 Teeth, whereas before they had 32. In Anno 1411. Guild-hall in London was built. In the 4th year of Edw. the 3d. A Solemn Tournament or Jousting, which lasted three days, was held in Cheapside London, near to Soper-lane, where a Scaffold was erected for the Queen Phi∣lippa and her Ladies to sit on to see the Jousting, which Scaffold fell, and (though there was no hurt done) the King threatned to punish the Car∣penters that erected it for their neglect, till the Queen (upon her knees) intreated pardon for them. In the 11th year of his Reign was so great a Plenty, that (in London) A Quarter of Wheat was was sold for 2 s. A fat Oxe for a Noble. A fat Sheep for 6 d. Five Pigeons for a Peny. A fat Goose for two Pence. A Pig for a Peny.
In the 14th year of Richard the 2d. on Christ∣mas day, a Dolphin was taken up at London Bridge of a monstrous growth, and 10 foot long. In a Parliament time in this Kings Reign, a certain Image was made of Wax by Necromancy, which at an hour appointed uttered these words, The Head shall be cut off. The Head shall be lift up aloft. The Feet shall be lift up above the Head. — This Parliament was called the Marvellous Par∣liament. In the 3d year of Henry the 5th upon Candlemas Day, 7 Dolphins came up the River of Thames, whereof 4 were taken. Upon the 8th of November, in the 7th year of K. Henry the 6th. the Duke of Norfolk passing through London Bridge, His Barge being set upon the Piles, overwhelmed so, that 37 persons were Drown'd, and the Duke (with some others that escaped) were fain to be drawn up with Ropes. In the 18th year of Henry the 6th. All the Lions in the Tower died. And upon the 18th day of July in the same year, the Postern Gate between the two Tower Hills sunk (by night) above 7 foot into the Ground. In the 10th year of King Henry the 7th in the digging a new Foundation in the Church of St. Mary Hill in London, the Body of Alice Hackney who had been Buried in that Church 175 years before, was found whole of Skin, and the Joynts of her Arms pliable, her Corps was kept above ground 4 days without annoyance, and then Bu∣ried again. In the 15th year of his Reign was a great Plague, of which there died in London in that year 30 Thousand persons.
In the 9th year of K. Henry the 8th. there hap∣ned a Sweating Sickness, whereof a number of People died, especially in London, so thar in 3, and sometimes in 2 hours it took away mens lives. It began in July, and continued till the middle of December. In the 20th year of his Reign in the end of May, began another Sweating Sickness in London, which infected all places of the Realm. In the 27th year of Henry the 8th. upon Tuesday in Easter VVeek, William Foxley Pot-maker for the Mynt of the Tower of London fell asleep, and could not be waked with pinching or burning, till 14 days after; and when he awaked, was found (in all points) as if he had slept but one night, and he lived 40 years after. In the second year of Edward the 6th. St. Anns Church by Aldersgate in London, was consumed by Fire. In his 5th year was a Sweating Sickness again, more violent than those foregoing, for in the first VVeek it began in London, there died there 800 persons, and it was so violent that it took men away in 24 hours, sometimes in 12, and some in less. In this Sickness (besides divers Persons of Quality and account) there died two Sons of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, both dying with∣in an hour one of another, and in such order, that both of them died Dukes. In the 2d year of Q. Mary, on the 15th of Fe∣bruary, in the Sky appeared a Rainbow reversed, i. e. the Bow downwards, and the ends upwards. Also 2 Suns shined at one time being a good di∣stance asunder. In the 4th year of her Reign, Burning Agues, and other-strange Diseases took away very many
people, so that (in London) between the 20th of October, and the last of December there died seven Aldermen. In her 5th year, upon the last of September, there fell such great store of Rain, that West∣minster Hall was full of VVater, and Boats were rowed over Westminster Bridge into King-street. In the 3d year of Q. Elizabeth, the Spire of St. Paul's Cathedral in London, being 260 foot high above the Stone-work, being made of VVood and covered with Lead, was with Lightning burnt down, together with the Roof of the Church and Steeple, and all in less than 5 hours time. Also in this year of her Reign, were produced many monstrous Births, viz. a Mare brought forth a Foal with two Heads, and a long Tail grow∣ing out between the two Heads. A Sow far∣rowed a Pig with 2 Bodies, 8 Feet, and but one Head. In her 6th year, a great Pestilence raged in London, whereof there died there in one year 21 Thousand and 5 Hundred persons. In her 8th year, there died in London in 10 Months space 7 Aldermen. In her 15th year, appeared the new Star or Comet in Cathedra Cassiopoea. In her 17th year, the River Thames Ebb'd and Flowed twice in one hour. And upon the 9th of September, the Heavens seemed to be all on fire. In her 26th year, was a great Plague in Lon∣don, of which there died (besides the Lord Maior, and three Aldermen) 17 Thousand 8 hundred and 90. and Michaelmas Term was held at St. Albans.
In the first year of K. James, the Plague was so violent in London, that from the 23th of De∣cember to the 12th of December following, there died in London and the Liberties 38 thousand 244 persons, whereof of the Plague 30 thousand 568, of which in one Week 3 thousand and 90. In his 3d year, a great Porpus was taken at West Ham, a mile and half within the Land, and a few days after, a Whale was divers times seen above the Water in the River of Thames, which was judged to exceed the biggest Ship upon the River, but tasting the fresh Water retired into the Sea. In his 6th year, 1609. A Frost began in De∣cember, and lasted till April following. In the 12th year of his Reign, the New-River Water was brought to London. In the year 1623. on Friday Octob. 24. A Ro∣mish Priest Preached in the Afternoon at Hunsdon House in the Black Fryers London, in an upper Chamber, where 300 persons were assembled to hear him, when about the middle of the Sermon a great part of the Floor brake and fell down, in the fall whereof the Priest was slain, and near 100 of his Auditors, and as many more maimed. In the 7th year of King Charles the First, upon the 29th of May, a Star appeared visible at Noon, the Sun shining clear, at which time the King rode to St. Paul's Church, to give thanks for the Queens safe delivery of her second Son, Prince Charles, now our most gracious Soveraign, whom God grant long to Reign over us. In the 8th year of his Reign, near one half of the Houses upon London Bridge were burnt to the tops of the Arches.
In the year 1643. The most Magnificent Cross in Cheapside London, was demolished. In the 17th year of K. Charles the Second. Be∣gan a dreadful Pestilence in the City of London, continuing from the beginning of May till the end of December, where there died in London and within the Bill of Mortality, of the Plague, and of other Diseases 97306. besides many more not taken account of. On the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th of September, in the 18th year of his Reign, in the space of three days, were in London consumed by Fire Fourscore and Ten Parish-Churches, and above Thirteen Thousand Dwelling-Houses.
Norfolk. THe County of Norfolk is bounded on the East by the German Ocean. On the West by Cam∣bridgeshire and Lincolnshire. On the South by Suffolk. And on the North by the German Ocean. It containeth in length 50 Miles. In breadth 35. And in Circumference 145 Miles. The Temperature of the Air in this County is very sharp, especially in the Champion and near the Sea, and the Spring and Harvest here are very late. The Soil in many places is very good, but generally of Clay or fat Chalk. And although it be healthy in some places, yet by composture of Sheep, the Heaths are made mighty Rich for Corn, so that when they are laid again from bearing of Corn, they yield a more sweet and plentiful feeding for Sheep. The Chief Commodities of this County are, Stuff, Stockings, Wool, Corn, Coals, and Conies. Herrings and other Fish. It is in the Diocess of Norwich, and hath in it 660 Parishes,
Out of it are Elected 12 Members to sit in Parliament. Knights 2 Norwich 2 Kings-Lynn 2 Yarmouth 2 Thetford 2 Castle-rising 2 Its Division is into 31 Hundreds, viz. Smethdon, Brothercross, North Grenehoe, Halfe, North Erpingham, Tunstad, Happing, West Flegg, Blowfield, Tavatham, South Erpingham, Eynsford, Gallowe, Frecbridge, Laundiche, Milforde, Forehoce, Humbleyarde, Hensteade, Loe, Clavering, Earshaw, Depwarde, Dysse, Guiltcrosse, Shorpham, Wayland, South Grenehoe, Walsham, Clackelosse, Grymshooe.
And in these Hundreds are 28 Market-Towns, viz. Lyn, Tues. & Sat. East Harling, Tues. Foulsham, Tues. Caston, Tues. Norwich, W. F. S. Harlston, Wed. Watton, Wed. Attlebury, Thurs. Fakingham, Thu. North Walsham, Th. Dis, Frid. Wymondham, Fr. East Deareham, Fr. Snetsham, Fri. Walsingham, Fri. Yarmouth, Sat. Thetford, Sa. Hingham, Sa. New Bakenham, Sa. Swafham, Sa. Downham, Sa. Holt, Sa. Burnham, Market, Sa. Cromer, Sa. Repham, Sa. Alesham, Sa. Worfled, Sa. Sechy, every second Monday. Three New Markets. Attlebury, Southwold, Winfield, The Sea-Coasts of this County are very fortu∣nate in Fish, and on these Coasts are very good Harbours, of which Lyn and Yarmouth are the Chief, both of them of great Traffick. And Wells and Blackney are next in estimation. The chief place in this County is the ancient City of Norwich, lying in the Latitude of 52 deg. 12 min. and bears from London N E. by N. and is distant therefrom 90 miles. Thus,
From London to Waltham Cross 12. to Ware 20. to Puckeridge 24. to Barkway 31. to Witlecford Bridge 41. to New-Market 53. to Thetford 69. to Attleborough 79. to Windham 84. to Norwich 90. But by a more accurate admeasurement upon the Road, it is distant 108 miles. It is a City flourishing in Peace, Plenty, Wealth and Honour; It is situate upon the River Hierus in a pleasant Valley, but upon rising ground. In the 17th year of K. Stephen it was founded and made a Corporation. In Edward the First's time inclosed with a fair Wall. It was first Governed by 4 Bailiffs. Then by Henry the 4th in Anno 1403. erected into a Majoralty and County. The Arms of this City are, Gules, a Castle triple Towred Argent, in Base a Lyon of England, or Passant Gardant, Or. Lyn, also in this County having been an an∣cient Borough under the Government of a Bailiff, was by K. John made Liber Burgus, who gave them a Cup, which to this day honoureth their Corporation. Henry the Third enlarged their Charter, and granted them to choose a Maior Loco Praeposito, unto whom K. Henry the 8th added 12 Aldermen, a Recorder and other Officers, and the bearing of a Sword before the Maior, and further he changed their Name from Major & Burgensis Lyn Episcopi, to Major & Burgensis Lyn Regis. Yarmouth being the Key of the Coast, seated by the Mouth of the River Year, and is an an∣cient Member of the Cinque Ports, being very well built and fortified. This Town growing populous, was by K. Henry the 3d, made a Cor∣poration under 2 Bailiffs.
The Earls and Dukes of Norfolk since the first Constitution. Richard Gaiet. E. of Norfolk. William of Boloign, E. of Norfolk. Hugb Bigod, E. of Norfolk. Thomas Brotherton, E. of Norfolk. Tho. Moubray, D. of Norfolk. Richard of Shrewsbury, D. of Norfolk. L. Howard, D. of Norfolk. Things Remarkable in this County. This County of Norfolk hath been infested with two remarkable Rebellions. The first of them was commenced by John Litister a Dyer in Norwich, calling himself King of the Commons, who led 50 Thousand Soldiers into the Field; and forcibly carried the Lord Morley and Scales, and other Knights besides, and caused them to serve him at his Table: but he was shortly over∣thrown by Henry Spencer Bishop of Norwich, and deservedly Hanged, Anno 1381. The other was under the leading of Robert Ket, a Tanner of Windham; who in a Conflict forced the Lord William Par, Marquess of Nor∣thampton to flight, and slew the Lord Shefield in the Field; but (after many Outrages done to the City of Norwich) was taken by John Dudley, E. of Warwick, having 5000 of his followers
slain, and himself takee and Hanged upon the top of the Castle, Anno 1543. Cambden Reports, that the Inhabitants of this County are naturally very capable of the niceties and quirks of the Law, and those of them that bend their Studies that way, prove generally ex∣cellent Lawyers. On the Shore of this County, viz. by Yarmouth, is every year in the Month of September the wor∣thiest fishing for Herrings in all Europe, which draweth great concourse of People thither, and maketh the Town much Richer all the year after. The River Bure in this County is incredibly full of Fish. In the River Tore by Norwich, there is great plenty of a Fish they call a Ruffe, which hath a Body all prickled over, it delights in Sandy places, and is much like a Perch; in colour brown, and duskish above, but of a pale yellow beneath: it is marked by the Chaws with a double course of half Circles: the Eye for the upper part of it is of a dark brown, and the lower part somewhat yellowish, and the ball of it black: There is a line goes along the back, which is as it were fastned to the body by an over∣twart thrid: it is all spotted with black specks over the Tale and Fins: 'Tis a wholsom Fish, and eats tender and short as a Perch. This Fish is rarely taken in any other River; and this is observable of it, that when the Fish is angry, the Fins stand up stiff, and after its anger is over, they fall flat again.
At St. Bennets in the Holm, Cockles and Peri∣winckles are digged out of the Ground. The Ground about Winterton is the Richest, Fattest, Rottenest and easiest to Plough, of any in England. Upon the Shoar of this Shire, Jet and Amber are often found; and sometimes Hawks are taken.
Northampton-Shire. IS bounded on the East by Cambridge-shire. On the West by Warwickshire. On the South by Buckinghamshire. And on the North by Lincoln∣shire and Leicestershire. It containeth in length 55 miles. In breadth 26 miles. And in Circumference 125 miles. The Air is Temperate, good and wholsom. The Soil is Champion, Rich and fruitful, and it is well peopled, and is the seat of many Noble Families of this Kingdom. The Chief Commodities of this Shire are Corn, Cattel, Sheep and Wood. It is in the Diocess of Peterborough, and hath in it 326 Parishes. Out of it are elected 9 Members which sit in Parliament.
Knights 2 Peterborough 2 Northampton 2 Brackley 2 Higham-Ferrers 1 Its Division is into 20 Hundreds, viz. Nassaburge, Willibrooke, Corby, Polbrook, Navisford, Huxloe, Rothwell, Guylesborrow, Orlington, Fansey, Newbottle Grove. Spelboe, Hamfordshoe, Higham ferryes, Wymersley, Towcester, Warden, Norton, Cleley, Sutton, And in these Hundreds are 13 Market-Towns, viz. Rothwell, Mond. Thrapston, Tuesd. Tonchester, Tues. Kings Cliff, Tu. Wellingborough, Wed. Brackley, Wedn. Daventry, Wed. Kettering, Friday. Northampton, Satur. Peterborough, Sat. Oundle, Sat. Higham Ferrers, Rockingham,
The principal place in this County, is the Town of Northampton, lying in the Latitude of 52 deg. 14 min. It bears from London N. W. and is di∣stant therefrom 54 miles. Thus, From London to Barnet 10. to St. Albans 20. to Dunstable 30. to Stony-stratford 34. to Nor∣thampton 54. But by more accurate admeasure∣ment upon the Road, it is found to be 65 miles. This Town is seated at the meeting and con∣fluence of two Rivers, and (saith Speed) for Cir∣cuit, Beauty and Building, may be ranked with most of the Cities of this Land. It hath former∣ly been built all of Stone, and walled about with a high and strong Wall. This Town is yearly Governed by a Mayor, two Bailiffs, 12 Magistrates, a Recorder, a Town-Clerk, a Common Council of 48 Burgesses, with 5 Sergeants to execute business. The Arms of this Town of Northampton are Gules, a Watch-Tower on a Hill Proper, sup∣ported by 2 Lions Rampant Or. The Names of the Earls of Northampton since the Norman Conquest. — Siward, E. of Northampton. Simon Scutlis, E. of Northampton. William Bohun, E. of Northampton. Humphrey Bohun, E. of Northamp. Thomas Woodstock, E. of Northamp. Humphrey Stafford, E. of Northamp. William Parr, M. Henry Haward, E. of Northamp. Will. Compton, E. of N.
Things Remarkable in this County. Upon the 26th of July 1469. at Edgcot in this County upon Danes Moor a bloody Battel was fought by the Lords of the North, their Cap∣tains being Sir John Comers and Robin of Risdale, against K. Edward the 4th. William Herbert E. of Pembrook was the King's General, who toge∣ther with his Brother Richard, and Richard Wood∣vill, Lord Rivers Brother to the Queen, with his Son, were all four there taken, with other 10 Gentlemen, and all of them carried to Banbury and there Beheaded. There were also 5000 of their men slain, the greatest part whereof were Welsh men.—After this Victory Robin of Risdale hasted to the King's Mannor House at Grafton, and there surprized Earl Rivers the Queens Fa∣ther, and his Son John, and had them Beheaded at Northampton. The Town of Northampton hath three times felt the smart of Civil Dissention. The first was in Anno 1106. by Robert, William and Henry, Brethren and Sons to the Conqueror, who spoiled it and all the Countrey adjoyning. The second was Anno 1263. by K. Henry the 3d. who surprized it against his Rebellious Barons, and broke down the Walls thereof. The third was Anno 1459. in which Town was taken K. Henry the 6th, by the Earls of Warwick and March, supporters of the Title of York, wherein were slain Humphrey Stafford D. of Buckingham, John Talbot E. of Shrewsbury, and the Lords Beamount and Egremount, with many more, and the King was by the Lords conveyed to London.
From some Ascents in this County may be seen at one view 30 Parish-Churches, and many more Windmils. By Collyweston in this County, Slate Stones are digged. The River Nun runs by the South side of Peter∣borough, in the middle of which (saith William of Swaffham) is a Gulf so deep, and cold withal, that in Summer time no Swimmer is able to Dive to the bottom of it, and yet it is never fro∣zen in Winter; for there is a Spring in it, whence the Water always rises and bubleth up, which keeps it from freezing.
Northumber∣land. THis County is bounded on the East by the German Ocean. On the West by Cumber∣land. On the South by the Bishoprick of Dur∣ham. And on the North by Scotland. It con∣taineth in length 60 miles. In breadth 40 miles. And in Circumference 145 miles. The Temperature of the Air of this Shire of it self is sharp and piercing; but the German Ocean doth somewhat abate the edge of this sharpness, and helps to dissolve the Snow and Ice. The Soil is barren, having neither fertility of Ground for Corn or Cattel, it being naturally rough, and hard to be manured. But those parts by the Sea side, and by the River Tyne, good Husbanding of it hath made it reasonable fertile. The principal Commodities are Sea-Coals, Fish and Fowl.
It is in the Diocess of Durham, and hath in it 460 Parishes. Out of it are elected 8 Parliament Men. Knights 2 New-Castle upon Tyne 2 Morpeth 2 Berwick upon Tweed 2 Its Division is not into Hundreds, but into 6 Wards. In the County are 6 Market-Towns, viz. 1 New-Castle, Tues. and Sat. 2 Hexam, Tues. 3 Morpeth, Wednes. 4 Weller, Thurs. 5 Alnewick, Satur. 6 Barwick, Sat. The Principal Town in this County is New-Castle, lying in the Latitude of 55 deg. 3 min. It bears from London N. by W. And is distant therefrom 212 miles. Thus, From London to Waltham-Cross 12 miles. to Ware 20. to Royston 33. to Huntington 48. to Stamford 69. to Grantham 85. to Newark 95. to Tuxford 105. to Doncaster 123. to Ferrybridge 134. to Tadcaster 142. to York 150. to Burrough-bridge 163. to Northallerton 176. to Darlington 186. to Dur∣ham 200. to New-Castle 212. But being accu∣rately measured upon the Road, the distance is found to be 276.
It hath in it 4 Churches, and a strong VVall about it, in which there are eight Gates. It is much ennobled by the Haven which the River Tyne maketh, being of that depth, that it beareth Ships of great burthen, and is able to defend them against Storms and Tempests. Its Government is by a Maior, to whom K. Ri∣chard the 2d granted a Sword to be carried before. And Henry the 6th made it a County, consisting of a Corporation within it self. The Arms of the Town is Gules, 3 Castles Or. In this County is also the Town of Barwick, the utmost Northerly Town in England, and the strongest Hold in all Brittanie. The Names of the Earls and Dukes of Northumberland since the Norman Con∣quest. VValdeof, Earl of Northumberland. Robert Mowbrey, E. of Northumberland. Henry, Son to David K. of Scotland. Hugh Pudsey, Bishop of Durham. John Nevill, E. of Northumberland. Henry Percy, E. of Northumberland. John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland. Tho. Percy, E. of Northumberland. George Fits Roy, E. of Northumber. 3d Son to the Dutchess of Cleveland.
Things Remarkable in this County. It may seem that the Inhabitants are long liv'd, for one Mr. Macklane Parson of Lesbury in this County (who died about the year 1658.) did in the year 1656. renew his youth; so, that (though 40 years before he could not read without Specta∣cles, being 116 years of age) he could then read the smallest Print without them. His hair which before he had lost, came again as a Childes. There are Hills hard by North Tyne, so boggy and standing with Water on the top, that no Horseman is able to ride over them; and yet (which is to be wondered at) there be many great heaps of Stones (called by the Inhabitants Lews) which is thought were laid up in old time in remembrance of some Victory or, some that were slain there. By Bywell Castle is great store of Salmons. Many Memorable Antiquities are found in this County, as Coyns, Inscriptions, pieces of broken Altars. Russy-gap in this County, is a place infamous for Robbing and Thieving. In the year 1215. the Inhabitants of Morpeth in this County, set their own Town on Fire, in spite they bare to King John, for that he and his Rutars had over-run these Counties.
Nottingham-Shire. IT is bounded on the East by Lincolnshire. On the West by Derbyshire and Yorkshire. On the South by Leicestershire. And on the North by Yorkshire. It containeth in length 40 miles. In breadth 24. And in Circumference 110 miles. It hath a delectable healthy and sweet Air. The Soil is Rich, being part sandy and part Clayie, and for Corn and Grass so fruitful, that it may parallel any other of its bigness in the whole Kingdom; it yielding beside, abundance of Wood, Water and Coals. The chief Commodities are, Pit-Coals, Wood, Corn, Fish, Fowl and Liquorice. It is in the Diocess of York, and hath in it 168 Parish-Churches. Out of it are elected 8 Members to sit in Par∣liament.
Knights 2 Nottingham 2 Estretford 2 Newark 2 Its Division is into 8 Hundreds, viz. Bassetlaw, Worthelay, Southclay, Newark, Broxton, Thurgarton, Bingham, Bushcliffe. And in these 8 Hundreds are 9 Market-Towns, viz. Tuxford, Monday. Newark, Wednes. VVorksop, Wedn. Bingham, Thursday. Mansfield, Th. Blyth, Th. Southwell, Saturday. Redford, Sat. Nottingham, W. F.S. The principal Town is Nottingham, lying in the Latitude of 52 deg. 50 min. It bears from London N. W. And is distant therefrom 96 miles. Thus, From London to Newark 95 miles, as in the Road to New-Castle in Northumberland. Thence to Nottingham 3 miles, in all 98. But being mea∣sured upon the Road, it is distant from London 122 miles. This Town of Nottingham is most pleasantly seated upon a Hill, in it are many fair Buildings and large Streets, which may compare with most Cities, and the Market-place transcendeth any in any County.
The Town is Governed by a Mayor and 6 Al∣dermen clad in Scarlet, 2 Sheriffs, 2 Town-Clerks, and 6 Sergeants with Maces their Attendants. The Arms of the Town of Nottingham is, Ar∣gent, two Ragged Staves in Cross Vert, between three Coronets, two in Chief, and one in Base Or; the Ragged Staff in Pale passing through the Co∣ronet in Base. The Names of the Earls of Nottingham since the first Constitution. Robert Ferrers. John Mowbray. Rich. D. of York. VVill. Barkley. Hen. Fitz Roy. Charles Howard. Things remarkable in this County. Upon the 16th of June, Anno 1487. being the third year of Henry the 7th. At Stoke, near unto Newark in this County; a great Battel was fought against K. Henry the 7th, by the Erectors of Lam∣bert (a counterfeit Warwick) wherein, John de la Pole, E. of Lincoln, Francis L. Lovell, Tho. Gara∣dyne Chancellor of Ireland, Martin Swart, and Sir Tho. Broughton; with 4000 of their naked Irish lost their Lives. Lambert was there taken, and made a Turn-Spit in the King's Kitchen, and afterwards one of his Faulconers. In this County grows a Stone softer than Ala∣baster, which being burnt, makes a Plaister harder than that of Paris: With this they floor upper
Rooms, and when well laid, and throughly dried, is of great durance. At Worksop, grows the best Liquorice in all the Northern parts. In Nottingham Town, there are (in good Hou∣ses) many lower Rooms, which, the Door-Cases, Fire-Hearths, Stairs, Windows, Window-Jams and Soils, have all been hewed out of the solid Rock.
Oxfordshire. THis Shire is bounded by Buckinghamshire on the East. By Gloucestershire on the West. By Barkshire on the South. And by Warwickshire and Northamptonshire on the North. It containeth in length 41 miles. In breadth 29 miles. And in Circumference 144 miles. The Air is mild, temperate and delicate. The Soil fertile, pleasant and bounteous. The hilly parts being loaded with Wood and Cattel, and the Valleys with Corn and Pasturage. The chief Commodities of this County are Corn, Cattel, Fruit, Wood and Malt. It is in the Diocess of Oxford. And in it is contained 280 Parishes. Cut of it are elected 9 Members which sit in Parliament.
Knights 2 University of Ox∣ford 2 City of Oxford 2 New-VVoodstock 2 Banbury 2 Its Division is into 14 Hundreds, viz. Banbury, Bloxham, Chadlington, VVootton, Floughley, Bullington, Bampton, Tame, Lewknor, Pirton, Dorchester, Ewelme, Langtree, Binfield. And in these Hundreds are 15 Market-Towns, viz. VVoodstock, Tues. Tame, Tues. Bampton, Wed. Chippingnorton, Wed. Witney, Thurs. Banbury, Thurs. Henley, Thurs. Bunchester, Friday. Burford, Sat. Deddington, Sat. Watlington, Sat. Bistow,— Fairford,— Coleford,— Oxford, Wed. & Sat.
The principal place in this Shire, is the famous City and University of Oxford, from whence the Shire taketh its name. This City lyeth in the Latitude of 51 deg. 46 min. It bears from London W. N. W. And is distant there∣from 47 miles. Thus, From London to Uxbridge 15. to Beckonsfield 22. to High Wickham 27. to Stoken Church 32. to Wheatly Bridge 41. to Oxford 47. But by exact admeasurement upon the Road, the distance is found to be almost 56 miles. The Arms of Oxford is Bendy wavie Argent and Azure, An Oxe Gules, passing over a Ford proper.
The University consisteth of these Col∣ledges and Halls, viz. Colledges. Founded by Anno. University. King Alfrid. 872 Beliol. Jo. Belial Kt. & Dev. his Wife. 1263 Merton. Walter de Merton Clerk. 1267 Exeter. Walter Stapleton, E. of Excester. 1316 Oriel. K. Edward the II. 1324 Queens. Robert Eaglesfield, Clerk. 1340 New Colledge. Will. of Wickham, B. of Winton. 1379 Lincoln. Richard Fleming, B. of London. 1427 All Souls. Hen. Chichley, A.B. of Canterbury. 1438 Magdalen. Will. of Wainflet, B. of Winton. 1458 Brasen Nose. W. Smith, B. of Lincoln, and Sir Richard Sutton, Knight. 1511 Corpus Christi. Richard Fox, B. of Winton. 1516 Christ-Church. K. Henry the VIII. 1546 Trinity. Sir Thomas Pope. 1554 St. Johns. Sir Thomas White. 1555 Jesus. Dr. Hugh Price. 1571 Wadham. Nich. Wadham, Doroth. his Wife. 1612 Pembrook. Thomas Tesdale, Esq; and Ri. Whitwich, Cler. 1624 Halls in Oxford. Alba Hall. Hart Hall. S. Mary Hall. Edmund Hall. Colcester Hall. Magdalen Hall. New-Inn Hall.
The Earls of Oxford since the first Constitution. Vere, E. of Oxford. Hen. Stuart, D. of Gloucester, E. of Oxford. Things Remarkable in this County. The City of Oxford is a very healthful place, which Mr. Cambden thinks is, because it is de∣fended from the South and West winds, but lies open to the North East and East Winds. On the Descent of Hoddenton Hill near Oxford, rises a Spring which runs down towards Kings Mill, lying over against Magdalen Colledge. This Spring hath a petrifying quality, and will in some short time, if a stick be laid in it, either turn it into Stone, or have a strong crust about it. Near unto Enisham, in the South of this Shire, is a Monument of huge Stones set round in Com∣pass, in manner of those of Stonehinge, which (as some saith) were Metamorphosed from Men. But more probable, they were there erected upon some great Victory obtained by Rollo the Dane. This Shire is famous, for that in it were born, for K. Edward the Confessor was born in Islip. Edward the Black Prince in Woodstock. The Warlike Caw de Lyon, in Oxford. all in this County.
In the year 1552. at Middleton 7 miles from Oxford, a Woman brought forth a Child which had two perfect Bodies from the Navel upwards, which were so conjoyned together at the Navel, that when they were laid out at length, if one Head and Body were laid East, the other would be West, or in any other position: And the Legs of both the Bodies were joyned to∣gether in the midst. They were female Chil∣dren, and lived 18 days, and they had but one issue for the Excrement of them both.
Rutlandshire. THe least Shire in England. It is bounded on the East by Lincolnshire. On the West by Leicestershire. On the South by Nottingham∣shire. And on the North by Leicestershire. It containeth in length 14 miles. In breadth 12 miles. And in Circumference 42 miles. The Air is Temperate, wholsom, and not sub∣ject to Foggs. The Soil is Rich, but of a Reddish colour; in∣somuch that it changeth the colour of the Wool of the Sheep that feed upon it into a reddish colour. The chief Commodities of this County are Corn, Cattel, Wool and Wood. It is in the Diocess of Peterborough. And hath in it 48 Parishes. Out of it are elected only 2 Parliament Men. Knights 2
Its Division is into Five Hundreds, viz. Allstoe, East Hundred. Martinsley, Wrange Dye, Oukhamsook. And in these Hundreds are 2 Market-Towns, viz. Ʋppingham, Wedn. Okenham, Saturday. The Principal Town in this Shire is Oak∣ham, lying in the Latitude of 52 deg. 45 min. It bears from London N. N. W. And is distant therefrom 72 miles. Thus, From London to Barnet 10 miles. to St. Albans 20. to Luton 28. to Bedford 40. to Wellingbury 52. to Kettering 57. to Uppingham 69. to Oak∣ham 74. Oakham is a fair Market-Town, and a Hor∣shooe is the Badge thereof, taken from a Royalty enjoyed by the Baron of the Lordship, which is this. If any Noble by Birth come within the Precinct of the same Lordship, he shall forfeit as a Homage, a Shooe from the Horse whereon he rideth, unless he redeem it by Mo∣ney. In testimony whereof, there are many Horshooes nailed upon the Shire-Hall Door, and many of them of our English Nobilities, whose names are stamped upon them, as Hen. Hastings, &c. And in the Shire-Hall, over the seat of the Judg, is a Horshooe of Iron curiously wrought, con∣taining 5 foot and an half in length, and the breadth thereof proportionable.
This Shire being small, much Variety or many Curiosities cannot be expected to be found in it. But, Adjoyning to this County is the Town of Stam∣ford an ancient University, long before Oxford; the Arms whereof is, Party per Pale Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant Or. And Checkey Or and Azure.
Shropshire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Stafford∣shire. On the West by Denbyshire and Mont∣gomeryshire. On the South by Worcestershire and Herefordshire. And on the North by Cheshire. It containeth in length 38 miles. In breadth 30 miles. And in Circumference 135 miles. The Air of this Shire is Wholsom, Delectable, and Good, affording health to the Inhabitants in all the Seasons of the year. The Soil is rich, and it standeth upon a reddish Clay, the Rivers make fruitful the Land, and Severn supplies them with store of fresh Fish. The chief Commodities this Countrey affords, are Cloath, Wheat, Barley, Wood, Cattel, Iron and Pit-Coal. It is in the Diocess of Hereford and Lichfield, and hath in it 170 Parishes. Out of it are elected 12 Members to sit in Parliament.
Knights 2 Salop 2 Bruges alias Bridgnorth. 2 Ludlow 2 Great Wenlock 2 Bishops Castle 2 Its Division is into 15 Hundreds, viz. Bradford, Pimhill, Bradford, Brymstery, Wenlock, Condover, Oswestrey, Forde, Chirbury, Clunne, Purslowe, Munslowe, Overs, Stottesden, Shrewsbury. And in these Hundreds are 15 Market-Towns, viz. Oswestree, Mon. Great Wenlock, Mon. Ludlow, Mon. Elsmeere, Tu. Shipton, Tu. Braiton, Wed. Stretton, Thu. Wem, Th. Wellington, Th. Bishops Castle, Fri. Whitchurch, Fri. Bridgenorth, Sat. Newport, Sat. Clebury,— Shrewsbury, W. Th. Sat. The chief Town is Shrewsbury, lying in the Latitude of 52 deg. 47 min. It bears from Lon∣don
N. W. by W. And is distant therefrom 124 Miles. Thus, From London to Barnet 10. to St. Albans 20. to Dunstable 30. to Stony Stratford 44. to Toceter 50. to Daventry 60. to Coventry 74. to Meriden 78. to Bermingham 88. to Dudley 96. to Bridge∣north 108. to menlock 114. to Shrewsbury 124. But by admeasurement upon the Road it is found to be distant from London 155 miles. This Town of Shrewsbury may be compared with most Cities, and doth exceed many for fair Buildings, large Streets, and those many. The Inhabitants Rich, the principal Trade being in Staple Commodities, as Cloath, Frieze, &c. The Walls hereof are strong, and of a large com∣pass, and by one side of it runneth the River Severn; through the Wall are three entrances into the Town, at the East and West over two fair Stone Bridges, with Towers, Gates and Bars: the third entrance is at the North, over which is a large Castle. The Town is annually Governed by 2 Bailiffs, elected out of 24 Burgesses, a Recorder, Town-Clerk and Chamberlain, and 3 Sergeants at Mace. The Arms of the Town of Shrewsbury, is Azure, 3 Leopards heads Or. Things Remarkable in this County. That the Air of this County is healthful (as is aforesaid, was versified in old Tho. Parre of Alder∣bury, who was 152 years old, who about two years before he died, was brought up to London to K. Charles the First, and dyed there in Anno 1635.
At Wenlock in the time of Richard the Second, was found a rich Mine of Copper. At itchford in this Shire, is a Well or Spring in a private man's Yard, wherein floweth a thick skum of liquid Bitumen, which being cleared and taken off one day, will have the like upon it again on the morrow. Upon that plot of Ground where the ancient City Wroxcester lay, the Earth is more blackish than any elsewhere in the whole County, and bears excellent good Barley. In the third year of Q. Elizabeth, the Town of Oswestre in this County 200 Houses in the space of two hours were consumed with Fire. Dr. Fuller in his History of The Worthies of England, quoteth a Proverb which is attributed to the Women of this County, namely this: He that Marries a Wife in Shropshire, must carry her into Staffordshire, or live in Cumberland. The gingle of which Proverb, and the reflexion of it upon the Women, saying, That this County of Shropshire affordeth as good Housewifes, and as meek Women as any County in England of the like magnitude.
Somerset-Shire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Wilt∣shire. On the West by Devonshire. On the South by Dorsetshire. And on the North by Gloucestershire. It containeth in length 62 miles. In breadth 32 miles. And in Circumference 204 miles. The Temperature of the Air is mild, pleasing and delightful, especially in the Summer Season. The Soil is Wet, Mirey and Moorish; but as it is foul, so it is fruitful, and on every side gar∣nished with delightful Meadows, and beautified with many large Mansion-Houses, and the Seven Sea beating upon it on the North side. The chief Commodities of this County, are Corn, Cattel, Lead, and Bristol Stones. It is in the Diocess of Bath and Wells, and in it are contained 385 Parishes.
Out of it are elected 18 Members to sit in Parliament. Knights 2 Bristol 2 Bath 2 Wells 2 Taunton 2 Bridgewater 2 Minehead 2 Ilchester 2 Milborn Port 2 Its Division is into 42 Hundreds, viz. Chewe, Chewton, Bathforme, Keynsham, Bruton, Cattesayshe, Norton-ferry, Frome, Wellow, Killmersdon, Glaston, Horethorne, Wells and Melford, Whitston, North Curry, Milverton, Carhampton, Wyllyton and Free-Mannor, Whitleigh, Canington, North Petherton, Anderfield, Huntspill & Puriton, Abdicke, Bulston, Kingsbury, S. Petherton, Crewkerne, Sommerton, Pitney, Stone, Tintin hull, Houndsborough, Barwick, Coker, Martock, Winterstoake,
Portbury, Brempstone, Brent, Hartcliffe and Bed∣minster. And in these Hundreds are 30 Market-Towns, viz. Somerton, Mond. Chard, Mond. Glassenburrough, Tu. N. Curry, Tu & Sat. Wivescomb, Tu. Pensford, Tu. Wrinton, Tu. North Petherton, Tu. Wincaunion, W. Ilchester, W. Taunton, W. and S. Bristol, W. and Sat. Bath, W. and S. Wells W. and S. Frowmselwood, Wed. Axebridge, Th. South Petherton, Th. Wellington, Th. Bridgewater, Th. Canesham, Th. Shepton Mallet, Fr. Evill, Fr. Dunster, Fr. Wruton, Sa. Langport, S. Crokehorn, S. Ilmister, S. Wattchet, S. Dalverton, S. Phillips Norton,— This County is famous for that in it are three Cities, viz. Bath, Wells, and Bristol. Bath taketh its name from the Wells or Springs which there break forth. Bath taketh its name from the Hot Baths there. But the principal City (though not so ancient as the other two) is Bristol.
It lies in the Latitude of 51 deg. 32 min. It bears from London West, and is distant therefrom 94 miles. Thus, From London to New Brainford 8 miles. to Maidenhead 22. to Reading 32. to Newberry 47. to Marlborough 62. to Chipenham 77. to Marsh∣field 84. to Bristol 94. But by more accurate admeasurement upon the Road, the distance from London is found to be 115 Miles. This City is fair and well seated, and for beauty may compare with any City in England of the bigness, and may well deserve the old Saxon name Bright-stall, whose pleasantness is much augmented by reason of the River Avon runs through the middle of it, and the Severn running under all the Streets, cleanses the City from all manner of filth. It is not wholly seated in this County, but one part of it is in Gloucestershire. It is Governed both by a Bishop, and a Maior, a competent number of Aldermen and other Offi∣cers for the management of Civil affairs. The Arms of the City is, Gules, a Castle upon a Hill by the Seaside, and a helm of a Ship under Sail passing by, all proper. The Earls and Dukes of Somerset and Bath since the first Constitution. Rheonald de Mohum, Lord of Dunster, and E of Somerset. John Beauford, Duke of Somerset. Henry fits Roy, Duke of Somerset. Edward Somer, Duke of Somerset.
Phllip Chamdew, Earl of Bath. John Boucheir, Lord Fitz Warren, Earl of Bath. Henry Dawbney,— John Greenvile, Earl of Bath. Things Remarkable in this County. Camalet, a very steep Hill hard to be ascended, on the top whereof are seen the Lineaments of a large and ancient Castle; which is said to have been the Palace of King Arthur. The Church-yard of Avelena or Glassenborough, where K. Arthur's Sepulchre was searched for by Order of K. Henry the 2d. and was there found under a Stone with an Inscription upon it, almost 9 foot under ground. The principal Rarity of this County is the Baths, which are in number four, viz. The Kings Bath. The Queens Bath. The Cross Bath. And the Hot Bath. The King's Bath lies in the middle of the City, being about 60 foot Square, and it hath about the middle of it, many hot Springs rising, whence it hath the greater heat. The Queens Bath hath no Spring in it, but only receives the Water from the King's Bath (from which it is only divided by a Wall) for which reason it is more Tempe∣rate than the Kings. In these 2 Baths there is a Pump to Pump Water upon the Diseased, where strong Embrocations are required. The Cro Bath and the Hot Bath, are in the West part of
the City. The Cross Bath is Triangular, and about 25 foot long, and as broad at one end; It hath not so many Springs as the King's Bath and the Hot Bath have, and therefore is of a more gentle heat. About 100 foot from the Cross Bath is the Hot Bath, so called, because formerly (when it was not so large as now it is) it was much hotter than the rest. Near the River Frome are Pit-Coals digged, with which Smiths use to soften Iron. By the Sea-side (not far from Axbridge) about the year 1625. a parcel of Land swelled up like a Hill, and of a sudden clave asunder, and fell down again into the Earth, and in the place of it re∣mains a great Pool. At Kingsham in the Stone-Quarries there, are found Stones in the form of Serpents. At Bristol it Flows 13 or 14 foot in height every Tide, an extraordinary height in com∣parison of what it flows in other parts of the English Shore. Near unto Bristol, are those famous Rocks known by the name of St. Vincent's Rocks, very ragged, and hanging over the River Avon: where also is a Well of warm Water, very pleasing to the taste, whose Water is much commended for the cure of Ulcers, &c. it being taken inwardly, and applied outwardly, it cures Old Sores with very good success. On the upper side of these Rocks of St. Vincent, are digged out Pelna'd Stones, commonly called Bristol Stones, or Diamonds, some 4 cornered, others 6 cornered, which (saith Speed) are so bright of colour, as they may equa∣lize Indian Diamonds, but not so hard. Westward of St. Vincent's Rock, is another Rock, in which are found Diamonds inclosed in a
kind of reddish Flint in a wonderful manner, and the Earth thereabouts is read also. At Chedder near Axbridge, is a Spring so plen∣tiful of Water presently, that it drives 12 Mills within a quarter of a mile of the head of it. There was a Walnut Tree (saith Cambden) in Glastenbury Church-yard, that did never put out Leaf till St. Barnabas Day, and upon that very day it was very rank and full of Leaves. Near unto Glastenbury in Wivall Park was a Hawthorn that upon Christmas-Day sprouted forth as if it were in May. There is a Church in Bristol called the Temple, the Tower whereof shakes to and fro when the Bells ring, so that it hath divided it self from the rest of the Building from the top to the bot∣tom, the breadth of 3 fingers, and openeth and shutteth whensoever the Bell is rung. Mendip Hills in this Shire, afford great abun∣dance of Lead. In the 22 year of Q. Elizabeth, a strange Apparition appeared in this County, 60 Per∣sonages all cloathed in Black (a furlong in di∣stance from those that beheld them) and after their appearing, and a little while tarrying, they vanished away. But immediately another strange company, in like manner, colour and number, appeared in the same place; and they encountred one another, and so vanished away. And the third time appeared that num∣ber again all in bright Armour, and encoun∣tred one another, and so vanished away. Affidavit was made of the truth of this, by 4 honest men that saw it to be true, before Sir George Norton.
In the year 1607. a mighty West Wind brought in the River Severn with such violence, that in some places in Somersetshire and Glou∣cestershire, the Waters grew higher than the tops of the Houses, and 80 persons in Somer∣setshire were drowned, and damages done to the value of 26 thousand pounds.
Staffordshire. THis County is bounded on the East by Derby∣shire and Warwickshire. On the West by Shropshire and Cheshire. On the South by Wor∣cestershire. And on the North by Cheshire. It containeth in length 45 miles. In breadth 28 miles. And in Circumference 142 miles. The Air of this Shire is very healthful, yet in the North parts and Moorlands it is very sharp, the Wind blowing sharp, and the Snow lying long. The Soil on the South parts is very rich and fruitful, but the North more barren in respect of the Mines. The Meadows are very fruitful, being moistned with Springs and Rivers which run by them; so that they be green in the midst of Win∣ter; and Woods it wanteth none, witness the Cank. The chief Commodities are Copper, Lead, Iron, Alabaster, and Pit-Coals. It is in the Diocess of Litchfield and Coventry, and hath in it 130 Parishes. Out of it are elected 10 Parliament Men.
Knights 2 Litchfield 2 Stafford 2 New-Castle under-Line 2 Tamworth 2 Its Division is into 5 Hundreds, viz. Pyrehill, Totmonslow, Caddlestone, Seisdon, Offelwe. And in these Hundreds are 18 Market-Towns, viz. New-Castle under-Line Monday. Stow, Tu. Betles, Tu. Pagets Browley, Tu. Tutbury, Tu. Walsall, Tu. Ridgley, Tu. Pankridge, Tu. Brewood, Tu. Littlefield, Tu. & Fr. Leeke, Wed. Wolverhampton, W. Ʋtoxiter, W. Chickly, Th. Burton on Trent, Th. Ecleshall, Friday. Stafford, Sat. Tamworth.— The principal City is Lichfield, lying in the Latitude of 52 deg. 50 min. Its bears from London N. W. and is distant therefrom 94 miles. Thus, From London to Barnet 10 miles. to St. Albans 20. to Dunstable 30. to Stony-stratford 44. to To∣ceter 50. to Daventry 60. to Coventry 74. to Coles∣hill
82. to Lichfield 94. But by a more accurate admeasurement upon the Road, it is found to be distant from London 118 miles. This City of Lichfield was known by Beda by the name of Lucedfeld, which Rosse doth inter∣pret to be The Field of Dead Bodies, for the num∣ber of Saints under the rage of Dioclesian there slain; and for this cause it may be that the City bears for her Arms in an Escutcheon, a Landskip, with divers Martyrs in several manners Massa∣cred. But, The Shire-Town is Stafford, which is yearly Governed under 2 Bailiffs (annually elected out of 21 Assistants, called the Common-Council) a Recorder, a Town-Clerk, and 2 Serjeants at Mace. The Arms of this Town is, Or, on a Cheveron Gules, a True-lovers knot of the first. Ralph Stafford, Earl of Stafford. William Howard, Viscount Stafford. Things Remarkable in this County. Upon the 23d of September, Anno 1459. being the 38th year of K. Henry the 6th. A bloody Battel was fought upon Blore-heath in this County, by Richard E. of Salisbury in the quarrel of York, against James Lord Audley, General for K. Henry the 6th. in which the Lord James was slain, with many of the Gentry of Cheshire; who in great fa∣vour had received the Young Prince's Livery of Swans, and in his Right manfully fought and lost
their lives; namely, Sir Hugh Venibles, Sir Tho∣mas Dutton, Sir Richard Molineux, Sir William Trowthek, Sir John Leigh, Sir John Donn, and Sir John Edgerton, Knights; and of common Sol∣diers there were slain 2400. Also the two Sons of the E. of Salisbury were taken Prisoners and sent to Chester. In Pensneth Castle (saith Cambden) is a Coal-Pit, which was set on fire by a Candle through the negligence of a Digger, the smoak of it is commonly seen, and sometimes the Flame. In this Shire they manure their Land with Lime. The People about Wotton observe, that when the VVind sits West, it always produceth Rain: But the East and South Wind here bring fair weather, unless the Wind turn from the West into the South. If the River Dove overflow its Banks, and run into the adjacent Meadows in April, it makes them extream fruitful. This River uses to rise extreamly within 12 hours space, but it will in 12 hours return again within its Banks. But the River Trent, being once up, and over its Banks, flows over the fields 4 or 5 days together, ere the superfluous Water can get away. The little River Hans, runs under ground for three miles together.
Mr. Cambden saith, that Necham speaks of a Lake in this County (but says not where) that foreshews things to come by its Roaring: and no wild Beast will enter into it. Gervase of Tilbury tells of a Lake called Mahall, near Magdalen in this Shire, that Hunters, when they and their Horses are tired do drink of (though it be in the hottest weather) they both become presently as fresh, as if they had not run at all.
Suffolk. IS bounded on the East by the German Ocean. On the VVest by Cambridgshire. On the South by Essex. And on the North by Norfolk. It containeth in length 48 miles. In breadth 24 miles. And in Circumference 156 miles. The Temperature of the Air is exceeding good, and is by some Physicians thought to be the best in England, especially in the parts about Bury. The Soil consists of Clay, and rich Marle. The chief Commodities are Butter, Cheese, Lin∣nen and Woollen Cloath. It is in the Diocess of Norwich, and hath in it 575 Parishes. Out of it are Elected 16 Members to sit in Parliament. Knights 2 Ipswich 2 Dunwich 2 Orford 2 Aldborough 2 Sudbury 2 Eye 2 St. Edmonds-Bury 2
Its Division is into 22 Hundreds, viz. Lackford, Thingoe, Risbridge, Babergh, Thredwastrye, Blackborn, Stowey, Conford, Bosmere, Sampford, Colneis, Carleford, Thredling, Hartesmere, Floxone, Lones, Milford, Plumesgate, Blithing, Wangford, Mutford, Lothingland. And in these Hundreds are 29 Market-Towns, viz. Orford, Mon. Hadleigh, Mon. Lavenham, Tu. Mendlesham, Tu. Halesworth, Tu. Haverill, Wedn. Bildeston, Wed. Needham, W. Woodbridge, W. Lestoff. W. Bury, Wed. Stow-Market, Th. Tansdale, Th. Saxmundham, Th. Sowley, Th. Bungay, Th. New-market, Th. Ikesworth, Fr. Moldenhall, Fr. Clare, Fri. Neyland, Fr. Debenham, Fr.
Sudbury, Sa. Aye, Sa. Franglingham, S. Aldborough, S. Dunwich, S. Becles, S. Ipswich, W. F. Sa. Newland— The Principal Town is Ipswich, lying in the Latitude of 52 deg. 8 min. It bears from London N. E. and is distant from thence 55 miles. Thus, From London to Rumford 10 miles. to Burnt∣wood 15. to Chelmsford 25. to Keldon 35. to Col∣chester 43. to Ipswich 55. But by more accurate admeasurement on the Road, it is found to be distant from London 68 miles. This Town of Ipswich hath been formerly VValled about by a Rampire of Earth, and is a Town which for Commerce and fair Buildings may deserve the name of a City, and that no infe∣riour one neither; for its Trade, Circuit, and Situation may equalize any part of the Land. This Town is yearly Governed by two Bai∣liffs and Ten Port-men in Scarlet, and 24 Common-Council men in Purple, a Recorder, a Town-Clerk, 5 Sergeants, (whereof one is for the Admiralty) a Beadle and common Cryer all in Blew, with the Towns Arms on their Sleeves, which Arms are, Party per pale Gules, a Lion Rampant Or. And Azure 3 Sterns of Ships Argent.
The Dukes and Earls of Suffolk created since the Conquest. Robert Ʋfford, Earl of Suffolk. William de la Pool, D. of Suffolk. Charles Brandon, D. of Suffolk. Henry Gray, D. of Suffolk. Thomas Howard, E. of Suffolk. The Dukes and Earls of Clare created since the Norman Conquest. Gilbert de Clare, E. of Clare. Lionel, Son to K. Edward the 3d. D. of Clarence. Thomas Lancaster, Duke of Clarence. George, Brother to K. Edward the 4th, D. of Clarence. John Holes, E. of Clare. Things Remarkable in this County. Besides the Principal in this County (viz. Ips∣wich) this Town of St. Edmonds Bury is remar∣kable: For, (1.) In it was erected the first
Christian Church, by Sigebert K. of the East Angles, in which K. Edmond was Buried, and in Memory of him the famousest Monastery in the World erected. 2. For the Beauty and Build∣ings of this Town and Abbey, I shall refer the Reader to the Character which Leyland gives of it: viz. This, The Sun hath not seen a Town more finely seated, or so delicately upon the East ascent of a Hill, with a River running on the East side: Nor a more stately Abbey, either for Revennues or incomparable magnificence, in whose prospect appeareth rather a City than a Monastery; so many Gates for entrance, and many of them Brass; so many Towers; and a most glorious Church, upon which attend 3 others, standing all in the same Church-yard, all of them very fine, and of curious Artifice. Not far from this Town, a great Battel was fought by Robert Bassu, E. of Leicester, against his Soveraign K. Henry the 2d. But Bassu was over∣thrown, by Ri. Lucye, the King's High Justice, Bassu and his Wife taken Prisoners, and many English and Flemings slain. In the 30th year of K. Henry the 2d. near unto Orford, there was taken a Fish in the shape of a Man, which Fish was kept by Barthol. de Glandevile in the Castle at Orford above 6 Months, he spoke not one word, all man∣ner of meats he eat, but delighted chiefly in raw Fish; often-times they brought him to the Church, but he never shewed any sign of adoration; at length (for want of look∣ing to) he stole to the Sea, and was never more seen. At Downham Bridge near unto Ipswich (in the 10th year of Queen Elizabeth) 17 Mon∣strous
Fishes, some of them being 27 foot in length. In the year 1555. a crop of Pease (without sowing or Tillage) grew in the Rocks between Orford and Aldebrough, when by unseasonable weather, a great Dearth of Corn was in the Land; there (in the Month of August) were ga∣thered above 100 Quarters, and in blossoming re∣mained as many more; where Grass never grew, nor Earth ever seen; but 3 yards solid Rock un∣der their Roots.
Surrey. IS bounded on the East by Kent. On the West by Hantshire and Barkshire. On the South by Sussex. And on the North by Middlesex, the Ri∣ver Thames dividing those two Counties. This County containeth in length 40 miles. In breadth 37. And in Circumference 130 miles. The Temperature of the Air is sweet and wholsom. For the Soil (saith Speed) it is better stored for Game than Grain, and the wholsomness of the Air issues from the Sandiness of the Soil: And notwithstanding it is wealthy enough both in Corn and Pasture, especially in the North parts towards the River of Thames. The chief Commodities of this County, are Corn, Box, Fullers Earth, and Walnuts. It is in the Diocess of Winchester, and hath in it 140 Parishes. Out of it are elected 14 Members which sit in Parliament.
Knights 2 Southwark 2 Blechingly 2 Ryegate 2 Guildford 2 Gatton 2 Haslemore 2 Its Division is into 13 Hundreds, viz. Chersey, Woking, Fernham, Godalming, Emley, Kingston, Brixton, Croydon, Tanridge, Reygate, Copthorne, Darking, Black-Heath. And in these Hundreds are 7 Market-Towns, viz. Reygate, Tues. Darking, Thurs. Farnham, Thurs. Croydon, Sat. Kingston, Sat. Gilford, Sat. Ewell.— Besides the Burrough of Southwark, which keeps Market equal with London. The principal Town in this County is Guilford, lying in the Latitude of 51 deg. 13 min. It bears from London S. W. by W. and is distant there∣from 25 miles. Thus, From London to Kingston 10 miles. to Cob∣ham
17. to Guildford 25. But by more accu∣rate admeasurement it is found to be 30 miles from London. This County (saith Speed) is barren indeed of Cities or Towns of great estate, yet is she stored with many Princely Houses; yea, and 5 of His Majesties Palaces, so magnificently Built, that of some she may well say that no Shire hath none such, as is Nonesuch it self. The Dukes and Earls of Surrey since the first Constitution. William Warren created Earl of Surrey by Will. Rufus. William Earl of Eagle, Son to K. Stephen, E. of Surrey. Hamlin, Base Son to Geffery Plantaginet, E. of Surrey. Thomas Mowbray, E. of Surrey, in right of his Wife. Thomas Holland, Duke of Surrey, created by K. Richard the 2d. Thomas Beaufort, E. of Surrey, created by K. Henry the 4th. Thomas Howard, E. of Surrey, created by K. Richard the 3d.
Things Remarkable in this County. At Richmond in this County died Edward the 3d. Conqueror of France. The beautiful Ann, Daughter to Charles the 4th. Emperour and Wife to K. Richard the 2d. The most wise Prince K. Henry the 7th. And the rarest of her Sex Q. Elizabeth. Under Holm Castle, standing upon a Hill of Gritty Stone, is a great Vault of Arched Work. The River Mole runs above a mile under ground, and in the place where it falls into the ground, there groweth abundance of Box naturally. Near unto Nonesuch is a Vein of Potters Earth, much commended, for that it is excellent good for the making of Crucibles for the melting of Gold and other Metals. The rising of a Bourn or stream near Croydon (as the common people hold) presageth Death, as the Plague, or the like; and it hath been ob∣served to fall out so. The VVaters of Ebsham in this County, are very famous, and much frequented for their Medici∣nal Virtues, and purging by Siege. In the year 1389. in the Month of July, K. Ri∣chard the 2d being at his Court at Sheene, there swarmed in his Court such multitude of Flies and Gnats; skirmishing with one another, that in the end they were swept away with Brooms by heaps; and Bushels were filled with them.
Sussex. THis County is bounded on the East by Kent. On the West by Hantshire. On the South by the Brittish Sea. And on the North by Surrey. It containeth in length 53 miles. In breadth 16 miles. And in Circumference 172 miles. The Air is good, but subject to Fogs and Mists arising from the Sea. The Soil is Rich, and yeildeth plenty of all things necessary, but very ill for Travellers in the Winter time, for the Land lying low, the ways are very Mirey; but on the other side of them you have the prospect of Meadows, Pastures, and Corn Fields. The chief Commodities this County affords are Corn, VVood, Iron and Malt. It is in the Diocess of Chichester, and hath in it 312 Parishes. Out of it are elected 20 Parliament Men. Knights 2 Chichester 2 Horsham 2 Midhurst 2 Lewes 2 New-Shoreham 2 Bramber 2 Steyning 2 East-Grimstead 2 Arundel 2
Its Division is into 6 Rapes, and each of them contains a several number of Hundreds, in all 65 Hundreds, viz. Chichester Rape, In which is contained Hundreds 07 Arundale Rape, 05 Bramber Rape, 10 Lewes Rape, 13 Pevensa Rape, 17 Hastings Rape, 13 Hundreds in all 65 And in these Hundreds are 16 Market-Towns, viz. Chichester, Wednes. and Sat. Petworth, Wed. Stevington, Wed. Arundel, Wed. and Satur. Steneinge, Wed. Rhye, Wed. and Sat. Hastings, Wed. and Sat. Midhurst, Th. Bright Helmiston, Th. East Grinstead, Th. Sattell, Th. Coxfield, Friday. Horsham, Sat. Lewes, Sat. Tarringe— Winchelsey, now dis∣used. The Principal place in this County, is the City of Chichester, lying in the Latitude of 50 deg. 48 min. It bears from London S. VV. by S. And is distant therefrom 50 Miles, Thus:
From London to Kingston 10 miles. to Guilford 25. to Godalmin 28. to Lechford Bridge 39. to Chichester 50. But by measure it is found to be distant from London 63 miles. This City is beautiful and large, and well VValled about; This City hath born the Title of an Earldom, whereof those of Arundel were sometimes so stiled. The Arms of this City are Guttee Argent and Sable, On a Chief Engrailed Gules, a Lyon Pas∣sant Guardant Or. The Earls of Sussex and Arundel since the first Constitution. William de Albania, Earl of Chichester and Arundel. John Fitz Allan, Earl of Sussex and A∣rundel. Philip Howard, Earl of Arundel. Robert Radcliffe, Earl of Sussex. Leonard Lord Dacres, Earl of Sussex.
Things Remarkable in this County. Upon the 28th of September 1066. William the Bastard D. of Normandy, making his claim to the Crown of England by Affinity, Adoption and Promise, arrived at a Port in Sussex called Pensey, with 896 Ships furnished for VVar; And on the 14th of October following, near Hastings, Joyned Battel with Harold K. of England; where in the Field valiantly fighting, was there slain by the shot of an Arrow into his Brains; and with him died Gorob and Leofwine his Brethren, and almost 68 Thousand of his Men. The place where this Battel was fought, doth ever since bear the name of Battayl, where the Heptarchy of the Saxons was brought to the last Period. Then were all their Laws altered, their Nobles displaced, and all men disherited, and all seated into the Nor∣mans hands, who made himself Lord of all; and on the day of his Nativity was Crowned King of England in Westminster-Hall. Upon the place where this Battel was fought (namely at Battayl afore∣said) William of Newberry fabulously thus writeth, That if there any small showers of Rain do fall upon this place where so great a Slaughter of English men was made, presently sweateth forth very fresh blood out of the Earth. In this County are many Iron Mines. In this County also is made Glass, but it is nei∣ther good nor clear. This County hath been formerly all a VVood, being part of the great wood Andradswald, which was 120 miles long, and 30 miles broad.
At Selsey in this County are great store of Cockles and Lobsters, and those the best. In the year 1250. The Town of Winchelsey in this County was wholly swallowed up of the Sea. In the 35th year of K. Henry the 8th, the first Cast Pieces of Iron that ever were made in Eng∣land, were made at Bucksted in this County, by Ralph Hage, and Peter Bawde. In the 3d year of Q. Elizabeth, a Man-child was born in Chichester, having Arms and Legs like to an Anatomy, the Breast and Belly mon∣strous big, about the Neck a great Coller of Flesh and Skin, growing like the Ruff of a Shirt. In the 22th year of Q. Elizabeth, in the Town of Walsham in Sussex, a Child of Eleven years old, whose name was Will. Withars, lay in a Trance for the space of 10 days without any sustenance, and at the last, coming to himself, he uttered to the standers by many strange Speeches, inveighing against Pride, Covetousness, coldness of Charity, and other erroneous Sins.
Warwick-Shire. IT is bounded on the East by Leicestershire and Northamptonshire. On the West by Worcester∣shire. On the South by Orfordshire and Gloucester∣shire. And on the North by Staffordshire. It contains in length 40 miles. In breadth 30 miles. And in Circumference 122 miles. This Shire is commended much for the whol∣somness of the Air, especially about the Town of Warwick. The Soil is very Rich, especially the Vale of Red Horse, which hath a Red Earth, and yieldeth great Plenty of Corn. The chief Commodities of this County are, Wood, Wool, Iron and Malt. It is in the Diocesies of Lichfield and Worcester, and in it are 158 Parishes. Out of it are elected 6 Members to sit in Parliament.
Knights 2 Coventry 2 Warwick 2 Tamworth 2 Its Division is into 5 Hundreds, viz. Hemlinglord, Coventry, Knightlow, Barlichway, Kington. And in these Hundreds are 15 Market-Towns, viz. Henley, Monday. Southam, Mon. Sutton Cofield, Mon. Aulcester, Tues. Symeton, Tues. Atherston, Tues. Colshill, W. Stratford, Thur. Bromicham, Th. Coventry, Frid. Warwick, Sat. Shipton, Sat. Rugby, Sat. Nun Eaton, Sat. Tamworth, Sat. The Principal Town in this Shire is Warwick, which lies in the Latitude of 52 deg. 20 min. It bears from London N. W. And is distant there∣from 70 miles. Thus, From London to Coventry But by more accurate admeasurement upon the Road, it is found to be distant from London 88 miles.
This Town of Warwick lyeth upon the North∣west side of Avon, built by Gurgunstus 375 years before the Birth of Christ. The Situation of this place is most pleasant upon a Hill rising from the River, over which is a fair and strong Stone Bridge.— This Town is yearly Governed by a Bailiff, 12 Brethren, 24 Burgesses for Common Council, a Recorder, a Town-Clerk, and one Sergeant their Attendant. The Seal of this Town is, a Castle triple-Towred, having on the dexter side the Sun in its Glory, and on the sinister side a Crescent or half Moon, on the tops of the two fronting Towers of the Castle stand two Watchmen armed, and their Arms extended, with this Inscription upon the Ring of the Seal. SIGILLUM BALLIVI BURGENSIUM WARWICI. Although this be the Shire Town, yet the City of Coventry must not be forgotten, being a City for stately building inferiour to few; and for a Wall about it transcending any other, which Wall (for the ill use they put it to in the Rebel∣lion in the time of our late Soveraign Charles the First, of blessed Memory) was to the shame of their Citizens (most justly) rased to the ground, the ruines thereof only remaining to put them in mind (for the future) of their Allegiance to their Soveraign. These Citizens might have remem∣bred, that formerly for their offences offered to their Lord Leofrike, they had their Priviledges infringed, and themselves oppressed with many heavy Tributes; until Godiva his Lady, pitying their condition (by uncessant importunities) sued for their Peace of the Lord her Husband, which, at length, he granted, upon this Condition; viz.
That she should Ride naked through the face of the City, and that openly at high noon day; which she accordingly did. And stripping her self of all her Garments, looses the tresses of her hair, which on every side so covered her nakedness, that no part of her Body was uncivil to sight; by which means she redeemed their former Priviledges. I do not say but some Magistrates of this City have shewed greater respect to their Soveraigns; for as I have heard, that a Maior of Coventry, riding before Queen Elizabeth (she being in Pro∣gress) to usher her into the City (the weather being hot) his Horse attempted to drink at the Foard, but the Maior checking him several times, the Queen called to him, saying, Mr. Maior, Mr. Maior, Let your Horse Drink. But he modestly replied, May it please your Majesties Horse to Drink first. The City of Coventry is Governed yearly by a Maior and 2 Bailiffs. And the Arms of the City is, Party per Pale Gules and Vert, upon a Hill Proper, An Elephant Passant Argent, with a Castle on his back, Or.
The Earls of Warwick since the first Constitution. Henry of Nuburgh, Earl of Warwick. John Marshall, Earl of Warwick. John de Plesseis, Earl of Warwick. William Malduit, Earl of Warwick. Will. Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick. John Holland, Earl of Warwick. Richard Nevill, Earl of Warwick. George, D. of Clarend. Earl of Warwick. John Dudly, Earl of Warwick. Robert Rich, Earl of Warwick. Things Remarkable in this Shire. In the year 1469. At Wolney in this County, K. Edward the 4th gathering his Forces together to recover his former Loss, was suddenly surpri∣zed and taken Prisoner, by his Brother George D. of Clarence, and Richard the Stout E. of War∣wick, and thence conveyed to Middleham Castle in Yorkshire, whence he suddenly escaped and came to London. At Gofford Gate in the East part of Coventry, hangs the Shield bone of a Wild Boar, far bigger than the greatest Oxe bone (it is very likely to be an Elephants) with whose Snout (as the tale goes) the great Pit called Swainswell, was turned up. At Shugbury are found such Stones as are made mention of in Gloucestershire, called Astroites, or Star-Stones.
At Lemington, (a great distance from the Sea) a Salt Spring ariseth. At Menham-Regis are three Fountains, which it should seem are streamed through a Vein of Allum. The Water looks and tastes like Milk. It procures Urine abundantly. It is very Soveraign against the Stone; And good to cure Green Wounds, Ulcers and Impostumes Being drank with Salt it loosens the Body; but with Sugar it maketh it Costive. It turneth Wood into Stone (saith Speed) and (saith my Author) I my self saw some sticks that were fallen into it, some part of them Ash, and the other part Stone.
Westmore∣land. THis County is bounded on the East by York∣shire, and the Bishoprick of Durham. On the West by Cumberland. On the South by Lan∣cashire. And on the North by Cumberland. It containeth in length 38 miles. In breadth 33 miles. And in Circumference 112 miles. The Air of this County is sharp and piercing, and not subject to gross Foggs and Vapours, whereby the people are free from strange and in∣fectious Diseases, and are very healthful, and live generally to great Ages. The Soil is Moorish and Barren for the most part; but the Southern part is the most fruitful. The Principal Commodity this County af∣fordeth, is Cloath. It is in the Diocesses of Chester and Carlisle, and in it are 26 Parishes.
Out of it are elected 4 Members to sit in Par∣liament. Knights 2 Appleby 2 Its Division is into 4 Wards, and in them 8 Market-Towns, viz. Burton, Tues. Ambleside, Wed. Burgh, Wed. Orton, Wed. Kerby Laundale, Th. Kerby Stephens, Fri. Kendall, Sat. Appleby, Sat. Fardondike,— The principal Town in this County is Kendall, lying in the Latitude of 54 deg 24 min. It bears from London N. W. by N. And is distant there∣from 201 miles. Thus, From London to Barnet 10 miles. to St. Albans 20. to Dunstable 30. to Stony Stratford 44. to Daventry 60. to Coventry 74. to Coleshill 82. to Lichfield 94. Rugeley 99. to Stone 111. to New-Castle 116. to Warrington 136. to Wiggan 148. to Preston 162. to Garstang 172. to Lancaster 182. to Kendall 201. But by exact admeasure∣ment upon the Road, the distance is found to be 246 Miles. This Town standeth on the Bank of the River Can, and is of great Trade and resort, and the Inhabitants are very industrious for making of Cloath, and have great Vent and Traffick for the same; for their Woollen Cloaths are vended through all parts of England. The Town is an∣nually managed by an Alderman, chosen out of
his 12 Brethren, who are all distinguished from the rest by wearing of Purple Gowns. The Al∣derman and his Senior Brother are always Justi∣ces of the Peace and Quorum. They have also a Town-Clerk, a Recorder, 2 Sergeants at Mace, and 2 Chamberlains. The Arms of the Town is Quarterly two Coots, the first Argent 3 Tees Sable. The second Gules, 3 Spears in Pale Argent. The third like the se∣cond, the fourth as the first. The Earls of this County, since the Norman Conquest. John Duke of Bedford, Earl of Somerset. John Duke of Somerset, Earl of Somerset. John De Foix, Earl of Somerset. Ralph Nevill,— Earl of Somerset. Francis Farrar,— Earl of Somerset. Things remarkable in this County. Near unto the River Loder, is a Spring that Ebbs and Flows many times in a day. In the same place are Stones like Pyramids (some of them being 9 foot high, and 14 foot thick) pitched directly in a Row for a mile to∣gether. In the River Can near unto Kendall, are two Cataracts or Water-falls; where the Waters descend with a great fall and mighty noise. And
when that which standeth North from the Neigh∣bours living between them, sounds cleerer and lowder than the other, they certainly look for fair weather to follow. But when that on the South side doth so, they expect Foggs and Showers of Rain. Near Kirkby Lonsdale, are many deep and hol∣low places like Caves. In ancient times, the Pearl bearing Muscles were found upon this Shoar, which conceive by the Dew they suck in. And they are to be found at this day, both here and in the Rivers of Cum∣berland.
Wiltshire. THis County is bounded on the East by Berk∣shire and Hantshire. On the West by Somer∣setshire. On the South by Dorsetshire. And on the North by Gloucestershire. It containeth in length 52 miles. In breadth 38 miles. And in Circumference 142 miles. This County is seated in a good Climate, the Air is both sweet, pleasant, temperate and wholsom. The Soil is fruitful and plentiful, the Nor∣thern part rises up in delectable Hills, fur∣nished with large VVoods, and the Valleys with pleasant Rivers, namely, Isis, &c. The South part is more level, yielding Grass and Corn in abundance. The middest of the County is most plain, and therefore is called Salisbury Plain. The chief Commodities of this Shire are Wool, Wood and Sheep. It is in the Diocess of Salisbury, and hath in it 304 Parishes.
Out of it are chosen 34 Members which sit in Parliament. Knights 2 New Sarum 2 Wilton 2 Downton 2 Hindon 2 Hytesbury 2 Westbury 2 Calne 2 Devizes 2 Chipenham 2 Malmesbury 2 Cricklade 2 Great Bedwyn 2 Ludgersal 2 Old Sarum 2 Wooton Basset 2 Marleborough 2 Its Division is into 29 Hundreds, viz. Highworth, Malmsbury, Kingsbridge, Damerham Nor. Chippenham, Pottern, Calne, Selkley, Ramsbury, Kinwarston, Elstube, Swanborne, Melkesham, Bradford, Whorwelsdown, Westbury, Warmister, Haresbury, Branche, Amsbury, Ʋnderditch, Alderbury, Frustfield, Downton, Cawden, Danworth, Dametham, Mere, Chalke.
And in these Hundreds are 23 Market-Towns, viz. Bradford, Monday. Sundon, Mon. Swindon, Mon. Calne, Tues. Ashburn, Tues. Wilton, Wednes. Lavington, Wed. Highworth, Wed. Hindon, Thurs. Devizes, Thurs. Wootton Basset, Th. Dunston, Friday. Anersbury, Friday. Westbury, Friday. Mere,— Marmister— Werminster, Sat. Tronbridge, S. Chipnam, S. Marleborough, S. Malmesbury, S. Creeklad, S. Salisbury, Tuesday and Saturday. The principal Town in this County, is the City of Salisbury, lying in the Latitude of 51 deg. 4 min. It bears from London W. S. W. And is distant therefrom 70 miles. Thus, From London to New Brainford 8 miles. to Stanes 15. to Hartleyrow 31. to Basingstoke 39. to Whitchurch 49. to Andover 55. to Salisbury 70. But by a more accurate admeasurement on the Road it is found to be distant from London 83 miles. This City for fair Buildings is inferiour to none, and transcends all others for the benefit of Water, almost every Street having a River running through the midst thereof. The Arms of this City is, Azure, a Sword and a Key in Saltyre Or; On a chief Argent, 3 Lozenges Gules.
The Earls of Wiltshire and Salisbury, since the first Constitution. William Scroop, Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. Samuel Butler, Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. John Stafford, Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. Henry Stafford, Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. Thomas Bullen, Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. William Panlet; Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. Patrick Fitzwater, Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. William Longspey, Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. Henry Lacye, Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. Tho. E. of Lancaster. Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. William Montagule, Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. Richard Nevill, Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. George D. of Clarence. Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. Robert Cecil. Earl of Wiltshire & Salisbury. Things Remarkable in this County. The Cathedral Church of Salisbury was begun to be built by Richard Poore Bishop of this See, and in 40 years was brought to its perfect Splendor and Beauty. It is a most Rich and Magnificent Church; and in it are, as many VVindows as there are days in the year (viz. 365.) As many Pillars of Cast Marble as there are hours in the year. (viz. 8760.) As many Gates for Entrance as there are Months in the year (viz. 12.)
In the edge of this Shire, between Luckington and great Badminton, is a place called the Caves. They are upon the top of a rising Hill, and about 9 in number: Some of them are deeper and some shallower, some broader and longer than others; and they lie all together in a Row: The manner of them is 2 long Stones set upon the sides, and broad Stones upon the top to cover them. The least of these Caves is 4 foot broad; and some of them 9 or 10 foot long. These are called by some of the ignorant Inhabitants, The Gyants Caves: But the more ingenious think them to be the Tombs of some Saxons, Heroick Danes, or Romans, and the more probable for that in a late digging into them, they have found Spurs, old pieces of Armour, &c. In this Shire is a small Rill, called Devorill, which runneth a mile under ground. In Ivy Church, was found a Corps 12 foot long, and a Book of very thick Parchment, all written with great Roman Letters; but when the Leaves were touched, they mouldered to Dust. Near the River Kennet in this Shire, there breaks out Water in the manner of a suddain Landflood, out of certain Stones standing aloft in open Fields, which by the common people is accounted a fore-runner of dearth. The Stonehenge upon Salisbury Plain, is counted the most admirable Rarity this Island affordeth. It is in this manner. There are in a Pit great Stones standing upright, some being 28 foot high, and 7 foot broad in 3 ranks round like a Crown, and overthwart them, are laid others with Mortises and Tenants. Now the great question among the Learned is, how these Stones came hither; for (say they) it is not likely that
they were ab initio, placed here by the God of Nature; because the whole Countrey round for some miles, hardly affords a Stone either great or small: and they seem too vast to be brought hither either by Wagon, Cart, or other Artifice. The Learned Mr. Cambden, therefore thinks, that they were made there by Art of pure Sand and some unctuous Cement, even as those also in Yorkshire, because anciently there was such an Art of making Stone: And Pliny saith, that the dust of Puteoli (Puzzole) being laid in Wa∣ter, becometh Stone presently, and that there were Cisterns at Rome, made of digged Sand and Lime, which were so firm and hard, that they seemed Stone. But notwithstanding the Autho∣rity of this great Scholar (saith my Author) I am clearly of opinion that they are natural Stones, and placed there ab initio; than which I think nothing is plainer. For (saith he) upon the Downs between Marlbury and Anbury, not above 20 miles from Stonehinge (which Downs are but a Continuation, or part of Salisbury Plain, diffe∣ring nothing from it but in the un-evenness) are some abundance of great Stones, called (by the Country thereabouts, the Gray Weathers; and at Anbury in an Orchard, there are half a dozen, or half a score Stones little inferiour to the Stonehinge for bigness, and some of them stand∣ing upright, and others lying flat on the ground: And the Country here (like that about Stone∣hinge) affords not a Stone besides: So that (saith my Author) unless we will have all these Stones to be Artificial, we must grant the Stonehinge to be natural. Now whereas this unstoniness of the Country, about which we speak of, seems, to some, a strong Objection against the natural∣ness
of the Stones; but it is (on the contrary) (if duly considered) a great Argument for it: For (saith he) What can be more probable, than that Nature could not provide her self otherwise of Lapidifick matter enough to make those huge Stones of, but by robbing of the circumjacent places: The More of that matter Here, The Less hereabouts; because nature wanting Timber, would fetch it nearest hand. To say no more of Stone∣hinge, but that near it, mens bones are digged up many times, which may very well be; be∣cause it was the Burial place of old for the Kings of the Brittains. In the Parish of Luckington, is a Well called Handcock's Well, the Water whereof is said to be very cold in Summer, and warm in Winter; and is commended as a singular Water for the Eyes. About Sayworth, are found abundance of Stones somewhat like Cockles, yet so apparently differing from their shape, that by the very sight of them one may plainly see that they never were true Cockles, as some there do believe.
Worcester-Shire. IT is bounded by Warwickshire on the East. By Herefordshire and Shropshire on the West. By Gloucestershire on the South. And by Staffordshire on the North. It containeth in length 38 miles. In breadth 31 miles. And in Circumference 137 miles. The Air of this Shire is of a favourable tem∣perature, it gets an appetite for Labour, Diet and Rest. The Soil is fertile, and inferiour to none in the Lande, for besides abundance of Corn in every place, the Hills are stored with plenty of Woods and Pasturage, and the Hedge-Rows in the High-ways are filled with Fruit-Trees. The chief Commodities are, Corn, Salt, Sider and Perry.
It is in the Diocess of Worcester, and hath in it 152 Parishes. Out of it are elected 9 Parliament Men. Knights 2 Worcester 2 Droitwich 2 Evesham 2 Bewdley 1 Its Division is into 7 Hundreds, viz. Halfeshire, Doddington, Worcester, Parshor, Blakenhurst, Oswalderstow, Ʋpton. And in these Hundreds are 11 Market-Towns, viz. Evesholme, Mond. Parshore, Tues. Bromesgrove, Tues. Tenbury, Tues. Ʋpton, Thurs. Kedderminster, Th. Shipton, Friday. Droitwich, Fr. Sturbridge, Fr. Bewdley, Sat. Worcester, Wednes. Frid. and Sat. The principal place in this Shire is the City of Worcester. It lies in the Latitude of 52 deg. 14 min. It bears from London W. N. W. And is distant therefrom 92 miles. Thus, From London to Uxbridge 15 miles. to High Wickham 27. to Oxford 47. to Glimpton 60. to Marton on the Marsh 74. to Pershore 86. to Wor∣cester
92. But measured upon the Road it is found to be 112 miles distant from London. This City is most pleasantly seated, very much frequented, and very richly inhabited. It is seated upon the East Bank of the Severn, and that which the Severn doth not defend, is Walled about: through which Wall are 7 Gates for Entrance, and 5 Watch-Towers for Defence. This City is Governed by 2 Bailiffs, 2 Alder∣men, 2 Chamberlains, and 2 Constables, annually elected out of 24 Burgesses cloathed in Scarlet, assisted with 48 other Citizens, whom they call their Common Council, clad in Purple, a Recor∣der, Town-Clerk, and 5 Sergeants with Maces, their Attendants. The Arms of this City is Argent, a Fesse be∣tween 3 Pears Sable. The Earls of Worcester since the Norman Conquest. Waleram, E. of Mellent Earl of Worcester. Thomas Piercy, Earl of Worcester. Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Worcester. John Tiptost, Earl of Worcester. Edward Somerset, Earl of Worcester. Things Remarkable in this County. In the year 1265. upon the 5th of August, at Eversham in this County, a great Battel was fought betwixt K. Henry the 3d. and his Barons, through
whose Dissentions most of them were slain; as Simon Montfort, E. of Leicester, and 17 Lords and Knights besides; and Humphrey Bohun taken Prisoner. In many parts of this County are Salt Pits, and Salt Springs. The Hedge-Rows and High-ways are beset with Pear-Trees, of which they make Perry. The Severn here affords great store of fresh-water Lampreys. At Droitwich are 3 Fountains of Salt Water, di∣vided by a little Brook of Fresh Water passing by them, by the boiling of which Salt water, they make the purest white Salt in England. There is lately found out, about Eckington Bride, 7 miles from Worcester, a Medicinal Water.
Yorkshire. YOrkshire the greatest County in England, is bounded on the East by the German Ocean. On the West by Lancashire and Westmoreland. On the South by the River Humber. And on the North by Durham. It containeth in length 85 miles. In breadth 75 miles. And in Circumference 318 miles. As this County is large, and spacious, so the Air is of several Temperatures in several parts thereof. It is placed in such a Temperature of Climate, that in all parts of it she is indifferently fruitful, yet hath she her barren places too; But (saith Speed) If one part of her be a Stony and Barren ground, another is fertile and richly adorned with Corn Fields. If she be here naked and de∣stitute of Wood, in another place she is shadowed with Forrests full of Trees. If one place be Moorish, Mirey, or unpleasant; another yeilds as much de∣light and content to the Eye.
The Commodities that this Shire principally affords (besides many others) are Cloath, Stockins, Corn, Cattle, Knives, Spurs, &c. It is in the Diocess of York, and hath in it 563 Parishes. Out of it are elected 29 Members to fit in Par∣liament. Knights 2 York 2 Kingston upon Hull 2 Knaresborough 2 Skaredborough 2 Rippon 2 Richmond 2 Hidon 2 Burrowbrigg 2 Malton 2 Thirske 2 Aldeborough 2 Beverly 2 North-Allerton 2 Pomfret 2 Its Division is into Hundreds, as are most of the Counties in England, of which this is divided into 26. But because of the largeness thereof, it is first divided into three Parts, called Ridings, viz. The East Riding. The West Riding. The North Riding. And each of these Ridings have their several Hundreds, and those Hundreds their respective Market Towns; as followeth, viz. The East Riding is divided into 4 Hun∣dreds, viz.
Buccrosse, Dickering, Holdernesse, Ouse and Derwent. And in this Riding are these 8 Market-Towns, viz. Hull, Tu. and Sat. Beverly, Wed. and Sa. Wighton, Wednes. Kilham, Th. Headon, Sat. Bridlington, Sat. Howder, Sat. Packlington, Sat. The West Riding is divided into 10 Hun∣dreds, viz. Stancliffe, Claro, Ansty, Barkston, Skirink, Motley, Aggerage, Osgoderosse, Strasforth, Staincrosse. And in this Riding are 24 Market-Towns, viz. Rotheram, Monday. Selby, Mon. Leedes, Tuesday and Saturday. Otley, Tues. Settle, Tues. Sheffield, Tues. Barnesby, Wednes. Knaresborow, Wed. Hallifax, Thursday. Wakefield, Thursday and Friday. Bradforth, Thurs. Wetherly, Thurs. Tadcaster, Thurs. Rippon, Thurs.
Snathe, Friday. Ripley, Friday. Tickhill, Saturday. Bantrey, Sat. Doncaster, Sat. Sherborn, Sat. Pontefract, Sat. Borough Bridge, Sat. Skipton, Sat. Thorne,— The North Riding is divided into 12 Hun∣dreds, viz. Gilling West, Gilling East, Allerton, Langborgh, Whitbystand, Pickering, Ridall, Bulmar, Burford, Hallikeld, Hang East, Hang West. And in this Riding are 17 Market-Towns, viz. Pickering, Mond. Gisborough, Mond. Thruske, Mond. Beda, Tues. Masham, Tues. Kirby moreside, Wed North Allerton, Wed. Abberforth, Wedn. Scarborough, Th. Yarum, Thurs. York, Thursday and Saturday. Malton, Sat. Helmley, Sat. Whitby, Sat. Stokesly, Sat. Richmond, Sat. Askrigg,— The principal place in this large County is York, the second City in England. It lies in the
Latitude of 53 deg. 58 min. It bears from Lon∣don N. by W. And is distant therefrom 150 miles. Thus, From London to Waltham-Crosse 12 miles. to Ware 20. to Royston 33. to Caxton 42. to Hunt∣ingden 48. to Stamford 69. to Grantham 85. to Newark 95. to Tuxford 104. to Doncaster 122. to Wentbridge 129. to Tadcaster 141. to York 150. But being measured upon the Road, the distance is found to be 192 miles from London. This City (saith Speed) is a pleasant place, large and full of Magnificence, rich, and populous, in all which it over-masters all the other places of this County, and it is not only strengthned with Fortifications, but adorned with Magnificent Buildings, both Private and Publick. It is an Episcopal See, a Metropolitan City, and in it is a most famous Library. It is Governed by a Lord Maior, 12 Aldermen, many Chamberlains, a Recorder, a Town-Clerk, 6 Sergeants at Mace, and 2 Esquires, which are, a Sword-bearer, and a Common Sergeant; who with a large Mace, goeth on the left hand of the Sword. The Arms of the City of York is, Argent, on a Cross Gules, 5 Lyons Passant Guar∣dant, Or. Besides this City of York, there are two other Places of note not to be forgotten, viz. Richmond and Hull. The Arms of Richmond is, Gules, an inner bor∣der Argent, over all a Bend Dexter Ermine. The Arms of Hull is, Azure, 3 Corronets in Pale, Or.
The Arms of such Families as have born the Dignity of Earls of Rich∣mond and Holdernesse, since the Con∣quest. Allen, E. of Brittain and Richmond, Earl of Richmond. John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, Earl of Richmond. Geffery 4th Son to K. Henry the 2d, Earl of Richmond. John D. of Brittain, Earl of Richmond. Gray, Viscount Tours, Earl of Richmond. Ralph E. of West∣moreland, Earl of Richmond. Ralph E. of Chester, Earl of Richmond. John D. of Bedford, Earl of Richmond. Peter de Dreux, Earl of Richmond. Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, Earl of Richmond. Peter de Savoy, Earl of Richmond. Edmond Haddam, Earl of Richmond. John D. of Brittain, Earl of Richmond. Henry fits Roy, D. Earl of Richmond.
Earls of Holdernesse. Drugo de Buerer, Earl of Holdernesse. Stephen de Bloys, Earl of Holdernesse. William de Mende∣vile, Earl of Holdernesse. Baldwin de Beton, Earl of Holdernesse. William de Fortibus, Earl of Holdernesse. Edward. E. of Rut∣land. Earl of Holdernesse. There are lately added by His Majesty K. Charles II. these following, viz. Lodowick Stuart, D. of Richmond. John Ramsey, E. of Richmond. Rupert, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, E. of Holdernesse. Things Remarkable in this County. Upon Palm-Sunday, in the year 1461. was a Battel fought in the Quarrel between Lancaster and York, in which England never saw more No∣bility and Gentry, nor a more puissant Army in the Field; for there were there at one time (on both sides) 100 Thousand fighting men. When the Fight had continued doubtful a great part of the day, the Lancasterians not being able
longer to continue the force of their Enemies, turned back, and fled away, and such as took part with York pursued them so hotly, that they killed many of their Nobility and Gentry, and that day were slain on both sides 30 thousand English-men. About Pontefract and Knaresborough, grows great quantities of Liquorice. In some parts of this Shire near Sherbourn, are Quarries, whose Stones when first taken out of the Quarries are very soft, but seasoned with Wind and Weather, they become very hard and durable. Other parts of this Shire produce a Lime-stone, which being burnt, serves to enrich and manure those Lands that are cold and hilly. At the suppression of the Abbies in the days of K. Henry the 8th, in a certain Chappel in York, a Lamp was found burning in a Vault or Sepulchre under ground, wherein Constantine the Emperour was supposed to have been Buried. About Sheffield in this Shire are many Iron-Mines. About the year of Christ 759. the Town of Doncaster was burnt by Fire from Heaven. The Inhabitants about Dichmarsh and Marshland are of opinion, that the Land there is hollow, or hanging, and that as the Waters rise, the Land is also heaved up. Near unto Bratherton is a yellow kind of Marle found, which being cast upon the Fields, causeth them to bear good Corn for many years to∣gether. Not far from the Abby of Fountains, there are Lead-Mines.
Near unto Burrough Bridge, are certain Pyra∣mids standing, which are supposed to have been made of a factitious Stone, compounded of pure Sand, Lime, Vitrials, and other unctious matter. Under Knaresborough, is a Well called Dripa Well, in which the Water springs not out of the Veins of the Earth, but distills from the Rocks which hang over it. The Water of this VVell (saith Speed) turns VVood into Stone, for VVood put into it, will shortly after be covered over with a Stony Bark, and at length become Stone. At Giggleswick in this Shire are three small Springs about a Quoits cast from each other, the middlemost of which at every quarter of an hour Ebbs and Flows about 8 inches high, at the highest; and at the Ebb it is so low, that it is not an inch deep with VVater. Alevinus, in an Epistle of his to Egelred K. of Northumberland speaks of the Raining of Blood upon St. Peter's Church at York, even in a fair day, which descended in a very violent manner from the top of the Roof of the Church: And thereupon breaks forth into these Words: May it not be thought that Blood is coming upon the Land from the North parts? And not long after (to fulfil his Prae∣diction) the Danes invaded England, and a∣mong other Outrages, burnt the City of York. In Scarborough Castle, is a little Well of fresh Water springing out of a Rock. At Whitbay are Serpents (or Snakes) of Stone found.
Upon the Shoar of Moulgrave Castle, Jet is found. In Cleveland in the North Riding of this Shire about the year 1535. a Triton (or Man-Fish) was taken, that for certain days together fed upon raw Fish, but espying his opportunity, he got away to Sea again, and was seen no more. Upon the Shoar of Skengrave, whensoever it is calm, and the Sea (as it were) level; there is heard many times on a suddain, a horrible and fearful groaning (as it were) a great way off; at which times the Fishermen dare not launch out into the deep. Near unto Hunt Cliff, are certain Rocks, about which the Seal-Fishes meet together to sleep and Sun themselves: And upon that Rock which is next the Shoar, one of the Seals lies to keep Cen∣tinel; and as any man approacheth, he either throws down a big Stone, or tumbles himself into the Water with a great noise, as a signal to the rest to be gone. They are not afraid of Women, but only of men, and therefore they that catch them, put on VVomens Cloaths. VVhen they are chased by Men, (if they be destitute of VVater) they will with their hinder feet fling backward a Cloud of Sand and Gravel in the Faces and Eyes of their Pursuers; and many times drive them away, making them weary of their design in this manner. At Huntley Nab, at the Roots of the Craggy Rocks, that are there upon the Shoar, there lie Stones scattered here and there, of divers bignesses, so artificially (and yet naturally) Round, that one would think they had been turned in a Laythe, for Shot for great Ordnance: In which, if you break them, you shall find stony Serpents wrapped round; but most of these are headless.
Almost at the top of Roseberry-topping, there is a Spring of Water coming out of a huge Rock, Medicinable for Sore Eyes. When Roseberry-topping hath a Cloud over it, there commonly follows Rain; whence this Rhyming Proverb is very frequent with the People: When Roseberry-topping wears a Cap, Let Cleaveland then beware a Clap. The River Recall hides it self under ground near unto Elmesly in this County. Abundance of Springs rise together at Hinder∣skel, a little Castle near Sherry-hutton Castle. The Hills in Richmondshire are well stored with Lead, Copper, and Pit-Coals: And on the tops of these Hills Stones have been found like Sea-winckles, Cockles, and other Fish. There is a place in this Shire called St. Wilfrid's Needle, being a passage so narrow, that one of a mean bulk, can but just creep through it. The Story goes of it, That it easily lets chaste Women through it, but holds fast those that have plaid false: However the thing may seem a fable at first sight; yet if the Women that have plaid false be with Child, it may be true without Wonder.
Anglesey. THis Island is encompassed on all sides by the Irish Sea, except on the South-East part, on which part it is separated from Carnarvan∣shire, by the River Monai. It containeth in length 23 miles. In breadth 16 miles. And in Circumference 67 miles. The Temperature of the Air is indifferently healthful, and not generally subject to Diseases, only subject to Agues at certain Seasons of the year. The Soil is dry and Stony, and not very sightly (as the other Counties of Wales are) yet for the abundance of Corn which this County affordeth, it hath had the name of the Mother of Wales; for that when all other Counties have failed in their Wheat-Harvest, this Island hath supplied their defect. The chief Commodities that this County afford∣eth, are Corn, Cattel, Fish, Fowl, Milstones, &c. It is in the Diocess of Bangor, and hath in it 74 Parish-Churches. Out of it are elected 2 Parliament Men.
Knight 1 Bewmaris 1 Its Division is into 6 Hundreds, viz. Talybollion, Llyfon, Maltraeth, Meney, Fyndaythwy, Twikelyn. And in these Hundreds are 2 Market-Towns, viz. Newburgh, Tuesday. Bewmaris, Wednes. The Principal Town in this Island is Bewmaris, lying in the Latitude of 53 deg. 28 min. It bears from London N. W. by W. And is distant there∣from 184 miles. Thus, From London to Chester 142 miles (as in Cheshire) to Denbigh 160. to Bewmaris 184. But by more accurate admeasurement, it is found to be 291 miles. This Town was first built by K. Edward the First, it is a very fair Town, though in a Moorish place, and well fortified with a goodly Castle, and is very well peopled. It is Governed by a Maior yearly chosen, with the assistance of 2 Bai∣liffs, 2 Sergeants at Mace, and a Town-Clerk. Things Remarkable in this County. In the low Grounds and Champion Fields of this Island, are every day found and digged out of
the Earth the Bodies of huge Trees with their Roots, and Fir Trees of a wonderful length and bigness. Some do suppose that these Trees were cut down by the Romans, in their time to destroy their Woods; But a more probable conjecture is that these spoils were made on Maritine places for want of industry and good Husbandry in the infancy of the VVorld, because they are taken up with the Roots on. In this Island are found great store of Mill-stones and Grind-stones. Here is also found in some places an Aluminous Earth, of which (with Cost and Labour) they may make Allum and Coperas.
Brecknock-Shire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Radnor∣shire, Herefordshire, and Monmouthshire. On the West by Caremardenshire and Cardigan. On the South by Glamorganshire. And on the North by Radnorshire. It containeth in length 35 miles. In breadth 30 miles. And in Circumference 109 miles. The Air is very Temperate, the Hills sheltering it from the sharpness which would otherwise blow over it. The Soil in the Hilly parts is very Stony and Rocky, but full of Springs, which make the Val∣leys exceeding fruitful, yielding abundance of Corn and Grass. The Chief Commodities are Corn, Cotton, Cattel and Fish. It is in the Diocess of Landaffe, and hath in it 61 Parishes. Out of it are elected 2 Parliament Men.
Cardiganshire. IT is bounded on the East by Radnorshire and Brecknockshire. On the VVest by the Irish Sea On the South by Carmardenshire, and on the North by Merioneth and Montgomery. It containeth in length 44 miles. In breadth 22 miles. And in Circumference 103 miles. The Air is open and somewhat piercing. The Soil is hilly and uneven, but more plain and Champion towards the Sea, and the Valleys being fed with Springs and Rivulets, are very fruitful, yielding abundance of good Pasture, and good Corn, but little VVood. The chief Commodities are Corn, Cattel, Sea-Fowl, Fish and Lead. It is in the Diocess of St. Davids, and hath in it 64 Parishes. Out of it are elected 2 Members to sit in Par∣liament. Knight 1 Cardigan 1
Its Division is into Five Hundreds, viz. Llanbadarn, Llanylar, Pennarth, Moythen, Tredroir. And in these Hundreds are 4 Market-Towns, viz. Aberysthway, Mond. Llanbeder, Tuesday. Tregeron, Thurs. Cardigan, Sat. The principal Town is Cardigan, lying in the Latitude of 52 deg. 18 min. It bears from Lon∣don VV. by N. And is distant therefrom 147 miles. Thus, From London to Gloucester (as in Gloucester∣shire) 81 miles. to Kenfrich 103. to Longamore 135. to Pencarst 160. to Cardigan 147. But by more exact admeasurement the distance is sound to be 219 miles from London. This Town is seated upon a steep Bank, her South side guarded by the deep River Tyvy, and passable no way but by a Bridge under the Castle, it is VValled about, and hath three ways for Entrance. Things Remarkable in this County. At the Head of the River Istwyd, are some veins of Lead found. In the River Tivy, the Beasts called Bever or
Castor have been formerly found. It is an am∣phibious Creature, living partly in the VVater and partly on the Land. His fore-feet are like unto a Dogs feet, but the hinder feet are whole skinned like those of a Goose, his Dogs feet serve him ashoar to Run, and his Geese feet in the VVater to Swim. His Tail is broad and Grisly, which he useth as a Stern to direct his Course by his Skin is ash-colour inclining to black; and it is a very subtile Creature. Chronicles report, that while David Menevensi Bishop of St. Davids confuted the Pelagian Here∣sie, at Llan-devi-brevi, the Earth whereon he stood and Preached rose up by Miracle to a cer∣tain height under his feet.
Caernarvan-Shire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Denby∣shire. On the West and North by the Irish Sea. And on the South by Merioneth. It containeth in length 53 miles. In breadth 20 miles. And in Circumference 115 miles. Tht Air of this Shire is sharp and piercing. The Soil of this County cannot be commended for its fertility, only those parts near the Sea Coasts, the Inland part being very craggy and hilly. The chief Commodities of this Shire are Cat∣tel, Sheep, Fowl and Fish. It is in Bangor Diocess, and hath in it 68 Pa∣rish-Churches. Out of it are elected 2 Parliament Men. Knight 1 Carnarvan 1
It is not divided into Hundreds as the other Shires, but in it are 6 Market-Towns, viz. Bangar, Wedn. Krekych, Wed. Palbely, Wedn. Alberconway, Friday. Caernarvan, Saturd. Newin, Saturd. The principal Town is Caernarvan, lying in the Latitude of 51 deg. 22 min. It bears from London N. W. by W. And is distant therefrom 181 miles. Thus, From London to Buckingham (as in Bucking∣hamshire) 44 miles. to Bilford 71. to Kadermin∣ster 95. to Rowta 128. to Rutdock 153. to Do∣lathhan 163. to Caernarvan 181. But by more accurate admeasurement it is found to be distant from London 237 miles. The People of this Town are well approved of for courtesie and civility. The Town is Go∣verned by a Constable of the Castle (who is ever Maior by Patent) having the assistance of one Alderman, 2 Bailiffs, 2 Sergeants at Mace, and a Town-Clerk. Things Remarkable in this Shire. Here are extraordinary high Hills (the highest in all Wales) on some of which the Snow lies long, and upon others it lies all the year long, hard crusted together. In some places of this Shire are bred certain Shel-fish, which being produced by a Heavenly dew, bring forth Pearls. In the Pool called Lin-Paris, there is a Fish
called Torroch, having a red Belly, which is no where else to be seen but here. On the high Hills of this Shire are 2 Meers, one of which produces Fish that have but one Eye; and in the other is a floating Island, which as soon as a Man treads on, it presently floats a great way of. Snowdon Hills (saith Cambden) although they have Snow always lying on them, yet are exceed∣ing rank with Grass; insomuch that they are be∣come a Proverb among the Welsh, and it is cer∣tain that there are Pools and standing Waters upon the very tops of those Mountains, and they are so coated with that Snowy Crust that lies on them, that if a man do but lightly set his foot any where on the top of these Mountains, he shall perceive the Earth to stir the length of a stones cast from him. And this I suppose might occa∣sion the fable or vogue of the Floating Island be∣fore-mentioned.
Caermarden-Shire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Brecnock∣shire and Clamorganshire. On the West by Pembrokeshire. On the South by the Brittish Sea. And on the North by Cardiganshire. It containeth in length 40 miles. In breadth 26 miles. And in Circumference 106 miles. This Shire hath (as most hilly Countries have) a wholsom Air. The Soil cannot be said to be very fertile, only in some places it yields Pit-Coals. The chief Commodities are Cattel, Salmon and Pit-Coals. It is in the Diocess of St. Davids, and hath in it 87 Parishes. Out of it are elected 2 Parliament Men. Knight 1 Caernarden 1
Its Division is into 6 Hundreds, viz. Cathinok, Cayo, Pervethe, Ellnet, Derllys, Kidwellye. And in these Hundreds are 8 Market-Towns, viz. Kidwelyn, Tues. Llanelly, Tuesd, Llandilonawre, Tues. Caermarden, Wed. and Sat. Llanymodossy, Wed. and Sat. Llangadoke, Thurs. New Castle, Friday. Lancharne, Friday. The Shire-Town is Caermarden, lying in the Latitude of 52 deg. 2 min. It bears from Lon∣don W. by N. And is distant therefrom 157 miles. Thus, From London to Gloucester (as in Gloucester∣shire) 81 miles. to Michael-Dean 88. to Mon∣mouth 99. to Abergaveny 111. to Brecknock 123. to Llanimdiffry 137. to Caermarden 157. But by more accurate admeasurement upon the Road, it is found to be 206 miles distant from London. The Town is pleasantly seated upon the South west side of the River Tovy, which runneth through the middest of the Shire. The Inhabitants of this Town, are not a little Proud that Merlin was therein born, the
Son of a bad Angel, or of an Incubus Spirit. It is yearly Governed by a Maior, who ever after is an Alderman and Justice of the Peace, 2 Sheriffs elected out of 16 Burgesses, all of them in Scarlet, a Sword-bearer, a Town-Clerk, and 2 Sergeants with Maces. Things Remarkable in this Shire. In Carreg Castle (saith Giraldus) is a Well, that (like the Sea) Ebbs and Flows twice in 24 hours.
Denbyshire. IT is bounded on the East by Shropshire and Che∣shire. On the West by Caernarvan and Merio∣neth. On the South by Montgomery. And on the North by the Irish Sea, and Flintshire. It containeth in length 40 miles. In breadth 21 miles. And in Circumference 118 miles. The Air of this Shire is cold, but very whol∣som, and the Snow lies long on the Hills; the high Hills resemble the Battlements of a Wall, they stand so thick; upon the tops of which Hills, when vapours rise in the Morning in the Summer∣time, it foreshews a fair day to follow. The Soil is but barren, especially towards the West part; but in the middle, where it lies flat in a Valley, it is most fertile, and by the indu∣stry of the Husbandmen, they begin (by paring off the upper Coat and burning it upon the place, and disposing of the ashes there) to make the Hills moderately bearable of a kind of Rye or Amell-Corn, as they call it.
The chief Commodities of this County, are Goats, Sheep, and Lead. It is in the Diocess of St. Asaph, and hath in it 57 Parishes. Out of it are elected 2 Parliament Men. Knight 1 Denbigh 1 Its Division is into 12 Hundreds. And in these Hundreds are 4. Market-Towns, viz. Ruthen, Monday. Llanrost, Tuesday. Denbigh, Wedn. Wrexham, M. & Th. The Principal place in this Shire is Denbigh, which lies in the Latitude of 53 deg. 19 min. It bears from London N. W. And is distant there∣from 160 miles. Thus, From London to St. Albans 20. to Stony-Stratford 44. to Daventry 60. to Coventry 74. to Coleshill 82. to Lichfield 94. to Great Hey∣ward 102. to Stableford Bridge 115. to Nant∣wich 121. to Chester 135. to Denbigh 155. But by more accurate admeasurement it is found to be distant from London 209 miles. The Fame of this Town spreads it self far for repute, as being reckoned the most beautiful place in all North Wales, and of no less report, for that the Castle adjoyning to it is impregna∣ble. The Government of this Town is managed by 2 Aldermen, and 2 Bailiffs, who are yearly
elected out of 25 Burgesses their Assistants, it hath one Recorder, one Town-Clerk, and 2 Ser∣geants at Mace. The Lords and Earls of Denby, are, Robert Dudley, Lord Denby, and Earl of Leicester. William Fielding, Earl of Denby. Things Remarkable in this County. Moilenlly (the highest Hill in this Shire) hath a Spring of cleer Water on the top of it. Cambden saith, that the People which live in the Vale of this Shire, are very healthful; their heads sound and firm, their eyesight never dim, and their age very lasting and chearful. The River Alen runs under ground in two places in this County. Near unto Moinglath is plenty of Lead. In the year 1574. on the 26th of February, were great Earthquakes, which did many People much hurt, both within doors and without, both in York, Worcester, Hereford, Gloucester, Bristol and other places adjoyning. And this is remar∣kable, That, this shaking of the Earth made the Bell in the Shire-Hall of Denbigh, to Toll twice, but did no other harm at all thereabouts.
Flintshire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Cheshire On the West by Denbyshire. On the South by Shropshire. And on the North by the Irish Sea. It containeth in length 33 miles. In breadth  miles. And in Circumference 83 miles. The Temperature of the Air is very healthful without fogs or fenny Vapours, saving that some∣times there rise from the Sea, and the River Dee, certain thick and smoaky Mists, which of∣fend not much, for the Inhabitants live long and are very healthful. The Air is colder here than in Cheshire, by reason it is incompassed by the Sea, and the River Dee; whence it is that the Snow lies very long on the tops of the Hills. The Soil bringeth forth plenty both of Corn and Grass, and produceth great store of Cattel though they be but small; but their number ma¦keth amends for their parvity. The chief Commodities are Corn, Cattel Cheese, Butter, Honey, Pit-Coal, some Lead and Mill-stones.
It is in the Diocess of St. Asaph, and hath in it 28 Parishes. Out of it are elected 2 Parliament Men. Knight 1 Flint 1 Its Division is into 5 Hundreds. And in these Hundreds are but 2 Market-Towns, viz. Cajervise, Tuesday. St. Asaphs, Saturday. The Principal Town is Flint, lying in the La∣titude of 53 deg. 21 min. It bears from London N. W. And is distant therefrom 150 miles. Thus, From London to Chester (as in Cheshire Road) 144 miles. to 150. But by more accurate ad∣measurement upon the Road it is found to be distant from London 193 miles. This Town was founded by K. Henry the 2d. and finished by K. Edward the first.
Things remarkable in this Shire. Towards Dee, an Arm of the Sea, the Fields bear in some places Barley, in others Wheat, but generally throughout Rye, with better than a twenty fold increase (especially the first year they be broken up and sowen) and afterwards 4 or 5 crops together of Oats. At the mouth of the River Clind, the Valley on the Land seemeth to be lower, and to lie under the Sea, and yet the Water (to the admiration of all beholders) never overfloweth into the Valleys. Near unto Holy Well, was formerly found a very rich Mine of Silver, of which Money (small pieces) was coyned, and had stamped upon it the Plume of Feathers, being the Arms of the Princes of Wales. Hard by Kilken is a little Well, (which (at certain times) Ebbs and Flows. In this Shire is that excellent Well called St. Winifrids Well, or Holy Well, so famous for the strange Cures of Aches and Lamenesses as is wonderful and much to be admired. The Water of it is extream cold, and the Brook which flows from it hath so plentiful and violent a Stream, that it is presently able to drive a Mill. The Stones about it are (as it were) spotted with bloody Spots; and there are many red Stones in the bottom of it. The Moss which grows on the sides of it, is of an excellent sweet smell, and they say that (though some of it be given away to all Strangers that come, yet) it never wasteth.
Antiquity (saith Speed) reports concerning this Well, thus. That Winifrid a chaste Christian Virgin, very fair and virtuous; was doated upon by a young Lustful Prince (or Lord) of the Country, who not long able to rule his head-strong affe∣ctions, having many times (in vain) attempted her Chastity, both by rich Gifts and large Pro∣mises, could not by any means obtain his de∣sires; he therefore (in a place of advantage) suddenly surprized and ravished her weak (yet resisting) Body. After the Deed done, the cruel Tyrant (to stop her cries and acclama∣tions) slew her, and cut off her head; out of which place did suddainly arise a Spring which continueth to this day, carrying from the Foun∣tain such a forcible Stream and Current, as the like is not found in Christendom.
Glamorgan-Shire. THis Shire is bounded by Monmouthshire on the East. By Caermardenshire on the West. By the River Severn on the South. And by Breck∣nockshire on the North. It containeth in length 48 miles. In breadth 27 miles. And in Circumference 116 miles. This Shire hath a very Temperate Air, and is generally the pleasantest place in all South Wales. For the Soil, it is but barren and very hilly, the plainest part is that towards the Sea-Coasts, which yieldeth plenty of Grain, and is most Inha∣bited. The Mountainous part is replenished with Cattel, upon whose Hills you may behold whole herds. The chief Commodities are Corn, Cattel and Sheep.
It is in the Diocess of Landaffe, and hath in it 118 Parishes. Out of it are elected 2 Parliament Men. Its Division is into 10 Hundreds, viz. Llangevelach, Swanzey, Neath, Newcastle, Ogmor, Llantrissent, Dexispowys, Cardiff, Caerfily, Cowbridge. And in these Hundreds are 9 Market-Towns, viz. Cowbridge, Tues. Cardiff, Wed. and Satur. Swanzey, W. and S. Caerphilly, Thurs. Penrise, Thurs. Llantrissent, Frid. Bridgend, Sat. Neath, Saturd. Glamorgan,— The Principal place in this Shire is Lan∣daffe, which is the Bishops See. It lies in the Latitude of 51 deg. 35 Minutes. It bears from London West. And is distant therefrom 126 miles. Thus, From London to Monmouth 99. (as in Mon∣mouthshire) to Landaffe 126. But by more accu∣rate admeasurement upon the Road, it is found to be distant from London 163 miles. At Tave is a Harbour for Ships, and by that means is a friend to the Town, which is governed
by a Maior yearly elected out of 12 Aldermen, and assisted by 12 other Burgesses, a Town-Clerk, 4 Constables, and 2 Sergeants with Maces. Things Remarkable in this Shire. Upon the top of a Hill called Minyd-morgan, is a Monument with a strange Character, which the Dwellers thereabouts say, If any man read the same, he will die shortly after. Upon the River Ogmore, and near unto Newton, in a sandy plain, about 500 foot from Severn, there springs a Well, the water whereof is not very clear; in which, at full Sea (in the Summer time) can hardly any water be gotten, but at the Ebb of the Tide it bubleth up amain. And it is observed that this Spring never riseth up to the brink, or overfloweth. At Abarbarry in this Shire is a Cave under the bottom of a Hill, and on the top of it a gaping chink: And when the Wind is gathered into that hole, and tossed too and fro in the womb of it there is heard (as it were) a Musical sound, like that of Cymbals. Giraldus affirms (saith Speed) That in a Rock or Clift upon the Sea-side, and Island Barry ly∣ing near the South-east point of this County, is heard out of a little chink, the noise (as it were) of Smiths at their work; one while, the blowing of Bellows to increase the heat; then the strokes of the Hammer, and sound of the Anvil; sometimes the noise of the Grindstone, in grinding of Iron Tools; Then the hissing Sparks of Steel Gads as they fly from their heating; with the puffing noise of Flames in a Furnace.
Merioneth-Shire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Montgo∣meryshire. On the West by the Irish Sea. On the South by Cardiganshire. And on the North by Carnarvanshire and Denbyshire. It containeth in length 38 miles. In breadth 28 miles. And in Circumference 111 miles. The Air is indifferent wholsom. The Soil is very barren, and it is very full of spired Hills, being the most Mountainous County in all Wales, Caernarvanshire excepted. And the Shire is subject to very great winds. The Commodities that this Shire affordeth, are Sheep, Fish, Fowl and Cottons. It is in the Diocess of Bangor, and in it are 37 Parishes. Out of it is elected only one Member of Par∣liament. Knight 1
Its Division is into 6 Hundreds, viz. Ardydwy, Penllyn, Ydeirmon, Talybont, Ystymanael, Mowthy. In these Hundreds are 3 Market-Towns, viz. Belgelhe, Tuesday. Harlech, Saturday. Bala, Saturday. The principal Town in this Shire is Harlech, which lyes in the Latitude of 53 deg. 5 min. It bears from London N. W. by W. And is distant therefrom 176 miles. Thus, From London to Shrewsbury 124 miles (as in Shropshire) to Welshpool 137 miles. to Harlech 176 miles. But by an exact admeasurement upon the Road, it is found to be distant from London 218 miles. This Town standeth bleak enough, and hath but few Inhabitants, neither are their Houses ma∣ny, and those but of ordinary Building. It is annually governed by a Maior. Things Remarkable in this County. Near unto Bala is a great Pool of VVater that drowns at least 160 Acres of Ground, whose Na∣ture is (as the Inhabitants report) such, That the high Land-Floods (though never so great)
do not make (at any time) this Pool to swell bigger: But if the Air be troubled with violent Tempests of Wind, it then riseth above its Banks. The River Dee (saith Speed) runneth into this Pool with a sharp Stream, and slides through it without mixture of VVaters. In this Pool is bred the Fish called Guiniad, which is never seen in Dee: And in Dee Sal∣mons are taken, which are never found in this Pool. Upon the Sea-Coasts of this Shire, great store of Herrings are taken.
Monmouth-Shire. IT is bounded on the East by Gloucestershire. On the West by Brecknock and Glamorganshire. On the South by Severn. And on the North by Here∣fordshire. It containeth in length 29 miles. In breadth 20 miles. And in Circumference 84 miles. The Air is temperate, healthful and cleer. The Soil is Hilly, Woody and Rich; all places fruitful, and none barren. The Hills are grazed upon by Cattel and Sheep; and the Valleys are laden with Corn and Grass. The chief Commodities of this Shire are Cat∣tel, Corn and Sheep. It is in the Diocess of Llandaff, and in it are 127 Parishes. Out of it are elected 3 Members to sit in Parliament.
Its Division is into 6 Hundreds, viz. Wenlooge, Abergaveny, Skenfrith, Ragland, Caldicot, The Moor. And in these Hundreds are 7 Market-Towns, viz. Ʋske, Mon. & Frid. Abergavenny, Tues. Caerlyon, Thurs. Monmouth, Sat. Cheapstow, Sat. Newport, Sat. Pont Poole, Sat. The principal place in this Shire is the City of Monmouth, situate in the Latitude of 51 deg, 57 min. It bears from London W. by N. And is di∣stant therefrom 99 miles. Thus, From London to Gloucester 82 miles. (as in Glou∣cestershire) to Monmouth 99. But by a more accu∣rate admeasurement upon the Road, it is found to be 127 miles distant from London. This Towns situation is pleasant and good, seated between the Rivers of Monnow and Wye; it hath 3 Gates for entrance, besides the Lock, or Tower at the Bridge. It is a Town of good re∣pute, and well frequented. It is governed by a Maior, 2 Bailiffs, 15 Common-Councellors, a Town-Clerk, and 2 Sergeants for their Atten∣dants.
The Earls and Dukes of Monmouth are, Robert Carey, Earl of Monmouth. James Scot, Duke of Monmouth. Things Remarkable in this County. The two Rivers of Uske and Wye, are full of Salmon and Trouts. At Chepstow, the River Wye riseth to an exceed∣ing great height. At Lanthony Abby (saith Cambden) the Rain which the Mountains breed falls very often; The VVind blows strong, and almost all the Winter it is continually Cloudy and Misty; and, notwithstanding, there are seldom any Diseases among the Inhabitants there; And the grosser the Air is, the milder it is. The Moor or Marsh near Chepstow, in the year 1606. suffered great loss; For that year at the change of the Moon in February, the Severn, at a Spring-Tide was droven back for three days together with a South wind, and swelled so high, that it came rushing in amain upon the tract lying so low, (and also upon the like flats in Somersetshire, over against it) overflowed all, overthrowing Houses, and drowning Cattel and some People.
On Gold-Cliff, are yellow Stones of a golden colour, which glitter by the reflection of the Sun beams, which makes some suspect a Mine to be there. Merlin Prophesied, that when a stout Prince with a freckled face should pass over the Ford called Rydpencarn, being in a River called Nantpen∣carn, the Welsh should be subdued; which ac∣cordingly came to pass: For K. Henry the 2d, who passed over this Ford was freckle-faced; and as soon as the Welshmen heard where the King came over, their hearts failed them because of this Prophesie; and so they submitted through too much credulity.
Montgomery-Shire. THis Shire is bounded by Shropshire on the East. By Merionethshire on the West. By Radnor∣shire and Cardiganshire on the South. And by Denbyshire on the North. It containeth in length 32 miles. In breadth 23 miles. And in Circumference 98 miles. The Air is very wholsom and pleasant. The Soil (especially on the East part of the Shire) may be compared with most of the Land, and doth far exceed any other Shire in Wales. The West part is more Hilly, but upon them store of Cattel do graze. The chief Commodity of this Shire is Horses. It is in the Diocess of St. Davids, and hath in it 47 Parishes. Out of it are elected 2 Members to sit in Par∣liament.
Knight 1 Montgomery 1 Its Division is into 7 Hundreds, viz. Mechavy, Kareegnion, Kyfylog, Ystradmarchel, Kery, Ykrostly, Kidriorn. And in these Hundreds are 8 Market-Towns, viz. Welsh Pool, Monday. Machynleth, Mon. Newtowr, Tues. Montgomery, Thurs. Llanvilling, Thurs. Llanidloes, Sat. Anchor Poole,— Long-Lymore,— The principal or Shire-Town of this County is Montgomery, lying in the Latitude of 52 deg. 40 min. It bears from London N. W. by W. and is distant there from 122 miles. Thus, From London to Worcester, (as in Worcestershire) 85 miles. to Tenbury 101. to Ludlow 106. to Bi∣shops Castle 116. to Montgomery 122 miles. But by more accurate admeasurement upon the Road it self, the distance from London will be found to be 158 miles and a half. This Town is seated upon the easie ascent of a Hill, very wholsom for Air, and pleasant for Si∣tuation: How this Town is Governed annually I do not find, but the Arms thereof is—Azure, in a Border Or, a Lion Rampant of the Second.
This Town in the year 1605. received the Ho∣nour and Title of an Earldom; Philip Herbert, second Son of Henry Earl of Pembroke was the first Created. Things Remarkable in this County. This Shire in times past hath bred excellent Horses. There is not much more of note, only this I must not omit: That, The People of this County (as also those of Merioneth, Caernarvan, Denbigh, and Flint; which we call North Wales) are very Generous; Of affable Conditions; Goodly for feature; Fair of Complexion; Couragious of Mind; Courteous to Strangers. And most True and Loyal to the English Crown.
Pembroke-Shire. IT is bounded by Caermardenshire on the East. By the Irish Sea on the West and South. And by Cardiganshire on the North. It containeth in length 33 miles. In breadth 22 miles. And in Circumference 122 miles. The Air of this Shire is very Temperate. The Soil (saith Speed) is as old as St. Davids, neither clad with Woods, nor garnished with Rivers, nor beautified with Fields, nor adorned with Meadows; but lyeth always open to the Wind and Storms. Their chief Commodities are Pit-Coals, Fish and Fowl. It is in the Diocess of St. Davids. And it hath in it 145 Parishes. Out of it are elected 3 Parliament Men.
Its Division is into 7 Hundreds, viz. Kemes, Killgarran, Dungledy, Dewpsland, Rowse, Castle Martin, Merberth. And in these Hundreds are 8 Market-Towns, viz. Haverford, Tu. & Sa. Kilgarven, Wedn Nowbeth, Wed. Tenby, Wed. & S. Fishgard, Friday. Pembroke, Sat. Newport, Sat. Wiston, Sat. The Principal (or Shire-Town) in this County is Pembroke. It lyes in the Latitude of 51 deg. 48 min. It bears from London W. by N. And is distant therefrom 195 miles. Thus, From London to Monmouth 99 miles (as in Monmouthshire) to Brecknock 124. to Caermarden 159. to Pembroke 195. But by more accurate ad∣measurement it is found to be distant from Lon∣don 254 miles. The Town is seated in a very barren place, and is as little inhabited as any part in all Wales of a Town. There are two Harbours in the Shire, viz. Tenby, and Milford; the last of which is a Haven of such capacity, that 16 Creeks, 5 Bays, and 13 Roads are therein contained. The Town is
weakly walled about, having 3 Gates for Passage, and at the West end a Castle. How the Town is annually governed I find not, and the Arms or Seal is a Castle upon a Hill Proper. The Earls of Pembroke since the first Constitution. R. C. Stronghow, Earl of Pembroke. William Marshall, Earl of Pembroke. William Valence, Earl of Pembroke. Lawrence Hastings, Earl of Pembroke. John D. of Bedford, Earl of Pembroke. William de la Pool, Marquess. Jasper Hatfield, Earl of Pembroke. William Herbert, Earl of Pembroke. Edw. Pr. of Wales. Earl of Pembroke. Anne Bolloyne, Marchioness. William Herbert, Earl of Pembroke. Things Remarkable in this County. In the days of Giraldus Cambrensis, certain Flemmings inhabited this Shire which were very skilful in Southsaying, by looking into the En∣trals of Beasts. In the Rocks in this Shire, there breeds a rare kind of Faulcon, which is thus described. The head is flat and low, the Feathers laid in
Rows, the Legs pale and wan, the Claws slender and wide spread, and the Bill soaked round. It is reported that about 300 years ago, that for 5 Generations the Father of the Family in the Earldom of Pembroke (their name was Ha∣stings) never saw his Son. At the time when Henry the Second made his abode in Ireland, were extraordinary and lasting Storms of VVind and VVeather; so that the sandy Shoar on the Coast of this Shire was laid bare to the very bare ground, the which had lain hid for many ages. Upon this (upon farther search) the people found great Trunks of Trees, which when they had digged up, they were apparently Lopped; so that one might see the stroaks of the Axe upon them, as if they had been hewen but the day before. The Earth looked very black, and the wood of these Trunks was altogether like Ebony, both for colour and hardness. When this discovery was first made, the Trees lay so thick, that the whole shoar seemed nothing but a lopped Grove; Whence may be gathered (saith my Author) that the Sea hath overflowed much Land on this Coast. About Kilgarran are abundance of Salmons taken: And there also is a place called Salmons-Leap; for this Reason. The Salmon coveteth to get into fresh-water Rivers to Spawn, and when they come to places where the water falls down suddenly from some higher place (as many such there be) they use this piece
of natural Policy. They bend themselves back∣ward, and take their Tails in their Mouths, and with all their force (unloosing their Circle on a suddain) he mounteth up before the fall of the Stream: And therefore these downright Falls, (or rather Cataracts of water) are called Salmon-Leaps. In the Island of Scalmey, on the West side of this Shire there grows abundance of wild Thyme.
Radnorshire. THis Shire is bounded on the East by Here∣fordshire. On the West and South by Brecknockshire. And on the North by Mont∣gomeryshire. It containeth in length 27 miles. In breadth 20 miles. And in Circumference 8 miles. This Shire hath cold Air and sharp, because of the Snow lying long unmelted under the shady Hills and hanging Rocks, of which there are many. The Soil (saith Speed) is hungry, though not barren; but that on the East and South parts is the best. The North and West are rough and churlish, and hardly bettered by painful Labour; so that they serve chiefly for the reering of Cattel, and Horses. Their Commodities are Cattel, Cheese, and Horses. It is in the Diocess of Hereford. And hath in it 52 Parishes. Out of it are elected 2 Members to sit in Par∣liament.
Knight 1 Radnor 1 Its Division is into 6 Hundreds, viz. Knighton, Rayadergowy, Kevenllice, Radnor, Poinscastle, Collowyni. And in these Hundreds are 3 Market-Towns, viz. New Radnor, Thurs. Knighton, Thurs. Prestaine, Saturday. The Shire-Town is Radnor. It lies in the La∣titude of 52 deg. 22 min. It bears from London W. N. W. And is distant therefrom 115 miles. Thus, From London to Worcester 85 miles (as in Wor∣cestershire) to Radnor 115. But by more accu∣rate admeasurement, the distance is found to be 148 miles from London. The Town of Radnor is pleasantly seated under a Hill, whereon formerly stood a large and strong Castle. Although Radnor be the Shire-Town, yet Prestayn (for beauteous Building) is the best in this Shire, a Town of good Commerce and Trade, and of late years much frequented. There is no Remarque of note in all this Shire.
OF THE ISLANDS ABOUT England. I. Of MAN Island. THis Island lyeth open on the East against Lan∣cashire. On the West against Ireland. On the South against Anglesey. And on the North against Scotland. It containeth in length 35 miles. In breadth (in the broadest place) 10 miles. And in Cir∣cumference 82 miles. The Air is cold and sharp, and needs must, having for a shelter nothing but a Wall of Water.
The Soil is reasonable fruitful, both for Corn and Cattel, and by the industry of the Inhabi∣tants yieldeth sufficient of every thing for its self, and a moderate supply for other Countries. The chief Commodities are Corn, Cattel, Fish, Hemp and Flax. The People of this Island are happy in this, That all Controversies are there determined by certain Judges (whom they call Deemsters, chosen among themselves) without Writings or other charges. If any complaint be made to the Ma∣gistrate of wrong done or received, he presently takes up a Stone, and fixeth his mark upon it, and delivereth it to the Plaintiff; by vertue of which, he both calls his Adversary to appearance, and also Summons his Witnesses. If the Cause be more difficult or litigious, and cannot be ended by the Magistrate, it is then referred to 12 men, whom they term, The Keys of the Island. This Island is so well managed for Civil Rule and Government, that every man there possesseth his own in peace, and safety. No man liveth in fear of losing what he hath. And the men there are not inclinable to Robbing, Pilfering, or Li∣centious living. The Inhabitants are generally Religiously gi∣ven, and do much Reverence to their Pastors, daily frequenting the Church, and avoiding all Controversies either Ecclesiastical or Civil. The Gentrey do much imitate the people of Lancashire; both for their honest Carriage and good House-keeping.
Things Remarkable in this Island. The middle part of this Island riseth up with high Hills, the highest of which is called Sceafull; from the top whereof (upon a cleer day) a man may easily behold three Kingdoms at once, viz. England, Scotland, and Ireland. The Women of this Countrey, whensoever they go out of their doors, gird themselves about with their Winding-sheet that they purpose to be Buried in, to shew themselves mindful of their Mortality. If a Woman at any time be condemned to die; she is sowed up in a Sack, and flung from a Rock into the Sea. In the South part of the Island, the Speech of the Inhabitants doth much incline to the Irish Tone, as the Northern Inhabitants Speech doth to the Scotch. The Island is defended by 2 Castles, in it are 14 Parishes, and 5 Market-Towns.
II. Of WIGHT Island. THis Island is encompassed round with the Brittish Sea. It containeth in length 20 miles. In breadth 12 miles, and in Circumference 60 miles. The Air is delightful and very wholsom. The Soil is very fruitful, produceing Corn, not enough only to supply the Inhabitants of the Island; but to supply other neigh∣bouring people. The Sea about this Island is exceeding full of Fish: And the Land is well stored with Grain and Cattel, and almost all places are stored with Conies, Hares, Partridges and Pheasants. The chief Commodities are Cattel, Sea-Fowl, Corn and Fish. It is in the Diocess of Worcester. And hath in it 36 Parishes. Its Division is into two Medens, viz. East-Meden, West-Meden.
In it are 3 Market-Towns. The Principal Town in this Island is Newport, lying in the Latitude of 50 deg. 35 min. This Town of Newport is well seated, and much frequented. It is very populous. It hath an entrance into the Island from the Haven, and a passage for Vessels of small Burthen unto the Key. It is Governed by a Maior and Bur∣gesses. Things Remarkable in this Island. In the year of Christ 1176. in this Island it raigned a Shower of Blood, which continued the space of 2 hours.
III. Of JERSEY Island. THis Island lyeth upon the Brittish Sea, and hath upon the North parts the Coasts of Hampshire, and on the South the Countrey of Normandy. It containeth in length 10 miles. In breadth 6 miles. And in Circumference 38 miles. It is a very delightful and pleasant Island. The Soil is very fertile, and produceth great store of Corn and Cattel, but especially Sheep in abundance, whose Wool is very fine and white, of which they make Stockings. The chief Commodities are Fish, Cattel, Sheep, Lobsters, Wool, and in Summer the best Lobsters England affords. Firing (as Wood) is very scarce, and their chief firing is Turff, Furze, &c. In the Island are 12 Parishes, and 4 Castles. The Captain is the Governour of the Island, who appointeth certain Officers under them, the principal of them hath the Title of Bailiff, who in
Civil Causes hath the assistance of 12 Jurors to determine differences and minister Justice, in this order, viz. In Criminal Matters 7; In Mat∣ters of Reason and Equity 5. Their 12 are cho∣sen out of the 12 Parishes, so that no man goeth farther to complain than to his own Jurate in or∣dinary Controversies; But matters of moment and difficulty are determined before the Bailiff in a general Meeting. Things Remarkable in this Island. The Inhabitants speak French, but very cor∣ruptly. There are 2 small Islands adjacent to this Island, the one called St. Albans, the other Hillary. The most of the Sheep bred in this Island have 4 Horns apiece.
IV. Of GARNSEY Island. THis Island is encompassed by the Brittish Sea, (as Jersey was.) It containeth in length 13 miles. In breadth 9 miles. And in Circumference 36 miles. The Temperature of the Air and Climate differs nothing from that of Jersey. The Soil is very fruitful, yielding great plenty of Grass for their Sheep and other Cattel. The chief Commodities, are Sheep, Fish, Fowl, Sider. The Government of this Island is much the same with that of Jersey. Their Customes and Conditions do more re∣semble the people of England. It hath in it 10 Parishes. One Market-Town, being also a Haven, and is called St. Peter's Port. Things Remarkable in this Island. The Fields of this Island in the Summer time, are so naturally garnished with Flowers of all sorts, that (saith Speed) being in it he might
conceit himself to be in a pleasant artificial Garden. The Inhabitants within these 100 years have taken great delight in planting of Fruit-Trees (especially Apples) of which they make store of Syder. Amongst the Rocks of this Island are found a hard Stone called Emerill; much used by Gold∣smiths and Lapidaries for their cutting of other precious Stones. In this Island is neither Toad, Adder, Snake, or other venomous Creature to be found. But in Jersey (though the Air and Climate be the same with this of Garnsey) they have great store of such Creatures. THere are 2 other Islands, namely Holy Island and Farre Island, in neither of which is any thing Remarkable; and so I shall say no∣thing concerning them. The Names of the several Cinque-Ports of England, and in what County each of them are, viz. Dover in Kent. Rumney in Kent. Sandwich in Kent. Hastings in Sussex. Rye in Sussex. Seaford in Sussex. Winchelsey in Sussex.
An Account of the seve∣ral Monasteries, Priories, Frieries, Nunneries, Col∣ledges and Hospitals, in every County in England, and Diocesses in Wales, which were Demolished in the Reign of K. Henry the VIII. and the Annual Re∣venue of them.
Counties Names. Monasteries. Priories. Frieries. Nunneries. Colledges. Hospitals. Valuation. l. s. d. Barkshire 5 2 1 3 3 2 6368 12 8 Bedfordshire 1 6 3 4 3 3 3054 10 3 Buckinghamshire 1 1 1 2 1 0 0730 01 11½ Cambridgeshire 9 14 4 7 1 4 4002 11 10 Cheshire 5 1 3 2 3 1 1447 2 0½ Cornwall 11 3 1 0 2 0 1287 0 6½ Cumberland 4 4 1 2 22 0 2549 12 9 Derbyshire 8 2 0 3 3 1 1055 12 11½ Devonshire 14 10 1 2 1 1 5394 2 6 Dorcetshire 7 2 2 3 3 1 4520 6 9 Durham 4 0 0 1 10 4 2696 15 0 Essex 13 14 3 2 2 4 7013 8 6 Gloucestershire 11 3 1 2 1 5 7302 5 10½ Hantshire 8 10 6 3 3 4 7218 17 5 Herefordshire 2 6 1 2 0 1 0522 4 5 Hertfordshire 2 12 3 5 1 3 4076 3 10 Huntingdonshire 2 4 0 2 8 1 2743 5 6½ Kent 9 13 6 9 1 13 8840 18 7½ Lancashire 5 5 0 0 6 0 2288 19 8½ Leicestershire 9 6 0 3 4 5 4833 11 9½ Lincolnshire 32 24 5 6 5 3 1 1664 12 0½ London 3 3 0 4 2 11 1 2595 8 0 Middlesex 3 3 5 2 9 5 3550 0 8
Counties Names. Monasteries. Priories. Frieries. Nunneries. Colledges. Hospitals. Valuation. l. s. d. Norfolk 12 20 16 5 9 4 6128 1 3 Northamptonshire 6 6 4 7 7 3 4731 15 6 Nottinghamshire 3 6 2 1 4 3 2763 7 7½ Northumberland 2 2 4 3 3 1 1252 15 10 Oxfordshire 7 7 5 4 1 3 3078 1 6 Rutlandshire 0 1 0 0 0 1 0043 12 4 Shropshire 8 5 6 0 3 2 2757 14 6½ Staffordshire 4 10 2 5 8 3 1902 17 3½ Somersetshire 10 8 2 3 5 6 9324 17 2 Suffolk 13 15 3 3 4 1 5390 7 9 Surrey 3 4 3 0 1 1 4883 14 0½ Sussex 8 9 3 5 3 4 3355 10 7 Warwickshire 4 10 3 6 6 4 3839 3 0 Wiltshire 3 13 4 4 4 8 4044 17 1½ Westmorland 1 0 1 0 0 0 0166 10 6 Worcestershire 7 4 2 2 2 2 4896 1 8 Yorkshire 33 10 11 23 15 10 1 4611 3 5 Asaph Diocess 4 0 0 1 0 1 0808 5 5 Bangor Diocess. 5 1 3 0 2 0 0298 18 2 David Diocess 6 5 2 0 7 0 1548 3 7 Landaffe Diocess 6 6 3 1 1 0 0925 12 0   314 290 126 142 198 129 183508-1-11½
A TABLE shewing the Beginning of the Reigns, the time of the Reigning, the Termination or Ending of the Reigns, and the num∣ber of Years since the end∣ing of the Reigns of every of the English, Saxon and Danish Monarchs, from King Egbert to the Norman Conquest.
Kings Names. Began to Reign. Reigned Years. Ended their Reign. Since their Reign. 1 Egbert 818 18 836 842 2 Ethelwolf 836 21 857 821 3 Ethelbald 857 1 858 820 4 Ethelbert 858 5 863 815 5 Etheldred 863 10 873 805 6 Alfred 873 27 900 778 7 Edward I. Saxon 900 24 924 754 8 Ethelstan 924 16 940 738 9 Edmund 940 6 946 732 10 Edred 946 9 955 723 11 Edwyn 955 4 959 719 12 Edgar 959 20 979 699 13 Edward II. Saxon. 979 27 1006 672 14 Ethelred 982 34 1016 662 15 Edmond II. 1016 1 1017 661 The Danish Line. 16 Canutus 1017 20 1037 641 17 Herold I. 1037 3 1040 638 18 Hardicanutus 1040 2 1042 626 19 Edward Confessor. 1042 23 1065 613 20 Herold II. 1065 2 1067 611 The Saxon Line restored.
A TABLE OF THE KINGS and QUEENS of ENGLAND since the Norman Conquest.
Kings and Queens. Born anno Began to Reign. Reigned Y. M. Since their Reigns Ended. Buried at William 1 1023 1066 October 14. 20 11 591 September 9. Caen Norm. William 2 1057 1087 September 9. 12 11 578 August 2. Winchester. Henry 1 1068 1100 August 2. 35 4 543 December 1. Reading. Stephen 1105 1135 December 1. 18 11 524 October 26. Feversham. The Saxon Line Restored. Henry 2 1132 1154 October 25. 35 9 489 July 6. Fountever. Richard 1 1152 1189 July 6. 9 9 479 April 6. Fountever. John 1165 1199 April 6. 17 6 462 October 19. Worcester. Henry 3 1207 1216 October 19. 56 1 406 November 16. Westminster. Edward 1 1239 1272 November 16. 34 8 371 July 7. Westminster. Edward 2 1283 1307 July 7. 19 6 352 January 25. Gloucester. Edward 3 1312 1326 January 25. 51 5 301 June 21. Westminster. Richard 2 1366 1377 June 21. 22 3 279 September 29. Westminster. The Line of Lancaster. Henry 4 1367 1399 September 29. 13 6 265 March 20. Canterbury. Henry 5 1584 1412 March 20. 9 5 256 August 31. Westminster. Henry 6 1421 1422 August 31. 38 6 218 March 4. Windsor. The Line of York. Edward 4 1442 1460 March 4. 23 1 195 April 9. Winchester. Edward 5 1433 1471 April 9. 0 2 195 June 18. Not known. Richard 3 1448 1483 June 18. 2 2 193 August 22. Leicester. The Families United. Henry 7 1459 1485 August 22. 2 2 193 August 22. Leicester. Henry 8 1491 1508 April 22. 2 2 193 August 22. Leicester. Edward 6 1537 1547 January 28. 37 10 132 June 28. Windsor. Q. Mary 1518 1553 July 6. 6 5 125 July 6. Westminster. Q. Eliz. 1533 1558 November 17. 44 4 76 March 24. Westminster. The Union of the two Kingdoms. James 1566 1602 March 24. 22 0 53 March 27. Westminster. Charles 1 1600 1625 March 27. 23 11 30 January 30. Windsor. Charles 2 1630 1648 January 30. Whom God grant long to Reign.
A CATALOGUE of the Peers and Nobility of England according to their Precedence. Dukes. James, Duke of York and Albany, Earl of Ʋlster, Lord High Admiral of England the King's only Brother. Created Jan. 27. 1643. Rupert Duke of Cumberland, and Earl of Holdernesse. Jan. 24. 1643. The Lord Chancellor Keeper Treasurer Privy Seal Take place of all the other Dukes
Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk. Francis Seymour Duke of Somerset. George Villiers Duke of Buckingham. Christopher Monk Duke of Albemarle. James Fitz-Roy Duke of Monmouth. Henry Cavendish Duke of New-Castle. Charles Lenos Duke of Richmond. Charles Fitz-Roy Duke of Southampton. Henry Fitz-Roy Duke of Grafton. Marquesses. Charles Pawlet Marq. of Winchester. Henry Somerset Marq. of Worcester. Henry Pierrepoint Marq. of Dorchester. Earls. The L. High Chamberlain of England. Steward of the King's Houshold. Chamberlain of the King's Houshold. Take Place of all Earls in respect of their Pla∣ces.
Aubry de Vere Earl of Oxford. Charles Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury. Anthony Grey Earl of Kent. William Stanly Earl of Derby. John Manours Earl of Rutland. Theophil. Hastings Earl of Huntington. William Russell Earl of Bedford. Philip Herbert Earl of Pembroke. Edward Clinton Earl of Lincoln. Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham. James Howard Earl of Suffolk. Charles Sackville Earl of Dorset and Mid∣dlesex. James Cecill Earl of Salisbury. John Cecill Earl of Excester. John Egerton Earl of Bridgewater. Robert Sidney Earl of Leicester. James Compton Earl of Northampton. Edward Rich Earl of Warwick & Hol∣land. Will. Cavendish Earl of Devonshire. William Fielding Earl of Denbigh. John Digby Earl of Bristol. Charles Sackvill Earl of Middlesex and Dorset. Gilbert Holles Earl of Clare. Oliver St. John. Earl of Bullingbrook.
Charles Fane Earl of Westmorland. Robert Montague Earl of Manchester. Charles Howard Earl of Berkshire. John Sheffield Earl of Mulgrave. William Leg Earl of Marlborough. Thomas Savage Earl of Rivers. Robert Berty Earl of Lindsey. John Cary Earl of Dover ex. Charles Knollys Earl of Banbury. Henry Mordant Earl of Peterborough. Thomas Gray Earl of Stamford. Heneage Finch Earl of Winchelsey. Charles Dormer Earl of Caernarvan Mountjoy Blount Earl of Newport. Philip Stanhop Earl of Chesterfield. John Tufton Earl of Thanet. Tho. Weston Earl of Portland. Will. Wentworth Earl of Strafford. Robert Spencer Earl of Sunderland. Nicholas Lerke Earl of Scarsdale. John Wilmot Earl of Rochester. Henry Jermin Earl of St. Albans. Edw. Montague Earl of Sandwich. James Butler Earl of Brecknock. Henry Hyde Earl of Clarendon. Arthur Capel Earl of Essex. Robert Brukenel Earl of Cardigan. Arthur Annesley Earl of Anglesey. John Greenvill Earl of Bath.
Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle. William Craven Earl of Crave. Robert Bruce Earl of Aylesbury. Richard Boyle Earl of Burlington. Henry Bennet Earl of Arlington. Anth. Ashly Cooper Earl of Shaftsbury. George Fitz-Roy Earl of Northumberland. Henry Howard Earl of Norwich. William Herbert Earl of Powys. Edw. Henry Lee Earl of Litchfield. Charles Fitz-Charles Earl of Plymouth. Thomas Leonard Earl of Sussex. Thomas Osborn Earl of Darby. John Maitland Earl of Gilford. Lewis de Duras. Earl of Feversham. Charles— Earl of Burford.
Viscounts. Leicester Devereux Viscount Hereford. Francis Brown Viscount Montague. James Fiennes Viscount Say and Seale. Edward Conway Viscount Conway. Baptist Noel Viscount Cambden. William Howard Viscount Stafford. Thomas Bellasis Viscount Faulconberg. John Mordant Viscount Mordant. George Savill Viscount Hallifax. Robert Paston Viscount Yarmouth. Francis Newport Viscount Newport of Brad∣ford. Barons. George Nevill Lord Abergavenny. James Touchet Lord Audly. Charles West Lord De la Ware. George Berkley Lord Berkley. Thomas Parker Lord Morley and Mon∣tage. Cogniers Darcy Lord Darcy, and Mey∣nel. William Stourton Lord Stourton. Henry Lord Sandys, de la Vine. Benj. Mildmay Lord Fitzwater. Thomas Windsor Lord Windsor.
Wingfield Crom∣well Lord Cromwell Ralph Eure Lord Eure. Philip Wharton Lord Wharton. Will. Willoughby Lord Willoughby of Parham. William Pagett Lord Paget. Charles North Lord North, and Baron Grey of Rolston. William Bruges Lord Shandois. James Berty Lord Norris. William Petre Lord Petre. Digby Gerard Lord Gerard of Gerard Bromley. Charles Stanhop Lord Stanhop. Henry Arundell Lord Arundel of War∣dour. Christopher Roper Lord Tenham. Robert Grevill Lord Brook. Edw. Montague Lord Mountague of Boughton. Ford Grey Lord Grey of Wark. John Roberts Lord Roberts. John Lovelace Lord Lovelace. John Pawlet Lord Pawlet. William Maynord Lord Maynard. George Coventry Lord Coventry. James Lord Esrick. Charles Mohun Lord Mohun.
William Boteler Lord Boteler. Edw. Herbert Lord Herbert of Cher∣bury. Francis Seymore Lord Seymour. Thomas Leigh Lord Leigh of Stone∣leigh. Christopher Hatton Lord Hatton. Richard Byron Lord Byron. Richard Vaughan Lord Vaughan. Charles Smith Lord Carington. Will. Widdrington Lord Widdrington. Humble Ward Lord Ward. Tho. Culpepper Lord Culpepper. Isaac Astley Lord Astley. John Lucas Lord Lucas. John Bellasis Lord Bellasis. Edw. VVatson Lord Rokingham. Charles Gerard Lord Gerard of Brandon Gilbert Sutton Lord Lexinton. Char. Kirkhaven Lord Wotton. Marm. Langdale Lord Langdal. Will. Croft Lord Croft dead. John Berkley Lord Berkly of Stratton. Denzil Holles. Lord Holles. Char. Cornwallis Lord Cornwallis. George Booth Lord De la Mere. Horatio Townsend Lord Townsend. John Crew Lord Crew. John Frescheville Lord Frescheville.
Rich. Arundell Lord Arundel of Tre∣rice. Thomas Butler Lord Butler of Moor-Park. Thomas Clifford Lord Clifford of Chud∣ley. Richard Butler Lord Weston. Charles North Lord Grey of Rollston, and L. North of Cartlidge. Heneage Finch. Lord Daventry. The Lords Spiritual. Sancroft Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. Rich. Sterne Arch-Bishop of York. Isaac Barrow Bishop of St. Asaph. Humphrey Lloyd Bishop of Bangor. Peter Mew Bishop of Bath and Wells. Guy Carleton Bishop of Bristol. Edward Rainbow Bishop of Carlisle. John Pierson Bishop of Chester. Ralph Brideoake Bishop of Chichester. Thomas Wood Bishop of Coventry & Lichf. William Lucie Bishop of St. Davids. Nathanael Crew Bishop of Durham. Peter Gunning Bishop of Ely.
Thomas Lamplugh Bishop of Excester. John Prichard. Bishop of Gloucester. Herbert Crofts Bishop of Hereford. VVilliam Lloyd Bishop of Landaffe. Thomas Barlow Bishop of Lincoln. Henry Compton Bishop of London. Anthony Sparrow Bishop of Norwich. John Fell Bishop of Oxford. Joseph Henshaw Bishop of Peterborough. John Dolben Bishop of Rochester. Seth VVard Bishop of Salisbury. George Morley Bishop of VVinchester James Fleetwood Bishop of VVorcester.
A CATALOGUE of all the Bishopricks in the two Pro∣vinces of Canterbury and York. The Names of what Cities, Shires, or Counties are in each Diocess. How many Parishes in each Dio∣cess. How many of them are Impropriations. The Annual Revenue of each Bishoprick as it is in the Kings Book. And how the Clergies Tenths are rated in each of them.
In the Province of CANTERBURY The Diocess of Canterbury. Parishes. Impropri∣ations. Valuation. l. s. d. q. Clergies Tenths.l. s. d. q. Kent part. 257 000 2816-17-09-1 0651-18-02-1 St. Asaph. Part of Denbigh. Flint. Montgomery. Merioneth. Shropshire. 121 000 0187-11-06-0 0186-19-07-3 Bangor. All Carnarvan. Anglesey. Part of Denbigh. Montgomery. Merioneth. 107 036 0131-16-04-0 0151-14-03-1 Bath and Wells. Somersetshire all. 388 160 0533-01-03-0 0353-18-00-3 Bristol. Bristol City. Dorsetshire all. 236 064 0338-08-04-0 0353-18-00-3
Chichester. Parishes. Impropri∣ations. Valuation. l. s. d. q. Clergies Tenths. l. s. d. q. Sussex all. 250 112 0677-01-00-3 0287-02-00-3 Coventry and Lichfield. All Darbyshire. Staffordshire. Part of VVarwickshire. Shropshire. 557 250 0559-18-02-3 0590-16-11-1 Eely. All Cambridgeshire. Eely Isle. 141 075 2134-18-05-3 0384-14-09-1 St. Davids. All Pembrookshire. Cardiganshire. Radnorshire. Brecknockshire. Part of Monmouth. Hereford. Montgomery. Glamorgan. 308 120 0457-01-10-3 0336-14-10-0 Excester. All Devonshire. Cornwall. 604 239 0500-00-00-0 1200-15-02-0
Gloucester. Parishes. Impropri∣ations. Valuation. l. s. d. q. Clergies Tenths. l. s. d. q. Gloucestershire all. 267 125 0315-17-02-0 0358-15-00-0 Hereford. Herefordshire all. Shropshire part. 313 136 0768-10-06-3 340-02-02-2 Landaffe. Part of Glamorgan. Monmouth. 107 098 0154-14-01-0 155-05-04-0 Lincoln. All Lincolnshire. Leicestershire. Bedfordshire. Buckinghamshire. Huntingdonshire. Hertfordshire part. 1255 577 0894-10-01-2 751-14-06-0 London. All Middlesex. Essex. Part of Hertfordshire. 622 189 1119-08-40-0 821-15-01-0 Norwich. All Norfolk. Suffolk. 1181 385 0899-18-07-2 1117-13-00-1
Oxford. Parishes. Impropri∣ations. Valuation. l. s. d. q. Clergies Tenths. l. s. d. q. Oxfordshire all. 195 88 0354-16-04-2 255-08-00-0 Peterborough. All Northamptonshire. Rutlandshire. 293 91 0414-19-11-0 520-16-08-0 Rochester. Kent Part. 098 36 0358-03-02-1 222-14-06-3 Salisbury. All Barkshire. VViltshire. 544 109 1367-11-08-0 901-08-01-0 Worcester. VVorcester all. VVarwickshire part. 241 071 1049-17-03-3 228-00-00-0 Winchester. All Surrey. Southampton. Isle of VVight. Isle of Jersey. Isle of Garnsey. Sark and Ald. 362 131 2973-04-02-3 846-01-00-0
In the Province of YORK The Diocess of York.   Impropri∣ations. Valuation. l. s. d. q. Clergies Tenths. l. s. d. q. Nottinghamshire. Yorkshire part. 581 336 1609-19-02-0 1113-17-09-3 Carlisse. Cumberland part. VVestmorland all. 093 018 0530-04-11-2 0161-01-07-2 Chester. All Cheshire. Lancashire. Part of Yorkshire. Cumberland. 256 101 0420-01-08-0 0435-12-00-0 Durham. Durham all. Northumberland part. Yorkshire part. 135 087 1821-01-05-1 0385-05-06-2 Man. The Isle of Man. 017
The Total Number of Dukes 11 Marquesses 3 Earls 73 Viscounts 11 Barons 66 Baronets 668 Arch-Bishops 2 Bishops 24 Principal Secretaries of State 2 Judges 12 Judges of the Court of Kings Bench 4 Judges of the Court of Common Pleas 4 Barons of Exchequer 4 Counties in England 39 Counties in VVales 13 Islands 8 Parliament Men 509 Hundreds 768 Market-Towns 713 Parishes 9241 FINIS.
