e3058 r9479 12090996 53877
ENGLANDS Third Alarm TO VVARRE: Stirring up the whole Land as one Man, to help the LORD, and His servant David (all the Faithfull in the World) against most bloudy Adversaries, mighty Hunters before the LORD. In which Warre, No Resistance is maintained, but what has now (as in Davids time) a sweet agreement with Duty, and affinity with the best Obedi∣ence: No Resistance then or now of Regall Authority, or Higher Power, but of those, who are the greatest Enemies thereunto: Such were Sauls willing Helpers in his War against David; such are the Kings Helpers in his Warre now, against his best Subjects, the Faithfull of the Land. Jer. 48.10. Cursed be he, that keepeth backe his Sword from bloud. 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a Price, be not ye the servants of men. Joel 2.11. Feare not, O Land, be glad and rejoyce; for the LORD will doe great things. Gen. 8.1. God remembred Noah, and every living thing, and all the Cattell that was with him: He will remember David, and all his afflictions. Psal. 132.1. Chrysos. Serm. 68. Oremus ut Christus suo semper regnet in Milite: ut Miles semper suo triumphet in Rege. Let us pray, That Christ would evermore be King in his Souldier: That His Soul∣dier may evermore triumph in his King. London, Printed for Thomas Vnderhill, in the second yeare of the Beasts wounding, warring against the Lamb, and those that are with Him, Called, Chosen, and Faithfull. 1643.
TO THE READER. This Epistle shewes the purpose of the Book what could not be shewed in the Title; cleares the Du∣ty of all good people, to stand-up now all as one man; Gives Arguments full to that purpose; answers all materiall Arguments against is. HEe that speaks to All, speaks to none: Words, as Physicke, cannot be applied to MAN under that generall notion: but to this or that man in particular: Therefore I intend all this unto thee, who hast taken it into thy hand, that thou maist lay it unto thy heart. The noise of the Drum, and sound of Warre still in thine eares, has awakened thee sure; no Sleeper now, when such a Tempest lyes upon us, unlesse thou art as one of those, who can be secure in the midst of the Sea, or lye a∣sleepe upon the top of a Mast. I suppose thee awakened, and hearing thy selfe summoned to Warre. Thy Call is from Heaven,A supposition oly that the Reul enites and Gadites had built an Alar. contrary to God com∣mand, did stir-up the whole con∣gregation of Israel to warre against them, Iosb. 22.12. So did the forcing a Concubine; All Israel arose, and were knit together as one man, foure hundred thousand men, to warre with Benjamin, refsing to give up  Delinquents to death. Iudg. 20.1.8.11.13. See Ep. p. 4. all the Lawes of Heaven and Earth have sealed thee thy Warrant: for the cause is Gods, & His Peoples. To maintain all that is dear to Him & them in Earth & Hea∣ven: Thy enemies are the Lords Enemies, the most insul∣ting that ever the Church was infested with; for they are, most of them, home-bred, that are helpers with the Beast,
of the same Countrey with thee, and have the same Mo∣ther: Besides, they have the hornes of a Lamb, they will fight under formall colours, semblances, shewes, and pre∣tences of Law and Justice, which they carry upon their Swords point. It will be the hottest Warre that ever was yet. If these Adversaries have the day, expect no more mercy from them, then from the mouth of the Devourer, be it Cannon, Dragon, Wolfe, Lion, or she Beare, or from the Divell himselfe; for indeed he playes Rex now, he has armed the Edomite (Papist I meane) with a Sword, and with a Sword (Spirit though he be) he must be resisted. But in warring now,Ob. I may resist the King. No thou shalt resist no other,Ans. but that Evill Spirit, which has put a Sword into an Edomites hand now, and has en∣gaged the heart of the King to her, who has pawned the Jew∣els of the Kingdom, to purchase Instruments of death, thereby to lay waste the Kingdome of Israel, and to dethrone the King thereof: The soule of the King cleaves in love to her, even her, who bends all her power against the LORD CHRIST and His Kingdome; And, To purchase this cursed end (which will cost the best Flower in their Crowne, and they shall misse of it too, when all is done) To carry on this horrid designe, they have joyned hearts and hands, with Irish Rebels, and English Monsters, men skilfull to destroy, whose hearts and hands are steeped in bloud, and brawned in villanies. There can be no question now of the lawfulnesse of resistance, for thou shalt offer no more violence to the King and Kingdome, then what thou shouldst offer to the Kingdom of Heaven; a sweet violence in contending for the Faith, and the trust of the King∣dome. But some there are most contrary minded,Ob. Lawyers and DIVINES both; these are against the Covenant now, which engageth to defensive Armes: and they say their Rea∣son and Conscience is against it too *, and this their example may very well stumble thee. Example may win much with unstable mindes;Ans. But sure∣ly
the example of such men, whose walking is as contrary to a common Light and principles, as darknesse is to light; as contrary to Christ, His wayes and servants, as the Divel is, or as Hell is to Heaven: surely the example of such men cannot perswade with thee. These men have so long shut their eyes against a naturall light, and so long laboured to stifle and choak a naturall Conscience, that now they have not so much Logicke (Reason I meane) then has a Dog: nor any more (good) Conscience, then has a Beast. I would ra∣ther my tongue should cleave to the roofe of my Mouth, then that it should send forth the scum of a foule stomack, or corrupt heart, rotten speeches: The Lord knowes I speake what I know, and what all may know, that will observe the conversation of these men, (Anti-Covenanters now, like as the inti-petitioners before:) I will say it againe. They have no more (true) Reason, nor (good) Conscience then a Bast has: No, their pleasure and profit are their gods, their glo∣ry their shame, unreasonable men they are: And this is the clearest evidence thereof that ever was given,ll. 3.19. They mind earthly things. No matter what such Cretians say, alwayes Lyars, evill Beasts, slow Bellies. Shew thy selfe a man, bring forth the speare, and stop the way against these Murthe∣rers; for even these men are as one of them;Obad. 11.12. They stand on the other side: They have looked on the day of their Brother, They have rejoiced in the day of his destruction, and have spoken proudly in the day of distresse; these are as one of them. Thou wilt wish that these may be cut off that so trouble us: and bring forth the speare against those Murtherers, whose notorious violen∣ces are more legible all over the Land. Ob. No thou wilt say, for thou art not reslved of any other resistance that is lawfull, but by prayer, and fasting and so a Spirit must be resisted too. Ans. Thou maist read and be fully satisfied touching this matter, towards the close of this work, therefore I will say nothing to it here. See chap. 7. Ob. But thy Relations are such, that thou canst not goe forth to battell.It is as cleafe as the Sun, that the resistance, the Covenant ow engageth unto, is against the Evill Spirit, whch now woketh effectu∣ally in the chil∣dren of disobe∣dience. Therfore it had been a wonde, it the Divel and his children did not now contend a∣gainst it, mad with rage be∣cause the en∣tring into this. Covenant, and standing to it, will destroy Sa∣tants Kingdme. This commands a set discourse, though wo ds are lost pon such men
Be not willingly ignorant at this Point:Ans. Is there any re∣lation nearer then that to thy God, to His Church, to His People, to thy Countrey? But I will not examine thee strictly at this point, touching thy Relations, he is not good, who is not answerable there. I would gain thy heart to the worke; and for thy Relations otherwise, I leave to GOD, and thy Conscience; onely this I say, If ever there was a time, when all the People of the Land were called forth▪ to stand-up as one man now is the time,Now Altars are built contra∣ry to the com∣mand, And the Spouse of Christ is FORCED before her LORDS face. Never was there such a Cause as ths to make all Is∣rael arise, and to knit them toge∣ther all as one man. See Ep p. 1. Doe thy du∣ty now, gird up thy loines and put on thy harnesse, and goe forth thy selfe to battle, and not another for thee; Pity thy Country, and thy dwelling place; keepe the Wolves from thine owne doore. Remember the poore sheepe there, wives, children▪ sucklings, all these were a prey to the Edomite once, so they will be now; If thou wilt not quit thy selfe like a man. Gird-up thy loynes, and put on thy harnesse▪ and boast in The Lord all the day long. Though the Enemy be strong, so is God too.Neh. 4.16. Jer. 20.11. Who is great and a terrible one, mighty to deli∣ver. The enemy is wise, so is God too; The Counsellour. The enemy is many: one God is enough to answer all discourage∣ments: He workes most gloriously with a few,Joshua 1. Heb. 13.5. , five Ne∣gatives to ascer∣taine the Affir∣mative, and to give the Chuch strong conso¦lation for ever. and those, a few and weake people. Boast in The Lora all the day long, be strong and of a good courage, for He has said five times in one breath, He will Never, never, never, never, never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Object. But He seemes to forsake His people, for they are fallen downe. Answ. As good a sign as any the sacred word gives us; That now is the Time when God will build His People up, so as they shall stand fast like Mount Sion He builds-up but not before all is fallen to ruines in the Soul and in His Church; and so runnes the promise;Act. 15.16. After this I will returne and will bld againe the Tabernacle, which is FALLEN DOWN: and I will build againe the RVINES thereof, and I will set it up. But thou hast not a heart to reach forth thy hand to help them,Ob. that are fallen so low into the Deepes, and their Ad∣versary is so high.
Choose thee; these people shall rise without thy hand:Ans. and thou shalt be trodden downe by the foot of pride. But consider what a poore discouragement this is! The Righ∣teous are fallen low! No disparagenent, as long as GOD is highest. It is His glory to worke for His People, when they are lowest, and their power as gone, then Gd comes-in.Deut. 32.6. If thou wilt reade, thou shalt finde excellent Reason, why The Lord suffers His people to lie low as in the Deeps, & their adver∣saries to be above: It is for DISCOVERY-sake;Chap. 5. that the hearts of His owne people may be discovered to themselves; That the Adversary may be discovered too, his rage and ma∣lice (before in the heart secret there,) may bee made mani∣fest to all Israel: And that Gods right hand may be discove∣red also, made glorious before all the peoples sight, friends and adversaries both. If then God suffers His people to bee lw, it is that their (proud) spirit may fal, and their Faith may rise. Now say again▪ and make thy boast of it before thy Adversaries, who say, These people, whom they call GODS people, are low. Ans. Their GOD is above, above all their rage,Exod. 18.11. above all their water-floods; aboe all, wherein the Enemy deals proudly; He is above all; And He will set His people above, and through these adversaries down like a Milstone into the great waters. We have GODS Word for itRev. 18.21, and that is as much as the Heavens and Earth have for their continuance. And Israel have had an example for it before their eies; hey sanke as Lead in the mighty watersEx. 15.10.. This gives the Church assured confidence for ever, That by the greatnesse of Thine arme, these enemies also shall be as STILL AS A STONEVerse 16.. Remember, God stopped the mouthes of these Lyons then, when out soules lay amidst those devourers; God is the same still, He will doe so still; He has put an hooke in their nose. Note there are bridles in the lips of these Beasts at this time. Gird up thy loynes, and stand fast in the faith, and for the maintaining of it till thou die. While thou canst stand, stand fighting; when thou must fall, fall praying; And if thou doest not rise againe victoriously here, thou shalt rise glori∣ously anon; else The Lord has not spoken by the mouth of
His Servants, Patriarchs, Prophets▪ Apostles, in those daies▪ nor by the Messengers of the Churches and glory of Christ in these dayes. But thou art resolved at that point; Thou LORD wilt blesse the righteous:Psal. 5.12. Isa. 26.3. with favour wilt Thou compasse him, as with a Shield. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on Thee. Perfect peace; So we read, and it is a full reading, but it is peace, peace. A double Peace; In famine, enough then; peace in war, peace then: peace in life▪ and peace in death; then peace indeed a perfect peace. Now, no peace in the North, nor in the West nor in any quar∣ter in the Christian world, nor no peace can be, till the grea Whore be at peace with the Saints; and the divell at peace with the Church, (and that will never be, what ever offers and semblances there be that way,) but to him whose heart is stayed upon his GOD, peace, peace; The Peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keepe your heart and minde through Jesus Christ. Amen. Behold, God is my salvation: I will trust, and not be afraid, for The LORD IEHOVAH is my strength. Isa. 12.2. Looke unto Me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else. Isa. 45.22.
ENGLANDS Third Alarm to VVAR, Against the Beast. SECT. III. 0200 DAvids story, & Sauls persecution is continued: his hand is restrained, but his heart is bloody; and men are, as their hearts are. David delivers the Keilites, yet they will deliver David, into a murtherers hand. A lesson from thence. Saul holds-on his foot, in the path of the destroyer. Why does not Israel stand-up, for Israel, and for their (temporall) Savi∣our; against an over-bearing Lord, and an insulting Edomite? The Answer will resolve the Case of Conscience; and Is∣raels duty touching that matter. Saul drives-on furiously af∣ter David, seemes to prosper, gaines men, The Chosen out of all Israel, to carry-on his bloody designe; and drives Da∣vid from all his strong holds every one. Davids GOD looks upon all this, and suffers it to be done, for excellent Reasons, relating To David, To his Adversaries, and To GOD Himselfe; and all relating to these times: David was deli∣vered then, and he shall be delivered now; but not before all his strong holds are cast downe. The Tribes come▪ in at last, when the way was cleared before them, and all good meanes used first. All true Israelites will come in shortly, To helpe The LORD against THE MIGHTY, when That, which letteth, is taken away; There is the Conclusion; GODS Time is the best Time, best to Advance His Glory, and His Peoples Peace.
CHAP. 1. Davids story and Sauls persequution is continued; his heart as bloody as before; though after his march from Nob, hee could draw no more blood, for a Man is as his Will is. David delivers the Keilites out of the hand of spoilers, and the Keilites would de∣liver David into Sauls hands. David will doe his Duty notwith∣standing, and leave the rest to God. PRoud and haughty Scorner is his name,Prov. 21.24. who dealeth in proud wrath. The Edomite is he▪ who had a Bloody Com∣mission scaled unto him, and has executed it accor∣dingly; Turne thee and fall upon the Friests, because their hand is with David; and the Edomite turned, and did as aforesaid. And so we have read a bloudy Tragedy, Nec adhuc finitus Orestes, scriptus at à tergo, and yet we are not at an end. Turne over the leafe, on the backside we have as much more: As much more, I say▪ in proposition, and designe only, not in conclusion, which God makes that was, and, will be glo∣rious still: But much more endeavoured nothing done: Much Acti∣on, yet nothing effected to Sauls heart and purpose; And yet was it a deadly Persecution. True it was, The LORD suffered the Evill Spirit to open, by the hands of Saul, and the Edomite, a sluce or floodgate of wrath, and there-out issued a mighty streame of blood; But Hee, That opens at pleasure, and shuts also at pleasure. Hee quickly shut 02 this Sluce, and stopt this full streame; So as▪ Though Saul, and his E∣domite persecuted David, I know not how many yeares after with deadly hatred, yet they shed not one drop of bloud all that time: A wondrous thing;Psal. 31.15. we cannot stand upon it. My TIMES are in Thy hands, sayes David; They are indeed, and it is Davids comfort that they are so, that Davids life, and all his concernments are in GODS hand. He will dispose of all, and all shall come through His hands and shal be transacted there; all for Davids good in the end. If not a Sparrow falls to the ground without your FATHER▪Matth. 10.29. then not one drop of (Davids) bloud sure. Though Saul and his Edomite pursued-hard af∣ter David, yet they shall draw no more blood Though five hundred drawne swords (after our account,) nay five thousand drawn swords are about D vi round about, as we shall see anon, yet not one drop of bloud is drawne by Saul or his men. Why then,Qu. how is the story Tragicall? you will say, for we shall
reade no more of men or garments rolled in Blood. True, we shall not, and yet we shall see the Story is Tragicall,Ans. and Saul the King, with the Edomite his Generall, are as grievous persecu∣tors as before. The Divell was a murthrer from the beginning; So he will be to the end, a murtherer stil not because he actually sheds bloud every where at pleasure; but buse intentionally hee alwayes has a will to doe it. Had the divell power in his hand (but God has him in His Chaine,) if he could doe what he would doe, hee would make the whole earth one stage to act a Tragedy, which would de∣stroy the stage whereon it is acted, he would make the world a field of bloud, HORMAH, as was said, utter destruction; such a good wil. the divell has, he has not power; that must be let forth or restrai∣ned as GOD pleaseth, and as it was here. But this is the point. The will makes the murtherer; for, A MAN IS AS HIS WILL IS; And such an one was Saul, and his Edomite both; their wills were murtherous and destructive, wasting was in their paths, there∣fore they were murtherers, men of blouds. That it was so we shall well understand if we reade the Text. Saul and his Edomite pursue David; What to doe? To take away from him his Sword; No, the Text is cleare; To take away his life.1 Sam. 19.1. They sought David every day To kill him, sayes the Text. What care bloudy enemies for the Sword? Their care is to sheath the Sword in Davids bowels, that will satisfie, and nothing else; So the enemies, Saul with his Edomite drive-on furiously towards his Citty, and the other strong nolds. Why doe they drive-on so furiously? The anser is upon everlasting Record, TO DESTROY THE CITY FOR DAVIDS SAKE. But I will not huddle up things so, I will proceed in or∣der,1 Sam. 22.10. and keepe pace with Sauls and his Edomites march after David; taking in the Remarkables by the way. We shall see the Persecution was very sore, and that Conscience could not hold backe the neighbou∣ring Israelites from comming in to hold Sauls Sword, and his Edo∣mites hand from shedding bloud, and acting such notorious violen∣ces. This will be put to the question anon, and resolved, I hope▪ to every reasonable mans satisfaction. I will follow Saul and the Edo∣mite a little in this march, and David in his slight. It was well for David, that Doeg espied him at Nob, for he knowes what will follow; therefore he hastens thence, and leaves the City, as  lef odom; or as a man leaves his house, no sooner he is gone out thence▪ but he sees it fall into ashes. David flies bee knowes not well whither, but for feare of Saul he went to Achish ing of Gath; Th the Kings servants hurt him by recording his commendations (in a Panagerick;) and make him so sore afraid,1 Sam. 21.11. That he seemes not to be himselfe, and so playes mad prankes.
Reader, you cannot justifie David in all he did, though one of the best men in those dayes; nor may you condemn him; Nor may you say, if you had been in his case, you would not have done as David did; You know not what you might have done, had you been in his case, close pursued at the heels by a cruell Lord, & a bloudy Edomite. Thou little knowest now, what thou mightest have done then, being in Da∣vids case. It is thy neighbours case now, pitty them, condemne them not, but looke to thy owne standing, and in whose strength thou doest stand; Meditate Terrour, and strengthen thy hand and thy heart in GOD against the day of trouble and treading downe. Now pro∣ceed; The Lord orders all, even Davids mad prankes for Davids good; He is not more affraid of Achish, then Achish is affraid of David, A mad fellow! I have no need of him, David shall not come into my house, sayes A∣chish. David cared not whether he came thither or no. Nay he counts it a mercy, That he is escaped thence. And now hee is gone to the Cave Adullam;1 Sam. 22. There his friends comfort him, and he has an Army of five hundred men. He goes on somewhat an indirect course (we shall heare more of that anon,) for he was affraid. The Prophet meets with him, bids him goe backe againe into the land of Judah. There Saul heares tidings of him, and from Doegs mouth, he heares of all that was done at Nob. Then followes a miserable destruction, as we heard, all the Priests slaine, except one, who escaped to bring David the heavy tidings of All, that befell the Citty of Priests; which yet David expe∣cted, knowing it would be so, because he saw the Edomite was there. But David has escaped, and being delivered, hee will doe some service in testimony of his thankfull remembrance for that deliverance. David heares, that the Keilites were distressed, the Philistines were fighting against them, and notorious, Pillagers they were almost as these in our dayes,1 Sam. 23.1. They robbed the threshing floores, tooke from the poore People their provision they had layed-up against winter: Da∣vid cannot endure this wrong, his Soule hates oppression where ever he sees it, and to the LORD he goes, for He is Davids Oracle: The LORD delayes not David, gives him present Answer, Goe and smite the Philistines, and save Keilah:Verse 2. No but doe not, said his men: See! they crosse Gods command,Verse 3. but they give good Reason for it, so as they put David to a stand; We are afraid (say they) of one man Saul, who is behind us, and wilt thou thrust thy selfe into the mouth of the Troopers before thee, a legion of them? A poore hand-full of men against the Armies of the Philistines?a fronte. Wilt thou so? It must not be so. The men spake like men, very good reason, [but they who can speak no more, are not for action, they will hinder Davids victories:] Now David is at a stand, and faints, hastens to GOD againe, [thither he can retire himselfe still, and refresh his fainting spirits] enquires of
The LORD, and is established. A gracious God! He does not re∣prove David for hearkning to his men, after he had heard what God said, but gives him the same answere as before: And now David is upon his legges again, and as bold as a Lion, he will venture himself among Scorpions now; what cares he who they are, they are Gods enemies; or how many they are, they are but men all, and miserable men, David carries the revenge of God with him, and he must pre∣vaile, and doe worthily. God bids him goe against them, and he will goe; David waits but for GODS commission, and that shall be a sufficient warrant for David indeed; Let God alone with the rest. In point of worke and good service we must divide with God: Wee have to doe with no more but the Duty, the doing Gods command: as here Davids command was, Goe, and smite the Philistines: David must goe, for GODS command carries a good man, as Abraham, blind-fold, he knowes not whither. But the distracting troublesome part, that which is above strength, the difficulty, the darksome part of the worke, which so disheartned Davids men, and so shakes the soule with feare, that is not ours, but Gods part: It must bee rolled upon Him Who is mighty, and set Faith to work there: A little Man, and a great Faith; an hand-full of Men, and an heart-full of Faith, will doe great matters, Put to flight Armies of Aliens: So David did here, he smote those Pillagers, and saved the Inhabitants of Keilah. And now there David is even at KEILAH, amongst the inhabitants there; he is amongst those, whom he has indeared and engaged to him, he thinkes, by unrecountable favours. This was told to Saul, That David was come to Keilah; and Saul was glad of that, and so he said, God hath delivered him into my hands,1 Sam. 23.7. for he is shut in by entring into a Towne that hath gates and barres. And that he may take the opportunity, which GOD put into his hand (he thought, which yet was but to discover Sauls spirit, the treachery of the Kei∣lites, and his owne glorious Arme stretched out still against Saul, and for his Servant David) Saul calls all the People together to war, to goe downe to Keilah, to besiege David and his men there: David understands all this and more; for this was Davids advantage, and comfort both, GOD was with David, and went along with him where ever David went; a Refuge to Whom he could continually resort for counsell, and direction from His Mouth: So David under∣stands all the purposes of Sauls heart, and that the Keilites will prove Treacherous also. Set a Marke upon these Keilites as we passe, that we may know them where ever we meet them. Wicked, ungrate∣full — people; David has taken off their yokes, delivered them out of the hands of Spoylers, made them Free-men, who were Slaves before; David put his life in his hand, would jeopard it for them,
stand up for them against an Army of Philistines: In a word, Da∣vid did for these KEILITES as the Parliament have done for us; and when all this is done, ungratefull wretches as they are, they are so far from standing up for David, that they will betray him in∣to Sauls hand: O monstrous! &c. — Deliver up, deale treache∣rously with him, who was the best friend they had in the world! Give him up into the hand of Saul, and his Spoylers (the Edomites) to be spoyled, who had delivered them from out of the hands of Spoi∣lers! O monstrous! But yet David must not repent of what he has done; it was his duty, he had a command for it: Though Saul is a bloudy man, and the Keilites treacherous, GOD is faithfull; He will but learne His Servants this great Lesson, Not to trust in men, but in the Living, and Faithfull, and True God. Men will deale like men, deceit∣fully; GOD is Truth, and Davids Mercies are sure; There is Davids Hold-fast; He has nothing to doe, 'tis not his part, to trouble himselfe about this, What Saul is, or what the Keilites are; he may enquire of the LORD about it, and he shall be told, That Sauls intentions are bloudy, and the Keili es treacherous; but he must not trouble himselfe about it, not about what Saul will doe, or the Keilites will doe; David must doe his duty, that is his part to doe; let God alone with Saul and his Keilites, they shall doe David no hurt, but good a great deale, so be David does hs duty. We have learnt our part also, and what is our duty to doe now, and now we proceed. David was resolved to have defended himselfe, and the Keilites: he would not have sffered their City to be destroyed for his sake; but ad∣vising with his Oracle, and understanding how the Keilites were minded, he quits the place, and with his men marcheth away to∣wards the Wildernesse. Here a grave Question may be asked. Why does the Lord suffer David to be put to his shifts?Quest. why is his condition so restlesse from place to place, and no certaine place? before he can fixe his foot, stand still and breath himselfe, he must run for his life. For excellent Reasons the Lord did this,Ans. That David might know this wod is a Wilernesse indeed, not the place of his rest; and that he mig t not trust in strong-holds neither, nor in men, therefore was his condition so fleeting and full of changes: He must be raised to a Crowne it must be from a low bottome, after mens hearts towards him are lly discovered, and all his strong-holds are thrown down; for GOD must be exalted in that day. But of this towards the con∣clution,Isa. 10.11. when we shall see GOD performing His wh worke, and what end He makes; for then we shall, ee the LORD is very pitifull, and of tender mey.Jam. 5.11. But we must wait fr this, as the Husbandman ait∣eth for the precious fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it. There∣fore
I will referre that to the last, and give resolution here to another Question. CHAP. II. Why did not the Neighbouring Israelites Come-in to help their Brethren and Sisters, grievously oppressed by a cruell Lord and a bloudy Edomite? Or why did they not relieve David now driven into the Wildernesse? What Saul did, and would have done is exa∣mined, and who this Edomite was? So it is made very cleare, That Conscience could not hold-backe the neighbouring Israelites from standing-up, every man in his place, to defend himselfe, and to withstand the notorious violences from Sauls and his Edomites hands. HEres a strange sight! Saul with his Edomites have smitten and burnt Nob, a City of Priests and have destroyed Man and Beast there; They make the like offer against Keilah to destroy that City for Davids sake. They pursue David still with fire and sword, and now they have driven him out into the wildernesse, as he sayes him∣selfe, from abtaing in the inheritance of the LORD. Why does Israel suffer all this? VVhy doe they not bring forth the speare, to stop their Master Saul and his Edomite, driving on furiously in the Path of the destroyer? VVhy did not Israel withstand their Master Saul,2 Chro. 26.17, 18. as AZa∣riah, with fourscore Priests more withstood VZZiah their King, en∣tring upon their office? And why did they not deale with the Edo∣mite, as the Prophet caused that messenger to be dealt withall▪ who had a Commission from King Ahab to fetch away his head?2 Kin. 6.32. VVhy did they not deale so, or more roughly with the Edomite? It is an∣swered here boldly enough, That Israel were a conscientious People, they knew their duty, they saw no VVarrant to make resistance, let their King Murther Priest, and People, then Pillage, rob and spoile them by his Servants, like the high-lander theeves there, meere Con∣science keeps these neighbouring Israelites hands close in their Poc∣kets the while; It is their King; they will not resist him meere con∣science forbids them. I would speake something here in the ge∣nerall first, Conscience is a tender thing, and must be tenderly dealt with, and not judged rashly. But certaine it is, we of the common fort have been and now are, very little troubled in point of Consci∣ence about such matters as these are; we are not so conscientious of
our duty, as to commune with Conscience about it: we minde other matters here,Hab. 26. to lade our selves with thicke clay, which we call private wealth, neglecting the common; How long? It is a Prophets questi∣on, and by an Interrogation he makes his Answer very strong and terrible; untill they shall rise-up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that shall vexe thee,Ves 7. and thou shalt be booties unto them: To whom? To Spoylers and Robbers: That thicke clay, wherein we have laboured, shall be booties unto those Robbers; there is the crosse indeed, and if it were not for feare, we would fight our selves out of slavery sure, were it but to secure our private wealth; but because we would ra∣ther be accounted Conscientious men, then Cowards, we will not hold∣up our hands, for feare it should be taken to be, a lifting-up the hand against our King. This were well now, if we did make con∣science in other things, of Lying, Swearing, Blaspheming, Cursing, Robbing, Spoiling, &c. and of all unjust gaine; or if we did make conscience not to keep our Purses shut, when the necessity of the Poore commanded us to open: or if being able men, and could goe a warfare at our owne proper cost, we did make conscience of taking gaine of money, when we stand-up for our selves, our owne lives and liberties. If we make conscience of these things, wee might be ac∣counted conscientious men in other matters, in point of resistance, for feare we make warre against the King; wherein every true Israelite must make conscience, or else quit that name; for he is unworthy the name of Israel, that does not make conscience at that sacred point. To proceed a little in the generall, GOD forbid that any Israelite in the world should Resist their King and make conscience so to doe: Nay more (for I keep to the story) GOD forbid that an Israelite should have resisted Saul; he is the Anointed of the LORD s was said, the great Fiduciary of the Kingdome; An Israelite will make conscience of resisting Saul; I say Saul, for hearken what Ahimelech sayes, Be it far from me, Let not the King impute any thing unto his servant, nor to all the house of my Fathers.1 Sam. 22.15. What should not Saul impute unto Ahimelech? That he resisted his Lord, King Saul▪ and intended ill un∣to him; it was far from him so to doe. And certainly it was, and is far from all true Israelites in the world, To resist Saul▪ to oppresse him, and doe him hurt, The LORDS Anointed, they remember that still. To come more particularly to the point, that we may resolve Conscience anon, we will see first what Saul did, and by whose In∣stigation he did it: Then, who this Edomite was. What Saul did, is legible before, written in bloudy Characters, which will remaine unto the worlds end. By whoe instigation he did it? This is as legible also: By the instigation of the Divel, vexing
and tormenting Saul, effectually working in him, together with his owne spirit, thereby agitated, stirred-up, and boyled to the heigth of extreme wrath, against David, and all those that wished well unto, or had their hand with David. This being premised, I conclude first, That Conscience could not hold-backe Israel from helping their Brethren in the day of distresse, and treading downe, for who did so oppresse Israel at this time? It must be answered, Saul their King: for he had hands and feet, and other Instruments besides, to execute the wrath; but all he did was by the divels motion, that Evill spirit upon him, which hurried him from place to place, so as he did not goe, but was driven; and all his way long he breathed out threat∣nings against David: By the motion of this Evill spirit, and his owne (which every man, Saul also, are bound to resist) did Saul doe all this; Therefore whatsoever Israel makes conscience of, they cannot make conscience of resisting the divell, or the private will, which by the helpe of the divell, has done all the violences that ever were done in the world. I presume this is a cleared case, therefore I leave it; for if Saul, acted by an Evill spirit, will flye at Israels throat, they can make no conscience in the world to resist him, I meane the bloudy actings, and notorious violences of the divell. Secondly, Israel must looke upon Saul now, the great Fiduciary of the Kingdome, betraying that trust into an Edomites hand; then smiting Israels City, Man and Beast there. Conscience well informed now, calls-in Israel to help their distressed Brethren, so far as was in the power of their hands to helpe: grant so much power in their hands, that they could and were able to relieve their Brethren, and yet would not, then Conscience will be so far from pleading their ex∣cuse, that it will condemne them as accessary to that murder and bloodshed. Israel stands charged not to suffer bloud to be shed, so farre as they can hinder the shedding of it;Deut. 21.7. Our hands have not shed this bloud, nor have our eyes seene it: That is, Conscience to quit their Eyes in this case, as well as their hands; had their Eyes seene innocent bloud-shedding (as in this case) and not come-in to rescue the In∣nocent, they had not been innocent. Conscience then did not hold Israel backe from comming-in all as one man to rescue Nob, the Priests and People there, now greatly distressed, and to deliver Da∣vid: Rather Conscience rightly informed engageth Israel upon all this, being in the power of their hands; for it is to shew mercy to their Brethren, in this time of their great distresse, and treading down by the foot of pride. Thirdly, they had shewne mercy indeed to Saul their Master, even to his soule, could they have conjured that Evill spirit, and overcome
him, solacing and delighting himselfe (as his manner is) in proud wrath, and wherewith their Master Saul was sore vexed, that (like the Lunaticke man) he falls oft times into the fire and oft times into the water (i.e.) into most imminent apparent, and destructive dangers. Doubtlesse it had been a point of pure love, duty and conscience, to have resisted him, to have with-held him, driving-on furiously to shed bloud: Had Israel done so, they had shewne themselves con∣scientious men, who understood their duty, and entirely loved their King, and therefore would not suffer him to doe that, which would undoe him for ever. O! it had been an act of mercy, and of a well instructed conscience, if Israel had, every man to his power, as one man stept-in, and withstood Saul in his bloudy way: and all the true Israel in the world would have acquitted them so doing, and said, in meere pitty and compassion to Saul, and that which should be dearest unto him have they done this, with-held their Master from shedding bloud. Nay, Saul himselfe, had he ever come to himselfe (but the Evill spirit haunted him to the day of his death) would have thanked Israel for so doing. But here, though nothing can be said for Saul in justification of what he did, yet much is said against them that had any hand with David. That they were Rebells and Traitors all against the King, and so Saul himselfe chargeth all his servants, and all the Priests too; All of you have conspired against me,2 Sam. 22. Vers. 8. Vers. 13. and why have ye done so? An heavie charge, but yet no honest man made any account of it, as a charge of dishonour: They counted it a cheape word, a great honour ra∣ther, being the Cognizance of the choicest men of all Israel, and they could glory in it, defamed for rigteousnesse sake; for the very best and choicest men in those dayes were called Conspirators, Rebels to their King: David was called so, I know not how often, and the E∣domite the Rightest man, and best Subject; yet let us heare what may be charged upon these so defamed men, though nothing can be pro∣ved; That,Ob. had Israel rose up to defend themselves, and their Bre∣thren, they had withstood their King. No,Ans. they had stood for him, and had done him an infinite service, could they have delivered their King from the power of the Evill spi∣rit, and his owne Will, and from the hands of the Edomite, who withstood the King indeed, and fought against his Crowne, Peace, and Dignity. But if Israel,Ob. standing up in their own defence, had not withstood Saul, yet they had resisted the ordinance of God, and they must make con∣science there. Yes,Ans. great Reason they should; let Israel make conscience ever∣more of resisting Saul their King, or their Kings power, for that power
is the ordinance of GOD, and hee that resisteth the ordinance of GOD, doth resist GOD. That is true, but these orders (disorders rather) of the evill spirit, and of mans perverse will, are not the ordi∣nance of GOD: Therefore to resist these is to obey GOD, and to resist the divell. Make conscience evermore of resisting Saul the King, the power, which GOD hath intrusted him with, but never make conscience of resisting the evill spirit, ruling and commanding in Saul the King; he did nothing in prosecution of David, but by suggestion from that evill spirit, mighty in Saul and in other of Israels Kings, and Queenes; And this spirit was pro tempore Dominus fac totum, therefore it could not be conscience that kept Israel quiet, and still the while. A sinfull, and base fearfulnesse i might be (yet I will not be so bold as to determine that) a stupidity, a benummednesse, a drossinesse of spirit, contracted by long rest, and so Israel might be like a Dove with∣out an heart an Asse, and a strong Asse couching downe betwixt burthens, laid upon them by Saul, and his bloudy Courtiers, for Saul commands, and the Edomite smote Nob, and overthrowes all, who stood-up for, or had an hand with David. And all Israel stood shrinking up their armes into their sleeves, as we reade, in Xenophon, The Persians were wont to doe before their King in homage and subjection to all his com∣mands. But as I said, I will not conclude so; That a deadnesse of spirit was upon Israel at this time: I beleeve there was a more com∣manding cause then that, which with-held Israel at that time. Wee shall heare that anon, when I have taken off the imputation of trea∣son, and rebellion, charged upon David, by his master Saul, for David a private man doth defend himselfe as well as hee can, and would have fortified Keilah, had they not proved treacherous to him; and the lawfulnesse of this may be questionable by all Israel, as well as by Saul himselfe. Whether David in defending Keisah,Quest. had not maintained it against Saul? It was not against Saul;Ans. It was against the notorious violences of his evill spirit, those David would have withstood. But Keilah was Israels City; Saul the King of Israel,Qu. why would David fortifie that City? [As it is more then probable he would have done, had not the Keilites proved themselves ungratefull and treacherous.] Because David knew, That Saul secretly practised mischiefe against him,Ans. and would destroy Keilah for his sake. All this is written.1 Sam. 22. Therefore hee thrust himselfe into Keilah, would have fortified that place. But Saul might thrust out David thence, for it was Sauls City,Qu. was it not? No; it was Israels City, Sauls for Israels good, to defend Israel,Ans. not to destroy Israel: We are sure of that.
But David had strong-holds here and there,Qu. and did Breast-worke himselfe against Saul his master. No,Ans. not against Saul his master, but against those notorious vio∣lences, the actings of the evill spirit upon Saul his master. Against these extreame out-rages and riots David did fortifie and Breast-worke him∣selfe. And where ever we reade of these strong-holds and Breast-works, there we shall reade of Sauls bloudy persecution against David, Israels best friend, and temporall Saviour. Therefore will those strong holds be an eternall dishonour to King Saul, till the Records of Time be lost.1 Sam. 26.19. 1 Sam. 23.14 David did get up to his strong-hold, where be abode, and there he did Breast-worke himselfe. Why? It is answered, for Saul sought every day to kill him. It is upon ever-lasting Record, an eternall dis∣honour to King Saul, so to persecute his best servant, for who so faith∣full as David in all his Kingdome; And if David, a private man, did so fortifie himselfe to safe-guard his owne throat, much more might all Israel for their owne and Davids sake, stand-up against the insolencies of a private will, and an evill spirit acting thereby. Whatever held in Israel from comming-out armed at this time, conscience it was not, To let the King doe what a Tyrant does, make will his law, and doe what he pleaseth, and yet Israel stand still the while, behold all this with open face, hold their hands in their pockets, or shrinke them up into their sleeves in homage, forsooth, to the Evill spirit command∣ing in Saul, and in obedience to the Edomite executing that com∣mand. Surely the like was never done since the beginning of the world untill this Day: For here is the King of Israel smiting Israel; the great Fiduetary of the Kingdome, to whom Cities and Townes, Priests and People are all intrusted, betraying this Trust into an Edo∣mites hands; And so he, that should, next to GOD, uphold and pre∣serve Israel, destroyes Israel, and will lay their Cities waste. And all this that he may be avenged of David, one of the best men, and best subjects he had in his Kingdome; We are well resolved now in point of Israels subjection to that power, which GOD had intrusted Saul with thereby to be a Terrour to the evill, not to good workes.Rom. 13.3. And that if Israel had stood-up in their owne and Davids defence, they had not stood-up against Saul, but for him; and against the notorious violen∣ces, the actings of the evil spirit by Sauls and his Edomites hands. And so I come to enquire concerning this Edomite, who he was; VVhen we know him, we shall see plainly, that Israel could make no scruple of conscience to stand up in resistance of him, who stood up against the Crowne and peace of Israels King and Kingdome. [VVho this Edomite was; How bloudy his minde against Israel.] VVho was this Edomite? A Childe of Edom, who in the day of Hierusalem said, Rase it, rase it: even to the foundation thereof. And The LORD
remembers this, and chargeth the Edomite with it,Ams 1 11. hee did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast off all pitty, and his anger did teare per∣petually, and kept his wrath for ever. The LORD threatens the Edo∣mite in the same place also: For three transgressions of Edom, and for foure I will not turne away the punishment thereof; A finite number for an infi∣nite; for three transgressions, and for foure. But his bloudshed, his cruelty towards his brother, that shall set deepe upon his score. Though the LORD should passe over six transgressions of Edom, yet the seventh GOD will not passe over, I will not turne away the punishment thereof. Edom has broken all the bands of Nature. [O take heed of breaking those bands of Nature, and brother like kindnesses; the Edomite did so;] he did pursue his brother with the sword; and when he had his bro∣ther under his hands, he cast-off all pitty, his anger did teare, as wee reade before; An old adversary to Israel;Num. 20.14. The Edomite knew of all the travell that befell his brother; Yet he will not shew his brother the least fa∣vour; he will not suffer him to passe by the Kings high way, though Israel will not be chargeable to the Edomite for a drop of water, or a mouthfull of grasse, if my Cattell drinke of thy water, then we will pay for it. A reasonable request as ever was asked, yet the Edomite would not grant it; He would give his brother a stone for bread; and for a fish a Serpent; so he answered his brothers request, and then came-out a∣gainst, his brother with much people, and a strong hand. When? In the day of Iacobs trouble. And now see what he has done: He had no sooner the word of command from Sauls mouth, but hee answers it with his hand; Turne thou and fall upon the Priests; And Doeg the Edomite turned, and pursued his Brother with the sword, and shewed no pity. Ah Lord! Can an Israelites heart endure to see this, An Edomite flou∣rishing with his sword in Israels Land, and hold their hands! Can they endure to see 85. Priests slaine in one day; their City smote with the edge of the Sword, both Men and Women, Children and Suck∣lings, and Oxen, and Asses, and Sheepe, with the edge of the Sword, and by the command of the Evill spirit! Can they endure to see all this, and stand still the while, seeing an Edomite not onely buffeting Israel, but utterly destroying a City in Israel! Conscience could not hold backe Israel, that is certaine. But perusing the Text, I perswade my selfe thus it was. The sentence was hasty from the King, hee did indeed suffer Ahi∣melech to plead for himselfe, but Saul was resolved upon the question, though there was a parley, or treaty betwixt them, as if they would come to a good understanding, and so end the matter; yet Saul was resolved what to doe, (as some Judges have beene resolved in the Case before they came to their Court to heare the matter,) To take a∣way Ahimelechs life; And he was quicke in doing of it. No sooner
Ahimelech had given-in his Answer, (as good Reason and Law both, as ever was given,) but Saul passed his sentence, Thou shalt surely dye, Ahimelech, &c. And so it was, it was presently done, as Saul comman∣ded, (the evill spirit on him,) for an Edomite had the doing of it, and it was done suddenly; on that day he slew 85. Priests, and smote their City, Man and Beast there; On that day; A suddaine execution, for the evill spirit is strong, and as cunning too, we are not ignorant of his devices, but know not halfe the depths of Sathan: he surprized the City before the inhabitants were aware, much lesse could the neighbou∣ring Israelites be provided to come-in, and rescue their Brethren; so suddenly surprized, for the Divell watcheth, whom, and when hee may destroy: Besides, it was not an ordinary strength, that could give checke to, and mate That evill spirit working so effectually in Saul and the Edomite, the Manager of the Divels and Sauls wrath. See we now how all this relates to the present Time; And if wee shall finde, That the Divell has as active instruments now, and Managers of his wrath against Israel, as once he had, Then. I hope, wee shall make no more scruple of Conscience to resist the Divell now, than the Israelites did make then. VVith Gods helpe we will examine the matter, and resolve the case of Conscience at that point. CHAP. 3. This persecution comes-up to our Times, as bloudy now as ever any was in any time. The Papists now of the same generation with the Edomites then, and as bloudy now as then. Our engagements to withstand them: In so doing we stand for the King. What should be our prayer for him; and a case of Conscience touching our obe∣dience to him, resolved; and the chiefe Objections touching that matter. THis persecution of David, mannaged by King Saul and the Edo∣mite, comes fully up to our times, though in the degrees of cru∣elty, and execution thereof, it falls much short of what is done now. Saul and the Edomite in those dayes destroyed a City of Priests, for Davids sake, and would have destroyed Keilah also: The King, by his wicked Counsell, have the same execution more then upon designe, they have executed the same wrath upon two king∣domes. But two Cities, then, one destroyed, the other in designe for destruction; Two kingdomes here: For Davids sake then; The same Reason now, because the hands of the godly are with David now.
I will not spend time now to prove this. That the Atheists, and Pa∣pists, are the same in these dayes with the Edomites in Sauls dayes; Their words and actions make too sufficient proofe thereof: For they have done,Psal. 137.7. as their Fathers said before them in the day of Ierusa∣lem, RASE IT, RASE IT, EVEN TO THE FOVN∣DATION THEREOF. Children of Edom sure enough: So they said in ancient time, so they say now: So they pursued their Brother with the Sword then, so they pursue him now: They shew∣ed no pitty then, they shew no pitty now: They did smie and burne Cities then, they doe the same now. Reader, I could stuffe my Pa∣ges from out of the Records of time, with the most horrid horrible, divellish, &c. But I purposely forbeare, for thou art satisfied tou∣ching this matter, from what thou hast heard seene, and felt: There∣fore thou wilt make no question here, for Conscience sake; Thou wilt resist the Edomite according to the power in thy hand, for Con∣science sake; Conscience of thy vow in Baptisme; thou hast vowed there to renounce the divell, then this Edomite sure, he must be re∣nounced too, (he is singular, but a Legion) who is the great MA∣NAGER of all the divels affaires, against the ity of GOD, all the Christian world over. Who but the Edomite, he does all, hee transacts all, all the divels affaires come through his hands, whether they concerne his Warre or his Peace, (there is not a Pin to choose if his Peace were not the worst of the two) in conscience of thy Vow in Baptisme thou must renounce the Edomite, the Sonne as well as the Father, the divels Right-hand, the Manager of all his af∣faires upon earth: I say it againe, that it may bee remembred al∣wayes. Secondly, in Conscience to thy oath of Allegeance: Thou hast taken an oath to subject thy selfe to the Power GOD has set over thee, and that is a Power, which cannot be perverted to base ends, against GOD, and the power of Godlinesse; it cannot be Committed to an Edomites hand, nor can he be the MANAGER thereof: Wee shall heare more of this anon. 3. In Conscience of thy Covenant entred-into; You are not your own now▪ you are bought with a price, you are GODS, a sworn Servant to Him: You have sworne, and will not repent, to serve the Living GOD, and not the Lusts of Men; You have entred into Covenant, by the helpe of GOD, you are resolved to stand to it, and then to stand-up against all those, who stand up against GOD, and His Truths revealed in His Word. We are fully and clearly resolved at this point, To stand-up for GOD against the Edomites of these times, for Conscience sake; nay, for the Common-wealths sake, as our Countrey-men stood up against the Wolves; our Land would not
beare them,Sect. 2 chap. 6. say some; nay, the Land would not endure them, say I, for so sayes my Author too: Every man stood-up with his weapon in his hand, and out they thrust the Wolves, they could not endure them. The time will come, when we shall doe so with these Edo∣mites too, else we cannot maintaine our Lawes, our Liberties, our Lives; and, which is the Life of our Lives, and should be the Crown of our rejoycing, The Gospel; we cannot maintaine that, if we doe not thrust out the Edomites, for they will Thrust us from the Gospel, and the Gospel from us. We are resolved in this case of conscience touching the Edomite, Resistance of him. But here is a greater case; If wee resist the Edomite in our sense, and in Scripture language, That Legion of the Papists, now Raging and Rioting in our Land, we shall resist the King too; for this Edomite is the chiefe MANA∣GER (next to the Divel) of all the Kings affaires in this King∣dome his very best Subjects, and truest Friends. O horrible, what words are these! Papists his best Subjects! It must passe, for it has the Kings allowance, he has declared it so, he has proclaimed it so, once and againe, and a third time: The Edomites in Ireland, in England, they are the Kings best Subjects, those he may con∣fide-in, his heart may cleave to them in love, when David, The faithfull of the LORD, are called Traitors every day, and his good People Rebels all. O David cannot be silent now any lon∣ger; GOD knowes, and all the Christian world knowes, Davids heart is upright, and his hands cleare, and his prayer pure touch∣ing this matter; Their hands have not shed innocent bloud, nor have their eyes seen it, but with indignation and Zeale against these Murtherers. And we say, That many Kings have beene seduced by evill counsels, Many, whose hearts have beene stolne away from their good people; and given-up into their enemies hands cleaving to them in love; and some have shed bloud to their power, as Saul here, and others after him. But, oh, how loth I am to speake! The Evill Counsellours have carried-on the King in the Path of the destroyer, beyond all These, for he has given a Commission to destroy his good people, and makes shewes, That his soule bleeds over them: He pittieth his Peoples naked∣nesse, and takes from them their cloathes; hee calls them Rebels in Ireland, and entertaines the same Rebels here; He professeth to do all by helpe of GOD and the Law; and all he does, has a manifest con∣trariety to GOD, and contradiction to the Law. He professeth with his tongue to be for Religion indeed; when his heart and hand is ut∣terly against the professors of the same. To take them from the Earth. He professeth to maintaine his Peoples liberties and does all. that is in the power of his hands to inthrall, and oppresse his people; To make their neckes bend to the Edomites yoake; he would make be∣leeve
his hand goes along with GOD, when hee puts it forth against The Almighty, in all his peoples sight, as if he had an arm like GOD. But the bloudshed in both his Kingdomes, this The Lord sees, and heares the voice of it too; And, which maketh the voice yet louder, The LORD heares how he chargeth it upon the innocent, and bles∣seth the Murtherers, those that have shed it indeed. The LORD lay it close to the heart of his Majesty, that his soule may bleed over the blood he hath shed; That he may forbeare to say so, till he does so; That his soule may shed teares for the bloud he hath shed, indeed and indeed. Let others pray, The LORD bring his Majesty home to his Parliament upon the wings of the Churches Prayers; They that pray so, pray well; but they pray better, who pray, The Lord open the Kings eyes and heart, that he may discerne the Path he has trod, the way he is in, and feele the working of that bloud shed upon his soule, working in him a sor∣row after a godly sort; The LORD shew him the falshood, the hypocrisie of his heart, make it as manifest to him, as it is to all his good People, That his uncircumcised heart may be humbled, that he may abhorre evill, and loath himselfe for what he has done. Amen, say I, and all who wish that his soule may prosper. He may come home to his Parliament, and doe more hurt then good there, unlesse his heart be humbled for all he has done first, I remember very well, the Eleventh King of Scotland (the worst King that ever was, I thinke, yet) was brought home to his Parlia∣ment. I meane, he came-up to his good People▪ even to all the desire of their hearts; for thus he did. Those pernicious Counfellors [he had many, and they stole away his heart▪ or he stole away theirs: surely the King was worst▪ because chiefest in the trespasse] he suffe∣red to be imprisoned, and over some the wheele was turned: And all this he did in deep dissimulation, that he might the more freely, with no resistance, worke-out his owne will, and doe according to his owne pleasure afterwards. And so he did; the yeare after, by that time he saw all cleare before him, the hearts of his Nobles gained; for he gave the offenders into their hands, and all was well: and now they must be feasted. They were glad of that, and to supper they came, which was served-up in a Lordly dish; and after the meat, Wine: they are, and dranke, and their hearts were merry▪ but the worst Wine was kept last; towards the close of the Feast, the No∣bles were made drunke with their owne bloud, as with sweet Wine: A few escaped, and those few (by the helpe of the People) rose-up against their King, and slew him. I shall not meddle with that, though in the close of the worke, I shall point to that King againe, and another halfe as bad. I conclude from hence, That till the King be truly informed for
what he has done, That he has walked in the counsell of the ungodly; his foot has stood in the way of sinners; and he sitteth in the seat of the scornfull; Till his heart be humbled for this, Tll his soule cleaves to the ground for this, and what else God and his conscience best knowes. Till this be, the King cannot come-back to his Parliament, he canot be to the heart and desires of his good People there. There∣fore pray we; LORD turne the heart of the King, give him a sight of what he has done, and humble his soule in the sight of it; th the hath blasphemed the Name of his GOD; deal deceitful∣ly with his Maker; treacherouoy with His People; abominably with His Day, prophaning it by a Law. He must be restlesse in his spirit till he hath vindicated That dishonour done to That Rest; for∣cing and persecuting His best Servants, touching that matter, and shedding their bloud to his power ever since. LORD give the King a sight of all this, and of all that The Searcher of hearts, and his owne heart knowes by himselfe, and kindly humble him for all. Then all the rest followes, the King will be right for his Parliament, his heart will be with them; then it will be said, and not till then, What the King does pleaseth all his people; and what his good people doe, pleaseth the King. Amen: But if the King doe not his duty, his people must doe theirs; if hee looke not to his charge how he rules, not his, but Gods People, [THY PEOPLE] sitting in GODS Throne; Yet must the people look to their obedience; they must be subject to the higher Power notwith∣standing. I come then to resolve what this higher Power is, and the cases of conscience thereabouts. Not touching the giving of the Sword, Strong-holds and Forts, Ammunition▪ and the like, into con∣fiding hands; To this there is enough said, though I had said no∣thing; I will say but this; So long as these Strong-holds and Breast-workes doe stand, they will bee a memoriall of the Kings illegall and most injurious dealing with a righteous people. So long as these shall be spoken of, will the injustice, the bloudy proceedings of the King, (in the hands of bloudy Counsellours) be remembred also, to all ge∣nerations. We shall tell it to our children and they to their children, That the King of England would have oppressed his owne people; he would have inthralled their Lawes, Liberties, Religion; And for the maintenance of all these, their lives and all that was deare unto them, did his people so fortifie and Breast-worke themselves, against the fury and rage of their King, in the hands of bloudy persecuters. The Case of Conscience now. The People must not stand up for their lives and liberties,Ob. against murtherers, for if they stand up against them, they stand up against their King.
We deny that, and conclude the Contrary,Ans. That a standing up against Murtherers is a standing up for their King, To deliver him out of the hands of Murtherers; It has an affiance with duty, a full aspect and agreement thereunto. Why? but if you resist these Murtherers,Obj: You resist the King; and if you resist the King, You resist the Higher power, and that is the Or∣dinance of GOD wherto we must be subject for Conscience sake. Yes, but wee are cleare mistaken in point of Power:Ans. Therefore I will aske a question, and resolve it. What is this higher Power.Qu. I will tell you first what it is not. It is not that Power,Ans. which the King may have a will to give, and may commit to an Edomites hand; It is not a destructive power (that is from the Divell) whereby Saul and his Edomite were inabled to lay waste one City, and made faire-offer to destroy another; Not such a Power, whereby the King and his wicked Councell now indeavour the same destruction to two King∣domes. It is not such a Power. What Power then?Qu. A Power, whereunto? in case the King or his Edomite wrongs me,Ans. though the lowest in his Kingdome, yet I may appeale from him or them for Righteous Judgement; And this Power is the Law, and in the high Court, Who can determine what Law is; and doe stand bound to right mee oppressed by a Contrary Power, though the mea∣nest of many Thousands, and not worhty the dust I tread upon; yet This Court stands bound to right me. And if so be they stand so bound to a private Person (we must note this by the way) how much stron∣ger is their obligation to two or three Kingdomes, To stand up for Defence of Lawfull power against this Destructive Power? And now we have learn't our duty and office too; we would have the Pa liament stand up for us, we made choice of them for that end; The greatest shame in the world, If wee should not stand up for the Parliament with our Swords in our hands, or with what commeth next to hand in defence of Lawfull power, and all that is deare or neere unto us, involved in the same. What! see a King, seduced by evill Counsell, giving up his power (I say his power not the higher power) into an Edomites hand, and this Edomite flourishing with his Sword, and displaying his Banners in Israels Land, and Israel stand still the while! What a shame to all Israel! But blessed be God, they doe not stand still, they move, and they doe great things as their GOD inables them. Who gives Courage, Spirit and invention when and where Hee pleaseth: And where the Inhabitants of the Land are not over-powered by the King and his bloody party, there they doe fortify the Cities and Townes,
and Breast-worke themselves there. And these Forts and Breastworkes, are like to remaine to after Generations an Eternall dishonour to the King, now in the hands of desperate and pernicious Men; For when the Childe shall aske; Wherefore were these Forts, and Breastworkes rai∣sed? The Father will Answer; The King of England, seduced by evill Counsell, would have destroyed the Parliament of England, Laws, Li∣berties, Religion, Life and all; Therefore did the Parliament and all good people, in defence of the Parliament and themselves, raise up themselves and these Forts, Strong-holds, and Breastworkes: so wee shall declare to our Children, what the King, by his pernicious Counsel∣lors, has done against his good people; and what the Lord has done for them, shall be had in perpetuall remembrance. But will not this be called a resisting of the higher power?Qu. Yes, by those who understand not what higher power or Law mea∣neth:Ans. or judge it to be that which ruleth in their Members: Or doe understand by power The Kings private will, or that Commission he can give under the Great. Seale (such a KEEPER it hath) into the hands of Edomites, Davids utter and implacable enemies now, not like, but of the same generation with the Edomites in ancient dayes. But is it not a Resistance of the Power,Quest. which is indeed the Ordi∣nance of God? No,Ans. but a contending for that Power, the setling and establishing thereof in the Land by all lawfull meanes, which GOD has not onely allowed, but commanded; That his people may live as His people, in holinesse and righteousnesse, giving obedience to their Master in Heaven, (and in Relation to Him) to that power He has set over His people on earth. This is more then enough to these que∣stions, which we finde so fully and excellently cleared to every eye, but theirs who will not see, though we should (as the Proverbe is) Shew them the Sun in our hand.Si solem ipsum gestemus in ma∣nibus, Last. 7.1. I conclude then, That they, and they onely shew themselves con∣scientious men, and to understand the weight of duty, who stand-up now for their Lawes and Liberties, and life of their lives, their Re∣ligion, so to deliver a captive King, a distressed Church and State, now in the hands of bloudy and most pernitious Counsellours; And if all the people in the Land doe not stand-up now in this breach, it is not because they want will but because they want power, they are over-powered: The Divell is as strong now, and works as mightily now, so does the Edomite also, the Divels right hand in our Land, as they did anciently in the Kingdome of Iudab. But some make scruple here, and conscience too for they say, They have taken an Oath to serve the King,Ob. and they cannot dis∣pence with their Oath.
God forbid they should; Let them serve the King, and serve him heartily and faithfully; but then they must not serve his private Will, which they see enlived, made strong and mighty by an Evill spirit, now ruling against the Common-wealth and publike Faith of the King∣dome. I know this taking an Oath is much pleaded, and Conscience of breaking there; But let these conscientious men looke inward, deale truely, and turne their conscience outward, that we may see it, then we shall reade their mindes plainly, That it is not conscience of an oath that troubles them, for they cannot be bound by an Oath to serve the lusts of men: But this pincheth them, They are conscien∣tious of unlawfull gaine, and they will hold it fast still, and their ho∣nours they will not part-with, nor their reputation amongst men; They will hold to the King, that he may hold fast with them; They will serve his lusts, that he may serve theirs; and this is all the con∣science these men have, which they have choaked as well as they can, that they may the more quietly hold-fast iniquity, and keepe close their unjust gaine, and quite neglect their duty, while they suffer the Divell to command in chiefe, and the Edomite not onely to buffet, but to destroy their brethren, they looking upon all this the while with open face, and hold their hands in their pockets, or shrinke them up into their sleeves, in homage to the Evill spirit, and the Edo∣mite; and then plead Conscience to beare-out their basenesse of spirit, when they make no conscience of unjust gaine, nor of their vow in Baptisme, nor their Protestation, nor Covenant, for there they take an Oath, and draw upon them a Curse, if they performe not: It will not serve their turne. But I forbeare. We are concluded what is the Power GOD hath set over us, That we must make conscience of obeying that, and to resist the contrary power with all our might; we must be as active that way, as zealous for the truth, as our ene∣mies are against it; as valiant to maintaine our Lawes and Liber∣ties, as the adversaries are to destroy all: Why should it be said,Infelix populus Dei non habet tantum fervorem in bono, quantum mali  malo. Hiron. O unhappy people of God! They have not so much zeale in good, as the wickea have in evill; not so much zeale to build-up, as the wicked have to pull downe; not so much zeale to advance Christ and Hs Govern∣ment, as the wicked have to dethrone Him: The People of GOD (unhappy in that point) have not the courage, and constancy in the love of the SPIRIT, that the wicked world hath in the lusts of the flesh. That courage! nay nothing like it,Ad ertibesceni∣am nostram dico Nron: to our shame it must be spoken. Yea, but we must heare more what is spoken to take off that little courage and zeale the people of GOD shew at this time, in their war against the Beast Let us heare first Master Fullers Argument, (I mean not his against the high Commission Oath, which could never be answered till it
was taken away) but the Court-flatterers argument,Pag. 260. Master Fullers in his Holy-Warre; he sayes▪ Subjects are Adjectives, nothing in themselves, b ll they are in reference to their King, in fll agreement with their Princes will, and dependence upon him. That every Reader may understand this Argument, I will unfold it clearly to Master Fullers meaning, in the Grammaticall construction of the same; The Subjects must be Adjectives and the King the Substantive; that is first, If the King will number himselfe with the wicked those that will ruine themselves and their King the Subject is an Adjective, he must number himselfe with those also, else he makes bad construction sayes he. Secondly, If the King bring himselfe into a miserable Case, the Subject must throw himselfe into the same cse too, though it be up∣on the swords point. Thirdly, if the King degenerate, and prove Feminine, uxorious, and womanish, as a man may be; the Subject is an Adjetive, hee must degenerate too, for he must be of the same gender with his Substan∣stive: or if the King will be Neuter, neither Masculine nor Femi∣nine, of neither side, neither hot nor cold, a midling person, and he is worst of all; be he what he will be, the Subject is an Adjective, he must be so too: this is that the Grammarian calls Concord, such an agreement or dependence the Subject has upon his King, as the Ad∣jective has with his Substantive, with whom it must agree in Num∣ber, Case: and Gender. All this is good Grammar, but the worst Logicke that ever I read, for there is no Reason in it at all: No Reason at all, that the Subject, whom God has made a man, endowed him with a reasonable Soule; That this man should be Adjective, wholly at the dispose and will of his Prince, so dependant upon him; of the same minde and judge∣ment, though the Princes minde be most contrary to the minde of Christ. But it is excellent Divinite, not as Master Fuller understands it, but as we must understand it. The Subject is adjective; and GOD, his King, has only a Bing in Himselfe; The Subject is adj ctive, no∣thing in himselfe but all in reference to and dependance-on his GOD; no being in himselfe, but all in GOD; he understands, he wills, he does, he loves, he hates all in reference to GODS command; he is an adjective, all his dependance is upon GOD, his walking is before GOD; his love to GOD he expends and layes-out himselfe for Him, and ren∣ders all backe to Him, To Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. But wee must recall what was said before,A. the manner of the Per∣sian Subjects Subjects indeed; Their manner was to shrink-up their hands into their sleeves in homage to their King. VVhat have we to doe with Heathenish customes?B. This shrink∣ing-up
their hands into their sleeves, implyed an absolute obedience, which we absolutely deny. But yet we will hearken to it this once, and reade it againe as we finde it in Xenophon; It was the manner of the Persians in presence of their King, and homage to his Sacred Majesty, To shrink-up their hands into their sleeves. But they never did so while their King was smiting their Cities, and laying waste their Townes. Indeed there was never such a thing read of as now we see with our eyes. A King laying waste his owne king∣dome▪ as at this day. And therefore if we doe not shrink-up our hands into our sleeves we must be pardoned. But consider we Beza's note upn Rom. 13.5. Although the Magi∣strate have no pwer over the Conscience, yet he is the Miniter of GOD▪Ob. Etiamsi magi∣st atus 05 in consci∣entiam jus non habet, tamen qu ni De. sit Mi∣nister, bona con∣scientia ei resisti non potest▪ and cannot with good Conscience bee resisted. His Note is somewhat fuller and more binding, Act. 23. verse 5. We must heatil, honour Magistrates yea though they be Tyrants. And it is out of all question, that so they were, when Saint Paul taught submission unto them, whether to the supreame powers, or, the powers under him. But it is as cleare, That their obedience consisted in suffering▪ rather then in obeying, rather in bearing from the hand, what the Power inflicted,Magistratibus ex animo defe∣rendus honor, etiam Tyrannis. Ans. then in doing what the Power commanded. This is true, for there is an obedience in suffering, and so no resi∣sting of the power, for he that suffers from the hand of the Ruler, for what his conscience will not suffer him to doe▪ he doth not resist, but obeyes the Ruler. And yet we must note, That there is a wide diffe∣rence betwixt giving obedience to that, the Heathen Emperours commanded by their Lawes; and obedience to that, which Kings now command against Law. Christians then did take-up the bur∣den of their Ruler with a bended knee, (as the Lord Verub expresseth it and as I may interpret it) i. e. They made their body bow unto it, not their conscience; They suffered for that they could not obey; as the three Worthies in Daniel, who yeelded-up their bodies o the dis∣pose of their King, and so The LORD, Whom they served, kept their bodies untouched by the fire, who would keepe their conscien∣ces free from polution. It is otherwise with Christians now, They are called to liberty, To obey their King ruling by Law, The igher Power, which GOD has set over them; and which the King cannot commit to an Edomites hand. If he des, it ought to be resisted, for it is a terrour to the good, not to evill workes; Cleane contrary to tat a Mini∣ster of GOD should be. And whereas it is said, We must give honour to Magistrates, though Tyrants; we grant as much, for it hath beene, and is the manner of all the children of GOD so to do. David did so, wit∣nesse his words, and humble deportment before Saul; But David did not give his throat to Saul; though Saul was King, and David a private
man, yet he read no Law, nor could see Reason for that, but all Law and Reason against it. There is one argument more from the example of the Jewes, if not shrinking-up their hands into their sleeves after the Persian manner, yet bowing their hands behinde them in homge to their Emperours person, and commands; Philo relates the story in his Ambassie to Cajus, as followes. Caligula would set-up his Image in the Temple of Jerusalem that Abomination in that Sacred Place. So he would do; And for that end, Petronius was sent unto them to assure them, That Caligula, their Emperour, would have it so, and for that purpose an Army of foot and horse was in a readinesse to shoulder-in the Image, if by faire meanes he prevailed not. The Jewes, with their wives and children met the Emperours Ambassadour, stand before him as chil∣dren before their parents, with their Armes bent behinde them: assuring the Ambassadour by that reverentiall posture of their bodies, That as they were not so mad as to withstand their Lord; so they were not so mindlesse of their duty to GOD, as to suffer that abomination to be brought into their Temple, unlesse over the heads of themselves, their wives and children trampled upon all the way thither, as the myre in the streets; And so they quitted themselves, say they of themselves, like men, in hese two great points, In preserving entire the service of their GOD: And the bnd of allegeance to their Prince. This is the very posture of good Subjects,Ob. to carry their hands bent behinde them, while they suffer the Rebels to ride over their heads, And that is the objection from hence. I confesse this Story speakes as fully to Doctor Fearnes purpose,Ans. as any we have read; yet will it not satisfie his tender conscience, nor any understanding man; For he must heare Reason. A wise man will not show his teeth, that cannot bite; his offer that way, may cause all his teeth to be struck out. I will shrinke my hands up into my sleeves, or turne them behinde me, if I am not able to use my hands. Againe, If the Jewes at that time would expose themselves, wives, and chil∣dren, to the lust of one domineering Lord, That is no rule for Chri∣stians so to doe. Nay it was no rule for the Christians after them. So we will answer practice with practice; For they, being oppressed by the hand of an Heathen Emperour Lucinius, sought helpe from a Christian Emperour, who gave them aid, and thereby they oppressed him that oppressed them. Though yet it makes a wide difference, to live under them, whose will is their law, and will doe what they list; And under him▪ who is under a power, which must rule him, and his commands; Whereof bfore. The case is cleared; without controversie the King is not the higher
Power: Yet before we conclude, let us heare how the Heathen have resolved this matter. Whose is the power? The Kings: Who has the power over the King? The Law: Then the Law is the higher power, sayes Plutarch in his Moralls. But me thinkes Aristotles words are yet more notable, he sayes, He that will have the Law to be the higher power, Polit. lib. 3. sub finem:  (obliquos agit) . I∣bid. sets GOD uppermost, and the Law next to Him; But he that will have man to be the higher power, sayes a Beast may be it. A Beast! Yes: so sayes Aristotle, and his Reason must be this, though I finde it not in the place; for it is sufficient that he sayes, a Beast; Man may be car∣ried by his sensuall part, then he walks like a Beast, and acts like a Beast, his Reason and Judgment may be steeped (as was said) in his affections, Lust may sway him, Anger too, and turne him from the rule of Law and Reason both; yes that it may, the best men living, and all the while the man is so carried, he acts like a Beast. Therefore we must not place the higher power in him. What is the higher pow∣er then? The Law: What is the Law? It is (as the minde of the Law-giver Senate, or Councell should be) void of all sensuall Desire and Appetite. I expresse it as well as I can, I would it were expressed better, and better thought upon, for truely it is very excellent. I con∣clude then, that is the higher power, that can doe me no Wrong, but all the Right that can be, because it is void of all manner of Maligni∣ty, from selfe, sefe-seeking, or selfe-pleasing. Then it is a Truth as cleare as the Sun-beame, That the King is not the higher power, he is a Man, and may doe, and does much wrong, for there is a Maligni∣ty in man, even in the best of men, and will be there so long as selfe is in him. I am now to make further discovery of this malignant spi∣rit in Saul persecuting of David, so we proceed in the Story, where we shall read that which may be a great disheartning to Israel now, while they looke downward upon number and strength of men: But if they looke upward, setting their faces stedfastly heaven-ward, then they are in heart againe, and as bold as Lyons. We read as fol∣lowes.
CHAP. 4. Saul has shed bloud to his power, is resolved to shed more; sum∣mons Israel to come-in for that purpose; They come at his call. What to thinke of his Troopers. It relates to the later and present time, not to dishear, but to encourage all Israel David must be driven from out of all his strong Holds, and forsaken of all his friends; excellent Reason is given why it is so, in the next Chapter. SAul has done according as his will carrieth him, and the Edomite according to his Commission. And now their foot is entred into bloud, they drive-on furiously in the Path of the destroer, and to Keilh they march. A man would thinke now, that such a cruell Lord, and such a bloudy Generall as is the Edomite, should not have one man to goe out with him into the field, no not one. But see! it is otherwise;1 Sam. 23.8. for we read, Saul called all the People together to war. And they came in at his call▪ I examine not now what moved them) thick and threefold (as we say) by Companies and Troopes to the num∣ber of three thousand men: What to doe? To safeguard Sauls person, that was Sauls pretence, against the insolencies of David, who (ye know, or else ye know nothing) ran away faster then Saul could march after, though Saul made as much speed as possibly he could, who was exceedingly MAD against the righteous, and persecuted David even to strange Cities; yet Saul was afraid of David, and made his guard so strong. Let it goe, for I will not inquire into that matter, being made so legible already; I would rather enquire, Who, or what manner of persons these Souldiers were? It is answered, Chosen men out of all Israel, that is, noble, rich, valiant, stout men, learned men also, the vile Priests, and the treacherous Prophets: Doubtlesse these were now, as alwayes ever since, ingaged in the warre against Da∣vid, and Chosen men out of Israel to that purpose. And truly this must needs be a great disheartning to David, and so to all Israel; for Sauls foot is in the Path of the destroyer, the Edomite is with him, they are marching to Keilah, to doe to that City as they did to Nob; and yet GOD seemes to shine upon Saul and his Councell; Saul calls, and they come-in unto him no fewer them Three thousand chsen men out of all Israel. To relate unto the present time as we goe along; This has beene and is our present case. The King in his warre against David now,
(the faithful in his Land) has the same advantages now, as Saul and his Edomite had in the dayes of old; though the King, seduced by evill counsels, is gone-up to the knees in bloud, yet Nobles are come-in unto him, rich men, valiant men, an Army of Scholars too, Law∣yers and Divines both, to help-on the persecution, with their Swords and with their Pens: Such Instruments the King has, Choice, and Right-men for his service; and they serve their Master heartily, with∣out gaine of money (for they feed upon free cost, all is theirs they can lay hold on;) Right-men indeed as heart could wish; such as the Oratour tells me Philip of Macedon found; He sought with diligent search for wicked men, who w uld, in a treacherous way, bring his designes to passe, against their owne Countrey-men, and such be found;Demost. de falsa legatione pag. 204. in folio, . but yet (saith the Ora∣tour) Philip found them more wicked then he himselfe could have wishe. They had plotted and hammered out such projects, and contrivan∣ces against their owne Countrey, and for Philip ends, as that Philip himselfe durst not frame-out unto them the like plot, or desire the same either by Letter or Embassie; so abominable those Instruments were. Such instruments the King has▪ worse indeed, but more Right and straight to the Designes his Councell has laid-out unto him, then he expected or perhaps could have desired. And what Davids case is (the faithfull of the LORD) he knowes nothing that knowes not this: He has Armies by Sa and Armies by Land, North and South, East and West stand-up for his help and the Ee of the LORD is upon them for good that is certaine though many are sicke amongst them, and many fallen asleep; even the Righteous are taken away: Nay, many are run-away, and more have dealt treacherously, as we have heard, and shall hear; few there are that be hearty to the cause, and fewer yet that doe not serve for gaine of money: and no money no march. Thus they deal with Dvid. Ah Lord! how does the enemy laugh at this! Let his laugh. GOD laughes too, and His servants laugh al∣so, rejoycing alwayes in The LORD; they will doe their worke, let GOD alone to perfect His worke. They will give in their hand to David, he shall have their hearts too. And no marvell all this▪ not can it seeme any strange matter, That many noble, rich, valiant, learned men, are now on the contrary side and enemies to David. None of all these can endure afflictions with David, not a wildernesse with David; They cannot goe from soft beds, to bard boards. They must have their ease for the present, for after time they leave it to the DECREE; give them their portion here, they are satisfied. Nor can they con∣ceive, but, That Saul with his three thousand will overcome David with his five hundred, and then they shall receive what a King can give, for he will be abundantly good to them, now they have assisted
him to complete his victory (which wil never be) over David and his men. Yes, you will say, Saul will overcome David, for he has ten for one.This Saul under∣stood no more then the Egypti∣ans did, when God set Himselfe betwixt them and Israel. Ex, 14.19. True, if Saul were to fight with men. David only and his men: But Saul must fight with David and his GOD; hee must overcome GOD, before he overcome David. You have not mans warrant now, you have GODS warrant; That Saul shall never overcome. Let him call-in the chosen men out of Israel, give them his Commission, bid them cut, and kill, and slay, there is their warrant, yet they shall never overcome David, for GOD is with David. But yet Saul must have all the advantage that heart can wish: and all the disadvantage must be on Dvids side. Saul must rise in his hopes oftentimes, and Da∣vid must fall very low, and yet not at the lowest. Saul must have the advantage, counsell on his side, and strength both, and numbers also, Thousands for Davids hundreds; yet David is not troubled at all this, for it is as good a signe as can be looked upon; he looks to the Cause, and to his GOD, rolles himselfe, and his concernments upon GOD, and there he resteth his head, and has peace in himselfe, and in his way. But here is a Triall now, The LORD does more then seeme, He does indeed lift-up the right hand of Davids Adversaries, does Da∣vid and Israel say. Yes, and so He may doe, that He may exalt His owne Right-hand toward David anon. Where we shall see, That Da∣vids cause is not carried on by number, or multitude, or by strength, but by an over-ruling Hand; And That GOD on Davids side an∣swers all advantages on the Adversaries side, both of number and strength; and all disadvantages on Davids side in want of both; Though for Thousands with Saul, he can write, but hundreds, yet hee will not feare, for GOD is with David, and is departed from Saul, and that answers all advantages on Sauls side, and all disadvantages on Davids side as was said: For now GOD delights to shew Himselfe and His Arme, [else we will not see it, unlesse it be made most bare of flesh] we would have many on our side; so it will be, but not yet; but let us remember, they may be too many for GOD to give us victo∣ry;Iudges. Eccles. 9.11. for we thinke The race must be to the swift, and the battell to the strong; When in Davids war it is quite contrary. So much to Sauls Alarm to war, his successe therein, his numbers of men and how it relates to this war against David as it is at this day; and answers Sauls seeming advantages▪ and takes off the wonder there. Now I come to examine what persons these were, who come-in to Saul, side to car∣ry-on his persecution against David. Saul called all the people toge∣ther to war, and they came-in by Troops, an Host of three thousand chosen men What manner of persons were they? Murtherers all; I fa all, nay GOD sayes all, and every one of them were murtherers, that were privy to Sauls intents, and willingly followed the Commande∣ment.
Marke that, and marke we what we reade; Saul spake to all his servants. What to doe? That they should kill David. And they,1 Sam. 19.1.2 who did as Saul spake, To their power, were murtherers to their power. And it was very possible to finde-out some Thousands chosen men in Israel, who would kill David, the faithfull of the LORD at this time: for there were many Noble men in Israel, and not many of these would give their hand to David, conflict with him; against him rather, giving their hand to Saul. Very probable it was so. There were many rich men in Israel. And wha sayes the Apostle of them? They despise, they oppresse the pore, they draw them, (we need not make it a question,Ia. . 2.6. our eyes have seene it) befre the judgement seat; they blaspheme the wor∣thy Name, by which we are called. Doubtlesse many of these were with Saul. and bare their owne charges. And I am more then halfe per∣swaded. That Davids five hundred Troopers were but poore men, a ragged Regiment, very poore, and almost naked; for whence should they have supplies of necessaries! GOD knowes, surely man cannot tell. I finde them in a wildernesse, for the most part amongst wilde Goats. [No strange place to David and his Army.] They sen to a ve∣ry Rich Man and he sent them a very churlish Aswer, but not one bi of bread. And yet contented men they were▪ whether paid or not paid; and pillage they would not, rather dye then doe wrong. It it had: or beene so they might have made brave pillage of Nabals sheep, whereas they would not, no not they; Davids Souldiers!1 Sam. 25.16 they were a wall unto Nabals shepheards, and their flockes, both by night, and by day. And yet such a Nabal he was, such a Churle and such a Foole, when he made a feast like a King▪ surfeited on his meat, and was very drunke; Nay before he was so distempered he would not give David no not a mor∣sell. This stirred Dvids spirit not a little. I passe it over here; onely this in passage; Davids spirit must be discovered to himselfe, and that will be one maine Reason anon, why his deliverance was delayed. The Note is this; The Rich Churl mindes not David in the wilder∣nesse, nor shall he, or his men taste of his morsels. David shall taste of the Rich Mans spirit he will give David bad language and censure him withall: Who is David? A despicable person I warrant you▪ he and his men are broken away from their Masters. There's his censure, for as his name is so is he, Nabal is his name and folly is with him;Verse 25. he censures David at pleasure: But it was well for the Rich man, that Dvid and his men were so neare his Shepherds and his Flocks; had Sauls Troopers been so neare, they would have taken them all for Booies; and had they smelt-out Nabals feast▪ they would not have sent Mes∣sengers unto him with a Blessing in their mouth, Peace be both to thee,Verse 6. and peace be to thy house, and peace be unto all that thou hast: Nor would they have spoken supplications,Verse 8. Let the young men find favour in tne
eyes, for they come in a good day, give I pray thee, &c. No, they would not have prayed, they would have commanded, and done as the vile Priests did,1 Sam. 2.16. Thou shalt give it me now, and if not I will take it by force: Such a commanding Host was with Saul, and (past question) such Priests were with him too, to helpe-on the persecution, for it was a∣gainst David; And never was there any persecution against David, wherein the Priests were not most Active Ministers, not knuckle deepe, as we say, but elbow deep (in bloud.) as at this day. We will take a view now of the Kings Army. As before, many Nobles there, not many with David; Rich men there, such as the A∣poste has described, great hunters before The LORD, mighty to op∣presse, and to blaspheme The Name of their GOD. There are the vile Miniters too,Isa 56.10. they kennell neare the Court, even all your Dumb-Dgs, which cannot brke, sleeping ling downe, loving to slumber: All these all over the Land are with the King now, that his hand is against Da∣vid, and to strengthen his persecution. They cave murthered Soules already, now they will murther Bodies; If they cannot with their hands, they will set their heart to the worke, and open their purses wide towards it. Shall these and these men prosper? Shall they car∣ry-on their designe against David? Shall they, that hate The LORD lift-up the head? Yes for a Time, till GOD has perfected His work; And His Adversaries have done theirs, filling-up their measures; and for other excellent Reasons which we shall heare anon. We have seene now what Persons they ever have beene, and are, who have their hand against David, murtherers all, mighty hunters before The LORD. And yet as I am not so foolishly ignorant, to thinke. That the vile Priests were not a part of Sauls Army, either in Action, or Affection, contributing their Prayers, and Purses towards the holy warre, wherein, they alwayes have beene a willing people, of very large hearts: So I am not so uncharitable, as to thinke, That all these three thousand were all murtherers; They that were acquainred with Sauls minde, and willingly followed the Commandement, Those all were murtherers in the highest degree, there is no doubt of all that. But some there were, a very few, who followed Saul, and crossed his com∣mandement, what they could; So did Jonathan; and how many more I cannot tell: And others there were, who followed Saul as sheepe are driven by the Shepheard, when hee meanes to plunge them into the waters; They did not properly follow Saul, but were driven by the hand of violence, (as some of late have beene, and as Saul him∣selfe was) by the Divell. To exemplifie this by the Edomites practice at this time: The Edomite now in the North (we have no other name for him) has exercised such cruelties upon the inhabitants there, to force them to his side, tying their heads and heeles together, till from
some of them breath departed; And by these Turkish inforcements he has gained many bodies to his side, but David has their hearts. And so we may conceive, and so judge it was with men in Sauls Host▪ be∣cause the Sacred Scripture gives us that allowance. For we reade of no execution done upon Israel, upon their Cities, but by Saul and the Edomite; Saul spake indeed to all his Servants. That they would kill David; and wee make no doubt many were active Instruments that way, for the Edomite could not doe all his executions alone: But that all this Host was ingaged upon this service, and would have an∣swered Sauls bloudy will, had they come to a set Battell is more then I can tell, or any man in the world, for we have not a word for it: Onely to cleare this, and to say as much as needs in reference to the present tie also▪ for all is plaine all along this I will say, That who∣soever amongst those three thousand did follow Saul, and his Com∣mand, though grieving (for Conscience not asleep, or seared, will re∣gret and recoile, give checke sometimes) and yet approving,An. lib. 14 cap.  In some Bookes the fourth, Moe∣rens ac laudans. as Tacitus speakes of Burrhus, in a case not unlike: I say, All such as followed Saul so (though grieving, yet) approving, and commending what Saul did these were, as one of them, Edomites, murtherers in true judgement, and Scripture account. And if the Sacred Scripture accounts these men murtherers, then GOD accounts them so and then what will their Commission and Warran profit them? Or can it bare them out in these outrages they have committed, when they are indeed the fiercest enemies that ever the Church had! But I will draw-up to a conclusion of this matter, with some few observations from all wee have read▪ First; 1. Here an Edomite has done all the mischiefe a Right-hand to Saul in his bloudy execution. What was hee? A meane man sure an Heards-man, then he was lifted up higher, and made Steward of Sauls house, set over his Servants there. Conferring of honours upon him, en∣gaged him to Saul and his service; so Saul made him Generall in the Field. O! This preferment these honors, are a sweet bait! it takes a man strangely; it will take a man quite from Dvid that hath not his heart engaged to his GOD: Saul knew what he did, when he rald the Edomite to honour, he shall doe what Saul will have him doe: He is more then a man, who can shut his eyes against the glory of the world, and contemne it, for Davis ske;A man without ruth of Grace, is like a ship without ballast, it cannot endure a stonne. That can be content to passe over with a carelesse eye the pleasures and profits of the Court. and endure afflictions with David the friends of GOD. An HO∣THAM, who had the boldnesse (when time was and GODS pleasure to maintaine David and his cause) to out face a Prince, could not out-face the glory of the world▪ he is taken with the bait of honour, gaine, or I know not what, and so hath undone what he
did, and made himselfe infamous to all generations. The King has that at his dispose, which will worke upon all complexions; but ho∣nour for the proud workes strangely, brings many to his side, and makes them RIGHT for his service. David is in a Wildernesse, has little for himselfe, and lesse for his friends; but they that serve Da∣vid serve Him heartily; nothing can win them to Davids side but meere conscience of duty to GOD and His cause. LORD sta∣blish the heart with Grace▪ (a sleeting thing, we are never sure of it, and must never be secure about it) shew it the excellencies in the LORD JESUS▪ then we shall not be taken with the omp of the world,. Acts 24. (a Phantasie) nor be offended at the troubles of David. Secondly, there were many Noble many Rich, many Stout, ma∣ny valiant men, and many wife men on Sauls side; but yet they must not be a dishonour to Israel all these must come-in under one Head, and the Edomite their Generall must beare the envie and dishonour of that Naturall war, (for it is as Naturall for the Edomite to warre with David, as for the fire to burne:) It is not said, Israel smote Nob; No, The Edomite smote Nob; and all his helpers, (some Israelites no doubt) yet they goe under that name. So here are two Kingdomes smitten with the sword: Who smote them? It shall not be said, This Prince or That Prince; This Noble-man, or That Noble-man; No, The Edomite did it: It shall not lye as a reproach upon England; it shall cause her sorrow, that her owne children, whom she has dandled upon her lap, have to their power eat out her bowels: It is a grievous thing. And that those Brethren in evill, who ought them∣selves unto this Church, should prove such vipers, and doe her such mischiefe; This is grievous. But the dishonour of it shall not lye up∣on this Mother-Church, but upon Rome it shall lye, upon the chil∣dren of that Edom, and the Church shall remember them to all gene∣rations, Who in the day of Ierusalem said, Rase it, rase it, even to the foun∣dation thereof. Thirdly, though we doe not question Ionathans sincerity, being well resolved at that point, that he was a good man, and a true friend to David and did him great service at the Court; yet I thinke wee may question, whether his bands of nature, or Court-bands (all very strong no doubt) were strong enough to bind his bodily pre∣sence to continue with his father, all the time his father persecuted David. I determine nothing here, because the Scripture is silent, but thus the Scripture speakes out, and we may set a marke upon it, that if Ionathan was not slaine first (which yet the Text seemes to say) yet thus it was,1 Sam. 31.6. Saul died, and his three Sonnes and his Armour-bearer, and all his men that same day together: TOGETHER, they went along with Saul in a bloudy Path, he did drive-on furiously, but they went
along with him, and they were slaine the same day TOGE∣THER. Certainly, it is not safe to goe one step forward with a man, when we see plainly what way he goes, and that he drives fu∣riously on towards a cursed end. If we see two men walke together, we must needs thinke they are agreed, for so sayes the Spirit, they cannot walke together else: yet we will not judge that all in the Kings Court are Enemies to David. We think rather, That some there be, whose body is with their King, and their heart with David. We acknowledge, That Relati∣ons are binders; and Court-bands are shackles; But yet there is no such binder in the world, as our engagement to David.Which Ionathan answered, as a right precious: and faithfull friend, therefore no blame can lye upon him. And, in case we finde him persecuted. GOD will beare us out in it, if we cast off all orher bands and shackles, and come to helpe David, for then wee helpe The LORD against Whom the Adversary kicks, when he kicks David. And let the Adversary remember, and all his men with him, That Saul died, and all his men, That same day TOGETHER. 4. Saul called together his men, bade them follow him, doe as he did, pursue David, and shed bloud to their power:2 Sam. 13.28. Be couragious and be valiant, have not I commanded you? So he said to his followers, as Absalon to his Servants, Smite David, then, kill him, feare not, my COMMISSION shall be your WARRANT, for you and every one of you, to beare you out in all violences you shall doe against David. VVell, GOD takes the matter into his owne hand, and in the day of Recompences for Sion, Saul is slaine, and all his men together And then what good does it to his servants, That they had their masters Com∣mand for what they did, and his Commission for their War∣rant. The Servant has done his Masters worke, as his charge was, and the power in his hands, and now the hang-man must pay him his wages. They are the most unhappy servants in the world, that are servants to men, who will put their servants upon desperte designes, and then tell them, that they shall have a Warrant for what they doe under the Great Seale, which yet is of no more strength, then are the Popes Paper-pardons, from whom the LORD deliver us▪ and from them and their commands, who are not Masters of themselves. It is good and safe to be at the command of that LORD, who gives His Command, and His Warrant, and His Wages too: He will beare-out His Servants in all they shall doe by Command from His Mouth; That shall be their Warrant indeed, To them, and every one of them, for what they doe, and for so doing there is a sure reward. And if the ad∣versary shall thrust these men, for doing their duty, into a fiery furnace, or Lions den, yet GOD HAS COMMANDED, That is their Warrant still, and shall carry them boldly into the mouth of the
devourers, so as they shall quench the violence of the fire, and stop the mouth of Lyons. O how good a thing it is to be at the command of such a Master, whose command is your Warrant, your defence, and reward too. We have viewed the Armies on both sides; Saul has most men, and the most successefull he is, and strong for the warre: But GOD is with David,Iob 9.19. and if we speake of strengh, Lo, He is strong; or of coun∣sell, Lo, He is WONDERFUL, COUNSELLOR, the MIGHTY GOD; or of Reward, Lo, there is no service to the service of That KING; nor Wages like to that He gives. Wo must proceed in the Chapter; Saul has David in chase, he will pur∣sue him to the utmost extent of his chaine, as farre as his hand can reach; so farre we will follow him, and so end the Chapter. David and his men are hunted from Keilah, whence they went whathersoever they could goe;1 Sam. 23.13. And the best way they could thinke-on in their distraction, was to goe into a mountainous and wilde coun∣trey, where David abode in strong holds,Vers. 14. even in the wildernesse of Ziph: And Saul sought him every day, but God delivered him not into Sauls hand. Ionathan, Sauls sonne,Vers. 16. a true friend, visits David in the wood, strengthened his hand in GOD; they two made a Covenant together, then Ionathan returned to his house, lest David in the wood, in a strong hold there, with the Ziphites.Vers. 17.18.19 20 Now they play their prankes, give notice to Saul where Sauls abode is. Saul takes this wondrous kindly, counts it (the Ziphites treacherous dealing) a compassion, blesseth them (those Mur∣therers▪) then bids them prepare his way,Vers 21. Num dicebat mi∣hi esse, &c. Trem. observe Davids haunt, a sub∣tle fellow [he told me so himselfe, sayes Saul, when we were familiar together] bring me word, sayes Saul, touching the certainty of Davids abode,Vers. 23. and his lurking places, and I will goe up with you, and search him out throughout all the thousands of Iudah.Vers. 22.23.25 [See! Saul workes all by trea∣chery; if any help and successe in his way, the divel helps him to it, for he makes lyes and liars his refuge.] And Saul does as he said, hee and his men went to seeke David; And they told David, [Who told him? Some in Sauls camp sure, faithfull to David. See! David has friends, perhaps besides Ionathan,Vers. 19. in Sauls Court!] So he leaves Hachilah, came down to Maon, and before he could breath himself, Saul hears where his abode is, and pursues David even thither. There David is in a maze, knowes not in the world what way to take, for Saul and his men have compassed him round. But behold in passage the wonderfull workes of GOD towards David! Saul pursues after David in all haste, as after an enemy, has him in a Coop, makes no more conscience of destroy∣ing him, then he does to eat bread; Saul shall lose his advantage, for now he must be told, that an enemy indeed has invaded his land; so Saul must hasten as fast against the Philistines, as he hasted before in
the pursuite of David, &c. for it is noted before. Thus David escaped at this time, and at all times,Vers. 29. and he now dwels in strong holds in En-gedi. Saul has cleared his land of the Philistines,1 Sam. 24. now he drives after David as furiously as before; for David is discovered againe, and Saul is told where Davids abode is, even among the wilde goats,Vers. 2. and upon the rockes there; Saul, a mighty hunter before the LORD, hunts David with two thousand dogges, and more, not three thousand, I thinke, for the reason before said, though so many were with him. Not∣withstanding Sauls Companies, David shall have the better; Saul had an advantage upon David before, but could not take it; David has an advantage now of Saul, but will not take it, farther then to declare his uprightnesse towards his Master: As for wickednesse, it does ever proceed from the wicked man. This we have read before, and the words are cleare, and so Davids innocency is cleared as the noone day, and Saul abundantly satisfied, and his Evill spirit silenced for that time. But yet David would not trust Saul: No reason he should trust him, in whom is no truth, and from whom God is departed; So Da∣vid and his men gat them up into the hold in the hill of Hachilah,Vers. 22. 1 Sam. 26.1. among the Ziphites againe; and these are as treacherous as before: 'Tis expe∣cted so, Knave once, and Knave still! Treacherous persons will deal treacherously; they saw Saul did deale so, it was his common practise, they would follow such a great Master, he hearkened to lies, and all his servants were wicked, Pro. 29.12. But methinkes GOD does not deal so gratiously with His gracious Servant; the poore man knows not whither to run: hee went forward even now, and now back∣ward againe, and still almost in the mouth of danger, and hands of treacherous men: Is this GODS kindnesse to His Friend, may some say? Yes indeed is it, and we shall see it to be so anon, Admirable Kindnesse, wonderfull Providence strange Discoveries, but we will remember all Davids adventures first: In the meane time, this will serve to beare-up our Spirits, that it matters not whither David runs, whether forward or backward, so he keeps with GOD, and GOD with him; nay, though he doe stray from GOD a little, yet GOD will not leave David. We proceed. Saul reading the Ziphites Intelligence, drives furiously with the three thousand men to Ziph againe, where he knowes he has Right-men for his service: what followes now in the Chapter we have read before, but it is very well worth the paines to read the Chapter againe; for besides the behold∣ing GODS wonderfull hand there▪ in working for David, and ca∣sting his enemy into a deep sleep, we shall observe there also. That the divel was non-lust, quite silenced, he had not a word to say; and yet David, who could have trusted Saul very well, durst not trust his Evill
spirit, but concludes, It is better for him to make speed into the land of the Pilistines, and thither he goes, and dwells in Gath, driven out from abiing in the inheritance of the LORD: The King shewes David fa∣vour there, assigneth him a Towne called Ziglag, [which must be smitten anon, and burnt with fire] Now we may suppose Davids case to be full of distraction; David lookes on the right hand, calls out, Who is on my side, who? The Keilites, thought he: No but they are not their hand is with Saul: Then he looked on the left hand to the Ziphites, to see if they would helpe him; No, they are with Saul as Right as the other: No help from men they are deceitfull, and treache∣rous; Then Dvid lookes before him, and hastened to that strong hold and the other, and Saul drives him out thence also; then into the Wildernesse he goes, Saul hunts him there; then to Gath, and there he is out of Sauls reach, whose power vvas stinted there, when his vvill to doe David mischiefe vvas boundlesse. Novv to the Relation it has vvith our time, as it is at this day, and then I will conclude the Chapter; Indeed it relates it selfe, Saul has thrust out a rough hand against David; Davids LORD an Almighty Hand to deliver him from out of Sauls hand. The hotter the persecuti∣on, the more glorious the rescue. But how did Saul gain advantage upon David? By corruption in the Officers, and base treachery, which we call fine designes. But the LORD wrought-forth glorious salva∣tions for David hereby. All shall yeeld pretious matter for his soule and spirit to work upon, filling his mouth with MICHTAMS, gol∣den Songs of deliverance;Michtam of Da∣vid, a golden jewell, o nota∣ble Song, and so notes the excel∣lency of these Psalme, 16.56, 57, 58, 59, 60. So it was with David in those times: So it will be with David, The People and Friends of GOD, unto the worlds end. But these Michtams had beene lost, this pretious Treasure of the Church; had there not beene such fine devices, such subtile contri∣vances against him; had there not beene so much of Hell in all Sauls designes, against David, there had not been so much of Heaven in Da∣vids Psalmes. Nay, had not David been in these and these straits; had not his friends deceived him, and all his Strong-holds too, the Church had lost Davids MASCHILS also, his Psalmes to give Instruction, how to make advantage of an Adversary, and of all the mischiefes he shall doe, or intend to doe against David. He could not have wanted any one thing was done against him by the violence of man, either from their hand, or from their tongue. David could not have been so high above his Adversaries at the last, had they not had him under at the first; had not his Enemies dealing towards him been so base vile and treacherous, David had not been so glorious. The truth is, Sauls violent dealing with David, did David much good; he could not have wanted it: So likewise the treacherous dea∣ling of the Keilites, and Ziphites, all this did him much good also. And
for his strong-holds, he lost them with more advantage at the last, then he gained them at the first. These stood him in stead, but for the present time, to keepe Saul from his throat; the losse of them turned unto infinite advantage. To sum-up all that has beene spoken last: David is come to Nob, gets the sword into his hand, the best Sword that ever was in the world, for he sees The print of an Almighty hand upon it, and carryes the revenge of The LORD along with him in it; And now he thinks he shall be delivered; No not yet. Then he came to Keiliah; he has wrought a strange deliverance for them; Now he makes no doubt, but they will worke for his deliverance with all their might; No, they are treacherous. Then to Ziph he came, to see what the Ziphites will doe; As little as the Keilites, all they can against David. Friends prove themselves all false; Strong-holds are all too weake; yet all to make David strong in his GOD at the last, to fill Davids mouth with MICHTAMS, and with MASCHIL's, pretious songs for deliverance, and To give instruction. Therefore though we see great rea∣son why all should be even so with David, yet we will soberly enquire more fully into all these matters, for GOD will give us excellent re∣solution thereunto. CHAP. 5. God suffer'd the Adversary to prevaile a while. To worke-out his designes against David; That thereby Davids spirit might be discovered to himselfe; That his Adversares spirits might bee made manifest also, and convinced: And GODS Right-hand made glorious towards David. This, in all particulars, relates to David The Faithfull of The LORD evermore. VVHy does The LORD deale thus hardly, for so it seemes,Qu. with His gracious Servant Dvid? For excellent Reasons has The LORD done all this; First,Ans. I. 1. The Lord will discover David to himselfe. Saul shall prosper yet longer; he shall have fine devices, and neat contrivances against Da∣vid; he shall corrup by flattery, and worke mightily by treacheries: And David shall continue in his straits yet, longer; Why? That Sauls spirit might be fully manifest, and all his fine prankes fully ope∣ned to the world. That is true as we shall heare presently. But there is a maine and prime cause first to be considered on; That David may
be discovered to himselfe. Alas! David knows not himselfe yet; he shall before he be delivered; and his adversary shall helpe him exceeding∣ly at this high point; To discover Davids spirit to himselfe; where∣with, in probability, David had not beene acquainted, had not Saul persecuted him from place to place. As first, 1. Suppose Saul and David had come to a good understanding, and then to an agreement before David came to Nob; Then David had not beene acquainted with his lying spirit. I will but point at things, for excellent reason, that GOD may have the glory, for I like not to stay upon the Saints infirmities. The truth was, David had a lying spirit, and he hath told all the world so much, who will heare him; It was customary to him to tell a lye; he came to the Priest at Nob, and slaps him in the mouth with foure lyes before he came to a full stop. And he traversed the way of lying, till he came to Achish in Gath, and then he was in the way of lying too. David shall not be delivered yet fully. This lying spirit must bee discovered to David first: And blessed be GOD, Who sanctified Sauls rough hand towards David, and the treacheries of men, for this high end: The making Davids lying spirit manifest to himselfe, so as he can abhor himselfe for it, and desires of his GOD nothing more, then That He would remove out of sight (now upon his deepe humi∣liation) these wicked shifts;Psal. 119.29 Remove from mee (sayes hee) the way of lying. 2. Davids spirit could close with the creature; it could rest it selfe upon the Arme of flesh: he had done a notable service for the Kei∣lites; now thought he, they, whom I have so and so delivered, from such and such dangers; They will be fast friends unto me, I may rest upon them. No, if that be his thought, he shall be hunted yet further, till he see clearly, That men are vanity, deceitfull and light upon the ballance; There is no trust to be put in men: Saul may take them off with a profer of honour, gaine, or the like; But David may trust in GOD, He is faithfull. Davids spirit shall be restlesse, till it winde-up it selfe (by GODS power) above man, all humane props, and hath bottomed it selfe upon GOD, an Almighty foundation. So for Strong-holds too, he must be driven from them all, because his spirit could secure it selfe so well in such hiding-places. David must not be delivered yet, till he be acquainted with his owne spirit at this point also, That David may say, Surely Thou onely art my strong-hold, and my Hiding place. But more of this, when we come to Ziglag. 3. David had a very shifting fleeting spirit bessides his mad pranks, which we will not recall; he fluttered from place to place; I cannot tell how warrantable his way was, either when he went to the King of Moab; or afterwards, to Gath; True it was, David was hardly dri∣ven,
Saul still at his heels, and Saul was driven by the divell: It would make the wisest man run and flye also, to get out of the divels reach. But yet surely, the Prophet advised David well, Get thee into the land of Iudah. David must be advised whither he runs, and suffer reproofe too. What, makest thou with the King of Moab?1 Sam. 21.5. Get thee into the land of Iudah; It seemes spoken by way of reproofe. David would thrust himselfe into this place, and into that, here he might have re∣fuge, and there; No, David must be taught now, and Saul shall be his good master, That these are but shifts, vaine thoughts; These places (being trusted unto, as we shall see anon) are but like childrens castles, which they have framed with their owne hands, not likely to bee of any continuance, GOD must be Davids refuge whereto he may continu∣ally resort. 4. David was very impatient of delayes; he could not wait till GOD had perfected His worke: A man of an hasty spirit; If he was not delivered at this time, then GOD was slacke, as he counted slack∣nesse; And if not delivered at the other time, just when he would have it, Then all men were lyars, Samuel and all;Non Deispiritu propheticè sed &c. Psa. 116.11. All his promises tou∣ching a Kingdome were but words, and they vanish into winde, hee shall never be King, but by Sauls hand he shall fall; he said so (in his HASTE) haste indeed, all men are lyars. It is well then;Accellerando cum praeceps raperetur in per∣turbatione car∣nis. Ibid. David shall not be delivered, till he has got more power over his spirit, more con∣stancy there; Till he can be long-suffering endure, and wait GODS time, which is evermore best for David. Now I may be the briefer in relating to these times. God seemes to deale hardly with His Friends; They are not deli∣vered; They expected, That at such a time deliverance would be, and at such a time, but yet deliverence is delayed, and a rough hand is put-out against them to the uttermost, as it is at this day. It is well it is so; for GOD does all things well. Alas! what a little ease of Iron yoakes would have pleased His People! How little of purity in GODS Ordinances,Quicquid Deu instituerit & fa∣ciendum praece∣perit certum est non esse rem nihili, sed pre∣tiosam & utilem, etiamsi externâ facie stpulâ fa∣bali aut casiâ nuce esset inani∣o & levior Luth. Cat. de Bap. Tempore so. Is. .60.12. would have pleased them well; might they have had their Will, and their Time! A little, though nothing is litle there, and the least swerving from the Rule makes a great Rent, and greatly to bee stood upon; But I say, and I doe but point at it, how little would have served the turne, would GOD have left His People to their own time and way! GOD is better to them, then they are to themselves; Blessed be His Name, He has provided better for them, above their prayers, and beyond their hopes; They shall have a deliverance▪ if they will wait a little, A full Reformation. But hey must leave GOD to His Owne Time, and Way. But how are the spirits of the best men discovered by these (seeming delayes) unto themselves! Even David, the best servants of the LORD, made lyes their Refuge; That they
did, and it is plainly discovered unto them now, that so they did: so also the warpings of their spirits, and their vaine confidences, and how their hearts departed from their GOD; for so much as the heart drawes, and inclines to the creature, so much, and by the very same steps and degrees it withdrawes from GOD; so much of the world as comes-in, so much of heaven goes-out. This were excellent mat∣ter to dilate upon, but every good mans spirit is fitted for such a worke, selfe-searching and triall what spirit he is of, and how it has been discovered to himselfe all this time. O the murmurings of his spirit, how many have they been! what haste has he made! If he be not delivered now, he shall be tyred, and can follow GOD in His way no longer. It is not necessary, nay nor possible, to set downe the murmurings, warpings, hastinesses, of the best mans spirit; but he will confesse he has, in his HASTE, limited the Holy One of Israel, and tyed GOD (like a creature) to his owne time and way; A man would doe it at such a time, and by such meanes, Therefore GOD must doe so too; GOD must worke like a man. This argueth a great distemper of spirit, and must be corrected. Alas! shall David be delivered at this present time? It cannot be, the Servant of the Lord must be instructed first to a constancy of spirit, so as he can come to this Period, and stop there: David shall be delivered the fittest time, and after such a manner, as shall most gloriously exalt GODS Name, and Davids comfort, (and that, I hope, will best content) and so he will conclude, Therefore he will doe his worke, and let GOD alone to perfect His: and he will let GOD alone to His owne Time, and to His owne Way, in confident assurance, That if Davids deliverance be delayed, there is mighty Reason why it is so; and the prime Reason is, that David may be discovered, his owne spirit made fully manifest to himselfe. Secondly. That Davids adversaries every one may be discovered too, all the Right-men, his true Enemies, and false friends; all their fine designes, all their horrid hellish machinations, that all may be discovered, and layed open before all Israel, and before the Sun. David thought GOD was slack touching His Promise; He was indeed, as we count slicknesse, when things are not done, and deliverance wrought by the very same meanes, and at the very nicke of time, which we, in our haste, have concluded upon; GOD was not slacke, nor is he slacke towards David, He is working wonders for David, and we shall see it anon; Davids deliverance stayes a little: Why? That all Davids enemies may be discovered, how wicked, how per∣nicious they are, how mightily they fight against GOD, and His servant David. The enemy must be clearly convinced too: we will take this, and Davids adversaries in order, and proceed upon discovery.
First, Sauls most malignant spirit shall be made as manifest, and naked to Israels eye, as his body was in the day he was born: He made shewes of love to David, all his shewes shall shrinke-up to no∣thing, or prove reall hatred. Saul would have it told David, That the King delighted in him: Does e so? Heare what Saul sayes, and tell your selfe; Saul blesseth the Ziphites, those Murtherers,1 Sam. 23.19. Blessed be ye of the LORD: Why blessed? Because they undertooke Davids destru∣ction in designe, in the manner as they did at Bristoll, London, Lincolne, To deliver David into Sauls hands, that he might doe to him according to all the desire of his soule: What desire was that? To sheath his sword in Davids bowels: Will the Ziphites give such a price into Sauls hand, that he may doe to David according to all the desire of his soule; will they so? Blessed are ye of the Lord: O strange! Nay it was not strange, it was ordinary with Saul to blesse his Right-men, Murtherers, and no others; Blessed are ye of the Lord. O monstrous! what abominable words are these! Saul blesseth the Ziphites: I ask againe, Why does he so? Because the Ziphites have a fine designe upon David, (as our Right-men upon Bristoll, &c. as was said) to deliver him into Sauls hand, that Saul may doe to David, as we understood before. The Zi∣phites have that in designe, and Saul blesseth them for it, and so his wic∣kednesse is shewne before the whole congregation:Prov. 26. For that is GODS de∣signe too, Saul shall not couzen the world any longer; but GOD will turne Sauls blessings into curses; Saul blesseth Murtherers, GOD curseth them; a treacherous, and a murtherous Generation; though they curse, yet blesse thou; So GOD will, and curse them whom Saul blesseth. Saul applauds their designes, GOD abhorres them, and their designes too, and the Hang-man is appointed to give them their wages for their worke. Observe further, the Evill spirit of the man must be made more manifest, for he saith, ye have compassion on me: What ye? or who were they? The same men, who would lay a City waste, so they might gratifie Saul, in the destruction of David; and this Saul calls compas∣sion: O blindnesse! O desperate wickednesse! he counts that a COMPASSION to his soule (the working his will upon Da∣vid) which will destroy Sauls life here, and his soule for ever: Who is there that understands this, and does not pray, Lord leave me not in the lap of my owne will; to run mine owne way, and to accomplish my owne de∣sire. Does not many a man now-a-dayes count the granting of that a Compassion to his soule, which, being granted, and effected to his hearts desire, will destroy body and soule both, eternally. But I for∣beare. Here was a full discovery of Sauls spirit: But let me speake a word for Saul (for truely he had good things in him, which must be remembred, though the Evill spirits, the Divell, and his owne Spi∣rit,
perverted all the contrary way.) Sauls good spirit was discovered too; we fde him weeping in one place, and blessing David in ano∣ther. True; But the Text sayes, David would not trust him for all that; Saul gave David good words, and Blessings too, and there was an Oath betwixt them, and doubtlesse All was done heartily. Saul did not treat with David, and in the meane time carry on a fine designe, to take away Davids life; No, doubtlesse Saul spake as he thought, and meant to performe:1 Sam 24.22. But (sayes the Text) David would not trust Saul; he and his Men got them up into the hold: And the Reason was David knew an Evill Spirit haunted Saul; an Edomite besides, still at his Elbow, and Saul had his foot entred into bloud up to the ankles, David would not trust him. Had Saul shed but a bottle of Bloud, he might have be∣thought himselfe upon cold bloud, as we say, and repented; and he might shew favour to an Edomite, being his Herdsman. But Saul has filled Nob with bloud, from Corner to Corner. And now that the Edomite is declared to be the Chiefe Malignant to Israel, that ever was in Israels Land, Saul approves of him the more: The more bloud he hath shed, the better Subject he is, and friend both, and more right for Sauls designes, the more he declares himselfe an enemy to David. Why, now David cannot trust Saul; All his sweet words are lost; if he be melting a little, the Evill spirit and the Edomite will harden him againe; So David will to his Strong-hold; and is resolved upon the question, To go to GATH, out of Sauls reach, else he could not avoid Sauls bloody hand, (he thought) which pursued him so far, even till he had driven David from out of the Inheritance of the Lord; And so Sauls Evill spirit is fully discovered now, and manifest. He must be convin∣ced also, non-plussed, and put to silence. The Evill spirit shall bee convinced, that he shall not be able to say a word, but in way of ac∣knowledgement, and honest confession from a sound conviction, That he is a lyar, a murtherer, and has erred exceedingly. See how con∣vincing Truth is, from Davids mouth! and how ingenuous Saul is in his confession,1 Sam. 26.21. I have played the foole, and erred exceedingly. He had in∣deed. Saul, Davids grand enemy, is fully discovered, convinced also: yet David is not delivered; no. though all Sauls Right men, the Edo∣mites implacable adversaries; his false friends, Keilites and Ziphites are made manifest too; yet David is not delivered, no not yet; we shall see more reason for it anon; first, we must bring-this-up-to our time. GOD delayes his Churches deliverances now for the same reason sure, That the adversaries thereof might be fully manifest to all Israel. The actings of the evill spirit (President over the Kings Councell,) were not manifest enough sixe yeares agoe, when they thrust a cur∣sed
Booke upon the Scots, and after that the sword; Nor when they called a Parliament in England, not to ease the yokes, but to ingage the Kingdome in that warre, which would have ashed the people one a∣gainst the other, even the father and the son together.Ierem. 13.14. This evill spirit was not manifest enough yet; for wickednesse may bee established by a Law in Scotland, and yet pretence very faire, To establish True Re∣ligion, Lawes, and Liberties, here in England: And goodly and sweet words were spoken that way; and much done touching Bi∣shops and their Courts; And all this while the evill spirit was as an An∣gell of light; And his Actings more indiscernable then before. But then the Designe touching the Army in the North, changed the Divels colour quite, and made him looke as black as soot, as he is, an Angel of darknesse. But let the evill spirit alone, he can cleare up himselfe a∣gaine; he will not be made manifest yet; No not when he prevailed by the evill Counsell To remove the Lieutenant of the Tower, in whom all Israel could confide; and placed a Murtherer there in that Strong-hold; notwithstanding the evill spirit was not manifest enough. No, nor when he counselled the King to desert the Parliament. No, nor when he perswaded the King to call all Israel to war against David, and all that had their hand with David, under pretence of taking a guard to his person. Nor when he made the Edomite Generall in the field, MA∣NAGER of all the Kings affaires here in Israels Land; notwithstan∣ding the evill spirit was not manifest enough yet. But now we know what spirit they are of, and who rules them; For the Land is filled with bloud from corner to corner.Zeph. 3.3. The Princes within her are roaring Lyons; (reade-on, her Iudges are evening Wolves,) never such violences acted by Tartars, Caniballs, as by these Princes. Surely I cannot tell what shall be done unto them, these murtherers; GOD knowes; And that they have broken all the lawes of Heaven and Earth; Divine and Humane, such Children of Belial they are:Iob 31.3. I cannot tell what strange punishment shall befall these workers of iniquity. Doth not the LORD see their wayes, and count all their steps? We will leave them in His Hands, Who has put a bridle in their lips. But this I can tell, What an exe∣cution The LORD would have done upon those, who had wrought villany in Israel, joyning themselves unto BAAL-PEOR,Num. 25.3. as these unto as abominable an Idol as was that. [But they had not shed bloud in the defence of that Idol; These Princes, in name, have filled the Land with bloud from corner to corner.] Yet hearken what The LORD sayes unto those, who joyned themselves unto Baal-Peor, as these to the Idol of Rome; Take all the heads of the people,Vers. 4, and hang them up before the LORD against the Sun, that the fierce anger of The LORD may be turned away from Israel. We will wait Gods time, for then they shall be made manifest indeed before Israel and before the Sun. In the mean
time the evil spirit is discovered and discerned plaine enough, for by his meere motion he has prevailed with the King to seale a Commis∣sion to his Edomites, To kill and to slay his good people, to lay a City waste, even a Mother in Israel. And if they will doe so, to their power, They shall approve themselves in so doing his best subjects, and tru∣est friends: so he blesseth murtherers whom GOD will lay (if they re∣pent not) in the lowest hell. They have compassion on their King; why they? Because they will, to their power, destroy a mother City in Israel; They would have a whole Kingdome wasted: Blessed be ye of the LORD, ye have compassion on me, does the King say; Blessed be The LORD, The discovering GOD, Who has had compassion on His poore people, trusting in His Name; and on His dwelling place; Blessed be GOD! The Spirit, that rules the King and his Councell, is discovered, the Edomites also, those bitter enemies, the Keilites and the Ziphites too, those false and treacherous friends. Take them in or∣der; The Edomites first, Those called SPIRITVALL Lords, They must be discovered, how full of spirit they were. Their spirit was not sufficiently discovered eight yeares ago, when they forced a cursed Paper to be read in all the Churches, there to publish a Decla∣ration for Sports and Passe-times on The LORDS DAY: Their spirit was not discovered by all this; for this the people liked reaso∣nably well; They had an Advouson for liberty, To riot on the LORDS DAY, and they were glad of that. The people had a grant from the Bi∣shops, The Bishops from the Archbishop, he from the King; and that should be sufficient warrant for them, and every one of them, to riot on the LORDS DAY; And for every Minister from the Pulpit, GODS mouth there, To command the people so to do O abomina∣ble! Yes, they have justified the Heathen at this point. And yet these Bishops are not discovered yet; They are in their white Robes yet, we shall see them in Scarlet by and by. And yet not manifest to all the Christian world, say they, how spirituall they were, when, with the Scarlet Whore, they would have rode in the bloud of Scotland up even unto their horses bridles by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs. And yet their spirit not discovered yet! Nor when they would have established themselves by an Oath, A peculiar enstalment to the High Priest, the GOD of our salvation; as I shall shew in another Treatise purposely for them, To cleare their Spirit to the world, how spirituall they were. But they would not be discovered then! Nor by all the good offices they did the Church in Scotland and Ireland, and their mother Church here in England, who sayes of them, Bloudy fathers have ye beene unto me; bloudy fathers have ye beene! And yet they are not manifest yet, not yet! When they would have made void and null, as the phrase is, All the Votes and Acts of Parliament for the Chur∣ches
good. And was not their spirit discovered now? I cannot say No, now, for all Israel said Yes; and they themselves said Yes too when they cast themselves out of the Court with their owne hands. But yet they will be made more manifest. What bloudy wayes have they prosecuted, what divellish projects to wrest themselves into their places againe? If any there are so divelishly minded, so forsaken of common Reason, and light of nature, that they will give these spirituall men their right hand, to lift-them-up to their chaire again, though they make way thither through a field of BLOOD, yet these Bishops will say, Blessed are ye of the Lord, ye have compassion on us. These men are discovered sure, how spirituall they are. So are the Temporall Lords too, all discovered, and fully manifest to all Israel, by their deceit, guile, couzenage, their lying, not unto man, but to the LORD; by their justifying the wicked, whom the Lord abhorres; by their Treacheries, Treasons, more then bloudy conspiracies: now they are manifest enough; Lord Digby, manifest enough; What KEEPERS the Great Seale has, manifest enough; and what a Re∣corder the City has, manifest enough: The LORD turne the Wheele over them all, who would turne the Lawes into worme∣wood, and justice into gall, and would turne three Kingdomes up∣side-downe▪ and make Cities ruinous heaps: But they are discove∣red, the Keilites too, the Ziphites also, friends in shew, bloudy adversa∣ries in deed. These must be convinced also, for the Churches inno∣cency must be made manifest, and they must put to silence the igno∣rance of wicked men; and this is next to be considered on. The LORD brings Saul into Davids Cave;1 Sam. 24.3. there David and his men en∣compasse him round, as Saul and his men encompassed David in the Chapter before: Now they come to Parley; David cleares his inno∣cency, stops the divels mouth, opens Sauls mouth for David, and a∣gainst himselfe, convinceth Saul, makes him weep; That's GODS end. They must come to a Parley the second time, for the divell is not non-plussed yet, he shall be anon.1 Sam. 26.6, 7 GOD puts it into Davids heart to goe downe to Sauls campe; He causeth a deep sleep to fall up∣on Saul and his company; then David does as we read; returning back, and standing at a distance, he calls-out to Saul, and so they come a∣gaine to a Parley; and now the divell has not a word to say, the spi∣rit seemes to depart a little, for then Saul heares David speake, and so speakes himselfe, as if he would make David weep, and beleeve that there shall be a sweet agreement betwixt them for ever, for Saul bles∣seth his sonne David, and assureth him he shall doe great things,1 Sam. 26.25. and also shall still prevaile, O that I could bring up this to this time! But I cannot: The di∣vell is more mighty now, and more shamelesse now, then he was
then, if more can be, as surely it can be: for as length of time, and ex∣periences therein, may make him more cunning, so more wicked, more shamelesse, as at this day. I can say, GOD has brought the King, and His Parliament to a Parley, once and againe, but still the malice of this evill Councell ap∣peared, wickednesse still proceeded from the wicked man, but how won∣derfully was the innocency of David (the faithfull servants of the Lord) cleared! The LORD had this designe now, He will make manifest the Adversaries treachery, and His Servants innocency; and he brings it about thus: His Servants shall, because they will, treat upon a way to accommodate a Peace: The LORD left men to goe their owne way, not so warrantable by His Word, to treat with impla∣cable adversaries, that He might bring to passe His owne will, and bring good to His people. It was conceived by all rationall men, that on the Kings party nothing was intended really and indeed, but mischiefe and bloudy treachery, as is now manifest to the world; But GOD suffered it to goe on, brought sweet out of that sower, good out of that evill: The Evill spirit is silenced now, the Malig∣nants have not what to say; O blessed be GOD! He can doe what He pleaseth, and what He does is for the good of His Israel. This last Treaty betwixt King and Parliament, has non-plussed the Divell, his MANAGERS all are put to silence now, they have not what to say, and yet they are not ashamed: True, the wicked cannot be asha∣med: Were they (sayes the Spirit) ashamed when they had committed abo∣mination, oppressed GODS Poore to their power, shed bloud to their power; profaned the LORDS DAY by a Law, when they endevoured to establish their cursed Hitrarchy by an Oath, were they ashamed? Or when they decreed unrighteous decrees, and prescribed grievousnesse, were they ashamed? When they had committed these and these abominations,Ier. 6.15. were they ashamed? Nay, They were not at all asha∣med, neither could they blush. The wicked are discovered now; nay. they have discovered themselves, and they are convinced, some of them carry a mighty conviction within their Bosome: And the Di∣vell is put to silence too, so I said, I did not say the wicked are asha∣med; I know well, they who have entred the path of the Destroyer, and will pursue it, they are hardened and brawned in evill, They can∣not blush. But now, what great matter have we gained by all this? the wic∣ked are manifest now, they are convinced too, and yet, nor David, nor the Church, are delivered: Delivered! nay, they are in as bad a case as before, and deliverance further off, for ought we see! True, for David must be lower yet; and the Churches deliverance further
out of sight then now it is, for ought we know. But I pray you make answere to this, and consider well on it; Has David been a loser by any thing that has fallen out unto him all this long time (so hee thought it) of Sauls persecution? No, you will say, for indeed you must say so; David has been a great gainer by all this, that hath hap∣pened unto him in the day wherein the LORD was pleased to exercise him with sore afflictions; he has gained experience of his owne spirit, how lying, warping, murmuring, hasty, proud, and stout it was; all this he has gained, and I know not how much more. He has gained a full sight of all his adversaries, their malice, treacheries, and falshoods, are all made manifest; his adversaries are convinced too, and the Evill spirit silenced also. Why then the Church will trust in their GOD for ever; and well they may, the LORD deales so and so with David, His faithfull servant: He de∣laied Davids deliverance; it stayed, as a Child comming to the birth, when there is no power to bring forth; but yet all this slacknesse (as we call it in our haste) was but to open Davids mouth the wider, that he might be more filled with MICHTAMS, and with MAS∣CHILS. Blessed be GOD then, that the Churches deliverance does seeme to linger, to be long a comming; Blessed be His Name, it is GODS doing, and he does all things well; and this He does now (deferring His Churches deliverance) is best of all: Is it not best of all, that the Church sees now more clearly into the way of their owne spirits, and more through into the Path of the destroyer, and into the very intents and purposes of her Adversaries? Certain∣ly, if her deliverance be longer delayed (as we call delay) it is best for the Church still, for all her straits shall be a meanes to open her mouth the wider, to let in, and give forth her MICHTAMS, and her MASCHILS; If deliverance stayes, it is because there must be more discovery yet, even of Gods Right-hand with David; and this comes now to be considered on, for it containes much. Thirdly, We will read Davids case first, how wonderfully God made bare His arme towards him, though he did not complete His deliverance yet; This will be quickly done. Then I will bring it up to these times, even as it is at this day: where we shall see, the Church had seen very little of God, had she been delivered after the manner, and at the time they would have made choice of: But GOD delay∣ing the time from day to day, the Church sees much in God every day. See it in David first: Had not Saul sought David every day to kill him, David had not seene GODS hand so wonderfully reached-forth towards him in his salvation. How wonderfully was David delivered from the Lions mouth at Nob! A wonderful hand is reach∣ed out to David, when he is delivered from treacherous persons, that
dealt treacherously; Then in the wildernesse of Maon, where the LORD wrought as wonderfully for David, as He did for the chil∣dren of Israel, when He set-up a pillar betwixt the Egyptians and Is∣rael, assuring their adversary, (but he will not understand who must perish) that he must overcome GOD first, who lookes to over∣come Israel. So here is a Rocke of Separation (as was said before) so wonderfull was GOD in Davids deliverance, as in Hachilah, and in the wildernesse of Ziph, where Ionathan helped David to strengthen his band in GOD, and then did Davids GOD strengthen His hand towards David; ever more strong towards His servants then, when they are in a wood: So also in the Philistines Countrey, and when Davids City was burnt. But I must referre this burning of Ziglag to the last; for it was his last refuge, and when David sate in ashes there, he was nearest to his Crowne. To apply this to our times;1 Sam. 23.26. 1 Sam. 26. Had the Church been delivered with a deliverance as we had accounted a deliverance, not a halfe delive∣rance; but had we been delivered so as would have served our desires, (capacious and large, as the Sea towards the world and things there, but straitned to better and higher matters.) When the Lords and Commons went downe into the North, three yeares agoe, Then where had beene our Parliament? Yet was Gods Hand wonderfull towards His people there. Had it been granted to us from that high Court quickly after their sitting there, according to the desires of our soules (feeling no burden, but what presseth, and pincheth the outward man) That the hurtfull sword should not hurt us at that time; that should be sheathed, our yokes should be taken off the shoulders, ship∣money, and the like most illegall taxations; then had we (an igno∣rant and bruitish people) rested our selves wonderously contented; we had had enough: And the Clergy also, a sound part of them, had been well enough too, had the high Court freed them from that hor∣rible Oath, but for the ET-CAETERA'S there, there let them be, the Clergy thought not of those mischiefes, minding the Oath onely, that abominable invention. I might goe-on, but I must stand still and admire too little: O the goodnesse of our GOD! Hee would not grant our desires; He would give us a deliverance indeed; He will have things done in order; the Prison-doores shall be opened to His servants, and fast shut upon His adversaries: He will make His enemies, who sayd they were Bishops, and were not; Spirituall, and were not;Rev. 2.9: Lords, and were not, whose Blasphemy the LORD knowes, He will make those uncase themselves, and plucke-off their owne vi∣zards, and throw out themselves too (at the last) with their owne hands: He will turne His wheele over the head that consulted against Him; and throw downe those Powers, that exalted themselves against
His hidden one, GOD would have glorious things done, whether we would or no; so as we can say now, we were too hasty. God has done all things well, admirably well hitherto. He has cast on the sps, throwne downe their bloody Courts, taken away those cu sed Oaths; they shall be no more for a snre, and a tra. How wonderfull was GODS right-hand here! His people will trust Him for af∣ter times. If He delayes deliverance it is to make bare His arme more, which is best for His people, if in patience, and with an holy resignation of themselves into His hands, they can wait for Him. Wait! does the hasty and impatient man say; the LORD is con∣suming his house in the fire of His wrath and heat of His sore dis∣pleasure! No, no, let GOD alone with His house and houshold; all that the LORD does doe is but to exalt His owne Right-hand in all His peoples sight, in His Churches deliverance; and to open the Churches mouth wide in praise and thanksgiving: So we will put the exalting of Gods hand, and the exalting of His praise both to∣gether. 4. Had not the pit of destruction been made wide, and deep for Davi, his mouth had not been so wide open: nor his heat so inlarged to the Praises of His GOD: If he had not been in the depths, he had not sung the high Praises of His GOD. Now so many deliveran∣ces, so Many MICHTAM; and how many enemies were disco∣vered so many Masils: these pretious songs we find here and here, And some Psalms TO BRING TO REMEMRNE.Psal. 38.70. It was necessary the Church should passe through these and those strats: here and there a Gulfe, else she would not have made use of her rea∣sure, which Davi has prepared for tem. I might Reflct back now an hundred yeeres, then Come-up ta∣king in o our Serious thoughts. That wonderfull yeere of 8. Then the 5th of November, 1605. And then 1639. when th second Spanish Fleet was upon our English shore, from which our Deliveane ws more miraculous, then was that in 88. because from this lst wee were delivered before we thought of the danger; and the snare bro∣ken before wee would see it, and so up all along to this day. But I shall Recall but these three last yeeres TO BRING TO RE∣MMBRANCE, how wonderfull The LORD was towards His People in Scotland and here three yeeres agoe. Indeed wee have need of all those straits we were in To bring to Remembrance The won∣derfull workes of the LORD The operation of His hand. in ma∣king TWAONE so making Peace, Soemey Recorded on the Seventh of September, 1641. And Many dayes of Thanksgiving, and opening wide the Churches Mouth Since and before, To bring to Remembrance, The Churches Deliverance from blooy Courts; Cur∣sed
Oathes, Sore oppressions, grievous yoakes, vexing Bryars, grieving Thornes, Divellish Machinations, horrid inventions, upwards to this day to this very day, the 15 of June, 1643. To bring to Remembrance. What? Truely I cannot expresse it, I see so much of Hell in it, such depths of Sathan. That I cannot expresse it; But to bring to Remembrance The Admirable kindnesses, Wonderfull Providences, glorious Dis∣coveries. And now I can condemne my owne hasty Spirit, and I hope can more quietly Rest upon GOD for after Time: The Truth was. I thought verily, and so did Thousands besides My selfe thinke. That if the high Court did Propositi n it once more. Treat Spend Time, that may with implacable Adversaries; If so, They will breake us all in pieces, Thought I and wiser men then my selfe, specially the best affected in the City. And yet truly, not to belie my selfe, I did verily believe. That GOD is in heaven, and did LAUGH all the while; and His Faithfull Servants might laugh too; but yet so brui∣tish My thoughts were; Treat once more and break us all; So I thought and so though many more not so well considering what GOD had done before, and what He might doe then with another Treaty. But now, having so many experiences, we can quietly resigne the matter into GODS hand; Let men alone to their worke, and GOD alone to His worke, and let us doe our duty. That is our worke; GOD will not breake Hs people, not He, though men should proposition it again, as some will goe neare to doe, yet He will not break H s people, but He will break His Adversaries, as it is at this day. Had there not beene those offers to Peace from the contrary side, fained and treacherous, There had not beene a discovery of those Right Men in Oxford, and London; Their fine devices, the depths of Satan; our Adversaries had not so broken themselves, and we had not had our good day, Thursday the 15. of June, To call to remembrance all the forementioned, and our old Protestatin, To humble, and shame us for it, and so to enter into a New, a New Covenant, Vow and Oath. If that bloudy designe had not been and been discovered which was to ruine King Kingdome, Lawes, Liberties, Religion, and all; [So horrid a designe it was, and is acknowledged to be by those, who should have been Actors in it, upon sound conviction, we hope, true and deepe humiliation for it;] If such a designe had not been, and been disclosed. Then had not She∣caniah. I meane the Nobles and Worthics of the Land thought upon the way.zra 10 2. The only way to recover, and save a distressed State and Church sinking into the pit of destruction; We have done so and so yet there is hope in Israel concerning these things: Nw therefore let us make a Covnant with our GOD, To put away all persons and things, which have thrust GOD from us. Let us make a Covenant to doe so, and stand to it. So spake Shecaniah then; So said in effect, our Nobles, and Worthies now.
And so they entred into the way, the only way, to recover a sick and languishing State, to raise it up from the dead, before the Pit close its mouth upon us. VVe know not what will become of it; Not how we enter into it, nor how we shall stand to it. VVe know some will be grieved, and have indignation against the Holy Covenant; And have intel∣ligence with them that forsake The holy Covenant. VVe must leave this to whom it does belong and doe our duty. Blesse we GOD, who put such a prize into our hands. To strengen our hands in GOD, by renew∣ing our Covenant againe. VVe entred into Covenant formerly, and some of the chiefest amongst us have done wickedly against the Covenant,Dan. 11. corrupted by flatteries, and corrupting, and so are left to miserable delu∣sions. And we, the best of us all, have done weakly against the Cove∣nant; None of us have dealt truly; None have kept close to it, and to our GOD. And yet is there hope in Israel concerning this; To make a Covenant with our GOD firmer, and surer, laying our heart (a fleeting slippery thing) under Sacred bands, and feters stronger then Brasse; That we will keepe closely with our GOD; VVe! Yes we,Mr. Cal. Ser∣mon. and our house [As it has been excellently charged upon us.] will serve our GOD, VVho has done all these things for us. VVe are firmly resolved to serve Him, not as we have served Him, but in Sincerity and Truth; And being so resolved, we will put away all persons and things which stop-up the currant and streame of blessings, hindring good from comming-in. And wee will advance those persons, and doe those things, which may procure good to our souls, and peace to King and Kingdome. VVe will enter into Covenant upon this being firm∣ly resolved so to doe, even as Israel, under grievous Adversaries,Num. 21.12. op∣pressing some Israelites, and imprisoning other some, and vexing all Israel; Then they vowed a vow unto The LORD, That, if He would be pleased INDEED to deliver them from that oppressing Adversary, They would make sure worke with the Adversary, he should annoy and vexe them no more, Then I will utterly destroy their Cities. Nor will we make gaine of the spoiles, but devote all to Thee, The giver of Victories. Now marke how well pleased The LORD was with this Vow; And The LORD hearkned to the voice of Israel, and they did as they had vowed, for they called the place. HORMAH, a curse, or utter destructi∣on.Vers. 3. Now The LORD be praised, and evermore blessed be His holy Name. Who has put it into the heart of His Servants to do this thing, the ONE THING NECESSARY at this time, an ONELY VVAY to save a Nation as appeareth fully by the words of Shecani∣ah, [YET THERE IS THIS HOPE;] and as clearly in the story of Asa, [VVhere we reade how the case was with Israel, when Israel were loose with their GOD; how successefull when the people made a covenant with their GOD; And how miserable when they brake
covenant with Him.] He that has put this purpose of heart into them,  in the purpose of their heart for ever, and make the heart of the people firme, stable, and upright with their GOD in this great mar. Amen. Htherto we have seene GOD working wonderfully for His people in their straits, and grievous afflictions, discovering heir hearts an  o themselves; and if their afflictions continue yet longer it is that there may be more discovery made of the way and pde of their spiris. That when GOD calls them to mourning, they may not make then cloaths so gay but be as those whom GOD will humble. 2. Discoverin the adversaries to His people, their wiles, pro∣jects, and bd  signes against His Church; and if deliverance staves and is cke in comming it is that more discovery may be made this way also; and that the adversary may be yet more con∣vinced. 3. That GODS Right hand may be more manifest with His people. And 4. His peoples mouths may be more open to sing the high praises of their GOD. And because deliverance lingers, and is slacke in comming, as we count slcknesse, it is because there might be more discovery made of all the particulars before mentioned. I will draw up to a conclusion of the Chapter.Psal 94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O LORD, and tea est them out of thy Law. We must not stop there, but read on in the Psalme, thereby to strengthen our spi∣rits, that we may stand st l, and wait for GOD in the way of His judgements: there are sad matters yet behind; we have scene Dvid brought very low, but not yet at the lowest; we shall see him, and heare him out of the depths, but he is delivered out of them all. Da∣vid now, many the faithfull Servants of the LORD are in Davids case, which we shall read by and by: their Ziglags are smitten, and burnt with fire; we are sure in a sad case, if we knevv it, and (which speaks sadly to our hearts) our case is like to be sadder yet; we are low, and are like to be lovver, for un-answerable Reasons, vvhich vve shall heare fully anon: This in short because vve doe not hum∣ble our selves under GODS Almighty hand; He has layed us lovv, vve are high, our spirits are proud, and stout. Hovv does that ap∣peare? As plainly as the nose in your face; by the provision vve make for our backs and bellies: I say no more here, but this, vve should not be more stout, but more humble, because our Ziglags (vve call properly ours) are not burnt yet. These are burnt round about us, the fire has taken the State and Church-house, and vve should (as men doe in such a case) plucke dovvne every thing that exalts it selfe. I
remember a note of Master Ainsworths touching Israel,In Deut. When the sword of GOD is abroad, vvarre, famine, pestilence, though amongst the heathen people, et it is GODS sword, and a calamity; we must pray, and fat, we must (say they) humble our selves the onely way to keep it from eing our doore. The sword is bted in heaven novv, our ovvne land is vvatered vvith our bloud, and dunged vvith our carcases; and vve vvould have the svvord to rest and be still: No, it cannot vve must fall lovv in our spirits, and rise high in our saith, before this vill be. It is a true saying also, Calamity knockes at that mans doore, and will ente,Calamias illiu f pul qui alio  nomo∣vetu. w minalesse of the calamity upon his neighbour and brother. We con∣clude novv, vve are like to see heavier times because vve have not vvell observed the vvay of our ovvne spirits nor the operan of GODS hand, not the meaning of is Rod tovv us all this vvhile vve are not humbled. Well blessed be  vvat ever it be, and blessed be His Name, vvho useth Princes and Nobles of the earth, as Scullions indeed, to cleare and vvash His Vessels app to hnour. But that vve may not faint in out de bt exect vvith patience the salvation of GOD; We vv l pro , vv vve broke off, and give no rest to our spirits ll vve have x∣ed them upon an everlasting undaon, vvhereupon vve may stand still, and abide the raine and the vvindes, te stormes and hae, even the sts of great Waters, in Davids assurance and confidence.Psal. 94.22. Verse 23. That the LOD is my defence, and my GOD is the rocke of my refuge: And He shall bring upon my adversaries their owne iniquity, and shall ut them off in then owne wickednesse: Yea, the LORD our GOD shall cut them off. Amen.
CHAP. 6. Davids troubles have a happy close; but his case is very sad first. The Churches case now, is read in Davids case then; there∣fore we record former deliverances very wonderfull, to strengthen our assurance in a deliverance to come, which will be more glorious the longer it stayes. Quere's touching Davids case, now at the low∣est, with resolution from Gods mouth thereunto; which speaks com∣fortable words to David, but sad things to us. Our strong hold, as well as Davids, must be cast downe before we are delivered. I See the Land, said one, after he had beene long upon the Sea, and es∣caped many dangers there; We can say as much touching Davids adventures (as a private man) and what end God makes; That is, glori∣ous still, but David must endure first. Wee read before. that David came to Gath; the King there respects him very well, assigneth him a City called Ziglag, which Da∣vid might lay claime to,Ish. 14 31. being assigned long before by Ishuah to the Tribe of Iudah, and now fell to David by lot. David was there, but he could not sit still there, he was for action, the service of his GOD, and his Countrey, and abroad he goes; though his body be among the Philistines, yet his heart is in Iudah, and to doe Saul his Master all the good service he can, and his adversaries all the hurt he is able. Hereon depends a very notable story, because of some very notable circumstances thereabouts▪ specially touching the sword: An hurt∣full instrument, but yet could do David no hurt, being wholly at Gods dispose; and that is very comfortable, specially at that time: which I would have insisted upon a little, but that I finde my selfe preven∣ted in a little Paper, called, A staffe of comfort, whereunto I referre the Reader, if please him. That which concernes us here, is, David has put himselfe upon a very hot service, and overcomes where-ever he goes for he carries the Revenge of GOD with him. After execution done, he retires to Ziglag;1 Sam. 30.3. comming thither, he finds it smitten, and burnt with fire: the Amalekites had been there, had done as we read, and had taken thence all Davids earthly comforts, every one. Truely a very hard and sad case; Saul has hunted him from all his strong holds, those in Israel, those in the Wildernesse; and now by the favour of Achish, he has one City of Refuge more assigned to him, David is stept aside,
the Amalekites invade the City the while, Smite it, and burne it with fire, and take away all his comforts, the desire of his eyes, and the de∣light of his heart, all his comfort thence. He heares devouring words besides, to adde to his griefe: Ah Lord! what a sad case is this! I shall propose some Quere's about it anon, because the resolution thereunto will instruct us very much: It will state, and resolve our questions too; and if not satisfie us, yet will make us silent. But first, observing my method all along hitherto, we must see how this relates to the present time also: And blessed be GOD we see it very clearly; it relates fully to our times, for our Ziglags are smitten and burnt with fire: Yes, and our case is more like Davids still; David heares devouring words from those he put as much con∣fidence in, as could be put upon men too much; These talke of sto∣ping him. It is our case too; we made lyes our refuge, we put confidence in men, because they are many, in that Arm, because it is strong. And wha doe we heare? Surely that which troubles us as much as it did David, when his men spake of stoning him; That men will prove them∣selves men, deceitfull and treacherous; That there is as much or more danger from them, then from professed Adversaries. VVell, yes in∣deed it is well, blessed be GOD; let Him take what way He pleaseth, so He will cast downe all our strong-holds, our vaine confidences: I know the Adversary laughs now; VVell; GOD laughes also, and His People may laugh too at their owne folly, and bee ashamed also the more, the more they looked to multitudes; Should not a peo∣ple loke to their GOD? Stay themselves upon an Almighty Arme? Oh blessed be GOD, who by every dayes experience of His faithful∣nesse, and mans unfaithfulnesse, instructs His people to discretion, To doe now as David did then, encourage themselves in The LORD their GOD. And they that can doe so, are in a good case, as David was here▪ and never nearer and closer to his GOD, then when the creature was remotest from his eye; never more encouragement from GOD, then when he had most discouragement from man: Therefore now, though there be a casting downe, yet these faithfull servans of The LORD are neare to a raising-up, if not to a kingdome in this world, yet in a better world▪ which shall not be shaken, and that is best of all. So now Davids case, though it relates not fully to our case, yet it tells us what The LORD will doe for His people in after time, we hope, shortly, raise them out of the Ashes, so soone, (not sooner) as their strong-holds (All their vaine confidences) shall bee destroyed. As these fall, so His people rise; wherein we shall have a cleare understan∣ding anon. I would call-to remembrance first, how wonderfully GOD has wrought for his Church and People, that so we might not faint in our mindes, but, (as doubtlesse Gods people doe) encourage our hearts
in GOD, to strengthen us at the present, and in after time. He has wrought for His Church as strange a deliverance, within these foure yeares, as was that from out of Egypt; That through the Red Sea; And the bringing-back from Bbln, so strange a deliverance has GOD wrought. I conceive, the Church has passed through her greatest strait already; Before the siting of the last Parliament, and a moneth after, she went through the greatest gulfe, wherein she almost won∣ders at this day (but GOD in Christ is only wonderfull) how she passed it ver, and was not swallowed-up therein. Certaine it is That then, at that time the Church was brought to the brow of the hill, she, as her LORD before her pssed thrugh the midst of er adversaries, she knows not how; nor have we▪ poore people well and rightly considered on it how wonderfull that deliverance was. Had we not had comm n thoughts about it it had not been as t tis day. I was a cheape delive∣rance indeed,Isa. 9.5. not b the battell of the Warriur, with whom is a confused  an garmens rolled in bloud. The LORD brought it about by His one out streched Arme. He hath boke the yoake of i buthen▪ and the sase is hoer▪ th rod of his oppressour, as in the day f idian. And He put His pople to litle Cost all this while. But bcause the cheap∣nee of tht delverance has taken awa very much from the worth and wht of the sae, therefore sure it is, that The LORD will not deliver Hs Church now. But by t battell of the Wao, with conf∣s nois and garments lle in bld. I purposely insist upon this won∣derfull deliverance the Church has had▪ the more to strengthen our had in GOD against the time to come. I do not well understand who Gg n Magog are, who are her se∣cret, who are the Churches open enemies. Nor can I ell whether the Tuke may no molest her, before she be taken from the earth or made a qiet abitation there. But this I conceive, an ye I will not call it a conceit That as Davids deliverance was most arable, which yet, at present he took least notice of because the dnger was over before he knew it, covered, and kept close under shwes and pretences of extraordinary favours, and acts of grace: So were the Churches de∣liverances also, all these three yeares, before the war against her was open and manifest: but more particularly admirable about three yeares agoe. And I verily perswade my selfe, the Papists shal never have the like advantages against her as they have had; She has esca∣ped heir great snare that is broken; And though she was n her Ad∣vrsries teeth, as a prey there, (they were sure of her, and made no more conscience to devoure her, then to eate bread,) yet she is deli∣vered. O wonderfull! Truly as wonderfull I think every whit as her deliverance will be then, when her open Adversaries shall think ve∣rily to swallow her up quick, for then, when her enemy has prepared
his Instruments of death, is bigge with expectation, Then the LORD will smite his bow out of his left hand,Ezek. 39.3. and cause his arrowes to fall out of his Right hand. Will it be surely so? Yes, it is as sure as if it were done; Behold, it is come, and it is done, saith the Lord. Surely the Churches de∣liverance three yeares agoe is as admirable, as this will be; And marke how the LORD has followed His victory over His Chur∣ches adversaries ever since; Then He sent in the Heads of the Tribes, and He has covered their heads with His owne wing ever since; Their abode was among Scorpions, yet were they not stung; their soule was among Lions, yet not devoured; they were amongst those that were set on fire, yet they were delivered: O wonderfull! Yes, when GOD begins to deliver, in delivering He will deliver; He will deliver indeed. And see how graciously He has dealt with His Servants, that serve Him with a willing mind! He has given them successe ever since, e∣ven to admiration, and sent-them-in supplies, and prospered those supplies after a wonderfull manner: They have been in straits so of∣ten, but these have served to make their way more passable, and their enlargement more glorious. I have recalled all this, recording the yeares by-past, and remembring the Right-hand of the Most High to strengthen and fortifie our spirit, that we may not faint in the day of trouble, when our Ziglags are smitten, and burnt over our heads: GOD is He, who hath delivered,2 Cor. 1.10. (saith the Apostle) And so he con∣cludes comfortably for the present, and for after time. But give me leave to reason a little, as flesh & bloud will, whether we will or not: Though GOD has delivered, it does not therefore follow, that He will deliver; He had delivered His People from these and these ene∣mies, yet when His People had provoked Him by their images, and strange vanities, the LORD tells them plainly, He will deliver them no more: And why may not we expect to heare the same words; Ye have rebelled more and more, therefore I will deliver you no more: We might indeed expect to heare the same words, if the LORD in shewing mercy to a land did consult with the People of the Land, with their deservings, and the merit of their workes: which he does not doe, but with His free Mercy, Goodnesse, and loving Kindnesses; consulting with Himselfe, He hath delivered us from SO GREAT A DEATH (marke that, SO GREAT A DEATH, for we had it not before) when the righteous were pressed out of mea∣sure, above strength; when they were brought to the brow and brinke of the hill, purposely to throw them downe headlong thence; when they despaired even of life: when the sentence of death was re∣ceived in themselves; when GOD doth deliver after such a man∣ner as this, such an unexpected glorious manner, which heaven and
earth stand wondring at (from so great a death) when He turneth the cap ivity of a People as Jordan, back; when He worketh so strange∣ly, so wonderfully, this is an evident token, that, though the delive∣rance be not perfected yet it is perfecting: The LORD doth watch over it and is working and contriving what way to make it more glorious, for His Name is engaged upon it: It may goe-backe till it be out of sight; it may have many stops in comming-on againe; it may fall into the depths, where we can finde no bottome, nor any humane helpe whereby it may rise again. Notwithstanding GOD is working gloriously all this while; so as we may say even now, Now, when they that hate the Lord lift-up the head, why yet deliverance goes-on; the LORD watcheth it. and promoteth it, and, as it is in the Text. He dot deliver, while He is fitting His servants, and making them MEET for deliverance: And the more we shall see the Pit opened before us, and hell there; the more the way to deliverance shal be opened, and the more of heaven we shall see there; to doubt there∣of, were to provoke the LORD, as they did at the SEA, even at the RED SEA. And now I suppose we are better fitted by all this, to read over Davids case, and therein our owne anon, when I have given (or rather, not I, but the Lord) a resolution to certaine Quere's touching Davids case, why the LORD dealt so bitterly with him. Indeed David was greatly distressed; a great desolation be∣fore his eyes, but his eyes are to The LORD, and that will helpe all. David is as low brought as can be, yet not too low for GOD to raise againe; if He puts under His hand, it is done; and it is His glory to put forth His right hand at a dead lift. David has said, Try me (O LORD) and prove me; the LORD will doe it, he shall be tryed as silver is tryed, but God, his God, will stand by him, while he melts: Da∣vid shall be at no losse, onely the drosse shall goe forth and his scum: David had said, Thou art my portion, O LORD; he had not said so, had he not found what poore portions of comfort the creature yeelds us here below, in the day of trouble. David had prayed, The LORD bring me to the rocke that is higher then I; The LORD will doe it, by unbottoming him of all creature confidences. Alas how are we de∣ceived! we fooles build our house here, as if so be we expected al∣wayes faire weather; No, we must build so, as those who know the Raine will fall, Windes will blow, stormy haile will beat upon our house:Heb. 11.10. . We may read, Abraham lookt for a City that hath foundations, but not before all his strong-holds were downe, and he was driven from all his foundations, his creature-comforts here below. We see already excellent Reasons, why David was laid so low, but I will speake of them very briefly, in this order. First, David is in a strange land, he lookes for peace there! No, he
had no peace in his owne land, and expects he to have it amongst the Philistines! GOD will not give David rest from all adversity in the Philistines land; David must not sit downe at rest, till he be returned to his owne People: And there is not the place of his rest neither; our expectations from worldly things will deceive us; it is good to learn how uncertaine these things are, betimes, that we may put no trust in them. 2. Davids Ziglag is smitten, and burnt with fire; That David might now well understand, what kinde of thing his Ziglag is, casuall and hazar∣dous. He smote Amalecks town a few dayes ago; Now Amaleck smites Davids town; These are the changes here below, up and downe; The Adversary was smitten yesterday, David to day; a great difference in the stroke, because GOD ordered it; we can conclude neither love nor hatred from these things. Do we hear that the Adversaries Right hand is lifted-up, has smitten and burnt Davids City; and he goes on vali∣antly, as if he would carry all before him? Be not dismaid at this, it is no new thing; Davids case he is low now, but he will be up again, and confound the Adversary anon, and be more then conquerour. It was said of the Romanes. They were put to the worse in many skir∣mishes, and light battels, but never in a War. They were worsted in the world many times▪ never conquered there, but they conquered the world. This truly relates to David and his Warriours; They are worsted in the world, but yet (in Christ) they have overcome the world; and shall be more then conquerours there anon, after they have endu∣red, like good souldiers, a little hardnesse. 3. Davids Ziglag is smitten, all his delectable things taken captive thence, but not one slaine. The Sword is in the enraged Amalekites hand, yet does drinke no bloud, nor eate flesh. I told you before, GOD would stand by David, when he was in the refining pot, melting there; His presence would be with him, as with the three Worthies; He will moderate the fire, (if He does not quench it) the extream heat of the enemies rage against David; he shall do David no hurt, blessed be His Name. But yet behold the Ciy is burnt with fire, wives, sons and daughters taken captives, Davids wives too. Learne then, 4. How corruptible our Ziglags are, how uncertaine our com∣forts there; (like Ionas Gourd) they cast a shadow in the morning, and we sit contentedly under them; at night they are withered. David and his men a very few dayes ago, had every man an house, wives and children round about them, and David had a City, a place of refuge to go unto; Now their houses lye in ashes, and all their delectable things taken thence: Let us consider well on it, and reade the Case once more. David and his men are gone from home, they returne
in ashes, their houses smitten and burnt, all their comforts taken thence It was Davids case and theirs whose hand was with David. Then why ma it not be ours? LORD teach us, by this example, not to set our eyes upon our Ziglags, not our hearts upon our comforts there. A great lesson for this time; and because of our dotings that way, a maine reason why The LORD, infinitely wise, and exceeding loving to Davi, suffers his Ziglag to lye in ashes before his eyes; haply Da∣vid and his men had set their eyes upon that place, and their comforts there; they had delighted in them too much. Whosoever does so, Da∣vid must not, therefore his Ziglag shall be smitten, and burnt with Fire. But we do not see the worst of Davids case yet. His City is burnt, it is possible for David, a valiant man, to get another. His wives are taken captives, he may recover them againe; but he cannot doe all this without his men; and (see hs case!) they will turn from him, or turn against him, for they spake of stoning him. It is the saddest case that ever I read, I meane an outward case, and so every man will say that observes it. David is in a strange Countrey, he has a shelter there, It is burnt with fire, all his comforts taken thence. O for a friend now to comfort him! he has not one; They that should comfort him are miserable comforters; Their soule is grieved, every man for his sons and daughters; then they spake of stoning David. Israels old doings; Their fathers dealt little better with Moses; If they wanted bread or water, or were in danger, then presently they blamed Moses: So here, these men are smitten: whose ever was the hand, it was GODS rod, and they speak of smiting David. Surely David is in a sad and a dark∣some condition; he walks now in the shadow of death, but GOD will be a light unto him, and David looks for Him, even for a light to rise in this obscurity. I remember, there was a Kingdom which wan∣ted an heire, Competitors there were enow. It was agreed upon a∣mongst the Nobles, That he should be King, who could first spy the Suns rising. You will imagine now, that many eyes were turned eastward, intent that way, for they looked for a Kingdom; and yet not all; one amongst many, and but one, looked as stedfastly westward, and got a Kingdom by it for without controversie he spied the beams of the rising Sun first, striking upon the high places of the earth west∣ward. Here is the patience of the Saints. They can wait upon GOD, stay His leasure, leave Him to His own way and Time, Who created the light, and formed the darknesse; His servants expect now, the clearest manifestation of the light of GODS countenance towards them. there,Isa. 58.10. where the Sun of all their outward comforts set. Thy light shall rise in obscurity, and Thy darknesse shall be as the noone day. Every man ex∣pects light in the morning, and to see the Sun rise in the East; But to
expect light to rise in the West, where the Sun of all our comforts here below, sets, here is the wisedome and patience of the Saints also. And it is a wonderfull Promise, In the morning it shall be light. Are those the words? No; for that runs along vvith our sense too; but vvhen vve think the time vvill be darkest, as novv in Davids case, vvhen the Sun of all his comforts is set, novv to expect light, there is the wisedome, and patience of the Saints; and they have a vvonderfull promise for it, (praised be His glorious Name:) But it shall come to passe,Zech. 147. That at EVENING, IT SHALL BE LIGHT. It shall be the lightest Time (vvith David) vvhen he expects it vvill be darkest; i.e. When he is in the shadovv of death, AT EVENING IT SHALL BE LIGHT, vvhich Davids GOD vvill create for David, and that is a glorious light. We can novv resolve our selves, vvhy The LORD vvill have it night vvith David; vvhy He vvill have the Sun of all his (outvvard com∣forts) goe dovvne and set all at once. Why? To indeare light unto him. VVhile the Sun shines, and it is day vvith us, light is but an ordinary thing; and but an ordinary rate set upon it, (an excellent creature though it be.) But vvhen neither Sunne, nor Moone, nor Stars appeare, in the night of our affliction; then to have light come-in unto us (as to Paul and Silas in the prison) this indeares light, novv it is light indeed; To have a light arise in obscurity, that is comfortable indeed, in this evening, (of our distractions) in the night of our afflicti∣on, it shall be light; That is a glorious promise, and it is a new Cre∣ation. The LORD suffers the adversary to over-power David, to take from him all was his; all below, that David could take delight in: Now (would we say) David is an undone man: No, we are deceived, the enemy cannot undoe a man, he may distresse him for a minute, or an houre, but he cannot undoe him; the enemy cannot take GOD from a man, and till that be done, till GOD be gone from a man, he is never undone. Nay, the more fierce and violent the enemy is upon David, the nearer GOD is to him: as wee are nearest our children when trouble and paines are upon them, then we are near∣est them; so is GOD too; and He is the Fountaine of Light; be it Even-tide, or Mid-night with us, He maketh it day where-ever He is. And now His Servant David will set his face more stedfastly to looke after this light, now, that his shadow is so dark: If his comforts be not removed from his eye, the streame of his affections will not run cleare, towards the Spring-head. The Living Fountain of light and comfort. David must finde a nothingnesse in the creature, before he can finde all in GOD. He cannot be taught that great lesson, but by losses, after losses. David must be a King, just and mercifull; there∣fore he must feele oppression; and grone under it; He must see afflicti∣on,
and be acquainted with it; David is rising a pace to his Crown; It must be from the lowest bottome; and when he was there in dust and ashes, (though he thought not so) the Crown was hastning to his head; For he did not faint in his minde: But David encouraged himselfe in The LORD. Mighty words, and they make David strong and migh∣ty in his GOD. All was gone; All the discouragements that the world could lay upon David, lyes now upon him; yet he can encourage himselfe in GOD, and so makes-up all his losses in one GOD. Indeed GOD is all-sufficient; And now GOD turnes the heart of his men unto David againe; And they march forth against the enemy in the strength of The LORD, and fetch all back againe. If David can en∣courage himselfe in GOD, he shall see the streame turned presently, as the rivers in the South. If we can beleeve, trust perfectly. That, which we think cannot be, is possible, and shall be; That which we thinke is gone, shall all turn back againe. If we can be patient, we shall re∣ceive all againe with advantage. This in passage, I would rather set a marke upon the time, when David was delivered. David was delivered, but not before he was driven from all his strong-holds; not before his-last place of refuge was smitten, and burnt with fire; not before all his comforts were taken from him, and his men spake of stoning him; Then he was delivered when, to the eye of Reason, deliverance was farthest off, cleane out of sight. I con∣clude from hence, that David now, all the faithfull of the LORD, shall be delivered, but not yet; deliverance is comming-on, and perfecting every day, even by those meanes and wayes, whereby we thinke it is set further backe; but it will not be perfected, not com∣pleated (as it shall be in time, and as we call complete) before all strong-holds and brest-workes, are cast downe and destroyed. I cannot be mistaken here, I doe not meane, that all the strong holds, forts, and brest-workes before our eyes, must be destroyed, before the Church shall be delivered; no, the Church is alwayes allowed the wisdome of the serpent, to stand upon her guard, and in her watch-tower, to fortifie and brest-worke themselves against an insulting adversary, who (if he should prevaile) will tread upon the head of the righteous, more heavily then ever yet they were trod upon so as their neckes shall bow downe to the foot of pride▪ shall be trod upon as the mire in the streets. Blessed be GOD, His servants have so fortified themselves; and His blessings be upon the heads of those, who have given forth their heart and hand to the raising these works; for I verily beleeve, these will be very serviceable to the Church till the very time when her LORD will make her a quiet habitation; all the time before is like to be Troublous. The meaning then is not, That these forts and brest-workes, before our eyes, must be destroyed,
before the Church is delivered, [though it is very notable, that so it was with David; all was downe before he was raised; quite forsaken before GOD took him up;] But all the Churches strong-holds within must be destroyed, their vaine confidences, their brest-works within, raised there by these without, making the Church confident and secure, trusting in them, these must be destroyed, before the Church can be delivered. Nay, if these brest-workes and strong holds with∣in, be not destroyed, they will destroy us, they will put deliverance further backe, and destroy these without: I meane, our trusting in them, expecting salvation from them, will destroy us and them; it will bring a curse upon all; the sword shall impoverish thy fenced Cities, saith the LORD:Ier. 5.17. Why will the Lord suffer the Adversarie to doe so? Because His People set their hearts that way, and departed from the LORD; they expected salvation from their fenced Cities: it is as idolatrous every whit, as to expect salvation from stockes and stones; therefore the LORD would impoverish their fenced Cities, wherem thou TRVSTEDST with the sword; their trust in these things, destroy∣ed the things and persons too. But more of this in the eighth and last Chapter. Our deliverance is delayed, we shall see reason why it is so; we are very high now and exalted, but GOD must be exalted in that day. We do (indeed) many of us lye among the Pots, like as Scullions be∣twixt the Raunges, (i.e.) sore troubles are upon us,Psal 63.13. In summis angu∣stiis, sordibus, & squalore vixeritii, Metaphora a ca∣lonibus castren∣sibus. Iunius. and our eyes have seen adversity; and yet, because our out-sides shew forth no such thing, our outward garbe is so unsutable to Mourners, to those that are sultied among Pots; because our faces doe not change colour yet, nor our cloaths, we doe not take shame unto our selves: Therefore GOD will not take off our reproach, we shall see more adversity, before GOD will put glory upon us, before we shall be as the wings of a Dove, covered with silver, and yellow gold. But more of ths anon. Now David is delivered, for all his strong holds are downe and he can encourage himselfe in the Lord, when all the discouragements that could be were upon him; when he was weakest, then was he stron∣gest; when he was driven from all his strong holds, when all his comforts were removed, when his men turned themselves against him, then GOD comes in; when no help from earth, there is much from heaven; GOD loves to shew himselfe for David, when they can see nothing but His right hand put forth in their salvation: Blessed be GOD, a refuge that never failed David, He comes-in, when all goes out, a present help in trouble; Refuge failed me, (said David in his Maschil when he was in the Cave) no man careth for me,Psal. 142.4. my owne servants speake of stoning me, did he say at that time; but
then he encouraged himselfe in the LORD his GOD, and said, Thou art my refuge; O! blessed be GOD! Be the Nations never so angry, and the earth unquiet,Ier. 3.23. the Sea of this world never so tempestuous, yet His servants eyes are ever to the LORD, they can put-in into that harbour, and they are secure. I conclude; Truely in vaine is salvation hoped for, from the hills, and from the multitude of mountaines; Trul in the LORD our GOD is the salva∣tion of Israel.Isa. 29.19. The meeke shall increase their joy in the LORD, and the poore among men shall rejoice in the Holy one of Israel. In the way of thy judge∣ments. O Lord,Isa. 26.8. have we waited for thee: the desire of our soule is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee. Amen. CHAP. 7. A grave Question resolved, Touching the manner how a Spirit is to be resisted; If he acts like a Spirit, then by the spirit of Prayer, wherein Israel neither was nor is wanting: If hee acts by the hand of an Edomite, then he must be resisted by the sword of an Israelite, wherein Israel now must not be wanting neither, but doe as Israel did, and as their Brethren in Scotland have done of late, and in ancient Times. DAvid, greatly distressed, has encouraged himselfe in The LORD his GOD; then, enquiring of The LORD is commanded to pursue after his enemies, and assured without faile to recover all. His ar∣my is but in an ill case for service, six hundred in all, two hundred so faint, that they could not go. Notwithstanding GOD, who hangs the greatest waights upon the weakest wyers: does the greatest matters by the weakest instruments, has done His worke by these weake men. But yet, that all Israel may attest Davids innocency, and secure him from Sauls and his Edomites insolencies, GOD sends them all-in now, to help David; And in they come with a blessing in their mouths, Peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be unto thine belpers, for thy GOD helpeth thee.1 Chro. 12.18. Here is a grave question now touching the manner of resi∣stance. If the Tribes come-in not to resist Saul,Obj: but (as affirmed before) his private will or spirit, like a strong man keeping possession in Sauls heart, and holding his tenure therein more firmly by the activity and effe∣ctuall working of the evill spirit, which came upon Saul, and never left him to the day of his death: If so, Then me thinkes this kinde
should have beene cast forth by Prayer and Fasting. The meaning is, Israel should not have taken Bow and Arrowes, Shield and Buckler into their hands, but have fallen downe upon their knees, and have prayed for their Master, and so by mighty-wrastlings have dispossessed Saul of his own spirit, so by mighty in him: This had been according to the Rule and word of The LORD Christ;Matth. 17.21. This kind is not cast forth but by Prayer and Fasting. To this I reply first, and doe grant, 1. That this kinde, while it does act as a spirit, is to be resisted by the spirit of Prayer, and so alwayes has beene cast forth. But when his act∣ings are more open and visible upon any person, as upon that Lunatick there; Then, if there had beene force enough to resist him, the father of the childe, would not have called it a Resistance of his childe, which was but the restraining of the childe from falling into the fire, and into the water. So we see in this case, There might have been a resisting of the divell, which had had an affiance and good agreement with duty. Much more then, had this Lunaticke Person played the Edomite, flou∣rished with his sword, slaine all he met, man, woman, and childe, sucklings too, beasts also; made Cities ruinous heaps. Should Israel goe to prayer now? Pray the divell to be quiet; So they might have beene killed upon their knees. Israel knew the divell well enough, and the Edomite too. That the more they prayed them, the fiercer they would be, as Rabshakeh cried the louder in the Jewish language, the more he was prayed to speake in the Syriacke tongue;2 Kin. 18.28: When the di∣vell has put a sword into an Edomites hand, we must not use suppli∣cations, but put force to force, and conjure-out the divell with the Sword. If the divell make you bleed, try a conclusion, whether you cannot make the divell bleed; which is very poffible, sayes Zanchie, and he has a large discourse upon it, and touching the methods of Sa∣tan. The divell acts now by the hand of an Edomite; he must be re∣sisted by the hand of an Israelite. This first, I affirm, 2. That Israel, Priests and People there, went by their Rule; doubt∣lesse they had used all fair means before they tooke the sword in hand. They had prayed for Saul, and to make their prayer the more fervent, they fasted for him also. But here was a sad case (you read it before.) Saul has murthered those Priests, who were the likeliest men in all Ju∣dah to pray and fast for him; he murthered them. Indeed it was as sad a case, as (I thinke) is imaginable; for, whereas he might have had groanes and Prayers put up to the throne of grace in his be∣halfe, from the Priests mouth, he makes the good Priests groane be∣cause of his oppression: The good Priests would have cryed for him, spake good for him before his and their LORD night and day: Saul regards not that, he has shed their bloud, and now their bloud
cries against him night and day, How long LORD, how long er thou doest avenge our bloud that is shed. Truely this is an heavie case; cer∣tainly Israel went by rule, they prayed for their King they were not wanting in that point. Indeed there is one thing touching this mat∣ter, which seemed strange to me; All this time which Soul has cast away, and worse then lost, in persecution of David, I heare not one word of counsell or Prayer from Samuels mouth that good old Prophet. It is true, before this persecution begun▪ we read, Samuel came no more to see Saul,1 Sam. 15 35. till the day of his death. Yet me thinkes it is very cleare and expresse (though not in words) that Samuel prayed for Sau; Neverthe∣lesse Samuel mourned for Saul (sayes the Text;) Then he prayed for him sure.1 Ion 5.16. There is a sin unto death, sayes Saint Ihn I doe not say that be shall pray for it: But, sayes another, If thou maist not pray for him, yet maist thou grieve,Si non ores, ge¦ma tamen; sorta∣ssis gemitus tuas penetet quo ora∣tio non paesumat tendere. and urne for him; perhaps thy sighes, groanes, and in urnings of thy sirit, may ascend thither, where thy prayer presumes not to come. Samuel MOVRNED for Saul; That was a servent prayer: And certainly the LORD answered Samuels Prayer touching Saul, though not as Samuel desired yet as best pleased the Lord. He answered him, and in a very effectuall way and manner of answering; for thus we read; So David fled, and escaped the hands of Saul and came to Ramih,1 Sam. 19 18. and told him all that Saul had done to him; all Sauls ungodly deeds and hard words, committed against David, he told Samuel all, and they dwelt together at Naioth. Saul heares of this thing, and where Davids abode is and he sent messengers to take David; GOD prevented them,Verse 20. and made a change of them quickly; no sooner came they thither, but they doe (for the time) as others did, they pro∣phesie. Saul heares all this, he will have his Will, sends more Messen∣gers, and thither they came; and it was with them, as it was with the former,Ver. 21. they prophesie also. Then Saul went himselfe to Ramah, for he will have David whether GOD will or no; But when he comes thither, he is changed for that season, and does as all his messengers befre him, and then it became a Proverbe. How was this sudden change made in Sauls messengers▪ and in himselfe? It is answered, The Spirit of GOD came upon them: That is true; but sure there is something in this,Ver. 20. and Samuel standing as appointed over them: Doubt∣lesse this change upon Saul the restraint of his bloudy hand, the thru∣sting-backe of his sword three times successively, was the fruit of Sa∣muels words, and answere of his prayers, for an in behalfe of David, and to withhold Saul from shedding innocent blood. I make menti∣on of it here, To shew, that all faire and warrantable wayes were used, prayers and supplycations were put-up for Saul, while there was time for it, and persons fit for that service, which did properly belong to Samuel and the Priests, not to the Heads of the Tribes. It was their time
now to appeare in the Field, there to hold up their hands, with their Swords; for Saul in pursuance of his own way, and to satisfie his will, hath commanded the Edomite, and Nob is destroyed, and Saul is ha∣sting to Keilah, and hath called together five thousand men. David and his men must look to have the roughest hand put out against them, that ever was put forth▪ for it is Sauls hand and his Edomites, as it is at this Day: Therfore, I will cleare Israels duty, now, touching their prayers for their King now, (as I have cleared their practice in ta∣king-up Defensive Armes) That they have performed their duty at that point just as belongeth to the Israel of GOD. Armies appeare in the field in a seeming opposition to the King, yet not so indeed, but in opposition to his wicked Councell, carryed on, and acted by that evill spirit, who now workes so effectually all over all the Christian world; Now the Objection is, That Christians should make no Resistance, no not of the Devill, but by prayer and fasting. I have denyed that and made it cleare; That, when the Devill acts by the hand of an Edomite, then he must be resisted by the sword of an Israclite; We must make him bleed (a spirit though he be) if he maketh us bleed. Yet I say; as Israel then, so have Israel now, taken the old way of disposessing the Divell by prayer and fasting; They have made petitions to their King, prayers and supplications have been put-up to him; So many and so servent, That Israel may be said, in this behalfe, to be, a praying people, wrastlers with GOD for their King; and their King may be said to be a King of prayers. But yet there is no Answer of prayer. Yes; there is: as shall appeare by and by, though yet not such an Answer, as Israel could desire with all their hears; And for this it is a sad thing to consider, Whether the sighing of the poore under his oppression hath not thrust-back the sighings and groanes of the poore, for, and in his behalfe: whether the blood he hath shed (for he hath given a commission to the Edomite, the Papist, an old Adversary to Israell) vvhether this blood he hath spi t like water, cryes not lowder in the eares of the LORD for Revenge, Then the prayers of his faithfull servants can doe for mercy? vve cannot resolve it but it yeelds a sad consideration. Yet certain it is, The true Israell of GOD, Ministers and people, may see a Return of prayer, for and in behalfe of their King, which appeares thus; The King by the mo∣tion of his evill Councell, pursued a way not good; he sent a cursed Booke into Sctland, vvorse then a Sword against David; This destroyes the body, That the soule; This Booke was rejected by the best Law and Reason that ever was read;Facile est quic. quid in presenti faculonocet illud grave, &c. Salv. de Eccl. lib. 2. yet the King vvas pleased to force it upon them; and they forced it away: The King, pressed by an evill Councell, pressed-on, and sent Messengers again and again, and then the Sword pressed on; Then he vvent himselfe to the borders, as often
as Saul sent Messengers to fetch David-in: The third time he went himselfe; And vvhat he did there, for, and in behalfe of David, (I meane the true servants of GOD) he knowes, and GOD knowes, and more then tvvo or three in the vvorld; for his ovvn hand has made it legible pursuing David vvith the Sword, and those that have an hand vvith David ever since. His heart could not be vvith David, the faithfull in the LORD in one Kingdome; and his hand against them in another. But how comes it to passe, that the King (we must speake out now or never) has driven on-vvard furiously, more then 4. yeares together, pressing-on against the dravvn sword, and yet the svvord has not taken him off from the earth? We must say, GOD is exceedingly patient, and long-suffering; but sure the prayers of them, vvhom he persecutes, has hitherto been as a shield over his head to keep off that deadly shower vve read of, from falling on his hayry scalpe;Psal. 116. Prayers have turned back from him the svvord of the destroyer, vvherevvith he assayed tvvice to have destroyed his native people, or to make their necks stoop to an iron yoake; Prayers have vvithheld from his lippes, That horrible draught, (the portion of their Cup, vvho vvalke in such vvayes) fier, and brimstone and an hor∣rible tempest. His good people have put up prayers for their King, they are not wanting therein: If they are wanting to their King, it is in reproofes, in telling him in plaine and down-right words (as the Pro∣phets before him) That he is in a perishing way: Certainly, if they are wanting to their King, it is in this, they have not sent him a writing, such as Iehoran received, wherein was written; Lamentations, Mour∣ning, and Woe.2 Chro. 21.12. They have sought GOD for their▪King, and they have not sought Him in vaine; therfore it is that he yet drives-on furious∣ly to destroy David, and those that have an hand with David, and a∣gainst the Angels sword in his way, and yet the sword has not cut him off from the earth. And his good people are not a weary, they will continue seeking GOD for him still; though he revile them, they will blesse him;See Thank-off p. 83.83. though defamed, they entreat; being persecuted, they will suffer it: For this is his good Peoples duty, theirs, whose du∣ty it is to lye on their face; but not theirs, to whom GOD sayes now, as unto Ioshua, GET THEE VP, there is an accursed thing, which has thrust you from the Lord, and it must be thrust away; they must be cut off from the earth, who have taken peace thence, and have put forth their power to dethrone the LORD Christ. Ioshus then, and the Worthies of the LORD now▪ must not lye upon their faces, but (according to the power that GOD has put into their hands) they must oppose these actings of the evill spirit, working effectually with the Princes of the earth. I Remember now what the Scots did, not 3. Yeeres agoe, but al∣most
as many hundred; Their King, Iames the third, lived an idle life from the beginning of his Reigne, which was the Seventh Yeere of his Age: He was no sooner Marryed, but hee Doted, and had a speciall gift in flattering himselfe.Exclua Nobili∣tate. And those about him (few or none) of the Nobility the worst he could pick from cut of the Cities or Country) quickly learnt the Court-Art, and could flatter as well as their King: but none more accurately then the Priests could doe; They told their King, he might doe what he listed; he was King, and his will was the Law, Thereafter he might punish, and might pardon, and bestow his honours, as he would, and not as the Common Law wills; but, saies the Author, all as hee wills, so it must bee; will was Law and King both, and Commands all. What a miserable Confusion was here? The face of the Kingdome quite changed; Nobles could not be heard, nor the Law neither, and good Men were Silent. Some base Men, or quite degenerate, had the eare of their King and his heart, and commanded his hand; and they did all till they had almost un∣done all, for they Monopolized the Common good of all the Subjects, their King; They Ingrossed his heart, that deare Commodity; So as That, which should be as Rivers of water to Refresh the whole Kingdome, they made as a sealed fountaine, quite shut-up to all honest Men, and open to, &c. In the Nick of Time, there came an Am∣bassadour out of England (if I well remember) to treat of Peace, and to seale it with a Marriage, when the Prince and Princesse should come to age. So great a businesse required consultation; The King calls a Parliment; He (with his wicked Counsell) has his end; satisfaction of a Private will; and to enlarge Private wealth; The Nobles and Commons have their end, the Common-wealth, the publike Faith, and Trust of the Kingdome. They are all assembled; the Lord Douglasse (a faithfull Minister of State) is their Speaker; his Speech is long, that which relates to the present is short; He tells them wherefore they were called together, what their Kings end, what theirs; the Kings businesse requires no haste, the matters of the Kingdome does: he opens unto them the sinke of the Court, shewes the Nobles and Commons their Vassalage under these, the vilest per∣sons, who stanke all the Kingdome over. We are Nobles, sayes he, ye and we are a free people, yet if we looke not to it quickly, we must be made servants to the basest Masters, the lusts of our King and his favourites, who have stollen away our King; his heart is gone, quite alienated from his friends, and betrayed to his enemies. No sooner this was spoken, and his speech ended, but out he and the rest went, Nobles and Commons, and to the Court gate. What is the mattes, sayes the King? We will plucke the evill Counsellours from your side, said they. The Question was quick; the Answer was as quick:
They will have their demands, and they have them; those evill Coun∣sellours, the Plague and Pests of the King and Kingdome (all but one, and he was a youth, too ingenuous to learne the art so quickly, is spared at the request of the King but all the rest) are given over un∣to them; and they as quickly hang them up. How did they doe for Ropes? That might be a question indeed, being so neare the Court gates.Vt cm funes in re subta decsse. They made an honest shift, for they hanged these evill men up with their horses bridles▪ Perfidious Scots, said some, three years agoe: Honest Scots, say I and shall say so, till I read and finde the contrary: They will bestirre themselves, when they see a Kingdome neare to ruine. There is not the like story but a very notable one of Dursthus their eleventh King, mentioned befoe: hee was slaine in battell by his owe subject; They re blamed for it to this day, that they brake their Oath with their King: No▪ they did not, he brake with them, and was the most perfidious King that you shall read of in any Chronicle. The case is plaine and the manner of resi∣stance, cleared to be as becommeth Israel then and now: But all Is∣rael comes not in now as they did then, to help the LORD against the Mighty: There will be excellent Reason given for this in the next Chapter. CHAP. 8. Mans extremity is Gods opportunity. David had a glorious de∣liverance when he was made meet for it: So shall the Church have, when their adversaries have filled up their measures; When Gods People are purified in their furnace, then their God will send them glorious Saviours, and a glorious Salvation: In the meane time they hold fast their confidence. DAvids helpers came-in, he was raised to a glorious condition here on earth, the Crowne was set upon his head presently; and there is mighty Reason why it was so: His head was made meet for a Crowne, he was fitted for deliverance: All his strong holds were downe; all his Altars (the lying vanities whereto he trusted) were as Chalke stones, that are beaten asunder.Isa. 27.8. He was greatly distressed, forsa∣ken of all humane helps, refuge failed, all is gone, and all the discou∣ragements in the world were upon him; yet at such a time he fainted not, but encouraged himselfe in the LORD his GOD; Then he could exalt GOD in that day,Psal. 18.12. he could say of Him Thou art my strength, my Rocke, my Fortresse, &c. he called upon the LORD in that day,
SO he was saved from his enemies, and from the hand of Saul.2 Sam. 22. Our case is otherwise, our helpers come-not-in, as to David, all as one man; we are yet greatly distressed. True, you will say, in some quar∣ters of the Land, but it is not every mans case; and God forbid it should be so all the Land over: So say I too. Amen. And yet it must be every mans case, I meane not, to suffer all alike, the spoyling of our goods, but to be affected and afflicted for what others our Bre∣thren and Sisters doe suffer that way; this must be every mans case, to have a sympathy, a fellow-feeling of what others doe suffer; wee must suffer all in compassion, before we are dlivered; every man must beare his part;Heb. 10.33. partly (sayes the Apostle) whilest we were made a gazing stocke, both by reproaches and assliions; and partly while ye became companions of them that were so used. If we examine our case by this Scripture, it will tell us how fit and meet wee are for deliverance, which we wonder does linger so long. The sword has greatly distressed our land, how has it wrought up∣on the oppressed therein, or what compassion in those, who have not yet been oppressod by it? Surely it may be answered,Perdidistis utili∣tatem calamita∣tii, & miserimi fcti estis, & pessimi perman∣sistis. Aug. de Civis. l. 1. c. 33. that the most of us have lost the fruit of all this sore wrath, which has lyon upon our neighbours these many yeares, and upon our owne land these few moneths, which yet we have reckoned yeares: We are very miserable, (that is every mans complaint) and yet we continue very wicked, and that the fewest lay to heart: We are far from seeing this fruit of our pu∣nishment, The purging of our sinne: But this we must see before wee are delivered; By this shall the iniquity of Iacob be purged,Isa. 27.9 and this is all the fruit, to take away their sinne. These words containe much, we will give our minds to understand them; Then we shall observe, That there is but one meanes, even by the bloud of Christ, whreby the ini∣quity of Iacob is purged; He onely takes away sinne, immediately by Himselfe; our repentance does not merit salvation, nor can our ma∣ny Plagues satisfie for one sinne: GOD forbid we should thinke so; Nay, GOD forgive, if any such thought should take hold of us. The intent of the Prophets words is this, That the People of GOD ought not to murmure and repine under the plagues and strokes of GODS hand.; These are intended for remedies, and meanes to plucke downe, and humble the stout heart under Gods Almightie hand, to make His People fall low before Him, in the sense and hum∣ble confession of all their provocations against Him; and that He is righteous in all He has inflicted upon His People, wanton evermore in their prosperity, and more hardned in their way. They must blesse GOD therefore for His plagues, and sore judgements, and pray unto Hime, that as He layes the stroke upon them, so He would sanctifie the same unto them, to the beating downe of all their strong
holds, (which in the day of their prosperity they have raised) for the consuming of all their Idols, set up in the heart, or before the eyes, that they may moulder away like Chalk-stones, that are beaten in sunder, that they cannot stand up. This is sound repentance, a sorrow after a godly sort; and hereby, as by a sanctified meanes, the iniquity of Iacob is purged. Repentance, that which is sound, is a secret thing, the very inward affection of the heart, deeply humbled for sinne; yet is the truth there∣of discovered by outward signes and tokens, which the spirit calls fruits meet for repentance;Matth. 38. and in this place, A taking away of sinne. It is vaine to talke of repentance, till we see these fruits; or to thinke of removing the plagues, till by (such a) repentance we have removed our sinnes: When is that? or how can we know we have repented? When our Idols are mouldered away like Chalk-stones, that are beaten in sunder; and our lying vanities stand up no more. Thus we have the purpose of these words, and of Gods dealing with His people at this time: They are greatly distressed; Let them thanke God they are so, and say, The LORD is righteous, GOD intends them good by all this, and He stayeth His rough wind in the day of His East wind; (i.e.) He moderates His Judgements, He correcteth in measure, that His people may debute about it, That thereby the iniquity of Iacob may be pur∣ged, and this may be all the fruit, to take away their sin. Three Consectories shall be cleared from hence; Then I con∣clude, First, That our evill of punishment (as of sinne) is from our selves: GODS owne people make their adversaries strong. Secondly, That the LORD lifting-up the right hand of his adversa∣ries, giving them successe in the world, does this the more to confound them, so perfecting His owne Praise, and His Churches good. Thirdly, when His People are meet for deliverance, then it hastens as up∣on Eagles wings. I will read these over againe very briefly. First, If the enemies of GOD, and His Church lift up their head, and His people turne their backe upon them, they may thank them∣selves; their sinnes have made the enemies strong, and themselves weake; they themselves have put a sword into their enemies hand: We say, that Malignancy in persons, and things, doe give checke to great proceedings, and doe hinder the comming-in of unspeakable mercies. We are deceived: the LORD, the Churches GOD, ne∣ver graced His adversaries, (whether Spirituall Lords or Temporall) so much as to hinder the comming-in of deliverance to His People, or to retard it for an houres time. Their opposition does now, as it ever has done, rather hasten deliverance; their extreme rage against it, rather puts it forward. The Ancient of dayes doth not like the dayes, lengthen and shorten, yesterday and to day He is still the same, His
Power the same, His Love the same. But Iniquities, these make the wall of separation; Sinnes, these hide His face from us. And these are the sinnes and iniquities of His own people, theirs, who with desire do desire That deliverance might go on, and that The LORD would appeare in His glory; their sins are the let and stop in the way; The pro∣voking of sonnes and daughters, these are the mountaines in the way.Deut. 32.19. Isa. 48.18. O that thou wouldest have hearkned to my Commandements, saith the Lord! What if he had hearkned? Then mercies had followed mercies; de∣liverance after deliverance▪ loving kindnesse upon loving kindnesse, Then had thy peace beene as a River, and thy righteousnesse as the waves of the Sea. Heare againe what The LORD saith;Psal. 81.13. O that my People had heark∣ned unto me, and Israel had walked in my way. Had they done so, then it had followed; I should soon have subdued their enemies,Verse 14. and turned my hand against their adversaries; The haters of the LORD should have submitted themselves. It is a conclusion of experience drawne-up from the Time,See Dan. Ha∣rald. 2. p. 25. the Danes came in, after them the Normans, and now the Turkes (I meane Beasts in the shape of men) That never any enemie came-in to our Iland, before he was called-in by Divisions: And, being come-in, They thrived by our Factions, and were strengthned by our Sinnes. I will adde this to it; That never any adversary from that time to this day, (for I will go no farther back) strengthned himselfe against the Church, but by the sinnes of the Church. Hierom resolves a question greatly for our profit, What is the Reason, That the Heathen people rage, as now they do;See 2. Sect. p. 24. ser. 2.5. 2 Chro. 19.7. That a Barbarous Nation is so strong and prevailing as now they are? Our sinnes (saith he) against a good GOD, in whom we found no iniquity; Who hath done us good all our dayes; These our sinnes have stirred-up our adversaries, given them heart, made them strong against us. The sinnes of the Church strengthens the Adversarie mightily against the Church. It is of eternall use to consider, what and where that thing was, which gave checke to Ioshuahs Battalion or Militia. It was not any favour The LORD bore to them, for they were the people of His Curse; It was not any power of the Adversaries, they were not a considerable company, a few, saith the Text,Iosh. 7.3. and why shauld all the peo∣ple labour thither? Yet we reade how those few prevailed, for the evill was from themselves, the accursed thing is in Israels Camp. There is a deep matter in it, said Iob; A root of wickednesse, it must be disco∣vered, and rooted out, before The LORD will take off His hand. Who gave Iacob for aspoile, and Israel to the robbers? Did not The LORD,Isa. 42.24. He against Whom we have sinned? For they would not walke in His wayes, neither be obedient to His law:Verse 25. Therefore He hath poured upon him the fury of His anger, and the strength of battell.The anger of the LORD is kindled against His people: and He hath stretched forth His hand against
them: and their carcasses were torne in the midst of the streets. Then the LORD was pacified towards His people, was He not? No: for all this His anger is not turned away, but His hand is stretched out still.The Sy∣rians before, and the Philistines behinde, and they shall devoute Israel with open mouth. Now The LORD is pacified: No, not yet; For all this His anger is not turned away, but His hand is stretched out still. And the very same reason now as then. For the people trneth not unto Him, That smiteth them, neither doe they seeke The LORD of bosts. Therefore His hand is stretched out still; It is repeated againe and a∣gaine, to assure us, if we proceed in our sinning before The LORD, He will proceed in punishing before all Israel and before the Sunne; till we repent of our sins, He will not repent of His sore plagues; He will proceed to smite till our uncircumcised hearts be humbled; till we can accept of our punishment, and say from an ingenuous and humble spirit, The LORD is righteous in all that He has done against us: Till this be, we shall finde it will be thus; His anger is not turned away, but His hand is stretched out still. I will punish you seven times more for your sinnes, and I will breake the pride of your power:Levit. 26.18. i. e. If you will walk contrary to Me, I will walk contrary to you: And now consider we with all our hearts how contrary we have walked. We thinke the wrath that lyes upon the land is sore and heavy, and indeed it is so. But consider we; was it a light provocation, to prophane The LORDS day? to mar the beauty of it, more then any other day! The Bishops gave command for that, you will say. That is true; Therefore the land has spewed them forth; You shall heare more of their rough hand and bloudy designes; But never any more of their unrighteous decrees, and grievousnesse: Be the Nations never so angry, they shall never pre∣vaile to bring in Bishops againe. But the people were content to have it so, to have The LORDS Day so prophaned; to have such a scorne put upon it; And therefore, if we be trod-upon all the land over as mire in the streets; And if the land should now lye-fallow, and keep her Sabbaths, we must acquit The LORD and say, Hee is righteous. But I will not reckon up particular sins, for they are infi∣nite. We are conluded; Great and marvellous are Thy workes LORD GOD ALMIGHTY just and true are Thy wayes, Thou King of Saints, for Thy judgements are made manifest.Rev. 15.3. 2. The LORD makes His Adversaries successefull, gives them power over His people, to put forth all their wrath against them as at this day; I say all their wrath; never was there such a wrath, boiled to such a height of rage as now it is at this day; for it is agi Da∣vid, and his men, put forth by Davids King, and his men, which will be a scorching wrath, and it shall be put forth to the utmost extent, because under specious shewes, and formall pretences, to maintaine
our Lawes by lawlesse men; our Liberties, by companies of Rob∣bers; our Religion, by Papists, the bloudiest men that are, or ever were in the world, haters of GOD, and the power of godlinesse: This will be a bloudy persecution, the roughest hand will be put forth now, that ever was put forth against the Church, for it is put forth against David and his men (as was said) by Davids King and his men, for Reasons so specious and formall (in some mens eyes) as a∣foresaid. Never any Popes were greater oppressors then those, that had the most specious names: Pope Godly (Pius) Pope Harmlesse (Innocent) Pope Civill (Vrban) these were wicked Popes, yet not more wicked then they, who have a form, and specious pretences: They will make a people free by oppressing their Lawes, and them under the foot of pride, &c. and their King glorious (so they say) by making him a Lord over a conquered Nation:Vnum alique voluptate ac de∣liciis flere ge∣mentibus undi{que} ac lament antibus alii, hoc non est Regni sed carce∣ris esse custodem, Th. A. Vp. and that (sayes Sir Thomas Moore) is not to be a King over men, but a Taylor over Captives; To be a Keeper of a pri∣son, and not chiefe Guardian in a Kingdome. Yet the LORD may suf∣fer these men, or rather beasts in the shape of men, to goe-on (to the length of their chaine) and to prosper; so as it may be said, The Taber∣nacles of Robbers prosper, and they that provoke GOD are secure, into whose hand the LORD bringeth abundantly. GOD is righteous, so we are re∣solved; But why is it so? For excellent Reason; That their Adver∣saries may fill up their measure apace, and heighten their destruction, which will be in all His peoples sight, as lifted-up even to the Skies: Their rage reacheth to heaven, so shall their judgment also. Second∣ly, GOD useth the wicked as Scullions, to try His people, and to purge, and to make them white▪ so perfecting His praise, and His Churches salvation; to make His people MEET for deliverance, as we shall heare by and by. GOD does not suffer this viperous generation to run at large, (laxis habenis, as a best with reines on nck) that they might satisfie their lusts upon His people, (though so they do, and GOD suffers it to be done) but that is not Gods end, this God intends, The purifying, the purging▪ the humbling of His ser∣vants▪ that their lusts may be subdued, the lusts of the Eye, of the world, and Pride of life. This is Gods end, the very purpose of His heart, to make a people meet for deliverance; when this is done, the Rod shall be cast into the fire, the tabernacles of the Robbers shall be destroy∣ed, and they sent to their owne place. We wait, and God waits;We have waited three yeares, God has waited eigh∣ty yeare. we wait for deliverance, GOD waits for glory, in waiting to shew mercy; we shall have our waitings in good time, when His people shall be truly humbled for then they shall see their desire upon their enemies, and give GOD the glory of all His worke, even of His strange work for.
Thirdly, When His people are meet for deliverance, they shall be delivered suddenly; then the Lord will send them meet Saviours. It is true, GOD can worke by what instruments he pleaseth; but He will not use base and inglorious instruments, to worke forth a glo∣rious salvation, such as He has now in designe: not such as pretend to have an hand with David, and work all the mischiefe they can a∣gainst David, and those that have an hand with him; and drinke the health of those, who have sworne the destruction of David, and in pursuance of that▪ shed bloud to their power. These men, who have drunke a way their wits, and their valour, and their healths, and cur∣sed away their soules, the Lord has rejected; they shall not, if they would, do Him service in this warre; He will purge His Armies, as He has done the Courts: He will have Noble Instruments (I meane faithfull, such as feare GOD above many) to carry on these designes, and to bring about a worke of this nature; Certainly they must be Mosesses and Ioshua's, and Davids, by which He will worke forth this glorious deliverance; when GOD does glorious things, wee shall see they are done by glorious instruments; so it was in an∣cient times so it will be now. We smote Og, and all his people, till there was none left to him remaining; And a huge fellow this was, King of Bashan, who remained of the remnant of the Gyants; and we tooke all his Cities at that time,Deut. 3.3.4, 5. there was not a City which we tooke nt from them, threescore Cities, and these were fenced with high walls, gates, and barres, besides unwalled Townes a great many. Who was he that was so victorious? Moses the faithfull Servant of the Lord. It is as notable, how successefull Ioshua, Moses Successor was (when the accursed thing was removed) we never read the like untill this day: He came upon his enemies like a tem∣pest, destroyes all as he goes; he passed-on to that strong-hold, looked upon it, and tooke it upon that day, sayes the Text: That is the account he gives us, He came, looked upon Makkedah, Libnah, Lachish, Eglon, He∣bron, and Hazor, the heads of the Kingdomes, tooke them on that day, destroyed them, neither left they any to breath. Some adversaries melted before him, others submitted, others stood-it-out, and quickly fell to his foot, which Joshua set upon their neckes, and gives Israel assu∣red confidence for ever, Thus shall the LORD doe against all the ene∣mies against whom you fight. But when are a people meet for such Saviours?Quest. When the people can love such Saviours,Ans. and not dote upon them; When they can pray for them, but not trust in them; when they can use them as glorious Instruments in Gods hands, but not leane upon them, for that is to depart from an Almighty Hand, (the Church LEANES upon her BELOVED;) When they can give them their due thankes, honour, and praise, and God all the glory: O
how faulty have we been at this point! therefore how has The LORD pluckt some of those instruments from us▪ those that were most faith∣full:If we give Gi∣deons sword the preheminence, we undo him, and overthrow all. and weakned the strength of others, because we looked so sted∣fastly towards them. How hath he discovered the treachery of others? And all this that we may take our hope wholly off from the creature, and six it fully upon Him, vvho is faithfull. If The LORD shevv us no more, blessed be His Name, that He hath shevved us so much▪ and, that He hath strengthned the hand of any of His Servants, to bring salvation to His Israel, notvvithstanding Israel is so prone to idolize Men. I must give resolution to one question more. VVhen are a people fit and meet for such a salvation GOD has novv upon designe?Qu. When their uncircumcised hearts are humbled;Ans. when they can indeed and in truth acknowledge their contrary walking,It is a sad relati∣on I read from 2. great persons, who had travel∣led all Germany over; that they found the Prote∣stants there sarte more wicked un∣der their pres∣sures and cala∣mitie, then when they were in their ease and prosperity. Ier. 6.29. and accept of the pu∣nishment for walking so contrary to the rule and will of GOD; when their drosse and scum is sod forth in the furnace of their affli∣ction; this must be before we are delivered; GOD does not deli∣ver out of the furnace, before His people are purified therein. We think we have lyen long in the furnace; But what have we profited by ly∣ing there so long. Is not he that was proud, proud still? he that was filthy, filthy still? Is not the great scum sod in, and are not the Bellows burnt? As The Lord complaineth. We are Brasse and Iron indeed; an ordinary fire, (ordinary affliction) will not melt us. And though some are more tender, and, with Iosiah, will quickly melt, at the very hearing of wrath denounced, yet these things must be soberly enqui∣red into by all, before we be delivered. 2. A people are meet for deliverance, when the accursed, whether persons or things, are destroyed from amongst them; then Ioshuah was mighty and prevailed, and not before.Iosh. 7.11. Till the accursed were destroyed from amongst Israel, Israel were accursed; and lying on the face could not help them. That is a resolved Case. 3. A people is meet for deliverance, when all their Strong-holds are down. I do not meane those before our eyes, though this may he: All our Forts and reast-workes must be destroyed before our eyes also, as Davids was; I say, it may be so, and likely so, because it is so hard a matter to have them, and not to Trust in them. And if we do trust in them, then they must be impoverished, saith The LORD. All our strong-holds must downe. All wherein thou trustedst, that is out of question; Every thing that exalts it selfe against GOD must down, for GOD will be exalted in that day. It will be a glorious deliverance; His people shall be greatly exalted; Their enemies all shall be strange∣ly confounded; None of the glory of this wonderfull salvation shall be given to the Arm of flesh. GOD will have all, He is dainty at that
point, He will not give His glory to another. To conclude, we think GOD is long in comming, and salvation sleepeth. No, GOD will come in the fittest season; His salvation shall come, and not stay; It shall come, and in such a season, and in such a glorious manner, as His people shall say, Salvation could not have come in a fitter time. It is certaine, that the Servants of The LORD shall acknowledge, they could not have wanted any one thing, Their LORD has done in shew and semblance for their Ad∣versaries, and against them, His own people; their falling before their enemies, has made them fall low before their GOD, and rise high in their faith; and to hold their confidence the faster. They could not have wanted those blowes in the North, no nor those blowes in the West, which were like those stones thrown against Saint Steven, They did knocke them closer to their GOD. They could not have wanted that unfaithfulnesse in some, nor the treacheries in others, or the weaknes∣ses of others, they could not have wanted any of all this; for all this has greatly advanced the Wisdome, Power, Goodnesse, and Faith∣fulnesse of GOD. All has made His people wise in the wisedome of GOD, and strong in the power of His might. If they had not beene so weak once, they had not been so strong now. If they had not seen what fooles they were, they had not been so wise now. If they had not been filled with sorrow once, their joy had not been so brim-ful now. Their salvation could not have come sooner, if it had, it had not been so well; their hearts had not been so prepared for mercy, for such or∣dinances, so agreeable to His holy will. If they had not been hewed and hacked, they had not been polished stones so fitted for a spirituall building. In a word, their sicknesse has beene better to them then their health; their war better to them then peace; their prison better then liberty; their fallings before their enemy, has made them more victo∣rious; and in deaths often, has made their lives more glorious in the face of heaven and earth. Now blessed be GOD. Who dost all things well, and in the best time, as shall be best to advance Thy glory, and Thy peoples salvation! Blessed be GOD! Why then do with Thy people what Thou wilt; take Thine own Time, and Way, to do with them what Thou pleasest. Wilt Thou suffer the Plow-men to make yet longer surrowes upon the backes of the righteous. Blessed be Thy Name, Thou wilt make the field of Thy Church more fruitfull there∣by. Shall there be a treading downe by the foot of pride yet longer? It is that Thy people may rise in their faith more gloriously. Shall Thy people lye yet longer in the deeps? it is, that one deepe may call upon another, the depth of misery to the depth of mercy. Shall Thy people lye longer amongst the Pots? It is that they may be more glo∣rious, as are the wings of a Dove,Psal. 68.13: covered with silver: and her fea∣thers
with yellow gold. Wilt Thou keepe Thy people longer in the furnace? It is that Thy people may come forth as silver seven times purified in the fire. Thou wilt do Thy people good by all this; bles∣sed be Thy Name. Yet remember LORD, Thy Servants are flesh too; their strength is not the strength of stones, nor are their bones of brasse. Let not the rod of the wicked lye alwayes upon the backes of the righteous, lest they also put out their hand to wickednesse; lift up the foot to the perpetuall desolation. The spirit will faile before Thee; LORD hasten Thy work; LORD strengthen the hands and the hearts of Thy Servants, for they are called by Thy Name, and their trust is in Thee. Thou wilt save, Thou wilt deliver, for it is Thy promise. Thy Servants will not be beaten from Thee, but by their blowes closer to Thee. They are well content, since Thou art pleased so, to see the Tabernacle of David fallen downe. Now they looke, Thou wilt binde it up firme and stable, as a quiet habitation,Act. 15.16. a Tabernacle that shall not bee taken downe, not one of the stakes thereof shall ever bee removed.Isa. 33.20. what Thy Servant Iacob said once, the seed of Iacob will say ever,Gen. 49. I have waited for Thy Salvation, O LORD! It shall come at the fittest time, and by the fittest meanes: Even so Amen. Hab. 3 17.18.19. Although the Figtree shall not flourish, &c, yet I will rejoyce in The LORD, &c. Isa. 12.1. And in that Day thou shalt say, O LORD I will praise Thee: Though Thou wast angry with me, Thine Anger is turned away, and Thou comfortest me. Finis tertiae Sectionis.
