E3111 R31433 11977871 51805
THE English Prelates Practizing the Methods and RULES OF THE JESUITS, FOR Enervating and altering the Protestant Reformed Religion in ENGLAND; and Reducing the People to POPERY. Plainly Demonstrated by a Reverend and godly Divine. Take heed to thy self, that thou bee not snared by following them, after that they bee destroyed from before thee, and that thou inquire not after their gods; saying, how did these Nations serve their gods? Even so will I do likewise, Deut. 12.30. Though thou Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah offend, and come not yee unto Gilgal, neither go yee up to Bethaven, &c. Hos. 4.15. papal crown, topped with a crescent Printed in the Year. 1661.
The English Prelates practising the Me∣thods and Rules of the Jesuits, for enerva∣ting and altering the Protestant reformed Religion in England, and reducing the peo∣ple to Popery. Quest. HOw doth it appear that the English Prelates do design the alteration of Religion amongst us here in England? Answ. As face answers to face in a  so the practices of the Prelates in England do symbo∣ with the Rules and methods of the Jesuits, who hope to accomplish that by sleight of hand, which they cannot effect by force and down-right Blows. Adam Contzen a Jesuit of Mentz, and a great Politician,Contzen Politie. lib. 2. cap. 18. in his second Book of Politicks, hath laid a Plot for the cheating of a people of the true reformed Religion (which should bee dearer to them than ten thousand worlds) by sleight of hand, and the serving in of Popery again upon them, by art of Le∣gerdemaine; that they shall neither know nor see who hurts them, till they be utterly ruined, Neh. 4.11. The Method for accomplishing of this (which certainly is one of Satans methods) he laies down in certain Rules in his sore-mentioned Book of Politicks. Let English-men and Pro∣testants observe how exactly, the late and present Prelates of England, have moved and acted according to those Rules, and then judge of their designs. I. Rule. The Jesuits first Rule is this; To proceed as Musicians Do, in tuning their Instruments; who proceed gradually, straining their strings with a gentle hand, and setting them up by little and little. Or as Physicians do in curing diseases, who abate noxious humours by degrees and pauses.
This Rule hath been diligently observed and practised a∣mongst us both for the destructive and adstructive way; for the destruction of the true Religion, and the advancing of the false, The English Prelates (though some of them are more violent and hot-headed than others) have learned this poli∣cy, to proceed by degrees and pauses. 1. And first for the Destruction of the true Religion, and cating out the vitals and power of godliness, though that be their great design, yet as to the execution of it, they must go warily and gradually to work: It would make too great a noise (now that so much Gospel-light is broke forth) to su∣spend all the Orthodox Powerful Preachers in the Land at once; and therefore they will proceed by degrees; And first suspend all Lecturers, who boggle at the Service-book, and P Ceremonies, then after a little pause, put down all Lect as an order of Vagrants, not to be tolerated in the Chu. (Some of our zealous Bishops have already presumed to sup∣press divers choice profitable Lectures) When this is done; they will forbid all faithful Ministers to preach in their own Pa∣rish-Churches upon week-daies (the Jesuits and Prelates be∣ing both bitter enemies to sound and powerful Preaching) Next, they will inhibit Preaching upon the Lords Day in the afternoon under pretence of advancing Catechizing by that means, and yet within a little while after, all Catechistical ex∣position shall bee inhibited by these Soul-destroyers, and able men tyed to the bare words of the Primmer-Catechism. Nay, have they not forbidden all praying, save in the words of the Canon? and are they not of the same spirit still? to wit, ene∣mies to the Spirit of God, both in Preaching and Prayer? What can any ingenious man think the design of all this should be, but to rob us of true Evangelical Preaching and Praying? and thereby at length of the Gospel and True Re∣ligion? Onely these men will do it by degrees for fear of noise and Tumult; they will do it so, as we shall neither know nor see. 2. And then for the Adstructive way, the Rebuilding of the Romish Babel among us; do they not proceed by the same steps, as if the Jesuits and they were animated by one soul?
First, They rigidly urge the practice of the old Cere∣monies, beyond the intention either of Law or Canon; yea, they bring in an Idolatrous fardel of new Popish Superstitions, without warrant either of Law or Canon, but their own pa∣per Injunctions, imposing them on Ministers and People, but yet by pauses and degrees. The Communion-Table must be first railed in. Soon after it must be set in an Altar-posture. Then all must be compelled to come and kneel before it, or not receive the Sacrament. Then it must be cried up as the Sanctum Sanctorum, the place of Gods chief residence upon earth; the seat and throne of Gods Majesty. And upon this Consideration, all mens faces in prayer must be turned towards it. Men may, yea must, (say some) adore and bow before it, &c. What (I pray you) should the design of all this bee, but after the Altar, to bring in the Popish Sacrifice, and with their woodden worship the Breaden God? Onely they will do it by degrees. They will reconcile us to Rome by degrees, and in a cunning way, that wee may neither know nor see. Secondly, I may further add their making null and void the Ordination of so many godly Ministers (who were or∣dained by Presbyters alone, without a Diocessan Bishop) and their ascribing more virtue to the Popish Antichristian Orders of the Church of Rome, than to Ordination by Protestant Presbyters; for Popish Priests, when they turn Protestants, are not re-ordained. By this means our English Prelates do undermine and supplant all the reformed Churches in France, Holland, Scotland, &c. where they have no Diocessan Bishops to ordain Ministers, and if their Ministers bee not lawfully called, then they have no true Churches, Baptism, Ordinan∣ces, &c. And will not this (think you) contribute much to the rebuilding of Babel amongst us, and reconciling of Eng∣land to Rome? whither (at length) men will be forced to go for a lawful Ordination (according to these mens Popish principles and practices) for if Ordination by Presbyters,
qua Presbyters be held unlawful (which yet the most learn∣ed and judicious of the Protestant Bishops have proved to be lawful, and therefore not to be iterated) then we must have recourse to the Pope and Church of Rome (for a lawful or∣dination) from whom, as from the fountain our Lordly Dio∣cessans derive their exorbitant Ecclesiastical Power and Ju∣risdiction over the Ministers and Flock of Christ, and not from the Scriptures, nor the Church of Christ. Again, as the Prelates have practised the Jesuits Rule (for altering Religion) in Discipline and Ceremonies, so they have likewise observed it in Doctrine. First, they will bring in the Arminian Doctrine, and the Cassandrian-Grotian Di∣vinity, and then they know that down-right Popish Doctrine will easily follow. Let the Serpent but winde in his head, he will soon work in his whole body: Let Arminianism but obtain Countenance and Licence in the Kingdome, our Universities, Schools, Pulpits, Presses, will soon be filled with Popish Doctrines. Witness the publishing of so many points of Popery one after another, especially those two (which you may frequently meet with in the Books of Dr. Hammond, Dr. Bramhall now Primate of Ireland, and Dr. Jeremy Tay∣ler, now a Bishop in that Kingdome, and of other High Prelatists) namely, That the Pope is not Antichrist. And that the Church of Rome is a true Visible Church. Altae sic surgunt maenia Romae. Thus according to the Rule of their Masters the Jesuits, they seek to re-establish Rome by de∣grees here in England, and to do it so as wee may not know nor see. So much for Contzns first Rule. II. Rule propounded by the Jesuit. His second Rule is this, To press the examples and practises of some eminent men, as a good means to draw on the rest. And is not this Rule likewise well observed by our Prela∣tical men? They dazle the eyes of the meaner, and less judicious people, with the practices of some noble and learn∣ed persons. If any begin to startle, or be troubled at the matter, and cannot swallow down the Service-book and Po∣pish Ceremonies and observations, they presently answer, My
Lord Bishop doth thus and thus: and my Lords Grace of Canterbury doth thus and thus. The Knights of the most noble order of the Garter-bow versus Altare towards the Al∣tar at their Instalment. His Majesties Chappel is thus and thus adorned, many honourable Lords do observe these Or∣ders and Ceremonies.A. C. Speech  Star-Chamb. p. 47. The learned Doctors of the Universities are conformable thereunto. Such a zealous Minister, is Re-or∣dained by a Diocessan Bishop, and now reads the Service-book. Such a strict Professor is present when the Service-book is read, and the Ceremonies practised: And what, will you be wiser than so many noble persons, so many reverend Pre∣lates, so many learned Doctors, so many eminent famous Preachers and Professors? By these, and the like pretences, they cast a mist before the peoples eyes, and so dazle them that they cannot, or will not see that Jesuitical design that is carried on for Altering Religion. III. Rule of the Jesuit. His third Rule is this, That Arch-hereticks, and such as are teachers of Heresie, must be banished the Common-wealth at once, if it may safely be done, but if not, by degres. It is easie to know who are the Jesuits Arch-hereticks (whom they would have banished) even the most active, or∣thodox, conscientious Protestants, the Calvinists (as they call them) who have eyes in their heads to discern and discover their Antichristian designs, and will not be gulled by their sleights as the ignorant people are. For the extirpating and rooting out of these, the Jesuit prescribes a method of twelve or thirteen steps, Contz. Poll. l. 2. c. 18 sect. 6. for which I refer the Reader to the Book it self, such as will not Bow, they must Break, such as will not comply with the Popish Design, must be crushed. According to this Rule the Prelates have acted. By them the Puritan Preachers have been count∣ed the Arch-hereticks and teachers of Heresie in England, though they teach nothing but what is consonant to Scrip∣ture, and the publick Doctrine of the Church, yet they are the teachers of Heresie. And being too many to root out at once, it must be done by degrees. The Puritan party must be
divided one from another, and then they may be more ea∣sily suppressed. It may be done with more case, and less noise. And therfore first they did cast all those out of the Minister that were not punctual and full Conformists to the old Cere∣monies. This was the practise of Prelats. Next (because there was a company of conformable Puritans as themselves stiled them) they procured an Edict for Recreations upon the Lords day; and this must be published by Ministers, that such as could stand under the Ceremonies (though groaning under that burthen) might fall and be broken in peeces under this: And yet because some men suspected of Puritanisme, might have a latitude here beyond their brethren, they had a third Engine, and that was the enjoyning now Ceremonies and Adorations, that if any could swallow the Book, yet they might discover, and cast them out by straining here. To this they added a fourth, Prayers and Proclamations to be read against the Anti-prelatical party in Scotland. And their last and greatest Engine which was like the Powder-plot against the godly Ministry of the Nation to blow up the Relicks of them at once, was the Oath for Episcopacy, the Oath Et∣caetera. By these successive Stratagems, they made account utterly to extirpate those Arch-hereticks. As it was sometimes said to Elijah, Him that escapeth the sword of Hazael, shall Jehu slay, and him that escapeth the sword of Jehu, shall Elisha slay, 1 King. 19. So had they said, Him that escapeth the dint of the Ceremonies, shall the Book of Sports slay, and him that escapeth the Book of Sports, shall the new Injunctions slay, and him that escapeth the new Injunctions, shall the Procla∣mations slay; and him that escapeth the Proclamations, shall the Oath slay. And this by degrees and pauses, that they shall neither know, nor see till we slay them, and cause the work to cease. If one snare do not intangle them, another shall: If one Engine do not batter down this party, another shall. The Prelates have variety of means and engines to ruine consci∣entious Ministers and Professors.
IV. Rule of the Jesuit. The fourth Rule is this, That those which are adversaries to the true Religion (which with him is Popery) be put by their Dig∣nities, places, and offices, and not trusted with power or publick Imployment. I think none is such a stranger in England, but from his own knowledge can witness this, The bestowing of all Offices, the collating of Benefices, the election of Masters and Fel∣lows of Colledges in both Ʋniversities, who have had the over∣ruling hand in them all, the power of Mandamus, but the Prelats and their faction? and whom were they conferred upon usually, but upon men infamous for, and impudent in Arminian and Popish opinions? protested Arminianisme and bold-faced Popery hath been the onely speedy way to Church preferment. These have been, and are still confided in (as to publick trust and imployment) whilst the soundest and most zealous Protestants are discountenanced, by our high Prelatists, whose practice suits well with the Jesuites Rule. V. Rule of the Jesuit. His fifth Rule is, To make the Protestant Religion odious, by laying load upon such tenents as are most subject to harshest con∣structions, and rendring the persons of those who maintain them contemptible. In this our Prelates have not been sparing, Quot plaustra convitirum, have they powred out upon some Doctrines of our Religion, specially the points of Grace? The Pulpits of Italy and Rome, never spit more Gall and Venome against the Protestant Doctrines of Election, Free-grace, Justification by faith, perseverance, touching Antichrist, and the Exp si∣tions of the Protestants on Daniel and the Revelation; and in a word against all those Doctrines wherein we do in a special manner differ from, and are at an irreconcileable enmity with the Church of Rome. N ver did the Popish B shops and Doctors, as Eecius, Cocleus, Stapleton, Harding, Bellarmine, the rayling Rhemists sweat more to exaggerate the seeming ab∣surdities, which carnal prejudiced men would draw from
our Doctrine, than many of the English Prelatical Clergy have done. And as for the persons of the most famous re∣formed Divines; as Calvin, Beza, Pareus, Whitaker, Reynolds, Perkins; It is well enough known how they have been, and are to this day sleighted and aspersed by this sort of men. VI. Rule. The Jesuits sixth Rule is, To foment the quarrels that are among the Protestants, and strengthen that party that is neerest a compliance with Rome. And, the wretched Jesuit hath the unhappiness to prescribe one thing as the proper means of Englands Cure. For who (saith hee) Quis enim non facile puri∣anos in Angli a edigat in ordi∣em si Episcopo∣um approbatio∣em, ab iis ex∣orqueat. Contz. ubi supra para∣graph. 9.might not easily reduce the Puritans of England into Order (you know what the Je∣suits reducing into Order is) if hee could extort from them an Approbation of the Bishops. And had not the Prelates at∣tempted, and almost effected this? They had made us their Slaves before, and were they not about to make us swear we would be so for ever? Certainly, though nothing but Episcopacy floated in the surface of that Oath, yet Popery was in the , in the &c, of it, or reducing the Puritans of England into Order sensu Pentificio. And do they not to this day frequently speak for, yea strenuously indeavour af∣ter, and contend for a general Conformity of all sorts and sexes, to the Prelatical Government, Service-book, and Ce∣remonies, yea higher than was formerly attempted? none must buy or sell, unless hee receive the mark of the Beast; not onely England and Ireland, but Scotland, and the forein Isles must bow or break before this Idol. Our Prelates there∣fore have well observed this Rule of the Jesuit. VII. Rule. His seventh Rule is this, That all private Conventicles, and publick Meetings must bee forbidden. As for private Conventicles, you all know that to meet to∣gether to pray, or to confer (which with them is a Conven∣ticle) is peccatum irremissibile; a man may at a better rate almost answer any thing than such a Meeting; The terrible Canons of our Prelates are mounted higher, and more deeply
charged against this commendable practice of Christians, than against Drunkenness, Swearing, Adultery, Sabbath-breaking, and the greatest abominations. Nor would the restless spi∣rits of these persecuting Prelates be quiet, till they had got all such meetings utterly suppressed; men may meet together at Cock-fighting, Horse-coursing, Stage-playes, to swear, and bee drunk, and unclean; but they must not meet to pray and confer together of the Scriptures, no, not in those places and Parishes where the Ministers are no better than dumb Idols. Behold here the Tyranny of our Prelates! And then for publick meetings, the antient laudable exer∣cise of Prophecy (I mean not in that sense, the word is lately taken, for private spirits to interprer Scripture.) But prophe∣sying by men in office, peculiarly gifted and called to that work; these must bee banished, ejected, silenced; the publick and most frequented Lectures blasted; publick fasts by con∣sent of Ministers (which had of long time been used in ma∣ny parts of the Kingdome) are become piacular; a Sermon at next Church the forbidden fruit, when they had none at home, or worse than none. The Prelates have been, and still are very diligent, to suppress holy Assemblies, under the no∣tion of Conventicles and seditious meetings, whilst they keep up their Cathedrals and Popish service. VIII. Rule propounded by the Jesuit. The eighth means to reduce us to Popery is, By severity of Laws and punishments to compel the obstinate unto duty; and yet the rigor of the Law must be slowly drawn out, and not a∣gainst all, but onely such as be most dangerous. Now what severity not onely ad summum Jus, to the highest Apex of the Law, but even supra Jus, beyond the extent and rigor of the Law hath been used to such as stood in the way of their great design, let the walls of their High Commission Court speak; and if that Babell were once raised up again in England (which the Lord in mercy prevent) not onely the ordinary people, but the Gentry of this Nation, (if they do but cross the ambitious designs of these men) should drink deep of their cruelty and rigor.
Our Chronicles report, that when our Fore-fathers demo∣lished the Abbies, they found in their Walls, and Vaults, and Ponds, heaps of skulls, and bones; the Monuments of their smothered cruelties, I doubt not but the Abolishers of that High Commission have found as manifest evidence of their cruel practices: heaps of the blood of Innocents, whose skin hath been flead from off them,Mc. 3. and their bones broken, and they and their families chopped in peeces, as flesh for the Cal∣dron: And this fruit they reaped of their severity mannaged with this Art which the Jesuit promised. That though com∣pulsory Reformation could do no good upon old standers,Itaque refor∣atio quae pro∣vctos non ad∣uvat, atatem tamen puerilem Catholicam raddet. Contzen. yet it would render the younger sort Catholicks. IX. Rule of the Jesuit. The ninth means, and (as hee saith) of all the rest most effectual is, That such as are in authority, and have the pub∣lick mannagement of Ecclesiastical Affairs, do religiously pra∣ctise and maintain Integrity of life, and purity of manners. The Reformation of Religion (that is, the introducing of Popery into a Reformed Church) will go on very slowly, and prove very difficult, unless the Prelates and Doctors shall outshine the whole Common-wealth, not onely in innocency, but in reputa∣tion and fame of integrity. Now, though this Rule be far from the practice of most of the servants, followers, and adherents of the Prelates (who for the most part are prophane, Atheistical, and debauched persons, in whom there is little appearance of morality, and less of Religion) yet some of the Grand Masters of this faction do counterfeit much devotion and piety in their outward Garb, looks, gestures, conversation: Or else it were not possible for them at any time to obtain so far up∣on the hearts of Prince and Parliament (whose Interests do thwart the ambitious designs of the Prelates) as to leave the disposing of all Church Affairs wholly unto them: If they should not outwardly demean themselves as the onely Saints upon earth, as incarnate Angels, men wholly com∣posed
of Devotion to God, Compassion to his Church,Quem ubi vident constan∣ter Religions adharentem, non adeò teme∣rarii sant, ut directe calum∣nieutur & tra∣ducant apud eum Orthodoxam Religionem: sed occasiones commodas accipiunt, quibus dplorem turbat pacem Ecclesiae, hortantur principem ad eam restituendam, id facile esse dicunt auferatur modo contentionis studium, quod dissidium non sit in rebus magai momenti sed exigui ponderis. Vedel. de prud. vet. Eccles. l. 2. c. 5. grief for the Rents and breaches of it, Zeal for the peace and good of it; they could not prevail with the Magistrate to trust them with so much power, specially considering how often they have abused it in this Nation, and intrenched upon the Royal Prerogative, and the authority of Parliaments, as appears by above a hundred instances in the English Chro∣nickle. Doubtless it stands not with reason that a Protestant Prince should knowingly and willingly give way to the re-establish∣ing of the Popish Religion, and therein ipso facto divest him∣self of his Supremacy, and lay his head at the Popes feet for him to kick off the Crown from his Royal Brow, with a spurn of his disdainful foot at pleasure. But why the Bishops (spe∣cially such of them as have been observed to wish well to Popery ab Incunabulis) should contrive and carry on such a Plot; some reason may be given; For could they but once obtain this, That Popery should Triumph over the Reformed Religion, then they know that the Miter would soon Trample upon the Crown and Scepter: Haec enim est veritaes, &c. (saith BellarmineBell. de of∣fic. princip. Christi L. 1 c. 5.) This is the Truth, whatever custome hath in∣troduced; That the Bishop is the Father, Pastor and Doctor, as well of the Prince, as of the rest of the people. And according to these Appellations the Prince ought to be subject to his Bishop, and not the Bishop to his Prince. Swarez saith, Swarez. Dfens. fidi. lib. 3. cap. 17. ss. 18. & lib. 4. c. 17. ss. 16, 17. cap. 15. ss. 1.unusquis∣que Rex Subditus est, &c. Every King is subject to his Bishop in spiritualibus, unless he be exempted by the Pope. Would not this be a brave world for our Bishops, and the whole Cler∣gy too, to be exempted from the power of Laws, and civil Ju∣dicature? Leges non obligant Clericos, &c. (saith Swarez again) The Law doth not binde the Clergy by vertue of any Lak Juris∣diction, neither can Kings binde the Clergy by laying any special Law upon them; And again, Ecclesiastical persus are privi∣ledged
in Court, not onely in case of Ecclesiastical, but of Civil Crimes. And therefore Reader, though thou canst see no Reason why a Prince or State professing the Protestant Religion (ha∣ving sufficiently smarted under the Popes and Prelates Ty∣ranny) should decline to Popery; yet thou mayest see strong reason why a proud Prelacy, and a corrupt Clergy should underhand indeavour to bring it in, and thou mayest here take notice of the method and waies whereby they may com∣pass their designs, and neither Prince nor people shall know nor see, and yet our Prelatical Clergy are so confident of the truth of their Maxime, No Bishop, no King, That they would make us beleeve that it is as true as the Gospel, where∣as their great design is to make the Scepter subject to the Miter, so much are they for the Royal Prerogative, and the Power of Parliaments. It is well enough known (he that runs may read it) that the Jesuits Rules for introducing Popery, have been practi∣sed by our English Prelates of late years, and still are practised by them. Let any ingenious spirit judge of their intentions by their actions. I have only let you see from whose Quiver they have drawn their shafts; you may hereby judge of the mark whereat they aim. You have seen whose Heifer it is they plowed with: Judge by that of the seed they would have sown. If they never knew that a Jesuit had delivered these Rules for the altering of Religion in a Christian state, they were very unhappy in complying so exactly with them, when they did not know them: And what can we think but that they were, and are acted by the same Genius, or the same Angelus informans that the Jesuit was when he penned them? But if they know (as it is most probable they do) that these are the Rules, this the Art delivered by a Jesuit for the sub∣verting the true Reformed Religion, and the introduction of Popery again, and yet do knowingly, and de Industria con∣form to them, and make proof of them, what can we think is their intention, but to alter our Religion? But blessed bee the Lord who hath said (and will perform it) That no wea∣pon
formed against his Jerusalem shall prosper. Give me leave (Gentle Reader) here to subjoyn the say∣ings of some wife and learned men, as well Papists as Prote∣stants touching the Grotian Arminian Design carried on by the Prelats and their Adherents in England, for introducing Popery and reducing England to the Church of Rome. A Jesuit writes in a Letter to the Rector at Brussels thus: Father Rector, &c. We have now many strings to our Bows, and have strongly fortified our Faction, and have added two Bul∣warks more; for when King J. lived, we know he was very vio∣lent against Arminianisme, and interrupted with his pestilent wit and deep learning, our strong designs in Holland: Now we have planted the Sovereign Drug Arminianisme, &c. which we hope will purge the Protestants from their heresie. This Letter was seized in Archbishop Lands Study, and attested against him at the Lords Bar. An English Jesuit in a Book inscribed, A Direction to be ob∣served by N. N. printed 1636. p. 20, 22. Thus writes, To speak truth, what learned judicious man can after unpar∣tial examination embrace Protestantisme which now waxeth weary of it self? Its professors declare themselves to love tem∣per and moderation, allow of many things which some years ago were usually condemned as superstitious and Antichristian: And are at this time more unresolved where to fasten, then in the infan∣cy of their Church: for do not the Protestant Churches begin to look with another face? Their walls to speak with another lan∣guage? Their Preachers to use a sweeter Tone? Their annual publick Tenets in the Universities to be of another stile and matter? Their books to appear with Titles and Arguments which once would have caused much scandal among th Brethren? Their Doctrine to be altered in many things, and even in those points for which their Progenitors forsook the then visible Church of Christ? Their 39 Articles, the summe, the con∣fessions
and almost the creed of their faith are patient, yea am∣bitious of some sense wherein they may seem to be Catholick? To alledge wife and children in these dayes is but a weak plea to compass a Benefice. Fiery Calvinisme once a Darling in Eng∣land, is at length accounted Heresie, yea and little less than Treason, men in word and writing willingly use the once fearful names of Priests and Altars; nay if one do but mutter against the placing of the Altar after the old fashion, for a warning he shall be well warmed with a Cole from the Altar, &c. That aspiring Prelate Dr. Laud in his Letter to Bishop Hall concerning Episcopacy, hath these words, You do extreamly well to distinguish the Scottish business from the state of the foreign Churches; but yet to those Churches and their Authors, you are a little more favourable than our case will now bear. What should bee the intendment of this word Now? Bishop Carleton in his Examination of Mountagues Appeal, page 62. What greater pleasure (saith he) can a man procure to the exemies of the truth than to speak evil and odiously of those men whose service God hath used, and made them excellent Instru∣ments to make the truth known to us? Some take it for a sign of such as are looking towards Popery, when they offer such a service to the Papists, as to speak evil of them who have been the greatest enemies to Popery, the greatest Propagators of the truth. Dr. Robert Abbot Bishop of Sarum, in a Sermon preached before the University of Oxford, 1615. Men under the pretence of truth, and preaching against the Puritans (saith he) strike at the heart and root of faith and Re∣ligion now established among us; This preaching against the Puritans, was but the practise of Parsons and Campians counsel, when they came into England to seduce young Students,
and when many of them were afraid to lose their places if they should professedly be thus, the counsel they then gave them was, That they should speak freely against the Puritans, and that should suffice: And they cannot pretend that they are accounted Papists, because they speak against the Puritans, but because they are Papists indeed, they speak not against them. If they do at any time speak against the Papists, They do beat a little upon the Bush, and that softly too, for fear of troubling or disquieting the Birds that are in it. They speak of nothing but that in which one Papist will speak against another; as against Equivocation, the Popes temporal Authority, and the like, and perhaps against some of their blasphemous speeches; but in the point of Free-will, Justification, Concupiscence, being sin after Baptisme, inhe∣rent Righteousness, Certainty of salvation; the Papists beyond the Sea can say, They are wholly theirs; and the Recusants at home make their brags of them: And in all things they keep them∣selves so near the Brink, that upon all occasions they may stop over them. The University of Cambridge in a Letter March 8. 1595. to their Chancellor subscribed unanimously by the Heads of the Colledges. They desire his Lordship to use some effectual remedy for sup∣pressing of Baroes Arminian opinions, lest (say they) by per∣mitting passage to these errors, the whole body of Popery, should by little and little break in upon us to the overthrow of our Religion. And a little after, Vouchsafe your Lordships aid and advice both to us (wholly consenting and agreeing in judgement) and all others of the University soundly affected: and to the suppression in time not only of these Errours, but even of gross Popery, like by such means in time easily to creep in among us, as we finde by late experience it hath dangerously begun. Declaration of the House of Commons to his late Majesty. The hearts of your subjects are perplexed when with sorrow
they behold a daily growth, and spredg of the faction of the Arminians; that being as your Majesty well knows, but a cun∣ning way to bring in Popery: And the professors of those opini∣ons, the common disturbers of the Protestant Churches, and In∣cendiaries of those States in which they have gotten any head, being Protestants in shew, but Jesuits in opinion and practice. The Noble Lord Falkeland in his excellent speech to the House of Commons, printed anno 1641. pag. 3, 4, 5.6, 7. Master Speaker, hee is a great stranger in Israel, who knows not that this Kingdome hath long laboured under many and great oppressions, both in Religion and Liberty, and his acquain∣tance here is not great, or his ingenuity less, who doth not both know and acknowledge, that a great, if not a principal cause of both thse, hath been some Bishops and their adherents. Mr. Speaker, A little search will serve to finde them to have been the destruction of Unity, under pretence of Uniformity, To have brought in Superstition and scandal under the titles of reverence and decency, to have defiled our Church by adorn∣ing our Churches, to have slackned the strictness of that Union which was formerly between us, and those of our Religion beyond the Sea, an action as unpolitick as ungodly. And again p. 7. As Sir Thomas Moore saies of the Ca∣suists, their business was not to keep man from sinning, but to in∣form them quam prope ad peccatum sine peccato liceat acce∣cere; so it seemed their work (meaning the Prelates) was to try how much of a Papist might bee brought in without Popery, and to destroy as much as they could of the Gospel without bringing themselves into danger of being destroyed by the Law. Mr. Speaker, to go yet further, some of them have so indu∣striously laboured to deduce themselves from Rome, that they have given great suspition, that in gratitude they desire to return thither, or at least to meet it half way: some have evidently la∣boured to bring in an English, though not a Roman Popery: I mean, not the outside onely, and dress of it, but equally absolute, a blinde dependance of the people upon the Clergy and of the
Clergy upon themselves: And have opposed Papacy beyond the Sea, that they might settle one beyond e Water: Nay, Common fame is more than ordinarily false, if none of them have found a way to reconcile the opinions of Rome to the preferments of Eng∣land; be so absolutely, directly and cordially Papists, that it is all that 1500 l. per annum can do to keep them from confes∣sing it. And again p. 9. Wee shall finde of them to have oth kindled and blown the common fire of both Nations, to have both sent and maintained that Book, of which the Author hath no doubt long since wished with Nero, Utinam nescissem literas: and of which more than one Kingdome hath cause to wish, That when he writ that he had rather burned a Library, though of the value of Prolomies. Wee shall finde them to have been the first and principal cause of the breach, I will not say of, but since the Pacification at Barwick: Wee shall finde them to have been the almost sole Abetters of my Lord of Strafford, whilest hee was practising upon another Kingdome, that manner of Go∣vernment which hee intended to settle in this, where hee committed so many, so mighty, and so manifest enormities as the like have not been committed by any Governour in any Govern∣ment since Verres left Sicily. And after they had called him o∣ver from being Deputy of Ireland, to be in a manner Deputy of England (all things here being governed by a Juntillo, and that Juntillo governed by him) to have assisted him in the giving of such Counsels, and the pursuing of such courses, as it is a hard and measuring cast, whether they were more unwise, more unjust, or more unfortunate, and which had infallibly been our destruction, if by the Grace of God their share had not been as small in the subtilty of Serpents as in the innocence of Doves. FINIS.
