E3340 13018008 96598
A VVorthy SPEECH Spoken by His Excellence The Earle of Essex. In the Head of his Armie, before his Arrivall at Worcester, on Saterday last, being the 24. of September, 1642. VVherein is declared every particular Order and Duty which his Excellence expects to be performed both by his Comman∣ders and Souldiers. With a Royall Protestation taken by his Excellence, and by him prescribed to be taken throughont the Armie. LONDON, Printed for Henry Fowler. Sept. 29. 1642.
A VVorthy Speech, spoken by his Ex∣cellence the Earle of Essex. GEntlemen and fellow Sol∣diers, which are at this time assembled for the de∣fence of his majestie, and the maintenance of the true protestant Religion under my command, I shall desire you to take no∣tice what I that am your Generall shall by my Honour promise to performe to¦ward you, and what I shall be forced to expect that you should performe to∣ward me. I do promise in the sight of Almighty God, that I shall undertake nothing,
but what shall tend to the advance∣ment of the true protestant Religion, the securing of his Majesties Royall Person, the maintenance of the just pri∣viledge of Parliament, and the liberty and property of the Subject, neither will I ingage any of you into any dan∣ger but (though for many reasons I might forbeare) I will in my owne per∣son runne an equall hazard with you, and either bring you off with Honour, or (if God have so decreed) fall with you, and willingly become a sacrafice for the preservation of my Country. Likewise I doe promise that my eare shall be open to heare the complaint of the poorest of my Souldiers, though against the chiefest of my Officers, nei∣ther shall his greatnesse (if justly tax'd) gaine any priviledge, but I shall be rea∣dy
to execute Justice against all from the greatest to the least. Your pay shall be constantly deli∣vered to your Commanders, and if de∣fault be made by any Officer, give me timely notice, and you shall find speedy redresse. This being performed on my part, I shall now declare what is your duty toward me, which I must likewise ex∣pect to be carefully performed by you. 1. I shall desire All and every Officer to endeavour by love and affable carriage to command his Souldiers, since what is done for feare, is done unwillingly, and what is unwillingly attempted can never prosper. Likewise tis my request that you be very carefull in the excercising of your men, and bring them to use their Armes readily and expertly, and not to bussy them in practiz∣ing
the cerimonious formes of Military di∣scipline, onely let them be well instructed in the necessary rudiments of Warre, that they may know to fall on with discretion, and retreate with care, how to maintaine their Order, and make good their ground. Also I doe expect that all those which vol∣luntarily ingaged themselves in this Ser∣vice, should answer my expectation in the performance of these ensuing Artickles. 1. That you willingly and cheerefully o∣bey such as (by your owne election) you have made Commanders over you. 2. That you take speciall care to keepe your Armes at all times fit for Service, that upon all occasions you may be ready when the signall shall be given by the sound of Drumme or Trumpet to repaire to your Colours, and so to march upon any Service where, and when occasion shall require. 3. That you beare your selves like Sol∣diers,
without doing any spoile to the inha∣bitants of the Country, so doing you shall gaine love and friendship, where otherwise you will be hated, and complained off, and I that should protect you, shall be forced to punish you according to the severity of Law 4. That you accept and rest satisfied with such quarters as shall fall to your Lot, or be appointed you by your quartermaster. 5. That you shall (if appointed for Cen∣tries or Per-dues) faithfully discharge that duty, for upon faile heereof, you are sure to undergo a very severe censure. 6. You shall forbeare to prophane the Saboth, either by being drunke, or by un∣lawfull games for whosoever shall be found faulty must not expect to passe unpunished. 7. Whosoever shall be knowne to neg∣lect the feeding of his Horse with necessary Provender, to the end that his Horse be disabled or unfit for Service, the party for
the party for the said default, shall suffer a month's imprisonment, and afterward be cashiered as unworthy the name of a Soul∣dier. 8. That no Trooper or other of our sol∣diers shall suffer his Paddee to feed his Horse in the Corne, or to steale mens hay, but shall pay every man for Hay 6. d. day and night, and for Oats 2. s. the Bushell. Lastly, that you avoid cruelty; for it is my desire rather to save the life of thou∣sands, then to kill one, so that it may be done without prejudice. These things faithfully performed, and the justice of our cause truely considered let us advance with a religions courage, and willingly adventure our lives in the defence of the King and Parliament. FINIS.
