E3692 R40585 19370503 108808
An EXACT RELATION OF THE Late King JAMES's Embarking for France: And of the Proclaiming K. William: WITH THE Present Condition of Dublin, and other Places near that City. In a LETTER from DƲBLIN. DƲBLIN, Saturday, July 5. 1690. Honoured Sir, I Presume, er'e this, you have received the Letter I sent you from our Camp, near the Boyne. Since that, you have known by other hands, that by one Fight we have frighted and scattered our Ene∣my, and were presently possessed of the strong Town of Droghedah, and are now as quietly setled in this City, yet in much better Condition than was expected. They left Stores filled with Provision of Mouth and War: They have great Stores likewise in the Country; which are all open for our receipt. Their King is run away, with the Duke of Powis, Tyrconnel, and some few more, to∣wards Kingsale; their Army all scattered in the Country; so that the War seems new to be at an end. Galloway, Limerick, and Athlone are, as I hear, the only places like to stand out against us; and having no hopes of Relief, will, as its thought, be easily surrendred. His Majesty you see hath conquered this Kingdom, with a Veni vidi vici, it will require more of his trouble to settle then to conquer it: I cannot now further enlarge, the Express waiting the motion of my Pen, but to tell you, this day by the Post, if possible, will send you a more particular account. Dublin, July 5th, 1690. Honoured Sir, I Sent you one of this Date by the Ex∣press, and have now to add, That we have sure and certain Advertisement sent us by an Express, that the late King James on Wednesday-night last embarqued at Dun∣cannon, a Fort that commands Passage-Harbour, viz. the Harbour of Waterford; and that he, Duke Powis, and Tyrconnel, and some others, are gone direct for France. Their Army are scattered in the Country, and are forced to turn Tories to get them a support; so that it's believed our King's work will be apply'd now rather to settle, then make further Conquests here. His Majesty is not yet come to this Town, but is this Night. Encampt within two Miles of this City, and as we hear, intends to be here to morrow. The Protestants of Wexford hath seized that Garrison, and declare for K. William
and Q. Mary: The other Towns where Protestants are, will, we expect, follow that President. Of which we have alrea∣dy some Reports, particularly as to Water∣ford and Kilkenny. We cannot learn, that there is 5000 of the Enemy in a Body, not understand that there are any of them appears within thir∣ty Miles of this City. What Forces they lately had of the Germans that were Pro∣testants are come in to us. The French are gone with Three Field-Pieces towards Lymerick, but its thought they will be met in the way: Our Horse are now scattering to pick up the Scatterers of the Enemies scattered Army. We all believe, that there will not be struck one stroke more in this War; and we have many Reasons to wish and expect it; but none more important, then that we hope thereby our King may return to you, as safe as he came to us. His active and invincible Courage gave us horrid frights, finding that he acted in the Field, rather as a Couragious Captain, than a great King. This Success may, we hope, justly entitle him to the Character of the greatest Monarch in the European World. Our Enemy is run in that hast, that they have left vaster Stores than we could have imagined they had, not only of War, but Provision behind them. Not an hour but we have some News of loss to them, and gain to us. I am under those straits of Time, that I can nei∣ther be so full or methodical in account of Persons and Things, as I wish. I have sent you enclosed a Copy of a Prophecy, which you may put into English, having onely time to write it; and that I am Your Affectionate Friend and Servant. A Prophesie found near One hundred years since in Chan∣cellor Loftus his Studdy, and since this War shewed often to King James his Ministers here. SI post hac alíquando rem militarem exactius dedicirint inordinata & incomposita Hi∣bernorum numerosa Phalanges, eoque Viribus, aere & arte militari creverit Gens ista pau∣perrima, ut numero, pondere & magnitudine intumescat & laboret, hunc equidem mole sua ruet, subitoque casu & flatu Boreali è facie terra at peccora obigitur, sibique (spe-profliga∣ta) in Secula omnia abjudicabit Libertatem, Seque Regemque suum exteris, Saxonibus, Danis & Battavis mancipia reddit. IF at any time hereafter the rude and disorderly numerous Phalanxe's of the Irish shall more exactly learn the Art of War, and that poor Nation shall by means of brass Money, and the Art of War, in∣crease to that degree of Strength, and to swell and labour under their Number, Weight, and Multitude, then shall they fall with the weight of their own Bulk, and by a suddain Accident, and the force of the North-wind, shall be scattered like Sheep from the face of the Earth, and hopeless of all Relief, shall for ever re∣nounce all thought of Liberty, and Sur∣render up themselves and their King ab∣solute Slaves to Saxons, Danes, and Hollan∣ders. ADVERTISEMENT. THE Secret History of the Dutchess of Portsmouth; Giving an Account of the Intreagues of the Court, during her Mi∣nistry. And of the Death of King CHARLES the Second Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old-Bailey. London: Printed for R. Baldwin, in the Old-Bailey. 1690.
