E3724 R26700 9523534 43473
THE EXAMINATION OF Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Iohn Winter, Sir John Stowell, with two other Knights, upon their knees at the Barre, in the House of Commons, the 14 day of this instant October. With the Articles of high Trea∣son, exhibited against them by the House of COMMONS. IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's or publisher's device London, Printed in the yeer 1642.
The Examination of Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Iohn Winter, Sir Iohn Stowell, with two other Knights, brought upon their knees at the Barr in the House of Commons the 14. day of this instant October with the Articles of High Treason exhibited against them by the House of Commons. FRyday being the 14 of Octo∣ber was Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Iohn Winter, Sir Iohn Stowell with two other Knights, which were ap∣prehended at Falmouth in the County of Cornwall, by the Earle of Bedfords Forces, brought to the Barr in the House of Commons, and after submission severally made to the House, they were commanded out againe by a Serjeant at Armes, upon which the House falling into
debate of the offences by them committed in the County of Summerset-shire Dor∣set-shire and Cornwall against the Kings good Subjects. They were unanimously voted Delinquents against both King and Parliament, after which Sir Ralph Hopton was againe called to the Barr, and exami∣ned upon these questions. First, by what authority or Commission the said Sir Ralph did leavy and cause to be leavyed Forces in the County of Summer∣set-shire against the expresse order and de∣claration published by authority of both Houses of Parliament. 2. Wherefore he endeavoured to put the Commission of Array in execution in that County, it having been declared illegall by the Iudgement of both Houses of Parli∣ament, and in opposition to the Ordinance of both Houses for putting the Militia in execution. 3. By what authority the said Sir Ralph caused to be raised Horse, Money and Plate for maintenance of the war begun against the Parliament, and seizing by force of Armes the goods of divers Gentlemen
well affected to the Parliaments procee∣dings, which refused to lend any money or plate, or to set forth any Horse according to his desires. Vpon which, the said Sir Ralph Hopton was called to make answer to the said que∣stions, who answered in brief, That what∣soever he had done was by authority from Marquesse Hartford, the Lord Seymour and the Lord Paulet, who had received a Commission of Array from His Majesty, That he was not convinced in his Iudge∣ment of the illegality of the said Commis∣sion, but by vertue thereof had lawfull po∣wer to put that County into a posture of Defence. For his endeavouring to raise money, Horse and plate for the use and service of His Maiesty, it was by vertue of Warrants in His Maiesties Name directed to him for that purpose, which he conceived he was bound by his Oath of Allegiance to obey, upon which his answers he was againe commanded from the Barr, and the House falling into consideration and great debate touching the same, una voce voted these particulars.
1. That the raising of Forces without consent of both Houses of Parliament, and marching with the same against any of his Maiesties Subiects, is actually leavying of war, and hath been by the Lawes of this Land adjudged Treason against King and Parliament. 2. That for any Member of either of both Houses to leave their attendance for the service of the State, and privately depart without leave of the House, and shall in disobedience to the Orders and Summons of the same refuse to make his appearance is a high breach of the priviledges of Par∣liament. 3. That to endeavour to raise or procure any money, Armes or Amunition for the nourishing or maintenance of any warre raised against the State is Treason. 4. To joyne any Forces so raised against the Lawes of the Land, and Ordinances of Parliament, with any persons that by both Houses are declared Traytors, is Treason. 5. That the said Sir Ralph Hopton is guil∣ty of every the aforesaid Votes, and ought
to be proceeded against accordingly. 6. That the aforesaid particulars shall be drawne into a charge against the said Sir Ralph Hopton, and a Committee ap∣pointed for the perfecting of the same, and presenting it to the House on Munday next. 7. That the said Sir Ralph Hopton shall be forthwith committed prisoner to the Tower. After which, Sir Iohn Stowell and the rest were called in severally, and after exami∣nation it being put to the question, it was resolved that the said Knights, first for joy∣ning and confederating themselves with Marquesse Hertford, Lord Seymour, and the Lord Paulet in the warre against the Parli∣ament, who are declared Traytors. 2. For raising of Forces joyntly and se∣verally in the Counties of Summerset-shire, Dorchester, Devon-shire and Corne∣wall, and marching against the Forces rai∣sed by Authority for Parliament, for sup∣pressing tumultuous and malignant per∣sons that have endeavoured to disturbe the peace of the Kingdome.
3. For refusing to appeare before the House of Commons upon their Summons as Delinquents, but returning sleight and disobedient answers. 4. For endeavouring to put the Com∣mission of Array in execution against the Parliament are guilty of high Treason. 5. Then the House of Commons ap∣pointed a Committee to draw up a charge of Treason against the said Knights upon these severall Votes, and present the same to the House on Tuesday following, and ordered that Sir Iohn Stowell, and Sir Iohn Winter should be committed to the Tow∣er, Captaine Digby to the Gate-house, and the other to the Fleet, which was done ac∣cordingly. FINIS.
