F2485 12251615 57126
A PLAIN PROOF OF The true Father and Mother of the pretended PRINCE of WALES. BY Several Letters written by the late Queen in France; The Earle of Tyrconnel, Lord Deputy of Ire∣land, The Dutchess of Powis, Governess to the pre∣tended Prince; Mr. Carrell, the Queens Secretary, and Father Lewis Sabran, Chaplain & Tutor to the Prince. WITH Informations of several Persons of Note Plainly discovering the whole Management of that Imposture. COLLECTED From the Originals, as they were Intercepted and De∣liver'd to his present Majesty. And never before made publick. New Published by WILLIAM FULLER, Gent. LONDON, Printed for the AUTHOR; And Sold by the Book-sel∣ers of London and Westminster, 1700
A true Copy of his Grace the Duke of Shrewsbu∣ry's Certificate. I Do hereby certify, that in November 1689. Mr. William Fuller came to me, and did make severall considerable Discoveries of the Intreagues of the Ene∣mies of the present Government, And he was by my encouragement sent into France; And at his Return did perform very great Service for the Preservation of their Ma∣jesties Sacred Persont, and the Peace and Security of their Government: And that it was by his endeavours, that Mr. Mat∣thew Crone was detected and convicted of High Treason. Given under my hand this 15th. of April, 1692. Shrewsbury
To the Right Honourable, Sir Richard Levett, Kt. Lord Mayor. And to the Right Worshipful, the Al∣dermen and Sheriffs of the City of London. I Hope the same Noble Disposition which has inspir'd you bravely on all occasions, to demonstrat your Zeal for the Preservation of the present Government, by supporting the best of Kings, will induce you favourably to look on, and protect this short, but true Narrative of the most socret and subtile Design of the late Reign; which was a Contrivance so deeply laid, to root out the Protestant Religion, and all things else valuable to every true English Man, that nothing but the mighty power and favour of God could deliver this Nation from: I hope there can be no Danger of a Relapse; And verily believe there will not, unless Sins and Ignorance rule the People of this Land into a Lethargy of Security—You, Gentlemen, are the Ru∣lers over a great People, and it is much in your power, by your Authority and Example, to preserve the lasting Peace of this Kingdom: Therefore I humble beg your partronage of this piece; which as a strange Mountain, bids Defiance to all its Opposers; And the Truth thereof may at one time be more powerful than the Arms of a Popish pretender; and thereby be of Ʋse to you and your posterity. May Almighty GOD long preserve the present King, under whose Care you and your famous City are sure of peace and Prospetity, it is the Prayers of Your most Devoted, and Obedient Servant W. FULLER.
The PREFACE. SInce the happy Conclusion of the Peace, that many of your Nation have had their Tours into France: It is very observeable, how strangely the Mouths of some come back, are filled with the mighty Actions of that Heroick Gentleman, pretended Prince of Wales; they seem so to adore him, that were he truly what they pretend, King James's, or His Queens Son, (as he is neither) these Gentlemen could not exceed their flat∣tering Praises: It must be confess'd▪ That Pomp and Shew often makes Men seem what they are not, and so it does here; For this young Spark being by the late King and Queen own'd as their Son, as soon as Born of Mrs. Gray, it behoves them to mantain him as such, whilst there is any hopes of imposing him to the Advan∣tage of the Roman Catholick Cause, which was the first Ground of their Design; and even at this day is no less than what the Jesuits and Priests both at Home and A∣broad, do very confidently affirm, will answer their design of settling Popery in this Kingdom in a short time: Being my self in July last at Antwerp, and con∣versing there with several English Priests and Jesuits, particularly one Father Hunter, a Jesuit, the only En∣glish in the great and famous Colledge there; he told me plainly, That however Matters seem'd to stand a∣gainst the Interest of the Church of Rome at this time; He question'd not but to hear Mass said a Hundred times in St. Paul's Church in London before he Died; adding for one Reason, That he was much younger than King William, and hoping to out live him, he saw no other obstacle in their way; most of the other Jesuits and Priests gave their Opinion to the same Effect, and seem'd to speak not of their own Judgment barely, but according to their Advice from England &c. And
did frankly tell me, That they had now, notwithstand∣ing the late Act of Parliament against them, above Seven Thousand Priests in England: And I know very well, that there is every Week very great Sums of Money remitted from England, for the use of the Re∣ligious there. So much do Intreagues and Interest prosper, which if rightly consider'd, is a sufficient cause for every true English Men, to join in the Suppressing such a growing Evil: But to return to our Business in hand, since the most unhappy, most unspeakable loss of His Highness the Duke of Gloucester, has given new and strange Hopes to that Party of England's Foes. I cannot be a miss, once more to remind them, whose Son, their darling Hopes, the pretended Prince of Wales is, which is here done by several Letters, sufficiently attested to be the true Copies taken from the Originals of the late Queen, and her chief Persons of Quality's own Writing, and some of the Originals (as they were sent from Ireland by persons of Quality their, that took them out of the Dutchess of Tyronnel's Trunk) are ye in being, and ready to be produced when occasion offers▪ If it may be objected, why they were not publish'd sooner? I Answer, That I did intend it four Years ago, and hoping from time to time to have brought the matter to a Hearing, before the Right Honourable the House of Lords, I was constraind to delay the pub∣lishing of them on that Score only; But having been beyond the Seas, and conversing with Father Lewis Sabran, who was Chaplain to the pretended Prince, and one cheif Manager of this Intreague, now refiding at the English Colledge in Liege. I do undertake to Answer the said Father, by proving not only the Sup∣positious Birth of the pretended Prince, but the whole Management in every particular, at the time of the late Queen's pretending to deliver'd at St. James's the 10th. of June, 1688. with a particular account of the true Mothers being cruelly Murtder'd in March 1690.
A Plain Proof of the true Father and Mother of the Pretended Prince of Wales. ABout four Years since, I published a small Narra∣tive, shewing, by several Circumstances▪ how Reasonable it was for every dising udge∣ment impartially to discern by those ruths I related, how cunningly the Transactions  Reign were managed, by imposing a mpstor Child to be Hir to the Crowns of these Kingdoms of Great Brittain, and Ireland. A short Time after my  was ou, it bad so far con∣vinced many that eore were doubtful concerning that suppositio Birth, that instantly the whole Party of a∣pists, and hotbrain'd Jacobits ell har ▪ ut instead of disproving any one Particular which I had alled a∣gainst he Legitimate Birth (as they pretended to vin∣dicat) a certain Author of Quality,  terms imself, (being ashamed of His Name and Cause to, as W have Reoson to believe) Scribbles a few sheets, and sends them into the World, in Hopes to Banter Truth (according to the Old Custom) and falls to a ▪ against Me, charging Me with Crimes I never knew, and from these Inventions of His own Brain, endeavrs to dravv Reasons to hinder or Invalidate the Truth of my Relati∣on: But I shall not trouble You with His nter or Cha∣racter, only say, I know Him; And tho' he be a Man of Quality, he is also so well known by the People of
England, espcially the Tradesmen of London, that there is  that will Trust him on any Score. things material which I cannot but take , His bringing all the Depositions which were  Westminster by King JAMES His Friends before  lution; and at the end of them this Au∣thor in Admiration, That so mean a Per∣son obtai any Credit against such a Num∣ber of , made by persons of so high a Rank & Qulity  which some were Protestants. nswer, That all thei Depositions to my As∣stions against the true Birth of this Child: For whoe∣ver those Depositions, they will find th  Person who says. They saw or sel the Child come from the Queen's Body, tho' Mrs Wilks, the Popish Midwife, swears, she cut the Child's Navel-String, which we verily believe she might; for, as We shall presently shew, Mrs▪ Grey, te true Mother of that Child, was Delivered by Mrs. Wilks, not many Minuts be∣fore the Child was conveyed in the Warming-Pan into the Queen's Bed. Secondly, This Noble Author would insinuate, That whatever I published at that Time, (it being in the last Year of the late War with France) I should be silent e∣nough when once a Peace was concluded, and that the Persons I charged with the management of that Impo∣sture had the opportunity to answer for themselves. To this I Reply, That it is sufficiently known, the Wars have now been over about the Years, and those Persons He would iustify have had all the Opportunities imagin∣abie to have made their Defence, and done themselves and the pretended Prince, Right: if it had Injurd either. They could not be ignorant of what I charged against them, by Reason many of my Books in English were sent to France, and the same Book was Translated both into French and Dutch, and Printed at the Hague and Amster∣dam,
and other Places beyond the Seas, as is sufficient∣ly known. But to avoid Arguments, not material, and come close to the matter, I must now tell the World, that I lately ven∣tur'd my self abroad into Flanders, where I met my for∣me Tutor, Father Lewis Sabran, of the Jesuits Society, he being now a kind of Superior to these English ones of that Society, who Reside at the City of Liege. He was Chap∣lain to the pretended Prince of Wales, and one of the chief Actors in the management of that Imposture (as You find him charged in my former Book) With this Father I had some Disputes at the later end of July last▪ and his Endeavour was to perswade me to return to the Church of Rome, and live the Remainder of my Life in that Place, by entring my self into their Society (that is to be a Lay Brother) but I could by no means yeild to his Inducements. Upon which, after a short sharp Disput, the good Father and I parted with this Resolve, That to what I had formerly published, I would at my coming to England expose his Letters, and all the remaining Passag-wherein he was concerned, and send him them in Print, desiring his Reply and Confutation, if I did him or o∣thers any Injury. He promised he would do it if I gave Occasion. Therefore, with humble Submission, I think, I cannot proceed more fairly to justifie the Truth of my Narrative, than by setting down first what I know con∣cerning the Management of that Intrigue, which has been already, and can at any Time be sufficiently prov'd as fol∣lows, viz. First, That in May 1688. The Countess of Tyrconnel came over from Ireland in the Monmouth Yacht, Captaine Wright Commandder, and brought with her two Young Gentlewomen big with child. This is prov'd by Capt. Wright, and others belonging to the Yatch, as also by a great many People of Quality and others in Ireland. Secondly, I do aver, That one of these two Gentle∣n who came over with the said Countess of Tyrcon∣nel,
( was with her on the Road towards London) fell on Labour, and lay in at St. Alban's, which is Te∣stify'd by several on that Road, and the Inhabitants as St. Albans. Thirdly, I do aver, That the other of these Women that came over from Ireland, and to London, with the Countess of Tyrconnel, (her Name being Mrs. Mary Gray) was brought big with Child, and Lodged in two small Chambers over the Lady Stricklands Lodgings, near to the Queens Apartment, in the palace of St. James's, which said Chamber, joind also to the Marchioness of Powis's Lodgings, and were the most privat and con∣venient for their intended purpose in the whole Palace. Fourthly, I do aver, That on Saturday the 9th. of June 1688, the same Mrs. Gray fell into pains, upon which Mrs. Wilks was brought to her, and that Aftre∣noon the Queen came privatly to St. James's, and per∣tended also of a sudden to find the Symptoms of her ap∣proaching Delivery, which increased according as Mrs. Gray did in Reality; and Mrs. Gray being deliver'd be∣twixt the Hours of Nine and Ten on Sunday Morning, the Tenth of June, the Child of the said Mrs. Gray was convey'd in a Warming-pan, which I saw Mrs. Labaddie carry from Mrs. Grays Chamber along the narrow Gal∣lery, and so passed into the back Room, next to that the Queen lay in. Fifthly, I do aver, That this very same Mrs. Grey, three Weeks after the time of her Delivery, was by Command sent to Dover in a Coach and six Horses, ac∣company'd by Father Lewis Sabran, the Marchioness of Powis's Woman, and my self; and that she was there met by one Father Grey, a secular Priest, who liv'd at Calis, and call'd her Sister, with whom she went on Board the Packet Boat, in order to go for Calis, and from thence to the Benedictine Nunnery in Paris: And this is prov'd by the Persons where she and we lodged,
and is well remembered by the Master of the acket Boat, who had often before and since, both seen and Drank with Father Grey her Brother, at Calis, and heard him say, his Sister, meaning this Mary Grey was gone to end her days in a Nunnery. Sixthly, I do aver, That the said Mary Grey, in Fe∣bruary 1690, (there being a Breach in the Garden-Walls of that Cloyster at that time) did make her escape out of the said Convent of English Benedictine Nuns in Paris, and upon which, a diligent Search was made after her in Paris, and after three days she was found again. This I prove by several Persons Inhabitants in Paris, who dwell near the Convent, which will remember the Breach at that time, and the search which was made after a Woman who had made her escape. And if our Enemies shou'd here alledge it was another Woman, and not Mrs. Grey. I answer, It behoves them to prove who that other Wowan was; And forasmuch, as in a few Days after Mrs. Grey was carried to St. Germains from the said Convent, (where she was kept under a strict Guard after her Escape) it likewise concerns them to demonstrate, what became of her afterwards. And whereas, I do further charge them with Mur∣thering her; certainly, if they're no Guilty, it is easy to disprove my Assertion, by either producing her, or proving where, and how she died. And yet further, I do attest, That this Mary Grey was meerly Murther'd (she being the true Mother of the pretended Prince of Wales) to prevent her dis∣covering the same to the honest People of England, whom they rerm the Enemies of the late King and Queen: Therefore, if she were not put to Death, meerly on that account, it will be a mighty Justifica∣tion to the Court of St. Germains, if they please to shew for what cause she was Murther'd, so that these my
positive Assertions, being so answer'd, as I propose, I will not only confess my Error, but shall freely lay my Life at their Mercy, tho' I am sure to find none: As for Father Sabran, I verily believe I have left him lit∣tle or no Room for a Reply. But partly pursuant to a former promise of mine, in my first and second Nar∣rative, and to make the matter more apparent, I here following present the Courtious Reader with a few e Copies of Letters, writ by the late King James's Queen, and others, concerning Mrs. Grey; and the first two Letters were wrote upon the occasion of a great Fright, which Mrs. Grey gave the Queen, when she made her escape, which occasion'd the Queen to order me to go for England with the saids Letters immediatly; but Mrs. Grey being taken, and exprss was dispatch'd after me, to call me back to St. Germains, when I found the Queen overjoy'd at taking of the lost Sheep, as the Queen was pleased to term Mrs. Grey. The following Letter was wrote by the Queens own hand, directed to me, to deliver to the Lord Montgomery in England. LETTER I. At St. Germains, Feb▪ 10. 1690. I Desire You, my Lord, instantly to Repair to Rummy Marsh▪ and take with You my Servant Ashton, with others whom You can trust; For Mrs. Grey is con∣vey'd out of the Cloyster, no doubt, by the Help of our Enemies Agents at Paris. I need not urge to You the dangerous Consequence of this Womans ariving saf∣ly in England: But, as You tender the Interest of Our Holy Mother and all things else, which I believe are dear to You. I charge You not to fail to get her dispatcht at her Landing, which must be consequently in those Parts in a small Vessel, Care being raken to prevent her Es∣kape
otherwise; the Bearer will inform You further. I shall pray for Your Success. Your assured Friend, Mary R. This Letter was Writ by the late Queens hand, and copyed by Fuler, to whom the Queen gave it to deliver to the Lord Montgommery; and the said better being made up in the Pipe of a Key, he had the Oportunity of taking the Contents, Which Mr. Fuler, deliverd to the present King on the 2 of March following, and Deposed an Oath, that the Copy was truely taken from the Original, as the late Queen in France gave it to Me with her own Hand, which Letter was by Me delivered back to the Queen upon My being Recal'd to Saint Germans, as I was upon My Journey to England upon the ac∣count of Mis. Mary Grey's being taken in Paris, as You have it set down in My first Narrative. OBSERVATION I. By this Letter it is easie to discern how much the late Queen fear'd the Consequence of rhis Womans getting safely into England, and surely, were not the Cause ex∣traordinary, Her Maiesty (whose Soul is haughty enough) would not be so Frighted at her Escape: But the Interest of the Holy Church was as the stake, that is, the Impo∣sture, she fear'd, would be Exposed, & her Masterpiece of Intrigue brought to nothing, but redound to her eter∣nal dishonour; So poor Ms. Grey must Die, whatever Trouble or Pains it cost, even one of the best Friends the late Queen had in England, and that too at her first Landing, before the mighty Secret was divulged, and what that Secret was, surely her Majesty in this Letter does Her self fo plainly hint at, that it needs no furth∣er Interpretation. The next was given me at the same time, and is much to the some Purpose. A Letter from the late Queen to the Right Honourable, the E. of Castlemain, on the same Occasion: Dated at St. Germains, Feb, 10. 1690.
LETTER II. I Never, My Lord, had any Occasion of greater Con∣sequence (than what now offers now) to try Your Disposition for the King's and my own Service▪ Nor do I in the least question Your Diligence in executing my Wil, when You know (as is too true) that Ms. Grey, who came from Ireland with the Dutches of Tyrconnel in 1688 is by the same means stoln out of the Cloyster, and upon Ezamination appears too plain, that she must be assisted by some Agent of the Prince of Oranges, and consequent∣ly designed to be conveyed to England, and made the Instrument of Our Disgrace; which Motive obliges Me to desire You, with al imaginable Speed, to go in Disguise with such a number of proper Persons as You shall judg convenient to the coast of Kent, where most convenient¦ly she may be Landed near Deal. I have writ to My Lord Montgomery to go to Rumy-Marsh, and wish You to con∣fer together before it be too late. I hope the Goodness of Our Cause will inspire Hour Zeal, to Act as becomes a Christian and Faithful Subject. The Bearer will inform You more, from, Your assured Friend, Mary R. It was also copyed by M. William Fuller, being delivered to him by the Late Queens own Hand, and made up in the Pipe of a Key, us the former to the Lord Montgomery; and was Orderd to be deliver'd to the Earl of Castlemain in Eng∣land, but Returned back to the Queen at M. Fuller's being cal'd back to S. Germains. This Copy was also delivered to his present Majesty King Wil: by Me, ot the same time with the former, when I De∣posed on Oath that it is a true Copy of the late Queens Letter. Observation II. The Queen here speaks so very plain to this Lord, that nothing can well Express a greater Con∣cern: She terms it the greatest She ever had; And no doubt but She thonght it so at shat Time; For the first News of Ms. Grey's escape, put Her into a Fever; And
its true that the Queen kept Her Chamber two Days upon it. Her Majesty was much afraid of the Prince of Oranges Agents: So true it is that Guilty Persons Tremble at evry shaddow. The whole Letter is so plain that I need say no more about it. LETTRE III. WHen I wrote last by Hays, I was under some Mortification concerning Mrs. Grey, who that Morning made her escape, and gave us, upon some Examination, a Jealousie that she was con∣vey'd to England; but I am very Thankful to Almighty GOD that we had no occasion to trouble you concern∣ing her there: She is now safe, past doing any Dam∣age; but I fear that the Concern we were under, and the Search we caus'd to be made after her, has a little taken Air, and is convey'd to the Knowledge both of some of our Friends and Enemies in England, which is proper to be stiffled: Therefore, I have given Di∣rections to Carrol, to send you full Instructions how to proceed with Mrs. Grey's Relations now in London, to prevent their Resentment of our proceedings, which o∣therwise may be of ill Consequence, and their Rashness (the common Defect of their Countrey-mens Judgement) may give dangerons occasions to the never ceasing Watchfulness of our Enemies: And at this time it much behoves us to prevent even the least Disputes among our good Subjects: And to this purpose, I have ordered a sufficient Sum of Money to be remitted amongst the Bills which F. brings over to Ashton. I pray GOD to give a Gracious Issue to this, and all other your Endeavours, for His Glory and the Defence of the King. I am Your Friend, Mary R.
Mr. Crone coming from France with Mr. Fuller, the latter caus'd him for to be apprehended; and the said Crone in June following being arreign'd at the Old Baily for High-Treason, by a Commission of Oyer and Terminer for that purpose, before the then Lord Mayot, Sir Tho: Pilkinon, and all the Judges of England, after a long and most fair Tryal, Mr. Crone was found Guilty of High-Treason, and received Sentence accordingly: And several Warrants were sign'd for his Execution, which was from time to time put off by 2 several Reprieves, until the said Crone gave to the present Government a free Confession, of what he knew of the designs carry∣ing on against the present Government at that time; all which he not only gave to His Majesty's Ministers of State in Writing, but afterwards deposed on Oath, That all the Matter contain'd in those Papers was Truth, and that this and others were the true Letters which he he brought from the late Queens own hand. And this Confession of Mr. Crone's was laid before the Honour∣able House of Commons, according to an Address of that Honourable House to His Majesty, in November 1692. for that purpose. Note. Mr. Crone having obtain'd his Pardon in June, was let out of Newgate for his Health, the Govern∣ment not believing he ever would venture into France again, and after having made so large a Confession and Discovery of the Court of St. Germains, which was so very material, that Mr. Crone continu'd in England until His Majesty's Attorney-General had proceeded upon the Pro∣secuting such as Crone and Fuller had given Informa∣tion against, there's no doubt but it had prevented several Conspiracies, which have since been car∣ryed on by the same conspyring Hands: But But Crone went went for France, and some affirm it was by Invitation from King James, with Assurance of His Pardon and Favour. Others affirm, He was caryed on ship-board by six Men disguised who came Armed by Night,
taking him by Force, and Gagging Him, convey'd Him into a Boat, and so off. But however it were, he is now in France, and used kindly, which shews his being there is very agreable to the Court of St Germains. And con∣sidering he was made a Major of Horse o the Account of his being serviceable, in going betwixt France, England and Ireland, the two first Years of the War, when the greatest Conspiracies were on Foot; it cannot but be I∣magined but this Crone was greatly Instrusted by the Late King James and his Queen, even in their most secret In∣trigues; and what he did confess to to the Government was so plainly demonstrated, that there is no Room for the least Particular. Besides, it confirmed every Par∣ticular of what Fuler had given in Information before; And both were afterwards confirmed by the Viscount Preston, only this and some other Letters▪ Mr. Crone was only privy to, which He confirmed on Oath came from the late Queens own Hnds in France; and a more posi∣tive Proof surely cannot be Required. So I proceed to make a short Observation from some parts of it, viz. Observation III. Now the Queen writes the Letter, her Fears concerning Mrs Grey being over, but yet some Jealousies Remain of their late Dealings with Mrs. Grey's taking Air. The Queen is mighty Jealous of the Spyes in France, and knowing that King William and his Roy∣al Consort, had some time before the Revolution learnt something of this intreague, and the pretended Princes being Mrs. Greys Son: Her late Majesty at St. Germains (who wants not thought) instantly weighs how much it concern'd her to keep this Murther and dealings with Mrs. Grey, as secret as might be, well knowing, that the least Air or Knowledge of it in England would put an end to her pretended Sons Right. The Persons the Queen most dreaded▪ were Mrs. Greys Relations, who were some of them in England, but all Natives of Ire∣land, and Priests: Her Majesty orders her Secretary,
Mr. Carrol, to provide and send over Means to stop their Mouths, that was an Invitation into France, with the promise of Perferment and a Sum of Money, the seldom or never failling Cure for all Mischief: Mr. Ash∣ton▪ was to pay the Money, he was Her Majesty's Treasur∣er in England, and since hanged for his Zeal in a bad Cause, which the Queen terms, God's Glory and the Kings Service. The next is Letter wrote by Father Lewis Sabran, a Jesuit and Chaplain to the pretended Prince of Wales, to the Dutchess of Tyrconnel in Ireland, and was sent by Fuller, who was sent to that Kingdom by the late Queen from France, by the way of England, where F▪ opened the said Letter, shewing it to the late Queen of ever Blessed Memory, who ordered the Copy to be taken after which Fuller went for Ireland, and delivered the said Letter as directed; Dated at St. Germains, March 15th. 1689. LETTER IV. Madam, IN obedience to the Commands I received from your Grace, I have several times visited Mrs. Mary Grey. endeavouring to convince her, how incon∣sistent with Reason her several requests to your Grace are; I assured her how kindly ready you were to con∣descend to the doing her every good Office which might condce to her Eternal, as well as perfect Hap∣piness; And I thought my self at first happy, by having fully evinced her, how much she was mistaken by desir∣ing to leave the Holy Societie, which she now enjoies, and the Dangers that attend a Woman of her Constitu∣tion, by being abroad in the World, where all things strive to wound the Soul: I urged to her the Coe∣ration of her former Miscarriage; and much Reasn she has continually to send up her prayers, and to en∣dure a continual Mortification to merit Blessings Son, that by him so many Millions might one
made happy: Much more I offered, and pressed it home; but tho then she seem'd satisfied, I am sory to to tell your Grace, that she is now run into the Extra∣vagancy of meer Frenzy, and nothing will content her, unless the Queen permit her leave to take some Employ that she may attend the Price continually: I dare not let the Queen as yet know it, but have left is to the Discretion of my good Lady, the Dutchess of Powis, to inform her Majesty, as she finds occasion (tho I hear∣tily wish there may be none,) I have twice obtained leave by the Queens Commands to my Reverend Lady Aes, for Mrs. Greys coming to St. Germains to see the Child, which, I fear, has done more hurt than con∣trary wise; Malady seems to be much increased. I truly pity her, and pray for her, begging your Grace to write frequently to her, for I knw nothing that so much Influence with her as your Graces prudent Admo∣nutions. I bless GOD the Prince thrives even beyond Expection, and I hope, the whole Course of his Life will be blest to Crown their Majesty's, and your Graces most worthy Endeavours. I am, Madam, your Graces most humble, and Devoted Sevant, Lewis Sabran. This Letter with the following, and several others were taken in a Trunk of the said Dutchess of Tyrconnel's, which Trunk was left at her Daughters in Dublin, and being search'd soon after the the Fight of the Boyne, the said Letters were presented to the King, and after∣wards remitted to the Queen in England; then by Com∣mmand delivered to me, in order to the publishing them with other Papers. Observation IV. Mrs. Grey being a Relation of the E. of Tyrconnel's and by his and his Ladys Istigation drawn to this fatal Intreague, the Countess of Tyrconnel to whom Mrs. Grey made her frequent Appeals from the Monastery, injoyns Father Sabran to give her Advice; Mrs. Grey being uneasie for being kept so Close from her Child, who no doubt, was very dear to her, though raifed to such a heighth of Princely Honours, that she,
poor Lady, begg'd only to be his Minal Servant: But the Queen and others judge it not proper for these Rea∣sons; First, That the Women of Ireland are the most Passionat Lover of Children in the World, which might have given Cause of Observation. Secondly, The pre∣sent King of England, as before-mentioned, having some Notice of this Intreague, might by some means, they at St. Geramis suspected, have found out ways to get her off, which could not, they knew, be so easily done at the Cloyster. The Father in his Letter plain∣ly calls the pretended Price her Son, and sets forth what mighty Deeds he hopes to see accomplish'd by him; and surely, were he not her Son, why should such Care be taken to gratify her, in carrying her to St. Germaius to see him. The Latter is very plain and true. The next which was found in the Dutchess of Tyrcon∣nel's Trunk. is a Letter from the Marchioness of Powis, to the Dutchess of Tyrconnel in Ireland, Dated at Ger∣mains, Feb. 23. 1690. LETTER. V. Dear Madam, I Wish to shun this Talk, and be assured that nothing but the Queens indisputable Command could ex∣tort it from me, to tell you what Mrs. Greys folly had at last wrought that, both you and I know, tha all her Friends feared would in some measure happen to her. Indeed, my dearest Lady, it is unspeakable how many Fears and Frights she has by her continual Un∣easiness put the good Queen into, and that by reason she was not admitted continually to attend the Prince, which if't had heen allowed her, must have terminated in the overthrow of all the Queens Genius, and the Glo∣rious Design of our Holy Cause: And her strange Un∣easiness could not but give divers Thoughts to the Queen to the Quen and others; especially that unadvised Act of Stealing from the Convent, which savoured too much of a secret Corrospondence with the Rebellious Subjects, who saw too deeply into the Matter, when your Grace
came to London with her; And so miserably stuborn (if worse) was her Temper, that nothing but her Death could give Security of preventing the wretched Effects of her folly; and that she must now under∣o (I wish it might be order'd otherwise) but present it seems impossible; And there is so many Reasons for hastning of her Death, that fear it will not he delay∣ed. Let not then the News, dear Madam, surprize you, but the thoughts of so Glorious a Design supply the loss of one, I know you dearly loved: For who indeed nor themselves lay down a Thousand Lives for a Cause (if it were in their power) Let this then your Repose, that we cannot be Instruments of Gods Glory, and the Holy Churches Prosperity at too dear a . The good Queen is much diurb'd that, that things of necessity urg'd to such a period, and would do any∣thing (were it possible to divert it) The Prince is very ell, and Mrs. Grey is now in my Lodging; so that in a Days, your Grace shall know a final event. I am concern'd at the Fears you daily suffer, and hope will shortly avert them, that we may meet with Praise the Divine Bounty▪ and unspeakable Joy to each other. give my Service to your good Lord and Family; Madam, your most▪ humble Servant. Powis. foregoing is a plain Demonstration of Mrs. Mary being designedly to be put to Death, in order to any discovery she might make of the pretended of Wales, being her Son, of which the late Queen extreamly jealous, and that not without sufficient , as doth appear by Mr. Carol. the late Queens , by her Maiestyies Command, the said Letter was in the Lady Tyrconnels Trunk, and sent over to with the former, and being expos'd to several of Honour of Mr. Carols Acquaintance is judg'd of them to be write by his own hand; and that as found, in my Lady Tyrconnels Trunk, is sufficienly by several Witnesses that were at the opening same, it is dated at St. Germans, Feb: 24.
Observation V. The Dutches of Powis [the Queens chief Confident]: here excuses the Proceedings against Ms. Grey to the Dutchess of Tyrconnel; Tels her plainly the Queens Sentiments, and why Ms Grey must Die. This Dutchess speaks plainly, so I need observe no more but proceed to Letter VI. LETTER VI. May it Please Your Grace, I Am comanded by the Queen to inform you, that of Ne∣cessity Ms. Grey must be put to Death; for Reasons Your Grace has, I sppose, Receaved from the Dutchess of Powis, and Father Sabran: But however just, this may appear to Judicious Person:, it may possibly (Notwithstand∣ing all Endeavours used to the contrary) Mrs, Gry's Re∣lations, especially her Sister, whom the Queen supposes to be with your Grace; and at least she in the hight of passion should let slip out that, may do hurt; Her Majesty thinks it advisrble that your Grace should take a fit occasion to in∣form her first in the Cause, and then the absolute Necessity of her Death; and it's Her Majesty's pleasure, that no Incour∣agement should be wanting to her Sister, either in Ireland, or if you Judge conveniant to send her over to St: Germans As for other Relations in England, I have sent Instructions to pacifie them; And I have no more to add in this Matter, not doubting your Grace's Management in this as well as other weighty affairs, I am Madam, Your Grace's most Humbly Devoted Servant. W. Carrel. Observation VI. Mr. Secretary Carrol by the Queen's command, further shews the D. of Tyrconnel the necessity of Ms. Grey's Death, and greatly applauds the Act, which He says al Judicious Men must aprove just (but certainly He means no other for Judicious but those of St Germans Cabin Council) You see how careful He is by His Mistress's command to secure Ms. Grey's Sister, who no doubt, must hear of her Sisters death, and most certainly wuld be con∣cernd much at it. But here is nothing omitted to prevent a discovery of this horrid Deed, & it was wisely thought
on to get the Sister into France, where no doubt she would be soon made as silent as her deceas'd Sister. If the Gen∣tlemen or Ladies at St. Germains found her prating. The Dutchess of Tyrconnel, as well as others, has her part to Act, to the very end of the matter: And for Intrigues, sutely. Onr Roman Ladys surpass all others. After these Letters, which are a plain Demonstration that Ms Grey is the true Mother: I shal Lay before You a Letter which I receaved from Ireland, a short time af∣ter the Publishing my former Books, it was writ by joint Consent of Robert Fitz Gerald. Esq and Mr. Roger Hamil∣ton, both of Dublin, and Persons of Honourable Families, and of good Report, they being Gentlemen of consider∣able Fortunes. Their Letter is Dated at Dublin, Dec. 2' 1690. Mr. William Fuller. Sir, WE whose Names hereunto Subscribed, do joint∣ly assure You, That we are very sory we had not the Opportunity of knowing Your Design before. You Published Your Narrative, relating to Ms. Grey, the ustly supposed Mother of the sham Prince of Wales: But however, if You have Occasion to Publish any thing more on that Subject, we desire that these our joynt fol∣lowing Relation of her may be published also, we being Ready to confirm the same upon Oath in any of his Ma∣jestie's Courts of Judicature here, or before any Lawfull Magistrate, if cal'd thereunto, viz. This Mary Grey is the second Daughter of Mr. James rey, who lived at Kilkenny and left three other Children at his Decease, whih he had by his own Wife, and who surviv'd Him, and she being a Relation to the Earl of Tyrconnel, the said Widow with her two Daughters were much Favoured and succoured by the said Earl: And this Ms Grey, whom You mention, after her Mothers Decease (which was in the Year 1686) was wholy mantained, and that in much Splendor by the Earle of Tyrcoel, which gave a reasonable suspicion to us, and several others, that he had debaucb'd her. But a little time after she retir'd into the Nunnery, Which
we had in this City, as she pretended, not with a Design to e a proses'd Nun, but to take off the Cause of that Scandal which was spread Abroad concerning the Earle visiting her often privetly in her Lodgings, and to abate that Adversion which the Countess of Tyrconnel had been observ'd at that time to take against Mrs. Grey, to whom the said Countess before had alwise shew'd the greatest Kindness imaginable; And after her being in a Cloyster, to our most certain Knowledge: she was frequently visited by the Countess of Tyrconel and her Daughters, when they were in Dublin; and that Countess having been some time absent, at returne, came the very next day to see Trs Gray, and we whose Names are hereunto Sub∣scrib,d, having been formerly favour'd with her Com∣pany, as visiting our Wives frequently, did twice go to the Nunnery and saw her; And hearing in May 1688, that she was going from the Convent for England, we repaird thither, to wish her a good Voage; and our Wives doing the same, and they only being admitted, told us, that certainly Mrs Mary Gray was big with Child, and a going for England to ie in there: This gave us a Desire to take the Opportunity of seeing her as she went on Borad the Monmouth Yatch with the Countess, and with much difficulty we had the Oportunity not only of seeing her on Board the Yatch but leave again to wish her a good Voyag to England; and then we saw plainly she was big with Child, This is what we can freely depon upon Oath, and there is many more In this City, who know the same to be Truth. We have under written sen you our Wives Informations, according to their Knowledge; and hope this hidden Mystery will be plainly-made appear to the World. We are, Sir, your most Aumble Servants, Robert Fitz Gerald, Roger Hamilton. This Letter was brought to me from these Gentlemen, by John Smith, Gent, who lives in Chappel-Street in Dublin.
WE whose Names are hereunto Subscribe'd do de∣clare, and are ready to make Oth, that in May 1688, we visited Mrs. Mary Grey in the Nunnery, in this City of Dublin, and being private with lies (our most intimate Acquaintance) we disrn'd her to be with Child, which me franklie charg'd her with? Ʋpon which after some Tears let fall, she ingeniously owned to us that she was with Child by the Earle of Tyrconel, then Lord Deputie of Ireland, and that she was going over with his Countess, in order to Lie in at London, In Witness hereof, we have hereunto set our Hands this 13. of December, 1696 Mary Fitz Gerald Katharine Hamilton. All I shall say concerning these Assertions, is, that u-Enuiry, the Persons who, wrote them, are of unble∣mish'd Reputation, and so well known, that I cannot hear of any (tho' many persons of Quality and others, have seen the foregoing Letter) who can give the least Reason for Invalidating their Testimoney, which is also confirm'd by many more; so apparent is it, that the late Earl of Tyrconnel was the true Father of the pretend∣ed Prince of Wales. I have thus shew'd you part of the Letters I promised, and according as I have occasion, I shall publish the Re∣mainder, being a much greater Parcel: And these being sufficiently prov'd Authentick, will begin, if re∣quir'd, on the strictest Scrutiny imaginable; I am con∣tented to see if my Adversaries will give any Answer: which if they prove so candid as to do on plain honest Terms, I shall be oblig'd to them, and think it my hap∣piness, by publishing what remains, to put this Matter (if possible) out of Dispute. Therefore, I would humbly beg this favour of them to stick close the matter of Fact, otherwise I shall not concern my self to make a Reply. W. Fuller. FINIS.
