G1541 18425811 107603
THE Paedo-Baptists Apology FOR THE Baptized Churches, Shewing The invalidity of the strongest grounds for Infant Baptism out of the works of the learned assertors of that tenent. AND That the Baptism of Repentance for the re∣mission of sins is a duty incumbent upon all sinners who come orderly to the pro∣fession of Christianity. ALSO The Promise of the Spirit eing the substance of a Sermon on 1 Cor. 12. 1. To which is added A POST-SCRIPT. Out of the works of Dr. Jer. Taylor in defence of imposition of hands as a never failing Ministery. By Tho. Grantham. Mr. Perkins on Gal. 3. 27. Baptism alone is no mark of Gods Child, but Baptism joyned with Faith, for so must the text be consideres. All the Galations that be∣lieve are baptized into Christ. Printed in the Year. 1671.
To the Reader. Friend, I Have a few things to say before thou read this ensuing Apology, and first, The occasion of it is from the late unkind usages which the Baptized Churches have received from the Pae∣do-Baptists, by violently dispersing their Assemblies, by defacing and ta∣king away their meeting places, by imprisoning their persons, seizing and wasting their Estates, by injuring them in their Trade by means of excommu∣nications, by Writs de Capiendo and other penall proceedings both confi∣ning their Persons and exposing them to great inconveniencies. And all this only (as I conceive for their con∣scionable observance of the will of God in Preaching the Gospel to sinners r the obedience of faith, and for
adhearing to that form of Doctrine once deliered to the Saints Heb. 6. 1, 2. In which Doctine and suffer∣ings being through the mercy of God a pertaker with them, I thought I might lawsully write an Apology for them, or at least for the Truth pro∣fessed by them. And that I might the ore effectually do this I chose to speak o their adversries by the learned ens of their own Doctors. 2. My design in writing this Apo∣ogy, is to abate (if it may be) that great enmity which hath appeared ge∣nerally between the parties concerned; and more perticularly that spirit of op∣position and disrespct which too much appears in the more refined sort of the Paedo-Baptists, against such as la∣bor to reform (or rather to restore) the Doctrine of Baptism, to its first in∣tegrity and estimation among all that profess the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, under what Epethets or den¦minations soever. And me thinks th truth should prevail with all that do consider the authority and force there∣of to be such that men are constrained (as it were to speak for it though to the overthrow of their dearest errours, so that we may say their Rock is net as our Rock, our enemies being judges. 3. I have not injured the sense of my authours, and where I have added any thing for explycation of any word or passage, I have distingushed the same partly by a different Letter, and partly by this Character [] nor have I said much in the Apology, as indeed it was not necessary, considering the e∣vidence of the word of God for us, and the Record which our opposers do bear in favour of our Cause; and beside they that will may see what may be further said in the case depending, if they please to peruse the Learned works of
those of our way, viz. Denn his An∣swer to Dr. Featley, Tombs, his Antipaedo-Baptist, Fisher his Chri∣stianismus Redivvous, and many others. 4. The second part intitled Of the Promise of the Spirit, I though fit to be annexed, because Acts 2. 38, 39. such as are Baptized with the Baptism of Repentance for Remission of fins, have the promise of the Spirit made to them, which being sought for in the way ordained of God, shall be recei∣ved according to his will for he is faithfull that promised. Thy servant in Christ, Tho. Grantham,
THE Paedo Baptists Apologie FOR The Baptized Churches, &c. THere is no point of the Christi∣an Faith, of greater impor∣tance in order to the compo∣sure of Divisions among such as conscientiously profess the Name of Christ, then the Doctrine of holy Bap∣tisme, in the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins; for as many as have been Gal. 3. 27. Heb. 6. 2. Baptixed into Christ have put on Christ. And where this foundation truth hath been neglected or essentially corrupted, there hath ensued great disorder in Re∣ligion, because the being of the Church (as visible) is so concern'd therein, that there can be no orderly proceed∣ing
in any Church Act, nor participa∣tion in any Church Priviledge, where Sacred Baptisme is not Antecedent. And though Reformation (or rather the restoration) of this Truth be hard to accomplish, yet must we not be discouraged, but still pursue all law∣ful and probable wayes to effect it in this, as well as in other cases. And the way which I have chosen to help on this needful work at this time is to shew, that (notwithstanding the dis∣cord in point of practice, yet) there is a very great concord in doctrine, touching the main questions which concern this Heavenly Institution, be∣tween the Paedo-Baptists, and the Baptized Churces. The questions are these. 1. What are the Qualifications requi∣red of all such as are to be baptzed. 2. What is the aue Act or right Form to be observed and done in this solemn rite of Baptisme. Touching the first, the doctrine of the Baptized Churches is well known,
namely, That Repentance toward God, and Faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ are prerequisites to the baptisme of every sinner. And to this agrees the holy Scripture with full consent, aying, Repent and be bapti∣zed every one of you. Act. 2. 38. Mark 1. 5. Acts 8. 12, Acts 18, 8. They were all baptized confessing their sins. When they beleived Phi∣lip preaching the things concerning the Kingdome of God &c. They were baptized both men and women, many of the Corinthians hearing, believe'd and were baptised. And hence this holy Ordinance is well called the Laver of Regeneration; the Baptisme of repentance, foth rmision of sins. Now let us hear the doctrine of the Paedo-Baptists touching this question. 1. The Church of England both in her Articles and vulgar Catechism, de∣livers her mind clearly to this purpose, that such repentance whereby sin is for∣saken, and such Faith as by which the promises of God are stedfastly be∣leived,
is required of persons (mean∣ing all persons) which are to be bap∣tized, and that in Baptism Faith is con∣firmed &c. 2. M. Perkins) a Learned Son of he same Church) upon these words, each all Nations baptizeing them. saith, I explain the words thus▪ (mark, first of all it is said Teach them, that is make them my Disciples by calling them to believe, and to repent. Here we are to consider, the order which God observes in makeing with man the Covenant in Baptism, first of all he calls them by his word and com∣mands them to beleive and repent, then in the second place God makes his promise of mercy and forgiveness▪ and thirdly he feals his promise by Baptism—they that know not, nor consider this order which God used in Covenanting with them in Bap∣tim deal preprosterously, overslip∣ing the commandment of repenting and bleiving—this is the cause of of so much profaneness in the world—
we see what is done in Baptism, the Covenant of grace is solemniz'd be∣tween God and the Party baptized, and in this Covenant something▪ be∣longs to God, some to the Party baptized, the actions of the Party baptized is a certain stipulation, or obligation, whereby he bindeth himself to give homage to the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. This homage standeth IN FAITH, whereby all the promises of God are beleieved, and in OBEDIENCE to all his commandements. The sign of this obligation, is that the Party bapti∣zed WILLINGLY yeilds him∣self to be washed with water. 3. Diodate on the same Text, teaches that Baptism is a Sacrament of grace in remission and expiation of sins, and regeneration to a new life. And like∣wise for a token that they are bound on there side (meaning such as are baptized) to consecrate themseves to God, and to give themselves over to the conduct of  Spirit, and to
CONFESSE his name PER∣PETUALLY. [Thus these three witnesses do concurre with the truth and therein do hold a concord with the baptized Churches. And one would think there should now be no place for such a conceit, as that Infants are fit subjects for the sacred ordinance of baptism, because wholly uncapable of these qualifications. Now whereas di∣vr things are pretended as grounds for Infant Baptism, we shall briefly re∣count the particulars which are chiefly insisted on, and then show how the same are refelled or made void by some of the most learned Asserters of Paedo-baptism. The grounds pretend∣ed are these. 1. The Covenant which God made with Abraham and his seed, Gen. 17. who were to be circumcised (to wit the makes only) in their Infancy, this is thought to be a Type of baptism, and hence 'tis conceived that Infants ought o be baptized. 2. Christs permiing Infants to be
brought to him, as persons to whom the Kingdome belongs. 3. They being tainted with origi∣nal sin, must be cleansed from it, which is supposed to be done by baptism. 4. Because it is said except a man be born of water &c. he cannot enter in∣to the kingdome of God. John 3. 5. Because Infants do not ponere obi∣cem, and so are more fit for baptism then adult Persons, as 'tis thought. 6. Because without baptism Parents can not hope the salvation of dying In∣fants (as some think.) 7. The promise of the holy Ghost, Acts 2. 39, is thought to belong to In∣fants, and so they ought to be baptized because they are said to be holy. 8. Unless Infants be baptized 'tis thought God is worse to Infants in the Gospel, then in the Law. 9. Infants are a par of all Nations, and the command for baptizing is of extent to all Nations. 10. 'Tis thought the Apostles bap∣tized Infants because they baptized
whole housholds, and 'tis said, it hath descended to this very age as a Tradi∣tion Apostolical. To all which, Doct. Jer. Taylor (and others) in behalf of the baptized Churches, do give answer as followeth. That this is a goodly Harangue, which upon strict examination will come to nothing; that it pretends fair∣ly, and signifies little; that some of those allegations are false, some im∣pertinent, and all the rest insufficient. Libert. proph. p, 228. to pag. 246. For the argument from circumcision, is invalid (or of no wright) upon infinite considerations, figures and types prove nothing, un∣less a commandment go along with them, or some express o signifie such to be their purpose: for the deluge of waters and the ark of Noah were a figure of Baptism sid Per: and if therefore the Circumstances of one should be drawn to the other, we should make Baptism a Prodigie, ra∣ther
then a rite. The Pascal Lamb was a Type of the Eucharist which suc∣ceeds the other as Baptism doth Cir∣cumcision, but because there was in the manducation of the Pascal Lamb, no prescription of Sacramental drink, shall we thence conclude that the Eucharist is to be ministred but in one kind? and even in the very in∣stance of this argument suppsing a correspondence of analogie betwen Circumcision and Baptism, Which yet the Baptists do not grant. yet there is no correspon∣dence of Identity: for although it were granted that both of them did consign the Covenant of Faith, yet there is nothing in Circumstance of Childrens being Circumcised that so concerns that Mstery, but that it might very well be given to Children, and yet Baptism to men of reason; because Circumcision left a Character in the flesh, whih being imprinted upon Infants did its work to them
when they came to age, and such a Character was necessary, because there was no word added to the sign; but baptism imptints nothing that remains on the body, and if it leaves a Character at all it is upon the soul to which also the word is added, which is as much a part of the Sacra∣ment as the sign it self is It is a saying of Augustin, De trahe ver∣bum quid est aqua &c. Take away the word and what is wa∣ter, nothing but water joyn the word to the Ele∣ment and it is made a Sacra∣ment. This con∣sideration is very concluding a∣gainst Paedo Bap∣tism, for to the Infant, the word is as it were taken a∣way from the E∣lement, ad con∣squent y accor∣dirg to Aug. it can be no Sacra∣ment to them at all. for both wch reasons it is very re∣quisite that the Per∣sons baptized should be capable of rea∣son, that they may be capable of both the word of the Sacrament and th impress made upon the Spirit. Since therefore the reason of this paity does wholly fail, there is nothing left to in∣fer a necessity, of complying in this
circumstance of age, any more then in the other anexes of the Type: and the case is clear in the Bishops question to Cpiu, for why should not Infants be baptized just up∣on the eight day as well as Circumcised, if the corres∣pondence of the rites be an argu∣ment to infer one circumstance which is impertninent and accidental to the misteriousness of the rite, why should it not infer all [especially such a material thing as the time of bap∣tism, for if the eight day be not de∣termined, no man is able to assign the day of baptism, which being delayed till the tenth or twentieth day, may by the same reason be deferred till the Child have passed through its in∣fancy, and become capable of eu∣dition] and then also females must not be baptized because they were
not circumcized, but it were more proper, if we would understand it a∣right, to prosecute the analogie of the type to the antitipe by way of letter and spirit, and signification, and as circumcision signifies baptism so also the adjuncts of circumcision shall sig∣nifie something spiritual in the ad∣herences of baptism. And therefore as Infants were circumcised, so spiri∣tul Infants shall be baptized, which (according to some) is spiritual cir∣cumcision [which yet is better ex∣pounded by St. Paul. Phil. 3. Where he makes the spiritual circumcision to be the mind and spirit renewed, and the putting of the body of the sins of the flesh] for therefore babes had the ministery of the type to signifie that we must when we give our names to Christ, become  Children in malice, [for unless you become like one of these little ones you cannot enter into the Kingdome of Heaven] said our blessed Saviour, and then the ye is made
compleat, and this seems to have been the sence of the pimative Church, for in the ages next to the Apostles, they gave to all baptized persons mik and hony to represent to them their duty, that though in age and understanding they were men, yet they were babes in Christ, and Child∣ren in malice. But to infer the sence of the Paedo Baptists, is so weak a manner of arguing, that Augustin whose device it was (and men use to be in love with their own fancies) at the most pretended it but as probable [Lo here the newness of the argument, from Infant circumcision, to Infant baptism. [As for the Catho∣licks they hold it an Ex manu con∣trov under the probation of di∣vers of their Doctors, Profes∣sors and Stu∣dents in Theolo∣gy. p. 372. to 377. absurd thing to ar∣gue as the Protestants do, from the Cove∣nant made with A∣braham and his seed, Gen 17. 7. Thus they speak. That promse concerns literally pecu∣culiar
proction, and orldly felicity, not the remission of sins and everlasting Life, neither can we be sons of Abraham by carnal generation, or by our carnal Pa∣rens (we are not Jews but Gentiles) but only by spiritual generation (to wit Bap∣tism) by which we are born to God, and made the brothers of Chrt the Sons of Abraham, thse (saith St. Paul) are the sons of Abraham, not who are the Sons of the flesh but of Faith Rom. 4. 12. 13. Again they deride the Argument drawn S. N. Antid. from Infants being circumcised in order to their being baptized, calling it a cunning argument by which it will follow that Females are not to be baptized, &c.] And as ill success will they have with the other Arguments as with this for from the action of Christs bles∣sing Infants to inser that they are to be baptize, proves nothing so much as that there is a great want of better arguments,
The Conclusion would be with more probability derived thus; Christ blessed Children and so dismissed them, but baptized them not, there∣fore Infants are not to be baptized, but let this be as weak as it's enemy, yet that Christ did not baptize them, is an argument sufficient that Christ hath other wayes of bringing them to Heaven. He passed his act of Grace upon them by bene∣diction and imposition of hands. And therefore though neither In∣fants nor any man in puris naturalibus can attain to a supernatural end without the addition of some instru∣ment or means of Gods appointing ordinarily, yet where God hath not appointed a rule nor an order, as in the case of Infants, we contend he hath not, this argument is invalid▪ And as we are sure that God hath not commanded Infants t be bap∣tised, so we are sue God will do them no injustice, nor damn them for what they cannot help.
And therefore let them be pressed with all the inconveniences which ae consequent to Original sin, yet either it will not be laid to their charge, so as to be sussicient to condemn them; or if it could, yet the mercy and ab∣solute goodness of God will secure them, if he take them away before they can glorifie him by a free obe∣dience. Quid ergo fostivat innoceus alis ad remissionem pccatorum? Was the question of Tertullian (lib. de bapt.) he knew no such danger from their Original guilt, as to drive them to a laver of which in that age of in∣nocence they had no need, as he con∣ceived▪ and therefore there is no ne∣cessity of flying to the help of others, for tongue, and heart, and faith, & pre∣dispositions to baptism; for what need all this stir? as Infants without their own consent, without any act of their own. And without any exteriour so∣lemnity, contracted the guilt of A∣dams sin, and are lyable to all the punishment which can with Justice
descend upon his posterity who are personally innocent; so Infants shall be restored without any solem∣nity or act of their own, or any o∣ther for them, by the second Adam by the redemption of Jesus Christ by his righteousness and mercies, apply∣ed either immediately, or how, or when he pleases to appoint [and to this agrees that saying of the Apostle as in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive; and as by the disobedience of one many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous] And so Austins argument will come to nothing without a∣ny need of God-fathers, or the faith of any body else. And it is too nar∣row a conception of God Almighty, because he hath tyed us to the obser∣vation of Ceremonies of his own in∣stitution, that therefoe he hath tyed himself to it. Many thousand ways there are by which God can bring a∣ny reasonable soul to himself: but nothing is more unreasonable, then
because he hath tyed all men of years, and discretion to this way, therefore we of our own heads shall carry In∣fants to him that way without his di∣rection: the conceit is poor and low, and the action consequent to it, is too bold and ventrous, mysterium meum mihi & filiis domus meae. Let him do what he please to Infants we must not. Only this is certain, that God hath as great care of Infants as of others, and because they have no capacity of doing such acts, as may be in order to acquiring salvation, God will by his own immediate mercy bring them thither, where he hath intended them; but to say that therefore he will do it by an external act and ministry, and that confin'd to a particular, viz. This rite & no other, is no good argument unless God could not do it without such means, or that he had said he would not: and why cannot God as well do his mercies to Infants now immedi∣ately, as he did before the Institution
either of Circumcision or Baptism? [his query is worthy of serious con∣sideration] however there is no dan∣ger that Infants should perish for want of this external Ministry, much less for prevaricating Christs pre∣cept, nisi quis renatus fuerit &c. For first the water and spirit in this place [according to some learnéd expositers] signifie the same thing: and by water is ment the ffct of the spirit clen∣sing and purifying the soul, as ap∣pears in its parralel place of Christs baptizing with the holy Ghost and Fire—(but to let pass this advan∣tage and to suppose it to be ment of external Baptism [as that is the most likely sense] yet this no more infers a necessity of Infants Baptism, then the other words of Christ infer a necessity to give them the holy Communion, nisi comediritis carnem filii hominis, & brbe∣ritis sanguinem non introibitis in regnum aelorum; and yet we do not think these words sufficient Argument to communicate them; if men there∣fore
will do us justice, either let them give both Sacraments to Infants as some Ages of the Church did, or neither, for the wit of man is not able to shew a desparity in the sanction, or in the evergie of its ex∣pression; and therefore they were honest, that understood the obligati∣on to be parralel, and performed it accordingly, and yet because we say they were deceived in one instance, and yet the obligation (all the world cannot reasonably say but) is the same: they are as honest and as rea∣sonable that do neither. And since the antient-Church did with an e∣qual opinion of necessity give them Communion, and yet men now adays do not, why shall men be mor burthened with a prejudice and nam of obloquy for not giving the Infant one Sacrament, more then they ar disliked for not affording them the other. If Anabaptist shall be  name of disgrace, why shall not som other name be invented for them
that deny to communicate Infants, which shall be equally disgraceful, or else both the Opinions signifyed by such names, be accounted no dispa∣ragement, but receive their estimate according to their truth? Of which truth since we are now taking account from pretences of Scripture, it is considerable the dis∣course of St. Peter which is pretend∣ed for the intitleing Infants to the promise of the holy Ghost, and by consequence to Baptism, which is sup∣posed to be its instrument of convey∣ance, 'tis wholly a fancy, and hath nothing in it of certainty or demon∣stration and not much probability. For besides that the thing it self is unreasonable and the holy Ghost works by the heighting and improve∣ing our natural faculties, and there∣fore is a promise that so concerns them, as they are reasonable Creatures, and may have a tittle to it, in proportion to their nature, but no possession or reception of it, till
their faculties come into act, besides this, I say, the words mentioned in S. P∣trs rmon (which are the only record of the promise are interpreted upon a wa mistake; the promise belongs to you and to your Children there∣fore Infants are actually receptive o it in that capacity, that's the argu¦ment: but the reason of it is not yet discovered nor never will [For indeed it is without reason] To you and your Children, is you and your po∣sterity, to you and your children when they are of the same capacity in which you are effectually receptive o the promise. [Beside the promise of the Spirit in this place is refer'd to the gift of the holy Ghost, an is therefore made t those who had alread Se Diod te. in act 2. received it in the quic¦ning, or illuminating opperation of it, an is the potion of beleivers as such, and i consequent to baptism. Acts 2 38, 39▪ and is therefore wrongfully made an ar¦gument for the baptizing of Infants, wh
(what ever they may have of the gaces of the spirit a thing who∣ly unknown that they have any such receit of the Spirit. yet) have neither need of, nor any capacity to use the gifts of the spirit and there∣fore evident it is that this promise of the Spi∣rit belongs not to Infants at all] And for the Allegation of St. Paul, that Infants are holy if their Parents be faithful, it signifie nothing, bu that they are holy by designation,—[or according to Eras∣mus they (to wit In∣fants Eras. parrap. n 1 Cor. 7. born of such Pa∣rents as the oe being a Christian the other not) are holy leg∣ately; for the conversion of either wife or sband dth not dissove the marriage which was made when both were in ub∣eif. And however it is true, that Au∣tin was a great sticker for Paedo-Bap∣ism, yet he denys that any such thing can e deduced from the text in hand, his words re these. lib. 3 De pec. mer. remi.
It is to be held without doubling, whatsoever that sanctification was, it was not of power to make Christians and remit sins. He might well say so considering that the holiness of the child is derived from the sanctity of the unbeleiver, as the word else being right∣ly refer'd doth evince, 1 Co. 7. 14.] And as the promiss appertains not (for ought appears) to Infants in that capacity and consistance,—yet Bap∣tism is not the means of conveying the holy Ghost, for that which Peter sayes be baeptized and ye shall receive the holy Ghost, signifies no more then this; first be baptized and then by impo∣sition of the Apostles hands, (which was another mistery and rite)  shall receive the promiss of the Fa∣ther and this is nothing but an infinu¦ation of the rite of Confirmation, a to this sense expounded by diver antient Authors; and in ordinary Mi∣nistry, the effect of it is not bestowed upon any unbaptized persons, for it is in order next after baptism: and upon this ground Peters argument in the case
of Cornelius was concluding enough, a mojori ad minus, thus the holy Ghost was bestowed upon him and his Fa∣mily, which gift by ordinary ministry was consequent to baptism, not as the effect is to the cause, or to the proper instrument, but as a consequent is to an antecedent, in a chain of cu∣ses accidentally, and by positive insti∣tution depending upon each oher) God by that miracle did give Testi∣mony that the persons of the men were in geat dispositions towards Heaven, and therefore were to be admitted to these rites which are the ordinary inlets into the kingdome of Heaven. But then from hence to ar∣gue that where ever there is a capaci∣ty of receiving the same grace, there also the same sign is to be administred, and from ence to infer Paedo-Bap∣tism, is an argument very fallatious upon several grounds; first because Baptism is not the sign of the holy Ghost, but by another mistery it was conveyed ordinarily, and extraordi∣narily,
it was convey'd indepen∣dently from any mistery, and so the argument goes upon a wrong suppo∣sition. 2. If the supposition were true, yet the proposition built upon it is false, for they that are capable of the same grace, are not alwayes ca∣pable of the same sign, for women under the law of Moses although they were capable of the righteousness of Faith, yet they were not capable of the sign of Circumcision, for God does not alwayes convey his graces in the same manner, but to some me∣diately, to some immediately; and there is no better intance in the the World of it, then the gift of the holy Ghost (which is the thing now instanc'd in, in this contstation.) And after all this least these argu∣ments should not ascertain their cause, they fall on complaining against God, and will not be content with God, unless they may baptize their children but take exceptions that Gd did more for the children of the Jews, But why so? because God made a Co∣venant
with their children actually as Infants, and concin'd it by circum∣cision: well so he did with our child∣ren too in their proportion. He made a Convenant of spiritual promises on his part, and spiritual and real services on ours; and this pertins to children when capable, but made with them as soon as they are alive, and yet not so as with the Jews bbes, for as they rite consign'd them actually, so it was a national and temporal blessing and covenant, and a separation of them from the portion of the Nations, a markng them for a peculiar people, and therefore while they were in the Wilderness and seprate from the commixture of all people they were not at all cicumcised but as that rie did seal the righteousness of Faith, [Which wheher it did any such thing to an sve to braham only n mch doubt∣en] so by vertue of i's , and remanemy in their flsh, it did that work when the  came to age, But in Christian Infants te
case is otherwise, for the new Cove∣nant being estabished upon better promises, is not only to beter purpo∣ses, but also in a distinct manner to be understood, when their spirits are as receptive of a spiriual act or impress as the bodies of jewish children were of the sign of circumcision then it is to be consign'd; but the business is quickly at an end by saying that God hath done no less for ours, then for their children, for he will do the mer∣cies of a Father and Creator to them, and he did no more to the other, but he hath done more to ours, for he hath made a Covenant with them and built it upon promises of the great∣est concernment.—[And note further we have as much ground of comfort concerning our dying Infants, as the faith∣ful had for the first two thousand years, du∣ring all which time, the Covenant of grace reached to Infants, though there was no ex∣ternal ceremony to consign it to Infants.] —For the insinuation of the pre∣cept of Baptizing all Nation, of which
children are a part, does as little ad∣vantage as any of the rest, because o∣ther parallel expressions of the Scri∣ture do determine and expound them∣selves to a sence that includes not all persons absolutely, but of a capa∣ble condition as adoate um omnes gen∣tes, & persallirae Deo omnes Nationes ter∣ra. [And Nation shall rise against Nation, where Infants are excluded] and divers more. [But Erasmus hath well expounded this text, where he restrains Eraz. par. on Math. 28. the baptizing to such as are repentant of their former life. As for the Conjecture concerning the Family of Stephans, at the best it is but a conjecture, and besides that it is not prov'd that there were child∣ren in the Family; yet if that were granted it follows not that they were baptized, because by [whole Fami∣lies] in Scripture is ment all Persons of reason and age within the Familie, for it is said of the Ruler at Caper∣naum,
that he beleived ad all his house. Now you may also suppose that in his house were little babes, that is like enough, and you may suppose that they did beleive too, before they could understand, but that's not so likely; and then the argument from baptizing Stephen's Family may be allowed just as probable: but this is unmanlike to build upon such slight and airy conjectures. But tradition by all means must supply the place of Scripture, and there is pretended a Tradition aposto∣lical that Infants were baptized: but at this we are not much moved, for we who rely upon the written word of God, as sufficient to establish all true Religion, do not value the alle∣gations of Traditions; and however the World goes none of the reformed Churches can pretend this argument against this opinion, because they who reject Tadition when 'tis against them, must not preend it at al for them. But if we should allow the
Topick to be good, yet how will it be verified? for so far as it can yet ap∣pear, it relies wholly upon the Testi∣mony of Origen, for from him Austin had it. Now a Tradition apostolical if it be not consign'd with a fuller testimony then of one person, whom all after ages have condemn'd of ma∣ny errours, will obtain so little repu∣tation among those that knw that thing, have upon greater authority pretended to derive from the A∣postles, and yet fsly, that it will be a great argument that he is credulous and weak, that shall be deermined by so weak probation, in matters of so great concernment. And the truth of the business is, as there was no com∣mand of Scripture to obliedge child∣ren to the susception of it, so necessi∣ty of aeo-baptism was not determi∣ned in the Church till the eight age after Christ, but in the year 418. in the Mileritan coucel (a principal of Arca, there was a Cannon made for Paedo Bapt▪ never till then, I grant
it was practised in Africa before that time, and they or some of them thought well of it, and though that be no Argument for us to think so, yet none of them did ever before, pretend it to be necessary, none to have been a precept of the Gospel, St. Austin was the first that ever preach'd it to be absoutely necessa∣ry, and it was in his heat and anger against Pelagus who had warm'd and chafed him so in that question; that it made him innovate in other doctrines, possibly of greater con∣cernment then ths, And that although this was practic'd antiently in Africa yet that it was without an opinion of necessity, and not often there, nor at all in other places, we have the testimony of a learn∣ed Paedo Baptist Lu∣dovicus Ludovicus Vives. Vives who in his annotations upon Augustin De Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 27. afirms. Neminem nisi adultum antiquitus solre baptizari. [And be∣cause
ths Testimony is of great import I will set down the very words of Augu∣stine and Ludovicus Vives, as I find them in the English Edition of the said book of the City of God, cap. 26. Where Au∣gustine puts forth this question. What is the reason then that we do spend so much time in our exhortations, endeavouring to annimate thse whom we have baptzed, eiher unto Virginity, or cst widdow-ood or honest and honourable marriage; Now upon these words [hose whom we have baptizd] Vives comments tus, Least any man should mistake this place, un∣derstand tha in times of old, no man was brought unto baptism, but he was of sffi∣cient years, to know what that mistical water meant, and to require his baptism, and that sundry times.—I hear that in some Cityes of Italy they do for the most part observe the antient Custome as yet. And it is to be observed that in the Margent are two Notes, the 1. is that this is the old manner of baptizing. The 2, That all this is left out in the Paris E∣dition, whence we may note how the
writings of the Antients are abused, and how ingeniously it is confessed, Paedo-Baptism is not the old manner of baptizing. And here we will insert some other testimonies from the learned Paedo-Baptists, touching the Novelty of In∣fant baptism. The first is out of Robertus Fa∣bianus his Chron. 4. Fabian. part in fol. 107. where he brings in Augustine the Monk speaking thus to the Brittain Bishops▪ Since ye will not assent to my Hsts generally assent ye to me specially in three things, the first is that ye keep Easter-day in due form and time as it is ordained The second, THAT YE GIVE CHRISENDOM TO CHILDREN, &c. But THEY WOULD NOT THEREOF. This was about the fifth Age after Christ whence its re∣markable that Infant bapism was then opposed by he joynt consent of the Britan Bishps which were sent to the Assembly to consul the affairs of Re∣ligion
at that time. Our next testimony is from the Learned Casuist Hugo Grotius Hugo Grotius who tells us, To defer baptism till ripe years was in old time left at liberty, now the observation is otherwise. Plainly giving the case that Paedo-bap∣tism is not the old way but a new ob∣servation. But here we will again give place to Doctor Taylor, who saith. That besides that the tradition cannot be proved to be Apostolical, we have very good evidence from antiquity that it was the opinion of the primitive Church that IN∣FANS OUGH NOT TO BE Anno 315. BAPTIZED. And this is clear in the Con Necaes. sixh Cannon of the Cunsel of Neaesarea. The words  have this sence. A woman  may
be baptized when she please; for her bap∣tism concerns not the Child. The rea∣son of the connection of the parts of that Cannon is in the following words. Because every one in that confession is to give a demonstration of his own choice and election, meaning plainly, that if the baptism of the mother did pass upon the Child, it were not fit for a preg∣nant woman to receive baptism, be∣cause in that Sacrament, there being a confession of faith which confession supposes understanding, and free choyce, it is not reasonable the child should be consign'd with such a mistery, since it cannot do any act of choice or understanding. The Can∣non speaks reason, and it intimates a practice which was absolutely uni∣versal in the Church of interrogating the catechumens concerning the Ar∣ticles of the Creed, which is one ar∣gument that either they did not ad∣mit Infants to baptism, or that they did prevaricate egregiously, in ask∣ing questions of them, who them∣selves
knew were not capable of gi∣ving answer. and to supply their incapacity by the answer of a Godfather, is but the same unreasonableness acted with a worse circumstance; and there is no sen∣sible Tertul. lib. de Bap. cap. 18. account can be given of it, for that which some imper∣fectly murmure concerning stipula∣tions civil performed by tutors in the name of their pupils is an absolute vanity; for what if by positive consti∣tutions of the Romanes such solem∣nities of Law are required in all sti∣pulations, and by indulgence are permitted in the case of a notable be∣nefit acruing to Minors. Must God be tyed, and Christian Religion tran∣sact her misteries by proportion and complyance with the Law of the Ro∣manes? I know God might if he would have appointed Godfathers to give answer in behalf of Children, and to be Fde-jussors for them, but we can∣not
find any authority o ground that he hath and if he had then it is to be supposed he would have given them comission to have transacted the solemnity with better circumstaces, and given answers with more truth▪ and if the Godfathers answer in the Name of the Child [I do believe] it is notorious they speak false and ridi∣culously: for the Infant is not cap∣ble of beieving, and if he were, he were a so capable of dissenting, and how then do they know Tertull. lib. de baptis. cap. 18. his mind And there∣fore Tertullian gives advice that the bapism of Infants  be deferred till they could  an account of their faith, and the same also is the counsel of . to quest. in . Baptis∣ma. Gregory bishop of Nazia∣zum, although he allows them to hasten it in case of necessity, for though his reason taught him what
was fit, [Namely that none should b baptized till they were of understanding yet he was overborn with the practi and opinion of his Age which began to bear too violently upon him, and yet in another place he makes menti¦on of some to whom baptism was not administred  by reason of infancy. To which if we add that the Parents of St. Austin, St. Jerome, and St. Am∣brose, although they were Christian, yet did not baptize their Children be∣fore they were thirty years of age it will be very considerable in the ex∣ample, and of great efficacy for de∣stroing the supposed necessity or derivation from the Apostles [and for further evidence we may well alledge in this place, that of Theodosius the Emperor born in Spain his Parents being both Christians, and he from his youth educated in th Christian Faith, who falling sick at Thessonica, was baptized and recovered of his sickness.
but however (Paedo baptism) it is against the perpetual analog of Christs Doctrine to baptize Infants, for besides that Christ never gave any precept to bapize them, nor never himself nor his Apostles (that appears) did baptize any of them, all that either he or his Apostles said concerning baptism, requires such pretious dis∣positions to it, of which Infants are not capable, and these are faith and repentance, and not to instance in those innumerable places that require faith before baptism, there needs no more but this one saying, he that be∣lieveth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned. Plainly thus, faih Mark 6. and baptism in con∣junction Perseverence in Faith must here be understood, with the Fruits of Faith aso. will bring a Man to Heaven, but if he have not faith baptism shall do him no good. So that if baptism be necessary, then so
is faith, and much more; for want of Faith damns absolutely, it is not said so of the want of baptism. Now if this decretory sence be to be understood of persons of age, and if Children by such an answer (which indeed is reasonable enough) be ex∣cused from the necessity of Faith, the want of which regularly does damn, then it is sottish to say the same inca∣pacity of reason and Faith, shall not xcuse them from the actual suscepti∣on of baptism which as less necessa∣ry, and to which faith and many other acts are necessary predispositions when it is reasonably and humanely eceived. The conclusion is that bap∣sm is also to be defer'd till the time of aith, and whether Infants have faith or no, is a question to be disputed by ersons that care not how much they ▪ nor how little they prove. 1. Personal and actual faith they have none, for they have no acts of nderstanding, and besides how can ny man understand that they have,
since he never saw any sign of i neither was he told so by any o that could tell. 2. Some sy they have imputativ Faith, but then so let the Scramen be too, that is, if they have the Parent faith or the Churches, then so le baptism be imputed by derivatio from them also.—For since faith  necessary to the susception of baptis (and they themselves confess it b striving to find out new kinds of fait to daub the matter up) such as th faith is, such must be the Sacramen for there is no proportion betwee an actual Sacramen, and an imputa¦tive faith, this being in immedia and necessary order to that, an whatsoever can be said to take o from the necessiy of actual Faith, a that and much more may be said t excuse from the actual usception  baptism. 3. The first of these devices wa that of Luther and his Schol ar
the 2 of Calvin and his; And yet there is a third device which the Church of Rome teaches, and that is, that Infants have habitual faith, but who told them so? how can they prove it? what Revelaion, or reason teaches such a thing? Are they by this habit so much as disposed to an actual belief without a new Master? an an Infant sent into a Mahumetan Province be more confident for Christianity when he comes to be a, Man, then if he had not been bapti∣zed, are there any acts precedent Concomitant, or consequent to this pretended habit? this strange inven∣tion, is absolutely without Art, with∣out Scripture, Reason or Authority. But if there were such a thing as this abitual Faith, then either all Infants have  or some only if all why do they deny bap∣sm to the Infants which are horn of unbe∣evers? must the child bear the unbelief of  Parents? For they do t only deny such Infants the Act, but the ight to baptism because the children of nbelievers. if sme
only have it, how know they these from  rest, sith when they come to years, there found a like barrenness of this grace  means be used to beget it? but third where doth the Scripture make an habit Faith that which intitles any person to ba¦tism? Surely according to these conc no man can ever tell to whom, or when  dispence baptism.] But the men are  be excused unless there were bett grounds; but for all these stratage the Argument now alleadged agai Infant baptism is demonstrable a unanswerable. To which also this considerati may be added, that if baptism be ¦cessary to the Salvation of Infant upon whom is the imposition lai To whom is the command give To Parents or to the Children, not  the Children, for they are not cap¦ble of a Law; not to the parents,  then God hath put the salvation  innocent babe into the power of ¦thers, and Infants may then be damn for their Parents carelessness or m¦lice.
It follows that it is not necessa∣ry at all to be done to them, to whom it cannot be prescribed by a Law, and in whose behalf it cannot be rea∣sonably intrusted to others with the appendant necessity, and if it be not necessary, it is certain it is not reaso∣nable, and most certain it is no where in terms prescribed, and therefore it is to be presumed, that it ought to be understood and administred accor∣ding as other precepts are with refe∣rence to the capacity of the sub∣ject, and the reasonableness of the thing. For I consider that the baptizing of Infants does rush upon such in∣conveniences, which in other questions we avoid like Rocks which will appear if we discourse thus. Either baptism produces spiritual effects, or it produces them not: If it produces not any, why is such con∣tention about it?—But if (as with∣out all peradventure all the Paedo-bap∣tists will say) Baptism does a work
upon the soul, producing spiritual be¦nefits and advantages; These advan¦tages are produced by the externa work of the Sacrament alone, or b that as it is helped by the co-opera¦tion and predispositions of the susci¦pien. If by the external work of th Sacrament alone, how does this diffe from the opus oeratum of the Papist save that it is worse? For they sa the Sacrament does not produce in effect, but in a suscipient disposed b all requisites and due preparatives  piety, faith, and repentance, thoug in a subject so disposed they say th Sacrament by its own vertue does i but this opinion says it does it of  self without the help, or so much  the coexistence of any condition bu meer reception. But if the Sacrament does not d its work alone, but per modum recipi¦enes according to the predispofition of the suscipient, then because Infant can neither hinder it, nor do an
thing to further it, it does them no benesit at all. And if any man runs for succor to that, exploded  that Infants have faith or any other inspired habit of I know not what how, we desire no more advantage in the world then that they are con∣straind to an answer without Rev∣lation, against reason, common sence and all experience in the world. The sum of the argument in short, is this though under another repe∣sentment. Either baptism is a meer Ceremony or it imploys a duty on our part, if it be a Ceremony only, how does it sanctifie us or make the comers thereunto perect? If it imploy a duty on our part how then can Children receive it who cannot do duty at all. And indeed this way of Ministrati∣on makes baptism to be wholly an outward duty, a work of the Law, a carnal ordinance it makes us adheare to the Letter, without regard of the spirit, to be satissied with the shadows,
to return to bondage. To relin∣quish the misteriousnes, the substanc and spirituallity of the Gospel, which argument is of so much the more con∣sequence, because under the spiritual Covenant, or the Gospel of grace,  the mistery goes not before the Sym∣bol (which it does when the Symbol are seales and consignations of th grace, as it is said the Sacraments are) yet it always accompanies it, bu never follows in order of time, an this is clear in the perpetual analogy of holy Scripture. For Baptisme is never propound∣ed mentioned or enjoyned as a mean of remission of sins, or of eternal life, but something of duty choice or sanctity is joyned with it, in orde production of the end so mentione kow you not that s many as are Baptis ino hrst Jesus an Baptised into his death? There i the mistery and the Symbol to¦gether and declared to be perpetu¦ally
united . All of us who were Baptised into one▪ were Baptised into the other, not only in the name of Christ, but into his death also; but the mean∣ing of this, as it is explained in the following words of St. Paul, makes much for our purpose: for to be baptised into his death, signifies, to Verse. 4. be buried with him in baptisme, that as Christ rose from the dead; we also should walk in newness of life, That's the full mistery of Bap∣tisme; for being baptised into his death, or which is all one in the next words  in∣to the likeness of his death, cannot go alone; if we be so planted into Christ we shall be pertakers of his re∣surrection, and that is not here instan∣ced in precise reward but in exact duty for all this is nothing but Cru∣c fiction of the old man, a destroying the body of sin, that we no longer serve sin.
This indeed is truly to be bapti∣zed both in the Symbol and the Mistery what is less then this, is but the Symbol only, a meer Ceremony, an opus operatum, a dead Letter, an empty shadow, an instrument, with∣out an agent to manage; or force to actuate it. Plainer yet whosoever are baptized into Christ have put on Christ, have put on the new Man. But to put on the new Man, is to be formed in Righteous∣ness, holiness, and truth. This whole argument is the very words of St. Paul. The major proposition is dog∣matically determined, Gal. 3. 27. The minor in Ephes. 4. 24. The con∣clusion then is obvious. That they who are not formed a new in Righte∣ousness, holyness and truth, they who remaining in the present in inca∣pacities, cannot walk in newness of life, they have not been baptized in∣to Christ, and then they have but one member of the distinction used by St. Peter, they have
that baptism which is a put∣ting away the fith of the flesh [if yet an human institute may be so called] but they have not that bap∣tism which is the answer of a good Conscience towards God, which is the only baptism which saveth us, and this is the case of Children and then the case is thus. As Infants by the force of nature cannot put themselves into a super∣naturall condition (and therefore say the Paedo baptists they need baptism to put them into it [as if the re eeony of which only they are capa'le could put them into a supernaturall coni∣tion] so if they be baptized before the use of reason, before the works of the Spirit, before the op∣perations of grace, before they can throw of the works of darknes, and live in rihteousness ond newness of life, they are never the nearer; from the pains of Hell they shall be saved by the mercy of God and their o
innocence though they dye in puris naturalibus, and baptism will carry them no further for that baptism that saves us, is not the only washing with water, of which only Infant are capable, but the answer of a good Conscience towards God, of which they are not capable till the use o reason, till they know to chuse the good and refuse the evill. And from thence I consider a new that all vows made by persons unde others names stipulations made b minors▪ are not valid till they by  supervening act, after they are of suf¦ficient age do ratifie the same, wh then may not Infants as well mak the vow de novo as de novo ratifie th which was made for them ab antiqu when they come to years of choyce▪ If the Infant vow be invalid till th manly confirmation, why were it  as good they staid to make it till th time, before which if they do ma it, it is to no purpose, this would  considered.
And in conclusion our way is the surer way, for not to baptise Chil∣dren till they can give an account of their faith is the most proportion∣able to an act of reason and humanity, and it can have no danger in it: for to say that Infants may be damn'd for want of baptism (a thing which is not in their power to acquire they being yet persons not capable of a Law) is to afirm that of God which we dare not say of any wise and good man. Certainly it is very much derogatory to Gods justie and a plain defiance to the infinite reputation of his goodness. And therefore who ever will pertinatiously persist in this opinion of the paedo-baptists, and practise it accordingly they polute the blood of the everlasting Testament. They dishonor and make a pageantry of the Sacrament. They Ineffectually represent a sepulture into the death of Christ, and please themselves in a sign without effect, making baptism
like the Figtree full-of Leaves but no fruit, &c. Thus far the Anabaptists may argue, and men have disputed against them with so much weakness and conf¦dence, that they have been eucou∣raged in their error [alias in th truth] more by accidentiall [alia real] advantages we have given them by our weak arguings, then by any truth of their cause or excellency o of their wit [so the Dr. is pleased t say but the evidences of our side spak otherwise] but the use I make of it as to our ppesent question (saith the Dr.) is this, that since there is no direct impiety in the opinion no any that is apparently consequent to it, and they which so much po∣babillity, do or may pretend to true perswasion they are with all means, Christian, fair, and human, to b redargued, or instructed, but if they cannot be perswaded they must be left to God, who knows every de∣gree of every mans understanding,
all his weaknesses and strength's what impress each argument makes upon his spirit. and how unresist∣able every reason is, and he alone judges his inocecy and sincerity: And for the question, I think there is so much to be petended [he might say really urged] against that which I believe to be truth that there is much more truth then evidence on our side [a strange saying of so wie a man as if the truth in this case doth not whlly de∣pend upon evidence, sith its a positive and no morall precept] and therefore we may be confident as for our own particulars but not too forward premtorily to prescribe to others muchless damn, or kill or to perse∣cute them that only in this particular disagree. Thus far Doctor Taylor, for our appollogie. To whom to add any more wit∣nesses (though more might be brought) would be superfluous. I therefore proceed to the next ques∣tion, viz.
What is the due act, or outward form to be used in this sollemn rite of holy baptism? It may well be the admiration of every wise and good man how it should come into the mind of such as pretend to be followers of Christ that holy baptism should be performed by aspertion, or casting a few drops of Water upon the subject, by the fingers of the administrator. The scriptures every where teaching us that the origi∣nall form was by imversion in Ri∣vers or places of much Water, Ma. 1. John. 3. Christ himsef who surely would do nothing superfluous or in vain, was baptized in the River, by John the first baptist, who had his di∣rection from Heaven, and his appro∣bation from on high in that very action Mall. 3. and chuss who were under the immediate direction of the holy spirit the leader into all truth, found it necessary for the administrator and subject to go both into the Water, for the due performance of this holy Or∣dinance.
Add thereunto that the pro∣per signification of the word  when used to express the action done in this service, is to dip or immrge the party in the Element as is confessed by the learned Paedo-baptists them∣seves as we shall see in the sequel. And here we will still prefer the Church Litturgy. of England who teach∣eth us that the outward Sign or Form in baptism, is Water wherein the party baptized is dipped, &c. And though she add [or sprinkled with it] yet that her Conscience tells her that is not the right way appeareth, in that she only assigns that by indulgence to such In∣fants as are in danger of death, &c, The Church of Rome also confesseth Marq. of Wor∣cest. Certam. Relig. by a learned Pen, that she changed dipping the party baptized o∣ver the head and Ears to a little sprink∣ling upon the Face.
Erasmus paraphrasing on the words, baptizing them, Mat. 28. saith thus, if they believe that which you teach them and begin to be repentant of their former Life, &c. Then dip them in Water, &c. Walfridus Strabo de rebus Ecclsc 26. tells us, that we must know at h fist believers were baptized simply in Floods and Fountains. The learned Grotius tel's us in his judgement on Infant baptism, That the word  signifies to dip over the head and ears. To whom we will joyn Tlenus whose Testimony is in these words Secundum▪ Fisher. Baptism is the first Sacrament of the new Testament instituted by Christ, in which with a most pat and exact analogy between the sign and the thing signified, those that are in Covenant are by the Mi∣nister washed in Water. The out∣ward Rite in baptism is threefold im∣mersion into the Water, abiding under
the water, and resurruction out of the water, the form of baptism, to wit in∣ternal and essential▪ is no other then that analogical proportion, which the signs keep with the things signified thereby, for as the properties of the water in washing away the defilements of the body, do in a most suitable si∣militude, set forth the efficacy of Christs blood in blotting out of sins, so dipping into the Water doth in a most lively similitude set forth the mor∣tification of the old man, and rising out of the water the virification of the new.—That same plunging into the water holds forth to us that horrible gulf of divine Justice in which Christ for our sins sake, which he took upon him, was for a while in a manner swallowed up. Abode under the wa∣ter how little a while soever, denotes his descent into Hell, even the very deepest degree of livelesness, while ly∣ing in the sealed and guarded sepulchre he was accounted as one truly dead, ri∣sing out of the water holds out to us a
lively similitude of that conquest, which this dead man got ver death, which he vanquished in his own Den, as it were, that is the grave. In like man∣ner therefore it is meet that we being baptized into his death, and buried with him, should rise also with him and so go on in a new Life, Rom. 6. 3. 4. Col. . 12. Th far Tiles. Bishop Jewell in his defence, Appol. . 5. p. 308. brings the councel of Worms determining the manner of baptism; thus, In aquas demersio in , & usus ab aquis emersio R∣surrectio est. The dipping into the water is the going down into Hell [i. e. the grave] The coming out from of the water is the Resurrection. From all which Testimonies (and many more that might be brought) it is evident beyond all doubt our opposers being Judges) that whether we respect the signification of the word baptiz∣or the signification of the ordinance it self, or the consent of the primitive. Chur∣ches in their practice of holy baptism, dip∣ping
the subject (or party baptized) in the Element Water, is the due form of bap∣tism, and therefore sprinkling or crossing the face; is an humane innovation. Or, Upon the whole matter these ten particulars are very apparent. First, That Infant baptism was innovated, after the holy Scriptures were written which appeareth both from the deep silence of the Scripture in that case, and the confession of learned Paedo-baptists themselves. 2. That it came in stealing (as it were) being for a considera∣ble time left at liber∣ty (a sign it was not from Heaven) for Gods ways are not to be left to mans will be commands and tis mans duty to obey. and was disliked by the Antients who there∣fore disswaded from it. 3. That which gave it its great ad∣vantage for a more general reception, was this false opinion, that without baptism none could be saved. This
saith Mr. Perkins doth St. Augustine e∣very where assirm. 4. That the Lords Supper was as eagerly pressed, to be necessry sor In∣fants as baptism, and they continued in use together about Ex opp. Perk. Se the Scholast. discourse against Symbol with Antichrist. the space of six hun∣dred years, this con∣ceit was confirmed (saith Mr. Perkins) by the councel of Toledo, Can. 11. And Au∣gustine was so earnest for this also that he boldly sayes in vain do we promise Infants salvation without it. Aug ep: 23. & ep. 107. & contra ep. pelag. l. 1. c. 22. & contra. . l. 7. c. 2. l. 3. c. 12. 5. That divers in the Greek Church have all along to this day refused In∣fant baptism. Groius his words are these (as Mr. Tmbs quotes them) In every age many of the Greeks unto this day keep the custome of deferring baptism to little ones till they could themselves make a confession of their Faith. And
the Armenians are confessed by Heylin in his Macrocos. p. 575. To defer baptism to their Children till they be grown to years of knowledge. 6. Those foolish and sinful adjuncts, which the Authors and promoters of Infant baptism, were constrained to invent to make it look like baptism (for example their device of God∣fathers, &c.) do sufficiently de∣clare it to be of an infirm and humane Original. 7. The grounds upon which Paedo-baptism was at first urged, are now in a manner wholly declined, and new grounds daily invented whereon to built it. which are no sooner laid, but raized again by some of it's own fa∣vorites. 8. That the stoutest assertors of In∣fant baptism, hath ever met with as stout opposers; Thus Agustine, met with the Donatists and Pelagius whose arguments he could not avoid but by running into greater absurdity, and
though they are blamed (and per∣haps justly) for holding some errours, so also is Augustine and that not un∣deservedly. 9. That many of the Learne have much abused this age in telling them the Anabaptists (i. e. the bap∣tized Churches) are of late editi∣on a new sect, &c. When from their own writings the clean contrary is so evident. Tenthly and Lastly. Observe how the baptism of repentance for re∣mission of Sins, which is that one and only baptism commanded in ho∣ly Scripture hath been neglected, tra∣duced; and its affertors frequently abused, and that chiefly by thi device of Paedo-baptism which now hath so lost it's first form, that it cannot with any shew of truth o good sence be called baptism, and ought therefore to cease with its fol∣low
errors, viz. the giving the ords Supper to Infants, &c. That God may be justified in the submissi∣n of all sinners to the baptism of repentance for remission of sins, Luke 7. 39.
The Second Part Of the Promise of the Spirit. Delivered in a Sermon upon 1. Cor. 12. 1. To which is added A post-script out of the works  Dr. Jer. Taylor, touching the layin on of Hands, chiefly declaring ho Religiously it was observed by th Antient Christians, as it is now re¦vived by divers of the baptize Christians of this age. 1 Cor. 12. 1. Now concerning spiritual gifts bre¦thren I would not have you igno¦rant. THere was never more need for th Church of God to seek and searc for all those things which God hat
promised for her strength and encou∣agement then now partly for that her pposers are men of exquisite parts by eans of all Arts and Sciences which e not more profitable when used in  way of subserviency to the truth, en pernitious when used in opposi∣on to it (as it often falleth out they re) and partly for that ignorance of hat God hath promised for his Churches comfortable subsistance, roves a great occasion and temptati∣ to Christians to trust to failing and comfortable helps in the great bu∣ness of the Ministry of the word and rayer, &c. Now in the words which we have osen the Apostle shews his care for e Church at Corinthus (and in them  all Churches) that they should not  ignorant concerning spiritual gifts d labours in three Chapters toge∣er to instruct them fully in that point der several considerations, and st, 1. By giving them a definition of those
gifts, or shewing what they are, verse 8. 9. 10. viz. A word of Wisdom, a word of knowledge, faith, the gifts of healing, the working of miracles, prophesie, discerning of spirits, divers kinds of Tongues, interpretation of tongues, which definition or enumera∣tion of gifts he seems to inlarge, Chap, 13. 26. a Psalm, a Doctrine, &c. 2. By shewing that the Church hath a perpetual right to, and interest in all these gifs, Chap. 14. 1. Desire sor be zealous after spiritual gifts, Chap. 12▪ 31. Covet earnestly the best gifts Chap. 14. 39. Covet to prophesie and forbid not to speak with tongues. 3. By shewing whereto these gifts d¦serve, or to what end they were given▪ Chap. 14. 12. Forasmuch as ye are zealous of the spiritual gifts, seek tha ye may excel to the edification of th Church, ver. 31. that all may learn, and all be comforted, Eph. 4 12. fo the perfecting the Saints for the wor
of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. 4. By distinguishing of gifts as they are more or less necessary and accordingly gives direction which to prefer in our asking them (yet so as not to forbid the use of any of them, so it might be done with edification) Chap. 14. 1. Desire spiri∣tual gifts but rather that ye may prophe∣sie. Ver. 5. I would have ye all speak with tongues but rather that ye prophesied, for greater is he that prophesieth, then he that speaketh with tongues. Ver. 5. He that speaketh in an unknown tongue edify∣eth himself, but he that prophesieth edifyeth the Church. 5. By shewing that all these gifts, how excellently soever any are endowed with them, yet therein he is not to rest satisfyed because there is yet a far more excellent way of receiving the sirit, without which all gifts are as nothing. This more excellent way he refers to the fruit of the Spirit, which he both di∣stinguisheth by its several branches, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. compar'd with
Gal. 5. 22. 23. and also comprehends the whole in that excelling grace of Charity follow after Charity, Chap. 4. 1. The greatest of these is Cha∣rity. 6. By giving a notable Rule to know who are indeed spiritual Christians from such as only pretend to be so, Chap. 14. 35. If any man think himself to be a Pro∣phet or spiritual, let him acknowledge the things I write unto you are the commands of the Lord. Those then are not truly spiritual, or true Prophets who (as ma∣ny on the right hand) do not only lay aside the commands of the Lord, but prescribe to others their own Tra∣ditions, neither those on the other hand, who prefer their poor conceits and Notions, as if the word of God came out from them, when though (perhaps) it came to them, yet it came not to them only, ver. 36. Thus much briefly to shew what the Apostle means in this place by spiritu∣al gifts, and in what respects he would
not have the Church to be ignorant concerning them. Nor shall I insist upon all those par∣ticulars now, but only that which may be most needful to be demonstrated, and that is the second particular. For I find, it is not only a general conceit among the National Churches, that the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit were only Temporary, and now ceased, but also very many in the baptized Churches are doubtful (at the least) in this matter, as if that glorious promise of pouring out of the Spirit according to the prophesie of Joel, and the re∣ception thereof by the primitive Churches, were taken away long since from the Churches which succeed them, and not to be so much as looked for in these days! But that this is a very great mistake, and The poynt to be proved. that the contrary, even that, that very promise of the spirit and every part of it, from the time of its first effusion upon the day of
Pentecost, Acts 2. belongs to the Church throughout all Ages to the end of the World. I hope to evince to the satis∣faction such as desire to see the Truth in this matter. And First from the scope of the Apostle, 1 From the A∣postles scope. in these three Chap∣ters. Where as it is his designed subject to discourse of the gifts of the Spirit, so he informs us that God hath set them there, namely in his Church, that is, he hath placed, setled or fixed, that one spirit in that one body, nor for a few days only, and then to leave her as a body without a spirit for ever after, in respect of spiri∣tual gifts, but to abide there as in his temple 1 Cor. 3. 16. 2 Cor. 6. 16. both by gifts and graces, even the same which Christ by vertue of his assention obtained when he ascended on high, which gifts are given to the Church for the work of the Ministry, for the edifi∣cation of the body till the whole be
compleated. See to this purpose Ephes. 4. from vers▪ 4. to 16. Again, The pro∣mise of the holy spirit 2. From the extent of the promise. is made by our Lord himself to the Church for ever. John 14. 16. I will pray the Father and he shall give you another Comforter that he may abide with you for ever &c. I say with the Church, for it were a strange exposiion to re∣strain this for ever to the age of the Apostles (as some do) for sith the A∣postles and first Churches could neither pray nor prophysie as they ought, but as that spirit did help their infir∣mity, it were strange the subsequent should be able to do it though destitute of that distance, seeing prophysie is ex∣presly one of those spirituall gifts, as before we have shewed. That great Apostle Peter, dates the promise of the holy spirit very large∣ly, Acts, 2. 38. &c. As descending to the very Skirt, or last age
of the Church of God, even to as ma∣ny as the Lord our God shall call, and he here takes the promise in tat sence wher in Jol meant it, and the Church had then received it, which clearly in∣tends both the gifts and graces of the Spirit, for as 'tis sure they received then very great gifts, so 'tis said great grace was upon them all. Act.  This very pomise of the Father is by this Apostle appropriated to all the called of the Lord, even the servants and hand maids in thse days. Now these days must either be a few days at the beginning of the Gos∣pel, or it must be referred to the whole time of that glorious dispension if the first, then how shall all the called of the Lord receive it? Or who will tell us when these days expired? But we know that These days the latter days last time, and last days are used with some frequency in Scripture, to point out the time of the Gospel as it suc∣ceeded the time of the Law.
During all which time we are sure that 3. From the Nature of the duties of the Church. the duties in generall (and perhaps some difficult duties which were not formerly known) which were imposed upon the first Churches, are laid upon the Churches to the end of the World, Mat. 28. 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, &c. Must the Churches now contend earnestly for the faith (and that both against old and new errors) must she be the Salt of the Earth, the Light of the World must she strive to preach the Gospel of the Kingdom to all Nations, must she keep her self in the Love of God building up her self in her most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost? Surely, if these duties remain, and the Lord requires that she should glorifie him in the faithful and constant discharge hereof as also in suffering for his sake; It cannot reasonably be imagined that he
should recall his holy spirit, in the gifts thereof from her who when she had them all, had nothing that was super∣fluous, but stood in need of all to fur∣nish her for the work she stood inga∣ged to do, in these forementioned and other like considerations, sith then our God doth require the same service of his Churches now, which he required of his Churches in the first ages of the Gospel, let us not imagine he will re∣quire the same Brick, and not allow the same Straw. That the gifts of the spirit here intend∣by 4. From the nature and per∣petuity of the exhortations to seek for the spirit. our Apostle are the portion of the Church in every age (as her right) appeareth, from the nature of these ex∣hortations she is under to ask them. Luk. 11. 13. How much more shall your Heavenly Father give his holy spirit to them that ask it—ask and it shall be given unto you. vers, 10. How frequent
is our Apostle in these 3. Chapters in his exhortations to this Church (and in them to all others) to desire spirituall gifts, to covet earnestly the best gifts, to covet to prophesie, wish∣ing that they may speak with tongues, and warning them not to prohibet that gift. Now to what purpose is all this if these gifts be ceased and that the Church may not now expect them? I hope no man will say these exhortations are now out of date least in so doing he deprive us of the exhor∣tation to Charity, for they are so link∣ed together as the one cannot cease as 'tis an exhortation) before the o∣ther. Follow after Charity and desire spi∣ritual gifts and rather that ye may prophe∣sie. Thus we see the Church being un∣der perpetual exhortations, to seek for spiritual gifts without any restirction, necessarily infers her perpetual right to them and every of them, which consideration alone is sufficient (as I conceive) to satisfie any Christian, that the promise of the Spirit (even the
same that was given to the first Chur∣ches) in respect of gifts as well as gra∣ces belongs to the Church of Christ throughout all ages. Let us now consi∣der, whether the 5. From the continuation of spiritual gifts in the Church to this day. Church of God do not even now injoy the promised spirit in the gifts and graces of it at this day, for the latter, I think there is none doh questi∣on it, and yet should the graces or fruits of the spirit which now appear, be strictly considered by what did for∣merly shine forth in the Churches, it might peradventure put us to some pause, yet not thence to conclude that we have not that spirit of grace, or that the graces thereof are ceased, but it would surely become a provocation, to cry mightily to God for an enlarge∣ment of what we have received in that behalf. And as I intend not to boast of the gifts of any, so I may safely presume
that the gifts received in these days are far more then I can set down, or give you account of because the Church is diffused through many Na∣tions, and her gifts there unknown to me; I will then restrain my observati∣ons to the Churches in this poor Island, who may not vie with all Churches, but rather in humility conclude themselves to be short of many concerning spirituall gifts. And yet, shall we say she hath none (or may we not rather say she hath many that are endowed with a word of knowledge and that meerly by a gift from God, having otherwise, no ca∣pacity or faulty more then others, but therein far short of many of their bre∣thren; only the gift of God, and no naturall faculty hath made the differ∣ance: How have men of knowledge in this world, been found to have no skill, and the foolish to attain know∣ledge, and some to excell so far, as to confound the wisdome of the wise and to bring to nought the understanding
of the prudent, yet out of the mouth of Babes hath our God ordained strength, and thereby hath sometimes stilled the enemy. And as Wisdome is usefull to direct, so hath God given it to such as fear him; who if we respect their educa∣tion &c. could never have acquired it; some by a word of wisdome here un∣derstand, the well ordering of affaires in the Church, others the right or use∣full applycation of the word &c. sure∣ly according to these expositions the Church hath some, even by the gift of the spirit of God to go before here in these respects. Neither is the gift of Healings so ab∣negated, but that something of it hath appeared, as many living witness by experience have testified, and how far faith (over and beside the common faith) hath therein appeared, as also in some other memorable undertakings against Sathan himself, or against his designs, with some good success, be∣comes
others to consider more then it doth me to write! as for me I rest sa∣tisfied, that miracles are not ceased as a gift to the Church of God, though perhaps they are but rarely found, as being (in the wisdom of God) not so necessary now in many places as in times past. Now for the gift of pophesie, which the Apostle here intends, 'tis certain the Church enjoys it very gratiously in these days sith she hath them that by the gift of Gods spirit (and not by acquired Arts) do minister to her the word of life, by exhortation, to her edi∣fication and comfort; which yet she could not have if the gifts were ceased seeing prophesie is not only one of the spirituall gifts but the very best of them, and the greatest of them all. Nor is the spirit of our God removed in the gift of discerning of spirits; for if it had false spirits had by their subtilty ere this day made havock of the Churches, but through the grace of God, notwithstanding all their cunning
craftiness they have been discerned, and their designs prevented; and though perhaps charity for some time hath born with such, in hope of the best, yet this is no other thing then ought to be, as may be seen by the carriage of our Lord toward Judas, and his Apostles towards fome others. The gifts of Doctrine and praising our God with a Psalme is not yet re∣moved, our Teachers (as taught of God) remaining in every Church; where also are some that are skillfull in praisiing the Lord to the edification of the Church; As for Revelations, there might per∣haps sometimes be strange or hidden things made known by some speciall gift of God and why may not God do such things now? However it is not un∣safe to understand the Revellations here ment, by Chap. 14. 30. If any thing be revealed to another that sitteth by let the first hold his peace &c. which can∣not so well be understood af a new Or∣acle as of some further subject or
more full explication of the matter treated on by him that spake first; according to which interprtation we may say the Church hath yet the gift of Revellations. And thus far we seem to be got safe, not any thing so materiall intervening, as to conclude against the continuance of these spiri∣tuall gifts in the Church to this day, so that the present repairers of the House or City of God may comfort them∣selves by the consideration of the words of the Prophet, Hagg. 2. 5. According to the word which I covenant∣ed with you when you came out of Egypt, so my SPIRIT REMAINETH amog you, fear ye not. But now the gft of Tongues and in∣terpretation of Tongues, these! where shall we find them. Doubtless these gifts are rarely if at all found in these days, and in this Nation, so as to sute with those who frequently in some Churches at first received those gifts; the reasons are many (but none such as conclude the Church from under
the promise of these gifts) as first these gifts differ much from the rest, chiefly in this that they may be sup∣ply'd another way, for the conversion of persons of all Languages, or such as can speak other Languages and in∣terpret the same to others, doth supply the absence of those gifts; 2. The Churche (in this and I suppose other Nati∣ons) It is probable that Paul made use of his edu∣cation in speak∣ing divers Lan∣guages, as may be perceived by his discouses in the acts of the Apostles, and by the Epistles which he wrote to severall Chur∣ches, useing therein (as 'tis confessed) fre∣quently the Greek Tongue. have very little need of these gifts, and therefore con∣sidering that they are not so necessary as the rest, the Apostle leaves these with a forbid them not, whilst the rest he wills us to cvt earnestly. But 3? one great cause (as I conceive) why these gfts are so much ab∣sent, and the other no
more received, i because we either ask them not at all, or else we ask them a∣miss. For many have been so ar from a king these gifts of the spirit, that in truth they have been arguing that these gifts are not attainable, and then tis no wonder they have not been re∣ceived. Again where there hath been some un∣derstanding of the interest we have in those gifts, there faith in asking hath been and is very low, and atended (perhaps) with great wavering, and then little can be expected at the hand of the Almighty Jam. 1. And here let me premonish you of one thing which (by my little reading) I perceive to have been a great provocation to the Lord to wihdraw his gifts in times pst (and I fear it again) And that was and and I doubt is) an over curious per∣formance, of that which God gave spirituall gifts for, to wit the minister∣ing of the word, when the Churches grew populous, and great personages came to her communion, the unwary
pastours, let go the simplicity of th Gospell enclining so much to curiosi¦ties that some Counsells decreed tha a Bshop should not read Heathen Authors and Graian is said to have this passag viz. Doth not he seem to wak in vanit and dakness of mind, who vexing him∣self day ad night in the studies of Logick in the persuite of physicall speculaion one while elevates himself above the high¦est Heavens and afterward throws him∣self below the nethermost part of the Earth True, the use that may be made o reading is one thing, and the abuse ano∣ther; however let the least gift o God be preferred in the ministry o the word, above the greatest of human Arts, otherwise we are in danger to incur the guilt of despising Prophysyings▪ Lastly the truth in hand appeareth from 6. From the silence of the Scriptures, as to the privation of the gifts of the Spirit &c, the silence of Scrip∣tures, touching th
privation of any of the gifts of the spi∣it till that which is perfect become, 1. or. 13. 8. 9. Charity never faileth but whether there be prophesies they shall fail, whether there be tongues they shall cease, whether there be knowledge it shall vanish away, for we know in part and we prophe∣e in part. But when that which is per∣fect is come THEN that which is in part sha'l be done away. Hence observe a finall determinati∣on of the matter in question, If any ask when the gifts of prophysie, know∣ledge and tongues &c. Shall cease? The Apostles answer is, even THEN, when that which is perfect is come, or when we come to see face to face, or as we are seen. So then seeing the gifts of the spirit do yet remain to the Church, and every of them (as her need requires) are attainable, it re∣mains that we humbly consider our wants, and desire spirituall gifts, you ove earnestly the best gifts. From these considerations I con∣clude, that howsoever it is too true
that the gifts received by the present Churches are but low (and truly so are her graces) yet thence we may not, we ought not to infer, that the gifts promised are ceased, or that the Church hath now no interest therein. But contrarywise as the promise of gifts (as well as graces) pertains to us as we are the called of God, we ought to tir one another up, to seek with all 1. Cor. 2. 4. dilligence and full assurance for the spirit of promise, which being received, will abundantly supply our wants, help our infirmities, convince the contrary minded by its powerfull evidence and demonstration in the ministry of the word and prayer. There be two things objected against that which is said, the first. Ob: If the promise of the spirit do thus belong to the Church, then this will follow, that the doctrines de∣livered by such gifted men must pass
for Oracles of God being the effects f the spirit of truth whose propertie it  to lead into all truth. And hence ome have conceived the decrees f their Counsells to be infallible, and thers have given out of their private tters or books that they were as in∣allibly the word of God as the Scrip∣ure &c. Ans. 1. Those gifts do not argue he infallibillity of him that hath them, or then all the gifted brethren at Co∣inth had been infallible which yet they ere not, witness their great want of Wisdom how to use their gifts to edi∣ication, as also the Apostles refering what they delivered to Tryal, telling s of gifted person in general (and as uch not excluding himself) that they ee but darkly, prophesie but in part, know but in part, so that perfection erein is not to be pretended. 2. That the Apostles did deliver in∣fallible and undoubted verities for all
to submit to, as the very word of God &c. proceeded not hence, viz. because they were gifted men. But as being the chosen witnesses of God, purpose∣ly ordained to that very end, for which cause they saw that just one, heard the words of his mouth, and by infallible proves were assured of the Resurrecti∣on of our Lord and of his will concern∣ing his Kingdom, John 15▪ 16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you and ordained you that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should re∣main, that whatsoever ye shall ask the Fa∣ther in my Name he may give it you, see Acts 10. 40. 41. and Acts 22. 14. 15. The God of or Fathers hath chosen thee that thou should knw his will, and see that just one, and shouldest hear the voice of his mouth. FOR thou shalt be his wit∣ness unto all men of what thou hast SEEN AND HEARD. These are the Fathers of the Chur∣ches, the Foundation layers, the Master-builders in such an elevated
consideration, as that the authority of one is to be valued above the autho∣rity of ten thousand subsequent teach∣ers, which is a greater number then ever yet convened in a generall coun∣cell, 1. Cor. 4. 15. 16. These were such Fathers as laid up such a stock of doctrine for their Children, as whoso bringeth not along with them is not to be received. 2. John. 8. 9, 10. And whosoever corrupteth by adding takeing away or perverting is to be held accursed, to be nameless in the Ci∣ty of God and the book of Life, The conclusion is this, gifted persons, on whom the Holy Ghost fell as it did on the Apostles, were not thereby im∣powered, to propose new Oracles, or to be the Apostles Competitors, and if any presume to these things (as some did in the Apostles dayes) they shall fulfill that sentence, 2. Tim. 3. 9. They shall proceed no further for their folly shall be made manifest to all men as theirs also was.
Ob. 2. If the gifts of the spirit, 1. Cor. 12. Have continued in the Church as you teach, 'tis strange we have no account of them since their days, unless we regard the papacy who have claim'd the gift of Miracles in every age, which they urge as an undoubted proof that they only are the Church of Christ. Ans. 1. It is true that people do pretend, as 'tis said in the objection and it is now my business to examine the goodness of that pretence, only this I say they cannot find their Church to have had a being in every age since Christ, and therefore very unlikely to prove what they say in the case of Miracles. But put case that since they have had a being in the world, some signs or wonders have been done among them, yet hence to infer the truth of their Church state is very unsafe, sith before an equall judge others will be found to have as clear
a claim to Miracles as themselves. Which yet shall avail them nothing, because they wanted truth with their gifts. Mat. 7. 22. Many wll say unto me in that day have we not prophesid in thy Name, and in thy name have we cast out Devils and in thy name have done many wondrous works. And then will I profess uno them I never knew you, depart from me ye work∣ers of iniquity, And though our Saviour saith, no man can do a miracle in his Name and lightly speak evil of him, yet that very speech supposes the thing possible. It doth not follow therefore that where∣soever miraculous gifts are there is the true Church, but she is only known by her Conformity to the Doctrine of God our Saviour, chiefly in the prin∣ciples of Religion, Heb. 6. 1. 2. For we are his House if built upon that foundation of Repentance, faith, &c▪ and patakers of him, IF we hold the beginning of our confidence sted∣fast
to the end otherwise not. Heb. 3. 6. 14. If any come unto you and bring not this doctrine receive him not to house, no, though he work miracles, for thus saith the Lord. If there arise among you a Prophet or a Dreamer of Dreams, and giveth thee asign or a won∣der, and the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spake unto thee [now note if he do this] saying let us go after other Gods (which thou hast not koown) and let us serve them, thou shalt not hearken to the words of that Prophet—For the Lord your God proveth you to know whether you love the Lord your God, with all your heart, and with all your Soul. And hence learn this one thing that Gods Truth is not to give place to any gifts, but all gifts are to subserve to the furtherance of his Truth. To conclude as we ought not to be ignorant of the gifts of the spirit, so neither of the means ordain'd of God to obtain those gifts. The primitive Churches are herein our best guide
as the word directs. Tis well known (and I think granted on all hand) that they used the solemn Ordinance of prayer and imposition of hands for ob∣taining the promised Spirit, at least with respect to these gifts. Now be it so (though I say for the Graces or Fruits also) then seeing these gifts are promised to us as well as unto them, and are attainable, and in part (at least) attained by many, what should hinder the Churches, but that now they should tread in this path, with faith and full assurance that a blessing is in it? As in holy baptism we are pla∣ced (as it were) among those whose sins are washed away in the blood of the Lamb. So in this Holy Ordinance of prayer and imposition of hands we are in a solemn manner ushered, into the promise of the holy spirit, and as the pardon of our sins signified in bap∣tism doth not prevent, but better ca∣paciate us to pray daily forgive us our espasses, so imposition of hands doth put us into a better capacity to seek
dayly for the gifts and graces of the spiri, bcause now solemnly intercessed in the promise, by that very way the primiive Saints were intercessed there∣in, Acts 8. 15, 17. Acts 19. 2. 6. 2 Tim. 1. 6. Heb. 6. 12. Who when they were down prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost, then laid they their hands on them and they recei∣the Holy Ghost. Have they received of the Holy Ghost since the believed? And when Paul had laid his hand is on them, the Holy Ghost  on them. Wherefore I put the in remmbance that thou stir up the gift of God which is in thee by the putting o of my hands.—The foundation of Repentance, and of faith towards God of the Dctrine of bapism and of laying on of hands, of the resur∣rection of the dead, and of Eternal Judgement. What shall I , the Scriptures are
evidence sufficient that this Ordinance is of divine institution, is from Hea∣ven; the promise which it leads to s perpetual, and Universal, it belong, to the whole body. There is one body and one Spirit even as ye are called i  hope of your calling.
A POST-SCRIPT. Taken out of the Works of Dr. Jer. Taylor, in defence of laying on of Hands, as a ne∣ver-failing Mini∣stery. WE have seen the Original [of laying on of hands] from Christ the practice and exercise of it in the Apostles, and the first converts
in Christianity, that which I shall now remark is, that this is established and passed into a Christian Doctrine. The Waranty for what I say is the words of St. Paul where the holy Rite of con∣firmation, so called from the effect of this Ministration, and expressed by the Ritual part of it, imposition of hands is reckoned a Foundamental point  not laying again the foundation of Repentance from Deas works, and of faith towards God, of the Doctrine of baptism, and of lay∣ing on of hands, of Resurrection from the dead and of Eternal Judgement; Here are six foundamental points of St. Pauls Catechism which he said as te foundation or beginning of the insti∣tution of the Christian Church, and amongst these imposition of hands is reckoned as a prt of the foundation and therefore they who deny it, dig up foundations. Now that this impo∣sition of hands is that which the A∣postles used in confirming the baptized and invocating the Holy Gost upon
them remins to be pro.—Abso¦lution of penitents cannot be meant here, not only bcause we never read that the Apostles did use that Ceremo∣ny in their absolutions, but because the Aposte speaking of the foundation in which baptism is.—There needd no absolution but bapismal; for they and we believig gone baptism for the re∣mssion of sins, this is al the absolution that can be at the first and in the foundation. The Mening that laying on of hands used by some at the ab∣solving pene∣tents. other was se∣cunda post  fragm tabula.  me in af∣ter when men had mde Shipwrack of their good Conscien∣science and were as St. Peter saith—unmindful of the former cleansing. 2. It cannot be meant of Ordina∣tion and this is also evident. 1. Because the Apostle saves he would thence forth leave to speak of the foundation and go on to perfection, that is to higher misteries. Now in Riuals of which he speaks, there is none higher
then Ordination. 2. The Apostle saying he would speak no more of lay∣ing on of hands goes presentl to dis∣course, of the misteriousness of the E∣vangelical Priest-hood, and the honor of that vocation, by which it is evi∣dent he spake nothing of Ordination in the Catechism, or Narrative of Foun∣damentals. 3. This also appears from te context, not only because laying on of hands is Immediately set after bap∣tism but also because in the very next words of this discourse, he does enu∣merate and apportion to baptism, and [impsition of hands] their proper and proportioned effects. To bp∣tism ilumiraion,—And to Confir∣maion he reckons tasting the Heaven∣ly gift and being made parakers of the Holy Ghost▪ By the thing sigifi∣ed declaring the sign, and by he miste∣y the ▪ Upon these words t Chrisostom dis∣coursing sayes, That all these are founda∣mental Articles: that it that e ought to repent from dead works; to be baptized ∣to
the Faith of Christ, and be made wor∣thy of the gift of the spirit, who is given by imposition of hands and we are to be taught the misteries of the Resurrection and Eternal Judgement. This Catechism (sayes he) is perfect, so that if any Man have Faith in God, and being baptized is also confirmed and so tasts the Heavenly gift, and partakes of the Holy Ghost, by hope of the resurrection tasts of the good things of the World to come, if he falls away from this state—digging down and turn∣ing up these foundations he shall never be built again, he can never be baptized a∣gain—Confirmed again. God will not be∣gin again, &c. He cannot be made a Christian twice.—This is the full ex∣plication of this excellent place, and any other ways it cannot be reasonably ex∣picated.—I shall observe one thing more out of this Testimony of St. Paul He cals it the Doctrine of baptism and laying on of hands, by which it does not only appear to be a lasting Mini∣stry, because no part of the Christian Doctrine could change or be abolished
but hence also it appears to be divine Institution. For it were not St. Paul had been guilty of that which our bles∣sed Savior reproves in the Scribes and Pharises, and should have taught for doc∣trines the Commandements of Men. Which because it cannot be supposed, it must follow that this doctrine of confirmation, or imposition of hands is Apostolicall and divine. The ar∣gument is clear, and not easily to be reproved. Yea but what is this to us? it be∣long'd to the days of wonder and ex∣traordinary. The Holy Ghost breath∣ed upon the Apostle and Apostolicall men, but then he breath'd his last; vecendente gratiae recessit disiplina; when the grace departed we had no further need of the cerimony. In Answer to this I shall  by divers particulars evince plainly, that this Ministry—was not temporary and relative only to the Acts of the Apostles, but was to de∣scend to the Church for ever. This
indeed is done already in the proceed∣ing Sect in which it is clearly manifest∣ed, that Christ himself made the bap∣tism of the spirit necessary to the Church▪ He declar'd the fruits of this baptism, and did particularly relate it to the descent of the holy spirit upon the Church at and after that glorious Petiest. He sactified it and com∣mended it b hi example; just as he sanctified the flood Jordan, and all other waters to the misticall washing away of sin, viz. by his great exam∣ple, and fulfiling this righteousness also. This doctrine the Apostles first found in their own persons, and expe∣rience, and practised to all their Con∣verts, by a solemn, and externall rite; And all this pssed into an Evangelicall, doctine the whole mistery being sig∣nified by the externall rite in the words of the Apostle, as before it was by Christ expressing only the internall. So that there needs n more strength to this argument. But that there may be wanting no moments to this tuth
which the holy scripture affords, I shall add more weight to it; And, 1. The perpetuity of this rite ap∣pears, because this great gift of the Holy Ghost was promised to abide with the Chuches for ever. And when the Jes head the Apostles speak with tongues at the first and miracu∣lous dsent of the spirit in Pencst, to take of the strageess of the won∣dr, and the envy of the power. St. Peer at that very time tells them plain∣ly. Rent and be baptizd evey one of you—and  shall recee the gift of the Holy Ghost  not the meanest person among you all, but shall receive this great thing, which ye observe us to have received and not only you, but your Children too, not of this eneration only, sed nati natorum et qi ncentur ab illis, but your Children for ever. For the pro∣mise is to you and to your Children and to all that are affar off, even to as many as the
Lord your God shall call▪ now then let it be considered. 1. This gift is by promise, by a promise not made to the Apostles a∣lone, but to all; to all for ever. 2. Consider here at the very first as there is a verbum, a word of promise, so there is a sacramentum too I use the word——in a large sence only, and according to the stile of the primitive Church) It is a rite partly morall; and partly cerimoniall, the first is prayer, the other is laying on of the hands: and to an effect that is but transient and extraordinary, and of a little abode, it is not easily to be sup∣posed that such a solemnity should be appointed. I say such a solemnity; that is, it not imaginable that a solemn rite, annexed to a perpetuall promise should be transient and temporary for by the nature of relatives they may be of equall abode, the cerimony or rite was anexed to the promise, and
therefore also must be for ever. [I think this wil abide try∣all, sith we may not expect a change of the dispensation we are under; otherwise the promise might continue under some o∣ther rite or elce without it] 3: This is attested by St. Paul who reduces this argument to this mistery saying, In home after that you believed—ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise. He spake it to the Ephesians who well understood his meaning, by remembring what was done to them∣selves by the Apostle, Act. 19. 6. But a while before, who after he had baptised them did lay his hands upon them, and so they received the holy spirit of promise; for here the very matter of fact is the clearest comenta∣ry on St. Pauls words——But fourthly. What hinders any man from a quick consent at the first representation of these plain reasonings and authorityes? is it because there were extraordinary
effects accompanying this ministration, and because now there are not, that we will suppose the whole oeconomy must cease? if this be it, and indeed this is all that can be pretended in op∣position to it, it is infinitely vain. 1. Because these exraordinary effect, did continue even after the death of all the Apostles. St. Frenoeus saies they did continue even to his time, even the greatest instance of miraculous power. et infraternitate, sapssimc propter aliquid necessarium, &c. When God saw it ne∣cessary, and the Church prayed and fasted much, they did miraculous things, even of reducing the Spirit to a dead Man. 2. In the days of the Apstles the spirit did produce miraculous effects, but neither always, nor at all in all men, are all workers of miracles, &c. No, the spirit bloweth where it listeth, and as he listeth he gives gifts to all, but to some after this manner, and some after that. 3. These gifts were not necessary at,
all times any more then to all persons, but the promise did belong to all and was made to all, and was perform∣ed to all.—And therefore if the grace be given to all, there is no rea∣son that the ritual ministration of that grace should cease upon pretence that the spirit is not given extraordina∣rily. Other arguments he hath (many) to the same purpose, and a I conceive well wor∣thy the consideration of all Christians Who know how to read men without being scandi i∣zed if they meet with phraises, and some nothing which are doubtful as its the case of most that write. speci∣ally those that are doubt∣full in this principle of religion but I shall sht up all with a few of his citations out of the works of antient wri∣ters, in behalf of this point of faith. And first noteing How that originally it came from the Apostles. In the second Cen∣tury he brings Th∣ophilus,
Antiochenus and ertullian, the latter saith thus, D hinc manus impo∣nitur, &c. After baptism the hand is im∣posed by blessing, calling, and inviting the holy spirit.—Being cleansed by baptis∣mal water, we are dispos'd for the holy spirit under the hand of the Angel of the Church, and to this effect the rest, &c. For the third Century he brings Ori∣gen, Cyprian, Dionis, and Eusebius, The first Testimony set down is out of Cy∣prian who Writing upon the passage in Acts 8. 14. saith, which custome is also descended to us, that they who are baptized might be brought by the ru∣lers of the Church and by prayer and imposition of hands receive the Lords signature, &c. For the Fourth hundred he brings Melchiades, Optatus, Civil, and others speaking very highly of the use of this ministration and then brings Urba the first, as more plainly setting down what the rest delivered more sigura∣tively, in these words Omnes Fideles, &c. All faithful people ought to receive the holy
spirit by imposition of the Bishops hands after baptism. And having added yet more witnesses of this kind, he al∣leadges six Counsells, to evince the same thing,  Con. Arles. c. 8. viz. That this Ordi∣nance of prayer, lay∣ing on of hands were received toge∣ther with the other principles by Christians generally. The decree of one of these Counsels (concerning such as had received baptism in a re∣gular form) is in these words manus antum eiis imponatur ut accipiant spiritum sanctum. Let there be imposition of hands that they may receive the Holy Ghost. Afterwards the Dr. concludes thus. So many Fathers testifying the practice of the Church and teaching this Doctrine, and so many more Fa∣thers as it were assembled in six Coun∣cells, all giving witness to this holy Rite AND THAT IN PUR∣SUANCE OF SCRIPTURE
are too great a blood of witnesses to be despised by any man that calls him∣self a Christian. FINIS.
