G1680 12562162 63256
A GREAT CONSPIRACY By the Papists in the Kingdome of IRELAND, Discovered by the Lords, Justices, and Coun∣sell at DVBLIN and Proclaimed there Octob. 23, 1641. VVhich Proclamation was sent to the PAR∣LIAMENT here in ENGLAND And read before the Lords and Commons in Parliament on Munday Novemb. 1. 1641. VVhereunto is annexed the Copy of a Let∣ter written with the Kings owne hand, and sent to Mr. Nicholas, Clarke of the Counsell from EDENBVRGH Octob. 18. 1641. LONDON, Printed for John Thomas. 1461.
BY THE LORDS JVSTICES, AND Councell at Dublin in Ireland, Octob. 23. 1641. W. Parsons, Io. Burlacie. THese are to mke known and published to all his Majesties good Subjects in this Kingdome of Ireland, That there is a Dis∣covery made by Us the Lords, Justices, and Councell, of a most disloyall and detestable Conspira∣cie intended by some evill affected Irish Papists, against the lives of Us the Lords, Justices, and Councell, and many others of his Majesties faith∣full
Subjects universally throughout this King∣dome, and for the seizing not onely of his Maje∣sties Castle of Dublin his Majesties principall Fort here, but also of the other Fortifications of the Kingdome. And seeing by the great goodnesse and aboundant mercy of Almighty God to his Majesty and this State and Kingdome, these wick∣ed Conspiracies are brought to light, and some of the Conspirators committed to the Castle of Dub∣lin by us, by his Majesties authority, so as those wicked and Damnable Plots, are now disappoin∣ted in the chiefe parts thereof: Wee therefore have thought fit hereby not onely to make it pub∣likely knowne for the comfort of his Majesties good and loyall Subjects in all parts of the King∣dome, but also hereby to require them, that they doe with all confidence and cheerefulnesse betake themselves to their owne defence, and stand upon their Guard, so to render the more safety to them∣selves and all the Kingdome besides, and that they advertise us with all possible speed of all occur∣rences which may concerne the peace and safety of the Kingdome, and now to shew fully that faith and Loyalty which they have alwayes shewen for the publike service of the Crowne and Kingdome, which we will value to his Majesty accordingly, and a speciall memory thereof, will be retained for their advantage in due time, and wee require that great care be taken that no Levies of men be made for forraigne Service, or any man suffered to march upon any such pretences. Given at his Maje∣sties Castle at Dublin, 25. Octob. 1641.
The Names of those Lords Iustices, and Counsellours in the Castle of Dublin, at the dating of this Proclamation. Robert Dillon. Robert Digby, Adam Loftus. Iohn Temple. Thomas Rothoram. Francis VVilloughby. Iames VVare. Robert Meridith. God save the King.
A Copy of a Letter written with the Kings owne hand to Mr. Nicholas, Clarke of the Counsell, bearing date from Edenburgh, 18. Octob. 1641. I Heare it is reported that at my returne I intend to alter the Government of the Church of England, and to bring it to that forme as it is here. There∣fore I command you to assure all my Servants, that J will be constant to the Discipline and Do∣ctrine of the Church of England established by Queene ELIZABETH and my Father, and that I resolve by the grace of God) to dye in the main∣tenance of it. Charles Rex. From Edenburgh Octob. 18. 1641. FINIS.
