G523A 12424709 61802
The Genuine EPISTLES OF THE Apostolical Fathers S. BARNABAS, S. IGNATIUS, S. CLEMENT, S. POLYCARP. THE SHEPHERD of HERMAS, And the Martyrdoms of St. Ignatius and St. Polycarp, Written by Those who were present at their Sufferings. Being, together with the Holy Scriptures of the New Testament, a compleat Collection of the most Primi∣tive Antiquity for about CI Years after Christ. Translated and Publish'd, with a large Preliminary Discourse relating to the several Treatises here put together, By W. Wake▪ D.D. Chapl. in Ordinary to their  and Preacher to the Honorable Society of Grays-Inn. LONDON Printed for Ric. Sare at Grays-Inn Gate next Holborn. 1693.
Imprimatur, Apr. 11. 1693. Carolus Alston, R.P.D. Hen. Episc. Lond. à sacris.
A CATALOGUE OF THE Several PIECES contain'd in this Book, and the Order of them. A Discourse concerning the Treatises here collected, and the Authors of them. PART I. The First Epistle of St. Clement to the Corinthians. The Epistle of St. Polycarp to the Philippians. The Genuine Epistles of St. Igna∣tius.
A Relation of the Martyrdom of St. Ignatius, written by those who were present at his Suf∣ferings. The Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, concerning the Mar∣tyrdom of St. Polycarp. PART II. The Catholick Epistle of St. Bar∣nabas. The Shepherd of Hermas, in Three Books. The Remains of St. Clement's Second Epistle to the Corin∣thians. An INDEX to both Parts.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The several Treatises con∣tain'd in the following Collection; and the Au∣thors of them. The INTRODUCTION. 1. HAD I designed the following Collection either for the Be∣nefit or Perusal of the learned World, I should have needed to say but very little by way of Introduction to it: The Editors of the several Treatises here put together, having already observed so much upon each of them, that it would I believe be difficult to discover, I am sure be very needless to trouble the Rea∣der with any more.
2. BUT as it would be Ridiculous for me to pretend to have design'd a Translation for those who are able with much more Profit and Satisfaction to go to the Originals; so being now to address my self to those especially who want that Ability, I suppose it may not be amiss be∣fore I lead them to the Discourses them∣selves, to give them some Account both of the Authors of the several Pieces I have here collected; and of the Tracts themselves; and of that Collection that is now the first time made of them in our own Tongue. Tho' as to the first of these, I shall say the less, by reason of that excellent Account that has been al∣ready given of the most of them by our Pious and Learned Dr. Cave: Whose Lives of the Apostles and Primitive Fa∣thers, with his other Admirable Dis∣course of Primitive Christianity, I could heartily wish were in the hands of all the more judicious part of our English Readers. 3. NOR may such an Account as I now propose to my self to give of the following Pieces be altogether useless to some even of the Learned themselves; who wanting either the Opportunity of Collecting the several Authors necessa∣ry for such a search, or leisure to exa∣min them; may not be unwilling to see that faithfully brought together under one short and general View; which
would have required some Time and La∣bour to have search'd out, as it lay dif∣fus'd in a Multitude of Writers, out of which they must otherwise have gather'd it. CHAP. II. Of the First Epistle of S. Clement to the Corinthians. Of the Value which the Ancients put up∣on this Epistle. Of St. Clement him∣self, who was the Author of it: That it was the same Clement of whom S. Paul speaks, Phil. iv.3. Of his Conversion to Christianity: When he became Bishop of Rome, as also whether he suffer'd Martyrdom, uncertain. Of the Occa∣sion of his Writing this Epistle, and the two main Parts of it. Of the Time when it was written. That there is no reason to doubt but that the Epistle we now have was truly written by S. Cle∣ment: The Objection of Tentzelius against it of no force. How this Epi∣stle was first published by Mr. Patrick Young; and translated by Mr. Burton into English. Of the present Edition of it.
1. THE first Tract which begins this Collection, and perhaps the most worthy too, is that Admirable, or as some of the Ancients have called it, that Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. III. cap. 16. wonderful Epistle of S. Clement to the Corinthians; and which he wrote not in his own Name, but in the Name of the whole Church of Rome to them. An Epistle so highly esteem'd by the Primitive Church, that we are told it was wont to be publickly read in the Idem, lib. III. cap. 12. Assemblies of it: And if we may cre∣dit one of the most ancient Canon. Apo∣stol. Can. ult. Collections of the Canon of Scripture, was placed among the Sacred and Inspired Writings. Nor is it any small Evidence of the Va∣lue which in those days was put upon this Epistle, that in the only Copy, which for ought we know, at this day remains of it, we find it to have been written in the same MS. Alexan. Volume with the Books of the New Testament: And which seems to confirm what was before observed concerning it; that it was heretofore wont to be read in the Congregations, to∣gether with the Holy Scriptures of the Apostles and Evangelists. 2. BUT of the Epistle it self, I shall take occasion to speak more particularly by and by. It will now be more pro∣per to enquire a little into the Author of it; and consider when, and upon what occasion it was written by him.
3. AND first for what concerns the Person who wrote this Epistle; it is no small Commendation which the Holy Ghost by S. Paul has left us of him; Phil. iv.3. Where the Apostle mentions him not only as his Fellow-Labourer in the Work of the Gospel; but as one whose Name was written in the Book of Life. A Character, which if we will allow our Saviour to be the Judg, far ex∣ceeds that of the highest Power and Dig∣nity. And who therefore when his Dis∣ciples began to rejoyce upon the account of that Authority which he had bestow'd upon them, insomuch that even the De∣vils were subject unto them; Luke x.17. tho' he seem'd to allow that there was a just matter of Joy in such an extraordi∣nary Power, yet bade them not to Re∣joyce so much in this, that those Spirits were subject unto them; but rather, says he, Re∣joyce that your Names are written in the Book of Life. 4. IT is indeed insinuated by a late very Grot. Annot. in Phil. iv.3. Learned Critick, as if this were not that Clement of whom we are now discoursing, and whose Epistle to the Corinthians I have here subjoyn'd. But besides that, he himself confesses, that the Person of whom S. Paul there speaks was a Roman; both Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. III. cap. 12 Epiph. lib. I. Adv. Carpor. Hieronim. de Script. Eccles. Et Comment. in loc. Item lib. I. adv. Jo∣vin. Photii Cod. mem. 113, &c. Eusebius and Epi∣phanius, and S. Hierome expresly tell us that the Clement there meant, was the same that was afterwards Bishop of Rome:
Nor do we read of any Other to whom either the Character there mentioned, of being the Fellow-Labourer of that Apostle, or the Elogy given of having his Name written in the Book of Life, could so pro∣perly belong as to him; and whom therefore the generality of Learned Men both of the ancient and present times, without scruple conclude to have been referr'd to in that Passage. 5. I SHALL not say any thing of what is reported by Vid. Eucher. Lugd. de Con∣tempt. Mundi▪ & Chron. Al∣ert. Stad. in∣ter Testimo∣nia à unio Ci∣tat. Some concerning his Noble Birth and Family; of his Studies at Athens; and of the occasion and manner of his Conversion to Chri∣stianity; which they tell us, was wrought by S. Peter, whom he met with Barnabas at Caesarea; And who there first declared to him the Doctrine of Christ, and in∣clined him to a good Opinion of it. All which is very uncertain, and justly doubt∣ed of by many. I shall chuse rather to observe that whatever his Condition was before he became a Christian, he was held in no small Reputation after: But merited such a Character from the An∣cient Fathers, as is hardly given to any, besides the Apostles. Nay some of them doubt not in plain terms to call him an Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. IV. Apostle; and tho S. Hierome durst not go so far as that, yet he gives him ano∣ther Title but little short of it; Hieron. in Isaiam, c. 52. he tells us that he was an Apostolical Man, and as De Adulte∣rat. lib. Origi∣nis. Ruffinus adds almost an Apostle.
6. TO declare more particularly how he spent the first part of his Life after his Conversion is neither necessary to the Design I have now in hand, nor can any certain Account be given of it. On∣ly as we are told in the general, that he was S. Peter's Disciple, so it may not be improbable that for some time he at∣tended his Motions, and was subject to his direction. 7. BUT whatever he was, or where∣ever he laboured before, in this I think Antiquity is absolutely agreed, that he at last came to be Bishop of Rome; and was placed in that See by the express di∣rection of one, or both the Apostles, S. Peter and S. Paul: Tho' whom he suc∣ceeded, or at what time to fix his en∣trance on that great Charge, is a Point that I suppose will never be agreed up∣on among Learned Men. If any could have settled this matter beyond Dispute, it had without question been done by Pearson Dis∣sert. de Success. prim. RR. PP. cum Append. Hen. Dodweli. Pearson. dis∣sert. Posthum. Cap. V. Num. 7. those of our own Nation, who as they have the latest searched with all possible Diligence into it, so never were there any better qualified for the determina∣tion of it. But as their mutual Dodwelli Dissert. singul. Cap. XV. pag. 220. Disa∣greement, after all their Endeavours to fix this Point, shews that one of them must have been mistaken; so I doubt not but it will sufficiently satisfie all such as shall consider the high Character they
have so justly obtain'd both by their Learning and Judgment in these kind of Disquisitions, that they are Points not to be determined; and that he who shall do the best upon them, may only be said to have made a good Guess, in a Subject too hard for any at this distance to de∣cide Dodwell. Dissert. singul. Cap. XI. p. 151.. 8. NOR is there any less Contro∣versie among Learned Men concerning the Death of S. Clement, than there has been about the Order and Time of his Succession to his Bishoprick. That he lived in expectation of Martyrdom, and was ready to have undergone it, should it have pleased God to have called him to it, the Clem. Epistle to the Corinth. Num. vii. p. 16. Epistle we are now speaking of, sufficiently shews us. But that he did glorifie God by those particular Suf∣ferings which some have pretended, is I confess to me a matter of some doubt. For, first; It must be acknowledged that De Adulte∣rat. Lib. Orig. Ruffinus is one of the first Authors we have that speaks of him as a Martyr. Nei∣ther Hist. Eccles. Lib. III. c. 34. Eusebius, (who is usually very exact in his Observation of such things;) nor any of the Fathers yet nearer his time, as Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertul∣lian, &c. take any notice of it. And for the Account which some others have yet more lately given us of the manner of his Death, besides that in some parts of it it is altogether fabulous; it is not im∣probable,
but that as our Learned Dodwel Ad∣dit. ad Cap. VI. Dissert. Post∣hum. Pearson. Num. 22. pag. 215. Mr. Dodwell has observed the first rise of it may have been owing to their confounding Flavius Clemens the Roman Consul, with Clement Bishop of Rome: Who did indeed Vid. Euseb. Chron. Ano 97. Et in Euseb. Annot. Scalig. p. 205. b. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. Lib III. cap. 18. suffer Martyrdom for the Faith about the Time of which they speak; and some other parts of whose Character, such as his Relation to the Emperour, and Banishment into Pontus, they manifestly ascribe to him. 9. HOWEVER seeing Euseb. Hist. Eccles. Lib III. cap. 34. Eusebius refers his Death to the third Year of Trajan famous for the Persecution of the Church, and may thereby seem to insi∣nuate that Clement also then suffered among the rest; and that Apud Cote∣ler. Patr. Apo∣stol. Tom. I. Simeon Me∣taphrastes has given a long and particu∣lar Account of his Condemnation to the Mines first, and then of his Death fol∣lowing thereupon: As I shall not deter∣mine any thing against it, so they who are desirous to know what is usually said concerning the Passion of this Holy Man, may abundantly satisfie their Cu∣riosity in this particular, from the accu∣rate Collection of Dr. Cave in the Life of this Saint; and which is too long to be transcribed into the present Discourse. 10. AND this may suffice to have been observed in short concerning S. Clement himself: As for the Epistle
we are now speaking of to the Corin∣thians, I have already taken notice how great a Value was put upon it in the most Primitive Ages of the Church, and what a mighty Commendation has been left us of it, by the Writers of those Times. Nor indeed does it at all come short of the highest Praises which they have given to it; being a Piece compos∣ed with such an admirable Spirit of Love and Charity; Of Zeal towards God, and of Concern for the Church of Christ; Of the most excellent Exhortations deliver'd with the greatest Plainness and Simpli∣city of Speech, and yet pressed many times with such moving Eloquence too; that I cannot imagine what could have been desired in such an Epistle more pro∣per for the End for which it was com∣posed; What could have been written more becoming an Apostolical Age, and the Pen of one of the most eminent Bishops of it. 11. BUT that it may be the better un∣derstood by those who shall now think fit to peruse it; there are a few things which it will be necessary for me in this place to observe concerning it. 12. AND the first is, the Occasion that was given for the writing of this Epistle. For however we have no par∣ticular Account what it was, yet may we
from the Subject of it, give a very pro∣bable Guess at it. When St. Paul wrote his First Epistle to the Corinthians, the two great things that seem'd to have es∣pecially called for it were the Divisions of that Church upon the account of their Teachers, and of their vain Con∣ceit of their own Spiritual Gifts; and the great Mistake that was getting in among them concerning the Nature of the future Resurrection. But tho' the Apostle there∣fore by his Writing and Authority did for the present put a stop to the One, and set them right as to the Other; yet it seems after his Death, they began again to fall not only into the same Con∣tentions, but into the same Errour too, that had given them so much trouble be∣fore. 13. NOW this gave occasion to St. Clement to write the present Epistle to them: In which having first taken notice of the Rise of those new Sedi∣tions that were broke out among them, and exhorted them to a Christian Com∣posure of them; he in the next place goes on by many Arguments to esta∣blish the undoubted Truth and Certain∣ty of the future Resurrection; which was the other thing in which St. Paul had before observed them to have been greatly and dangerously mistaken.
15. THIS then was the Occasion, and is the main Subject and Design of the following Epistle. But now what time it was written, it is not so easie to determine. Vid. in An∣not. in Epist. Clem. in prin∣cip. Junius supposes it was writ∣ten by St. Clement in the Name of the Church of Rome, about two Years before his Martyrdom; and that from the Place of his Banishment: Which also seems to have been the Opinion of our Learned Annot. 2. p. 41. Mr. Burton in his Notes on this Epistle. Baron. Annal. ad Ann. XCV. Num. 1. Baronius places it some six or seven Years sooner, about the twelfth Year of Domitian: And with him Coteler. No. in Clem. Epist. pag. 8. Cotelerius agrees; only he supposes the Persecution was then drawing towards an end; it be∣ing otherwise unlikely that such an Em∣bassy could have been sent from Rome with the Epistle, as by the Close of it we find there was. But Dodwell. Append. ad Cap. VI. Dis∣sert. 2. Pear∣son, pag 219. Num. 24. Mr. Dodwell with much greater probability, thinks it to have been written yet sooner; viz. immediately after the end of Nero's Persecution: And to that refers those Troubles complain'd of by St. Clement in the very Epistle, c I. p. 9. beginning of his Epistle, and in which he Ibid. c. V. p. 15. elsewhere speaks of St. Peter and St. Paul, as some of the latest Instances of any that had died for the Sake of their Religion. 16. NOW that which seems yet more to countenance this Opinion is, that St. Clement in Chap. XLI. p. 56, 57. another part of his E∣pistle
speaks of the Temple Service not only as still continuing, but as being in such a state as necessarily supposes all things to be yet in Peace and Quiet at Je∣rusalem. And from whence that Dodwel. loc. supr. cit. Learn∣ed Man with great Reason concludes, that this Epistle must have been written somewhat before the XII. year of Nero, in which the Jewish Wars first brake out. Let us add to this, that in the Close of this Epistle we find mention made of Epist. chap. lix. pag 78. Fortunatus as the Person whom the Church of Corinth had probably sent to Rome with an account of their Disasters; and by whom together with the four Delegates of their own, the Roman Church returned this Epistle to the Co∣rinthians. Now Fortunatus is expresly said by St. Paul to have been an old Disciple in his time; insomuch that he tells us he was the first Fruits of Achaia, 1 Cor. xvi.15. And therefore we must conclude that this Epistle could not have been written so late as some would have it, seeing this Man was not only still alive, but in a Condition of undertaking so great a Journey as from Corinth to Rome: For from thence it is most likely he was sent with the Letter of that Church to Rome; and so became the Bearer of this Epistle, which was written in the Name of the Church of Rome in answer to it.
17. I CONCLUDE then that this Epistle was written shortly after the End of the Persecution under Nero, Dodwel. loc. supr. cit. Add. Cave Hist. Li∣terar. in Cle∣ment. pag. 18. about the LXIV. year of Christ: And that, as the learned Defender of this Period supposes, in the Vacancy of the See of Rome; before the Promotion of St. Cle∣ment to the Government of it. 18. BUT this is not yet all: There is still a difficulty remaining, and that of much greater Consequence than any I have hitherto mentioned; namely, Whe∣ther the Epistle we now have be, after all, the Genuine Epistle of St. Clement, so much applauded by the Ancients; so long look'd upon as lost to us; and so lately discover'd in the present Age? And this I mention, not that I think there is any real Occasion offer'd to in∣cline us to doubt of it; but because I find there are Callovius Bibl. illustr. N. T. To. 2. Exam. prae. Grot. in 1 Cor. p. 250. Voe∣tius Paralip. p. 1167, &c. Vid. Tentzel. Ex∣ercit. select. Exerc. 2. de Phoenice. some who would seem still to make a Question of it. 19. AND here, I would in the first place ask these wary Men, what Marks they can propose whereby to distinguish the true Work of any ancient Writer, from a false and supposititious, that do's not occur in the present Piece? 20. THAT Vid. Callov. Oper. Socin. To. 2 pag. 487. St. Clement wrote an Epistle to the Corinthians▪ that he wrote
it on the same Occasion that we find ex∣pressed in this we now have; that this Epistle was of great Reputation, so as to be publickly read in the Churches heretofore; All this the Authority of the Ancient Fathers will not suffer us to doubt. That the Copy we now have of this Epistle was taken from the End of a Manuscript of the New Testament, written as is supposed about the time of the first General Council of Nice, within little more than Two Hundred Years after St. Clement's Death; and at the very time that it was yet wont to be so read in the Churches; both the Vid. Jun. Praefat. in E∣pist. Clem. Learned Editor of it assures us, and the Manuscript its self sufficiently declares. Now how can it be supposed, that an Epistle so famous in those days; so well known to every Christian at that time, when the very Copy was written, which we at this day have of it; should have been alone con∣cealed from the Transcriber of this Ma∣nuscript Bible, and a spurious piece started up to supply the place of it? 21. NOR is this yet all: For if we have not now the true Copy of this E∣pistle, it is manifest that then neither had the Ancient Fathers of those first Ages, a true Copy of it. Vid. Baron. Annal. Anno· 95. Num. iii. &. For the Passages which they have quoted are the same in our Epistle; and so they too were imposed upon, no less than we are, in this Mat∣ter.
And can this be rationally supposed? Can we think that those great Men, and diligent Searchers into Antiquity, were ignorant of an Epistle, not only in every Bodies Hand, but almost in every Bodies Memory through their constant reading and hearing of it? 22. YET farther: Let me ask those who call in Question the Credit of this excellent piece; what do they find in it either unworthy of St. Clement, or disagreeable to those times in which we pretend it to have been written? Cer∣tainly, if this be a counterfeit piece, it was not only exceedingly well done; but without any design to serve any party or interest in it: There being nothing in the whole Epistle that might not have become as excellent an Age, and as Holy a Man, as that Age, and that Man were, in which we have all the Reason in the World to believe it was composed. 23▪ BUT what then is it that makes these learned Men so unwilling to own this Epistle to be the Genuine Work of that Holy Bishop to whom we ascribe it? It is in short this; Tenzelius Dissert. select. de Phoenie. p. 3. Et Num. xvi pag 45. That the Author of this Epistle, in proof of the possibility of a future Resurrection, asserts the Sto∣ry of the Phoenix's reviving out of its own Ashes; which is not only a thing false in its self, but unworthy of such a Person as St. Clement to mention.
24. NOW not to say any thing as to this Matter, (1st.) That Photii Bi∣blioth. Tmem. cxxvi. p. 306. Photius a severe Critick of the ancient Fathers, who first started it as a fault in St. Clement that he made use of this as a true Observation, which it seems the Other look'd upon as a meer Fable, yet did not think it any Objection against the Authority of this Epistle, which he nevertheless acknow∣ledg'd to be St. Clements: To pass by, (2dly;) That the Generality of the An∣cient Fathers have made use of the very same instance, in proof of the same Point; as the Tertullian. Origen. Cyril. Hierosolym. Euseb. Greg. Naz. Epipha∣nius, Synesius, Hieronym. Lactantius, &c. Jun. Notae in Clem pag. 34. learned Junius has parti∣cularly shewn in his Notes upon this Pas∣sage; and the Authority of whose Works no one yet ever called in question upon that account: I would only ask, (3dly;) What if St. Clement really believed the Account which he here gives us of this Matter? That there was such a Bird; and that he did revive out of the Cin∣ders of the Body before burnt? Where was the great harm either in giving Cre∣dit to such a Wonder; or believing it, to make such a use, as he here do's, of it? 25. THE Truth is, Whosoever shall consider both the general Credit which this Story had in those days; and the particular Accident which fell out not long before the time that this Epistle
was written to confirm their Belief of it, (And of which one of the most judicious of all the Tacitus An∣nal. libr. vi. num. 28. Roman Historians has given us a large Account;) I mean of the Phoe∣nix that was said to have come into E∣gypt a little after the Death of Christ, and to have given occasion, of much Discourse to the most Learned Men, both of the Greeks and Romans, concerning the very Miracle of which St. Clement here speaks; Will find it to have been no such strange thing in this Holy Man to have suffer'd himself to be led away with the Common Opinion; and to have believed what so many learned Men did among the Vid. Annot. Edit. Oxon. in loc. Bochar∣tus Hierozöic. in Phoenice, &c. apud Tent∣zel▪ p. 18, 19. Jews and Vid. Ed. Oxon. loc. cit. Adde Annot. Schotti in Photium, Tmem. cxxvi. pag. 3. Gentiles, no less than among the Christians, viz. That God was pleased to give to the World this great Earnest and Type of a future Resurrection; and to silence thereby the Cavils of such as should pretend, what we know the generality of the wise Men of the World did, that it was impos∣sible for God to effect such a Restitu∣tion. 26. BUT I insist too long on so trifling an Objection▪ however magni∣fied by some Men; and may, I think, from what I have already said conclude; that if this be indeed, as Aliis argu∣mentis, tum HOC IMPR∣MIS. Tntel. . cit. pag. 33. they confess it is, the greatest ground they have to call in question the Credit of this Epistle; there is then nothing that ought to move
any considering Man to entertain the least Doubt or Scruple concerning it. 27. THERE are indeed two other Exceptions which Photii Bibl. Photius has made a∣gainst St. Clement upon the Account of the Epistle before us, which yet he look'd upon as unquestionably his; the One for that he speaks in it of the Worlds beyond the Ocean; the Other, in that he seems not to have Written so honourably as was sitting, of the Divinity of our Blessed Saviour. But as the latter of these is but a meer Cavil against this Holy Man, who in his Other Epistle expresly asserts his Divine Nature, and even in this speaks in such a manner of him, as shews him to be much more than a meer Creature: So in the former he said no∣thing but what was agreeable both to the Notions and Language of the times in which he lived; when it was common to call our British Isles another World; or as St. Clement here stiles them the Worlds beyond the Ocean. 28. AND these I think are the chief Exceptions that have been at any time raised against the following Epistle; and which however insisted upon in these lat∣ter days, yet did not hinder the first and best Ages of the Church, when Men were less curious, but much more pious, from putting a very great Value upon it.
Nor will they I suppose have any more weight with any serious and ingenuous Mind now: Or hinder him from esteem∣ing it a very great Blessing to our pre∣sent Times, that a Work so highly e∣steemed among the Ancient Fathers, but so long, and as it was justly feared, irrecoverably lost to these latter Ages, was at last so happily found out, for the Encrease and Confirmation both of our Faith and Piety. 29. NOW the manner of its Dis∣covery and Publication was this. It hap∣pen'd about the beginning of the pre∣sent Age, that Cyril Patriarch of Alex∣andria being removed from thence to Constantinople, brought along with him a great Treasure of Books to that place. Among the rest he had a very ancient Manuscript Copy both of the Septua∣gint Old, and of the New Greek Te∣stament; written but little more than three hundred years after Christ. Vid. Praefat. Jun. in Edit. Oxon. 1633. This he sent, as the most valuable Present that he was Master of, to our late Royal Sovereign King Charles the First, by Sir Thomas Roe, his Majesty's Ambassadour at that time at the Port. Being thus brought into England, and placed in the Royal Library at St. James's, Mr. Patrick Young the learned Keeper of the King's Library at that time, discover'd this E∣pistle, with part of another, at the End
of the New Testament; and was there∣upon commanded by his Majesty to pub∣lish it for the benefit of the World. This he accordingly did, with a Latin Trans∣lation, and Notes at Oxford, Anno 1633: It was not Anno 1647. Lond. 4to. long after that a very learned Man, and a great Master of the Greek Tongue, Mr. William Burton, translated it into English, and publish'd it very accurately, and with new Anno∣tations of his own upon it. This I had not seen till the first Sheets of the pre∣sent Edition were sent to the Press; Nor had I any other knowledge either of that or of the Author, than what I found in the Accounts given by our Re∣verend Edit. Colo∣mesii lectori, Cave. Hist. li∣terar. in Clem. Dr. Cave, and the late Monsieur Edit. Colo∣mesii lectori, Cave. Hist. li∣terar. in Clem. Colomesius of the One, and by our labo∣rious Antiquary Athenae Oxon. 2 part▪ pag. 137, 138▪ Mr. A. Wood of the O∣ther; in his useful Collection of the Lives and Writings of our Modern Au∣thors. And though I believe whosoe∣ver shall take the pains to compare the two Translations together, will find them generally agreeing as to the Sense; yet there will otherwise appear such mani∣fest Differences between them, as may abundantly satisfie any indifferent Person, that I have tuly translated it from the O∣riginal Greek, and not Revised only Mr. Burton's Edition of it.
CHAP. III. Of the Epistle of St. Polycarp to the Philippians. Of the Time when St. Polycarp wrote this Epistle. The Reason of its being placed before the Epistles of Ignatius. That St. Polycarp wrote several other pieces: Yet nothing of his now remain∣ing but only this Epistle. Whether this Epistle has been interpolated, as those of Ignatius were? The latter part of it vindicated against the Exceptions of Monsieur Daillé, and some Others. Of the Translation of it into our own Lan∣guage by Dr. Cave; and of the present Edition of it. 1. THE next Piece that follows in the present Collection, is the Epistle of St. Polycarp to the Philippi∣ans. In placing of which I have fol∣low'd the Example, not so much of our most Reverend Edit. Poly∣carp. & Ignat. Oxon. Anno 1644. Archbishop Vsher, as of St. Polycarp himself: Though in the Order of Time the Epistles of Ig∣natius ought to have had the precedence; St. Polycarp not writing this Letter to the Philippians till about the time that that glorious Martyr suffer'd for the
Faith of Christ; as from several Pas∣sages in the Epistle it self may plainly be made appear. 2. FOR first; Having in his ixth Chapter exhorted the Philippians to obey the Word of Righteousness, and to exer∣cise all Patience after the Examples of those Holy Men whom they had seen a∣mong them; he particularly instances in Epist. of Po∣lycarp, Numb. ix. pag. 93. Ignatius as one of them. Now the Ma. of Ig. Numb. x. pag. 225. Acts of the Martyrdom of that Holy Martyr tell us, that the time when they beheld his Patience set forth before their Eyes was, when he passed by them in Chains to Rome in order to his being cast to the wild Beasts, according to the Sen∣tence pronounced upon him by the Em∣perour Trajan: By consequence that this Epistle must have been written some time after his Condemnation. 3. BUT St. Polycarp goes yet farther; and in the next Words supposes, that Ignatius might have been dead at the time that he wrote to them. For en∣forcing his Exhortation to them to fol∣low the Examples of Ignatius, and the rest of those excellent Men whom he there names, he subjoyns; Being confi∣dent of this, that all these have not run in vain, but in Faith and Righteousness, and are gone to the place that was due to them from the LORD, with whom also they
suffered. For they loved not this present World, but him who died, and was raised again by God for us. In which words he evidently implies that Ignatius too, as well as the rest of those whom he there mentions was by this time gone to the Place that was due to him from the LORD, upon the Account of his Sufferings; and by consequence had finished his Mar∣tyrdom. 4. IT was then about the time of Ig∣natius's Death that S. Polycarp wrote this Epistle to the Philippians. And yet that if this Holy Man had suffer'd, it was but a very little time that he had done so, is clear from another Passage of the same Epist of Po∣lycarp, numb. xiv. pag. 98. Epistle: Where he desires the Philippians to send him word what they had heard with any Certainty concerning Ignatius, and those that went to Rome with him. And from whence it appears, that though he supposed that Ignatius by that time might have suffer'd, yet he had not received any certain Account of it, but was still to learn the Manner and Circumstances of his Passion. 5. NOW this will lead us to a yet more exact Conjecture of the time of St. Polycarp's writing the following E∣pistle; viz. that it must have been just about the time of St. Ignatius's Death: It being no way probable that had Igna∣tius
been any long time dead, so great a Bishop, and so dear a Friend of his as St. Polycarp was, should have been still to learn the Certainty of it. 6. AND this may serve, by the way, not only to fix the Time when this E∣pistle was written; but also to shew how groundless the Exception of those Dallaeus in Pseudepigr. cap. xxxii. pa. 428. Larroque Observat. in Pearson, p. 69. Men is against the Authority of it, who pretend to find out a Contradiction between the two Passages I have now mentioned: And would from thence infer either the utter Falseness of this whole Epistle; or at least conclude that this latter part of it is none of Polycarp's, but added by some latter hand to give the greater Credit to the Epistles of St. Ig∣natius, which they are resolved by all means to reject as none of his. For in∣deed were not Men willing to be con∣tentious, where is the Contradiction they so much boast of between the two Places I have before alledged? Is it that in the former of them he sets be∣fore them the Sufferings of St. Igna∣tius, and exhorts them to follow the Ex∣ample of his Patience? But 'tis evi∣dent the Sufferings he there speaks of were those which the Philippians had seen in him. The Weight of his Chains; the Hardships of his Journey; the Rude∣ness of the Souldiers that guarded him; and of which the Ignat. Epist. to the Romans, cap. v. p. 163. blessed Martyr him∣self
complains in one of his Epistles; and to add no more, the Expectation of that cruel Death he was suddainly to undergo. 7. BUT I suppose the Contradiction lies in what follows; that in Vid. Dal∣laeum & Lar∣roque loc. cit. one place he speaks of him as if he had already suffered; and yet in the other desires the Philippians to send him word what they heard of him. Now what is there in all this that does not very well agree toge∣ther? St. Polycarp, either by the Compu∣tation of the Arrival of Ignatius at Rome; or by the Consideration of the Solemn Festival that was wont at that time to be held there; and at which it was usual to exhibit such kind of Spectacles to the People; or it may be, lastly, from the Accounts which he had received of the Holy Martyr from some of those that were with him; did suppose, nay if you will, did not doubt but that Ignatius was dead when he wrote his Epistle to the Philippians. Yet having not hitherto re∣ceived any certain Account of it, and being not sure whether he had suffered or no; or if he had, how he had been treated by his Enemies, and how he had behaved himself in his last Encounter with the Beasts; desires the Philippians, who were much nearer to Rome than he was, and might therefore very probably have heard much later from thence than
he had done, to send him a certain Ac∣count of what they knew as to this matter. What is there in this, I do not say that looks like a Contradiction, but that is not very Natural: And particularly most becoming the Love and Friendship of the Blessed Polycarp towards him con∣cerning whom he so diligently enquired? I am sure Photius Bibl. Tmem. cxxvi. pag. 305. Photius who not only had read this Epistle, but transcribed this last Passage out of it, tho' as severe a Critick as any that have ever perused it since, saw no Contradiction in it to any thing that went before. Since if he had, he was not of a Humour to have let it pass, without making some Re∣flection or other upon it. 8. LET me add yet more, that nei∣ther could those see the Contradiction here pretended, who in our present times would have been as forward as any to have made use of it to the Disadvan∣tage of this Epistle, had they had but the least Grounds so to do. I shall in∣stance only in Two; the first, the late Learned Divine of Leyden, Proleg. ad Var. Sacr. in Polycarp. Monsieur le Moyne: Who tho' he judged the Pas∣sage relating to St. Ignatius's Epistles, which was wanting in his Manuscript, to be abrupt, and would from thence ar∣gue against the Authority of it; yet has made no Reflection on the Words im∣mediately following, and in which those
Others will have the Contradiction to lie. 9. THE Other that I shall mention in Opposition to this Pretence, is a yet later Writer, Exercit. Se∣lect. Exerc. IV. num. 42. pag. 157. Ernestus Tentzelius; who tho' no great Friend to this Epistle, which he supposes to have been Corrupted, no less than those of Ignatius were in the Antient Editions of them; yet utterly refuses to comply with this Objection, as not apprehending that there was the least Ground for it. 10. BUT to return from this Di∣gression, in Answer to the Exception of two of the most Learned Adversaries of this Epistle, against the Credit of it: Tho' as I have now shewn, St. Polycarp wrote not to the Philippians till after the Death of St. Ignatius, and conse∣quently this Epistle in order of time ought to have been placed after those which the other wrote immediately be∣fore it: Yet was it fit to give this the Precedency in the following Collection, both as containing a most proper Intro∣duction to the Epistles of Ignatius; and as having in all probability been first sent in the same Order, by St. Polycarp to the Philippians. 11. FOR thus we find that Holy Man speaking to them in the Polycarp. E∣pist. num. xiii. p. 97. Close of his
Letter: The Epistles of Ignatius which he wrote unto us, together with what others of his have come to our Hands, we have sent unto you according to your Order; which are subjoyn'd to this Epistle. So both Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. iii. cap. 36. Eusebius transcribed it out of the Original Greek; and so we find it in our Antient Apud Usser. p. 24. Latin Version, which is all that remains of that Part of this Epistle. And from whence our Learned Arch-Bishop Dissert. de Ignat. Epist. cap. ii. Usher with great reason con∣cludes, that St. Polycarp caused the Co∣pies of St. Ignatius's Epistles to be im∣mediately added at the end of his own; and sent them to the Philippians together with it. 12. AND this perhaps may have been one great means of preserving this Epistle of St. Polycarp from the Fate that has attended all the rest of his Writings. For being wont to be transcribed toge∣ther with those of Ignatius, and com∣monly placed at the front of them; they mutually help'd to secure one ano∣ther: Whilst the rest of his Epistles, for want of being thus collected toge∣ther, have for a long time been so ut∣terly lost to the World, that neither Photii Bibl Tmem. cxxvi. p. 35. Photius, nor St De Scripr Eccles. in Po¦lycarp. Hierome, nor Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. IV c. 1 Eu∣sebius, nor even Irenaeus himself, the Dis∣ciple of St. Polycarp, seems to have had any particular Catalogue of them.
13. INDEED for what concerns the last of these, I mean Iren. Epist. ad Florin. apud Euseb. Hist. Ec∣cles. lib. V. c. 20. Irenaeus; he tells us that this great Man did write several Epistles, not only to the Neighbouring Churches, to confirm them in the Faith; but even to particular Persons, for their Instruction and Admonition. But what they were, or to whom they were sent, neither does he say, nor does Eusebius, where he speaks of the Writings of St. Polycarp, mention any more, than that Epistle to the Philippians, of which we are now discoursing. And tho' a few later S. Maximus Prolog. in Dio∣nys Areop. Suda in Po∣lycarp. &c. Vid. Usserii Disert. de Script. Ign. p. 4.5. ezel. Exerc. Select. de Polyc. num. xxxvi, xxxvii. Authors pretend to give us the very Titles of some other of his Works; yet have we reason to doubt from this Silence of those who lived the nearest to his Time, that their Authority is but small; nor can we say that even the Pieces which they name, are any where to be found at this Day. 14. NOR shall I except here those Fragments lately published by Ad lib. iii. c. 3. Irenaei. Fevar∣dentius out of Victor Capuanus; and re∣printed by Bishop Lond. 1647. p. 31. Usher in his Appen∣dix to Ignatius. In which as there are some things which neither Father Userius An∣not. loc. cit. p. 72, 73. Hal∣loix, nor our Learned Userius An∣not. loc. cit. p. 72▪ 73. Vsher could ap∣prove of, as written by St. Polycarp; so the Distance of Victor  he li∣ved anno 545. him who was the first Collector of them from the time of that Blessed Martyr; and the manifest Proofs he has on other Occasions given
of his little Care and Judgment in di∣stinguishing the Works of the Antient Fathers who lived any long time before him; not to say any thing of the Passa∣ges themselves ascribed to St. Cave Hist. li∣ter. in Polyc. pag. 28. Le Moyné Prol. ad Var. Sacr. Tenzel. Exercit. Select. IV. de Polyc. num. xlix. Du Pin. Bibl. Eccl. in Poly∣carp. &c. Polycarp, but little agreeable to the Apostolical Age: All these Considerations have justly re∣strained Learned Men from giving any great Credit to these Fragments, or from receiving them as belonging in any wise to so antient an Author. 15. BUT whatever becomes of these Fragments, certain it is that the Epistle which I have here subjoyn'd is the Genu∣ine Work of this Holy Man; and wor∣thy of that great Character which An∣tiquity has given of it. Even Monsieur De Scriptis Ignatian. cap, xxxii. Daillé himself confesses that excepting only the Close of it, against which it was necessary for him to declare himself; there is nothing in it that either ought to offend any, or that may be thought unworthy of Polycarp. But Prol. a Var. Sacr. Tom. I. in Polycarp. le Moyne goes yet farther; he declares that he does not see how any one can entertain the lest Sus∣picion against it: That there is not per∣haps any Work extant, that has more certain Evidences of its being Genuine, than this: In short, that if it shall be lawful to doubt of this, there will be no Monument of Antiquity left which we may not as well call in Question, and re∣ject as spurious.
16. INDEED so general is the reception which Vid. apud Tentzel. de Polycarp. Dis∣sert. IV. num. 41. pag. 157. Learned Men on all sides have given to this Epistle, that I might well omit any further Discourse in Confirmation of the Credit and Au∣thority of it. But yet seing there have been two things started by some of late, if not utterly to destroy, yet at least to lessen the Reputation of this Piece; I will consider in short what may fairly be replied to both their Exceptions. 17. NOW the first is that of Exercit. Se∣lect. Exerc. IV. num. 42, &c. 47. Tent∣zelius, in his Exercitation upon this Epi∣stle: Who tho' he allows it to be un∣doubtedly Genuine, yet supposes it to have been corrupted by the same hand that we confess Usserius Dis∣sert. de Epist. Ignat. cap. VI. pag. 33. did corrupt the Epi∣stles of Ignatius, about DC Years after Christ. But to this I reply; 1st. That it is allow'd that there is nothing in this Epistle that may give any just Grounds for the Suspicion of any such Fraud as this: It being acknowledged even by Monsr Daillé himself, one of the great∣est Adversaries of it, to be an Epistle in all respects worthy of St. Polycarp, excepting only in the Close of it, which I shall more particularly consider by and by. So that either we have then this E∣pistle pure and uncorrupted as it was first written; or at least we have it so little prejudiced by any Alterations that may have been made in it, that there is no∣thing
in the Epistle, as it now is, dan∣gerous in Point either of Faith or Man∣ners; or that might not have well e∣nough been written by St. Polycarp. But now this was not the Case with the E∣pistles of Vid. Dissert. Usser. c. X, XI. p. 63, &c. St. Ignatius; which not only laboured under many Impertinencies un∣becoming the Character of that Great Man, but was fraught with many things that were altogether fabulous: Nay if we may credit Arch-Bishop Ibid. c. XV. p. ▪ 3. Usher, had some Passages in them that tend∣ed to corrupt the very Faith of Christ, in one of the most considerable Points of it. 18. BUT Secondly, That the Epistles of St. Ignatius had been corrupted, was evident from  p. 12. Disagreement of the Co∣pies which we usually had of them, from the Quotations of the Ancient Fathers of the first Five Centuries out of them. Now this was a most unquestionable De∣monstration of their having been chang∣ed from what they were in those first Ages in which those Fathers lived: And accordingly proved to be so, when the old Latin Version of Bishop Vsher first, and then the Florentine Greek Edition of the Learned Isaac Vossius, came to be com∣pared with those Editions that had be∣fore been extant of them But neither does this Exception appear against the present Epistle, which agrees with what
is quoted both by Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. III. c. 36. Photius Bibl. Tmem. cxxvi. p. 305. Eusebius and Others out of it; and thereby clearly shews our present Copy to be sincere and un-cor∣rupted. 19. SEEING then there is nothing but a mere Conjecture for the Depra∣vation of this Epistle, and such just Rea∣son to conclude that there is no good Foundation for it; to be sure none that may compare with the Arguments we have against it: I think we may con∣clude, that for any thing yet appears to the contrary, we not only have the Ge∣nuine Epistle of St. Polycarp, but that Epistle free from any designed Corrup∣tions or Depravations of it. 20. NOR is there any more, that I do not say there is much less Weight, in the other Supposal of Monsieur Vid. Lar∣roque Observ. in Vind. Pears. p. 65, 66. Daillé, continued and abetted by his Learned De∣fender Monsieur Larroque, tho' without any more weight of Reason than what had been before fully answer'd by our most Learned and judicious Bishop Pear∣son: Namely; That this Epistle origi∣nally ended at the Doxology which we meet with Chapter the XIIth, and that what follows concerning the Epistles of St. Ignatius, has been added to it by some latter hand. But now, what proof do they offer of this? What Authority have they to support such a Supposition?
This they pretend not to: All they have to say is, that the Doxology which we find there seems to imply that the Epi∣stle originally went no farther; And that in what follows there is a flat Contra∣diction to what went before; the Close of the Epistle speaking of Ignatius as if he were still alive, whom the true Po∣polycarp had before set forth to the Phi∣lippians as having suffer'd, and been gone to the place that was prepared for him. 21. AS for what concerns the latter of these Suggestions, I have already ful∣ly shewn how vain and groundless it is. Nor can we reasonably suppose that any one who designed to serve a turn by corrupting such an Epistle as this, would have been either so negligent as not once to read over the Piece he was about to make so considerable an Addition to; or having read it, would have been so foolish, as to have, without any need, subjoyn'd a Request to the Philippians, directly contrary to what the true Poly∣carp had told them before; and which by consequence would be sure to discover the Fraud, and frustrate the Design of it. 22. SO little appearance of Reason is there in this Suggestion, which yet these Learned Men insist upon, as their main Argument against the latter part
of this Epistle. As for the other Obje∣ction which they bring against it, viz. that St. Polycarp must have concluded at the XIIth Chapter, because of the Vow which he there makes for these to whom he wrote; I reply, first: That this is at the best but a very uncertain Guess; seeing it is notorious to all that have ever read the Epistles either of the Apo∣stles, or those that followed after, that nothing is more common than to meet with such kind of Conclusions, not only in the end, but in the See 1 Tim. i.17. beginning, and Ephes. iii.20. Rom. xv.33. middle; in short, in all the parts of their Epistles. To look no farther than the Epistle, with which we have begun this Collection, of St. Clement to the Co∣rinthians: How many of these sort of Stops may we find in the Progress of it? I am sure there are not less than seven or eight of them. But I suppose he would be thought very ridiculous who should therefore reject all that follow'd the first of these, as none of St. Cle∣ment's, but pieced on to the end of his Epistle by some other hand, merely be∣cause the Doxology seem'd to imply his having concluded there. 23. BUT to lay aside Conjectures, and proceed to that, which will put a fi∣nal end to this Difficulty; I observe, 2dly, That this Passage which these Men deny to be St. Polycarps, and suppose to
have been added to it by some latter hand, is expresly quoted by Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. iii. c. 36. Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History, as a part of this Epistle. If therefore it be the Ad∣dition of some other hand, 'tis evident it was made to it before Eusebius's time, that is to say, within two Hundred Years after the time of St. Polycarp's writing of it; and whether this be probable we will now more particulary enquire. 24. FOR the better clearing of which I must observe, that this Epistle of St. Polycarp, like that of St. Clement fore∣going, was for several Hundreds of Years wont to be publickly read in the Churches of Asia: So Hieron. de Script. in Po∣lycarp. St. Jerome expresly assures us; or as his Interpreter Sophro∣nius renders him, in the Synod or Con∣vention of Asia. By which a Le Moyne Prolegom. ad var. Sacr. Learned Man supposes we are to understand some common Meetings of the Christians in those Parts, answerable to the like As∣semblies of the Gentiles there; And that in these this Epistle was wont to be read to them. 25. HENCE Apud Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. iv. cap. 14. Irenaeus speaks of it as an Epistle that was in every Bodies hand; and obvious to be read by any, for the Benefit of their Faith and Man∣ners. Which being so, it can hardly be supposed but that so inquisitive a Sear∣cher into Antiquity as Eusebius was, must
needs have been very well acquainted with it; and doubtless have had a true and genuine Copy of it. Seeing then he produces this Passage as a part of that Epistle which was generally received as Authentick in his Days; and that the E∣pistle its self being spread into all Hands, and publickly read in the Eastern Churches immediately after the Death of its great Author, could not have been corrupted or alter'd, but the Cheat must needs have been discover'd; of which yet we have not the least intimation in all Antiquity: I think it cannot be doubted but that this, as well as the rest of that Epistle, was written by St. Polycarp himself; and not added to his Epistle by some latter Hand, as is suggested, not only without all ground, but against such plain and un-answerable Evidence to the con∣trary. 26. HAVING said thus much in Vindication of this Epistle, and to clear it from those Prejudices that have of late been raised against it; it remains only for me to observe, that though the fol∣lowing Translation was truly made from the Greek and Latin Copies of it, set out by Bishop Vsher first, and since reprinted by Cotelerius in his Collection of the Apo∣stolical Fathers; yet is not this the first time that this Epistle has appear'd in our Language. For our most diligent and
Learned Country-man Dr. Cave's Lives of the Apostolical Fa∣thers in St. Po∣lycarp. Dr. Cave, ha∣ving a just Respect to the Worth of a Piece so highly applauded among the An∣cients, and so well deserving the Esteem of all good Men; thought it would be no unuseful Digression to present to his Reader so venerable a Monument of the Primitive Church: And therefore sub∣joyn'd it intirely to his Account of the Life of St. Polycarp, in a most accurate English Translation of it. 27. IT would no doubt have been more to the Readers Satisfaction, to have met with that Translation of this Epistle here, than to find another which he may have just reason to suppose can ne∣ver equal that which was finish'd by so great a Hand. And indeed I could have been glad to have render'd the following Collection more considerable, by the Reputation of a Translation made by so eminent an Author. But however, as it now is, I hope it may not be unacceptable to the pious Peruser of it: Who, what∣ever other Defects he may find in it, may yet, I am pretty confident, depend upon the Exactness of the Translation; seeing I perceive by an after Collation of it, that it does not differ in any thing that is material, from that of the Judi∣cious and Worthy Dr. Cave.
CHAP. IV. Of the Epistles of St. Ignatius. Of the different Editions of St. Ignatius's Epistles: Which are here translated from that of Isaac Vossius, and ac∣cording to the Enumeration made by Eusebius of them. The Authority of these Epistles vindicated, against the Objections raised of late against them. The Epistle to St. Polycarp one of those mentioned by Eusebius: The Excep∣tion against it taken from the Substance of the Epistle its self answer'd. A short Account of the following Translation of all of them. 1. BEFORE I enter upon that Ac∣count which it will be fitting for me to give of the Epistles of St. Ignatius, (the next that follow in the present Col∣lection;) it will be necessary for me to ob∣serve, that there have been considerable Differences in the Editions of the Epistles of this Holy Man, no less than in the Judgment of our latter Criticks concern∣ing them. To pass by the first, and most imperfect of them; the best that for a long time was extant, contained not only a great number of Epistles falsly ascribed to this Author, but even those that were
Genuine so alter'd and corrupted, that it was hard to find out the true Ignatius in them. 2. THE first that began to remedy this Confusion, and to restore this great Writer to his Primitive Simplicity, was our Most Reverend and Learned Arch-bishop Usher, in his Edition of Them at Oxford, Anno 1644. But still we wanted a correct Copy of the Original Greek; the Epistles set out by him, though ex∣ceedingly more sincere than any we had seen before, yet consisting only of the Old Latin Translations of them. Now this was in great measure perform'd by the Learned Isaac Vossius, in the Edition published by him at Amsterdam, Anno 1646: And presenting us from the Flo∣rentine Manuscript with six of the Epistles of this Holy Martyr mentioned by Eu∣sebius, in their ancient and pure Greek; and the seventh so happily amended, that there is but little doubt to be made of the Integrity of that too. And concerning these Epistles of St. Ignatius, enumerated by Eusebius, and set out according to their Primitive Purity by these two great Men, and from them translated into the following Collection; there are two things to be consider'd and proved by me in this place: First,Vid. Vossii Praefat. in Ig∣nat ad Lecto∣rem. That St. Ignatius did write such Epistles as those we have here trans∣lated: And secondly; that those Epistles
we here have, are the very Epistles that he wrote. 3. THAT Ignatius did, in general, write some Epistles to the Churches about him, however it has been de∣ny'd by Some, is yet I think now u∣niversally allow'd even by Vid. Vindic. Pearson in Proëm. p. 20. those who are the greatest Opposers of those E∣pistles which we affirm to be his. That he wrote to those particular Chur∣ches to which the Epistles here sub∣joyn'd are addressed, we have both St. Polycarp and Eusebius to assure us. For, first; Polycarp. E∣pist. Numb. xiii. pag. 97. Annot. Cotel. in loc. Poly∣carp. p. 486. B. St. Polycarp, in the Close of his Epistle, (which I am now to look upon as sufficiently proved to be his) speaking to the Philippians of this Holy Man, tells them; that he had sent them all such Epistles of his, as Ignatius had either written to himself, or to his Church at Smyrna, or as had hitherto come to his Hands. So that here then we have a plain Account of two of those Epistles which we affirm Ignatius to have written; One to St. Polycarp himself, Another to the Church of Smyrna. 4. BUT Eusebius will enable us to carry this Testimony yet farther: Whilst assuring us, that he wrote four Epistles from Smyrna; namely to the Churches of Ephesus, Magnesia, Tralles and Rome; he gives us just grounds to conclude that
these also must have been part of St. Po∣lycarp's Collection; and have been some of those others, besides the two before mentioned, which he tells us he sent to the Philippians. Unless we should suppose that either he knew not of Ignatius's writing, though every Day, almost eve∣ry Hour, with him at the time that he wrote them: Or else that knowing of it, He took no care to preserve the Copies of his Epistles; which yet we see he put the highest Value, that can well be ima∣gined, upon. Seeing therefore we can∣not with any reason suppose, either that St. Polycarp did not know of Ignatius's writing to these Churches; nor is it pro∣bable, that being present with him at the writing of them, and acquainted with it, he should not have kept any Copies of his Letters to them: Seeing lastly; he him∣self tells us that he had Copies of more of the Epistles of this Great Saint, besides those that were sent to Smyrna, and that what he had, he sent to the Philippians; neither can we reasonably doubt but that these also were in his Hands, and sent by him to the Church at Phillipi. 5. AND thus have we I think upon very good grounds concluded that Six of the Seven Epistles, which we affirm to have been written by St. Ignatius, were collected by St. Polycarp; and sent, together with his own Epistle, to the
Philippians. Let me add yet farther, that neither can we reasonably question but that the Seventh too was at that time in the Hands of St. Polycarp; and by con∣sequence, that what we now have is no other Collection, than what he made, and by that means help'd to preserve to af∣ter Ages, of the Epistles of this Holy Martyr. Now this I conclude not only from the Nearness of the Church of Philadelphia, to which it was written, to that of Symrna in which St. Polycarp presi∣ded; and from the great Respect which all the Neighbouring Churches payd to him, as a kind of Universal Bishop of the whole Lesser Asia; but from the Con∣clusion of the Epistle its self: Which tells us that it was sent by Ignatius to the Philadelphians, not only from the same place, and at the same time, that he wrote to St. Polycarp himself, and to his Church of Smyrna; but also by the same Person that carried the other two; and that Person St. Polycarps own Deacon, whom he had sent with Ignatius to Troas, and by whom Ignatius wrote back that Epistle. 6. St. POLYCARP then certainly knew of Ignatius's writing to the Philadelphians; and very probably sent on Burrhus his Deacon from Smyrna to Philadelphia, with his Letter. And then I think we may very reasonably conclude, that he brought
back with him the Copy of it; and so that St. Polycarp had that Epistle too in his Hands, when he wrote to the Phi∣lippians. 7. SUCH good grounds have we to believe, that the Collection we now have of St. Ignatius's Epistles, was no other than what St. Polycarp himself made; and refer'd to in that passage of his own Epistle to the Philippians, which I have before shewn to be truly his, and not the Addition of any latter hand. And the same is the Account which Hist. Eccles. lib. iii. cap. 36. Eu∣sebius himself has given us of this Mat∣ter. He tells us that as Ignatius was on his way to Rome, where he was to be cast to the Wild Beasts; he not only confirm'd the Churches that were in the places through which he passed, by his Exhortations, but wrote to the Chiefest of those others that were near, such E∣pistles as these of which we are now speaking. And that, as he goes on, in this following Order. First, from Smyr∣na Vid. Chrys. Orat. ad An∣tiochen., where he tarried some time with his Old Acquaintance and Fellow-Disci∣ple St. Polycarp, he wrote to the Ephe∣sians, Magnesians, Trallians and Romans: And being gone farther on his Way to Troas, he from thence wrote to the Phi∣ladelphians, and Smyrneans; , and a par∣ticular Letter to Polycarp, the Bishop of Smyrna.
8. I SAY nothing to the Testimony of Libr. de Script. Illustr. cap. xvi. St. Hierome as to this Matter, who as he exactly agrees with Eusebius in all this, so I make no question but that he transcribed his Account out of him. It is I think sufficiently evident from what has been already observed, not only that St. Ignatius did in general write some Epistles which even Mounsieur Apud Pear∣son, Vindic. Ignat. Prole∣gom. pag. 20. Daillé himself thinks ought not to be any question; but that he wrote to those particular Churches to which the Epistles we now have, are directed; and of which I am perswaded there ought to be as little doubt. 9. AS for the other point proposed, and in which the foregoing also will be yet more fully confirmed; namely, that those Epistles we now have are the same that Ignatius wrote: Two things there are that seem to determine our Belief of it. First; that there is nothing in these Epistles, as we now have them, either un∣worthy of the Spirit of Ignatius, or the Character that Antiquity has given us of them: Nothing disagreeing to the Time in which he wrote, or that should seem to speak them to have been the Work of any latter Author; which hardly ever fails to appear in such pieces as are falsly imposed upon Ancient Au∣thors; and which not appearing in these Epistles, inclines us the more readily to
conclude that they were undoubtedly written by him whose they are said to be. 10. BUT this is only a presumptive Argument in favour of these Epistles; and which though it may serve to dispose us the more readily to receive them as true and genuine, yet is not alone suf∣ficient to prove them so to be. The other Argument I have now to offer is positive and convincing; namely, That we find these Epistles, as they now are, exactly agreeing both with the Descrip∣tions which St. Pearson Vind. Ignat. par. I. cap. 3. pag. 27. Polycarp and Ibid. cap. ii. pag. 8. Eusebius have left us of those which they took to be the Authentick Epistles of this Ho∣ly Man; and with the numerous Quota∣tions which the Pearson ibid. pag. 8 ad 25. Comp. Testim. Cotelerii de Ignat. Et Usser. Dissert. Ignat. Ancient Fathers have taken out of them; and which all occur in the same Words, in our present Co∣pies of them, that they are cited in their Writings. 11. THIS has been so fully shewn by our most Learned Bishop Pearson, and indeed was so manifest of its self to any one that had ever made any Com∣parisons of this kind; that Monsieur Apud Pear∣son Vind. Ig∣nat. Proaem. pag. 20. Et Vind. par. i. pag. 8. Daillé himself could not deny but that we have the same Epistles now, that Eu∣sebius, Athanasius, St. Jerome, Theodoret and Gelasius had heretofore. So that the only Question then to be consider'd by
us is; Whether those which Eusebius, &c. had, were not counterfeit, but the true Epistles of this great Martyr. 12. AND here, first, it is evident, that if those Epistles which Eusebius first, and then the rest of those great Men I before mentioned, took for the Genuine Epistles of St. Ignatius, were none of his; the true Epistles, which I have just now shewn, and which it is confes'd were writ∣ten by him, must before that time have been utterly lost, or otherwise destroyed out of the World: It being very impro∣bable that had the true Epistles been still remaining, neither so inquisitive a Search¦er into Antiquity as Eusebius should have heard of them, nor such great and learned Men as those that followed after, have had any Suspition of such a Deceit. But now whether this be probable; Whether it can be supposed that such Epistles as these, directed to so many great and emi∣nent Churches, collected by so Venerable a Man as St. Polycarp, and written by so glorious a Martyr as St. Ignatius, should within so little time be utterly lost out of the Church; I shall leave it to any one, who considers how great a Reverence the Primitive Christians had for every thing that came from the Hands of such Holy and Excellent Men, and such glo∣rious Martyrs of Christ, to determine.
13. WE read in the See below, p. 228. Acts of the Mar∣tyrdom of this Blessed Saint, with what a mighty Care those who went with him to Rome, and were the Eye-Wit∣nesses of his Sufferings, gathered up the few hard Bones of his Body which the Lions had left; and how they brought them back in a kind of Triumph to his Church at Antioch. And we are told with what Pomp they were many Ages after taken up from the place where they were first buried, and carried by the Command of the younger Theodosius within the City: Insomuch that as our Evagrius lib. i. cap. 16. Nicephor. lib. xiv. cap. 44. Historians observe, there was a Festi∣val Solemnity established upon that Oc∣casion; and Annually observed to the very time in which they wrote, in re∣membrance of it. But was the Church then so careful of a few dead Bones of such a Saint as this, and did they e∣steem them as so great a Treasure; and yet had they so little regard to his Wri∣tings, the last Testimonies of his Affe∣ction to the Churches to which he wrote, as to suffer them within Two Hundred Years to be so utterly lost, as not to be once known or heard of, by the greatest and most curious Searchers into Anti∣quity? This is, I confess, to me so very improbable, that I could almost as easi∣ly believe the Holy Scriptures them∣selves to have been upon a suddain
changed into some other Epistles than what St. Peter or St. Paul wrote; as that such Epistles as these could be so totally defaced, as some pretend, and new ones set out in the room of them, and yet no Body know any thing of the doing of it. But such Impossibilties as these must learned Men be content to please them∣selves, and impose upon others withall, who resolve to be wiser than any that went before them; and to be able to know better at fiftteen hundred years distance what Ignatius wrote, than those who lived within two Generations of him. 14. FOR to press our Argument yet more closely: Since it is allow'd that Ignatius did write some Epistles, and I think sufficiently evident that St. Poly∣carp did make a Collection of them, and send them together with his own to the Philippians; I presume it will not be question'd but that he most certainly had the Genuine Writings of that Holy Mar∣tyr, his dear Friend and Fellow-Disciple. Now St. Polycarp suffer'd not according to the earliest Computation of our ac∣curate Bishop Pearson dis∣sert. Chron. ii. cap. xiv ad xx. Pearson till the Year of our Saviour 147. And Usher. Anno 169. Euseb. & in eum Va∣les. 167. Peti∣tus 175. &c. See below. others suppose it to have been yet later. Hitherto there∣fore it is certain that the true Epistles of Ignatius continued in the Church: It be∣ing by no means probable that they should
have been changed whilst the Men lived to whom Ignatius wrote; whilst Polycarp was living who collected them toge∣ther; and whilst those of the Church of Philippi remained, to whom he sent them. 15. TO St. Polycarp let us add his Scholar and Admirer, Irenaeus; and as him∣self professes a most diligent Collector of whatever fell from that Holy Man. That he had the Epistles of St. Ignatius, Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. v. cap. 8. Eusebius assures us; who particularly takes notice of his quoting several Pas∣sages out of them. And one of his Quo∣tations Ibid. lib. iii. cap. 36. he mentions out of the Works of Irenaeus which still remain: And of which though the Greek be lost, yet the Old Irenaeus, lib. iii. cap. 28. Latine Version, as well as the Greek of Eusebius, shews us, that it was taken out of the Epistle of Ignatius to the Ro∣mans, where it still occurs in our present Copy of it. And it must be allow'd that the other Passages of which Eusebius speaks, were also to have been found the Epistles as he had them: Because o∣therwise, the Difference between what the one quoted, and the other read in his Copy of those Epistles, would present∣ly have discovered the Fraud; and shewn that his Epistles were not the same with those which Irenaeus mentioned.
16. AND this puts the Matter yet more out of doubt: For if Eusebius had the same Epistles that Irenaeus had, we must allow one of these two things; Either that he had a Genuine Copy of them, as we affirm; or that Irenaeus, the Disciple and Contemporary of St. Po∣lycarp had not; which we think it very unreasonable to suppose. 17. FOR not to say any thing as to this Matter, that Irenaeus lived too near the time both in which Ignatius wrote, and St. Polycarp collected his Epistles, to have been imposed upon in this particu∣lar: Seeing he himself tells us how care∣ful he was to gather up whatever came from the Hand of the Blessed Polycarp, and that he not only had the Epistles of Ignatius, as appears by his citing of them; but, as Apud Euseb. Epist. ad Flo∣rin. Hist. Ec∣cles. lib. v. cap. 20. himself declares, had also the Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians; at the end of which the Epistles of Ig∣natius were subjoyned: What can we conclude, but that the Copy he had of both was taken from that of his Master Polycarp; which being to be sure Authen∣tick, it must remain that Irenaeus's was so too. 18. WERE it needful to add any thing yet farther to shew that Eusebius, who is confessed to have had the same Copy of St. Ignatius that we have now,
had no other than that of St. Polycarp so often mentioned; I might to the Testi∣mony of Irenaeus, before alledged, add that of Orig. Homil. vi. in Luc. Et in Cantic. Pro∣leg. Origen, who began to live some time before the other died. Now this Father has not only spoken of these E∣pistles, but has left us two Quotations to this day out of them; and both to be found in our Copies which we suppose to be true and Authentick. And from him to Eusebius was not above half a Century; too little a while for so great an Alteration to have been made in Writings spread up and down into so many Hands; read by all the Learned and Pious Men of those days; and up∣on all these Accounts utterly uncapable of such a Change, as is without the Au∣thority of one single Writer, only up∣on I know not what Conjectures, sup∣posed to have been made in them. 19. BUT I enlarge my self too much in so plain a Matter; and which I should hardly have thought worth the examining thus distinctly, had it not en∣gaged the Pens of so many Learned Men of the Reformed Religion, that it might have seem'd too great an Omission in such a Discourse as this, not to have given some Account of it. As for what we find a late Ernest Tent¦zel. Ex. select  11, 12 pag . Learned Man advancing in Opposition to the Authority of these Epistles, that our Copies, though exceed∣ingly
more perfect than any that were ever extant before that those great Men Bishop Usher and Isaac Vossius set out the One, the old Latin Versions; the Other, the Original Greek, from the Manu∣script which he found in the Florentine Library of it; yet there may be reason still to suspect that they are not so free from all Corruptions as were to be wish'd: I reply; that if he means that the same has happen'd to these Epistles as has done to all other ancient Writings, that Letters, or Words have been mi∣staken, and perhaps even the pieces of some Sentences corrupted, either by the Carelesness or Ignorance of the Transcri∣bers; I see no Reason why we should deny that to have befallen these Epistles, which has been the Misfortune of all other Pieces of the like Antiquity. This therefore, it has been often Vossi Annot. passim. Peason vind. Ignat. Proleg. p 20. declared, that neither do we contend about; nor can any one, who reads the best Copies we have of them with any Care or Judgment, make any doubt of it. But as for any larger Interpolations, such as were those of the Copies before ex∣tant; for any Changes or Mistakes that may call in question either the Credit or Authority of these Epistles as we now have them; we utterly deny that there are any such in these last Editions of them; nor has that Learned Man offer'd any thing to induce us to believe that there are.
20. AND here I should have con∣cluded these Reflections, but that there is yet one thing more to be taken notice of, and which must by no means be passed by; namely, that our most Learned Arch∣bishop Dissert. de Ignat. cap. iii. Usher himself, though he agrees with us as to the Authority of the other Six Epistles here translated, yet doubts whether the Seventh, written to St. Po∣lycarp, be Genuine or no. Nor do's Annot. in Ignat. Epist. pag 264, 265. Isaac Vossius himself deny but that there are some things in it that may seem to ren∣der it suspicious; though more to prove it to be Authentick. For 1st, Polycarp. E∣pist. num. xii. pag. 97. St. Poly∣carp expresly assures us that Ignatius had written to him; so both Hist. Eccles. lib. III. c. 36. Eusebius and Hieronym. de Viris Illustr. in Ignat. S. Hierome teach us to understand his Ex∣pression; They mention the Epistle to Po∣lycarp, as distinct from that to the Church of Smyrna: And 2dly, Vid. Isaac. Vess. Annot. loc. supr. cit. The Ancient Fathers quote it as Ignatius's no less than the rest: And from all which it seems to be very plain, that this also has the same Evidence of being written by Ignatius that any of the rest have; and therefore that he who allows it as sufficient for them, ought not to refuse it for this. 21. AS for that which seems to be the most difficult to account for in it, namely his writing after such a manner to so great a Bishop, and so old a Man, as he do's to Polycarp; Chap. V, VI. it is rightly observed by Pag. 213. Vossius in his
Annotations on those Chapters, that he speaks in them not to St. Polycarp; but by a usual Change of Person, shews what he would have Polycarp say to his Church: And whosoever shall consider in what manner he brings in what he there delivers; Say to my Sisters, &c. And again, Exhort my Brethren, &c. will presently see, how those Instructions are to be understood. 22. AND now it remains only that I give some short Account of the fol∣lowing Translation of these Epistles. The Copies from which I did it were those of Isaac Vossius and Bishop Usher; com∣paring both as I had Occasion with the late Edition of Cotelerius. In the See below, pag. 159. Sa∣lutation of the Epistle to the Romans I have departed from all of them, and follow'd the Correction of that Judicious Man, whose Name I mention in the Margent of it. I thought my self the more at liberty to do this, because that this Epistle was not found in the Floren∣tine Manuscript; but made up in some measure from the Latin Versions, by the Conjectures of Learned Men: Among whom I think I shall offend none, if in judging of these kind of things, and espe∣cially of this Author, I shall allow Bi∣shop Pearson the first place. For the rest I have kept as strictly to the Text of Vossius, as the Sense would permit me to
do: Only where a place was manifest∣ly imperfect I have sometimes taken the Liberty to express my own Conjectures, though differing from those of others, with whom nevertheless I pretend not to compare my self. But then I seldome do this without taking notice of it, and tel∣ling my Reader to whom he may recur for a somewhat different Opinion. If after all there shall appear some Faults in my Translation; though I may mo∣destly say I have taken what Care my little Acquaintance in these Matters would enable me to do, to avoid them; I desire it may be consider'd that I had a difficult Author, and an imperfect Co∣py to deal with; And I shall be very ready thankfully to amend any Error, that any more discerning Person shall think fit to advertise me of, if ever this Collection should be thought worthy to come to a Second Edition.
CHAP. V. Of the Martyrdom of St. Ignatius; and of the following Relation of it, written by those who were present at his Sufferings. Of the Life of St. Ignatius; whence he was called Theophorus? That he ne∣ver saw Christ; but was converted to Christianity by the Apostles: And by them made Bishop of Antioch. How he behaved himself in that Station? Of his Death: Why he was sent from Antioch to Rome, in order to his suf∣fering there? Metaphrastes account of the Effect which his Death wrought upon the Emperour Trajan, rejected. How the Persecution of the Christians came to be mitigated about the time that he suffered? An Enquiry into the Time of his Martyrdom. 1. IN the foregoing Chapter I have given such an Account of the Epi∣stles of St. Ignatius as seem'd necessary to vindicate the Authority of them, and to remove those Prejudices which some had of late endeavour'd to raise against them. I am now to pass from the
Writings of this Holy Man, to his tru∣ly Great and Heroical Sufferings: An Account whereof is in the next place subjoyn'd, in the Relation of those who accompanied him from Antioch to Rome; and were there the Eye-Witnesses of his Martyrdom. 2. BUT before I come to the Con∣sideration of this last and noblest part of his Life, I cannot but think it will be expected from me to give some Ac∣count of the foregoing Passages of it: That so we may here have at once a full View of this Great Saint; and per∣ceive by what Steps he prepared himself for so Constant and Glorious a Death. 3. AND here it will be necessary for me in the first place to consider the Character which he gives of himself in the Beginning of all his Epistles, and which he constantly asserted before the Acts of Igna∣tius, numb. iv, v. pag. 221, 222. Emperour at his Examination, name∣ly, that of Theophôrus. Now this ac∣cording to the different Pronunciation of it, may be expounded after a very different manner; and signifie either a Person carried by God, or else a Divine Person; One who carries God in his Breast. And in both these Significations we find this Name to have been given to this Holy Man.
4. FOR 1st. As to the former Sig∣nification, we are told by some of the Writers of his Life, that St. Ignatius was the Child whom our Blessed Sa∣viour took in his Arms, and set before his Disciples as a Pattern of Humility, when he told them, That unless they should be converted,Mat. xviii.3. and become as little Children, they should in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God: And that from thence He took the Name of Theo∣phorus; One who was Born, or Carried by God. And thus not only Metaphrast. apud Coteler. p. 991. Meta∣phrastes and Niceph. Hist. Eccl. lib. II. cap. 35. Nicephorus among the Greeks; but as our Learned Usher. Annot. in Act. Mart. Ignat. Num. iv. Bishop Usher tells us, some Syriac Writers more ancient than they, both interpret this Name, and give an Account of its be∣ing attributed to this Blessed Martyr. 5. BUT as Stories of this kind sel∣dom lose in the relation, so we find the Vid. Annot. in Concil. Oe∣co▪ viii Con∣c.  Tom. viii. p. 994. D. Latines making a farther Improve∣ment of the present Fable. For having Confirm'd the Truth of what these Men had before observed, of St. Ignatius's being taken up by our Saviour into his Arms; they add, that for this Reason the Apostles, when they made him Bishop of Antioch, durst not lay their Hands upon him; He having been before both commended by our Saviour Christ, and sanctified by his touching of him.
6. THERE is so much of Romance in all the latter part of this Story, and so little Grounds for the former, that I shall not need to spend any time in the confuting of either. It is enough that Homil. in S. Ignat. To. I. Fevardent. p. 499, 506 B. C. St. Chrysostome has assured us, that this Holy Man never saw the LORD; and that all the other Ancient Writers are silent as to this particular. Which makes me the rather wonder at the En∣deavour of a late Mountac. O∣rigin. Eccles. To. II. p. 211, 212. Learned Writer of our own Country, to give Countenance to such a Fable; and which if not de∣stitute of all Probability, yet at least wants any good Authority to support it: And as our Learned Vind. Ignat. Part. II. c. xii. p. 149. Bishop Pear∣son very reasonably conjectures, was first started about the time of the VIIIth Ge∣neral Council, by the Party of that Igna∣tius who was then set up in Opposition to Photius; and from thence derived both to Anastasius among the Latines, and to Metaphrastes among the Greeks. 7. TO pass then from this fabulous Account of this Title, let us come to the consideration of the true Import of it. Now for that as we cannot have any better, so neither need we desire any other Account, than what this Acts of Ignat. Num. V. p. 222. Ho∣ly Man himself gave the Emperour of that Name. When being asked by him, Who was Theophorus? He replied, He who has Christ in his Breast. And in
this sense was this Name commonly used among the Ancients; as has been shewn in a multitude of Examples by Bishop Vind. Ignat. Part. II. p. 144. Pearson, in his Elaborate Vindication of Ignatius's Epistles. I shall offer only one of them, that of St. Cyrill; who Anathematizes those who should call our Saviour Christ, Theophorus; Lest, says he, he should thereby be understood to have been no other than one of the Saints. 8. IT remains then that Ignatius was called Theophorus upon no other Account, than as any other Divine or Excellent Person might have been so called; name∣ly, upon the Account of his admirable Piety: Because his Soul was full of the Love of God, and sanctified with an extraordinary Portion of the Divine Grace; as both his Life shewed, and the earnest desire he had to be dissolved and to be with Christ; and his Joy when he saw himself approaching towards it; and (to mention no more,) his Constan∣cy in his last, and most terrible Conflict with the Wild Beasts, will not suffer us to doubt. 9. BUT tho' the Story then of our Saviour's taking St. Ignatius into his Arms be of no Credit; yet thus much Homil. in Ig∣nat. pag. 499. To. I. Fevar∣dent. St. Chrysostome tells us, that he was inti∣mately acquainted with the Holy Apo∣stles, and instructed by them in the full
Knowledg of all the Mysteries of the Gospel. What was the Country that gave Birth to this Blessed Saint, or who his Parents, we cannot tell. Indeed as to the former of these, his Country; a Ernest. Tent∣zel. Exercit. Select. III num. ii. p. 47. late Author has endeavoured from a Passage in Abulfaragius, set out by our Incom∣parable Dr. Pocock, to fix it at Nora in Sardinia; a place which still retains its anicent Name with very little Variation. This is certain, that growing eminent both in the Knowledg of the Doctrine of Christ, and in a Life exactly framed according to the strictest Rules of it; He was upon the Death of Evodius cho∣sen, by the Apostles that were still living, to be Bishop of Antioch, the Metropolis of Syria; and whatever Anastasius pre∣tends Vid. Chry∣sost. Orat. in Laud Ignat. Theodoret. To. IV. p. 33. Dial. I Comp. Usser. Annot. in Epist. ad Anti∣och. pag. 107. Pearson. Vind. Ignat. part. II. p. 107., received Imposition of Hands from them. 10. HOW he behaved himself in this great Station, tho' we have no par∣ticular Account left to us, yet may we easily conclude from that short hint that is given us of it, in the Relation of his Martyrdom Acts of Ignat. num. I, II, III. p. 219, 220, 221.. Where we are told that he was a Man in all things like unto the Apostles; that as a good Gover∣nour, by the Helm of Prayer and Fa∣sting, by the Constancy of his Do∣ctrine and Spiritual Labour, he op∣posed himself to the Floods of the Ad∣versary: That he was like a Divine
Lamp illuminating the Hearts of the Faithful by his Exposition of the Ho∣ly Scriptures; and lastly, that to pre∣serve his Church, he doubted not free∣ly and of his own accord, to expose himself to the most bitter Death. This is in general the Character of his Beha∣viour in his Church of Antioch; and a greater than which can hardly be given to any Man. Nor indeed can we doubt but that he who, as Hist. Eccles. lib. III. cap. 36. Eusebius tells us, and as his Epistles still remaining abun∣dantly testifie, was so careful of all the other Churches, to confirm them in a sound Faith, and in a constant Adhe∣rence to their Holy Religion; was cer∣tainly much more vigilant to promote the Interests of Piety within his own Diocese, which was bless'd with his Government above Euseb. Chron. ab anno 69 ad 110. alii ad 116. vid. infr. Forty Years. 11. HENCE we may observe, what a tender concern he expresses in all his Epistles for his Church at Antioch: With what Affection he recommends it to the Prayers of those to whom he wrote? And especially to the Care of his dear Friend, and Fellow-Disciple St. Polycarp. And when he heard at Troas of the cea∣sing of the Persecution there, how did he rejoyce at it? And require all the neighbouring See his Epistles to the Phila∣delph. Smyrn. and to St. Poly∣carp. Churches to rejoyce with him; and to send their Messengers and Letters thither, to congratulate with them upon that account?
12. SUCH was his Affection to∣wards his own Church, and his Care of all the Others round about him: And by which he became in such an extra∣ordinary Favour with them, that they thought nothing could be sufficient to ex∣press their Respect towards him. And therefore we are told, that when he was carried from Antioch to Rome, in order to his Suffering there; all the Churches every where sent Vid. Ignat Epist. & spe∣atim. ad Rom. num. ix. p. 167. Add. Act. Ignat. num. ix. p. 224. Messengers on the way to attend him, and to com∣municate to his Wants. And what is yet more, they were generally their Bishops themselves that came to meet him; and thought it a singular Hap∣piness to receive some Spiritual Exhor∣tations from him. And when he was Dead, they paid such an Honour to his Memory, as to account the Vid. Act. Ig∣nat. num. xiii.228. few Bones that were left of him by the Wild Beasts, more precious than the richest Jewels: Insomuch that we are told they were several Vid. Usserii Ann. in Act. Ignat. num. 37. Ages after ta∣ken up from the place where they were first deposited, as not Honourable enough for them to lie in; and that being brought within the City where he once was Bishop, there was institu∣ted a Yearly Festival in Memory of him.
13. AS for what concerns the Cir∣cumstances of his Death, they are so particularly recounted in the Relation I have here subjoyn'd of it, that there need nothing further to be added, to what is there deliver'd of this matter. Yet one Remark I cannot but make on that particular of his Story which has puzzled so many Vid. Scalig. in Euseb. ad Ann. 110. Learned Men to ac∣count for; but may easily be resolved, and I believe most truly too, into the over-ruling Hand of the Divine Provi∣dence. And that is; of the sending of this Holy Man from Antioch as far as Rome to suffer. For whatever the Design of the Vid. Usser. Not. in Act Ig∣nat. num. ix. p. 39.40. Tent¦zel. Exerc. iii. p. 49. Emperour may have been in it; Whether he intended to increase his Sufferings by a Journey so wearisom, and attended with so many bitter Cir∣cumstances as that must needs have been to a Person very probably at that time Fourscore Years of Age: Or whether he hoped by this means to have over∣come his Constancy, and have drawn him away from his Faith: Or lastly, Whether, as Mart. apud Coteler. Metaphrastes tells us, upon his con∣sulting with Those of the Senate who were with him, he was advised not to let him suffer at Antioch, least thereby he should raise his Esteem the more among the People there, and render him the more dear and desirable to them: We cannot but doubt, that God hereby designed to present to all
the Nations through which he was to pass, a glorious Instance of the Power of his Religion, that could enable this Bles∣sed Martyr with so much Constancy to despise all the Violence of his Enemies; and to be impatient after those Tryals which they hoped should have affrighted him into a base and degenerous Com∣plyance with their Desires. 14. THIS was indeed a Triumph worthy of the Christian Religion: Nor was it any small Advantage to the Churches at such a critical Time, to have their Zeal awaken'd, and their Courage confirm'd, both by the Example and Ex∣hortations of this great Man, from An∣tioch even to Rome it self. And we are accordingly told with what mighty Com∣fort and Satisfaction they received his In∣structions; and as the Acts of Ig∣nat. num. ix. p. 224. Authors of his Acts express it, Rejoyced to partake in his Spiritual Gift. 15. NAY but if we may believe Me∣taphrastes as to the Effect which the Suf∣ferings of this Holy Man had upon the Mind of the Emperour, the Church re∣ceived yet greater Benefit by his Death. For TrajanMart. Ignat. apud Coteler. p. 1 02., says he, hearing of what had been done to Ignatius, and how undauntedly he had undergone the Sen∣tence that was pronounced against him; and being inform'd that the Christians
were a sort of Men that did nothing contrary to the Laws, nor were guilty of any Impieties; but worshipped Christ as the Son of God, and exercis∣ed all Temperance both in Meat and Drink, nor medled with any thing that was forbidden: He began to repent of what he had done, and command∣ed that the Christians should indeed be searched out, but that being discover'd they should not be put to Death; On∣ly they should not be admitted into any Offices, nor be suffer'd to meddle with any Publick Employs. Thus was not only the Life of Ignatius of great Use to the Church; but his very Death the means of procuring much Good to it. And what Metaphrastes here tells us, we find in effect deliver'd by ano∣ther Vid. Usser. Annot. in Act. Ignat. p. 55 56. Author of his Acts not yet set forth; and from whom he seems to have taken his Story, only with the Addi∣tion of some farther Circumstances of his own, to make it the more complete. 16. BUT tho' I should be far from envying any thing that might make for the Honour of this Blessed Martyr; yet are there many Circumstances in the Story which Metaphrastes has here put together, that make me justly call in question the Truth of it. For first, it is evident beyond all doubt, that the Persecution was abated at Antioch before
Ignatius suffer'd, nay before he was yet gone out of the Lesser Asia. Insomuch that in his three last Epistles which he wrote from Troas, to the Philadelphians, the Smyrnaeans, and to Polycarp himself; he particularly takes notice of the Peace of the Church of Antioch, and exhorts them to send Congratulatory Messages thither upon the account of it. 17. NOR was this Suspension of the Persecution granted upon Ignatius's ac∣count, but upon the Remonstances which his own Officers made to him both of the Numbers of those that died for the Christian Faith, and of the Innocency of their Lives; and lastly of the Readiness with which they not only suffer'd when taken, but voluntarily came and presented themselves before them. Two of these Epistles relating to this very Persecution we have still remaining; the One writ∣ten by Apud Usser. Annot. in E∣pist. ad Phila∣delph. Not. 82. Et in Append. p. 9. Tiberianus President of Palaestina Prima, the Other of Plin. Secand. Epist. lib. X. Epist. 97. Pliny the Younger Pro-Praetor of Bythinia. And the An∣swer of Ibid. Epist. 98. Trajan to the latter of which we find to have been in the same Words that Jo. Malela tells us he replied to the Other; viz. That the Christians should not be sought after; but if they were brought before them and convicted, should be punish'd, unless they abjured.
18. AND the same is the Account which not only Hist. Eccles. lib. III. c. 33. Eusebius from Apologet. cap. II. Tertul∣lian gives us of the Emperour's Order, as to this matter; but which In voce . Suidas after Both, has left us of it. Which makes it the more strange to find such a different Relation both in Bishop Ushers Manuscript Author, and in Metaphrastes's Acts of Ignatius before mentioned. It is true that notwithstanding these Re∣scripts of the Emperour, the Persecution still continued; nor was it so soon over in other Places as it was at Antioch. This is plain not only from the History of this time left us by Lib. III. c. 33 Hist. Eccles. Eusebius, but may in general be concluded from the Acta Mart. Ignat. num. xii. p. 227. Prayer which this Holy Saint made at his Martyrdom: Where, say our Acts, He intreated the Son of God in be∣half of the Churches, that he would put a stop to the Persecution; and re∣store Peace and Quiet to them. But these were only Local Persecutions, as Euseb. ibid. Eusebius calls them, and proceeded ra∣ther from the Fury of the People, and the Perverseness of some particular Go∣vernours, than from the Design or Command of the Emperour. 19. AS for the Time of Ignatius's Suffering, we are only told in his Acts that it was when Syria and Synecius were Consuls; nor are Learned Men yet a∣greed in what Year to fix it. Eusebius
in his Chronicle places it in the Year of Christ CX. Marianus Scotus CXII. Annot. in Act. Martyr. Ignat. not. 39. Bishop Usher yet sooner in the Year CVII. And lastly to name no more, our most exact Vid. Ant. Pagi Critic. in Baron. ad Ann. 108. Bishop Lloyd, follow'd therein by the late Critick upon Baronius Antonius Pagi, yet later than any; to wit, in the Year that the great Earth∣quake fell out at Antioch, and from which Trajan himself hardly escaped: Which as Apud Usser. loc. supr. Cit. Jo. Malela accounts it, and is follow'd therein by Bishop Usher in his Computation, was in the Year CXVI. 20. AND this may suffice to have been observed concerning the most emi∣nent Passages that occur in the Acts of the Martyrdom of St. Ignatius. I shall need say nothing of the Authority of the Relation its self; which as it is writ∣ten with all Sincerity, and void of those Additions which latter Writers have made to these kind of Histories, so we are told in the Close of it, that it was compiled by Those who went with him from Antioch, and were the Eye-Witnes∣ses of his Encounters. This Account was first publish'd from two very anci∣ent Manuscripts by our most Reverend Arch-Bishop Usher, in the Appendix to his Edition of Ignatius, Ao 1647. and is now I suppose the first time translated into our own Language. I cannot tell
whether it be worth the observing, that in the Collection made by the late Learn∣ed Cotelerius of the Writings of the A∣postolical Fathers, there is instead of these Genuine Acts, inserted the Account which Metaphrastes put together of his Sufferings, several Ages after. It would perhaps have made a more agreeable Hi∣story to the Vulgar Reader, had I tran∣slated that Relation, rather than this, which is much shorter, and wants many notable Passages that are to be found in that Other. But as I should then have departed from my Design of setting out nothing but what I thought to be of an Apostolical Antiquity; so to those who love the naked Truth, these plain Acts will be much more satisfactory, than a Relation filled up with the uncertain, and too often fabulous Circumstances of latter Ages.
CHAP. VI. Of the Martyrdom of St. Poly∣carp, and of the Epistle writ∣ten by the Church of Smyrna concerning it. That there were heretofore several called by the Name of Polycarp: Both the Country, and Parentage of St. Po∣lycarp uncertain. What he was be∣fore his Conversion; and by whom Converted? He is made Bishop of Smyrna by the Apostles. How he be∣haved himself in that Office? The great Veneration which the Christians had for him. Of his Journey to Rome, and what he did there? The Testi∣mony of St. John concerning him, Rev. ii.8. Of the Time of St. Poly∣carp's Martyrdom: What Persecu∣tions the Church then labour'd under? Of the Epistle of the Church of Smyr∣na concerning his Sufferings; and the Value which the Antients put upon it. Of the Miracles that hapned at his Death. What his Age was when he suffered? What the Day of his Suf∣fering? In what Place he was put to
Death? Of the Authority of the pre∣sent Epistle; and its Translation into our own Language. 1. THE Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, the next Piece that follows in the present Collection; how∣ever it makes mention of some Others that suffered, at the same time with St. Polycarp, for the Faith of Christ; yet insisting chiefly upon the particu∣lars of his Passion, and being design'd by that Church to communicate to all the World the Glorious End of their beloved Bishop, and most worthy and constant Martyr of Christ: I shall ob∣serve the same Method in treating of this, that I did in discoursing of the Acts of St. Ignatius before; and speak some∣what of the Life of St. Polycarp first, before I come to consider the Account that is here given us of his Death. 2. THAT there were several of the Name of Polycarp heretofore, and who must therefore carefully be distinguish'd from him of whom we are now to dis∣course, has been evidently shewn, by the late Learned Le Moyne Prol. ad var. sac. Editor of his Epistle. As for our Polycarp the Disciple of St. John, and the great Subject of the present Martyrologie; we have little account, either what was his Country, or who his Parents? In general we are
told that he was born somewhere in the East; as Ibid. le Moyne thinks not far from Antioch; and perhaps in Smyrna its self, says our Learned Dr. Life of S. Po∣lycarp, p. 112. So the Roman Martyrologie. Cave. Being sold in his Childhood, he was bought by a certain Noble Matron whose Name was Calisto; and bred up by her, and at her Death made Heir to all her Estate; which tho' very consi∣derable, he soon spent in Works of Charity and Mercy Le Moyne, Cave, &c.. 3. HIS Christianity he received in his younger Years from Bucolus Bishop of Smyrna; by whom being made Ibid. Dea∣con and Catechist of that Church, and discharging those Offices with great Ap∣probation; he was upon the Death of Bucolus made Bishop of Smyrna by the Irenaeus lib. III. cap. 3. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. IV. cap. 14. Vid. Tentzel. Ex∣erc. select. de Polyc. iii. §. 5. Apostles, and particularly by St. Tertul. de Praeser. Haeret. c. 32. Hieron. de Script. in Polycarp. Vid. Martyrol. Rom. Jan. xxvi. John, whose Disciple, together with Ignatius, he had before been. 4. HOW considerable a Reputation he gain'd by his wise Administration of this great Office, we may in some mea∣sure conclude from that Character which his very Enemies gave of him at his Death: When crying out that he should be thrown to the Lyons, they laid this to him as his Crime, but which was in∣deed his chiefest Honour Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, numb. xii. p. 243.; This, say they, is the Doctor of Asia, the Father of the Christians, and the Over-turner of
our Gods; And when he was burnt, they persuaded the Governour not to suffer his Friends to carry away any of his Remains, Ibid. numb. xvii. p. 248. Least, say they, the Chri∣stians forsaking him that was crucified, should begin to worship Polycarp. 5. NOR was it any small Testimo∣ny of the Respect that was paid to him, that (as we are told in this See below, pag 244. Epistle) the Christians would not suffer him to pull off his own Cloaths, but strove who should be the most forward to do him Service; thinking themselves happy if they could but come to touch his Flesh. For, says the Epistle, even before he had grey Hairs, he was adorn'd with such a good Conversation, as made all Men pay a more than ordinary Respect to him. 6. HENCE St. De Script. in Polycarp. So∣phron. Interp. Graec. Hierome calls him the Prince of all Asia, Sophronius the · or Chief Ruler; perhaps, says a Le Moyne Prol. ad var. Sacr. Learned Man in opposition to the Asiarchae of the Heathens spoken of in this Epistle: Signifying thereby, that as they were among the Gentiles, the Heads of their sacred Rites, and presided in the common Assemblies and Spectacles of Asia; So was Polycarp among the Chri∣stians a kind of Universal Bishop; the Prince and Head of the Churches in those Parts.
7. NOR was his Care of the Church confined within the Bounds of the Lesser Asia, but extended even unto Rome its self: Euseb. Hist. Eccles▪ lib. i. cap. 14. Whither we are told he went upon the Occasion of the Quarto-deci∣man Controversie then on foot between the Eastern and Western Churches, and which he hoped to have put a stop to, by his timely interposition with those of Rome. But tho' Anicetus and he could not agree upon that Point, each pretending Apostolical Tradition to war∣rant them in their Practice: Yet that did not hinder but that he was received with all possible Respect there; and Vid. Vals Annot. ad Eu∣seb. Eccl. Hist. lib iv. cap. 14. Tezel. Exer∣cit. de Poly∣carp. §. ix. officiated in their Churches in presence of the Bishop, and L Myne Prolego. ad var. Sacr. communicated with him in the most sacred Mysteries of Re∣ligion. 8. WHILE he was at Rome he re∣mitted nothing of his Concern for the Interests of the Church; but employed his time partly in confirming those who were sound in the Faith, but especially in drawing over those who were not, from their Errours. In which Work how successful he was, his own Scholar Apud . Irenaeus particularly recounts to us. 9. WHAT he did after his return, and how he discharged his pastoral Of∣fice to the time of his Martyrdom we
have little farther Account: Nor shall I trouble my self with the Stories which Apud Tent∣zel. Exercit. Select. IV. p. 76, &c. Pionius without any good Grounds has recorded of the Life of this Holy Man. But that he still continued with all diligence to watch over the Flock of Christ, we have all the reason in the World to believe: And that not only from what has been already observed, but from one particular more which ought not to be omitted; namely, that when Ignatius was hurried away from his Church of Antioch to his Martyrdom, he knew none so proper to commend the Care of it to, as to this Excellent Man; or to supply by his own Letters, what the Other had not time to write, to all the Other Churches round about. 10. BUT I shall close up this part of the Life of this Holy Saint, with the Testimony which St. John has given to him, Revel. ii.8. And which as it af∣fords us a sufficient Evidence of the Ex∣cellency of his Life, so do's it open the way to what we are next to consider, viz. his Death and Passion; Unto the Angel of the Church in Smyrna, write: These things saith the First and the Last, which was dead and is alive. I know thy Works, and Tribulation, and Poverty (but thou art Rich;) and I know the Blasphe∣my of Them that say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan.
Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer: Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have Tribulation ten Days: Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. 11. AND this brings me to that which I am chiefly to insist upon, name∣ly the Death of this Blessed Martyr; the Subject of that Epistle which is here sub∣joyn'd from the Church of Smyrna con∣cerning it. And here I shall in the first place take for granted what our Learn∣ed Bishop Dissert. Chron. part. II. à cap. 14. ad 20. Pearson seems to have prov∣ed beyond Contradiction; that St. Poly∣carp suffer'd, not as is Euseb. Chron. commonly sup∣posed, about the Year of Christ CLXVII. or as Bishop Not. in Epist. Smyrn. 104, 105. Comp. Tentz. Exer∣cit. de Poly∣carp. §. xxi. Usher has stated it yet later CLXIX. much less as Vid. Cave Hist. Eccles. in Polycarp. Petit still later CLXXV. but under the Emperour An∣toninus Pius, in the Year of our LORD CXLVII. Now that the Christians a∣bout that time, and especially those of Asia, lay under some severe Prosecutions is evident from the Apology which Justin Martyr about this very time presented to the Emperour in order to a Mitiga∣tion of it. And which however Ad An. 150. Comp. Spond. Epitom. ibid. Ba∣ronius, and after him Annot. in Euseb. lib. IV. c 8. Valesius places two or three Years later; yet is their Opinion much more probable who put it about the beginning of that Empe∣rour's Reign: As both Euseb. Chron. ann. 142. Eusebius among
the Ancients; and his Learned Editor Scalig. An∣not. in Euseb. p. 210. Scaliger, not to mention any Petav. in E∣piphan Haeres. xlvi. Anton. Pagi in Baron. ad ann. 150. num. iii. Her∣man. Contract. Marian. Scot. &c. Others, of latter Times, have done. 12. WHAT the Effect of this Apo∣logy was we cannot certainly tell; but that the Persecution was not presently put to an end, not only the Second Apo∣logy of the same Father; but that which Hist. Eccles. lib. IV. c. 26. Eusebius tells us was afterwards present∣ed to his Successor Marcus Aurelius, by Hist. Eccles. lib. IV. c. 26. Melito Bishop of Sardis, plainly makes appear. In which he complains, that the Christians were still informed a∣gainst by wicked Men, greedy of what they had; and prosecuted notwith∣standing the several Orders that his Father had given, and the Letters he had written to the contrary. It is true, Eusebius tells us that the Empe∣rour Ib. lib. IV. c. 13. Antoninus Pius had set out an Ef∣fectual Edict in favour of the Christians; and that particularly addressed to the Common Council of Asia, not long before the time in which we affirm St. Polycarp to have suffered. And this seems to leave it under some doubt how a Perse∣cution could have been again revived a∣gainst the Church, within so short a time, and after such a vigourous Edict of an Emperour still living to the contrary. But it is evident Eusebius must have mistook the Emperour, and have set down that for the Rescript of Antoninus Pius,
which was indeed set out by Marcus Au∣relius immediately after his Death; as both the Inscription shews, and Vales. in lib. IV. c. 13. Eu∣seb. & infr. in c. 26. p. 73. Add. Ant. Pagi Critic. in Ba∣ron. ad ann. 154. num. iv. Vale∣sius and Others have evidently made it appear to be. 13. IT was then in One of these Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. IV. c. 15. p. 104. Topical Persecutions, so frequent in the Lesser Asia; that the Storm happening to fall in a particular manner upon the Church of Smyrna, carried off this Holy Martyr among the rest. What the par∣ticular Circumstances of his Passion were it would be impertinent for me to relate in this place, seeing they are so fully and exactly described in the Epistle of which we are now discoursing. A Piece so ex∣cellently composed, that Eusebius thought it worthy to be almost intirely transcrib∣ed into his Ecclesiastical History. And of which a very Scalig. An∣adv. in Eu∣seb. pag. 221. num. 283. great Man of the present Age profess'd, That he knew not any thing in all Ecclesiastical Antiquity, that was more wont to affect his Mind; insomuch that he seem'd to be no lon∣ger himself when he read it: And be∣lieved that no good Christian could be satisfied with reading often enough this, and the like Accounts, of the Sufferings of those Blessed Martyrs, who in the Primitive times laid down their Lives for the Faith.
14. NOR did the Ancients put any less Value upon this Piece, which as De Glor. Mart. cap. LXXXVI. Gregory of Tours tells us was even to his time read publickly in the Gallican Churches; and no doubt made a part of that Annual Remembrance, which the Churches of Asia kept of his Martyr∣dome. 15. BUT tho' I think it needless to mention here any thing of what the following Epistle relates concerning the Passion of this Holy Man; yet one Cir∣cumstance there is which both Vid. Usser. Annot. in Act. Polyc. num. 77. Euse∣bius and Vid. Usser. Annot. in Act. Polyc. num. 77. Ruffinus having omitted, is al∣so pass'd by in the following Translation, tho' found in the Acts as set out from the Barrochian Manuscript by Arch-Bishop Usher. And that is this; That the Souldier or Officer having struck his Launce into the Side of the Saint, there came forth a Pigeon, together with a great quantity of Blood, as is express'd in the following Num. xvi. p. 247. Epistle. Now tho' there may seem to have been something of a Foundation for such a Miracle in the Railery of De Morte Peregrini, p. 1006. Lucian, upon the Death of Peregrinus the Philosopher; who burnt himself about the same time that St. Po∣lycarp suffered, and from whose Funeral Pile he makes a Vulture to ascend, in Opposition, it may be, to St. Polycarp's Pigeon; if indeed he design'd (as a
Le Moyne var. sacr. Prol. ad Tom. I. Learned Man has conjectured) under the Story of that Philosopher, to ridicule the Life and Sufferings of Polycarp: Yet I confess I am so little a Friend to such kind of Miracles, that I thought it better with Eusebius to omit that Circumstance, than to mention it from Bishop Usher's Manuscript. And indeed besides the strangeness of such an Adventure, I cannot think, had any such thing truly happen'd at his Death; that not only Eusebius should have been ignorant of it, but that neither St. Hierome, nor Ruffi∣nus, nor the Menaea of the Greek Church, should have made the least mention of it. Either therefore there must have been some Interpolation in the Manu∣script set forth by that Learned Man; Or because that does not appear, per∣haps it may be better accounted for by the Mistake of a So le Moyne corrects it, Prol. ad varia sacra: Reading for . single Letter in the Original; and which will bring it to no more than what Eusebius has in effect said, that there came out of his Left Side a great quantity of Blood. 16. AS for what concerns the Time of his Martyrdome, I have before shewn the different Computations which Learn∣ed Men have made of it. Nor are they less at Variance about the Vid. Tent∣zel. Exercit. select. de Po∣lycarp. §. xxxiv. Age of this Holy Martyr when he suffered, than a∣bout the Year of his Suffering. For tho' St. Polycarp expresly told the Pro-Consul,
as we read in the following Num. ix. p. 241. E∣pistle, that he had served Christ Eighty and Six Years; Yet Vid. Praef. Usser. ad Act. Ignat. & Poly∣carp. pag. ult. Comp. Tent∣zel. disp. IV. de Polyc. § iii, iv. some interpret this of the Number of Years since his Conversion; Pearson Dis∣sert. Chron. part. II. c. 15. Others of those of his whole Life. But however thus much is evident, that which soever of the two be in the right, they will either of them make good what Iren. contr. Haeres. lib. III. c. 3. Irenaeus has told us of him, that he was very old when he died; and from which therefore nothing can be concluded either for the former of these Opinions, or against the latter. 17. BUT the following Acts of his Martyrdome go yet farther: They tell us that He not only suffer'd at so great an Age; but upon the Great Sabbath, the Second Day of the Month Xanticus, before the Seventh Kalend of May, about VIII. a Clock. What is meant by this Great Sabbath is another Point much debated, but never like to be agreed among Learned Men: Whose Opinions are ex∣amined at large by In Act. Po∣lyc. num. 104, 105. Bishop Usher, Annot. in Euseb. p. 66. a Va∣lesius, Proleg. ad var. sacr. Le Moyne, Dissert. Chron. par. II. c. 18. Bishop Pearson, and Ant. Pagi Critic. in Baron. ad Ann. 169. Tentzel. Exerc. select. de Polyc. § xxv.xxxi, &c. Others upon this Occasion. But if we were right before in assigning the Year of his Suffering, as I think we were; then we must conclude the Great Sab∣bath to have been the same here, that is
usually called by that Name among Ec∣clesiastical Writers, namely, the Saturday in the Holy Week; and to which all the Other Characters here assigned are exact∣ly Correspondent. And then according to this Computation, St. Polycarp will have suffer'd in the Year of Christ CXLVII. being March 26. the Satur∣day before Easter, about VIII. a Clock. 18. THE place in which he suffer'd was a large Amphitheatre in which the Common Assemblies of Asia were wont to be kept: And as we are told by Smith Epist. de VII. Asiae Eccles. Taver∣nier, Whee∣ler, &c. Vid. Tentzel. Ex∣ercit. Select. IV. §. XXXII, XXXIII. those who have travelled into those Parts, is in some measure still remaining; and shewn as the Place of St. Polycarp's Mar∣tyrdom. I say nothing, to that which some have observed upon this Occasion of the Calamities which not long after fell upon the City of Smyrna; and which may seem to have been the Effect of the Divine Vengeance, punishing them for their Cruelty towards this Excellent Man, and the rest of his Companions that suffered together with him. But this is without the Bounds of my pre∣sent Design; which leads me only to consider what concerns the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, and to which that which follow'd the Death of Polycarp has no relation.
19. AND now having pass'd through the chief Parts of the following Rela∣tion, and which seem'd most to require our Animadversion; it is time for me to observe concerning the Epistle it self, which is here subjoyn'd, that it is a piece of most unquestionable Credit and Antiquity. As for the main Body of it, we find it preserved in the Ecclesiastical History of Lib. IV. c. 15. Eusebius; who lived not above an Age and a half after the writ∣ing of it. And even the Manuscript it self, made use of by Bishop Vsher, is so well attested; that we need not any far∣ther Assurance of the Truth of it. The Sum of the Account which we have given us of it is this; See below, p. 253. That Gaius an Acquaintance of St. Irenaeus the Disciple of Polycarp, transcribed it from the Copy of that Father: And Socrates, the Corinthian from Gaius; and from Socrates's Copy was transcribed that Manuscript which we still have of it. 20. TWICE has this Epistle been been put into our own Language, as far as the History of Eusebius has given oc∣casion for the Translation of it. What those Editions are I cannot tell, having never perused either of them. But I suppose it is now the first time joyn'd in an intire Piece together, and so com∣municated to the English Reader. In
my Translation of it I have strictly fol∣low'd the Edition of our most Reverend Primate, from which Cotelerius's is but a Copy: Nor have I, that I know of, de∣parted in the least Circumstance from it, except in that One for which I have before accounted. So that I may ven∣ture to say, I have here truly set forth the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna; as near as our Language would serve to express the Sense, if not to come up to the Beauty and Vigour of the Original. CHAP. VII. Of the Catholick Epistle of St. Barnabas. Why the Pieces that follow, are put in a Second Part, separate from the forego∣ing? The History of St. Barnabas, chiefly from the Acts of the Apostles. Of his Name, Education, and Tra∣vels; especially with St. Paul. How he came to be separated from that A∣postle. What he did afterwards? Of his Death: And the Invention of his Relicks; and of the Cyprian Privi∣ledges establish'd on that account. Of the present Epistle; and that it was
truly written by St. Barnabas. The principal Objections against it an∣swer'd. An Apology for its Allegori∣cal Interpretations of Scripture. The latter part of it, originally belonging to this Epistle. That it was written af∣ter the Destruction of Jerusalem. The Design and Usefulness of it. 1. WHEN I first enter'd upon the Design of publishing the following Collection, I intended to have here put an End to it: The following Pieces under the Names of Barnabas and Hermas, together with the Second Epistle of St. Clement; however un∣doubtedly very Ancient, and confess'd by all to come but little, if any thing, short of the Apostolical Times; having yet been neither so highly esteem'd a∣mong the Ancients, nor so generally re∣ceiv'd by many of the present Times, as those I have already mention'd. But when I consider'd the Deference which Others among the Primitive Fathers have paid to them, and the Value which is still put upon them by many, not inferior either in Learning or Pie∣ty to those who speak against them; I thought I could not better satisfie All, than by adding them in a Second Part to the fore-going Epistles: That so both they who have a just Esteem for them, might not complain of being defrauded
of any part of what remains of the A∣postolical Writings; and those who are otherwise minded might look upon them as standing in a second Rank, and not taking place, (which otherwise they must have done,) of those undoubtedly Ge∣nuine and Admirable Discourses, that make up the former part of this Work. 2. AND here the first Piece that oc∣curs, is the Catholick Eplistle of St. Bar∣nabas, the Companion of St. Paul, and Disciple of our Saviour Christ: Being generally esteem'd to have been one of the Clem. Alex. Strom. Lib. II. p. 410. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. I. cap. 12. & lib. II. cap. 1. LXX. that were chose by him; However our Country-Man In Act. IV. Bede, up∣on I know not what grounds, calls the Verdict of Antiquity in question as to this Matter; And of whom the Holy Spirit of God, has left us by St. Luke this Character, Acts xi.24. That he was a good Man, full of Faith, and of the Holy Ghost. 3. IT is not my design to enter on any long Account of the Life of a Per∣son so largely spoken of in the Holy Scriptures; and of whom little certain can be written, besides what is there re∣corded. His Country was Cyprus, a fa∣mous Island in the Mediterranean Sea; where there inhabited in those days so great a Number of Jews, that in the Time of Euseb. Chron. ad ann. CXVII. Trajan they conspired against
the Gentiles there, and slew of them Dion. lib. LXVIII. Xiphiline, &c. two Hundred and Forty Thousand Men. Upon which being cast out of the Isle, they were never suffer'd upon any account to set foot again in it, up∣on pain of Death. 4. HIS Name was at first Joses, but by the Apostles changed into Barnabas; which being interpreted, says St. Luke, is the Son of Consolation: And as we may conjecture from the Acts iv.36, 37. place where it is first mentioned, was given him by the Apostles as an Honourable Acknow∣ledgment of his Charity, in selling his whole Estate for the Relief of the poor Christians; and upon the account of that Consolation which they received thereby. 5. HIS first Education, says Apud Baron. Annal. ad ann. XXXIV num. 262. Comp. Dr. Cave in his Life, numb. 2. Meta∣phrastes, was at the Feet of Gamaliel; by whom he was instructed, together with St. Paul: Which perhaps moved that great Apostle upon his Conversion to apply himself to him, as the proper∣est Person to introduce him into the Acquaintance of the other Apostles; and afterwards to embrace him as his chief Friend and Fellow-Labourer in the Work of the Gospel. 6. HOW they travell'd together, and what they did in the Discharge of their Ministry, is at large set down
both by Acts ix.27. St. Luke in the Acts of the A∣postles, and by Galat. ii. St. Paul himself in his Epistle to the Galatians: And in which we have the History of Men truly concern∣ed for the Propagation of the Gospel; and despising not only their own Ease, but their very Lives themselves in com∣parison of it. Many a weary Journey did they take, and danger did they run: They preach'd in the Day, and when they had so done, with their own Hands they wrought in the Night for their Sub∣sistence; that so they might not be bur∣thensom to any, nor seem to seek their own Advantage, but the Profit of those to whom they tender'd the Gospel. 7. AMONG other Countries to which they went, we are told that One of the first was Cyprus, the Native I∣sland of St. Barnabas: And that not of their own Motion, but by the express Order and Appointment of the Holy Ghost. How they prevail'd there, and by what Miracles they made way for the Conversion of it, first at Salamis, and then at Paphos, we are at large in∣form'd by St. Luke, Acts xiii. From thence they fetch'd a pretty large com∣pass through the Lesser Asia: And having with various Success preached to seve∣ral Cities of it, after Usher. Chro∣nol. ann. 45.46. Pearson. An∣nal. Paulin. ad ann. 48. about Three Years Travel they again return'd to Antioch in Syria, the place from which they first set out.
8. HERE they tarried a considera∣ble space, in a sedulous Discharge of their Ministry: Till some Controver∣sies arising between the Jewish and the Gentile Converts, they were obliged for the better composing of them, to go up to Jerusalem; where a final End was put to them by Acts xv. Comp. Galat. ii. a Synodical Decree of the Apostles and Elders assembled toge∣ther for that purpose. 9. WITH Joy they return'd to their Disciples at Antioch, and brought the Determination of that Divine Sy∣nod unto them. But it was not long 'ere St. Peter coming down after them, a little abated their Satisfaction: Galat. ii.11, 14. Whilst to please the Jewish Converts he dissem∣bled his Christian Liberty; and as St. Paul complains, led Barnabas also in∣to the same Dissimulation with him. 10. AND here St. Paul had occasion first of all to reprove St. Barnabas; which he did with great freedom, for his unseasonable Complyance. But it was not very long before he had ano∣ther Occasion offer'd for a yet worser Contention with him. For the next Year these two Acts xv.36. Ann. Christi L. Pearson. LIII. Usserius. Holy Men having a∣greed to take a new Progress together, and to visit the Churches which they had planted in Asia some Years before; Bar∣nabas
was for taking his Cousin Mark again with them, but St. Paul would not consent to it; because that in their former Travels he had consulted too much his own Ease and safety, and Acts xiii.13. left them at Pamphilia in the midst of their Journey. 11. BEING both resolute in their Opinions, the One to take his Kinsman with him, the Other not to yield to it; They not only came to some sharp Words with one another about it, but went their several ways Acts xv.36, 41., Barnabas with Mark to Cyprus; and Paul with Silas, into Syria and Cilicia. Thus after a joynt Labour in their Ministry for al∣most Fourteen Years, were these two excellent Men, by a small Punctilio, sepa∣rated from one another: The Holy Spi∣rit of God intending hereby to shew us, that the Best Christians are still subject to the same Infirmities with other Men; and therefore ought not to be either too much exalted in their own Piety, or to despise others whom they suppose to be less perfect than themselves, 12. NOR was it a small Benefit which from hence accrued not only to the Church, which thereby enjoyed the Bene∣fit of these two great Men much more in their separate Labours, than if they had continued still together; but par∣ticularly
to St. Mark: Who being by the Severity of St. Paul brought to a deep Sense of his former Indifference in the Work of the Gospel, and yet not left by St. Barnabas to give way to any desperate Resolutions thereupon; be∣came afterwards a most useful Minister of Christ, and deserved not only to be made again the Colos. iv.10. Companion of St. Paul, but to receive a very high Testimony of his 2 Tim. iv.11. Zeal from him. So well does the Wisdom of God know how to turn the Infirmities of Men to his own Glory, and to the Good of those who serve him with an honest and upright Heart. 13. WHAT became of St. Barnabas after this, and whither he went, is very uncertain. Recognit. Clem. apud Baron. Annal. ad ann. LI. num. 52, 54. Et not. ad Mar. Rom. Jun. xi. Some tell us, that from Cyprus he went on to Rome, and preach∣ed the Gospel there, even before St. Peter came thither. But tho' Baronius can by no means allow this, yet is he content that Barnabas should be thought to have come thither after him. At least this he Ibid. Annal. num. 54. pretends to be without Dispute, that St. Barnabas came into Italy, and preach'd the Gospel in Liguria; where he founded the ancient Church of Milan, as from many ancient Monuments and Writers, says he, might be made appear; tho' at the same time he produces not one Testi∣mony in proof of it. I shall therefore conclude, till I am better inform'd, that
St. Barnabas spent the Remains of his Life in converting his own Country∣men the Jews; of which as I have be∣fore observed, there were such vast Numbers in that Island, and for whom we cannot but think he must have had a very tender regard. Or if we shall suppose him to have gone any farther, I presume it was only into the neighbour∣ing parts of the Lesser Asia, and Judaea, where he had before preach'd; or at farthest into Vid. in Vit. ejus Edit. O∣xon. Epist. p. 132. Aegypt, where some tell us he went, and consecrated his Ne∣phew St. Mark the first Bishop of the Christian Church at Alexandria. 14. AND in this Opinion I am the rather confirm'd from the consideration of his Epistle which I have here sub∣joyn'd: Which seems manifestly to have been design'd for the Benefit of the Jews; and to shew how all the parts of it had a farther Spiritual Meaning than what at first sight appear'd, and were de∣sign'd to lead them to the Faith and Pie∣ty of the Gospel. 15. IN this Exercise therefore he most likely spent his Life; and if we may credit the Relation of the Alexandr. Monach. En∣com. Barnabae. Monk in Surius, who writes the Acts of this Holy Evangelist, at last suffer'd Martyr∣dom in the Prosecution of it: Being at the Instigation of certain Jews that came
from Syria to Salamis, shut up in a Sy∣nagogue where he was disputing with them, and at Night stoned by them. What Truth there is in this Story I cannot tell; but this I must observe, which even Baron. Annal. ann. LI. num. 54. Baronius himself is forced to acknowledg, that there is nothing of this kind to be met with in any ancient Author; nor does either Eusebius or Hieron. de script. in Bar∣nab. St. Jerome, where they treat expresly of this Holy Man, so much as once give the Title of Martyr to him. 16. BUT whatever were the man∣ner of St. Barnabas's Death, yet fa∣mous is the Story of the Invention of his Reliques, deliver'd by the same Monk; and who, as Baron. An∣nal. ann. 485. Baronius tells us, lived at the same time under Zeno the Empe∣rour; and confirm'd by the concurrent Id. Annot. ad Martyrol. Rom. Jun. XI. Testimonies of Theodorus, Nicephorus, Cedrenus, Sigebert, Marianus Scotus, and others. With what Ceremony this was perform'd, and how this Blessed Saint appear'd twice to Anthemius, then Bishop of Salamis, in order to the Discovery of his own Reliques; and how the Empe∣rour commanded a stately Church to be built over the Place of his Burial; I shall leave it to those who are fond of such Stories, to read at large in Annal. ann. 485. Baro∣nius, and the Apud Su∣rium. Jun. XI. To. iii. Monk whom I before mentioned. It will be of more concern to take notice that Apud le Moyne Var. Sacr. Tom. l. p. 236. Nilus Doxapater
tells us, that this very thing was the Ground of the Cyprian Privileges: Where speaking of certain Provinces that de∣pended not upon any of the Greater Pa∣triarchats, he instances first of all in Cyprus; Which, says he, continues free, and is subject to none of the Patriarchs, because of the Apostle Barnabas being found in it. And the same is the Account which Hist. Eccles. lib. XVI c. 37. Nice∣phorus also gives us of it; and which was assign'd before both in the See le Moyne Prolegom. ad Var. Sacr. No∣titia ascrib'd to Leo, as I find it quoted by Monsieur le Moyne, in his Preface to his late Collection of several ancient Pie∣ces relating to Ecclesiastical Antiquity. 17. TOGETHER with his Body, was found, says Alex. Mo∣nach. loc. ci∣tat. So Theo∣dorus Lector Collect. lib. II. p. 184. Alexander, the Gospel of St. Matthew written in the Hebrew Tongue, lying upon his Breast; but Nilus Do∣xap. inter Var. Sacr. p. 236. Nilus says, that of his Kinsman S. Mark. Which of the two it was, or whether any thing of all this were more than a mere Story, contriv'd by Anthemius to get the better of Peter Patriarch of An∣tioch, I shall not undertake to determine. It is enough that we are assured that by this means Baron Annal. loc. supr. citar. he not only preserved his Priviledges against Peter, but got his See confirm'd by the Emperour, as an Inde∣pendent See; which was also afterwards again done by Justinian, at the Instiga∣tion of the Empress Theodora, who was her self a Cyprian.
18. BUT to return to that which is more properly the Business of these Reflections. It do's not appear that St. Barnabas left any more in Writing than the Epistle I have here subjoyn'd. Indeed there were some heretofore who thought that the Epistle to the Hebrews was written by him. Tertull. de Pudicit. c. 20. Tertullian con∣fidently quotes it as his: Nor do's De Script. Eccles. in S. Paulo. St. Hierome censure him for it, but leaves it as a doubt whether it should be ascribed to him, or to St. Luke, St. Clement, or St. Paul; tho' he seems rather to incline to St. Paul. As for the present Epistle, I do not know that it is deny'd by any of the Ancients to have been written by St. Barnabas. Passim. Vid. Testim. Cote∣leril. Clemens Alexandrinus both mentions and commends it as his. Contra Cel∣sum lib. I. Origen calls it, The Catholick Epistle of Barna∣bas. Hist. Eccles. lib. III. c. 25. Eusebius, and St. De Scriptor. in Barnab. Jerome, tho' they place it among the Apochryphal Books, that is to say among such as were of doubtful Authority, and not admitted into the Canon of the Church; for so Annot. in Euseb. lib. III. c. 25. Valesius shews we are there to under∣stand them; yet make no question but that Barnabas was the Author of it, any more than that the Epistles of St. James, St. Jude, the Second Epistle of St. Peter, and the Second and Third of St. John, together with his Revelations; which Hist Eccles. lib. III c. 25. Eusebius places in the same rank; were
written by those whose Names they bear. 19. WHICH being so, I cannot but wonder at some in our own Times, who upon such weak Grounds peremptorily pronounce it to be none of St. Barna∣bas's; which, says our Learned Bishop Lection in Act. ii. num. 10. p. 44. Pearson, none of all the Ancients pre∣tended to doubt of. And of this Cotel. Not. in Barnab. p. 7. B. C. Co∣telerius seems to have been sensible; Who tho' he did not care to ascribe it to the Blessed Evangelist of whom we are now discoursing, yet was forced to sup∣pose that some other Barnabas wrote it, and without which he saw there could be no way of answering the concurrent Verdict of all Antiquity, which has uni∣versally agreed in Barnabas as the Au∣thor of it. But now who this Other Barnabas was, or that in those Times there was any such Person, he pretends not to tell us; and they who ascribe it to Barnabas, expresly speak of him as the same of whom I have hitherto been discoursing Vid. Clem. Alex Hieron. &c. inter Te∣stim. Coteler.. 20. BUT of all Others, most un∣accountable is the Fancy of Monsieur Proleg. in Var. Sacr. in Polycarpo▪ le Moyne concerning the Author of this Epistle. He had observed that in seve∣ral Manuscripts it was immediately con∣tinued on with that of St. Polycarp: And from this Ignorance or Negligence of a
few Transcribers has this Learned Man concluded the two Epistles to have been both written by St. Polycarp; in which as he had none to go before him, so I believe he will scarcely meet with any to follow him Vid. Tentzel. Exercit. Se∣lect. de Polyc. § 38, 39. Praef. Usser. in Edit. Oxon. S. Bar∣nab. p. v.. 21. NOR are the Arguments which they bring against the Authority of it, of such Moment as to overthrow the constant Testimonies of the Ancients on its behalf. They tell us Coteler. Not. in Barnab. p. 7. C. Natal. A∣lex. Hist. Ec∣cles. Tom. I. §. I. p. 100. Le Moyne Pro∣leg. ad Var. Sacr. first; that it is evident from the XVIth Chapter of this Epistle, that it was written after the Destruction of Jerusalem. But why may not Barnabas have been then living, as well as we are sure St. John, and seve∣ral others of the Companions of the Apo∣stles were? And if he may have been living after it; why shall not we suppose that he was, as well as they, that he was not? Seeing it does not appear from the Testimony of any Antient Writers when he died. 22. BUT 2dly, Coteler. Not. in Barn. p. 5, 6. Natal. Alex. ibid. Le Moyne Prolegom. ad Var. Sacr. They argue yet farther against it: For if this, say they, be the Genuine Epistle of St. Barnabas, how comes it to pass that it is not re∣ceived as Canonical? Certainly had the Primitive Christians believed it to have been written by such a Man, they would without Controversie have plac'd it a∣mong the sacred Writings; and not have
censured it as of doubtful Authority. This is indeed a very specious Pretence, but which being a little examined will be found to have no strength in it: It be∣ing certain that the Vid. Coteler. Not. in Bar∣nab. p. 6. E. 7. A. Primitive Fathers did own this for St. Barnabas's Epistle, and yet not receive it into their Canon; and therefore that it do's not follow, that had they believed it to have been his, they must have esteem'd it Canonical. 23. WHAT Rules they had, or by what Measure they proceeded in those First Times in judging of the Canonical Scriptures of the New Testament, it is not necessary for me here to enquire. It is enough that we know what Books the Church did at last agree in as com∣ing under that Character: And for the rest, as we cannot doubt but that there was a due care taken in examining into a matter of such Importance, and that those Primitive Fathers did not without very good reason distinguish what were written by Divine Inspiration, from what were not; So we are very sure that all was not admitted by them into the rank of Canonical Scripture that was written by any Apostolical Man; and therefore that it can be no good Argument, that Barnabas was not the Author of this E∣pistle, because it is not placed among the Sacred Writings of the New Testa∣ment.
24. BUT there is yet one Objection more, and that much insisted upon by those who are Enemies to this Epistle. Cotel. Not. ad Barnab. p. 5. D. Natal. A∣lex. Hist. Ec∣cles Saec. I. To. I. p. 100. Le Moyne Prol. ad var. sacr. They tell us it is full of a strange sort of Allegorical Interpretations of Holy Scri∣pture; and therefore unworthy to be fa∣ther'd upon so Evangelical an Author. And yet notwithstanding this, we find Clemens Alexandrinus and Origen, Eu∣sebius and St. Jerome, some of the great∣est and most learned Criticks of those Ages that were the nearest to the time in which it was written, not doubt∣ing to ascribe it to St. Barnabas, and to think it worthy too of such an Author. 25. I NEED not say how general a way this was of interpreting Scripture, in the time that St. Barnabas lived. To omit Origen, who has generally been noted as excessive in it; and for whom yet a Huetius Ori∣gen lib. ii. Quaest. 13. p. 170, &c. Learned Man has very lately made a reasonable Apology: Who has ever shewn a more diffusive Knowledg, than Clemens Alexandrinus has done in all his Composures? And yet in his Works we find the very same Method taken of Interpreting the Holy Scriptures, and that without any Reproach either to his Learning, or to his Judgment. What Author has there been more ge∣nerally applauded for his admirable Pie∣ty than the other Clement, whose Epi∣stle
to the Corinthians I have here in∣serted? And yet even in that plain piece Vid. Annot· Vossii in Bar∣nab. p. 310., we meet with more than one Instance of the same kind of Interpretation; which was never the less admired by the best and most Primitive Christians. 26. EVEN See 1 Cor. x.1, 4. Galat. iv.21. Ephes. v.31. Hebr. ix.8, 23▪ 24. x.1, &c. St. Paul himself in his Epistles received by us as Canonical, affords us not a few Instances of this which is so much found fault with in St. Barnabas: As I might easily make appear from a multitude of Passages out of them, were it needful for me to en∣large my self on a Point, which every one who has read the Scriptures with any care, cannot chuse but have ob∣served. 27. NOW that which makes it the less to be wonder'd at in St. Barnabas is, that the See Hist. Crit. du v. T. Liv. iii. chap. vi. Jews, of which Number he was himself originally one, and to whom he wrote, had of a long time been wholly addicted to this way of Inter∣preting the Law; and taught Men to search out a Spiritual Meaning for almost all the Ritual Commands and Ceremonies of it. This is plain from the Account which Apud Euseb. Praeparat. E∣van . lib. VIII. cap 9. Aristeas has left us of the Rules which Eleazar the High Priest, to whom Ptolomy sent for a Copy of the Mosaical Law, gave him for the understanding of it. When it being
objected to him, That their Legislator seem'd to have been too curious in little Matters; such as the Prohibi∣tions of Meats and Drinks, and the like, for which there appeared no just reason: He shew'd him at large, that there was a farther, hidden De∣sign, in it than what at first sight ap∣pear'd; and that these Outward Ordi∣nances were but as so many Cautions to them against such Vices, as were principally meant to be forbidden by them. And then goes on to explain this part of the Law, after the same manner that Barnabas has done, in the following Epistle. 28. BUT this is not all; Praepar. E∣vang. lib. VIII. c. 10. p. 376. Eusebius gives us yet another Instance to con∣firm this to us; viz. of Aristobulus, who lived at the same time, and gave the same Account of the Spiritual Meaning of the Law, that Eleazar had done be∣fore. And that this was still continued among the Hellenistical Jews, is evi∣dent from the Account that is left us by one of them, who was con-tempo∣rary with St. Barnabas, and than whom none has been more famous for this way of Writing, I mean, Apud Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. II. c. 17. Philo in his Description of the Theraputae: Whe∣ther the same whom in the beginning of his De Vit. Con∣templ p. 889. Book he calls by the Name of Essenes, as  mnor. lib. V. Scaliger supposes; Or a
particular Sect of Jews, as Vales. Annot. in Euseb. lib. II. c. 17. p. 30, 31. Valesius will have it; Or lastly, a kind of Monkish Converts from Judaism to Christianity, as Hist. Eccles. lib. II. c. 17. p. 43, A. B. & p. 45. A. B. Eusebius heretofore described them, and as some Bruno de Therapeut. dissert. p. 183, &c. other Learned Men, seem rather to conjecture. But what∣ever becomes of this, herein they all agree, that they were originally Jews; and therefore we may be sure they follow'd the same Method of Interpreting Scri∣pture, that the Alexandrian Jews were wont to do. 29. NOW the Account which Euseb. Hist. Eccles. loc. cit. p. 44. B. Eu∣sebius, from Philo, gives us of them, is this. Their Leaders, says he, left them many ancient Writings of their No∣tions, clothed in Allegories. And a∣gain; Ibid. p. 45. B. C. They interpret the Holy Scri∣ptures, viz. of the Old Testament, Al∣legorically. For you must know, con∣tinues he, that they liken the Law to an Animal; the Words of which make up the Body, but the hidden Sense which lies under them, and is not seen, that they think to be the Soul of it. And this was that which a late Learned Bruno de Therap. p. 193 Author supposes render'd their Conversion to Christianity the more easie. For be∣ing wont to seek out the Spiritual Mean∣ing of the Law, they more readily em∣braced the Gospel, than those who look∣ed no farther than the outward Letter; and were therefore the harder to be per∣suaded
to come over to so Spiritual an Institution. 30. AND, I suppose, it was from hence that the most early Hereticks were so wedded to their Mystical Interpreta∣tions of Scripture, and so much valued themselves upon the account of them. And against whose false and impure Do∣ctrines, our late great Critick, Dissert. de Antichristo, c. VII. Dr. Ham∣mond, supposes St▪ Barnabas to have prin∣cipally design'd his Epistle: And there∣fore that being to deal with Men who va∣lu'd nothing but such kind of Expositions, he was forced to confute them in their own way; both as most suitable to their Manners, and as most proper either to convince them of their Errors, or at least to prevent others, especially the Jewish Converts, from falling into them. 31. BUT whether this were so or no, thus much is evident from what has been said; that the Hellenistical Jews, to whom it is most probable St. Barnabas address'd his Epistle, were altogether used to this way of Interpreting the Holy Scriptures: And therefore that howsoe∣ver it may appear to others, who are so utterly unaccustomed to it, yet we ought not to wonder that St. Barnabas, who was himself a Jew, should at such a Time, and upon such an Occasion as this, make use of it; or suppose it at all unworthy of him so to do.
32. NOR indeed were they the Jews only that led the Holy Men in those days into these Mystical Expositions of the Sa∣cred Scriptures. Even the Gentile Philoso∣phers too conduced towards it: Whilst the better to cover over the fabulous Sto∣ries of their Gods, and which they saw were too ridiculous to be maintain'd; they explain'd the whole System of their Idolatry by Allegorical Analogies, and shew'd all the Poetical Accounts of them to be only the out-side Shadows of a sort of Natural Theology included under those Fictions. Thus Tatian. contr. Graec. p. 160. B. C. Heraclides of Pontus wrote a whole Book of the Allegories of Homer: And Tatian. contr. Graec. p. 160. B. C. Metrodorus of Lampsacus is fallen foul upon by Tatian, in his Ora∣tion against the Greeks, for pretending that neither Juno, nor Minerva, nor Jupiter were what those imagin'd who built Temples and Altars to them, . Nay so far went this last Author in his Allegories, as to turn all the Trojan and Graecian He∣ro's into mere Fictions: And to make Hector, and Achilles, and Agamemnon, and even Helena her self, nothing less than what one would think they were, and what the common People ignorantly imagin'd them to be. 33. AND for the Influence which this had upon the  Hist. Crit. du v. T. Lv. iii. chap. viii. Ancient Fathers who
from Philosophers became Christians; the Writings both of Justin Martyr and Cle∣mens Alexandrinus sufficiently shew. And if we may believe Apud Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. VI. c. 19. p. 178. Porphery, an Ene∣my, in the Case of Origen; he tells us in the same place in which he complains of him, For turning those things that were clearly deliver'd by Moses into Mystical Significations, not only that he did this in Imitation of the Graecians; but that it was his frequent Ibid. p. 179. Vid. Annot. Vales. p. 108, 109. Conver∣sation with Numenius and Cronius, Mo∣deratus, Nichomachus, and Others among the Pythagoreans; and with Chaeremon and Cornutus among the Stoics; that he had learnt his Allegorical way of Ex∣pounding the Holy Scriptures, and ap∣plied that to his Religion, which they were wont to do to their Superstition. 34. FROM all which it appears, that this way of Writing in Matters of Re∣ligion, was in those days generally used not only among the Jews, but among the Wiser and more Philosophical of the Gentiles too: And from both came to be almost universally practised among the Primitive Christians. Which being so, we ought to be far from censuring of St. Barnabas for his mystical Application of what God prescribed to the Jews in the Old Testament, to the Spiritual Ac∣complishment of it in the New. Much less should we ever the more call in
question either the Truth, or Credit, of his Epistle upon this account. 35. HAVING said thus much either in Vindication of the Allegorical Exposi∣tions of this Epistle, or at least by way of Apology for them; I shall add but little more concerning the Epistle it self. I have before observed as to the Time of its Writing, that it was somewhat after the Destruction of Jerusalem; and as we may conjecture from the Subject of it, (for Title at present it has none, nor do's it appear that ever it had any) was ad∣dress'd to the Jews, to draw them off from the Letter of the Law, to a Spi∣ritual Understanding of it; and by that means dispose them to embrace the Gos∣pel. Whether he had besides this a far∣ther Design in it, as Dissert. de Antichristo, cap. VII. Dr. Hammond supposes, to confute the Errours of the Gnostick Hereticks, and to prevent the Jewish Converts from falling into them, it is not certain; but may from the chief Points insisted upon by him be probably enough supposed. If any one shall think it strange, that disputing against the Jews for the Truth of the Gospel, he should not have urged any of those Passages re∣lating to the Messiah, which seem to us the most apposite to such a purpose; Such as the Oracle of Jacob concerning the Time that Shiloh was to come; the LXX Weeks of Daniel; the Prophecies
of Haggai and Malachi, of his coming while the Second Temple stood; and which was now destroyed when he wrote this Epistle, and the like: Proleg. ad var. sacr. Monsieur le Moyne will give him a ready Answer; viz. that these Passages relate chiefly to the Time of Christ's appearing, and that this was no Controversie in those days; the Jews not only confessing it, but being ready at every turn through this Persuasion to set up some or other for their Messiah, to their Shame and Confusion. It was therefore then but little necessary to use those Arguments against them, which now appear to be the most proper and convincing; since the State of the Que∣stion is alter'd, and the Jews either deny that their Messiah is come; or that it was necessary for him to have come a∣bout that time, that our Saviour Christ appeared in the Flesh. 36. BUT tho' the chief Design of this Epistle was to convince the Jews of the Truth of our Religion, yet are there not wanting in the latter part of it, ma∣ny excellent Rules, to render it still ve∣ry useful to the Pious Reader. Praefat. Usser. ad Edit. Oxon. p. 11. &c. Indeed some have doubted whether this did ori∣ginally belong to this Epistle; or whe∣ther it has not since been added to it. But seeing we find this part quoted by the Fathers, as belonging to St. Barna∣bas, no less than the other; and that the
Measure assign'd to it in the ancient Sti∣chometries, can hardly be well accounted for without it: I do not see but that we ought to conclude, that our Author did di∣vide his Epistle into the two Parts, in which we now have it; and that this lat∣ter, aswell as the former, was written by him. 37. AS for the Translation which I have here given of it; I have made it up out of what remains of the Original Greek, and of the Old Latin Version; and of each of which, tho' a Part be lost, yet it has so fallen out, that between them we not only have the whole Epi∣stle, but that too free of those Interpo∣lations which Is. Vossius Annot. in Barnab. p. 318. Vossius tells us some had endeavour'd to make in this, as well as in Ignatius's Epistles. In both I have en∣deavour'd to attain to the Sense of my Author, and to make him as plain and easie as I was able. If in any thing I shall have chanced to mistake him, I have only this to say for my self; that he must be better acquainted with the Road, than I pretend to be, who will undertake to travel so long a Journey in the dark, and never to miss his way.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Shepherd of St. Hermas; and of the Second Epistle of St. Clement to the Corinthians. That the Hermas mention'd by St. Paul, Rom. xvi.14. was the Author of that Book which is here subjoyn'd under his Name. There is little remaining of his Life, more than what is taken out of his own Book. Of his Death; Uncertain whether he died a Martyr. The An∣cient Fathers divided in their Opi∣nions of this Book: Nor are our later Criticks less. That there are many use∣ful things in it. Of the Second Epi∣stle of St. Clement: That it is not of equal Reputation with the Former. By some deny'd to be St. Clements. It is most probable that it was written by St. Clement; and has many excellent things, and worthy of that Holy Man, in it. These two Pieces now the first time translated into our own Language. 1. THERE is not a greater Dif∣ference between the Learned Men of the present Times concerning the Epistle of St. Barnabas, than there
was among the Ancient Fathers here∣tofore, concerning the Authority of that Book, which next follows, under the Name of Hermas. Who this Hermas was, what he did, and what he suffer'd for the Faiths sake, is in great measure unknown to us. That there was one of that Name at Rome when St. Paul wrote his Epistle to the Church there, his Remembrance of him Rom. xvi.14. will not suffer us to doubt. Nor is it improbable but that it was the same Vid. Baron. Annot. ad Martyrol. Rom. Maii ix. Hermas who afterwards wrote this Book: And who appears not only still to have continued his Relation to the Church of Rome, but to have written at such a time as may well agree to one of St. Paul's Acquaintance. The former of these may be collected from his Vis. Second, num. iv. Second Vision, which he seems to have had at the same time that Clement was Bishop of Rome, and to whom therefore he is commanded to carry a Copy of it. And for the latter, if the Conjectures of two of our Dr. Ham∣mond, & Mr. Dodwell. Vid. Cave Hist. liter. in Herm. Greatest Cri∣ticks may be allow'd, in applying the Great Affliction of which he speaks in ano∣ther of his Vision IV §. 3. Visions, to the Destruction of Jerusalem then at hand; it is evident that this Book must have been written with∣in XL. Years after the Death of Christ, and by consequence by some Author who lived at the very time, that the Hermas of whom St. Paul speaks, most certainly did.
2. HENCE Hom. in Rom. lib. X. c. 16. Origen in his Homily upon that place of St. Paul before men∣tioned, delivers it as his Opinion, that it was the Hermas there spoken of who wrote this Book. But Hist. Eccles. lib. III. c. 3. Eusebius do's more; He tells us that it was the receiv∣ed Opinion in those days, that it was composed by him. And that it continued to be so in the Age after, Hieron. de Script. in Herm. St. Hierome witnesses; who speaks yet more posi∣tively than Eusebius to that purpose. And from all which we may conclude what is to be judg'd of that Mistake which our latter Writers have fallen into, by their too credulous following Lib. III. the Author of the Poem against Mar∣cion under the Name of Tertullian, viz. that it was written by Hermes Brother to Pope Pius; and in which not only the In Vit. Pii Papae. Authors of the Pontifical ascribed to Pope Damascus, and of the pretended Epist. I. at∣trib. Pio PP. p. 194. Edit. Blondell. Decretal Epistles of the ancient Bishops of Rome, but the Martyrologists of the Middle Ages, Bede, Ado, &c. have ge∣nerally been involved. 3. IT is true, Cardinal Baronius has endeavour'd to make up this Difference, by supposing that the Hermes spoken of by St. Paul, was Brother to Pope Pius, and so all Parties may be in the right. But besides, that this Book was written by Hermas, not the Hermes of whom
St. Paul there speaks; the difference of the See Bellarm. de Script. §. I. p. 45. in Herm. Time renders it altogether incre∣dible, that a Person of some consider∣able Age at St. Paul's writing his Epi∣stle, should have lived so long as that Pope's Brother is said to have done: Whom the Annal. Eccl. in fine Anni 164 Cardinal himself observes to have been living CLXIV. Years af∣ter Christ; that is to say, CVII. Years after the writing of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans. And this his Epitomator Spondan. E∣pitom. Annal. Baron. ad Ann. 159. Spondanus was aware of: And there∣fore tho' he seems to have allow'd of the Conjecture, yet could not chuse but add this Reflection of his own upon it; that according to this reckoning, Her∣mas must have been CXXX Years old when he died, and in all probability a great deal more. 4. WHAT the Condition of this Hermas was before his Conversion, we cannot tell; but that he was a Man of some Consideration, we may conclude from what we read of him in his Third Vision III. num. VI. below, p. 348. Vision: Where he is said to have been formerly unprofitable to the LORD up∣on the account of those Riches, which after he became a Christian, he seems to have dispensed in Works of Charity and Beneficence. 5. NOR have we any more know∣ledg how he was converted, than what
his Condition was before: It is probable from several Passages in his Vision I. num. 3. Vis. II. num. 2, 3. Book, that he was brought over to Christianity him∣self, before his Family; who continued yet in the practice of many and great Impieties. During this while, Hermas was not only very kind to them, but seems to have been so indulgent to∣wards them, as to permit them rather to go on in their Sins, than he would take any rough Measures with them, to draw them off from them. 6. BUT this was not all; he not only patiently bore with them, but was himself disturb'd with many anxious See below, p. 326. Cares, to supply them in their Extra∣vagances, and often times did not be∣have himself so well as he ought upon that account. But however, being of an honest and upright Disposition, and having a great Sincerity in his Religion; it pleased God at last not only to con∣vince him of his Faults, in thus negle∣cting his Family, but to give them Grace to hearken to his Admonitions, and to embrace at once both the Chri∣stian Faith, and a Practice also suitable thereunto. 7. WHAT he did after this we have no account; but that he lived a very strict Life, we may reasonably con∣jecture, in that it pleased God to vouch∣safe
such extraordinary Revelations to him; and to employ him in several Mes∣sages to his Church, both to correct their Manners, and to warn them of the Try∣als that were about to come upon them. 8. THIS was so singular a Grace, even in those Times of Miracles, that we find some other Christians, not so humble as they ought to be, became Enemies to him upon the account of them. However this did not hinder, but that God still continu'd to make use of his Ministry in admonishing Sinners; and he as readily and faith∣fully went on, both in warning them of their danger, and in exhorting them to repent and save their Souls. 9. THIS then was the Business of this Holy Man, in which he spent his Life; and if we may believe the Ro∣man Martyrologie, his Death was not un∣suitable to it: Where we read, that being illustrious for his Miracles, he at last offer'd himself a worthy Sacrifice unto God. But upon what Grounds this is establish'd Annot. ad Ma. Rom. Ma ix. Baronius himself could not tell us: Insomuch that in his Annals he durst not once mention the manner of his Death, but is content to say Pa on. An∣nal. Ecls. ad ann. , That having undergone many Labours and Troubles in the time of the Persecu∣tion under Aurelius, (and that too
without any Authority) he at last rested in the LORD, July XXVI. and which is therefore observed in Com∣memoration of him. And here is in∣deed a pleasant Mistake, and worthy the Roman Martyrologie. For this Author, from the Book of which we are now discoursing, being sometimes called by the Title of Pastor, or Shepherd, the Martyrologist has very gravely divided the good Man into two Saints: And they observe the Memorial of Hermas Vid. Marty∣rol. Rom. ad Mai ix. & Jul. xxvi., May IXth, and of Pastor, July XXVIth. Unless we shall rather say that this was indeed the Cardinal's Blunder, and the Martyrologie in the right, to make two distinct Persons of St. Hermas rembem∣bred by St. Paul, and the Brother of Pope Pius, to whom the Comp. Mar∣tyrol. Rom. Jul. xxvi. with Baron. Annal. Ao 162, 164, 166. Passages men∣tion'd July XXVI. do manifestly belong: And erred only in applying the Chara∣cter of Martyol. Rom. Jul. xxvi. Pastor to the latter, which, with the Treatise of which we are now discoursing, ought, as the Annot. b. ad Martyrol. Rom. Maii ix. Cardinal has truly observed, to have been ascribed to the former. 10. BUT not to insist any longer on the Author of this Book: As for the Work it self, we find both the Ancient Fathers, and the Learned Men of our own Times, not a little divided in their Judgments concerning it. Some there are, and those the nearest to the time
when this Book was written, that treat it almost with the same Respect that they would do the Canonical Scriptures. Lib. IV. ad∣vers. Haeres. & apud Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. IV. c. 8. Irenaeus quotes it under the very Name of the Scripture. Origen E∣narrat. in E∣pist. ad Rom. p. 411. D. Origen, tho' he sometimes moderates his Opinion of it, upon the account of some who did not, it seems, pay the same Respect with him∣self to it; yet speaking of Hermas be∣ing the Author of this Book in his Com∣ments on the Epistle to the Romans, gives us this Character of it, That He thought it to be a most useful Writing; and was, as he believed, Divinely Inspired. Hist. Eccles. lib. III. c. 3. Eusebius tells us, that tho' being doubted of by Some, it was not esteem'd Canonical, yet was it by Others judged a most neces∣sary Book, and as such read publickly in the Churches. And St. Catalog. Script. in Herm. Hierom having in like manner observed that it was read in some Churches, makes this Remark up∣on it, That it was indeed a very profi∣table Book; and whose Testimony was often quoted by the Greek Fathers. De Incarnat. Verb. Tom. I. p. 55. D. A∣thanasius places it in the same rank with the Books of Scripture, and calls it a most useful Treatise: And in Epist. Pasch. Tom. II. p. 39, 40. another place tells us, That tho' it was not strictly Ca∣nonical; yet was it reckon'd among those Books which the Fathers appointed to be read to such as were to be instructed in the Faith, and desired to be directed in the Way of Piety.
11. HENCE we may observe, as a farther Evidence of that Respect which was paid to this Book hereto∣fore, that it was not only openly read in the Churches, but in some of the most ancient Manuscripts of the New Testa∣ment, is joyned together with the o∣ther Books of the Holy Scriptures. An Instance of this Annot. ad Herm. p. 41. Cotelerius offers us in that of the Monastry of St. Germans in France, in which it is continued on at the End of St. Paul's Epistles. And in several of the Old Stichometries, it is put in the same Catalogue with the In∣spired Writings. As may be seen in that which the same Annot. in Barnab. p. 9, 10. Author has published out of a Manuscript in the King's Li∣brary, in his Observations upon St. Bar∣nabas; and in which St. Barnabas's Epi∣stle is placed immediately before the Re∣velations, as the Acts of the Apostles, and Hermas's Shepherd are immediately after it. 12. AND yet after all this, we find this same Book not only doubted of by Others among the Ancient Fathers, but slighted even by some of those, who upon other Occasions have spoken thus highly in its Favour. Thus Comment. in Habac. I. 14. ol. 83. D. St. Jerome in his Comments Exposes the Folly of that Apochryphal Book, as he calls it, which in his Catalogue of Writers he had
so highly applauded. De Orat. cap. XII. Tertullian, who spake if not honourably yet calmly of it whilst a Catholick, being become De Pudiciti, cap. X. Montanist, rejected it, even with Scorn. And most of the other Vid. Testi∣mon. in Edit. Coteler. p. 28, &c. Fathers who have spoken the highest of it them∣selves, yet plainly enough insinuate, that there were those who did not put the same Value upon it. Thus Philocal. c. I. Origen mentions some who not only deny'd, but despis'd its Authority. And Cassian. Col∣lar. xiii. c. 12. Cassian having made use of it in the Point of Free-Will, Contr. Col∣lator. c. XXX. Prosper without more ado rejected it as a Testimony of no Value. And what the Judgment of the Latter Ages was as to this matter, especially after Decret. Gratian. Dist. XV. Pope Gelasius had rank∣ed it among the Apochryphal Books, may be seen at large in the Observations of De Emend. Gratiani Dial. VI. p. 63, 64. Antonius Augustinus upon that Decree. 13. HOW far this has influenced the Learned Men of our present Times in their Censures upon this Work, is evident from what many on all sides have freely spoken concerning it: Who not only See Postev. Apparat. Tom. II. titul. Pastor. deny it to have been written by Hermas the Companion of St. Paul, but utterly cast it off, as a Piece of no Worth, but rather full of Error and Folly. Thus Baron Annal. ann. CLIX. num. 5, 6. Baronius himself, tho' he delivers not his own Judgment con∣cerning it, yet plainly enough shews that he ran in with the severest Censures of
the Ancients against it: And in effect charges it with favouring the Arrians, tho' upon a mistaken Authority of Epist. ad A∣fros apud The∣odoret. Hist. Eccles. lib. I. cap. 8. St. Athanasius, and which by no means proves any such Errour to be in it. But Script. Ec∣cles. Centur. I. in Herm. Cardinal Bellarmine is more free: He tells us that it has many hurtful things in it, and particularly that it favours the Novatian Heresie; which yet I think a very little Equity in interpreting of some Passages that look that way, by others that are directly contrary thereunto, would serve to acquit it of. Others are yet more severe Jo. M. Brasi∣chellan. apud Labbaeum de Script. To. I. p. 791.: They censure it as full of Heresies and Fables: Tho' this De Script. in Herm. Tom. I. p. 431. Labbe would be thought to excuse, by telling us that they have been foisted into it by some later Interpolations, and ought not to be imputed to Hermas, the Author of this Book. 14. NOR have many Rivet. Critic. Sacr. lib. I. c. 12. Hoernbeck. Theol PP. To. I. Miscellan. Sacr. p. 91. Scultel. Me∣dulla PP. pag 375 Daillé de Script. Ignat. Larroque Ob∣serv. in Vind. Ignat Part. I. p. 19. Add. Cve Hist. Li∣ter. p. 21, &c. of those of the Reform'd Churches been any whit more favourable in their Censures of the present Treatise. But then as the Chiefest of the most Ancient Fathers heretofore, tho' they admitted it not in∣to the Canon of Holy Scripture, yet o∣therwise paid a very great Deference to it; so the more moderate part of the Learned Men of our present Times, e∣steem it as a Piece worthy of all Re∣spect, and clear of those Faults which are too lightly charged by some Persons
upon it. Thus Praefat. in To. II. Dogm. Theol. c. 2. §. 6. Petavius, none of the most favourable Critics upon the An∣cient Fathers, yet acknowledges, as to the present Book, that it was never cen∣sured by any of the Ancients as guilty of any false Doctrine or Heresie; and especially as to the Point of the Holy Trinity. Notae in Herm. p. 43. C. Cotelerius, one of the latest Editors of it, esteems it as an Ecclesia∣stical Work of good note, and a great Defence of the Catholick Faith against the Errors of Montanism: Whose Judg∣ment is not only follow'd by their late Historian Alex. Natal. §. I. Tom. I. p. 103, 104. Natalis Alexander, but is made good too in the Defence of it a∣gainst those Objections, which some have brought to lessen its Reputation. And for those of our own Communion, I shall mention only two, but They such as will serve instead of many to all ju∣dicious Persons, who have at large ju∣stified it against the chief of those Ex∣ceptions that have been taken at it; the One, the most Excellent Bishop Vind. Ignat. part. I. c. 4. Pearson in his Vindication of St. Ignatius; the Other the Learned Dr. Defens. Fid. Nicaen. §. I. c. . p. 30. Bull, in his Defence of the Nicene Faith, in the Point of our Blessed Saviour's Divini∣ty; and which he largely shews our pre∣sent Author to have been far from do∣ing any Prejudice unto. 15. SUCH then have been the dif∣ferent Judgments of Learned Men, both
heretofore, and in our present Times, concerning this Book. It would be too great a Presumption for me to pretend to determine any thing as to this mat∣ter; and having subjoyn'd the Work it self in our common Language, every one may be able to satisfie himself what Value he ought to put upon it. That there are many useful things to be found in it, but especially in the Second, and I think, the best part of it, cannot be de∣ny'd. And for the other Two, it must be considered, that tho' such Visions as we there read of, being no longer con∣tinu'd to these latter Ages, may war∣rantably be despised in the Pretenders of the present days; yet we cannot doubt but that at the time when this Book was written, the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost were very fre∣quent; And we need not question but that such Revelations too among the rest, were communicated to Holy Men for the Benefit of the Church. 16. BUT I shall not pursue this Sub∣ject any farther: Nor will I add very much to what I have before said with relation to St. Clement and his First Epi∣stle, concerning that Part which still re∣mains of a Second under his Name, and which concludes the following Collection.
17. THAT this Second Epistle was not of so great a Reputation among the Primitive Fathers, as the foregoing, Hist. Eccles. lib. III. c. 38. Eusebius not only plainly tells us, but gives us this Testimony of it, That he could not find it quoted, as the Other was, by any of them. But St. De Script. in Clemente. Jerome is more severe; he represents it to us as rejected by them: And Phot. Cod. 112, 113. Photius af∣ter him, calls it a Spurious Piece. And not to mention any more; our most Reve∣rend Bishop Dissert. de Script. Ignat. cap. X. Usher not only concurs in the same Censure, but offers several Arguments too in proof of it. 18. AND yet, when all is done, it do's not appear but that St. Clement was indeed the Author of this, as well as of the other Epistle, before spoken of; tho' it was not so much esteem'd, nor by consequence so generally known to the Ancients as that. In the Vid. Catal. Bevereg. Co∣dex Canon. Vindicat. 289. Manuscript of St. Thecla we find this set forth under the same Title with the other. And in all the other Catalogues of the Ancients, wherever One is spoken of, the Other is for the most part set together with it: As may particularly be observed in the Apostolical Canon. LXXXV. Canons, one of the most early Collections of this kind. 19. NOR does Hist. Eccles. lib. III. c.  Eusebius deny this Epistle to be St. Clement's, but only says
that it was not so celebrated as the Other. And true it is, we do not find it either so often, or so expresly men∣tion'd, as that. But yet if the Conje∣cture of Divinat. de Epist. Clem. Wendeline, approved by a ve∣ry, Learned Beverege Cod. Canon. Vindic. lib. II. c. 9. §. 10. p. 286. Man of our own Coun∣try may be admitted; Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. IV. c. 23. Eusebius him∣self will afford us an Instance of one who not only spake of it, but spake of it as wont to be publickly read in the Church of Corinth. For discoursing of the Epistles of Dionysius, Bishop of that See; he tells us, that in One of them which he wrote to the Romans, he took notice of St. Clement's Epistle in these Words: Today have we kept the LORD's Day with all Holiness; in which we have read your Epistle, as we shall always con∣tinue to read it for our Instruction, toge∣ther with the former written to us by Clement. What that Epistle was, that Dionysius here speaks of, as written by the Church of Rome to that of Corinth, and publickly read in the Congregation there, it do's not appear; nor can we give any account of it, unless it was that which St. Clement wrote to them in the Name of the Church of Rome, and which Eusebius tells us was publickly read in that Church in those days. But then if this be so, as I think it most likely that it is; we must conclude that the Epistle of which we are now speaking, was indeed the first written to them, however called
his Second Epistle; and wont to be read, together with that other which he sent in the Name of the Roman Church to them, in their Assemblies. 20. NOW that which yet more fa∣vours this Opinion is, that it seems by many Arguments to appear, that this Letter which he wrote in his own Name (tho' as being sent from a particular Per∣son, and not in it self so considerable as the Other, it was usually set after that which he wrote by the Order of the Church, and in their Name, to the Co∣rinthians) was yet indeed the See Divinat. Wendelin. ad secund Epist. Clem. Add. Coteler. An∣not. ad PP. A∣postol. p. 108. first written. And for being read in the Churches, Haeres. XXVII. num. 6. Epiphanius expresly tells us, that this Epistle, no less than the fore∣going, was in his time wont to be pub∣lickly read in the Congregation. And tho' St. Jerome and Photius indeed speak but meanly of it in those places where they seem to deliver the Judgment of Eusebius rather than their own Opinion; yet upon other See Hieron. adv. Jovin. Tom. III. fol. 12. Photius Cod. 126. in Clem. Occasions, they make no exception against the Authority of it, but equally ascribe it to St. Clement with the Other, of which there is no doubt. 21. IT were an easie matter to shew that the same was the Opinion of the o∣ther Ecclesiastical Writers of those Times: But this having been done at large by
Wendel. Dio. de Clem. E∣pist. Wendeline first, and since by Notae ad Clem. p. 104, 105. Cotele∣rius, and his perpetual Transcriber Natal. Alex. Dissert. Hist. §. I. Tom. I. in Clem. Na∣talis Alexander, I shall forbear; and con∣clude with this, That it is an Epistle, tho' not of equal Value with the O∣ther, yet of good use, and which if it were not written by St. Clement, as I make no doubt but it was, has yet nothing in it that is in the least unwor∣thy of him. 22. AND now having said thus much concerning these two last Pieces, and with which the present Collection is concluded; I have but this to add, That they are Both of them now first of all put into our own Language; and presented to the perusal of the English Reader: The Former from the Old La∣tin Version, which is by Barthius a∣pud Coteler. Not. in Herm. p. 44. some much complained of, tho' by Cotelerius ibid. others as stifly defended: The Latter from the Original Greek, as it was publish'd by Mr. Patrick Young from the Alexandrian Manuscript, the only Copy that, for ought appears, do's at this day remain of it. 23. IF any one shall ask how it came to pass that our Learned Country-Man Mr. Burton, when he set out the former Epistle of St. Clement in English, did not subjoyn this to it; the Answer which Burton Notes on S. Clement. p. 94. himself warrants us to return is this: That taking what has been said by the
Antients before mentioned, in the strict∣est Sense, he looked upon this Epistle as a Spurious Piece: And which tho' it carried the Name of St. Clement, was yet truly no more his, than those Con∣stitutions and Recognitions, which are al∣so publish'd under the same Name; but are generally acknowledged to be none of his, as in the prosecution of this Dis∣course I shall take occasion more particu∣larly to shew. 24. AS for the Epistle it self, I have concluded it somewhat sooner, than the Greek, which yet remains of it, do's. But that which I have omitted being only an imperfect Piece of a Sentence, and which would have made the Conclusion much more abrupt than it is now; I chose rather to add what follow'd here, than to continue it there. And to make the Rea∣der the better amends for this Liberty, I have not only subjoyn'd what remains of St. Clement, but have endeavour'd to make out the Sense of what is wanting in our Copy from the Other Clement, who seems to have follow'd this Original. Clem. Rom. ex MS Regio. FOR the LORD himself be∣ing asked by a certain Person, when his Kingdom should come; answer'd, When Two shall be One, and that which is without as that which is with∣in; and the Male with the Female,
neither Male nor Female. Now Two are One, when we speak the Truth to each other; and there is, (without Hy∣pocrisie,) one Soul in two Bodies. And that which is without, as that which is within; He means this; he calls the Soul that which is within, and the Body that which is without. As there∣fore thy Body appears, so let thy Soul be seen by its good Works. And the Male with the Female, neither Male nor Female; — Ex Clem. A∣lexandrin. He means this; He calls our Anger the Male, our Concupiscence the Female. When therefore a Man is come to such a pass, that he is subject neither to the One or Other of these; both of which through the prevalence of Custom, and an evil Education, cloud and dar∣ken the Reason; but rather having dispell'd the Mist arising from them, and being full of Shame, shall by Re∣pentance have united both his Soul and Spirit in the Obedience of Reason; then as Paul, says, there is in us nei∣ther Male nor Female.
CHAP. IX. That the Pieces here put toge∣ther are All that remain of the most Primitive and Apo∣stolical Antiquity. That there are several Other Treatises pretended to have been written within the compass of this Period; But none such as truly come up to it. Of the Epistle of our Saviour Christ to Ab∣garus, and the Occasion of it: That it is not probable that any such Letter was written by him. The Epistles a∣scribed to the Virgin Mary, spurious. So is the Epistle pretended to have been written by St. Paul to the Laodi∣ceans. Of the Acts, the Gospel, the Preaching and Revelations of St. Pe∣ter. Of the Liturgy attributed to St. Matthew: And the Discourse said to have been written by him con∣cerning the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin. Of the Liturgies ascribed to St. Peter, St. Mark, and St. James. Of the Gospels attributed to several of the Apostles. Of the Apostles Creed; and the Canons called Apostolical. Of the other Pieces under the Names
of St. Clement and St. Ignatius: And particularly of the Recognitions and E∣pitome of Clement. Of the History of the Life, Miracles, and Assum∣ption of St. John, pretended to have been written by Prochorus, One of the Seven Deacons. Of the Histories of St. Peter and St. Paul, ascribed to Linus Bishop of Rome. Of the Lives of the Apostles attributed to Abdias Bishop of Babylon. Of the Epistles of St. Martial. Of the Passion of St. Andrew, written by the Presby∣ters of Achaja. Of the Works ascrib∣ed to Dionysius the Areopagite. That, upon the whole, the Pieces here put to∣gether, are all that remain of the Apo∣stolical Times, after the Books of the Holy Scripture. 1. AND now having said thus much concerning the several Pieces here put together, and the Authors of them; it is time to go on to the Other Part of this Discourse, and consider what may be fit to be observed concerning them All together, and as they are now first of all set forth, in our own Lan∣guage, in the following Collection. 2. NOW the first thing that may be fit to be here taken notice of is, That the following Collection is truly what the Title pretends it to be, A full
and perfect Collection of all the Genuine Writings that remain to us of the Apo∣stolical Fathers: And carries on the Anti∣quity of the Church from the time of the Holy Scriptures of the New Testament, to about an Hundred and Fifty Years af∣ter Christ. 3. TO make this the more evident, it will be necessary for me to consider, what those other Writings are which some have endeavoured to raise up into the Rank of Apostolical Antiquity; and shew, that they are indeed Writings ei∣ther of no Credit nor Authority at all, or at least, not of such as they are falsly pretended to be. And to the end I may proceed the more clearly in this Enqui∣ry, I will divide the several Pieces now to be examined into the Three following Ranks: The, First, of Those which are Antecedent to any I have here collected; as being pretended to have been written either by our Saviour Christ himself, or by the Virgin Mary, or by the Apostles. The, Second, of such Other Tracts as are ascribed to some of those Fathers, whose Genuine Remains I have here put toge∣ther. And the, Third, of such Pieces as are said to have been written by some Other Authors who lived in the Aposto∣lical Times; and wrote, if we will be∣lieve some Men, several Books much more considerable than any I have here collected.
4. OF the first of these kinds is that pretended Letter of our Blessed Saviour to Abgarus King of Edessa, a little City of Arabia Vid. Annot. Valesii in Eu∣seb. p. 18, 19., a part of which Country was subject to him. Now this may seem to be of so much the better Credit, in that Hist. Eccles. lib. I. c. 13. Eusebius tells us he had himself faithfully translated it out of the Syriac Language, as he found it in the Archives of Edessa. Nor was it very long after, that Testam. S. E∣phraem inter Oper. p. 788. Ephraem, a Deacon of that Church, made mention of this Communication between our Saviour and Abgarus, as the Occasion of the first Conversion of that Place; and exhorted his People upon that Account, the rather to hold fast to their Holy Profession, and to live worthy of it. Evagrii Hist. Eccles. lib. IV. cap. 27. Evagrius who wrote about Two Hundred Years after this, not only confirmed all that had been said by Both these, but added, from Proco∣pius, several other Circumstances, un∣known, for ought appears, to either of them. And particularly, that of the Im∣pression which our Saviour had made of his Face upon a Napkin, and sent to that Prince; and which, he tells us, was of no small Advantage to them in the de∣fence of their Town against Chosdroes King of Persia, who by this means was hindred from taking of it.
5. AND now, since the Addition of this new Story, to the old account of this Matter; it is not to be wondred if the Patrons of Images among the Greeks, from henceforth contended with all Ear∣nestness for the Truth of both. Inso∣much that we find they instituted a par∣ticular Festival in Memory of it, August the XVIth; and transcribed at large the whole History of this Adventure into their Menaeon, and recited it upon it. 6. AND upon the same account I suppose it is, that some of our late Au∣thors, tho' they do not care to assert the Truth of this Story, are yet unwilling to deny all Credit to it. Annal. Eccl. ann. XXXI. num. 60. Baronius re∣ports both the Relation and the Epistle from Eusebius, but will not answer for the Truth of either. Epitom. An∣nal. Baron. Ann. XXXI. num. 22. Spondanus de∣livers the same from the Cardinal, that he had done from Eusebius; and passes no Censure either One way or Other upon it: Only in his Margent he ob∣serves that Gretser the Jesuit in his Dis∣course of Images, &c. had vindicated the Authority of our Saviour's Epistle to Ab∣garus, from the Exceptions of Casaubon in his Exercitations upon Baronius against it. Annot. ad O∣per. Ephraem. yr. p. 796. Gerard Vossius in his Scholia upon the Testament of St. Ephraem, contents himself to refer us to the Authority of the Ancients for the Truth of this Re∣lation;
who, he pretends, did without Controversie look upon it to be authen∣tick. And Annot. in Euseb. Hist. Eccles. p. 25. A. Valesius himself, tho' he do's not go about to confute this Story, but rather endeavours to rectifie those Errors that seem'd the most considera∣ble in it; yet plainly enough shews that he was not out of all doubt con∣cerning the Truth of it. 7. BUT Others, even of the Church of Rome, have not observed so much Caution in this particular. They round∣ly stand by the Censure of Pope Apud Gra∣tian. Dist. XV. c. 3. Simon Hist. Crit. du N. T. ch. iii. p. 23. Ge∣lasius who pronounced this Epistle of our Saviours to be Apochryphal: And not only shew by many probable Arguments the Falseness of it; but what is yet more, pass the same Censure upon the Story of the Image too that Exercit. in Baron. XIII. §. 31. p. 289. Casaubon had done, not∣withstanding all that Gretser could say in Favour of it. Saecul. I. Vol. I. p. 266. Natalis Alexander delivers this Conclusion concerning it: The Epistle of Abgarus to our Saviour, and his Answer to it, are Supposititious and Apochryphal; And at large answers all that is usually urged in Favour of them. And Nouvelle Bibl. Vol. I. p. 1. Du Pin after him, yet more so∣lidly convinces it of such manifest Er∣rors, as may serve to satisfie all consi∣dering Persons, that Eusebius and Ephraem were too easie of Belief in this particu∣lar: And did not sufficiently examin in∣to it, when they deliver'd that as a cer∣tain
Truth, which in several Circum∣stances shews it self to be evidently o∣therwise. 8. I SHALL not need to say a∣ny thing of the Opinions of the Learn∣ed Men of the Vid. apud Basnaginm Ex∣ercit. Hist. Crit. in Baron. ad ann. XLIII. num. 18. pag. 430. Reformed Religion as to this Matter; which generally agree in the same Censure. But yet seeing both Eusebius and St. Ephraem have spoken with such Confidence of this Story, and whose Authority ought not to be light∣ly esteemed; I shall chuse rather with the Casaubon. Exerc. in Ba∣ron. XIII. p. 289. Montacu∣tius Orig. Ec∣cles. Tom. I. part. 2. p. 63. Cave Hist. Li∣teraria, §. I. p. 1. in Jesu Christo. middle sort, to leave it to every one to judg as he pleases, than determine any thing in this Case. And that they may the better do it, I will subjoyn at length the Two Epistles, as they are rendered by Eusebius from the Original Syriac into Greek; and from him tran∣slated into our own Tongue. The EPISTLE of Abgarus to our Blessed Saviour. 9. ABgarus Prince of Edessa, to Je∣sus the Good Saviour, who has appeared in the Country about Jerusalem, Health. I have received an account of Thee, and Thy Cures; how without any Medicines or Herbs they are done by Thee. For Report
says, that thou makest the Blind to see, the Lame to walk; that thou cleansest the Lepers, and castest out unclean Spirits and Devils, and healest Those who have laboured under long Diseases, and raisest up the Dead. And having heard all this concerning Thee, I have concluded with my self one of these two things; either that Thou art God, and that being come down from Heaven, thou doest all these mighty Works; Or that Thou art the Son of God, seeing thou art a∣ble to perform such things. Where∣fore by this present Letter I intreat Thee to come unto me, and to cure me of the Infirmity that lies upon me. For I have also heard that the Jews murmure against Thee, and seek to do Thee Mischief. But I have tho' but a small, yet a very pretty City which may be sufficient both for Thee and me. The ANSWER of our Saviour to Abgarus. 10. ABgarus, thou art blessed, in that tho' Thou hast not seen me, thou hast yet believed in me. For it is written concerning me, That those who have seen me should not
believe in me; that so they who have not seen me, might believe and live. As for what thou hast written unto me, that I should come to thee; It is ne∣cessary that all those things for which I was sent, should be fulfilled by me in this place: And that having ful∣filled them, I should be received up to him that sent me. When there∣fore I shall be received into Heaven, I will send unto thee some One of my Disciples, who shall both heal thy Distemper, and give Life to thee, and to those that are with thee. 11. HAVING said thus much con∣cerning this pretended Entercourse be∣tween our Saviour Christ and this Prince; I should in the next place mention the Letters ascribed to his Mother, the Bles∣sed Virgin Mary, but that there is not the least shadow of Truth to give Cre∣dit to them; nor any Arguments brought in favour of them, that may deserve a Refutation. I shall therefore say no∣thing to these, but pass on without any more ado, to those Pieces which have been attributed either to some particu∣lar Apostle or Evangelist; or else are pre∣tended to have been composed by the whole Colledge of the Apostles together. 12. OF the former kind is the Epi∣stle of St. Paul to the Laodiceans, set out
by Hutter in his Polyglott New Testament, and inserted by Bibl. Sanct. lib. II. in Paulo. Add. Frasse∣niun Disq. Bi∣blic. p. 731, &c. Sixtus Senensis into his Bibliotheque, together with the Other Epistles that are in the like manner pre∣tended, tho' without any just ground, to have pass'd between the same Apostle, and Seneca the Philosopher. Now that which gave occasion to the forging of such an Epistle, was; that St. Paul him∣self seems to speak, Coloss. iv.16. as if he had written an Epistle to that Church. For having commanded the Colossians when they should have read the Epi∣stle which he wrote to them, To cause it to be read in the Church of the Laodi∣ceans; He adds, That they likewise should read the Epistle from Laodicea. But whoever shall examin the true Import of those Words, will find that St. Paul do's not there speak of an Epistle sent to the Laodiceans; but either of some Epistle that had been written So Chrysost. Theodoret, &c. from thence, (as Theophy∣lact. in loc. Theophylact thinks his First Epistle to Timothy;) Or of some Epistle which the Apostle had written to some Other Church, but order'd to be sent on to them: As the Epistle to the Corinthians was directed not only to that One place, but to all the Churches of Achaja, 2 Cor. I.1. And as in the very Passage under debate, the Epistle to the Colossians is order'd to be communicated to the Church of the Laodiceans, and to be read in it. And then taking this to have been the mean∣ing
of that Expression, it will not be improbable but that by the Epistle from Laodicea he may have meant his Epistle to the Ephesians; and which Tertull. adv. Marcion. lib. V. cap. xi. p. 476. Tertullian tells us was wont in those days to be sometimes called by that Name. 13. NOW that which favours this Conjecture is, that Ephesus was in those days looked upon, even in the Civil Account of the Empire, as the Chief City and Metropolis of the Lesser Asia. Here it was that the Vid. Euseb. Eccles. Hist. lib. IV. c. 13. Emperours order'd their Edicts relating to that Province to be publish'd; (in like manner, as we find in several Vid. Annot. Vales. in Eu∣seb. p. 60. A. Laws of the Theodo∣sian Code, that they were wont to be proposed at Rome for Italy, and at Car∣thage for Africa.) Here the Common-Councils of Asia assembled: And to name no more, Here the Publick Sports and Sacred Rites, &c. that concerned the whole Community of that Province, were usually transacted. 14. AND much greater was the re∣spect which it had with relation to Ec∣clesiastical Matters; both as it was a Church founded by St. Paul, and as it was the Seat of the Beloved Disciple St. John, who continued there to the very time of Trajan, above 100 Years after Christ. Hence Tertull. de Prescript. cap XXXVI. pag. 215▪ Tertullian dire∣cting those who were desirous to know
what the true Faith of Christ was, to enquire among the Chiefest Churches in every part, what had been deliver'd to them, and was the Faith received and taught amongst them; bids them if they were in Italy go to Rome, if in A∣chaja to Corinth; if in Macedonia, to Philippi; if in Asia, to Ephesus: In∣somuch that, as Hist. Eccles. lib. III. c. vi. p. 339. Evagrius tells us, the Bishop of Ephesus had a Patriarchal Power within the Diocese of Asia till the Time of the Fourth General Council. And long after that, Theodorus Bishop of this See, sub∣scribing to the Acts of the Sixth General Council, calls himself Bishop of Ephesus, the Metroplis of the Province of Asia. And even in the Times of which we are now discoursing, St. John writing to the Seven Churches of Asia, (of which Laodicea was One,) places Rev. I 11.II.1. Ephesus at the head of them, as that which had the Precedence of all the rest in those Parts. 15. SEEING then such was the Pre∣rogative, which the Church of Ephesus had, from the beginning, over all the o∣ther Churches of the Asian Diocese; and that St. Paul himself had first planted Christianity there: And seeing it appears from the Command which he gave to the Colossians, Chap. iv.16. to cause the Epistle which he had written to them, to be read in the Church of the Laodi∣ceans, that he was wont to order the
Epistles which he wrote to One Church to be sent to, and be read in the Others that we renear unto it: Seeing, lastly, we are told both by Tertull. adv. Marcion lib. V. c. xvi. p. 481. Epiphan. Hae∣res. xlii. num. xii. Tertullian and Epipha∣nius, that the Epistle to the Ephesians, was anciently called by some the Epistle to the Laodiceans; I think it may not be improbable, but that by the Epistle from Laodicea, he may have meant the Epistle which he wrote to Vid. L'Hi∣stoire Critique de Monsieur Simon sur le N. T. c. xv. p. 166. the Ephesians, at the same time, and by the same Person, that he wrote to the Colossians; and which being from them communicated to the Laodiceans, might be ordered by St. Paul to be sent on to the Colossians, who were a Neighbour Church to Lao∣dicea, and afterwards subject to it as their Metropolitane. 16. BUT whatever becomes of this Conjecture: Whether by the Epistle from Laodicea we are to understand some Epistle written from that place, and that either by St. Paul to some other Church or Person, or by the Laodiceans Frassenius Disq. Biblic. p. 730, 731. to him; Or whether we are to understand by it some Epistle that was to be communi∣cated from thence to the Colossians, which seems to me the more probable, and par∣ticularly that which he wrote by Tychi∣cus to the Ephesians, at the same time that he wrote by him to the Colossians: Cer∣tain it is that the Epistle now extant un∣der that Title is none of St. Paul's; nor
do's his Expression in that place to the Colossians, before mentioned, any more prove there was ever any such, than that Other in 1 Cor. v.9. proves a Third Epi∣stle to the Corinthians, which some also have pretended, as Sixt. Sinens. Bibl. sanct. lib. II. in St. Paulo. Sixtus Sinensis, and Others observe. 17. IT would be endless to insist up∣on all the other Spurious Pieces of the like kind that have been attributed to this great Apostle. It is sufficient to ob∣serve, that neither Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. III. c. 3. Eusebius, nor St. Hieron. de Script. Eccles. in St. Paulo. Je∣rome, knew any thing more of his Writ∣ing than what we have in those Epistles that are still extant in our Bibles under his Name; except it were the Epistle to the Hebrews, and which tho' doubted of by some in the Primitive Church, is yet ascribed to him by Eusebius, who expres∣ly accounts XIV. of his Epistles, and speaks of that to the Hebrews as his; tho' he adds, that being not received by the Church of Rome, it was by some suspe∣cted whether it were indeed the true E∣pistle of St. Paul. 18. BUT much greater is the Autho∣rity of those Supposititious Pieces which the same Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. III. c. xxx. Comp. Hieron. in Ca∣tal. Script. Ec∣cles. in S. Petro. Eusebius tells us were, even in those days, attributed to that other great Apostle St. Peter, viz. The Acts, the Gos∣ple, the Preaching, and the Revelations of St. Peter. Nevertheless, seeing he at
the same time declares that they were never look'd upon as Catholick, but ra∣ther as set out by some Hereticks of those Times, (as many other Pieces of the like kind were,) under the venerable Name of that Apostle, the better to gain thereby Credit to their Doctrine; How ancient soever they may otherwise be, yet they will not fall within the compass of the present Collection: Nor indeed is there any thing of them remaining to us, except the Names; and perhaps a few Fragments, scatter'd up and down in the Quotations that have been made by Ecclesiastical Writers out of them. 19. TO these let me add in the third place, the Discourses attributed to Vid. Cave Hist. literar. p 9. Natal. A∣lex. §. I. Vol. I. p. 85. Du Pin. Bibl. Vol. I. p. 21. St. Matthew, the first Writer of the New Testament. Two Books there are still remaining under his Name; A Li∣turgy pretended to have been composed be him, and a Discourse concerning the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin: But both rejected by Learned Men, as the Works of some Impostor, many Ages af∣ter the Death of that Holy Apostle. 20. AND the same must be said of the Cave. Natal▪ Alex. Du Pin. ib. Hoornb. Theol. PP. p. 41. Rivet. Cri∣tic. Sacr. lib. I. c. lii. Liturgies ascribed in like manner to St. Peter, St. Mark, St. James, and Others; and of the Falsity of which all the Learned World seems now to be universally agreed. Which makes it
the more to be admir'd that such Great Men as Bona de Reb. Liturgic. lib. I. c. 8. Cardinal Bona and Leo Allatius Dissert. de Sym. part. I. p. 176. Leo Al∣latius were, should be so far prejudiced in their Favour, as to think at least the Liturgy of St. James to have been truly composed by that Apostle; and only cor∣rupted and interpolated by some other hand in the following Ages. 21. NOR may we judg any other∣wise of the Gospels set out under the Names of several of the Apostles, and Others who were contemporary with them: And of which however some were very ancient; yet is it generally a∣greed among the most judicious of all sides, that they were not only not writ∣ten by those whose Names they carry, but were for the most part set out by suspected Persons, and for ill Ends, after their Deaths. 22. AS for the Writings of the whole Colledge of Apostles; Two Pieces there are, besides the Synodical Letter spoken of by St. Luke, Acts xv.23. which not only go under their Names, but have been by some ascribed to them, as the Authors of them. And those are, first the Creed, and secondly the Canons of the Apostles. 23. FOR the former of these, the A∣postles Creed, it has been thought by many
that it was so called, not only as being a Summary of the Apostles Doctrine, but because it was really composed by them. And that either in their first Assembly after our LORD's Resurrection, Acts i. or else immediately before their Disper∣sion, upon the breaking out of Herod's Persecution, Acts xii. which Baronius and others esteem the more probable. It is not my intention to enter on any parti∣cular Examination of this Matter, which has been so fully handled, not only by the late Criticks of the Church of Rome, Nat. Alex. § I. Vol. I. p. 490, &c. Natalis Alexander, Du Pin, Bi∣blioth. Eccles. Vol. I. p. 25, &c. Du Pin, &c. but yet more especially by Diatrib. de Symb. Arch-Bishop Usher, Voss. Dissert. de tribus Sym∣bolis. Gerard Vossius, Suicer. The∣saur. Eccles. To. II. Voce , p. 180. &c. Suicer, Spanhem. Introd ad Hist Eccles. § i. c. 3. Span∣hemius, Ernest Tent∣zel. Exercit. select. Exercit. I. Tentzelius, and Sam. Basnage Exercit. Hist. Crit. a Ann. XLIV. num. 17, 18. Sam. Basnage, among the Protestants. It shall suffice to say, that as it is not likely, that had a∣ny such thing as this been done by the Apostles, St. Luke would have pass'd it by, without taking the least notice of it: So the Diversity of Creeds in the Ancient Church; and that not only in Expression, but in some whole Articles too, suffici∣ently shew's; that the Creed which we call by that Name, was not compos'd by the Apostles; nor probably reduced into that form in which it now is, for some Hundreds of Years after their Deaths.
26. NOR is it any more probable that the Canons now extant under their Name were truly compiled by them; but rather as our Pious and Learned Annot. in Pandect. Ca∣non. Oxon. To. II. p. 1. Id. Co∣dex Can. Vin∣dicat. c. 11, &c. Dr. Beverege has shewn, were a Col∣lection of the Canons made by the Coun∣cils of the first Ages, put together at se∣veral times; and finished, as we now see them, within CCC Years after Christ, before the assembling of the first Gene∣ral Council of Nice. This is the earliest date that is now ascribed to them by the most Vid. Albas∣pin. Obs. lib. I. c. 13. p. 28. De Marca a∣pud Bevereg. Annot. in Pan∣dect. p. 4. num. xii. Coteler. Not. in Patr. A∣postol. p. 327, 328. Du Pin Bibl. Eccles. Tom. I. p. 36. Natal. Alex. §. I. Vol. II. p. 138. Judicious Writers of the Ro∣man Communion, as well as of the Re∣formed Religion; and Daillé de Pseu∣dep. Apostol. lib. III. Larroque Observat. in. Bevereg. Hoornbeck Theolog. Patr. p. 35, &c. some there are who will by no means allow them to be so ancient, as even this Opinion supposes them to be. 27. IT is evident then, that except the Holy Scriptures, there is nothing re∣maining of the truly Genuine Christian Antiquity, more early than what is here put together. Nor have the Authors, whose Tracts I have now set forth, any Other Pieces yet remaining, besides those that appear in the following Collection. Indeed for what concerns two of the Fa∣thers here mentioned, St. Clement, and St. Ignatius; several Treatises there are,
and some that may seem much more con∣siderable than any I have subjoyn'd, that have been sent abroad under the Autho∣rity of their Names; but which are at present universally exploded by all Learn∣ed Men. Such are the Constitutions, and Recognitions of St. Clement. The Colle∣ction called from the same Father, The Clementines. The Epitome of Clement, and the Epistles ascribed to Ignatius, be∣sides the VII. here set out; and which a∣lone were either mention'd by Eusebius, or known to the Church for some Ages after See this dis∣cuss'd at large by Bishop Usher, Dissert. ad Ig∣nat. cap. V, VI, XIX. p. 2.. 28. I SHALL not here enter upon any particular Enquiry when these seve∣ral Pieces were first sent abroad into the World; or how it came to pass that Some even among the Epiphan. Haeres. XXX. Ruffinus de Adulterat. libr. Origen. Tract. XXXV. in Matthaeum. Author Oper. Imperfect. in Math. inter Oper. Chry∣sost. ad Mat. x. & xxiv. Ancients them∣selves receiv'd them for the Genuine Writings of these Holy Men; only cor∣rupted, as many others were, by the Hereticks of those first Times, the bet∣ter to give some Colour to their Errours. I will only observe, that the Recog∣nitions of St. Clement; not only the most Learned, but the most Ancient too of any of these, as near as we can guess, were not set forth till about the mid∣dle of the Second Century; and are re∣jected by Vid. Coteler. Not. in Script. PP. Apost. p. 343. Natal. Alex. §. I. Tom. I. p. 126 Du Pin Bibl. Vol. I. p. 80, 81. Eusebius as none of his, but as One of those many Impostures which
were even then publish'd under his Name. And for the rest, tho' some of them have been Ancient too, yet it is evident that none of them come up to the Period of which I am now speaking; nor even to the Age of the Recognitions before mentioned Coteler. An∣not. in Script. PP. Apost. p. 113. A. 115. D. 403. A. 431. C. D. Sixt. Senens. Biblioth. lib. II. in Clement. Posevin. Apparat. p. 328. Bellarm. de Script. §. I. in Clement. Natal Alex. §. I. Tom. I. p. 129. Id. ibid. cap. de St. Ignat. p. 139. Du Pin. Biblioth. p. 81, 83, 102, &c.. 29. AS for the Epitomé of St. Clement, Notae in Script. PP. A∣post. p. 431. C. D. Cotelerius esteems it to have been yet later than any of the rest. Per∣haps it was collected by Metaphrastes, whom I take to have been the Author of the Martyrdom of that Holy Man, set out by Surius ad Nov. xxiii. Surius and Allarius in Diatrib. de Sy∣meonum Scri∣ptis. Allatius, and re∣printed by Cotelerius at the end of the Works ascribed to St. Clement. This is certain, that it was composed in some of the latter Ages; As was also the Account of the Miracle pretended to have been wrought at his Martyrdom, which goe's under the Name of Ephraem, Archbishop of Cherson, and where (as Du Pin i∣blioth. Tom. I. p. 89. r. Du Pin well observes) there never was any. And this Cotelerius seems to have been aware of; and therefore in his An∣notations upon this Relation, calls him Archbishop or Bishop of Cherson. Now that there was such a Bishop appears both from the Ancient Vid. Geogr. sacr. à S. Paulo, p. 11, 43. Notitiae of the
Province of Europe under the Patriarch of Constantinople; and from the Subscri∣ption which Ibid. p. 233. in Chersoneso. Peter Bishop of this place made to the Council of Chalcedon, for Cyriacus Archbishop of Heraclea, in whose Province that See lay. 30. THERE is then nothing in any of those Pieces which make up the rest of Cotelerius's Collection, and are indeed All that still remain under the Names of those Fathers of which we are now speak∣ing, that can with any good Grounds be relied upon as the Genuine Products of those Holy Men. Let us see, in the last place; Whether any of those Discourses which have been sent abroad under the Names of some others of the Apostolical Fathers, may deserve to be received by us, as coming truly from them. 31. AND here I shall in the first place take it for granted, that what those who are usually the most fond of such Spurious Pieces; I mean, the Wri∣ters of the Church of Rome, have yet al∣most unanimously rejected as false and counterfeit, may securely be laid aside by us, without any further enquiry into the Condition of them. Such are, The History of the Life, Miracles, and As∣sumption of St. John; pretended to have been written by Prochorus his Disciple, and one of the seven Deacons, chosen
by the Church of Jerusalem, Acts vi. The Histories of St. Peter and St. Paul, said to have been written by Linus one of the first Bishops of Rome. The Lives of the Apostles, ascribed to Abdias Bishop of Babylon, and supposed to have been writ∣ten by him in the Hebrew Tongue. The Epistles of St. Martial; who is said to have been one of the LXX Disciples appointed by our Saviour, and one of the first Preachers of the Gospel in France. These are all so evidently Spurious, that even Eccles. Hist. §. I. To. I. p. 95, 115. Natalis Alexander himself was ashamed to undertake the Defence of them: And not only he, but all the other Writers of the same Church, Baronius, Bellarmine, Sixtus Senensis, Possevine, Espencaeus, Bisciola, Labbe, &c. have freely acknowledged the little Credit that is to be given to them. 32. BUT two Pieces there are which Alexander is still unwilling to part with; tho' he cannot deny but that the most Learned Men, even of his own Commu∣nion, have at last agreed in the rejecting of them. And those are, the Passion of St. Andrew, written, (as is pretended,) by the Presbyters of Achaja; and the Works set out under the Name of Dio∣nysius the Areopagite. 33. AS for the former of these, I confess there have not been wanting
many from the VIIIth Century down∣wards, who have undertaken the De∣fence of it. Vid. Natal. Alex. §. I. To. I. p. 109. Labbe de Script. Ec∣cles. To. I. p. 3, &c. Etherius mention'd it a∣bout the Year DCC.LXXX.VIII. Re∣migius after: Peter Damian, Lanfranc, and St. Bernard, still later. And in this last Age Baronius, Bellarmine, Labbe, and a few Others, have yet more en∣deavour'd to establish it's Authority. But then as Nouvelle Biblioth. To. I. p. 47, 48. Du Pin well observes, it is certain that the Ancients knew no∣thing of it; nor are the Acts we now have quoted by any before the time of Etherius before-mentioned. And yet how they could have escaped the Search of the Primitive Fathers, had they been extant in their days, it is hard to imagin. 34. BUT much less is the Credit that ought to be given to the pretend∣ed Works of Dionysius the Areopagite: Which as Natal. Alex. §. I. Vol. I. p. 136. Labbe de Script. Tom. I. in Dionysio. Alexander confesses, two ve∣ry great He might have added se∣veral others: See Bellarm. de Script. p. 56. Criticks of his own Commu∣nion, to have deny'd to have been writ∣ten by that Holy Man; so has a Du Pin-Nouvelle Bi∣blioth. To. I. p. 90. third very lately given such Reasons to shew that the Writings, now extant under his Name, could not have been composed by him, as ought to satisfie every consi∣dering Man of their Imposture. For not to say any thing of what occurs every where in those Discourses, utterly disa∣greeable to the State of the Church in the time that that Dionysius lived: Can
it be imagin'd, that had such consider∣able Books as these been written by him, none of the Ancients of the first IV Cen∣turies should have heard any thing of them. Or shall we say that they did know of them; as well as the Fathers that lived after, and yet made no men∣tion of them, tho' they had so often oc∣casion to have done it, as Eusebius, and St. Jerome, not to name any Others, had? 35. IN short, one of the first times that we hear of them, is in the Dispute between the Severians and Catholicks a∣bout the Year D.XXX.II. When the Former produced them in favour of their Errours, and the Latter rejected them as Books utterly unknown to all Antiqui∣ty, and therefore not worthy to be re∣ceived by them. 36. IT is therefore much to be won∣dered, that after so many Arguments as have been brought to prove how little Right these Treatises have to such a Pri∣mitive Antiquity; nevertheless, not on∣ly Natalis Alexander, but a Man of much better Judgment, I mean Vid. Cave Hist. liter. §. IV. p. 177. Emanuel Schelstrat, the late Learned Keeper of the Vatican Library, should still under∣take the Defence of them. When they were written, or by what Author, is very uncertain: But as Vindic. Ig∣nat. part. I. c. 10. Bishop Pearson supposes them to have been first
set forth about the latter end of Euse∣bius's Life; so Loc. supr. cit. Dr. Cave conjectures, that the Elder Apollinarius may very probably have been the Author of them. Daillé apud Pearson. loc. supr. cit. Others there are who place them yet later, and suspect Pope Gregory the Great to have had a hand in the For∣gery. And indeed the Arguments which our very Learned Dodwell de Sacerdot. Lai∣cor. cap. VIII. §. III. p. 389. Mr. Dodwell brings to prove that they were originally writ∣ten by one of the Roman Church, are not without their just Weight. But what∣ever becomes of this, thus much is cer∣tain, that these Books were not written before the middle of the IVth Century, and therefore are without the Compass of the present Undertaking. 37. AND now having taken such a View as was necessary for the present Design, of all those other Pieces which have been obtruded upon the World for Apostolical Writings, besides what is ei∣ther here collected, or has been before publish'd in the Sacred Books of the New Testament; I suppose I may with good Grounds conclude, that the little I have now put together is all that can with any Certainty be depended upon, of the most Primitive Fathers: And therefore that from these, next to the Holy Scriptures, we must be content to draw the best Account we can of the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church,
for the first Hundred Years after the Death of Christ. CHAP. X. Of the Authority of the fol∣lowing Treatises, and the Deference that ought to be paid to them upon the ac∣count of it. This is shewn from the following Consi∣derations: 1st, That the Authors of them were Contemporary with the Apostles, and instructed by them. 2dly, They were Men of an eminent Cha∣racter in the Church; and therefore to be sure such as could not be ignorant of what was taught in it. 3dly, They were very careful to preserve the Do∣ctrine of Christ in its Purity, and to oppose such as went about to corrupt it. 4thly, They were Men not only of a per∣fect Piety, but of great Courage and Constancy; and therefore such as cannot be suspected to have had any Design to prevaricate in this Matter. 5thly, They were endued with a large Portion of the Holy Spirit, and as such, could
hardly err in what they deliver'd as the Gospel of Christ. And 6thly, Their Writings were approved by the Church in those days, which could not be mista∣ken in its Approbation of them. BUT, Secondly, and to proceed yet farther: The following Collection pretends to a just Esteem, not only up∣on the account of its Perfection, as it is an Entire Collection of what remains to us of the Apostolical Fathers; but yet much more, from the Respect that is due to the Authors themselves, whose Writings are here put together. 2. IF, First, we consider them as the Contemporaries of the Holy Apostles; Some of them bred up under our Sa∣viour Christ himself, and the rest instru∣cted by those Great Men whom he commissioned Mat. xxviii.19. Mark xvi.15. to go forth and preach to all the World, and Luke xxiv.49. Acts i.8. Acts ii. endued with an ex∣traordinary Assistance of his Blessed Spi∣rit for the doing of it: We cannot doubt but that what they deliver to us, must be, without Controversie, the pure Do∣ctrine of the Gospel; What Christ and his Apostles taught, and what they had themselves received from their own Mouths. This is the least Deference we can pay to them, to look upon them as faithful Deliverers of the Doctrine and Practice of the Church in those most
early Times: When Heresies were not as yet so openly broke out in it, Nor the true Faith so dangerously corrupt∣ed with the Mixture of those erro∣neous Opinions, which afterwards more fatally infected the Minds of Men, and divided the Church into so many Parties and Factions. So that here then we may read with Security, and, let me add, with Respect too: And not doubt but what these Holy Men deliver to us, is as cer∣tainly the true Doctrine of Christ, as if we had received it, like them, from our Saviour and his Apostles. 3. BUT, Secondly, The Authors of the following Pieces had not only the Ad∣vantage of living in the Apostolical Times, and of hearing the Holy Apostles, and con∣versing with them, but they were of a very Eminent Character in the Church too; Men raised up to the highest pitch of Ho∣nour and Authority in some of the most famous Churches of the World; Chosen by the Apostles to preside in their own proper Sees; at Rome, at Antioch, at Smyrna; One of them set apart, by the express Command of the Holy Ghost, to be the Companion of the Great St. Paul in his Work of the Ministry; and the rest for the most part commended for their rare Endowments, in the inspired Writings of the Holy Scriptures deliver∣ed to us. And therefore we may be sure
that such Men as these must needs have been very carefully instructed in the My∣stery of the Gospel, and have had a most perfect and comprehensive Knowledg of the Faith, as it is in Jesus. 4. HAD they been some ordinary and obscure Writers, even of the Aposto∣lical Times, Men of no Note, no Au∣thority in the Church; tho' still whilst we had a good Account of their Inte∣grity, the very Advantage of the Age wherein they lived would have render∣ed their Discourses justly Venerable to us; yet should we not perhaps have been obliged to pay such a Deference to their Writings, as not to make Allowance for some little Defects or Mistakes that might have happen'd to them. But now having to do with Men, not only instru∣cted in common by the Apostles, with the other Christians of those days, but particularly bred up, and instituted by them: Having here the Writings of Men who had attained to such a perfect Knowledg in the Mystery of Godliness, and were judg'd to have been so well grounded and setled in it, as to deserve to be raised up by the Apostles themselves to the Government of such eminent Churches, as those over which these Holy Men were Over-Seers: It is plain that we cannot with any reason doubt of what they deliver to us, as the Gospel
of Christ; but ought to receive it, if not with equal Veneration, yet but with a little less Respect, than we do the Sa∣cred Writings of those who were their Masters and Instructers. 5. YET farther, Thirdly: The fol∣lowing Authors, were not only such E∣minent Men, and bred up under such mighty Advantages, and so well instru∣cted in the Knowledg of the Gospel, as I have now observed; but they were moreover Persons of a Consummated Piety, adorn'd with all those Christian Virtues they so affectionately recom∣mend to us. But especially, they were zealous Watchmen over their Churches; careful to instruct them in the true Faith and Doctrine of Christ, and no less care∣ful to preserve them against the Conta∣gion of those Heresies, which even in their days began to corrupt the Purity of it. Hence we read with what Ear∣nestness that Blessed Martyr Ignatius first, and then his Fellow-Disciple St. Polycarp, set themselves against those who would insinuate some Other Doctrines into the Minds of their People, than what the Apo∣stles had deliver'd unto them. What wise Directions they gave them for the Dis∣covery of such false Teachers; Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. III. c. 35. and how earnestly they exhorted them by keeping firm to their respective Bishops and Pres∣byters, and to the Apostolical Doctrine de∣livered
by them, to prevent their gain∣ing any Advantage against them. 6. WITH what Assurance do they deliver the Doctrine which they had re∣ceived? How confidently do they de∣clare it to be the true Doctrine of Christ? And exhort the Churches to whom they write, not to give any heed to such as would insinuate any Other Doctrine in∣to their Minds? And how did they themselves shew them by their own Ex∣amples, how they should avoid such Per∣sons? Insomuch that Epist. ad Flor. in num. apud Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. V. c. 20. Irenaeus tells us, that if St. Polycarp at any time chanced to hear any One deliver any Other Do∣ctrine than what he had been taught, he did not only not give any Countenance to such an One; but was wont to stop his Ears at him, and cry out with Astonish∣ment and Grief, Good God! To what Times hast thou reserved me, that I should endure this? Nay he would not tarry in the same place with such a Person, but would leave the House, if he knew that any Hereticks were in it. 7. BUT of the Care which these Holy Men had to keep close in every the least Circumstance to the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles, we cannot, I think, desire a fairer Instance to con∣vince us, than what Euseb. Hist▪ Eccles. lib. v. c. 6 Eusebius has re∣corded of the same Blessed Martyr.
How that hearing of the Difference be∣tween the Eastern and Western Churches about the Time of keeping Easter, he thought it worthy his Pains, at an ex∣treme old Age, to take a Journey as far as Rome for the composing of it. And notwithstanding all that Anicetus, who was then Bishop of that Church, could say to move him from his Practice; yet having this Ground for it, that St. John was wont to keep Easter as he did; the good Man held close to it, and would not hear of changing a Custom which that blessed Apostle had deliver'd to him. 8. AND when such was the Care which these Holy Writers had of hold∣ing fast, even to the least particular, of what they received from the Apostles, that they would not comply with the rest of the Church in such an indifferent matter, only because by so doing they should depart from the Practice of One of them; Surely we may with Confi∣dence depend upon the Doctrine which they deliver, as most pure and genuine; What our Saviour taught his Apostles, and his Apostles them. And what Iren. adv. Haeres. lib. III. c. 30. Ire∣naeus once said of his Master Polycarp, we may with equal Truth and Assurance apply to all the rest of those Fathers, whose Treatises I have here put together; That they taught evermore what they had received from the Apostles, which also they
deliver'd to the Church, and which only is the true Doctrine of Christ. 9. TO this general Piety of their Lives, and Care for the Truth and Pu∣rity of their Religion; let me add, Fourthly, their Courage and Constancy in the maintaining of it. How great this was I have already shewn, in the parti∣cular Accounts which I have given of the several Fathers whose Writings are here subjoyn'd. It shall suffice in this place to observe, that the most of them after having spent their Lives in a care∣ful administration of the great Charges to which they were called, were at last made perfect by Martyrdom; and un∣derwent the most exquisite Cruelties with a Courage and Constancy, worthy both of the Religion they profess'd, and of the eminent Characters which they had ob∣tained in the Church. 10. NOW tho' this do's not imme∣diately argue the Purity of their Do∣ctrine, yet being added to what I have before observed, will give us a new Ground to rely upon the Truth of what they deliver. For since we cannot rea∣sonably doubt but that such Persons as these, must needs have known what the Doctrine of the Apostles was; and have been perfectly instructed in that Religion which they were esteem'd able
and worthy to preach to others: We have in this a clear Demonstration of their Integrity both in their Teaching and Writing of it; and must conclude, That they who liv'd such excellent Lives, and took so much Pains in the Ministry of the Gospel; that stuck with such Firmness to it, notwithstanding all the Endeavours of their Enemies to the con∣trary; and chose rather to undergo the most bitter Deaths, than they would in any wise depart from it; have doubtless dealt most uprightly in this matter, and deliver'd nothing to us but what they took for the true Doctrine of Christ, and what therefore we may conclude, undoubtedly was so. 11. SUCH good reason then have we upon all these Accounts to look up∣on the Writings of these Holy Men, as containing the pure and uncorrupted Do∣ctrine of our Blessed Saviour and his A∣postles. But now, Fifthly, and to ad∣vance yet higher: These Writers were not only thus qualified by these Ordinary means to deliver the Gospel of Christ to us, but in all probability were endued with the Extraordinary Assistance of the Holy Spirit too. So that what they teach us, it not to be look'd upon as a mere traditionary Relation of what had been deliver'd to them, but rather, as an Authoritative Declaration of the Gospel of
Christ to us; tho' indeed as much infe∣rior to that of the Apostles and Evange∣lists, as their Gifts and Assistances were less than theirs. 12. FOR, (1st.) That the Extraor∣dinary Gifts of the Holy Spirit with which the Apostles were endued, and which the See 1 Cor. iv.12. Ephes. i.6, &c. Acts viii.14, 17.xix.6, &c. Holy Scriptures themselves tell us were in those days distributed to Other Believers, as well as unto Them, continu'd still in the Church after their departure; we have the express assur∣ance of Vid. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. IV. c. 15. Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 308. Justin Martyr, one of the most ancient Writers, after those I have here subjoyn'd, to assure us. They were communicated not only to Men but Ibid. p. 315. Wo∣men: And that we may be sure he spake nothing in this matter but what he could undeniably have made out, we find him boasting of it against Trypho the Jew, and urging it as an unanswerable Argu∣ment in the Behalf of Christianity, and against the Jews, from whom these Gifts had a long time been departed. And e∣ven in the Fathers, whose Writings are here put together, there appear sufficient Indications of the Continuance of these Extraordinary Powers. 13. THIS Se below, c▪ xlviii. p 66. St. Clement manifestly declares in his First Epistle to the Co∣rinthians. He tells us that some in that Church not only had such Gifts, but
were even proud and conceited upon the account of them. Let a Man, says he, have Faith, i. e. such a Faith by which he is able to work Miracles; Let him be powerful to utter Mystical Knowledg; (for to that his Expression manifestly re∣fers;) Let him be wise in discerning of Speeches; Another Gift common in those Times: But still, says he, by how much the more he seems to excel Others, viz. upon the account of these extra∣ordinary Endowments, by so much the more will it behove him to be humble-minded, and to seek what is profitable to all Men, and not to his own Advantage. And St. Ignatius not only See his Salu∣tation to the Smyrnaans, p. 193, 194. supposes that such Gifts might be in Others, but plain∣ly intimates, that he Epist. to the Philadelph § VII. p. 182. To the Tral∣lians. Sect. V. p. 149. himself was en∣dued with a large Portion of them. 14. WHICH being so, we cannot doubt (2dly.) but that, as it was most reasonable, both the Apostles were care∣ful to set those in the chiefest Places of Honour and Authority in their several Churches, who were the most eminent for their Gifts; And that God was also pleased to grant to such Persons a more than ordinary Portion of the Holy Spirit, for the better discharge of those eminent Places to which they were called. 15. CONCERNING the former of these, we are told by St. Paul, Acts vi.
that when the Apostles thought it neces∣sary to establish a new Order of Mini∣sters in the Church, that might take care of those things, which they, who were of a higher Rank, could not find Leisure to attend to; tho' their Ministry were of the lowest Nature, and which requi∣red much lesser Capacities in those who were to discharge it, than theirs whose Business it was to Govern and Instruct the Church of Christ; yet they particu∣larly laid it down to the Brethren, as one of the Qualifications that was to be re∣quired in Those whom they chose for that purpose, that they should be Men well approved of, full of the Holy Spirit and of Wisdom, Vers. 3. And of One of them, viz. St. Stephen, it is particu∣larly observed, Vers. 8. That he was full of Faith and Power, and did Signs and great Wonders among the People. And when the Jews disputed against him, we read Vers. 10. That they were not able to stand against the Wisdom and Spirit by which he spake. 16. NOW if such were the Care which they took in the Choice of those who were to be admitted into the lowest Ministry of the Church; We cannot doubt but that they were certainly much more careful not to admit any into the highest Rank of Honour and Au∣thority in it, but what were in a yet
more eminent manner endued with the same Gifts. Hence Clem. Epist. num. xlii. p. 58. num. xliv. p. 60. St. Clement tells us, that The Apostles did prove by the Spirit the first Fruits of their Conver∣sions, and out of them set Bishops and Pa∣stors over such as should believe. And by which we must understand One of these Two things, and very probably they were both meant by it: Either that the Apostles made use of their own extraor∣dinary Gift of the Spirit (One 1 Cor. xii.10. Heb. iv.12. Use of which was to discern and try the Spi∣rits of Others) in chusing Persons fitly qualified for the Work of the Ministry; Or else, that by the extraordinary Gifts of those whom they pitch'd upon, they perceiv'd that they were worthy of such an Employ, and therefore chose them out for it. And the Other Clem. Alex. de Divit. Salv. num. xlii. Eu∣seb. Hist. Ec∣cles. lib. III. c. 23. Clement yet more plainly speaks the same thing: That St. John being returned from his Banishment in Patmos, went about the Country near unto Ephesus, both to form and settle Churches, where he saw occa∣sion; and to admit into the Order of the Clergy, such as were mark'd out to him by the Spirit. 17. AND then for the Other thing observed; It is clear that the very Im∣position of Hands, did in those days con∣fer the Holy Spirit, in an extraordinary manner, upon Those who were ordain'd to the Ministry of the Gospel. This
St. Paul intimates in his First Epistle to Timothy, Ch. iv.14. where he exhorts him to stir up, , the Gift, i. e. the extraordinary Power of the Holy Spirit, which, says he, is in thee by the Imposition of my hands. 2 Tim. i.6. And would you know how this Ceremony of setting him apart for such a Service came to endue him with such an extra∣ordinary Power; the same Apostle will tell you, 1 Tim. iv.14. That it was given unto him by Prophecy; with, or through the Imposition of Hands upon him. That is to say; God, who by his Prophets had before design'd and mark'd him out for that great Office, 1 Tim. i.18. upon the actual admission of him into it by the outward Rite of Laying on of Hands, and upon the solemn Prayers that were then withal made for him, did bestow the Gifts of his Blessed Spirit, in an ex∣traordinary manner upon him. 18. NOW this as will it afford us just cause to conclude that those Holy Men, whose Writings we have here col∣lected, were doubtless endued with a very large Portion of the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost: Whether we consider the Frequency of those Endow∣ments in the Age in which they lived; Or the extraordinary Strictness and Piety of their Lives; Or the Greatness of those Stations to which they were called in
the Church; Or lastly, the Judgment which the Apostles, who called them to those high Offices, were by the Spirit en∣abled to make of them; So, (3dly) If we look to those Accounts which still remain to us of them; they will plainly shew us that they were endued, and that in a very singular manner, with this Power and Gift of the Blessed Spirit. 19. OF Barnabas, the Holy Scripture it self bears Witness, that He was a good Man, full of the Holy Ghost, and of Faith, Acts xi.24. Hermas is another of whom St. Paul himself makes mention, Rom. xvi.14. as an early Convert to Christianity: And what extraordinary Revelations he had, and how he foretold the Troubles that were to come upon the Church, his following Visions sufficiently declare. 20 CLEMENT is not only spo∣ken of by the same Apostle, but with this advantageous Character too, that he was the Fellow-Labourer of that great Man, and had his Name written in the Book of Life, Phil. iv.3. And when we shall consider to how much lesser and worser Men these Gifts were usually commu∣nicated at that time; we can hardly think that so excellent a Man, and the Companion of so great an Apostle; em∣ployed first in the planting of the Gospel
with him, and then set to govern one of the most considerable Churches in the World, should have been destitute of it. 21. AS for St. Ignatius, I have before observed that he had this Gift; and by the help of it, warned the Epist. to the Philadel∣phians, ch. vii. p. 182, 183. Add the Mar∣tyrdom of Igna∣tius, num. xii. p. 226. Philadelphi∣ans against falling into those Divisions, which he fore-saw were about to rise up amonst them. 22. POLYCARP not only Prophe∣cy'd of his own Death, but spake often times of things that were to come: And has this Witness from the whole Church of Smyrna, that nothing of all that he foretold ever failed of coming to pass ac∣cording to his Prediction. 23. IT remains then that the Holy Men whose Writings are here subjoyn'd, were not only instructed by such as were Inspir'd, but were themselves Inspir'd too. And therefore we must conclude, that they have not only not mistaken the Mind of the Apostles, in what they deli∣ver to us as the Gospel of Christ, but were not capable of doing of it. By conse∣quence, that we ought to look upon their Writings, Vid. Dod∣well. Dissert. in Iren. Prae∣fat. & Dissert. 2. tho' not of equal Authority with those which we call in a singular manner The Holy Scriptures; (because neither were the Authors of them called in so extraordinary a way to the writing
of them, nor endued with so eminent a Portion of the Gifts of the Blessed Spi∣rit for the doing of it; Nor have their Writings been judg'd by the common Consent of the Church in those inspir'd Ages of it, when they were so much bet∣ter qualified, than we are now, to judge of the Divine Authority of those kind of Writings, to be of equal Dignity with those of the Apostles and Evangelists;) yet worthy of a much greater Respect than any Composures that have been made since; however Men may seem to have afterwards written with more Art, and to have shewn a much greater Stock of humane Learning, than what is to be found, not only in the following Pieces, but even in the Sacred Books of the New Testament it self. 24. I SHALL add but One Consi∣deration more, the better to shew the true Deference that ought to be paid to the Treatises here collected, and that is, Sixthly: That they were not only writ∣ten by such Men as I have said, instru∣cted by the Apostles, and judg'd worthy by them both for their Knowledg and their Integrity, to govern some of the most eminent Churches in the World; and lastly, endued with the extraordinary Gift of the Holy Ghost; and upon all these Accounts to be much respected by us: But were moreover received by the
Church in those First Ages, as Pieces of a very great value, which could not be mistaken in its Judgment of them. 25. THE Epistle of St. Clement was a long time read publickly with the O∣ther Scriptures in the Congregations of the Faithful; made a part of their Bi∣ble, and was numbred among the Sacred Writings, however finally separated from them. And not only the Apostolical Ca∣nons, but our most ancient Alexandrian Manuscript, gives the same place to the Second, that it do's to the First of them: And Epiphanius after both, tells us, that they were both of them wont to be read in the Church in his Time Epiphan. Haeres. xxx. num. 15.. 26. THE Epistle of St. Polycarp, with that of the Church of Smyrna, were not only very highly approved of by parti∣cular Persons, but like those of St. Cle∣ment, were read publickly too in the As∣semblies of the Faithful. And for those of Ignatius, besides that we find a mighty Value put upon them by the Christians of those Times, they are sealed to us by this Character of St. Polycarp; That they are such Epistles, by which we may be greatly profited; For, says he, They treat of Faith and Patience, and of all things that pertain to Edification in the LORD.
27. THE Epistle of Barnabas is not only quoted with great Honour by those of the next Age to him, but as I have before shewn, is expresly called Catholick and Canonical. And in the ancient Annot. in Epist. in Bar∣nab. p. 9, 10. Sti∣chometry of Cotelerius, we find it placed the very next to the Epistle of St. Jude, and no difference put between the Au∣thority of the One and of the Other. 28. AND for the Book of Hermas, both Eusebius and St. Jerome tell us, that it was also used to be read in the Churches. In the same Stichometry, I before men∣tioned, it is placed in the very next Rank to the Acts of the Holy Apostles: And in some of the most ancient Manuscripts of the New Testament, we find it written in the same Volume with the Books of the Apostles and Evangelists, as if it had been esteem'd of the same Value and Au∣thority with them. 29. SO that now then we must either say that the Church in those days was so little careful of what was taught in it, as to allow such Books to be publickly read in its Congregations, the Doctrine where∣of it did not approve; Or we must con∣fess, that the following Pieces are deli∣ver'd to us, not only by the Learned Men of the First Ages of the Church, but by the whole Body of the Faithful, as con∣taining
the pure Doctrine of Christ; and must be look'd upon to have nothing in them, but what was then thought wor∣thy of all Acceptation. 30. NOW how much this adds to the Authority of these Discourses, may easi∣ly be concluded from what I have be∣fore observed. For since it is certain that in those Times the Extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost were bestowed, not only upon the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, (tho' upon them in a more eminent degree) but also upon a great many of the common Christians too: Since One particular Design of these Gifts was for the Discerning of Prophe∣cies, to judg of what was proposed by any to the Church, or written for the Use and Benefit of it: We cannot doubt but what was universally approved of and al∣low'd, not by a few Learned Men, but by the whole Church in those days; what was permitted to be publickly read to the Faithful for their Comfort and In∣struction; must by this means have re∣ceived a more than Humane Approbation; and ought to be look'd upon by us, tho' not of Equal Authority with those Books which they have deliver'd to us as strictly Canonical, yet as standing in the first Rank of Ecclesiastical Writings, and as con∣taining the true and pure Faith of Christ, without the least Error intermix'd with it.
CHAP. XI. Of the Subject of the follow∣ing Discourses; and of the Use that is to be made of Them. That in the following Treatises, there is deliver'd to us a good account, both of the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, in the Apostolical Times. This shewn in several particulars. What they taught concerning God the Father, our Saviour Christ, and the Holy Ghost. Of An∣gels and Spirits. Of the rest of the Ar∣ticles of the Apostles Creed. Concern∣ing the two Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper. Of the Holy Scri∣ptures, and the Divine Authority of them. What we meet with in these Trea∣tises concerning the Government of the Church. Of the Necessity of Communi∣cating with the Bishops and Pastors of it. Of Schismaticks, Hereticks, and A∣postates. Of their publick Assembling for the Service of God, and what was done by them in those Meetings. Of se∣veral other Instances of their Discipline; particularly, of their Fasting and Con∣fession of Sins. Of the Care which
their Bishops had of the whole Church. Of the Respect that was paid to them. Of their Martyrs; and the Venera∣tion which they thought due to them. Of their Practical Instructions, and how severe their Morality was; shewn in several particulars. That upon the whole, we may here see what the State of Christianity then was, and still ought to be. 1. AND now having shewn in the foregoing Chapter, what Defe∣rence we ought to pay to the Authority of those Holy Men, whose Writings I have here collected; it may not be a∣miss, in the Third place to enquire, What it is which they deliver to us; what ac∣count we find in them, of the Doctrine, and Discipline of the Church, in those Times in which they lived. 2. IT would be endless for me to go about to make a just Catalogue of all the Particulars of this kind that occur in the following Pieces; and I have already in a great measure perform'd it, in the Index which I have for that purpose subjoyn'd to them. I shall therefore here consi∣der only a few particulars, in such Points as may seem most worthy to be remark∣ed; and by them (as by a short Speci∣men shew) How the Judicious Reader may himself improve it, into a more par∣ticular
History of the Faith and Practice of the Church, in the best and most ancient State of it. 3. AND (1st.) for what concerns the Doctrines of those Times; there is hard∣ly any Point that is necessary to be believ∣ed or known by us, that is not very plain∣ly delivered in Some or Other of the fol∣lowing Pieces. 4. HERE we may read what we are to believe concerning the first Article of all of our Creed,See the Index, God. God the Father. That he is One, Almighty, Invisible; the Creator and Maker of all things. That he is Omniscient, Immense; Neither to be comprehended within any Bounds, nor so much as to be perfectly conceived by us. That his Providence is over all things: And that we can none of us flee from him, or escape his Knowledg. That we are to believe in him, to fear him, to love him; And fearing him, to abstain from all Evil. 5. IF from thence we go on to the next Person of the Blessed Trinity, Our Saviour Jesus Christ;See ibid. in Christ. here we shall find all that either our Creed teaches us to profess concerning him, or that any Christian need to believe. That he Exi∣sted not only before he came into the World, but from all Eternity. That he is not
only the Son of God, but is himself also God. That in the fulness of Time he took upon him our Nature, and became Man: Was born of the Virgin Mary, was crucified under Pontius Pilate; That he suffer'd for our Salvation, and was raised again from the dead, not only by the Power of the Father, but by his Own also. That he is our High-Priest and Protectour now, and shall come again at the End of the World, to judge the whole Race of Mankind. That there is no coming unto God but by him: Inso∣much that even the Ancient Fathers, who died before his Appearing, are yet saved by the same means that we are now. 6. AS for what concerns the Holy Spirit, the Third Person in the Glorious Godhead;See ibid. Trinity. he is here set out to us not on∣ly as a Person, but as distinct from the Father and the Son. And to shew what kind of Spirit he is; We may here see him joyn'd together in the same Worship with the Father, and our Saviour Jesus Christ. 7. AND now I am mentioning the Holy Spirit; let me add,See the Index, Angel, De∣vil. that we may here see what is needful to be known, con∣cerning all the Other Spirits of an infe∣riour Nature. How the Holy Angels mi∣nister unto us; but especially then, when we have most need of them, at the time
of our Death. And that tho' the Devil may attacque us, and use all his Arts to draw us away from our Duty; yet it must be our own Faults if we are overcome by him, and therefore that we ought not to be afraid of him. See ib. Peace, Unity, Mar∣tyrs, Re∣liques, &c.8. BUT to return to our Creed, and the Articles of it: Here we may farther see, both what a great Obligation there lies upon us to keep up a Communion of Saints in the Unity of the Church on Earth, and what is that true Fellowship that we ought to have with those, who are gone before us to Heaven. That it consists not in the Worship of any, tho' never so gloriously exalted by God; but in Love and Remembrance; in Thanks∣giving to God for their Excellencies, and in our Prayers to him, joyn'd with hear∣ty Endeavours of our own, to imitate their Perfections. 9. AND whilst we do this, we are here assured of the Forgiveness of our Sins too,See Repen∣tance. through the Merits and Satis∣faction of Jesus Christ. And that not only of those which we committed be∣fore our Baptism; but of all such as we shall chance to fall into after, if we tru∣ly repent of them. 10. AS for the next Point, the Re∣surrection of the Body;See ibid. Re∣surrection. it is not only as∣serted,
but at large proved too, in the following Discourses. There we may see, not only that there shall be a fu∣ture Resurrection; but that we shall be raised in the very same Bodies in which we go down into the Grave. And that being raised, we shall be judged by Christ according to our Works; and be either unspeakably rewarded,Ibid. Punish∣ment. or exceeding∣ly punished, and that to all Eternity. 11. IF from the Articles of our Creed, we go on to the Sacraments of the Church:See ibid. Sa∣crament, Ba∣ptism, &c. Here we have set out to us the great Benefit of our Baptism, and of what a mighty Concern it is to us in the business of our Salvation. And for the Other Sacrament; Here we are taught,See ib. Tran∣substantia∣tion. that the Elements of Bread and Wine are the same (as to their Substance) after Con∣secration, that they were before; and are only in a Spiritual Sense, the Flesh and Blood of our Saviour Christ. 12. AND, Lastly; For that great,See ibid. comprehensive Point of our Religion, the Foundation of our Faith, the Holy Scriptures: Here we may see what Opi∣nion these Holy Men had of the Divine Inspiration of them; what Deferences they paid to them, and how they look∣ed upon them to contain the true Words of the Holy Ghost.
13. SUCH is the Doctrine of Faith, that is here delivered to us. If from thence we pass; 2dly, to what concerns the Publick Order and Government of the Church, in the first Establishment of it: Here we may see by what Persons it was directed;See Bishops, ibid. and how exactly our own Church do's in this particular resemble the Primitive, perhaps beyond any other at this day in the World, in the Aposto∣lical Orders, of Bishops, Priests, and Dea∣cons. Ibid.14. HOW necessarily they esteem'd it their Duty, to keep up a strict Com∣munion with these Governours, and how little they thought the very Name of a Church could belong to those who sepa∣rated from them, we are here likewise taught. And how light soever some may make of the Business of Schism now,Ibid. See Schism. yet it is plain these Holy Men had a ve∣ry different Apprehension of it, and hardly thought that such could be saved as continued in it. Ibid. Here∣tick, Apo∣state.15. AND the same, or rather much worse, was their Opinion of Hereticks and Apostates. To the latter of which, as they seem even to have deny'd Re∣pentance; so 'tis manifest that without it, they thought the Others must perish. And in the mean time, they declare,
that we ought not to have any Commu∣nication with them: Only we must pray for them, that they may be converted, which yet they supposed would be very hard. 16. AS for those who continued in the Doctrine and Communion of the Church;See Index, Worship, &c. here we may see how zealous they were in attending all the publick Offices of it. How constantly they assembled together for the Worship of God, notwithstanding all the Malice and Fury of their Enemies against them upon the Account of it. Here we may see, how from the begin∣ning they had their set Times and Places of Worship: And how they look'd upon such Offertories, both as more acceptable unto God, and more prevalent with him, than any Private Addresses that they could make to him. 17. IN these Assemblies, they not on∣ly put up their Prayers to God,See ibid. Sa∣crament, Bi∣shop. but re∣ceived also the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And in that part of their Service, none officiated but either the Bishop himself, or he who was appoint∣ed, or allow'd, by him. 18. FOR this purpose they had in every such place of their Assembling,See below, p. 110, 121, 198. One Table or Altar, at which they per∣form'd this Service. And they com∣municated
after the same manner, that our Saviour Christ had set them the Example; of one common Loaf, which was broken and distributed to them, not of little separate and unbroken Wafers, as some now do. See below, p. 220.19. NOR was this yet all: In these Assemblies, the Holy Scriptures were read to them; and (as I have before shewn) some of the very Treatises I have here subjoyn'd, together with them. And the Bishop besides, himself instructed the People, and expounded the Doctrine of Christ to them. See the Index, Marriage, Bishop.20. BY the Bishop were the Christians blessed, and joyn'd together in the Holy State of Matrimony. And indeed with∣out him was nothing done of all that pertain'd unto Religion. Ib. See Priest.21. IN those Times the Clergy were marry'd, as well as Laity; nor do we find it esteem'd the least Scandal for them so to be. Ibid. Fast.22. HERE we may see, what the an∣cient manner of Fasting was; and what was thought requisite to render such Ex∣ercises acceptable to God, and profita∣ble to our own Souls.
23. IN short,Ibid. Repen∣tance. Here we may perceive what their Opinion was of Repentance for Sins; and how hardly they thought of those who were still Repenting, and yet still continuing to sin on, notwithstand∣ing their frequent Repentance. But es∣pecially, here we are told that we must finish our Repentance before we die; for that there is no place for Repentance af∣ter. 24. AND tho' they prescribe Con∣fession, as one Act of Repentance,Ibid. Con∣fession. and ne∣cessary to be perform'd in order to our Forgiveness; yet we find them advising it to be done to God only, and intimate to us that that alone was sufficient. 25. BUT the Care of their Bishops in those first times was not confin'd with∣in the narrow Bounds of their own Churches,See Ignatius's Epistles and Martyrdom, &c. but extended to All the Faith∣ful, wheresoever they were. And they were still ready to look to those who were at the greatest distance from them, whenever they thought their Advice or Authority might be either useful to them, or for the Honour and Benefit of their Religion. 26. FROM this,See the Index, Bishop. and from the gene∣ral Piety and Excellence of their Lives, joyn'd to the Greatness of their Cha∣racter
in the Church, came that mighty Respect, that was shewn to the Bishops in those days: And which how great it was, the following Treatises abundantly shew. Ibid. Mar∣tyrs, and be∣low, p. 236.27. BUT much greater was their Veneration for those, who not only Go∣vern'd well, and adorn'd their Holy Pro∣fession by an Exemplary Life, but con∣firm'd the Truth of it with their Blood. They were indeed of Opinion that no Man ought causelesly to expose himself unto Suffering:See Index, Suffer. But if God called a Man to it, they doubted not but that our Sa∣viour Christ would both support him in his Conflicts, and most gloriously reward him for the enduring of them. Hence was it their Opinion, that Martyrdom blotted out all Sins: That they who suffer'd for the Faith, should have a Degree of Glory peculiar to themselves, above all Other Saints in God's King∣dom. And when God shew'd such re∣gard for them, they concluded that they could never almost do enough, to testifie their Respect to them. Ibid. See Re∣liques, Mar∣tyrs.28. TO this we must ascribe the Care they took to gather up their Remains, the Honour which they gave to them, and the Solemnities with which they de∣posited them into the Earth. Hence came their Custom, which we here find,
of writing down the particulars of their Conflicts; and sending them abroad to the Churches round about. Hence their Anniversary Meetings at their Tombs and Monuments, Where they recited the Acts of their Martyrdoms, and some∣times made express Discourses in Praise of their Martyrs, and to exhort One Ano∣ther to the like Constancy. 29. BUT not to insist any longer on these Particulars: There is yet a (3d.) sort of Matters contain'd in these Dis∣courses, and those of no less Use to us, than either of the foregoing; and that is, the Practical Rules of Life, that are here deliver'd to us. 30. HERE we may see what Care we are to take,See ibid. Sin. not only not to Sin our selves, but, as far as in us lies, not to let any that belong to us continue in Sin; least we also become Partakers of their evil Doings. 31. HERE we are taught not only to have a care of our Words and Actions,See below, p. 321, &c. but of our very Thoughts and Desires: Which must not only not be indulged in any Instances of Sin, but not be suffer'd, if it be possible, to wander on any thing that is in the least measure wanton or ir∣regular.
32. IF we will hearken to these Ho∣ly Men; we must learn not only to do the Will of God, (but if it be his Plea∣sure) to endure patiently whatever he shall send upon us. We must consider, that Troubles and Afflictions are not only sent upon us to punish us for our Sins; but as Monitors too, to draw us off from them. See Index, Riches, Alms-giv∣ing, &c.33. TO convince us the more effe∣ctually of this; We are here shewn the mighty Danger of Riches, especially where Mens Hearts are in any degree set upon them; and how very hardly such Persons shall be saved. We are taught what Use we should make of our Abun∣dance, that so it may not prove a Snare to us. But especially, we are shewn the great Advantage of Alms-giving to this End; and what mighty Engagements there lie upon us to the Practice of it. 34. AND then, as for our Lives; We are here told,Ibid. Chri∣stian. that a Christian must not only be Good, but Exemplary: He must shew the Truth of his Profession by a suitable Conversation; and be known by his Actions, rather than by his Words. 35. HE must pray for all Men, even for his very Enemies; nay, for the very Enemies of the Church; for Hereticks
and Schismaticks; for those of whom there is but little Hope that they will ever come to Repentance, or that God will give them Grace so to do. 36. HE must be kind and charitable to all Men; free from Envy and Con∣tention: He must neither raise any Dif∣ferences among his Brethren, nor follow any in the doing of it. To this End, he must carefully observe those Duties which relate to his Neighbour, as well as those he is to pay to God. He must obey Magistrates; must respect the Aged; must have a due Regard to all Men. Is he a Husband, a Parent, or a Child? He must then be sure to exercise himself in the several Duties becoming those seve∣ral Relations. In short; In the follow∣ing Writings we may see in all the Parts of our Duty towards God, our Neigh∣bour, and our Selves, what we are to do, and what to avoid: And are assured, that God both sees all our Actions now, and will reward or punish us for them hereafter to all Eternity. 37. AND thus have I given a short Prospect, of what is more largely con∣tain'd in the following Collection. I need not say either how useful a Variety of Matter it is, or how worthy to be known by all of us. But sure I am, who∣soever shall take the pains impartially to
compare what is here found, with the Sacred Writings of the New Testament; may be able both with Clearness and Certainty to understand whatever is re∣quisite to his Eternal Salvation: And that with much more Satisfaction and Se∣curity too, than from many Volumes of our later Writers; who for the most part spend a great deal of Time, and take much Pains, to Obscure rather than Ex∣plain, the most easie and intelligible Points of our Religion. CHAP. XII. Of the Manner after which these Discourses are written; And the Simplicity of Stile used in them. That the Writers of those Times used no Af∣fectation of Humane Eloquence; but deliver'd themselves with the greatest Plainness that they were able. This manner of Writing the best and most proper for Instruction. A short Account of the Occasion of the present Colle∣ction, and the Translation that is here made of the following Treatises.
1. THERE is yet one thing to be ob∣served by me, with Reference to the Discourses here subjoyn'd; and that is, Fourthly, concerning the Manner af∣ter which they are written, and that true primitive Simplicity, which appears in all the parts of them. 2. IT is one Property of Truth, that as it do's not need any Disguises, so nei∣ther does it seek any vain Ornaments of Humane Eloquence, to recommend it self to the Approbation of those to whom it is tender'd. When the Apostles preach'd the Gospel to the World, they did it not with Excellency of Speech, nor with en∣ticing Words of Mans Wisdom; but in the demonstration of Spirit and of Power. They gave such convincing Proofs of their Di∣vine Mission, as forced all indifferent Per∣sons to acknowledg their Authority: And they thought it after that, too mean a thing to endeavour to catch Mens Ears, when without any such Arts they had be∣fore captivated their Reason, and forced them to confess the Truth of what they deliver'd. 3. AND the same was the Method of those Holy Fathers who succeeded them. They knew the Excellency of their Do∣ctrine, and the mighty Influence which the Revelations it made of the Future
State, would be sure to have upon the Minds of all considering Men: And therefore they contented themselves to lay these things before them in a plain and simple manner; and with such an affe∣cted Sincerity, as is beyond all the high∣est Rhetorick in the World. 4. LET not then the Reader be sur∣prised, if in the following Discourses he meets with none of those Ornaments, that are wont to recommend the Writings of Others to his perusal. But rather let him consider, that he has here to do with Men who were above such a Care. Their business was to instruct not to please; to speak to Mens Hearts and Consciences, not to their Fancies: And they knew that this is evermore best done by a plain and unaffected Discourse; by solid Rules and substantial Motives, not by vain Words; which if they satisfie a Man at the pre∣sent, yet seldom leave any lasting Im∣pression behind them. 5. BUT of the Authors of the fol∣lowing Treatises, and of the Discourses themselves I have said enough, perhaps too much: Tho' yet I think no more than what was necessary to prepare the English Reader, for whom I am now chief∣ly concern'd, to a useful perusal of them. As for the present Collection, I shall on∣ly say thus much; that it is the first of
this kind that was ever set forth in our own Language; nor were the greatest part of the following Pieces, ever (that I know of) before translated into it. 6. I CONFESS, when I consider the great Usefulness of such a Work, and the high Esteem, which not only the Ancient Fathers, but the most Learned of all Ages have had of the Treatises here collected together; I have sometimes won∣dered, that among so many things as have of late been brought into the English Tongue, none has yet hitherto undertaken such a Task as this. But when I came to the Tryal, I soon found out what may perhaps have been one reason of it: Since, could I have foreseen the Difficulty of the Work, I much question whether I should ever have been persuaded to go about it. And this I say, not to magnifie any thing that I have done, which I have too much reason to fear will be far from deserving any great Commendation; but to suggest an Apology for whatever Defects those of greater Leisure, more Health, and better Abilities, shall chance to find in it, notwithstanding all the Care I have taken to guess aright at the Intention of my Authors, and to deliver what upon the best Examination I could make, I then took to be their Meaning.
7. I NEED not say any thing to con∣vince those who are at all acquainted with these Matters, and who are alone the competent Judges of the present Per∣formance, How hard oftentimes it is, with the help of the best Copies, to hit up∣on the true Meaning of an Author that lived so many Ages since, as those I have here collected. And what great Defects in many places there are, in the Copies I have here been forced to make use of, is not unknown to them. Had I whilst I was about this Work, been in another place, where I could have had recourse to the Assistance of a very Learned Friend; than whom none could have afforded me a better help in this particular, or would more readily have done it; I should have had much less reason to apprehend any Defects in it. But however, as it is, I am not aware of any great Errors that I have committed; and am in some hope that I have no where very much, nor at all ve∣ry dangerously, mistaken the Meaning of those Holy Men, whose Sense I have un∣dertaken to represent. 8. THIS I am sure of, that my De∣sign in this whole Undertaking, was to mi∣nister the best I could to the Interests of Truth and Piety: And I thought my self at this time, the rather obliged to do it from the Press, in that it has pleased God
in some measure to take me off, from the Ability of doing it, from the Pulpit. 9. IF it shall be ask'd how I came to chuse the Drudgery of a Translator, rather than the more ingenuous part of publishing somewhat of my own Com∣posing, it was in short this; Because I hop'd that such Writings as these would find a more general and unprejudiced ac∣ceptance with all sorts of Men, than any thing that could be written by any One now living: Who, if esteem'd by some, is yet in danger of being despis'd by more; whose Prejudice to his Person will not suffer them to reap any Benefit, by any thing, tho' never so useful, that can come from him; Whilst such Tracts as these may possibly receive a general Respect from all sorts of Persons; and meet not only with an Entertainment, but an Esteem too from All. 10. THESE were the Motives that first induced me to set about this Work; and in the Reasonableness of which should I chance to be mistaken, yet I cannot but persuade my self that the Honesty of my Intentions, shall excuse me to all indiffe∣rent Persons. Let Others then, to whom God has given better Opportunities, and greater Abilities, serve the Church in bet∣ter and higher Performances. It shall suf∣fice me in any way to minister to the
Souls of Men. And if by this present Undertaking I shall but in any measure have contributed to the reviving a true Sense of Piety and Devotion among us; but especially to the disposing of any num∣ber of Men to consider more seriously the fatal Consequences of our present Divi∣sions, and to labour what in them lies to the Composing of them; I shall heartily bless God, both that he first prompted me to undertake this troublesome Task, and has since enabled me, tho' amidst many Infirmities, to go through with it.
The First EPISTLE OF St. CLEMENT TO THE Corinthians.
THE CONTENTS. Ch. I, II. HE commends them for their excellent Order and Piety in Christ, before their Schism brake out. III. How their Divisions began? IV, V, VI. Envy and Emulation the Original of all Strife and Dis∣order. Examples of the Mischiefs they have occasion'd. VII, VIII. He exhorts them to look up to the Rules of their Religion, and repent of their Divisions, and they shall be forgiven. IX, X. To encourage them whereunto, he sets before them the Examples of Holy Men, whose Piety is re∣corded in the Scriptures. XI, XII. And particularly such as have been eminent for their Kind∣ness and Charity to their Neigh∣bours. XIII. What Rules our Religion has let us to this purpose?
XIV, XV. Which he applies to the Case of the Corinthians; exhorting them to put an End to their Con∣tentions, so contrary to their Duty. XVI, XVII, XVIII. In order to this, he advises them to be humble; and that from the Examples of our Sa∣viour, and of Holy Men in all Ages. XIX, XX. He returns to the busi∣ness of their Divisions; which he by more Arguments persuades them to compose. XXI. He exhorts them to Obedience, from the Consideration of the Good∣ness of God, and of his Presence in every place. XXIII, XXIV. Of Faith: And par∣ticularly what we are to believe as to the Future Resurrection. XXIV, &c. to XXVII. This Arti∣cle at large proved. XXVIII. He again exhorts them to Obedience: That it is impossible to escape the Vengeance of God, if we continue in Sin. XXIX. This farther enforced from the Consideration of their Relation to God, as his Elect. XXX. How we must live that we may please God?
XXXII. We are justified by Faith. XXXIII. et this must not lessen our Care to live well; nor our Pleasure in it. XXXIV. This enforc'd from the Exam∣ples of the Holy Angels, and from the exceeding greatness of that Re∣ward which God has prepared for us. XXXV, XXXVI. We must attain unto this Reward by Faith and O∣bedience. XXXVII. Which we must carry on in an orderly pursuing of the Duties of our several Stations, without Envy∣ing or Contention. XXXVIII. The necessity of different Orders among Men. We have none of us any thing but what we received of God; Whom therefore we ought in every Condition thankfully to obey. XXXIX, &c. From whence he exhorts them to do every thing orderly in the Church, as the only way to please God. XLII. The Orders of Ministers in Christ's Church establish'd by the Apostles, according to Christ's Com∣mand. XLIII. And after the Example of Moses. XLIV. Therefore they who have been duly placed in the Ministry
according to their Order, cannot without great Sin be put out of it. XLV, &c. He exhorts them to Peace from Examples out of the Holy Scri∣ptures. XLVII. Particularly from St. Paul's Exhortation to them. XLIX. The Value which God puts upon Love and Unity: The Effects of a true Charity. L. Which is the Gift of God, and must be obtain'd by Prayer. LI. He exhorts such as have been concern'd in these Divisions to re∣pent, and return to their Unity, confessing their Sin to God. LIII. Which he infers from the Ex∣ample of Moses: LV. Nay of many among the Hea∣then; and of Judith, and Esther among the Jews. LVI. The benefit of mutual Advice and Correction. LVII. He entreats them to follow that which is here given to them. LVIII. Recommends them to God. LIX. Desires speedily to hear that this Epistle had had a good Effect upon them. LX. And so concludes.
THE EPISTLE OF St. CLEMENT TO THE Corinthians. The Church of God which is Sojourneth. at Rome, to the Church of God which Called. See Dr. Ham∣mond on Matt. 20. c. is at Corinth, Called. See Dr. Ham∣mond on Matt. 20. c. Elect, Sanctified, Gr. in. by the Will of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord: Grace be to you; and Peace from the Almighty God by Jesus Christ be multiplied. See Bishop Pearson's Note on this place. Ed. Colomes, p. 2. THE See Bishop Pearson's Note on this place. Ed. Colomes, p. 2. suddain and unexpected Dangers and Calamities that have fallen upon Us, BELOVED BRETHREN, have, we fear, made us
the more slow in our Consideration of those things which you Gr. sought of Vs. proposed to Us: and. As also of that Wicked and Detestable Sedition, so Gr. strange to. unbecoming the Elect of God, which a few heady and self-will'd Men have fomented to such a Degree, that your Venera∣ble and Renowned Name, so worthy of all Men to be beloved, is greatly Blasphemed thereby. For who that has Gr. lodg'd as a Stranger. ever been among you, has not experimented Your firm and fruitful Faith in all good Works, &c. the firmness of your Faith, and its Fruitfulness in all Good Works? And admired the Temper and Moderation of your Religion in Christ? And publish'd abroad the Magnificence of your Hospitality? And thought you Happy in your perfect and certain knowledge of the Gospel. For ye did all things with∣out respect of Persons; and walked in. according to the Laws of God: Being subject to those who had the Rule over you; and giving the Honour that was fitting, to such as were the Presbyters. Aged among you. The young Men ye commanded to think those things that were Modest and Grave. The Women ye exhorted, to do all things
with an unblameable, and seemly and pure Conscience: Loving their own Husbands, as was fitting: And that keeping themselves within the Canon, Rule. Limits of a due Obedience, they should Themselves do their own busi∣ness. Vid. Not. Junii in loc. order their Houses gravely with all Temperance, Sobiety. 1 Pet. v.5. Dis∣cretion. II. YE were All of you Humble minded, not Proud. Acts xx.35. 1 Tim. vi.8. Boasting of any thing: Desiring rather to be Subject than to Govern, to Give than to Receive, be∣ing content with the Portion God had dispensed to you: And hearkning diligently to his Word, ye Embraced it in your very Bowels received it into your Hearts, having his See Junii Not. in loc. Pre∣cepts always before your Eyes. Thus a firm, and Gr. ▪ blessed and Gr. ▪ profitable Peace was given unto you; and an unsatiable desire of doing Good; and a plentiful Effusion of the Holy Ghost was upon all of you. And being full of Holy Counsel, or Purpose, or Will. Good Desires, ye did with a Gr. Good. great readiness, and with a Religious Con∣fidence stretch forth your hands to God Almighty; beseeching him to be merciful unto you, if in any thing ye had unwillingly sinn'd against Him. Ye contended day and night for the
whole Brotherhood; that With Mercy and Conscience. through the Mercy of God, and a Good Con∣science, the number of his Elect might be saved. Ye were sincere, and with∣out Offence towards each other; not mindful of Injuries: All Sedition and Schism was an Abomination unto you. Ye bewailed every one his Neighbours Sins, esteeming their Defects your Own. Ye Ye were with∣out Repentance in all well-doing Titus iii.1. were kind one to another without grudging; being ready to every Good Work. And being thus adorn'd with a Conversation altoge∣ther Virtuous and Religious, ye did All things in the fear of God; whose Commandments were written upon the Tables of your Hearts.Prov. vii.3. III. ALL Honour and Enlarge∣ment was given unto you; and so was fulfill'd that which is written;Deut. xxxii.15. My Beloved did Eat and Drink, he was En∣larged and waxed Fat, and he Kicked. From hence came Envy, and Strife, and Sedition; Persecution and Confusion, Tu∣mults, &c. Dis∣order, War and Captivity. So they who were of no Renown, lifted up themselves against the Honourable; Those of no Reputation, against those
that were in Respect; The Foolish, against the Wise; The young Men against the Aged. Therefore Righte∣ousness and Peace are departed from you, because Every one hath forsaken the Fear of the Lord; and is grown blind in His Faith; nor walketh by the Rule of Gods Commandments, nor liveth as is fitting in Christ: But every one walketh after. follows his own wicked Lusts, Having taken up an Ungodly and Un∣just Envy, by which Death first entred into the World. IV. FOR so it is written; And in process of time it came to pass,Gen. iv.3. &c. that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an Offering unto the LORD. And Abel He also brought of the Firstlings of his Flock and of the fat thereof: And the LORD had respect unto Abel and to his Offering. But unto Cain and unto his Offering he had not respect. And Cain was very Wroth, and his Countenance fell. And the LORD said unto Cain, Why art thou Wroth? And why is thy Countenance fallen? This is accor∣ding to the Lxx. If thou shalt offer aright, but not divide aright, hast thou not sinned? Hold thy peace: Vnto Thee
shall be his desire, and Thou shalt rule over Him. And Cain said unto Abel his Brother, let us go down into the Field. And it came to pass as they were in the Field, that Cain rose up against Abel his Brother, and slew him. Ye see Brethren, how Envy and Emu∣lation wrought fraricide. the Death of a Bro∣ther. For Envy. Gen. 28. this our Father Jacob fled from the Face of his Brother Esau. It was this that caused Joseph to be persecuted even unto Death,Gen. 37. & 39. and Bon∣dage.Exod. ii.15. It was Envy. Gen. 28. this that forced Moses to flee from the Face of Pharaoh King of Egypt, when he heard his own Country-man ask him,Exod. ii.14. Who made Thee a Prince and a Judge over us? Wilt thou kill me as thou didst the Egyp∣tian yesterday? For Envy. Gen. 28. this Aaron and Miriam were made to lodge out. Numb. xii.14, 15. shut out of the Camp, from the rest of the Congregation seven days. Emulation brought. sent Dathan and Abiram quick into ades. the Grave, because they raised up a Sedition against Moses the Servant of God. For Envy. Gen. 28. this David had or under∣went the Ha∣tred, not only, &c. was not only hated of Strangers, but was persecuted even by Saul the King of Israel.
V. BUT to cease from. not to insist upon an∣tient Examples, let us come to those Combatants, Wrestlers. Worthies that have been nearest to us; and take the brave Examples of our own Age. Through Zeal and Envy, The Faithful and most Righ∣teous. the most Faithful, and Righteous Pillars of the Church, have been persecuted even to the most bitter Deaths. Let us set before our Eyes the Good. Holy Apostles: Peter by unjust Envy underwent not One or Two, but many Labours. Sufferings; and so. till at last being Martyr'd, he went to the place of Glory that was due unto Him. By Envy. For the same cause, did Paul in like manner receive the Re∣ward of his Patience: Seven times Having born seven times bonds, &c. he was in Bonds; He was Whipp'd, was Stoned; He preach'd both in the East and in the West; He received the &c. leaving behind Him the Glorious Report of his Faith: And so having taught the whole World Righteousness, and for that end travell'd even to the utmost Bounds of the West; He at last suf∣fer'd Martyrdom Vid. Pearson de Success. c. viii. § 9. by the Command of the Governours, and departed out of the World, and went unto his Holy
place; being become a most eminent Pattern of Patience unto All Ages. VI. TO these Men who have lived Godly, is gathered toge∣ther. Holy Apostles we may add, a very great number of others, who having through Envy undergone in like manner many Pains and Torments, have become an ex∣cellent Exam∣ple among u. left a Glorious Example to us. For Envy. this not only Men but even Women have been Per∣secuted: The names of Danae and Dirce I omit. See Junius An∣not. in loc. And having suffer'd very grievous and Cursed Affli∣ctions or Tor∣ments. cruel Punishments, have finish'd the Course of their Faith with Firmness; and though weak in Body, yet received a Glorious Re∣ward. Envy or Emu∣lation. This has alienated the Minds even of Women from their Husbands; and changed what was once said by our Father Adam;Gen. ii.23. This is now Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh. In a word, Envy and Strife, have over∣turn'd Great. whole Cities, and rooted out Great Nations from off the Earth. VII. THESE Things, Beloved, we send. write unto you not only Instructing you but also re∣membring, &c. for your Instruction, but also for our own Remembrance. For we are all in the same place of En∣counter. Field, and the same Com∣bat
is Imposed upon us all. prepared for us all. Where∣fore let Us lay aside all Vain and Empty Cares; and let us come up to the Glorious and Venerable Rule of our Holy Calling. Let us consider what is Good, and Acceptable,1 Tim. v.4. and Well-pleasing in the Sight of Him that made Us. Let us look stedfastly to the Bloud of Christ, and see how Precious his Bloud is in the sight of God: Which being shed for our Sal∣vation, afforded or given to. has obtain'd the Grace of Repentance for all the World. Let us Look dili∣gently to. search into the Ages that have gone before us; and let us learn that our Lord has from Age to Age. in every one of them still given place for Repentance to all such as would be turned. 2 Peter ii.5. Gen. vii. Jon. lii. turn to him. Noah preach'd Repentance; and as many as heark∣ened to him were Saved. Jonah de∣nounced Destruction against the Ni∣nivites: Howbeit they repenting of their Sins, appeased God by their Prayers, and received Sal∣vation. were saved, tho' they were Strangers to the Covenant of God. VIII. HENCE we find how All the Ministers of the Grace of God
have spoken by the Holy Spirit of Repentance. And even the Lord of All has himself spoken. declared with an Oath concerning it; As I live, saith the LORD,Ezek. xxxiii.11 I desire not the death of a Sinner, so much as his Repentance. but that He should repent. Adding this Good Sentence. farther Assurance; Repent from. Ezek. xviii.30, 32. Turn from your Iniquity O House of Israel. Say unto the Children of my People, Tho' your sins should reach from Earth to Heaven; and tho' they should be redder than Scarlet, and blacker than Sackcloth: Yet if ye shall turn to me with all your Heart, and shall call me Father,Jer. iii.4.19. I will hearken to you, as to a Holy People. And in another place He saith on this wise:Isaiah 1.16. Wash ye, make you clean; put away the Evil of your doings from before mine Eyes; Cease to do Evil, Learn to do well; Seek Judg∣ment; relieve the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow. Come now and let us reason together, saith the LORD: Tho' your sins be as Scarlet they shall be as white as Snow; tho' they be red as Crimson, they shall be as Wooll. If ye be willing and Obedient ye shall eat the Good of the Land: But if ye refuse and rebell ye shall be devoured with the
Sword; for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it. These things has God esta∣blish'd by his Almighty Will, desiring that all his Beloved should come to Repentance. IX. WHEREFORE let us obey his Excellent and Glorious Will; and Becoming Sup∣pliants of, &c. imploring his Mercy and Good∣ness, let us fall down upon Our faces before him, and turn our selves to his Mercy. Cast our selves upon his Mercy: Laying aside all Vain Labour. Vanity, and Contention, and Envy which leads unto Death. Let us look up to those who have the most per∣fectly ministred to his Excellent Glory. Let us take Enoch for our Example, who being found Righteous in Obe∣dience, was translated,Gen. v.24. and his Death was not found. known. Noah being found. being proved to be Faithful, did by his Mi∣nistry preach Regeneration to the World,Gen. vi.vil.viii. and the LORD saved by Him all the Living Creatures, that went in Vnity. with one Accord together into the Ark. X. SO also Abraham who was called Gods Friend,James ii.23. Isaiah xli.8. was in like manner found
Faithful; in as much as he obeyed the Words. Commands of God. By Obedi∣ence This Man. he went out of his own Coun∣try, and from his own Kindred, and from his Fathers House; that so for∣saking a small Country, and a weak Affinity, and a little House, he might inherit the Promises of God. For thus God said unto Him:Gen. xii.1. Get Thee out of thy Country, and from thy Kindred, and from thy Fathers House, unto a Land that I will shew thee. And I will make thee a Great Nation, and I will bless Thee, and make thy Name Great, and thou shalt be blessed. And I will bless them that bless Thee, and Curse them that Curse Thee; And in Thee shall all Families of the Earth be Blessed. And again when he separated Himself from Lot,Gen. xiii.14. God said unto him: Lift up now thine Eyes, and look from the place where thou art, Northward and Southward, and Eastward and Towards the Sea. West∣ward: For all the Land which Thou seest to thee will I give it, and to thy Seed for ever. And I will make thy Seed as the dust of the Earth, so that if a Man can number the Dust of the Earth, then shall thy Seed also be num∣bred.
And again He saith;Gen. xv.5. And God brought forth Abraham and said unto Him, look now towards Heaven and tell the Stars; if thou be able to number them: So shall thy Seed be. And Abra∣ham believed God, and it was counted to Him for Righteousness. Through Faith and Hospitality, A Son was given unto Him. he had a Son given him in his Old Age; and through Obedience he offer'd him up in Sacrifice to God, upon One of the Mountains which God shew'd unto Him. XI. BY Hospitality and Godliness was Lot saved out of Sodom,Gen. xix. 2 Pet. ii.6. Jude 7. when all the Country round about was See Not. Junii in loc. de∣stroy'd by Fire and Brimstone. The LORD thereby making it manifest, that he will not forsake Those that trust in Him; but But those that turn another way, he puts, &c. will bring the Dis∣obedient to Punishment and Corre∣ction. For his Wife who went out with Him, being of a different Mind, and Not in Con∣cord. not continuing in the same Obedience, was for that very reason set forth for an put for a sign. Example, being turn'd into a Pillar of Salt unto this day. That so all Men may know,
that those who are double minded, and distrustful of the Power of God, are become. prepared for Condemnation, and to be a sign to all succeeding Ages. Jos. ii.1, &c.XII. BY Faith and Hospitality was Rahab the Harlot Saved. For when the Spies were sent by Jo∣shua the Son of Nun to search out Jericho, and the King of Jericho knew that they were come to spy out his Country; He He sent Men that should take them, that being taken, &c. order'd them to be taken, that so they might be put to death. Therefore Ho∣spitable Rahab. Rahab therefore, be∣ing Hospitable, received them, and hid them under the Stalks of Flax, on the Top of her House. And when the Men being sent by the King and saying. Ver. 3. Messengers that were sent by the King came unto Her, and asked Her saying, There came Men unto Thee to Spy out the Land, bring them forth, for so hath the King Commanded: She answered,Ver. 4, 5. The two Men whom ye seek came unto Me but presently they departed, and are gone: Shewing them withall a Contrary way. Then she said to the Men. Ver. 9. Spies, I know that the LORD your God has given you this City. given this City into
your hands; for the fear of you is fallen upon All that dwell therein.Ver. 13. When therefore ye shall have taken it, ye shall save Me and my Fathers House. And they answered her saying, It shall be as Thou hast spoken unto Vs.Ver. 18, 19. Therefore when Thou shalt know that we are near, thou shalt Gather all thy Family toge∣ther upon the House top, and they shall be saved: But all that shall be found without thy House, shall be destroyed. And they gave her moreover a Sign; that she should Hang out of her House a Scarlet Rope: Shewing thereby,Ver. 18 that by the Blood of our Lord, there should be Redemption to all that Believe and Hope in God. Ye see, Beloved, How there was not only Faith, but Pro∣phesie too in this Woman. XIII. LET us therefore Humble our selves, Brethren, laying aside all Pride, and Boasting, and Foolishness, and Anger: And let us do as it is written, for thus saith the Holy Spirit, Let not the Wise Man Glory in his Wisdom,Jer. ix.2. nor the Strong Man in his Strength, nor the Rich Man in his Riches; But let him that Glorieth,
Glory in the LORD, to seek Him, and to do Judgment and Justice. Above All, remembring the words of the Lord Jesus, which he spake teaching us. concerning Equity and Long-suffering, for thus he saith. Luke vi.36. saying, Be ye Merciful, and ye shall obtain Mercy; Forgive and ye shall be Forgiven; As ye do so shall it be done unto you; As ye give so shall it be given unto you; As ye judge so shall ye be judged; As ye are kind to Others, so shall God be kind to you; With what Measure ye Meet, with the same shall it be mea∣sured to you Again. By this Com∣mand, and by these Rules, let us establish our selves, that so we may always walk obediently to his Holy Words; being humble minded: For so says Holy Word. the Holy Scripture; Vpon Whom shall I look, even upon him that is poor and of a Contrite Spirit,Isaiah lxvi.2. and that trembles at my Word. XIV. IT is therefore Just and Holy. Righteous, Men and Brethren, that we should become Obedient unto God, rather than follow such as in. through Pride and Disorder, have made themselves the Ring-leaders of
a detestable Emulation. For it is not an Ordinary Harm that we shall do our selves, but rather a very great Danger that we shall run, if we shall rashly give up our selves to the Wills of Men, who prick on to. See Junius Ann. promote Strife and Seditions, to turn us aside from what is fitting. But let us be kind to One Another, according to the Compassion, and Sweetness of him that made us. For it is writ∣ten,Psal. xxxvii.9. The Merciful shall inherit the Earth; and they that are without Evil shall be left upon it:Prov. ii.20. But the Transgressors shall perish from off the face of it. And again He saith, I have seen the Wicked in great Power,Psal. xxxvii.36 and spreading himself like the Cedars of Libanus. I passed by, and Lo he was not; I sought his place, but it could not be found. Keep Innocency, and do the thing that is right, for there shall be a Remnant to the Peaceable Man. XV. LET us therefore hold fast to Those who with Religion or Godliness. religiously follow Peace; and not to such as with Hypocrisie Will it. only pre∣tend to desire it. For He saith in a
certain place,Isaiah xxix.13. This People honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.Psal. lxii.4. And again, They Blessed. Bless with their Mouth, but Cursed. Curse in their Heart. And again He saith, They loved him with their Mouth,Psal. lxxvili. —7. and with their Tongue they lied to Him. For their heart was not right with Him, neither were they faithful in his Covenant.Psal. xxix.19. The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, And the tongue that speaketh proud things.Psal. xii.3. Who have said, with our tongue will we prevail, Our lips are our own, who is LORD over us? For the Oppression of the Poor, for the Sighing of the Needy, now will I arise saith the LORD; I will set him in safety, I will deal con∣fidently with him. XVI. FOR Christ is theirs who are Humble, and not who exalt themselves over his Flock. The Scepter of the Majesty of God our Lord Jesus Christ, came not in the Boasting. shew of Pride, and Arrogance, tho' he could have done so; But with Humility, as the Holy Ghost had before spoken concerning him. For thus he saith,Isaiah Liii. LORD, who hath
believed our Report, and to whom is the Arm of the LORD revealed? For He shall grow up before him as a ten∣der Plant, and as a root out of a dry Ground. He hath no Form nor Come∣liness, and when we shall see Him, there is no Beauty that we should desire Him. He is despised and rejected of Men; A man of Sorrows and acquainted with Grief. And we hid, as it were, our faces from Him; He was despised, and we esteemed Him not. Surely He hath borne our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows; yet we did Esteem him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted. But he was wounded for our Transgressions, He was bruised for our Iniquities; The Chastisement of our Peace was upon Him; and with his Stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every One to his own way, and the LORD hath laid on Him the Iniquity of Vs all. He was Oppressed and he was Afflicted, yet he Opened not his mouth: He is brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter; and as a Sheep before her Shearers is Dumb, so He openeth not his Mouth. He was taken from Prison and from Judg∣ment;
And who shall declare his Gene∣ration? For he was cut off out of the Land of the Living: For the Trans∣gression of my People was he stricken. And he made his Grave with the Wicked, and with the Rich in his Death, because he had done no Violence, neither was any deceit in his Mouth. Yet it pleased the LORD to bruise him, he hath put him to grief: When thou shalt make his Soul an Offering for sin, He shall see his Seed, he shall prolong his days; And the pleasure of the LORD shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travail of his Soul and shall be satisfied; by his Know∣ledge shall my righteous Servant justifie many: For He shall bear their Ini∣quities. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the Great, and he shall divide the Spoil with the Strong; be∣cause He hath poured out his Soul unto death: And he was numbred with the Transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made Intercession for the Transgressors. And again he Him∣self saith,Psal. xxii. Ver. 6. I am a Worm and no Man, a reproach of men, and despised of the People. All they that see me laugh
me to scorn; they shout out their lips, they shake their head saying; He trusted in the LORD that he would deliver Him, let him deliver him seeing he delighted in Him. Ye see, Beloved, what the Pattern is that has been given to Us. For if the Lord thus humbled himself, what should we do who are come under the Yoak of his Grace? XVII. LET us be Followers of those who went about in Goat-skins and Sheep-skins; preaching the Coming of Christ. We say. Such were Elias, and Elisaeus and Ezekiel the Prophets. To these, those also that have been witnessed of. And let us add to these, such others as have received the like Testimony. Abraham has been greatly witnessed of; having been called the Friend of God. And yet He stedfastly beholding the Glory of God says with all Humility, I am Dust and Ashes. Again,Gen. xviii. 27. of Job it is thus written,Job i.1. That he was Just and without Blame, True; One that served God and abstained from all Evil. Yet he despising himself, says, No man is free from Pollution,Job xiv.4. no not
tho' He should live but one day. Moses was called Faithful in all Gods House; and by his Ministry. Conduct God deter∣mined to deliver the Israelites from their Stripes and Pains. And yet even this Man, tho' thus Greatly Honoured, spake not greatly of Him∣self; but when the Oracle of God was delivered to him out of the Bush,Exod. iii.11. —iv.10. he said, Who am I, that thou dost send me? I am of a slender Voice, and a slow Tongue. And again He saith, I am as the smoak of the Pot. XVIII. AND what shall we say of David, so highly testified of in the Holy Scriptures?Psal. lxxxlx.20 To whom God said, I have found a Man after my own heart, David the Son of Jesse, with my Holy Oil have I anointed Him. But yet he Himself saith unto God,Psal. Li. to Ver. 17. Have mercy upon me O God, according to thy loving kindness; According unto the multitude of thy tender Mercies blot out my Trans∣gressions. Wash me throughly from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin. For I acknowledge my Trans∣gressions, and my Sin is ever before Me.
Against Thee only have I sinned, and done this Evil in thy sight, that Thou mightest be justified when Thou speakest, and be clear when Thou judgest. Be∣hold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother Conceive me. Be∣hold, Thou desirest Truth in the In∣ward parts; and in the hidden part Thou shalt make me to know Wisdom. Purge me with Hysop and I shall be Clean, wash me and I shall be whiter than Snow. Make me to hear Joy and Gladness, that the Bones which Thou hast broken may rejoyce. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out All mine Iniquities. Create in me a clean Heart O God; and renew a right Spirit within Me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from Me. Restore unto me the Joy of thy Salvation, and up∣hold me with thy free Spirit. Then will I teach Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be converted unto Thee. Deliver me from Blood-guiltiness O God, thou God of my Salvation, and my Tongue shall sing aloud of thy Righte∣ousness. O LORD open thou my Lips, and my Mouth shall shew forth thy
Praise. For thou desirest not Sacrifice, else would I give it; thou delightest not in Burnt-offerings. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit, a broken and a Contrite Heart O God thou wilt not despise. XIX. THUS has the Humility and Fearfulness. Godly Fear of these So great and such kind of Men. great and excellent Men, Witnessed of, or Celebrated. recorded in the Scriptures, through Obedience made not only Us but also the Gene∣rations before us Better; even as many as have received his Holy Oracles in. with Fear and Truth. Having therefore so many, and such Great and Glorious Examples, Let us return to the Mark of Peace given to us from the be∣ginning. let us return to that Peace, which was the Mark that from the Begin∣ning was set before Us: Let us look up to the Father and Creator of the whole World; and let us hold fast to his Glorious and Exceeding Gifts and Benefits which are of Peace. Let us See him with our Vnder∣standing. consider and behold with the Eyes of our Soul. Understandings his Long-suffering Will; and think how Gentle and Patient he is towards his whole Creation.
XX. THE Heavens Not starting from his Admi∣nistration. holding fast to his Appointment, are subject to Him in Peace. Day and Night accomplish the Courses that he has allotted unto them, not disturbing one another. The Sun and Moon, and all the several Chorus's. Companies and Constellations of the Stars, run the Bounds. Courses that he has appointed to them in Concord, without departing in the least from them. The Fruit∣ful Earth yields its Food plentifully in due Season both to Man and Beast, and to all that is upon it according to His Will; not Doubting. disputing, nor altering any thing of what was or∣der'd by Him. So also the untrodden and unsearchable Floods of the Deep are kept in by his Command: Vid. Edit. Co∣mes. p. 53. And the Hollow or Depth. Conflux of the vast Sea being brought together at the Creation into its several Collections, passes not the Bounds that He has set to it; but as he then Commanded, so it does. appointed it, so it remains. For he said, Hitherto shalt thou come,Job xxxviii. and thy Flouds shall be broken within Thee. The Ocean, unpassable to Mankind, and the
Worlds that are beyond it, are go∣vern'd by the same Commands of their great Master. Spring and Summer, Autumn and Winter, give place peaceably to Each other. The several Stations. Quarters of the Winds, ful∣fil their Service. work in their Seasons, without offending one Another. The Ever-flowing Fountains, made both for Pleasure and Health, never fail to reach out their Breasts, to sup∣port the Life of Men. Even the smallest Creatures Mix together. live together in Peace and Concord with Each other. All these has the Great Creator and Lord of all, commanded to observe Peace and Concord; being Good to all: But especially to Us who flee to his Mercy through our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory and Majesty for Ever and Ever, Amen. XXI. TAKE heed, Beloved, that his many Blessings be not to All of Vs. us to Condemnation; except we shall walk worthy of Him, doing with With Concord. One Consent what is Good and Pleasing in his Sight. The Spirit
of the LORD is a Candle,Prov. xx.27. searching all the inward parts of the Belly. Let us therefore consider how near he is to us; and how that none of our Thoughts are That nothing is hid to him of our thoughts. hid from him; nor any of our Conversation which we have with one Another. It is there∣fore Just that we should not forsake our Rank, by doing contrary to his Will. Let us chuse to offend a few foolish and inconsiderate Men, lifted up and Glorying In the Pride of their own Speech or Reason. in their own Pride, rather than God. Let us Reverence our Lord Jesus Christ whose Bloud was Given for us. Let us Honour Those who are set over us; let us respect the Aged that are amongst us; and let us instruct the younger Men, in the Discipline and Fear of the LORD. Our Wives let us Correct or a∣mend. direct in Doing that which is Good. Let them shew forth a lovely Habit of Purity in all their Conversation; with a sincere Affection of Meekness: Let the government of their Tongues Let them ma∣nifest. be made manifest by their Silence: Let their Charity be without respect of Persons, alike towards all such as truly fear God. Let your Children
Partake of. be bred up in the Instruction of the Lord: And especially let them learn how great a Power Humility has with God; How much a Pure and Holy Charity avails with Him; How Excellent and Great his Fear is, and how it will Saving. save all such as turn to Him with Holiness in a Pure Mind. For He is the Searcher of the Thoughts and Desires of the Heart; whose Breath is in Us, and when He pleases he can take it from Us. XXII. BUT all these things The Faith confirms. must be confirm'd by the Faith which is in Christ, for so He himself bespeaks us by the Holy Ghost.Psal. xxxiv.11. Come ye Children and harken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the LORD. What man is there that desireth Life, and loveth to see Good days? Keep thy Tongue from Evil, and thy Lips that they speak no Guile. Depart from Evil and do Good; seek Peace and ensue it. The Eyes of the LORD are upon the Righte∣ous, and his Ears are open unto their Prayers. But the face of the LORD is against them that do Evil, to cut off the
Remembrance of them from the Earth. The Righteous cried, and the LORD heard Him, and deliver'd him out of all his Troubles.Psal. xxxii.10. Many are the Trou∣bles of the Wicked, But they that trust in the LORD, Mercy shall encompass them About. XXIII. OUR All-Merciful and Beneficent Father hath Bowels of Compassion towards Them that fear Him; And Kindly and Lovingly bestows his Graces upon all such as come to Him with a simple Mind. Wherefore let us not Be double minded. waver, neither let us have any doubt in our Hearts, of his Excellent and Glorious Gifts. Let the writ∣ing be far from us. James i.2. Let that be far from us which is written, Miserable are the double-minded, and those who are doubtful in their Hearts. Who say, These things have we heard, and our Fathers have told us these things. But behold we are grown old,2 Pet. iii.4. and none of them has happened unto Vs. O ye Fools! Compare your selves into a Tree. Consider the Trees; take the Vine for an Example. First it sheds its Leaves; then it Buds; after that it spreads its Leaves; then it
flowers; then come the sower Grapes; and after them follows the Ripe Fruit. Ye see how in a little time the Fruit of the Trees comes to Maturity. Of a truth, yet a little while and his Will shall suddainly be accomplish'd. The Holy Scripture it self bearing witness, That the LORD shall suddainly come to his Temple,Malach. iii.1. even the Holy one whom ye look for. XXIV. LET us consider, Beloved, how the LORD does continually shew Us, that there shall be a future Re∣surrection; of which he has made our Lord Jesus Christ the First-fruits, raising him from the Dead. Let us See. contemplate, Beloved, the Resur∣rection that is continually made be∣fore our Eyes. Day and Night ma∣nifest a Resurrection to Us. The night lies down, and the day arises: Again the day departs and the night comes on. Let us behold the Fruits of the Earth. Every one sees how the Seed is sown. The Sower Went forth, and so in the rest. goes forth, and casts it upon the Earth; and the Seed which when it was
sown fell upon the Earth dry and naked, in time dissolves: And from the Dissolution, the great Power of the Providence of the Lord raises it again; and of one Seed many arise, and bring forth Fruit. XXV. LET us consider that wonderful Sign. Type of the Resurrecti∣on, which is seen in the Eastern Countries; that is to say in Arabia. There is a certain Bird called a Phae∣nix: Of this there is never but one at a time; and that lives five hun∣dred Years. And when the time of its Dissolution draws near that it must Die; it makes it self a Nest of Frankincense, and Myrrhe, and other Spices, into which when its time is fulfilled it enters and dies. But its Flesh putrifying breeds a certain Worm, which being nourished with the Juice of the dead Animal Bird brings orth Fea∣thers; and when it is grown to Stong. a perfect State, it takes up the Nest in which the Bones of its Progenitor. Parent lie, and carries it from Arabia into Egypt, to a City called Heliopolis: And flying in open day in the sight
of all Men, lays it upon the Altar of the Sun, and so returns from whence it came. The Priests then search into the Records of the Time; and find that it return'd precisely at the end of five hundred Years. XXVI. AND Do. shall we then think it to be any very great and strange thing, for the Lord of all to raise up those that religiously serve him in the Assurance of a good Faith, when even by a Bird he shews us the greatness of his power to fulfil his Promise? For he says in a certain place,Psal. iii.5. Thou shalt raise me up and I shall confess unto Thee. And again, I laid me down and slept, and awaked, because thou art with me. And again Job says,Job xix.23. Thou shalt raise up this flesh of mine, that has suffered all these things. XXVII. HAVING therefore this Hope, let us Let our Minds be fastned. hold fast to him who is Faithful in all his Promises, and Righteous in all his Judgments. Who has commanded us not to Lye, how much more shall he not Him∣self
Lye? For nothing is impossible with God, but to Lye. Let his Faith then be stirred up again in us; and let us consider that all things are nigh unto Him. By the Word of his Majesty. Power He made all things; and by the same Word he is able, when ever he will, to destroy them. Who shall say unto Him, what dost Thou? Or who shall resist the Power of his Strength? When, and As he pleased he made All things; and nothing shall pass away of all that has been appointed by Him. All things are Open before him; nor can any thing be hid from his Counsell. If the, &c. The Heavens declare the Glory of God,Psal. xix.1. and the Firmament sheweth his handy work. Day unto Day uttereth Speech, and Night unto Night sheweth Knowledge. There is no Speech nor Language where their Voice is not heard. XXVIII. SEEING then all things are seen and heard by God; let us fear him, and let us lay aside our Corrupt Desires of Wicked Works; that through his Mercy we may be Cover'd. delivered from the Judgments. Con∣demnation
to come. For whither can any of us flee from his mighty Hand? Or what World shall receive any of those who run away from him? For thus saith the Scripture in a certain place,Psal. cxxxx.7. Whither shall I flee [from thy Spirit] or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: If I shall go to the utmost parts of the Earth, there is thy right hand: If I shall make my Bed in the deep, thy Spirit is there. Whi∣ther then shall any one go; or whi∣ther shall he run from him that com∣prehends all things? XXIX. LET us therefore come to him with Holiness of Mind. Heart, lift∣ing up Chast and Undefiled Hands unto him: Loving our gracious and merciful Father, who has made us A part. to partake of his Election. For so it is written,Deut. xxxii.8, 9. When the most High di∣vided the Nations, when he separated the Sons of Adam, he set the Bounds of the Nations, according to the number of his Angels: His People Jacob became the Portion of the LORD,lxx. and Israel the Lot of his Inheritance. And in ano∣ther
Place he saith,Deut. iv.34. Behold the LORD taketh unto himself a Nation, out of the midst of the Nations, as a Man taketh the First-fruits of his Flour; and the Most Holy shall come out of that Nati∣on.Num. xxvii. XXX. WHEREFORE we being a part of the Holy One; Let us do all those things that pertain unto Holyness: Fleeing all Evil-speak∣ing against one another; all filthy and impure Embraces, together with all Drunkenness, Love of Innovati∣on, abominable Concupiscences, de∣testable Adultery, and execrable Pride. For God resisteth the Proud,Prov. iii.34. but giveth Grace to the Humble. Let us there∣fore hold fast to those to whom The Grace of God has been given. God has given his Grace. And let us put on Concord, being Humble, Tem∣perate; free from all Whispering and Detraction; and justified by our Works. Actions, not our Words. For he saith, He that speak∣eth many things shall also hear, &c. Job xi. 2, 3. Lxx. Doth he that speaketh and hear∣eth many things, and that is of a ready Tongue, suppose that he is Righteous? Blessed is he that is born of a Woman, that liveth but a few days: Be not much in Words. Vse not
therefore much Speech. Let our Praise be of God, not of our selves; For God hateth those that Are praised of. commend themselves. Let the Witness of our good Actions be given to us of others, as it was given to the Holy Men that went before us. Rashness, and Ar∣rogance, and Confidence, be to them who are Accursed of God: But E∣quity, and Humility, and Mildness, to such as are Blessed by him. XXXI. LET us then hold fast to his Blessing, and let us See what are the ways of his Blessing. consider what are the ways by which we may attain unto it. Let us Vnroll. look back upon those things that have happened from the beginning. For what was our Father Abraham Bles∣sed? Was it not because that through Faith he wrought Righteousness and Truth? Isaac being With full per∣swasion, fore∣knowing what was to be, pleas∣ingly became a Sacrifice. fully perswa∣ded of what he knew was to come, chearfully yielded himself up for a Sacrifice. Jacob with Humility de∣parted out of his own Country, flee∣ing from his Brother, and went un∣to Laban and served him: And so the Scepter of the Twelve Tribes of Israel, was given unto him.
XXXII. NOW what the Great∣ness of The Gifts that were given by him, were, He shall know, who∣soever will one by one, carefully and distinctly consider them. this Gift was, will plain∣ly appear, if we shall take the pains distinctly to consider all the parts of it. For from him came the Priests and Levites; who all Ministred at the Altar of God. From him came our Lord Jesus Christ, ac∣cording to the Flesh. From him came the Kings and Princes, and Rulers in Judah. Nor were the rest of his Scepters: See Jun. Annot. Gen. xxvii.17. Tribes in any small Glory: God having promis'd that Thy Seed, [says he,] shall be as the Stars of Hea∣ven. They were all therefore Glorified and Magnified. great∣ly glorified, not for their own Sake, or for their own Works, or for the Righteousness that they them∣selves wrought; but through his Will. And we also being called by the same Will in Christ Jesus, are not justified by our selves, neither by our own Wis∣dom, or Knowledge, or Piety, or the Works which we have done In Holiness of Heart. in the Holiness of our Hearts: But by that Faith by which God Almighty has justified those also who were from the Beginning; to whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen.
XXXIII. WHAT shall we do therefore, Brethren? Shall we be Sloathful in Well-doing, and lay a∣side our Charity? God forbid that any such thing should be done by us. But rather let us hasten with all Earn∣estness and Readiness of Mind, to perfect every Good Work. For even the Creator and Lord of all things, rejoyces in his own Works. By his All-greatest. Almighty Power he fixed the Hea∣vens, and by his Incomprehensible Wisdom he adorned them. He also divided the Earth from the Water, with which it is encompassed; and fix∣ed it as a secure Tower, upon the Foundation of his own Will. He also by his Appointment, command∣ed all the Beasts that are upon it, to exist. So likewise the Sea, and all the Creatures that are in it; having first created them, He enclosed them there∣in by his Power. And above all, he with his Holy and Pure Hands, form∣ed Man, the most Excellent, and as to his Understanding, truly the great∣est of all other Creatures, the Cha∣racter of his own Image. For so God says,Gen. i.26, 27. Let us make Man in our
Image, after our owon Likeness: So God created Man, Male and Female created he them. And having thus finished all these things, he com∣mended all that he had made, and Blessed them, and said;Gen. i.28. Encrease and Multiply: We see therefore, how all Righteous Men have been adorn'd with Good Works: And not only so, but even the Lord himself, having a∣dorn'd himself with his Works, re∣joyced. Having therefore This. such an Example, let us without Delay, Come to. fulfill his Will, and with all our Strength, work the Work of Righte∣ousness. XXXIV. THE Good Work∣man with Confidence receives the Bread of his Work. Labour; But the Slug∣gish and Lazy, cannot endure to be∣hold him that set him on work. We must therefore be ready and forward in Well-doing: For from him are all things. And thus he foretells us, Behold the LORD cometh,Isaiah. XL.1▪ Lxii.11. and his Re∣ward is with him, even before his Face, to render to every one according to his Works. He warns us therefore beforehand,
with all his Heart, to this end, that we should not be Sloathful and Negli∣gent in Every Good Work. Well-doing. Let our Boasting therefore, and our Confi∣dence be in Him. God: Let us submit our selves to his Will. Let us con∣sider the vast Multitude of his Angels, how ready they stand to minister un∣to His Will. Dan. vii.10. it? As saith the Scripture, Thou∣sands of Thousands stood before him, and Ten Thousand times Ten Thousand Mi∣nistred unto him.Isa. vi.3. And they cry'd saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts: The whole Earth is full of his Glory. Wherefore let us also, being gather∣ed together in Love and Concord with one another; with With Consci∣ence. one Mind as well as one Mouth, cry earnestly unto Him, that he would make us Par∣takers of his Great and Glorious Pro∣mises. For he saith Eye hath not seen, nor Ear heard,Isa. Lxiv.4. neither have entred in∣to the Heart of Man,1 Cor. ii.9. the things which God has prepared for them that wait for him. XXXV. How Blessed and Won∣derful, Beloved, are the Gifts of God? Life in Immortality! Bright∣ness
in Righteousness! Truth in full Assurance! Faith in Conviction! Temperance in Holiness! And all this has He. God subjected to our Under∣standings: What therefore shall those things be which he has prepared for them that wait for him? The Crea∣tor and Father of Ages. all things, the most Holy; He only knows both the Quantity. Greatness and Beauty of them. Let us therefore strive with all Earnest∣ness, that we may be found in the number of those that wait for him; that so we may receive the Gifts. Reward which he has promised. But how Beloved, shall If we shall. we do this? We must fix our Minds by Faith towards God, and seek those things that are pleasing and acceptable unto Him. We must Perform those things that are agreeable. act conformably to his Holy Will; and follow the way of Truth, casting off all Unrighteous∣ness and Iniquity, together with all Covetousness, Strife, Evil Manners, Deceit, Whispering, Detractions; all Hatred of God, Pride and Boast∣ing; Vain-glory and Ambition: For they that do these things, are Odious to God; and not only they
that do them, but also all such as ap∣prove of those that do them.Rom. i.32. For thus saith the Scripture,Pal. L. 16. &c. But unto the Wicked God said, What hast thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou shouldst take my Covenant in thy Mouth? Seeing thou hatest Instruction, and castest my Words behind thee. When thou samest a Thief, then thou consent∣edst with him; and hast been Partaker with Adulterers. Thou givest thy Mouth to Evil, and thy Tongue frameth Deceit. Thou sittest and speakest against thy Brother; Thou slanderest thine own Mothers Son. These things hast thou done and I kept Silence; Thou thought∣edst that I was altogether such a one as thy self: But I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine Eyes. Now consider this ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. Whoso offereth Praise, Glo∣rifieth me: And to him that disposeth his way aright, will I shew the Salvation of God. XXXVI. THIS is the way, Beloved, in which we may find That which has the Power to save us. our Saviour, even Jesus Christ, the
High Priest of all our Offerings, the Defender and Helper of our Weak∣ness. By him we look up to the Heigths of Heaven. Highest Heavens, and behold as in a Glass, his spotless and most excel∣lent Visage. By him are the Eyes of our Hearts opened; by him is our foolish and darkned Understanding enabled to behold his wonderful Light. By Him would God have us to taste the Knowledge of Immortality,Heb. i.2. who being the Brightness of his Glory, is by so much greater than the Angels, as he has by Inheritance obtain'd a more ex∣cellent Name than they.Heb. i.3. For so it is Written, Who maketh his Angels Spi∣rits, and his Ministers a Flame of Fire.Psal. Civ. 4. Heb. 1.7. But to the Son, thus saith the LORD, Thou art my Son,Heb. i.5. to day have I begot∣ten thee. Ask of me,Comp. Psal. ii.7, 8. and I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for thy Possession. And again he saith unto him, Sit thou on my Right Hand, untill I make thine Enemies thy Foot∣stool. But who are his Enemies?Heb. i.13. Psal. cx.1. even the Wicked? and such who oppose their own Wills, to the Will of God.
XXXVII. LET us therefore War. go on, Men and Brethren, with all Earnestness in his Holy Laws. Let us consider those who Fight under our Earthly Governours: How orderly how readily, and with what exact Obedience they perform those things that are commanded them? All are not Prefects. Generals, nor Commanders of a Thousand. Colonels, nor Centurions. Captains, nor Commanders of 50, and so on. inferior Officers: But every one in his respective Rank does what is commanded him by the King, and those who have the Au∣thority over Him. They who are Great, cannot yet subsist without Those that are Little; nor the Little with∣out the Great. But there must be a Mixture in all things, and then there will be Use and Profit too. Let us, for Example,1 Cor. xii.13. take our Body: The Head without the Feet is nothing, neither the Feet without the Head. And even the smallest Members of our Body, are yet both necessary and useful to the whole Body. But all con∣spire together, and Vse one com∣mon Subjection. are subject to one common Use, namely, the Pre∣servation of the whole.
XXXVIII. LET therefore our whole Body be saved in Christ Jesus: And let every one be subject to another, As also he has been placed. according to the Or∣der in which he is placed by the His Gift. Gift of God. Let not the strong Man neglect to take care of the Weak; and let the Weak see that he reve∣rence the Strong. Let the Rich Man distribute to the Necessity of the Poor: And let the Poor bless God, that he has given one unto him, by whom his Want may be supplied. Let the Wise Man shew forth his Wisdom, not in Words, but in Good Works. Let him that is Humble, not bear Witness to himself, but let him leave it to another to bear Wit∣ness of him. Let him that is pure in the Flesh, not grow proud of it, knowing that it was Another that gave him. from another that he received the Gift of Conti∣nence. Let us consider therefore, Brethren, Of what Mat∣ter. whereof we are made; who, and what kind of Men we came into the World, as it were out of a Sepulchre, and from outer Dark∣ness. He that made us and formed us, brought us into his own World;
having Prepared for us. prevented us with his Be∣nefits, even before we were Born. Wherefore, having Received all these things from Him, we ought upon all Occasions, to give thanks unto Him: To whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen. XXXIX. FOOLISH and Un∣wise Men, And Impru∣dent and with∣out Instruction. who have neither Pru∣dence nor Learning, may perhaps Mock and Deride us; being willing to set up themselves in their own Conceits: For. But what can a Mortal Man do? Or what Strength is there in him that is made out of the Dust? For it is written, There was no Shape be∣fore mine Eyes; only I heard a Air. Sound and a Voice.Job iv.16. &c. For what? Shall Man be Pure before the LORD? Shall he be blame∣less in his Works? Behold, he trusteth not in his Servants; and his Angels he charged with Folly. Yea, the Heaven is not clean in his Sight, how much less they that dwell in Houses of Clay; of which also we our selves were made? He smote them as a Moth; and from Morning even unto the Evening they endure not. Be∣cause they were not able to help themselves
they Perish'd: He breath'd upon them and they dy'd, because they had no Wisdom Call now if there be any that will answer thee;Job iv.1. &c. and to which of the Angels wilt thou look? For Wrath killeth the Foolish Man, and Envy slayeth him that is in Error. I have seen the Foolish taking Root, but lo their Habitation was pre∣sently consumed. Their Children were far from Safety, they Were crushed upon. Perished at the Gates of those who were lesser than them∣selves; And there was no Man to Deliver. help them. For what was prepared for them, the Righteous Eat. did Eat: And they shall not be delivered from Evil. XL. SEEING then these things are manifest unto us, it will behove us, to take care that looking into the Depths of the Divine Knowledge, we do all things in order, whatsoever our Lord has commanded us to do. And particularly, that we perform our Offerings and Service to God, at their appointed Seasons: For these he has commanded to be done, not By chance. rashly and disorderly, but at Certain Determinate Times and Hours. And therefore he has ordained by his Su∣preme
Will and Authority, both where, and by what Persons they are to be perform'd: That so all things being piously done unto all Well-pleasing, they may be accept∣able unto To his Will. him. They therefore who make their Offerings at the ap∣pointed Seasons, are Happy, and Accepted: Because that obeying the Commandments of the Lord, they are free from Sin. And the same care must be had of the Persons that Minister unto him. For the Chief Priest has his proper Services; and to the Priests their proper Place is appoint∣ed; And to the Levites appertain their proper Ministries: And the Lay∣man is confined within the Bounds of what is commanded to Lay-men. XLI. LET every one of you therefore, Brethren, bless God in his proper Station with Being in a good Conscience. a Good Consci∣ence, and with all Gravity, not ex∣ceeding the Rule of his Service that is appointed to him. The daily Sa∣crifices Are. were not offer'd every where, nor the Peace-offerings, nor the Sacrifices appointed for Sins and
Transgressions, but only at Jerusa∣lem: Nor might they be offer'd in any Place there neither, but only at the Altar before the Temple; being first diligently examin'd by the High-Priest and the other Ministers we before mentioned. They there∣fore who Do: Is: Are: &c. did any thing besides what Do: Is: Are: &c. was agreeable to his Will, Do: Is: Are: &c. were punished with Death. Ye see. Con∣sider, Brethren, by how much the better Knowledge God has vouch∣safed unto us, by so much the great∣er Danger are we exposed to. XLII. THE Apostles have Preach∣ed to us from our Lord JESUS CHRIST: Jesus Christ from God. Christ there∣fore was sent by God, the Apostles by Christ: So both their Offices were or∣derly fulfill'd, according to the Will of God. For having received their Com∣mand, and being fully assured by the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ;1 Thess. .. and convinced by the Word of God, and the With the full Assurance. Evidence of the Holy Spirit, they went abroad, publishing, That the Kingdom of God was at Hand. And thus Preaching through Coun∣tries
and Cities, and proving by the Spirit, the first Fruits of their Conver∣sions, they appointed out of them Bi∣shops and Ministers over such as should afterwards believe. Nor was this any new Thing: Seeing that long before it was written concerning Bishops and Deacons. For thus saith the Scripture, in a certain place; I will appoint their Bishops, Dea∣cons. Overseers in Righte∣ousness,Isaiah lx.17. and their Bishops, Dea∣cons. Ministers in Faith. XLIII. AND what wonder if they to whom such a work was committed by God in Christ, establish'd such Offi∣cers as we before mentioned; When even that Blessed and Faithful Servant in all his House, Moses, Signified. set down in the Holy Scriptures all things that were commanded Him. Whom also all the rest of the Prophets follow'd, bear∣ing witness with one consent to those things that were appointed by him. For He, perceiving an An Emulation appening. Emu∣lation to arise among the Tribes concerning the Priesthood, and that there was a Strife about it, which of them should be Adorned with that Glorious Title; commanded their
twelve Captains to bring to him twelve Rods;Numb. xvii. every Tribe being Written. noted upon its Rod according to its Name. And he took them and bound them together, and sealed them with the Seals of the Twelve Princes of the Tribes; and laid them up in the Tabernacle of Witness, upon the Table of God. And when he had shut the door of the Taber∣nacle, he sealed up the Keys of it, in like manner And the Rods. as he had done the Rods; And said unto them, Men and Brethren; Which soever Tribe shall have its Rod Blossom, that Tribe has God chosen to Himself, To exercise the Office of the Priesthood, and to Minister, &c. to Mi∣nister unto Him in Holy Things. And when Morning was come, He called together All Israel, six Hundred Thou∣sand Men; and shew'd to their Princes the Seals; and opened the Tabernacle of Witness; and brought forth the Rods. And the Rod of Aaron was found not only to have Blossom'd, but also to have Fruit upon it. What think you, Beloved? Did not Moses before know That this should be so. what should happen? Yes verily: But to the End there might be no Division nor Tumult in Israel,
He did in this manner, that the Name of the True and Only God might be Glorified: To Him be Honour for Ever and Ever, Amen. XLIV. SO likewise our Apostles knew by our Lord Jesus Christ, that there should Contentions arise About the name of the Bi∣shoprick. upon the Account of the Ministry. And therefore having a perfect fore-know∣ledge of this, they appointed Per∣sons, as we have before said, and then gave Direction, That. How when they should die, other chosen and approved Men should succeed in their Ministry. Wherefore we cannot think that those may justly be thrown out of their Ministry, who were either Appointed by Them, or afterwards Chosen by Emi∣nent Men with the Consent of the whole Church, and have with all Lowliness and Innocency ministred to the Flock of Christ, in Peace, and without Self-interest, and for a long time commended by all. For it would be no small Sin in us, should we cast off those from their Bishoprick. Mini∣stry, who Holily and without Blame
Offer the Gifts. fulfil the Duties of it. Blessed are those Priests, who having finish'd their Course before these times, have obtain'd a fruitful and perfect Disso∣lution: For they have no fear, lest any one should turn them out of the place in which they are now esta∣blish'd. But we see how you have put out some, who lived excellently among you, from the Ministry, with which they were Without blame rightly and inno∣cently adorn'd. XLV. YE are Contentious, Bre∣thren, and Zealous for things that pertain not unto Salvation. Look into the Holy Scriptures, which are the true words of the Holy Ghost. Ye know that there is nothing un∣just or Spurious Written. in them. There you shall not find that Just Men were ever cast off by such as were good themselves. Just Men. They were per∣secuted 'tis true, but it was by the Wicked and Ungodly. They were cast into Prison, but they were cast in by those that were Unholy. They were stoned, but it was by Sinners and Transgressors. They were killed,
but by Accursed Men, and such as had taken up an Unjust Envy against them. Suffering these things they un∣derwent them Gloriously. And all these things they underwent Gloriously. For what shall we say, Brethren? Was Daniel cast into the Dan. vi.16. Den of Lyons, by Men fearing God? Ananias, Azarias and Misael, were they Shut into. cast into the Dan. iii.20. Fiery Furnace by Men Worshipping the Worship. pro∣fessing the Excellent and Glorious Worship of the most High? God forbid. What kind of Persons then were they that did these things? They were Men Abominable, full of all Wickedness, who were in∣censed to so great a Degree, as to bring those into Sufferings, who with a Holy and Unblamable Purpose of mind worshipped God: Not know∣ing that the Most High is the Pro∣tector and Defender of all such as in a Pure Conscience serve his Full of Vertue. Holy Name: To whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen. But they who with a full Perswasion have endured to the end, Have inhe∣rited. are now made Partakers of Glory and Honour: And Have been exalted. are Exalted and lifted up by God in their Memorial throughout all Ages, Amen.
XLVI. WHEREFORE it will behove us also, Brethren, To be Glue'd to. to follow such Examples as these; for it is written, Psal. xvii.25. Hold fast to such as are Holy; for they that do so shall be san∣ctified. And again in another place he saith,Psal. xvii.20. With the Pure thou shalt be Pure, but with the Perverse Man thou shalt be Turn aside. perverse. Let us therefore keep our selves firm to the Innocent and Righteous; for such are The Elect. Cho∣sen of God. Wherefore are there Strifes and Anger, and Divisions and Schisms and Wars among Us?Eph. iv.4. Have we not all One God, and One Christ?1 Cor. xii. Is not one Spirit of Grace poured out upon us All? Have we not One Calling in Christ? Why then do we rent and tear in pieces the Members of Christ; And raise Seditions a∣gainst our own Body? And are come to such a heighth of Madness, as to forget that we were Members one of Another?Rom. xii.5. Remember the words of the Lord Jesus, For he said. how he said, Wo to that Man,Luke xvii. [By whom Offences come] It were better for him that he had never been Born, Than that he should
have offended one of My Elect. It were better for him, that a Mill-stone should be tyed about his Neck, and he should be cast into the Sea, than that he should offend one of My little ones. Your Schism has perverted Many, has discouraged many: It has raised Doubts in many, and Grief in us All. And yet your Sedition continues still. XLVII. TAKE the Epistle of the Blessed Paul the Apostle into your Hands; What was it that he wrote to you in the very Beginning of his Gospel. Instructions to you? Verily he did Spiritually send to you. 1 Cor. i.12. by the Spirit admonish you concerning himself, and Cephas, and Apollos, forasmuch as even then ye had begun to fall into Inclinations [for one above another.] Parties and Factions. Nevertheless your Incli∣nations then led you into a much less Sin: Forasmuch as ye Inclined. placed your Affections on Apostles, Men of Witnessed of. Eminent Reputation in the Church, and on Another who was greatly try'd and approved of among you. But consider we pray you, who are they that have now led you astray▪ And lessen'd the Gravity. Reputation of
that Brotherly Love that was once So much spo∣ken of. so Eminent among you? 'Tis a Shame, my Beloved, yea a very great Shame, and unworthy of your Christian Institution. Profession, to hear, that the most firm and antient Church of the Corinthians should by one or two Persons, be led into a Sedition against its Priests. And this Report is come not only to us, but to those also that Differ from us. are without. Insomuch that the Name of the LORD is Blas∣phemed through your Folly; and even ye your selves are brought into Danger by it. XLVIII. LET us therefore with all hast Take away. put an End to this Sedition; and let us fall down before the Lord, and beseech him with Tears that he would Becoming fa∣vourable. be favourably reconciled to us, and restore us again to a Grave: Vener∣able. seem∣ly and Holy Course of Brotherly Love. For this is the Gate of Righteousness, opening unto Life: As it is written,Psalm cxviii.19, 20. Open unto me the Gates of Righteousness; I will go in unto them and will praise the LORD. This is the Gate of the LORD, the
Righteous shall enter into it. Although therefore there are many Gates that are opened, yet this Gate of Righte∣ousness is that Gate in Christ, at which Blessed are All they that en∣ter in, and direct their way in Holiness and Righteousness, doing all things without Disorder. Let a Man be Faithful, let him be Powerful in the Utterance of Knowledge; let him be wise in making an exact Judg∣ment of words; let him be Pure in all his Actions. But still by how much the more he seems to be Greater. Above others, by reason of these things, by so much the more will it Behove him to be Humble-minded; and to seek what is profitable to All Men, and not his own Advantage. XLIX. HE that has the Love that is in Christ, let him keep the Commandments of Christ. For who is able to express the Bond. Obligation of the Love of God? What Man is sufficient to declare, as is fitting, the Excellency of its Beauty? The Heighth to which Charity leads, is inexpressible. Charity Glues. unites us
to God: 1 Pet. iv.8. Charity covers the multi∣tude of sins: 1 Cor. xiil.7, &c. Charity endures all things, is long-suffering in all things. There is nothing Base and Sordid in Charity: Charity lifts not it self up above others; admits of no Divi∣sions; is not Seditious; but does all things in Peace and Concord. By Cha∣rity were all the Elect of God made Perfect: Without it nothing is plea∣sing and acceptable in the sight of God. Through Charity did the LORD Take us up. joyn us unto Himself; whilst for the Love that he bore towards us, our Lord Jesus Christ gave his own Bloud for us by the Will of God; his Flesh for our Flesh; his Soul for our Souls. L. YE see, Beloved, How great and wonderful a thing Love is; and how that no Expressions are suffi∣cient to declare its Perfection. But who is fit to be found in it? Even such only as God shall vouchsafe to make so. Let us therefore Pray to him, and beseech him, that we may be Worthy of it; that so we may live in Charity; being Unblamable▪
and without any Humane Affections to one more than another. All the Ages of the World, from the Begin∣ning of it, even unto this time, are passed away: But they who have been made Perfect in Love, have by the Grace of God obtain'd a place among the Just, and shall be made manifest in the Animadver∣sion, or Visita∣tion. Isa. xxvi.20. Judgment of the Kingdom of Christ. For it is writ∣ten, Enter into thy Chambers for a little space, till my Anger and Indig∣nation shall pass away: And I will re∣member the Good day, and will raise you up out of your Graves. Happy Are we. then shall we be, Beloved, if we shall have fulfilled the Command∣ments of God, in the Unity of Love; that so, through Love, our Sins may be forgiven us. For so it is written,Psal. xxxii. Blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose Sins are co∣vered. Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord imputeth no Sin, and in whose Mouth there is no Guile. Now this Blessing is fulfilled in those who are Chosen by God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, To whom be Glory for Ever and Ever, Amen.
LI. LET us therefore, as many as have transgressed by any of the See Junius in loc. Suggestions of the Adversary, beg God's Forgiveness. And as for those who have been the Chief Leaders. Heads of the Sedition and Faction among you, They ought. let them look to the Common End of our Hope. For as Many as are Walk accor∣ding to: live in▪ endued with Fear and Charity, would rather they Themselves should fall into Tryals than their Neigh∣bours: And chuse to be themselves condemn'd, rather than that the Excellent and Just Charity delivered to us, should Suffer. For it is Good for a Man to confess wherein he has transgressed; Rather tha. and not to harden his Heart, as the Hearts of those were hardened, who raised up Sedi∣tion against Moses the Servant of God: Whose Punishment was mani∣fest unto all Men; For they went down Alive into the Grave, Death swallowed them up. Pharaoh and his Host, and all the Rulers of Egypt, their Chariots also and their Horse-men, were for no other cause drowned in the bottom of the Red Sea, and Perish'd; but because they hardened
their foolish Hearts, after so many Signs done in the Land of Egypt by Moses the Servant of God. LII. BELOVED, God is not Indigent of any thing; nor does he demand any thing of Us, but that we should Confess our Sins unto Him. For so says the Chosen. Holy David, I will Confess unto the LORD,Psal. lxix.31. and it shall please him better than a Bullock that hath Horns and Hoofs. Let the Poor see it and be Glad. And again he saith,Psal. L.14. Offer unto God the Sacrifice of Praise, and pay thy Vows unto the most Highest. And call upon Me in the day of Trouble, and I will deliver Thee, and thou shalt Glorifie me. The Sacrifice of God is a Broken Spirit.—Li.17. LIII. YE know, Beloved, ye know full-well the Holy Scriptures; and have thoroughly search'd into the Oracles of God: Call them therefore to your Remembrance. For when Moses went up into the Mount, and tarried there Forty Days and Forty Nights in Fasting and Humility;Exod. xxxii. God said unto Him, Get thee down quickly
from Hence;Deutr. ix. For thy People whom thou broughtest out of the Land of Egypt: has committed Wickedness. They have soon transgressed the way that I com∣manded Them, and have made to them∣selves Graven Images. And the LORD said unto Him, I have spoken unto Thee Once and Twice· several times, saying, I have seen this People, and behold it is a stiff∣necked People: Let me therefore De∣stroy them, and put out their Name from under Heaven. And I will make unto thee a Great and a Wonderful Nation, that shall be much More, Great▪ larger than this. But Moses said, Not so LORD: Forgive now this People their Sin: Or if thou wilt not, Blot me also out of the Book of the Living. O admirable Charity! O insuperable Perfection! The Servant speaks free∣ly to his Lord; He beseeches him either to forgive the People, or to Blt ou▪ destroy Him together with them. LIV. WHO is there among you that is Generous? Who that is Com∣passionate? Who that has any Cha∣rity? Let him say, If this Sedition, this Contention, these Schisms are
upon my Account, I am ready to depart; to go away whithersoever ye please; and do whatsoever The Multi∣tude. ye shall desire of me; only let the Flock of Christ be in Peace, with the Priests that are set over it. He that shall do this, shall get to him∣self a very great Honour in the LORD; and Every place. there is no place but what will be ready to receive him: For the Earth is the LORD'S, and the Fullness thereof.Psalm xxiv. These things they who have their Conversation to∣wards God not to be repented of, both have done, and will always be ready to do. LV. But that we may bring the Examples of Heathens. NAY and even the Gentiles themselves have given us Examples of this kind. For we read, How many Kings and Princes, in times of Pestilence, being warned by their Oracles, have given up Themselves unto Death, that by their own Bloud, they might deliver their Citizens. Country-men from Destructi∣on. Many. Others have forsaken their Cities, that so they might put an End to the Seditions of them.
We know how many among our selves, have given up themselves unto Bonds, that thereby they might free others from them. Others have hired out themselves to the most Servile Employments, that with the Wages of them they might feed Others. their Brethen. And even Women themselves, being strengthned by the Grace of God, have done many Glorious and Manly things on such Occasions. The Blessed Judith,Judith viii, ix, x, xiii. when her City was besieged, desired the Elders, that they would suffer her to go into the Camp of The Strangers their Ene∣mies: And she went out exposing her self to Danger, for the Love she bare to her Country and her People that were Besieged; and the Lord delivered Holofernes into the Hands of a Woman. Nor did Esther, being perfect in Faith,Esther vii, vii▪ expose her self to any less Hazard, for the Delivery of the Twelve Tribes of Israel, in danger of being destroyed. For by Fasting and Humbling Her self, she intreated the Great Maker of All things, the God of Ages; Who▪ So that beholding the Humility of her
Soul, He delivered the People, for whose sake she was in Peril. LVI. WHEREFORE let us also pray for all such as fall into any Trouble or Distress; That being endued with Humility and Modera∣ration, they may submit not unto Us, but to the Will of God. For by this means There shall be to them. they shall obtain a Fruitful and Perfect Remembrance, with Mercy, both at the Hands of God, and of his Saints. Let us receive Cor∣rection, at which no Man ought to re∣pine. Beloved, the Reproof and the Correction which we exercise towards one another, is good, and exceeding Profitable: For it unites us the more closely to the Will of God. For so says the Holy Scripture, The LORD corrected me,Psal. cxviii.18. but he did not de∣liver me over unto Death.Prov. iii.11. For whom the LORD loveth he Chastneth, and scourgeth every Son whom he receiveth. The Righteous,Psal. cxli.5. saith He, shall instruct me in Mercy and reprove me; but the Oyl of Sinners shall not make fat my Head.Job v.17, &c. And again he saith, Happy is the Man whom God correcteth;
therefore despise not thou the Chastning of the Almighty. For he maketh sore and bindeth up; He woundeth and his hands make whole. He shall deliver thee in six Troubles; Yea in seven there shall no Evil touch Thee. In Famine he shall redeem thee from Death; and in War from the Power of the Sword. Thou shalt be hid from the Scourge of the Tongue; neither shalt thou be afraid of Destruction when it cometh. Thou shalt laugh at the Wicked and Sinners; neither shalt thou be afraid of the Beasts of the Earth. The wild Beasts shall be at peace with thee. Then shalt thou know that thy House shall be in peace; and the Habitation of thy Taber∣nacle shall not err. Thou shalt know also that thy Seed shall be great, and thy Off-spring as the Grass of the Earth. Thou shalt come to thy Grave as the ripe Corn, that is taken in due time; like as a Shock of Corn cometh in, in his Season. Ye see, Beloved, how there shall be a Defence to those that are corrected of the Lord. For being a good Instructor, he is willing to Admonish us by his Holy Discipline.
LVII. DO YE therefore who laid the first Foundation of this Sedi∣tion, submit your selves to your Priests; and be Instructed unto Re∣pentance, bending the Knees of your Hearts. Learn to be subject, laying aside all proud and arrogant Boast∣ing of your Tongues. For it is better for you to be found little and of good Reputation in the Sheepfold of Christ,See Junius in loc. than to seem to your selves better than others, and be cast out of his Fold. For thus speaks the excellent and all-vertuous Wisdom, Behold I will pour out the word of my Spirit upon you,Prov. i.23, &c. I will make known my Speech unto you. Because I called and ye would not hear, I stretched out my words and ye regarded not. But ye have set at nought all my Counsel, and would none of my reproof. I will also laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your fear cometh. When your Fear cometh as Desolation, and your Destruction as a Whirlwind, when Distress and Anguish cometh upon you. Then shall ye call upon me, but I will not hear you: The Wicked shall seek me, but they shall not
find me. For that they hated Knowledge, and did not seek the Fear of the Lord. They would not hearken unto my Coun∣sel: They despised all my Reproof. There∣fore shall they eat of the Fruit of their own ways; and be filled with their own Wickedness. LVIII. NOW God, the Inspe∣ctor of all things, the Master. Father of Spirits, and the Lord of all Flesh, who hath chosen our Lord Jesus Christ, and Us by Him, to be his Peculiar People; grant to every Soul of Man that calleth upon his Glorious and Holy Name, Faith, Fear, Peace, Long-suffering, Patience, Tempe∣rance, Holiness and Wisdom, unto all well-pleasing To his Name. in his sight; through our High Priest and Protector Jesus Christ, by whom be Glory, and Ma∣jesty, and Honour unto Him now and for Ever more, Amen. LIX. THE Messengers whom we have sent unto you, Claudius and
Ephebus, and Valerius, and Bito with Fortunatus, send back to us again with all speed in Peace and with Joy, that they may the sooner acquaint us with your Peace and Concord, so much pray'd for and desired by Us: And that we may rejoyce in your good Order. LX. THE Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, and with all others that are any where called by God and through Him: To whom be Honour and Glory, and Might, and Majesty, and Dominion, by Him. Christ Jesus, from Everlasting to Everlasting, Amen.
THE EPISTLE OF St. POLYCARP TO THE Philippians.
THE CONTENTS. After the Salutation: 1. HE Commends the Philippians for their Respect to Those who suffer'd for the Gospel; and for their own Faith and Piety. Numb. I. 2. He exhorts Them to continue in Both: And that particularly from the Consideration of the Resurrecti∣on and Judgment to come. N. II. For their better accomplishing whereof, He, 3. Advises them to call to mind the Doctrine which St. Paul had taught them whilst He was in Person among them; and after wrote to them in his Epistle. N. III. The Summ of all which he now goes on particularly to set before Them. I. As to Practical Duties. 1. Faith, Hope, Charity. N. III.
2. Against Covetousness. N. IV. 3. The Duties of Husbands, Wives, Widows. Ib. 4. Of Deacons, Young Men, Virgins. N. V. 5. Of Presbyters. N. VI. All which He again Inforces with the Consideration of that Account we must one day give to God of all our Actions. II. As to Matters of Faith. 1. What we are to Believe concerning our Saviour Christ: His Nature and Sufferings. N. VII. 2. Of the Future Resurrection and Judgment. Ib. Which being thus set forth, He finally Exhorts them, 1. To Prayer. N. VII. 2. To Stedfastness in their Faith. N. VIII. Inforced from the Examples of the Pa∣tience and Constancy. —Of Our Saviour Christ. Ib. —Of his Apostles and Saints. N. IX. 3. To Carefulness in all Well-doing. N. X.
And more particularly yet, from the Miscarriage of Valens, who had been a Presbyter among Them: He Ex∣horts them, 4. To beware of Covetousness. N. XI. 5. Not to be too severe towards such Persons, either in their Censures of them, or Behaviour towards them. N. XII. He Prays for them; and then Exhorts them, 6. To Pray for All others. Ib. And having thus done with what was Instructive of his Epistle: He ad∣vises Them of his sending Ignatius's Epistles to them. N. XIII. And desires an Account of Him from Them. N. XIV. And lastly: He recommends Crescens, by whom he wrote this Epistle, to∣gether with his Sister, to their Fa∣vour and Assistance. Ib.
THE EPISTLE OF St. POLYCARP TO THE Philippians. POLYCARP, and the PRES∣BYTERS that are with Him, to the Church of God which Sojourneth. is at PHILIPPI; Mercy unto you and Peace from God Al∣mighty, and the Lord Jesus Christ, our Saviour, be multiplied. I. I REJOYCED greatly with you in our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye received the Images of a true Love, and accompanied,
as it behoved you, those who were in Bonds, becoming Saints; which are the Crowns of such as are truly chosen by God and our Lord: As also that the Root of the Faith which was preach'd from antient times, remains firm in you to this day; and brings forth Fruit to our Lord Jesus Christ, who suffer'd himself to be brought even to the Death for our Sins. Whom God hath raised up,Acts ii.24. having loosed the Pains of Death. Whom having not seen,1 Pet. i.8. ye love; in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoyce with joy unspeakable and full of Glory: Into which many desire to enter, Knowing that by Grace ye are saved;Eph. ii.8. not by Works, but by the Will of God through Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. i.13.II. WHEREFORE girding up the Loyns of your Mind; Serve the Lord with Fear and in Truth:Psal. ii.11. Laying aside all empty and vain Speech, and the Error of many;1 Pet. 1.21. Believing in him that raised up our Lord Jesus Christ from the Dead, and hath given him Glory and a Throne at his right Hand. To whom all things are
made Subject,Phil. ii.10. Both that are in Hea∣ven, and that are in Earth; whom every Breath. Creature shall worship; who shall come to be the Judge of the Quick and Dead: Whose Bloud God shall require of them that believe not in him, but are disobedient to him. But he that raised up Him. Christ from the Dead, shall also raise up us in like manner, if we do his Will, and walk In. according to his Command∣ments; and love that which he hath loved: Abstaining from all Injustice. Vn∣righteousness; Eph. iv.19. Colos. iii.5. 1 Pet. iii.9. inordinate Affection, and love of Money; from Evil-speak∣ing; False Witness; not rendring Evil for Evil, or Railing for Railing, or Striking for Striking, or Cursing for Cursing: But remembring what the Lord has Said to us, Teaching. Luke vi.37. Matt. vii.1. taught us saying, Judge not and ye shall not be judged; Forgive and ye shall be forgiven; Be ye merci∣ful, and ye shall obtain Mercy; For with the same measure that ye meet withall, it shall be measured to you again.Matt. v.3.10▪ And again that Blessed are the Poor,Luke vi.20. and they that are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of God.
III. THESE things my Bre∣thren I took not the Liberty of my self to write unto you concerning Righteousness, but you your selves before encouraged me to it. For neither can I, nor any other such as I am, come up to the Wisdom of the Blessed and Renowned Paul; who being himself in Person with those who then lived, did with all Exactness and Soundness teach the Word of Truth; and being gone from you wrote an Epistles. Vid. Annot. Cotler. in loc. Epistle to you: Into which if you look, you will be able to Edifie your selves in the Faith that has been delivered unto you; which is the Mother of us All; be∣ing followed with Hope, and led on by a general Love, both towards God and towards Christ, and towards our Neighbour. For if any Man Be within. has these things, he has fulfilled the Law of Righteous∣ness: For he that has Charity is fa from all Sin.
IV. BUT the Love of Money is the Beginning. Root of all Evil. Knowing there∣fore that as we brought nothing into this World,1 Tim. 6.7. so neither may we carry any thing out; Let us Be arm'd. arm our selves with the Armour of Righteousness: And teach our selves first to walk according to the Commandments of the Lord; and then your Wives to walk likewise In. according to the Faith that is given to them; in Love. Charity and in Purity; loving their own Husbands with all Truth. Sin∣cerity, and all others alike with all Temperance; and to bring up their Children in the Instruction Of the. and Fear of the Lord. The Widows likewise teach that they be Sober and Discreet as to what concerns the Faith of the Lord: Praying always for All Men; being far from all Detraction, Evil speaking, false Witness; from Covetousness and from all Evil: Knowing that they are the Altars of God And that He. who sees all things, and from whom nothing is hid; Who searches out the very Reasonings, and Thoughts, and Secrets of our Hearts.
V. KNOWING therefore that God is not mocked, we ought to walk worthy both of his Command and of his Glory. Also the Deacons must be Blameless before His Righte∣ousness. Him, as the Ministers of God in Christ, and not of Men. Not false Accusers; not Double-tongued; not Lovers of Money; but Continent. Moderate in all things; Compassionate, Careful; walking according to the Truth of the Lord, who was the Servant of all: Whom if we please in this present World, we shall also be made Partakers of that which is to come, according as he has promised to us, that he will raise us from the Dead; And that if we shall walk worthy of him, we shall also reign together with him, if we believe. In like manner the younger Men must be unblamable in all things: Above all, taking care of their Purity, and to restrain them∣selves from all Evil. For it is good to be cut off from the Lusts that are in the World; because every such Lust warreth against the Spirit:1 Pet. 2.11. And neither Fornicators,1 Cor. vi.9, 10. nor Effeminate,
nor Abusers of themselves with Man∣kind, shall inherit the Kingdom of God; nor they who do such things as are Foolish and Unreasonable. Wherefore ye must abstain from all these things; being subject to the Priests and Deacons, as unto God and Christ. The Virgins admonish to walk in a spotless and pure Con∣science. VI. AND let the Presbyters. Elders be Compassionate and Merciful towards all; turning them from their Errors; seeking out those that are Weak; not forgetting the Widows, the Fa∣therless and the Poor; but always providing what is Good both in the sight of God and Man.Rom. xii.17. Abstaining from all Wrath, respect of Persons, and unrighteous Judgment: And especially being free from all Covet∣ousness. Not Swiftly be∣lieving. easie to believe any thing against any; not severe in Judgment; Knowing that we are all Debtors in point of Sin. If there∣fore we pray to the Lord that he would forgive us, we ought also to forgive others: For we are all in the
sight of our Lord and God;Matt. xii.14. Rom. xiv.10. 2 Cor. v.10. and must all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ; and every one give an ac∣count For. of Himself. Let us there∣fore serve him in fear, and with all Reverence as both Himself com∣manded; and as the Apostles and Prophets have preach'd to us, who have foretold the Coming of our Lord: Being Zealous of what is Good; abstaining from all Offence, and from all false Brethren; and from all that bear the Name of Christ in Hypocrisie; who deceive vain Men. 1 John iv.3.VII. FOR whosoever does not con∣fess that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, he is Antichrist: And whoever does not confess The Martyr∣dom or Witness of the Cross. his Suffering upon the Cross, is from the Devil. And whosoever perverts the Oracles of the Lord to his own Lusts; and says that there shall neither be any Re∣surrection nor Judgment, he is the first Born of Satan. Wherefore leav∣ing the Vanity of many, and their false Doctrines; let us Turn our selves hold fast to the Word that was delivered to us
from the Beginning;1 Pet. iv.7. Watching unto Prayer; and persevering in Fasting: Beseeching with all Supplication the All-seeing God not to lead us into Temptation; as the Lord hath said,Matt. vi.13. The Spirit truly is willing,Matt. xxvi.41. but the Flesh is weak. VIII. LET us therefore without ceasing keep stedfastly to Him who is our Hope, and the Earnest of our Righteousness, even Jesus Christ; Who his own self bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree: Who did no sin,1 Pet. ii.22, 24. neither was guile found in his mouth. But suffered all for us that we might live In: 1 Pet. iii.14, &c. through Him. Let us therefore imitate his Patience: And if we suffer for his Name, let us Glorifie him; for this Example he has given us by Himself, and so have we be∣lieved. IX. WHEREFORE I exhort all of you that ye obey the Word of Righteousness, and exercise all Pa∣tience; which ye have seen set forth before your Eyes, not only in the Blessed Ignatius, and Zozimus, and
Rufus, but in others that have been among you; and in Paul himself, and the rest of the Apostles. Being Perswaded. confident of this, that all these have not run in vain; but in Faith and Righteousness, and are gone to the place that was due to them from the Lord; with whom also they suffered. For they loved not this present World; but Him who died, and was raised again by God for us. X. STAND therefore in these things, and follow the Example of the LORD; being firm and immuta∣ble in the Faith, Lovers of the Bro∣therhood, Lovers of one another: Associated in Truth. Companions together in the Truth, being kind and gentle towards each other, despising none. When it is in your power to do good defer it not,Tobit xii.9. for Charity delivereth from death. Be all of you subject one to another,1 Pet. ii.12. having your Conversation Honest among the Gentiles; That by your good Works, both ye your selves may re∣ceive Praise, and the LORD may not be Blasphemed through you.Rom. ii.24. Titus ii.5. But Woe be to him by whom the Name of
the LORD is Blasphemed. There∣fore teach all Men Sobriety; in which do ye also exercise your selves. XI. I AM greatly afflicted for Valens, who was once a Presbyter among you; that he should so little understand the place that was given to Him in the Church. Wherefore I admonish you that ye abstain from Covetousness; and that ye be Chast, and true of Speech.1 Thess. v.22. Keep your selves from All Evil. For He that in these things cannot govern Himself,Eph. v.5. Coloss. iii.5. How shall he be able to prescribe them to another? If a Man does not keep himself from Covetousness, He shall be polluted with Idolatry, and be judged as if he were a Gentile. But who of you are Ignorant of the Judgment of God?1 Cor. vi.2. Do we not know that the Saints shall judge the World? As Paul teaches. But I have neither per∣ceived nor heard any thing of this Kind in you, among whom the Blessed Paul laboured; and whom he mentions with so much Honour in the beginning of his Epistle.Phil. i. For he
Glories of you in All the Churches who then only knew God; for we did not then know Him. Where∣fore, my Brethren, I am exceedingly sorry both for him and for his Wife; to whom God grant a true Repen∣tance. And be ye also mode∣rate on this occasion; and look not upon such as Enemies, but call them back as Suffering and Erring Mem∣bers, that ye may save your whole Body: For by so doing, ye shall edifie your own selves. XII. FOR I trust that ye are well exercised in the Holy Scrip∣tures, and that nothing is hid from you; But at present this is not grant∣ed unto me: As it is written, Be angry and Sin not;Psal. iv.5. And again, Let not the Sun go down upon your Wrath.Eph. iv.26. Blessed is he that believeth and re∣membreth these things; which also I trust you do. Now the God and Father of our LORD Jesus Christ; and He himself who is our Ever∣lasting High Priest, the Son of God, even Jesus Christ, build you up in Faith and in Truth, and in all Meek∣ness
and Lenity; in Patience and Long-suffering, and Chastity: And grant unto you that you may have your Lot and Portion among his Saints; and that we also may be to∣gether with you, and all that are under the Heavens, who shall be∣lieve in our LORD Jesus Christ, and in his Father who raised him from the Dead. Pray for all the Saints:Gal. i.1. 1 Tim. ii.1, 2. Pray also for Kings, and Powers and Princes. All that are in Authority; and for those who per∣secute you, and hate you, and are the Enemies of the Cross: That your Fruit may be manifest in all things; and that ye may be perfect in Him. Christ. XIII. YE wrote to me, both ye and also Ignatius, that if any one went from hence into Syria, he should bring your Letters with Him; which also I will take care of, as soon as I shall have a convenient opportunity; either by my self, or him whom I shall send upon your Account. The Epistles of Ignatius which He wrote unto Us, together with what others of his have come to our hands, we
have sent to you, according to your order; which are subjoyned to this Epistle: By which ye may be greatly profited; For they treat of Faith and Patience, and of all things that pertain to Edification in Our Lord. the Lord Jesus. XIV. WHAT you know cer∣tainly of Ignatius, and those that are with him, signifie unto us. THESE things have I written unto you by Crescens, whom by this present Epistle I have recommended to you, and do now again commend. For he has had his Conversation without blame among us; And I suppose also with you. Ye will also have regard unto his Sister when she shall come unto you. Be ye safe in the LORD Jesus Christ; And in Grace. Favour with all yours. Amen.
THE Genuine Epistles OF St. IGNATIVS. I. TO THE Ephesians.
THE CONTENTS. After the Salutation: Chap. I. HE thanks them for send∣ing Onesimus their Bi∣shop to Him: Whom he greatly Commends; and expresses his Joy to receive from Him so good a Cha∣racter of them. II. He mentions the rest of their Mem∣bers who were sent with Onesimus to Him: And Exhorts them to Unity by a due Subjection to their Bishop and Presbyters. III. He excuses the Liberty He takes of Admonishing them, and so returns to his Advice to them. IV. Which is still the same; namely, By a due Subjection to their Bishop, to preserve Vnity among themselves. V. The Benefit of which He particu∣larly sets out to them.
VI. That they ought not to Respect their Bishop the less; because he is not forward in exacting it from them: But should rather Honour him the more; which He also Commends them for doing. VII. He warns them against Here∣ticks; bidding them stick to their Master Jesus Christ: Whose Di∣vine and Humane Nature he de∣clares to Them. VIII.IX. He Commends them for their Care to keep themselves from False Teachers; and shews them the Way to God. X. He exhorts them to Prayer; and to behave themselves unblameably to∣wards those that are without. XI.XII. To be careful of their Salva∣tion; To Pray for Himself; whose own worth he much lessens in Compa∣rison of theirs. Especially, XIII.XIV. To be frequent in Publick Devotion: To live in Unity, in Faith, and in Charity. And, XV. To shew forth the Truth of their Profession by their Works. XVI.XVII. To have a Care that the Gospel of Christ be not Corrupted.
XVIII. Vpon which occasion, He treats particularly of the Three great Myste∣ries of Christianity, viz. The Vir∣ginity of Mary: And the Incarna∣tion and Death of Christ: Which he says were hid from the Devil. XIX. How the Birth of Christ was in a most extraordinary Manner re∣veal'd to the World. XX.XXI. Of all which he promises to Write more largely in a second Epi∣stle. And then finally Undertakes for their Salvation; if they continued, as he had exhorted them, to pursue it, by Unity among Themselves, and Piety towards God.
THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIVS TO THE Ephesians. IGNATIUS, who is also called THEOPHORUS, to the Church which is at Ephesus in Asia; most deservedly Happy; being Blessed In. through the Greatness and Fullness See Eph. iii.19 of God the Father, and Prede∣stinated before the World began, that it should be always unto an Enduring and Unchangeable
Glory; being United and Cho∣sen In. through his true Passion, In. ac∣cording to the Will of the Fa∣ther, and Jesus Christ our God; All Health, Joy. Happiness, by Jesus Christ, and In. his Undefiled Grace. I. I HAVE Received. Vid. Epist. Interp. heard of your Name much Beloved in God; which ye have Vid. Coteler. in loc. Comp. Gal. iv.8. very justly attain'd by a Pearson. Vind. Ign. par. 2. Cap. 14. Habit of Righteousness, ac∣cording to the Faith and Love which is in Jesus Christ our Saviour: How that being Imitators. Followers of God, and stirring up your selves by the Blood of Christ, ye have perfectly ac∣complished the Work that was Na∣tural to you. For hearing that I came bound from Syria, for the com∣mon Name and Hope, trusting through your Prayers to sight with Beasts at Rome; that so by Martyrdom. Suffer∣ing I may become indeed the Disci∣ple of Him who gave himself to God,Eph. v.2. an Offering and Sacrifice for us, [ye Hastned to see me.[See the old Lat. Ed. of Bishop Vsher.]] When I understood therefore how great a Multitude
there was among you in the Name of God by Onesimus, who In. if we consider his Charity is beyond all Ex∣pression, but who is according to the Flesh your Bishop: Whom I be∣seech you, by Jesus Christ, to love, and that you would all strive to be like unto Him. And Blessed be God, who has granted unto you, who are so worthy of Him, to Possess. enjoy such an Excellent Bishop. II. FOR what concerns my Fel∣low-Servant Burrhus, and your Blessed in all things. most Blessed Deacon, in things pertaining to God; I intreat you that he may tarry longer, both for yours and your Bishops Honour. And Crocus also worthy both of God and you, whom I have received as the Pattern of your Love, has in all things re∣fresh'd Me, as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ shall also refresh Him; together with Onesimus, and Burrhus, and Euplus, and Fronto, By. in whom I have, as to your Charity, seen all of you. And may I always See Philem. 20. Wis. xxx.2. have Joy of you, if I shall be wor∣thy of it. It is therefore fitting
that In all manner of ways. by all means To Glorifie. you should Glorifie Jesus Christ who hath Glo∣rified you: That by a In one. Uniform Obedience 1 Cor. i.10. ye may be perfectly joyned together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment; and may all speak the same things Concerning the same.: And that being sub∣ject to The. your Bishop, and his Pres∣bytery, ye may be wholly and tho∣roughly Sanctified. III. THESE things I Command you. pre∣scribe to you, not as if I were some body Extraordinary: For tho' I am bound In. for His Name, I am not yet perfect in Christ Jesus. For. But now I begin to learn, and I speak to you as Fellow-Disciples together with Me. For I ought to have been stirred up by you in Faith, in Admonition, in Patience, in Long-suffering. But for∣asmuch as Charity suffers me not to be silent Concerning. towards you, I have first taken upon me to exhort you, that ye would all run together according to the Will of God. For Jesus Christ, our inseparable Life, is the Will, Counsel, Opinion, &c. Mind of the Father; as the Bishops appointed even unto the utmost
Bounds of the Earth, are the Mind of Jesus Christ. IV. Whence. WHEREFORE it will become you to Run together accor∣ding to the Will of your Bishop, as also ye do. For your Worthy to be named. Famous Presbytery, worthy of God, is fitted as exactly to its Bishop, as the Strings are to their Harp. There∣fore in your Concord, and agreeing Charity, Jesus Christ is Sung; and every single Person among you makes up the Chorus: That so being all Consonant in Concord. Love, and taking up the Song of God, ye may with one Voice, and in a perfect Unity sing to the Father by Jesus Christ; to the end that by this means he may both hear you, and perceive by your Works, that ye are indeed the Mem∣bers of his Son. Wherefore it is profitable for you to live in an Un∣blameable Unity, that so ye may always Partake of. have a Fellowship with God. V. FOR if I in this little time have had such a Familiarity with
your Bishop, I mean not a Carnal, but Spiritual Acquaintance with Him; How much more must I think you Happy who are so joyn'd to Him, as the Church is to Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ to the Father; that so all things may agree in the same Unity? Let no Man deceive Him∣self; if a Man be not within the ALTAR, He is Deprived of the BREAD of God. For if the Prayer of One or Two be of such force, as we are told;Matt. xviii.19. How much more Power∣ful shall that of the Bishop and the whole Church be? He therefore that does not come together into the same place with it, is Is already proud and has, &c proud, and has already Judged, or separated. James iv.6. 1 Pet. v.5. condemned himself. For it is written, God resisteth the Proud. Let us take heed therefore, that we do not set our selves against the Bishop, that we may be Subject to God. the Servants of God. VI. And the. THE more any one sees his Bishop silent, the more let him Reverence him. For whomsoever the Master of the House sends unto his own Houshold, we ought in
like manner to receive him, as we would do Him that sent Him. It is therefore evident that we ought to look upon the Bishop, even as we would do upon the Lord Himself. Jesus. And indeed Onesimus himself does greatly commend your good Order in God: That you all live according to the Truth, and that no Heresie dwells among you. For neither do ye hearken to any one More than to. so much, as to Jesus Christ speaking to you in Truth. VII. FOR some there are who Accustom themselves to carry. carry about the name of Christ In wicked de∣ceit. in Deceitfulness, but do many things unworthy of God; whom ye must Avoid. flee, as ye would do so many wild Beasts. For they are ravening Wolves, who Bite. devour secretly: Against whom ye must guard your selves, as Men hardly to be cured. There is one Physician, both Fleshly and Spiritual; Made and not Made; God incarnate; True Life in Death; Both of Mary and of God: First Passible, then Impassible [See Bishop Usher. Vossius in Annot. in loc. p. 273. even Jesus Christ our Lord.]
VIII. WHEREFORE let no Man deceive you; as indeed neither are ye deceived, being wholly the Ser∣vants of God. For inasmuch as there is no Contention nor Strife among you, Which can. to trouble you, Without doubt ye lie. ye must needs live according to Gods Will. Vid. Voss. Annot. in loc. Pearson. Vind. Ign. par. 2. p. 207, 208. My Soul be for yours; and I my self the Expiatory Offering for your Church of Ephesus, so Famous To Ages. throughout the World. They that are of the Flesh cannot do the Works of the Spirit; neither they that are of the Spirit the Works of the Flesh. As neither is Faith the things of Infidelity, nor Infidelity the things of Faith. As he that has Faith, cannot be an Infidel; nor he that is an Infidel have Faith. But even those things which ye do according to the Flesh are Spiritual; forasmuch as ye do all things in Jesus Christ. IX. NEVERTHELESS I have Known. heard of some who have Passed thither. gone to you, having perverse Doctrine: Whom ye did not suffer to sow Vpon. among you; but stopp'd your Ears, that ye might not receive those things that were sown by Them.
As Comp. Eph. ii▪20, 21, 22. 1 Pet. ii.5. being the Stones of the Temple of the Father, prepared for The Building of God the Fa∣ther. his Building; and drawn up on High by the Cross of Christ, By the Engine of the Cross, &c. as by an Engine; using the Holy Ghost as the Rope by which to ascend: Your Faith being your Support, and your Charity the way that leads unto God. Ye are therefore, with all your Com∣panions in the same Journey,Pearson. ib. Part 2. cap. 12. full of God, His Spiritual Temples, full of Christ, full of Holinss: Adorn'd in all things with the Commands of Christ; Through whom also I Tri∣umph, in that I have been thought worthy by These things I write. this present Epistle to converse, and rejoyce together with you, that having regard to the other Life, ye love nothing but God only. X. YE do also Pray without ceasing for all Men: For there is Hope of Repentance in them, that they may attain unto God. Let them therefore at least be instructed by your Works, if they will be no other way. Be ye Mild at their Anger; Humble at their Boasting: To their
Blasphemies, return your Payers; To their Error, your  ye firm. firmness in the Faith: When they are Cruel, be ye Gentle; not endeavouring to imitate their ways. Let us be their Brethren in all Kindness and Mode∣ration, but let us be Followers of the LORD: Why has been more, &c. If any one be more than other either injured, or de∣frauded, or despised; That so no Herb of the Devil may be found in you, but ye may remain in all Holi∣ness and Sobriety In Jesus Christ both Bodily and Spiritually. 1 Cr. vii.34. both of Body and Spirit, in Christ Jesus. XI. THE Last times Remain: or, For  main. are come upon us: Let us therefore be very Reverent, and fear the Long-suffer∣ing of God, that it be not to us unto Condemnation. For let Us either fear the Wrath that is to come, or let us love the Grace I present. that we at present enjoy: That One of the two, Only that we may be found, &c. by the one or other of these we may be found in Christ Jesus, unto true Life. Without him. Besides him, let nothing Beme you. be wor∣thy of you; In. for whom also I bear about these Bonds, those Spiritual Jewels, in which I would to God,
that through your Prayers, I might arise: Of which I intreat you to make me always partaker, that I may be found in the Lot of the Christians of Ephesus, who have al∣ways Assented to. agreed with the Apostles, In. through the Power of Jesus Christ. XII. I KNOW both who I am, and to whom I write: I, a Person condemn'd; Ye, such as have ob∣tain'd Mercy: I, exposed to danger; Ye, confirm'd against Danger. Ye are the Passage of those that are kill'd for God; The Companions of Paul in the Mysteries of the Gospel; the Holy, the Martyr, the deservedly most Happy Paul; at whose Feet may I be found, when I shall have attain'd unto God; who Vid. Cotele in loc. Pears. Vind. Ign. Par. 2 cap. 10. through∣out all his Epistle makes mention of you in Christ Jesus. XIII. LET it be your care there∣fore to come oftner together, to the Praise and Glory of God. For when ye meet often together in the same place, the Powers of the Devil are
destroy'd, and his Destruction. Mischief is dis∣solved by the Concord. Unity of your Faith. And indeed, nothing is better than Peace; by which all War both Of things in Heaven, and of things on Earth. Spi∣ritual and Earthly, is abolish'd. XIV. OF All which nothing is hid from you, if ye have perfect Faith and Charity in Christ Jesus, which are the Beginning and End of Life. For the Beginning is Faith; the End Charity. And these two Being in Vnity. joyned together, are of God: But all other things are the Followers of Piety. No Man professing a true Faith, sinneth; Neither does he who has Charity,Matt xii.33. hate any. The Tree is made manifest by its Fruit; So they who profess themselves to be Chri∣stians, Shall be seen, or made mani∣fest. are known by what they do. For Christianity is not the Work of an outward Profession; but shews it self in the Power of Faith, if a Man be found Faithful unto the End. XV. IT is better for a Man to hold his Peace, and be; than Speaking, not to be. to say, He is a Christian, and not to be.
It is good to teach; If he who ▪ does. if what he says, He does likewise. There is therefore one Master who spake, and it was done; And even those things which he did without speaking, are worthy of the Father. He that possesses the Word of Jesus, is truly able to hear his very Silence, that he may be Perfect; That he ma. and both do according to what he speaks, and be known by those things of which he is silent. There is nothing hid from God, but even our Secrets are nigh unto Him. Let us therefore do all things, as becomes those who have Him. God dwelling in them; that we may be his Temples and He may be our God: As also He is, and will mani∣fest himself before our Faces by those things Out of. for which we justly love Him. XVI. BE not deceived, Brethren: Those that The Corrupts of . 1 Cor. vi 9, 1. corrupt and defile them∣selves with others, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. If therefore they who do this according to the Flesh, 1 Cor x.8 have suffered Death; How much more shall He dye, who by his
wicked Doctrine corrupts the Faith of God, for which Christ was Cru∣cified? Such a one be∣ing become de∣filed. He that is thus defiled, shall depart into unquenchable Fire, and so also shall He that Hears him. hearkens to him. XVII. FOR this cause did the LORD Receive Oynt∣ment. Psal. xliv.8.cxxxii.2. suffer the Oyntment to be poured on his Head; that he might breath the Breath of Immortality un∣to his Church. Be not ye therefore anointed with the evil Savour of the Doctrine of the Prince of this World: Let him not take you Captive from the Life that is set before you. And why are we not all Wise; seeing we have received the Knowledge of God, which is Jesus Christ? Why Are we fool∣ishly destroy'd? do we suffer our selves foolishly to Perish; Not knowing. not considering the Gift which the LORD has truly sent to Us? XVIII. MY Soul be the Surety of all such as trust in the Cross;1 Cor. i.18, 23, 24. which is indeed a Scandal to the Unbelievers, but to us is Salvation and Life Eter∣nal.1 Cor. i.20. Where is the Wise Man? Where is
the Disputer? Where is the Boasting of those who are called Wise? For our God Jesus Christ, was accor∣ding to the Dispensation of God, Carrie conceived in the Womb of Mary, of the Seed of David, by the Holy Ghost: Who was. Was born, and baptized, that through his Passion, he might purifie Water, to the washing away of Sin. XIX. NOW the Virginity of Mary, and her Delivery, was kept in secret from the Prince of this World; as was also the Death of our Lord: Three of the Mysteri  Noise. most notable Myste∣ries of the Gospel, yet done in Silence,  Quietness.  Rom. xvi.2▪ secret by God. How then was our Saviour manifested to the World? A Star shone in Heaven beyond all the other Stars, and its Light was Inexpressible, and its Novelty struck Terror into Mens Minds. All the rest of the Stars, together with the Sun and Moon, were the Chorus to this Star: But that sent out its Light exceedingly above them All. And Men Thee wa  Disorder. began to be troubled to think whence this . new Star came so unlike to  all the
Others. Hence all the Power of Ma∣gick became dissolved; and every Bond of Wickedness was Disappeared. destroy'd; Mens Ignorance was taken away; and the old Kingdom abolished; God himself Being made manifest. appearing in the Form of a Man, for the Renewal of Eternal Life. But the He received Authority, that which was per∣fect from God. Authority which he received was what God had allotted to Him. From thenceforth things were disturbed; forasmuch as he de∣sign'd to abolish Death. XX. BUT if Jesus Christ shall give me Grace through your Prayers, and it be his Will, I purpose in a second Epistle which I will suddenly write unto you to manifest to you more fully the Dispensation of which I have now begun to speak, unto the new Man, which is Jesus Christ; Both in his Faith, and Charity, in his Suffering and in his Resurrection: Especially if the Lord shall Reveal. make known unto Me; that ye all by Name come together in common in one Faith, and in one Jesus Christ, who was of the Race of David according to the Flesh; the Son of Man, and Son
of God; That ye may Obey. Obeying your Bishop and the Presbytery with an intire Mind. Affe∣ction; breaking one and the same Bread, which is the Medicine of Immortality; our Antidote that we should not die, but live for ever in Christ Jesus. XXI. MY Soul be for Yours, and Theirs whom ye have sent, to the Glory of God; even unto Smyrna, from whence also I write to you; Giving Thanks unto the Lord, and loving Polycarp even as I do you. Remember me, as Jesus Christ does remember you. Pray for the Church which is in Syria, from whence I am carried Bound to Rome, being the least of all the Faithful which are there, as I have been thought worthy to be found to the Glory of God. Fare ye well in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ, our common Hope▪ Amen. To the EPHESIANS.
THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIVS TO THE Magnesians.
THE CONTENTS. After the Salutation: He declares, Chap. I. THE Occasion of his Writing to Them and to the other Churches that were about them: And then mentions, II. The Arrival of Damas their Bi∣shop, and of the rest whom They had sent unto Him. III. He exhorts them to all due Reve∣rence and Subjection to their Bi∣shop; notwithstanding Vid. Annot. Coteler. in loc. He was but a Young Man, and had not long been in that Great Office among them. IV. Which also they must do, if they will be Christians indeed. V. That we must all 'ere long Die; and then be for ever either Happy or Miserable.
VI. He exhorts them therefore to live Orderly; and to maintain a Unity among each other. VII. And that especially by a due Sub∣jection to their Bishop and Presbyters. VIII.IX.X. He cautions them against false Opinions: Especially those of Pearson, Vind. Ign. par. 2. cap. 4 Ebion and the Judaizing Chri∣stians. XI. He Apologizes for this Advice; which he gave not to Reprove, but to Fore-warn Them. XII. Whose Faith and Piety he here greatly commends: And XIII. Exhorts them to go on, and in∣crease in Both. XIV. He desires their Prayers both for Himself and his Church at Antioch. XV. And then concludes all with the Salutations of those who were pre∣sent with Him at the Writing of this Epistle.
THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIVS TO THE Magnesians. IGNATIUS who is also called THEOPHORUS; to the Blessed [Vid. Interpr. Lat. Epist. In∣terpol. Church] In. by the Grace of God the Father in Jesus Christ our Saviour: In whom I salute the Church which is at MAG∣NESIA near the MAEAN∣DER; and wish it all Joy, in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ.
I. WHEN I heard of your well-order'd Love and Charity According to. in God, be∣ing full of Joy, I determined forth∣with to speak unto you in the Faith of Jesus Christ. For having Been vouch∣safed a Name carrying a great deal of Divinity in it. been thought worthy to obtain a most Excellent Name; See Bishop Pearson. Vind. Ign. par. 2. cap. 12. p. 146. in the Bonds which I carry about, I Sing, Com∣mend. salute the Churches; wishing in them a Union both of the Body and Spirit of Jesus Christ, our Eternal Life: As also of Faith and Charity, to which nothing is preferred; But especially of Jesus and the Father, in whom Vndergoing, and escaping. if we un∣dergo and escape all the Injuries of the Prince of this present World, we shall enjoy God. II. SEEING then I have been judged worthy to see you, by DAMAS your Worthy of God. most Excellent Bishop; and by your very worthy Presbyters BAS∣SUS and APOLLONIUS, and by my Fellow Servant SOTIO your Deacon; in whom Whom may I enjoy. I rejoyce, forasmuch as He is subject unto his Bishop as to the Grace of God, and to the
Presbytery as to the Law of Jesus Christ; Apud Vet. Lat. Interpr. Glorificato De∣um Patem D. nostri Jesu Christi. I determined to Write unto you. III. WHEREFORE it will become you also not Vid. Voss. Annot. in loc. Pearson Praef. ad Vind. Ignat. to take ad∣vantage of the Youth of your Bishop, but to yield all Reverence to Him according to the Power of God the Father: As also I perceive that your Holy Presbyters do; not considering his Seeming Youth∣ful State. Age, which indeed to appea∣rance is Young; but as becomes those who are Prudent in God, sub∣mitting to Him, or rather not to Him, but to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ the Bishop of us All. It will therefore It is becom∣ing. behove you, Without any Hypocrisie. with all Sincerity to obey your Bishop, in Honour of Him, Who willeth it. whose pleasure it is that ye should do so. Because he that does not do so, de∣ceives not the Bishop whom he sees, but Deludes. affronts him that is Invisible. For whatsoever of this kind is done, it reflects not upon Flesh. Man, but upon God who knows the Secrets of our Hearts.Vid. Epist. In∣terp. ad loc.
IV. IT is therefore fitting, that we should not only be called Chri∣stians, but be so. As some call in∣deed their Governour, Bishop; but yet do all things without Him. But I can never think that such as these have a good Conscience, seeing they are not gather'd together Firmly. thoroughly according to Gods Com∣mandment. V. SEEING then all things have an End, there are these two Together. indifferently set before Us, Death and Life: And every one shall de∣depart unto his proper place. For as there are two sorts of Coins, the one of God, the other of the World, and each of these has its proper Character set. Inscription engraven upon it; So also is it Here: The Unbelievers are of this World, but the Faithful through Charity have the Character of God the Father by Jesus Christ: By whom if we are not readily dis∣posed to Die unto his Passion, His Life is not in Us.
VI. FORASMUCH therefore as I have in the Persons before men∣tioned, seen Your whole Multitude. all of you in Faith and Charity; I exhort you that ye study to do all things in a The Concord of God. Divine Con∣cord: Your Bishop presiding in the place of God; your Presbyters in the place of the Council of the Apo∣stles; And your Deacons most Sweet. dear to Me, being intrusted with the Ministry of Jesus Christ, who was with the Father before all Ages, and appeared in the Was made manifest. Hebr. ix.26. End to us. Wherefore taking up the same Habit of God. Holy Course, see that ye all Reverence one another: And let no one look upon his Neighbour after the Flesh; but do ye all mutually love each other in Jesus Christ. Let there be no∣thing that may be able to make a Division among you; But be ye united to your Bishop and those who Preside over you, to be your Pattern and Direction in the way to Immor∣tality. VII. AS therefore the LORD did nothing without the Father,John x.30.xiv.11, 12.xvii.21, 22. being
united to Him, neither by Himself nor yet by his Apostles; So neither do ye do any thing without your Bishop and Presbyters: Neither en∣deavour to let any thing appear ra∣tional to your selves apart; but be∣ing come together into the same place,Eph. iv.3, 4, 5, 6. have one Common Prayer; One Supplication; One Mind; One Hope; in Charity and in Joy undefiled. There is One Lord Jesus Christ, than whom nothing is Better. Where∣fore Run. come ye all together as unto one Temple of God; as to one Altar, as to one Jesus Christ,John xvi.28. who proceeded from one Father; and exists in One, and is return'd to One. VIII. BE not Deceived with Heterodox. Strange Doctrines; nor with Old Fables which are unprofitable. For if we still continue to live according to the Jewish Law, we do confess our selves not to have received Grace. For even the Most Most Divine. Holy Prophets lived according to Christ Jesus. And for this cause were they persecuted, being inspired by his Grace, Fully to satisfie to convince the Unbelievers and Dis∣obedient
that there is one God who has manifested Himself by Jesus Christ his Son;John i.1▪ who is his Eternal Word, not coming forth from Si∣lence, who in all things pleased Him that sent Him. IX. WHEREFORE if they who were conversant in those antient Things, are nevertheless come to the Newness of Hope; No longer ob∣serving Sabbaths, but living accor∣ding to the Life. Commands of the LORD, in which also our Life is sprung up by Him, and through his Death, whom yet some deny: By which Mystery we have Received. been brought to Believe, and therefore wait that we may be found the Disciples of Jesus Christ, our only Master: How shall we be able to live Without. Different from Him; whose Disciples the very Prophets themselves being, did by the Spirit expect Him as their Ma∣ster. And therefore He whom they justly waited for, being come, raised them up from the Dead.
X. LET us not then be Insen∣sible of his Goodness; for should he Vid. Annot. Voss. in loc. have dealt with us according to our Works, we had not now had a Being. Wherefore being become his Disciples, let us learn to live ac∣cording to the Rules of Christianity: For whosoever is called by any other name More than. besides this, He is not of God. Lay aside therefore the Old, and Sower, and Evil Leaven, and be ye changed into the New Leaven, which is Jesus Christ. Be ye salted in Him, lest any one among you should be Corrupted; for by your smell ye shall be Convicted, Overthrown. Judged. It is Absurd to call your selves by the Name of Jesus Christ, and to Judaize. For the Christian Religion did not Believe. em∣brace the Jewish, but the Jewish the Christian; that so every Tongue that Believed might be gathered to∣gether unto God. XI. THESE things, my Be∣loved, I write unto you; not that I know of any among you that Have your selves so. lye under this Error: But as Lesser than you. one of
the least among you, I am desirous to forewarn you that ye fall not into the Hooks. Snares of Vain Doctrine: But that ye be fully instructed in the Birth, and Suffering, and Resurre∣ction of Jesus Christ, our Hope; which was done in the Time of the Government of Pontius Pilate, and that most truly and Firmly. certainly; and from which God forbid that any among you should be turn'd aside. XII. MAY I therefore have Joy of you in all things, if I shall be worthy of it. For though I am Bound, yet am I not worthy to be compared to one of you that are at Liberty. I know that ye are not puffed up; for ye have Jesus Christ In your selves. in your Hearts. And especially when I commend you, I know that ye are Ashamed, as it is written, The Just Man condemneth himself.Prov. xviii.17. Sept. XIII. STUDY therefore to be confirm'd in the Doctrine of our LORD and of his Apostles; that so whatsoever ye do, ye may prosper both in Body and Spirit; in Faith
and Charity; in the Son, and in the Father, and in the Holy Spirit; in the Beginning, and in the End: To∣gether with your most worthy Bi∣shop, and the Worthily com∣plicated. well-wrought Spiri∣tual Crown of your Presbytery; and your Deacons which are according to God. Be subject to your Bishop, and to one another, as Jesus Christ to the Father according to the Flesh; and the Apostles both to Christ, and to the Father, and to the Holy Ghost; that so ye may There may be a Vnion both Fleshly and Spi∣ritual. Eph. iii.4. be united both in Body and Spirit. XIV. KNOWING you to be full of God, I have the more briefly exhorted you: Be mindful of me in your Prayers, that I may Find, Enjoy. attain unto God. And forget not the Church that is in Syria, from Whence. which I am not worthy to be called. For I stand in need of your Joynt-Prayers in God, and of your Charity, that the Church which is in Syria may be thought worthy to be Bedew'd. Vid. Epist. In∣terp. in loc. nourish'd by your Church.
XV. THE Ephesians from Smyrna salute you, from which place I write unto you; (Being present here to the Glory of God, in like manner as you are,) who have in all things refresh'd me; together with Polycarp the Bi∣shop of the Smyrnaeans. The rest of the Churches, in the Honour of Jesus Christ, salute you. . Farewel, and be ye strengthned in the Concord of God; Possessing. enjoying his Inseparable Spirit, which is Jesus Christ. To the MAGNESIANS.
THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIVS TO THE Trallians.
THE CONTENTS. The Salutation. Chap. I. HE acknowledges the Com∣ing of their Bishop, and his receit of their Charity by Him. II. He commends them for their Orderly Subjection to their Bishop, Priests, and Deacons; and exhorts them to continue in it. III. He inforces the same Exhortation, Commends their Bishop, and excuses his not writing more fully to them of this Matter. IV. Which he does not, least he should seem to take too much upon Him; And be too much exalted in his own Conceit, which would be very Dan∣gerous to Him: Who is afraid even of his Over-great Desire to Suffer, least it should be prejudicial to Him.
V. Another Reason why he did not write more largely to them is, that at present they are not able to bear it. VI. He warns them against Hereticks, who poison the sound Word of Christ: And VII. Exhorts them by Humility of Mind, and Unity with the Church, to guard Themselves against Them. VIII. And this he does, not that he knows of any present need they had of this Advice; but to prevent any Mischief from falling upon them. IX. To which End, he briefly sets before them the true Doctrine concerning Christ. X. And particularly exposes the Error of some, who taught that he seemed only to Die, but did not really Suffer. XI. From these he would have Them flee. XII. He returns again to his Exhor∣tation of them to Unity: And de∣sires their Prayers, of which he was much in need.
XIII. Which also he begs for his Church at Antioch: And having given them the Salutations of Those who were with Him, and once more ex∣horted them to due Submission to their Bishop, &c. He Concludes.
THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIVS TO THE Trallians. IGNATIUS, who is also called THEOPHORUS, to the Beloved To: In. of God the Father of JESUS CHRIST, the Holy Church which is at TRALLES in Asia; Elect, and Worthy of God; Having Peace In. through the Flesh, and Bloud, and Pas∣sion of Jesus Christ our Hope; in the Resurrection which is
Vnto. by him: Which also I salute in the Fullness of the Vid. Interpr. Lat. Epist. In∣terpolat. Aposto∣lical Character; Wishing all Joy and Happiness unto it. I. I HAVE Known. heard of your Blameless and Inseparable Mind. Constant Disposition through Patience, which Which you have not accor∣ding to use, but according to Possession. not only appears in your Outward Conversation, but is habi∣tually rooted and grounded in you: In like manner as Polybius your Bi∣shop has declared unto me; Who came to me to Smyrna, by the Will of God and Jesus Christ, and so re∣joyced together with me Who am Bound. in my Bonds for Jesus Christ, that in effect I saw your whole Multitude. Church in Him. Having therefore received the Your Benevo∣lence. Te∣stimony of your Good Will towards me According to God. for Gods sake, by Him; Vid. Vossium in loc. 1 seem'd. I re∣joyced to find you, as also I knew that ye were, the Imitators. Followers of God. II. FOR When. whereas ye are sub∣ject to your Bishop as to Jesus Christ, ye appear to me to live not after the
manner of Men, but according to Jesus Christ, who died for us, that so believing in his Death, we might Flee from. escape Death. It is therefore ne∣cessary, that as ye do, so without your Bishop, you should do nothing: Also be ye subject to your Presby∣ters, as to the Apostles of Jesus Christ our Hope, in whom if we walk, we shall be found in Him. The Deacons also,Vid. Vossium in loc. being the Mini∣sters of the Mysteries of Jesus Christ, must by all means study to please all. For they are not the Deacons. Ministers of Meat and Drink, but of the Church of God. Wherefore They must avoid all Offences, as they would do Fire. III. IN like manner let all Re∣verence the Deacons as Jesus Christ; and the Bishop as the Father;Vossius in loc. vid. aliter Co∣telerium. and the Presbyters as the Sanhedrim of God, and Colledge of the Apostles. Without these there is no A Church is not called. Church. Concerning all which I am per∣swaded that ye think after the very same manner: For I have received, and even now have with me the Pattern of your Love, in your Bishop.
Whose very Habit of Body is great Instru∣ction. look is Instructive; and whose Mildness Power. Powerful: Whom I am perswaded, the very Atheists themselves cannot but Reve∣rence.Vid. Vossium & Usserium in loc. But because I have a Love towards you, I will not write any more sharply unto you about this Matter, though I very well might, and did once design to have done; least being a Condemn'd Man, I should seem to prescribe to you as an Apostle. IV. I HAVE I understand many things. great Know∣ledge in God; but I Measure. refrain my self, least I should perish in my Boasting. For now I ought the more to fear; and not hearken to those that would puff me up. For they that speak to me, Chasten me. For I indeed Love. desire to suffer, but I cannot tell whether I am worthy so to do. Vid. Annot. Vossii in loc. And this Desire, though to others it does not appear, yet to my self it is for that very rea∣son the more Violent. I have there∣fore need of Mildness. Moderation; by which the Prince of this World may Is. be destroy'd.
V. AM I not able to write to you of Heavenly things? But I fear least I should Harm you, who are yet but Babes in Christ: (Excuse me this Care;) And least perchance being not able to receive them, ye should be choaked with them. For even I my self, although I am in Bonds, yet am not therefore able to understand Heavenly Things: As the Description of the Places of the Angels, and the several Companies of them, under their respective Princes; Things Visible and Invisi∣ble; but in these I am yet a Learner. For many things are wanting to us, that we come not short of God. VI. I EXHORT you there∣fore, or rather not I, but the Love of Jesus Christ; that ye use none but Christian Nourishment; abstain∣ing from Pasture which is of ano∣ther Kind, I mean Heresie. Vid. de hoc loco conje∣cturas Vossii, Cotelerii, & Junil apud Usserium. Comp. Epist. Interpol in loc. Et Voss. Annot. in Epist. ad Phil. p. 281. For they that are Hereticks, confound toge∣ther the Doctrine of Jesus Christ; with their own Poison; whilst they seem worthy of Belief: As Men give a dead∣ly Potion mix'd with Sweet Wine;
which He who is ignorant of, does with the treacherous Pleasure sweetly Drink in his own Death. VII. WHEREFORE guard your selves against such Persons. And that you will do if you are not puffed up; but continue inseparable from Jesus Christ our God, and from your Bishop; and from the Com∣mands of the Apostles. He that is within the Altar is Pure:Vid. Usserii Obs Marg. Comp. Coteler. ib. But he that is without, that is, does any thing without the Bishop, and Pres∣byters, and Deacons, is not Pure in his Conscience. VIII. NOT that I know there is any thing of this Nature among you; But I fore-arm you, as being greatly Beloved by me, fore-seeing the Snares of the Devil. Wherefore putting on Meekness, renew your selves in Faith, which is the Flesh of the LORD; and in Charity, which is the Blood of Jesus Christ. Let no Man have Any thing. any Grudge against his Neighbour. Give no Occasion to the Gentiles; least by means of a
few Foolish Men, the whole Com∣pany that is in God be Evil spoken of. For Woe to that Man,Isaiah Lii.5. through whose Vanity my Name is Blas∣phemed by any. IX. STOP your Ears therefore, as often as any one shall speak Without. con∣trary to Jesus Christ; of the Race of David by the Virgin Mary. Who was truly Born, and did Eat and Drink; Was truly Persecuted under Pontius Pilate; Was truly Crucified and Dead; Both the Things in Hea∣ven, and the Things on Earth, and the Things under the Earth Seeing, or looking on. being Conscious of it. Who was also truly raised from the Dead His Father raising him. by his Father, after the same manner as The Father. he will also raise up us who believe in Him, by Christ Jesus; without whom we have no true Life. X. BUT if as some who are Atheists, that is to say Infidels, pre∣tend, that he only seem'd to Suffer: (They themselves only seeming to exist) why then am I Bound? Why do I desire to fight with Beasts?
Therefore do I die in vain. Nay, but I speak nothing that is False of the Lord. XI. FLEE therefore these Evil Plants. Branches which bring forth deadly Fruit; of which if any one taste, he shall presently Dye. For these are not the Plants of the Father: Seeing if they were, they would appear to be the Branches of the Cross, and their Fruit would be In∣corruptible: By which he invites you through his Passion, who are Members of him. For the Head cannot be without its Members, God having promised a Union, that is Himself. XII. I SALUTE you from Smyrna, together with the Churches of God that are present with Me; who have refresh'd me in all things, both in the Flesh and in the Spirit. My Bonds, which I carry about me for the sake of Christ, (beseeching him that I may attain unto God) exhort you, that you continue in The Concord of you. Concord among your selves, and
in Prayer with one another. For it becomes every one of you, especially the Presbyters, to refresh your Bishop, to the Honour of the Father, of Jesus Christ, and of the Apostles. I beseech you that you hearken to me in Love; that I may not Be a Testi∣mony among you, Writing. by those things which I write, rise up in Witness against you. Pray also for Me; who through the Mercy of God stand in need of your Prayers, that I may be worthy of the Portion which I am about to obtain, that I be not found a Reprobate. XIII. THE Love of those who are at Smyrna and Ephesus salute you. Remember in your Prayers the Church of Syria, from which I am not worthy to be called, being one of the least of Them. it. Fare ye well in Jesus Christ; being subject to your Bishop as to the Command of God; and so likewise to the Presbytery. Love every one his Brother with an Vndivided. unfeigned Heart. Vid. Annot. Vossii in loc. My Soul be your Expiation, not only now, but when I shall have attain'd unto God: For I am yet under
Danger. But the Father is Faith∣ful in Jesus Christ, to fulfil both mine and your Petition: In whom may ye be found Unblameable. To the TRALLIANS.
THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIVS TO THE Romans.
THE CONTENTS. The Salutation. Chap. I. HE testifies his Desire to Come unto Them; and His Hopes of Suffering for Christ, unless they Prevent it. II. Which he Earnestly Intreats them not to do: III. But rather to Pray for Him, that God would Strengthen Him to the Combat unto which He had called Him. IV. He expresses the Great Desire he had to Suffer Martyrdom. V.VI. And the Mighty Advantage it would be to Him so to do. VII.VIII. And therefore again intreats them that they would not do any thing to prevent it. IX. He desires their Prayers for his Church at Antioch; and expresses
the Kindness of the Christians to Him on his Way to Them. X. And then Concludes, with his Re∣commendations of Those who came from Syria with Him, and were gone before to Rome, to their Favourable Acceptance.
THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIVS TO THE Romans. IGNATIUS,Vid. Pearson. Vind. Ignat. Par. 2. ch. 16. p. 214. who is also called THEOPHORUS; to the Church which has obtained Mercy In. from the Majesty of the Most High Father, and his only Be∣gotten Son Jesus Christ; Be∣loved, and Illuminated In. through the Will of Him who Willeth all things which are according to the Love of Jesus Christ our
God; Which also Presides in the Type of the , i. e. The huch of the mans. See . Annot. in . Place of the Region of the Romans; and which I salute in the Name of Jesus Christ, as being United both in Flesh and Spirit to all His Commands, and filled with the Grace of God; All Joy in Jesus Christ our God. I. I HAVE at last Vid. Voss. Annot. in loc. obtained of God, through my Earnest Prayers, to see your Worthy of God. Faces, which I have much desired to do. For being Bound in Christ Jesus, I hope e're long to salute you, if it shall be the Pleasure of God to grant me to attain unto the End I hope for. For the Beginning is well-disposed, if I shall but Have Grace. be so Happy, as with∣out Hindrance, to receive My Lot. what is Appointed for me. But I fear your Love, least it do me an Injury. For it is easie for you to do what you please; But it Is. will be hard for me to attain unto God, unless you spare me.
II. BUT I would not that ye should please Men, but God; As. whom also ye do please. For neither shall I ever hereafter have such an Oppor∣tunity Enjoying. of going unto God; Nor will you, if ye shall now be silent, ever be intituled to a better Work. For if you shall be silent From me. in my be∣half, I shall become partaker of God. But if you shall love my Flesh. Body, I shall have my Course again to run. Wherefore a greater Kindness ye cannot do Me, than to suffer me to be Sacrificed unto God, now that the Altar is already Prepared: That Being become a Chorus. when ye shall be gather'd together in Love, ye may Sing. give Thanks to the Father in Christ Jesus; that He has vouchsafed That a Bishop of Syria should be found. to bring a Bishop of Syria unto you, being sent from the East even unto the West. For it is good for me to Set from the World, unto God; that I may Rise again unto Him. III. YE HAVE never envied me in any thing; ye have taught others. I would therefore that ye
That those things also should be firm. should now do those things your selves, which in your Instructions you have Commanded. prescribed to Others. Only Pray for me,Vid. Annot. Usserii in loc. N. 26, 27. that God would give me Strength, that I may not only be called a Chri∣stian, but may also be found one. For if I shall be found a Christian, I may then deservedly be called one: And be thought Faithful, when I shall no longer appear to the World. Nothing is Good, that is seen. For even our God. Lord Jesus Christ, now that he is in the Father, does so much the more Appear. To be a True Christian is not a Work of Perswasion. Opinion; but of Greatness of Mind; especially when he is hated by the World. IV. I WRITE to the Churches, and Vid. Usser. Ann. N. 31. signifie to them All, that I am willing to die for God, unless you Forbid me. hinder me. I beseech you that you Be not. shew not an unseasonable good Will towards me. Suffer me to be Food to the Wild Beasts; By whom I may. by which means I shall go unto God. For I am the Wheat of God; and I shall be Ground by the Teeth of the Wild Beasts, that I may be found
the pure Bread Vid. Lat. Vet. Interpr. Et Annot. Usser. N. 33. of Christ. Rather Flatter. encourage the Beasts, that they may become my Sepulchre; and may leave nothing of my Body; that being Dead, I may not be troublesome to any. Then shall I be the True Disciple of Jesus Christ, when the World shall not see so much as my Body. Pray therefore unto Christ for me, that by these Instruments I may be made the Sa∣crifice of God. I do not as Peter and Paul, Command you. They were Apostles, I a Condemned Man; They were Free, I am even to this day a Servant: But if I shall Suffer, I shall then become the Free∣man of Jesus Christ and shall rise Free. And now, being in Bonds, I learn, not to desire any thing. V. FROM Syria even unto Rome, I fight with Beasts both by Sea and Land; both Night and Day: Being bound to Ten Leopards, that is to say, to such a Band of Souldiers; Who though treated with all man∣ner of Kindness, are but the Worse for it. But I am the more instructed
by their Injuries;1 Cor. iv.4. Yet am I not there∣fore Justified. May I enjoy the Wild Beasts that are Ready. prepared for me; Which also I wish may Vid. Voss. in loc. Usser. Annot. N. 48. exercise all their Fierceness upon me: And whom for that End I will Usser. Annot. N. 48. encou∣rage, that they may be sure to devour Me, and not serve me as they have done some, whom out of fear they have not touched. But and if they will not do it willing∣ly, I will provoke them to it. Par∣don me in this Matter; I know what is profitable for me.Luke xlv.27. Now I begin to be a Disciple: Nor Vid. Coteler. in loc. Rom. viii.38, 39 shall any thing move me, whether Visible or Invisible, that I may attain to Christ Jesus. Let Fire, and the Cross; let the Companies of Wild Beasts; let Breakings of Bones, and Tearing of Members; let the Vid. Usser. Annot. N. 56. shat∣tering in pieces of the whole Body, and all Ib. N. 57. the Torments of the Devil come upon me; only let That I may enjoy. me enjoy Jesus Christ. VI. ALL the Ends. Compass of the World, and the Kingdoms Of this Age. of it, will profit me nothing: It is better
for me to die for Jesus Christ, than to rule to the utmost Ends of the Earth. Him I seek who died for us: Him I desire, that rose again from the Dead for us. He is the Gain that is laid up for me. Pardon me, my Brethren, ye shall not hinder me from living: Vid. Voss. Correct p. 301. Nor seeing I desire to go to God, may you separate me from Him, for the sake of this World, nor seduce me by any of the By matter. Desires of it. Suffer me to Take: Lay hold on. enter into Pure Light: Where being come, I shall be indeed the Servant of Vid. Annot. Voss. in loc. God. Permit me to imitate the Passion of my God. If any one has Him with∣in Himself, let him consider what I desire; and let him have Compassion on me, as knowing What things constrain me how I am streightned. VII. THE Prince of this World would fain carry me away, and cor∣rupt my Mind: Will. Resolution towards my God. Let none of you Who are pre∣sent. therefore Help Vid. Voss. Annot▪ in loc▪ him: Rather do ye joyn with me, that is, with God. Do not speak with Jesus Christ, and yet Cover the World. Let not any
Envy dwell with you: No not though even I my self when I shall be come unto you, should exhort you to it, yet do not ye hearken to me; but rather believe what I now write to you. For though I am alive at the Writing this, yet my Desire is to Die. My Love is Crucified; And the Cotelerius aliter explicat. Annot. in loc. Usser. N. 79. Fire that is within me does not desire any Water: But being Alive and Voss. in loc. Contr. Cote∣ler. q. v. speaking within me, says, Come to the Father. I take no Pleasure in the Food of Cor∣ruption, nor in the Pleasures of this Life. I desire the Bread of God, which is the Flesh of Jesus Christ, of the Seed of David; and the Drink that I long for is his Blood, which is Uncorruptible Love. VIII. I HAVE no desire to live any longer after the manner of Men; And that shall be. neither shall I, if you consent. Be ye therefore willing, that ye your selves also may be Willed. pleasing to God. I Vid. Annot. Voss. in loc. exhort you By a short Letter. in a few Words, I pray you believe me. Jesus Christ will shew you that I speak truly: My Mouth is without Deceit, and
the Father hath truly spoken In. by it. Pray therefore for me, that I may accomplish what I desire. I have not written to you after the Flesh, but according to the Will of God. If I shall Suffer, ye have loved me: But if I shall be rejected, ye have hated me. IX. REMEMBER in your Prayers the Church of Syria, which now enjoys God for its Shepherd instead of me: Vid. Vet. In∣terpr. Lat. Let Jesus Christ only Oversee it, and your Charity. But I am even ashamed to be reckon'd as one of Them: For neither am I Worthy, being the least among them, and as one Born out of due Season.1 Cor. xv.8. But through Mercy I have obtain'd to be Somebody, if I shall get unto God. My Spirit salutes you; and the Charity of the Churches that have received me in the Name of Jesus Christ, not as a Stranger. For even they that have not accom∣panied me in my Journy According to the Flesh, have yet been ready in every City to re∣ceive me
X. THESE things I write to you from Smyrna, by the most Wor∣thy of the Church of Ephesus. There is now with me, together with many others, Crocus, most Beloved of me. As for those which Vid. Vet. In∣terpr. Lat. came with Me from Syria, and are gone be∣fore me to Rome, to the Glory of God, I suppose you are not Ignorant of them. Ye shall therefore signifie to them that I draw near, for they are all Worthy both of God and of you: Whom it is fit that you Refresh in all things. This have I written to you, the day before the Ninth of the Calends of September. Be Strong unto the End, in the Patience of Jesus Christ. To the ROMANS.
THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIVS TO THE Philadelphians.
THE CONTENTS. The Salutation. Chap. I. HE begins with a very Great Commendation of their Bishop, whom they had sent unto Him. II. He warns them against Divisions; and to stick close to their Bishop, as the best means to avoid falling into Errors and False Doctrines. III.IV. Which Exhortation he again enforces; and shews them the Danger of following Any Persons, to the making of a Schism in the Church. V. He excuses the length of this Ad∣vice; which proceeded from his Love towards Them: Desires their Prayers; And shews how the Holy Men under the Law, as well as since under the Gospel, were all United in Christ.
VI. Yet this must not prompt them to receive their Doctrine, who would tempt them to Judaize. VII. He declares what his own Conduct had been whilst he was amongst Them. VIII.IX. And exhorts them, after his Example, to maintain a Pure Do∣ctrine, in Unity with one Another. X. He accounts to them how he had heard that the Persecution was stopp'd in his Church at Antioch: And directs them to send some Mes∣senger thither, to Congratulate with Them thereupon. XI. He tells them what Persons were still with Him; and thanks them for the kind Entertainment they gave to some of Them: And so con∣cludes with the common Salutation of those who were present at his Writing of this Epistle to Them.
THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIVS TO THE Philadelphians. IGNATIUS, who is also called THEOPHORUS, to the Church of God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ which is at PHILADELPHIA in Asia; which has obtained Mercy, being fix'd in the Concord of God, and rejoycing Inseperably. evermore in the Passion of our Lord, and being fulfilled in all Mercy through
his Resurrection: Which also I salute in the Bloud of Jesus Christ, Vid. Vet. In∣terp. Lat. who is our Eternal and undefiled Joy; Especially if they are at Unity with the Bishop and Presbyters who are with Him, and the Deacons appointed In. according to the Mind of Jesus Christ; whom he has setled according to his own Will in all Firmness by His Holy Spirit. I. WHICH Bishop I know obtain'd Ministry be∣longing to the Publick. that Great Ministry among you, not of Himself, neither by Men, nor out of Vain Glory; but in the Love of God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ: Whose Mildness Has struck me with Wonder. I admire, who by his silence is able to do more, than Those that speak Vain things. others with all their Vain Talk. For he is fitted to the Commands, as the Harp to its Strings. Wherefore my Soul esteems his Mind towards God most Happy, knowing it to be Fruitful in all
Vertue, and perfect; full of Con∣stancy; free from Passion, In. and ac∣cording to all the Moderation of the Living God. II. WHEREFORE as be∣comes the Children both of the Light and of Truth; flee Divisions and False Doctrines: But where your Shepherd is, there do ye, as Sheep, follow after. For there are many Wolves Vid. Voss. An∣not. in loc. who seem worthy of Belief, that with a Evil. false Pleasure lead Captive those that run in the Course of God: But in your Concord, They shall find no place. III. ABSTAIN therefore from those Evil Herbs which Jesus Christ does not dress; because such are not the Plantation of the Father. Not that I have found any Division among you, but rather all manner of Purity. For as many as are of Jesus Christ, are also with their Bishop. And as many as shall with Repen∣tance return into the Unity of the Church, even these shall also be the Servants of God, that they may
live according to Jesus Christ. Be not deceived, Brethren: If any one follows him that makes a Schism in the Church, he shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. If any one walks after any other's Opinion, he agrees not with the Passion of Christ. IV. WHEREFORE let it be your Endeavour to partake All of the same Holy Eucharist. For there is but one Flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ; And One Cup, unto the Unity of his Bloud; One Altar; As also there is One Bishop, together with his Presbytery, and the Dea∣cons my Fellow-Servants: That so whatsoever ye do, ye may do it ac∣cording to the Will of God. V. MY Brethren, the Love I have towards you makes me the Very much Poured out. more large; and having a great Joy in you, I endeavour to secure you against Danger: Or rather not I, but Jesus Christ, in whom being Bound I the more fear, as being yet only Vid. Voss. in loc. on the way to Suffering. But your Prayer to God shall make me
Perfect, that I may attain to that Portion, which by God's Mercy is allotted to me: Fleeing to the Gospel as to the Flesh of Christ; and to the Apostles as to the Great Presbytery of the Church. Let us also love the Prophets, for as much as they also have by their Doctrine led us to the Gospel, and to Hope in Vid. Voss. in loc. Christ, and to expect Him. In whom also Be∣lieving they were saved; in the Unity of Jesus Christ, being Holy Men, Worthy to be loved, and had in Wonder; who have received Te∣stimony from Jesus Christ, and are reckon'd in the Gospel of our Com∣mon Hope. VI. BUT if any one shall preach the Jewish Law unto you, hearken not unto Him: For it is better to receive the Doctrine of Christ from one that has been Circumcised, than Judaism from One that has not. But if either the One or Other do not speak con∣cerning Christ Jesus; they seem to me to be but as Monuments and Se∣pulchres of the Dead, upon which are written only the Names of Men.
Flee therefore the wicked Arts and Snares of the Prince of this World; lest at any time being Oppressed by his Opinion: Council. Cunning, ye grow cold in your Charity. But come All-together in∣to the same Place, with an undivided Heart. And, I Bless my God that I have a good Conscience towards you, and that no One among you has whereof to boast either Openly or Privately, that I have been Bur∣thensome to Him in much or little. And I beseech All among whom I have conversed, that they make not use of that for a Testimony of it. VII. FOR although some would have deceived me according to the Flesh; yet the Spirit, being from God, is not deceived: For it knows both whence it comes, and whither it goes, and reproves the Secrets of the Heart. I cried whilst I was among you; I spake with a loud Voice; Attend to the Bishop, and to the Presbytery, and to the Deacons. Now some supposed that I spake this as foreseeing the Division Of some. that should come among you. But He is
my Witness for whose sake I am in Bonds that I knew nothing from any Flesh. Man. But the Spirit spake, saying on this wise; Do nothing without the Bishop: Keep your Flesh. Bodies as the Temples of God: Love Unity: Flee Divisions: Be the Followers of Christ, as he was of his Father. VIII. I THEREFORE did as became me, as a Man composed to Unity. For where there is Divi∣sion, and Wrath, God dwelleth not. But the Lord forgives all that Re∣pent, if they Repent. Return to the Unity of God, and to the Council of the Bishop. For I trust in the Grace of Jesus Christ Who will loose from you. that he will free you from every Bond. Nevertheless I ex∣hort you that you do nothing out of Strife, but according to the Instru∣ction of Christ. Because I have heard of some who say; Unless I find it written in some other Vid. Voss. An∣not. in loc. antient Mo∣numents, I will not believe the Go∣spel. And when I answer'd them, It is Written: They replied, That it does not appear. But to me Jesus Christ is instead of all the Antient
Monuments in the World: Together with those Vntouch'd. undefiled Monuments, His Cross, and Death, and Resur∣rection, and the Faith which is by Him: By which I desire, through your Prayers, to be Justified. IX. THE Priests indeed are Good: But much better is the High Priest to whom the Holy of Holies has been committed; and who alone has been intrusted with the Secrets of God. He is the Door of the Fa∣ther; by which Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets enter in; as well as the Apostles and the Church. And all these things tend to the Unity which is of God. How∣beit the Gospel has somewhat in it far above all other Dispensations; Namely, the Appearance of our Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, his Passion and Resurrection. For the Beloved Pro∣phets refer'd to Him: But the Gospel is the Perfection of Incorruption. All therefore together are Good, if ye believe with Charity.
X. NOW as concerning the Church of Antioch which is in Syria, seeing I am told that through your Prayers, and the Bowels which ye have towards it in Jesus Christ, it is in Peace; it will become you, as the Church of God, to ordain some Messenger or Minister. Dea∣con to go to them thither as the Em∣bassador of God; that He may re∣joyce with Them when they meet together, and Glorifie Gods Name. Blessed be that Man in Jesus Christ, who shall be found worthy of such a Ministry; and ye your selves also shall be Glorified. Now if ye be willing, it is not Impossible for you to do this for the sake of God; as also the other Neighbouring Churches have sent them some Bishops, some Priests and Deacons. XI. AS concerning Philo the Dea∣con of Cilicia, a most worthy Vossius. a Mar∣tyr, or Confessor. Vid. Annot. in loe. Man, He still Ministers unto me in the Word of God; together with Rheus Vid. Vossius Annot. in Ep. ad Smyrn. p. 261. of Agathopolis a singular good Per∣son, who has follow'd me even from Syria, not regarding his Life:
These also bear witness unto you. And I my self give Thanks to God for you, that ye received them, as the Lord shall receive you. But for those that dishonour'd them, may they be forgiven through the Grace of Jesus Christ. The Charity of the Brethren that are at Troas salutes you: From whence also I now write by Burrhus who was sent together with me by those of Ephesus and Smyrna, for respect sake. May Our Lord Jesus Christ Honour them; in whom they Hope, both in Flesh, and Soul, and Spirit; in Faith, in Love, in Unity. Farewel in Christ Jesus our Common Hope.
THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIVS TO THE Smyrneans.
THE CONTENTS. The Salutation. Chap. I. HE declares the Joy he had to hear of their Firmness in the Gospel: The Sub∣stance of which, as to what con∣cerns the Person of Christ, he briefly repeats to Them. II. And this against such as pretended, that Christ suffer'd only in Shew, and not Really. Against these, III. He assures them, that he knew Christ was a True Man, even after his Resurrection; And did give ma∣nifest Proofs to his Disciples of his Being such. IV. He Exhorts them therefore, to have nothing to do with those Here∣ticks whom he here Opposes: Nor believe that He would Suffer so
so much for the Faith of Christ, unless he were very sure of the Truth of it. V. He shews them, farther, the Dan∣ger of the Doctrine before menti∣oned: And how they who held it did, in Effect, Deny Christ. VI. How Dangerous this is? And how different those who maintain this Doctrine are, in All other re∣spects from the Church of Christ? VII. That it will therefore become them, to Guard themselves against such Persons. VIII. To this end; He Exhorts them to follow their Bishop and Pastors: But especially their Bishop. IX. He thanks them for their Kindness to Himself: X. And to those that were with Him; which God will reward. XI. He acquaints them with the Cea∣sing of the Persecution at Antioch: And exhorts them to send a Messen∣ger unto them, to congratulate with them on this Occasion.
XII. He concludes with his own Salu∣tation, and the Remembrances of those that were with Him, to them all in General, and to several in Particular.
THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIVS TO THE Smyrneans. IGNATIUS, who is also called THEOPHORUS, to the Church of God the Father, and of the Beloved Jesus Christ; which God hath Comp. 1 Cor. vii.25. Blessed with every Good Gift; being filled with Faith and Charity, so that it is wanting in no Gift: To the most Worthy of God and Fruitful in Saints, the Church
which is at SMYRNA in Asia; All Joy, through his Im∣maculate Spirit, and through the Word of God. I. I GLORIFIE God, even Jesus Christ, who has thus filled you with all Wisdom. For I have understood how that you are settled in an Immoveable Faith, as if you were Nailed to the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ both in the Flesh and in the Spirit; and are confirm'd in Love through the Bloud of Christ; being fully perswaded of those things which relate Vnto the Lord. unto our LORD: Who truly was of the Race of David according to the Flesh, but the Son of God accor∣ding to the Will and Power of God: Truly Born of the Virgin, and Bap∣tized of John; that so all Righteous∣ness might be fulfilled by him.Mat. iii.15. He was also truly Crucified by Pontius Pi∣late, and Herod the Tetrarch, for us in the Flesh; by the Fruits of which we are saved, even by his most Bles∣sed Passion, that he might set Vid. Voss. Annot. in loc. up a
sure Token and Earnest of Hope, for all following Ages through his Resur∣rection, to all his Holy and Faithful Servants, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, in one Body of his Church. II. NOW all these things he suf∣fer'd for us, that we might be saved. And he suffer'd truly, as He also truly Raised up himself: And not as some Unbelievers say, that he only seemed to suffer, they themselves only seem∣ing to be. And as they Believe so shall it happen unto them; when they shall become Incorpreal and . Spiritual and In∣corporeal. III. BUT I know that even after his Resurrection he was in the Flesh; and I believe that he was so. And when he came to those who were with Peter, he said unto them, Take,Luke xxiv.39 John xx.27. Handle me and see that I am not an In∣corporeal Daemon. And straightway they felt Him and Believed; being convinced both by his Flesh and Spirit. For this cause they despised Death, and were found to be above
Death. it. But after his Resurrection he did Eat and Drink with them, as he was Flesh; although as to his Spirit he was united to the Father. IV. NOW these things, Beloved, I Admonish. put you in mind of, not questi∣oning but that you your selves also Have so. believe that they are so. But I arm you before-hand against certain Beasts in the shape of Men; whom you must not only not receive, but if it be possible must not meet with. Only you must pray for them, that if it be the Will of God they may repent; which yet will be very hard. But of this our Lord Jesus Christ has the Power, who is our true Life. For if all these things were done only in shew by our LORD, then do I also only seem to be Bound: And why have I given up my self to Death, to the Fire, to the Sword, to Wild Beasts? But now the nearer I am to the Sword, the nearer am I to God: What is between me and the Beasts, is between me and God. Only in the Name of Jesus Christ, who was a Perfect Man, and by his
Assistance, am I ready to suffer All things together with Him. V. WHOM some, not knowing, do deny; or rather have been denied by him, being the Advocates of Death, rather than of the Truth. Whom neither the Prophecies, nor the Law of Moses have perswaded; nor the Gospel it self even to this day, nor all our Sufferings. For they think also the same things of us. For what does a Man profit me, if he shall Praise me, and Blaspheme my LORD; not confessing that he Had true Flesh. was truly made Man? Now he that says this, does in effect deny him, and is in Death. But for the Names of such as do this, they being Unbelievers, I thought it not fitting to write them unto you. Nay, God forbid that I should make any men∣tion of them, till they shall repent to a true Belief of Christ's Passion, which is our Resurrection. VI. LET no Man deceive him∣self; Both the things which are in Heaven, and the Glory of Angels,
and Principalities, whether Visible or Invisible, if they believe not in the Bloud of Christ, It is. it shall be to them to Condemnation. He that is able to receive this,Matt. xix.12. Let him receive it. Let no Man's Vid. Epist. Interp. Place or State in the World puff him up: That which is worth All is Faith and Charity, to which nothing is to be preferred. But then consider those who defend a different Opinion from us, as to what concerns the Grace of God which is come unto us, how contrary they are to the Mind of God? They have no regard to Charity; No Care of the Widow, the Fatherless, and the Oppressed; Of the Bound or Free, of the Hungry or Thirsty. VII. THEY abstain from Vid. Annot. Coteler. in loc. the Publick Offices and from the Holy Eucharist; because they confess The Eucharist. it not to be the Flesh of our Saviour Jesus Christ, which suffered for our Sins, and which the Father, of his Goodness, raised again from the Dead. And for this cause contradicting the Gift of God, they die in their Dis∣putes: Vid Coteler. Annot. But much better would it
be for them to love it, that they might one day rise through it. It will therefore become you to abstain from such Persons; and not to speak with them neither in Private, nor in Publick. But to hearken to the Pro∣phets, and especially to the Gospel, in which both Christ's Passion is ma∣nifested unto us, and his Resur∣rection perfectly declared. But flee all Divisions, as the beginning of Evils. VIII. FOLLOW your Bishop, as Jesus Christ, the Father: And the Presbytery, as the Apostles. As for the Deacons, reverence them as the Command of God. Let no Man do any thing of what belongs to the Church without the Bishop. Let that Eucharist be look'd upon as Firm and Just, which is either offer'd by the Bishop, or by Him to whom the Bishop has given his Consent. Wheresoever the Bishop shall appear, there let the The Multitude People also be: As where Jesus Christ is, there is the Catholick Church. It is not lawful without the Bishop, neither to Baptise,
nor Make a Love-Feast. to celebrate the Holy Commu∣nion: But whatsoever he shall ap∣prove of, that is also pleasing unto God; that so whatever is done, may be secure and well done. IX. FOR what remains, it is very reasonable that we should Return to a sound Mind. re∣pent, whilst there is yet time to re∣turn unto God. It is a good thing to have a due regard both to God and to the Bishop: He that Honours the Bishop, shall be Honoured of God. But he that does any thing without his Knowledge, Does worship. Ministers unto the Devil. Let all things there∣fore abound to you in Charity; see∣ing ye are Worthy. Ye have re∣fresh'd me in all things; so shall Jesus Christ you. Ye have loved me both when I was present with you, and now being absent, ye cease not to do so. May God be your Re∣ward, for whom whilst ye undergo all things ye shall attain unto Him. X. YE HAVE done well in that ye have received Philo, and Rheus, and Vid. Voss. Annot. in loc. Agathopus, as the
Deacons of Christ our Lord: Who also give Thanks unto the Lord for you, forasmuch as ye have refreshed them in all Ways. things. Vid. Epist. Interpol. Nor shall any thing that you have done, be lost to you. My Spirit. Soul be for yours, and my Bonds which ye have not despised, nor been ashamed of. Wherefore neither shall Jesus Christ, our perfect Faith, be ashamed of you. XI. YOUR Prayer is come to the Church of Antioch which is in Syria. From whence being sent bound with Chains becoming God, I salute the * Churches; being not worthy to be called from thence, as being the least among them. Never∣theless by the Will of God I have been thought worthy of this Honour; not for that I think I have deserved it, but by the Grace of God: Which I wish may be perfect to the End, that through your Prayers I may attain unto God. And therefore that your Work may be fully accomplish'd both upon Earth and in Heaven; it will be fitting Vid. Voss. An∣not. in loc. that your Church appoint some One to the Honour of
God, who being come as far as Syria, may rejoyce together with them that they are in Peace; and that they are again restored to their former Great∣ness, and have again received their proper Body. Wherefore I should think it a worthy Action to send some one from you with an Epistle, to congratulate with them their Peace in God; and that through your Prayers, they have now gotten to their Harbor. For in as much as ye are perfect your selves, you ought to think those things that are perfect. For when you are desirous to do well, God is ready to do well to you. XII. THE Love of the Brethren that are at Troas salutes you; from whence I write to you by Burrhus whom ye sent with me, together with the Ephesians your Brethren; and who has in all things refresh'd me. And I would to God that all would imitate Him, as being an Ex∣emplar of the Ministry of God. May his Grace fully reward Him. I salute your very worthy Bishop, and your Venerable Presbytery; and your
Deacons, my Fellow-Servants; and all of you in General, and every one in particular, in the Name of Jesus Christ, and in his Flesh and Blood; in his Passion and Resurrection both Fleshly and Spiritually; and in Vid. Voss. An∣not. in loc. the Unity of God with you. Grace be with you, and Mercy, and Peace, and Patience, for Ever-more. XIII. I SALUTE the Families of my Brethren, with their Wives and Children; and the See for the reason of this Name. Voss. An∣not. in loc. Add. Coteler. ib. Virgins that are called Widows. Be strong in the Power of the Holy Ghost. Philo, who is present with me salutes you. I salute the House of Tavias, and pray that it may be strengthned in Faith and Charity, both of Flesh and Spirit. I salute Alcé my Well-beloved, See Voss. An∣not. ex Epist. Interpol. together with the very Excellent Daphnus, and Eutychus, and all by Name. Farewel in the Grace of God. To the SMYRNAEANS from TROAS.
THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIVS TO St. Polycarp.
THE CONTENTS. The Salutation. Chap. I. HE Blesses God for the Firm Establishment of Polycarp in all Piety: And gives him many particular Directions for his Improvement in it. II. But especially with Relation to the Church, over which he was Bishop. III. IV. He continues his Advice to Him: And V. Then teaches Him, what Advice he should give to Others. VI. In which He continues; and espe∣cially inforces Unity among Them∣selves, and Subjection to their Bishop. VII He accounts to Polycarp the Peace of His Church in Syria; And directs Him to appoint some Messenger to
go to Antioch; to rejoyce with them on that Occasion. VIII. He desires Polycarp to write to the same Effect to the Neighbouring Churches; which He had not Him∣self time to do. And then concludes all with his Sa∣lutation both to Polycarp, and to several of the Church of Smyr∣na, by Name.
THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIVS TO St. Polycarp, IGNATIUS who is also called THEOPHORUS, to Poly∣carp Bishop of the Church which is at Smyrna; Their Over∣seer, but rather himself Over∣look'd by God the Father, and the LORD Jesus Christ; All Happiness. I. HAVING known that thy Will towards God, is fix'd as it were upon an im∣moveable Rock; I exceedingly give
Thanks, that I have been thought worthy to behold thy Innocent. Blessed Face, in which may I always rejoyce in God. Wherefore I beseech thee by the Grace of God with which thou art cloathed, to press forward in thy Course, and to exhort all others that they may be saved. Maintain thy Place, with all care Vid. 1 Cor. vii.34. both of Flesh and Spirit: Make it thy Endeavour to preserve Unity in thy Church, than which nothing is better. Bear with all Men, even as the Lord with thee. Support all in Love, as also thou dost. Be at leisure to, &c. Pray without Ceasing: Ask more Understanding than what thou al∣ready hast. Be Watchful, having thy Spirit always awake. Speak to every one Vid. Voss. in loc. aliter Vet. Lat. Interpr. according as God shall enable Thee. Bear the The Diseases. Infirmities of all, as a perfect Combatant; Where the Labour is Great, the Gain is so too. II. IF thou shalt love the Good Disciples, what Thank is it? But rather do thou subject to thee those that are infected, in Meekness. Every Wound is not healed with the same
Plaister: If the accessions of the Dis∣ease be vehement, molifie them with Superfusions. soft Remedies; Be in all things, Wise as a Serpent, but Harmless as a Dove.Mat. x.16. For this cause thou art com∣posed of Flesh and Spirit; that thou mayst molifie those things that ap∣pear before thy Face: But as for those that are not seen, pray to God that he would reveal them unto thee, that so thou mayst be wanting in nothing, but may'st abound in every Gift. The Times demand thee, as the Ma∣riner the Winds, and he that is toss'd in a Tempest, the Haven where he would be; that thou may'st attain unto God. Be Sober, as the Com∣batant of God: The Vid. Voss. Annot. in loc. Collat. cum Coteler. ib. Crown pro∣posed to thee is Immortality, and Life Eternal; concerning which thou art fully perswaded. I will be thy Surety in all things, and my Bonds, which thou hast loved. III. LET not those that appear to be faithful, but teach other Do∣ctrines, Amaze Thee. disturb thee. Stand firm and immovable, as an Anvil when it is beaten upon. It is the Part of
a brave Combatant indeed, to be Beaten Wounded, and yet Overcome. And especially we ought to endure all things for Gods sake, that he may bear with us. Be every day More Studi∣ous, Diligent. Better than other: Consider the Times; and expect him, Who is above all Time, Eternal, Invisible, though for our sakes made Visible: Impal∣pible, and impassible, yet for us subjected to Sufferings; endu∣ring all manner of ways for our Salvation. IV. LET not the Widows be neglected: Be thou after God, their Guardian. Let nothing be done but with thy Knowledge and Consent: Neither do thou any thing but ac∣cording to the Will of God, as also thou dost, Being well-setled. with all Constancy. Let your Assemblies be more frequent: Inquire into all by Name. Overlook not the Men and Maid Servants; Neither let them be Puffed up; but rather let them be more Subject, to the Glory of God; that they may obtain from him a better Liberty. Let them not desire to Vid. Annot. Coteler. in loc. be set free
from their present Service, that they be not Slaves to their own Lusts. V. FLEE Evil Or, Trades. Arts: Or ra∣ther, make not any mention of them. Say to my Sisters, that they love the Lord; and be satisfied with their own Husbands, both in the Flesh and Spirit. Note, that in what follows, Ignatius speaks not to Polycarp, but as in his Name to the People. In like manner, Exhort my Brethren in the Name of Jesus Christ, that they Love their Wives, even as the LORD the Church. If any Man can remain in a Virgin State, Vid. Annot. Vossii Coteler. in loc. to the Honour of Christ, let him remain without Boasting: But if he Boast, he is undone. And if he thinks that he knows more than the Bishop; he is ruined. But it be∣comes all such as are Marryed, whe∣ther Men or Women, to come to∣gether with the Consent of the Bi∣shop; that so their Marriage may be according to Godliness, and not in Lust. Let all things be done to the Honour of God. VI. HEARKEN unto the Bishop, that God also may hearken unto you. My Soul be Security for
them that Submit to their Bishop, with their Presbyters and Deacons. And may my Portion be together with theirs in God. Labour with one another; Contend together, run together, suffer together; sleep to∣gether, and rise together; as the Stewards, and Assessors, and Mini∣sters of God. Please him under whom ye War; and from whom ye receive your Wages. Let none of you be found a Deserter; But let your Baptism remain, as your Arms; your Faith, as your Helmet; your Charity, as your Spear; your Pati∣ence, as your whole Armour. Let your Works be your That which is committed to your Custody, to keep secure. Charge, that so you may receive a suitable Re∣ward. Be long-suffering therefore towards each other in Meekness; as God is towards you. Let me have Joy of you in all things. VII. NOW forasmuch as the Church of Antioch in Syria is, as I am told, in Peace through your Prayers; I also have been the more comforted in The Security of God. their Security; if so be that by suffering, I shall attain
unto God; that through your Pray∣er I may be found a faithful Dis∣ciple. It will be very fit, O most worthy Polycarp, to call a Most becom∣ing God. Select Council, and chuse some One whom ye particularly Love, and who is pa∣tient of Labour; that he may be the Messenger of God: And that going unto Syria, he may Glorifie your incessant Love, to the Praise of God. A Christian has not the Power of Himself; but must be always at leisure for God's Service. Now this work, is both Gods and yours; when ye shall have perfected it. For I trust in your fa∣vour, that ye are ready to do all the good Work that is fitting for you in the LORD. Knowing therefore your earnest Affection to the Truth, I have exhorted you by this short Epistle. VIII. BUT forasmuch as I have not been able to Write to all the Churches, because I must suddainly Sail from Troas to Neapolis; for so is the Command of those to whose pleasure I am subject; Do you write to the Churches that are near you, as
being instructed in the Will of God, that they also may do in like manner. Let those that are able send Footmen. Mes∣sengers; and let the rest send their Letters by those who shall be sent by you: That you may be Glorified Vid. Voss. in loc. In the E∣ternal Work. to all Eternity, of which you are wor∣thy. I salute all by Name; parti∣cularly the Wife of Epitropus, with all her House, and Children. I sa∣lute Attalus my Well-beloved. I sa∣lute him, who shall be sent by you into Syria. Let my Grace be ever with him, Ex Vet. In∣terpr. Vid. Voss. in Annot. and with Polycarp who sends him. I wish you all Happiness in our God, Jesus Christ; in whom continue in the Unity, and Protecti∣on of God. I salute Alcé my well-beloved. Farewell in the LORD. To POLYCARP.
THE MARTYRDOM'S OF St. IGNATIUS & St. POLYCARP: Written by Those who were present at their SUFFERING.
A RELATION OF THE Martyrdom OF St. IGNATIVS. I. IT was but a little while after TRAJANS advancement to the Roman Empire; that IGNATI∣US, the Disciple of St. JOHN the Apo∣stle and Evangelist, a Man in all things Apostolical. like unto the Apostles, go∣vern'd the Church of Antioch. Who being scarcely able to mitigate the Storms of many Persecutions, before under Domitian; as a good Gover∣nour, by the Helm of Prayer and Fasting, by the constancy of his
Doctrine, and Spiritual Compare the Cotton MS. Labour, opposed himself to the Flouds of the Adversary; fearing lest he should happen to overthrow any of those who either wanted Courage, or Magis Sim∣plices. In MS. Cotton: Infir∣mum. were not so strong in the Faith, as was necessary at such a time. II. WHEREFORE the Perse∣cution being at present somewhat abated, he rejoiced greatly at the firmness of his Church: Yet doubt∣ed As to himself. within himself, that he had not attain'd to a true love of Christ, nor was come up to the Order. Pitch of a Per∣fect Disciple. For he thought, that the Confession which is made by Martyrdom, would bring him More to a Fa∣miliarity of the Lord. to a yet more close and intimate Union with the LORD. Wherefore conti∣nuing a few years longer with the Church, and after the manner of a Divine Candle. Lamp, illuminating the Every mans Heart. Hearts of the faithful, by the Ex∣position of the Holy Scriptures; He attain'd to what he had so long and earnestly desired.
III. FOR Trajan after the See the Cotton MS. Comp An∣not. Usser. N. 1 Ninth year of his Empire, being lifted up with his Victory over the Scythians and Dacians, and many Many and di∣verse. other Na∣tions; and thinking that the Church of the Christians worshipping the true God, were yet wanting in an entire Obedience to him, unless he com∣pelled them To enter into the Worship of Devils, with all Nations. after the manner of all other People, to embrace the Ser∣vice of Devils: He obliged all such as were the Worshippers. Servants of the true God, with the Threats of Persecu∣tion, either to Sacrifice to the Heathen Deities, or to Die. Wherefore our Manly. Brave Souldier of Christ, being in fear for the Church of Antioch; was voluntarily brought before TRAJAN, who was at that time there, on his Way to Armenia, and the Parthians, against whom he was hastning. IV. BEING come into the presence of the Emperor TRAJAN; the Em∣peror ask'd him, saying: What a Devil: Vid. Pears. Vind. Ign. part 2. cap. 12. wicked Wretch art Thou, thus to hasten to transgress our Commands, and to per∣swade others also to do likewise, to their
Destruction? Ignatius answered; No one ought to call Theophorus Devil. after such a manner: forasmuch as all wicked Spirits are departed far from the Ser∣vants of God. But if because I am a trouble to those Evil-Spirits, you call me wicked, with reference to them, I con∣fess the Charge: For having within me Christ the Heavenly King, I dissolve all the Snares Of those. of the Devil. V. TRAJAN reply'd:] And who is Theophorus? Ignat.] He who has Christ in his Breast. Trajan.] And do not we then seem to thee to have the Gods In our Breast: So MS. Cotton. To have an un∣derstanding of the Gods: Or, The Gods ac∣cording to Vn∣derstanding. So the other of A. B. Usher. Metaphrastes joyns both toge∣ther. Vid. An∣not. Usser n 5. within us, who fight for us against our Enemies? Ignat.] You Err, in that you call the Evil-spirits of the Hea∣thens GODS; For there is but ONE GOD, who made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all that are in Them: and ONE JESUS CHRIST his only Be∣gotten Son; whose favour may I enjoy. VI. TRAJAN] His favour you say who was Crucified undr Pontius Pilate. Ignat.] His who Crucified Sin, with the Inventor of it; and has put all the Vid Gra Metaphr n. 5 Power and Malice of the Devil under
their Feet, who from their Hearts believe in Him. Trajan.] Dost thou then carry Christ within Thee? Ignat.] I do: for it is written, 2 Cor. vi.16▪ I will dwell in them, and walk in them. Then Trajan pronounced this Sentence a∣gainst him; Forasmuch as Ignatius has confess'd, that he carries about with∣in himself Him that was Crucified, we Command that he be carried Bound by Souldiers to the Great Rome, there to be thrown to the Beasts, for the Spectacle. Enter∣tainment of the People. VII. WHEN the Holy Martyr heard this Sentence, he cry'd out with Joy, I thank thee O LORD, that thou hast vouchsafed to Honour me with a perfect love towards Thee; and hast made me to be put in Iron Bonds with thy Apostle Paul Having said this, he with Joy put his Bonds about him: And having pray'd for the Church, and commended it with Tears unto the LORD; He was hurried away, like a Stout Ram, the Leader of a good Flock, by the Bruitish Soldiers, in order to his being carried to Rome, there to be devoured by the Beasts eating raw flesh. Savage Beasts.
VIII. WHEREFORE with much readiness and Joy, out of his desire to Suffer, he left Antioch, and came to Seleucia; from whence he was to Sail towards Rome. And af∣ter a great deal of Toil, being come to Smyrna, he hastned with all possible Gladness to see the Holy Polycarp his Co. Auditor. Fellow-Scholar, who was Bishop there; For they had both of them been formerly the Disciples of St. John. IX. Being brought to him, and communicating with him in Spiri∣tual Gifts, and. but especially rejoycing in his Bonds: He intreated first of all the whole Church (for the Churches and Cities of Asia Honour'd this Holy Man by their Bishops and Priests, and Deacons, all hastning to him, if by any means they might Partake of his Spiritual Blessing. MS. Cotton. Hear his Discourses: Metaphrast. receive some part of his Spiritual Gift:) but more particularly Polycarp, To contend to his purpose. to con∣tend with God in his behalf; that That the more suddainly dis∣appearing to the World. be∣ing the more suddainly taken by the Beasts from the World, he might appear To. before the Face of Christ.
X. FROM Smyrna, he came to Troas: And being carried from thence to Neapolis, he passed by Philippi, through Macedonia on Foot, and came to Epidamnus; where having got a Ship, he Sail'd cross the Adri∣atick Sea, and from thence going higher into the Tyrrhone, and passing by several Islands and Cities, at length he came to Puteoli. Which being shew'd to the Holy Man, he pressed by all means to Land there, being desirous to Walk from thence, after the Example of the Apostle Paul. But a Violent Wind arising,Acts xxviii.13, 14. and The Ship being repell'd from the Forepart, would not per∣mit. driving on the Ship, They would not suffer him so to do: Wherefore wishing all Happiness to the Charity of the Brethren in that place, he sail'd forward. XI. AND the Wind continuing fa∣vourable to us, in one Day and a Night, we indeed were unwillingly hurried on, as sorrowing to think of the Se∣paration from this Holy Martyr: But with reference to him it happened justly, according to his Wish, that he
might go the sooner out of the World, and attain unto the LORD whom he loved. Wherefore sailing into the Roman Port, that the Vain Glory of the World might have an End, the Soldiers began to be of∣fended at our slowness; but the Bishop with great Joy complied with their Hastiness. XII. BEING therefore soon forced away from the Port, we forth∣with met the Brethren; (for the re∣port of what concern'd the Holy Martyr was spread abroad) who were full of Fear and Joy: For they re∣joyced in that God had vouchsafed them the Company of Theophorus; but were afraid, when they consi∣der'd, that such an One was brought thither to die. Now some of these he commanded to hold their peace, who were Hot. the most zealous for his safety, and said; Quietare Ple∣bem ad non expetere per∣dere Justum. THAT the Peo∣ple ought to be appeased, that they should not desire the destruction of the Just. Whom presently knowing by the Spirit, and saluting all of them, he desired them that they would shew a
true Love to him; disputing yet more with them than he had done in his Epistle, and perswading them not to Envy him who was hastning unto the LORD. And so, all the Brethren kneeling down, he pray'd to the Son of God in behalf of the Churches; that he would put a stop to the Per∣secution, and increase the Love of the Brethren towards each other: Which being done, he was with all haste led into the Amphi-Theatre, and there according to the Command of Coesar before given,See another Conjecture of Bishop Vsher: Annot. n. 32. thrown to the Wild Beasts, that so their Boastings might come to an End. For it was then a very solemn day, call'd in the Roman Tongue the xiiith of the Calends of January upon which the People were more than ordinarily wont to be gather'd together. XIII. IN this manner was he de∣liver'd to the Beasts by wicked Men: that so the desire of the Holy Martyr Ignatius might be accomplish'd, which Comp. Graec. Metaphrast. apud Coteler. Prov. x.24. he mention'd before-hand in his Epistle; as it is written, The Desire of the Righteous is Acceptable; name∣ly,
That he might not be Burthen∣some to any of the Brethren, for the gathering together of his Remains; but According to what, praeoccu∣pying in his Epistle, he de∣sires to be made his proper fru∣ition. might be wholly devoured by them. For only the greater and harder of his Holy Bones remain'd; which were carried to Antioch; and there put up in a Case, as an in∣estimable And buried. Vid. Annot. Usser. in Act. Ignat. n. 37. Treasure. XIV. NOW these things were done the Day before the xiiith of the Calends of January; Syria and Synecius being the second time Con∣suls. Of which we our selves were Eye-witnessess with Tears: And be∣ing the whole Night following in Watching, Praying to God with our bended Knees, that he would give us Weak Men some Assurance of what had been before done; it happened, that falling into a slum∣ber, some of us on the suddain saw the Blessed Ignatius standing by us and embracing us▪ Others beheld him as it were sweating, as if he were just come from his great La∣bour; and standing by the LORD with much Assurance, and in un∣speakable Glory.
XV. Which when we saw, being filled with Joy, and glorifying God, the Giver of all good things; and Bratificantes Sanctum, Pro∣nouncing him Blessed. assured of the Blessedness of the Saint; we Having ma∣nifested or made known. thought fit to manifest unto you both the Day and the Time: That being assembled toge∣ther according to the time of his Martyrdom, we may communicate with the Combatant, and most va∣liant Martyr of Christ; Who trod under foot the Devil, and bare down his Snares even unto the end; Glo∣rifying our LORD Jesus Christ in his Venerable and Holy Memory: To whom, and with whom, All Glory and Power be to the Father, with the Blessed Spirit in the Holy Church for ever and ever, Amen.
The Circular EPISTLE OF THE Church of SMYRNA Concerning the Martyrdom OF St. POLYCARP. The Church of God which is at SMYRNA, to the Church of God which is at Philomiia. Vid. Annot. Uss. n. 1. Comp. Vet. lat. Interpr. & Euseb. Hist. Eccles. l.iv. c. PHILA∣DELPHIA; and to all the Other . Assemblies of the Holy Catholick Church, in every Place; Peace, and Love from God the
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, be multiplied. I. WE have written to you, Brethren, both of what concerns the other Mar∣tyrs, but especially the Blessed Poly∣carp, who by his Martyrdom. Sufferings put an end to the Persecution; setting as it were, his Seal to it. For almost all things that went before, were done, that the LORD might shew us from Above, a Martyrdom truly such as became the Gospel. For he ex∣pected to be deliver'd to the Per∣secution; Even as the LORD also do's, that we should become the Fol∣lowers of Him. his Example: Consider∣ing not only what is profitable for our selves, but also for our Neigh∣bours Advantage. For it is the part of a true and perfect Charity, to de∣sire, not only that a Mans self should be saved, but also all the Brethren, together with him. II. THE Martyrdoms. Sufferings then of all the other Martyrs, were Blessed and
Generous; which they underwent according to the Will of God. For so it Vid. Corre. Coteler. & Vlei. in Anno. Euseb. l.iv. . 15. p. 61. becomes us, who are more Religious than others, to refer the Power and Ordering of all things unto Him. And indeed who can chuse but admire the greatness of their Mind, and that admirable Pa∣tience, and Love of their Master; which then appeared in them? Who when they were so flea'd with Whip∣ping, that the frame and structure of their Bodies were laid open to their very inward Veins and Arteries; ne∣vertheless endured it. And when all that beheld them pitied and la∣mented them; yet shew'd so great a Generosity of Mind, that not one of them let so much as a Sigh or a Groan escape them: Shewing to all of us. Plainly shew∣ing, that those Holy Martyrs of Christ, at the very same time that they were thus tormented, were ab∣sent from the Body; Or rather, that the LORD stood by them, and con∣versed with them. Wherefore being supported by the Grace of Christ, they despised all the torments of the World; By the Sufferings of an hour,
redeeming themselves from Everlast∣ing Punishment. For this cause, even the Fire of their Cruel and Barbarous Executioners seemed Cold to them; For they had before their Eyes to escape. whilst they hoped hereby to escape that Fire which is Eternal, and shall never be extinguish'd; And beheld with the Eyes of Faith, those good things which are reserved for them that endure to the End; which neither Ear has heard,1 Cor. ii.9. nor Eye seen, nor have they entred into the Heart of Man. But to them they were now Shewn. reveal∣ed by the LORD; as who were no longer Men, but already become Angels. In like manner, Those who were condemned to the Beasts, being kept a long time in Prison, under∣went many cruel Torments: Being forced to lie upon See Bishop Vsher's Annot. n. 7. Euseb. l. v. c. 15. & n eum Annot. Valesii p. 62. D. sharp Spikes laid under their Bodies; and tormented with divers other sorts of punish∣ments; that so if it were possible, the Tyrant by the length of their Sufferings, might have brought them to Deny Christ. III. FOR indeed, the Devil did invent many things against them:
But thanks be to God, he was not able to prevail over All. For the Brave GERMANICUS strengthen'd Their fearful∣ness. those that fear'd, by his Patience; And fought Gloriously with the Beasts. And when the Proconsul would have perswaded him, telling him, that he should consider his Age, and spare himself; He pull'd the Wild Beast to him, and provoked him, being desirous the more quickly to be deliver'd from a Wicked and Unjust Life of them. World. Upon this, the whole multitude wondring at the Courage of the Holy and Pious Race of Christians; cryed out, Take away those wicked Wretches, let POLYCARP be look'd out. IV. THEN one named QUIN∣TUS a Phrygian, being newly come from thence, seeing the Beasts, was afraid. This was he who forced himself and some others, to present themselves of their own Accord, to the Trial. Him therefore the Pro∣consul perswaded with many Pro∣mises, to Swear and Sacrifice. For which Cause, Brethren, we do not
commend those who offer themselves to Persecution; and especially seeing the Gospel teaches no such thing. V. BUT the most Admirable POLYCARP, when he first heard that he was called for, was not at all con∣cern'd at it; but resolved to tarry in the City. Nevertheless, he was at the last perswaded, at the desire of many, to go out of it. He departed therefore into a little Village, not far distant from the City, and there arried with a few about him; doing nothing Night nor Day, but praying for all Men, and for the Churches which were in all the World, ac∣cording to his usual Custom. And as he was praying, he saw a Vision three days before he was taken; and behold, the Pillow under his Head seem'd to him on Fire. Whereupon, turning to those that were with him, he said Prophetically; I must be. That he should be Burnt alive. VI. NOW when those who were to take him drew near, he departed into another Village; and immedi∣ately
they who sought him, came thither. And when they found him not, they seized upon two young Men that were there; One of which, being tormented, confess'd. For it was impossible the Holy Man should be concealed; forasmuch as they who betray'd him, were his own Domestic's. So the Officer, who is also called Justice of the Peace. Vid. Usser. in loc. num. 14, 15. Vales. in Eu∣seb. p. 63. D▪ Cleronomus, HEROD by name; hastned to bring him into the Lists: That so POLYCARP might receive his proper Portion, being made partaker of Christ; and they that betray'd him, undergo the pu∣nishment of Judas. VII. THE Serjeants therefore and Horsemen taking the young Lad along with them, departed about Supper-time, being Friday; with their Usual Arms, as it were against a Thief or a Robber. And being come to the place where he was, about the Close of the Evening, they found him lying down, in a little upper Room; from whence he could easily have escaped into another place, but he would not, saying, The Will
of the LORD be done. Wherefore when he heard that they were come to the House, he went down, and Discoursed. deliver'd himself unto them. And as they all wonder'd at his Age and Constancy; some of them began to say;Why was all this Diligence. Vid Annot. 20 Usser. in loc. Was there need of all this Care to take such an Old Man? Then pre∣sently he order'd, that the same hour there should be somewhat got ready for them, that they might Eat and Drink their fill: Desiring them with∣all, that they would give him one Hours Liberty the while, to pray Freely. without disturbance. And when they had permitted him, he stood praying, being full of the Grace of God; so that he ceased not for two whole Hours, to the Admiration of all that heard him: Insomuch, that many of the Souldiers began to Re∣pent, that they were come out against so Holy an Old Man. VIII. AS soon as he had done his Prayer, in which he remember'd All Men, whether little or great, Ho∣nourable or Obscure, that had at any time Comp. Euseb. l.iv. c. 15. p. 106. B. Edit. Vales. & Annot. Vales. p. 62. C. been acquainted with him;
and with them the whole Catholick Church, over All the World; the time being come that he was to de∣part, the Guards set him up upon an Ass, and so brought him into the City, being the Day of the Great Sabbath. But Herod the Chief Of∣ficer, with his Father Nicetes, met him in a Chariot. And having taken him up to them, and set him by them, they began to persuade him saying, What harm is there in it, to say, Lord Caesar and sacrifice (with the rest that is usually said on such occasions) and so be safe? But POLYCARP, at first, answered them not: Where∣upon they continuing to urge him, he answered, I shall not do what you would perswade me to. So being out of all Hope of prevailing with him; they began first They spake bitter words. to rail at him; and then with Violence threw him out of the Chariot; insomuch that he hurt his Thigh with Getting out of the Chariot. the fall. But he without being the least moved at it, went on readily with all diligence, as if he had received no harm at all; and so was brought to the Lists, where there was so great a Tumult, that no Body could be heard.
IX. AS he was going into the Lists, there came a Voice from Hea∣ven to him; Be strong, POLYCARP, and quit thy self like a Man. Now no Man saw who it was that spake to him; but for the Voice, several of our Brethren that were present, heard it. And as he was brought in, there was a great disturbance when they heard how that POLY∣CARP was taken. For the rest, be∣ing come near, the Proconsul asked him, Whether he was POLYCARP? Who confessing that He was; He persuaded him to deny the Faith, saying, Reverence thy Old Age, with many other things of the like Na∣ture, as their Custom is; concluding thus, Swear by Caesar's Fortune. Re∣pent, and say; Take away the Wicked. Then POLYCARP, looking with a stern Countenance upon the whole Multitude, that was gathered to∣gether, of wicked Gentiles; and shaking his Hand at them, looked up to Heaven, and groaning, said, Take away the Wicked. But the Pro∣consul, insisting and saying, Swear,
and I will set thee at Liberty; Re∣proach Christ. POLYCARP replied, Eighty and six years have I now served Christ, and he has never done me the least wrong: How then can I Blaspheme my King and my Saviour? X. AND when the Proconsul nevertheless still insisted, saying, Swear by the Genius of Caesar. He answered, Seeing thou art so vainly urgent with me that I should swear, as thou call'st it, by the Genius of Cae∣sar, seeming as if thou didst not know what I am; Hear me freely professing it to thee, that I am a Christian. But if thou farther desirest an account what Christianity is; appoint a day, and thou shalt hear it. The Proconsul replied, Persuade the People. POLYCARP an∣swered, To thee have I offered to give a Reason of my Faith: For so are we taught to pay all Due Honour, such only excepted as would be hurtful to our selves, to the Powers and Authorities which are ordained of God. But for the People, I esteem them not worthy, that I should give any account of my Faith to them.
XI. THE Proconsul continued, and said unto him, I have wild Beasts ready, to those I will cast thee except thou repent. He answered, Call for them, then: For I am not at all dis∣posed to Change my mind. Vid. Va∣les. Annot. in Euseb. p. 63. C. D. repent from Good to Evil. But it is honourable to turn from those things that are Dishonest, to what is Just and Good. The Proconsul ad∣ded; Seeing thou despisest the Wild Beasts, I will cause thee to be devoured by Fire, unless thou shalt repent. POLYCARP answered, Thou threatnest me with Fire which burns for an hour, and so is extinguished; but knowest not the Fire of the Future Judgment; and of that Eternal Punishment, which is reserved for the Vngodly. But why tarriest thou? Bring forth what thou wilt. XII. HAVING said this, and many other things of the like Nature, he was filled with Confidence and Joy, insomuch that his very Coun∣tenance Was filled. shone with Grace: So that he did not only not let it fall As troubled or disturbed. with any confusion at what was spoken to him; but on the contrary, the
Proconsul was struck with Astonish∣ment; and sent his Cryer into the Middle of the Lists, to proclaim three several times; POLYCARP has confessed himself to be a CHRISTIAN. Which being done by the Cryer, the whole Multitude both of the Gen∣tiles and of the Jews which dwelt at Smyrna, being full of Fury, cry'd out with a loud Voice; This is the Doctor of So Eusebius Ruffin. Vet. In∣terpr. Lat. &c. Vid. Usser. Not. 44.Asia; The Father of the Christians, and the Overthrower of Our Gods. He that has taught so many not to sacrifice, nor pay any Worship to the Gods. And saying this, they cryed out, and de∣sired Philip the Who was President of the Spectacles; the Chief Priest for that year. See Usser. Annot. Num. 46. Vales. in Euseb. p. 63▪ 64 Asiarch, that he would let loose a Lion against PO∣LYCARP. But Philip replied, that it was not lawful for him to do so, because that kind of Spectacles was already over. Then it pleased them to cry out with one Consent, that POLYCARP should be burnt alive. For so it was necessary that the Vision should be fulfilled which was made manifest unto him by his Pillow, when seeing it on fire as he was praying, he turned about and said Prophetically to the Faithful that
were with him; I must be burnt alive. XIII. THIS therefore was done with greater speed than it was spoke; The whole Multitude instantly ga∣thering together Wood and Faggots out of the Shops and Baths: The Jews especially, according to their Cu∣stom, with all readiness assisting them in it. When the Fewel was ready POLYCARP laying aside all his upper Garments, and undoing his Girdle, tryed also to pull off his Shoes, which aforetime he was not wont to do; forasmuch as still every one of the Christians that was about him con∣tended who should soonest touch his Flesh. Vid. aliter apud Euseb. l. iv. c. 15. Et n eum Vales. Annot. p. 64. For he was truly adorn'd by his good Conversation with With every thing that was good. all kind of Pity, even before his Mar∣tyrdom. This being done, they pre∣sently put about him such Instruments. Things as were necessary to prepare him for the The Pile that was to burn him, See Vales. in Euseb. p. 4. b. Fire. But when they would have nailed him to the Stake, he said; Let me alone as I am: For he who has given me strength to endure the Fire, will also enable me without your securing
me by Nails to stand without moving in it. XIV. WHEREFORE they did not nail him, but only tied him to it. But he having put his Hands behind him, and being bound as a Ram chosen out of a Great Flock, for an Offering, and prepared to be a Burnt Sacrifice, acceptable unto God: look'd up to Heaven and said; O LORD God Almighty, the Father of thy Well-beloved, and Blessed Son Je∣sus Christ, by whom we have recived the Knowledge of thee; the God of Angels and Powers, and of every Crea∣ture, and especially of the whole Race of Just Men who live in thy presence! I give thee hearty thanks that thou hast vouchafed to bring me to this Day, and to this Hour; that I should have a part in the Number of thy Martyrs, and in the Cup of thy Son Christ, to the Resur∣rection of Eternal Life, both of Soul and Body, in the Incorruption of the Holy Ghost. Among which may I be accepted this Day before thee, as a fat and acceptable Sacrifice; as thou the true God, with whom is no falshood, hast both before ordained, and mani∣fested
unto me, and also hast now ful∣filled it. For this, and for all things else, I praise thee, I bless thee, I glori∣fie thee By Euseb. & Vet. Lat. In∣terpr. with the Eternal, and Heavenly Jesus Christ thy Beloved Son; with whom to Thee and the Holy Ghost, be Glory both now, and to all succeeding Ages, Amen. XV. HE had no sooner pro∣nounced aloud, AMEN, and finish'd his Prayer, but they who were ap∣pointed to be his Executioners, light∣ed the Fire. And when the Flame began to blaze to a very great heighth, Behold a Wonderful Miracle appear'd, to us who had the Happiness to see it; And who were reserved by Heaven, to report to others what had happen'd. For the Flame making a kind of Arch, like the Sail of a Ship against a full Wind, encompassed as in a Circle the Body of the Holy Martyr. Who stood in the Midst of it, not as if his Flesh were burnt, but as Bread that is baked, or as Gold or Silver▪ glowing in the Furnace. Moreover, so sweet a Smell came from it, as if Frankinsense, or some rich Spices had been smoaking there.
XVI. AT length when those wicked Men saw that his Body could not be consumed by the Fire, they commanded the . Vid. Annot. Usser. num. 75. Vales. under∣stands by it one of the Launce-Men that were set to kill the Beasts, if they grew unruly, at these kind of Spectacles, Vid. in Euseb. p. 64. C. Executioner to go near to him and stick his Dagger in him: Which being accordingly done there came forth So Eusebius. so great a Quantity of Blood, as even extin∣guish'd the Fire; and raised an Ad∣miration in all the People, to consi∣der what a difference there was be∣tween the Infidels and the Elect. One of which this great Martyr PO∣LYCARP most certainly was; being in our Times a truly Apostolical and Prophetical Teacher; and Bishop of the Catholick Church which is at Smyrna. For every Word that went out of his Mouth either has been al∣ready fulfill'd, or in its due time will be accomplished. XVII. BUT when the Emulous, and Envious, and Wicked Adversary of the Race of the Just, saw the Greatness of his Martyrdom; and consider'd how irreprehensible his Conversation had been from the be∣ginning;
and how he was now crown'd with the Crown of Immor∣tality, having without all Contro∣versy received his Reward: He took all possible Care that not the least Remainder of his Body should be taken away by us; although many desired to do it, and to be made Par∣takers of his Holy Flesh. And to that end he suggested it to Nicetas the Father of Herod and Brother of Alcé to go to the Governour, and hinder him from giving us his Body to be buried. Least, says he, for∣saking him that was Crucified, they should begin to worship this POLYCARP. And this he said at the Suggestion and In∣stance of the Jews; who also watch'd us, that we should not take any part of him out of the Fire: Not Knowing. con∣sidering, that neither is it possible for us ever to forsake Christ, who suffer'd for the Salvation of all such as shall be saved throughout the whole World, the Righteous, for the Vn∣godly; nor worship any other besides him. For him indeed, as being the Son of God, we do adore: But for the Martyrs, we worthily love them,
as the Disciples and Imitators. Followers of our LORD, and upon the account of their exceeding great Affection to∣wards Own proper. their Master, and their King. Of whom may we also be made Com∣panions, and Fellow-disciples. XVIII. THE Centurion there∣fore seeing the Contention of the Jews, put his Body into the Midst of the Fire, and so consum'd it. Af∣ter which we taking up his Bones more precious than the richest Jewels, and try'd above Gold, disposed of them where it was fitting. Where being gather'd together as we have Opportunity, with Joy and Glad∣ness, the LORD shall grant unto us to celebrate the Anniversary of his Martyrdom, both in Memory of what he suffer'd, and for the Exer∣cise and Preparation of those that may hereafter suffer. XIX. SUCH was the Passion of the Blessed POLYCARP; who tho' he was the Twelfth of those who together with those of Philadelphia suffered Martyrdom, is yet alone chiefly had in Memory of all Men:
Insomuch that he is spoken of, by the very Gentiles themselves in every Place; as having been not only an Eminent Teacher, but also a Glori∣ous Martyr. Whose Martyrdom. Death all de∣sire to imitate, as having been every way conformable to the Gospel of Christ. For having by Patience o∣vercome the unjust Governour, and so received the Crown of Immorta∣lity; he now together with the A∣postles and all other Righteous Men, who have gone before, with great Tri∣umph, glorifies God even the Father; and blesses our LORD the Governor both of our Vid. Coteler. in Marg. & Vet. Lat. Interpr. Souls and Bodies; and Shepherd of the Catholick Church which is over all the Earth. XX. WHEREAS therefore ye desired that we would at large de∣clare to you what was done; we have by this present Epistle given you a summary account of it by our Brother Marcus: Having there∣fore your selves read this Epistle, you may do well to send it for∣ward to the Brethren that are far∣ther off; that they also may glo∣rifie
God who makes such Choice of his own Servants: And is able to bring all of us by his Grace and Help to his Eternal Kingdom, through his only begotten Son Je∣sus Christ; To whom be Glory, and Honour, and Power, and Majesty, for Ever and Ever, Amen. Salute all the Saints; they that are with us salute you: With Evaristus, who wrote this Epistle, and his whole House. XXI. NOW the Suffering of Po∣lycarp was the second Day of the Month Xanthicus; viz. before the viith of the Calends of Rather of April: See An∣not. Usser. n. 105. & Pears. on Chron. Diss. 11. c. 18. n. 4.— May; being the Great Sabbath about viii a Clock. He was taken by Herod, Philip the Trallian, being Asiarch. High-Priest; Sta∣tius Quadratus Proconsul; But our Saviour Christ reigning for ever∣more: To him be Honour, Glory, Majesty, and an Eternal Throne, from Generation to Generation, A∣men. XXII. WE wish you, Brethren, all Happiness; by living according to
the Rule of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: With whom, Glory be to God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, for the Salvation of his Chosen Saints. As the Blessed, &c. Af∣ter whose Example the Blessed PO∣LYCARP suffer'd; at whose Feet may we be found in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.
AN ADVERTISEMENT Relating to the Foregoing EPISTLE THIS Epistle was transcribed by Caius out of the Copy of IRE∣NAEUS the Disciple of POLYCARP;Ad finem Ex∣empl. Usser. p. 30. who also lived and conversed with Ire∣neaeus. And I Socrates transcrib'd it at Corinth, out of the Copy of the said Caius. Grace be with All. After which I Pionius again wrote it from the Copy before mentioned; Having search'd it out by the Revelation of Po∣lycarp, who directed me to it; As also I shall declare in what follows: Having gather'd these Things together, now al∣most corrupted through process of Time; that Jesus Christ our LORD may also gather me togethe with his Elect: To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be Glory for Ever and Ever, Amen.
THE Genuine Remains OF THE Apostolical Fathers. PART II. In which are Comprised 1. The Epistle of St. BARNABAS. 2. The Shepherd of HERMAS. And, 3. The Second Epistle of St. CLEMENT to the CORINTHIANS. LONDON, Printed for R. Sare at Grays-Inn Gate in Holborn, 1693.
THE Catholick Epistle OF St. BARNABAS.
THE CONTENTS. Numb. I. THE Salutation, and Preface to the follow∣ing Epistle. II.III. That God has abolish'd the legal Sacrifices, to introduce the Spiritual Righteousness of the Gospel. IV. The Prophecies of Daniel con∣cerning the Ten Kings; and the Coming of Christ. V, VI. That Christ was to suffer; Proved from the Prophecies con∣cerning him. VII. The Scape-Goat, an Evident Type of This. VIII. The Red-Heifer, another Type of Christ. IX. Of the Circumcision of the Ears: And how in the first Institution of that Ceremony, ABRAHAM Mysti∣cally foretold Christ by Name. X. That the Commands of Moses con∣cerning Clean and Unclean Beasts, &c. were all designed for a Spiritual Signification.
XI, XII. Baptism and the Cross of Christ, foretold in Figures under the Law. XIII. The Promise of God not made to the Jews only, but to the Gentiles also. XIV. And fulfilled to us by Jesus Christ. XV. That the Sabbath of the Jews, was but a Figure of a more Glorious Sabbath to come. XVI. Their Temple, of the Spiritual Temples of God. XVII. The Conclusion of the former Part of this Epistle. XVIII. He goes on to the other Part, that which relates to Practice: Which he divides into Two Considerations; the former, of the Way of Light; the latter, of the Way of Darkness. XIX. Of the Way of Light; being a Summary of what a Christian is to do, that he may be happy for ever. XX. Of the Way of Darkness; that is, what kind of Persons shall be for ever cast out of the Kingdom of God? XXI. The Close of All: Being an Earnest Exhortation to them to live so that they may be Blessed to all E∣ternity.
THE Catholick Epistle OF St. BARNABAS. ALL Happiness to you my Sons and Daughters, in the Name of our LORD Jesus Christ, who loved us in Peace. I. HAVING perceived a large abundance of the Great and Honestarum. Excellent Aequitatum. Righteous∣ness of God to be in you, I exceed∣ingly rejoyced in your Blessed and admirable Spiritibus. Temper, that ye had so worthily received the Grace that was Natural. given to you. For which cause I am full of Joy, hoping to
be shortly set at Liberty; in as much as I truly see a Spirit infused into you, from the Honest. Blessed Foun∣tain of God. Wherefore having this Perswasion, and being fully con∣vinced that since I have begun to speak unto you, I have had a more than ordinary Good Success in the way of Equity of the Lord. Righteousness, which is in Christ; I also, Vid. Annot. Voss. in loc. Brethren, sup∣pose my self to love you above my own Life: See be∣low: Chap. iv. pag. 268. Soul: Because the Greatness of Faith and Charity dwelleth in him, as also the Hope of that Life which is to come. Wherefore consider∣ing this, that if I shall take care to communicate to you a part of what I have received, it shall turn to my Reward, that I have served such as you are in Spiritual Things: I gave diligence to write in a few Words unto you; that together with your Faith, your Knowledge also may be Perfect. There are therefore Three Constitutions of the Lord. Sorts of things to be considered in what relates to the LORD; the Hope of Life; the Be∣ginning, and the Completion of it. For the Lord has both declared un∣to
us, by the Prophets, those things that have been done; and Given us to know. open'd to us the Beginnings of those that were to come. Wherefore, it will behove us, as he has spoken, to come The more ho∣nestly and deep∣ly. with all readiness, and as is fitting to his Altar. I therefore not as a Teacher, but as one of you, will endeavour to lay a few things before you, by which you may In many things. on many accounts become the more Joyful. II. SEEING then the Days are exceeding Evil, and the Adversary has got the Power of this Present Age. World; we ought to give the more diligence to enquire into the Equities. just ways of the LORD. Now the Assistants of our Faith are Fear and Patience;Comp. Graec. Clem. Alex. Our Fellow-Comba∣tants, Long-Suffering and Conti∣nence. Whilst these remain Pure in what relates unto the LORD, Wis∣dom, and Knowledge, and Prudence, and Understanding, rejoyce toge∣ther with them. For God has ma∣nifested to us by all the Prophets, that he has no Occasion for our Sa∣crifices,
or Burnt-Offerings or Ob∣lations;Isaiah i.11. saying: To what purpose is the Multitude of your Sacrifices unto me saith the LORD. I am full of the Burnt Offerings of Rams, and the Fat of fed Beasts; and I delight not in the Bloud of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of He-Goats.— 12. When ye come to appear before me; Who hath required this at your hand to tread my Courts?—13. Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an Abomination unto me: your new Moons and Sabbaths, the Calling of Assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity, even the Solemn Meeting:— 14. Your new Moons and your appointed Feasts, my Soul hateth. These things therefore hath God abolished, that the New Law of our LORD Jesus Christ, which is without the yoak of any such Ne∣cessity, might have an Offering be∣coming Men. For so the Lord saith again to those heretofore;Jer. vii.22. Did I at all command your Fathers when they came out of the Land of Egypt concerning Burnt Offerings or Sacri∣fices?— 23. But this I commanded them, say∣ing, Let none of you imagine Evil in your Hearts against his Neighbour,Zach. viii.17. and
love no False-Oath, Forasmuch then as we are not without Understand∣ing, we ought to apprehend the Design Of the Mercy of our Fathe. of our Merciful Father. For he speaks to us, being willing to seek out us who are in Error, and shew us how we may come to him. And therefore he thus be∣speaks us,Psal. L.19. The Sacrifice of God [is a broken Spirit,] A broken and Contrite Heart God will not despise. Where∣fore, Brethren, we ought the more diligently to enquire after those things that belong to our Salvation, that the Adversary may not have any Entrance into us, and turn us aside from the Way of Life. III. WHEREFORE he again speaketh to them, concerning these things:Isaiah Lviii.4. Ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your Voice to be heard on High. Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? A Day for a Man to afflict his Soul?— 5. Is it to bow down his Head like a Bulrush, and to spread Sackcloath and Ashes under him? Wilt thou call this a Fast and an acceptable Day to the LORD? But to us he saith on
this wise.— 6. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen, to loose the Bands of Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens, and to let the Oppressed go Free; and that ye break every Yoke? Is it not to deal thy Bread to the Hungry,— 7. and that thou bring the Poor that are cast out to thy House? When thou seest the Naked that thou cover him, and that thou hide not not thy self from thine own Flesh?— 8. Then shall thy Light break forth as the Morning, and thy Health shall spring forth speedily; and thy Righteousness shall go before thee, the Glory of the LORD shall be thy Rere-ward. Then shalt thou call and the LORD shall answer;— 9. thou shalt cry and he shall say, Here I am: If thou put away from the midst of thee the Yoke, the putting forth of the Finger,— 10. and speaking Vanity. And if thou draw out thy Soul to the Hungry; and satisfie the afflicted Soul. In this therefore, Brethren, God has mani∣fested his Providence. Fore-knowledge and Mercy to us; because the People which he has purchased to his Be∣loved Son were to believe in Simpliity. Sin∣cerity; and therefore he has shewn
these things to All of us, that we should not run as Proselytes to Their. the Jewish Law. IV. WHEREFORE it is neces∣sary that searching diligently into these Voss. in loc. p. 312. Edit. Oxon. p. 12. b. Et Annot. D. Bernard p. 122. Matters we should write to you what may serve to keep you whole. To which end let us flee from every Evil Work, and hate the Errors of the present Time, that we may be Beloved. Happy in that which is to come. Let us not give our selves the Liberty of disputing with the Wicked and Sinners; least we should chance in time to become like unto them. For the Consummation of Sin is come,Dan. ix. as the Prophet Da∣niel says; And for this End saith the LORD, are the Times and the Days shortned;Mat. xxiv.22. Mal. iii.1. Comp. Ed. Oxon. p. 14. Dan. vii. And the LORD will suddainly come to his Temple. For so the Prophet speaks; There shall Ten Kings reign in the Earth, and there shall rise last of all another, and he shall humble three Kings. And again Daniel speaks in like manner concerning the Kingdoms;— 7. And I saw the fourth Beast dreadful and ter∣rible,
and strong exceedingly; and it had ten Horns.— 8. I considered the Horns, and behold there came up among them another little Horn, before which were three of the first Horns pluckt up by the Roots. We ought therefore to consider these things: And I beseech you, as one of your own Brethren, loving you all beyond my own Life, that you look well to your selves: And be not like to those who Heap up Sins. add Sin to Sin, and say; That their Co∣venant is ours also. Nay, but it is ours only; for they have for ever lost that which Moses received. For thus saith the Scripture;Exod. xxxi, xxxiv. And Mo∣ses continued fasting forty Days and forty Nights in the Mount; and he received the Covenant from the LORD, even Two Tables of Stone written by the Hand of God. But having turn'd themselves to Idols they lost it; as the LORD also said to Moses;Exod. xxxii.7. Moses, Go down quickly, for thy People which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt,Deutr. ix.12. have corrupted themselves, and turn'd aside from the way which I commanded them. And Moses cast the Two Ta∣bles of Stone out of his Hands; and
their Covenant was broken; that the Love of Jesus might be sealed in your Hearts, unto the Hope of his Faith. Wherefore let us give heed unto the last Times. For the time past of our Life, and our Faith will profit us nothing; unless we continue also to hate what is Evil, and to withstand the future Temptations. So the Son of God tells us; Let us resist all Iniquity and hate it. Where∣fore consider the Works of the E∣vil Way. Do not deceive your selves Separately with your own private Thoughts, as if you were already justified; But coming All together in∣to one place, enquire what is agree∣able to, and profitable for the Be∣loved of God. For the Scripture saith;Vid. Gr. Clem. Alex. Isa. v.21. Wo unto them that are Wise in their own Eyes, and Prudent in their own Sight. Let us become Spiritual, a perfect Temple to God. As much as in us lies let us meditate upon the Fear of the God. LORD; and strive to the utmost of our power to keep his Commandments; that we may rejoyce in his Righteous Judgments. For God will judge the World with∣out
respect of Persons; and receive every one according to his Works. If a Man shall be Good, his Righte∣ousness shall go before him: If Wicked, the Reward of his Wicked∣ness shall follow him. Take heed therefore, least sitting still now that we are called, we fall asleep in our Sins; and the Wicked One getting the Dominion over us, raise us up, and shut us out of the Kingdom of the LORD. But especially consider the great Signs and Wonders which ye have seen among the People of the Jews, and how thus the LORD forsook them. Beware therefore, least it happen to us; as it is written, There be many Called,Mat. xii.14. but few Chosen. V. FOR this cause did our LORD vouchsafe to give to up his Body to Destruction, that through the For∣giveness of our Sins we might be sanctified; that is, by the sprinkling of his Bloud. Now for what concerns the things that are written about him, some belong to the People of the Jews, and some to us. For thus saith the Scripture;Isaiah Liii.5, 7. He was wounded
for our Transgressions, He was bruised for our Iniquities, and by his Bloud we are healed. He was led as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a Sheep before his Shearers is dumb, so he opened not his Mouth. Wherefore we ought the more to give thanks unto God, for that he hath both declared unto us what is passed, Vid. Edi Oxon. p. 21. and not suffer'd us to be without Understanding even of those things that are to come. And therefore he saith;Prov. I.17. The Nets are not unjustly spread for the Birds. This he spake, because a Man will justly perish, if having the Knowledge of the Way of Truth, he shall never∣theless not refrain himself from the Way of Darkness. And for this Cause the LORD was content to suf∣fer for our Souls, although he be the LORD of the whole Earth; to whom God said before the Begin∣ning of the World;Gen. I.26. Let us make Man after our own Image and Like∣ness. Now how he suffered for us, seeing it was by Men that he un∣derwent it; Learn▪ I will shew you. The Prophets, having received from him the Gift of Prophecy, spake before
concerning him: But he, that he might abolish Death, and make known the Resurrection from the Dead, was content, as it was neces∣sary, to appear in the Flesh, that he might make good the Promise before given to our Fathers, and pre∣paring himself a New People, might demonstrate to them whilst he was upon Earth, that after the Resur∣rection he would judge the World. And thus teaching the People of Is∣rael, and doing many Wonders and Signs among them, he preached to them, and shewed the exceeding great Love which he bare towards them. And when he chose his Apostles, which were afterwards to publish his Gospel, he took Men who had been very great Sinners; that there∣by he might plainly shew, That he came not to call the Righteous,Mat. ix.13. but Sin∣ners to Repentance. Then he clearly manifested himself to be the Son of God. For had he not come in the Flesh, how could Men have been able to look upon him, that they might be saved? Seeing if we be∣hold only the Sun, which was the
Work of his Hands, and shall here∣after cease to be, we are not able to endure stedfastly to look against the Rays of it. Wherefore the Son of God came in the Flesh for this Cause, that he might fill up the measure of their Iniquity, who have persecuted his Prophts unto Death: And for the same reason also he suffered; Vid. Coteler. in loc. Aliter Vet. Int. Lat. Comp. Ed. Oxon. Isa. Liii.5. Zach. xiii.7. For saith God, By the Stripes of his Flesh we are healed. And again, another Prophet, When I shall smite the Shepherd the Sheep of the Flock shall be scatter'd. Nevertheless, he would suffer in this Manner: Because it be∣hoved him to suffer upon the Cross. For thus one saith, prophecying con∣cerning him;Psal. xxi.20. Deliver my Soul from the Sword. And again, They pierced my Hands and my Feet. And again, The Congregation of wicked Doers rose up against me. And again, he saith,— 17. I gave my Back to the Smiters,Isa. L.6, 7. and my Cheeks to be buffeted,LXX. and my Face I set as an hard Rock. VI. AND when he had fulfilled the Commandment of God, What says he? Who will contend with me?
Let him stand against me: Or who is he that will implead me? Let him draw near to the Servant of the LORD. Wo be to you!Septuag. Inter. Because ye shall all wax old as a Garment, the Moth shall eat you up. And again the Prophet adds: He is put for a Stone of stumbling.Isa. vii.14. Behold I lay in Zion for a Foundation,— xxviii.16. a precious Stone, a choice Corner-Stone; an Honourable Stone. And what fol∣lows? And he that hopeth in him shall live for ever. What then? Is our Hope built upon a Stone? God forbid. But because the LORD hath put his Flesh in strength, he saith this of it. As it is written; I have placed my self as a sure Rock.Isa. L.7. And again the Prophet adds; The Stone which the Builders refused is become the Head of the Corner.Psal. 117.22. And again he saith;— 23. This is the Great and Wonder∣ful Day which the LORD hath made.Clem. Alex. Strom. v. [This is not in the Old Lat. Vers. I write these things the more plainly to you that ye may under∣stand:] Vid. Edit. Oxon. p. 29. a. For indeed I could be con∣tent even to die for your sakes. But what saith the Prophet:Psal. xxi.17. The Coun∣sel of the Wicked encompassed me about. They came about me,—Cxvii.12. as Bees about the
Hive: And;—xxi.19. Vpon my Vesture they cast Lots. Forasmuch then as our Saviour was to appear in the Flesh, and suffer; his Passion was hereby foretold. For thus again saith the Prophet against Israel:Isa. iii.9. Wo be to their Soul, because they have taken Wicked Counsel against themseves, saying; Let us lay Snares for the Righteous, be∣cause he is unprofitable to us. Moses also in like manner speaketh to them: Behold thus saith the LORD God;Exod xxxiii.1. En∣ter ye into the Good Land of which the LORD hath sworn to Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, that he would give it you, and possess it; a Land flowing with Milk and Hony Now what the Spiritual meaning of this is, learn; Vid. Coteler. Annot. Marg. ex Clem. Alex. It is as if it had been said; Put your Trust in Jesus, who shall be mani∣fested to you in the Flesh. For Man is the Earth which suffers: Foras∣much as out of the Substance of the Earth Adam was formed. What therefore do's he mean when he says, Into a Good Land flowing with Milk and Honey? Blessed be our LORD, who has given us Wisdom, and a Heart to understand his Se∣crets.
For so says the Prophet,Isaiah xl.13. Who shall understand the hard Sayings of the LORD?Prov. I.6. Eccl. I.10. But he that is Wise, and Intelligent, and that loves his LORD. Seeing therefore he has renewed us by the Remission of our Sins, he has given us another form, that we should have our Souls Vid. Edit.  Oxon p. 3. b. like the Soul of a Child; Even as he himself has form'd us Vid. Vet. Lat. Interp. by the Spirit. For thus the Scripture saith concerning us, where it introduceth the Father speaking to the Son;Gen. I.26. Comp. Coloss. iii.10. Let us make Man in our Image, after our Likeness: And let him have Dominion over the Beasts of the Earth, and over the Fowls of the Air, and over the Fish of the Sea. And when the LORD saw the Man which he had form'd, that be∣hold he was very Good; He said, Encrease,— 28. and multiply, and replenish the Earth. And this he spake to his Son. I will now shew you, how he made us into a second Form, in the latter Days: As also he saith; Behold I will make the last as the first.Ezek. xxxvi. Mat. xx.16. Wherefore the Prophet thus fore∣told it; Comp. Hebr. iii. Enter into the Land flowing with Milk and Hony, and rule in it.
Wherefore ye see how we are again formed anew; as also he speaks by another Prophet: Behold, saith the LORD, I will take from them,Ezek. xi.19. that is,—xxxvi.26. from those whom the Spirit of the LORD foresaw, their Hearts of Stone, and I will put into them Hearts of Flesh. Because he was a∣bout to be made manifest in the Flesh, and to dwell in us. For, my Brethren, the Habitation of our Heart is a So St. Paul 1 Cor. ii.16, 17 —vi.19. Psal. xli.3. Psal. xxi, 23. Holy Temple unto the LORD. As he again saith; Wherewithal shall I appear before the LORD my God, and be Glorified? He answers, I will confess unto thee in the Congregation in the midst of my Brethren; and will sing unto thee in the Church of the Saints. Wherefore we are they whom he has brought into that good Land. Comp. Hier. in Jer. xxxii.22. Et in Jer. xi.5. Add. 1 Pet. ii.2. But what signifies the Milk and Hony? Because as the Child is nourish'd first with Milk, and then with Hony; So we being kept alive with the Belief of his Promises, and the Word of his Gospel, shall live and have Dominion over the Land. For so he foretold above, saying, Encrease, and Multiply, and have Do∣minion
over the Fishes, &c. But who is there that is now able to have this Dominion over the Wild Beasts, or Fishes, or Fowls of the Air? For you know that to Rule is to have Power, that a Man should be Lord over what he rules. But forasmuch as this we have not now, he tells us when we shall have it: Namely; when he shall become perfect, that so we may be made Inheritors of the Covenant of the LORD. VII. UNDERSTAND then, my Beloved Children, that the Good God hath before manifested all things unto us, that we might know to whom we ought always to give Thanks. If therefore the Son of God, who is the LORD of all, and shall come to judge both the Quick and Dead, hath suffer'd; that by his Stripes we might live: Let us believe that the Son of God could not have suffer'd but for us But, being cru∣cified, they gave him Gall and Vi∣negar to drink. Hear therefore how the Priests of the Temple did fore∣shew this also: See this ap∣plied after the same manner, Hebr. ix. The LORD by his
Command which was written, de∣clar'd that whosoever did not fast the Appointed Fast Levit. xxiii.29. should die the Death: Because he also was one day to of∣fer his Body for our Sins; and so the Type of what was done in Gen. xxv. I∣saac be fulfill'd, who was offer'd up∣on the Altar. What therefore is it that he says by the Prophet? Numb. xxix, &c. Vid. Co∣teler. in Marg. Et Annot. in Loc. Comp. Observ. Edit. Oxon. And let them eat of the Goat which is offer'd in the day of the Fast for all their Sins. Harken diligently, my Bre∣thren, And all the Priests, and they only shall eat the Inwards, not washed, with Vinegar. And why so? Because Vid. Annot. Cotel. in loc. I know that when I shall hereafter offer my Flesh for the Sins of a New People, ye will give me Vinegar to drink mixed with Gall; therefore do ye only eat, the People fasting the while, and lamenting in Sack∣cloath and Ashes. That by this he might fore-shew, that he was to suffer by them. But, hear then, how he appointed it? Levit. xvi. Vid. Maimon. Tract. de Die Exp. Edit. du Veil. pag. 350. Add. Annot. Cotel. & Ed. Oxon. in loc Take, says he, two Goats, fair and alike, and offer them; And let the High Priest take one of them for a Burnt Offering. And what must be done with the
other? Let it be accursed. Consider how exactly this appears to have been a Type of Jesus. Vid. Edit. Oxon. p. 40. a. 41. b. And let all the Congregation spit upon it, and prick it; and put the Scarlet Wool a∣bout its Head: And thus let it be car∣ried forth into the Wilderness. And this being done, he that was appointed to convey the Goat, led it into the Wilderness, Vid. Maim. ibid. pag. 341. Comp. Annot. Edit. Oxon. in loc. and took away the Scarlet Wool, and put it upon a Thorn-Bush, whose Vid. Annot. Isaac Voss. in loc. young Sprouts when we find them in the Field we are wont to eat: So the Fruit of that Thorn only is sweet. And to what end was this Ceremony? Consider; One was offered upon the Altar, the Other was accursed. And why was that which was accursed, crown'd? Because they shall see Christ in that Day having a Scarlet Garment about his Body; and shall say: Is not this he whom hereto∣fore we crucified; having despised him, pierced him, mocked him? Certainly this is he, who then said, that he was the Son of God. As therefore he shall be then like to what he was on Earth, so were
the Jews heretotore commanded, to take two Goats, Fair and Equal. That when they shall see our Saviour here∣after coming in the Clouds of Heaven, they may be amazed at the Like∣ness of the Goats. Wherefore Vid. Lat. Ver. ye here again see a Type of Jesus who was to suffer for us. But what then signifies this, That the Wool was to be put into the midst of the Thorns? This also is a Figure of Jesus, set out to the Church. For as he who would take away the Scarlet Wool must undergo many difficulties, be∣cause that Thorn was very sharp, and with difficulty get it: So they, says Christ, that will see me,See Acts xiv.22. and come to my Kingdom, must through many Afflictions and Trou∣bles attain unto me. VIII. BUT what Type do ye suppose it to have been,Numb. xx. where it is commanded Israel. That this was also a Type of Christ, See Hebr. ix.13. in the Law; that certain Men who had been guilty of many Sins, should offer a Heifer, and kill it and burn it. And the young Men should take up the Ashes and put them in Vessels; and tie
a piece of Scarlet Wool and Hyssop upon a Stick, and so the young Men should sprinkle every one of the People, and they should be clear from their Sins? Consider how all these things are delivered in a Vid. Vet. Lat. Interpr. Fi∣gure to us. This Heifer is Jesus Christ; the Wicked Men that were to offer it, are those Sinners who brought him to Death: Who now are no longer Men; there is no more any Glory of those Sinners re∣maining. The young Men that sprinkled them, signifie to us those who preach the Forgiveness of Sins, and the Purification of the Heart, to whom our LORD gave Authority to Preach his Gospel: Being at the Beginning Twelve, for a witness of the Tribes, because there were Twelve Tribes of Israel. But why were there Three young Men, that were appointed to sprinkle the Sin∣ners? In Testimony of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, that they were Great before God. And why was the Wool put upon a Wood. Stick? Be∣cause the Kingdom of Jesus was founded upon the Wood. Cross; And
therefore they that put their Trust in him shall live for ever. But why was the Wool and Hyssop put toge∣ther? To signifie that in the King∣dom of Christ there shall be evil and base Days, in which we shall be saved. And Vid. Coteler. in Annot. because he that has any Disease in the Flesh is by Hyssop purged from the Pollution of it. Wherefore these things being thus done, to us indeed are evident, but to the Jews they are obscure; be∣cause they hearkned not unto the Voice of the LORD. IX. AND therefore the Scrip∣ture again speaks concerning our Ears, that God has circumcised them, together with our Hearts. For thus saith the LORD in the Holy Pro∣phet:Septuag. Psal. xvii.45. Isa. xxxiii.13. By the hearing of the Ear they obeyed me. And again, They who are afar off, shall hear what things I have done, and shall understand. And a∣gain, Circumcise your Hearts,Jer. iv.4. saith the LORD. And again he saith,Jer. VII.2. Hear O Israel! Thus saith the LORD thy God. And again the Spirit of God prophesieth, saying;Psal. xxxiii. Who is there
that would live for ever, let him hear the Voice of my Son. And again, Hear O Heaven, and give Ear O Earth!Isaiah I.2. Because the LORD has spoken these things for a Witness. And again he saith,—10. Hear the word of the LORD, ye Princes of the People. And again, Hear O Children! The Voice of one crying in the Wilderness.— xi.3. Where∣fore he has circumcised our Ears, that we should hear his Word, and believe. But as for that Circumci∣sion, in which the Jews trust, it is abolished. For the Circumcision of which God spake, was not of the Flesh: But they have transgressed his Commands, because the Evil Angel. One hath deceived them. For thus God bespeaks them;Jer. iv.3, 4. Thus saith the LORD your God, Here you may find the New Command; Sow not upon Thorns; Be circumcised to the LORD your God. And what do's he mean by this? Vid. Lat. In∣terp. Vet. Jer. vii.26. Hearken unto your LORD, and circumcise the Hardness of your Heart, and harden not your Neck.Jer. ix.25, 26. And again, Behold, saith the LORD, all the Nations are uncircum∣cised, they have not lost their Fore-Skin;
but this People is not circum∣cised in Heart. But you will say; the Jews were circumcised for a Sign. Vid. Cote∣ler. in loc. Confer. Orig. ad Rom. cap. ii.25. And so are all the Syrians, and Arabians, and all the Priests of their Idols: But are they therefore of the Covenant of Israel? And even the Egyptians themselves are circumcised. Understand therefore, Children, these things more fully, that Abraham, who was the first that gave Circumcision in the Spirit, looking forward to JESUS, circum∣cised, taking the Mystery of Three Letters. For the Scripture says that Abraham circumcised three hundred and eighteen Men of his House. That many o∣thers of the An∣tient Fathers have concurred with him in this: See Co∣teler. in loc. Add. eund. pag. 34, 35. ibid. Edit. Oxon. in loc. An Instance of the like kind, See Rev. xiii.17, 18. Add. Annot. D. Bernard. Edit. Oxon. p 125. But what therefore was the Mystery that was made known unto him? I will tell you: It consists first in the EIGHTEEN, and next in the Three Hundred. For the Numeral Letters of Ten and Eight; are I H. And these denote JESUS. And be∣cause the Cross was that by which we were to find Grace; therefore he adds, Three hundred; the note of which is T [the Figure of his Cross.] Wherefore by two Letters, he sig∣nified
Jesus, and by One his Cross. He who has put the Natural Gift of his Doctrin within in us, knows, that I never shew'd to any one a more Ge∣nuine Truth: But I trust that ye are worthy of it. X. BUT why did Moses say; That in this he goes on the received Opi∣nions of the RR. Vid. Annot. Coteler. & Ed. Oxon. in loc. Levitic. xi. Deutr. xiv. Add. Ains∣worth. on Lev. xi.1. And a∣gain on Deut. xiv.4. Ye shall not eat of the Swine, neither the Eagle, nor the Hawk; nor the Crow; nor any Fish that has not a Scale upon him? I answer, that under this out∣side Figure, he comprehended three Spiritual Doctrins, that were to be In the Vn∣derstanding. Deutr. iv.gathered from thence. Besides which he says to them in the Book of Deu∣tronomy, and I will give my Statutes unto this People. Wherefore it is not the Command of God that they should not eat; but Moses, in the Spirit spake unto them. Now the Sow he forbad them to eat; meaning thus much; Thou shalt not join thy self to such Persons as are like unto Swine Who whilst they live in Pleasure, forget their God; but when any Want pinches them, then they know the LORD: As the Sow, when she is full, knows not her
Master; but when she is hungry, she makes a Noise; and being again fed, is silent. Neither, says he, shalt thou eat the Eagle, nor the Hawk, nor the Kite, nor the Crow; that is, Thou shalt not keep Company with such kind of Men as know not how by their Labour, and Sweat to get themselves Food: But injuriosly ra∣vish away the things of others; and watch how to lay Snares for them; when at the same time they appear to live in perfect Innocence. [Vid. Antiq. Lat. Vers. So these Birds alone seek not Food for themselves, but] sitting idle seek how they may eat of the Flesh which Others have provided; being de∣structive through their Wickedness. Neither, says he, shalt thou eat the Lampry, nor the Polypus, nor the Cuttle-Fish; that is, thou shalt not be like such Men, by using to converse with them: Who are Wicked to the end. altogether wicked and adjudged to Death. For so those Fishes are alone accursed, and wal∣low in the Mire, nor swim as other Fishes, but tumble in the Dirt at the Bottom of the Deep. But he adds, See Coteler. Annot. in loc. Neither shalt thou eat of the
Hare. To what end? To signifie this to us; Thou shalt not be an A∣dulterer; nor liken thy self to such Persons. For the Hare every year multiplies . the places of its Concepti∣on; and as many years as it lives, so many . it has. Neither shalt thou eat of the Hyena. That is, again, Be not an Adulterer, nor a Corrupter of others, neither be like to such. And wherefore so? So several Naturalists have affirmed, the others de∣nyed: See An∣not. Coteler. in loc. Because that Creature every year changes its kind, and is sometimes Male and sometimes Female. For which cause also he justly hated the Weesel; to the end that they should not be like such persons who with their Mouths commit Wickedness, by reason of their Uncleanness; nor joyn themselves with those impure Wo∣men, who with their Mouths com∣mit Wickedness. Vid. Arist. apud Euseb. Praep. Evang. L. viii. cap. 9. Add. Coteler. in loc. Because that A∣nimal conceives with its Mouth. Moses therefore speaking as concern∣ing Meats, deliver'd indeed three great Precepts to them in the Spiri∣tual Signification of those Commands. But they according to the desires of the Flesh, understood him as if he
had only meant it of Meats. And therefore David took aright the Knowledge of his threefold Com∣mand, saying in like manner;Psal. I.1. Bles∣sed is the Man that hath not walked in the Counsel of the Vngodly; As the Fishes before mentioned in the Bot∣tom of the Deep in Darkness: Nor stood in the Way of Sinners; As they who seem to fear the LORD, but yet sin, as the Sow. And hath not sat in the Seat of the Scorners; as those Birds who sit and watch that they may devour. Here ye have this Matter perfectly set forth, and according to the true knowledge of it. But says Moses, See Edit. Oxon. p. 64. a. So Iren. adv. Her. l.v. c. 8. Ye shall eat all that divideth the Hoof, and cheweth the Cud. Signifying thereby such an one as having taken his Food, knows him that nourisheth him; and resting upon him, rejoyceth in him. And in this he spake well, having respect to the Commandment. Comp. Clem. Alex. l.iii. Paedag. c. 11, Et simil. Orig. Theod. &c. Co∣teler. Annot. in loc. What therefore is it that he says? That we should hold fast to them that fear the LORD; with those who meditate on the Portion of the Word which they have received, in
their Heart; with those that declare the Righteousness of the LORD; and keep his Commandments; In short, with those who know that to Meditate is a Work of Pleasure, and therefore Ruminate upon. exercise themselves in the Word of the LORD. But why might they eat those that clave the Hoof? Because the Righteous liveth in this present World; but his Expectation is fixed upon the other. See, Brethren, how admira∣bly Moses commanded these things. But how should we thus know all this, and understand it? We there∣fore understanding aright the Com∣mandments, speak as the Lord would have us. Wherefore he has circum∣cised our Ears and our Hearts, that we might know these things. XI. LET us now enquire whe∣ther the Lord took care to mani∣fest any thing beforehand concern∣ing WATER and the CROSS. Now for the former of these, it is writ∣ten to the People of Israel how they shall not receive that BAPTISM which brings to Forgiveness of Sins; but shall institute another to themselves,
that cannot. For thus saith the Pro∣phet: Be astonish'd O Heaven!Jer. II.12. and let the Earth tremble at it, because this People have done two Great and Wicked things. They have left me, the Foun∣tain of living Water, and have digged for themselves broken Cisterns, that can hold no Water. Is my holy Moun∣tain Vid. Annot. Cotel. & Edit. Oxon. in loc. Isa. xvi.1, 2. Zion a desolate Wilderness? For ye shall be as a young Bird when its Nest is taken away. And again the Prophet saith,— xlv.2. I will go before thee, and will make plain the Moun∣tains, and will break the Gates of Brass, and will snap in sundr the Bars of Iron: And will give thee dark and hidden, and invisible Treasures, that they may know I am the LORD God. And again;—xxxiii.16, 17. He shall dwell in the high Den of the strong Rock. And then, what follows In. Vid. Edit. Coteler. p. 8. Psal. I. concerning the Son? His Water is faithful: Ye shall see the King with Glory, and your Soul shall learn the Fear of the LORD. And again he saith in another Prophet; He that do's these things; shall be like a Tree planted by the Currents of Water, which shall give its Fruit in its Season. Its Leaf also shall not
wither, and whatsoever he doth it shall prosper. As for the Wicked it is not so with them; but they are as the Dust which the Wind scattereth away from the face of the Earth. Therefore the Vngodly shall not stand in the Judg∣ment, neither the Sinners in the Coun∣cil of the Righteous. For the LORD knoweth the way of the Righteous, and the Way of the Vngodly shall perish. Consider how he has join'd both the Cross and the Water together. For this he saith; Blessed are they who putting their Trust in the Cross, descend into the Water; for they shall have their Reward in due time: then, saith he, will I give it them. But as concerning the present time, he saith, Their Leaves shall not fall. Meaning thereby, that every Word that shall go out of your Mouth, shall through Faith and Charity be to the Conversion and Hope of ma∣ny. In like manner do's another Prophet speak. And the Land of Ja∣cob was the Praise of all the Earth;Zeph iii.19. that is, the Vessel of his Spirit, which he there magnifies. And what follows? And there was a River run∣ning
on the Right hand, and beautiful Trees grew up by it; and he that shall eat of them shall live for ever. The signification of which is this: That we go down into the Water full of Sins and Pollutions; but come up again bringing forth Fruit; having in our Hearts the Fear and Hope which is in Jesus. And whosoever shall eat of them shall live for ever. That is, whosoever shall hearken to those who call them, and shall be∣lieve, shall live for ever. XII. IN like manner he deter∣mins concerning the Cross in Vid. Conject. Edit. Oxon. Comp. iv. Esdr. v. 4. Et Obs. Cotel. in loc. ano∣ther Prophet, saying; And when shall these things be fulfilled? The LORD answers; When the Tree that is fallen shall rise, and when Bloud shall drop down from the Tree. Here you have again mention made, both of the Cross and of him that was to be crucified upon it. See St. Hier. in like manner Annot. D. Ber∣nard. p. 124. Edit. Oxon. Exod. xvii. And yet farther he saith in one of the Books of Moses; where when Israel was beaten by a strange People; to the End that God might remember That were so beaten. them, how that for their Sins they were deliver'd unto Death;
the Holy Spirit put it into the Heart of Moses to represent both the Sign of the Cross, and of him that was to suffer. That so they might know that if they did not believe in him, they should be overcome for ever. Moses therefore Again set them in Array, being armed. Lat. vers. piled up Armour upon Armour in the middle of a rising Ground, and standing up high above all of them stretched forth his Arms, and so Israel again Conquer'd. But no sooner did he let down his Hands, but they were again slain. And why so? To the end they might know, that except they trust in him they cannot be saved. And in another Prophet he saith,Isa. lxv.2. I have stretched out my Hands all the Day long to a People disobedient, and speak∣ing against my righteous Way. And again Moses makes a So Irenaeus, Just Mart. St. Chrysost. &c. Vid. Edi. Oxon. p. 77. a. Type of Je∣sus, to shew that he was to die, and then that he, whom they thought to be dead, was to give Life to o∣thers; in the Sign of Israel falling. those that fell in Israel. For God caused all sorts of Serpents to bite them, and they died; forasmuch as by a Ser∣pent Transgression began in Eve;
that so he might convince them that for their Transgressions they shall be delivered into the Pain of Death. Moses then himself, who had com∣manded them, saying,Deutr. xxvii.1 Ye shall not make to your selves any graven or mol∣ten Image to be your God; yet now did so himself, that he might re∣present to them the Figure of the LORD Jesus. For he made a brazen Serpent, and set it up on high, and called the People together to an As∣sembly: Where being come, they intreated Moses that he would make an Attonement for them, and pray that they might be healed. Then Moses spake unto them, saying; when any one among you shall be bitten, let him come unto the Serpent that is set upon the Pole; and let him assured∣ly trust in him, that though he be dead, yet he is able to give Life, and pre∣sently he shall be saved; and so they did. See therefore how here also you have in this the Glory of Jesus; and that in him and to him are all things. Again;Rom. xi.36. What says Moses to Jesus the Son of Nun, when he gave that Name unto him, as being a Pro∣phet,
that all the People might under∣stand that the Father did manifest all things concerning his Son Jesus in So the other Fathers. Just. Mart. &c. Vid. Edit. Oxon. pag. 79. Jesus the Son of Nun? Moses therefore gave him that Name when he sent him to spy out the Land of Canaan; Vid. Interp. Vet. Lat. Exod. xvli.14. and said; Take a Book in thine Hands, and write what the LORD saith: forasmuch as Jesus the Son of God, shall in the last Days cut off by the Roots all the House of Amaleck. See here again Jesus, not the Son of Man, but the Son of God, made manifest in a Type and in the Flesh. But because it might hereafter be said, that Christ was the Son of Da∣vid; Comp. Vet. Lat. Interp. therefore David fearing and well-knowing the Errors of the Wicked,Psal. cix.3. saith; The LORD said unto my LORD, sit thou on my Right Hand until I make thine Enemies thy Footstool. And again Isaiah speaketh on this wise, The LORD said unto Vid. Annot. Coteler. in loc. Edit. Oxon. p. 78. c. Isa. xlv.1. Christ my LORD, I have laid hold on his right Hand, that the Nations should obey before him, and I will break the strength of Kings. Behold, how both Comp. Vet. Lat. Interp. David and Isaiah call him LORD, and the Son of God.
XIII. BUT let us go yet farther, and enquire whether this People be the Heir or the former; and whe∣ther the Covenant be with us or with them. And first as concern∣ing the People hear what the Scrip∣ture saith.Gen. xxv.21. Compar. St. Paul. Rom. ix. Just. Mart. Tert. &c. Vid. Ed. Oxon. p. 81. a. Isaac prayed for his Wife Rebeckah, because she was barren; and she conceived. Afterwards Re∣beckah went forth to enquire of the LORD. And the LORD said unto her, There are two Nations in thy Womb, and two People shall come from thee; and the one shall have power o∣ver the other, and the Greater shall serve the Lesser. Understand here who was Isaac; who Rebeckah, and of whom it was foretold, that this People should be Greater than that. And in another Prophecy Jacob speaketh more clearly to his Son Joseph saying; Behold the LORD hath not taken me from thy Face,Gen. xlviii. bring me thy Sons that I may bless them. And he brought unto his Father Vid. Lat. Interp. Vet. Manasseh and Ephraim, desiring that he should bless Manasseh, be∣cause he was the Elder. Therefore
Joseph brought him to the Right Hand of his Father Jacob. But Jacob by the Spirit foresaw the Fi∣gure of the People that was to come. And what saith the Scripture? And Jacob crossed his Hands, and put his Right Hand upon Ephraim his second, and the Younger Son, and Blessed him. And Joseph said unto Jacob: Put thy Right Hand upon the Head of Manasseh, for he is my First-born Son. And Jacob said unto Joseph; I know it, my Son, I know it; but the Greater shall serve the Lesser; though he also shall be Blessed. Ye see of whom he appointed it, that they should be the first People, and Heirs of the Covenant. If therefore God shall have yet farther taken Notice of this by Abraham too; Our Un∣derstanding of it will then be per∣fectly established. What then saith the Scripture to Abraham, when he believed,Gen. xv.17. So St. Paul himself applies this. Rom. iv.3. and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness? Behold I have made thee a Father of the Nations, which without Circumcision believe in the LORD.
XIV. LET us therefore now en∣quire, whether God has fulfilled the Covenant, which he sware to our Fathers, that he would give this Peo∣ple? Yes verily, He gave it: But they were not worthy to receive it by reason of their Sins. For thus saith the Prophet:Exod. xxiv.18 And Moses continued fasting in Mount Sinai, to receive the Covenant of the LORD with the People, forty Days and forty Nights.Deutr. ix.10. And he received of the LORD two Tables written with the Finger of the LORD'S Hand in the Spirit:Exod. xxxi.1 And Moses when he had received them brought them down that he might deliver them to the People. And the LORD said unto Moses; Moses, Moses,Exod. xxxii.7 Deutr. ix.12. get thee down quickly, for the People which thou broughtest out of the Land of Egypt have done Wickedly. And Moses understeod that they had again set up a Molten Image; and he cast the two Tables out of his Hands; and the Tables of the Covenant of the LORD were broken. Moses there∣fore received them, but they were not worthy. Now then learn how
we have received them. Moses, be∣ing a Servant took them; but the LORD himself has given them unto us, that we might be the People of his Inheritance, having suffered all things for us. And it was therefore made manifest; that they should fill up the Measure of their Sins, and that we Vid. Lat. Interp. Vet. being made Heirs by him, should receive the Covenant of the LORD Jesus. And again the Prophet saith,Isa. xlix.6. Behold, I have set thee for a Light unto the Gentiles, to be For Salvati∣on unto. the Sa∣viour of all the Ends of the Earth, saith the LORD the God who hath re∣deemed thee. Who for that very End was prepared, that by his Own appearing he might redeem our Hearts, already devoured by Death, and delivered over to the Irregula∣rity of Error, from Darkness; and establish a Covenant with us by his Word. For so it is written, that the Father commanded him, by de∣livering of us from Darkness, to pre∣pare unto himself a Holy People. Wherefore the Prophet saith,Isa. xlii.6. I the LORD thy God have called thee in Righteousness, and I will take thee by
the Hand and will strenghthen thee. And give thee for a Covenant of the People, for a Light of the Gentiles.— 7 To open the Eyes of the Blind, to bring out the Pri∣soners from the Prison, and them that sit in Darkness out of the Prison-House. Consider therefore from whence we have been redeemed. And again the Prophet saith; The Spirit of the LORD is upon me, because he hath anointed me;Isa. Lxi.1, 2. Comp. Luke iv.18. he hath sent me to preach glad Tidings to the Lowly; to heal the broken in Heart; to preach Remission to the Cap∣tives, and sight unto the Blind: To pro∣claim the acceptable year of the LORD, and the Day of Restitution; to comfort all that mourn. XV. FURTHERMORE it is written concerning the Sabbath in the Ten Commandments, which God spake in the Mount Sinai to Moses, Face to Face;Exod. xx.8. Sanctifie the Sabbath of the LORD with pure Hands, and with a clean Heart. And else∣where he saith,Jer. xvii.24. If thy Children shall keep my Sabbaths, then will I put my Mercy upon them. And even in the beginning of the Creation he makes mention
of the Sabbath.Gen. II.2. Exod. xx.11. xxxi.17. And God made in six Days the Works of his Hands; and he finished them on the Vid. Cotel. Annot. in loc.seventh Day, and he rested the seventh day and sanctified it. Consider, my Children, what that signifies, he finish'd them in six Days. The meaning of it is this; that in How general this Tradition then was, See Coteler. Annot. in loc. Edit. Oxon. p. 90. a. six thousand years the LORD God will bring all things to an End. For with him One Day is a Thousand Years: as himself testifi∣eth,Psal. Lxxxix.4. saying, Behold this day shall be as a thousand years. Therefore, Children, in six Days, that is, in six thousand years shall That is, to the time of the Gospel, says, Dr. Bernard. q. v. Annot. p. 127. Ed. Oxon. All things be accom∣plished. And rested the Seventh Day: He meaneth this; that when his Son shall come, and abolish the Season of the So the Lat. Vers. Wicked One, and jugde the Ungodly; and shall change the Sun, and the Moon and the Stars; then he shall gloriously rest in that seventh Day. He adds lastly; Thou shalt sanctifie it with clean Hands and a pure Heart. Wherefore we are greatly deceived if we imagin that any one can now sanctifie that Day which God has made Holy, without having a Heart pure in all things. He will
therefore then truly sanctifie it with blessed Rest, when we (having re∣ceived the righteous Promise, when Iniquity shall be no more, all things being renewed by the LORD) shall be able to sanctifie it, being our selves first made Holy. Lastly, he saith unto them;Isa. I.13. Your New Moons and your Sabbaths I cannot bear them. Consider what he means by it; The Sabbaths, says he, which ye now keep are not acceptable unto me, but those which I have made; when resting from all things I shall begin So the other Fathers, q. v. Apud Coteler. Annot. in loc. pag. 36. the Eighth Day, that is the Beginning of the other World. For which cause we observe the Eighth Day with Gladness, in which Jesus both rose from the dead; and manifested himself to his Disciples; and so ascended into Heaven. XVI. IT remains yet that we speak to you concerning the Tem∣ple: How those miserable Men be∣ing deceived have put their trust in the Vid. Edit. Oxon. & Vet. Lat. Interp. House, and not in God him∣self who made them; as if it were the Habitation of God. Much
after the same manner as the Gentiles have consecrated him in The Temple. their Temples. But learn there∣fore how the LORD speaketh, ren∣dring the Temple vain:Isa. xl.12. Who has measured the Heaven with a Span, and the Earth with his Hand? Is it not I? Thus saith the LORD; Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Foot∣stool.Isa. lxvi.1. What is the House that ye will build me? Or what is the place of my Rest? Know therefore that all their Hope is vain. And again he speaketh after this manner;Isa. xlix.17. Behold they that destroy this Temple, even they shall build another. And so it came to pass; For through their Wars it is now destroy'd by their Enemies; and the Servants of their Enemies build it up. Farthermore, it has been made manifest how both the City, and the Temple, and the Peo∣ple of Israel should be given up. For the Scripture saith; And it shall come to pass in the last days,Jer xxv. Isa. v. that the LORD will deliver up the Sheep of his Pasture; and their Fold, and their Tower unto Destruction. And it has come to pass, as the LORD hath
spoken. Let us enquire therefore, whether there be any Temple of God? Yes there is: And that there where himself declares that he would both make and establish it. For it is written; And it shall be that as soon as the Week shall be compleated the Temple of the LORD shall be glo∣riously built in the Name of the LORD.Dan. 9. Haggai ii. I find therefore that there is a Temple. But how shall it be built in the Name of the LORD? I will shew you. Before that we belived in God, the Habitation of our Heart, was corruptible and fee∣ble, as a Temple truly built with Hands. For it was a House full of Idolatry, a House of Devils; in∣asmuch as there was done in it whatsoever was contrary unto God. But it shall be built in the Name of the LORD. Consider, how that the Temple of the LORD shall be very gloriously built. And by what means that shall be, learn. Having re∣ceived Remission of our Sins, and trusting in the Name of the LORD, we are become Renew'd, being a∣gain created from the Beginning. Wherefore God truly dwells in our
House, that is, in us. But how do's he dwell in us? The Word of his Faith, the Calling of his Promise, the Wisdom of his Righteous Judg∣ments, the Commands of his Do∣ctrine; He himself prophecies with∣in us, he himself dwelleth in us, and openeth to us who were in Bon∣dage the Gate of Vid. Lat. Vet. Interp. Our Temple, that is, Vid. Lat. Vet. Interp. the Mouth of Wisdom, having given Repentance to us; and by this means has brought us into his incorruptible Temple. He therefore that desires to be saved looketh Vid. Lat. Vet. Interp. not unto the Man, but unto him that dwelleth in him, and speaketh by him; being struck with Wonder, forasmuch as he ne∣ver either heard him speaking such Words out of his Mouth, nor ever desired to hear them. This is that Spiritual Temple that is built unto the LORD. XVII. AND thus I trust, I have declared to you as much, and with as great Simplicity as I could, those things which make for your Salva∣tion, so as not to have omitted any
thing that might be requisite thereunto. For should I speak farther of the Things that So the Old Lat. Interp. now are, and of those that are to come, you would not yet understand them, seeing they lie in Parables. This therefore shall suffice as to these things. XVIII. LET us now go on to the other kind of Knowledge and Do∣ctrine. There are two ways of Doctrine and Power; The one of Light, the other of Darkness. But there is a great deal of difference be∣tween these two ways: For over one are appointed the Vid. Cote∣ler. in loc. Et Basil. in Psal. i. Angels of God, the Leaders of the way of Light; Over the others the Angels of Satan. And the one is the LORD from Everlasting to Everlasting; the other is the Prince of the Time of Unrighteousness. XIX. NOW the way of Light is this; if any one desires to attain to the Place that is appointed for him, and will hasten thither by his Works. And the Knowledge that has been given to us of walking in it; to
this Effect. * Thou shalt love him that made thee: * Thou shalt glo∣rifie him that hath redeemed thee from Death. * Thou shalt be simple in Heart, and * Rich in the Spirit. * Thou shalt not cleave to those that walk in the Way of Death. * Thou shalt hate to do any thing that is not pleasing unto God. * Thou shalt abhor all Dissimula∣tion. * Thou shalt not neglect any of the Commands of the LORD. * Thou shalt not exalt thy self, but shalt be humble. * Thou shalt not take Honour to thy self. * Thou shalt not enter into any Wicked Counsel against thy Neighbour. * Thou shalt not be confident in thy Heart. * Thou shalt not com∣mit * Fornication; nor * Adultery. Neither shalt thou * corrupt thy self with Mankind. * Thou shalt not make use of the Speech which God has given thee, to any Impuri∣ty. * Thou shalt not accept any Mans Person, when thou reprovest any ones Faults. * Thou shalt be Gentle. * Thou shalt be Quiet. * Thou shalt tremble at the Words
which thou hast heard. * Thou shalt not keep any Hatred in thy Heart against thy Brother. * Thou shalt not entertain any doubt whe∣ther it shall be, or not. * Thou shalt not take the Name of the LORD in vain. * Thou shalt love thy Neighbour above thy own Soul. * Thou shalt not destroy thy Con∣ceptions before they are brought forth; nor kill them after they are born. * Thou shalt not take off thy Hand from thy Son, or from thy Daughter; but shalt teach them from their youth the Fear of the LORD. * Thou shalt not covet thy Neigh∣bours Goods; neither shalt thou be an Extortioner. * Neither shall thy Heart be joined to proud Men; but thou shalt be numbred among the Righteous and the Lowly. * What∣ever Troubles shall happen unto thee, thou shalt receive them as good. * Thou shalt not be double-minded, or double-tongu'd; for a double Tongue is the Snare of Death. * Thou shalt be subject unto the LORD and to inferior Masters as to the I∣mages of God, in Fear and Reve∣rence.
* Thou shalt not be bitter in thy Commands towards any of thy Servants that trust in God; least thou chance not to fear him who is over both; because he came not to call any with respect of Per∣sons, but whomsoever his Spirit had prepared. * Thou shalt communi∣cate to thy Neighbour of all thou hast; Thou shalt not call any thing thine own: For if ye partake in such things as are incorruptible, how much more should ye do it in those that are Corruptible? * Thou shalt not be forward to speak; for the Mouth is the Snare of Death. * As far as thou art able, Vid. Cotel. in loc. keep thy self Pure. * Reach not out thine Hand to receive, and with-hold it not when thou shouldst give. * Thou shalt love, as the Apple of thine Eye, every one that speaketh unto thee the Word of the LORD. * Call to thy Remem∣brance Day and Night, the future Judgment. * Thou shalt seek out every Day the Persons of the Righte∣ous. * And both seek by thy Speech and go forth to exhort; and medi∣tate how thou maiest save thine
own Soul. * Thou shalt also labour with thy Hands that thy Sins may be forgiven thee. * Thou shalt not deliberate whether thou shouldst give; * Nor having given, murmur at it. * Give to every one that asks; so shalt thou know who is the good Rewarder of thy Gifts. * Keep what thou hast received; thou shalt nei∣ther add to it, or take from it. * Let the Wicked be always thy Aversion. * Thou shalt judge righteous Judg∣ment. * Thou shalt never cause Di∣visions; but shalt make Peace be∣tween those that are at variance, and bring them together. * Thou shalt confess thy Sins; * And not come to thy Prayer with an Evil-Conscience. This is the Way of Light. XX. BUT the Way of Darkness is crooked, and full of Cursing. For it is the Way of Eternal Death with Punishment; in which they that walk, meet those things that destroy their own Souls. Such are; Idolatry, Confidence, Pride of Power, Hypocrisie, Double-Mindedness, A∣dultery,
Murder, Rapine, Pride, Transgression, Deceit, Malice, Ar∣rogance, Witchcraft, Covetousness, and the Want of the Fear of God. In this walk those who are the Per∣secutors of them that are good; Ha∣ters of Truth; Lovers of Lies; who know not the Reward of Righteousness, nor cleave to any thing that is good. Who admini∣ster not righteous Judgment to the Widdow and Orphan; who watch for Wickedness, and not for the Fear of the LORD; From whom Gentle∣ness, and Patience are far off; Who love Vanity, and follow after Rewards; Having no Compassion up∣on the Poor; nor take any pains for such as are heavy laden and Opressed: Ready to evil speaking, not knowing him that made them: Murderers of Children; Corrupters of the Crea∣ture of God; That turn away from the Needy; Oppress the Afflicted; The Adorers of the Rich, but unjust Judges of the Poor; being Altoge∣ther Sinners.
XXI. IT is therefore fitting that learning the just Commands of the LORD, which we have before men∣tioned, we should walk in them. For he that do's such things shall be glorified in the Kingdom of God. But he that chuses the other part, shall be destroyed together with his Works. For this cause there shall be both a Resurrection and a Retri∣bution. I beseech those that are Ex∣cellent among you, if so be you will take the Counsel which with a good intention I offer to you; You have those with you towards whom you may do good; Do not forsake them. For the Day is at hand in which All things shall be destroyed, together with the Wicked One. The LORD is near, and his Reward is with him. I beseech you therefore again and again; be as good Law-givers to one another; continue faithful Coun∣sellors to each other; Remove from among you all Hypocrisie. And may God, the LORD of all the World, give you Wisdom, Knowledge, Un∣derstanding; and a true apprehension of his Judgments in Patience. Be ye
taught of God; Seeking what it is the LORD requires of you, and do∣ing it; that ye may be saved in the Day of Judgment. And if there be among you any remembrance of what is good; think of me, medi∣tating upon these things, that both your Desire and your Watching may turn to some good account. I be∣seech you; I ask it as a Favour of you; Whilst you are in this beauti∣ful Vessel. Tabernacle of the Body be want∣ing in none of these things; but without ceasing seek them, and ful∣fill every Command; For these things are fitting and worthy to be done. Wherefore I have given the more diligence to write unto you, ac∣cording to my Ability, that you might rejoice. Farewel, Children of Love and Peace. The LORD of Glory and of all Grace, be with your Spi∣rit. Amen. The End of the Epistle of BARNABAS the Apostle and Companion of St. PAUL the Apostle.
THE SHEPHERD OF St. HERMAS.
THE CONTENTS. The First BOOK. Vision I. AGAINST Filthy and Proud Thoughts: Al∣so the Correction of HERMAS for his Neglect of his Sons. II. Again of his Neglect in correcting his Talkative Wife; and of his Lewd Sons; and of his own Man∣ners. III Of the Building of the Church-Triumphant: And of the several Orders of Reprobates. IV. Of the Tryal and Tribulation, that is about to come upon Men.
The Second BOOK. An Introduction to the following COMMANDS. Command I. OF Believing in One God. II. That we must avoid Detraction; and do our Alms-Deeds with Sim∣plicity. III. Of Avoiding Lying: And the Re∣pentance of HERMAS for his Dis∣simulation. IV. Of putting away Ones Wife for ADULTERY. V. Of the Sadness of the Heart; and of Patience. VI. That every Man has two Angels; and of the Suggestions of both. VII. That we must fear God, but not the Devil. VIII. That we must flee from Evil, and do Good. IX. That we must ask of God daily, and without doubting. X. Of the Sadness of the Heart; and that we must take heed not to grieve the Spirit of God that is in us.
XI. That the Spirits and Prophets are to be tried by their Works; and of a Two-fold Spirit. XII. Of a two-fold Desire: That the Commands of God are not impos∣sible: And that the Devil is not to be feared by them that Believe. The Third BOOK. Similitude I. THAT seeing we have no abiding City in this World; we ought to look after that which is to come. II. As the Vine is supported by the Elm, so is the Rich-Man help'd by the Prayers of the Poor. III. As the Green Trees in the Win∣ter cannot be distinguish'd from the Dry; so neither can the Righteous from the Wicked in this present World. IV. As in Summer the living Trees are distinguish'd from the Dry by their Fruit and Green Leaves; so in the World to come the Righte∣ous shall be distinguish'd from the Unrighteous by their Happiness.
V. Of a True Fast, and the Reward of it: Also of the Cleanness of the Body. VI. Of two Sorts of Voluptuous Men; and of their Death, De∣fection, and of the Continuance of their Pains. VII. That they who Repent, must bring forth Fruits worthy of Repentance. VIII. That there are many kinds of Elect, and of Repenting Sin∣ners: And how all of them shall re∣ceive a Reward proportionable to the Measure of their Repentance and Good Works. IX. The Greatest Mysteries of the Militant and Triumphant Church which is to be built. X. Of Repentance and Alms-Deeds.
The First BOOK OF St. HERMAS, Which is Called His VISIONS. The First VISION. Against filthy and proud Thoughts: also the Correction of Hermas for his Neglect of his Sons. I. HE who had bred me up Sold a certain young Maid at Rome: whom when I saw many Years after, I remembred her, and began to love her as a Sister. It happen'd some time afterwards,
that I saw her wash'd in the River Tyber; and I reach'd out my hand unto her, and help'd her out of the River. And when I saw her, I thought with my self, saying, That I should be happy had I fortun'd to have met with a Wife like unto her both for her Beauty and Manners. This I thought with my self; nor did I think any thing more. But not long after, as I was walking and musing on these Thoughts, I began to honor the Creature of God, think∣ing with my self how noble and beautiful it is. And when I had walk'd a little, I fell asleep. And the Spirit caught me away, and car∣ried me through a certain Place to∣wards the Right-hand, through which no Man could pass. It was a Place among Rocks, very steep, and unpassable for Water. When I was past this Place I came into a Plain; and there falling down upon my Knees, I began to pray unto the LORD, and to confess my Sins. And as I was praying, the Heaven was opened, and I saw the Woman which I had coveted, saluting me from Hea∣ven,
and saying, HERMAS, hail! And I looking upon her, answered, Lady, What dost thou do here? She answered me, I am taken up hither to convince thee of Sin unto the LORD. Lady, said I, Wilt thou con∣vince me? No, said she: but hear the Words which I am about to speak unto thee. God who dwelleth in Heaven, and hath made All things out of Nothing, and has multiplied them for his Holy Churches sake, is angry with thee, because thou hast sinned against me. And I answering said unto her, Lady, If I have sinned against thee, tell me where, or in what Place, or when did I ever speak an unseemly or dishonest Word unto thee? Have I not always esteemed thee as a Lady? Have I not always reverenced thee as a Sister? Why then dost thou imagine these wicked things against me? Then she, smi∣ling upon me, said, The desire of Naughtiness has risen up in thy heart. Does it not seem to thee Edit. Oxon. aliter . to be an ill thing for a Righteous Man to have an evil desire rise up in his heart? It is indeed a Sin, and that a
very great one, to such a Man: for a righteous Man thinketh what is righteous. And whilst he does so, and walketh uprightly, he shall have the LORD in Heaven favourable unto him in all his Works. But as for those who think wickedly in their hearts, they take to themselves Death and Captivity: and especially those who love this present World, and glory in their Riches, and regard not the good things that are to come; their Souls wander up and down, and know not where to fix. Now this is the Case of such as are Doubtful, who trust not in the LORD, and de∣spise and neglect their own life. But do thou pray unto the LORD, and he will heal thy Sins, and the Sins of thy whole House, and of all his Saints. II. AS soon as she had spoken these Words the Heavens were shut, and I remained utterly swallowed up in Sadness and Fear; and said within my self, If this be laid against me for Sin, how can I ever be saved? or how shall I ever be able to intreat
the LORD for my many and great Sins? With what Words shall I be∣seech him to be merciful unto me? As I was thinking over these things, and meditating in my self upon them, behold a Chair set over against me of the whitest Wool, as bright as Snow. And there came an old Woman in a bright Garment, having a Book in her hand, and sate alone,Vid. Hieron. in Hosoam. vii.9. and salu∣ted me, saying, HERMAS, hail! And I being full of Sorrow, and weeping, answered, Hail, Lady! and she said unto me, Why art thou sad, Hermas, who wert wont to be pati∣ent, and modest, and always cheer∣ful? I answered, and said to her, Lady, a Reproach has been objected to me by an excellent Woman, who tells me that I have sinned against her. She replied, Far be any such thing from the Servant of God. But it may be the desire of her has risen up in thy Heart? For indeed there is such a Thought even in the Servants of God, leading unto Sin. Nor ought such a detestable Thought to be in the Servant of God; nor should a Spirit that is approved desire that
which is evil; nor especially HER∣MAS, who contains himself from all wicked Appetites, and is full of all Simplicity, and of great Innocence. III. NEVERTHELESS the LORD is not angry with thee for thine own sake, but upon the account of thy House, which has committed Wick∣edness against the LORD, and against their Parents. And that Act of thy Fondness towards thy Sons; in that thou hast not admonished them, but hast permitted them to live wickedly; and for this Cause the LORD is angry with thee: But he will heal all the Evils that are done before thee in thy House. For through their Sins and Iniquities, thou art wholly consumed in secular Affairs. But now the Mer∣cy of God hath taken Compassion upon thee, and upon thine House, and hath In Glory. — Edit. Oxon. Hath preserved thee in Glory. greatly comforted thee; only as for thee, do not wander, but be of an even Mind, and comfort thy House. As the Workman bring∣ing forth his Work, offers it to whom∣soever he pleases; so shalt thou by teaching every day what is just, cut
off a great sin. Wherefore cease not to admonish thy Sons, for the LORD knows that they will repent with all their heart, and he will write thee in the Book of Life. And when she had said this, she added unto me; Wilt thou hear me Read? I answer'd her, Lady, I will. Hear then, said she; And opening the Book she read, glo∣riously, greatly, and wonderfully, such things as I could not keep in my Memory. For they were terri∣ble Words, such as no Man could bear. Howbeit I committed her last Words to my Remembrance; for they were but few, and of great use. Behold the mighty LORD, who by his invincible Power, and with his excellent Wisdom made the World, and by his glorious Counsel encom∣passed the Beauty of his Creature, and with the Word of his strength fix'd the Heaven, and founded the Earth upon the Waters; and by his powerful Vertue establish'd his Holy Church, which he hath blessed: Behold, he will remove the Heavens, and the Mountains, the Hills and the Seas; and all
things shall be made Plain for his Elect; that he may render unto them the Promise which he has pro∣mised with much Honor and Joy; if so be that they shall keep the Commandments of God, which they have received with great Faith. IV. AND when she had made an end of Reading, she rose out of the Chair; and behold four Young∣men came, and carried the Chair to the East. And she called me unto her, and touch'd my Breast, and said unto me, Did my Reading please thee? I answered, Lady, These last things please me; but what went be∣fore was severe and hard. She said unto me, These last things are for Edit. Oxon. the Righteous, but the foregoing for the Revolters and Heathen. And as she was talking with me, Two more appeared, and took her up on their shoulders, and went to the East, where the Chair was. And she went chearfully away; and as she was go∣ing, said unto me, HERMAS, be of good chear.
VISION II. Again, of his Neglect in Cor∣recting his Talkative Wife; and of his Lewd Sons; and of his Own Manners. I. AS I was on the Way to Cumae, about the same time that I had been the last Year, I began to call to mind the Vision I formerly had. And again the Spirit carried me away, and brought me into the same Place, in which I had been the Year before. And when I was come into the Place, I fell down upon my Knees, and began to Pray unto the LORD, and to Honour his Name, that he had esteemed me worthy, and had manifested unto me my former Sins. And when I arose from Prayer, behold I saw over against me the Old Woman whom I had seen the last Year, walking and reading in a cer∣tain Book. And she said unto me, Can'st thou tell these things to the
Elect of God? I answered and said unto her, Lady, I cannot retain such great things in my Memory, but give me the Book, and I will write them down. Take it, says she, and see that thou restore it again to me. As soon as I had receiv'd it, I went aside into a certain Place of the Field, and transcribed every Letter, for I found no Syllables.Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. And as soon as I had finished what was written in the Book, the Book was suddenly caught out of my hands, but by whom I saw not. II. AFTER fifteen days, when I had fasted, and intreated the LORD with all earnestness, the Knowledge of the Writing was revealed unto me. Now the Writing was this: Thy Seed, O HERMAS! hath sin∣ned against the LORD, and have be∣trayed their Parents, through their great Wickedness. And they have been called the Betrayers of their Pa∣rents, and have gone on in their Treachery. And now have they added Lewdness to their other Sins, and the Pollutions of Naughtiness;
Thus have they fill'd up the Mea∣sure of their Iniquities. But do thou upbraid thy Sons with all these Words; and thy Wife, which shall be thy Sister. And let her learn to refrain her Tongue, with which she calumniates. For when she shall hear these things, she will refrain her self, and shall obtain Mercy. And So Coteler. Edit. Oxon. And she, &c. they shall be instructed, when thou shalt have reproach'd them with these Words, which the LORD has commanded to be revealed unto thee. Then shall their Sins be for∣given which they have heretofore committed, and the Sins of all the Saints, who have sinned even unto this day; if they shall repent with all their Hearts, and remove all Doubts out of their Hearts. For the LORD hath sworn by his Glory concerning his Elect, having determined the certain Day, that if any one shall even now sin, he shall not be saved. For the Repentance of the Righte∣ous has its End. The Days of Repen∣tance are fulfilled to all the Saints; but to the Heathen, there is Repen∣tance even unto the Last Day. Thou
shalt therefore say to those who are over the Church, that they order their Ways in Righteousness; that they may fully receive the Promise with much Glory. Stand fast there∣fore ye that work Righteousness; and continue to do it, that your De∣parture may be with the Holy An∣gels. Happy are ye, as many as shall endure the Great Tryal that is at hand, and whosoever shall not deny his Life. For the LORD hath sworn by his Son, that who so de∣nieth his Son and him, being afraid of his Life; he will also deny him in the Days that are coming. World that is to come. But those who shall never deny him, he will of his exceeding great Mercy be favourable unto them. III. BUT thou, O Hermas! re∣member not the Evils which thy Sons have done, neither neglect thy Sister, but take care that they amend of their former Sins. For they will be instructed by this Doctrine, if thou shalt not be mindful of what they have done wickedly. For the Re∣membrance of Evils worketh Death;
but the Forgetting of them, Life Eter∣nal. But thou, O HERMAS! hast under∣gone a great many Wordly Trou∣bles for the Offences of thy House; because thou hast neglected them, as things that did not belong unto thee; and thou art wholly taken up with thy great Business. Never∣theless, for this cause shalt thou be saved, that thou hast not departed from the Living God; And thy Sim∣plicity, and singular Continency shall preserve thee, if thou shalt continue in them. Yea, they shall save All such as do such things; and walk in Innocence and Simplicity. They who are of this kind, shall prevail against all Impiety, and continue unto Life Eternal. Happy are all they that do Righteousness, they shall not be consumed for ever. But thou wilt say; Behold there is a great Tryal coming. If it seems good to thee, Deny him again. The LORD is nigh to them that turn to him, as it is written in the Books of Heldam and Modal, who prophecy'd to the Israelites in the Wilderness.Numb. xi.26, 27.
IV. MOREOVER, Brethren, it was reavealed to me, as I was sleeping, by a very goodly young Man, saying unto me; What thinkest thou of that old Woman from whom thou receivedst the Book; Who is she? I answered, a Sybil. Thou art mistaken, said he, she is not. I reply'd, who is she then, Sir? He an∣swered me, it is the Church of God. And I said unto him, Why then do's she appear Old? She is there∣fore, said he, an Old Woman, be∣cause she was the first of all the Creation, and the World was made for her. After this I saw a Vision at home in my own House, and the Old Woman whom I had seen be∣fore, came to me and ask'd me, whe∣ther I had yet deliver'd the Book which she had given me to the Elders of the Church? And I answered, that I had not yet. She reply'd, Thou hast well done, for I have cer∣tain Words more to tell thee. But when I shall have finished all the Words, they shall be clearly under∣stood by the Elect.Origen. Philo∣cal. cap. 1. And thou shalt write two Books, and send one to
Clement, and one to Grapté. For Clement shall send it to the foreign Cities, because it is permitted to him so to do. But Grapté shall admonish the Widows and Orphans. But thou shalt read it to the Elders that are over the Church. VISION III. Of the Building of the Church-Triumphant; and of the se∣veral Orders of Reprobates. I. THE Vision which I saw, Brethren, was this. When I had often fasted and pray'd unto the LORD, that he would manifest unto me the Revelation which he had promised by the Old Woman to shew unto me: The same Night she appear'd unto me, and said unto me; because thou dost thus afflict thy self, and art so desirous to know All things, come into the Field, where thou wilt, and about the sixth Hour, I will appear unto
thee, and shew thee what thou must see. I ask'd her, saying; Lady, in∣to what part of the Field? She an∣swered, wherever thou wilt, only chuse a good and a private place. And before I could begin to speak and tell her the place, she said unto me; I will come where thou wilt. I was therefore, Brethren, in the Field, and I observed the Hours, and came into the place where I had ap∣pointed to go. And I beheld a Bench placed; it was a linnen Pillow, and over it spread a Covering of fine Linnen. When I saw these things or∣der'd in this Manner, and that there was no Body in the place, I began to be astonish'd, and my Hair stood on end, and a kind of Horror seiz'd me, for I was alone. But being come to my self, and calling to mind the Glory of God, and taking Courage, I fell down upon my Knees, and be∣gan again to confess my Sins as be∣fore. And whilst I was doing this, the Old Woman came thither with the six young Men whom I had seen before, and stood behind me as I was praying and confessing my
Sins unto the LORD. And touching me, she said; leave off now to pray only for thy Sins; pray also for Righteousness, that thou maist re∣ceive a part from her in thy House. And she lifted me up from the place, and took me by the Hand, and brought me to the Seat; and said to the young Men, Go, and Build. As soon as they were departed, and we were alone, she said unto me; sit here. I answered her; Lady, let those who are Elder sit first. She reply'd, sit down as I bid you. And when I would have sate on the right side, she suffered me not, but made a sign to me with her Hand, that I should sit on the left. As I was therefore musing, and full of Sorrow, that she would not suffer me to sit on the right side, she said unto me, HERMAS, why art thou sad? The place which is on the right Hand is theirs who have already attain'd unto God, and have suffered for his Name sake. But there is yet a great deal remaining unto thee, before thou canst sit with them. But con∣tinue, as thou dost in thy Sincerity,
and thou shalt sit with them; as all others shall that do their Works, and shall bear what they have born. II. I said unto her; Lady, I would know what it is that they have suf∣fered? Hear then, said she: Wild Beasts, Scourgings, Imprisonments, and Crosses for his Name sake. For this cause the right Hand of Holi∣ness belongs to them, and to all o∣thers as many as shall suffer for the Name of God; but the left belongs to the rest. Howbeit the Gifts and the Promises belong to both; to them, and to those on the left Hand; only that sitting on the right Hand they have some Glory above the others. But thou art desirous to sit on the right Hand with them; and thy De∣fects are many. But thou shalt be purg'd from thy Defects: As also all who doubt not, shall be cleansed from all the Sins which they have commit∣ted unto this Day. And when she had said this she would have departed; Wherefore falling down before her Feet, I began to intreat her, for the LORD'S sake, that she would shew
me the Vision which she had pro∣mised. Then she again took me by the Hand, and lifted me up, and made me sit upon the Seat on the left side; and holding up a certain bright Wand, said unto me; seest thou that great thing? I reply'd; Lady, I see nothing. She answered; Dost thou not see over against thee a great Tower, which is built upon the Water with bright square Stones? For the Tower was built upon a square by those six young Men that came with her. And thousands of other Men brought Stones: Some drew them out of the Deep; Others carried them from the Ground, and gave them to the six young Men. And they took them, and built. As for those Stones which were drawn out of the Deep, they put them all into the Building; for they were polish'd, and their Squares exactly answered one another, and so one was joyn'd in such wise to the other, that there was no space to be seen where they joyn'd. Insomuch that the whole Tower appear'd to be built as it were of one Stone. But
as for the other Stones that were taken off from the Ground, some of them they rejected, others they fitted into the Building. Others they cut out, and cast at a distance from the Tower. Moreover there were many other Stones, which lay round about the Tower, which they made no use of in the Building. Some of these were rough, others had Clefts in them; others were white and round, not proper for the build∣ing of the Tower. Besides these, I saw other Stones cast afar off from the Tower, and falling into the High-Way, but not continuing in the Way, but were rolled from the Way into a desert Place. Others I saw falling into the Fire and burn∣ing: Others were glowing hot just by the Water, yet could not roll themselves into it, though very de∣sirous to fall into the Water. III. AND when she had shew'd me these things she would have de∣parted. But I said unto her, Lady, What do's it profit me to see these things, and not understand what they
mean? She answer'd and said unto me, you are very cunning, in that you are desirous to know those things which Are abou. relate to the Tower. Yea, said I, Lady, that I may declare them unto the Brethren; and they may rejoyce, and hearing these things may glorifie God with great Honour. Then she said; Many indeed shall hear them, and when they shall have heard them, some shall rejoyce, and others weep. And yet even these, if they shall repent, shall rejoyce too. Hear therefore what I shall say con∣cerning the Parable of the Tower, and after this be no longer importu∣nate with me about the Revelation. For these Revelations have an end, seeing they are fulfilled. But thou dost not leave off to desire Revela∣tions; for thou art very Edit. Oxon. urgent. As for the Tower which thou seest built, it is I my self, namely the Church, which have appeared to thee both now, and heretofore. Wherefore ask what thou wilt con∣cerning the Tower, and I will reveal it unto thee, that thou mayst re∣joyce with the Saints. I said unto
her, Lady, Because thou hast thought me once worthy to receive from thee the Revelation of all these things, declare them unto me. She answer'd me; whatsoever is fit to be revealed unto thee, shall be revealed: Clem. Alex. Strom. xii. Only let thy Heart be with the LORD, and doubt not, whatsoever thou shalt see. I ask'd her, Lady, why is the Tower built upon the Water? She replied; I said before to thee that thou wert very Wise to enquire di∣ligently concerning the Building! therefore thou shalt find the Truth. Hear therefore why the Tower is built upon the Water:Baptism. Because your Life is and shall be saved by Water. For it is founded by the Word of the Almighty and Honourable Name; and is supported by the Invisible Power and Virtue of God. IV. AND I answering said unto her; These things are very admira∣ble: But Lady, who are those six young Men that build? They are, said she, the Angels of God, which were first appointed, and to whom the LORD has deliver'd all his Crea∣tures,
to build them up, and to rule over. For by these the Building of the Tower shall be finish'd. And who are the rest who bring them Stones? They also are the Holy Angels of the LORD; but the other are more excellent than these. Where∣fore when the whole Building of the Tower shall be finished, they shall all feast together besides the Tower, and shall glorifie God, because the Structure of the Tower is finish'd. I ask'd her, saying; I would know the Condition of the Stones, and the meaning of them, what it is? She answering said unto me; Art thou better than all others, that this should be revealed unto thee? For others are both before thee, and better than thou art, to whom these Visions should be made manifest: Never∣theless that the Name of God may be honour'd, it has been, and shall be reveal'd unto thee, for the sake of those who are doubtful, and think in their Hearts whether these things are so or not? Tell them that all these things are true; and that there is nothing in them that
is not true; but all are firm, and truly established. V. HEAR now then concern∣ing the Stones that are in the Build∣ing. The square and white Stones, which agree exactly in their joynts; are the Apostles, and Bishops, and Doctors, and Ministers who through the Mercy of God have come in, and govern'd, and taught, and mi∣nistred holily and modestly to the Elect of God, both that are fallen asleep, and which yet remain; and have always agreed with them, and have had peace within themselves and with each other. For which cause their Joints exactly meet together in the Building of the Tower. They which are drawn out of the Deep and put into the Building, and whose Joynts agree with the other Stones which are already built, are those which are already fallen asleep, and have suffered for the sake of the LORD'S Name. And what are the other Stones, Lady, that are brought from the Earth; I would know what they are? She answer'd, They which
lie upon the Ground and are not po∣lished, are those which God has ap∣proved because they have walked in the Law of the LORD, and directed their ways in his Commandments. They which are put in the Building of the Tower, are the young in Faith and the Faithful. And these are ad∣monish'd by the Angels to do well, because that Iniquity is not found in them. But who are those whom they rejected, and laid besides the Tower? They are such as have sinn'd, and are willing to repent; for which cause they are not cast far from the Tower, because they will be useful in the Building if they shall repent. They therefore that are yet to repent, if they shall repent shall become strong in the Faith; that is, if they repent now, whilst the Tower is building. For if the Building shall be finish'd, there will then be no place for them to be put in, but they shall be rejected; For he only has this Priviledge, who shall now be put to the Tower.
VI. BUT would you know who they are that were cut out and cast afar off from the Tower? Vid. Edit. Oxon. Lady, said I, I desire it. They are the Children of Iniquity, who believed only in Hypocrisie, and departed not from their Evil Ways: For this cause they are not saved, because they are not of any Use in the Building by reason of their Sins. Wherefore they are cut out, and cast afar off, because of the Anger of the LORD, and be∣cause they have provoked him to an∣ger against them. As for the great Number of other Stones which thou hast seen placed about the Tower, but not put into the Building; those which are rugged, are they who have known the Truth, but have not continued in it, nor been joyn'd to the Saints; and therefore are un∣profitable. Those that have Clefts in them, are they who keep up Dis∣cord in their Hearts against each o∣ther, and live not in Peace; that are friendly when present with their Brethren, but as soon as they are departed from one another, their
Wickedness still continues in their Hearts. These are the Clefts which are seen in those Stones. Those that are maim'd and short are they who have believed indeed; but still are in great measure full of Wickedness; for this cause are they maim'd and not whole. But what are the white and round Stones, Lady, and which are not proper for the Building of the Tower? She answering said un∣to me; How long wilt thou continue Foolish and without Understanding; asking every thing and discerning nothing? They are such as have Faith indeed; but have withal the Riches of this present World. When therefore any Troubles arise, for the sake of their Riches they deny the LORD. I answering said unto her; when therefore will they be Profita∣ble to the LORD? When their Riches shall be cut away, says she, in which they take delight, then they will be profitable unto the LORD for his Building. For as a round Stone, un∣less he be cut away, and cast some∣what oft of its Bulk cannot be made square; so they who are rich in this
World, unless their Riches be pared off, cannot be made profitable unto the LORD. Learn this from thy own Experience: When thou wert Rich, thou wast unprofitable; but now thou art profitable, and fit for the Life which thou hast under∣taken; for thou also once wast one of those Stones. VII. AS for the rest of the Stones which thou sawest cast afar off from the Tower, and running in the Way; and tumbled out of the Way into Desert places; they are such as have believed indeed, but through their doubting have forsaken their true Way, thinking that they could find a better. But they wander and are miserable; going into desolate Ways. Then for those Stones which fell into the Fire, and were burnt; They are those who have for ever departed from the Living God; nor has it e∣ver come into their Hearts to repent, by reason of the Affection which they bear to their Lusts and Wicked∣nesses which they commit. And what are the rest which fell by the Wa∣ter,
and could not roll into the Wa∣ter? They are such as have heard the Word; and were willing to be baptized in the Name of the LORD; but considering the great Holiness which the Truth requires, have with∣drawn themselves, and walk'd again after their wicked Lusts. Thus she finish'd the Explication of the Tower. But I being still urgent, ask'd her: Is there Repentance allow'd to all those Stones which are thus cast away and were not suitable to the Building of the Tower; and shall they find place in this Tower? They may repent, said she, but they cannot come into this Tower; but they shall be placed in a much lower Rank; and this after that they shall have been afflicted, and fulfill'd the Days of their Sins. And for this cause they shall be removed, because they have received the Word of Righteousness. And then they shall be translated from their Afflictions, if they shall have a true sense in their Hearts of what they have done amiss. But if they shall not have this Sense in their Hearts, they shall not be
saved, by reason of the Hardness of their Hearts. VIII. WHEN therefore I had done asking her concerning all these things, she said unto me; Wilt thou see somewhat else? And I being desi∣rous of seeing it, I became very chear∣ful of Countenance. She therefore looing back upon me, and smiling a little, said unto me: Seest thou se∣ven Women about the Tower? La∣dy, said I, I see them. This Tower, replied she, is supported by them, according to the Command of the LORD: Hear therefore the Effects of them. The first of them which holds her Hand fast, is called Faith; by her the Elect shall be saved. The next which is girt up, and looks Manly, is named Abstinence: She is the Daughter of Faith. Whoso∣ever therefore shall follow her shall be happy in all his Life; because he shall abstain from all evil Works, be∣lieving that if he shall contain him∣self from all Concupiscence, he shall be the Heir of Eternal Life. And what Lady, said I, are the other five?
They are, reply'd she, the Daugh∣ters of One another. One of them is called Simplicity; the next Inno∣cence; the third Modesty; then Discipline, and the last of all is Cha∣rity. When therefore thou shalt have observed the Works of their Mo∣ther, thou shalt be able to observe all things. Lady, said I, I would know what particular Virtue every one of these has. Hear then, replied she; They have equal Vertues; and their Vertues are knit together, and follow one another as they were born. From Faith proceeds Abstinence; from Abstinence, Simplicity; from Simplicity, Innocence; from Inno∣cence, Modesty; from Modesty, Discipline and Charity. Therefore the Works of these are Holy and Chast, and Right. Whosoever there∣fore shall serve these, and hold fast to their Works, he shall have his Dwelling in the Tower with the Saints of God. Then I ask'd her con∣cerning the Times, whether the End were now at Hand? But she cry'd out with a loud Voice, saying; O foolish Man! Dost thou not see the
Tower that it is always building? When therefore the Tower shall be finish'd, and built, it shall have an End; and indeed it shall soon be ac∣complished. But do not ask me any more Questions. What has been said may suffice for thee and for all the Saints; with the renewal of your Spirits. For these things have not been revealed to thee only, but that thou mayst make them manifest un∣to all. For therefore, O HERMAS, after three Days thou must under∣stand these Words which I begin to speak unto thee, that thou mayst speak them in the Ears of the Saints; that when they shall have heard and done them, they may be cleansed from their Iniquities, and thou to∣gether with them. IX. HEAR me therefore, O my Sons! I have bred you up in much Simplicity, and Modesty, and In∣nocency; for the Mercy of God, which has dropp'd down upon you in Righteousness; that you should be sanctified, and justified from all Sin and Wickedness: But ye will not
cease from your evil Doings. Now therefore hearken unto me, and have Peace one with another, and visit one another, and receive one ano∣ther, and do not enjoy the Creatures of God alone. Give freely to them that are in need. For some by too free feeding contract an Infirmity in their Flesh, and do Injury to their Bodies; whilst the Flesh of others, who have not Food, withers away, because they want sufficient Nourish∣ment, and their Bodies are consum'd. Wherefore this Intemperance is hurt∣ful to you, who have, and do not communicate to them that want. Prepare for the Judgment that is a∣bout to come upon you. Ye that are the more Eminent search out them that are Hungry, whilst the Tower is yet unfinish'd. For when the Tower shall be finish'd, ye shall be willing to do good, and shall not find any place for it. See therefore, ye that glory in your Riches, least perhaps they groan who are in want; and their Sighing come up unto God, and ye be shut out with your Goods without the Gate of the Tower.
Behold I now warn you who are set over the Church, and love the highest Seats; be not ye like unto those that work Mischief. And they indeed carry about their Poison in Boxes; but ye contain your Poison and Me∣dicines in your Hearts; and will not purge them, and mix your Sense with a Pure Heart, that ye may find Mercy with the Great King. Take heed, my Children, that your Dissen∣tions deprive you not of your Lives. How will ye instruct the Elect of God, when ye your selves want Correction? Wherefore admonish one another, and be at Peace among your selves; that I standing before your Father, may give an Account for you unto the LORD. X. AND when she had made an end of talking with me, the six young Men that built came and carried her to the Tower; and four others took up the Seat on which she sate, and went away again, they also, to the Tower. I saw not the Faces of these, for their Backs were towards me. As she was going along
I asked her, that she would reveal to me what concern'd the three Forms in which she had appear'd unto me. But she answering said unto me; concerning these things thou must ask some other, that they may be revealed unto thee. Now, Brethren, in the First Vision the last Year, she appeared unto me exceed∣ing old, and sitting in a Chair. In another Vision, she had indeed a youthful Face, but her Flesh and Hair were old; and she talked with me standing, and was more chearful than the first time. In the third Vi∣sion, she was in all respects much younger, and comely to the Eye; only she had the Hair of an Aged Person: Yet she looked chearful, and sate upon a Seat. I was therefore very sad concerning these things, un∣til I might understand the Vision. Wherefore I saw the same Old Wo∣man in a Vision of the Night saying unto me; All Prayer needeth Hu∣mility. Fast therefore, and thou shalt learn from the LORD that which thou dost ask. I fasted therefore one Day. The same Night a young Man
appear'd to me and said; Why dost thou thus often desire Revelations in thy Prayers? Take heed that by asking many things, thou hurt not thy Body. Let these Revelations suffice thee; Canst thou see more notable Revela∣tions than those which thou hast al∣ready received? I answered and said unto him; Sir, I only ask this one thing upon the account of the three Figures of the Old Woman that ap∣peared to me, that the Revelation may be compleat. He answer'd me; You are not without Understanding, but your Doubts make you so; for∣asmuch as you have not your Heart with the LORD. I replyed and said; But I shall learn these things more carefully from you. XI. HEAR then, says he, con∣cerning the Figures, about which you enquire. And first, in the first Vision she appear'd to thee in the Shape of an Old Woman; because your ancient Spirit was decay'd, and without Strength, by reason of your Infirmities, and the Doubtfulness of your Heart. For as they who are
Old have no hope of renewing them∣selves, nor expect any thing but their Departure: So you being weakned through your worldly Affairs gave your self up to Sloath, and cast not away your Sollicitude from your self upon the LORD; and your Sense was confused, and you grew Old in your Sadness. But Sir, I would know why she sate upon a Chair? He answered; Because every one that is weak sitteth upon a Chair by reason of his Infirmity; that his Weakness may be upheld: See therefore the Figure of the first Vi∣sion. XII. IN the second Vision you saw her standing, and having a youthful Face, and more chearful than her former; but her Flesh and her Hair were ancient. Hear, said he, this Parable also. When any one grows Old, He despairs of himself by reason of his Infirmity and Po∣verty; and expects nothing but the last Day of his Life. But on the suddain an Inheritance is left to him; and he hears of it, and rises; and
being become chearful, he puts on new Strength; And now he no longer lies along, but stands; and is de∣liver'd from his former Sorrow; and sits not, but acts manfully. So you, having heard the Revelation which God revealed unto you; because God had Compassion upon you, and renew'd your Spirit; both laid a∣side your Infirmities, and Strength came to you, and you grew strong in the Faith; and God seeing your Strength rejoyced. For this cause he shewed you the Building of the Tower; and will shew other things unto you, if you shall have Peace with all your Heart among each o∣ther. XIII. BUT in the third Vision you saw her yet younger; fair and chearful, and of a serene Counte∣nance. For as if some good News comes to one that is sad, he straight∣way forgets his Sadness, and regards nothing else but the good News which he has heard; and for the rest he is comforted, and his Spirit is renew'd through the Joy which
he has received: Even so you have been renew'd in your Spirit, by see∣ing these good things. And for that you saw her sitting upon a Bench, it denotes a strong Position; because a Bench has four Feet, and stands strongly. And even the World its self is kept up by the four Elements. They therefore that repent perfect∣ly, shall be young; and they that turn from their Sins with their whole Heart, shall be establish'd. And now you have the Revelation fully; ask no more to have any thing farther revealed unto you. But if any thing be to be revealed, it shall be made manifest unto you. VISION IV. Of the Tryal and Tribulation that is about to come upon Men. I. I Saw a Vision, Brethren, twenty Days after the former Vision; a Figure of the Tribulation that is at hand. I was walking in the Field
Way: Now from the publick Way to the Mannour whither I went is about ten Furlongs. It is a Way very little frequented: And as I was walk∣ing alone, I entreated the LORD that he would confirm the Revelations which he had shew'd unto me by his Holy Church: and would grant Repentance to all his Servants, who had been offended, that his great and honourable Name might be glorified; and because he thought me Worthy to whom he might shew his Won∣ders; and that I might honour him, and give thanks unto him. And be∣hold somewhat like a Voice answer'd me; Doubt not, HERMAS. Where∣fore I began to think, and say with∣in my self; why should I doubt, seeing I am thus setled by the LORD, and have seen such glorious things? I had gone but a little far∣ther, Brethren, when behold I saw a Dust rise up to Heaven. I began to say within my self; Is there a Drove of Cattle coming, that raises such a Dust? It was about a Fur∣long off from me. And behold I saw the Dust rise more and more, inso∣much
that I began to suspect that there was somewhat extraordinary in it. And the Sun shone a little; and be∣hold I saw a great Beast, as it were a Whale; and fiery Locusts came out of his Mouth. The Heigth of the Beast was about a hundred Feet; and he had a Head like a Vas urale. large Earthen Vessel. I began to weep, and to pray unto the LORD, that he would deliver me from it. Then I call'd to mind the Word which I had heard; Doubt not, HERMAS. Wherefore, Brethren, put∣ting on the Faith of God, and remem∣bring who it was that had taught me great things, I deliver'd my self bold∣ly unto the Beast. Now the Beast came on in such a manner, as if it could with one Blast have devour'd a City. I came near unto it; and the Beast extended its whole Bulk upon the Ground; and put forth nothing but its Tongue, nor once moved its self, till I had quite pass'd by it. Now the Beast had upon its Head four Colours, first Black, then a Red, and Bloudy Colour, then a Golden; and then a White.
II. AFTER that I had pass'd by it, and was gon forward about thirty Foot; behold there met me a certain Virgin well-adorn'd, as if she had been just come out of her Bride-Chamber, all in white, having on white Shoes, and a Vail down her Face; and cover'd with shining Hair. Now I know by my former Visions that it was the Church; and thereupon grew the more chearful. And she saluted me saying, Hail O Man! I re∣turn'd the Salutation, saying, Lady, Hail! She answering said unto me, Did nothing meet you, O Man! I re∣plyed; Lady, There met me such a Beast, as seem'd able to devour a whole People: But by the Power of God, and through his singular Mercy I escap'd it. Thou didst escape it well, said she; because thou didst cast thy whole Care upon God; and open'dst thy Heart unto him; believing that thou couldst be safe by no other, than by his Great and Honourable Name. For this cause the LORD sent his Angel, who is over the Beasts, whose Name is HEGRIN, and stopp'd his
Mouth, that he should not devour thee. Thou hast escap'd a great Tryal by means of thy Faith; and because thou, didst not doubt for such a terrible Beast. Go therefore, and relate to the Elect of God, the great things that he hath done for thee. And thou shalt say unto them, that this Beast is the Figure of the Tryal that is about to come. If therefore ye shall have prepared your selves, ye may escape it, if your Heart be pure and without Spot; and if ye shall serve God all the rest of your Days without complaint. Cast all your Cares upon the LORD, and he will direct them. Believe in God, ye doubtful, because he can do all things; He can both turn a∣way his Wrath from you, and send you Help and Security. Wo to the double-minded, to those who shall hear these Words, and shall despise them; It had been better for them that they had not been born. III. THEN I ask'd her concern∣ing the four Colours which the Beast had upon its Head. But she answer'd me, saying; Again art thou curious
in that thou askest concerning these things. And I said unto her, La∣dy; Shew me what they are? Hear, said she: The Black which thou sawest, denotes the World in which you dwell. The Fiery and Bloudy Colour, signifies, that this Age must be destroyed by Fire and Bloud. The Golden Part are ye, who have escaped out of it. For as Gold is try'd by the Fire, and is made Pro∣fitable; so are ye also in like man∣ner try'd who dwell among the Men of this World. They therefore that shall endure to the end, and be proved by them, shall be purged. And as Gold, by this Tryal is cleansed and loses it Dross; so shall ye also cast away all Sorrow, and Trouble; and be made pure for the Building of the Tower. But the White Colour, de∣notes the time of the World which is to come, in which the Elect of God shall inhabit: Because the Elect of God shall be pure and without Spot unto Life Eternal. Wherefore do not thou cease to speake these things in the Ears of the Saints. Here ye have the Figure of the great Tri∣bulation
that is about to come; which if you please, shall be nothing to you. Keep therefore in mind the things which I have said unto you. When she had spoken thus much, she departed: But I saw not whither she went. But suddainly I heard a Noise, and I turn'd back, being a∣fraid; for I thought that the Beast was coming toward me.
The Second BOOK OF St. HERMAS Which is Called His COMMANDS. The Introduction. WHEN I had pray'd at home, and was sate down upon the Bed; a certain Man came in to me with a Reverend Look, in the Habit of a SHEPHERD cloath'd with a white Cloak, having his Bag upon his Back, and his Staff in his Hand, and saluted me. I re∣turn'd his Salutation; and immedi∣ately he sate down by me, and said unto me; I am sent by that Venera∣ble
Messenger, that I should dwell with thee all the remaining Days of thy life. But I thought that he was come to try me, and said unto him, Who are you? For I know to whom I am delivered. He said unto me, Do you not know me? I answer'd, No. I am, said he, that SHEPHERD, to whose Care you are delivered. Whilst he was yet speak∣ing his Shape was changed; and when I knew that it was he to whom I was committed, I was asham'd, and a suddain Fear came upon me, and I was utterly overcome with Sadness, because I had spoken so foolishly un∣to him. But he said unto me, Be not asham'd, but stir up Vertue in thy Mind, through the Commands which I am about to deliver unto thee. For, said he, I am sent to shew unto thee all those things again, which thou hast seen before; and especially such of them as may be of most use unto you. And first of all write my COM∣MANDS and SIMILITUDES, that by often reading of them, you may the more easily Observe them. keep them in Memory. Whereupon I wrote his Commands
and Similitudes, as he bad me. Which things if when you have heard, ye shall observe to do them; and shall exercise your selves in them, and walk according to them with a pure Mind; ye shall receive from the LORD those things which he has promised unto you. But if having heard them ye shall not repent, but shall still go on to add to your Sins; ye shall be pu∣nish'd by him. All these things that SHEPHERD, the Angel of Repen∣tance, commanded me to write. The First COMMAND. Of Believing in ONE GOD. Irenaeus lib. 1. c. 3. Origen. de Princ. l. 1. c. 3. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. l. v. c. 8. Atha∣nas. de Incarn. Verb. &c.FIRST of all believe that there is One God who created and fi∣nished All things; and made All things out of Nothing. He com∣prehends all things, and is only Im∣mense, not to be comprehended by Any. Who can neither be defined by any Words, nor conceived by the Mind. Therefore believe in him, and fear
him; and fearing him abstain from all Evil. Keep these things, and cast all Iniquity far from thee; and put on Righteousness; and thou shalt live to God, if thou shalt keep this Commandment. The Second COMMAND. That we must avoid Detraction; and do our Alms-Deeds with Simplicity. I. HE said unto me; Be inno∣cent and Simple. without disguise; so shalt thou be like an Infant who knows no Malice, which destroys the Life of Man. And especially see that thou speak Evil of None; nor willingly hear any one speak Evil of Any. For if thou shalt hear them, thou shalt be partaker of the Sin of him that speaketh Evil; and by be∣lieving such a one thou also shalt have Sin; because thou believedst him that spake Evil of thy Brother.
Vid. Antioch. Hom. xxix. Detraction is a pernicious thing; an inconstant Daemon. Evil Spirit; that ne∣ver continues in Peace, but is always in Discord. Wherefore refrain thy self from it; and keep Peace ever∣more with thy Brother. Put on a Holy Constancy, in which there are no Sins; but all is full of Joy: and do good of thy Labours. Vid. Antioch. Hom. xcviii. Give Simply. without distinction to all that are in Want; not doubting to whom thou givest. But give to All; for God will have us give to all of His own. the Goods which he dispenses to us. They therefore that receive shall give an Account to God, both where∣fore they received, and for what End. And they that receive with∣out a real need, shall give an account for it; but he that gives shall be In∣nocent: For he has fulfill'd his Duty as he received it from God; not making any Choice to whom he should give, and to whom not. And this Service he did with Simplicity, and Gloriously to God. to the Glory of God. Keep therefore this Command according as I have deliver'd it unto thee; that thy Repentance may be found
to be sincere; and that Good may come to thy House; and have a pure Heart. The Third COMMAND. Of avoiding Lying and the Re∣pentance of HERMAS for his Dissimulation. Antioch. Hom. lxvi. MOREOVER he said unto me; Love Truth; and let all the Speech be true which pro∣ceeds out of thy Mouth; that the Spirit which the LORD hath appoint∣ed in thy Flesh may be found true towards all Men; and the LORD be magnified, who hath given such a Spirit unto thee: Because God is true in all his Words, and there is no Lie found in him. But they that lie, deny the LORD; See below, Book lii. Si. x Chap. 32. not rendring to God what they received from him. For they received the Spirit without a Lie: if therefore they make that a Lyar, they defile the Command∣ment of the LORD, and become De∣ceivers.
And when I heard this, I wept bitterly. And when he saw me weeping he said unto me; Why weepest thou? And I said; Because, Sir, I doubt whether I can be saved? He ask'd me, Wherefore? I reply'd; Because, Sir, I never spake a true Word in my Life; but always lived in Dissimulation; and affirm'd a Lie for Truth to all Men; and no Man contradicted me, but all gave Credit to my Words. How then can I live, seeing I have done in this manner? And he said unto me; Thou thinkest well, and truly. For thou oughtest, as the Servant of God, to have walked in the Truth, and not have joyn'd an Evil Con∣science with the Spirit of Truth; nor have grieved the Holy and true Spirit of God. And I reply'd unto him; Sir, I never before hearkned so diligently to these things. He answer'd; Now thou hearest them: Take care from henceforth, that even those things which thou hast formerly spoken falsly for the sake of thy Business, may by thy present Truth, receive Credit. For even
those things may be credited, if for the time to come thou shalt speak the Truth: and If thou shalt keep the Truth by so doing thou mayst attain unto Life. And who∣soever shall hearken unto this Com∣mand, and do it; and shall depart from all Lying, he shall live unto God. The Fourth COMMAND. Of putting away ones Wife for Adultery. I. FURTHERMORE, said he, I command thee, that thou keep Chastity. thy self Chast; and that thou suf∣fer not any thought Another Mans. of any other Marriage, or of Fornification, to enter into thy Heart; For such a Thought produces a great Sin. But be thou at all times mindful of the LORD, and thou shalt never sin. For if such an Evil Thought should arise in thy Heart, thou wouldst be guil∣ty of a great Sin; and they who do such things, follow the way of Death.
Look therefore to thy self, and keep thy self from such a Thought: For where Chastity remains in the Heart of a Righteous Man, there an Evil Thought ought never to arise. And I said unto him, Sir, Suffer me to speak a little with you. He bad me, Say on. And I answer'd, Sir, If a Man shall have a Wife that is faith∣ful in the LORD, and shall catch her in Adultery; shall a Man sin that continues to live still with her? And he said unto me; As long as he is ignorant of her Sin, he commits no fault in living with her: But if a Man shall know his Wife to have offended; and she shall not repent of her Sin, but go on still in her Fornication, and a Man shall con∣tinue nevertheless to live with her, he shall become guilty of her Sin, and partake with her in her Adulte∣ry. And I said unto him; what therefore is to be done if the Woman continues on in her Sin? He an∣swered; Let her Husband put her away, and let him continue by him∣self. But if he shall put away his Wife, and marry another, he also
shall commit Adultery. And I said; What if the Woman that is so put a∣way shall repent, and be willing to return to her Husband, shall she not be received by him? He said unto me, Yes; and if her Husband shall not receive her, he will sin; and commit a great Offence against him∣self: But he ought to receive her though an Offender, if she repents; only not often. For to the Servants of God there is but one Repentance. And for this Cause a Man that put∣teth away his Wife ought not to take another, because she may re∣pent. This Act is alike both in the Man and in the Woman. Now they commit Adultery, not only who pollute their Flesh, but who also make an Image. See 1 Cor. vii.15▪ If therefore a Woman perseveres in any thing of this kind, and repents not; depart from her, and live not with her: Otherwise thou also shalt be Par∣taker of her Sin. But it is therefore commanded that both the Man and Woman should remain unmarried, because such Persons may repent. Nor do I in this administer any Oc∣casion
for the doing of these things so; but rather that whoso has offend∣ed should not offend any more. But for their former Sins, God who has the Power of Healing will give a Remedy: For it is he who can do all things. II. I ASKED him again, and said; Seeing my LORD has thought me worthy with whom to dwell continually; speak a few Words unto me, because I understand no∣thing and my Heart is hardned through my former Conversation; and open my Sense. Understanding be∣cause I am very dull, and apprehend nothing at all. And he answering said unto me; I am the Praepositus: See below, Chap. iii. Minister of Repentance, and give Sense. Under∣standing to all that repent. Do's it not seem to thee to be Great Wis∣dom. a very wise thing to repent? Because he that do's so gets a great Sense. Feeling: For he Sense. feels himself to have sinn'd and done wickedly in the sight of the LORD; and he remembers In his Vnder∣standing. with∣in himself that he has offended, and repents and do's no more wickedly;
but do's that which is good, and humbles his Soul, and afflicts it, be∣cause he has offended. You see therefore that Repentance is a deep Sense. And I said unto him; For this cause, Sir, I enquire diligently into all things, because I am a Sin∣ner, that I may know what I must do that I may live; and because my Sins are many. And he said unto me; Thou shalt live if thou shalt keep these my Commandments. And whosoever shall hear and do these Commands, shall live unto God. III. AND I said unto him; I have even now heard from certain Teachers that there is no other Re∣pentance besides that of Baptism; when we go down into the Water, and receive the Forgiveness of our Sins: and that after that, we must sin no more, but live in Chastity. Purity. And he said unto me, thou hast Rightly hear been rightly inform'd. Neverthe∣less seeing now thou enquirest dili∣gently into all things, I will mani∣fest this also unto thee; yet not so as to give any Occasion of sinning
either to those who shall hereafter believe, or who have already believ'd in the LORD. For neither they who have already believed, or who shall hereafter believe have any Repen∣tance of Sins, but Forgiveness of them. But as to those who are al∣ready called, the LORD before Those days. that time appointed Repentance: Be∣cause God knoweth the Thoughts of all Mens Hearts, and their Infirmi∣ties; and the manifold Wickedness of the Devil, who is always con∣triving something against the Ser∣vants of God; and maliciously lays Snares for them. Therefore our merciful LORD had Compassion to∣wards his Creature, and appointed that Repentance, and gave unto me the Power of it. And therefore I say unto thee, If any one after that Great and Holy Calling shall be tempted by the Devil and Sin, he has but one Vid. Annot. Coteler. in loc. pag. 60, 61. Repentance. But if he shall often sin and repent; it shall not profit such a one; for he shall hardly live unto God. And I said, Sir, I am restored again to Life since I have thus diligently hearken'd to
these Commands. For I perceive, that if I shall not hereafter add any more to my Sins, I shall be saved. And he said, Thou shalt be saved; and so shall all others, as many as shall observe these Command∣ments. IV. AND again I said unto him; Sir, seeing thou hearest me patient∣ly, shew me yet one thing more. Tell me, saith he, what it is. And I said; If a Husband or Wife die, and the Party which survives marry again, do's he sin in so doing? Vid. Not. Co∣teler. in loc. p. 64. B. C. Rom. vii.3. Comp. 1 Cor. vii. He that marries (says he) sins not: Howbeit if he shall remain single, he shall thereby gain to himself great Honour with the LORD. Keep therefore thy Chastity, and Mode∣sty; and thou shalt live unto God. Observe from henceforth those things which I speak with thee, and com∣mand thee to observe; from the time that I have been deliver'd un∣to thee, and dwell in thy House. So shall thy former Sins be for∣given, if thou shalt keep these my Commandments. And in like man∣ner
shall all others be forgiven, who shall observe these my Command∣ments. The Fifth COMMAND. Of the Sadness of the Heart: And of Patience. I. BE Patient, says he, and of an Even-Mind; so shalt thou have Dominion over all Wicked Works, and shalt fulfil all Righte∣ousness. For if thou shalt be Pa∣tient, the Holy Spirit which dwel∣leth in thee shall be pure; and not be darkned by any other Evil Spirit; But being full of Joy shall be en∣larged, and feast in the The Vessel. Body in which it dwells, and shall appear before the LORD with Joy, and in great Peace. But if any Disposition to Anger: And so in what follows. Anger shall over-take thee, presently the Holy Spirit which is in thee will be straightned and seek to depart from thee. For he is choaked by the Evil
Spirit; and has not the Place. Liberty of appearing before the LORD as he would. For he is grieved by Disposition to Anger: And so in what follows. An∣ger. Vid. Antioch. Hom. x. When therefore both these Spirits dwell together, it is destru∣ctive to a Man. As if one should take a little Wormwood, and put it into a Vessel of Honey, the whole Honey would be spoiled; and a great Quantity of Honey is corrupt∣ed by a very little Wormwood, and loses the Sweetness of Honey, and has no longer any Favour with its Lord; because the whole Honey is made bitter, and loses its Use. But if no Wormwood be put into the Honey it is sweet and profitable to its Lord. Thus is an Equality of Mind sweeter than Honey, and pro∣fitable to the LORD, who dwel∣leth in it. But Disposition to Anger: And so in what follows. Anger is unpro∣fitable. If therefore Disposition to Anger: And so in what follows. Anger shall be mixed with Equanimity, the Soul is distress'd, and its Prayer is not profitable To. with God. And I said unto him; Sir, I would know the Sinfulness of Disposition to Anger: And so in what follows. Anger, that I may keep my self from it. And he said unto me, Thou shalt know it;
and if thou shalt not keep thy self from it, thou shalt lose thy Hope with all thy House. Wherefore de∣part from it. For I the Angel. Messenger of Righteousness am with thee; and all that depart from it, as many as shall repent with all their Hearts, shall live unto God; and I will be with them, and will keep them all. For all such as have repented, have been justified, by the Angel. Messenger which bringeth Salvation. II. AND now, says he, hear the Wickedness of Angriness. Anger; How E∣vil and Hurtful it is, and how it o∣verthrows the Servants of God. For nothing can hurt those that are full of Faith, Because the Vertue. Power of God is with them. But he over∣throws the doubtful, and those that are destitute of Faith: But as often as he sees the other sort, he will cast himself into their Hearts. Let not therefore any Man or Woman be in Bitterness for any thing; whether for such things as they have occasion for here; or for Sustenance; or for any vain Word, if any should chance
to fall in; or by reason of any Friend; or for any Debt; or for any superfluous things of the like Nature. For these things are foolish, and superfluous, and vain to the Servants of God. But Equanimity is strong, and forcible; and of great Power, and sitteth in great Enlarge∣ment; is chearful, rejocing in Peace; and glorifying God at all times with Meekness. And this Equality of Mind dwells with those that are full of Faith. But Angriness: Disposition to Anger. See a∣bove. Anger is foolish, and light, and empty. Now Bitter∣ness is bred through Folly; by Bit∣terness, Angriness: Disposition to Anger. See a∣bove. Anger; by Angriness: Disposition to Anger. See a∣bove. Anger, Fury. And this Fury arising from many evil Principles, worketh a great and uncurable Sin. For when all these things are in the same Vessel. Man in which the Holy Spirit dwells; the Vessel cannot contain them, but runs over: And because the tender Spirit cannot tarry with the Evil-One; it departs and dwells with him that is mild. When therefore it is departed from the Man in whom it dwelt; that Man becomes desti∣tute of the Holy Spirit, and is af∣terwards
filled with Wicked Spi∣rits, and is blinded with Evil Thoughts. Thus do's it happen to all Angry Men. Wherefore de∣part thou from Anger, and put on Equanimity, and resist Wrath; and thou shalt be found with Modesty and Chastity by God. Take good heed therefore that thou neglect not this Commandment. For if thou shalt obey this Command, then shalt thou also be able to observe the o∣ther Commandments which I shall command thee. Wherefore strengthen thy self now in these Commands, that thou mayst live unto God. And whosoever shall observe these Com∣mandments shall live unto God. The Sixth COMMAND. That every Man has two Vid Coteler. Annot. in loc. pag. 67.68. Comp. Edit. Oxon. p. 61. Not. a. Angels, and of the Suggestions of both. I COMMANDED thee, said he, in my first Commandment, that thou shouldst keep Faith, and Fear,
and Repentance. Yes, Sir, said I. He continued; But now I will shew thee the Vertues of these Commands, that thou mayst know their Effects; how they are Placed. prescribed alike to the Just and Unjust. Do thou there∣fore believe the Righteous, but give no Credit to the Unrighteous. For Righteousness keepeth the right Way, but Unrighteousness the wicked Way. Do thou therefore keep the right Way, and leave that which is Evil. For the Evil Way has not a Good End, but hath many Stumb∣ling-Blocks; it is rugged and full of Thorns, and leads to Destruction, and is hurtful to all such as walk in it. But they who go in the right Way, walk with Evenness, and without Offence; because it is not Rough, nor Thorny. Thou seest therefore, how it is best to walk in this Way. Thou shalt therefore go, says he, and all others as many as be∣lieve in God with all their Heart shall go through it. And now, says he; Vid Antioch Hom. lxi. Comp Orig. L. lii. De Princip. Et in Lc. Hom xxxv. Understand first of all what belongs to Faith. There are two Angels with Man; One of Righte∣ousness,
the Other of Iniquity. And I said unto him; Sir, How shall I know that there are two such Angels with Man? Hear, says he, and un∣derstand. The Angel of Righteous∣ness, is Mild, and Modest, and Gen∣tle, and Quiet. When therefore he gets into thy Heart, immediately he talks with thee of Righteousness, of Modesty, of Chastity, of Bounti∣fulness, of Forgiveness, of Charity, and Piety. When all these things come into thy Heart, know then that the Angel of Righteousness is with thee. Wherefore hearken to this Angel and to his Works. Learn also the Works of the Angel of Ini∣quity. He is first of all Bitter, and Angry, and Foolish; and his Works are pernicious, and overthrow the Servants of God. When therefore these things come into thy Heart; thou shalt know him by his Works, that it is the Angel of Iniquity. And I said unto him; Sir, How shall I understand these things? Hear, says he, and understand. When Anger overtakes thee, or Bitterness, know that he is in thee: As also, when
the desire of many Works. things, and of the best Meats, and of Drunkenness; when the Love of what belongs to others; of Pride, and of much Speech, of Ambition; and of the like things, come upon thee. When therefore these things arise in thy Heart, know that the Angel of Ini∣quity is with thee. Seeing there∣fore thou knowest his Works, depart from them all, and give no Credit to him: Because his Works are E∣vil, and agree not to the Servants of God. Here therefore thou hast the Works of both these Angels. Know now and believe the Angel of Righ∣teousness, because his Instruction is Good. For let a Man be never so happy; yet if the Thoughts of the other Angel arise in his Heart, that Man or Woman must needs sin. But let a Man or Woman be never so Wicked, and the Works of the Angel of Righteousness come into his Heart, that Man or Woman must needs do some Good. Thou seest therefore how it is good to follow the Angel of Righteousness. If there∣fore thou shalt follow him, and be∣lieve
in his Works, thou shalt live unto God. And as many as shall be∣lieve in his Works, shall live also unto God. The Seventh COMMAND. That we must fear God, but not the Devil. Vid. Antioch. Hom. cxxvii. FEAR God, says he, and keep his Commandments. For if thou keepest his Commandments thou shalt be powerful in every Work, and all thy Counsel shall be excellent. For by fearing God, thou shalt do every thing well. This is that Fear with which thou must be affected, that thou mayst be saved. But fear not the Devil: For if thou fearest the LORD thou shalt have Dominion over him; because there is no Power in him. Now if there be no Power in him, then neither is he to be feared. But he in whom Power is Excellent, he is also to be feared. For
every one that has Power is to be feared. But he that has no Power is despised by every one. Fear the Works of the Devil because they are Evil. For by fearing the LORD, thou wilt fear and not do the Works of the Devil, but keep thy self from them. For there is a twofold Fear; For if whilst thou fearest the LORD thou wilt do that which is Evil, thou shalt not do even that. But if thou wilt do good, the Fear of the LORD is Strong, and Great, and Glorious. Wherefore, Fear God and thou shalt live. And whosoever shall fear him, and keep his Commandments, their Life is with the LORD. But they who keep them not, neither is Life in them. The Eighth COMMAND. That we must Flee from Evil, and Do Good. I HAVE told thee, said he, that there are two kinds of Crea∣tures of the LORD, and that there
is a two-fold Antioch. Hom. lxxix. Abstinence. From some therefore thou must abstain, and from others not. I answered, Tell me, Sir, from what I must abstain, and from what not. Hearken, said he. Keep thy self from Evil, and do it not. But abstain not from Good, but do it. For if thou shalt abstain from what is Good, and not do it; thou shalt sin. Abstain there∣fore from all Evil, and thou shalt know all Righteousness. I said; What Evil things are they from which I must abstain? Hearken, said he; from Adultery; from Drunkenness; from wicked Riots; from Excess of Eating; from Dain∣tiness and Dishonesty; from Pride; from Denials; from Lying; from Detraction; from feigned Wicked∣ness; from Remembrance of Inju∣ries; and from Evil Reports. For these are Of all Ini∣quities. all the Works of Iniqui∣ty; from which the Servant of God must abstain. For he that cannot keep himself from these things, can∣not live unto God. But hear, said he, what follows of these kind of things. And indeed many more
there are from which the Servant of God must abstain. From Theft, and Cheating; from False-Witness; from Covetousness; from Boasting; and all other things of the like Nature. Do these things seem to thee to be E∣vil or not? Indeed they are very Evil to the Servants of God. Where∣fore every such Person must abstain from all these Vid. Coteler. in loc. Works. Keep thy self therefore from them, that thou mayst live unto God, and be written among those that abstain from them. And thus have I shewn thee what things thou must avoid: Now learn from what thou must not abstain. Abstain not from any good Works, but do them. Hear, said he, what the Vertue of those good Works is which thou must do, that thou mayst be saved. The first of all is Faith; the Fear of the LORD; Charity; Concord; Pie∣ty; Equity; Truth; Patience; Cha∣stity. There is nothing better than these things in the Life of Man; who shall keep and do these things in their Life. Hear next what fol∣low these. To minister to the Wi∣dows;
not to despise the Father∣less and Poor; to redeem the Ser∣vants of God from Necessity; to be Hospitable; for in Hospitality there is sometimes great Fruit. Not to be contentious, but be quiet; to be humble above all Men; to reverence the Aged; to labour to be Righte∣ous; to keep up Brotherhood; to bear Affronts; to be equal minded; not to cast away those that have fallen from the Faith; but to make them gentle; to admonish Sinners; not to oppress those that are our Debtors; and all other things of alike kind. Do these things seem to thee to be good, or not? And I said, what can be better than these Words? Live, then said he, in these Commandments, and do not depart from them. For if thou shalt keep all these Command∣ments, thou shalt live unto God. And all they that shall keep these Com∣mandments shall live unto God.
The Ninth COMMAND. That we must ask of God daily; and without Doubting. AGAIN he said unto me; Vid. Antioch. Hom. lxxxiii. Re∣move from thee all Doubting; and Question nothing at all. When thou askest any thing of the LORD, say not within thy self; How shall I be able to ask any thing of the LORD and receive it, seeing I am so great a Sinner against him? Do not think thus, but turn unto the LORD with all thy Heart. Ask without Doubting, and thou shalt know the Mercy of the LORD; How that he will not forsake thee, but will fulfil the Request of thy Soul. For God is not as Men, mindful of the Inju∣ries he has received; but he forgets Injuries, and has Compassion upon his Creature. Wherefore purifie thy Heart from all the Vices of this pre∣sent World; and observe the Com∣mands I have before deliver'd unto thee from God; and thou shalt re∣ceive
whatsoever good things thou shalt ask, and nothing shall be want∣ing unto thee of all thy Petitions; if thou shalt ask of the LORD without doubting. But they that are not such, shall obtain none of those things which they ask. For they that are full of Faith, ask with Confidence, and receive from the LORD, be∣cause they ask without doubting. But he that doubts; shall hardly live unto God, except he repent. Wherefore purifie thy Heart from doubting, and put on Faith; and trust in God; and thou shalt receive all that thou shalt ask. But and if thou shouldst chance to ask somewhat and not receive it, yet do not therefore doubt, because thou hast not pre∣sently received the Petition of thy Soul. For it may be thou shalt not yet receive it for thy Tryal, or else for some Sin which thou knowest not. But do not thou leave off to ask, Asking the Petition of thy Soul. and then thou shalt receive. Else if thou shalt cease to ask, thou must complain of thy self, and not of God, that he has not given unto thee what thou didst desire. Consider there∣fore
this Doubting how cruel and per∣nicious it is; and how it utterly roots out many from the Faith, who were very faithful and firm. For this Doubting is the Daughter of the De∣vil; and deals very wickedly with its Servants. Despise it therefore, and thou shalt rule over it In every thing. on every Occasion. Put on a firm and power∣ful Faith. For Faith promises all things, and perfects all things. But doubting will not believe, that it shall obtain any thing, by all that it can do. Thou seest therefore, says he, how Faith cometh from above, from God; and has great Power. But Doubting is an Earthly Spirit, and proceedeth from the Devil, and has no Strēgth. Do thou therefore keep the Vertue of Faith, and depart from Doubting, in which is no Ver∣tue, and thou shalt live unto God. And all shall live unto God, as many as shall do these things.
The Tenth COMMAND. Of the Sadness of the Heart; and that we must take heed not to grieve the Spirit of God that is in us. I. PUT all Sadness far from thee; for it is the Sister of Doubt∣ing and of Anger. How, Sir, said I, Is it the Sister of these? For Sad∣ness, and Anger, and Doubting, seem to me to be very different from one another. And he answered; Without Sense thou dost not understand it. Art thou without Sense that thou dost not understand it? For Sadness is the most mischievous of all Spirits, and the worst to the Servants of God: It destroys the Spirits of all Men, and torments the Holy Spirit; and again it saves. Sir, said I, I am very foolish, and understand not these Questions. things. I cannot apprehend how it can torment, and yet save? Hear, said he, and understand. They who never sought out the Truth, nor en∣quired concerning the Majesty of God; but only believed, are involved in the Affairs of the Heathen. And
there is another Vid. Edit. Oxon. p. 70. b. Comp. 2 Cor. vii.10. lying Prophet, that destroys the Senses of the Servants of God; that is, of those that are doubtful, not of those that fully trust in the LORD. Now those doubtful Persons come to him, as to a Divine Spirit, and enquire of him, what shall befal them. And this lying Pro∣phet, having no Power in him of the Divine Spirit, answers them ac∣cording to their Demands; and fills their Souls with Promises according as they desire. Howbeit that Pro∣phet is vain, and answers vain things to those who are themselves vain. And whatsoever is asked of him by vain Men, he answers them vainly. Nevertheless he speaketh some things truly. For the Devil fills him with his Spirit, that he may overthrow some of the Righteous. II. WHOSOEVER therefore are strong in the Faith of the LORD, and have put on the Truth; they are not joyned to such Spirits, but depart from them. But those that are doubt∣ful, and often repenting; like the Hea∣thens, consult them, and heap up
to themselves great Sin, serving I∣dols. As many therefore as are such, enquire of them upon every Occa∣sion; worship Idols, and are foolish, and void of the Truth. For every Spirit that is given from God is not asked; but having the Power of the Divinity speaks all things of its self; because it comes from above from the Power of the Holy Spirit. But he that being ask'd speaks ac∣cording to Mens desires, and con∣cerning many other Affairs of this present World, understands not the things which relate unto God. For these Spirits are darkned through such Affairs, and corrupted, and broken. As good Vines if they are neglected, are oppress'd with Weeds and Thorns, and at last kill'd by them; So are the Men who believe such Spirits: They fall into many Actions and Businesses, and are void of Sense, and when they think of things per∣taining unto God, they understand nothing at all. But if at any time they chance to hear any thing con∣cerning the LORD, their Senses. Thoughts are upon their Business: But they
that have the Fear of the LORD, and search out the Truth concerning God, have all their Thoughts with the LORD. They apprehend what∣soever is said to them, and forth∣with they understand it, because they have the Fear of the LORD in them. For where the Spirit of the LORD dwells, there is also a great Sense added. Wherefore joyn thy self to the LORD, and thou shalt understand and apprehend all things. III. LEARN now, O Unwise Man! How Sadness grieves the Holy Spirit, and how it saves. When a Man that is doubtful is engaged in any Affair, and do's not accomplish it by reason of his Doubting; this Sadness enters into him, and grieves the Holy Spirit, and makes him sad. Again, Anger when it overtakes any Man for any Business, he is great∣ly moved; and Anger possesses his Heart; and he is disturb'd in his Work which he is about, and after∣wards repents, because he did amiss. Thus both Doubting and Sadness hurt the Holy Spirit. Doubting,
because his Work did not succeed; and Sadness, because he angr'd the Holy Spirit. Antioch. Hom. xxv. Remove therefore Sad∣ness from thy self; and offend not the Holy Spirit which dwelleth in thee; least he ask the LORD, and depart from thee. For the Spirit of the LORD which is given to us in the Flesh, endures not Sadness. Where∣fore cloath thy self with Chearful∣ness, which has always Favour with the LORD, and thou shalt rejoyce in it. For every chearful Man do's well, and relishes those things that are good, and despises Unrighteous∣ness. But the sad Man do's wicked∣ly, because he grieves the Holy Spi∣rit, which is given to the chearful Man. And again he do's ill, because he prays with Sadness unto the LORD, except he first makes a thankful acknowledgment unto him of former Mercies; and obtains not of God what he asks. For the Prayer of a sad Man has not always Effi∣cacy to come up to the Altar of God. And I said unto him, Sir, Why has not the Prayer of a sad Man Vertue to come up to the Altar of God?
Because, said he, that Sadness re∣maineth in his Heart. When there∣fore a Man's Prayer shall be accom∣panied with Sadness, it will not suf∣fer his Requests to ascend pure to the Altar of God. For as Wine when it is mingled with Vinegar, has not the Sweetness it had before; so Sad∣ness being mix'd with the Holy Spi∣rit, suffers not a Man's Prayer to be Pure, as it would be otherwise. Where∣fore purifie thy self from Sadness, which is Evil, and thou shalt live unto God. And all others shall live unto God, as many as shall lay aside Sadness, and put on Chearfulness. The Eleventh COMMAND. That the Spirits and Prophets are to be tried by their Works; and of a Two-fold Spirit. HE shew'd me certain Men sit∣ting upon Benches, and one sitting in a Chair: And he said un∣to me; Seest thou those who sit
upon the Benches? Sir, said I, I see them. He answer'd; They are the Faithful; and he who sits in the Chair, is an Earthly Spirit. For he cometh not into the Church Of Men. with the Faithful, but avoids it. But he joyns himself to the Doubtful and Empty; and prophecies to them in hidden Places and Corners; and pleases them by speaking according to all the Desires of their Hearts. For that which is fitted to empty Vessels is not broken, but the one agrees to the other. But when such a one comes into the Company of Just Men, who have the Spirit of God, and they pray unto the LORD; that Man is emptied, because that Earthly Spirit flies from him, and he is dumb, and cannot speak any thing. As if in a Store-House you shall stop up Wine or Oyl; and a∣mong those Vessels shall place an empty Jar; and shall afterwards come to open it, you shall find it empty as you stopp'd it up: So those em∣pty Prophets, when they come a∣mong the Spirits of the Just, are found to be such as they came. Thus
you see the Life of each of these kind of Prophets. Wherefore prove that Man by his Life and Works, who says that he hath the Holy Spirit. And believe the Spirit which comes from God, and has Power as such. But believe not the Earthly Spirit, in whom there is no Trust nor Vertue, but he is empty; be∣cause he is from the Devil. Hear now the Similitude which I am a∣bout to speak unto thee. Take a Stone, and throw it up towards Heaven; or take a Spout of Water, and mount it up thither-ward; and see if thou canst reach unto Heaven. Sir, said I; How can this be done? For neither of those things, which you have mentioned, are possible to be done. And he answer'd; There∣fore as these things cannot be done, so is the Earthly Spirit without Ver∣tue, and without Effect. Under∣stand yet farther the Power of the other, in this Similitude. The Grains of Hail that drop down are exceeding small; and yet when they fall upon the Head of a Man, how do they cause Pain to it? And again; con∣sider
the Droppings of a House; how the little Drops falling upon the Earth, work a Hollow in the Stones. So in like manner the least things which come from above, and fall upon the Earth, have great force. Wherefore join thy self to this Spirit, which has Power; and depart from the other which is empty. The Twelfth COMMAND. Of a two-fold Desire: That the Com∣mands of God are not impossible: And that the Devil is not to be feared by them that Believe. I. AGAIN he said unto me; Vid. Antioch. Hom. lxxiv. Re∣move from thee all Evil De∣sires, and put on all Good and Holy Desires. For having put on a good Desire, thou shalt hate that which is Evil, and bridle it as thou wilt. But an Evil Desire is dreadful, and hard to be appeas'd. It is very horrible and wild; and by its Wildness con∣sumes Men. And especially if the
Servant of God shall chance to fall into it, except he be very Wise, he shall be ruined by it. For it de∣stroys those who have not the Garment of a good Desire; and engages them in the Affairs of this present World, and delivers them unto Death. Sir, said I, What are the Works of an evil Desire, which shall bring Men unto Death? Shew them to me, that I may depart from them. Hear, said he, in what Works an evil Desire shall bring the Ser∣vants of God unto Death. The Spirit of all Men is Earthly, and light, and has no Vertue, and speaks much. I said; How then shall a Man be able to discern them? Con∣sider what I am going to say con∣cerning both kinds of Vessels. Men; and as I speak unto thee so shalt thou prove the Prophet of God, and the False Prophet. And first, try the Man who hath the Spirit of God; because the Spirit, which is from above, is humble, and quiet, and departs from all Wickedness, and from the vain Desires of the present World; and makes himself more
humble than all Men; and answers to none when he is ask'd; nor to every one singly; neither do's the Spirit of God speak to a Man when he will; but speaks when God pleases. When therefore a Man who has the Spirit of God shall come into the Church of the Righteous, who have the Faith of God, and they pray unto the LORD; then the Holy Angel of God fills that Man with the Blessed Spirit, and he speaks in the Congregation as he is moved by God. Thus therefore is the Spirit of God known, because whosoever speaks by the Spirit of God, speaketh as the LORD will. II. HEAR now concerning the Earthly Spirit which is empty and foolish, and without Vertue. And first of all the Man, who may be supposed to have this Spirit exalteth himself, and desires to have the first Seat, and is wicked and full of Words; and spends his time in Plea∣sure, and in all manner of Volup∣tuousness; and receives the Reward of his Divination. Which if he re∣ceives
not, he do's not divine. Al∣though the Spirit of God may re∣ceive Reward, and Divine: But it becomes not the Prophet of God so to do. But it is an evil Desire to covet another Mans Wife; or for a Woman to covet anothers Hus∣band; as also to desire the Dainties of Riches; and Multitude of super∣fluous Meats; and Drunkenness; and many Delights. For in much Delicacy there is Folly; and many Pleasures are needless to the Servants of God. Such Lusting therefore is evil and pernicious, which brings to Death the Servants of God. For all such Lusting is from the Devil. Whosoever therefore shall depart from all evil Desires, shall live unto God: But they that are subject un∣to them shall die for ever. For this evil Lusting is deadly. Do thou therefore put on the Desire of Righ∣teousness, and being armed with the Fear of the LORD resist all wicked Lusting. For Fear dwelleth in good Desires; and when evil Coveting shall see thee arm'd with the Fear of the LORD, and resisting
it; it will flie far from thee, and not appear before thee, but be afraid of thy Armour; and thou shalt have the Victory, and be crown'd for it; and shalt attain unto that Desire which is good; and shalt give the Victory which thou hast obtain'd unto God, and shalt serve him in doing what thou thy self wouldst do. For if thou shalt be subject to good Desires, and follow them; thou shalt be able to get the Dominion over thy wicked Lustings; and they shall be subject to thee as thou wilt. III. AND I said; Sir, I would know how I ought to serve that Desire which is good? Hearken, said he, Fear God, and put thy Trust in him; and love Truth, and Righteousness; and do that which is good. If thou shalt do these things, thou shalt be an approved Servant of God; and shalt serve him. And when he had fulfilled these Twelve Commands, he said unto me; Thou hast now these Commands, walk in them; and exhort those that hear them that they repent; and that
they keep their Repentance pure all the remaining Days of their Life. And fulfil diligently this Service which I commit to thee, and thou shalt receive great Advantage by it, and shalt find Favour with all such as shall repent, and shall believe thy Words. For I am with thee, and will force them to believe. And I said unto him; Sir, These Commands are Great and Excellent, and able to chear the Heart of that Man that shall be able to keep them. But Sir, I cannot tell, whether they can be observed by any Man? He answer'd; Thou shalt easily keep these Com∣mands, and they shall not be hard: Howbeit if thou shalt suffer it once to enter into thy Heart that they cannot be kept by any one, thou shalt not fulfil them. But now I say unto thee; If thou shalt not observe these Commands, but shalt dissemble, thou shalt not be saved, nor thy Children, nor thy House: Because thou hast judged that these Commands cannot be kept by Man.
IV. THESE things he spake very angrily unto me, insomuch that he greatly affrighted me. For he changed his Countenance, so that a Man could not bear his Anger. And when he saw me altogether troubled and confounded, he began to speak more moderately and chearfully say∣ing; O foolish, and without Under∣standing! Unconstant, not know∣ing the Majesty of God, how great, but withal how merciful he is; who created the World for Man; and hath made every Creature subject unto him, and given him all Power, that he should be able to overcome all these Commands. He is able, said he, to overcome all these Commands, who has the LORD in his Heart: But they who have the LORD only in their Mouths, and their Heart is hardned, are far from the LORD. To such Persons these Commands are hard and difficult. Put there∣fore ye that are empty and light in the Faith, the LORD your God, and keep him in your Hearts; and ye shall understand how that nothing is
more easie then these Commands, nor more pleasant, nor more gentle and holy: And turn your selves to the LORD your God, and forsake the Devil and his Pleasures, because they are Evil, and Bitter, and Impure. And fear not the Devil, because he has no Power over you. For I am with you, the Angel. Messenger of Re∣pentance, who have the Dominion over him. The Devil do's indeed affright Men; but his Terror is vain. Wherefore fear him not, and he will flee from you. V. AND I said unto him; Sir, Hear me speak a few Words unto you. He answer'd, Say on: A Man indeed desires to keep the Command∣ments of God; and there is no one but what prays unto God, that he may be able to keep his Command∣ments. But the Devil is hard, and by his Power rules over the Servants of God. And he said; He cannot rule over the Servants of God, who believe in him with all their Hearts. The Devil may strive, but he cannot overcome them. For if ye resist
him, he will flee away with shame from you. But they that are not full in the Faith, fear the Devil, as if he had some great Power. For the Devil tries the Servants of God, and if he finds them empty, he de∣stroys them. For as a Man, when he fills up Vessels with good Wine, Origen. in Matth. xxiv.42. and among them puts a few Vessels half full, and comes to try and tast of the Vessels, do's not try those that are full, because he knows that they are good; but tasts those that are half full, least they should grow sowre; for Vessels half full soon grow sowre, and lose the Tast of Wine: So the Devil comes to the Servants of God to try them. They that are full of Faith resist him stoutly, and he de∣parts from them, because he finds no place where to enter into them; then he go's to those that are not full of Faith, and because he has place of entrance he goes into them and do's what he will with them, and they become his Servants. VI. BUT I, the Angel. Messenger of Repentance, say unto you, Fear
not the Devil. For I am sent unto you, that I may be with you, as many as shall repent with your whole Heart, and that I may confirm you in the Faith. Vid. Antioch. Hom. lxxvii. Believe therefore ye who by reason of your Transgres∣sions have forgot God, and who company your Salvation with your Sins, lead your Lives in Trouble; that if ye shall turn to the LORD with your whole Hearts, and shall serve him according to his Will; he will give a Remedy to your Souls, notwithstanding your former Sins, and ye shall have dominion over all the Works of the Devil. Be not then afraid in the least of his Threat∣nings; for they are without force; as the Sinews of a dead Man. But hearken unto me, and fear the LORD Almighty who is able to save and to destroy you; and keep his Com∣mands, that ye may live unto God. And I said unto him; Sir, I am now confirm'd in all the Commands of the LORD whilst that you are with me; and I know that you will break all the Power of the Devil. And we also shall overcome him, if we shall
be able, through the help of the LORD, to keep these Commands which you have delivered. Thou shalt keep them, said he, if thou shalt purifie thy Heart towards the LORD. And all they also shall keep them who shall cleanse their Hearts from the vain desires of the present World, and shall live unto God.
The Third BOOK OF St. HERMAS Which is Called His SIMILITUDES. The First SIMILITUDE. That seeing we have no abiding City in this World; we ought to look af∣ter that which is to come. AND he said unto me; Antioch. Hom. xv. Ye know that ye who are the Servants of the LORD, live here as in a Pilgrimage. For your City is far off from this City. If therefore ye know your City in which ye are to dwell, why do ye here buy
Estates, and provide your selves with Delicacies, and stately Buildings, and superfluous Houses? For he that provides himself these things in this City, do's not think of returning in∣to his own City. O foolish, and doubtful, and wretched Man! Who understandest not that all these things are other Mens, and under the Power of another! For the LORD of this City saith unto thee, either obey my Laws, or depart out of my City. What therefore shalt thou do who art subject to a Law in thine own City? Canst thou for thy Estate, or for any of those things which thou hast provided, deny thy Law? But if thou shalt deny it, and wilt afterwards return into thy own City, thou shalt not be received, but shalt be excluded thence. See therefore that like a Man in another Country, thou procure no more to thy self than what is necessary, and suffici∣ent for thee; and be ready, that when the God or LORD of this City shall drive thee out of it, thou mayst oppose his Law, and go into thine own City; where thou mayst with
all Chearfulness live according to thine own Law without Wrong. Take heed then ye that serve God, and have him in your Hearts; work ye the Works of God, being mind∣ful both of his Commands and of his Promises, which he has promised; and be assured that he will make them good unto you; if ye shall keep his Commandments. Instead therefore of the Possessions that ye would otherwise purchase, redeem Soule. those that are in want from their Necessities, as every one is able; Justifie the Widows; Judge the Cause of the Fatherless; and spend your Riches and your Wealth in such Works as these. For, for this end has God enriched you, that ye might fulfil these kind of Services. It is much better to do this, than to buy Lands or Houses; because all such things shall perish with this present Time. But what ye shall do for the Name of the LORD, ye shall find in your City, and shall have Joy with∣out Sadness or Fear. Wherefore covet not the Riches of the Heathen; for they are destructive to the Servants
of God. But of your own Abundance which you have, do those things by which ye may attain unto Joy. And do not commit Adultery, nor touch any other Mans Wife; nor desire her: But covet that which is thy own Business, and thou shalt be saved. The Second SIMILITUDE. As the Vine is supported by the Elm, so is the Rich-Man help'd by the Prayers of the Poor. AS I was walking into the Field, and consider'd the Elm and the Vine, and thought with my self of their Fruits; an Angel appear'd un∣to me, and said unto me; What is it that thou thinkest upon thus long within thy self? And I said unto him; Sir, I think of this Vine and this Elm, because their Fruits are fair. And he said unto me; Vid. Origen. in Jos. Hom. x. These two Trees are set for a Pattern to the Servants of God. And I said
unto him; Sir, I would know what the Pattern is for which these Trees are set. Hearken, saith he; Seest thou this Vine and this Elm? Sir, said I, I see them. This Vine, saith he, is fruitful, but the Elm is a Tree without Fruit. Nevertheless this Vine unless it were set by this Elm, and supported by it, would not bear much Fruit; but lying along upon the Ground, would bear ill Fruit, because it did not hang upon the Elm: Whereas now being supported upon the Elm, it bears Fruit both for its self and for that. See there∣fore how the Elm gives no less, but rather more Fruit than the Vine. How, Sir, said I, do's it bear more Fruit than the Vine? Because, said he, the Vine being supported upon the Elm gives both much and good Fruit: Whereas if it lay along upon the Ground it would bear but little, and that very ill too. This Simili∣tude therefore is set forth to the Ser∣vants of God; and it represents the Rich and Poor Man. I answer'd, Sir, make this manifest unto me. Hear, said he: The Rich Man has
Wealth; howbeit towards the LORD he is Poor: For he is taken up about his Riches, and prays but little to the LORD; and the Prayers which he makes are lazy and without force. When therefore the Rich Man reaches out to the Poor those things which he wants, the Poor Man prays unto the LORD for the Rich; and God grants unto the Rich Man all good things; because the Poor Man is Rich in Prayer; and his Requests have great Power with the LORD. Then the Rich Man ministers all things to the Poor, because he per∣ceives that he is heard by the LORD; and he the more willingly, and with∣out doubting affords him what he wants, and takes care that nothing be lacking to him. And the Poor Man gives Thanks unto the LORD for the Rich; because he do's this Work to him from the LORD. With Men therefore the Elm is not thought to give any Fruit; and they know not, neither understand that its Company being added to the Vine, the Vine bears a double En∣crease, both for its self and for the
Elm. Even so the Poor praying unto the LORD for the Rich, are heard by him; and their Riches are encreased, because they minister to the Poor of their Wealth. They are therefore both made Partakers of each others Good Works. Whosoever therefore shall do these things, he shall not be forsaken by the LORD, but shall be written in the Book of Life. Happy are they who are Rich, and perceive themselves to be en∣creased: For he that is sensible of this, will be able to minister somewhat to others. The Third SIMILITUDE. As the Green Trees in the Win∣ter cannot be distinguish'd from the Dry; so neither can the Righteous from the Wicked in this present World. AGAIN he shewed me many Trees whose Leaves were shed, and which seemed to me to be wi∣ther'd;
for they were all alike. And he said unto me, Seest thou these Trees? I said, Sir, I see that they look like dry Trees. He answering said unto me; These Trees are like unto the Men who live in this pre∣sent World. I reply'd; Sir, Why are they like unto dryed Trees? Be∣cause, said he, neither the Righte∣ous nor Unrighteous are known from one another; but are all alike in this present World. For this World is as the Winter to the Righteous Men, because they are not known, but dwell among Sinners. As in the Winter all the Trees, having lost their Leaves, are like dry Trees; nor can it be said which are Dry and which are Green: So in this pre∣sent World neither the Righteous nor Wicked are discern'd from each other, but they are all alike.
The Fourth SIMILITUDE. As in Summer the living Trees are distinguish'd from the Dry by their Fruit and Green Leaves; so in the World to come the Righteous shall be distinguish'd from the Un∣righteous by their Happiness. AGAIN he shewed me many other Trees, of which some had Leaves, and others appear'd dry and wither'd. And he said unto me, Seest thou these Trees? I answer'd, Sir, I see them; and some are dry, and others full of Leaves. These Trees, saith he, which are green are the Righteous, who shall pos∣sess the World to come. For the World to come, is the Summer to the Righteous; but to Sinners it is the Winter. When therefore the Mercy of the LORD shall shine forth, then they who serve God shall be made manifest, and plain unto all. For as in the Summer the Fruit of every Tree is shewn and made manifest,
so also the Works of the Righteous shall be declared and made manifest, and they shall all be restored in that World merry and joyful. For the other Nations. kind of Men, namely Wicked, like the Trees which thou sawest dry, shall as such be found dry and with∣out Fruit in that other World; and like dry Wood shall be burnt, and it shall be made manifest that they have done Evil in the time of their Life; and they shall be burnt because they have sinned, and have not repented of their Sins. And also all the other Nations shall be burnt, because they have not acknowledged God their Creator. Do thou therefore bring forth good Fruit, that in the Sum∣mer thy Fruit may be known; and keep thy self from much Business, and thou shalt not offend. For they that are involved in much Business, sin much; because they are taken up with their Affairs, and neglect to serve God. And how can a Man that do's not serve God, ask any thing of God, and receive it? But they who serve him, ask and receive what they desire. But if a Man has only
one thing to follow, he may serve God, because his Mind is not there∣by taken off from God, but he serves him with a pure Mind. If there∣fore thou shalt do thus, thou shalt have Fruit in the World to come; and all, as many as shall do in like manner, shall bring forth Fruit. The Fifth SIMILITUDE. Of a True Fast, and the Rewards of it: Also of the Cleanness of the Body. I. AS I was fasting, and sitting down in a certain Mountain, and giving Thanks unto God for all the things that he had done With me. unto me; behold I saw the Shepherd, who was wont to converse with me, sitting by me, and saying unto me: What has brought thee hither thus early in the Morning? I answer'd, Sir, To Day I keep a Vid. Not. Coteler. in loc. pag. 72, 73. Station. He answer'd, What is a Station? I reply'd; It is a
Fast. He said; What is that Fast? I answer'd, I fast, as I have been wont to do. Ye know not, said he, what it is to fast unto God; nor is this a Fast which ye fast, profiting nothing with God. Sir, said I, what makes you speak thus? He reply'd; I speak it, because this is not the true Fast which you think that you fast; but I will shew you what that is which is a Coteler. ibid. compleat Fast, and ac∣ceptable unto God. Hearken, said he, The LORD do's not desire such a needless Fast: For by Fasting in this manner, thou advancest nothing in Righteousness. But the true Fast is this; Do nothing wickedly in thy Life; but serve God with a pure Mind; and keep his Command∣ments, and walk according to his Precepts, nor suffer any wicked De∣sire to dwell in thy Mind. And trust in the LORD; that if thou dost these things, and fearest him, and abstainest from every evil Work, thou shalt live unto God. If thou shalt do this, thou shalt perfect a great Fast, and an acceptable one unto the LORD.
II. HEARKEN unto the Simi∣litude which I am about to propose unto thee, as to this matter. A cer∣tain Man having a Farm, and many Servants, planted a Vineyard in a certain part of his Estate for his Posterity: And taking a Journey in∣to a far Country chose one of his Ser∣vants which he thought the most faithful and approved, and deliver'd the Vineyard into his care; com∣manding him that he should stake up his Vines. Which if he did, and fulfilled his Command, he promised to give him his Liberty. Nor did he command him to do any thing more; and so went into a far Coun∣try. After then that that Servant had taken that Charge upon him; he did whatsoever his LORD com∣manded him. And when he had staked the Vineyard, and found it to be full of Weeds, he began to think with himself, saying; I have done what my Lord commanded me; I will now dig this Vineyard, and when it is digg'd it will be more beautiful; and the Weeds being pull'd up it
will bring forth more Fruit, and not be choak'd by the Weeds. So setting about his Work he digg'd it, and pluck'd up all the Weeds that were in it: And by that means the Vine∣yard became very beautiful and pros∣perous, and not over-run and choak'd with Weeds. After some time the LORD of the Vineyard comes and goes into the Vineyard, and when he saw that it was handsomely stak'd, and digg'd, and the Weeds pluck'd up that were in it, and the Vines flourishing, he rejoyced great∣ly at the Care of his Servant. And calling his Son whom he loved, and who was to be his Heir; and his Friends with whom he was wont to consult, he tells them what he had commanded his Servant to do, and what his Servant had done more: And they immediately congratulated that Servant, that he had received so full a Testimony from his Lord. Then he said unto them; I indeed promised this Servant his Liberty, if he observed the Command which I gave him; and he observed it, and besides has done a good Work to my
Vineyard, which has exceedingly pleased me. Wherefore for this Work which he hath done, I will make him my Heir together with my Son; because that when he saw what was good, he dissembled it not, but did it. This Design of the LORD, both his Son and his Friends approved, namely, that this Servant should be Heir together with his Son. Not long after this, the Master of the Fa∣mily calling together his Friends, sent from his Supper several kinds of Food to that Servant. Which when he had received, he took so much of them as was sufficient for himself, and divided the rest among his Fel∣low Servants. Which when they had received, they rejoyced; and wish'd that he might find yet greater favour with his Lord, for what he had done to them. When his Lord heard all these things, he was again fill'd with great Joy; and calling again his Friends and his Son together, he related to them what his Servant had done with the Meats which he had sent unto him. They therefore so much the more assented to the Ma∣ster
of the Houshold; that he ought to make that Servant his Heir to∣gether with his Son. III. I SAID unto him; Sir, I know not these Similitudes, neither can I understand them, unless you expound them unto me. I will, says he, expound all things unto thee whatsoever I have talk'd with thee, or shewn unto thee. Keep the Com∣mandments of the LORD and thou shalt be approved, and shalt be writ∣ten in the Number of those that keep his Commandments. But if besides those things which the LORD hath commanded, thou shalt add some good thing; thou shalt purchase to thy self a greater Dignity, and be in more favour with the LORD than thou shouldst otherwise have been. If therefore thou shalt keep the Com∣mandments of the LORD, and shalt add to them these Stations, thou shalt rejoyce; but especially if thou shalt keep them according to my Com∣mands. I said unto him; Sir, What∣soever thou shalt command me, I will observe; for I know that thou
wilt be with me. I will, said he, be with thee, who hast taken up such a Resolution; and I will be with all those who purpose in like manner. This Fast, saith he, whilst thou dost also observe the Commandments of the LORD, is exceeding good. Thus therefore shalt thou keep it. First of all, take heed to thy self, and keep thy self from every wicked Act, and from every filthy Word, and from every hurtful Desire; and purifie thy Sense from all the Vanity of this pre∣sent World. If thou shalt observe these things, this Fast shall be such as it ought to be. Thus therefore do. Having perform'd what is before written, that day on which thou fastest thou shalt taste nothing at all but Vid. Not. Cotelerli. pag. 74. A. B. C. Bread and Water Vid. Antioch. Hom. vii. and computing the Quantity of Food which thou art wont to eat upon other Days, thou shalt Vid. Not. Cotelerli. pag. 74. A. B. C. lay aside the Expence which thou shouldst have made that Day, and give it unto the Widow, the Fatherless and the Poor. Vid. Not. Cotelerli. pag. 74. A. B. C. And thus thou shalt perfect the Humility of thy Soul; that he who receives of it may satisfie his Soul, and his
Prayer come up to the LORD God for thee. If therefore thou shalt thus accomplish thy Fast, as I command thee; thy Sacrifice shall be accepta∣ble uto the LORD, and thy Fast shall be written in his Book. This Station thus perform'd is good, and pleasing, and acceptable unto the LORD. These things if thou shalt observe with thy Children, and with all thy House, thou shalt be happy. And whosoever, when they hear these things, shall do them; they also shall be happy, and whatsoever they shall ask of the LORD they shall receive it. IV. AND I pray'd him that he would expound unto me the Simili∣tude of the Farm, and the Lord; and of the Vineyard and of the Ser∣vant that had staked the Vine-yard; and of the Weeds that were pluck'd out of the Vineyard; and of his Son and his Friends which he took into Counsel with him. For I understood that that was the Similitude. He said unto me; Thou art very ready in asking: Howbeit thou oughst not
to ask any thing, for if it be fitting to shew it unto thee, it shall be shewed. I answer'd him; Sir, What∣soever thou shalt shew, without ex∣plaining it unto me, I shall in vain see it: And what Similitudes thou shalt propose, and not expound them, I shall in vain hear them. He an∣swered me again, saying, Whosoever is the Servant of God, and has the LORD in his Heart, desires Under∣standing of him, and receives it; and he explains every Similitude, and understands the Words of the LORD which need an Enquiry. But they that are lazy, and slow to pray; doubt to seek from the LORD, al∣though the LORD be of such an ex∣traordinary Goodness, that without ceasing he giveth all things to them that ask of him. Thou therefore who art strengthened by that Vene∣rable Messenger, and hast received such a powerful Gift of Prayer; see∣ing thou art not sloathful, why dost thou not now ask Understanding of the LORD and receive it? I said un∣to him; seeing I have thee present, it is necessary that I should seek it of
thee, and ask thee; for thou shewest all things unto me, and speakest to me when thou art present. But if I should see or hear these things when thou wert not present, I would then ask the LORD that he would shew them unto me. V. AND he reply'd; I said a little before that thou wert subtle and bold, and that thou askest the mean∣ing of these Similitudes. But because thou still persistest; I will unfold to thee the Parable which thou desirest, that thou mayst make it known un∣to all Men. Hear therefore, said he, and understand. The Farm before mention'd denotes the whole Earth: The Lord of the Farm is he, who created and finished all things; and gave Vertue unto them. His Son is the Holy Vid. Edit. Oxon. Annot. a. p. 105. Spirit; The Servant is the Son of God. The Vineyard is the People whom he saves. The Stakes are the Angels. Messengers which are set over them by the LORD, to support his People. The Weeds that are pluckt up out of the Vineyard, are the Sins which the Servants of God
had committed. The Food which he sent him from his Supper, are the Commands which he gave to his People by his Son. The Friends whom he call'd to Counsel with him, are the Holy Angels whom he first crea∣ted. The Absence of the Master of the Houshold is the Time that re∣mains unto his Coming. I said un∣to him; Sir, All these things are very excellent, and wonderful, and good. But, continued I, could I or any other Man besides, though ne∣ver so wise, have understood these things? Wherefore now Sir, tell me what I ask. He replied, ask me what thou wilt. Why, said I, is the Son of God in this Parable, put in the place of a Servant? VI. Hearken, said he; The Son of God is not put in the condition of a Servant, but in great Power and Authority. And I answer'd, How, Sir? I understood it not. Because said he, The Son set his Angels. Messengers over those whom the Father deliver'd unto him, to keep every one of them; but he himself labour'd very much,
and suffer'd much, that he might blot out their Offences. For no Vineyard can be digg'd without much Labour and Pains. Wherefore having blotted out the Sins of his People, he shew'd to them the Paths of Life, giving them the Law which he had received of the Father. You see, said he, that he is the LORD of his People, having re∣ceived all Power from his Father. But why did the LORD take into Counsel his Son, concerning dividing the In∣heritance, and the Good Angels? Hear: Because that Messenger heark∣ned to the Holy Ghost, which was first of all infused into the Body in which God should dwell. For his Understanding placed him in the Bo∣dy, as it seem'd Good to him. This Body therefore into which the Holy Spirit was brought, served that Spi∣rit, walking rightly and purely in Modesty; nor ever defiled that Spirit. Seeing therefore the Body at all times obeyed the Holy Spirit, and labour'd rightly and chastly with him; nor falter'd at any time; that Body be∣ing wearied conversed indeed Servily, but being stoutly approved with the
Holy Spirit, was accepted by God. For such a powerful Course pleased God, because he was not defiled in the Earth, keeping the Holy Spirit in Council with him. He called there∣fore his Son, and the Good Angels, that there might be some place of standing given to this Body which had served the Holy Spirit without Complaint; least it should seem to have lost the reward of its Service. For every pure Body, shall receive its reward; that is found without Spot, in which the Holy Spirit has been appointed to dwell. And thus you have now the Exposition of this Pa∣rable also. VII. SIR, said I, I now understand your Meaning, since I have heard this Exposition. Hearken farther, said he: Keep this thy Body Clean and Pure; that the Spirit which shall dwell in it may bear Witness unto it, and be judged to have been with thee. Also take heed that it be not instill'd into thy Mind that this Body perishes, and thou abuse it to any Lust. For if thou shalt defile thy Body; thou shalt
also at the same time defile the Holy Spirit; and if thou shalt defile the Holy Spirit, thou shalt not live. And I said; What if through Ignorance this should have been already committed, before a Man heard these Words; How can he attain unto Salvation, who has thus defiled his Body? He reply'd; As for Mens former Actions, which through Ignorance they have committed, God only can afford a remedy unto them; For all power belongeth unto him. But now Guard thy self; and seeing God is Almighty and Merciful, he will grant a reme∣dy to what thou hast formerly done amiss, if for the time to come thou shalt not defile thy Body and Spirit: For they are Companions together, and the One cannot be defiled but the other will be so too. Keep therefore both of them Pure, and thou shalt live unto God.
The Sixth SIMILITUDE. Of two sorts of Voluptuous Men, and of their Death, Defection, and of the Continuance of their Pains. I. AS I was sitting at home, and praising God for all the things which I had seen; and was thinking concerning the Commands, that they were exceeding Good and Great, and Honest, and Pleasant; and such as would certainly bring a Man to Sal∣vation; I said thus within my self: I shall be happy if I shall walk accord∣ing to these Commands, and whoso∣ever shall walk in them shall live un∣to God. Whilst I was meditating on this wise, I saw him whom I had before been wont to see, sitting by me; and he spake thus unto me. What doubtest thou concerning the Commands which I have delivered unto thee? Doubt not whether they are Good, but trust in the LORD and thou shalt walk in them. For I will give thee strength In them. to fulfil them. These Commands are profitable to
those who shall repent of those sins which they have formerly commit∣ted; if for the time to come they shall not continue in them. Whoso∣ever therefore ye be that Repent, cast away from you the naughtiness of the present World. And put on all Vertue, and all Righteousness, and so shall ye be able to keep these Com∣mands; neither sin from henceforth any more. For if ye shall keep your selves from sin for the time to come, ye shall cut off a great deal of your former sins. Walk in my Commands, and ye shall live unto God: These things have I spoken unto you. And when he had said this, he added; let us go into the Field, and I will shew thee Shepherds of Sheep. I reply'd, Sir, let us go. And we came into a cer∣tain Field, and there he shew'd me a young Shepherd, Vid. Annot. Coteler. in loc. finely array'd, with his Garments of a Purple Co∣lour. And he fed large Flocks; and his Sheep were full of Pleasure, and in much Delight and Chearfulness; and they ran here and there, as it were rejoicing. And the Shepherd took very great Satisfaction in his Flock;
and the Countenance of that Shepherd was Chearful, running up and down among his Flock. II. THEN the Angel said unto me; See'st thou this Shepherd? I an∣swer'd, Sir, I see him. He said unto me; this is the Angel. Messenger of De∣light and Pleasure. He therefore cor∣rupts the Minds of the Servants of God, and turns them from the Truth, delighting them with many Pleasures, and they perish. For they forget the Commands of the living God, and live in luxury and in vain satisfacti∣ons; and are corrupted by this Evil-Angel, some of them unto Death; and others even to a falling off from the truth. I replied; I understand not what you mean, by being corrupted unto Death, and so falling away. Hear, says he: All those Sheep which thou sawest exceeding fair and joy∣ful, are such as have for ever departed from God, and given themselves up to the desires of this present Time. To these therefore there is no return, by Repentance, unto Life; because that to their other Sins they have ad∣ded
this, that they have Blasphemed the Name of the LORD. These kind of Men are ordained unto Death. But those Sheep which thou sawest not leaping for Joy, but feeding in one place; are such as have indeed given themselves up to Pleasures and De∣lights; but have not spoken any thing wickedly against the LORD. These have not departed from the Truth, and therefore have yet Hope laid up for them in Repentance. For such a Defection has some hope still left of a renewal; But they that are dead, are utterly gone for ever. Again we went a little farther forward; and he shew'd me a great Shepherd, who had as it were a Wild Figure; clad with a White Goats Skin, having his Bag up∣on his Shoulder, and in his Hand a Stick full of Knots, and very hard, and a Whip in his Other Hand; And his Countenance was Stern and Sour; enough to affright a Man; such was his look. He took from that young Shepherd such Sheep as lived in Plea∣sures, but did not skip up and down; and drove them into a certain Steep Craggy Place, full of Thorns and
Briars, insomuch that they could not get themselves free from them; but being entangled in them, fed upon Thorns and Briars, and were grie∣vously tormented with his Whipping. For he still drove them on, nor afford∣ed them any Place or Time to stand still. III. WHEN therefore I saw them so cruelly whipp'd and afflicted, I was grieved for them, because they were greatly tormented, nor had they any Rest afforded them. And I said unto the Shepherd that was with me; Sir, Who is this cruel and implacable Shepherd, who is moved with no Compassion towards these Sheep? He answer'd, Vid. Origen. in Psal. xxxvii. Hom. 1. This Shep∣herd is indeed the Angel. Messenger of the Righteous, but is set over them for their Punishment. To him there∣fore are deliver'd those who have erred from God, and follow'd the Desires and Pleasures of this World, and served them. For this Cause he punishes them every one according to their Deserts with cruel and va∣rious kind of Pains. Sir, said I, I
would know, what kind of Pains they are which every one under∣goes? Hearken, said he; The se∣veral Pains and Torments are those which Men every Day undergo in their present Lives. For some suffer Losses; others Poverty; others di∣vers Sicknesses. Some are Uncon∣stant; Others suffer injuries from those that are Unworthy; Others fall under many other Tryals and In∣conveniences. Many with an un∣setled design aim at many things, and it profiteth them not, and they say that they have not Success in their Undertakings. These things call to their Mind what they have done a∣miss, and they complain of the LORD. When therefore they shall have un∣dergon all kind of Vexation and In∣conveniencie; then they are deliver'd over to me for good Instruction, and are confirm'd in the Faith of the LORD, and serve the LORD all the rest of their Life with a pure Mind. And when they begin to repent of their Sins, then they call to mind their Works which they have done amiss, and give Honour to God, say∣ing,
That he is a just Judge, and that they have deservedly suffer'd all things according to their Deeds. And for what remains of their Lives they serve God with a pure Mind, and have Success in all their Under∣takings, and receive from the LORD whatever they desire. And then they give thanks unto the LORD that they were deliver'd unto me; nor do they suffer any more Cruelty. IV. I SAID unto him; Sir, I intreat you now to shew me one thing. What, said he, dost thou de∣sire? I said unto him; Are they who depart from the Fear of God tormented for the same time that they enjoy'd their false Delight and Pleasures? He answer'd me; They are tormented for the same Time. And I said unto him, they are then tormented but little; whereas they who enjoy their Pleasures so as to forget God, ought to endure seven times as much Punishment. He an∣swer'd me; Thou art foolish; nei∣ther understandest thou the Efficacy of this kind of Punishment. I said unto him, Sir, If I understood it, I
would not desire you to tell me. Hearken, said he, and learn what the force of both is, both of the Plea∣sure and of the Punishment. An hour of Pleasure is terminated with∣in its own Space: But one hour of Punishment has the Efficacy of thirty Days. Origen. in Num. Hom. viii. Whosoever therefore enjoys his false Pleasure for one Day, and is one Day tormented, that one Day of Punishment is equivalent to a whole years space. Thus look how many Days any one pursues his Pleasures, so many Years is he punish'd for it. You see therefore, how that the Time of Worldly Enjoyments is but short, but that of Pain and Torments, a great deal more. V. I REPLY'D, Sir; forasmuch as I do not understand all these Times of Pleasure and Pain; I in∣treat you that you would explain your self more clearly concerning them. He answer'd me saying; Thy Foolishness still sticks inseparably un∣to thee. Shouldst thou not rather purifie thy Mind, and serve God? Take heed, least when thy Time is fulfill'd, thou shalt be found still un∣wise.
Hear then, as thou desirest, that thou mayst the more easily un∣derstand. He that gives himself up one Day to his Pleasures and De∣lights; and do's whatsoever his Soul desires; is full of great Folly, nor understands what he do's, but the Day following forgets what he did the Day before. For Sweetness and Worldly Pleasure have no Memory by reason of the Folly that is rooted in them. But when Pain and Tor∣ment befal a Man a Day, he is in Effect troubled the whole Year after; because his Punishment continues firm in his Memory. Wherefore he remembers it with Sorrow the whole Year; and then calls to mind his vain Pleasure and Delight, and perceives that for the sake of that he was pu∣nished. Whosoever therefore have deliver'd themselves over to such Pleasures, are thus punished; be∣cause that when they had Life, they rendred themselves liable to Death. I said unto him; Sir, And what Pleasures are hurtful? He answer'd, That is Pleasure to every Man which he do's willingly. For the Angry Man, gratifying his Passion perceives
Pleasure in it; and so the Adulterer, and Drunkard; the Detractor, and Lyar, and Covetous Man, and the Deceiver; and whosoever commits any thing like unto these, because he gratifies his Infirmities, he receives a Satisfaction in the doing of it. All these Pleasures and Delights are hurt∣ful to the Servants of God. For these therefore they are tormented and suf∣fer Punishment. There are also Plea∣sures that bring Salvation unto Men. For many, when they do what is good, find Pleasure in it, and are at∣tracted by the Delights of it. Now this Pleasure is profitable to the Ser∣vants of God, and brings Life to such Men: But those hurtful Pleasures, which were before mention'd, bring Torments and Punishment. And who∣soever shall continue in them, and shall not repent of what they have done, shall gain Death unto them∣selves.
The Seventh SIMILITUDE. That they who Repent, must bring forth Fruits worthy of Repentance. AFTER a few Days I saw the same Person that before talked with me, in the same Field, in which I had before seen the Shepherds. And he said unto me; What seekest thou? Sir, said I, I came to intreat you, that you would command the Shepherd who is the Minister of Punishment, to depart out of my House, because he greatly afflicts me. And he an∣swer'd; It is necessary for thee to endure Inconveniencies and Vexati∣ons; for so that good Angel hath commanded concerning thee, because he would try thee. Sir, said I; What so great Offence have I committed, that I should be deliver'd to this Angel. Messenger? Hearken, said he: Thou art indeed guilty of many Sins, yet not so many that thou shouldst be delivered to this Angel. Messenger: But thy House hath committed many Sins and Offences, and therefore that good Angel. Messenger being grieved at their
Doings commanded that for some time thou shouldst suffer Affliction, that they may both repent of what they have done, and may wash them∣selves from all desires of this present World. When therefore they shall have repented, and be purified, then that Messenger which is appointed over thy Punishment, shall depart from thee. I said unto him; Sir, If they have behaved themselves so as to an∣ger that good Angel, yet what have I done? He answer'd; They can∣not otherwise be afflicted, unless thou, who art the Head of the Fa∣mily, suffer. For whatsoever thou shalt suffer, they must needs feel it: But as long as thou shalt stand well establish'd, they cannot experience any Vexation. I replyed; But, Sir, behold they also now repent with all their Hearts. I know, says he, that they repent with all their Hearts; but dost thou therefore think that their Offences who repent are immediately blotted out? No, they are not pre∣sently; But he that repents must af∣flict his Soul, and shew himself hum∣ble in all his Affairs, and undergo many and divers Vexations. And
when he shall have suffer'd all things that were appointed for him; then perhaps he that made him and all things besides will be moved with Compassion towards him, and af∣ford him some Remedy; and espe∣cially if he shall perceive his Heart who repents, to be pure from every Evil Work. But at present it is ex∣pedient for thee and for thy House to be grieved; and it is needful that thou shouldst endure much Vexation; as the Angel of the LORD who committed thee unto me, has com∣manded. Rather give Thanks un∣to the LORD, that knowing what was to come, he thought thee wor∣thy to whom he should foretel that Trouble was coming upon those that were able to bear it. I said unto him; Sir, Be but thou also with me, and I shall easily undergo any Trouble. I will, said he, be with thee; and I will ask the Messenger who is set over thy Punishment, that he would moderate his Afflictions towards thee. And moreover thou shalt suffer Ad∣versity but for a little time; and then thou shalt again be restored to thy former Place; only continue on in
the Humility of thy Mind. Obey the LORD with a pure Heart; thou and thy House, and thy Children; and walk in the Commands which I have delivered unto thee. And then thy Repentance may be firm and pure. And if thou shalt keep these things with thy House, all In∣conveniencies shall depart from thee. And all Vexation shall in like man∣ner depart from all those, whosoe∣ver shall walk according to these Commands. The Eighth SIMILITUDE. That there are many kinds of Elect, and of Repenting Sinners: And how all of them shall receive a Re∣ward proportionable to the Measure of their Repentance and Good Works. I. AGAIN he shew'd me a Wil∣low which covered the Fields and the Mountains, under whose Shadow came all such as were called by the Name of the LORD. And by that Willow stood the Angel of the LORD very excellent and lofty; and
did cut down Boughs from that Wil∣low with a great Hook; and reach'd out to the People that were under the Shadow of that Willow little Rods, as it were about a Foot long. And when all of them had taken them, he laid a∣side his Hook, and the Tree continued intire, as I had before seen it. At which I wondred, and mused within my self. Then that Shepherd said unto me; Forbear to wonder that that Tree continues whole, notwithstand∣ing so many Boughs have been cut off from it: But attend; for now it shall be shewn thee, what that An∣gel means, who gave those Rods to the People. So he again demanded the Rods of them; and in the same Order that every one had received them, was he call'd to him, and re∣stored his Rod: Which when he had received, he examin'd them. From some he received them Dry and Rot∣ten, and as it were touch'd with the Moth; those he commanded to be separated from the rest, and placed by themselves. Others gave him their Rods dry indeed, but not touch'd with the Moth; these also he order'd to be set by themselves. Others gave
in their Rods half dry; these also were set apart. Others gave in their Rods half dry, and cleft; these too were set by themselves. Others brought in their Rods, half dry and half green; and were in like man∣ner placed by themselves. Others de∣liver'd up their Rods two parts green, and the third dry; and they too were set apart. Others brought their Rods two parts dry and the third green; and were also placed by themselves. Others deliver'd up their Rods yet less dry, for there was but a very little, to wit, their Tops dry; but they had Clefts, and these were set in like manner by themselves. In the Rods of others there was but a little green, and the rest dry; and these were set aside by themselves. Others came, and brought their Rods green as they had received them, and the greatest part brought their Rods thus, and these also were put apart by themselves. Others brought their Rods not only green, but full of Branches; and these were set aside; being received by the Angel with great Joy. Others brought their Rods green with Branches, and those also
full of Fruit. They who had such Rods were very chearful; and the Angel himself took great Joy at them; nor was the Shepherd that stood with me less pleased with them. II. THEN the Angel of the LORD commanded Crowns to be brought: And the Crowns were brought made of Palms; and the Angel crown'd those Men in whose Rods he found the young Branches with Fruit; and commanded them to go into the Tower. He also sent those into the Tower in whose Rods he found Branches without Fruit, giving his Seal unto them. For they had the same Garment, that is, one white as Snow, with which he had them go into the Tower. And so he did to those who return'd their Rods green as they received them, giving them a white Garment; and so sent them away to go into the Tower. Having done this, he said to the Shepherd that was with me; I go my way; but do thou send these within the Walls, every one into the place in which he has deserved to dwell, examining first their Rods; but examine them
diligently that no one deceive thee. But and if any one shall escape thee, I will try them upon the Altar. Having said this to the Shepherd he departed. After he was gone, the Shepherd said unto me; Let us take the Rods from them all, and plant them; if perchance they may grow green again. I said unto him, Sir, How can those dry Rods ever grow green again? He answer'd me; That Tree is a Willow, and always loves to live. If therefore these Rods shall be planted, and receive a little Moi∣sture, many of them will recover themselves. Wherefore I will try, and will pour Water upon them, and if any of them can live, I will rejoyce with him: But if not, at least by this means I shall be found not to have neglected my part. And they all came unto him, every one in the Rank in which he stood, and gave him their Rods; which having received, He planted every one of them in their several Orders. And after he had planted them all, he poured much Water upon them, in∣somuch that they were covered with Water, and did not appear above it.
And when he had water'd them, he said unto me; Let us depart, and after a little time we will return and visit them. For he who created this Tree, would have all those live that received Rods from it. And I hope, now that these Rods are thus wa∣tered, many of them, receiving in the Moisture, will recover. III. I SAID unto him, Sir; Tell me what this Tree denotes? For I am greatly moved, that after so many Branches have been cut off, it seems still to be whole; nor do's there any thing the less of it appear to remain, which greatly amazes me. He an∣swer'd, Hearken. This great Tree which covers the Plains and the Moun∣tains, and all the Earth, is the Law of God, publish'd throughout the whole World. Now by this Law the Son of God is preach'd to all the Ends of the Earth. The People that stand under its Shadow, are those which have heard his Preaching, and believed. The great and good Angel which you saw, was MICHAEL, who has the Power over this People, and Governs them. For he has planted the Law in
the Hearts of those who have believed. And therefore he visits them to whom he has given the Law, to see if they have kept it. And he examines every ones Rod; and of those, many that are weakned. For those Rods are the Law of the LORD. Then he dis∣cerns all those who have not kept the Law, knowing the place of every one of them. I said unto him; Sir, why did he send away some to the Tower, and left others here to you? He re∣ply'd; those who have transgress'd the Law, which they receiv'd from him, are left in my Power, that they may repent of their Sins: But they who satisfied the Law and kept it, are under his Power. But who then, said I, are those, who went into the Tower Crowned? He reply'd; All such as having striven with the Devil, have overcome him, are Crown'd. And they are those, who have suffer'd in∣juries, that they might keep the Law. But they who gave up their Rods Green, and with young Branches, but without Fruit, have indeed endured Trouble for the same Law, but have not suffer'd Death; but neither have they deny'd their Holy Law: They
who deliver'd up their Rods Green as they received them; are those who were Modest and Just, and have lived with a very Pure Mind, and kept the Commandments of God. The rest thou shalt know, when I shall have consider'd those Rods which I have planted and watered. IV. AFTER a few days we re∣turn'd, and in the same place stood that great Angel, and I stood by him. Then he said unto me; Gird thy self with a Vid. Edit. Oxon. p. 129 not. d. Napkin, and serve me. And I girded my self with a clean Towel, which was made of Coarse Cloath. And when he saw me girded, and ready to minister unto him, he said; Call those Men whose Rods have been planted every one in his Order as they gave them. And he brought me into the Field, and I called them all, and they all stood ready in their several Ranks. Then he said unto them, let every one pluck up his Rod and bring it unto me. And first they deliver'd theirs, whose Rods were Dry and Rotten. And those whose Rods still continued so, he commanded to stand apart. Then they came whose Rods
were Dry but not Rotten. Some of these deliver'd in their Rods Green; Others dry and rotten, as if they had been touch'd by the Moth. Those who gave them up Green, he com∣manded to stand apart: But those whose Rods were dry and rotten, he caused to stand with the first sort. Then came they whose Rods were half dry, and Cleft: Many of these gave up their Rods Green, but still Cleft. Others delivered them up Green with Branches, and Fruit up∣on the Branches, like unto theirs who went Crown'd into the Tower. Others deliver'd them up Dry and Rotten: And some as they were be∣fore, half dry, and cleft. Every one of these he order'd to stand apart, some by themselves, others in their respective Ranks. V. THEN came they whose Rods were for the most part Green; but cleft. These deliver'd their Rods altogether Green, and stood in their own Order. And the Shepherd rejoiced at these, because they were all even and free from their Clefts. Then they gave in their Rods, who had half Green and
half Dry. Of these some were found wholly Green, others half dry; others green, with young Shoots. And all these were sent away, every one to his proper Rank. Then they gave up their Rods, who had two parts Green, and the rest Dry: Many of these gave in their Rods Green; ma∣ny half dry; the rest dry but not rot∣ten. So these were sent away, each to his proper Place. Then came they who had their Rods two parts Dry and the third Green; many of these delivered up their Rods half dry; others dry and rotten; others half dry and cleft; but few Green. And all these were set every one in his own Rank. Then they reach'd in their Rods, who had them before a third part Green, and the rest dry; Their Rods were for the most part found Green, having little Boughs, with Fruit upon them; and the rest alto∣gether Green. And the Shepherd up∣on sight of these rejoiced exceedingly, because he had sound them thus. And they also went to their proper Or∣ders.
VI. NOW after he had examin'd all their Rods, he said unto me; I told thee that this Tree loved Life: Thou seest how many have repented, and attain'd unto Salvation. Sir, said I, I see it. That thou mightest know, saith he, that the Goodness and Mer∣cy of the LORD is Great and to be had in Honour; who gave his Spirit to them that were worthy of Repentance. I answer'd, Sir, why then did not all of them repent? He reply'd; Those whose Minds the LORD foresaw would be Pure, and that they would serve him with all their Hearts, to them he gave Repentance. But for those whose deceit and wickedness he beheld, and perceived that they would not truly return unto him; to them he deny'd any return unto Repentance, least they should again blaspheme his Law with wicked Words. I said unto him; Now Sir, make known unto me, what is the place of every one of those, who have given up their Rods, and what their Sea. Portion; that when they who have not kept their Seal en∣tire, but have cast away the Seal which they received, shall hear and
believe these things, they may ac∣knowledge their Evil-deeds and re∣pent; and receiving again their Seal from you, may give Glory to God, that he was moved with Compassion towards them, and sent you to renew their Spirits. Hearken, said he: They whose Rods have been found dry and rotten, and as it were touch'd with the Moth; are the Deserters, and the Betrayers of the Church. Who with the rest of their Crimes, have also blasphemed the LORD, and deny'd his Name which was called upon them. Therefore all these are Dead unto God; and thou seest that none of them have repented, although they have heard my Commands which thou hast delivered unto them. From these Men therefore Life is far distant. And they also who have deliver'd up their Rods Dry but not Rotten, have not been far from them. For they have been Counterfeits, and brought in Evil-Doctrines; and have perverted the Servants of God; and especially those who had sinn'd, not suffering them to return unto Repentance; but keeping them back by their False Doctrines. These therefore have
Hope; and thou seest that many of them have repented, since the time that thou hast laid my Commands before them; and many more will yet Repent. But they that shall not Re∣pent; both they have lost Patience, and shall lose their Life. But they that have repented, their place is begun to be within the first Walls, and some of them are even gone into the Tower. Thou seest therefore, said he, that in the Repentance of sinners there is Life; but that for them who Repent not, Death is prepared. VII. HEAR now concerning those who gave in their Rods half dry, and full of Clefts. They whose Rods were only half-dry, are the Doubtful; for they are neither Living nor Dead. But they who deliver'd in their Rods not only half-dry, but also full of Clefts, are both Doubtful and Evil-speakers; who detract from those that are absent, and have never peace among themselves; and that envy one ano∣ther. Howbeit to these there is yet lest space for Repentance; for thou seest that some of these also have re∣pented. Now all those of this kind
who have quickly repented, shall have a place in the Tower; but they who have been more slow in their Repen∣tance, shall dwell within the Walls: But they that shall not repent, but shall continue on in their wicked Do∣ings, shall die the Death. As for those who had their Rods Green, but yet Cleft; they are such as were always Faithful and Good; but who had some Envy and Strife among themselves concerning Dignity and Preheminence. Now all such are Vain and without Understanding, as contend with one another about these things. Never∣theless seeing they are otherwise Good, if when they shall hear these Commands they shall amend them∣selves, and shall at my Perswasion suddainly repent; they shall forthwith begin to dwell in the Tower, as they who have truly and worthily repented. But if any one shall again return to his Dissention, he shall be shut out from the Tower, and shall lose his Life. For the Life of those who keep the Commandments of the LORD, consists in doing what they are com∣manded; not in Principality, or in any other Dignity. For by Patience
and Humility of Mind Men shall at∣tain unto Life; but by Seditions, and Contempt of the Law, they shall pur∣chase Death unto themselves. VIII. THEY who in their Rods had half Green and half Dry, are those who are engag'd in many Affairs; nor are wholly applied to Holy things. For which Cause half of them liveth, and half is dead. Wherefore many of these since the time that they have heard my Commands, have re∣pented; and begun to live in the Tower. But some of them have whol∣ly fallen away; to these there is no more place for Repentance. For by reason of their present Interests, they have blasphemed and denied God: And for this Wickedness have lost Life. And of these many are still in doubt; these may yet return; and if they shall quickly repent, they shall have a place in the Tower; but if they shall be more slow, they shall dwell within the Walls; but if they shall not repent, they shall die. As for those who had two parts of their Rods Green, and the third Dry; they have deny'd the LORD, by their ma∣nifold
sins. Of these many have re∣pented, and found a place in the Tower; and many have altogether departed from God. These have ut∣terly lost their Lives. And some be∣ing in a doubtful state, have raised up Dissentions: These may yet return, if they shall suddainly repent, and not be with-held by their pleasures; but if they shall continue in their Evil-doings they shall Die. IX. THEY who gave in their Rods two parts Dry, and the other Green; are those who have indeed been faith∣ful, but withall Rich, and full of good things; and thereupon have desired to be famous With foreign Nations. among those without, and have thereby fallen into great Pride, and began to aim at high mat∣ters, and to forsake the Truth: Nor did they hold fast to the Righteous, but lived With foreign Nations. with Strangers; and this Life seem'd the more Pleasant to them. Howbeit they departed not from God, but continued in the Faith; only they did not exercise the Works of Faith. Many therefore of these repented; and began to dwell in the Tower. Yet others still living among strange
People, and being lifted up with their Vanities, have utterly fallen away from God; and follow'd the Works, and Wickednesses of the Heathen. These kind of Men therefore are reckon'd among Strangers to the Go∣spel. Others of these became Doubt∣ful minded; despairing by reason of their wicked doings ever to attain un∣to Salvation: Others being Dubious, stirr'd up Dissentions. To these there∣fore, and to those who by reason of their Doings are become doubtful, there is still hopes of return; but they must repent quickly, that their Place may be in the Tower. But they that repent not, but continue still in their Pleasures; are nigh unto Death. X. As for those who gave in their Rods Green, excepting their Tops, which only were Dry, and had Clefts; These were always Good, and Faith∣ful, and Approved towards od: Nevertheless they sinn'd a little, by reason of their empty Pleasures, and little Disputes which they had among themselves. Wherefore many of them when they heard my words, repented forthwith; and began to dwell in the
Tower. Nevertheless some grew doubtful, and others to their doubt∣ful Minds added Dissentions. To these therefore there is still hope of return, because they were always Good; but they shall hardly be moved. As for those lastly, who gave in their Rods dry, their Tops only excepted, which alone were Green; They are such as have believed indeed in God, but have lived in Wickedness; yet without departing from God: Having always willingly Born the Name of the LORD; and readily received into their Houses the Servants of God. Wherefore hear∣ing these things, they return'd, and without delay repented, and lived in all Righteousness. And some of them suffered Death; others readily under∣went many trials, being mindful of their Evil-doings. XI. AND when he had ended his Explications of all the Rods, he said unto me; Go, and say unto all Men that they Repent, and they shall live unto God: Because the LORD being moved with great Clemency hath sent me to preach Repentance unto all; even to those who by reason of their
Evil-doings, deserve not to attain unto Salvation. But the LORD will be Pa∣tient, and keep the Invitation that was made by his Son. I said unto him; Sir, I hope that All when they shall hear these things will repent. For I trust that every one acknow∣ledging his Crimes, and taking up the fear of the LORD, will return unto Repentance. He said unto me; Who∣soever shall repent with all their Hearts, and cleanse themselves from all the Evils that I have before men∣tioned; and not add any thing more to their sins, shall receive from the LORD the Cure of their former Ini∣quities; if they shall not make any Doubt of my Commands, and shall live unto God. But they that shall continue to add to their Transgressi∣ons, and shall still converse with the Lusts of this present World, shall Condemn themselves unto Death. But do thou walk in these Commands, and thou shalt live unto God. And who∣soever shall walk in these, and exercise them rightly, shall live unto God. And having shew'd me all these things, he said: I will shew thee the rest in a few days.
The Ninth SIMILITUDE. The Greatest Mysteries of the Mili∣tant and Triumphant Church which is to be built. I. AFTER I had written the Commands and Similitudes of the Shepherd, the Angel of Repen∣tance; he came unto me, and said to me; I will shew thee all those things which the See above Book I. Spirit spake with thee under the Figure of the Church. For that Spirit is the Son of God. And because thou wert weak in Body, it was not declared unto thee by the Angel, until thou wert strengthened by the Spirit, and encreased in force, that thou mightest also see the Angel. For then indeed the Building of the Tower was gloriously shewn unto thee by the Church; nevertheless thou sawest all things shewn unto thee as it were by a Virgin. But now thou art enlightned by the Angel, but indeed by the same Spirit. But thou must consider all things dili∣gently; for therefore am I sent into thine House by that Venerable Angel. Mes∣senger,
that when thou shalt have seen all things powerfully, thou mayst not be afraid as before. And he led me to the Top of a Mountain of Arcadia, and we sate upon its Top. And he shew'd me a great Plain, and about it Twelve Mountains in dif∣ferent Figures. The First was black as Soot. The Second was smooth, without Grass. The Third was full of Thorns and Thistles. The Fourth had Grass half dryed; of which the upper part was green, but that next the Root was dry; and some of the Herbs, when the Sun grew hot, were dry. The Fifth Mountain was very rugged; but yet had green Grass. The Sixth Mountain was full of Clefts, some lesser, and some greater; and in those Clefts grew Grass, not flourishing, but which seem'd to be withering. The Seventh Mountain had delightful Pasture; and was wholly fruitful; and all kinds of Cattle, and of the Birds of Heaven, fed upon it; and the more they fed of it, the more and better did the Grass grow. The Eighth Mountain was full of Fountains, and from those Fountains were water'd all kinds of
the Creatures of God. The Ninth Mountain had no Water at all, but was wholly destitute of it; and nou∣rish'd deadly Serpents, and de∣structive to Men. The Tenth Moun∣tain was full of tall Trees, and alto∣gether shady; and under the Shade of them lay Cattle resting and chew∣ing the Cud. The Eleventh Moun∣tain was full of the thickest Trees; and those Trees seem'd to be loaded with several sorts of Fruits; that whosoever saw them could not chuse but desire to eat of their Fruit. The Twelfth Mountain was altogether white, and of a most pleasant As∣pect, and its self gave a most excel∣lent Beauty to its self. II. IN the middle of the Origen. Hom. iii. in Ezech. Plain he shew'd me a huge white Rock, which rose out of the Plain, and the Rock was higher than those Moun∣tains, and was square; so that it seem'd capable of supporting the whole World. It look'd to me to be old, yet had in it a new Gate, which seem'd to have been newly hewn out in it. Now that Gate was bright be∣yond the Sun its self; insomuch that
I greatly admired at its Light. About that Gate stood Twelve Virgins; of which Four that stood at the Cor∣ners of the Gate, seem'd to me to be the Chiefest; although the rest also were of worth, and they stood in the four parts of the Gate. It added also to the Grace of those Virgins, that they stood in pairs, cloathed with linnen Garments, and decently girded, their right Arms being at li∣berty, as if they were about to lift up a Hook, for so they were adorn'd; and were exceeding chearful and ready. When I saw this, I wonder'd with my self to see such great and noble things. And again I admir'd upon the Account of those Virgins, that they were so handsom and deli∣cate; and stood with such Firmness and Constancy, as if they would carry the whole Heaven. And as I was thinking thus within my self; the Shepherd said unto me; What thinkest thou within thy self, and art disquieted, and fillest thy self with Care? Do not seem to consider as if thou wert wise what thou dost not understand, but pray unto the LORD, that thou mayst have Ability
to understand it: What is to come thou canst not understand, but sst that which is before thee. Be not therefore disquieted at those things which thou canst not see; but get the Understanding of those which thou seest. Forbear to be curious: And I will shew thee all things that I ought to declare unto thee; but first consider what yet remains. III. AND when he had said this unto me, I looked up, and behold I saw Six tall and Venerable Men coming; their Countenances were all alike; and they call'd a certain Multitude of Men; and they who came at their Call were also tall and stout. And those six commanded them to build a certain Tower over that Gate. And immediately there began to be a great Noise of those Men running here and there about the Gate, who were come together to build the Tower. Now those Vir∣gins which stood about the Gate per∣ceived that the Building of the Tower was to be hastned on by them. And they stretched out their Hands, as if they were about to receive somewhat
from them. Then those six Men commanded, that they should lift up Stones out of a certain deep place, and prepare them for the Building of the Tower. And there were lifted up ten white Stones, square, and So Coteleri∣us in loc. not cut round. Then those six Men called the Virgins to them, and commanded them to carry all the Stones that were to be put into the Building; and having carried them through the Gate to deliver them to those that were about to build that Tower. Immediately the Virgins be∣gan to lift up all of them together those Stones, that were before taken out of the Deep. IV. AND they also who stood about the Gate did carry Stones in such a manner, that those Stones which seem'd to be the strongest were laid at the Corners, the rest were put into the Sides; and thus they carried all the Stones, and bring∣ing them through the Gate, deliver'd them to the Builders, as they had been commanded. Now they re∣ceiving them at their Hands built with them. The Building was made
upon that great Rock, and over the Gate; and by these the whole Tower was supported. But the Building of the Ten Stones fill'd the whole Gate, which began to be made at the Foun∣dation of that Tower. After those ten Stones were five and twenty others lifted up out of the Deep; and these were placed in the Building of the same Tower; being lifted up by those Virgins, as the others had been before. After these were five and thirty others lifted up; and these were also in like manner fitted into the same Work. Then forty other Stones were brought up, and all these were added unto the Building of that Tower. So there began to be four Ranks in the Foundation of that Tower; and the Stones began to cease to be drawn out of the Deep; and they also which built rested a lit∣tle. Again, those six Men commanded the Multitude, that they should bring Stones out of those twelve Mountains to the Building of the same Tower. So they cut out of all the Moun∣tains Stones of divers Colours, and brought them, and gave them to the Virgins; which when they had re∣ceived
they reach'd them up, and carried them into the Building of the Tower. In which when they were built they became white, and different from what they were before; for they were all alike, and did change their former Colours. And some were reach'd up by the Men themselves, which when they came into the Building, continued such as they were put in. These neither became white, nor different from what they were before; because they were not carried by the Virgins through the Gate. Wherefore these Stones were disagreeable in the Building; which when those six Men perceived, they commanded them to be removed, and put again in the place from which they were brought. And they said to those who brought those Stones: Do not ye reach up to us any Stones for this Building; but lay them down by the Tower, that these Virgins may take them up and reach them to us. For unless they shall be car∣ried by these Virgins through this Gate, they cannot change their Co∣lours: Therefore do not labour in vain.
V. SO the Building that day was ended, howbeit the Tower was not finish'd; for it was afterwards to be built, therefore now also there was some delay made of it. And those six Men commanded those that built to depart, and as it were to rest for some time; but they order'd those Vir∣gins that they should not depart from the Tower: Now they seem'd to me to be left for the guarding of it. When all were departed, I said unto that Shepherd; Sir, Why is not the Building of the Tower finish'd? Be∣cause it cannot, said he, be finish'd until its Lord comes, and approves of the Building; that if he shall find any Stones in it that are not good they may be changed; for this Tower is built according to his Will. Sir, said I, I would know, what the Building of this Tower signifies; as also I would be inform'd concerning this Rock, and this Gate, and con∣cerning the Mountains, and the Vir∣gins, and the Stones that were drawn out of the Deep, and not cut, but put into the Building just as they came forth; and why the ten Stones
were first laid in the Foundation; then the twenty five; then thirty five; then forty? Also concerning those Stones that were put into the Building, and again taken out, and carried back into their place? Ful∣fil, I pray, the desire of my Soul as to all these things, and manifest all unto me. And he said unto me; If thou shalt not be dull, thou shalt know all, and shalt see all the other things that are about to happen in this Tower; and shalt understand diligently all these Similitudes. And after a few days we came into the same place where we had sate before; and he said unto me, Let us go unto the Tower; for the LORD of it will come and examine it. So we came thither, and found none but those Virgins there. And he asked them, whether the LORD of that Tower was come thither? And they re∣ply'd, that he would be there present∣ly, to examine the Building. VI. AFTER a very little while I saw a great Multitude of Men coming, and in the middle of them a Man so tall, that he surpassed the
Tower in Bigness. And about him were those six, who before com∣manded in the Building, and all the rest of those who had built that Tower, and many others of great Dignity: And the Virgins that kept the Tower ran to meet him, and kissed him, and began to walk near unto him. But he examined the Build∣ing with so much care that he hand∣led every Stone; and strook every one with a Rod which he held in his Hand; of which some being so struck turn'd black as Soot; others were rough; some looked as if they had Cracks in them; others seem'd maimed; some neither black nor white; some look'd sharp, and a∣greed not with the other Stones, and others were full of Spots. These were the several kinds of these Stones which were not found proper in the Building: All which the LORD commanded to be taken out of the Tower, and laid near it, and other Stones to be brought, and put in their Places. And they that built, ask'd him from which of the Mountains he would have Stones brought to put in the Place of those that were laid
aside: But he forbad them to bring any from the Mountains, and com∣manded that they should take them out of a certain Field that was near: So they digged in that Field, and found many bright square Stones, and some also that were round. How∣beit all that were found in that Field were taken away, and carried through the Gate by those Virgins; and those of them that were square were fitted and put into the places of those that were pulled out. But the round ones were not put into the Building, be∣cause they were hard, and it would have required too much time to ut them; but they were placed about the Tower, as if they should here∣after be cut square, and put into the Building; for they were very white. VII. WHEN he who was chief in Dignity, and LORD of the whole Tower saw this, he called to him the Shepherd that was with me, and gave him the Stones that were re∣jected and laid about the Tower, and said unto him; Cleanse these Stones with all Care, and fit them into the
Building of the Tower, that they may agree with the rest; but those that will not suit with the rest, cast away afar from off from the Tower. When he had thus commanded him, he departed, with all those that came with him to the Tower: But those Virgins still stood about the Tower to keep it. And I said unto that Shepherd; How can these Stones, seeing they have been rejected, re∣turn into the Building of this Tower? He reply'd; I will cut off the greatest part from these Stones, and will add them to the Building, and they will agree with the rest. And I said, Sir, How will they be able to fill the same place, when they shall be so much cut away? He answer'd; They that shall be found too little shall be put into the middle of the Building, and the greater shall be placed without, and keep them in. When he had said thus unto me, he added; Let us go, and after three days we will return, and I will put these Stones, being cleansed, into the Tower: For all these that are about the Tower must be cleansed, least the Master of the House chance to
come upon the suddain, and find those which are about the Tower, un∣clean, and so shall despise them; and these Stones shall not be put into this Building, and I shall be look'd upon to have been negligent. When therefore we came after three days to the Tower, he said unto me; Let us examin all these Stones, and let us see which of them may go into the Building. I answer'd, Sir, Let us see. VIII. AND first of all we began to consider those which had been Black; for they were found just such as they were when they were pull'd out of the Tower: Wherefore he commanded them to be removed from the Tower, and put by themselves. Then he examined those which had been rough; and commanded many of those to be cut round, and to be fitted by the Virgins into the Build∣ing of the Tower: So they took them, and fitted them into the middle of the Building; and he commanded the rest to be laid by with the Black Ones, for they also were become Black. Next he considered those which
were full of Cracks; and many of those also he order'd to be pared away, and so to be added to the rest of the Building, by the same Virgins: These were placed without, because they were found entire; but the residue through the multitude of their Cracks could not be reform'd, and therefore were cast away from the Building of the Tower. Then he consider'd those that were maimed; many of these had Cracks, and were become Black: Others had large Clefts: These he commanded to be placed with those that were rejected; but the rest being cleansed and reform'd, he command∣ed to be put into the Building: These therefore those Virgins took up, and fitted into the Middle of the Build∣ing; because they were but Weak. After these he examined those which were found half White and half Black; and many of those were now Black; These also he order'd to be laid among those that were cast away. The rest were found altogether White; those were taken up by the Virgins, and fitted into the same Tower: Vid. MS. Lamb. Edit. Oxon, p. 15. And these were put in the outside, because they were found entire; that so they
might keep in those that were placed in the middle; for nothing was cut off from them. Next he look'd upon those which were Hard and Sharp; But few of these were made use of, because they could not be Cut: For they were found very hard; but the rest were form'd, and fitted by the Virgins in∣to the middle of the Building, because they were more weak. Then he con∣sider'd those which had Spots; of these a few were found Black, and these were carried to their Fellows. The rest were White and Entire; and they were fitted by the Virgins into the Building, and placed in the Out∣side, by reason of their Strength. IX. AFTER this he came to con∣sider those Stones which were White and Round; and he said unto me, What shall we do with these Stones? I answer'd, Sir, I cannot tell. He re∣ply'd, Canst thou think of nothing then for these? I answer'd, Sir, I un∣derstand not this Art; neither am I a Stone-Cutter, nor can I tell any thing. And he said, Seest thou not that they are very Round? Now to make them Square, I must cut off a
great deal from them; Howbeit it is necessary that some of these should go into the Building of the Tower: I answer'd; If it be Necessary, why do you perplex your self, and not ra∣ther chuse, if you have any Choice among them, and fit them into the Building? Upon this he chose out the largest and brightest, and squared them; which when he had done the Virgins took them up, and placed them in the Outside of the Building. And the rest that remained, were car∣ried back into the same Field from which they were taken: Howbeit they were not cast away; Because, said he, there is yet a little wanting to this Tower, which is to be Built; and perhaps the LORD will have these Stones fitted into this Building, be∣cause they are exceeding White. Then were there called twelve very Stately Women, cloath'd with a Black Gar∣ment, girded, and their Shoulders free, and their Hair loose. These seem'd to me to be Country Women. And the Shepherd commanded them to take up those Stones which were cast out of the Building, and carry them back to the Mountains out of
which they were taken. And they took them up joyfully, and carried them back to their Places from whence they had been taken. When not one Stone remain'd about the Tower, he said unto me; let us go about this Tower, and see that nothing be want∣ing to it. We began therefore to go round it; and when he saw that it was handsomely Built, he began to be very Glad: for it was so beauti∣fully framed, that any one that had seen it must have been in Love with the Building: For it seem'd to be all but one Stone, nor did a joynt any where appear; but it look'd as if it had all been cut out of One Rock. X. AND when I diligently consi∣der'd what a Tower it was, I was extremely pleased; And he said unto me, Bring hither some Lime and little Shells, that I may fill up the Spaces of those Stones that were taken out of the Building, and put in again; for all things about the Tower, must be made Even. And I did as he com∣manded me, and brought them unto him; And he said unto me, Be ready to Help me, and this Work will quick∣ly
be finish'd. He therefore filled up the Spaces of those Stones, and com∣manded the place about the Tower to be cleansed. Then those Virgins took Beasoms, and cleansed all the place around, and took away all the Rubbish, and threw on Water. Which being done, the place became delight∣ful, and the Tower Beauteous. Then he said unto me; All is now Clean: If the LORD should come to finish the Tower, he will find nothing where∣by to complain of us. When he had said this he would have departed. But I laid hold on his Bag, and began to entreat him for the LORD's sake, that he would explain to me all things that he had shewn me. He said unto me, I have at present a little business; but I will suddainly explain all things un∣to thee. Tarry here for me till I come. I said unto him; Sir, What shall I do here alone? He answer'd, Thou art not alone, seeing all these Virgins are with thee. I said; Sir, Deliver me then unto them. Then he called them, and said unto them; I commend this Man unto you till I shall come. So I remain'd with those Virgins; Now they were Chearful
and Courteous unto me; especially the four, which seem'd to be the Chiefest among them. XI. THEN those Virgins said un∣to me; that Shepherd will not return hither to day. I said unto them; What then shall I do? They answer'd, Tarry for him till the Evening, if perhaps he may come and speak with thee; But if not, yet thou shalt con∣tinue with us till he do's come. I said unto them, I will tarry for him till Evening; but if he comes not by that time I will go home, and return hi∣ther again the next Morning. They answered me; thou art deliver'd un∣to us, thou mayst not depart from us. I said, Where shall I tarry? They re∣plied; Thou shalt sleep with us as a Brother, not as a Husband: For thou art our Brother, and we are ready from henceforth to dwell with thee; for thou art very dear to us. Howbeit I was ashamed to continue with them. But she that seem'd to be the chiefest amongst them, em∣braced me, and began to kiss me. And the rest when they saw that I was kissed by her, began also to kiss
me as a Brother; and led me about the Tower, and play'd with me. Some of them also sung Psalms, o∣thers made up the Chorus with them. But I walked about the Tower with them, rejoycing silently and seem∣ing to my self to be grown young a∣gain. And when the Evening came on, I would forthwith have gone home, but they with-held me, and suffer'd me not to depart. Where∣fore I continued with them that Night near the same Tower. So they spread their Linnen Garments upon the Ground; and placed me in the middle, nor did they any thing else but Pray. I also pray'd with them without ceasing, no less than they. Who when they saw me pray in that manner, rejoyced greatly; and I continued there with them till the next day. And when we had worship'd God, then the Shepherd came and said unto them; You have done no Injury to this Man. They answer'd, Ask him. I said unto him, Sir, I have received a great deal of Satisfaction in that I have remained with them. And he said unto me, How didst thou sup? I answered,
Sir, I feasted the whole Night upon the Words of the LORD. They re∣ceived thee well then, said he? I said, Sir, Very well. He answer'd, Wilt thou now learn what thou didst desire? I reply'd, Sir, I will: And first I pray thee that thou shouldst shew me all things in the Order that I asked them. He answer'd. I will do all as thou wouldst have me, nor will I hide any thing from thee. XII. FIRST of all Sir, said I, Tell me, what this Rock and this Gate denote? Hearken said he; This Rock, and this Gate are the Son of God. I reply'd, Sir, How can that be; seeing the Rock is old, but the Gate new? Hear, said he, O foolish Man! and understand. The Son of God is indeed more antient than any Creature; insomuch that he was in Council with his Father at the Cre∣ation of all things. But the Gate is therefore new, because he appear'd in the last days at the fulness of time; that they who shall attain unto Sal∣vation, may by it enter into the Kingdom of God. You have seen,
said he, those Stones which were carried through the Gate, how they were placed in the Building of the Tower; but that those which were not carried through the Gate, were sent away into their own places? I answer'd, Sir, I saw it. Thus, said he, No Man shall enter into the Kingdom of God, but he who shall take upon him the Name of the Son of God. For if you would enter in∣to any City, and that City should be encompassed with a Wall, and had only one Gate, could you enter into that City except by the Gate which it has? I answer'd, Sir, How could I do otherwise? As therefore, said he, there would be no other way of entring into that City but by its Gate, so neither can any one enter into the Kingdom of God, but only by the Name of the Son of God, who is most dear unto him. And he said unto me, Didst thou see the Multi∣tude that built that Tower? Sir, said I, I saw it. He answer'd, All those are the Angels, venerable in their Dignity. With these is the LORD encompassed as with a Wall; but the Gate is the Son of God; who is the
only Way of coming unto God. For no Man shall enter into the Kingdom of God by any other Way, but on∣ly by his Son. Thou sawest also, said he, the six Men, and in the middle of them that Tall, Great Man, who walk'd about the Tower, and rejected the Stones out of the Tower? Sir, said I, I saw them. He answer'd, that Man was the glorious Son of God; and those six were his Angels of most eminent Dignity, which stand about him on the Right Hand and on the Left. Of these excellent Angels none comes in unto God with∣out him. He added; Whosoever there∣fore shall not take upon him his Name, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. XIII. THEN he said, What is this Tower? This said he, is the Church. And what, Sir, are these Virgins? He said unto me, these are the Holy Spirits; for no Man can enter into the Kingdom of God ex∣cept these cloath him with their Garment. For it will avail thee no∣thing to take up the Name of the Son of God, unless thou shalt also receive
their Garment from them. For these Virgins are the Powers of the Son of God. So shall a Man in vain carry his Name, unless he shall also carry his Powers. And he said unto me; Sawest thou those Stones that were cast away? They carried indeed the Name, but put not on their Gar∣ment. I said, Sir, What is their Garment? Vid. Annot. Edit. Oxon. p. 166. d. Their very Names, said he, are their Garment. Therefore whosoever carries the Name of the Son of God, ought to carry their Names also; for the Son of God also himself carrieth their Names. As for those Stones, continued he, which being deliver'd by their Hands, thou sawest remain in the Building, they were cloathed with their Power; for which cause thou seest the whole Tower of the same Vid. Origen. Philocal. c. viii. Colour with the Rock, and made as it were of one Stone. So also those who have believed in God by his Son, have put on this Spirit. Behold there shall be one Spirit, and one Body, and one Colour of their Garments: And all they shall attain this, who shall carry the Names of these Virgins. And I said, Sir, Why then were
those Stones cast away which were rejected; seeing they also were car∣ried through the Gate; and deli∣vered by the Hands of these Vir∣gins into the Building of this Tower? Seeing, said he, thou takest care to enquire diligently into all things; hear also concerning those Stones which were rejected. All these re∣ceived the Name of the Son of God, and with that the Power of these Vir∣gins. Having therefore received these Spirits they were perfected, and brought into the Number of the Ser∣vants of God; and they began to be one Body, and to have one Gar∣ment; for they were sensible of the same Righteousness, which they a∣like exercised. But after that they beheld those Women which thou sawest cloathed with a black Gar∣ment, with their Shoulders at Liber∣ty and their Hair loose; they fix'd their Desires upon them, being tempted with their Beauty; and were cloathed with their Power, and cast off the Cloathing of the Virgins. Therefore were they cast off from the House of God, and de∣livered to those Women. But they
that were not corrupted with their Beauty, remained in the House of God. This, said he, is the signifi∣cation of those Stones which were re∣jected. XIV. AND I said: Sir, What if any of these Men shall repent, and cast away their desire of those Wo∣men, and be converted, and return to these Virgins, and put on again their Vertue; shall they not enter into the House of God? They shall enter, said he, if they shall lay aside all the Works of those Women, and shall resume the Power of these Vir∣gins, and shall walk in their Works. And for this Cause there is a stop in the Building, that if they shall re∣pent, they may be added to the Build∣ing of this Tower; but if they shall not repent, that others may be built in their places, and they be utterly cast away. For all these things I gave Thanks unto the LORD, that be∣ing moved with Mercy towards all those upon whom his Name is called, he sent to us the Angel of Repentance to preside over us who have sinned against him; and that
he has renew'd our Spirits which were almost gone, and who had no hope of Salvation, but are now re∣freshed to the Renewal of Life. Then I said; Shew me now Sir, Why this Tower is not built upon the Ground, but upon a Rock, and upon the Gate? He replied; Thou art yet foolish and without Under∣standing, seeing thou askest this. And I said; Sir, I must needs ask all things of you, because I understand nothing. For all your Answers are great and excellent; and which a Man can hardly understand. Hear, said he: The Name of the Son of God is great and without Bounds, and the whole World is supported by it. If therefore, said I, every Crea∣ture of God be sustain'd by his Son; Why do's he not support those also who have been invited by him, and who carry his Name, and walk in his Commandments? Seest thou not, said he, that he do's support them, who with all their Heart carry his Name? He therefore is their Foun∣dation, and gladly supports those who do not deny his Name, but wil∣lingly bear it.
XV. AND I said: Sir, tell me, the Names of these Virgins; and of those Women that were cloathed with the black Garment. Hear, said he, the Names of those Virgins which are the more powerful, and stand at the Corners of the Gate. These are their Names: The First is called Origen. Hom. in Ezek. Faith; the Second, Absti∣nence; the Third, Power; the Fourth, Patience; the rest which stand beneath these are, Simplicity; Innocence; Chastity; Chearfulness; Truth; Understanding; Concord; and Charity. Whosoever therefore carry these Names, and the Name of the Son God, shall enter into the Kingdom of God. Hear now, said he, the Names of those Women, which were cloathed with the black Garment. Of these, Four are the prin∣cipal; the First is Perfidiousness; the Second, Intemperance; the Third, Infidelity; the Fourth, Pleasure. And the rest which follow are called thus, Sadness; Malice; Lust; Anger; Lying; Foolishness; Pride, and Ha∣tred. The Servant of God which carries these Spirits, shall see indeed the Kingdom of God, but he shall
not enter into it. But Sir, what are those Stones which were taken out of the Deep and fitted into the Build∣ing? Then ten, said he, which were placed at the Foundation, are the first Age; the following five and twenty, the second, of Righteous Men. The next thirty five, are the Prophets and Ministers of the LORD. And the forty, are the Apostles and Doctors of the Preaching of the Son of God. And I said, Sir, Why did the Virgins carry even these Stones also through the Gate, and so put them into the Building? And he said, Because these first Spirits carried them; and they departed not one from the other, nei∣ther the Men from the Spirits, nor the Spirits from the Men; but the Spirits were joyned to those Men e∣ven to the day of their Death; who if they had not had these Spirits with them they could not have been useful to the Building of this Tower. XVI. AND I said; Sir, Shew me this farther. He answer'd, What do'st thou demand? Why did these Stones come out of the Deep, and were placed into the Building of this
Tower, seeing that they long ago carried their just Spirits? Vid. Edit. Oxon. p. 171. b. It was necessary, said he, for them to ascend by Water, and so to be at rest. For they could not otherwise enter into the Kingdom of God, but by laying aside the Mortality of their former Life. They therefore being dead, were nevertheless sealed with the Seal of the Son of God, and so entred in∣to the Kingdom of God. For be∣fore a Man receives the Name of the Son of God, he is ordained unto Death; but when he receives the Seal he is freed from Death, and delivered unto Life. Now that Seal is Water, into which Men go down under the Obligation unto Death, but come up appointed unto Life. Wherefore to those also was this Seal Vid. Coteler. Annot. in loc. pag. 77, 78. Comp. 1 Pet. iii. 19. preached, and they made use of it, that they might enter into the Kingdom of God. And I said; Why then, Sir, did these forty Stones also ascend with them out of the Deep, having already received that Seal? He an∣swered; Vid. Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. Et vi. Because these Apostles and Teachers, who preached the Name of the Son of God, dying af∣ter they had received his Faith and
Power, preached to them who were dead before; and they gave this Seal to them. They went down therefore into the Water with them, and again came up. But these went down a∣live; whereas those, who were be∣fore dead, went down dead, but came up alive. Through these therefore they received Life and knew the Son of God: For which Cause they came up with them, and agreed in the Building of the Tower; and were not cut, but put in intire; because they dyed in great Purity being full of Righteousness; only this Seal was wanting to them. Thus you have the Explication of these things. XVII. I ANSWER'D: Sir, Tell me now what concerns those Moun∣tains, why they are so different; some of one Form, and some of another. Hear, said he: These Twelve Moun∣tains which thou seest, are Twelve Nations, which make up the whole World. Wherefore the Son of God is preached to them, by those whom he sent unto them. But why, said I, are they different, and every one of a several Figure? He replied;
Hearken. Those Twelve Nations which possess the whole World, are Twelve Peoples: And as thou hast beheld these Mountains different, so are they. I will therefore open to thee the Meaning, and Actions of every Mountain. But first, Sir, said I, shew me this: Seeing these Moun∣tains are so different, how have they agreed into the Building of this Tower; and are no less bright than those which came out of the Deep? Because, reply'd he, all the Nations under Heaven, that have heard and believed, have been called in the same one Name of the Son of God. Where∣fore having received his Seal, they have all been made Partakers of the same Prudence and Sense. Knowledge; and their Faith and Charity have been the same; and they have carried the Spirits of these Virgins with his Name. And therefore the Building of this Tower seemed of the same Colour, and did shine like the Bright∣ness of the Sun. Howbeit after that they were thus perswaded, and that there began to be one Body of them all, some among them polluted them∣selves, and were cast off from the
Generation of the Righteous, and again return'd to their former State, and became even worse than they were before. XVIII. HOW, said I, Sir, were they worse who knew the LORD? He answer'd; If he who knows not the LORD liveth wickedly, the Pu∣nishment of his Wickedness attends him. But he who has known the LORD, ought to abstain altogether from all Wickedness, and more and more be the Servant of Righteous∣ness. And do's not he then seem to thee to sin more who ought to follow Goodness, if he shall prefer the part of Sin; than he who offends with∣out knowing the Vertue of God? Wherefore these are indeed or∣dain'd unto Death; But they who have known the LORD, and have seen his wonderful Works, if they shall live wickedly, they shall be doubly punish'd, and shall die for e∣ver. As therefore thou hast seen that after the Stones were cast out of the Tower, which had been re∣jected; they were deliver'd to wicked and cruel Spirits; and thou beheldst
the Tower so cleansed, as if it had all been made of one Stone: Vid. Orig. Philocal. C. viii. So the Church of God, when it shall be pu∣rified; (the Wicked and Counter∣feits, the Mischeivous and Doubtful, and all that have behaved themselves wickedly in it, and committed di∣vers kinds of Sin, being cast out;) shall become one Body, and there shall be one Understanding, one O∣pinion, one Faith, and the same Chari∣ty. Then shall the son of God rejoice among them; and shall receive his People with a pure Will. And I said; Sir, All these things are great and honourable: But now shew unto me the Effect and Force of every Moun∣tain; that every Soul which trusteth in the LORD, when it shall hear these things, many honour his Great, and Wonderful, and Holy Name. Hear, said he, the Variety of these Moun∣tains, that is, of the twelve Nations. XIX. THEY who have believed of the first Mountain, which is Black, are those who have revolted from the Faith; and spoken wicked things against the LORD; and betray'd the Servants of God. To these Death
is proposed, but there is no Repen∣tance for them: And therefore they are Black, because their kind is wicked. Of the second Mountain which was Smooth, are the Feigned. Hypo∣crites, who have believed, and the Teachers of Naughtiness: And these are next to the foregoing, which have not in them the Fruit of Righteous∣ness. For as their Mountain is bar∣ren, and without Fruit; so also such kind of Men have indeed the Name of Christians, but are empty of Faith; nor is there any Fruit of the Truth in them. Nevertheless there is room left to them for Repentance, if they shall suddainly pursue it: But if they shall delay, they also shall be Par∣takers of Death with the foregoing kind. I said, Sir, Why is there room left to those for Repentance, and not to the foregoing kind, seeing their Sins are well nigh the same? There is therefore, said he, to these a return unto Life, because they have not blasphemed their LORD, nor be∣tray'd the Servants of God: But by their desire of Gain have deceived Men, leading them according to the desires of Sinners; wherefore they
shall suffer for this thing. Howbeit there is still left them room for Re∣pentance, because they have not spoken any thing wickedly against their LORD. XX. THEY who are of the third Mountain which had Thorns and Brambles, are those who believed, but were some of them Rich, others taken up with many Affairs: The Brambles are their Riches; the Thorns, those Affairs in which they were engaged. Now they who are entangled in much Business, and in Diversity of Affairs, joyn not them∣selves to the Servants of God, but wander, being called away by those Affairs with which they are choaked. And so they which are rich, with difficulty yield themselves to the Vid. Edit. Oxon. p. 178. Not. b. Conversation of the Servants of God; fearing least any thing should be ask'd of them. These therefore shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of God. For as Men walk with dif∣ficulty bare-foot over Thorns; even so these kind of Men, shall scarcely enter into the Kingdom of God. Ne∣vertheless there is afforded to all these
a return unto Repentance; if so be they shall quickly return to it; that because in their former days they have neglected to work, in the time that is to come they may do some Good. If therefore having repented they shall do the Works of Righte∣ousness, they shall live: But if they shall continue in their Evil Courses, they shall be deliver'd to those Wo∣men that will take away their Life. XXI AS for the fourth Mountain, which had much Grass, the upper part of which is green, but the rest dry, and some of which being touch'd with the Heat of the Sun, is wither'd; it denotes the doubtful, who have believed, and some others who carry the LORD in their Tongues, but have him not in their Heart: Therefore their Grass is dry, and without Root; because they live only in Words, but their Works are dead. These there∣fore are neither dead nor living, and withal are doubtful. For the Doubt∣ful are neither Green nor Dry, that is, neither Dead nor Alive. For as their Grass dries away at the Sight
of the Sun; so the Doubtful as soon as they hear of Persecution, and fear Inconveniences, return to their Idols, and again serve them, and are ashamed to bear the Name of their LORD. This kind of Men then is neither Dead nor Alive; neverthe∣less these also may live, if they shall presently repent: But if not, they shall be delivered to those Women, who shall take away their Life. XXII. AS concerning the fifth Mountain that is craggy, and yet has green Grass: They are of this kind who have believed, and are Faithful indeed, but believe with Difficulty; and are bold, and self-conceited; that would be thought to know all things, but really know nothing. Where∣fore by reason of this Confidence Knowledge is departed from them, and a rash Presumption is entred into them. But they carry themselves high, and as prudent Men; and though they are Fools, yet would seem to be Teachers. Now by reason of this Folly many of them whilst they mag∣nifie themselves, are become vain and empty. For Boldness and vain
Confidence is a great Seducer. Where∣fore many of these are cast away: But others acknowledging their Er∣ror, have repented, and submitted themselves to those who are know∣ing: And to all the rest of this kind there is Repentance allow'd; foras∣much as they were not so much wicked as foolish, and void of Un∣derstanding. If these therefore shall repent, they shall live unto God; but if not, they shall dwell with those Women, who shall exercise their Wickedness upon them. XXIII. FOR what concerns the sixth Mountain having greater and lesser Clefts, they are such as have believed; but those in which were the lesser Clefts are they who have had Controversies among themselves; and by reason of their Quarrels lan∣guish in the Faith: Nevertheless many of these have repented, and so will the rest when they shall hear my Commands; for their Contro∣versies are but small, and they will easily return unto Repentance. But those who have the greater Clefts, will be as stiff Stones, mindful of
Grudges and Offences, and practising Anger among themselves. These therefore are cast from the Tower, and rejected to be put into its Build∣ing; therefore this kind of Men shall hardly live. Our God and LORD, who ruleth over all things, and has Power over all his Creatures, will not remember our Offences, but is easily appeased by those who confess their Sins: But Man being Languid, Mortal, Infirm, and full of Sins, per∣severes in his Anger against Man; as if it were in his Power to save or to destroy him. But I, as the Angel who am set over your Repentance, ad∣monish you, that whosoever among you has any such purpose he would lay it aside, and return unto Repen∣tance; and the LORD will provide Remedies for your former Sins, if you shall purge your selves from this Evil Spirit; but if you shall not do it, ye shall be delivered to him unto Death. XXIV. AS for the seventh Moun∣tain in which the Grass was green and flourishing, and the whole Mountain fruitful; and all kind of Cattel fed
upon the Grass of it; and the more the Grass was eaten, so much the more it flourished; they are such as believed, and were always good and upright; and without any Differen∣ces among themselves, but still re∣joyced in all the Servants of God, having put on the Spirit of these Vir∣gins; and been always ready to shew Mercy to all Men, and easi∣ly giving to all Men of their La∣bours without upbraiding, and with∣out Deliberation. Wherefore the LORD seeing their Simplicity and Infancy. Innocence, has encreased them in the Works of their Hands, and given them Grace in all their Works. But I, who am appointed over your Re∣pentance exhort you, that as many as are of this kind would continue in the same purpose, that your Seed may not be rooted out for ever. For the LORD hath try'd you, and writ∣ten you into our Number; and all your Seed shall dwell with the Son of God; for ye are all of his Spirit. XXV. AS concerning the eighth Mountain in which were a great
many Springs, by which every kind of all the Creatures of God was wa∣tered; they are such as have believed the Apostles which the LORD sent in∣to all the World to preach; and some Teachers who have preached and taught purely and sincerely, and have not in the least yielded to any Evil Desires, but have constantly walked in Righteousness and Truth. These therefore have their Conversation a∣mong the Angels. XXVI. AGAIN; as for what con∣cerns the ninth Mountain which was desert, and full of Serpents; they are such as have believed, but had many Stains: These are such Mi∣nisters as discharge their Ministry amiss; ravishing away the Goods of the Widows and Fatherless; and serve themselves, not others, out of those things which they have re∣ceived. These, if they continue in this Covetousness, shall deliver them∣selves unto Death, nor shall there be any hope of Life for them. But if they shall be converted, and shall dis∣charge their Ministry sincerely, they may live. As for those which were
found rough; they are such as have deny'd the Name of the LORD, and not return'd again to the LORD, but have become savage, and wild; not applying themselves to the Servants of God; but being separated from them, have for the sake of a little Anxiety lost their Lives. For as a Vine that is forsaken in a Hedge, and never dress'd, perishes and is choak∣ed by the Weeds, and in time be∣comes wild; and ceases to be useful to its LORD. So this kind of Men despairing of themselves, and being made sour, have begun to be unpro∣fitable to their LORD. Howbeit to these there is at last Repentance al∣low'd, if they shall not be found from their Hearts to have denied Christ: But if any of these shall be found to have denied him from his Heart, I cannot tell whether such a one can attain unto Life. And I say there∣fore, that if in these Days any one has denied, he should return unto Re∣pentance; for it cannot be that any one who now denies the LORD, can afterwards attain unto Salvation: Nevertheless Repentance is proposed unto them, who have formerly de∣ny'd.
But he who will repent must hasten on his Repentance, before the Building of this Tower is finished: Or if not, he shall be delivered by those Women unto Death. But they that are maimed, are the Deceit∣ful; and those who mix one with another: These are the Serpents that you saw in that Mountain. For as the Poyson of Serpents is deadly un∣to Men; So the Words of such Per∣sons infect and destroy Men. They are therefore maimed in their Faith, by reason of that kind of Life in which they lead. Howbeit some of them, having repented, have been saved; and so shall others of the same kind be saved, if they shall repent; but if not, they shall die by those Women whose Power and Force they enjoy. XXVII. FOR what concerns the tenth Mountain, in which were the Trees covering the Cattle, they are such as have believed; and some of them been Bishops, that is, Go∣vernours of the Churches. Others, are such Stones, as have not feigned∣ly, but with a chearful Mind enter∣tain'd
the Servants of God. Then such as have been set over inferior Ministries; and have protected the Poor and the Widows; and have al∣ways kept a chast Conversation; therefore they also are protected by the LORD. Whosoever shall do on this wise, are honour'd with the LORD; and their Place is among the Angels, if they shall continue to o∣bey the LORD even unto the End. XXVIII. AS to the eleventh Moun∣tain in which were Trees loaded with several sorts of Fruits; they are such as have believed, and suffered Death for the Name of the LORD; and have endured with a ready Mind, and have given up their Lives with all their Hearts. And I said, Why then Sir, have all these Fruit; but some fairer than others? Hearken, said he: Whosoever have suffered for the Name of the LORD are esteemed ho∣nourable by the LORD; and all their Offences are blotted out, because they have suffered Death for the Name of the Son of God. Hear now, why their Fruits are different, and some of them excel others. They who
being brought before Magistrates, and being ask'd, deny'd not the LORD, but suffered with a ready Mind; these are more honourable with the LORD. The Fruits therefore that are the most fair are these. But they who were fearful and doubtful; and have deliberated with themselves whether they should confess or deny Christ; and yet have suffered; their Fruits are smaller, because that this Thought came into their Hearts: For it is a wicked and evil Thought for a Ser∣vant to deliberate whether he should deny his Master. Take heed there∣fore ye who have such Thoughts, that this Mind continue not in you, and ye die unto God. But ye who suffer Death for his Name sake, ought to honour the LORD, that he has e∣steem'd you worthy to bear his Name; and that you should be de∣livered from all your Sins. And why therefore do you not rather esteem your selves happy? Why do you not think that if any one among you suffer, he performs a great Work? For the LORD giveth you Life, and ye understand it not. For your Of∣fences did oppress you; and had you
not suffer'd for his Names sake ye had now been dead unto the LORD. Wherefore I speak this unto you who deliberate whether ye should confess or deny him: Confess that ye have the LORD for your God; least at any time denying him, ye be delivered over into Bonds. For if all Nations punish their Servants which deny their Masters; What think you that the LORD will do un∣to you, who has the Power of all things? Remove therefore out of your Hearts these Doubts; that ye may live for ever unto God. XXIX. AS for the twelfth Moun∣tain, which was white, they are such as have believed like sincere Children, into whose Thoughts there never came any Malice; nor have they e∣ver known what Sin was, but have always continued in their Integrity. Wherefore this kind of Men shall without all doubt inherit the King∣dom of God; because they have never in any thing defiled the Com∣mandments of God, but have con∣tinued with Sincerity in the same Condition all the days of their Life.
Whosoever therefore, said he, shall continue as Children without Ma∣lice; shall be more honourable than all those of whom I have yet spoken: For all such Children are honour'd by the LORD, and esteemed the first of all. Happy therefore are ye who have removed all Malice from you, and put on Innocence; because ye shall first see the LORD. And after he had thus ended his Explication of all the Mountains, I said unto him; Sir, Shew me now also what con∣cerns the Stones that were brought out of the Plain, and put into the Tower in the room of those that were rejected; as also concerning those round Stones which were added into the Building of the Tower; and also of those who still continued round. XXX. HEAR now, says he, concerning those Stones which were brought out of the Plain into the Building of the Tower, and placed in the room of those that were re∣jected: They are the Roots of that white Mountain. Wherefore because those who have believed of that Moun∣tain, were very Innocent; the LORD
of this Tower commanded that they which were of the Roots of this Mountain should be placed into the Building. For he knew that if they were put into this Building they would continue bright; nor would any of them any more be made black. But if he had added on this manner from the rest of the Mountains, he would Not. have needed again to visit this Tower and to cleanse it. Now all these white Stones, are the young Men who have, and shall believe; for they are all of the same kind. Happy is this kind, because it is In∣nocent. Hear now also concerning those round and bright Stones. All these are of this white Mountain. But they are therefore found round, because their Riches have a little darkned them from the Truth, and dazzled their Eyes: Howbeit they have never departed from the LORD, nor has any wicked Word proceeded out of their Mouths; but all Righ∣teousness, and Vertue, and Truth. When therefore the LORD saw their Mind, and that they might adorn the Truth; he commanded that they should continue good, and that their
Riches should be pared away: For he would not have them taken whol∣ly away, to the End they might do some good with that which was left, and live unto God; because they also are of a good kind: Therefore they were a little cut away, and so put in∣to the Building of this Tower. XXXI. AS for the rest which continu'd still round, and were not found fit for the Building, because they have not yet received the Seal, they were carried back to their place; because they were found very round. But this present World must be cut away from them, and the Vanities of their Riches; and then they will be fit for the Kingdom of God. For they must enter into the Kingdom of God, because God has blessed this innocent kind. Of this kind there∣fore none shall fall away; for though any of them being tempted by the Devil should offend, he shall soon re∣turn to his LORD God. I the An∣gel of Repentance esteem you hap∣py, whosoever are Innocent as little Children, because your part is good and honourable with the LORD.
And I say unto all you who have re∣ceived this Seal; keep Simplicity, and remember not Affronts, nor con∣tinue in Malice; neither suffer Bit∣terness to grow in your Spirits through the Memory of any Of∣fences that you have received; but provide Remedies for these evil Rents, and remove them from you; that the LORD of the Sheep may rejoyce in you; Vid. Antioch. Hom. cxxii. for he will rejoyce, if he shall find all whole. But if any of these Sheep shall be found scatter'd away, Wo shall be to the Shepherds: And if the Shepherds themselves shall be scattered, how will they an∣swer to God for the Sheep? Will they say that they were troubled by the Sheep? But they shall not be believed. For it is not to be believed, that the Shepherd should suffer by his Flock; and he shall be the more pu∣nished for his Lie. Now I am the Shepherd; and I especially must give an Account of you. XXXII. WHEREFORE provide for your selves whilst the Tower is yet building. The LORD dwells in those that love Peace; for true Peace
is dear; but he is far off from the Contentious, and those who are over∣taken with Malice. Wherefore re∣store unto him the Spirit intire, as ye received it. Antioch. Hom xciv. For if thou shalt give unto a Fuller a new Garment whole, thou wilt expect to receive it whole again: If therefore the Fuller shall restore it unto thee torn, wouldst thou receive it? Wouldst thou not presently be angry; and reproach him, saying; I gave my Garment to thee whole, why hast thou rent it, and made it useless to me? Now it is of no use to me, by reason of the Rent which thou hast made in it. Wouldst thou not say all this to a Fuller, for the Rent which he made in thy Garment? If therefore thou wouldst be concern'd for thy Gar∣ment, and complain that thou hadst not received it whole, what thinkest thou that the LORD will do, who gave his Spirit to thee intire, and thou hast render'd him altogether unpro∣fitable? So that he can be of no use unto his LORD? For being corrupted by thee, he is no longer profitable to him. Will not therefore the LORD do the same concerning his Spirit,
by reason of thy Sin? Undoubtedly, said I, he will do the same to all those whom he shall find to continue in the Remembrance of Injuries. Tread not then under foot, said he, his Mercy; but rather honour him, because he is so patient with respect to your Offences, and not like one of you; but repent, for that will be pro∣fitable for you. XXXIII. ALL these things which are above written, I the Angel of Repentance have shewn and spoken to the Servants of God. If there∣fore ye shall believe and hearken to these Words, and shall walk in them, and shall correct your Ways, ye shall live. But if ye shall continue in your Wickedness, and in the Re∣membrance of Injuries, no such Sin∣ners shall live unto God. All these things which were to be deliver'd by me, I have thus spoken unto thee. Then the Shepherd said unto me, Hast thou ask'd all things of me? I answered, Sir, I have. Why then, said he, Hast thou not ask'd concerning the Form of these Stones that were put in the Building, that I
may explain that also unto thee? I answer'd, Sir, I forgot it. Hear then, said he, concerning those also. They are those who have heard these Commands, and have repented with all their Hearts: And when the LORD saw that their Repentance was good and pure, and that they could continue in it, he commanded their former Sins to be blotted out. For these Forms were their Sins, and they are therefore made even that their Sins might not appear. The Tenth SIMILITUDE. Of Repentance and Alms-Deeds. I. AFTER that I had written this Book, the Angel which had deliver'd me to that Shepherd, came into the House where I was, and sate upon the Bed, and that Shep∣herd stood at his Right Hand. Then he called me and said unto me; I de∣liver'd thee and thy House to this Shepherd, that thou mightest be pro∣tected by him. I said, Yes LORD. If therefore, said he, thou wilt be protected from all Vexation, and from all Cruelty, and have Success
in every good Word and Work; and all Vertue and Righteousness; walk in those Commands which he has given thee; and thou shalt have Dominion over all Sin. For if thou keepest those Commands, all the De∣sire and Pleasure of this present World shall be subject to thee; and Success shall follow thee in every good Undertaking. Take there∣fore his Gravity and Modesty upon thee, and say unto all, that he is in great Honour and Renown with God, and is, a President. Prince of great Au∣thority, and Powerful in his Of∣fice. To him only is the Power of Repentance committed throughout the whole World. Do's he not seem to thee to be of great Authority? But ye despise his Goodness, and the Mo∣desty which he shews towards you. II. I SAID unto him; Sir, Ask him since the time that he came into my House, whether I have done any thing disorderly, or have of∣fended him in any thing? I know, said he, that thou hast done nothing disorderly, neither wilt thou hereaf∣ter do any thing; and therefore I
speak these things with thee that thou mayst persevere; for he has given me a good Account concern∣ing thee. But thou shalt speak these things to others, that they who ei∣ther have repented, or shall repent, may be of the same opinion with thee; and he may give me as good an Account of them also, and I may do the same unto the LORD. I an∣swer'd, Sir, I declare to all Men the wonderful Works of God: And I hope that all who love them and have before sinned, when they shall hear these things will willingly re∣pent, and so recover Life. Continue therefore, said he, in this Ministry, and perfect it. And whosoever shall fulfil the Commands of this Shepherd, shall live; and shall have great Ho∣nour both here, and with the LORD. But they that shall not keep his Com∣mands, flee from their Life, and are Adversaries unto it. And they that follow not his Commands, shall de∣liver themselves unto Death; and e∣very one shall be guilty of his own Bloud. But I say unto thee, keep these Commandments, and thou shalt find a Cure for all thy Sins.
III. MOREOVER I have sent these Virgins to dwell with thee, for I have seen that they are very kind to thee. Thou shalt therefore have them for thy Helpers, that thou mayst the better keep the Commands which have been given thee; for these Com∣mands cannot be kept without these Virgins. And thou seest how they are willing to be with thee; and I will also command them that they shall not at all depart from thy House. Only do thou purifie thy House; for they will readily dwell in a clean House. For they are Clean, and Chast, and Industrious; and all of them have Grace with the LORD. If therefore thou shalt have thy House pure, they will abide with thee. But if it shall be never so little pol∣luted, they will immediately depart from thy House; for these Virgins cannot endure any manner of Pollu∣tion. I said unto him; Sir, I hope that I shall so please them, that they shall always delight to dwell in my House. And as he to whom you have committed me makes no Com∣plaint of me; so neither shall they
complain. Then he said to that Shep∣herd; I see that the Servant of God will live and keep these Command∣ments; and place these Virgins in a pure Habitation. When he had said this he delivered me again to that Shepherd, and called the Vir∣gins, and said unto them; Foras∣much as I see that ye will readily dwell in this Mans House, I com∣mend him and his House to you; that ye may not at all depart from his House. And they willingly heard these Words. IV. THEN he said unto me, Go on Manfully in thy Ministry; Declare to all Men the great things of God, and thou shalt find Grace in this Ministry. And whosoever shall walk in these Commands shall live, and be happy in his Life. But he that shall neglect them, shall not live, and shall be unhappy in his Life. Say unto all, that whosoever can do what is right, cease not to exercise themselves in good Works. For I would that all Men should be deli∣vered from the Inconveniences they lie under. For he that wants and suf∣fers
Inconveniences in his daily Life, is in great Torment and Necessity. Whosoever therefore delivers such a Soul from Necessity, gets great Joy unto himself. For he that is grieved with such Inconveniences, is equally tormented, as if he were in Chains. And many upon the Account of such Calamities, being not able to bear them, have chosen even to destroy themselves. He therefore that knows the Calamity of such a Man, and do's not free him from it, commits a great Sin, and is guilty of his Bloud. Wherefore exercise your selves in Good Works, as many as have re∣ceived Ability from the LORD; least whilst ye delay to do them the Building of the Tower be finish'd; because for your sakes the Building is stopp'd. Except therefore ye shall make haste to do well, the Tower shall be finish'd, and ye shall have no place in it. And after he had thus spoken with me, he rose up from the Bed, and departed, taking the Shepherd and Virgins with him. Howbeit he said unto me, that he would send back the Shepherd and Virgins unto my House, Amen.
The Second EPISTLE OF St. CLEMENT TO THE Corinthians.
THE CONTENTS. Chap. I. THAT we ought to en∣tertain a Worthy Opi∣nion of our Salvation: And to do the utmost of what in us lies to ex∣press the Value we put upon it, by a sincere Obedience to our Saviour Christ, and his Gospel. II. That God had before prophecy'd by Isaiah, that the Gentiles should be saved. III, IV. That this ought to engage such especially to be very careful to live well; without which they will still miscarry. V. That whilst we secure to our selves the Favour of God, and the Reward of the other World; we need not fear what can befal us in this. VI. That we cannot serve God and Mammon: Nor if we follow the Interests of this present World,
is it possible for us to escape the Pu∣nishment of the Other. VII. The Consideration of which ought to bring us to Repentance and Ho∣liness. VIII. And that presently; knowing that now, whilst we are in this World, is the only time for Repentance. IX. We shall rise, and be Judged in those Bodies in which we now are; therefore we must live well in them. X. That we ought, as we value our own Interests, to live well; however few seem to mind what really is for their Advantage. XI. And not deceive our selves with any vain Imaginations, as if no Punish∣ment should remain for us if we do Evil; or Good happen to us here∣after, if we behave our selves as we ought to do: Seeing God will cer∣tainly judge us, and render to all of us according to our Works, and how soon this may be we can none of us tell.
The Second EPISTLE OF St. CLEMENT TO THE Corinthians. I. BRETRHEN, we ought so to think of Jesus Christ as of GOD; as of the Judge of the Living and the Dead. Nor should we think Little things, or meanly. any less of our Salvation. For if we think Little things, or meanly. meanly of it, we shall hope only to receive Little things, or meanly. some small Benefit by it. And if we shall Hear as of little things. do so; we shall sin; not Knowing. considering from whence we have been called, and by whom, and to what place;
and how much Jesus Christ vouch∣safed to suffer for our sakes. What Recompense then shall we render un∣to him? Or what Fruit that may be worthy of what he has given to us? For indeed How great Holy things do we owe unto him. how great are those Ad∣vantages which we owe to him in Relation to our Holiness? He has illuminated us; as a Father, he has called us his Children; he has saved us who were lost and undone. What Praise shall we ascribe to him? Or what Reward that may be answera∣ble to those things which we have received? We were defective in our Understandings; worshiping Stones and Wood; Gold, and Silver, and Brass, the Works of Mens Hands, and our whole Life was no∣thing else but Death. Wherefore being encompassed with Darkness, and having such a Mist before our Eyes, we have look'd up; and through his Will have laid aside the Cloud wherewith we were surrounded. For he had Compassion upon us, and be∣ing moved in his Bowels towards us, he saved us; having beheld in us much Deceit, and Destruction; and seen that we had no hope of
Salvation but only by him. There∣fore he called us, who were not; and was pleased from nothing to give us a Being. II. REJOICE thou Barren that barest not,Isai. liv.1. break forth and cry thou that travailest not; for she that is desolate hath many more Children, than she that hath an Husband. In that he said, Rejoice thou Barren that bearest not, He spake of us: For our Church was barren, before that Children were given unto it. And again; when he said, Cry thou that travailest not; He implied thus much: That after the manner of Women in Tra∣vail, we should not cease to put up our Prayers unto God Simply. only. And for what remains, Because she that is desolate hath more Children than she that hath an Husband; It was therefore added, because our People which seem'd to have been forsaken by God, now believing in him, are be∣come more than they who seem'd to have God. And another Scripture saith,Mat. ix.13. I came not to call the Righteous but Sinners to Repentance. The Mean∣ing of which is this; that those who
were lost, must be saved. For that is indeed truly great and wonder∣ful, not to confirm those things that are yet standing, but those which are falling. Even so did it seem good to Christ to save what was lost; and when he came into the World he saved many, and called us who were already perishing. III. SEEING then he has shew'd so great Mercy towards us; and chiefly for that we who are alive do now no longer sacrifice to dead Gods, nor pay any Worship to them, but have by him been brought to the Knowledge of the Father of Truth; What is the Knowledge which is to∣wards him. Whereby shall we shew that we do indeed know him, but by not de∣nying him by whom we have come to the Knowledge of him? For e∣ven he himself saith, Whosoever shall confess me before Men,Mat. x.32. him will I con∣fess before my Father. This therefore is our Reward, that if we confess him we shall be saved by him. But wherein must we confess him? Namely, in doing those things which he saith, and not disobeying his Commandments: By worshiping him
not with our Lips only, but with all our Heart, and with all our Mind. For he saith in Isaiah;Isa. xxix.13. This People honoureth me with their Lips, but their Heart is far from me. IV. LET us not then only call him LORD; for that will not save us. For he saith;Mat. vii.21. Not every one that saith unto me LORD, LORD, shall be saved, but he that doth Righteousness. Wherefore, Brethren, let us confess him by our Works; by loving one another, in not committing Adul∣tery, not speaking Evil against each other, not envying one another; but by being Temperate, Merciful, and Good. Let us also have a mutual Sense of one anothers Sufferings; and not be covetous of Mony: But let us by our Good Works confess God, and not by those that are otherwise. Also let us not fear Men; but ra∣ther God. For this cause, Wherefore we doing these things. and to the End that we should do thus, hath the LORD said; Though ye should be joyn'd unto me, even in my very Bosom, and not keep my Command∣ments, I would cast you off, and say unto you; Depart from me;Mat. vii.23. Luke xiii.27. I know
not whence you are, ye Workers of In∣iquity. V. WHEREFORE, Brethren, lay∣ing aside our sojourning in this pre∣sent World, let us do the Will of him who has called us, and not fear to depart out of this World. For the LORD saith,Mat. x.16. Ye shall be as Sheep in the midst of Wolves. Peter an∣swered and said, What if the Wolves shall tear in pieces the Sheep? Jesus said unto Peter; Let not the Sheep fear the Wolves after Death:Luke xii.4, 5. And ye also fear not those that kill you, and after that have no more that they can do unto you, but fear him who after you are dead, has power to cast both Soul and Body into Hell Fire. For consi∣der, Brethren, that the sojourning of this Flesh, in the present World, is but little, and of a short Conti∣nuance; but the Promise of Christ is Great and Wonderful, even the rest of the Kingdom that is to come, and of Eternal Life. But what then must we do that we attain unto it? We must be converted to a divine and just Course of Life; and look upon all the things of this World,
as none of ours; and not desire them. For if we shall desire to possess them, we are fallen from the Way of Righ∣teousness. VI. FOR thus saith the LORD, No Servant can serve two Masters.Luke xvi.13. If therefore we shall desire to serve God and Mammon, it will be without Profit to us.Mat. xvi.26. For what will it pro∣fit us, if we shall gain the whole World, and lose our own Souls? Now this World, and that to come, are two Enemies. This calls us to Adulte∣ry and Corruption, to Covetousness and to Deceit; but that commands us to renounce these things. We cannot therefore be the Friends of both; but we must resolve by for∣saking one, to enjoy the other. And we think that it is better to hate the present things, as little, short-lived, and corruptible; and to love those which are to come, which are truly good, and incorruptible. For if we do the Will of Christ, we shall find Rest: But if not, nothing shall de∣liver us from Eternal Punishment, if we shall disobey his Commands. For even thus saith the Scripture, in
the Prophet Ezekiel;Ezek. xiv.14, 20. If Noah, Job and Daniel should rise up, they shall not deliver their Children in Captivity. Wherefore if such Righteous Men, are not able by their Righteousness to deliver their Children; how can we hope to enter into the Kingdom of God, except we keep our Baptism Holy and Undefiled? Or who shall be our Advocate, unless we shall be found to have done what is Holy and Just? VII. LET us therefore, my Bre∣thren, contend with all Earnestness, knowing that The Combat s before us. we are now called to the Combat; and that many go long Voyages to corruptible Encoun∣ters, in which all are not concern'd, but they only that labour much, and strive gloriously. Let us there∣fore so contend, that we may all of us be crown'd. Let us run in the straight Road, the Race that is incor∣ruptible: And let us in great Num∣bers pass unto it, and strive, that we may receive the Crown. But and if we cannot all be crown'd, let us come as near to it as we are able. Moreover we must consider, that he
who contends in a corruptible Com∣bat; if he be found doing any thing that is not fair, is taken away and scourged, and cast out of the Lists. What think ye then that he shall suffer, who do's any thing that is not fitting in the Combat of Immorta∣lity? Thus speaks the Prophet con∣cerning those who keep not their Seal; Their Worm shall not die,Isa. lxvi.24. and their Fire shall not be quenched; and they shall be for a Spectacle unto all Flesh. VIII. LET us therefore repent whilst we are yet upon the Earth: For we are as Clay in the Hand of the Artificer. For as the Potter if he make a Vessel, and it be distorted in his Hands, or broken, again forms it anew; but if he have gone so far as to throw it into the Furnace of Fire, he can no more bring any Remedy to it: So we, whilst we are in this World Let us repen should repent with our whole Heart for whatsoever Evil we have done in the Flesh, while we have yet the time of Repentance, that we may be saved by the LORD. For after we shall have departed out of this World,
we shall no longer be able either to confess our Sins, or repent There. in the other. Wherefore, Brethren, let us doing the Will of the Father, and keeping our Flesh pure, and observing the Commandments of the LORD, secure to our selves Eternal Life. For the LORD saith in the Gospel.Luke xvi.1, 12. If ye have not kept that which was little, who will give you that which is great? For I say unto you, he that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much. This therefore is what he saith; keep your Bodies pure, and your Soul without Spot, that ye may receive Eternal Life. IX. AND let not any one among you say, that this very Flesh is not judged, neither raised up. Consider, in what were ye saved, in what did ye look up, if not whilst ye were in this Flesh? We must therefore keep our Flesh as the Temple of God. For in like manner as ye were called in the Flesh, ye shall also come in the Flesh. Even our LORD Jesus Christ, who has saved us, being first a Spirit, was made Flesh, and so called us. Wherefore we also shall in this Flesh
receive the Reward. Let us there∣fore love one another, that we may all attain unto the Kingdom of God. Whilst we are in a Condition of being healed, let us deliver up our selve to God our Physician, giving our Re∣ward unto him. And what Reward shall we give? Repentance out of a pure Heart. For he knows all things before-hand, and searches out our very Hearts. Let us therefore give Praise unto him; and that not only with our Mouths, but with all our Souls; that he may receive us as the Children of God. For so the LORD hath said, They are my Brethren,Mat. xii.50. who do the Will of my Father. X. Wherefore, my Brethren, let us do the Will of our Father, who hath call'd us, that we may live. Let us pursue Vertue, and forsake Wickedness, as the Forerunner of our Punishment; and let us lee all Ungodliness that Evils overtake us not. For if we shall do our diligence to live well, Peace shall follow us.  for this cause we cannot find a Man Aliter  q v. And yet how hard is it to find a Man that do's this? For almost all are led by Human Fears, chusing ra∣ther
the present Enjoyments, than the future Promise. For they know not how great a Torment the present Enjoyments bring with them; nor what Delights the Promise of what is to come. And did they themselves only do this, it might the more easily be endured; but now they go on to infect innocent Souls with their Evil Doctrins; not knowing that both themselves, and those that hear them, shall receive a double Condemna∣tion. XI. LET us therefore serve God with a pure Heart, and we shall be Righteous: But if we shall not serve him, nor believe in the Promise of God, we shall be miserable. For thus saith the Prophet;See above the 1st Epistle, chap. xxiii. pag 37, 38. Miserable are the double minded, who doubt in their Heart, and say, These things have we heard, and our Fathers have told them unto us, but we have seen none of them, though we have expected them from Day to Day. O ye Fools! Consider the Trees, take the Vine for an Example: First it sheds its Leaves, then it Buds, then come the Sour Grapes, then the Ripe Fruit. Even so my People has
born its Disorders and Afflictions, but shall hereafter receive good things. Wherefore my Brethren, let us not doubt in our Minds, but let us expect with Hope, that we may receive our Reward: For he is Faith∣ful who has promised, that he will render to every one a Reward ac∣cording to his Works. If therefore we shall do what is just in the Sight of God, we shall enter into his King∣dom, and shall receive the Promises; Which neither Eye has seen, nor Ear hard, nor have entred into the Heart of Man. XII. WHEREFORE let us every Hour expect the Kingdom of God in Love and Righteousness; because we know not the Day of God's Ap∣pearing. FINIS.
An INDEX OF THE Principal Matters contain'd in the fore∣going TREATISES. A. Alms-giving. HOW we ought to give. Pag. 369, 370. Angels. Attend the Death of good Men. 332. Every Man has Two Angels. 385. Apostates. No Repentance allow'd to them. 441, 463. They cannot be saved. 505, 514. B. Baptism. Forgives all Sins. 290, 293. Its Necessity. 342. Bishops, In the Primitive Church the same, as now with us. 128, 131, 136, 147, 150, 178, 180, 182, 185, 199, 202, 214, 224. The Reverence due to them. 129.
That we ought to adhere to the Bishops. 199. The Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper not to be given but by the Bishop, or such as he appoints. 199, 201. Marriage not to be made without his Knowledg and Consent. 213. A Bishop ought to instruct as well as govern his Church. 220. Exhortations proper for a Bishop. Vid. Unity. 210, &c. Business. Much Business a hindrance to Religion. 424, 507. C. Calamities. God sends them upon us to bring us to Repentance. 443, 444. Charity. What true Charity is? 67. The Praise of it. 67, 68. Exhortations to it. 353, 530. Christ. His Divinity shewn. 26, 51, 106, 119.160, 162, 165, 216, 271, 272, 535, His Pre-Existence. 131, 133, 271, 544. His Eternity. 133, 246, 492. His two Natures. 111, 120, 194, 212. Of his Birth, &c. 119, 135, 222. He is our High-Priest and Protectour. 77. No coming to God but by him. 493, 494, 536. The Ancient Fathers saved by him. 184, 502. So are we. 538. He suffer'd for our Salvation. 195, 270, 271, &c. 536. He truly suffer'd. 151.
He was raised from the dead by the Father. 151, 198. By himself. 195. He shall judge the World. 272. Christian. A Christian is not to be judg'd by his outward Profes∣sion, but by his true Piety. 116. Commands. God's Commands possible to be observed. 409. Confession, To be made to God. 69, 70. Contentment, Recommended. 52, 53. D. Death. While we do well, we need not be afraid to die. Vid. Angels. 540. Devil. We ought not to fear him. 388. He cannot overcome us if we strive against him. 411, 412. Devotion. The benefit of frequent publick Devotion. 115, 116. Differ. How we ought to behave our selves towards those that differ from us? 114. We must not give Scandal to them. 150, 151. E. Envy. The Mischiefs of it. 13, &c. Evil. We must abstain from Evil, as well as do good. Eucharist. Vid. Sacrament. 390. Example. That we should imitate the Examples of Christ and his Saints. 93, &c.
F. Fast. What a true Fast is? And how we may render our Fast∣ing acceptable unto God? 426, 431. Fear. We must fear God, and not be afraid of the Devil. 388. Future Happiness. The Greatness of it. 48, 49, 540, 541. Future Iudgment. There shall be a final Judgment. 213, 314. Christ shall be the Judg. Vid. Christ. G. God. His Attributes. 438. Omniscient. 41, 117. Almighty. 376. There is but One God. 222. There is no flying from him. 41, 42. The Nature of God; and our Duty to him. 368. His Praescience. 545. He searcheth the Heart. Ibid. Good. What Good we must do? 391. H. Happiness. Vid. Future. Hereticks. Heresie. We must avoid Hereticks. 111, 112, 118, 179, 199, 197, 118. The danger of them. 117, 196. Yet we must pray for them. 196. We must arm our selves against falling into Heresie. 149, 150, 151, 152.
I. Image. Wherein the Image of God consists? 46. Iudge. Iudgment. Vid. Future. Christ the Judge of the World. 272, 539. Iustification. By Faith. 45. We are justified by the same Faith that Holy Men were from the beginning. 45. L. Lying. Against Lying. 371. M. Marriage, Not to be made without the Bishop's Knowledg and Con∣sent. Vid. Bishop and Priest. Martyr. Martyrdom. The Anniversaries of the Martyrs wont to be observed in the Primitive Church. 229, 249. The Respect which the Christians had for them. 248. Martyrs shall have a more than ordinary degree of Glo∣ry hereafter. 336, 338, 458. Martyrdom blots out all Sins. 516, 517, 518. It is therefore to be esteem'd a Happiness to suffer. 517. Mind. Against Trouble and Anxiety of Mind. 380. Ministers, Anciently chosen by the Church. 60. O. Obedience, Recommended. 33. The Necessity of it. 539.
P. Peace. Exhortations to Peace and Unity. 63, 71, 131, 132, 152, 180, 214. Prayer. We must pray with Faith, not Doubting. 393. Publick Prayer. Vid. Devotion and Worship. Priests. Married in the Primitive Church. 96. Promise. God is faithful in his Promises, therefore we ought not to doubt of them. 546, 547. Prophets. The ancient Prophets inspir'd by Christ. 271. Providence. God's Providence is over all things. 233. Punishment. The Punishment of Sinners in the other World shall be Eternal. 242. R. Reliques. What Respect the ancient Christians paid to the Re∣mains of their Martyrs? 228, 248. Repentance. God allows Repentance to Sinners. 17, 443, 444, 464, 469, 524. Apostates only excepted. Vid. Apostates. No Repentance after Death. 442, 543, 544. The Benefit of Repentance purchas'd for us by Christ. 17. Men are not presently pardon'd, as soon as they begin to Repent, till it appears that their Repentance is sin∣cere. 450.
Resurrection. That there shall be a future Resurrection. 38, to 40, 87, 151. We shall rise in the same Bodies. 544. Riches. The Danger of Riches: What Use we ought to make of them? 228, 248. Rule. Particular Rules of Life. 35, 43, 49, 87, 308. S. Sacrament. The Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper not to be ad∣ministred but by the Bishop, or by him whom the Bi∣shop appoints. 199. Sadness. The Mischief of it. 396. Salvation. We are saved by the Bloud of Christ. 23. God desires that all Christians should be saved. 457. No Man can be saved without Piety. 541, 542. Exhortation to strive after our Salvation. 542. Scandal. We must take heed that we do not give Scandal to the Enemies of our Religion. 150, 151. Schism. The danger of it. 110, 180. Scriptures. The Holy Scriptures written by Divine Inspiration. 61, 64. Sin. We must answer to God for the Sins of those who belong unto us. 326, 449.
We must take care that we do not partake in Other Mens Sins. 369, 374. Speech. Against Evil-Speaking. 369. Suffer. Christ supports all such as suffer for him. Vid. Christ. 233. T. Transubstantiation. Against it. 110, 121, 166. Compare. 198. Trinity. See for it. 229, 246. V. Uirginity, Recommended. 213. Unity. Vid. Peace. Unity with the Bishop, the best means to secure our selves against falling into Heresie. 179. W. World. We live in this World as in a Pilgrimage. 415. We cannot serve this World and the next. 541. Worship. Appointed Times of publick Worship. 55. Appointed Persons for the performing of it. 56. Setled by the Apostles. 58, 60. FINIS.
