H1057 12489815 62336
Casus Medico-Chirurgicus: OR, A most Memorable CASE OF A NOBLE-MAN, Deceased. Wherein is shewed, His Lordship's Wound, the various Diseases survening, how his Physicians and Surgeons treated him, how treated by the Author after my Lord was given over by all his Physicians, with all their Opinions and Remedies. Moreover, The Art of Curing the most dangerous of Wounds, by the first intention; with the Description of the REMEDIES. By GIDEON HARVEY, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to his Majesty. LONDON: Printed for M. Rooks, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London. 1678.
THE EPISTLE TO THE Reader. READER, HIs Lordship's Aunt ha∣ving acquainted me, that it was his Majesty's Com∣mand, I should write my Lord's Case, the humble obedience I owed to so great and high Au∣thority, hath obliged me to de∣scribe the said Case in all its circumstances; not doubting but that it may prove as use∣ful
in its kind, especially if it shall meet with an Answer, as any Physical Consultation that ever was yet printed. For, first, it contains the best Cor∣dial Method, and Practice of the chiefest, Experienc'd, Lear∣nedest Physicians. 2. Their best Methods and Remedies for curing all the sorts of Colicks. 3. Their best Me∣thods and Remedies for cu∣ring the Scurvy. 4. Their best Methods and Remedies for curing the Stone and Gra∣vel in the Kidneys. 5. Their best Methods and Remedies for transferring a total sup∣pression of Vrine. 6. Their best Method and Remedies to cure a Diabetes. 7. Their best
Method and Remedies for cu∣ring a Fever, Acute Pains, Vomitings, Gripes, and many other Diseases. 8. After all this, a clear Demonstration, that his Lordship was troubled with no other Disease, than what was occasioned by the puncture of a Nerve, or procu∣red by Art. But what I chiefly pretend unto in this Tract, is to inform you how to cure the most dange∣rous of Wounds by the first Intention, that is, in fewer hours than most simple fleshy Wounds are days or weeks in curing; which certainly will prove of great advantage to you, whether you be a Physi∣cian, Surgeon, Apothecary, or
neither; for it is the Publick good I aim at in this Treatise, and in that called The Fami∣ly-Physician, and the House-Apothecary: For which, in recompence, some Apotheca∣ries, some Physicians, and some near Neighbours, did ve∣ry lately combine into a Con∣spiracy against my Life and Estate; but if that should miss, they were resolved not to miss their stroke in stabbing my Reputation: And what de∣fence is there against a preme∣ditated Stab? So, curteous Reader, I bid you Farewel.
THE Medical & Chirurgical CASE OF A NOBLE-MAN. § 1. FRom the esteem of those numerous observations in Physick communica∣ted to the World, is greatly detracted by the Romancing vein of their Authors, or by being so common and vulgar, that they seem no novelty to every Nurse: So that they are onely very few that recompense Physitians for their pains in reading of them; and a∣mong those few, the Case I am
now describing, may merit a re∣marque for rarity and variety of Symptomes, equal to any ever pub∣lished; assuring you, there shall be nothing inserted here, what is not respondent to the truth in the least particular; though nothing is more to be regretted, than that an acci∣dent so unfortunate in all its cir∣cumstances, both of the Wound, Cure, and Mistakes, should befall a person, whose Magnanimity, Va∣lour, ancient Descent, and other singular Endowments, did render him a true English Nobleman, and Peer of the Realm. § 2. His Lordship received a Wound in the right Hypocondre, the Sword entring about an Inch more or less (by conjecture) below the short Ribs, almost perpendicular to the right Pap, and passing thwart down through the Abdomen, seemed to stop on the Os coxendix (or hip bone) somewhat above the Acetabulum. The Sword felt very cold as it pas∣sed,
and on this side the terminati∣on near the Groin, made a prick or puncture so smart, that it caused his Lordship to fall down; which also occasioned a great Bruise or Contusi∣on on the Hip; that is, a contusion of the Musculi glutaei, and the Cutis above them. His Lordship got up again, and walked to some consi∣derable distance, until he arrived at a person of Quality's house in, &c. § 3. My Lords constitution of Body was strong and vigorous; his Temperament Hot and Hu∣mid, that is, Sanguine; his Ha∣bit replete, fleshy, and well-coloured: he was , that is, of good and sound Bowels; aged near eight and twenty; his was onely observable in this, that his Nature could in no manner bear strong Catharticks; whereas on the other hand, the gentlest Lenitives or Laxatives, and Eccoproticks, in a very moderate Dose, would ever operate plentifully with him, and
that upon occasion cum . My Lord's  (if I may so term it) was a most passionate aversion from the Roman-Catholick Reli∣gion, and a great inclination to Learning and Languages; wherein he was so far advanced, as to be noted to be an universal Scholar; an expert Linguist, and an excel∣lent Mathematician. His Candour and Affability rendred him belo∣ved of all persons of whatsoever degree, that had the honour of knowing him. He was undaun∣ted in the greatest of dangers, as appeared in the late Sea-fights, in which he served his Majesty as a Voluntier. He was entirely just in his actions, and free of all manner of Debaucheries of the Times. § 4. After a short repose at the place above-mentioned, his Lord∣ship was advised to send for a Sur∣geon nearest at hand, who proved to be a French man: He no sooner came, but immediately probed the
Wound, which finding to pene∣trate into the hollow of the Belly, cram'd in a Tent, armed I suppose with some Stegnotick, though without any great occasion, in re∣gard the Wound did issue forth but a small proportion of Blood. This done, he took away some eight or nine ounces of blood out of the right Arm. § 5. Whether the foresaid French∣mam was a Barber, a Blood-letter, or Surgeon, I know not, being wholly unacquainted with his edu∣cation, by which at Paris one is obliged to be Apprentice four years to a Master-surgeon of Paris, and afterwards examined: or if he hath attained to his profession with some Master abroad, he is to serve three years in one of the Ho∣spitals of Paris before he can be admitted Master-surgeon of Paris. Neither is this French man, accor∣ding to my information, received among the Company of Surgeons
at London as a forain Brother: So that if he was not a Master-surgeon of Paris, or other great City, nor yet a forein Brother in England, I judge it was a great presumption in him to offer to dress so great a person as his Lordship. § 6. However, he hath the re∣reputation of a Surgeon here, which any French Lacquey, having one∣ly served a Barber ten or twelve moneths, and coming into England provided with a Pot of Turpentine, a Lancet, and a stock of impudence, shall never miss of, viz. of the re∣pute of a famous Surgeon lately come out of France. By the first ingredient he is to cure you of the Chaude Pisse; by the second, of the Fever; and by the third ingredient it is he makes you believe he is as great a Physician as he is a Sur∣geon; whereas in effect, he is onely a Surgeon of the three Ingredi∣ents. § 7. The first Physician sent for,
was my self, having served his Lord∣ship in that capacity seven or eight years; but not being in Town, Dr. Polyphemus his assistance was desir'd, who immediately prescribed Cly∣sters, Oyntments, Fomentations, Cordials, and what not, to fill up the Sheet, in order to remove, or at least to appease the violent pain of the left side in the lower part of the Belly, among Physicians ter∣med the Hypogastrick region. What the Prescriptions contained, the Doctor's own Apothecary knows best; neither can I speak further of them, than that in the time of four and twenty hours, or somewhat longer, the Bill amounted to three pounds odde shillings. § 8. Dr. Polyphemus observing the storm of Symptomes to increase upon him, in point of prudence did not judge it convenient to see himself sole Pilot in a Sea where so many Sands and Rocks might possibly environ him, and he not
perceive 'em; he therefore pressed that some more able Head-pieces might be joyned to his, by which means, if a Shipwrack should hap∣pen, they could readily excuse one another; it being customary to ma∣ny Physicians, first to consult their own reputation and profit, and next to that, the welfare of their Patients. To answer that indica∣tion, Dr. Timon and the Ephesian Doctor were called in. The first thing in debate was, what parts were hurt; for the discovery of which, they commanded their French Surgeon to make his soun∣dings, which he performed not by the Probe, but by his Fingers, screwing one or two of them into the Wound, and turning them round: upon the forcing them out again certifi'd his Principals, that the Peritonaeum was divided, his Fin∣ger having grated quite round and round the Perforation, and so con∣seqvently the Sword must have
passed through the hollow of the Belly. Whereupon the eloquent Dr. Polyph. according to the usual custome of his Polyglot, did dis∣charge himself in a most elegant Ha∣rangue, (which some in Burlesque term, prating, a quality more be∣coming the Stage, than a Patients Bed-side.) The substance was, That Wounds are more or less dange∣rous according to the parts that are hurt; therefore it were highly incumbent upon them in this con∣juncture to make use of their best Anatomical craft; in which parti∣cular the learned Dr. Timon, by his industrious and most minute dis∣sections of Animals and their parts, as Heads, Plucks, Dogs, Cats, at Oxford (humane Carcasses being very rare there) hath acquired so great a share (as appears in his e∣gregious piece de C.) that he might with right challenge the dig∣nity of Speaker in that little Coun∣cil, whose determination then was:
First, That the Liver was not hurt. Second, That the Sword slid over the Guts (being slippery) under the Peritonaeum. Further this De∣ponent saith not. § 9. Next Dr. Polyphemus flung in his Anatomical Talent, implying the external coat of the Colon to be raced by the Point of the Sword. Moreover, That the Sword did not pass under the bowels, (a sort of expression I never expected from any Physitian) and conse∣quently that the Mesentery escaped being pierced. § 10. The Doctor of Ephesus, then not a Fellow, nor indeed so much as a Candidate, spoke last, and least, and closed with them both in a concedo totum. Should I pass by this last Doctor's care, I should eclipse his merit: For though every night either one of the Sur∣geons, Apothecary, or their men, were pressing to watch with his Lordship, yet the Doctor's passio∣nate
care did oft exclude them, to prefer himself to sit up all night; for which service he was ever sa∣luted next Morning with three Guinies, besides Pipes, Tobacco, Wine, Ale, and paying the Apo∣thecary for the Opium, which was usually given when the Doctor watched. § 11. The French-Surgeon (who hath the honour of being called Dr. Polyph. his Surgeon, whether from following his Coach, or from being his Tributary, I know not) had the boldness to say, in the presence of two Noblemen, and before the Physicians faces, The Doctor be all mistaken, it be neider de Liver, neider de Gut, neider de Bladder; but it be de Kiddenay be hurt; and did undertake to prove it mathe∣matically, viz. The Sword entred just under the short Ribs on the right side, which is one Angle; thence passed thwart over to the Kiddey, which makes another
Angle; whence again the Point might easily be retorted to the Groin, which compleats the third Angle: so that here you have a Wound made in a Triangle; ad∣ding, that if the Point of the Sword should not have reached the Groin, by consent of parts the pain might very well have been communicated from the Kidney thither. I confess had he not smiled when he deliver∣ed this impertinency, I could not have inferred him a rational Ani∣mal from his discourse, but onely from his Risibility; and for that reason have not thought it seemly to insert the least Letter of his Name among those so eminently learned men, as are mentioned, and to be mentioned in this Narra∣tive. § 12. Still more Eyes were re∣quired; and to that end Dr. W. was invited into their Conclave; of whose sharp-sighted ingeny nothing was less doubted than a clear dis∣covery
of the seat and cause of those pains that continually tor∣tured this Noble person. Anatomy had oft shewed him that the left Vreter commonly took its way not far off from that region, within whose circumference the foremen∣tioned pains were limited; the dif∣ficulty of Urine thereunto being added, whereby his Lordship was at intervals much incommoded, were Arguments sufficient enough to induce him to believe the left Vreter to be pierced through. § 13. Affairs daily appearing in a worse dress than other, it was pru∣dently resolved among the fore∣mentioned experienced and learned Doctors, that since in all appear∣ance a fatal determination would suddenly (in their opinions) hap∣pen, that to render their frustrane∣ous consultations more authentick, it was highly necessary to admit into the Cabal Mr. Pres. the Foun∣tain of Physick, and Father to the
Family of Physicians; likewise Dr. Nemo, their elder Brother and Elect, whose deep learning is so univer∣sally noted, that his abode can∣not be unknown to any that shall but cast an eye upon the Frontis∣piece of that elaborate Dispensato∣ry of the last Edition. By these, whatever had been done by the o∣thers before, was ratified and con∣firmed; and whatever hereafter should be acted, done, or perfor∣med, should also be approved and corroborated by them. So that it might seem not a little strange to hear people talk of miscarriages, errors, and I know not what o∣ther discourses concerning the pre∣ceding Physicians, here being the greatest and undeniable Authority to bear them out; therefore this may be an Item to all persons, that if any of their Relations, as Father, or Wife, should happily die under the care of such or such a Physici∣an, not to mutter or mumble that
they miscarried, or might have been recovered, or the like; because the Physician (if legal, as they call it) acteth cum privilegio; and it shall be ratified at any time that they died learnedly; and this in Law is adjudged to be a competent satisfaction. § 14. Though several parts were respectively by these great men in their scrutiny proposed to be affe∣cted, as you have read; yet in the whole their counsel cannot be dee∣med to be divided, no more than when any thing is supposed to be lost, it is determined by the seekers to look for it in places (though never so distant and absurd) as well where it is not, as where it is: and so it was in this case, especially, when his Lordships Relation, out of curiosity hiding her self behinde the Curtains in the Room where the Consultation was held, heard them conclude thus: Let the pain be in this part, that, or the other
part, let us order a Clyster, for that can do no hurt: and so it was una∣nimously carried; and for this ad∣vice several Guinees were distribu∣ted, which however can hardly be said that it was respondent to the new Motto, Come, let us prescribe for our Fees. § 15. In the next grand mee∣ting, according to the account I had from the same person of Ho∣nour, it was held necessary to ad∣vise Barley-water for the Patient's ordinary drink; for which care the like number of Guinees was pre∣sented: and for a third Consulta∣tion, where Milk and Water was agreed on, they were rewarded with such another sum. So you may observe with what care and mature deliberation Medicines were particularly advised one by one, and not thronged in by num∣bers; yet alas! Saepè etenim docta plus valet arte malum.
§ 16. But Reader, be not tran∣sported in your amazement at the extraordinary industry of these Physicians, in pitching upon such simple (that is, single) Medicines, as were just before mentioned to you, when two other Physicians of the Cabal did by far outvie them in their care, in prescribing a Pippin roasted to their Patient for his every nights supper; and to shew of what importance the pre∣paration of it is, they fell into a se∣rious debate, whether it ought to be roasted in a brown Paper, or a Vine-leaf. The Contest grew high, though at last agreed upon the Vine-leaf, as being more medicinal. Likewise in the case of my Lord, about a moneth before his decease, it was thought necessary to call in two of the learnedest Physicians of London, who having taken an ex∣act inspection of the Disease, and particulaly examined all my Pre∣scriptions, did positively aver,
that the Disease and Causes could be no other than what I had disco∣vered them to be, and the applica∣tions expressed in the Bills to be ve∣ry proper: Furthermore they de∣sired me to retire with them into the next Room to consult; which I excused, alleadging, that it would be more convenient for them both onely to consult together, to have their free scope, and prescribe what they thought fit, that his Lordship's Relations and others might see what they could advise, whether it should be the same, or different, or something more than what was in use then, which on purpose I kept concealed from them. They wrote down, 1. An Hypnotick (or sleeping) Potion. 2. A Pa∣regorick Liniment. 3. An Ano∣dyne and Traumatick Glyster. 4. A Vulnerary Decoction. This done, his Lordship's Relation de∣manded the Resolves of their Con∣sult; which being expressed to her,
she was pleased to render this An∣swer: As for the Hypnotick, that in the opinion of all people hath been adjudged to be the principal cause of my Lord's ruine. Touching the Oyntment, there is one made use of now, which is seldom appli'd with∣out success. A Vulnerary Drink also is daily taken, by vertue of which my Lord was (not long since) so well recovered, as to enable him to go forth two moneths together. A Glyster is given every afternoon, or at least every other day, the ef∣fect of which hath been sufficiently approved. Wherefore if you have thought upon nothing else, I con∣ceive that the Medicines that are at present made use of, ought rather to be continued, than to run the risque of others, though of the same kinde; and so I thank you for your pains and trouble. But that for which I produced this instance, was once more to offer to your view the great caution that's ever
concomitant to the Learned in their joynt advises: for upon my return into the Consult-room, I found the two Doctors at some variance; the one preferring brown Sugar to be dissolved in the Glyster last spoken of, and the other striving hard for Sugar-candy. § 17. Before I arrive to the re∣cital of the practical attempts of these grand Physicians, let's pause a while upon the variety of their Sentiments touching the parts hurt. The Anatomical Physician in his Essay, declares with a pensive gra∣vity, that the Liver was not hurt; which, considering onely the pas∣sage of the Sword, and the posture his Lordship stood in when the Wound was given, (a circumstance necessarily to be considered) was easily determined. My Lord's Ad∣versary standing upon a high guard, with his Sword-arm straight exten∣ded, his Lordship made a Pass upon the Seconde (being the onely
thrust the other lay open to) with a ful allonge; upon which his Ad∣versary took time, by dropping his Point, and pursuing it with a thrust on the tiers, by which the Sword happened to enter a little below the short Ribs on the right side, and passed thwart downwards to the inside of the left Hip; so that he holding up his Wrist, and turning the Point of his Sword down, and thereupon making a Pass with an allonge upon his Lordship, standing in the posture aforesaid, must ne∣cessarily have mist the Liver, and passed through the Mesentery be∣tween the small Guts downwards; whereas if one standing on his guard in somewhat a higher po∣sture, had received a quart thrust made straight, and the Sword had entred a little below the short Ribs on the right side, and had passed directly thwart over, then the Li∣ver could not have escaped being wounded; and in all probability
the Colon and the Spleen also would have been hurt (supposing the Sword had passed quite through) or if it had descended onely a lit∣tle downwards, then the Kidney in∣deed might have been hurt, as the French-man inconsiderately asser∣ted. So that you may observe how requisite it is to take notice of the circumstances. In fine, I conceive that that learned Dr. was too short (I crave his excuse for the ex∣pression) in his discovery, there being other parts hurt then not thought on. § 18. He that suspected the Colon to be toucht, must also have infer∣red, that a Wound in that part, though in the external Tunick, tur∣ning into an Ulcer, would soon have perforated the other Coats of that Gut; and consequently Blood and Matter issuing out at the stool, would have been evident signes of it; besides, the Excrements e∣very time passing by, whether na∣turally,
or by Glyster, must also have occasioned inflammations and smart pains, and probably some part of the Excrements would now and then have been thrown into the capacity of the Abdomen. If according to the opinion of the other Physician, one of the Vreters had been divided, there must soon have ensued a Dropsie upon it. § 19. The Chirurgical part was performed by two French-men, whose devoires were to heal the Wound of the right Hypochondre by several intentions, viz. by stop∣ping the bleeding, digesting, deter∣ging, incarning, and cicatrizing; whereby on purpose it was kept open for many days, though against the rules of the most experienced Surgery; there hapning, as com∣monly doth, 1. Cholerick Vomi∣tings. 2. Smart gripes of the Guts. 3. A Wound-feaver; and all this, besides other Symptomes, by keeping the Wound open, through
which the crude nitro-salin air enter∣ing into the Body, causes such an im∣pression and alteration on the Guts and Bowels, as produceth those mischiefs aforesaid. Moreover, if the Remedies to remove such ill at∣tendants be not properly applied, then there is an addition of new concomitants, whereby at last the Patient is obliged to yield to his unfortunate Period, and this by the first mistake of curing a Wound: so that it is in Chirurgical practice, as it is in the way of reasoning, Admisso uno absurdo, conceduntur mille. § 20. Wounds are kept open either for to give passage in extra∣cting some extraneous Body, as a Bullet, Splinter, a piece of a Sword, or Lance; or to purge extravasate Blood, or other Juices, that Nature may convert into an Ichor, Sanies, Pus, or other matter at the Orifice of the Wound. Now in this case of his Lordship, whatever Blood,
or other matter should be supposed to have been extravased or issued out of the Vessels, disseminated through those parts that were hurt, it must necessarily through its na∣tural propensity of weight have descended down into the Pelvis, or bottom of the Abdomen, granting the Peritonaeum to be divided: if so, how could it rationally be ex∣pected, that the foresaid matter lodging in the bottom of the Bel∣ly, should be evacuated at the up∣per part, unless the Patient were hung every day by the Heels with his Head downwards? neither then would it be feasible, in regard that the Epiploon and the Guts would by such a counternatural position cram and fill up the Ori∣fice of the Wound, by which the forementioned matter would be intercepted. Another inconveni∣ence that is consequent to pene∣trating Wounds of the upper part of the Belly, is the Epiploon, or
the Guts, or both, do ever after up∣on Coughing, or by lying on that side, or otherways, make such a Protuberance there, as is observed to happen upon ruptures, or Her∣nia's; which also upon this way of cure befel his Lordship, being thereby rendered subject upon the least Cough, or lying on his right side, to be extreamly incommoded with a Protuberance of the bigness of a Fist, more or less; for which we advised a Truss, such as I had seen another wear before, being wounded in the Belly, and ill cu∣red. § 21. The last, and for what I know, the greatest mischief, where∣of this way of cure was the occa∣sional cause (a term best under∣stood by the three first named Phy∣sicians) was, that nature was di∣verted from her work, namely of protruding the extravase Blood, that might be suspected to be fallen down into the Cavity of the Ab∣domen,
towards the Groin, or other external part, to be converted into an Imposthume, as on the like oc∣casion hath been oft observed. 2. Of discussing through the Pores, or carrying off the Gleet (which otherwise soon turns into a Virus) by Urine, as daily remarques on such cases do sufficiently evince. 3. Of thickning and concocting the ner∣vous juice (that by a Wound or puncture of a Nerve is rendred thin and acrimonious) by Natures Balsamick vertue, whereby a pun∣cture is soudered and consolidated. Of all these three intentions, I say, Nature was diverted, by keeping the Wound open; which occasio∣ned unsufferable Gripes, Vomitings, and a Wound-feaver; by which means the spirits were put into a tumult and outrage, dispersed in∣to several parts, which otherwise would in three or four days have easily healed both the Puncture and external Wound.
§ 22. I am not onely to tell you how this accident ought not to be cured, but also am obliged to ex∣press the manner how his Lordship in probability might have been re∣covered in fewer hours than he survived Weeks. The external Wound, for the reasons alledged before, ought to have been cured by the first intention onely, which is Agglutination or Consolidation, whereunto a Wound is easily pro∣moted, by applying the lips toge∣ther, and retaining them so, either by Bandage, Suture-plaster, or Su∣ture, according to the position of the part, and circumstances of the discontinuity; supposing there was no extraordinary Hemorrhage, or expectation of extraneous Bodies to be extracted, or matter to be repurged, Tendons and Nerves to be recently hurt, so as to have re∣ceived no prejudice from the am∣bient Air, or its own Gleet, which immediately turns into a Virus, and
the whole Wound fresh, to which its own Blood oft serves for the best Gluten and Balsam. But if by long retardation the extravase Blood should have been coagulated, then it must be washed off with a little warm'd red Wine, and immediate∣ly upon it the Lips are to be clo∣sed. § 23. In case of a Haemorrhage in a fresh Wound, hapning upon the division of some of the capil∣lar or greater Arteries or Veins, make use onely of this styptick Li∣quor, viz. Put three parts of Col∣cothar, one part of common Allom, and one of Sal Prunellae, powdred and mixed together, into a Bolts∣head, affusing on them as much Spirit of Wine not rectified, as may swim atop two Inches; digest them in Ashes eight and forty hours, or longer, then decant the Liquor; with this wet some dry Lint, for∣med into a loose Pledget, and ap∣ply it to the Wound so, that each
particle thereof may assuge some part of the evaporation of the Li∣quor: this being continued until the Haemorrhage be sufficiently checkt; then close the Lips, apply∣ing the same Pledget atop, newly wetted again, and put a Compress on each side of the Lips, about one Inch more or less distant from them; and over that make a Bandage ac∣cording to the structure of the part and figure of the Wound. § 24. Possibly what concerns simple fleshy Wounds, their cure by the first intention may universal∣ly be approved to be the best and speediest, barring the exceptions hinted to before, and some few o∣thers; but it is much scrupled where Nerves or Tendons are pun∣ctured or divided, where Gleet, if imprisoned by a sudden consolida∣tion of the circumjacent wounded fleshy parts, doth cause most ex∣quisite Pains, Inflammations, Im∣posthumes, Convulsions, and some∣times
Syncopees, and upon their continuation, Death. § 25. Surgery is in no part less improved than in this particular, which though punctures of Nerves or Tendons daily happen upon unskilful bleedings, yet allowing, they dilate the cuticular Orifice to give vent to the Gleet, sanies, or other matter that may be en∣gendered, and so endeavour to cure the Wound by several intentions, notwithstanding it's frequently re∣marqued, that few escape without great tortures, large tumours, lame∣ness, or the loss of the whole Limb, and sometimes of Life; and all this by reason the Gleet is not sudden∣ly stopt, the Puncture healed, and the Air kept out, by a speedy con∣solidation of the supercubant wounded sanguine parts. § 26. Now to prevent all these mischiefs, and to answer those va∣rious indications by one single in∣tention, I will do the Publick that
service, to impart a Medicine so pe∣netrable as to reach a wounded Nerve, Tendon, or any nervous parts, though in the remotest re∣cess of the Body, and so congluti∣native and balsamick, that it will stop the Gleet, and consolidate the divided Nerve, and other wounded parts, in an interval of time so short, that onely your trial of it can in∣duce you to believe. The Medicine is the following Bal∣sam. Take Oyl of Therebinthin what proportion you please, which by gentle evaporation in Sand reduce to a Balsam; adde to it as much Colchotar of Vitriol as will serve to impastate it into the consistence of an Electuary; hereon pour as much Spirit of Wine, once rectified, as will swim atop five or six Fingers breadth; digest it in Sand, until the Spirit of Wine be sufficiently im∣pregnated
or clogged with the Bal∣sam; then decant it, pour on the remaining Balsam the same measure of Spirit of Wine, which being sufficiently digested, decant it. Pour the decantations into a Glass-body, fasten the Head to it, and abstract the Spirit of Wine in Balneo M. until what remains in the Glass-bo∣dy be of the consistency of a Bal∣sam or thick Ol. You may observe, if you make use of compound Balsam of Sul∣phur, instead of the Balsam of The∣rebinthin, impastate it with the Colchotar, and extract it as afore∣said, it may be preferred in some cases. The Application is in manner following: The discontinuity of the Nerve, or nervous part, not being very remote from the surface of the Body, you are to drop a few drops warm'd into the Orifice of the Wound, having first, by wash∣ing with warm'd red Wine, or
gentle compression, removed the coagulated Blood out of the Wound, that may intercept the pe∣netration of the Balsam to the parts intended; afterwards uniting the Lips, impose upon them a Pledget armed with a few drops of the Bal∣sam; and with, or without Com∣presses, according to the condition of the Wound make your Bandage. But if a nervous part be supposed injured in a more retired scituation of the Body, a proportionable number of drops of the same Bal∣sam is to be instilled into a small quantity of white Sugar, and then dissolved in a draught of red Wine, or vulnerary sanative Decoction, which taken inwardly twice or thrice a day, will soon reduce the Patient to a perfect recovery. What I have here proposed, is to be apprehended onely to relate to the manner of cure, by the first intention; in the mean while, if the Patient be plethorick, costive, or
attended with particular Sym∣ptomes; bleedings, evacuations, and other means, are left to the dis∣cretion of the Physician, or Sur∣geon, to be administred according to the emergencie of the occasi∣on. Though among Vulnerary Me∣dicines these before-mentioned are the best I know, yet the many experiments of his Majesty's Vul∣nerary Drops on Wounds, and some penetrating also, (which in point of danger might seem to exceed that of his Lordships in the begin∣ning) so speedily and safely cured by them, is an evident demonstra∣tion, that it is the most excelling of Medicines that ever was inven∣ted, considering how pleasant it is, and amicable to all the Spirits, and yet so extraordinary penetrating and sanative. These Royal Vul∣nerary Drops were procured by the Right Honorable my Lord H. and sent from him to his Lordship
by Monsieur, &c. Which be∣ing signified to the Physicians, after they had sufficiently abu∣sed the said Monsieur, &c. for his pains, they declared it was a Medicine they did not under∣stand; they knew not what it was, and therefore would not give their consent it should be used; adding withal this die sort of menace, That if his Lordship did take it, they would come at him no more (Would to God they had not) pro∣vided my Lord had onely made use of the foresaid Vulnerary Drops. I am assured, by all what I under∣stand of the circumstances of that Wound, and the manner how it ought to have been cured, (which I have already expressed to you) it was very possible he might have been living at this hour, and have given his Gracious Majesty thanks for saving his life, by the service that a Noble-man of his vigorous years, and extraordinary qualifi∣cations
might enable him to. But then we should have lost our Fees and Reputation, for not per∣forming the Cure. This puts me in minde of a French Surgeon at the Hague, (a sort of people to be found almost in all places, where the price of bleeding exceeds two pence half penny) who being met by a friend in the street, was in∣quired of whither he was going in so great haste; t'other replied, To get a brave Gelding, or a fat Ox, out of a Gentleman's Leg; Which be∣ing but superficially hurt, he to accomplish his designe, did by sharp gnawing Ointments and Plaisters, purposely widen the Wound, un∣til at length by his tampering a Gangrene hapned, and thereupon his Leg was taken off below the Knee, which soon after put a period to his life. Now had this Wound been cured by the first intention, in two or three days, then the Monsieur would have been disap∣pointed
of his fat Ox; or had he suffered another Surgeon more knowing and expert than himself to be called in to his assistance, which by the rules of honesty and conscience he ought to have done, when he found himself in an er∣rour, and the Patient in apparent danger; but, thought he, then his male practice, his ignorance, and want of skill would be detected, especially should one be called in that was not of his Colledge at Paris, and possibly one that might have known the Constitution of this Patients Body for several years. No, saith the French-man, it's bet∣ter for my Reputation that this man, and a hundred more, die un∣der my hands, than that I suffer one to go from me not cured, to be recovered by another; for the Grave hides a multitude. But would the Patients Relations have had five or six of his Colledge at Paris sent for, these he would glad∣ly
consult with, (for many Shoul∣ders can easier carry a Corpse to the Church-yard than one) and the method is usually thus. Bro∣ther (saith he in ordinary) I holp you out t'other day at a dead lift, and you, and you, and you; here is a Patient whose Leg is gan∣gren'd, he will die; I have made such and such applications: Then they conclude one and all, this Gangrene was occasioned by the Patient's ill diet and disorders. Yes, Brother, saith another Cox-comb, this Gangrene is Hereditary, his Father died of a Gangrene in the Kidneys; you have done what man could do, he is a dead man; but continue still the same applica∣tions, until he is certainly dead, lest another should come in and set him up again; for that would prove a great scandal to our whole So∣ciety. Before I recede from my Narra∣tive, give me leave to prevent your
suspecting it fabulous, by making appear, that it's very possible for a French-man, though onely a Corn-cutter, a Shaver, or Blood-letter, to pass for an excellent Sur∣geon. First he shall shew you a rare show of glittering Instru∣ments; then charm your Ears with prating of hard words; by flea∣ing of a Dog or Cat before two or three Novices as Witnesses, de∣clares himself an Anatomist: If he mangles a Muscul into two parts, he triumphs in the Character of being the greatest Anatomist in the world, in regard he hath first discovered all Musculs to have two Bellies; whereas, poor fellow, besides a false experiment or two upon the ductus Chyliferus, or transfusing of Blood, is utterly ignorant of the whole System of Anatomy: and lastly, with a Stentorophonia, howls it out, he is one of the Colledge of Paris, which engrosses all; and therefore needs to give no other
account, though he be never so great a Quidam. The same arrogance is assumed by the Physicians of the faculty of Paris, which is the Col∣ledge also, who therefore suffer none to mount on Asses, or rather Mules, to visit Patients in the City, but themselves; whereas those o∣ther Physicians that are graduated at Monpellier, or other famous U∣niversities, have onely the liberty of practising in the Suburbs; so that if a person of Quality should happen to fall sick in the City of Paris, he is obliged to live and die under one of the Physicians of the faculty; and if by Prognostick he is sentenced to die by one of them, if he sends for twenty more, he will get no reprieve. For this reason, many Gentlemen, whose sickness will permit them to re∣move, make choice of the Faux∣bourgs, where they may advise with what Physicians they please, whose Learning and Experience doth not
consist in a mere formality of being of the Colledge of Paris, but it's derived from their close studies, and industry in attaining to every Branch of the Art of Physick, as Anatomy, Pathologie, Chirurgery, Botanicks, Pharmacy, Chymistry, travelling to most of the renown'd Univer∣sities of Europe; visiting the Ho∣spitals in all places, and observing cases, and fishing out of Professors what it's possible for them to learn. So that it hath been oft obser∣ved, that those that could not be cured in the City, were easily re∣covered in the Suburbs. This be∣ing represented to his Majesty of France, it was judged very injust, that a Company of formal Fops should, by their invincible By-laws, exclude so many Learned men, and by that disable them for practising; and therefore, whoever he be that lieth sick in Paris, must either be kill'd or cured by one of them, and be mulcted according to his discretion.
To remedy this, though his said Majesty would not deprive them of their ancient Priviledges, be∣cause conferred on them by his An∣cestors, yet thought it expedient to erect a forein Colledge, into which all Physicians that were gra∣duated as Doctors in other Uni∣versities, were incorporated, and priviledged to practise in the City, as well as Suburbs; which seemed to be a Ballance to the faculty of Paris; by which means if male practice was committed by one of the latter, it was immediately ta∣ken notice of by some or other of the former, and complaint made to a superior power; and thus vouching for one another, and kil∣ling cum previlegio, was at an end. Another benefit that redounded from instituting a forain Colledge, was, that they were ever outvying one another in Learning, Experi∣ence, Cures: In fine, they were a diametrical controul to one ano∣ther;
a sick man might be sure he should not be slattered, deceived, or imposed upon in his Distemper, or Purse, because there were their opposites (I mean in emulation) ready at hand to be called in upon them. This new Constitution was like∣wise very pleasing to many Gen∣tlemen, that had three or four Sons; the Eldest claiming the Lands jure Haereditario, one of the rest possi∣bly might be intended for Physick, on whose education in Learning, Travelling, and taking his Degrees, there must be a good sum of money expended, and probably all his Por∣tion; now that this Physician so honourably educated, should have the priviledge denied him of pra∣ctising in the capital City of his Country, by a Society of avari∣tious Monopolizing Physicians, be∣cause he will not repeat or take his degrees over again among them, pay 3 or 4 thousand Livres, stoop to the
meanest of them, though his Ju∣niors, and cohere with them in all their diabolical vouchings, errours, and ill practices, was one of the severest things, and worst of cu∣stomes imaginable. Neither was this all; but whoever was admit∣ted among them, was to swear, that he would with all artifices, interest, and power, declame all other Phy∣sicians, though duely educated and graduated, especially those that by their Industry, Studies, Travels, and Experience, equal'd the best of their Colledge, he was obliged to Mountebank, and call them Quacks, Ignorants, or any other vile name, that might render them contempti∣ble to the people, to prevent them in their Bud for ever coming to any considerable employment in Physick. The people at length grew in∣censed, and made it a grievance of the Nation, that a Colledge-phy∣sician should, beyond their Prince,
have a power of life and death over them, without being liable to an account for it: Neither did their sollicitude rest here, but would oft surmise, what if a brave spirited Nobleman, or the Prince himself, should be taken ill, his life and their welfare must depend upon the conjectural opinions of three or four of these fellows; whereof if one by a hired wilful mistake, errour, or ignorance, doth act perniciously, the rest will readily complie with their Leader, unless controuled and ballanced by others of a more sincere and judicious temper. No wonder then, that these men had contracted the Character of Phy∣sicians of the three S. viz. Son, meaning thereby a Glyster: Seigneé, Bleeding: and Sena, intimating Purging; expressing, as if they could do nothing else, but blow Wind in their Guts, bleed, and scowre them. It was not keep∣ing a Coach, and living in Gran∣deur,
that would longer perswade people, they knew a whit the more for that; comparing them to some Merchants, who by living splendid and high, had procured a great credit, though looking into their bottom, they found them not worth a Sous marc. Therefore it is easily believed, that the erecting a forain Colledge was a great satis∣faction to the Subject. But it's time I should have done describing those Colledge-fripons,Fripnode Colledge, a proverb, vid. Cotgrave's Dictionary. and pass o∣ver to the remainder of my task, where now I am arrived, to record the Prescriptions of the learnedst Physicians of the Universe, and chief Members of another sort of a Colledge famous and renowned for every thing, that is, for aliquid in omnibus. I have already told you, that from the seventeenth of November in the Evening, to the nineteenth in the Morning, there were ordered Fomentations, Li∣niments, Cordials, &c. to be
prepared by Dr. Polyph. his own A∣pothecary. November 19. ℞ Decoct. enem. praescript. addend. theriac. Andr. zij. injiciatur sta∣tim. ℞ Rad. lilior. alb. ℥j. sol. malv. pa∣rietar. Mercur. althaeae, flor. meli∣lot. hyper. chamaemel. an. Mj. sum. centaur. absynth. M. ss. bac. laur. juniper. sem. lini, saenugr. an. ℥ss. coq. in Aq. commun. q. s. ad lb j. addendo circa sinem coct. vin. alb. lbss. Coletur pro fotu. Ingredientia pro fotu (expres∣so liquore) contusa, in saccu∣lis laneis applicentur inguini do∣lenti, illinendo prius sacculum unguento nervino. Persistat in usu Iulap. Cordialis & decoction. ℞ Decocti pro sotu ℥ xij. mellis mercurialis, & rosacei, an ℥j. ol. hyperici ℥j. Theriac. Londinen∣sis ℥ss. sacchar. vnlgaris ℥ij. T. C. W. C. R. L. Me.
What this last Prescription was intended for, they forgot to set down; whether for a Glyster, (which is most likely) or a Fomen∣tation, I know not; but this being their Mornings exercise, I presume they were in haste. Note, That all these following Prescripts are transcribed exactly from the autography of their Bills, both in respect of their Latinisms and Pointing. November 19. ℞ Aq. ceras. nigror. ℥viij. aq. epidemic. ℥ij. aq. poeoniae com∣pos. ℥i. Syr. Caryophill. & de succo citri an. ʒvj. m. f. Iulap. Cardiac. ℞ Decoct. pro syrupo althaeae lbij. syr. e 5 radic. ℥iij. m. capiat tepid. saepius. T. C. W C R L In the Evening they marked down these following: ℞ Aq. cerasorum nigrorum ℥ij ss. Aq. Epidemicae ℥ss. syr. de me∣conio ʒvj. m. cap. hor. somni te∣pid.
Repetatur idem haust. post 6 horas, omisso syr. de Meconio, & ejus loco substituend. syrup. Caryophil. & de succo citri an. ʒiij. ℞ Aq. ceras nigror. ℥viij. Aq. Epi∣demic. ℥iij. pulv. perlar. ʒj ss. sach. crystallin. ʒvj. m. f. Iulap. de quo cap. cochl. v. vel vj. 3tiâ quoque horâ & de∣inceps ad libitum. T. C. WCRL Me. I perceive they begin to be puz∣zled, in regard they flie so early to their Hypnotic or Sleeping Drink; they cannot conjecture what that pain in the Groin means. Novem. 20. ℞ Mann. opt. ℥iij. Sal prunell. ʒj. dissolvantur in lb jss. liquoris poscetici. Colaturae addendo olei Amygdalarum dulc. recentis ℥iiij. capiat ℥iiij. per vicem secunda quaque hora donec operetur.
Pergat in usu Iulapii, fotus & sac∣culorum. T. C, GC. RL. Me. Repetatur haustus hypnoticus H. S. cum Syr. de Meconio. Another sleeping Potion. Praesto sint enemata duo injicienda, si opus fuerit. Permittantur reliqua judicio Medici praesentis. Novem. 21. Repetat. enema hor. 3tia pomeridi∣ana. Persistat in usu Iulap. Cordi∣alis perlat. T. C. WCRL Novem. 21. ℞ Vng. Nervin. ℥vj. Spir. Lavendul. compos. zj. M. probe agitent. in mortar. marmoreo, & redigant. in Linimentum, quo inung. pars femoris interior. & inguinis. Sint in promptu Iulap perlat Sint in promptu cras mane
Mann. & ol. Amygd. an ʒij. se∣orsum. Sal Prunel. & Crem. Tart. an. ʒj. se∣orsum Sumat haust hypnotic heri parat hora somni hac nocte. Repetat. enem. T. C. WCRL Me. Novemb. 22. ℞ Aq. ceras. nigror. menth. an. ℥j. diascord. ʒj. pulv. è chel. com∣pos. ℈j. malaxentur in mortar. & adde aq. Epidemic. cinam. hordeat. an. ʒj. syr flor. para∣lys. ℥ss. m. f. haust. sumend. ca∣lidiuscule hac nocte. Praesto sint 2 enemata injiciend prout opus suerit. T. C. W. CRL Novem. 23. Sint in promptu enemata injicienda semel aut bis in die, prout opus suer it, persistat in usu Iulap. perlat. Cap. haust. hypnot. cum diacod. alternis noct. si opus fuerit. T. C. WCRL
Novem. 24. ℞ Pil. Russi ʒss. Sal succini gr vj Elix proprietat Paracels. q. s. f pil. iiij sumend hac nocte sub somnum. ℞ Mann. Calabrin. ℥j. Crem. tar∣tar. ʒss. dissolut in haust posset sumat quam primum evigilaverit. W. CRL Decem. 1. ℞ Limacum hortens. mundat. lb i.ss. salsaeparillae medullos ℥vj. folior. beccabungae, agrimoniae, Taraxaci anam. j. flor. cichorei, borragin. genistae anam j. cortic. duorum Limonum, totidem{que} Aurantior. recens decisor. C. C. eborisque raspat. ana ℥iij. santali albi & citrini ana ʒvj. Glycyrrhiz. ℥ij. Incisis & contusis affunde Lactis vaccini recens emulcti lbix. & vini Malagani veri lbij. sact aque vj horarum maceratione, destillen∣tur us{que} ad siccitatem. Liquor mo∣derate
dulcoretur, bibaturque ad ℥ iv. ter in die. G▪ C. Decemb. 2. Mittat. sanguis è brachio ad ℥ viij statim; but out of which arm, was forgotten. ℞ fotus prius praescript. lb iiij. ut a∣tur ut prius. Applic. hypogastric & perinaeo ante & post clysterem. ℞ fotus praescript ℥ x ol. lini ℥ ij. ol. hyper. ℥ j. Syrup. Althaeae ℥ ij. vitell. ovi unius M. injiciatur a misso sanguine. ℞ Aq. ceras. nigror. ℥ ij ss. Syr Al∣thaeae mecon an. ʒ vj. Aq Cinam hordeat ʒ ij. m cap hor somni. T. C. W. C R L. Postscript. ℞ Aq. ceras nigror. ℥ viij. aq. Epi∣demic. Cinam hordeat an. ℥ ij. Syr. Caryophil. & de succo ci∣tri an ℥ j. f Iulap. cap. cochl. vj. ad libitum ℞ Hordei integr ℥ j. liquirit ℥ ss. coq. in aq. font lb ij ad lb j ss f
Colatur. cui add. syr. Althaeae & de Nymphaea an ℥ j bibat ut libet. Decemb. 3. ℞ Ol. amygd. d. ℥ ij. syr. althaeae & de 5 radicib. an ℥ j. sach. cry∣stalini ʒ ss. m f linctus perfectis∣me mixtus. sumat cochl ij. in haust liquor. posset calidi 3tia vel 4ta quaque hora. Injiciatur quamprimum enema. & praesto sint 2 alia in noctem. Persistat in usu fotus cum sacculo applicand. fiat post fotum ap∣plic ung ex ung. nervin & sp. lavendul compos. Which will make a Liniment, but not an Un∣guent. T. C. W. C R L, Decemb. 4. Sumat statim part 4 tam mann & ol. Amygd. d. solut. in decoct. pectoral praescripto Sumat. part. 2 post horam & sic. deinceps sin∣gulis
horis interea urgente dolore colico repetat enem. & sacculi. Excellent Grammatical Latine! T. C. W C R L They returned at night, and prescribed in form following: Repet at hypnoticum hac nocte. ℞ Aq. fl. Camemel. Epidemic. an. ℥ iiij. Syrup. de corticib. Citri. ℥ j ss. M. f Iulap. cap. cochl. iiij. al∣ternis horis. T. C. W. C R L. Decemb. 5. ℞ Fl. Camemel melilot. sambuc hy∣peric. an pug ij. semin lini. aneth. ʒ ij. coq. in aq. commun. q. s. ad ℥ xij. colato liquori adde tinctur. castorei ℥ j. Theriac. An∣drom. ʒ iij. Ol. rutac. camemel. an ℥ j. m. f. enema. injiciend. hor. 2da post meridiem. ℞ Theriac. Londinens. ℥ ij. Theriac.
Androm. ℥ j. m f Empl. adde ol. Camemel. chym. gt xx. applicetur Abdomini inferiori sinistro. T. C. W C R L Decemb. 5. ℞ Aq. flor. camemeli, Ceras. nigr. an. ℥ j. Aq. Steph. ʒ ij. Syr. de mecon. ℥ ss. Laud. liquid gut. 12 m▪ capiat hac nocte hora somni. ℞ Syr. nostr. Balsamic. ℥ vj. capiat bis, ter, quaterve in die aq. lact is praescr. ℥ iij ss. syr Bals. c. 1. Decemb. 7. Repetat. hac nocte haustus Cardiac. heri praescr. Sit semper in promtu enema. & fotus. Pergat in usu Apozematis. Repetatur linctus ex ol. Amyg. &c. Decem. 9. ℞ Pulv. sen. comp. major. ʒ ss. rhab. pulv. salis prunel. Cryst. tart. an. ℈ j. ol. ch. nuc. mose. gut. ij. Syr. de althaea s. q. f. Elect. molle.
capiat statim, & superbibat ju∣sculi momentum. Repet. linctus. Sit in promptu Enema. Decemb. 9. ℞ Decoct. Emol. lb j. Mell. Merc. sacch. vulg. ana ℥ ij. Elect. leni∣tiv. ℥ j. Terebinth. vitell. ovi solut. z ss. f. enema. Sit in promptu injiciend. vesperi si opus fuerit. Decemb. 11. ℞ Milleped. recent. no. 50. Teran∣tur in mortario marm. sensim affundendo Apozematis praes. ℥ 4. f. expressio. Capiat cras mane, & repet. hora quinta pomerid. calidiuscule, & sic ad quatri∣duum. Et post duas horas ℞ Opobalsami veri ʒ ss. capi. die crast. in ℥ 4. Aquae praescript. cum Syr. balsamic. Cochl. j & sic bis in die ad quatriduum. In reliquis ut ante▪ Propinetur opobalsamum horis circiter duabus post haustum ex millepedibus.
Decemb. 12. ℞ Magmatis residui ex decocto pro fotu praescr. Contund. in mort. marmor. & adde ol. è pedibus † bovinis ℥ 4. pro lb j magmatis cum vitellis quatuor ovorum▪ f. Cataplasma applic. parti affect ae loco cataplasmatis ex Theriac. Lond. &c. Repetatur fotus quo∣tidie ad horae spatium: & post fotum applic. statim Catapl. calide & sic quotidie. Sint in promptu enemata, & pergat in praescri∣ptis. In the Margin was written Neats-foot-oyl with this cha∣racter †. Decemb. 15. ℞ Labdani, Tacamahac. an. ℥ ss. empl. è mucilaginius, & empl. è bacclauri an. ℥ j ss. Picis Burg▪ ℥ j. Styracis liq. ʒ ij. dissolv. simul. Extend. super Alut. applic par∣tibus affectis. ℞ Pulv. ezoardic magistral. ℈ j.
Capiat hac nocte hora somnie C. 1. Iulap Cardiac. & superbib ejus∣dem Cochl. 4. aut 6. Et sic ad quatuor noctes. Decemb. 15. ℞ Rad. Chin▪ Sarsaeparil. lig. lentisc. incis & contus, an. ℥ 4 ras. c c. eboris an. ℥ j ligni nephrit. ℥ ij. incid & contund. dein add. Aq. font▪ lb 12. coq. (post debitam in B. M. infusionem) ad lb viij. Co∣laturae calidae infund. ad▪ duas horas liquerit. Santal. alb. & rub. an. ℥ j. Cinam. confract. ℥ j. dein denuò coletur ad usum. Sumat. ℥ 4, aut 6. alternis horis calide edulcorando tempore usus seq. syrupi cochleari uno aut altero. ℞ Syr. Peruvian. ℥ viij. Decemb. 17. ℞ Ol. Amygd. dulc. recens expressi ℥ iiij. Aqu. Stephan. & Syr. de Me∣conio ana ℥ j. m. in haustum
mox ab enemate rejecto propi∣nandum. ℞ Decoct. carmin. ℥ ix. Balsam Lu∣catelli ℥ 4. M. in Enema quam∣primum infundendum. Perseveret in usu tum destillati antiscorbutici cum Syrupo Balsa∣mico, tum Ol. Amygdal. & ejus∣dem Syrupi. Mi T G G C. Decemb. 18. ℞ Ol. Amygd. dulc. ℥ ij ss. Syr. de Althaea & de 5 radicibus ana ℥ ss. Aqu. Stephani ʒ ij. M. Sumat quamprimum. ℞ Pulver. Nephrit. magistral. ℈ 4. diluatur vini Rhenani cyatho, i.e. cochlearibus 4 vel 5 circatertiam pomeridianam. T C, G C. ℞ Pulv. nephrit. ante praescript. ʒ iij. dividatur in duas partes aequales, sumat. unam quam quamprimum in haust. vini Rhenani, alteram partem quando opus fuerit, id est, post horas 12 vel hora somni.
℞ Ol. Amygdal. dulc. rec. expressi ʒ ij. Aqu. Stephani ʒ ij. m. capiat ho∣ra 1 post pulverem cum vini Rhenani pauxillo, vel sine pro libitu. T C. G C. G M. Decemb. 20. ℞ Decoct. Emol. & carm. lb j. Ole. Hyperic. Rut. an. ʒ vj. Elect. è bacc. Laur. Terebinth. Ven. vitello ovi solut. ana ʒ iij. f. enema in∣jiciend. hora tertia vel quarta po∣merid. Repetat. pulv. praescript. sexta qua{que} hora alternatim. Sint in prom∣ptu Ol. Amygd. & Clyster. Balsam. & Syr. Balsamic. & Opobalsa∣mum, (I think, they embalm'd his Lordship before he was dead, for here it's all Balsam and Bal∣samic) usurpanda urgente occa∣sione methodo ante praescr. Decemb. 22. ℞ Spir. Terebinth. rectific. gut. xx.
Syr. de alth. de 5 rad. ana ℥ ss. m. & quamprimum in posseti haustu propina; superbibendo Vini Rhe∣nani haustum: & post sex hor. repetat. T. C. G. C. Decemb. 24. ℞ Aqu. Ceras. nigr. ℥ vj. cinam. hord. & epidem. ana ℥ ij. Mar. pp ʒ ij. Sach. & Syr. Cardiac. ana ℥ ss. m. in Iulap. unde singu∣lis horis propinentur ℥ ij. G. C. ℞ Infus. Emetic. ʒ ij. propinetur ex∣templo, superbibendo post ho∣rulam Oxymell. Scyllit. Posseto diluti q. opus fuerit. T. C. G. C. Decemb. 25. ℞ Decoct. traumat. & pro Syrup. de Alth. ana lb j. m. & ter in die propinentur ℥ vj. vel vij. ℞ Pulv. Holland. ʒ ss. Syr. Alth. q. s. ut fiat mixtura mollis, gut. vj vel
vij Balsam. Capiebae condienda, & singulis auroris exhibenda, super∣bibendo haustum decocti supra de∣scripti. Perseveret in usu enematum quo∣ties opus fuerit. Mi. T. C. D. W. G. C. Decemb. 27. ℞ Aqu. Epidem. ℥ 4. aqu. flor. Au∣rant. aqu. Cinam. hord. ana ℥ ij, Syr. Caryoph. & è succ. Citr. ana ʒ vj. M. sumat. ℥ ij. ad libitum in languoribus. Decemb. 28. ℞ Pulv. Senn. comp. major. ℈ ij. Salis Absynth. gr. vj. Bals. de Capiva s. q. f▪ Bolus mollis su∣mend. statim. ℞ Aqu. Epidem. ℥ vj. Aqu. Cin. hord▪ ana ℥ ij. Syr. Ca∣ryoph. & è succ. Citr. ana ʒ vj. m. f. Iulep. Capiat ℥ ij ad libi∣tum in languoribus. Man. Xsti perlat. lb ss. the Cor∣dail
Julep prescribed to day. The asse by 7 to morrow morn. GC. Decemb. 28. ℞ Conf. Alkerm. c. m. ℥ ij. Theriac. Androm. ℥ ss. Pulv. Gascon. ℈ ij. Ol. Cinam. gut. j. Syr. Caryoph. s. q. f. Electuarium molle cum fo. auri no xij. sumat. q. nuc. mo∣schat. quarta quaque hora & ad libitum▪ in languoribus. T C. Decemb. 29. ℞ Candit Ros. rub. Consosruct. Cy∣norrhod. Syr. Berberor. M. f. E∣lect. molle, cui adde Margarit. pul. ʒ iij. Confect. Alcherm. ʒ vj. M. f. Elect. capiat quantitat. Iu∣gland. min. superbib. co. iiij vel v sequentis Iulepi repetendo ter∣tia quaque hora. ℞ Aqu. Cerasor. nigror. citri ana ℥ iiij. Epidem. ℥ iij. Cinnamom.
hord. Rosar. rub. ana ℥ j. Syr. Caryophil. ℥ j ss. m. f. Iulepus. ℞ Rad. Symphyti ℥ j. Ras. c. c. & eboris, ana ʒ iij. fol. millefol. m j ss. coq. in Aqu. fontis lb ij. Colatura reponetur ad usum, cujus sumat haustum cum part. aequal. lactis recentis permixtum, ter vel quater in die. T C G C T W Decemb. 30 in the morning. ℞ Gummi Arabic. Tragacanth. ana ʒ iij. Sacchari penidior. ℥ ss. f. pulvis in vj partes aequales di∣videndus, quarum detur una mane, & altera sub vesperam quotidie in tantillo lactis hordeat. ℞ Summit Cupressi M. iv. albumin. ovor. conquassator. lb ss. Cinna∣momi crassiuscule triturati ʒ ij. minutim concisis affunde lactis vaccini recentis lb iv. & destil∣lentur organis vulgaribus ad sic∣citatem. Destillati capiat uncias
circiter vj statim post unam∣quamque pulveris supra praescripti dosin. T C G C Decemb. 30. at Noon. ℞ Rhab. pulv. gr. 24. Gum. trag. Arab. Rad. Symphyt. pulv. ana gr. iij. Syr. e ros. sic. s. q. M. f. mixtura mollis sumend. hac nocte. T. C▪ Decemb. 30. at Night. ℞ Sem. melon. pepon. papav. alb. ana ℥ ss. Amygd. decorticat. & incis. no. 12. Sacchari Cryst. ℥ j. Aqu. Ros. rub. ℥ ij. aqu. hord. in∣tegr. depurat. lb j. f. s. a. Emulsio. Capiat ℥ 4 aut 5 tepidè tertia quaque hora, vel insuper ad li∣bitum. T. C. Decemb. 31. Morning. ℞ Vnguenti Comitissae ℥ iiij. Vngr. partes Lumobales. T C G C
Decemb. 31 at Night. ℞ Sem. Melon. Pepon. ana ℥ ss. sem. plantag. portulac acetos ana ʒ ij. sem. papar. alb. ʒ vj. Sacch. albiss. ℥ j. Aq. Panis & aq. papav. Rhaead. ana lb j. f. s. a. Emulsio qua utatur ut priori usus est. ℞ Rad. Symphyt. sicc. ℥ j. Gum. Arab. ℥ ss. Sacch. albiss. ℥ vj. m. f. Pulv. subtilissimus. Sumat cochl. unum ex haustu lactis Ave∣nacei praescript. T. C G C. Jan. 4. ℞ Aqu. meliss. Cerasor. nigr. Epidem. ana ℥ iij. aqu. mirab. ℥ j. Croc. ℈ j. Glycyrrhiz. ℥ j. Infund. statim in frigido, & post horam unam f. Colatura, cui add. Syr. Meliss. Caryoph. ana ℥ j. Sumat ℥ ij ss. singulis horis. ℞ Spir. CC. recti∣ficat. ʒ ij. capiat gut. 15 (quoties
urget virium languor) ex ℥ ij ss. Iulapii. T C. § 60. Observe, that about every four hours, or a little more, there are four Ounces of hot Wters to be swallowed down, viz▪ Aua mi∣rabilis and Epidemica, besides 15 drops of burning Spirit of Harts∣horn, almost in every Dose, which in 24 hours will amount to a Pint and half; and an half Ounce or more of Spirit of Hartshorn; on some oc∣casions, enough to precipitate a well man into a Fever, and subvert his Senses, but much more a person so much macerated as this Noble Patient was. Probably the Doctor had amplified his experience by his Travels in Poland or Russia, where far larger Doses of Brandy, and o∣ther sublimed Spirits, acuated with a Spoonful of powder'd Ginger, or half that quantity of Pepper, are given.
§ 61. But what need I, to justi∣fie the foremeant Doctor, fetch a president so far off, when there is one nearer, in a notable instance (if true) of a Physician, a degree higher elevated in fame than he? This Doctor was called in (as they term it) upon another Physician, not of the Colledge, to cure a Pa∣tient; he no sooner saw him, but cries out, This is a sort of Asthma, which my self and Dr. Willis first found out, and named it Asthma Convulsivum: But it's I only have appropriated a Remedy to it. What is't, demanded t'other Gentleman? It is, quoth he, Spirit of Sal Ar∣moniac, exhibited in the measure of a Spoonful without any vehicle. The other replied, I dare not con∣sent to it, without a good propor∣tion of liquor to dilute it. You are over-cautious, quoth the Sal Armo∣niac Doctor, leave it to me, and behold the Miracle. Nolens volens,
given it was, but the Patient freely expiring that day (which is more than he had done many days be∣fore, his Lungs being obstructed) prevented the Medicine of per∣forming its effect, and the Doctor of seeing the Miracle. Had the Pa∣tient been dissected, without doubt, they would have observed another occasional cause, namely a very sharp cutting Armoniac Rheum, that had inflamed, corroded, and excoriated the Oesophagus and Sto∣mach, and convelled the great stomachic Nerves, whence derived this convulsive Asthma, the nerves of the Diaphragm being likewise convelled by consent: excuse the expression of attributing the word Convulsion to the Nerves, it being usually applied to Muscles. Now it's apparent enough, that this Me∣dicine did exceed the former in heat; but by the way remember, that exhibiting it in that manner, was Authoritas Medica, not to be
imitated by every Physician, nor indeed by any, unless of very great repute, no more than Steteruntque comae, by every Poetical Paeda∣gogue. The relation of this fore∣mentioned consultation was given me in the company and hearing of twenty Physicians more, by the same Physician, whom the other was called in upon; from whose reputation the credit of this instance is to take its measure. But enough of this, intending to be more at large upon Miracles of this kinde performed at Paris, in a Treatise, entitul'd, The Conclave of Physici∣ans, where the subtil and polite Government of the Physical Pope and his Cardinals, is discoursed of. § 62. On the 27th and 28th of Decemb. if you look back on the Recipees, you will finde the Cordial Juleps strained to a higher pitch of heat, and throngs of Spirits; where∣as in the preceding treatment of
his Lordship, especially towards the beginning, the Cordials were pre∣scribed more moderate in heat, be∣ing diluted with Simple Waters; which as the Patients Symptomes increased, were also thought fit to be stimulated, and made quicker, to keep pace with the Distemper, until at last both had carreer'd into an high Fever, as hereafter shall be remarqued. § 63. What ever Curatory Indi∣cations are desumed, I have ever observed, that some grand Physi∣cians of, &c. never are forgetful of the Indicatio Vitalis; whereon they lay so great a stress, that they seem to prefer it before the Cure of the Malady, and the removing of the Cause: Insomuch, that where-ever they come, the Scene is a Cordial prescribed at the head of the Scrowl, especially where the Disease doth not manifest it self so plainly to their apprehension; and particularly in the Diseases of Chil∣dren
and big-bellied Women. This sort of Cordial Practice sounding so safe among the Vulgar, imposes a necessity upon the minor Physici∣ans to move in the same Zodiac: For should a Friend or Relation of a Patient come to visit him, and not see the small Vials on the Ta∣ble, with the Silken Stoppers, he would rail the poor minor Prophet out of doors, and cry out, He kil∣led the sick man for want of a Cor∣dial. So that it's easily believed, that the greatest estates are gotten by prescribing of Cordials, and not by curing Diseases. However, take my meaning right, I do not hence infer this Cordial Practice to be an Imposture in those eminent Doctors, but rather some Ruines of Paracel∣sus in their Pericranium; whence you may justly term them Chymists: for by their Cordials they intend to fortifie the general Archeus in the Stomach, or at least to make an im∣pression or idea upon it (or to use
Helmont's phrase, a reflection like upon a looking-glass) which being successively continuated or propa∣gated (like streams in a water) unto every particular Archeus, that com∣mands over every part, a Disease, and its occasional Cause, are expelled in a moment; provided that their Cordials are virtuated with those Qualifications Helmont designed for his Drif. But these are onely Deliramenta Catarrhi, and so is oft this Cordial Practice, unless when put into use, it hath a power ad∣joyned to oppose and remove the Cause of the Disease. This pre∣mised, let's make enquiry whether this Cordial Practice used from the beginning upon my Lord, might be accounted proper. Se∣condly, Whether prescribing gentle and moderate Cordials in the be∣ginning, and very strong and smart ones towards the latter end, was not much more improper. § 63. The Indication for Cor∣dials
is taken from the defect of the vital and animal Spirits, occasi∣oned by the loss of laudable Blood, or a vitiated and diminuted Chy∣mosis, whence Blood is not suffici∣ently engendred for matter to be converted into Spirits and the Suc∣cus nutritius, or by the loss of Spi∣rits dispersed and consumed by great Pains and Tortures, or what other Cause, by the Phaenomenon they then conceived, they please to assign. The loss of Blood was insignificant here; but the insuf∣ferable pains in the lower part of the Belly were great, through which Sleep was interdicted, the Spirits extremely depauperated, and the Concoctions of the body subverted, so that a proportionable measure of Blood could not be ge∣nerated. To answer the Indica∣tion surmised in this latter notion, they prescribed the common Cor∣dials usual among them almost in all Distempers; viz. Black-Cherry-water,
Plague-water, Cinamon-water, and Aqua mirabilis; some∣time the one, and sometimes the other. But what could these ef∣fect? You may believe, they could not supply the twentieth part of Spirits that were dayly exhausted. Furthermore, it may be offered to consideration, whether the foresaid Cordials did not sharpen and fret the Blood and Spirits, whereby the pains might be render'd more in∣tense, and their causes augmented; which Method being continued, what could the issue of it be, but that which followed? § 64. To illustrate this to you in a more familiar instance; Suppose a man loaden with a burthen on his shoulders so weighty, as to make his Joynts shake and tremble under him; if you give him a Dram of the Bottle, he may support a little the longer: though soon after, his Joynts fall on shaking much more, and then you relieve him with a
glass of Canary; which perceiving to effect less than his first Cordial, in regard the burthen on his shoul∣ders hath dispersed more Spirits, and weakned him much more than the first Cordial restored, or corrobo∣rated, you make a third essay (ima∣gining the former Cordials too weak) and offer him a large dose of Aqua mirabilis, upon which suddenly comes tumbling down to the ground, both man and bur∣then. § 65. My observation upon this is; 1. That the direct way to assist this man, is to take off his burthen from his shoulders, either all at once, or by degrees; which will prove the best Strengthner and Cordial, especially if supplying him with proportionable Corrobo∣ratives. 2. That the weaker a man groweth, his Cordials ought to be less spirituous, and more temperate; for else it will drown and overwhelm his Spirits on a
sudden. But in these preceding Prescripts, I finde the weakest Cordials exhibited in the begin∣ning, and the strongest towards the end. However, since it was concluded by such great Physici∣ans, that the administration of Cordials in that form and propor∣tion was necessary, good manners prompt me to declare, It was well done, they did what men could do, and they ought to have been sure to continue it, until the Patient had certainly, &c. § 66. For to appease and lay the pains, Hypnoticks were fre∣quently given: These by stupe∣fying and condensing the Spirits, gave his Lordship some intermission of his tortures, during their opera∣tion; which no sooner was expir'd, but they return'd into their accu∣stomed fury. What followed? My Lord was several times surpri∣zed with a total suppression of Urine, a Symptome very dreadful:
But the Ephesian happily thought on a small Wax-candle, which be∣ing forced into the Vrethra (or passage of the Yard) not so far as the Sphincter, did by stimulation excite the facultas excretrix of the Bladder, by which means his Lord∣ship immediately discharged his Urine. Now let's examine the Cause of this Suppression: It was not occasioned by the Stone; for the Wax-candle did not penetrate so far, as to be supposed to reach it, and thrust it back; neither was it any grumous Blood, Slime, or Gravel, for the same reason. Then, I hope, I may without offence, put the question, Whether it was not the too oft repeated Hypnoticks and Opiates, that had stupefied the Bladder, its Sphincter, and those branches of Nerves that defer the animal Faculty to both, and con∣sequently the animal Spirits being render'd torpid, had not force suf∣ficient to evacuate the Urine,
whence hapned that suppression. That Opiats and Narcoticks are not seldome attended with so ill a Symptome, as the suppression of Urine, needs no other proof, than dayly Experience; and that his Lordships suppression depended on such like cause, the argument à juvante seems evidently to infer, which was a Wax-candle; that by stimulating and exciting the sopo∣rous faculty of the Bladder, pro∣cured an excretion of Urine. But Modesty obliges me to say, This was very well done, in regard such great Masters of Medicine cannot do amiss. § 67. All this while the Physi∣cians were only vagrant in latitude, receding from one Remedy to ano∣ther, and not gaining the least way in longitude, but rather losing ground; which made them come so oft to an anchor, by giving of Opium. How∣ever, since they could not always act Lulla by, nor the Patient con∣stantly
be detained in sleep, there was a necessity of launching out, and steering all manner of Courses, to get into Port. First then, his Lordship's pains were judged to proceed from a Coli∣ca Biliosa, (or a hot Colick) which they endeavoured to purge off by their Laxative, prescribed on the 20th of November: What success had this? By night they were for∣ced to summon in their whole Posse Comitatus, viz. Cordial Juleps, Fomentations, Bags, Hypnotic Po∣tion, two Anodyne Glysters, as appears in their Prescriptions: the next day the repetition of the Purge was approved of, but Gly∣sters, Anodyne Liniments, Pearl Cordial, and the Hypnotic, were to be in readiness. The 22th and 23th the Hypnotic (their Anchora salutis) and Cordials were repea∣ted. On the 24th of Decemb. they were resolved to try their fortune once more, by purging of Phlegm
out of the Stomach; by which they seem'd to intimate another opinion, viz. That his Lordships Pains issued from a Wind-Colick, the Wind being occasioned by the at∣tenuation of the Phlegm in the Stomach, and posted thence into the great Guts; whence it was to be carried off by Pil. Ruffi, &c. § 68. Seeing the Pains proved too obstinate to be longer suspect∣ed for any, or all the sorts of Co∣lick, they would now tentativè (a term too much in use among them) suppose these torments to be Scor∣butic, and the pain that oft excur∣red as far as the Loins, to be a Lumbago Scorbutica. About ship again, steer large; orders were im∣mediately given to distil an Anti∣scorbutic Water or Spirit (or what you please to term it) prescribed on the 1 of Decemb. consisting of Snails, Brooklime, Dandalyon, Oranges, and Limons, Broom flowers, &c. And that you may
the better understand, that they had treated his Lordship severally and jointly as a Scorbutic Patient, you may peruse their joint-Pre∣scription of the seventeenth of Decemb. where it is determined, that the Patient shall persevere in the use of the Destillatum Anti∣scorbuticum, which is the proper name they imposed upon their Pre∣scription of the first of Decemb. Moreover you may observe, that I have not suggested these Diseases from the vertues or intention of their Bills, but from their expressed words; as for further instance, in their Record of the fourth of De∣cember you read, they term my Lord's pains a Colick pain. Where they seem for a while to leave off their Scorbutic method, and convert their whole efforts against the Co∣lick on fresh: Here Oyl of sweet Almonds, Syrup of Marshmallows, and Chamomil-water, are esteemed as great Specificks: Their Auxili∣aries
are Carminative Glysters, Fo∣mentations, Bags, Cordials, Balsa∣mics, and Hypnotics, their old friend. But Omnia incassum, still worse and worse. § 65. Once more, and that for the last, they are resolved to make a bolt or a shot of it: They re∣membred, that My Lord had been taken more than once with a sup∣pression of Urine, a Symptome that oft attends the Stone in the Bladder, and that which proved an Ignis fatuus to seduce our Phy∣sicians into a strange mistake: For unto the foresaid Symptome of Suppression, they added an inter∣current pain of the Loins, Vomi∣tings, (now deemed a Symptome of the Stone-Colick) pains above the Groin, interpreted to be Vellica∣tions of the Ureter by Gravel, or small angular Stones: And lastly, his Lordship's Father dying of the Stone in the Kidneys, was an Her∣culean Argument, that those great
Tortures were Nephritic Pains, and the Disease no other than the Stone in the Kidneys. This they confi∣dently asserted to all my Lord's Relations and Visiters; and they made no doubt, but there were Engines, Pickaxes, and Shovels, that they could command out of their Apothecaries Shop, whereby they should easily dig the Stone out of the Mine of the Kidneys. To work they go with their edged tools, and make their first attaque with a Nephritic Purge, mark'd down on the 8th of Decemb. this to be seconded with a strong Laxative and Diuretic Glyster; the next day the assault to be renewed twice with a Diuretic Apozem, virtuated with the expression of fifty Hog∣lice, and within two hours to be reinforced with the exhibition of Opobalsamum, commonly called, The Balm of Gilead, or the best sort of a well-concocted Therebinthin, exactly imitating the vertues of the
Rosin of Venice: In summa, an Imposture put upon the European Christians, by Armenians and Per∣sian Mahometans. But by the way consider, the vast Dose of Hog-lice, the Opobalsam, or Armenian There∣binthin upon that, and Therebin∣thin Glysters upon that again; whereof some days four or five of them were administred successively one after another, each Glyster containing four Ounces of Luca∣tellus's Balsam dissolved in it; so that in twenty four hours there were twenty or five and twenty Oun∣ces, that is, above a Pound and an half of Lucatellus's Balsam forced into the Patient's Belly: How large the proportion of Therebinthine must be to make such a huge mass of Balsam, is easily computed. Be∣sides all this, in the intervals were exhibited Doses of Oyl of sweet Almonds, Syrup of Marshmallows, Balsamic Syrups, and a Decoction of Lignum Nephriticum and Mastic∣wood,
Chips so highly decanted for the Cure of the Stone. All these I account only the Shovels; but the great Pickax was their Pulvis Nephriticus Magistralis, a Nostrum prepared by their Privy Apotheca∣ry, and to be purchased of him at his own rate by the Apothecary in ordinary. And forasmuch as col∣laterally was intimated to me, this famed Pulvis Nephrit▪ derived its vertues chiefly from Hog-lice, Egg∣shels calcined, Crabs eyes prepared with Oyl of Tartar, &c. But whether Cantharides, or Spanish-flies, did constitute any part of the basis of this mighty Pouder, I could yet never learn; a particularity worthy to be enquired into. A Dram and half of this Pulvis was ordered for a Dose on the 19th of December, as you may read before among the Prescripts, and to be swallowed down once or twice a day in Rhenish Wine. And be∣cause the passages, through which
the Stone was to come, should be made big enough, wide enough, and slippery enough, a Draught writ down on the 17th of Decem∣ber, of Oyl of sweet Almonds, Syrup of Marshmallows, and of the five opening Roots, was to be given a little before; besides, lest the Stone should stick in the way, a Therebinthin Glyster was to bring up the rear, to force it on. Du∣ring all this bustle, his Lordships Urine came tumbling down in Ca∣taracts, but no Stone. At length the Doctors begin to discover red Gravel, of which they reported, they had saved near upon one Spoonful and an half; but in re∣gard it so exactly resembled that sort of red Sand, which is contain'd in the German Hour-glasses, scarce any body could look upon it with∣out smiling. The Gravel descending was interpreted by them to be the Prodromus of the Stone, which now they expected every minute, with
as much Faith, as the Iews do their Messias, after a great Storm. And what is more, one of them like a Bigot Midwife, sate up a Night or two, to assist at this Rocky birth. § 64. They push on still, and adde new forces to their Stone-breakers, and Piss-driving Medi∣cines, by ordering twenty drops of Spirit of Therebinthin (a strong Piss-driver) to be mixt with the Syrups forementioned, and washt down with a draught of Rhenish-Wine, this to be repeated after six hours: no Stone yet, but Urine in abundance; whence they sur∣mised, that since the passages were so well lubricated, the Stone must stick fast in the Pelvis of the Kid∣neys; to loosen which, a Vomit was commanded to be used on the 24th of Decemb. as their Bill ex∣presseth; and on the 25th and 28th, a Purge. From the concus∣sion of the Vomit in its operation,
and the compression of the Mus∣culs of the Belly upon going to Stool, it was expected the Stone would be shaken, and tum∣bled down. But in fine, they were greatly mistaken in their measures; instead of the Stone, there was a flood of Urine (impro∣perly so called) came down so impetuously, that this Patient, or Physicians Martyr (as his Lordship was oft pleased to term himself) in twenty four hours made six times more water than he drank, according as my self, and Chirurgeon several times found upon an exact computati∣on by measure: For in a Nights time twelve, and sometimes thir∣teen Pints of water, were discharg∣ed by the Bladder; which I can∣not denominate Urine, as not having the Colour, Scent, or Tast of such; but on the con∣trary, lookt like rock-water, tran∣sparent, and clear, without sedi∣ment,
scented like Beef-broath, and tasted sweetish like Honey. Here, from making little or no U∣rine, observe well, sourced a most plentiful spring or fountain of clear water. Now all hands at work, if you are men, Luff, no near. To stopping the leak they go; and in order to that, on the 29th of De∣cember appoint an Adstringent stopping Electuary; likewise a po∣tent binding Decoction of Comfrey, Yarrow, &c. On the 30th a thick∣ning Powder of Gum-Arabick, and Gum-Dragant, with a Distillation of Cypress-tops, Whites of Eggs, Cinna∣mon and Milk: Upon this a mixture of Rhubarb, Gum Arabic, Dragant and Confrey-roots, an unpleasant sort of Tansey. More yet, there must be also plentifully drunk Almond-Milk with Poppey-seeds in it, and Cordials, and all this in one day. On the 31th in the morning they made their Visit, and spake to the wo∣man attending; Well, what chear,
Nurse? O, Mr. Doctor, abundance of Vrine this night! Pain and tor∣tures so insufferably violent, that his Lordship flung himself twice out of Bed, as if he had Convulsions! His burning Heat so great, that all night long my Lord held his hands on bot∣tles of cold water! Fainted several times, that I thought he would not have seen the Morning! Vomited and strained very oft, as if his eye-strings would have broke! My Lord drew his breath so extremely short and thick, that I verily believed, he would have been stifled; for his Lordship would not suffer any Cur∣tain to be drawn, or any body stand near the bed-side, lest he should hin∣der the air from him! Now, Mr. Doctor, Quomodo pulvis? No doubt, but the Nephritic Pulvis was a most excellent Powder; ne∣ver did Medicine answer expecta∣tion better; for perfectly did it remove the suppression of Urine, and if Stone or Gravel had been in
the way, it could never have re∣sisted the force of it. Therefore, Let's conclude, one and all, They did what men could do! Here was no want, but abundance of Reme∣dies, and it was ten to one, if one of them did not hit. He that throwes with ten Dice, cannot easily miss quater trey, unless he be cursedly unfortunate; and Sea-men in a Storm do oft hoist up all their Sails, though they bring the Mainmast by the board. § 69. Well, Contra vim mortis non est Medicamen in hortis. After the Consult-Masse was ended, my Lord's Relation askt them, What think ye of my Lord? what hopes have ye? they replyed (as I am in∣formed) one and all, We have no manner of hopes, he is a dead man; we will do what we can to give him ease. They all gave him over; and to all those Noblemen that were Visiters, they declared posi∣tively, that his Lordship could not
live; and some went so far, that they expressed it was impossible, he should outlive seven days. This desperate Decree of the Doctors was soon conveyed to my Lord's ears by a messenger, that seldome tarried long by the way to carry news of this nature to him. § 70. His Lordship no whit dis∣maid at the ill-tidings, about the second or third of Ianuary desired I should attend him. My Lord was then pleased to signifie, that my absence from the Town on the day he received his Wounds, had occasioned him to make use of se∣veral vogued Physicians, whose greatness of fame since he perceived to be a vulgar opinion, by the suc∣cess that attended their experi∣ments upon him, he frequently pressed them to consult with me, as having had a greater experience of his Constitution upon various occasions, that did not only require
competent Learning and Judgment, but a careful attendance. The in∣flammation this sort of discourse raised on their Dura Mater, caused them to burst into this peremptory answer, that they would not con∣sult with me, let the event be what it would, because I was not of the College, and if his Lordship per∣sisted in those demands, they would certainly desert him. This reply being thoroughly perused, my Lord was obliged to surrender himself to their discretion, partly through the necessity of pleasing▪ some of his Relations, and partly through the new assurances they confident∣ly gave him of a speedy and perfect Recovery. Since therefore now he found their hopes turned into despair, he had easily obtained from them, what by no manner of arguments he could dispose them to before; and in consequence of that, did appoint me to give them a Consult-meeting on the morning
following. In order hereunto, I examined the Symptomes prece∣ding, and those present, which chiefly were insufferable Pains and Tortures on the left side of the lower part of the Belly, too horri∣ble for any man of ordinary strength to endure. 2. A scorching Hectic Fever, that had so macerated his Body, that it was a perfect repre∣sentative of a Skeleton, covered over with a skin. 3. A Diabetes, in the dialect of some borish Physici∣ans called a Pisspot-dropsie, a Sym∣ptome so rare, that among ten millions of sick persons, scarce one is observed to be afflicted with: For it is seldome in the power of the worst of Morbisick Causes to produce it, unless assisted with the Pickaxes and Shovels of the Art of Physick. 4. Syncopees, or long deep Swoonings, several in a day, and frequent Lipothymies, or fain∣tings. 5. A suffocative Respira∣tion, or stifling breathing; as for
want of sleep, a very low ebbe of Strength, Vomitings, a dejected Ap∣petite, and worse Concoction, &c. I account as nothing, in comparison of these five. § 70. Death usually being the termination of each of these Sym∣ptoms, even when singly afflicting the Body, moved this Query in me, Which of all these five mortal Ene∣mies would in the most appearance kill his Lordship first? Upon some discussion, my opinion inferred, that the Diabetes would absolve its fatal course the soonest, probably in eleven days; but then that each of the other four Symptomes might very well pretend to one days mis∣chief, seemed conjectural enough, which substracted from the foresaid eleven, inferred a consequence, that his Lordship would not out∣live seven days, as some of the Doctors had prognosticated. How little such a Tragic Scene of Morbisic Attendants could en∣courage
a person to act jointly with those, that after so many brutal ca∣lumnies and affronts, now seemed only to admit of a Consultation to make use of me, like the Fox of the Cats foot, was evident; how∣ever, the obligation I owed to my Lord, and some of his Lordships own Relations, engaged me to con∣tribute the utmost of my endeavors, especially upon the general noise of their Conclamatum of his Life, and the observation of many particu∣lars, wherein I apprehended they had egregiously erred. By appearing somewhat later than the hour appointed, it was supposed my stomach was taken off by the reflections the Doctors had made the night before, (for I was not yet of the College) who therefore knowing where I was that Morning, now pressed ear∣nestly I should be sent for; not so much to consult, as to hale me in to bear part of the burthen. Being
come to the famous Consult-room, I found two men, one much of the Meen of some Renegado-Divine, or School-master turn'd to Physick, vested and tunickt with black; the other Campagne Tunickt with gray, smoaking a Pipe of Tobacco al' Indiano. Whatever they seem'd to me in the external, the Physical Eloquence of the former, expressed by a tongue so nimble, that my ears could hardly keep pace with him, and the solid judgment of the latter, did demonstrate them most excellent Physicians in the general; and in particular, the one hath me∣rited, among the Vulgar, the fame of a good Childrens Doctor, and the other of a Womans Doctor. The Prologue of these Physicians was, that they were come thither to hear, what Proposal I had to offer, in order to my Lords Reco∣very. A greater impertinency I have not heard; implying, as if they had looked upon themselves to
be appointed Commissioners to receive Proposals from me, touching some kinde of improbable work, as the draining of a River, or the like; and to be Judges of Oyer and Terminer of the feasibility of the Project. Thus we see how arro∣gant some sort of men are, when finding themselves buoyed up by common fame, Coach and Horses, and Propt with the dubious inter∣pretation of a Law, studying Om∣nibus viis & modis to oppress their equals. § 71. The Replication I made 'em was, that according to the form of Consultations, I expected an account of what course and method had been used, what Reme∣dies, and against what Diseases, Causes, or Symptomes; which done, I should shew▪ my self ready in declaring my Sentiment. Upon this, the well-spoken Gentleman re∣lated the nature of the Wound, and by what means cured; withal, that
there were other Distempers sur∣vened upon that, viz. Colick, Scorbutic pains, Stone and Gravel; the latter of which he offer'd to prove, by having caused the dis∣charge of a great heap of Gravel, through the force of those Stone-breaking and Piss-driving Medicines that were exhibited, adding the hereditary property of the Stone, whereof his Lordship's Father died. The other Physician was upon the carping auscultation, to which his continuando of the Vir∣ginian smoak contributed, by its Henbane quality of condensing of his animal Spirits. § 72. By passing over all what they had acted, and the reflections thereon, I endeavoured to avoid Disputes and Provocations, and thought to have contracted an ami∣ty and well understanding among them, which is very necessary to render Consultations successful; and therefore immediately exprest
my sense, That in all Wounds, the termination of the Cause wound∣ing, be it Sword, Lance, &c. ought to be particularly observed; and for that reason, the Sword wherewith his Lordship was woun∣ded, was to be exactly traced in its passage; which considering the prick, that my Lord very sensibly perceived a little above the left Groin, and caused him to fall down, was an argument the Sword termi∣nated or stopt upon the Os Coxen∣dix or Ischion, a little above the Acetabulum; if so, then probably the Sword must have passed the Mesentery, part of the Psoas, and the Musculus Iliacus internus. The ausculting Physician interrupted me, in saying, that there was no such Muscul as the Musculus Iliacus belonging to the frame of Mans Body; and that I was under a great mistake, it was an errour; and far∣ther, it was ignorance in me; and therefore I ought to consider well
of what I said before such men as they were. At that time having no Anatomical Picture-Book by me, nor the occasion of shewing them the Muscul in a dead Body, I swallowed the affront, for the reason expressed in the beginning of this Paragraph, and proceeded, intimating that here might very rationally be suspected, that there was some small proportion of puru∣lent matter collected in the hollow of the Abdomen, converted in∣to such, out of Blood leaking through some small Vessels, that were hurt by the passing of the Sword. But this did not seem a cause sufficiently adequated to produce those acute Pains above the Groin, which therefore I posi∣tively asserted, could be occasioned by no other than the Puncture of one of those great Nerves, that are originated from the Medulla Spina∣lis about the Lumbi, whence issuing a Gleet, which by Stagnation is
soon converted into a Virus, or Venom, the property whereof is not only to cause horrible pains of the Nerves and Nervous Parts, but Syncopees, Lipothymies, Vo∣mitings, short oppressed breath∣ings, Convulsions, Fevers; but never a suppression of Urine, nor Diabetes: Whence these two latter are to be derived, ask the Doctors, and consult their Prescriptions. To prove that those fore-menti∣oned Symptomes did only issue from the puncture of a Nerve, I instanced the concomitants and accidents, that usually attend and follow a puncture of a Tendon, or which is much worse, of a Nerve in the Arm, upon unskilful Blee∣dings; viz. extreme Pains, Imposthu∣mations, Syncopees, and the rest. The Indications are two. 1. To stop the Gleet of the Nerve. 2. To remove the virulent humour, or liquor, that's already gleeted. By answering the first indication readi∣ly
and in due time, the latter is prevented. But in his Lordships case there were more Indications to be desumed from Diseases, that were constituted, per Deuteropathi∣am, per errorem externum, and by occasional causes. I cannot here omit, once more to declare the excellency of our Balsam, described before, how speedily it would have performed in the beginning, what both the Indications point at; and in many other Distempers its effects are no less admirable. But nothing is more to be regretted, than the o∣mission of the Royal Vulnerary Drops, especially being offer'd so seasonably; which as far as I can understand, were never yet taken for the cure of the most dangerous of Wounds, without having cer∣tainly performed the effect, that was expected from them. More∣over, I do believe, that far meaner Medicines might have stopt the
Gleet, as Spirit of Vitriol dulci∣fied, Spirit of Sulphur, or Vitrio∣lum Martis, or what is more ordi∣nary, common Vitriol tied up in a rag, and applied externally, near the place where the puncture was, or further off; so diffusive and pe∣netrative is the nature of Vitriol. It was not in the beginning, but at the latter end, that I was con∣sulted; and therefore besides the former, other Indications are to be taken, as well from the Diseases the Sword had occasioned, as those which Art had procured, viz. Dia∣betes, Fever, &c. I soon percei∣ved, that nothing but a Mercurial Remedy would answer all Indi∣cations; but lest the well-spoken Doctor should thence take an occa∣sion to bespatter me, and cry out aloud, I offered to give his Lord∣ship Mercury, (a word that sounds barbarous among the ignorant.) I apprehended it prudence to defer it, until another might be called in,
or that I had prepared his Lord∣ship, or some of his Relations for it. In the mean time I proposed this following, as answering most of the Indications, as affairs stood then. Januar. 5. ℞ Cerus. Antimon. ℈ j. Troch. Vipe∣rin. ʒ ss. Croci Angl. pulv. gr. j ss. Syr. Cort. Citr. q. s. m. f. mixt. moll. Sumend. horâ nonâ vesper∣tin. superbibendo haust. decoct. sudorif. Signed by Dr. &c. and my self. You may remember, I mentioned two Physicians that were to be con∣sulted that Morning, before this was prescribed; but one of them being thrown out for a wrangler, I was yoaked to the other; who did as readily reform, and conform, or indeed take up any form, as any man I ever met with; though at
the same time he did also expect to be indulged in several of his own Enthusiasms, which resting too much upon the basis of some of his preceding Opinions, caused fre∣quent dissentions and jarrings a∣mong us. And it is a very common Observation, that where some great Physicians have taken up a senti∣ment, and declared it, they will not recede from it, though they are convinced they are in the wrong, and that it will tend to a certain prejudice of the Patient; because they will seem to be more than men, in the impossibility of erring; but I have more charity, than to be∣lieve this worthy Physician was polluted with any such Principle; or at least I hope he was not. I have somewhat abruptly given you an account of our first Consul∣tation, which now I shall set down in the total. After I found that whatever I proposed, was not only rejected, but render'd in Ridicule,
and that at so unfit a season, where a Person of Honours Life lay at stake; I asked one of them in La∣tine, discoursing of the Diabetes, Exhibuisti ne bolum armenum con∣tra hunc affectum? He replied, Non novi bolum armenum, sed novi qui∣dem bolum armenam. Here I per∣ceived he rather acted the part of a School-master, as he had done that of the Iliac Anatomist, than of a Physician; which made me conclude, they designed less what might be advantageous to the Pa∣tient, than carping, and derision. Upon that I took my leave, refu∣sing my Fee, because I had done nothing for it; which notwith∣standing they greedily accepted, as if they had laboured hard in prescribing never a Bill; and so we left the Patient in a great deal of Pain and Misery. At Night I was sent for again, where I met one of them alone, who singly agreed to all what I
offer'd, but for formality desired, to defer prescribing until the other Iliac Physician should be present, which would not be until the next morning; and so we left the Pa∣tient again as we found him. But it hapned before I went away, that a very eminent English Surgeon came thither, to give his opinion touching his Lordships condition, which imported, that either some Tendon, Nerve, or Membrane was hurt on that side, where the pain was. This agreeing very near with what I declared to his Lordship be∣fore, we were appointed to meet the other Doctors next morning. My self and the forementioned Chi∣rurgeon, as we returned home, a∣greed, that in this case, Rebus sic stantibus, nothing could be more proper, than a Mercurial Medi∣cine, viz. Mercurius dulcis, a pre∣paration so safe, that it is as com∣monly given to Children against the Worms, as Aloes, or Worm∣seed.
But I desired him to propose it, in regard the Physicians would rather take it from a Chirurgeon, than a Physician; such is the cur∣sed emulation of mankinde! On the Morning we met; it be∣ing my turn to speak first, the re∣sentment I had of their false re∣flections touching the internal Iliac Muscul, and Bolus Armenus, oblig'd me to declare, that before I went on further, I would make it ap∣pear, who was in the errour; and to that purpose, here was now brought an authentic Anatomy-Book, and a Pharmacopoea; in the latter they might see Bolus Arme∣nus, and in the former the Muscu∣lus Iliacus internus. This was no sooner expressed, but one of the Physicians burst out into very scur∣rilous language, which without any further ceremony caused me to leave the Room, and the Consulta∣tion. Before I was gone past half the length of the street, I was cal∣led
back again; and he that was the most mutinous dismissed, though much against my desire. § 73. During the calm, the use of Mercuri. Dulcis was no sooner pro∣posed, but agreed to, prescribed and signed by the other Doctor and my self, in form following. Januar. 3. ℞ Calomelan. ℈ j. Cort. Citr. humid. condit. contus. & per setac. tra∣ject. ʒ j. Syr. ejusd. q. s. M. f. Mixtur. moll. sumenda quam primum. ℞ Rad. Sarsaeparil. ℥ iiij. Rad. Chin. non carios. ℥ ij. rasur. Ebor. corn. cerv. ana ʒ vj. Lign. sassafr. Ci∣namom. ana ʒ ij. Lign. Santal. rubr. ℥ ss. post digest. coq. in aq. font. lb viij. ad consumpt. medie∣tat. coletr. & reponatr. in am∣pul. vitr. de q. capiat lb ss. quater ad minimum quotidie. ℞ Erinac. calc. & subtil. pulv. ʒ ss. sumat. in cochl. j. Syr. Balsam∣rubr.
horis duodecim post bolum praescript. § We had some controversie about this Hedg-hog powder, the Doctor pretending he had done Miracles with it in the like case of a Diabe∣tes; which assertion I much su∣spected, in regard such a Distem∣per, under those circumstances, was not easily parallel'd. Besides, all the Authors that I ever read, and in particular Fran. Ioel. lib. 6. sect. 2. q. 8. recommends it as a sin∣gular Diuretic, against a total sup∣pression of Urine, and seems to in∣timate, as if it were more forcible than Hog-lice. Likewise Forestus l. 21. 15. extols it for moving of Urine and Stool. How could this then be proper to put a stop to a Pissing Disease, that so potently moved Urine? However he would have it used, because his experi∣ence had supplied him with no∣table Examples. Neither could we
well accord upon his Syrupus Bal∣samicus ruber, which according to my information was a dissolution of Gummi Guaiaci in Spirit of Wine, and sweetned into a Syrup with white Sugar. This Medicine I ob∣jected against, as being a violent Purgative, and Diuretic, and a great fretter of the Blood. The argument he valued little, but pre∣ferr'd his own experience; so that I was forced through importunity to yield to it. Though in the whole I found this was grounded upon the remains of his former opi∣nion of his Lordship's being trou∣bled with the Stone and Scurvey. So opiniatre are some men, when they fasten to a Disease. § 75. It was his Lordsh. commands, that since he had taken a new Me∣dicine, prescribed him on Indica∣tions different from those of his former Physicians, I should watch with him; by which means I had occasion more particularly to ob∣serve
the manner of his Pains, making of Urine, Vomiting, Brea∣thing, and Fainting. About eleven of the Clock at Night his Sym∣ptomes grew very violent, inso∣much that he called very earnestly for his Hypnotic, or sleeping Po∣tion. I told his Lordship, I could by no means consent to it, in re∣gard it would six those virulent hu∣mours, weaken his Brain and Nerves, and that it was wholly disagreeing with the Medicine he had taken in the Morning. A day or two after, My Lord related to me, that his other Physicians had given it him two and thirty Nights together, and therefore wondered I scrupled so much at it. You are to observe, that this ordinary Hyp∣notic was seldome prescribed, but order'd by word of mouth; For it's very rare, that Opiates are given in that proportion, and for so long a continuance; so that it was not convenient to have those Bills filed
in an Apothecaries shop, in perpe∣tuam rei memoriam. According to my information, this following was the usual Hypnotic. ℞ Aqu. Ceras. nigr. Paralys. Pa∣pav. Rh. ana ℥ j. Aqu. Epi∣dem. ℥ss. Syr. de mecon. ʒ vj. Laudani Opiati gr. iij. m. f. Pot. sumend. hora somni. § 76. On the Morning following the Night I sate up, I gave his Lord∣ship assurance of removing his pains very suddenly, by Remedies, that nights observation had indicated; but desired the application might be deferred, for an hour or two, until the English Surgeon (a per∣son of great Knowledge and Expe∣rience, whose judgment I esteemed far beyond any of the Physicians) and the Doctor appeared, to whom I offer'd the use of Ventoses, or Copping-glasses, to be applyed on the part affected, to the intent
those virulent humours that occa∣sioned these torments, should be attracted externally, and so discus∣sed. The Surgeon well under∣standing the effects of Ventoses, and the nature of the Distemper, agreed immediately they should be applied, not in the least doubting a good success; but the Doctor stumbled at it extremely, and objected elo∣quently against it: I suppose, be∣cause it was proposed by me, and so well approved by the Surgeon. At length our arguments prevailed for the Ventoses: Upon the appli∣cation of the first Copping-glass, his Lordships Pains abated, and upon the renewing it the second and third time, his Pains were va∣nished and clearly removed, with∣out the least return for two Months together. § 77. On the fourth of Ianuary in the Morning we met again, and prescribed as followeth. ℞ Aqu. Ceras. nigr. Epidem. ana ℥ iv.
Syr. Garyophil. de suc. Citr. ana ʒ vj. Aqu. mirabil. ℥ss. m. f. Iulap. de q. capiat cochl. iv. ad libit. in languoribus. § 78. This hot Cordial was prest upon me, and to avoid debates, yielded to; but advised his Lord∣ship privately to use it very mode∣rately, a spoonful or two once in five or six hours. Renovetur Emplastr. parti affectae applicand. ℞ Iugland. condit. No iij. Sumat hora somni. Cras mane diluculo repetatur Bol. è Calomelan. post cujus usum se alvus non respondeat intra spati∣um duar. horar. sumat Syr. è flor. persic. ℥ jss. ex haustu allae coct. In reliquis pergat ut ante. ℞ Aq. papav. Rh. ℥ ij. Syr. flor. pa∣ralys. ℥ j. tinct. Castor. gutt. x. m. f. haust. sumend. hora una aut altera a sumptis jugland. § 79. At Night the other Doctor
sited alone by himself, and pre∣scribed this Cordial. ℞ Aqu. Melis. Ceras. nigror. Epidem. ana ℥ iij. Aqu. mirab. ℥ j. Croci ℈ j. Glycyrrhiz. ℥ j. infund. statim in frigido, & post horam unam f. Colatura, cui add. Syr. Meliss. Caryoph. ana ℥ j. Sumat ℥ ijss. singulis horis. ℞ Spir. C. C. rectificat. ʒ ij. Capiat. gut. 15. (quoties urget virium languor) ex ℥ ijss. Iulapii. Januar. the 5th we prescribed, ℞ Cerus. Antimonii ℈ j Trochise. vi∣perin. ʒss. Croc. Angl. pulv. gr. jss. Syr. cort. Citr. q. s. m. f. mixt. moll. Sumenda hora nona vespert. superbibendo haust. decoct. sudorif. calidè hora tertia pomeridiana. Sumat bolum è pulv. Erinacei calcinati. § 80. Upon the going off of my Lords pains, his Urine came in lesser quantities and better coloured, for a day or two; then the other Do∣ctor
would needs crowd in his Hedg-hog powder again, which procured the return of the Diabe∣tes in the same degree as before: this being plainly observed by my self and the Surgeon, we posi∣tively told him, if he would not desist from giving this flying Hedg-hog, we would consult with him no more; so that afterwards it was wholy left off. ℞ Spir. Salis Armoniac. succin. ℥ss. Sumat gut. xij. in cochl. vj. cu∣juscunque liquoris, urgente lipo∣thymia. At Night the Doctor prescribed alone by himself thus; Bolus è Cerussa Antimonii & Troch. Viperin. hac nocte hora nona. Haustus hypnotic. Vin. Ceras. ℥ ijss. vel iij. per inter∣valla. Cras mane pulv. Erinac. In reliquis ut ante. § 81. When I saw this Bill, I would neither allow of the Hypnotic, black Cherry-wine, nor Hedg-hog. I
confess it moved a strange jealousie in me; concerning the Doctor, pre∣scribing now afresh a Hypnotic Hedg-hog, and adding black Cherry-wine. § 82. Ianuary the 7th these follow∣ing Prescriptions were signed by us both. ℞ Theriac. Andr, Diascord. ana ℈ ij. Spec. è chel. Cancr. comp. ℈ j. Ol. cinam. gut. ss. Syr. Coral. q. s. M. f. mixt. moll. deaur. sumend. hora somni. superbibendo seq. Iulap. cochl. iij. The way to divide the single drop of Oyl of Cinamon into two parts, was by dropping it into a little powder, which being mixt together, might easily be separated into two parts. ℞ Aqu. Epidem ℥ vj. Aqu. Cinam. hord. ℥ ij. Diascord. ʒ ijss. conte∣rantur in mort. marm. addendo Syr. Garyophyl. de rub. id. cort. Citr. ana ℥ss. m. f. Iulap. Sumat
cochl. ij. alternis horis vel ad libit. § 83. About this time his Lordship was on a sudden surprized with a Diarrhaea, or Loosness, so violent, that it put us out of our road for▪ a while; but the occasional cause of it was controverted between us, the one Doctor asserting it was the operation of the two doses of Calo∣melon. though it had been given some days before, and was wrought off by five or six motions on the same day. But beyond all perad-venture it was to be imputed to the daily use of the Balsamic Syrup of Gum Guaiaoi, that is so potently purging, and fretting; therefore without any more ado, my self and the Surgeon desired, that both the Glasses of the balsamic Syrups of the other Doctors might be taken away out of the Room, and be seen there no more. Moreover, we judged it highly necessary, to be more than ordinarily careful, that
nothing should be imposed upon us, whereby so fair an appearance of a Cure might be subverted. Besides this Diarrhaea, my Lord was every moment heaving to vo∣mit. On the 8th of Ianuary we agreed to these Prescripts; ℞ Mass. Empl. stomach. Magistr. part. ij. Gum. Tacamahac. part. j. Ol. Cinam. gut. j. M. f. Empl. scutiform. Extend. super alut. & applic. Ventriculo. ℞ Rhab. pulv. ℈ ss. Diascord. ʒ j. Ol. Cin. gut. ss. Syr. de ros. sic. q. s. M. f. mixt. moll. deaur. Capiat hora somni haec nocte. ℞ Corn. Cerv. Calc. ℥ j. coq. in aq. font. lb iiij. ad consuumpt. medi∣etat. dein calidè affunde super Cinamom. crass. confrit ʒ ij. Sac∣char. alb. ℥ j. post horam decan∣tetur sine colatura. Bibat ℥ iiij. ad libit. per se, vel cum aequali proport. lact is coct.
Sit in promptu bolus suprascript. sitque in promptu idem bolus sine Rhabarb. addendo pulv. è chel. Cancr. comp. ℈ j. bol. armen. ver. ℈ ss. Horis duabus a sumpto bolo sumat. haust. hypn. usual. Here there was a necessity to allow half an ounce of Diacod. dissolved in simple Waters for an Hypnotic. January 9. ℞ C. C. C. ℥ j. coq. in aq. font lb iij. ad lb ij. colato liquori adde aq. cinam. hord. sacchar. chrystal. ana ℥ j. m. Capiat ℥ iiij. 4ta quavis hora. ℞ Aq. Cerasar. nigr. ℥ vij. Aq. Epi∣dem. ℥ jss. Syr. Caryophil. Syr. è suc. Citr. ana ʒ vj. m. f. Iulap. sumat cochl. v. ad libitum in languoribus. Januar. 10. Repetatur bolus hac nocte, & cras manè hora sexta. Repetatur Iulap. cord. & Decoct. corn. Cerv. calc.
℞ Marg. praep. ʒ ij. dividantur in part. sex, & capiat part. sexta quarta quavis hora in cochl. j. Iul. cord. superbibendo ejusdem Iulap. cochl. iiij. § 84. The effect of these Medicines having reduced the retentive fa∣culty of the Guts to their former duty, I judged it expedient to loose no more time, but to pro∣ceed towards a Cure; and in re∣gard it was not improbable, that in a short interval the Gleet of the Nerve would by stagnation re∣assume its preceding virus, and that the superfluous Humours of the body would by nature be thrown to that part, as being the weakest, I proposed, that a large Caustick should be applied on the region of the left Ilia, by which means the channel of the foresaid Humours would not only be diverted out∣wards, but there would be a vent given to those virulent evapora∣tions, though their fountain was
so deeply remote. For it's conso∣nant to Experience, that an Empy∣ema consisting of matter more gross, hath been rarified, extracted, and dryed up, by several Causticks applied to the Breast. This being new to the other Physic ian, and because it was recommended by me, he would by no means assent to it, and therefore pressed, that an∣other Physician of the Cabal should be called, in which particular he was indulged by my Lords Rela∣tions. He misunderstanding, that it was the other Doctor advised the Caustick, therefore immediate∣ly approved of it; but the next Morning perceiving his mistake, did as obstinately oppose the appli∣cation of a Caustick on the inside of the Thigh a little below the Groin, as he had easily yielded to the former. The Surgeon, whose Experience and Judgment I estee∣med beyond twenty of them, gave me his opinion, that the applica∣tion
could not be used without success; and therefore after they were withdrawn to their several occupations, we caused the foresaid Caustick to be applyed, and three or four days after we judged it convenient to apply another on the inside of the Thigh, a little above the Knee; the Escar being cast off, we keep them open for a long time, by putting in several Ivy-pease with a piece of flatted lead over them, to cause them to make a deeper impression. § 85. The Prescriptions they forc'd in upon me then were these, being two to one; the major part ac∣cording to the mode of consulta∣tions ever prevailing. ℞ Decoct. Traumat. ℥ x. ol. hypr. mel. ros. ana ℥ j.ss. Balsam. Luca∣tel. ℥ j. Vitel. ovi unius. M. f. E∣nem. Injiciatur quamprimum. ℞ Lap. Bezoar. or. pulv. ℈ j. Capiat hora una post rejectum Clyst. è
cochl. j. Iulap. cardiac. super∣bibendo cochl. vj. Iulap. ejusdem. ℞ Conserv. rosar. rub. vet. ℥ iij. Balsam Lucatel. ℥ j. m. f. Elect. Signetur Electuar. Vulnerarium. ℞ Balsam. Sulphur. Therebinthin. ℥ss. capiat gut. x in cochl. j. Syr. Bal∣sam. rubr. superbibendo decoct. Chin. praescript. I was extremely dissatisfied at these Prescripts, and did vehe∣mently suspect their effect; but their grandeur influenced his Lord∣ship to use them. On the 12th of Januar. ℞ Diascord. fr. ʒ j. sp. è chel. cancr. comp. ℈ j. Lap. Bezoar. or. ℈ss. syr. Garyophil. q. s. M. f. Elect. Moll. Capiat octava quavis hora, superbi∣bendo Iulap. card. cochl. iiij. ℞ Balsam. Sulphur. rectif. ʒ ij. Ca∣piat gut. vj. octava quavis hora, in haust. decoct. Chin. Repetatur Enem. praescript. What hapned? The next day we had the Diabetes, a Diarrhaea,
Faintings, Syncopees, Vomitings, and Gripes. The Balsam of Sulphur was a Re∣medy offered by me; but in regard the ordinary Chymical Balsam, that was brought thither, was a Medicine fitter for a horse (though purchased with all the care imagi∣nable by the Apothecary from the Chymist) I prevented his Lordship from using it, promising to bring some of my own preparation, but did not suffer my Lord to take it, until several days after. The other Doctors returning, I told them, it was their old Medi∣cines had put us back again; and once for all declared, they should never be exhibited again, as long as I was concerned. They replied, it was the Balsam of Sulphur; up∣on which I drew a small thumb∣glass of my own Balsam of Sulphur out of my pocket, and shewed it them full, telling them, though I had carried it about me several
days, my Lord had not yet taken a drop of it; which his Lordship, and the others that attended, like∣wise attested: neither should it be used, before I saw what the effect of their Medicines would amount unto. § 78. Being transported into passion, they retired to their seve∣ral occasions; one of them repeated his Visit next Morning, very early, leaving these subsequent directions. Januar. 15. ℞ Troch. Viperin. ʒ j. Pulv. Comi∣tiss. Lap. Bez. orient. ana ℈ j. Succ. Kerm. s. q. f. Bolus exhi∣bend. sexta quaque hora, loco prius praescript. ℞ Aqu. Epidem. aq. Ceras. nigr. ana ℥ iv. Croc. ℈ j. Infund. in frigido ad horae spatium, dein coletur & add. Aqu. Steph. & Aqu. mirab. ana ʒ vj. Syr. Caryoph. & è succ. Citr. ana ℥ j. M. sumat in onini languore, & alternis horis, vel
tertia quaque hora. Pergat in usu margarit. Adde enemati theriac. Androm. ʒ iij. These to me seemed Bills written upon the fret, and therefore I or∣dered the Apothecary to exhibit only half the forementioned Bolus, and that only once every twelve hours. The Cordial pleased me as little. At night he prescribed this costly Electuary, which was not used. Januar. 15. ℞ Confect. Alkermes ℥ ij. Theriac. Androm. ℥ss. Pulv. Comitiss. ʒ ij. Confect. de Hyacintho ʒ ij. Lap. Bez. orient. ʒ j. Ol. Cinam. gut. j. Syr. Caryoph. s. q. f. Elect. cum fol. xij auri. Capiat ʒ j vel ij pro libitu in languoribus. On the 16th of Ianuary in the morning, this Physician finding his Lordship encompassed with Sym∣tomes so dangerous, that in his opi∣nion he seemed to have computed
the Hours and Minutes, beyond which he could not survive, and therefore peremptorily declared, that if another Physician of the Cabal was not called in, he would come no more; an expedient that was made use of by him, to draw his neck out of the collar. I told him, as he went down the stairs, he acted not only very ungrateful∣ly, having received so many Fees; but uncharitably and inhumanely, in leaving a Person of Honour in that condition, who now once in six hours was assailed with a Syn∣cope, that sometimes for the space of half an hour rendered him in appearance little different from dead. Conceiving these Convulsions, and other Symptomes, to be occa∣sioned by those venemous steems, attacquing the Brain, and the whole genus nervosum, and consequently the Heart, through that nervous branch of the Sixth pair that is
distributed to it, to which the En∣glish Surgeon did not only assent, but likewise offer'd such demon∣strative Arguments, that I should not have expected from any of the Physicians, moved me to give his Lordship six, and sometimes eight drops of my own Balsam of Sulphur, (prepared after a mode not com∣mon in the least) in an ounce of a Cordial prescribed by me: for now being left at my own liberty, I directed such Medicines as I thought proper to answer the present Indi∣cations. At the second exhibition the Syncope and Convulsions cea∣sed. His Vomiting, which was caused by consent of the great Stomachick Nerves, and his diffi∣culty of Respiration depending on the affection (by consent) of the Nerves, that are disseminated through the Diaphragma, were al∣so very considerably abated. Notwithstanding the other Phy∣sician judged it prudence to change
his resolution, and make officious Visits to his deserted Patient, to observe the event; and perceiving that the Symptomes went off so strangely beyond his expectation, on the third morning after he had left us, came into the Consult-chamber again among us, with much affability and Eloquence, in∣tending to enter into consultation with me; but we immediately gave him the whole Room to walk in by himself. My Lord enquired the rea∣son of our leaving the Doctor; an∣swer was made, that he had a minde to come in upon the review, and it was thought sit, that since he left his Lordship in extremity, we ought to leave the Doctor, now the distemper had a better aspect: But however as for my own particular, if his Lordship was pleased to com∣mand me, or if his Honours Relation would needs have it so, I was very willing to advise with so learned and eminent a Physician. My Lord
waved it, and left himself wholly to our care. By the way, this is a plain in∣stance of the result of Consultati∣ons, and the difference of a Physi∣cians acting singly and freely with∣out that disturbance, imploying the utmost of his care and endeavours to the advantage of his Patient: Whereas in Consultations, especially grand ones, it matters not what the event is, there being a great many vouchers and shoulders, to bear the corps upon; besides, oft-times he that prates most, leads the rest by the nose. And to what purpose should any of them take much pains? For if the Patient lives, the reputation of his Cure is equal to them all, as well to the Fool as the Knave; their Fee is likewise equal, he that saith little, hath as much as he that speaks all: More∣over, if any of them should prove refractory, or somewhat mutinous, be sure the rest would never con∣sult
with him again; which must necessarily prove a great loss to him. For there is abundantly more money got by Consultations, than single Practice: Neither Mayern, Prudgeon, nor Willis could have got a quarter of the estate they left, barring Consultations; more∣over, it is a safe practice, and no hazard of a mans Reputation. Every Physician expects no less than a double Fee, and for that each of them will foist in his me∣dicine, which too oft proves to be such a hodgpot, that it sends the Patient in a little time to his An∣cestors. Fernelius, Hollerius, Du∣retus, and Cardan, men in their time of far greater fame than any of my Lords Physicians, chanced to be called in Consultation; the one advised Bleeding, the other a Julep, the third a Decoction, the fourth a Cordial Bolus, besides ma∣ny other Medicines, all to be used in one day: a great charge this
must amount to! The Patient was a Youth troubled with a Headach, Drouth, Gripes and Fever. The Physicians were no sooner gone, but there comes an Old-woman, re∣commended by a Jesuit, who with∣out much consultation anoints his Belly, especially about the Navil, with a Liniment of Ox-gall, Colo∣cynthis, and Aloës, which in less than an hour moved a Stool or two, and brought away five or six Worms: Upon this the Lad was immediately restored to his health. The Physicians returning next morning to see the Patient, who was abroad at play, were very ill-received by the Mother of the Boy, who called them Rogues, that would have kill'd her Childe by bleeding; and Cheats, for taking her Money without deserving it. Some days before this Doctor left us, there hapned a long dispute between me and two of the former Physicians, who baited me for
three hours together in a Consul∣tation, concerning a purulent eva∣cuation, which I had observed his Lordship made by Stool. Here they cavill'd, in objecting, they saw no passage by which matter could be transmitted into the Guts. I told them the passages were not different from those, through which Nature in a Dropsie, being stimulated by a Purge, doth throw off water, that is collected in the capacity of the Abdomen. Let them read Hippocr. Aphor. 14. Sect. 6. . Likewise it hath been many times observed, that in an Empyema the purulent collecti∣on hath been discharged sometimes by Stool, but more commonly by Urine, by the matter being admit∣ted into the Vessels, and so by Circulation posted down. Read Scultetus in Armament. Chir. Ob∣serv. Li. item Observ. 46. Fe∣lix Wurts in his Surgery, in the
Chapt. Of Wounds in the Breast. Also Fabrit. Hildan. in his Observ. and Skenkius, besides many others. In Impostnumes of the Liver and of the Mesentery, the matter is com∣monly evacuated by Stool, by means of the Vessels, or sometimes by perforation of the pus through the Guts. It was much about this time, since affairs went on so successfully, the Physicians of the Brotherhood made it their business to disperse themselves into most of the great Coffee-houses of the Town, where they sometimes reported, I was a Mountebank, sometimes a Surgeon, and othertimes an Apothecary, or a Chymist; for what I had done was meerly by chance. I much wonder, how many such Mountebanks they can shew me, that are of their com∣bination. As for my Education, I question whether I have not had far better than any of them. The Latine and Greek Tongues I at∣tained
in the Low-countries; then was placed in Exeter-College in Oxford, Doctor Conant being at that time Rector, where I studied Philosophy several years; then went to Leyden, where I had one Collegium Theoreticum, and two Collegia Practica under Professor vander Linden, two Collegia Ana∣tomica under Professor van Horn, and one Colleg. Botanicum under Professor Vorstius. I went twice a week to the Hospital with the foresaid Professor vander Linden, to learn to know Diseases, when they came before me, and how to cure them. I was also instructed there in the Chymical Art by a German. My Lodging was at a Surgeons house, on purpose to learn the practical part of Surgery; once a day I went to an Apothe∣caries shop, kept by a Relation of my Landlord, where I was taught the trade of an Apothecary. After this I passed into France, to im∣prove
my self by visiting the Sick of the Charité-Hospital every day, for some Moneths together; and twice a week I went to l'Hostel Dieu, made what Observations I could, and committed them to Pa∣per. Thence I made the petit tour, and in my way I took my Degrees in Physick, both of Ba∣chelor and Doctor. Upon my return to Paris, I made an agree∣ment with Monsieur Iannot to dress and assist at the greater Operations in Surgery, at the forementioned Charité-Hospital: in the intervals of my Studies I was present at Monsieur Gayen his Anatomies, as many as hapned to be during my abode there. I passed also a cours of Chymistry with Monsieur Barlet. Hence I returned into Holland, where I was admitted Fellow of the College of Physicians at the Hague, as appears by their Dispensatory in print. After some months I re∣turned to London, whence I was
sent to Flanders, to be Physician (or Doctor-General, as they com∣monly phrase it) to the Army, where I continued till I was tired of the employment, and then took my course for Italy through Ger∣many; passed away some time at Padua, Bolonia, and Rome; and having seen the other chief Cities, came back through Switzerland, and so down the Rhine to Collen, thence into Holland, and soon after into England, where I have con∣tinued ever since, and followed my Practice. Now how these Gen∣tlemen can make a Mountebank, Surgeon, Apothecary, or Chymist of me, without touching their own Copyhold, I cannot tell: Sure I am, I was never a Renegado Di∣vine, a Schoolmaster, or Trooper turn'd to Physick, or ever put the dice upon them by a forged Di∣plome from Oxford; neither am I a meer Velvetier, that hath no∣thing but the Plush-jacket on his
Back, to shew what Trade he is of; neither was I ever Member of a Society that harboured such, but scorn to be of it. I never gave Mercurius Dulcis to a Lady against Fits, that serv'd me such a jades trick as to Salivate her, and put her in danger of her Life. I never advised a young Lady very lately to loose twenty or thirty Ounces of Blood, upon a spotted Fever, which kill'd her. I have at no time ad∣ministred Laudanum Opiatum so unskilfully, that Patients never awaken'd again. I never gave Vomit or Purge, that kill'd the Patient in the operation. I have not prescribed a Purge very lately to a young Gentleman, whose small Pox appearing, was mistaken by the Physician for Heat; which the next day, when the Purge should have been taken, were plainly risen all over the body, and caused the Doctor to go to Prayers with the Lady his Mother and the Family, to
give God thanks the Purge was not taken, and made his confessi∣on, that it would have killed him, had he swallowed it, standing ready upon the Table for him. Thus you see Physicians sometimes tye a Sword over your head by a hair. Was it not the Town-Idol, that by his Anatomical Craft di∣rected the place of Incision in a Childe, whose Anus was imperfo∣rated, upon the Sphincter Muscul, whereof the Infant soon died, he having wholy missed the Venthole? Did he not a considerable time treat a Lady out of Town, for a a Rhumatisme of the Shoulder, which proved a large Imposthu∣mation ready to be opened, and upon apertion discharged above a Pint of purulent matter, and so was suddenly recovered; who other∣wise by this Rhumatic course might have lost the use of her Arm, and possibly of her Life? But enough of this at present; Only lest they
should run into an inconvenience by a mistake of the name, I will give them this Advertisement, That there is one Harvy, whom the courtesy of England gives the title of Doctor, he lives somewhere near Suffolk-str. learnt his Trade of Iohn ontaeus, and doth sell Medi∣cines up and down the Country, though whether he keeps the Stage, I cannot inform them. Thus much for my own vindication. The Vulnerary Decoction and Bags derived their Vertues chiefly from Traumatic Herbs (viz. Pyrola Virga aurea, Sanicula, and some others) that were gathered on the Alpes of Switzerland, and care∣fully dryed, in energy and good∣ness far exceeding ours, which were presented to me by the Right Ho∣nourable my Lord Holles. The form of my Prescriptions of the Vulneraries, Cordials, and other Medicines, may be seen on the Apothecaries file, the tran∣scription
whereof I have omitted, not only because it would swell this Treatise into too great a mole, but chiefly by reason those, that shall think fit to answer this Tract, should have some matter to work on; So that I hope they will as faithfully transcribe my Bills, as I have done theirs: For I should take it very ill, if they should tra∣duce me in that particular. A third Reason you shall also know in my Reply. My Lord's Diet was chiefly up∣on Broath made of Mutton, Veal, and Poultry; sometimes with Vul∣nerary Herbs in it, other times without. I allowed him no Flesh for a month or six weeks. From Glysters I disused his Body gradu∣ally; directing at first but one in two days, then one in a week, at length wholy omitted them for a long interval: They were either of Mutton-broath alone, or of Milk and Sugar, according as I judged
requisite. My Balsam of Sulphur was continued; I directed also a Vulnerary Decoction; after∣wards Vulnerary Bags to be infused in Eight-shilling Beer, and to be drunk in his usual Drink; like∣wise Cordials, and sometimes Cor∣dials and Antepileptics mixt toge∣ther. The effect of these Medicines were such, that in a short space his Urine appeared in moderate pro∣portions, of a good laudable con∣sistence and colour, and a healthy hypostasis. Then I thought sea∣sonable, to adde Comfry-roots and Milfoil to his other Vulneraries, to heal and consolidate the pun∣ctured Nerve. After this his Lordship went abroad for two Months, flung off his Medi∣cines too soon, against my advice; only once in a fortnight I prevail'd with him to take a Laxative of Manna and Syrup of Roses, dis∣solved in Broath. In the interim
my Lord kept a very ill Diet, some∣times did eat Coleworts, powder'd Beef, fresh Cod, Salmon, Tarts, and the like; dined oft abroad, where he scarce refused any thing, that was brought to the Table: Drank all sorts of Wine, though moderately; and once beyond o∣ther times drank sharp Rhenish-wine upon a plentiful Dinner of fresh Cod, which occasioned a smart ebullition of his Humours, bursted open again the Puncture, that was so lately healed, and procured a fresh Gleet, so violent, that his Lordship relapsed into Pains as great as ever. There was no way to stop the impetuous current of this Gleet, and consequently to remove his Pains, but by giving a lift to his humours, and turn the stream upwards; which I perfor∣med by raising a Salivation so gen∣tle, that his Mouth was scarce sore, or his Face swelled: his Lordship did not salivate above a Pint and
an half in 24 hours, neither was it continued beyond seven or eight days. The Salivation was no sooner raised, but his Pains vanisht immediately, and in the time of the Flux recovered his Appetite and Strength; an observation con∣trary to what it useth to effect in others. However, this was a De∣monstrative Argument à juvante, that his Lordships pains were oc∣casioned, by a venemous Gleet from a punctur'd Nerve. Upon this I caused my Lord to take two or three Sweats, upon a draught of a Decoction of Sarsa with Vulne∣naries, in a chair, to sweat out the remains of the Mineral, and dry up the superfluities of the Succus Ner∣vosus, and other humours: After∣wards continued the same Decocti∣on for some time, though not so long as I did advise. In every draught of the Decoction were used ten or twelve Drops of my Tincture of Antimony, which put
his Lordship into a condition to be abroad again for several Weeks; but returning to an irregular Diet, fell into a plain Rhumatism, viz. smart Pains in his Breast, which after a short continuance would remove to his Shoulders, thence to his Neck and Elbows, and some∣times to his Back; for this I ad∣vised his Lordship to be blooded a moderate quantity, twice in eight days, or thereabouts, by which means this foresaid Rhumatism went very well off. Then I used all the perswasive Arguments, not forgetting that of the Pitcher go∣ing so oft to the Well, to observe Rules strictly, and particularly those relating to his Diet, which my Lord thought a Penance so great (as indeed it would have been to any man, that had been so long in a course) that he soon shoke off all directions, and was again as irregular in his Diet, or rather more than before. The effect of
this proved likewise worse than formerly; for besides Pains, I be∣gan now to observe matter (pus) in my Lord's Urine, about the quantity of a dram, which by de∣grees increased to the measure of a spoonful or two, and that of an ill colour: For deterging, I gave his Lordship some of my Balsam of Sulphur, likewise another Tincture of Antimony, with directions how to use it in a Vulnerary Decoction that was prepared, sometimes with vulnerary Herbs, boiled in a small Aqua Calcis, and sometimes in wa∣ter and a little French-wine. The matter by these means soon grew of a better colour, and well-digested into a white pus, then gradually diminished, until it came to that pass, which required consolidation and healing: To which intent I gave a Tincture of Mars of my own preparation, which being all used, as much as I had of it ready pre∣pared, I was forced to advise Tun∣bridge-waters,
having a Vertue not only to cleanse, and consolidate, (witness many that have been cured both of internal and ex∣ternal Ulcers) but to discharge the malignant Gleet of the Nerve, to which I ever had a particular re∣gard, as being the cause of all. These Mineral-waters were drunk with so great success in Town, that I was encouraged to perswade his Lordship to go to the Wells, where the waters, by the observa∣tion of all people, are found much more effectual: But it hapned, that the rockiness of the ways thither had so disturbed those ten∣der parts (which might have been prevented by a Litter; but that my Lord would by no arguments yield unto) that it threw him into his pains, which so put us out of our course, that it was not in the power of Art to recover our point again; neither did his Lordship drink the Waters more than once; which he
should not have done, had I been present. Being returned to Town, the Ulcer recruded again, and discharged matter, sometimes for eight or ten days, until what was engender'd was quite drain'd; then there was an intermission of the discharge, until there was a suffici∣ent quantity regendred, which would then again be cast off by Urine. At length there was so great a Debilitation of the Nerves and Brain, occasioned by the frequent return of the Pains, and regurgi∣tation of the venemous Gleet, that it oft-times cast the Patient into Cataleptic Fits, which by internal Medicines, the application of Ven∣toses and Epispasticks, I did more than once bring his Lordship off, beyond the expectation of all per∣sons. His Body being dayly more and more macerated, his Spirits diminishing, and Strength extreme∣ly impairing, God Almighty was
pleased to deliver him of all his miseries, on Michaelmass-day in the morning, about seven of the Clock. His Lordships Body was opened two days after by command of the Coroners Jury, who ought to have understood, it was my business (who had attended this Noble Pa∣tient three quarters of a year, and in all probability knew best, where to discover the Cause (the occasi∣onal of his Death) by directing the Surgeon, Monsieur &c. (a Ma∣ster-Surgeon of Paris, and of the Hall in London, that likewise at∣tended last) in the Dissection: But it was so managed, that the other Physicians and Surgeons had de∣signedly so pallisado'd themselves about the table, that I had only room to peep through, to observe the hand of the dissecting Surgeon, that he might not drop in a Pebble into the hollow of the Kidney, to palliate the reputation of his Ma∣sters.
After they had left the Room, I returned to make a nar∣rower search than they had done, there being also present two Do∣ctors of Physick, not of the Col∣lege, who were both very expert Anatomists. Here I found all his Intrails sound, not the least Stone or Gravel in the Kidneys; but the Psoas Muscul, on the left side, was gangren'd, and part of the Colon, both being turn'd black, though not sphacelated: for in a Sphacelus, which is a perfect Mortification, the part is so rotted, that it will scarce hang together, and is usually attended with a stink; whereas a Gangrene is only a tendency to, or the beginning of a Sphacelus. I likewise observed, that the fore∣said Muscul, comparing it with the Muscul of the other side, was di∣minisht one third part, being cor∣roded away, and turned into mat∣ter, that was engendred through the Ebullition, or in their sense
Fermentation of the malign Gleet and the Blood, which being re∣ceived ito the Veins, was by Cir∣culation carried to the Emulgents and Kidneys, and thence with the Urine to the Bladder, in the same manner as I have already mention'd before. So that here in this part was the Ulcer, where no matter was found at that time; because it had been drained and carried off before, his Lordship not having discharged any matter five or six days before his Death. Moreover, pressing hard with my Fingers up∣on the said Psoas Muscul, that was so extremely wasted, I felt those great branches of Nerves of the first and third Lumbal Conjugations (whose anterior branches are disse∣minated through its body) like a cord, rigidly contracted, and knot∣ted throughout, a true signe the Puncture was in one of those Nerves, neither was any other ac∣cident capable to produce all these
and the other Symptomes; so that it was no wonder, if upon contra∣ction of the Nerves, his Lordship's left Leg was contracted shorter than the right. His difficulty of breath∣ing was beyond all dispute occa∣sioned by consent of a branch of the first Lumbal pair of Nerves, that is distributed through the carnous part of the Diaphragm; likewise his Gripes by consent of those other branches of Nerves, that excur to the Guts. The pre∣tented tumor on the left Ilia was only a tension of the Membranes. In Conclusion, I will presume to offer these Queries. 1. Whether I ever receded from the opinion I first stated, or from the Indications I first desumed. 2. Whether it be not probable, had I acted as vari∣ably as others have done, these great Physicians would have judged Oribasius de Laqueis a fitter author for me to read than Hippo∣crates. 3. Whether a good old
Surgeress in the Country might not in the beginning have been more successful with a Poultess of a few green Herbs on the Com∣mon, and the good Allom Posset. 4. If the method that was followed by me, had been used at the time, when they began to give his Lord∣ship Opium, and before they had made use of their Pickaxes and Shovels, whether in all probability the success would not have been different. 5. Whether it was not as ridiculous as malicious, in some of these Physicians, to report, that two or three small Doses of Mercu∣rius Dulcis, (whereof Children of three or four years old have taken six or seven Doses with great suc∣cess against the Worms) and those consented unto by the chief of 'em, as appears by his Mark set to the Prescription, should have done his Lordship the least injury, having been given at least Six or Seven Months before. I have no more to
say at present, but, From grand Consultations in Physick, Liberae nos Domine. Amen▪ FINIS.
