H3255 12226884 56572
HUDIBRAS ANSWERED By True de Case In his own POEM and LANGƲAGE. WHat Rayling Asse is Hudibrasse? some fury come from Hell, The name it self betrayes the Elf, some charming conjuring spell. The language of the Dragon Red, such fire he spits abroad, As if his Crop wisht Dives drop, to cool his hot aboad. Let's recton up the strength o'th Cup, that gives this Fiend such speech, And see if he deserve to be in Pauls to lay his breech. He's not prophetick, but a shitten critick, not honest, true or wise, See how he brawles to shite in Pauls, and pull out reverend eyes. Sure he can tell, that came from Hell, how Organs fright the Divel, That Reverend Father, hence may gather, that he is full of evil, He ill doth guesse, a Gospel dresse to mask Rebellion in, Sure coals of wrath, not publick faith, will punish hellish sinne. Hell hath no melting, but Fiends yelping, when Hudibrasse was there; It's his desire to raise new fire, Crocodiles and Bodkins here. His Drollery Act, shews that his fact deserveth both the Gout And Halter eke, that Bishop meek, was ne're of that same Rout. Poor Wild is civil, but Hudibrass Divel is more then maudlin drunk; His holy cheat doth plead the feat of Babylons base punck. Our Judges Great, i'th law compleat, sure ne're durst wrest the Act; And though he's vext, with a down right text, Jack Pudding's here compact. He ill doth choose, for to abuse both Miter and the Crown, And make the law but like a straw, if Hudibrasse pull it down. For Hudibrasse Club and Belzebub, in malice both agree; Since he's ingrate, then let his fate, mount up on Hudibrasse Tree. 'Twill not be strange if then he change, Rogero's Ink and Tune; If he relent, and there repent, hee'l flie above the Moon. The furious Elf's against himself, and all his black bravadoes; His satyrd dregs are worse then Megs, then Squibs, Jeers, or Granadoes. The tail o'th beast, not Smec the least, some three years chang'd and horne; Both Father and Mother▪ both Sister & bro∣ther of Hudibrasse were the horn. Our Temples mixt, with calves are fixt, and Schismaticks made by the Asse; His legacy I wish it may be, Repent O Hudibrasse. Judges awake, Lord prelates make, this sonne of Edom cry, Hee's half a Jew, a Calf and Hu∣Debrasse so let him die. No Tyburne Hedge, nor Newgate Sledge, I wish may be his Date; Our Common-prayer that is so Rare, may give him a better Fate. Onely a Letany, that runs so pleasantly, Il'e read to Hudibrasse Trim; From a Coach and a Cart, and Death that limbs part, Good Lord deliver him. Let no man grumble, that thus I rumble, in Hudibrasse language brave; For to retort sometimes is good sport. and so to play with a knave. God bless our gracious King and Queen, Bishops and Judges too; Our glorious peace let never cease, by Hudibrasse black Crew. Our Parliament that shall be sent, by Cbarles his Majesty: Let settle Law to keep in awe, Hudibrasse Fraternity. And so I end as Hudibrasse Friend, wishing both Church and State A blessed peace in happiness, and Enemies out of Date. FINIS.
