H3410 12306471 59273
THE HUMBLE DESIRES AND PROPOSALS Of the private AGITATORS of Colonel Hewsons Regiment to the generall Agitators of the Ar∣my, to be presented to his Excel∣lency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and communicated to both Houses of Parliament. Wherein is contained these parti∣culars, viz. 1. Their desires concerning the Army 2. Concerning Prisoners being brought to tryall, 3. Concerning justice to be forthwith executed. 4. Concerning divers corrupt Members in both Hou∣ses of Parliament. 5. Concerning the Souldiers of this Kingdome, and their resisting of a forraigne Power. London Printed by I. G. 1647.
THE HUMBLE DESIRES AND PROPOSALLS Of the private AGITATORS of Colonell Hewsons Regiment, to the Generall Agitators of the Army. Gentlemen, WEE cannot but review those divine ma∣nifestations to us, in a first and se∣cond modell of this Army. Its not altogether unlike the building of the Temple, the stones were ready hewed, and fitted for their severall sta∣tions, so that there was neither Axe, nor Hammer heard in the Temple; even so hath God erected and compacted us together in our various condi∣tions to be a meane for the end, to administer and establish Truth, Peace, and Righteousnesse, in this our Tabernacle. We have not much heard the ham∣merings and noyse of flesh in our Councels, and resolutions, as to boast in the Arme of flesh; but in a still sure confidence in God, and from the manifest presence of God, have we obtained in all
our adventures. The sweet union we had with God doth indeare us together in love, from the power of love. There was such a reprocall con∣tract, that there did not so much of man appeare, as to make distinctions of names or parties, though differing in Judgement; God having seemingly accomplished the ends of our desires in conquer∣ring the Kingdomes and our visible enemies, we were taken up to contemplate in the hopes of en∣joying the fruits of our labours in a happy Peace: Then unexpectedly there appeared a Ghostlike e∣nemy of the same spirit as the former, onely in an∣other vizage, then God awaked us dead and dry bones, and gendred us together, and gave in life, light, and strength, to act without any known formes or Custome, but in unknown and untroden paths, save this maxim, viz. salus populi suprema lex. But above all this satisfied, viz the invitation of God in us to this work. Then were we acted out to elect adjutations, in which we have seene God clothed in your flesh, and prefigured in love, uni∣on, holines, mekes, and selfe annihilation the more you enjoy God, the more you thus live, and act like him; but on the contrary, if carnall selfe interest shall puff you up, and cause you to act be∣yond your spheire, and hereby beget divisions, then know that God is risen out of you, and will carry on the wrk in some other dispensation: be∣sides then you have forfeited the trust reposed, for the end of our electing of you was to unite sce∣ment, and contract us together, and for an orderly presentment of our grievances to the General, that
confusion may be avoided, we speake not this from any feare or doubt you, but by motive in order to a reflection within you that ye may see God all in all, and the creature nothinged. We professe we rejoyce and congratulate with you for that sweet frame of spirit in love union and pulique intrest that is amongst you, and do in the name of the Souldiry of the Rgment give you manie thanks for your faithfull services and un∣wearied paines for the good of us, and the King∣dom, and as we have alwayes hitherto been satis∣fied with (and rested in your just proceeds: so wee shall not degress, but shall remaine in our for∣mall way of presenting our agrievances to you: and shall rest in your known fidellity for the re∣presenting of them to the Generall, and as all we have had large testimony of the uprightnes, and faithfulnes of our ever honoured Generall and his Councel, so we humbly desire you to preserve in your duty as aforesaid, and there to acquiess. As also to resolve by the assistance of God to stand firme to your first principles, and submitting to and defending of the legall Auhosity of Parlia∣ment, giving due obedience to the derivative power in the Generall, under whom we have had the presence of divine protection. We do as Adju∣tators for the severall and respective Companies in Col. Hewsons Regiment subscribe our selves. Yours and the Kingdomes faithfull Servants.
The humble Desires and Propo∣salls of the Agitators of Colo∣nell Hewsons Regiment, to be presented to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax. 1. THat the Parliament would speedily take care for pay for his Army. 2. That those Prisoners who have been committed, may be brought to a speedy and just Tryall, and being found to be unjustly imprisonned, maybe relea∣sed and receive ample reparations.
3. That justice may be forthwith executed upon all sorts and degrees of men, who were in the bloody designe to engage this Kingdome in a new Warre. 4. That all visible corrupt Mem∣bers of both Houses in Parliament, may be forthwith expunged, without which we cannot have any happy assu∣rance of safety. 5. That no persons may have pla∣ces of trust in the Kingdome, but those of knowne fidelity that hereby we may be ready to resist any forraigne at∣tempts.
And it is further humbly desired, (by the afore∣said Agitators) that these Proposalls may be forthwith presented to his Excellencie Sir Thomas Fairfax; and to be communicated to both Houses of Parliament; that so, both his Excellencie and the Parliament, may forthwith proceed to a full period and result of the foregoing particulars, that Justice may the better be executed, upon all sorts and degrees of men, who were active in the late bloody designe to ingage this Kingdom in a despe∣rate and new Watre, and that the Kingdome may, be also put into such a posture, and under faith∣full Commanders, both of integrity and trust, that so they may be readie to assist and oppose anie for∣raigne power, upon anie attempt whatsoever.
FINIS.
