L1094 12680032 65625
TWO LETTERS OF NOTE, The one Master Speakers Letter, Ordered by the Honorable House of Commons, to the high Sheriffe, and Gentry of Yorke-Shire, The Other From the Lords of the Counsell in Ireland, to the High Court of Parliament here in England, &c. The Names of the Lords. Corke. Loftus. Ormond. Ridgway. Kildare. Munster. Carey. Courtney, &c. H. Elsings Cler. Par. D. Com. London Printed for F. Coules 1641.
Master Speakers Letter. SIR, THe House hath received information by Letters from your selfe, that the malice of some hath proceeded so far of late, as to endevour first, to perswade your Countrey, that the Petition to the Parliament were ill rellished by this House. And that your free offers therein of putting your selves into a posture of defence, hath given such testimony of our abilities, that it hath utterly taken away the hopes of paying your Billet mo∣ny, till the Parliament knowes not how else to dispose of it. Secondly, to cry down Exercises (which have alrea∣dy done much good) and to draw off some Ministers by perswading them that they are not acceptable to this House. Thirdly, that some in Holdernesse have dis∣swaded the Trained Bands from going unto Hull upon the Parliament Order. Which information of yours, the House takes for an especiall service, and for so full a testimony of your fi∣delity to the Parliament, and of love to your Country, as they hold it an evident Character of your worth, and for this commands me to give you very hearty thanks, And to desire you in the name of the house to declare to the Country, how false and malicious these reports are: since the House was so far from disrellishing their
Petitions, or turning their free offer to their disadvan∣tage, as that they returned their publike thanks when the petition was receaved: passed a Vote to approve of their offer & since by another Vote justified them in the same act upon his Majesties taking notice thereof. And have since ordered that the same Counties which paid their Polemony heretofore at Yorke, shall now pay all their proportions of the bill of foure hundred thousand pounds shortly to be raised to the discharge of the Billet mony in your County and those other Counties where it is owing, which if it shall not fully satisfie, they will discharge as soone as the great necessities of the King∣dome can possibly permit. And likewise they command me to let you know that they doe very much wonder at the impiety and impudence of those men who dare to hinder the advancement of the glory of God, and of his worship. And also to scandalize the piety of this house in so high a measure, as to say those good Ministers endeavours are not acceptable to it, they accounting it their greatest honour to patronize painfull Preachers in the performance of their duties. And being resolved to cherish and advance with their utmost power, whatso∣ever may tend to the propagating of Religion of which they hold those exercises to be an especiall means. This house therefore being very sensible of the great incon∣veniences which may happen by their misreports in these distracted times, and from the malice of these men, if it should proceed uncontrolled desires, & enjoyns you to return the names aswell of those who have vented these untruths, as likewise of those who have disswaded the Trained Bands in Holdernesse, from entring into Hull upon the Parliaments Order: Perswading themselves that you who have already given such proofe of your
affection to the Kingdome, will still continue it by your endeavours, to prevent the practises of any ill-affected persons upon any of that County, to the disturbance of the peace. Die Mercurii 16. Martii, 1641. It is this day ordered by the House of Com∣mons now assembled in Parliament, that this Letter be forthwith printed. H. Elsyngs Cler. Parl. D. Com.
A LETTER FROM THE LORDS OF THE COVNCELL IN IRELAND to the High Court of Parliament here in England assembled, &c. Right Honorable, THe present distractions and troubles raised in this Kingdome by the Rebellion of the Catholique partie still increasing more dangerous and perillous to this Kingdome, inforced us again to apply our addresses to the High Court of Parliament for speedy prevention of the same, with great joy and thankfulness, acknow∣ledging the vigilant care and painfull endeavours of the same hitherto, to relieve us in our present troubles. That your Lordships have manifestly shewed your Noble and affectionate desires to preserve and defend this Kingdom from utter ruine and desolation, by your willing and cheerfull concurrence, with the Honorable House of Commons, in all their proceedings for our assist∣ance: and removing the obstructions and hinderances that have been procured in expediting the same by evill and malignant instruments, the Prelaticall faction, in taking away their Votes, and sitting in Parliament, which hitherto we conceive have been much prejudiciall, and of great disadvantage to our timely assistance.
The Noble Courage and Magnanimity of the Parlia∣ment, in wading thorow all troubles and distemper of State, hath infused into our drooping spirits life and vi∣gour, which were ready to faint with despaire, but hol∣den up with confident assurance of your tender and indulgent affections towards us in our miseries, we received strength and courage, not doubting but at length through Gods mercy, and your provident wis∣doms we should have reliefe and remedy against our Enemies. We now humbly inform your Lordships of the pre∣sent Condition now standing, viz. the County of Cork is wholly subdued by the Rebels, Lmster, Munster, and Vl∣ster, even at the last gasp of yeelding up themselves. The Earle of Corke hath lost all his Lands and meanes, and this Kingdome in apparent hazard of utter confu∣sion and ruine, unlesse your Wisdomes prevent it in time by a speedy supply of more men, money, and mu∣nition. The Rebells are growne to that height of impudency and boldnesse, that they give forth in their Declarations, they fight in defence of the honour and prerogatives of their King and Queene. And we are credibly given to understand, they have presumed to send a Letter to his Majesty, intimating they take Armes only for the preservation of his Majesty, and his rightfull govern∣ment over them, his Queene and posterity, the defence of their Religion, Lawes, and Liberties, in the exercise of the same. That they take not Armes, as did the Scots, for lucre of gaine, to raise their own fortunes by the ruin of others, but only out of Conscience and duty to God, and his Majesty; which by their inhumane and savage behaviours since their Rebellion, have manifested to the Contrary.
We rejoyce with great thankfulnesse, that the Wis∣dome and care of your Lordships, and the House of Commons, have provided and sent over for our assistance, such worthy and valiant Commanders, whose prowesse and magnanimity, many great over∣throwes and victorious exployts have been atchi against the Rebells in divers places of this Kingdome to the great refreshing and encouragement of the sed Protestants. Our further desires therefore are that the High Court of Parliament would be pleased to proceed in expedi∣ting that effectuall Remedy, to reduce this Kingdome to due obedience to the Crowne of England, and the Lawes and Ordinances of the States of both Kingdoms, their Designe in agitation upon the Propositions pro∣pounded by the House of Commons, for the speedy rai∣sing of money for that purpose, of such persons willing to be purchasers, by their monies and persons, of the Lands won and obtained by the Rebells, and our endea∣vours shall not be wanting to comply with them in the same to the losse of our lives and fortunes. From his Majesties Castle of Dublin, March. 10. 1641. FINIS.
