l2832 12594243 64012
THE LATEST AND TRVEST NEVVES FROM IRELAND; OR, ATRVE RELATION of the happy victory obtained a∣gainst the Rebels before Droheda, and how the Earle of Ormond Sir Charles Coote, and Sir Simon Harecourt sallying out of Dublin to Donshoglen with two thou∣sand Souldiers; Slew two hundred Rebels, and but 5. of them slain: Related in a Letter from a Privy Councellor in Dublin, to Master Fenton Parsons of Lincolns-Inne, Feb. 26. 1641. WHEREUNTO IS ADDED Another Relation of an Overthrow given them by Sir Henry Tichbourne, being related in a Letter to Sir Robert King Knight, Feb. 27. 1641. LONDON, Printed for H.S. and W. Ley. 1642.
A Copy of a Letter sent from a Privy Councellor, to M. Fenton Parsons of Lincolnes Inne, Feb. 26. 1641. BAd newes I know alwayes comes too fast to you, but good newes cannot. I love to bee the writer of none but good, it is our greatest misery that we see not ayd and treasure comming fa∣ster from England, and in such extremities as wee are in, it is our greatest happinesse that God gives such courage to those few men that are here as hee does. Droheda was of late driven to that extremitie for want of victualls, that they were faine to kill ther Hor∣ses and feede on them, which foode being harsh to them, their chiefe Commander, Sir Henry Titchbourne Governour of the towne pittying the Souldiers misery and his owne distresse, resol∣ving rather to die by the Sword, then to starve or let the towne be taken as long as he lived, one night with about 50. Horse sallied out of the towne, fell upon one of the quarters of the Re∣bels that lay before the towne, routed them, and killed of them about fourescore, and tooke
two of their Colours and foure hundred Cowes from them, and brought them into the Citie of Droheda, in that time when that Citie was in that lamentable condition for want of victualls, the State here was not unmindfull of releeving them, and aiding them the best they could, for of late the Kings Pinnace and nine small vessells were sent thither with victualls and Souldiers to releeve them, but the Rebells care to keep reliefe from comming to that City was such, that they had so blockt and chained up the River, whereby the reliefe should have beene brought in, that there was no passage in or out by water, but God that provides for his, and will never suffer the righteous to perish, sent such a storme, that their workes and endea∣vours they had used to stop up the river, were throwne downe, and the passage laid o∣pen the very night before the Kings Pinnace and the nine small vessells got thither with re∣liefe, that when they came the reliefe went in without any great trouble, or great danger: thus God you see provides for the distressed; And not to keepe from you the other service our Dublin Souldiers have of late done, I must informe you, that the Earle of Ormond, Sir Charles Coote, and Sir Simon Hartcourt with some of 2000. Souldiers in Dublin marched lately out of Dublin to a place neare Dunshoglen, 12. miles from Dublin where the Rebells had entrenched themselves neare a Wood very strongly, but our Souldiers manfully beat them out of their
Trenches, routed them, kild about 200. of them, and but five of our men lost, whereof Lieuete∣nant Richford was one, a man of a gallant spirit, and suffered by his too much resolution; for had he not too eagerly followed them into the Wood he had beene alive for all that fight still. I can∣not certainly informe you whether any of Sir Henry Tichbournes men were lost in getting that reliefe they did, nor have we any certaine intelli∣gence from Mounster.
Ioyfull Newes from Ireland, or a true relation of the great overthrow which the English gave the Rebels before Droheda, &c. Noble Sir, IN my last to you, I signified to you, the difficulties which were like to befall us by the relieving of Droheda, but God by his infi∣nte mercy hath freed us (I may say miraculously) from that haz∣zard: for when our men there were driven to that extremity to eat horse-flesh, Sir Henry Tichbourne sallyed out of the Town with on∣ly forty Musketiers, and frty Horse, and beat off foure hundred of the enemies, killed above three∣score of them, recovered fourescore Cowes and Oxen, and two hundred Sheep; burned foure towns, and brought home two of their Colours; Besides, I must relate unto you Gods abundant goodnesse unto us, in that the night before the reliefe and suc∣cours which we sent by Sea from Dublin to them, should have entred into the Harbour of Droheda, (which was strongly fenced over with a Chain and severall boats) there hapned a storme which broke their chaines, and gave our men so free a passage, as with little difficulty they came safely to the towne. The Rebels were gathered at Kilshalgham within seven miles of Dublin, above two thousand men,
where they were setled in a very strong wood. My Lord of Ormond carryed out part of our Army, and beat them out of that great strength (for they would not come into the Champaine) and killed above a hundred of them, without any considerable losse of our side, only Captain Iames Rochfort, a most gal∣lant and couragious Gentleman. This was an act of great bravery, wherein Sir Charles Coote did, (as he doth alwayes) beyond expectation, exposing his person to as much danger as any man living could▪ and in truth he is a gallant man, full of courage and good affections, and deserves great incouragement from that side. Our souldiers are in great want of mony, which causes a generall want of all other ne∣cessaries, yet notwithstanding God hath infused such courage into them (for undoubtedly it is his work) that they think there is no danger so great, but they may attempt it. Colonel Munke is arrived here with my Lord Lieutenants Regiment of fifteen hundred foot, and Sir Richard Greevill with neare foure hundred horse, which puts much heart into us, and makes us look big upon our neighbours, yet we grieve we cannot be able to relieve our friends in other parts; but I hope when our full succours shall come, we shall not only defend this place, but adde comfort to our poore distressed friends abroad. The enemy though their numbers be very great, even beyond beliefe, yet their hearts begin to faint, and I believe they repent their furious madnesse. If my Brother be in London, I pray you impart this Letter to him, I would have written to him,
but that I thought he was at Chester, or in his way thither; By the next he shall heare from me at large, and I shall likewise trouble you. I must now only tell you, that I thank you for your care of those things which concern me, and that I am, Sir, your most affectionate servant, Feb. 27. 1641. Ed. Loftus. Martii 7. It is this day ordered forthwith, That this Letter be published in Print. H. Elsing. Cler. P. D. Com.
