P2999 99830988 35450
MOTTETS Of TWO VOYCES FOR TREBLE OR TENOR and BASS. With the CONTINUED BASS or SCORE: To be performed to an Organ, Harpspycon, Lute or Bass-Viol. PUBLISHED By WALTER PORTER, Who was one of the Gentlemen of the Royal Chappel of the late King, and Master of the Choristers at Westminster. BASSO CONTINUO. LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM GODBID for the Author. 1657.
To the highly Honour'd, and most Hopefull Gentleman, EDWARD LAVRENCE Esq SIR, BEfore I pay my Debt to Nature, I would willingly discharge the Debt I owe to your so many Civili∣ties and Favours. And I should then Depart well pleas'd; could I leave something to shew, That I have Lived; And a Testimony that I Died with the Honour of being knowne Your Servant. How farre These few MOTTETS (which I here humbly present you) will contribute to the Ambition of my Designe; the Modesty of an Old Man, alwayes distrusting his owne Compositions, may make him suspect: Which yet cannot but find a Pardon, if not a Patronage from a Soule so Harmonious as Yours. However the Offer is Pious, and the Adventure Noble, that I should Dare to put a Spirit (for the Note is That by which they Breath) into the Words of Excellent Sandys: Words so Pure and Proper, as that David Himself would have sung them with Joy: I might without Prophanation have spoke higher. And had the Church of England but the Happiness to receive into Her Assemblies Those Psalms Thus Translated; Her Enemies long before this would have turn'd their Scorn into Envy, and Witty Atheists their Scoffs into Admiration. I am sure the Prudent Worshipper of God, in stead of Scandal, had receiv'd Delight. I complain not of all; Some I confess are Tolerable. In the mean time I am among Those, who Mourn to see, These transcendently Holy Raptures even in Publick Worship exposed to so much Scandal and Scorn. I could not say less to Advance the Subject of my Mottets: Nor can I speak too much to Excuse the Meanness of the Composition: yet, having followed the Grounds of an Art by me studied more then 50 years, something in These may prove not unwor∣thy of Your Eye: though the Author has at present little else to bring him forth from Obscurity, then the Honour He hopes to receive of being acknowledged, Sir, Your ever oblieged and ready humble Servant W. P.
To all Lovers of MUSICK. Gentlemen, I Must confess the most of these Mottets were composed for a great Lover of Musick, and my especial friend, Sir Edward Spencer, an Honorable Mecenas to all Virtuoso's known to him; a person indued with exemplary gifts and virtues, who I presum'd would have liv'd to have seen them published, but God hath ta∣ken him, unto whose glorious Name I doubt not but he sings Alle∣luiahs in the Heavenly Quire: whose goodness, though he be missing, lives in his virtuous Lady, continuing favours and noble respect to all he lov'd and esteemed; giving them to understand, their friend is not dead to them, as long as she is living, for which may she find her reward in heaven. This worthy friend of mine be∣ing taken away, weighing my deep ingagements to several friends, but disabled (being plung'd by these tempestuous times in many dangerous stormes of adversi∣ty, and growing calamities) to retaliate their many civilities and courtesies, yet willing, notwithstanding, to return some grateful acknowledgment, resolv'd to ten∣der these Mottets to them, not offering them for their worthiness or merit, but as a testimony and reall demonstration of my sincere and cordiall respect, not having, according to the blessed Apostle St. Peter, either Gold or Silver, but such as I have, &c. My aim in the Composing these Divine Hymnes, was at Good Ayre, Variety, and to marry the Words and Notes wel together, according to the saying of that famous Musician, Mr. Robert Johnson; I desire those to whom any of these things shall come, to have them well voic'd, humor'd, and sung right, and to fol∣low the rule of that excellent Musician, my worthy friend, Mr. Thomas Ford, who familiarly said, and knew it by experience, that no Song could be so well sung and humor'd, as that which was known to the Performers by practise: If you shall vouchsafe to follow his rule, and satisfie my request, I shall adventure to say with the Italian, Spero Che questa cosa non vuol dispiacere: I hope these things will not displease you. The Inducement of my Composing of Parts onely, was in regard of the scarcity of Voyces, it being both difficult and trou∣blesome to get two Voyces, much more three or foure together, to Sing Sure and Masterlike: And the Ignorant judge frequently by the Performance, not by the Composition; which caus'dthat unparalell'd Master of Musick, my good Friend and Maestro, to vindicate a good Composition ill performed, affirming that had he been Rector Chori, he would have made that Song before judg'd had, to have pass'd for good. So advantagious and necessary is the Iudicious ordering and management of Musick. This I am to advertise you, that you are to sing but where there are Words, or this signe of Repetition , having made the Singing Bass a Thorough Bass; and that all the Words of these Mottets are taken out of the learned Poet Mr. George Sandys his Paraphrase on the Holy Psalmes of David, but onely the Third and Fifth. So entreating your Acceptance and charitable censure, as also to amend the defects of the Composition in your well-performance, I rest Yours in all love WALTER PORTER.
Mottets of 2 Voyces. Basso continuo. Walter Porter. To Sir WILLIAM OVVEN. I. WHen Israel George Sandys.
To Sir JOHN THOROVVGOOD. II. Vers.  O Blest estate      Chor. George Sandys.
To Sir EDVVARD SEBRIGHT. III. BEhold    S.  S. Psal. 134.
To Mr. EDVVARD MONTAGUE. IV. HOw long George Sandys.
To JOHN MOSTYN, Esq V. I Will lift up      Chor.  Chor. E S.
To Sir JOHN BROVVN, Esq VI. First part.  WHo knows the terror  Second part. To JUSTINIAN PAGET, Esq VII. Chor. Vers.  THy bounty  Chor. George Sandys.
To Mr. WILLIAM SETTERTHVVAIT. X. First part.  CAst off    Second part. George Sandys.
To Mr. LAMBERT ORBERSTYN. IX. Vers.  WHen I the bold  Chor. Vers.  Vers.  Last Chor.  Chor. George Sandys.
To Mr. RICHARD BUSBY. X. First part.  GReat God of Hosts    Second part. How long shall they, &c.  WHo strangers George Sandys.
To Captain WILLIAM CRESSET. XI. Vers.  BUt O thrice blessed he  Chor. Vers.  Chor. Ver.    Chor. Vers.  Chor.  Chor.  Chor. George Sandys.
To Mr. JAMES HOVVEL Esq XII. MY ravisht Soul George Sandys.
To Mr. GEORGE PALMER. XIII. Vers. Chorus 3 times over.  LOrd showre on us  Vers.  Vers.  Chor.  Chor.  Vers.   Chor.  Chor. George Sandys.
Mottets of 2 Voyces. BASSUS. Walter Porter. To JOHN MOSTYN, Esq V. Vers.  I VVill lift up Ev'n from the  Lord my help doth come, who made of Heav'n and Earth the total sum  See see and behold, for he that Israel keeps  shall not be seiz'd with slumber nor with sleep:  Neither the Sun by Day, nor the Moon nor the Moon by Night; Chor.  nay, th' Lord himself preserve preserve thy Soul with light: The  Lord preserve thy going out, and coming in, for evermore, for evermore,  from hurt or sin, from hurt or wrong, from shame or sin. E. S.
To JOHN BROVVN Esq VI. First part.  WHo knows the terror of thy wrath, or to thy dreadful anger hath pro∣ -portion'd his due fear? Teach us to number our frail daies, that we our  Hearts to thee to thee may raise, and wisely sin forbear. Second part.  Lord, O how long! at length relent! and of our miseries repent; thy early  mercy shew: That we may unknown comfort unknown comfort taste: For  those long dayes of sorrow past, as long of joy bestow. George Sandys. To JUSTINIAN PAGET Esq VII. Chorus  THe Bounty of Iehovah praise: This God of gods all Scepters swaies. Vers. Chor.  For from the King of Kings eternal mercy springs. Him praise who fram'd the arched Skie; Those Orbs that move so orderlie. Firm Earth above, The Flouds that move Display'd and rais'd the Hils on high. For from the King of Kings Eternal mercy springs. George Sandys.
To Mr. WILLIAM SETTERTHVVAIT. VIII. First part.  CAst off, and scattered scattered in thine Ire in thine Ire: Lord on our  woes with pity pity look. The Lands inforc'd inforc'd foundations shook in∣ -forc'd foundations shook; whose yawning ruptures sighs sighs sighs expire.  O O cure the breaches the breaches thou hast rent, and make her make her  firmly firmly permanent. Second part.  Our Souls thou hast with sorrow fed with sorrow fed; and mad'st us drink of  deadly deadly Wine: Yet now yet now thy Ensigns giv'st to thine thy Ensigns  giv'st to thine to thine Ev'n when beset with trem-bling dread that we thy  Banner may display, that we thy Banner may display, whilest truth to  conquest conquest makes our way. George Sandys.
To Mr. LAMBERT ORBERSTYN. IX. Vers.  WHen I the bold Chor. Vers.  become of all abhorr'd. Their words are vain and full and full of guile; they  wisdome from their hearts their hearts exile; forsaken Virtue hate: Who Chor. Last Chor.  mischief on their beds contrive, and vices propagate. Let not the feet of  pride of pride de-feat, nor such as are in mischief in mischief great my guiltless  Soul surprise. The workers of Iniquitie are falne are falne like Meteors  from the skie: cast down, cast down, no more to rise. George Sandys.
To Mr. WILLIAM FULLER. XIV. WHo knows who knows what his offences be? From secret sins O  clense O clense thou me! And from presumptuous crimes restrain; nor let them  in thy Servant reign: so shall I live in Innocence, so shal I live in Innocence, not  spotted with that great offence that great offence. My Fortress, my Deliverer;  O let the prayers my lips prefer prefer, & thoughts which from my heart arise,  be acceptable be acceptable in thine eyes. George Sandys.
To Mr. ROBERT COLEMAN. XV. Vers.  THou Mover Chor.  As Servants mark their Masters hands, as Maids their Mistresses com∣Vers.  -mands, and liberty expect. So we deprest by enemies, and growing troubles,  fix our Eyes on God, who sits on high; Till he in mercy shall descend to Chor.  give our miseries an end, and turn our tears our tears to joy. Till he in mercy  shall descend to give our miseries an end, and turn our tears our tears to joy. Last Chor.  O save us, Lord, us, Lord, O save us, Lord, us, Lord, by all forlorn, the  subject of contempt and scorn, the subject of contempt of contempt and scorn  and scorn. Defend us from their pride, who live in fluency and ease; who Slow time.   who with our woes their malice please, and miseries deride. George Sandys.
To Mr. EDVVARD WORMAL. XVI. O Happy he, who God obeys, nor from his directions strays: thou shalt  of thy labours feed; all shall to thy wish thy wish succeed: Like a fair and  fruitful Vine, by thy House thy Wife shal join: Sons, obedient to command,  Shall about thy Table stand; shall  like green plants of Olives, set  by the moistning rivulet. He who fears the power above, thus shall prosper  in his love. God shall thee from Sion bless; thou shalt joy  in the suc∣ cess which the Lord will Salem give, while thou hast a day to live; thou shalt  see thou shalt see our Israels peace, and thy childrens large increase. George Sandys.
To Mr. JOHN HILTON, B. M. XVII. Vers. Chor.  MY Soul In misery he heard he heard thy cry, to him thy Vers.  Prayers thy Prayers direct. Sorrows of Death my Soul assail'd, the greedy Chor.  jaws of Hell of Hell prevail'd: Deprest deprest with grief, when all relief and Vers. Chor.  humane pity fail'd; O from the Grave thy Servant thy Last Chor.  Servant save; for mercy lives in thee. The Innocent and long distrest; the  humble mind by wrongs opprest; thy favour still preserves from ill: My  Soul then take then take thy rest. George Sandys.
