Q131 13012126 96496
The Minde of the Frontispeece. REader, observe, and see Jehovah stand Showring down blessings to the grasping hand Of new-made, naked Man, that takes delight To take the Crowns, but cares not to requite The gratious giver of such gifts as those, With any thing, except it be with blows; A fair reward: but sure it much redowns To Mans disgrace, to give God blows, for Crowns
GODS Loue MANS Vn∣worthiness By Jo: Qu: Lord what is man that thou art mindfull of him and the son of man that thou so regardest him Ps: 8. v. 4 London Printed for Jo: Stafford dwelling in St. Brides Church:yard
GODS LOVE AND Mans Vnworthiness: Whereunto is annexed a Dis∣course between the SOUL & SATAN. With several Divine Ejaculations. Written by JOHN QUARLES. LONDON, Printed for John Stafford, and are to be sold at his house in S. Brides Church yard, and by Hum∣phrey Moseley at the Princes Armes in St. Pauls Church yard, and John Holden at the blue Anchor in the new Exchange. 1651.
TO My much-honoured and Esteemed Friend, Edward Benlowes, Esq. SIR, I Am confident you cannot have greater cause to wonder at my boldness, then I have rea∣son to admire at your Learning, and Piety; for indeed the rare example of your virtues addd much alacrity to my endeavours, which are but shallow if compar'd to the depth of your un∣derstanding. Sir, the limits of my request (though they are large) extend themselves no further then this, That You would be pleas'd to permit this my unfleg'd bird to rest under the wings of Your pro∣tection, that I may ever be engag'd to boast of so worthy a Patron: Sir, as I know I have errors, so I know you have goodness to excuse them, and I a heart to be thankfull, and alwayes be a faithfull honourer of Your Virtues, whilest I am Sir,  Your Servant to Command, JOHN QUARLES.
To the Reader. Kinde Reader, LET me lay this Injunction upon thee, before thou permittest thy eye to sur∣vey this little Volume, which is. That thou wilt resolve to pardon; I will not say for what, for fear thou shouldst be srupulous and not Read: The Subject is Divine, and I con∣fess too good to be so badly handled; however I have done my best endeavour, and Alexander did no more when he conquered Kingdomes; But Reader, because I will not detain thine eye too long in one place, I bid thee Farewell.
To my Muse. TEL me presumptuous Muse how dar'st thou treat Upon a Subject so sublime, so great! Alas how dare thy infancy aspire So high as Heaven, where the caelestial quire Of soul-enchanting Angels, hourely sing, Anthems of Joy to their mellifluous King! This is a taske that invocates the best And loftiest quils; Heav'ns love must not b'exprest With wanton language; he that shall presume To labour in this work, must first persume His Soul with true divinity, and breathe Celestiall ayres, that Readers may perceive Their Author labours with a serious heart T' embalm his actions with divinest art; This is a field whose spacious bounds extend Themselves to infinite; who strives to end Shall still begin, and having once begun This pleasing progress, must not cease to run Untill he stops in Heaven, there lyes the gain, Who runs with Faith is certain to obtain. If then my Muse, thou canst divinely mount This Sacred Stage, thou needst not fear t'account
Thy actions prosperous, strive thou to stand Guarded with Faith, and Heav'n will lend a hand To prop thee up, his power will infuse Sufficient matter for an active Muse To work upon, his wisdome will direct Thy painfull hand, his mercies will correct Thy rambling thoughts, and teach thee to proclaim Th' unsum'd up glories of his Royall Name; Abandon earth, and bid vain thoughts adeu Thou canst not serve thy God and Mammon too; Rouse then, and let thy well-prun'd Eagles wings Mount thee aloft, let not terrestiall things Disturbe thy resolutions, let them all Evade thy minde; thy thoughts must grow too tall For such low toyes: stir up thy zealous fire, And what thou canst not well expresse, admire.
See, heer, a Phoenix rare, rais'd from ye dust of precious Parents; Fathers Effigies just Who for his Genius & ingenious Parts, Of Learning, Worth, & Witt, to Conquer hearts By pleasant Poetry; Seemes to inherit (By Transmigration) his rare Fathers Spirit, As, old Pythag'ras held: So sweetly, Hee Doth Patrizare, in full Ex'ssencie
Gods Love, AND Mans Unworthiness. GOD! how that word hath thunder-clapt my Soul Into a ravishment; I must condole My forward weakness; Ah, where shall I find Sufficient Metaphors t'express my mind? Thou heart-amusing word, how hast thou fil'd My Soul with Halelujahs, and distil'd Wonders into me! Oh, that I could break My heart in pieces, and divinely speak My mind in Raptures, that the frantique Earth May bathe it felf in these sweet streams of mirth.
Then rouze my Soul, and practise how to turn Thy wonders into language; do not burn Thy sacred fuel in a place where none Can have the benefit but thee alone. Hoist up thy Sails, and let thy speedy motion Hurry thee hence into the boundless Ocean: Observe thy compass, keep a constant pace, And Heav'n will steer thee to the Port of Grace. is strange to think, how the Almighty can (That is so pure) love such a thing as Man, Whose primitive corruption makes him worse Then nothing, whose Rebellion claims a curse, More then affection: How can Heav'n endure A thing that can be nothing but impure? Man (like a word that's voyd of reason) sounds In every ear, his very name expounds A misery; at best, he needs must be But vain; And how can Heav'n love vanitie? Man (like a shadow) flies before the Sun Of his afflictions, and is still undone By his own doing, he's his own pursuer; And how can Heav'n love such a self-undoer? Man (like a naked worm) is often found Digging himself into the loathsom ground Of ruine, he's a Traytor to his Bliss; And how can Heav'n love such a worm as this?
Man (like a flash of lightning) courts the world With lavish flames, and by and by is hurl'd Into that Nothing, whence at first it came; Then how can God love such a short-liv'd flame? Man (like a Reed) is evermore inclin'd To shake, and totter with each blast of wind; He's always running to the ground with speed: And how can Heav'n love such an earthly Reed? Man (like the dust) is always blown, and ost From place to place, and flies, till it has lost Its Center; never resting in one place: Then how can Heav'n love that which flies in's face? Man (like a Fly) still buzzes up and down From cup to cup, and sips on, till he drown Himself in pleasure; fears no stander by: And how can Heav'n love such a drunken Fly? Man (like a Rain-bow) oftentimes appears Clothed in colours, but can claim no years, No days, nay hardly hours, but must decay; And how can heav'n love that which loves no stay? Man (like a bubble) floats upon the waves Of his desires, whilst every blast enslaves His brittle substance, fill'd with windy troubles▪ And how can heav'n love such uncōstant bubbles? Man (like the froth) spew'd from the Oceans brest, s tyded up and down, but knows no rest,
Nor perpetuity; and can betroth It self to nothing: Heav'n loves no such froth. Man (like the wind) is every moment flying To every place, and hates to be complying Or resting any where: How can it be, That Heav'n can love so much inconstancie? Man (like a Swallow) loves the fragrant Spring Of Earths delights, but with a spreading wing Flies from the Winters more congealed brest; And how can Heav'n love such a Summer guest? Man (like a smoak) presumptuously aspires Into the air, and by and by retires Himself to nothing, nothing's his conclusion; And how can Heav'n love such a base confusion? Man (like a fire) whose green and scragged fuel Denies to burn, until it fight a duel With the inountring Bellows, which atlast Obtains the conquest, then it burns as fast, And seems, as 'twere, ambitious to expire; Then how can Heav'n love such a raging fire? Man (like an arrow) being once let go Out from the Archers well-commanded bow, Affronts the Clouds; at last, having spent the store Of his small strength, fals down, and seems tador Th'inferior Earth, which, with a welcom, hides His down▪ cast head within her wounded sides,
Where he remains, and scorns to be withstood: Man can be any thing, but what is good. And cannot Man be good? strange kind of tone! What? has he wept himself into a stone, Like Niobie? no sure; I fear his eyes Were never loaded with such large supplies: Ah, could he weep a flood, Heav'n that prepares His ears to hear, would bottle up his tears In his remembrance; every drop should shine Like Pearls, absconded in a golden Myne▪ His sins command a deluge; could his head Be turn'd into a fountain, could he shed An Ocean at a drop, it could not cover His sins (which are mountanious) from the Lover Of real drops; for he would soon discry Those sand-excelling crimes, where e're they lie: Yet would his Soul so much compassionate The flowing sorrows of his way state, That with a calming hand he would remove His rocky sins, and hide them with his Love; He would have pity, and with speed consent T'express his love, when all our tears are spent. Should Heav'n, who justly may, for every sin Drop down a plagne, and make it live within Mans guilty Soul, the world would quickly be Transform'd, and chang'd into a leprosie.
Let none dispair, for Heav'ns known mercies can Out-infinite the greatest sins of man. Oh love beyond degree! Shall Heav'n indulge Himself to Man? and shall not Man divulge A gratefulness to him, whose hand prepares To wipe away his sin-polluted cares? Ungrateful Miscreant, how canst thou view Thy former miseries, and not renew Thy thanks to him, whose power set thee free, And brought thee back from thy captivity? Hast thou abandon'd Love? Wilt thou imprint Thy Soul with baseness? Ah, what obvious flint Hath turn'd Affections edg? What, art thou bent To shoot at him, that labours to prevent The arrows of thy ruine, which will fly Into thy brest, except he puts them by? Hast thou transform'd thy heart into a rock That will not move? Shall mercy call, and knock, And thou not hear? What? hast thou arm'd thy With sensless marble, that no flaming dart Of Love can enter? Hast thou vow'd to stand heart In opposition? Cannot Gods Command Force thee to bow? Art thou resolv'd to sport With thy destruction, and not yield the Fort? Oh yield be times; do not resolve to be Too much a slave to Infidelitie:
For know (frail wretch) thy strēgth consists in clay; When Mercy's lost, then Judgment finds the way▪ Rally thy thoughts together, and throw down Thy brazen walls, thy yielding yields a Crown: For 'tis in vain to oppose an arm that can Out-grasp the measure of so small a span. Alas, Alas! it may be quickly seen What a large disproportion is between Thy God, and thee: Consider, he is all, And thou art nothing; what can be more small? Or what more great? for he is infinite, And thou art finite; He is full of light, And thou of darkness; He is fill'd with Love, And thou art stuff'd with baseness; He's a Dove, And thou a worm: Thus, thus thou mayst discry His firmness, and thine own infirmity. Then be not obstinate, but strike the sails Of thy desires to him that never fails; And know, 'tis easie in an inch of time To take a worm ingarrison'd with slime; For such a thing thou art, and all thy power Must yield to Heav'ns assaults; thy April showre Has no continuance: therefore do not strive Against a God, whose Wisdom can contrive What pleases him: Alas! thy state is grounded Upon contingencies, thou art compounded
Of nothing but uncertainties; thy arm Assumes no power, except it be to harm Thy wilful self: Then why wilt thou contend With him that importunes to be thy Friend? Thy Friend, (Soul-saving word) what higher Bliss Can crown a heart, then such a Friend as this? Oh life of Ravishment! how can it be A God, a worm, and yet a sympathie? Strange condescention▪ was the like e're known, Or spoke by any mouth, except his own? His balmy breath declares, that he will save And succor those that faithfully do crave His blest assistance: Hark, and hear him say, Ye that are heavy loaded, come away, Oh come to me, I am content to bear Your burthens, and extenuate your care. What higher note of love was ever strain'd To any ear? Oh how hath man obtain'd So great a friendship! 'Tis a happy lot, Nay, and a wonder not to be forgot. And yet it is not strange, that he should prove So true a Lover, that's compos'd of Love, And can do nothing else: If he correct, 'Tis for thy crimes; he only has th'effect Of anger: for his grieved Spirit moans To punish sinners, and to hear their groans.
His Soul takes no delight to crush to death Th'offending pris'oners of th'inferior Earth▪ He is the rich Exchequor of all good, And is by nothing (except man) withstood. All things perform what they were made to do, But only man, that strives to prove untrue To his Creator: nothing can be found Within thy brest, but that which is unsound. How sad it is to hear th'Almighty say. I've nourish'd children, that are gone astray, And scorn to own me! Oh rebellious dust! That hate my paths, because my ways are just. The Ox will know his Owner, and the Ass His Masters crib; but Israel, alas, Will not acknowledg me, but have destroy'd Themselves, and made their understandings voyd: Has not my fury then just cause to swell, Because they can do nothing but rebel? Nefandeous Creature, how canst thou endure Thy wretched self? Ah, why wilt thou procure Thine own destructions? Shall all creatures be Obedient to their owners, only thee? And wilt thou not acknowledg him that gave Large blessings to thee, and desires to save Thy Soul from torments, if thou wouldst incline Thy will to his, whose thoughts are all divine?
Forget obduracy, and learn the art Of loving him, that loves an upright heart: Go ruminate upon thy base estate, And be, unto thy self, compassionate. Yield to thy Maker with a cheerful brow; First know what 'tis to love, and after, how. Love is the Laws Fulfiller; he that will Love God aright, must practise how to fill His Soul with true affection; for the ways Of Heav'n are pav'd with Love: Immortal praise Attend his Courts; He that forgets to love Forgets his God: They that desire to prove Heav'ns amatorious Guests, must first admire How such a spark as Man came to aspire To such a flame, and how he came to be, Not only Earths, but Heav'ns, Epitomie: Be serious then, and let thy thoughts reflect Upon Heav'ns goodness, and thy disrespect. God out of Nothing (except Love) compil'd This spacious World, as if some princely child Were to be born: His providential care Was (as it were) ambitious to prepare The quintessence of pleasures to invite Some stately Guest to banquet with delight. First he extracted from a darksom Cell A glorious Light, whose beauty pleas'd him well:
Then he prepar'd a Canopie, inlayd With glittring Pearl, whose twinkling luster made A heav'nly shew; and afterwards his hand Dasht back the waters from the naked Land: Then he commanded, that the Earth, being come Out from the Oceans new delivered womb, Should be adorn'd with an imbroidered Gown▪ That so her new-warm'd bowels might abound With several fruits.— —Thus having playd his part Upon this Theatre, this life of art, He usher'd in a thing, which pleas'd him best, (He made the Feast, and after made the Guest;) Call'd by the name of Man, a naked, small, And dusty, shiftless Creature; this was all, And all this nothing, but a lump of death, Until inspir'd by Heav'ns all▪ quick'ning breath. Vain, simple wretch; ah, how couldst thou behave Thy self before a Judg, so great, so grave? Hadst thou but seen thy self, thou wouldst have Thy self to death, and with a blush, defy'd (cry'd Thy base estate, to think that thou shouldst be Natures most rude and base Anatomie. Couldst thou expect that Heav'n would entertain A thing so poor? so weak? so vile? so vain?
Which, like a spark blown from a new-made fire, Can only shew it self, and then expire▪ Was it for this the All-Creator made Such large Provisions? Was't for this he layd Such rich Foundations? Was't for this his Power Deckt this well-pleasing odoriferous Bower? Was it for this (this little world) he form'd A world so great? Was it for this he warm'd The Earths chill bosom? Was't for this he spent His six days labour? Was't for this intent He made a Paradise? where Flora spread Her fragrant Off-spring, and made Earth a bed Of rare compounded Pleasures, where he plac'd This new-come Guest, whose very looks disgrac'd The face of beauty, to whose thriftless hand He gave that Government, with this Command: Of all the trees that here thou dost behold, Thy lips being authoriz'd, thou mayst be bold To taste with freedom, only one, which I Conjure thee from, therefore restrain thine eye From lusting after it; if not, thy breath Shall glut it self in everlasting death: Forget not my Commands, but let thy brest Be always faithful, and thou shalt be blest. Thus the Recorder having spoke at large This well-deliv'red (although ill-kept) Charge, He after said;
It is not good that Man should be alone Without a help, Ile therefore make him one. Oh sacred Prudence! Here we may discern A sweet Conjunction; here our Souls may learn Wisdom and Love, both which, if not enjoy'd, Pleasures prove vanities, and Blessings voyd. Heav'n, whose unidle artful hand had set Man, as a Jewel, in his Cabinet, Thought it unfit, that those delights which he Had made by his most powerful Love, should be Monopoliz'd by one, he therefore laid Adam asleep, and having done, he made Out of a crooked rib (strange kind of art) A woman, fair, compleat, in every part; Nay, and a helper too; for in conclusion She helpt poor Adam to his own confusion. Oh most detested deed! Unconstant wife, To prove a Traytor to thy husbands life As soon as made: Fond wretch, could nothing suit With thy nice pallate, but forbidden fruit? Ah, could thy longing lie no longer hid? What? didst thou long, because thou wert forbid? Was there no tree that could content thine eye, But only that which was forbidden? Fie, Oh shame to think thou shouldst so quickly waste Thine hours of pleasure for a minutes taste:
Couldst thou not like, or fall in love with any But that? Heav'n had but one, & thou hadst many Wherewith to please thine appetite; and yet Wouldst thou prove so ambitious, as to sit Upon the highest twigg? Ah, could th'advice Of Satan tempt thee to this avarice With so much ease, and make thee rashly do So foul a deed, and tempt thy Adam too? Preposterous wretch, how hast thou spread a cloud Over thy head? What? didst thou think to shrowd Thy self from vengeance? Having eat thy death. Couldst thou expect to live? Oh no, thy breath Offended Heav'n: but ah, hadst thou but thought (Before thy heart had entertain'd a fault So great as this) what 'twas to dye, thy mind Had made thee more abstemious, and confin'd Thy base inordinate desires; thy meat Had prov'd delightful, and thy comforts great; But now, unhappy now, thy crimes have made Thy Soul Deaths debtor, and thou art betray'd By thine own self; therefore prepare to meet Thy wrathful Judg: 'tis said, stoln goods are sweet; But thine provd sour▪ the fruits wch thou hast stole Sugar'd thy mouth, but wormwoodiz'd thy Soul; VVhen thou hadst eaten, Ah! why didst thou o Tremble to dath, to think thou hadst forgot
Thy Gods Commands, & that his Judgments must Follow thy Soul, and blow thee into dust? Thus iv▪ thus Adam, having vilipended Their Gods Commands, their happines soon ended; Their joys were turn'd to mourning, & their light VVas turn'd to darkness, and their day to night: Both being too much conscious, fled with speed To hide themselves from God, but not the deed. Even as some poor distressed wretch desires To hide himself from the enraged fires Of his incensed Foe, runs up and down To shun the rage of a condemning frown▪ At last observing his enquiring Foe Approach the place, lies still, and dares not blow, For fear the wordless Eccho of his breath Should soon betray him to a sudden death: Being at last discry'd, his throbbing heart Gives an Alarum to each trembling part; Fear, like an Earthquake, then begins to shake His loos'ned joynts, he knows not how to make A ready answer to his foes demands; But, as a sad convicted man, he stands Subjected to his will, that can dispence With nothing, but with death, to calm th'offence. Even so guilt-loaded Adam having done A deed so foul, prepares himself to run
To some close shelter, where he might immure His naked body, and repose secure: But ah, in vain, in vain he strove to hide Himself from God, that need implore no guide To teach him where his sad offender lay; He needs must find, when sin hath chalk'd the way: But when Heav'ns shril-enquiring voyce surroun∣ded The ears of Adam, Adam was confounded VVith deep distress, his heart began to call His quivering Senses to a Funeral: Fear, like a powerful fire, began to thaw His frozen thoughts, and keep his soul in awe; He breath'd in a Dilemma, and could find No Sanctuary for a perjur'd mind: At last the language of th'eternal God Storm'd his sin-armed soul, and like a Rod VVhip him from his security; and cry'd, Adam, where art thou? Adam thus reply'd, I heard thee walking in the pleasing shade Of the cool ev'ning, and I was afraid, And hid my self, because I must confess, I blusht to see my shameful nakedness. GOD. Tell me, thou trembling wretch, how dost thou know That thou art naked? say, who told thee so?
hat? has thy lips usurp'd the fruit which I njur'd thee not to touch? if so, reply. Adam. The woman which thou gav'st me, gave to me, d I did eat of the forbidden tree. GOD. Unconstant woman! Ah, why hast thou ru ond thy bounds? what's this that thou hast done? Woman. he Serpents flowing language swel'd too great my low banks: he tempted, and I eat. Gods Curse against the Serpent. Because thou hast thus subtilly deluded lustful woman, thou shalt be excluded m future good; more shall thy curses yield n all the beasts and cattle in the field▪ belly shall (because thou hast done this) e to the earth a life-remaiming kiss; u shalt not taste of any thing that's good, t shall supply the place of wholesom food. be thy ways, thou shalt no more be seen me: I will put enmity between
Thy seed and her; hereafter thou shalt feel A bruised head▪ and she a bruised heel. Gods Curse against the woman. And as for thee, oh woman, I'le enlarge Thy grief, and thy conception; I'le discharge Thy joys, and load thee with a weighty grief; Thy pains in child-bed shall find no relief: Thou shalt desire thy husband, and his hand Shall over-rule thee with a strict command. Adams Curse. Rebellious Adam, unto thee I'le give A life as bad as death, for thou shalt live To see thy sorrows more and more abound, And for thy sake I'le curse the loathed ground; For thou hast hark'ned to the conquering voyce Of thy frail wife, and made my fruit thy choyce, And sepulchred my words within the grave Of thy false heart; be gone, thou self-made slave: The thorny ground shall give a large increase To thy laborious hand; the name of Peace Shall prove a stranger to thy ears, and thou Shalt eat thy bread with a sweat-dropping brow. I'le murther all thy joys; thy brest shall burn VVith flaming care, until thy corps return
Into the bowels of th'inclusive earth, From whence thou hadst thy substance, and thy birth▪ For base thou art, and therefore thou shalt be A food for gnawing worms, and not for me: As thou art dust, to dust thou shalt etire; Hereafter let not dust presume t'spire. Strange alteration! Oh pernicious Fate! Too quickly bred in such an infant▪ state! He that but even now enjoy'd a life Ballanc'd with pleasures, now is ll'd with strife▪ He, whose majestick Soul was latly crown'd VVith blest content, is now ingulf'd, and drown'd In sorrows Ocean; He which was before Inrich'd with happiness, is nw as poor As poverty can make him▪ He▪ which ad The countenance of Hav'n to mk him glad, Is now eclipst; he knows not where to run, Sin having interpos'd between the Sun And his dark Soul, the Center of whose rest Is now remov'd, and he survives unblest: He, which but even now had leave to dwell And revel in Heav'ns eye, desires a Cell To entertain him; he, which liv'd in Peace, Is now thrown down, and forfeited his lease: Great was his Crime, great was his sudden Fall, Great was his Tenement, his rent but small:
Poor Adam's taken by his own decoys; Sin is the Sequestrator of all joys. Sad Pilgrim of the world, where wilt thou find (In the unpathed earth) a place so kind To entertain thee? Ah, where wilt thou keep (Thus tumbled from a Precepes so steep) Thy sad unpeopl'd randezvouz? Oh where VVilt thou procure a hand that will unsnare Th'intangled Soul? Alas, thy wearied life Hath two most sad companions; first a Wife, Then a bad Conscience; what two greater crosses Can hang upon a brest, whose cares, whose losses, Are grown so infinite, that no relief, But what distills from Heav'n, can ease their grief? Thou wert the first of men that entertain'd So grand a sorrow, thou the first that stain'd So pure a colour, thou the first that dwelt In Edens garden, thou the first that felt The scourge of fury; hadst not thou transgrest, Vengeance had found no hand, nor grief a brest. Ah, hadst not thou offended, sin had found No habitation, nor thy Soul a wound: Had not thy hand so wilfully unlock'd The door of Death, Destruction had not knock'd At thine impenitrable gates, or ventur'd T'approach so near, but being open'd, enter'd.
Bold Customer of fate, that sought about To come within, and turn poor Adam out; Thy strength outstrengthd his strēgth, & made him weak; A vessel crack'd, how can it chuse but leak? Sin prov'd Deaths father, & mans heart the womb That brought it forth; this death shall find a tomb VVhen the Determiner of time hath hurl'd A finis to the volume of the world; Till then, man (mortaliz'd by sin) must be A subject unto Deaths Soveraigntie. Poor man, in what a wilderness of sorrow Dost thou now ramble in▪ where wilt thou bor∣row A minutes rest? On what inclining ear VVilt thou expend thy groans? what canst thou hear But dialects of misery to vex Thy bankrupt thoughts? The fatal disrespects Of Heav'n will blow and toss thee up and down From place to place, his still-renewed frown VVill follow thee; therefore provide t'endure The hot pursutes of such a fierce pursuer. Canst thou expect that this thy grand abuse (VVhich runs beyond the limits of excuse) Can be forgotten? Dost thou think t'out-live Thy long-liv'd crimes, or hope for power to give Due satisfaction to thy God, whose rage Thy heart cannot endure, much less asswage?
Most lachrymable state! What canst thou do, Oa man, that may ingratiate or renew Thy formor love? Alas, thy base condition Ms the capable of a Petition: Prepare thy self, see if thou canst invade His Soul with pray'rs▪ see if thou canst perswade His eart to yield unto thy sad request, And inth one thee with thy former rest; Dct thy Soul with groans, anatomize Thy heart with sighs, and let thy winged cries Fly through the angles of his sacred ear, And breed a harmony within the sphere Of his blest Soul; be circumspect, and lay The best foundation; hear what Heav'n will say. Adams Petition to God. Incensed Father of eternal light Permit a darkened Soul t'approach the sight Of thine incomparable eye; unmask Thy anger▪ clouded Soul, and let me ask Forgiveness for those loading Crimes which press My stagging Soul; I know not whom t'address My apostare self unto, but only thee, Whom I offended; Please to pity me: I have no pleasing Sacrifice t'attone Thy wrathful Brest, except a hearty groan
That's quadrupl'd with grief; Oh deign to look Upon the lines of my all-blotted book: Although I'm full of most detested spots, Yet Lord, I know that thou canst read my blots; Oh read them then, and let thy mercies run With thy progressive eye; I am undone, If not forgiven; Lord, I thee implore To shew some mercy to me, thou hast store. Discipher all my sins, and let them not Bar record in thy rouls, but rest forgot: Revoke this act of Death, that I may sing Th'admired mercies of so blest a King. Oh lift me up, that now am thrown below; Make not my Soul the Custom-house of woe. Oh hear these bitter groans that I have spent, And send some comfort from thy Parliament. Gods Reply. Thou skelleton of baseness, hie thee hence, Disturb me not; return, I say, from whence Thou cam'st at first; thou shalt as soon remove A mountain, as my mind: I cannot love, No nor I will not, nothing shall intreat My resolutions, for my fury's great. Begone, proud Rebel, do not think thy prayers, Thy vows, thy groans, thy sighs, thy sobs, thy tears,
Shall make my brest their receptacle; No; How can I be a friend to such a foe? Surcease thy importunities, let fall Thy high desires, I will not hear thee call, Thy sins have barr'd my ears; I'le not be won With thy base airy words, for thou hast spun The thred of thy destruction, therefore wear What thou hast labour'd for, and so forbear T'intrench upon my patience; 'tis in vain To seek for that which thou shalt not obtain. And is it thus, that Heav'n will not regard My cries? Ah me! and must my groans be heard With disrespect by him, whose tongue affords Nothing but grief, involv'd with bitter words? Alas, alas! what greater wo can crowd Into a brest, then to be disavow'd By Gods high Voyce, whose most enraged breath Darts forth the arrows of eternal death? What shall I do? Oh, whither shall I run To hide my self, until the glorious Sun Of his affections usher in the day Of welcom Joy? Oh, whither shall I stray? If I am silent, then my silence turns My thoughts to fire; If speak, my speech returns Trebbl'd with wo, into the brazen Tower Of my sad heart, my language has no power
To work upon his ears, my words Banded, and thrown against th'obdurate walls (like balls Unyielding brest) bounds back again, and breaks Into my heart, and every sorrow speaks A volume at a word; yet, yet must I Return unheard; 'tis misery to dye, And pain to live; thus in despair I draw The loathsom air: Destruction knows no Law. Grief rains a flood of doubt into my Soul; Ah me! I can do nothing but condole▪ I am despis'd; and if I bend the force Of my desires to him, he will divorce All thoughts of pity, and with rage re-double Th'unsum'd up sums of my infringing trouble. I sail into the Straits, both wind and tyde Prevail against me, and I have no guide To pilate me unto the long'd-for Port Of pleasing happiness; I am a sport To threatning Ruine, whose presumptuous waves Out-dares my Soul, whilst every blast enslaves My reeling Pinnace: If I strive to go Towards Scylla, Scylla will contemn my wo. Alas, in vain I can expect relief, Scylla will bark at my unbridled grief; Or if my head-long vessel chance to hit Against Charybdis; I am torn and split
Into ten thousand pieces: Oh hard hap! Thus am I tossed in Destructions lap. Where shall I find a heart that will advise My friendless Soul, and audiate my cries? I will not thus desist, I must implore, He that's lost once, sure can be lost no more. Adams Petition to God. Once more, thou Metropolitan of all The spacious world, I here presume to call Upon thy mercy; Oh let me inherit The pleasing fruits of thy re-pleased Spirit! I am thy fabrick, oh some pity take, Preserve the building for the Builders sake. Clothe not thy brow with frowns, but let thine eye (That rests inshrin'd with glorious Majesty) Reflect upon my sorrows; Oh incline Thy willing ears to hear this grief of mine: Oh do not say I shall as soon remove A mountain as thy heart, thou canst not love; Let not such harsh, imbitter'd language flow Out of a mouth so sweet; I know, I know, Thou art as good as great; oh therefore bow Thy sacred ears to hear, oh hear me now: Bestow some scraps on me, that have deserv'd Nothing but stripes; for I have fondly swerv'd
From thy Commands, & have committed treason Against thy Majesty: Great God of Reason, View my in-humbled Soul, see how it lies Before thy sight, a weeping Sacrifice. I know thou knowst I am a hainous sinner, Yet pity me, that am a young beginner In this rich art of begging: Do not slight My real prayers; I know thou tak'st delight In being merciful; oh let me not Return unanswer'd, or my prayers forgot: Oh hear the sorrows of my bleeding state, Let my complaints make thee compassionate, And let the fervor of my language turn Thy thoughts to pity; quench these flames that burn My wasting Soul; speak peace to me, that find A civil war in my uncivil mind: Oh I have tasted of thy hot displeasure Too much; Ah, shall thy vengeance know no mea∣sure Say 'tis enough; though (Lord) I must confess I have deserved more, yet give me less. Thus with a melting heart I end my Suit Ah me! how bitter is forbidden fruit! Gods Reply Thou bold fac'd Orator, how darst thou come Before me, or be otherwise then dumb?
Tell me, how dat'st thou interrupt my brest? I hate to see thee, or hear thy Request. Audacious wretch, what, has my Judgments made Thy heart grow peremptory? Have I layd Too small a burthen on thee? If I have, I'le lay a greater, thou apostate slave: I will not note thee, nor I will not hear Thy words, which have usurp'd my deafned ear. Love thee, for what? be't known, sad wretch, I scorn To love a thing so base, so vile, forlorn; And if I cannot love, how can it be, That I can pity such a worm as thee? I'le neither love, nor pity, for my heart Is adamantine; thou shalt feel the smart Of my displeasure: Go, my Soul disdains To look upon thee; thou art fill'd with stains▪ And smel'st too much of fruit to find respect▪ Thou art the subject of my great neglect: Thou art a barren soil, nothing will grow Upon thy heart, except the seeds of woe. Tell me, from what conceit dost thou derive Thy working confidence, that thou dar'st drive Thy language to my ears, and be so bold T'approach my sight, and wilt not be controul'd? Art thou resolv'd to make (what dost thou mean) My ears thy stage, and every word a scean?
Sum up thy small, thy weak deserts, and see What large respects thou hast deserv'd from me. I plac'd thee in a garden, not to eat The uit forbidden, but to keep it neat! Had not the violation of my Laws Mov'd me to anger, thou hadst had no cause T'ave felt the burthen of my weighty stroke, Or live thus much subjected to the yoke Of thine own sins; most shameful is that loss That's crown'd with negligence, & great the cross That's made with a self-hand; and they that clime Above their strengths, impropriate a crime To their own Souls; Destruction is the end Of all Rebellion: Ruine knows no friend. Suppose I should invest and entertain Your Soul with love, and call thee back again, The tree is still the same, the fruit as sweet, Thy appetite as great, and thou mayst meet A Serpent too, whose oratorious skill May soon intreat thee to enact his will: He has a voyce to tempt, and thou an ear Will re-assume the priviledg to hear; He has a hand to give, and thou another Freely to take: thus wouldst thou quickly smother Thy new delights; therefore I will not trust A heart that can be nothing but unjust.
Thou great Mugul of baseness, cease to plead, Thy tongue's a canker, and thy words are lead; Thy sins have made thee not deserve the air Thou entertainst hadst than implay'd thy care To serve me, when I lov'd thee, thou hadst had My heart-delighting joys to make thee glad; But now expect no favour, for no art Of thine shall ever captivate my heart. Hie thee unto the shades of grief, bewail Thy sequestrated happiness, no bail Of thy procuring will I take to set Thy Soul at liberty; I will not let The vision of a comfort creep within Thy rambling thoughts, thou art a slave to sin: Hadst thou but lov'd or fear'd me at the first, Th'adst been as happy, as th'art now accurst: If now thou lov'st me, I shall quickly prove It is for fear alone, and not for love▪ Thy heart is steel'd with wickedness, thy faults Are sparks enlivened by thy flinty thoughts. Breathe out thy groans unto a sensless rock, And let thy sighs (like hammers) beat and knock Against her scragged sides, thou shalt as soon Have her consent, as mine, to grant thy boon: 'Tis therefore vain to multiply thy words, For ah, my brest, my hardned brest, affords
Thy Soul no pity; and the more thy cry Attempts my ear, the less I will reply. Alas! thy guilt-o're-burth'ned words renew Fresh thoughts of rage, I cannot hear thee sue Without impatiency; for ah, the longer Thou crav'st, thou mak'st my fury grow the stron∣ger. Avoid my presence, for I will no more Give audience to thy voyce, then cease t'implore. Adams Lamentation. Undone, undone  what mountain now will hide My lothed body from the swelling tyde Of raging Vengeance? Whither shall I fly T'involve my Soul with true security? Stretch, stretch my lungs, and roar unto the deep To entertain me: Oh that I might sleep Within her wavey bowels, till the blast Of Heav'ns all-shaking, thundring Voyce were past. Oh that some rock would hear my sad request, And give me burial in her frigid brest! Oh that my grief-extended voyce could cleave The solid Earth, and make her to receive My wretched limbs! Oh that some ranging beast Would prove so courteous to devour, and feast Upon my corps! Oh that I could contrive A way to live, and yet not be alive!
Ah, thus my sorrow-shaken fancy flies And envies at impossibilities. I fain would dye, but that I have no heart To kill my self, and yet I feel a smart Transcending death; I see I cannot shun The wrath of Heav'n: Ah, thus am I undone By my own doing; this it is to eat Forbidden fruit: Oh most pernicious meat! I was too rash, and rashly have I taken A deadly fall, and falling, am forsaken: I'm bruis'd to death, and yet I cannot dye; Ah, what can be so much unblest as I? I am inflamed, and I dayly drench My Soul with tears, and yet I cannot quench My raging fires; the more I strive t'ass wage And mitigate my pains, the more they rage. What shall I do, or whither shall I go, To hide me from this Labyrinth of Wo? I am compos'd of sorrow, and my veins, Instead of blood, are fill'd with griping pains. Curst be these eyes of mine, which have let in The lawless Tyrant of imperious Sin: Curst be these lips of mine, which at the suit Of my fond wife receiv'd forbidden fruit: Curst be these ears, that entertain'd the charms Of that inchantress, which procur'd my harms:
Curst be these hands of mine, which took, and fed My greedy Soul, and struck my Conscience dead: And now my lips, my ears, my hands, my eyes, Must see, hear, taste, and feel, my miseries. Oh sad condition! Since there's no relief, I must be subject to perpetual grief. Here we will leave poor Adam in the state Of woe, and thus begin to ruminate. Are there not many in this tollsom age That meditate themselves into a rage, And wonder how a Serpent could express Himself, and reason with such readiness, Being by nature brute, nay and the worst Of living creatures, that he should at first Perswade and conquer, and instruct his will, How to determine both of good and ill? It would seem strange, if Reason were without Her wings, and could not fly above this doubt: We may (and yet not stain the truth) declare It was the work of Satan to ensnare Frail Eve; although he was not nam'd at all By Moses in the Hist'ry of the Fall, It may not trouble us; for we must know, The bending Serpent was the Devils bow, By which he shot the arrows of his spite, Which did [Oh grief to speak it,] fly too right:
And he that dares so high a Crime to act (Though by another) needs must own the fact: And this our tongues may never cease to tell, The Serpent was the Instrument of Hell, Tun'd to the Devils voyce: thus we may see His fraud, his malice, and his subtiltie. First when he saw he could not over-turn The great Creator, he begun to burn With flames of envy, lab'ring to invade, And so disturb that order God had made In the Creation, and to change the features Of his own Image in the best of Creatures, That so he may by his too-sooth delusion Make man run headlong to his own confusion: Thus having laid the platform of his work, He then begun to agitate, and lurk For opportunity, which was effected As soon, nay if not sooner, then expected; He gave the blow, and by that blow he found The weakest vessel had the weakest sound; But yet it strongly eccho'd to the voyce Of his desires, and made him love his choyce. Even as some bold-fac'd General, that dares To storm a well-man'd Town; at first prepares A potent Army, which he soon sets down Before the Walls of the alarum'd Town;
He after views the ruine-threatning-Fort, Which speaks defiance, and begins to sport Their several shots, and with a sad delight Ingage each other in a bloody fight: Then if the fierce Besiegers once perceive Themselves out-strength'd, they think it fit to leave So hot a work, and for a little space Desist, and fall upon a weaker place, Where finding smaller opposition, venture With greater courage, and at last they enter The yielding Town, and cruelly begin To take revenge of them that are within. Even so the grim-look'd, malice-armed Devil, The base-resolved General of Evil, Perceiving that he could by no means take The sublime Fort of Heav'n, plots how to make A fresh attempt upon a weaker part, And so prepares to storm the flexive heart Of unresisting Eve, that could not grapple With such a Foe, but yielded for an Apple To those most false Alarums which surrounded Her, much obedient, and soon confounded Her inward parts, and gave her Soul a wound, Which cannot be by time or art made sound, Except the grand Physician please to slake His swelling fury, and some pity take.
Thus are our conquer'd parents sadly left In a deplor'd condition, and bereft Of all their comforts; they which have enjoy'd The life of happiness, are now destroy'd; And man (his wretched off-spring) must be made Sorrows sad heir, and Peace must not be said T'inhabit in him: Adams actual sin Made ours original; for we begin, As soon as made, to entertain the guests Of Sin, and lodg them in our infant-brests. Now may our weak and despicable eyes Behold in them our ample miseries▪ Now we may glut the Air with this sad cry, The root being dead, the branches needs must dye; For Adam's gone beyond all humane call: Rebellion never ends without a Fall. But stay my Muse, here let us rest a while; Our Journey's long, and 'tis not good to toil Too much at first; for Reason says 'tis best To pause a time, and take a little rest: Know then (kind Reader) that my Muse shall meet Thy serious eyes within another sheet. The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF GODS LOVE, AND Mans Unworthiness. ARe all hopes fled? and is there no relief? Must man still wander in the shades of grief? Will not the eye of Heav'n be pleas'd to shine Upon his Soul, but leave him in the brine Of his own sins? Is there no warbling voyce Can charm his ears, and woo him to rejoyce
In being pitiful? Will nothing move The much incensed Soul of Heav'n to love? Man [Map of Misery] who can prevail In thy requests? or who cut off th'entail Of thy distress? 'Tis not a writ of Error Can satisfie, or guard thee from the terror Of thine own Conscience, which will alway stare Upon thy face, and load thee with despair. 'Tis not a Habeas Corpus will remove The body of thy sin, none can disprove The Will of God, what he resolves to do Must neither be withstood, nor div'd into: It lies beyond thy power to perswade Thy God to pity, whom thy sins have made A wrathful Judg; what he intends, must be Derived from himself, and not from thee; For thou hast nothing in thee worth the name Of good, because thy glory's turn'd to shame: Thou art corrupt and vile in every part And who can know the evil of thy heart? Which like the Ocean, that no art nor eye Can search her bottom, or her banks disery: Therefore till heav'n shal please to change the s Of thy condition; Reason bids thee wait: For be assur'd, the promis'd seed will spread It self abroad, and bruise the Serpents head.
Even as the Fountain, whose exuberous brest Is always fluent, and admits no rest; But with a cheerful willingness she sends Her crystal tokens to her smaller friends: Even so our God distilleth from above The healing streams of his refreshing love; For ah the luster of his Sun-bright eye Is drown'd in tears, when our sad Souls prove dry! Oh admiration! that a God so just Should rain down floods upon a heap of dust! Oh Mercy! that so much incens'd a God Should send forth Mercy, and keep in his Rod! His Soul is fili'd with pity, and his eyes Begin to view th'unsatiate miseries Of Adams down-cast off-spring: Though his ear Seems unto us resolved not to hear Their bitter cries, nor note the sad Devotions Of their contristed hearts; yet by the Motions Of his blest Soul, he sends his Son and Heir Into this wretched world, that he might bear The Cross of our Transgressions, and expel The clouds of sin, and conquer Death and Hell: Thus by his death we liv'd, and by his grief Our new-calm'd Souls were furnish'd with relief▪ Oh sudden change! That wind which did before Drive wretched man upon the threat'ning shore
Of unvoyding ruine, fills the ails Of his desires with milde and prosperous gales; The Boreas of his sin does now surcease His full mouth'd blasts, and Zphyr speas peace Unto his ship-wrack'd Soul, and now he rides Upon the new-tam'd backs of pleasing Tydes. Oh that my tongue were able to rehearse The Love of God with an Angelike Verse, Oh that some heav'nly diety would fill The black-mouth'd concave of my wandring quill With pure celestial Ink, that I might write In heav'nly characters, and learn t'indite I chahs praises in a stile as high As my desires, and make the lofty Sky Eccho with Hallelujahs, that the Earth May (like a Midwife) hug the joyful birth Of every word, and make each corner ring (VVith peals of Joy) the Glories of our King: Is man deliver'd from the painful womb Of his foul sin, and raised from the tomb Of everlasting death? and shall not we Applaud that hand which set such pris'ners free? VVhat, shall we be afraid to rack and break The chains of silence, and attempt to speak The dialects of Angels? No; let's call Vpon his name, that rais'd us from a Fall.
Let's stretch our lungs, & with a warbling breath Sing to the life, how we were rais'd from death: And when our tongues are wearied, let's express By heav'nly signs our real thankfulness. But stay, where runs my quill? what, have I lost My self in raptures? or else am I tost Into the air of pleasure by the wind Of true delight? If Passion proves so kind, I am content, oh may I always rest Adorn'd & crown'd with a Heav'n-ravish'd brest: O love ineffable! Must wretched Man, The spawn of baseness, and the unmeasur'd span f everlasting infancy, be made Loves object? Must th' Almighty's love be said To dwell in Man, whose tongue cannot deliver The least of thanks unto so great a Giver? VVill the Sun-gazing Eagle, that soars high. Descend t'assist the web-infolded Fly? VVill he that arkens with a willing ear To pleasing musick, turn away to hear Confounding discords? or will any woo A perju'd enemy to come and go Into his Courts? VVill any hand forbear To strike at him that labours to impair His worth, and contumeliously upbraid His upright deeds? Will he that is betray'd
Affect the Traytor, and with patience sue For reconcilement, when as death is due? All this blest Heav'n will do, that he might place Vain man within the Covenant of Grace. Consider man, how often hath this mirror Of pure affection woo'd thee from thine error? Thou unconsiderate dust, which every wind Can puff away, how canst thou prove unkind To such a Louer, that delights to spin His bowels out, to nourish thee with in His milky bosom? Shall his bounty crave Thy base acceptance? Shall he be a slave To his own slaves? Ah, shall thy God implore, And beg of beggars to receive his store? Does he, whom Heav'n & Earth cannot contain, No no the heav'n of heav'ns, stoop down to gain Thy dull respects? And ah, wilt thou not raise Thy stupid Soul an inch to give him praise? Thy fervent prayers he always will admit, Then how canst thou remember to forget A God so mindful? How canst thou forbear To numerate his love without a tear? How can thine eyes (when thou observ'st the Sun) Refuse to weep to see him dayly run His painful progress, and rejoyce to greet The Earth with luster to direct thy feet,
Thy sinful feet, which every moment slide Into Rebellion, loaded with thy pride? How canst thou choose, when thou behold'st the ground Whereon thou tread'st, but voluntary drown'd Thy self in briny floods, to think what care Indulgent Heav'n hath taken to prepare For thee, before thou wert, and how his hand Hath for thy profit fertiliz'd the Land? How can thy rocky heart refuse to vent A stream of blood, when thou behold'st th'extent Of the unbounded Ocean, how it hides, Within the bosom of her swelling Tydes, Diversities of fish, which live to feed Thy gulf of gluttony at time of need? Uncloud thy thoughts (O Man) and thou shalt see He who ordained all these things for thee, Created thee for him, that thou mayst give The praise to him, that lends thee leave to live. Be serious Man, consider how thou hast Converted all these blessings into waste: Know that the great Edificer of things Furnish'd thy Soul with Reason, gave thee wings To fly above all mortals, and hath crown'd Thy head with heps of honor, and hath bound Inferior creatures prentice to thy will; And this he did, because thou shouldst fulfil
Thy Gods Commands; but thou that wert the best Hast made thy self more loathsom then the rest, And by thy most detested deviation Abus'd the glory of thy free Creation: Though the Majestick Eagles will despise To be assistants to th▪intangled Flies; Yet Heav'n will from his lofty Throne deseend, And with a speedy cheerfulness defend The sons of men, who dayly are betray'd By those insiduous snares which Satan lay'd T'intrap their Souls: Alas, how voyd of care Is heedless man! how subject to a snare! But he, whose more then superficial love Is always active, lab'ring to improve Our hearts with thankfulness, denies to let Our Souls be taken in th'eternal net Of unconceived misery, and live In lasting death, not having power to give The least of drops unto our howling tongues, But uck the flames, until our sulphurous lungs Crackle, and belch▪ forth brimstone, till we tire Our Carbonado'd members in a fire That's inextinct; the more we strive to turn Our parched Souls, still more and more they burn. Revolve these things within thy serious mind; Oh Man, let Love instruct thee to be kind
To him that's loving; do not disrespect A God, whose Soul so dearly can affect: Pour out thy thoughts, and practise to relent, And let thy thoughts induce thee to repent: Grasp opportunity, Time's always flying; God's always living, and thou always dying: Dy then; before thou dy'st, redeem the time, Because thy days are evil; learn to clime Jacobs erected ladder; thou shalt see Th'adst better clime a Ladder, then a Tree, As Judas did: Be wise, and do not fan Thy Soul with air; remember what a span Thou art; remember whose inspired breath Made thee a Soul; forget not whose sad death Made thee alive; be mindful that thou art Th'Epitomy of Heav'n; inure thy heart To love the best of loves, so shall thy brest Be fill'd with comfort, and thy Soul with rest: Prepare and know, the very fowls delight To prune their wings before they take their flight. Although terrestial Kings will not permit A Traytor to his Courts, no let him sit Before his presence, though they will not hear A Malefactors pray'rs; yet Heav'ns blest ear Is always open, and his tongue invites Repentant sinners, for his eye delights
To view them in his Courts when they appear; For muddy waters may at last prove clear: 'Tis not unlike; ill scented dunghils may At last bear flowers; that which is foul to day, To morrow may prove fair; the thing that cost Millions of silver, may as well be lost, As things of smaller value; Heav'n can spy A mite, as well as mountains; for his eye Is lodg'd in every cranny of mans heart, And he knows all that searches every part. Where breathes that Mortal that can apprehend The ways and thoughts of God, who knows the end Of his beginning?—— He that can break a rocky heart in twain, And re-unite it (if he please) again; He that can part the boiling waves, and stand Upon the Seas, as on the dryest Land; He whose celestial power can make the graves To open, and command their slumbring slaves To rise; nay more, to stand; nay more, to walk; Nay more (if more then this may be) to talk: He that can make a Whale to entertain A Jonah, and to spe him out again; He whose Almighty Power can unlock The flinty bowels of a sergged Rock,
And make her headlong-gushing streams abound To wash the bosom of the thirsty ground; He that can transmutate by power divine The poorest water into richest wine; He that can curb rude Boreas, and asswage The lawless passion of the Oceans rage; He that can rain down Manna to supply The craving stomacks of mortality; He that can, like an all-commanding God, Make Almonds flourish from a sapless rod; He that can make the Sun and Moon stand still, Or run according to his sacred Will; He that sav'd a Daniel from the paws Of Lyons, and can muzzle up their jaws; He that can make the greedy Ravens carry Food to his Servants like a Commissary; He that can, with an unresisted hand, Dash fire into Ice, and counter-mand The wanton flames, and charm them, that they dare But burn his servants cords, and not their hair; He that can cause ten thousand to be fed With two small fishes, and five loaves of bread; He that can clothe himself with fire, and name Himself, I AM, and make a bush to flame Without consuming; He that can convert A Rod into a Serpent, and not hurt;
He that can make his visage shine so bright, That not a Moses can behold the light; He that can strike a hand with leprosie, And cure it in the twinkling of an eye; He that can in a moment cut and break Tongue tying cords, and make the dumb to speak▪ He that can out of unregarded stones Raise unto Abraham many little ones; He that can heal the Cripple with a touch, And free him from the thraldom of his Crouch; He that can cure the deaf, and can expel A thousand Devils in despite of Hell; He that can perfect what he first begun, Expects that man should say▪ Thy will be done. Consider Man and thou shalt find it true▪ can do all, but what he will not do: Think not, because thou art of low estate, That he will scorn to love, and love to hate: Remember Dives, whose unsum'd up store Improv'd so much, until he prov'd as poor As ever Iob was: Iob! unhappy I To speak it, he was rich in poverty; Hea'n made poor Iob so rich, that Satans wealth uld purcha nothing from him, but his health, And that corporeal too; he could not boast His bargain, for 'twas Iob that purchas'd most.
"Happy is he that can at last inherit "Riches obtain'd by an impov'rish'd spirit: "We'd better lick with Lazarus the crumbs, "Then gripe with Dives for Soul-damning sums. Welth cānot bride the flames, yet scraps may feed The hungry wretch; he that has wealth, may need The crumbs of comfort: David did condole Th'abundant famine of his hungry Soul: Gods Love's not mercenary, to be sold For brain-distracting, heart-confounding gold. Hast thou not heard (O Man) the heav'nly cry Of him that says, Ye that are poor, come buy, Come buy of me; your pen'worth shall be such, That for a little you shall purchase much. Here's Love that's spun unto the smallest thred. Tho thou want'st mony, yet thou ma have bred▪ Do thou but ask, thou shalt not fail to have; For God's more free to give, then thou to crave: Fear not to ask of him, whose ready ear, Before thy tongue can ask, is apt to hear. Heav'n loves the language of a broken heart, And he will harken, and with joy impart His love unto thee, and his milk and wine, Without the price of mony, shall be thine. Th'ingrated pris'ner, whose dull tongue is whet With sharp'ned hunger, will not fear to let
His language fly to every ear that comes Within his audience; and he always sums The totals of his grief in hungry words, Whilst thousands pass along, but few affords The blessing of an Alms; perhaps they'l grieve, And seem to pity, but will not relieve: Yet will he not desist, but hourly cry, Bread, bread, for Heav'ns sake bread, or else I dye. Hard hearred Man, why wilt thou not relent To hear thy brother, almost hunger spent, Craving thy succour? Where's thy love become? Because th'art deaf▪ ah! woldst thou have him dūb? Or dost thou think, because thy panch is fill'd, He cannot hunger? He that first distill'd Those mercies on thy head, expects that thou Shouldst feed thy brother with a cheerful brow; Say not thou canst not give, thy treasure's light; But let thy heart record the widows mite, So Ha'n will fill thy Cisterns to the brim, And feed thy Soul, because thou hast fed him. Should the Grandfather of true Charity Pass by thy gates, and here thee beg and cry, And not relieve thee; should he slight thy prayrs, And scorn to take a survey of thy tears; Wouldst thou not grieve, and pine thy self to dust, And almost say thy God was much unjust
To turn away his ears from thy complaint, And disrespect thy pray'rs▪ and let thee aint For want of od? Ah▪ whither wouldst thou ly To feed thy famish'd Soul, should Heav'n deny? But ah he cannot, for his melting Soul Is always free, and willing to condole The sad conditions of distressed Man, Who only strives to do, but what he can To contradict him▪ yet he'l hear our grief: In multitudes of mercy lies relief. When our impris'ned Souls peep through the Of this corrupting Earth, our God delates Himself unto us, and he sends us meat From the rich store-house of his lofty Seat; He hears; and hearing, pities; pitying, sends; And sending, blesses, and with blessing ends. Even as the Sun, which every day surrounds The sublime Globe, and pries into the bounds Of this darke Center; lets his Beams reflect Upon a molehill with as much respect As on a Mountain; for his glorious Beams Shine always with equivolent extreams. Even so the great and powerful three in one, That sits upon his all-inlight'ning Throne, Does not deny to let his mercies crown The poorest Peasant with as much renown
As the most stateliest Emperor; though he Invests his body with more dignitie, Yet he's but earth, and must at last decay, For Prince and Peasant go the self-same way; Their earth must turn to earth, their Souls return To him that gave them, or for ever burn; There's no distinction, one infused breath Made them alike, and both must live in death, Or everlasting life; both must commence Divines in Heav'n; there's no preheminence, But all equality, all must express, With equal Joy, their equal Happiness. Rouze up dull Man, and let thy wak'ned Soul Be vigilant; oh let thy thoughts enroul The Love of God, engrave it in thy brest, That his resounding tongue may read thee blest. O let thy sighs, like Pens, and let thy tears, Like Ink, transcribe the Love, th'indulgent cares Of thy Creator, that himself may find (Within the unblotted volume of thy mind) Himself recorded, so will he imbrace Thy spotless Soul, and fill thee with his grace. Incl thine cars, and let thy heart rejoyce To ear the strains of his harmonious voyce; Harken, and thou shalt hear his Prophets sing Th'admired Mercies of thy glorious King.
Thus saith the great, and ever-living One,Isa. That rules the Heav'ns, and governs Earth alone;43. Thus saith the Lord, that takes delight to dwell1. Amongst his Saints, that formed Israel, Created Iacob, Let thy sorrows slee Out of thy brest, I have redeemed thee: 'Twas I that made thy clouded visage shine▪ And call'd thee by my Name, for thou are mine. I will be with thee, when thy feet shall wade2 Thorow the waters; I will be thy aid: I'le make thee walk thorow rivers, and the waves Shall prove ambitious to become thy slaves: And when thou walkest thorow the raging fire, Th'unruly flames shall not presume to aspire, Or kindle on thy garments. I alone3 The Lord thy God, and Israels holy one, And thy dear Saviour, that was always true, Gave Egypt, Seba, and Ethiopia too, To ransom thee; for thou wert my delight,4 And always precious in my gracious sight: Honors were heap'd upon thee, and thou wert The tender love of my affecting heart; Therefore even I, that am well pleas'd, will give People for thy dear sake, that thou mayst live. Fear not, for I am with thee, and I'le stand5 In thy defence, and my all-grasping hand
Shall bring thy seed from the remotest places, And fill thee with my satisfying graces. My tongue shall call unto the North, and say6 Unto the South, Give, and they shall obey; Bring from a far my sons and daughters all, Hear my loud voyce, be active when I call. I have created them, and I proclaim7 They shall be call'd and honor'd by my Name. I'le usher forth the bld, and make them see The splendent Glories of my Majestic: I'l cu th deaf, and make their hearts rejoyce To a the  of my warbling voyce. Thus hath our God unty'd the tongues, and broke His Prophets lips; thus have his Prophets spoke: And wilt thou be (O Man) so much obdure, A not to credit him that will assure Perpeal happiness? hu canst not ask That which he cannot give; do but unmask Thy shamae▪d Soul, that so thou mayst discry mercies with a faithful eye▪ aut upon his pomies, advise With chine own thoughts, let Reason make thee wise spct thy self, weigh well tine own condition. And thou shalt find thou wat'st a good Physician o cure thy aculatd Soul Alas! Thou a like water stop'd up in a glass,
So weakly fortily'd, and fene'd about, That one weak knock soon le the prisner out. Vain lump of vanity, what can this irth Afford thy thoughts more then a shortliv'd mirth? A mirth that fills thee with deluding toys, And like a Tyrant afterwards destroys. Dot'st thou on Earth? for what? because her plea∣sure Can guild thy wanton eye? Because her treasure Can cram thy bags? Because her Sirens song Can ravish thee? Because her power can throng Thy Soul with luxury? Because her charms Can court thee with delight? Because her arms can pleasingly imbrace thee, and imbost Thy heart with gold, and lull thee, when th'ast lost Thy self in sleep? Is this the little All That this great world can boast of? Must we call These things our pleasures? No, they'l prove our cares, Our golden fetters, and our silken snaes: These are the Ioys we love, these are the things That makes us fly with our Icaria wings Up to Ambitions Court, and there presume To gaze so long, until our waen plume Dissolve with heat, and like presumptuous slaves Tumble our selves into the raging waves Of speedy Ruine; Ruine's all that we Must hope to obtain from Earths base treaur.
Lets scorn her wealth, and say, O Earth, thou art A painted Mistriss with a rotten heart: Let's hate to love, that we may love to hate Th'unconstant glory of her sickle State. Even as the subtle Crocodile prepares Her slatt'ring heart, and eye-commanding tears, To woo her prey to come within the power Of her command▪ that so she may devour With more facility, and make her Jaws To execute by her tyrannike Laws. Even so this World, whose Crocodile▪ like eyes Are always slowing, wanting no supplies Of gliding tears to wash the rugged faces Of her designs with falsifying graces, That so she may by her too smooth delusion Make man the Author of his own confusion. Frail slesh and blood, how canst thou take delight To love this world, that cannot give a mite Of comfort to thee, but will still intrap, And dayly lull thee in her lustful lap: She'l rock thy Soul to ruine, and she'l spawn Baseness into thee; she'l deceive, and fawn Upon thy heart, and with her guilded baits She'l hook thy Soul unto the worst of Fates: There's nothing in her that deserves the name Of constancy; her glory is her shame:
Smile at her tears, for every drop she vents Harbors ten thousand thousand discontents: Believe her not; but when she speaks the best, Believe the worst; and if she promise rest, Assure thy self of trouble; if she chance To promise treasure, let thy thoughts advance Above her promises, contemn her dross, For what thou gain'st from her will be thy los! Let not her wealthy Donatives perswade Thy heart t'accept; when once thou art betray'd There's no resistance: They that well advise Before they act, deserve the name of wise: But they that study in her frantick Schools May prove her wise men; but Heav'ns out-cast fools Ask her the way to Bliss: Try if her skill Can give directions, ask her if she will Fill thee with blest Eternity, conjure Her helpless aid, see if she can assure A safety to thee, ask her if she can Prescribe a cure for a despairing Man; Tell her thy Soul is sick, thou canst not live A minute longer; see if she can give A Cordial to thee, see if she can heal A broken heart; see if she can reveal Celestial Joys unto thee, and impart A heav'nly comfort to thy grieved heart:
If so, cheer up, and prosecute thy mirth, And say there is no other Heaven but Earth. Do thus (sond Man; and thou sale quickly see A bassl'd World, that cannot answer thee, Bt must be silent, for she cannot plea For her own self; she knows she cannot lead The way to Heav'n, she's but a bad Director, A base Reliever, and a worse Protector. Thus shalt thou make her envy swell and burst, And, like the Basilisk, discover'd first, She needs must dye; but if she should discover Thee first, farewell, th'art murthet'd by thy lover: Then shalt thou heat the Soul▪ amazing tone Of him that sie on his immortal Throne, Pronounce against thee at the dreadful day Of thy accounts; thus shalt thou hear him say: Depart, ye cursed off-springs of a father As curst as you, avoyd my sight, go gather The fruits of your deserts; you have forgot The God that made you, and I know ye not: See if the world, within whose folding arms You always slept, can quit thee from the harms That must ensue; see if her slatt'ring power Can shelter thee from the o'▪ flowing showre Of my fast▪ dropping rage; see if her brest Can entertain thee with eternal rest:
Begone, begone, my fury hates to see Such Miscreants; had you remember'd me, I now had known you; had you made me eat When I was forc'd to importune for meat, I now would blest you with celestial dyet, And crown your Souls with everlasting quiet, Had you but quench'd my raging thst, or gave A single drop, that very drop should save Your death-adjudged Souls, and you should up Abundant comforts from my streaming cup: Had you (sad sons of vengeance) but supply'd My nakedness with garments, when I cry'd And call'd upon your charity to send Relieve unto me, I had been your friend! Or had your (more then marble) hearts reliev'd M'impris'ned body, now ye had not griev'd: Had you, you world▪ affined Souls, addrest Your selves unto me when I was opprest With ling'ring sickness, then I would have fed Your Souls (which now are starv'd) with heav'nly bread. But since you have not done it unto those Which I esteem'd, ye'ave prov'd your selves my foes: Therefore begone, let darkness be your lot, Learn to remember that ye have forgot My Mercies; go, and let my Judgments dwell Within your guilty hearts; let black▪ mouth'd Hell
Plague you with torments, let him always lash Your hearts with flames, until ye howl, and gnash Your teeth together; go, depart my sight, And taste the fruits of everlasting night. But as for you whose better deeds have found Acceptance in my heart, ye shall be crown'd With unremoved happiness, because Ye have obsequiously perform'd my Laws; You fed my craving stomack, and you cloath'd My naked body, and you have not loath'd To visit me; and when I was a stranger, Ye took me in, and guarded me from danger; Go then my Lambs, and let your Oratory Proclaim the greatness of your Fathers glory: Go revel in my Courts; no discontent Shall breed a faction in my Parliament; I'le pass an Act of Peace, and it shall be Sign'd by the hand of my Eternitie. My tongue shall stile you blessed, and my voyce Shall raise your Souls, and teach you to ejoyce▪ Your unexcised pleasures shall abound To infinite, your ravish'd hearts shall sound The depth of my delights; all things shall move Within the sphere of uncontrouled Love: Be well assur'd, your pleasures shall be great; Then fly from Judgment to my Mercies Seat,
And there rejoyce with a triumphant mirth; My Love shall live with them that hated Earth. Obdurate Man, here, here thou mayst discry Judgment and Mercy, one to terrifie, The other to perswade; and yet wilt thou Prove adamantine, and refuse to bow To thy Redeemer? Canst thou ruminate Upon his Love, and yet wilt not delate Thy Soul unto him? Is thy brazen heart Impenitrable? Will no flaming dart Of true affection enter? Hast thou vow'd To stop thy ars; Shall Mercy call aloud, And thou not hear? Shall thund'ring Judgments rattle About thy ears, and yet wilt thou imbattle Against the Lord of Hosts? Wilt thou invoke Perpetual Vengeance to intail a stroke Upon thy stubborn heart? What, dost thou think Hell's voyd of flames, or that thy God will wink At thine enormities? Go, rally all Thy thoughts together, and discreetly fall Into a serious study.—— ———Let thy mind Be absolute, and really inclin'd To meditation; contradict the rage Of thine own passion: labour to. asswage
The fire of lust, that so thou mayst behold, With more serenety, how manifold His mercies are, that every day prevents The sad incursions of deprav'd events. Think but in what a most defam'd condition Thy Soul was in, before the grand Physician Of Heav'n and Earth spontaniously sent down A balm from his own Gilliard to crown The sons of grief: Think what he did endure, Before his wounds had perfected thy cure. Remember how undauntedly he stood, And sweat himself into a Crimson flood To ransom thee; remember how his woes Were asperated by his raging foes; Remember how his sacred temples wore A spiny Crown; remember how it tore His sublime Front; remember how they broach'd His brest with Spears, and shamefully reproach'd His spotless fame; remember how they nail'd His spreading hands, remember how they seal'd His Ivory wlls, remember how they spawl'd Upon his face, remember how they baw'ld And banded at his Agony, whilst he Prov'd patient Martyr to their tyrannie; Remember when he came unto the brink O death, they gave him vinegar to drink▪
Nay more (because they vow'd to empty all Their poys'ned malice out) they gave him Gall. Oh bitter deed! oh most abhorred Crimes! (Too nearly paralleld in these our times.) Thus having put a period to their plots, They thought it good to cast their hellish lots For his (I dare not say mean) clothes; I know They were our Saviours, to whose worth we ow Perpetual thanks; 'twas his well finished breath Redeem'd our Souls from everlasting death. Here's Love (O Man) that does as far transcend Thy thoughts as thy deserts, that Heav'n should send His Son and Heir to be incarnated▪ And suffer death for thee, that wert as dead As sin could make thee; 'twas for thy offence He dy'd: Ah, how, how canst thou recompence Such high brd Favors! Favors unexpected Deserve to be imbrac'd, and not neglected. Do not (rash Soul) like Cleopatria, nurse Imbosom'd vipers; blessings prove a curse, If once abus'd; Ingratitude cuts off Th'intail of Love; it is a shame to scoff At Benefactors; after thou art fed, Wilt thou contemn the hand that gave thee bread? Wouldst thou not love that friend that should be∣stow A supernuated crust, and shew
Respect unto thee, when the ebbing Tyde Of Fortune runs so low, that thou mayst ride Upon the sands of Poverty? Fond Man, Strive to be grateful, study how to scan The mercies of thy God; remember how He feeds thy Soul with Manna; learn to bow Th'unruly thoughts; (with admiration) think How often, and how much imbitter'd drink Thy Saviour drank; with what a doleful cry He beg'd of God to let that cup pass by; But knowing that his pleasure must be done, He proy'd himself his most obedient Son. And wilt thou not (y wretch) drink one poor sup Of bitter drink for him, that drank a cup To sweeten thine; thou need'st not fear, or scorn To taste, because Heav'ns sacred Unicorn Hath purg'd the waters, and they must be sweet, Except they're reimpoys'ned by thy feet: If so, what wilt thou do? where wilt thou find An Antidote for an invenom'd mind? It is reported, if the Spider chance To meet the obvious Toad, they'l both advance Then inward force, and mutually proclaim An open War; brave combitas of Fame! And having  their imbowel'd might, Mach boldly on, and both incens'd, thy fight▪
The Toad being heavy loaded, cannot go, Or wheel about, like his encountring foe, But keeps his ground, and makes a small resistance: The Spider scorning to be kept at distance, Falls in upon him, and with nimble rage Assaults his foe, who now begins asswage His former fury, and would fain retreat From his small foe, whose strength is grown too great For opposition; being thus distress'd He crawls away, and with a crope-sick brest Seeks for relief, and by and by discrys A Planton leaf, within whose veins there lies A secret Antidote, which did at length Expel his poyson and renew his strength: Having disgorg'd himself, he soon returns Into the camp, where for a time he burns To be in action, and at last he sees The crafty Spider creeping by degrees To seize upon him, then his courage fails, He knows not what to do, his foe assails With all his might, constraining him to yield The conquest, and with shame to quit the field: Then he begins to seek, and hunt about, To find the soveraign healing Planton out, Which had before reliev'd him, and supply'd His wants; but that being gone, he burst, and dy'd
Even so, if Hells black Spider chance to crawl From his infernal Web into the Hall Of this all-dusty World, he soon prepares Himself to fight, and suddenly declares, That he, the grim-look'd General of Hell, Dares to encounter any Souls that dwell Within the limits of the spacious Earth, And in a moment qualifie their mirth: Thus Satan boasts, and if he chance to meet A single Soul, he'l thus begin to greet.
A DIALOGUE between the Soul and Satan. Sat. SOul, th'art well met. So. 'Tis true, for I am wel. Sat. Say, whither art thou going? Sou. Not to Hell. Sat. ish, talk no more of that, but tell me whither Thou go'st; come, prethee let's go both together. Sou. A pretty motion; when I want a guide I'le send for thee, till then thou art deny'd To be my Usher. Sat. Prethee tell me why Thou art so obstinate, as to deny
So free a courtesie as I have shewn; Mischance oft falls to them that walk alone: Be not so much averse as to neglect This opportunity; I can protect Thy feet from sliding; dangers still attend Those that dispise the favors of a friend. Sou. A friend! how canst thou prove that title? Sat. How? As thus; because I'm willing to allow The best assistance of my ready arm To guide, nay and protect thee from all harm; Theresore a friend. So. What you pretend to shew Is but external; he that can bestow Internal friendship on a Soul distress'd Is a true friend; no matter for the rest. If Heav'n will guide my Soul, I shall not stray, Or sear the evils of a dangerous way: But as for you, I needs must borrow leave To say, your friendship's only to deceive; Confusion paths your ways, and if I run By your advise, I needs must be undone. God bids me fly from sin, if I refuse Obedience to his Will, I shall abuse His just Commands; then will my sorrows cry, When Mercy stops Judgment begins to fly. Sat. Desist (fond Soul) and labour to divorce Thy lips from this too fabulous discourse;
Guild not thy words with vanity, perswade These thoughts (which ate erronious) to evade Thy serious mind; advise, and thou shal see My ways are best be principl'd by me Let not the swing of passion strike thee down, But follow me, 'tis I must give a Crown To thy deserts, 'tis I that can advance Thy down-cast Soul above the reach of chance; 'Tis I (mistaken Soul) 'tis I alone That must conduct thee to the sublime throne Of true Salvation; 'tis my hand must bring Thy trembling Soul before th'all▪ judging King Of Heaven and Earth; it is my power can fill Thy heart with joy; believe me, and I will. Trust not the babling languages of those That seem thy friends, but are thy greatest foes; They're great to thy desruction, they'l connive And fawn, nay almost bury thee alive; They'l talk of Heav'n and Hell, they'l tell thee stories Of endless, boundless, unconceived glories; They'l tell thee of Eternity, and woo Thy Soul out of thy ears, if thou'lt bestow Thy pains to hear them; they'l infuse, and brew Their own designs, and tell thee all is true That they declare; they'l tell thee that they're sent As Messengers from Heav'ns high Parliament.
Believe me Soul, 'tis I that can display The Gospels Colours better far then they; There's nothing in that volume so obstruce, But I can winde and twist it to my use; And there is nothing in this world can be Stil'd worth a work, but can be done by me: I can do all; it lies within my power To make thee poor or rich in half an hour: I can command whole Legions to attend Upon my honour: Say, what nobler friend Canst thou imbrace; I'le be a friend to all That will give audience to my faithful call; I'le make them swell with riches, they shall have As much, nay if not more, then they can crave: Am I not rare, and rich, and high, and great, Incomprehensible? Is not my seat The throne of happiness? Yet cannot I Invite thee to my sweet eternity? Come gentle Soul into my twining arms, I'le hug thee, I'le delight thee with my charms, I'le shew thee all my Joys, nothing shall lie Hid from the view of thy all-gazing eye; Happy, beyond expression. Sou. Satan, stay The progress of thy tongue, and give me way▪ That I may vent my thoughts, for you have spoke At large already; and is this the stroke
Which you intend shall wound me? Be assur'd, The blows but small, and well may be endur'd. Sat. What, mov'd to passion! Is thy mind disturb'd With foul mistrust? pray let those thoughts be curbd: What, dost thou think I am perfidious? Fie; 'Tis folly to condemn before you try. Alas, alas! what profit can accrue To me, by wronging such a Soul as you? What I express is only for your good, But what is more (then grave advice) withstood? I doubt these weak, these empty thoughts presage A tempest, guarded with a storm of rage: Well then, storm on, and when thy storm is spent, Sit down, and meditate, and then repent. Sou. Repent, Oh happy word! although exprest By a foul mouth; those that repent are blest. How dares thy hellish lips  a word Fill'd with divinity, but will afford No rest, no comfort, to thy horrid Soul? Begone, begone; and if thou canst condole Thy self, thou art (if Logick prove but true) Curst in the Major, and the Minor too. Bless me, O Heav'n: What blust'ring stormy wea∣ther Drove such a vile prodigious Monster hither? Touch-stone of baseness, dost thou come to prove Whether I'm gold, or dross; thou mayst remove
Thy forward hopes, because I hope to be Mettal at last for Heav'n, and not for thee. Begone, fallacious wretch, I cannot brook Thy golden baits, I have discry'd thy hook▪ Father of lyes, thy policy is built Upon the sands, and plaster'd o're with guilt▪ Thy tongue foretels a storm; if so, be sure Thy sand-built policy shall not endure: Flatt'ry's the life of baseness, and that art Is well imprinted in thy subtile heart▪ Dost thou believe that I can entertain Belief from thee? Or dost thou think to raign Within my brest? No▪ no▪ thy cloudy powers Are at the best but falsifying showrs▪ Be satisfi'd, I cannot give the least Of credit to thee, nor I dare not feast My thoughts with such uncertainties; I know Thy dyet must and will corrupt to woe. Thou bidst me not condemn before I make Some al of thy trust▪ If I should Such green advice, I quickly should undo My wretched self; and in condemning you What profit could I have? or what relief Could I expect to mitigate my grief? My accusations would be blown as dust Before the wind; I'le neither try, nor trust
Sat. Nor try, nor trust? Art thou resolv'd to cross My real motions? Do, and see whose loss Will prove most weighty; if I lose the heat Of thy weak love, my loss will not be great; But if I should withdraw my love from thee, How▪ like a Map of well drawn misery, Wouldst thou appear? Be wise, correct thy thoghts; Neglected favors prove the greatest faults. Take my instructions, for 'tis I must bring Content unto thee; 'tis a glorious thing To be immortal: prethee Soul decline Thy former ways; say, shall I call thee mine: Me, mine thou art; I'le load thee with renown; Let me but conquer, thou shalt wear the Crown. How pleasing are my Joys! how full of peace Are all my ways! my glories still increase: I'm great and good, I take delight to win Distressed Souls, and lead them from their sin: I cannot choose but pity those that lie Upon the beds of sensualliy! My melting Soul is always free to give Comfort to them that study how to live. Alas, the care and trouble that I take s more for their content, then my own sake: My gates are always open, they that venture To come to me shall (with a welcom) enter!
And when they call, and cry, I will appear My self unto them, and rejoyce to hear Their sad complaints; I will not hide my face From them that seek the glory of my grace: I cannot be unconstant; I must grieve To hear their sorrows, and I will relieve▪ I will be pitiful to them that trust In me alone: I cannot be unjust; I cannot, no I cannot; Earth shall move Sooner then I will falsifie my love: I am eternal; they that will endeavor To gain my love, shall have my heart for ever. Sou. T'is not your empty words shall make my brest Stoop to the flatt'ry of thy vain request; Though I have ears to hear, I have a mind That will not shake at the hard-breathing wind Of your discourse; what you pretend for reason, Is nothing but the froth of private treason: ▪Tis not your multiloquious tongue can turn The Bis of my Soul, or make me spn At holy Writs; 'tis not your fond conceit Of being good, shall make me to retreat From Heav'ns Commands▪ 'tis not your promis d joys Can make me cheerful, or your painted toys sure me to your fist▪ 'tis not the dar Of your va love can penitrate my heart;
'Tis not your seeming clemency can make My Soul to love you, for your pities sake; 'Tis not your always-open gates that shall Intice my steps to your large Guilded Hall; 'Tis not your self-appearance shall invite My well-composed thoughts to your delight; 'Tis not your greatness that shall make me yield To your desires; Religion is my shield: I'le neither fear nor love your rash evasions, Nor give attendance to your smooth perswasions▪ 'Tis difficult to serve two Masters well; Who strays from Heav'n must needs approach to Hell. I am advis'd to shun the broad-path'd ways That lead to ruine; what the Scripture says I must believe; 'tis dangerous to fly Without the wings of true divinity: The Scriptures are my way, my light, my guide, And they that go without them needs must slide▪ The paths are strait in which I ought to run The course of grace, until my days are done; And they that change a virtue for a vice, Deserve no fruit from Heav'ns blest Paradise. Sat. Surcease those fond conceits, thou dost but spin Thine own destructions, and connive at sin▪ Urge not the Scriptures, for I dare maintain My paths are best, and other ways are vain:
Thy Scripture-conscience will at last confound Th'amazed thoughts, and give thy Soul a wound That hates a cure, then shalt thou prove unblest, Whilst others find the plainest road's the best▪ Suppose thou wert (I speak it for thy sake) Mov'd by occasions, forc'd to undertake A long-way'd journey, wouldst thou not enquire The readiest way, but run into the mire? If thou shouldst act a crime so fouly bad, Folly would stile thee fool, and Wisdom mad. Stray not into the wilderness of grief, But come to me, take courage, and be brief In thy designs; perswade thy self, that I Am both thy light, thy way, and best supply In time of need; I am thy prop, thy stay; Therefore resolve, and trifle not away Thy thriftless Soul, be not thy self-destroyer; I'le be thy Love, and thou my Loves enjoyer: Know that my real brest contrives no end, But what may merit so divine a friend As thine own self: Folly and Wisdom lies Before thy face; be either fool, or wise: Protract no time, but make a speedy choyce, Thy welfare shall instruct me to rejoyce; Observe my actions   my , Let's know each other by exchange of hearts;
I'le give thee ne, and for my love restore Thine unto me; grant this, I'le ask no more: Be free to give, as I am free to crave; Th'adst better live my friend, then dye my slave: For if thou shalt deny what I desire, I'le make my bellows to advance the fire Of thy distress, and sorrows shall corrode Thy stubborn heart, and care shall make abode Within thy brest, perpetuated grief Shall find a voyce, but ramble from relief: I'le gripe thee, till I make thee understand The fiery language of my furious hand: Sighings, and groaning, sobs, and tears, and cries, Shall be thy sad Concomitants; thine eyes Shall stare upon (well may I call them new And horrid) lights, such lights as shall renew Thy growing torments; every thing shall be Thy fellow slaves in servile miserie: I'le yoke thee with distress, nay and I'le chain Thy struggling Soul with everlasting pain: I'le crow'd thee full of sorrows, and I'le double Thy unconceived, uncontrouled trouble, Whilst I, triumphing I, will sit aloft, And be ador'd, and scoff to see thee sofft: Pity shall be a stranger to my brest; My care shall be to make thy Soul unblest▪
The tydes of woe shall overflow thy thoughts▪ And be equivalent unto thy faults, Be sure, that what extremity can be Thought worth the using, shall be us'd on thee: Now I have spoke, if thou wilt not repent I'le cease to speak, and study to torment. Sou. How full of poyson's every word that flows Out of thy mouth? what trust can I repose In such a flatterer▪ I dare not try, O throw my self upon thy courtesie: I know thou canst not answer my request; There is no trust in a self-praising brest. If I should dive into the deep abyss Of thy black thoughts, what glory, or what bliss Should I discern? Or if I should deliver My heart to thee, thou'dst disrespect the giver; Though at the first perhaps thou wouldst express A seeming-unbeseeming thankfulness, Yet at the last I know thou wouldst decline Thy promis'd ways and stile me to be thine. Fair words find easie passage, they proceed ut from the tongue  crowns the deed, Three things denotes a friend; first, to conceal A secret speech; the next is, to reveal A private good; the last is, to advise The safest way t'obtain an enterprise:
And he that can do this, a you pretend, Deserves the tile of a real friend▪ But my Religion tutors me to say, (Nay and affirm,) You neither can, nor may; I'm sure it is (if Reason dare prove true) One thing to speak, another thing to do. Your words are airy messengers, which fly Into my ears, and there enroul a lye▪ Many untruths have broke the Common Goal Of thy foul mouth; thou sayst thou canst prevail To make me glorious, and thou canst encrease My Joys, and crown me with eternal Peace: Thou sayst th'art good and great, & that thy paths Lead to Salvation; thou declarest thy Laws To be most just; If all these things be ue, I needs must call the Scriptures false, or you: Truth bids me tell thee boldly, when thou cry'st Th'art great, and good, and rich, and rare, thou ly'st: If thou art good and great, pray tell me why Thou wilt behold so vile a wretch as I▪ These things bespeak thee humble, unto which Thou plead'st not guilty; and if thou art rich, How can it be, that thou wilt condescend To feed my wants, that am so poor a friend? Strange is that charity▪ which seems to shine From such a iabolick brest as thine.
If my belief could keep an equal pace With thy swift tongue, how full of Faith & Grace Should I appear? Such Faith as would devast My wanton Soul, and make me weep as fast. It is impossible to find a Sion That has no Governor, except a Lyon. The Souls Petition to God. Oh Heav'n, I crave that thou wouldst keep me still From this most ile Progenitor of Ill; Suffer him no t'infold me in his arms, r overcome me with his wanton charms: Oh make my heart obdure, that he may knock Upon my Soul, as on a Marble Rock; Be thou my Fort, and then I shall endure His furious on-sets, and repose secure: Give me thy grace, that I may be content; Make me as strong, as he is impudent. Now let the spring-tyde of thy fierce desires Flow to the height, thou shalt not quench my ! Know Satan, know, my heart reserves no place For thy abode, I scorn thee to thy face: The well-dy'd colours of my Soul declares Defiance to thee, and my brest prepares To give thee battel; strike, I fear thee not; Whose arm'd with Faith needs fear no Canon-shot.
What impious tongue is that which dares defie Sat. My power with so much boldness? So. Wretch, 'tis I; 'Tis I (infernal Traytor) that will spend My strength to prove thou art a flatt'ring friend. Sat. Move me to anger, do, and thou shalt find A courteous friend at last may prove unkind: Have I not woo'd thee almost night and day To go to Heaven? Sou. The quite contrary way. Sat. Have I not labour'd like a watchful father To nourish thee? Sou. Or like a Devil rather. Sat. Have I not always taken great delight? Sll. To take away good gold, and give me light. Sat. How much nocturnal and diurnal care Have I sustain'd for thee? Sou. True, t'insnare. Sat. Have I not been assiduous to a wait Upon thy pleasure? Sou. And corrupt my state. Sat. Have I not proffer'd all that can be given To a sick Soul? Sou. To drive my Soul from Hea∣ven. Sat. Did I not promise to be true and just? Sll. Did I not say, I'd neither try nor trust? Sat. Did I not promise that I'd make thee wise? Sou. Did I not say thou wert compos'd of lyes? Sat. Did I not promise to encrease thy store? Sou. Did I not say such wealth would make me poor? Sat. Did I not promise to advance thy flame? Sou. Did I not say thy honors were thy shame?
Sat. Did I not promise to uphold thy peace? Sou. Did I not say such wars would never cease? Sat. Did I not promise thee a Crown of life? Sou. Did I not say that Crown would crown my strife? Sat. Did I not promise thee eternal glory? Sou. Did I not say that promise was a story? Sat. Did I not promise I would give thee all? Sou. Did I not say such promises were small? Sat. Did I not tell thee I was great and good? Sou. Did I not answer 'twas in shedding blood? Sat. Did I not tell thee that my ways were best? Sou. Did I not answer that they were unblest? Sat. Did I not tell thee that thou shouldst have joy? Sou. Did I not answer such as would destroy? Sat. Did I not tell thee that I did lament? Sou. Did I not answer that I was content? Sat. Did I not tell thee what a friend I'd prove? Sou. Did I not answer that I could not love? Sat. Thus by fair terms  labour'd to obtain. Sou. Thus in oul terms  told thee 'twas in vain. Sat. Then I begun to threaten thee with grief. Sou. And then I fled to Heav'n, and found relief. Sat. I threatened to afflict thee with large pains. Sou. I told thee such afflictions were my gains. Sat. I told thee more then now I will express. Sou. My answers made thee wish I had spoke less.
Sat. But now I see my real words can find No rest within the center of thy mind; For 'tis in vain to sow the seeds of life In a dead heart that is manur'd with strife: I'le therefore cease my importuning love, I'le shew my Serpent, and keep close my Dove. Do, do thy worst, vile wretch, I'le make thee know Griefs abstract, and the quintessence of woe; I'le load thee with extremities, thy brest Shall always crave, but find no place of rest: Had but my grave advice receiv'd a place Within thy heart, thou hadst been fil'd with grace, But now the inundations of thy trouble Shall overflow thee, and I will redouble My new-contrived plagues; I'le make thee feel My melting heart is now transform'd to steel: Thy tongue shall (like a bolt of thunder) roul And roar within thy mouth; thy sulphurous Soul Shall flash forth lightening, and thy blood-red eyes Shall blaze like Comets in the troubled Skies; Thy teeth shall gnash, as if they scorn'd to be Concomitants in so much miserie: Oh how I'le carbonado every part, And sill thy body with increasing smart; Thy Soul shall lure for death, but that shall hate To pierce upon thee, and contemn thy state:
Life shall be still incroaching, but thy breath Shall scorn that life, and hate it unto death; Thy flesh shall drop forth brimstone, and thy bones Shall court each other in their crackling tones; Horror shall be thy watchman, curses shall Possess thy tongue, one torment still shall call Upon another; when thy voyce shall cry But for a drop, Confusion shall reply, No, no, thou shalt not; if a golden Myne ould buy a drop, that drop should not be thine; Then shalt thou say, if thou hadst been at first Advis'd by me, thou hadst not been accurst: Thus in this sad Dilemma shalt thou roar, And crave my succour, but I'le not deplore Thy woful state, because thou wert averse To goodness; after folly comes a curse: Then shalt thou know and find I will exile All thoughts of pity, and I'le rather smile Then grieve at thy distress; ah know, 'tis hard To force an entrance where the gates are bar'd: Fond Soul, be serious, let thy thought reflect On my indulgency, and give respect Unto my elmency; believe, I will e good to thee, do but forsake thy Ill; Forsake, forsake that evil which will tur To thy destruction; do not, do not burn
The precious fuel of thy chaste desires In idle, wanton, all consuming fires: The Post of Time is swift, and knows no stay; 'Tis time to go when Reason calls away: Protraction's dangerous; it is not good To strive with that which scorns to be withstood: Then do not thou procrastinate, but take This opportunity; do but forsake Thy former ways, and readily incline Thy self to me, and I will make thee shine With so much lustre, that all eyes shall gaze Upon thy brightness, and admire with praise: Oh may my language teach thee to believe, That so my torments may not make thee grieve In utter darkness, that thou mayst imbrace Those glories which adorn my peaceful place: Repent, (dear Soul) repent what thou hast done, Then call me father, and I'le love my son: Thus having told thee all, I'le here desist; Be thou more apt to yield then to resist. Sou I find, I find, you first inflict a wound, And then with balsom strive to make it sound: You'l make me smile at first, but after groan; One hand incloses bread, the other stone; I fain would take the bread, but that I stand In fear and danger of the stony hand▪
Therefore, to shun all danger, I'le despise Your fond advice, and practise to be wise: If all should prove, that you have told me, true, I know the best and worst that thou canst do; As for your threatnings, they shall not disturb My peaceful thoughts, my faith shall be their curb▪ Urge me no more, but let me rest in quiet, Strong is that stomack can disgest thy diet. Sat. And is it so? will no perswasions work Upon thy thoughts? Those pregnant crimes that lurk Within thy brest, will, like to Scorpions, gnaw Thy groaning heart; such sorrow knows no Law: But since thou wilt not be advis'd, expect To find reward, as I have found neglect. Ah, why fond wretch, why dost thou thus provide Thy feeble self to strive against the tyde? Alas, alas! why art thou lull'd asleep In follies lap? Rouze up for shame, and weep For thine infirmities; be not thus cross To him that would preserve thee from a loss: 'Tis time to cast away the works of night, And cloath thee with the shining robes of light. Sou. If your strong Oratory had the skill To make me yield to your unsatiate will, It were enough; what more could you desire, Then a bad period to your bad desire?
But stay (bold friend) I'le meditate, and see What fruit will spring from thine infernal tree. Sat. What, must I stay (vile wretch) till you dispute, And prove the goodness of my pleasing fruit? Must I be always waiting on the train Of your desires, and spend my time in vain? No, no, I will not; for it is unfit I should attend, if you will not submit: Th'incensed fury of my spirits burn To be in action, I will not adjourn A minute longer; go, and hug thy vice, Thou lov'st the bargain, but abhor'st the price: Urge me no more, away, I have forgot All thoughts of friendship, and I know thee not: And here I leave thee to the lawless power Of thine own passion; cursed be that hour that brought thee forth; if all this will not do, May all men curse thee, and I'le curse thee too. Sou. And can the spring of thy affections find So soon an Autumn? Canst thou be unkind With so much ease? And can your real brest (As you so call't) be so soon dispossest Of love and patience? Oh how bad and strange Is the effect of such a sudden change! 'Tis disputable, for I know not whether Anger, or policy, or both together,
Whart thee to these extreams: Well then, pursue Thine own deis, and I will bid ade To all thy follies; yet my heart begun T'expand it self before the gl'ring Sun O hy perswasions; if thy sharp'ned rage I d ot so soon exploded me the stage, I , I fear, I had before this hour Bn prostituted to thy tameless power: Bgone, begone; but stay, hark atan, hark, Go bst you shot, but fairly miss'd the mark. Why dost thou bid me go? I'm sure you speak , in st, thou Wl not break of ; though thou hast exprest Thy  the   jst: god  which lve in thinner places with graces: and cy ▪ 'd fire▪ ain:
``Above all sense: when Reason finds divorce, ``The tongue proves subject to a headlong course. What I have spoke observe, and thou shalt find Proceeded from my passion, not my mind: The misconstruction of a word may make The dearest friends o vary, and forsake The plains of friendship, though their hearts are r From the curst evils of Inconstancy: Therefore mistake me not, nor do not thou Construe my words with an incensed brow: Smile on me then, and cheerfully impart The loving chidings of a friendly heart; Then shalt thou see with what a willing arm I will conduct and guide thee from all harm: Believe me Soul. I am not come to scatter Uncertain stories, but a real matter; What I hold forth unto thee, is the stem Of a pure heart, thou art the only m Shall grow upon it, come, and let's combine, I shall rejoyce to see thee prove divine. Sou. The Bias of thy Love runs now so strong, That I much fear 'twill not continue long; I find, I find thou hast the art to sail With any wind; thou labour'st to prevail, But tis in vain, for know, I'le ust thee not, My zealous heart is eaul of a plot▪
I cannot be so foolish as to trust Without assurance that thou wilt be just▪ Wilt thou be true? speak with a real breath. Sat. I will be just (beleeve me) unto death; I will, I will; oh may I never be True to my self, if I am false to thee. Sou. If thou art just and constant, tell me where Thy seat is plac'd, and who is Prince of th'ir▪ Be true in this, and thou shalt find that I, According to thy answer, will reply. Sat. I'le tell thee then (because I'le now fulfill The vast desires of thy enquiring will) Where my refulgent Seat is plac't; prepare Thy ears to hear, I'le speedily declare. The large extent of my unbounded grace Cannot be comprehended in one place, Because I am immortal, unconfin'd To time or place; I live in every mind That's truly real, and not disagreeing To my known Laws; I have no local Being: The World's a spacious Body, I the Soul Which lives in every part compleat and whole: Thus this dispute is easily decided▪ For what's immortal cannot be divided. Nay more, because I'le fill thee with content, I say I'm Prince of every Element,
Therefore of Air; Now if thou canst enquire Any thing moe, I'le answer thy desire. Sou. Before I suffer my swift thoughts to slide Into more questions, I'le be satisfy'd In what is past: If so it be, you have No local Being, how then will you save Those Hosts of Souls which you intend shall be Seal'd with the Signet of Eternitie? Did you not tell me, that your peaceful Seat Was rich, sublime, (and without measure) great? If thus it be, as 'tis exprest by you, 'Tis more then strange that 'tis not local too: Clear but this doubt, and thou shalt quickly find Those duties that attend an honest mind Flow from my brst, till th I'le st in , As you perform, so shall my love encrease. Sat. Ambiguous Soul, why dost thou thus connive At thine own follies? Why dost thou deprive Thy self of comfort, comforts that will heal Th'exulcerous sores of thy distemper'd weal? Why art thou thus inquisitive? the thing That thou desir'st o know (if known) will bring Small satisfaction to thy dubiours brest; He's wise enough that knows he shall be blest▪ If you enquire in such a doubtful case, You'l lose your rest in seeking out the place.
Surcease thy thoughts, and do not proudly knock Thy self in pieces, now thou knowst the rock: Pry not too far, let secret things alone, My Zodiack has more signs then must be known: 'Tis not the Heav'n of Heav'ns that can contain Me, the Creator, and my glorious train: I am even what I please, and I will be Even where I wil. So. Wher's that? Sa. What's that to thee? The knowledg of my Seat does no way tend To thy Salvation, therefore cease to spend Such truitless thoughts, cast by this needless care, Learn to know what I am, no matter where. Sou I must confess, it is not good to pry In things that suit not the capacity; But seeing 'twas your pleasure to express So much of friendship, I made bold t'address My self unto you, pardon then my crimes, You know that wisest men may doubt sometimes: Your weights are light, or else your courage fails, You have not strength enough to turn the scales Of my affections, yet you had almost Droven my ill-man'd ship upon your Coast; The winds of your perswasions rage and roar Within my brest▪ I cannot find a shoar For my desires; I'm tost from wave to wave, And am become a most distracted slave:
Those heav'nly thoughts which formerly frequent∣ed The closet of my brest, are now prevented By base-bred fancies, fancies that arise From a foul brain, and makes me to dispise Almost my self; I know not what to do, I dare not, oh I dare not yield to you; And yet I hardly can believe thou wilt Burthen thy conscience with so foul a guilt As to betray me, sure thou art more kind Then to abuse a well-affected mind▪ But yet I dare not trust a Soul-pursuer, Because thou kill'st when thou pretend'st to cure. I reel, I reel, (if not sustain'd) I shall Receive a sudden and a deadly fall; What shall I do in this deplot'd condition? I fear, I fear I've lost my best Physician: Try Satan, try, and see what may be done For a sick Soul, that foolishly has run Beyond it self; oh see what thou canst do To give me ease, and then I'le call thee true. Sat. Now Soul I love thee; rouze, bid grief depart, Thou hast the symptomes of an honest heart: Methinks I could, with much content, afford To say thou speak'st a Christian at a word; Cheer up, and know that many troubles wait Upon the changes of an ancient State:
The work of Reformation alway brings Trouble at first, but afterwards it sings Anthems of Peace, whose fortunate event Will more then countervail thy discontent. He that has spent the treasure of his days Under one roof, has reason to dispraise The troubles of removing; yet at last (When his defatigating cares are past) He may declare himself to be a debter To fortune, and confess that life the better. Even so mayst thou (dear Soul) hereafter say, Blest be that hand which led thee from the way And paths of Ignorance, although at first 'Tis often known, beginnings are the worst Thou feel'st a private nakedness within, Because thou hast uncloth'd thy self of sin: Although, I must confess, there cannot be A  in nature, yet in thee There is an , and most be still, For what is empty craves a time to till. If he whole stomack hath sustain'd the rage Of sharp'ning hunger. should at first asswage His appece with sulness, would it not Produce a usere, and impose a blo Upon his wisdom, raing such a stfe Within his , that his e
Would be endanger'd? Therefore learn by rote, That moderation is the chiefest note: In all my Gammut, none can sing so high A note as moderation, only I. If I should let thee make too large a meal Of my rich Joys at first, I should reveal Too much of folly; for if thou shouldst take A surfeit at the first, It needs must make Thee fear, nay hate, to entertain my diet; 'Tis better far to spare at first then riot: Moreover, should I let thee taste thy fill At first, I know the reins of thy fierce will Would scorn a hand, 'tis dangerous to trust; Presumptions spur can never want for rust: Come Soul, let Reason rule thee, do not stain Thy well-dy'd judgment, 'tis a greater pain To fear, then suffer; come, I long to see Thee wanton with me in Eternitie; Then doubt no more, resolve, and let's away, There is no greater grief then to delay A happiness; be well inform'd of this, Procrastination is a foe to Bliss. Sou. Thy words imposthumate my heart, I feel A greater pain then ever Ixions wheel Knew how to inflict, extremities still crowd Into my thoughts; my sorrows call aloud,
And none will hear; what shall I do? for I Unworthy am to live, unfit to dye; Except thall▪ ruling power above will please T'inspect my Soul, and furnish me with ease, To whose blest ears I'le recommend my suit, My sorrows will not let my tongue be mute. Great Auditor of groans, oh let my cries, My sighs, my tears, invite thine ears, thine eyes To bear, and view me, for I must confess, My crimes are great, and I am nothing less Then what is least; alas! and nothing better Then what is worst, oh pardon me thy debter! I'm tost with grief, and know not where to steer My shipwrack'd self, but still my sins appear Before my face, whose looks almot affright, And make me start into eternal night: What shall I do? or whither shall I dee. That am an allen (Lord) except to thee▪ From thee leann, and I am o vile To come unto thee, having made  pol Or those most sacred mercies which thy hand upon me, there is no Command But I have broke; vec, gracious Lord, I know That thy abounding mercies excelling , which cannot lie urveying eye.
With shame I must confess the subtile art Of Satan hath impoysoned my heart; Oh I am sick to death, I swell, I burst Never was any soul so much accurst: There's none but thee, thou sacred antidote Can cure my grief, be therefore pleas'd to note My sad condition, let my sorrows lye Before thy face, oh hear me when I cry; Grant me the shield of faith, that I may stand In opposition to the powerfull hand O active Satan, weaken (Lord) his powre And add unto my strength; Let every hour Afford new mercies, mercies that may sail Into my breast, ah should my Foc prevail Oh then I perish, shorten (Lord) his chain And lengthen out my patience, oh make vaine His fierce attempts, that he may feel, and see When he is strongest, I'm as strong as he, Then shall my lipps extoll thee, and proclame The greatness of thy glory▪ and his shame Give but thy grace unto me (Lord) and then Say what thou wilt, my tongue shall say dmen. Sat. Let everlasting plagues and horror dwell Within so fit a soul, let black-mouth'd Hell Remove his scituation, and take An everlasting Lease, oh let him make
A Tenement of thee; dost thou think that I Will here thy prayers, oh no, I scorn thee, fiye Away, begon— Sou What voyce is this that makes this bold intrusion Into my eares, and grumbles out confusion, Me thinks I see a storme-portending cloud, Bowel'd with thunder, and I hear a loud And horrid noise, a noyse that would confound A wel-prepared eare to here the sound; Who would not quake at such a voyce as this That roares forth Malice with an Emphasis? My thoughts are interrupted, and amasement, Flashes like Lightning through the brittle casement Of my ill-glaed brest; It cannot be The voyce of Heav'n, a God so pure as he Hates to be envious, malice cannot spring From such a good (and love-composed) King; Although his voyce (made terrible) oft-times By the addition of mans dayly crimes Thunders against a sinner, yet his breath Can take no pleasure in a sinners death. Hereafter (Lord) when malice findes a voyce To speak, my understanding shall rejoyce, In knowing who it is; this heart of mine Shall never quake at any voyce but thine;
Then let hels deep-mouth'd blood-hound, roar & thunder Ile neither fear, nor love, nor quake, nor wonder, For 'tis not strange to here a Lyon roare That wants his prey, the more he has, the more He seeks for more, imploying still his power In seeking how, and whom he may devour; Know therefore Sathan, that I am prepar'd To meet thee, and I will not be out dar'd; Tis not thy false malisluous tongue shall tempt My heart to love, no, nor thy rage exempt My thoghts from heav'n, although thy craft stil lurks For opertunity to stop good works; When I compose my self, and strive o pray, Thou seek'st to tr my thoughts another way: Thou great corrupter of Diviner parts, Thou watchfull theif that steal'st into the hearts Of silly motds, think not to devour My armed heart with thy persuing power. Will nothing move thee, wilt thou still mistrust, Sat. If fare means will not move thee, foul means must What dost thou think my arm is grown so short It cannot reach thee, dost thou think to sport with my commands; say, thou imperious mite Who gave thee beeing, who created light, Who made the Heav'ns, the earth, the sea, reply Audacious wretch, speak, was it thee, or I,
Thou vain contender, dost thou think to gain By striving with me, any thing but pain, Oh no, thou shalt not, for Ile still renue Thy pinching sorrows, therefore bid adue To all thy comforts, for thou shalt no more Injoy those blessings thou injoyd'st before, Oh how thy horrid tongue shall roar and cry With Dives for a drop, but no supply Shall dare t'appear; the more thou crav'st, the less Thou shalt be heard, for nothing shall expresse The least of pleasure to thy per boyl'd heart, Thy chiefest food shall be perpetuall smart, Be well assured that thy eares thy eyes Shall hear, nor see, nought but extremities, Begon, begon, my sury hates delay; Hell, and damnation be thy lot, away. Sou. Experience makes me understand thou art A lively actor, of a deadly part, I finde the greatnesse of your swelling rage; Your Prologue speaks 'twould be a bloudy stage If you might act as King, but Heav'n prevent The cursed plots of your accurst intent; I fear thee not, because I know thy powre Is limitted, and thou canst not devoure Without commission, therefore do thy worst, And let thy envie swell untill it burst
And sall to nothing, my Creator gives Me faith to say that my Redeemer lives, And wil protect me from the rage of those That are my known and secret deadly Foes. Thy thundring words shal not make me complying For he's unwise that dyes for fear of dying; Thus being guarded with the shield of grace Ile spite deffiance in thine impious face. Thou art a Lyou, and thou seek'st for blood How bad's that soul that dares to think thee good; Urge me no more cashiere thy fruitlesse trouble, The more thou striv'st, the more Ile strive to double My resolutions, for I dare not venture To rest my heart on such a bloody center, Oh no I dare not; he that shal let goe A certain friend for a most certain foe Justly deserves to have no other fame, But what reproach can build upon his name; Should I permit my rambling thoughts to glance Upon thy love, the Plea of Ignorance Could not be prevalent, because 'tis known Unto the blest-united three in one That I (by his assistance) have discry'd Thy reall slat'ry, and thy humble pride; I dare affirm no greater pride can be Then that that's acted with humility,
But here I'le stop and leave thee to inherit Th' effects of a diabolique spirit. Sat. Accursed chatffe, dost thou think to scape The fury of my hand, or make a rape Upon my goodness, no, the Sun and Moon Shall stop their usuall progresses as soon As I will change my minde, vengeance is mine And Ile repay it on that Soul of thine. Begon, begon, expect thy sudden doom, It is thy sins give punishment a room: Let everlasting Plagues, and horror dwell Within so it a Soul, let black-mouth'd Hell Remove his scituation, and so take A still continuing Lease, oh let him make A ten'ment of thee, dost thou think that I YYill hear thy Prayers, oh no I scorn thee, sye Away, begon Sou If words could kill, I had been ere this time Worded to death, but now I hope to clime Above the reach of words in thy despight, Where thou may'st grumble at me, but not bite Even as the surly blood-desiring dog Ty'd with a chain, or loaded with a elog Grows sirr with restraint, and stands in awe Of nothing but his master, to whose law
He must submit and keep within his list; For fear will not permit him to resist; But if some wandring passenger should chance To walk along, he quickly would advance His watchfull head, and running too and fro From place to place, he tuggs but cannot go Beyond his bounds, but labours still in vaine (With fruitlesse biting of his sensless chain) To free himself, but when he finds his strength Is not sufficient to out-go the length Of his well-fastned chain, he soon devides His sharp-fang'd jaws, and bauls until his sides And lungs are weary, then he runs the round Until he layes himself upon the ground VVhere he remaineth much displeas'd and vext Seeming to threaten ruin to the next: So you (hels tydog) if thou couldst but strain And quit thy self from heaven's fast-holding chain VVhat Soul could scape thy jaws, or be possest Of lasting peace, or comfortable rest, How sad, how miserable had it been For patient Job, had but thy pow'r been seen Upon his heart; but Heaven that will controul In spight of malice, chain'd thee from his soul: Alas, alas! thy chain is not so long To reach a soul, nor is thy pow'r so strong
To break it at thy pleasure, thou mayst baul And bark forth envie, but not hurt at all; If thou art God [as thou pretendest] why, Why dost thou suffer such a thing as I T' expostulate so long, and dost not show Thy judgments in my speedy overthrow. Sat. It is my goodness and not thy desert That breeds for bearance in my tender heart, Alas, alas, what honor would acrue To me in conquering such a thing as you, I could within a moments time asswage, (But that my clemencie out-vies my rage) Thy swelling fury, for I could discharge Vollies of wrath and easily inlarge Thy restless torments, I could make thee run (Like morning mists before the rising sun) Out of my presence, If I should but say The word begon, ah lasse thou couldst not stay, But ah I cannot, for I hate to hame, Love guides my strength, & that strength guids my arm Even as the Sheepheard with be-dewed locks Watches the feeding of his harmless flocks For fear the bold-fac'd wolf should chance to peep Into the coasts of his beloved sheep, And like a awlesse Tyrant, soon commence (Against those Emblems of pure innocence)
A bloody action, which would soon incite The Sheepheards grief, to see so sad a sight, So I th' eternall Sheepheard dayly watch My wel-fed Lambs for fear Hels wolf should catch Or fright (not being fearfull to be bold) My gentle flocks from their delightfull fold; I am beloved, and mine own, will own My sacred Name, my voyce is not unknown Unto my Sheep, they alwayes will be all Firmly obedient to my chearfull call, For which obedience they shal finde reward Nay such a one, as alwayes shall accord To their desires, thrice happy shall they be In truly calling, and in owning me To be their Sheepheard, nothing can more please M' indulgent soul, then such dear slocks as these, I will preserve them, and no wolt shal dare To seize upon them, or presume to reare Their downy fleeces, nothing shal be nearer Unto my heart, and nothing shal be dearer In my affections, for I wil affect Even where, and when I finde a true respect. What strange contusions hath thy language bred Sou Within my serious thoughts, how hast thou fed My ears with slatt'ries, but it is in vaine; Because my heart hath vow'd not to retain
Thy fain'd expressions, nothing shall remove My love from God, nor nothing make me love Thy wretched self; then be content, and cease To urge my mind, or interrupt my Peace. Go, do thy worst, And when that worst is done Sit down as wisely as thou hast begun: Sat. Art thou resolv'd? VVell then, let vengance light Upon thy cursed head, begon, thou mite (Nay lesse) of goodnesse, go, make hast t'inherit Those plagues that waite upon so damn'd a spirit? Sou May this be cal'd a farewell, if it be, The self same farewell must attend on thee; I hate, nay scorn to bid farewell to you, Tis charity enough to bid, . The Souls Thankefulness, and Request to God. MOst gracious God, I having lately felt The servont of thy mercies, needs must melt Into a thankfulnesse, Ah should I be Ungratefull to so blest a God as thee
'Twere pitty, ah 'twere pitty, that the ayre Should give me breath, or thy fierce hand forbear To throw me headlong to the deep abis Of speedy ruin, where no comfort is: Oh glorious Lord be pleased to inflame My heart with raptures, to extoll thy name; Alas I'm weak, and if thou shouldst deny Thy ayde, nothing could be more weak than I If thou wilt help me, I shall be so strong, That nothing can prevail to do me wrong, Lord I am blind, oh therefore let thy light Expell those clouds that thus ecclips my sight; Be thou my guide, my strength, my sight, my way, O else (being weak) I shall or fall, or stray; Oh leave me not, but as thou hast begun To shew me mercy, let thy mercy run VVith my desires, and grant that I may be A true forgetter of all things, but thee, And rather then I should forget thy call, Oh let me have no memory at all? Wean me, oh wean me from this nursing earth Make it my sorrow, and thy Throne my mirth. Let every morning make me know, and say Thy Laws are Just, or let me know no day; Let every ev'ning make me take delight n thy commands, or let me know no night.
Inspire my heart [O God] and make it▪ lad Always in thee, or make it alwayes sad; If thou affict'st me, make me understand, Thou hast a storming and a calming hand; If Poverty oppress me, whilst I live, Oh let thy mercy send me friends to give, Or if thy goodness please to send me store O give me grace to think I may be poor, It matters not, O Lord, how poor I be Unto the world, if I am rich to thee; If I am hungry,  be thou my meate, If I am weary,  be thou my seate; Or if I feast, O Lord, be thou my guest; If I am restlesse, Lord, be thou my rest; If I am thirsty, Lord, be thou my spring If I am subject, Lord, be thou my King; If I have virtue make me dote upon her If Honorable, be thou my honor: And if I cannot know that which I would, Be pleas'd to make me know, Lord, what I should; Then shal my ready lips expresse and show I know no more, then thou wouldst have me know My unty'd tongue shal evermore proclaim Th' attendant glories of thy sacred Name.
The sacrifice of y• icked is an abomination to the Lord,  the  of the pright is his delight. Pro: 15. 8
Divine Ejaculations. I. GReat God whose Scepter Rules the earth Distill thy fear into my heart. That being rapt with holy mirth I may proclaim how good thou art. Open my lips that I may sing, Full prayses to my God, my King. Ejaculation. II. Lord make the torments we endure The Symptomes of thy Love, not wrath: Thou art our Chiron, we thy cure Our crime's our sores, thy blood's our bath, O we are weake, be thou as strong How long O Lord; O Lord, how long.
Ejaculation 3. Just Judge of earth, in whom we trust Make sharp thy sword, and bend thy bow, Consume the wicked; Save the Just, For thou the Reines, and heart dost know Then shal our tongues sing forth thy praise, And praise thy justice al our dayes. Ejaculat. 4. Lord teachus timely how to pray, And give us patience to expect; Thou hatest sin; O guide our way; Judge thou our Foes: The Just protect: Then shal the wicked fall with shame, And we will sing that love thy name. Ejaculat. 5. Creat Son of the eternal God To whom the world subjected lyes, Break not, but breed us with thy rod: O we are foolish, make us wise: And if thy wrath begin to flame, Wee'l seek protection in thy Name.
Ejaculat. 6. Lord, if our enemies encrease, And we invoke, bow down thine ear; Be thou our shield, and make our Peace, And we will scorn what worldlings fear. Great God of health, great Lord of Rest, O make us thine, and we are blest. Ejaculat. 7. Thou righteous Hearer of Requests, Make voyd the counsels of thunjust▪ Send peace into our trembling brests, And fill our hearts with fear and trust: If thou wilt make thy face to shine, Let others joy in corn and wine. Ejaculat. 8. Lord, thou whose equal hand allays The poor mans grief, whose help thou art, Encline my heart to give thee praise, And I will praise thee with my heart: Forsake me not; for, Lord, I trust, As men are cruel, thou art just.
Ejaculat. 9. Lord, crush my Lyon-hearted Foes, Rout them that seek to ruine me; Rise up, O God, forget not those Whose wrongs refer their cause to thee: Or if the wicked must oppress, Be thou not far from my distress. Ejaculat. 10. Great God, thy Garden is defac'd, The Weeds do thrive, thy Flowers decay; O call to mind thy Pose past, Restore thou them, cut these away: Till then, let not the Weeds have power To starve or tain the poorest Flower. Ejaculat. 11. Lord, leave us not too long a space; O view our griefs, and hear our pray'r▪ Clear thou our eyes, unv thy face, Lest Foes presume, and we despair. Lord, make thy mercy our repose, And we will sing amidst thy Foes.
Ejaculat. 12. Lord, teach me to renown thy N, Which through the world is so renown'd: Let man thy glorious Works proclaim, Whose head with glory thou hast crown'd. As beasts to men subjected be, So Lord subject mans heart to thee. Ejaculat. 13. In all extreams, Lord, thou art still The Mount whereto my hopes do flee; O make my Soul detest all ill, Because so much abhor'd by thee. Lord, let thy gracious tryals show That I am just, or make me so. Ejaculat. 14. Great God, whom Fools deny, how dare Our lips request thy glorious Eyes! If thou but see, thou canst not spare, And what thou seest thou must despise. Lord, make us hear thy saving voyce, Then mayst thou see, and we rejoyce.
Ejaculat. 15: Lord, cleanse my heart, and guide my tongue, Preserve my lips from false deceit; Protect my hands from doing wrong, Teach whom to love, and whom to hate: Instruct me how to take and give; Lord, grant me this, and I shall live. Ejaculat. 16. Lord, teach my Reins, that in the night My tutor'd Reins may tutor me; And keep me always in thy sight For in thy sight all pleasures be: Let not my soul in darkness stray, O thou my life, O thou my way. Ejaculat. 17. Behold my Right, and right my wrongs, Thou Saviour of all those that trust: O I am weak, my Foes are strong; Lord thou art gracious, thou art just. O make me rightly prize this life, And let thy glory be my strife.
Ejaculat. 18. Great God, my strength, at whose command, Whil'st I serve thee, all creatures serve me, Protect me from my Foe-mans hand; O, as thou hast preserv'd, preserve me: With peaceful conquest crown my days, And I will crown thy Power with praise. Ejaculat. 19. Great God, the work of whose high hands The glory of thy Name declare, How perfect sweet are thy Commands! How purely just thy Precepts are! Cleanse all my sins, clear every spot, Both open, secret, known, forgot. Ejaculat. 20. Accept, O God, my holy fires, Lead thou our Armies, give success, Bless our designs, grant our desires; O hear and help in our distress: Preserv'd by thee, we shall prevail. When Chariots flee, and horses fail.
Ejaculat. 21. O God, whose Judgments are severe, And Mcs full of sweet compassion, Scourge thou thy Foes, save those that fear, Ravish my Soul with thy Salvation; And I will spend my joyful days In Psalms of thanks, and Songs of praise. Ejaculat. 22. My Jesus, thou that wert no less Then God, and yet with men forlorn, Larths Comforter, yet comfortless, Heavens Glory, yet to men a scorn. What thanks shall I return to thee, That wert all this, and more for me! Ejaculat. 23. Great Shepherd of my Soul, thy hand Both gives me food, and guides my way; Subject my will to thy Command, And I shall never starve, nor stray. If thou wilt keep me in thy sight, Thy House shall be my whole delight.
Ejaculat. 24. Lord, purge my heart, and cleanse my hand, Direct my tongue, and guide my will; For nothing that's unclean can stand Within thy great, thy glorious Hill. Lift up my heart, deprest with sin, And let the King of Glory in. Ejaculat. 25. Lord, guide my footsteps in thy Truth, And let thy grace be my repose; Forgive the frailties of my youth, And free me from my causless Foes: Redeem thine Isr'el from their hand, And bring me to thy promis'd Land. Ejaculat. 26. Lord, keep me just, and judg my right, Prove thou my reins, and try my heart; O make thy Temple my delight, And fix my dwelling where thou art: Redeem my Soul, confirm my ways, And give me power to give thee praise.
Ejaculat. 27. My God whose fear drives fear away, Shew me the beauty of thy House; Preserve me in the evil day, That I may sing, and pay my vows. Lord, grant me fear, and grard my path; Give Patience, and with Patience, Faith. Ejaculat. 28. O God, be thou my living Rock, Whereto my rstless Soul may fly: Bst be thy Name; when I invoke, Thu hear'st my suit, and send'st supply. , or else convert▪ Or weaken, that they may not hurt. Ejaculat. 29. Shall Mountain, Desert, Beast, and Tree, Yield to that heavenly Voyce of thine, And shall that voyce not startle me? No stir this stone, this heart of mine? No, Lord; till thou new-oe mine ear Thy Voyce is lost, I cannot hear.
Ejaculat. 30. Lord, let the evening of my grief Be followed with a morning joy; Hear thou my cry, and send relief, That tak'st no pleasure to destroy: If thou wilt lengthen out my days, Their task shall be to sing thy Praise▪ Ejaculat. 31. Lord, thou that hoord'st thy Grace for those That love and fear thy sacred Name, Redeem me from my conqu'ring Foes, And vindicate my trust from shame▪ Give me fair Conquest at the end, Till then, true courage to attend. Ejaculat. 32. Let my confession lanch my sore, And let forgiveness cure my wound; Lord, teach me early o implore, For I am lost till tho art found: Then shall my joyful Songs express Thy Praises, and my thankfulness.
Ejaculat. 33. Great Lord of Wonders, thou by whom My heart was fram'd and form'd alone, From whose high Power all powers come, That didst but say, and it was done; Appoint the remnant of my days To see thy Power, and sing thy praise. Ejaculat. 34. Lord, let the Sun-shine of thy face So clear mine eyes, so cleanse my heart, That being season'd with thy grace, My Soul may taste how sweet thou art. O let thy mercy make me just, And then my heart shall fear and trust. Ejaculat. 35. Lord, plead my cause, and right my wrong, And take my Snarers in their snare; O be not from me, Lord, too long, Lest they triumph, and I despair, Let all my Foes be cloth'd with shame, Whil'st I sing praises to thy Name.
Ejaculat. 36. Fountain of Light, and living Breath, Whose Mercies never fail nor fade, Fill me with life that hath no death, Fill me with light that hath no shade: Confound the proud in their pretence, And let thy wings be my defence. Ejaculat. 37. Be thou my Trust, my God, and I, When ners thrive, will not repine; Or if my wants should want supply, I will not fret, I will not whine: What if their wealth, my wants, increase, They shall have plagues at last, I pace. Ejaculat. 38. Lord, in thy wrath correct me not, For I confess and hate my sin; My flesh consumes, my bones do rot, ▪ pains without, and pans within. O thou that art the God of Rest, Release my sin, relieve my brest.
Ejaculat. 39. Lord, curb my tongue, and make we see How few my days, how short their length: Incline my heart to trust in thee; Remove thy scourge, or give me strength: I am a Pilgrim, hear my cry, And send some comfort ere I dye. Ejaculat. 40. Lord, thou whose Mercies do exceed, O fill my language with thy praise, Stand thou my Helper at my need, Confound the wicked in their ways: Be thou my Comfort in my grief, And crown my Patience with elief. Ejaculat. 41. Lord, if thy pleasure make me poor, Thou wilt bless them that give me bread; If thy sick hand hath scourg'd me sore, That hand that struck will make my bed. Sustain me, Lord; be thou my Store, I shall be neither sick nor poor.
Ejaculat. 42. My God, full tears are all the dyet That feed my sad, my drooping brest! In my distress, in my disquiet, Be thou my Stay, be thou my Rest: Be thou my God in my relief, And I will triumph in my grief. Ejaculat. 43. Lord, right my wrongs, and plead my right Against all those that seek my Ill; O let thy perfect Truth and Light Conduct me to thy holy Hill: Then shall thy Altar make relation Of thy due Praise, and my Salvation. Ejaculat. 44. Lord, our fore-fathers found redress In all their frights, in all their fears; Wilt thou be dumb to my distress, And not my God, as well as theirs? Redeem my Soul, whose loyal knee Ne're bow'd to any God, but thee.
Ejaculat. 45. Great Bridegroom, fill thy dearest Spouse With outward glory, inward graces; May she forget her fathers house, And only clinge to thy embraces: Affect her heart with Love and Duty, And then take pleasure in her Beauty. Ejaculat. 46. Lord, help me when my griefs do call, In my distress O be thou near; Then if Earth change, or Mountains fall, I will not aint▪ I will not fear. Shew me thy Wonders, and inflame My heart to magnifie thy Name. Ejaculat. 47. Lord, let thy Judgments fill all those That love thy Mount with joy and rth; Confound and crush all Sions Foes, Sion the glory of the Earth: Let all that love thy Sions glory, Recount her State, repeat her Story.
Ejaculat. 48. Lord, teach me wisely to contemn All goods that transitory be, Let me not stand possest of them, If they be not possest in thee. If I be wealthy, and not wise. I live but like a beast that dyes. Ejaculat. 49. Lord God of gods, before whose Throne Stand fire and storms, O what shall we Reues to Heav'n that is our own, When all the world belongs to thee! We have no offering to impart, But praises, and a wounded heart. Ejaculat. 50. Lord, if thy Mercies purge my heart, Conc'd in lust, and born in sin▪ Breathe truth into my inward part, Renew me a firm spirit within: Then let thy goodness not detest The ruines of a broken brest.
Ejaculat. 51. Let others boast in gold, and prize Ev'l more then good, and love deceit, Thy Mercies, Lord, are my supplies, And on thy Name will I await. Lord, let thy Mercies still inure My brest to love the thing that's pure. Ejaculat. 52. Lord, if thou take away thy hand, How all compos'd of fears are we! What Arm can save? what strength can stand? When Man, poor man's forsook by thee? Lord, keep my Faith in thee unshaken, For thou forsak'st not till forsaken. Ejaculat. 53. Lord, let thy Name secure and free My threat'ned Soul from all my Foes; Stand thou with them that stand for me, Support all these, suppress all those: Then shall my Soul division run Upon thy Praise; till Time be done▪
Ejaculat. 54. Hearer of Prayers, confound my Foes, That bruise my tortur'd Soul to dust: In man, alas, there's no repose; Foes have no pity, Friends no trust. My trust is in thy Word, which says, They shall not live out half their days. Ejaculat. 55. O God, the malice of my Foes Encreaseth dayly more and more; But, Lord, thou art my safe repose, Thou art my strength, thou art my store: Be thou my gracious God, and then I will not fear the pow'r of men. Ejaculat. 56. Be gracious, Lord, unto my grief, For in thy shadow do I trust; O send me plentiful relief, For thou art merciful and just; Then shall my spirits utter forth Twi light Hosanna's to thy worth.
Ejaculat. 57. Lord, keep me from those hearts and tongues That practise mischief from the womb; Weigh right to them that weigh us wrongs, And let confusion be their doom: But let the Just be fill'd with mirth, And fear that God that rules the Earth. Ejaculat. 58. Lord, save me from my Foes; make voyd Their Plots, and all their Counsels vain; For ever let them be destroy'd, For in thy hand my hopes remain: And I will always spend my days In Hymns of thanks, and Songs of praise. Ejaculat. 59. Lord, though we feel the bitter taste O thy displeasure for a while; Yet thou art gracious, and at last Thy angry brow, that frown'd, will smile. O when that storm is over-blown, Thou'lt trample those that tread us down.
Ejaculat. 60. Lord, hear my troubled voyce, and bring My Soul to that sweet Rock of Rest; Protect all those that strive to sing Thy praises with a cheerful brest: Let comfort with our years increase, That we may praise thy Name in peace. Ejaculat. 61. Lord God, from whom all mercy springs, Instruct my hopes to wait on thee; Teach me what vain and fruitless things The helps of what is earthly be. All strength belongs to thee alone, 'Tis thou, my God, must help, or none. Ejaculat. 62. Lord, how I long to see thy face, That I might spend me in thy praise! Thou art my glory in disgrace; Sustain my steps, direct my ways: Thou art my Refuge; when opprest With grief, my Joy; with toyl, my Rest.
Ejaculat. 63. Lord, hide me from my bloody Foes, For in thy goodness do I trust; Protect my sought-for life from those That shoot in secret for the just. So then shall I that fear thy Name Have cause of glory, they of shame. Ejaculat. 64. Thou gracious Hearer of Requests, Hide all my sins behind thy merits; Showre down thy Spirit into our brests, And drop thy grace into our spirits; That from our faith rich works may spring, And give us cause to shout and sing. Ejaculat. 65. Lord, if thy flame must needs be felt, Let us be purged in that flame; Let our rebellious spirits melt Into the Praises of thy Name; That we being tutor'd, and kept under, May fear with love, and love with wonder.
Ejaculat. 66. Lord, let thy favour still inflame Our light'ned hearts to walk thy ways, That all the World may praise thy Name, And all the Earth may sing thy Praise: So fructifie our hearts, that we May bless thy Name, being blest by thee. Ejaculat. 67. Lord, rise in pow'r within my heart, And chase my sins, thy Foes, and mine, Then shall I see thee as thou art, In Glory great, in Power divine: So I, more white then Snow, shall sing Thy ways, and praise my God, my King. Ejaculat. 68. To that sweet Lamb, which did sustain Grief above weight, Pain above measure, Whose stripes, and scoffs, and grief, and pain, Were only purchas'd by our pleasure, Be Honor, Glory, Praises, given By Souls on Earth, by Saints in Heaven.
Ejaculat. 69. Let shame be their due recompence That seeke to wound my Soul with shame: Be thou their help, and strong defence, That seek thee Lord, and love thy Name. Make haste, O God, for I do waste My Soul with grief; O God, make haste. Ejaculat. 70. Lord, thou that underneath thy wing Didst keep me in, and from, the womb, Assist my age, that it may sing Thy praise in ages yet to come▪ Preserve my Soul protect my name; Shame be to them that seek my shame. Ejaculat. 71. Great Prince of Peace, whose Kingdom brings Justice, Redemption, Power, and Peace, That bends the knees and hearts of Kings, And fill'st all Nations with encrease, All Praises, Honor, Glory, be Ascrib'd alone, great Prince, to thee.
Ejaculat. 72. O God, whose dreadful Voyce, like Thunder, Affrights the Earth, and shakes the Ayr, Whose Works and Ways are full of wonder, That hear'st my plaints, and grant'st my pray'r, Forsake me not, but when I stray, O let thy Crook reform my way. Ejaculat. 73. O thou, whose Mercy did begin Before all Time, unty'd to Times, As thou forgav'st our Fathers Sin, Be like wise gracious to our Crimes! Th'art now a God, as well as then, And we, as they, no more then men. Ejaculat. 74. O God, the Sion of my Soul Is wholly desolate and waste▪ Where thou shouldst rule, my lusts controul; O Lord, relieve, O God, make haste: Then shall my heart and tongue proclaim Eternal Praises to thy Name.
Ejaculat. 75. Glorious Creator, make thy face to shine On this our poor distressed Land; Defend, and dress thy fading Vine, And bless the Man of thy right hand: Let thy Free▪ grace inflame our hearts. And we will sing thy praise in parts. Ejaculat. 76. O God, our Song, our Strength, whose hand Hath broke our bonds, and set us free, Incline our hearts to thy Command, And we will own no God but thee: Conduct and feed us as thy Flock, And give us honey from thy Psal▪ 81. 16 Rock. Ejaculat. 77. Direct, O God, the Judges brest, Preserve his hands, his eyes upright, That he may vindicate th'opprest, And guard him from injurious might: O let him know that he shall be, As Judg of others, judg'd by thee▪
Ejaculat. 78. Lord, cast thine eyes upon thy Foes, Confound their Troops, that are combin'd Against thy Flock, which thou hast chose, Make them like chaff before the wind: Defeat their plots with sudden shame, That they may seek Jehovah's Name. Ejaculat. 79. Lord, teach mine eyes, my will, my heart, To see▪ to choose, and to desire Thy beautious Courts wherein thou art▪ O fill my thoughts with holy fire. Be thou my Sun, whose glorious Rays May light my Soul to sing thy praise. Ejaculat. 80. O God, remit thy Peoples Sin, And shew the Sun-shine of thy Face, Repress thy fury, and begin T'inspire us with thy saving grace; That Righteousness and Truth may meet, And light our hearts, and lead our feet.
Ejaculat.. 81. Great Spring, from whence all mercy flows To them that trust and love thy Name, Give me thy strength, and then my Foes Shall see thy greatness, and their shame: Be thou my Way, my Truth, my Light, So shall I live, and dye upright. Ejaculat. 82. Sion, the glory of the Earth, And Subject of my holy Passion, May all the Well-springs of my mirth Be ounded upon thy Foundation▪ Of all delights I wish no other, Then to be Son to such a Mother. Ejaculat. 83. Lord, let thy fury cease to burn, Or else my Soul must cease  e▪ Can praises issue from the Urn? What thanks can ashes give to thee? Enough, if thou but undertake me, Let death surprize, let friends forsake me.
Ejaculat. 84. Lord, thou whose Mercy fails not those That build their trust upon thy Name, Protect my Soul from all my Foes, Then shall my tongue thy worth proclaim: So shall the remnant of my days crown'd in Peace, and thou with Praise▪ Ejaculat. 85. Eternal God, before whose Eyes A thousand years seem as a day, Direct our hearts, and make us wise To use that time we cannot stay: Send Joy to our sad hearts, and bless Our prosp'rous actions with success. Ejaculat. 86. Though thousands here, ten thousands there, Do dayly fall before mne eyes, I will not faint, I will not fear, Beneath the wings of the most High: Let me be guarded, Lord, by thee, Then I'le not fear, nor faint, nor flee.
Ejaculat. 87. Lord, purge my Soul, that I may learn To read my Fortunes by thy hand; Let my instructed Soul discern, That worldly bliss is not thy brand. Lord, in thy Mercy make me thine, I have enough, showre thou, or shine. Ejaculat. 88. Great Monarch of the World, disclose Thy Power, and make thy Glory known; Out-flood the floods of all my Foes, And in my heart fix thou thy Throne: Plant Holiness within my brest, O Lord, my Strength, O God, my Rest. Ejaculat. 89. Just God of Vengeance, cast an eye Upon my poor afflicted brest; O send me help, O hear my cry, And let thy comforts be my rest: Suppress my Foes, and set me free, That have no Hope, no Help, but thee.
Ejaculat. 90. Great God of gods, great King of kings, From whom, by whom, we live, we be, In whom my Soul her triumph sings, To whom alone bows every knee: Teach me thy way▪ thy will' my Feast, Thy Crook my Guide, thy Fold my Rest. Ejaculat. 91. Lord, let our Jesus, and thy Christ, Be all the subject of our mirth; Let Satans Power be dismist, And let him ule, and judg the Earth: Then, then eternal Peace shall be Return'd to us, and praise to thee. Ejaculat. 92. Great King of Glory, who art drest In Clothes of Clouds, in Robes of Fire, Make evil hateful to my brest, Then shall I love thee most intire▪ Then shall my bosom reap that light Which thou hast sown for the upright.
Ejrculat. 93. Great God of Wonders, that dost ope The Gate of Life to our glad days, And found'st a help beyond all those, O give us mouths to give thee praise: So guide our ways, just Judg, that we May joyfully be judg'd by thee. Ejaculat. 94. Great God, whose Promise is to hear, Whose Practise is to pardon Sin, Let my Petitions find an ear, And cleanse my lep'rous Soul within. Thou, Lord, art holy, teach my heart To sing thy Praises as thou art. Ejaculat. 95. Eternal Maker, grant that we May praise thee with a cheerful heart; Guide thou ou was, and let us be h shp, where thou the Shepherd : , ▪ thy th  always se, And thy great Mercy shall endure.
Ejaculat. 96. Lord, teach my heart to walk upright In publique rev'rence, private fear; Keep thou the humble in thy sight, And to the proud be thou severe: Then shall thy Saints in triumph show Thy Mercy, and thy Justice too. Ejaculat. 97. O God, how poor a thing is Man! Begot in si, and born in sorrow; Our breath's a blast, our life a Span, But here to day, and gone to morrow. How needful, Lord is thy support! Our days are bad, our time is short. Ejaculat. 98. O thou, within whose tender brest Full streams of sweet compassion flow, Whose Mercies cannot be exprest By Saints above, or Men below▪ My Soul shall praise, my heart shall bless That goodness,  cannot express▪
Ejaculat. 99. Lord, every creature writes a Story Of thy full Majesty and Might, The contempltion of whose Glory Shall always be my hearts delight: Accept that praise my Soul can give, And it shall praise thee while I live. Ejaculat. 100. Dear God, the Pharaoh of our Souls Afflicts the Isr'el of our hearts; Where thou shouldst govern, he controuls; What thou command'st, his power thwarts: Confound his strength, and let thy hand Conduct us to the promis'd Land. Ejaculat. 101. Lord, shouldst thou punish every sin, Or strike as oft as we offend, How quickly would our plagues begin! How soon this sinful world would end! But Lord, thy tender Mercies stand Within the gap, and hold thy hand.
Ejaculat. 102. Lord let thy wonders, and thy wayes, Inflame my heart, my tongue my Pen, That Pen, and tongue, and heart may praise Thy name before the Sons of men. Look where I list, high, low, or under I see to learn, and learn to wonder. Ejaculat. 103. O Lord whose mercies, and whose pathes Transcend th' expressions of my tongue Instruct my heart to keep thy Laws And I will praise thee in my song, Lend me thy pow'r, or strengthen mine And I will crush my Foes, and thine. Ejaculat. 104. O thou that sit'st in Heaven, and seest My deeds without, my thoughts within; Be thou my Prince, be thou my priest, Command my soul, and cure my sin: How bitter my afflictions be, I care not, so I rise to thee.
Ejaculat. 105. Lord, teach my humble eyes the art To see aright, and hands to do, Then will I praise thee with my heart In publique, and in private too: Set thou thy fear in all my ways To make me wise, to give thee praise. Ejaculat. 106. Lord, plant thy fear before mine eyes, For in thy fear my Soul is blest; Thy Fear's that Spring, from whence arise My Crown, my Treasure, and my Rest. What fear I, fearing thee? and what Not fearing thee, Lord, fear I not? Ejaculat. 107. Highest of Highests, that dost raise The poor and needy from the dung, Advance my thoughts to give thee praise, And, Lord, untye my stam'ting tongue: So shall my heart and tongue proclaim Rare Halelujahs to thy Name.
Ejaculat. 108. O God, the Mountains, and the Seas Confess thee, Lord of Sea and Land, They quake and tremble, if thou please To shew the Power of thy hand: So shall my heart, when thou think'st good, To turn my int into a flood. Ejaculat. 109. Lord, teach our loyal hearts to build Their constant hopes upon thy hand; Thou art our Help, thou art our Shield, Wherein our hopes of safety stand: Send down thy blessings, and then we Will send all Praises up to thee. Ejaculat. 110. My God, thy Mercies so abound, That every minut speaks their story; They have no limits, have no bound; Ours are the comforts, thine▪ the glory: And what thy Mercy more displays, Thou are contented with our Praise▪
Ejaculat. 111. Surpassing Lord, whose mercies have surpast The limits of the worlds expression Whose truth continues me, and st To thy elect, and their succession. To thee perpetuall praise be given By Saints on earth, and souls in heav'n. Ejaculat. 112. Good God! thy mercy and thy might What heart conceives? what tongue can tell? Thou fillest my darknesse with thy light, And hast redeem'd my soul from hell. Thou art my God, thou onely art The strength, and musick of my heart. Ejaculat. 113. O God thy Law's a field, in which The fruitfull seed of life is sown; No seed so rare, no soil so rich; It renders infinite for one. O God, how fair these fields appear! O God, what pearls are buried here!
Ejaculat. 114. Great God, whose ever-wakefull eye Doth never slumber, never close, Teach all my dangers to rely Upon thy help, there safe repose: Be thou my shade, be thou my stay, I will not fear by night, by day. Ejaculat. 115. Lord let the fire of my true zel Unto thy house for ever flame Where let my thanks, and praise reveal The hidden honor of thy name. Let Sions glory still encrease, And blesse her wlls with plenteous peace. Ejaculat. 116. O God to whom my thoughts direct Their constant hopes, and hopefull cryes Let not my soul in vain expect For mercy, from such gracious eyes: Maintain thine honor; 'Tis not me The proud con, Great God, but thee.
Ejaculat. 117. Lord, give me a believing heart, Though wanting strength I fear not man▪ If thou be pleas'd to tae my part▪ Let malice do the worst it can. Although in snar'd I will not fear▪ For thou art stronger then a snare. Ejaculat. 118. Give me the heart▪ O God to trust▪ And lead my footsteps in thy wayes▪ Quell thou the power of th' uniust, That righteous hearts may give thee praise▪ Do good to good men▪ and encrease Their number▪ plenty, and their peace. Ejaculat. 119. Lord we are Captives▪ and we bow To Satans burthen every hour, We sow in teares, oh when wilt thou With Joy requite▪ the weary sower. So blesse my labours that I may▪ With comfort long to see that day.
Ejaculat. 120. What I possesse, o what I crave Brings no content▪ g God▪ to me If what I would▪ o what I crave Be not possest, and blest in thee▪ What I enjoy, oh make it mine In making me, that have it, e▪ Ejaculat. 121. Lord plant my fears within my brest That I may wall thy perfect ways Then shall I prosper and be blest In all my deeds in all my dayes▪ Then shall I see the fair encrease Of Syo glory, Is▪ peace▪ Ejaculat. 122. Lord since there must be alwayes Foes T' afflict the souls of flesh and blood, Let mine be such as do oppose Thy Churches peace, thy Sions good Then let  of thine▪ Confound, or re thy foes, and mine.
Ejaculat. 123. Hearer of prayers, to whom should I Implore, but thee, in my distresse For mercy harbors in thine eye, And thou art fil'd with righteousness. To thee, O God, my hopes shall flee, My soul expects no help but thee. Ejaculat. 124. Lord if mine eyes should look too high, Or ranc'rous heart begin to swell, Break thou the tumor, curb mine eye, Lest one grow fier, the other fell. So shall my soul grow wise, and flee From her own strength, and trust in thee. Ejaculat. 125. Lord let mine eyes not sleep untill I build thy Temple in my brest, Take pleasure then, and make it still The chosen palace of thy rest: Let all her Foes be trodden down, And let thy glory be her crown.
Ejaculat. 126. Lord we are several members joyn'd To make one whole, whose head thou art, Let all our thoughts but make one mind, And give one body, but one heart. United souls of Saints appear The sweetest musicke in thine eare. Ejaculat. 127. Light thou the Lamps, great God, that they Lightn'd by thee may give us light, Let their bright luster drive away All darkness from thy Courts by night, Bless us and them, that they, and we May bless thy name, first blest by thee. Ejaculat. 128. Let every wonder that I see In Heav'n, and earth, and in the s, Advance sme hn, Lord, to thee That didst, and canst do, wht thou please, Let others worship wood and stone, My soul shall blesse thee, Lord, alone.
Ejaculat. 129. Good God, where ere I cast mine eye. On earth beneath, or heaven above I see thy goodness, and I spye Perpetuall pledges of thy love. Thy favours through the world extend And of thy mercy is no end. Ejaculat. 130. Lord if my tongue, and busie quill Be not in Sions praise imploy'd Then let my hand forget henskill And  my ngu for, ee yd, Thy praise shal be my chief delight Whilst tongue can speak, or hand can write▪ Ejaculat. 131. Kindle O Lord, my love with zeal, Light my affections with thy flame Give my tongue courage to reveal The secret glory of th name Be thou my God, in all distresse, And let thy hand be my dse▪
Ejaculat. 132. Lord thou that mad'st me, and do'st py Into the soors, of my heart From whose all presence none can flye Nor hide them there, but where tho t, Inform my soul, inflame my brest And lead  to eternall Rest. Ejaculat. 133. Lord keep me from my self that am The greatest Foe, I need to fear O cover thou my fa with s And give my sins no dwelling here Subdue my flesh▪ and then my Spirit, Shall sing the praises of thy merit. Ejaculat. 134. Lord when my grief shall finde a tongue To cry for help, finde thou an care, Whilst others seek to do m wrong, Make thou O God my concin In those self-snares they haue prepr'd Let my insnar be insnar'd.
Ejaculat. 135. When winter fortunes cloud the brows Of summer friends▪ when eyes grow strange▪ When plighted faiths forget their vows, When earth, and all things in it change, O Lord thy mercies fail me never, Where once thou lov'st, thou lov'st for ever. Ejaculat. 136. Judge not my actions by thy Laws For then my sorrows are but just, But let thy mercies plead my cause For in thy mercy is my trust. Those that oppose my soul, oppose; I am thy servant, they thy Foes. Ejaculat. 137. What is there Lord, what is in me To hope for safety from thy power? What help can I expect from thee That merit vengeance every hour? How great so ere my sins have bin, Thy mercy's greater then my sin.
Ejaculat. 138. Great God, whose kingdome hath no end, Into whose secrets none can dive, Whose mercy none can apprehend Whose justice none can feel, and live, What my dull heart can not aspre To know, Lord, teach me to admire, Ejaculat. 139. O Lord my iudgements dark, and blind, It cannot judge twit good, and ill, My will is captiv'd, and confin'd, It wants a freedome how to will, Great Lord o pow'r, great God of might Release my bands, restore my sight. Ejaculat. 140. Great God whose goodness doth repleate And fill our coasts with full encrease That feed'st us with the fat of wheat, And glad'st thy Sion with thy Peace. How more then others are our days Extreamly bound to give thee praise.
Ejaculat. 141. Shall frost and snow give praise to thee And shall my soul not bear a part▪ Lord, frost and snow appear to be Not half so cold as is my heart. Shine glorious sun, thy beams but felt, My frost will thaw, my snow will melt. Ejaculat. 142. Great God to whom all praise belongs Whom Syon sings and Israel eas O stop those lusts that stop our tongues And fright thy glory from our eares. Do thou enlarge what flesh retaes, And bind those Kings, our lusts in chaines. Ejaculat. 143. Lord season my unsavory spii, And bridle my too headstrong will, That I may alwayes take delight In acting good, and  . O give me grace to understand, My life is alwayes in thy hand.
Ejaculat. 144. Direct my steps, Lord, be my way And make thy pathe my sole delight, That like a traveller I may Not fail to rest with tho at night, O me, how happie, and how blest, [Lord] should I be in such a rest Ejaculat. 145. Lord let the morning of my grife, Finde ont a night of lasting pleasure▪ Thou art the God in my relie In povertie, thou art my treasure. I care not Lord how poor I be Unto the world, rich to thee. Ejaculat. 146. Lord let thy sacred fe thaw The Ice of my hard froen zeal, And let thy will be my known Law▪ So shall my heart, thy worh reveal, And with a haujous Song My tongue shal praise thee all day long.
Ejaculat. 147. Great King of Peace, be pleas'd to send Thy Peace to our distepen'd Land, O we are bad, teach us t'amend, And let not ruin▪ be our brand, Then shall our lavish lips deliver Our thanks in Peace, to our Peace-giver. Ejaculat. 148. If it be so that we must fight, Lord make our crimes to prove our Foes, For thou (our God) dost take delight, To see such pleasant VVars  those. O may such was as these encreas, Untill our conquests end in Peace. Ejaculat. 149. Lord let the praises of thy power, Advance the power of thy praise, Let every day, let every Praise thee till  fil, and dayes. To thee all power and praise be given, By Saints on Earth, by Souls in Heaven. THE END.
