s2276 11907152 50739
The Second Dream. WHoever looks about, and minds things well, And on th' Affairs o'th' World does take a View, May think the Story which I here do tell, Was never dreamt, 'cause it falls out so true. I do confess 'tis somewhat hard to find A crooked Path directly in the dark: And when a Man's asleep you know he's blind, And cannot eas'ly hit upon a Mark. No, not so blind, but Story oft has told Of Sleep so Eagle-ey'd, and Dreams so bold As could the hidden Depths of Fate unfold: Orac'lous Dreams that op'ned the Book of Doom, And saw at once past, present, and to come. As t' other Night in Bed I thinking lay, How I my Rent should to my Landlord pay. Since Wool, nor Corn, nor Beasts wou'd Money make, Tumbling perplext, these thoughts kept me awake. What will become of this mad World, thought I! Whence the Disease, and what the Remedy? When will the Issue, whereto do's it tend? In Mis'ry 'tis some Ease to know its end. 'Till Servants Dreaming as they us'd to do, Snor'd me asleep; I fell a Dreaming too. So Dreamt— not Antick Forms, wild and unshap'd, From restless indigested Fumes escap'd; When aking Brains their Wine-born Frenzies broach The Riotous Creations of Debauch. Nor did my bounded Fancy only lead That narrow Dance that shallower Dreamers tread,
Who in their Nightly Forms repeat no more Than what they only saw the day before. No, for my Nobler more exalted Flight, A loftier Wing, and a more soaring Spright Rapt me aloft; whilst my swift Thought up rears, Born hurried back o're fifteen rowling Years. Dully those poor short-sighted Vision play, Who only see no farther than to day. To Day; a Day, alas, too dull a Theam, Where blazing Mischief's seen by that broad beam, The Business of to Day's not worth a Dream. For too sad Truths so plain need no beholding To Dreamers or Southsayers for unfolding. At open Noon to view the Banks of Seas Broke down, who stands amaz'd at Deluges. Right, Justice, Law, all Faith and Oaths laid by, Who wonders at our later Slavery: Where that profest avenging Thund'rer Reign'd, His Cyclops at the Forge, with Sweat and Pains, All bare fac'd at the Work of hamm'ring Chains. Fate strikes without Surprize, whose Bolt we see. Nay sweeping Plagues themselves would scarely be A mortal Wonderment; were but the keen Sword Edge of the Destroying Angel seen. T' explode the open Madness of this Age, Is scarcely worthy a Poetick Rage. Let Fools the full-grown Cockatrice admire! My Speculative Thoughts more high aspire: Would track the Seeds, and new form'd Egg Survey, And search the very Nest in which it lay. Th' unseen First Machine of our Ills unmasking, I, that's a curious Question worth the asking: Thus murm'ring long before to sleep I went, Some Friendly Pow'r a list'ning Ear had lent;
And by a kind illuminating Beam, Resolv'd to grant my Wishes in a Dream. Back then to Charles his Reign my Thoughts were led. How, back to Charles to trace the Fountain Head! The unhappy Source of our long Ills began Under that Easie, Calm, Unthinking Man! Yes, poor Good Charles, hard fated to our Curse, First lickt the Brat, lest James to Rear and Nurse. Methought th' Old Great Cabal in number Seven, Together met to make their Matters even; Where closely they Consulted how to play, And each one spoke what he was pleas'd to say. But first the Doors were all securely shut, And I behind the Arras closely put; Where hear and see I could: but he that there Had placed me, bad me have a special care Of stirring, for my Life; and ere that out From thence I came, resolv'd shou'd be my doubt, What would become of this mad World; unless Present Designs were crost with ill Success. An awful Silence there was kept some space, Till trembling thus began one call'd his Grace. Bucks.] Dread Sir, your Government the first Twelve Years Has spoil'd your Monarchy, and made our Fears So great, and many, we must now change quite The fretful old Foundations, wrong or right. The too great mixture of Democracy Out of your Government must taken be. And no way like to Nulling Parliaments; Spawn of the People, always making Rents, Factious and bold, disputing Royal Pleasure; And your Commands they by their Humours measure. A King in Manacles, to Rack Staves tied You must remain, if thus you will abide.
So spoke this first, but by and by another, Not quite so tall, but full as Wise a Brother, [Ormond] Did thus begin—Dread Sir, you now are on A Tender Point, much to be thought upon; And thought on only: For by ancient Law 'Tis Death to speak't; which that rash Lord foresaw, And trembled as he spoke. But, Sir, believe, My safe Advice, I dare undaunted give. Oh think not, Sir, t' attempt a Change so bold, Nor let the Thought be ev'n in Whispers told, 'Gainst what our Ancestors secur'd so much, That like the Sacred Mount 'tis Death to touch. Such Dang'rous Councils give my Soul a check; Nor do I like to make Tongue break my Neck. [Lauerd] Thus he, and then that Lord of Northern Tone In Gall and Guile a second unto none, Inraged rose, and Cholerich thus begun. Dread Majesty, Male born of Fame, the Son Of Hundred and Ten Monarchs of the Nore, Deel split the Wem o'th' Loon that spoke before: Shame faw the Crag of that mis-mannor'd Lord, That near his King durst speak so faw a word. And on my Sol full well the first man meant, Deel lop his Lugs that loves a Parliament. Twa Houses on my Sol are twa too mickle, Death! Ice ne're truck to those faes Kna aves in pickle. No Siller get to gee the Bonny Lass! Who can endure thus to be made an Ass? Ten thousand Plagues light on his Sol that 'gin. To gar you be but third part of a King. Deel tak my Sol, I'se ne're the matter mince: Ice rather Subject be than like a Prince. To hang and draw, and burn; and saw, and kill. And measure all things by my awn great Will. What's Kingship else; all Check-mates I do hate
Of Men or Laws; it looks too like a State. This eager well-meant Zeal some Laughter stirr'd. [Arling.] 'Till novv half-fish, half-flesh, the Ink-horn Lord Craved Audience. Thus Grave, Majesty Divine, To make you Great, let Gods and Men Combine. Now we are entred on the great Debate That does concern the Throne and Royal State, Contrive to make you High and Happy too, Is all that we at present have to do. Is it not strange that at this Sacred Board There still should sit a Magna Charta Lord? A piece of old Rebellious Barons Breed, The worst and greatest Foes of Royal Seed. But to proceed, it was well urg'd by's Grace, Such Liberty was had for Twelve Years space Last past, that now there's great Necessity Of new Foundations if you safe will be. What Care, what Charge, what Art (before was set This Parliament) we us'd, you can't forget How forc'd to Court, Cajole, and Bribe for fear They wrong should Act, e're since they have been here What Diligence, what Studies Day and Night Were we put on! What care to keep 'em right! If therefore you can't make this Parliament Do right, on whom such Art and Pains was spent; Since Money's all we have for them to do: If we miss that, let's e'ne dismiss them too. 'Tis true, this is the Best that you can call: But in my Judgment Best is none at all. Well mov'd, the whole Cabal cri'd, Parliaments Are Clogs to Princes, and their brave Intents. One did Object, 'Twas against Majesty, To beg the Peoples Pleasure Another he The Inconven'nce argued, and that we
Must close and speedy in our Actions be: Or else we fail in all our brave Design, This Senate House Foundation t' undermine. But this confused Chat did order break; Many were mov'd, none heard, but all did speak. [Chan.] At length a long Rob'd Lord, Champion of State, The Crown's too faithful Drudge, to such a height, Rais'd only to be crusht by his own Weight, Begs silence, and his Counsel thus began, Whilst in this Style his artful Accents ran. Best, and blest Monarch, that e're Scepter bore, Renown'd for Honour, but for Vertue more. The Lord that last did speak has wisely shown, That Parliaments, nor new, nor old, or none Ought to be trusted longer. Let them down, A Constitution rais'd t' eclipse the Crown. Imperial Power by Vassals so controul'd, A suff'ring Loyalist must with Grief behold. That Monarchy may from its Child-hood grow To Man's Estate, France do's th' Example show. Monarchy is Divine, and Text-Men say, He backwards goes, that keeps not on his way. Therefore go on, let other Kingdoms see Your Will's your Law, as Monarch's ought to be Away with all these Sawcy medling Chits, That make you King but now and then by fits. Nay, in those fits too, they will stand and pause, And boldly tell you, Kings must stoop to Laws. Thus you may see what Factious Fools would have, A King, and yet a Subject! This is brave. Fy, fy, let's down with all such Nonsense now, And make these Insolents to their Monarch bow. A hotch-potch Mixture we'll no longer bear, Caesar or Nothing. Now you need not sear.
If you'll but strike now whil'st the Iron's hot, There's no withstanding of our Princely Plot. Strike then, Great Sir, e're these Debates take Wind, Remember still Occasion's bald behind. The Game is sure in this, if wisely play'd, And Sacred Votes to th' Vulgar not betray'd. But if this Rumour once should get on Wing, That we consult to make you Absolute King, The Plebeian Heads and Gentry too forsooth Would Snort and Spurn, and have an aking Tooth. Left they therefore should this great Secret scent, And contradict us in this high Intent, I think it safer and far better Skill To obviate, than to o'rcome an Ill. For those that head the Herd are full as rude, When th' Humour takes, as all the Multitude. Wherefore be quick in your Resolves, and when You have resolv'd, be quick in Action then. Remember your great Father lost the Game By slow Procedure. Do not you the same. One unsuspected unregarded Blow Wounds more than Ten made by an open Foe. Delays breed Dangers: Sir, the Sword is yours▪ By Law declar'd, what need you other Pow'rs? We may in Politicks be Judg'd, or worse, If we can't make the Sword Command the Purse: No Art your Government so well can shape Without a Force, it must be done by Rape: And when 'tis done, to say we cannot help, Will satisfie enough the gentle Whelp. Phanatick, they'll to Providence impute Their Thraldom, and immediately grow mute. For they poor Pious Fools think the Decree Of Heaven is on them, tho' from Hell it be.
They must be silent under every stroke, And readily submit to any Yoke. Thus vainly glorying in a passive Shame, They'll put off Man to meet a Christian Name. Therefore to lull 'em, do their Hopes fulfil, With Liberty, they'r halter'd at your Will. Give them but Conventicle Room, and they Wilt let you steal their Englishman avvay; And heedless be till you your Nets have spread, And pull'd down Conventicles o're their Head. Militia then and Parliaments Cashier, And with all speed a Standing Army rear, To mount you up; and up you soon will be, Those that want Love, vvill fear your Monarchy. And if they fear, no matter for their hate, To Rule by Lavv becomes a Sneaking State. Lay by all Fear, nor care vvhat people say, For that vvill all your brave design betray. VVhen bite they can't, vvhat hurt vvill Barking do! And in short time vve'll spoil their Barking too. Make Coffee Clubs, talk of more humble things, Than such Affairs as do belong to Kings. Thus spake the hot spurr'd Peer. Then one more grave That had much less of Fool, but more of Knave, Began— [Cliff.] Great Sir; it gives me great Content, To see such Zeal for you vvith one consent. But yet, tho I'm an Enemy no less To Parliaments than they, my self confess, I must for all that enter my Protest Against these Rambling Councils undigest, And tell you, Sir, it is a harder thing Than they Suggest to make you such a King
As what they talk, and I could wish you were; The Method they propose, will cost you dear. Old Buildings to pluck down, believe it true, More danger has in't, than in Building New. Or what shall raise your Supe structure, till Another you have built to suit your Will? An Army shall, they say. Content: but stay, From whence shall this New Army have its pay? Easie and gentle Government a while, Will surely be the best way to beguile The Peoples Minds, and make them cry up You For this or that, or any thing you do. The Taxes of New Government all will blame, And put the Kingdom strait into a Flame. For Tyranny has no such lovely look To take Men by, unless you hide the Hook; And no Bait better hides than present Ease; Ease but their Taxes, then do what you please. Therefore these wild Debates lay by: From whence Shall Money rise to pay this vast Expence! There's only one thing if you will but do, Will gain your Will, and hush your People too. Strike in with Mother Church, whose Bosome stands Ope' to receive you, stretching forth her hands. Close but this Breach, and you will quickly see Her Purse as open, as her Arms shall be. For, Sacred Sir, by guess I do not speak; Of Poor she'll make you Rich, and Strong of Weak. At home, abroad, no Money, nor no Men She'll let you lack, turn but to her agen. You may depend, Sir, upon what I say; What e're is talk'd on, here's your only way. How can you fail of Honour and Success, When you grow Richer, and Your Taxes less.
Thus by this Wile you may advance your Crown, And when you'r up, you may pull others down [Laud.] The Scot here could no longer hold, but cry'd, Deel Curse the Pope, and all that's on his side. The Whore of Rome, the muckle Man of Sin, Plague take the Mother, Barns, and all the Kin. What, must we see the Paltry, hallow Rood Plac'd in the Kirk again in Deelish Mood! Plague take the Loon, the Deel and all his Work, The Pope shall ne're again come in the Kirk. Deel fau my Luggs, I'le venture Weem and Crag, E're Popish Imps o're Christen Men shall brag. The Scot with Laughter Check'd, and all agreed, The Lord spoke last, should in his Speech proceed, [Cliff.] Which thus he did. Great Sir, the Season's now Wherein we may both drive and draw the Plow. The best that ever came t' advance your Cause, To mend or make, or to demolish Laws. Besides the Sum, the Catholicks will advance, You know what offers you are made by France. And to have Money, and no Parliaments, Will fully answer all our brave Intents. And thus without Tumultish Brute, or Huff Of Parliaments, you will have Gold enough. And if neglected now, as none knows when The like Advantage you will have agen, T' extirpate Civil and Religious Right, Those Lime-twigs of the Laws that hold your flight. There's Money to be had t' Exalt your Crown, 'Thout stooping Majesty to th' Country Clown. The Triple League I know will be objected, As if by us that ought to be respected. For who to Covenants so poorly sticks, With Rebels to keep Faith or Hereticks,
With those that neither Church nor Prince affect; Our own Advantage we must still respect. Unfetter'd Monarchs should walk more at large, The Church does Princes from such Oaths discharge: And Kings Absolv'd have power to leave ot take, And keep no more than do's for Int'rest make. As you your self have admirably shown By burning Solemn Covenants, tho' your own. Faith, Justice, Truth, Plebeian Vertues be: Look well in them, but not in Majesty. For, publick Faith is but a publick Thief, The greatest Cheat, and yields the worst Relief. [Orm.] The Second Lord, tho' Check'd, yet did not fear Impatient grew, and could no longer bear. Great Majesty, Authentick Writers say, The hand when lifted up Cressus to slay, Such deep Impressions on the Son did make, Though dumb before, yet then he forth-with spake. Great Sir, your pardon, if in imitation, Seeing the danger of your Self and Nation, My resolv'd Silence too like him I break, In spight of Frowns, I shall, and I must speake. Under what ever doom my boldness fall, Though Fortune, Honour, Life, expos'd to all The hardest Censures, and it may be worse My Prince's Hatred, and the Papal Curse: Yet still for Princes Good I will not fear, To speak my Conscience, tho' it cost me dear. My Acts have spoke sufficient, still they are Above what these Dictators did or dare. Wherefore, Great Sir, 'tis Ignorance or Hate, That gives those Counsels so precipitate. For say't I will, nor will I bate my word, No Counsels, Power, no, nor yet the Sword,
Can old Foundations alter, or lay new, Let time interpret who has spoken true. The Country Gentlemen with Beef and Bacon, Will show hovv much your Courtiers are mistaken. For Parliaments are not at that cheap rate, That down they will vvithout a broken Pate: And then I doubt you'll find these Worthy Lords, Brave and more Champion with their Tongues than Swords. Wherefore incline not, Sir, your Royal Ear To their Advice, but safer Counsel hear. Stay ti'l these Lords have each a Crown to lose, And then consult with 'em which way they'll choose. Will you All hazard for their Humours sake, Who nothing have to lose, nothing at stake! And at that Game your Royal Crown expose, To gratifie the foolish Lust of those Who hardly have subsistence how to live, But what your Crown and Grace to 'em will give. For one of those Bag-pudding Gentlemen (Except their places) would buy nine or ten. And why we should thus slight the Gentleman, I see no Reason, nor believe they can. For had not Gentleman done more than Lord, I'le boldly say't; you ne're bad been restor'd. But why an Armies Greatness, Sir! should we So fond just now: all on a sudden be. Have they such faithful Guardians been to Powers That have employ'd them, that you'd make 'em yours? Our Age does tell, we need not seek the Glory Of Armies Faith in old and doubtful Story. Your Father 'gainst the Scots an Army rear'd, But soon that Army more than Scots he seard And tho' in haste to raise 'em, as we are, Soon to Disband them was his greatest care.
How Scottish Army after did betray His Trust and Person both, I need not say. The Lord Protector they set up one hour, The next they pluck't down Protectorean Pow'r. Your Fathers Block was guarded by those Drudges, Who after did the same thing for his Judges; And did rejoyce at both in open view, And would not grudge to do the like by you. Will you then suffer Armies to beguile, And give your Crown and Self to Cross and Pile? What if a Jesuit Swear, Lie, and Feign, Until your Trust and Army he should gain: And you believe his Faith and Oaths are true, He serves himself instead of serving you. Remember, Sir, what to your Face is said; No Faith from them to Hereticks is paid. This is enough to make your Soul abhor them, And stop each Mouth for ever speaking for 'em. When their own turns are serv'd, they'll serve you a trick, And in short time call you plain Heretick. If Pope command, and you shall once say nay, At this Trap-door your Strength shall run away. He'll make you stoop and truckle at his pleasure, Or else yon neither shall have Men or Treasure. 'Tis vain to trust to either Word or Oath; They plainly tell you they can violate both. The more of Friendship they pretend or Swear, The more of Mischief you have cause to fear. When once the Pope has got the upper-hand, Against your Will you soon shall understand, That if you cross him in the smallest thing, Unwelcome Storms about your Ears he'll bring. The Interest then of Holy Mother Church, Will be to leave all such as you i'th' lurch:
And all your former faithful Friends being down, 'Tis ten to one if you don't lose your Crown. Pardon, Great Sir, if Zeal transport my Tongue, To shew you what may prove your greatest wrong. I can't expose your Crown and Sacred Throat To th' fickle Humours of a false red Coat. But speak I must, whatever does insue, To hinder what we else may live to rue. The Law your All does fence, secure from Fear; And then what need the noise of Bandileer. Consider, Sir, 'tis Law that makes you King: But Sword another to the Crown may bring. For Force knows no distinction: Longest Sword Makes Peasant Prince, and Lackey above Lord. If Will be all that we must take for Laws, Your Will may be inferiour to Jack Straws. If he a greater Force, he has more Right: Where Law is wanting, if for Will Men Fight, He's the best Man whose Sword is still more strong: Where there's no Law, there's neither Right nor Wrong. Subjects may Prince, as Prince may them Invade; The Fence once broken, all is open laid. See then, Great Sir, how these your Throne pull down, 'Stead of exalting your Imperial Crown; How they divest you of your Majesty: For Law destroy'd, you are no more than we. In vain will be the Plea of Birth or Crown, Or Statute Laws, if Parliaments go down. This Peer went on, and show'd at large most plain, How dang'rous League with Rome wou'd be again. And how we suffer'd France to gain Renown, And steal away the Glory of our Crown. He's interupted, and bid speak no more, By inrag'd Majesty, who deeply Swore
His Tongue had so run o're, that he would take Such Vengeance on him, and Example make To after Ages, all that heard should fear To speak what should displease the Royal Ear. In that unwonted Thunder-Clap he broke, I scarce could fancy it was Charles that spoke. Methought, and 'twas a Thought of strange Presage, Charles utter'd, but Great James inspir'd the Rage. The more Imperial Ducal Fury blow'd, And tun'd the Royal Organ Pipe so loud. The Lord that spoke before 's bid to go on, And all commanded Silence 'till he has done. Who thus proceeded — If the Lord spoke last, To interrupt me had not made such haste, I soon had done, for I was come, Great Sir, T' Advise your sending Dutch Ambassador To keep them still a while, altho' we Flatter, Promise, Caress, Cajole, Betray, no matter. Tho' we break Faith, Leagues, Treaties, all t' advance Your dearer sworn Fidelity to France. And when all's done that can be done by Man, Much must be left to Chance do what we can. If you of Dutch can make an utter end, And make the Catholick Christian World your Friend, Then sure you'll have enough of Men and Treasure, Enough of both to execute your pleasure. And tho' that Noble Lord seems to perswade Confiding Armies are not to be had: True, tho' perhaps the English Hereticks In such a Cause may play some slippery Tricks, And joyn not hearty in your Holy League; Raise then your Irish Friends: The Trusty Teague
To Rome's dear Pipe will most devoutly Dance, And then what strength they want your Cause t' advance, Send o're, and borrow all the rest from France. This Project does the Feat: You need no more. Steer by this Chart, and Land on th' Golden Shore. And tho' perhaps your Glass Life may run Too fast, to see this blessed Work all done. Tho' kind Heaven lengthen out your happy Days, And Crown you late with the Immortal Bays; A Crown should be so much a good King's Care, As study t' entail Blessings on his Heir. And what though possibly you may not raise The Fabrick up entire in your own Days: Make the Foundation, and the Wall's but yours: Leave James to build the Battlements and Towers. James, whose each Word the Credulous World shall Trust, Proud of the Name, though not the Thought of Just. This Speech thus ended, Six of Seven agree, France should be lov'd, and Holland hated be. At last I wak'd, and took a serious View Of long revolving Causes, Old and New; And by their whole successive Chain I knew My Dream told Truth; our present Ills a 'course Took from this Fountain their original Source. 'Twas Charles begun the Clue that James has spun: The fatal Measures have our World undone. And if Cabals thus serve us Englishmen, 'Tis ten to one but we shall Dream agen. And being disturb'd in Sleep our Brains will ake, And make us Peevish when we are awake. FINIS.
