T2773 R12567 13801390 101941
A TRUE NARRATIVE OF A Wonderful Accident, Which occur'd upon the Execution of a CHRISTIAN SLAVE AT Aleppo in Turky. BEING A Remarkable Instance of Divine Providence, at∣testing the acceptableness of the Christian Religion, and the Virtue of Chastity to Almighty God. Written at first for the Satisfaction of a Friend only; and since made publick for the strengthning of Virtue. This may be Printed. May 12. 1676. Ro. L'Estrange. LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey. 1676.
A True Narrative of a Wonderful Accident, which occur'd upon the Execution of a Christian Slave at Aleppo in Turky. SIR, THough I am none of those men of easie Faith, which (either through want of Capacity to judg of, or want of due Industry to inquire into things) are apt to credit all Reports: and though possibly there are few men have a greater aversion to encourage Superstition than I have; Yet I confess I do not think my self oblig'd to deny my assent to those things my sences inform me of; though I cannot presently satisfie my self of the true causes which produce their Phoenomina, or ap∣pearances: for I have learn'd to know thus much, That there are many things we know not: And for my part, I look up∣on that man as a very false conceited person, that dare deny matter of fact, only because he is unacquainted with the cau∣ses from whence such or such an effect is produced. Nay, I will go yet farther, and venture to say, That if I receive a relation of a thing from a Person, or Persons, of whose Candor and Truth I have no reason to doubt; and if I am fully satisfied (upon a wary inspection) that such a worthy Person can have no interest to lead him to impose upon me: And if the same thing, with the same Circumstances, be attested to me by many such free and uninterested Persons, and that at several times, and unknowing to each other, and all this without the least variation: I then conceive I have the greatest humane probability imaginable for the giving an Historical Faith to such a thing. And this security any man may have (if he question the truth of the succeeding Relation) by going to Elford's Coffee-House in George-yard in Lombard-street, where he may meet with several Eminent and Worthy Gentlemen (Turky-Mer∣chants), that can confirm the truth of the thing, they having
been at the place where this was acted, and at the same time when it was done. I make this Apology, because the Reader may satisfie himself of the truth of the ensuing Story, and not be apt to think he is imposed upon by the Authors of the Island of Pines, or O Brazil. Some few years since, there happened an Insurrection or Tumult of some of the Turks which dwelt in the City of A∣leppo; which being easily suppressed, the Grand Seignior ne∣vertheless sent thither a Bashaw to enquire out the Malefa∣ctors, and see justice done upon them: in the Execution of which, the Turks are very severe (the Constitution of their Government obliging them to be so). Upon the approach of the Bashaw, all the Turks of quality in Aleppo went out some Leagues or Miles to reverence the Bashaw, and conduct him in triumphant manner to the City: And upon this occasion they were attended by the greatest part of their Slaves, the better to express their Grandeur and Quality. Upon this Affair it was, That the House of one of the most magnificent Turks of that City, was left that day without any other Person in it, but only the Turks Steward, and a handsom French Slave, a young man of eighteen years old: This Turk's Steward, being much addicted to that horrid and unnatural sin (too frequent with the Mahumetans) So∣domy; and having cast his lustful Eyes upon this Youth, and considered the fitness of the time (the House being empty) to act his Villanous design: He had in pursuance of his intent, got this Slave into a Chamber; where ha∣ving locked the Door upon him, to hinder his making an Escape, He at first began to make promises, and to flatter the Slave, if by that means possibly he might prevail with him to consent to his (more than Brutish) Devillish de∣sires: but finding the Slave of a setled and severe Virtue, he quickly perceived there was no hopes of accomplishing his hellish Desires that way, and therefore had took up a re∣solution to pollute the chast Youth by force; when the Slave perceived this, he begg'd, he pray'd, he demonstrated the im∣possibility of his assenting to such a Crime: But all this made no other impressions upon the vile Turk, but to add passion
and Fury to his Lust: insomuch, that he swore deeply, he would give him immediate Death, if he disputed any longer, and did not presently submit to his accursed Will. The virtuous Slave abhorring this baseness with all his Soul, and finding himself destitute of all other Remedies, nimbly sei∣zed upon a Cymeter which hung upon the wall of the Cham∣ber, and at one blow with it, smote off the Turks head. It is not easie for any one who is unacquainted with the Cruel and Tyrannical nature of the Turks, to make a true estimate of the miserable and deplorable Condition this ac∣cident had put this Generous Slave into: Death was the least thing he could expect (and I believe the least thing he feared): for it is very usual with the Turks, upon much slighter faults (than this seemed to be in their esteem) to devise long-lasting and inexpressive Torments to inflict up∣on their Slaves: which being foreseen by this unfortunate Youth, he immediately cast about by what means to make his escape; he had heard that threescore Miles distance from Aleppo, there was another English Factory (of Turky Mer∣chants) call'd Scanderoon; whither, if it were possible for him to get, he rationally suppos'd that he might be secur'd; and by being put aboard an English Vessel, be by that means carried out of the Turks Dominions. To accomplish this, he went to his Master's Stable, where finding an Arabian Horse, he presently mounted the back of him, and convey'd himself out of the City: which was not difficult for him to do at that time, the place being empty of people upon the foresaid occasion. But he being totally ig∣norant of the way he was to take, (having never been per∣mitted all the time of his abode there to go out of the City) and not daring to enquire it for fear of betraying himself; by a Caprise of ill Fortune, he happened to go the very same Road that his Master and the other Citizens of Aleppo (at∣tending upon the Bashaw) were returning homeward by. His Master and he were both surprised at the sight of each other: and the Turk hastily demanding the occasion of his coming thither (whether it were the surprise, and fear he was in, or his modesty which might make him loath to dis∣cover (before so much company) the truth of that shame∣ful
attempt upon him, which caused him to make an escape I know not; so it was, that) he answer'd his Master, That Thieves had broken into his House and kill'd his Steward, and that he having got out of a Window, had run to the Stable, and mounted that Horse to come and give him notice. The Turk seem'd to be satisfied with this account at pre∣sent, and commanded the Slave to joyn the Troop of those which were upon their return to the City: which he was necessitated to do. When they were come to Aleppo, the cunning Turk exa∣min'd his House, and found indeed his Steward kill'd, but when he perceived nothing was taken out of the House, he presently concluded no Thieves had been there: and there∣fore charg'd the French Slave with the death of his Steward, which he frankly confess'd, with a full account of what you have heard. The Turk then carried this Slave before the Bashaw, desi∣ring justice might be done upon him for the death of his Steward: But when the Bashaw had carefully examined the matter, he was convinced of the truth of the Slaves relation; and being willing to deter the Turk from that base sin of Sodomy, he acquitted the Youth of punishment. But the Turks being unsatisfied with this Sentence, apply themselves again, and in a body, to the Bashaw, demonstrating the ill consequences of his merciful Sentence, and the unsecure estate it would reduce them all to, in giving encouragement to their Slaves to murther them: And begging, That though it were true which the Slave alledged, (which yet they de∣ny'd, averring he murdred the Steward only that he might make his escape) that the Slave might be executed for an Example to others, which upon their importunity was at last granted them by the Bashaw; and his former merciful Sen∣tence revoked: but yet he would not suffer him to have any other death than beheading. The Slave then was brought to the place of Execution (which is a Field without the City); where being come, he appeared, though very modest, yet undaunted, and fearless of Death. And having pray'd with much fervour and devo∣tion, and having particularly acknowledg'd his fault, and
begg' Almighty Gods pardon for telling his Master that pas∣sage (about robbing his House) when he met him upon the Road; he was strip'd stark naked (according to the custom of that place) and discovered a lovely body, in which in∣habited a more lovely Soul. And immediately before his death he did aver, That he died a Christian, depending whol∣ly for his Salvation upon the merits of our Saviour; and that he kill'd the Steward for no other reason but to avoid being polluted by him; and that he hoped God would shew some sign upon his Body to attest his Innocency, and the truth of what he said. After having said this, his Head was struck off by the Executioner, and his Body and Head left in the Field unburied, according to the custom of the place. It happened that there were executed at the same time, and in the same place, several rebellious Turks, whose Bo∣dies were quickly torn in pieces, and devour'd by a certain sort of great Dogs, kept there at Aleppo, who are allow'd almost no other sustenance but the Carcasses of Malefactors. But it was observ'd, that none of these Dogs would touch the Body or Head of this Martyr of Chastity. It may be here objected, That this was a meer Accident, and that the Dogs bellies being fill'd, and satiated with eat∣ing the Carcasses of the other Malefactors, they forbore to touch this Youth for that cause, and no other. To which I answer, That it was observed, first, That the Body of this Young man lay in the Field unburied, for the space of ten or twelve days, in all which time there was no other Executions, and the Dogs were so extreamly pinch'd with hunger, that they were ready to devour living men, who had much difficulty to keep themselves from being attack'd by them; and yet would they not touch this Carcass. Secondly, It is remarkable, That the Body of this Young man remain'd all this time exposed to the heat of the Sun, (which in that Climate is very intemperate), and yet it did neither stink, corrupt, nor (which is somewhat odd) did it change its colour, but remain'd as fresh and vivid, as if he had been but asleep. Some may, to solve this, and take off the wonder, say, This proceeded from a peculiar and Balsamick constitution
of Body: But supposing this, The Youth was plump, juicy, of a good habit of Body, and what then should hinder the Dogs to feed upon him, when they were press'd by extream hunger? And this Circumstance is very well worth our Re∣mark, That after ten days, there being another Execution in the same place, That Carcass was immediately devour'd in the sight of the People. I will not stifly affirm all this is Miraculous; though I know Gods hand is not shorten'd: and though he seldom stops or turns the course of Nature, yet he can do it when he pleaseth: And upon this occasion, here was a considerable Motive for God to exert His power, to illustrate the Inno∣cency and Virtue of a devout and Chast Christian, and that in a place where the Enemies of Christ Reign, and despise his Doctrine, and persecute the Professors of it. But Preaching being none of my employment, I shall forbear, and leave e∣very man to abound in his own sense. I will end this Discourse with only saying this, What Sentiments some Christians may have upon reading this Hi∣story, I know not; but this I am assur'd of, That the sight of the thing was so convincive and operative upon the Turks, That to bury their shame, they were necessitated at last to dig a Grave, and intomb this Chast Martyr. I have now in compliance to your desires committed the true Narrative of this History into your hands, which you are per∣mitted to dispose of as you think fit. FINIS.
