W1757 R38593 17803198 106629
UNTO ALL GODS HOST IN ENGLAND. FRIENDS, THis is a Heavenly Visitation, sent from the Union of the holy Spirit, & holy Covenant of perpetual Peace, of Love and Consolation, unto all who are of the holy Faith, and are partakers of the Promise which God made with Abraham, the same Faith and holy Covenant which God made with him and his Seed after him, whose Seed are made partakers of the same Promise of Life and blessed Inheritance, into the Covenant of free Love, of Life, Peace and Salvation, all must be gathered; for in the Covenant is the fellowship with the Father, and in it, is the holy Faith known, which worketh all into love, which is the like∣ness of God; and this is the very Nature of God, whose Nature is love. Therefore all to the Foundation which is elect and preci∣ous, which was before the World was, or before the Mountains were brought forth; into that which was in the beginning, all must be gathered, into the inseparable love of the fulness of the Father, into the life of innocency which God at first formed, which was glorious; into the same Heavenly Life which must reign over all, in which no discord ever standeth, neither any strife∣maker did ever dwell. Therefore unto God's Covenant of peace
and blessedness all must come, to have union and fellowship with God, who is love; therefore all to the Foundation which God hath laid in you, which is his free-Love by which you were at first gathered: And this is upon me from the Lord God, to declare to all Israel, So in the Peace of God possess your souls, in the Rest in which the blessing of God is felt and daily encreased. And here life flourisheth like the green Willows by the Water-courses; but verily, verily, every plant which the Gardener hath not planted, must be plucked up, and consumed by the beams of consuming brightness, which is now breaking forth; for the glory of the Day is come; therefore arise you Seed and Children of Abraham, shine forth in the glory of the Lord God, for the reign of the Lamb is come, Christ the Foundation, the chosen and elect Corner-stone; all feel your Anchor on him; for verily every one that buildeth, and not on him, God is coming to throw down; and no other Foundation have I to declare, but that which God hath laid in you, which is his Love; and into Love you must all be gathered, and into the union of the holy Spirit, who is the perfection of love. The time is at hand wherein the good Gardener wil through∣ly weed his Garden, and every seed which he hath not sown, he will root up. Therefore all to the search, and throughly try what seed there is yet remaining in you, whether there is nothing but the seed of the Kingdom of God which remaineth. For who shall abide the day of the coming of the great God, who is flames of consuming sire; and what shall stand before him that is not of him? Verily the Lord God hath sent me to declare and publish, and sound forth his Messge unto all Israel, even to declare the day of free Love, and of everlasting consolation. Oh how bles∣sed a thing it is for Brethren to dwell together in the unity of the holy Spirit, in the Covenant of Love and Peace, in the union of the Saints in Light: Such feel the Life and Power, and Resurre∣ction of Jesus, in whom is the healing virtue found, whose life is risen in immortal glory, whose presence filleth heaven & earth, Unutterable and glorious will be the day of the Lord God unto the upright-hearted, who are found in the Faith of the holy Co∣venant. So my dear Friends and Brethren, in the life of holiness I am one with you, who am the weakest of the , but yet I desire
the prosperity of all the called of God. So in the blessed love of God all dwel; And Friends, in the Bowels of the Lord Jesus let your yearnings be one towards another in the unchangeable Love and Life of the Lord God; and above all things, be careful of grie∣ving the Life in one another, and watch over one another with a single eye in the simplicity and truth, keep your minds staid, and fix your eye alwayes on the Lord God; and that eye that is fixed on him, who looketh not for the evil, but rather to recover out of the evil, and to regain into that which is good; so none wil be overcome with the evil, but all wil overcome the evil with that which is good; therefore all down into the low, Lamb-like, heal∣ing Spirit, whose virtue and love overcometh the hearts of all that truly wait in the simple life, which leadeth through the tribulati∣on, and so to the washing; and so all who are led by it, wil be cleansed, purged and purified from all dross. And blessed, bles∣sed are all who dwel in the faith which works by love; such wil be overcome, and fill'd with the Fountain of Eternal Peace, of Love and Consolation. And Brethren and beloved, the Lord God of everlasting glory, who is risen in his beauty, who filleth both hea∣ven and earth with the Majesty of his brightness; he will more gloriously appear in his holy Mount, transfiguring himself in the midst of all the Disciples, who wait for the coming and appear∣ance of the Lord Jesus, whose coming is with great power, and great glory. Therefore arise you branches of the true Vine, spread forth you fruitful boughs, for the Lord God of the Vin∣tage is come to gather the ripe fruit; therefore sing ye desert pla∣ces, and rejoice ye that dwel in the low Valleys, for Gods holy Mountain drops of sweet Wine; so the Lord God is become a place of broad Rivers, a Fountain full of Streams; and blessed are all who drink at the still Waters, such are refreshed, who grow to the praise of God. So dear friends, in the heavenly places all wil come to lie dovvn in the Kingdom vvith the Seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. So in the patience and long-suffering of God dvvel, for the  of Gods Elect must be throughly tried, as purified Gold out of the Furnace, and as Silver that hath been seven times purified, in which burning flames (for God's Consummation) must burn up and consume all that which cannot stand before him when he ap∣peareth.
Therefore all feel the Refiner sitting as a Refiners fire in you, that you may know the Word that burneth through all the thickness and the darkness, that by it all may be expelled. So here is the power that expelleth, which is the Gospel, the power of God unto everlasting salvation; so that you may all feel the mighty power of God working Redemption in you, so that you may all sing the songs of the Redeemed of the Lord, which none can learn but they who follow the Lamb and his leading; so the hour and day of Redemption is come unto the house of Israel, therefore all lift up up your heads, and look over the Mountains, for God will make the Hills to flye, and trembling must come up∣on all transgressors; but blessed are are you that believe, you shall see the mighty salvation of the God of Israel, whose hope is in him, and whose dependance is upon him; they shall not miss of their expectation, but the reward of the righteous shall be sure, and a Crown of Life is laid up for all the faithful. Therefore re∣joice you little Flock, for you is the Kingdom prepared. And therefore in the Dominion of God, which reigns over death, stand in the Heavenly Life, so will your peace encrease, and the virtue of God you wil daily feel, the showers of his living mer∣cies distilling upon you. So the blessing of Eternal peace from the Lord God surround you all, for ever. And his Grace be with you all now and for ever. Dorothy White.
FRIENDS, ALL in the Life of the living God wait for the restoration and redemption of Zion, that you may shine in her beau∣ty, that you may all be covered with the glory of the Lord God, that ye may know that Mountain of his Holiness established on the top of all Mountains; that you may know the King of glo∣ry reigning on Mount Zion, that you her Converts may come up in this the day and reign of the great King, that you may all sing songs of rejoicing, even the songs of Moses and of the Lamb, that you may all have the harmony of holiness sounding through Heaven and Earth, that you may all sing Hallelujahs and everlast∣ing praises unto the God of Power, whose day is come, who is getting himself a Name and a praise in the Earth. And this is sent from the God of Heaven, unto the general Assembly of Saints, unto the Church of the first-born, who are renewed again by the renewings of his power, into the image of holiness. Peace be a mongst you all from God the Father of our Lord Jesus, who is come again in great power, glory and dominion. So all feel the virtue of the living God, in the life of holiness distilled upon you, and all that dwell in peace with the Lord God, and one with ano∣ther, may know the waterings, the buildings, the sweet showers which refresh the Plant of Renown, which groweth in the pleasant places. Arise, arise all that mourn, arise in the glory of the Lord God Almighty; rejoice, triumph in the Authority of the King of Israel, from whom this is sent to you all. The dew of the ever lasting Hills rest upon you. This is the greetings of the Father unto the Flock of the faithful. To be read in your Meetings, in the fear of God. D.W.
THis is the mighty day of the Lord God, wherein salvation is come unto the House of Israel; there∣fore let Sion rejoice, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem be glad; for the King of Isral, the Lord of Hosts is arising over all in his glorious Majesty, and is shining forth in his beautiful brightness; therefore let the Heavens rejoice, let the beauty of the true Vine spring forth, let them spread and overspread the whole Earth; for the day of Sions redemption and glorious deliverance draweth near, yea the seventh Trumpet is already blown out of Sion, to call the holy Host of Angels together. And this is the glorious day of the Lord God, wherein he hath appear∣ed unto the Children of men, as in the generations past; and from Heaven hath the Lord spoken; and blessed are all who hear his voice. So all in the meek spirit and life of the holy Lamb sink down, dwell low, for low in the Val∣leys doth the streams clearly run. Therefore all ye Chil∣dren and Seed of Abraham, sit down in the Kingdom, in the Faith and Patience of your Father, holding fast the faithful Testimony unto the end; and through the fire ye must all be led, as the Lord led the Children of Israel by the hand of Moses, who parted the Sea before them; And now is the Lord God leading his Children by an outstret∣ched hand, and by the arm of his own Salvation he is bringing thm into the Gates of Sion, where the harmo∣nies of the holy Host are sounded unto the God of Hea∣ven. And in this day hath the Lord God put it into my heart to sound forth the day of deliverance unto Sions Mourners, that they which have sate in the desert places, and in the howling Wilderness, may now come forth, and sit under the overshadowing branches of the true Vine, that so they may drink of the fruits of the Grapes there∣of;
for the blessed day is come, even the day of everlast∣ing rejoicing, wherein Truth and Righteousness shal over∣spread the Earth, wherein the glory of the Lord shal co∣ver his holy Mountain, and Jerusalem shall become the praise of the whole Earth; and into her the Nations shall be gathered; for the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus is come, and establishing in the hearts of the children of men: So all must know your selves gathered into the Kingdom, in∣to the Righteousness, that ye may behold the glory there∣of, for as the Sun shineth at noon-day, even so shall the glory of the Lord overspread the whole earth, and the dread of the Lord shall come over all his enemies, and great shall be the amazing of Sions oppressors; yea, the Lord God is working of a great wonder, to the astonish∣mnt of all the Nations round about, and his Enemies shall see his great indignation poured out, to their utter ruine and destruction. And this is near to be revealed, the Lord God hath spoken it, from whom I do declare it in his dread and authority, and from the zeal of his holy Majesty I do this publish, the day of his coming unto all flesh; and now is the restauration and salvation come; and therefore let the righteous rejoice, let the upright in heart lift up their heads; for God is advancing his Name, and they who trust in it, shall be crowned for ever with unut∣terable and glorious Crowns; in the heavenly places shall your habitations be with the God of Holiness, who reign∣eth in the Heaven of Heavens, King in his Eternal Glory; and all must be swallowed up of love, yea even with the Love and Life of the Lord God; therefore solace your selves in the Love and Life of the living God, that you may be perfect in love, and in the life of holiness may pos∣sess your souls, in eternal peace, rejoicing and praising the God of the living, for whom praises have wasted, unto
him be Hallelujahs given, even so saith my soul. And so in the living power all dwell, that life may be felt by all who possess the truth of the living God, that so none may be found as Wells, but having no Water; as Clouds, but having no Rain; and whilst they Minister to others, they being dead in themselves. And in the fear of the Lord God (I say) I do from him declare it; and so let all try the spi∣rits, whether they are of God, yea or nay; it is of great concernment; and if they are not, urn from them; for such there are who have erred from the Faith, who have loos∣ed their anchor, but of them beware; for this I do declare from the feeling of the life of the Lord God, great hurt hath been done, and self hath been exalted, whilst the boaster hath ruled, God's Heritage hath suffered; but now his life reviveth, and the Lord will establish his own, and that that which is not of him, shal be thrown down; for the Lord accepts that which is his own, and of his own beget∣ting, & that beareth his, Image, & that hath the seal of the Lamb; and that is that which God wil crown and establish for ever. So the grace of God, and of our Lord Jesus, rest and remain with you, and amongst you all, for ever. So from the Spirit of Truth I this publish, as the Counsel of God unto all Israel. D. W. THE END.
