15175.5 S124785 99898783 151978
A Perambulation of Kent: Conteining the description, Hystorie, and Customes of that Shyre. Collected and written (for the most part) in the yeare. 1570. by William Lambard of Lincolnes Inne Gent. and nowe increased by the addition of some things which the Authour him selfe hath obserued since that time. Iuuat immemorata ferentem Ingeniis, oculis{que} legi, manibus{que} teneri. ¶ Imprinted at Lon∣don for Ralphe Nevvberie, dwelling in Fleetestreete a litle aboue the Conduit. Anno. 1576.
¶ To his Countriemen, the Gen∣tlemen of the Countie of Kent. THis Booke faire written (in gifte) lately sent vn∣to mee, doo J fayre prin∣ted (by dedication) now sende and commend vnto you. I knowe not (in respect of the place) vnto whom I may more fitly thus send it then vnto you, that are eyther bred & wel brought vp here, or by the good∣nesse of God and your own good proui∣sion, are well setled here: and here lawfullye possesse, or are neere vnto sundrie of those things, that this booke specially speaketh of: and thus, as of your selfes, doe you see what they are now, and thus as of this booke, may you knowe why they were, and by whome they were, and what they were long agone. I knowe not (in respect of the per∣sons,)
vnto whō I may more fitly thus send it, then vnto you: with whome, I haue ben best and longest acquainted: from whō (by points of singular cour∣tesie) I haue been many wayes muche pleasured: Toward whom, for the ge∣nerall coniunction and association of your minds, and your selfes in good a∣mitie and familiaritie, one toward an other: and all, in good zeale towarde the aduancement of Christian religiō: and for the indifferent and discrete course ye keepe in handling and com∣pounding such controuersies, as many times fall (and thereby in nourishing peace, a Iewel most precious) betwene your honest and tractable neighbours, (things vnto almightie God, very ac∣ceptable: vnto her Maiestie, very grat¦full: vnto your countrie, very fruitful: vnto your selfes, very commendable:) Towarde whom, I say, for these causes
which, as a member of this Coūtie with others I see ioyfully and generally: and for the two first causes which deriued frō you, light vpon me self particular∣ly, I haue ben, and am, and must be ve∣ry louingelye affected. I know not how I may more fitly and effectually commend it thē to say, that it is in substance, an hystorie: treating of the partes (and actions of greatest weight a good time together, done by the most famous persons) of one speci∣all Countrie: fet frō great antiquitie, which many men are much delighted with: out of sundry bookes with great studie collected, painfully: by this au∣thoure in the matter set out, truely: with good words wel placed, eloquent∣ly. In commendation of this booke, vpon a fit occasion, the like in a man∣ner,Alexander Neuil, Norwicus. is in Latine lately written by a Gentleman of our Countrie, knowne
to be very honest, and, I thinke, very well learned: and so vnder the au∣thoritie of his good iudgement, may I (without blame) the more boldly cō∣mend it vnto you. What vtilitie foloweth the studie of Hystories, many of them haue well declared that haue published hysto∣ries writtē by theim selfes, or haue set out Hystories written by others. And therefore already sufficiently done, I neede not (vnlearned mee selfe, I can not) therein say muche. And yet thus much I may breefely say, and fit for the thing I haue in hande (me thinketh) I muste needes say, that (the sacred word of Almightie God alwayes excepted) there is nothing ei∣ther for our instruction more profita∣ble, or to our mindes more delectable, or within the compasse of common vn∣derstanding more easie or facile, then
the studie of hystories: nor that studie for none estate more meete, thē for the estate of Gentlemen: nor for the Gen∣tlemen of Englande, no Hystorie so meete, as the Hystorie of England. For, the dexteritie that men haue ey∣ther in prouiding for theimselfes, or in comforting their freendes (two very good things) or in seruing their King and Countrie (of all outward things, the best thing) doth rest cheefly vpon their awne & other folks experience: which I may assuredly accompt (for,Sir Tho∣mas Moore Knight, in the hysto∣rie of King Richard the thirde. in an hystorie, in our tong as wel written as any thing euer was, or I thinke euer shalbe, great experience deriued frō a proofe of two such things, as prospe∣ritie and aduersitie be, vpon a fit occa∣siō vnder the person of a very wisemā, is rightly accoūted) to be the very mo∣ther and maistres of wisdome. Now that that a number of folkes doth ge∣nerally,
is much more then that, that any one of vs can do specially, and so by other folks experiēce, are we taught largely: and that, that other folkes for their King, their coūtrie, theimselfes, their friends, like good men do vertu∣ously, ought to prouoke vs with good de¦uotion inwardly to loue theim: & with good words openly much to commende theim, and in their vertuous actions, rightly to folow theim. And that, that other folkes against their King, their countrie, their friends (and so against theim selfes) like foolish men do igno∣rantly, or like leude men do wickedly, ought to moue vs first (as our neigh∣bours) Christianly to bewaile theim: and thē (as by presidents of peril pro∣cured through their awne follies and faults) dutifully and wisely to beware by thm. And so by these mens experi∣ence (which like the burnt childe, that
then too late the fire dreadthe) with much repentaunce they bye deerely) are we taught and brought out of dā∣ger to settle our selues, as it were, in a seate of suretie. Thus you see what ex∣perience doth, and thus you see where other folkes experience is to be had: which, for the good estate of England (resting chiefly vpon the good iudge∣ment and seruice of the Gentlemen of England) is as J thinke, most proper∣ly fet from the Hystorie of England. And this for this purpose, I say bothe vnto you my country men the Gentle∣men of this Countie (a portion of the Realme) specially, and to al the Gen∣tlemen of the whole Realme beside, generally. There resteth that for this booke (whiche I doe vpon these respectes thus send, and with these reasons thus commende vnto you) we shoulde vnto
the Authour William Lambard, yeelde oure verye hartie and perpe∣tuall thankes: as oure Country man in our wordes and deedes louingly vse him: as a man learned, duely e∣steeme him:Mathewe Parker Archebi∣shop of Canterbu∣ry in his Preface to the Booke de rebus ge¦stis Aelfre∣di Regis. (for a late very well lear∣ned and reuerend father hath publi∣quely and rightly so reputed him) as a Gentleman religious and very ho∣nest, make righte accompt of him: whiche, for my parte, I thinke meete to do, and meane to do: and for your partes, I desire heartely you should do, and I hope assuredly you will do. And if by you he might (and woulde) be moued at his good leysure, to doe as muche for all the rest of the Counties of this Realme generally, as he hathe done for this Countie specially (toward whiche J knowe, by great paine and good cost, he hath alredy vnder the ti∣tle of a Topographical dictionarie
gathered together greate store of very good matter) himselfe (the Authour of it) were worthy of good reward, & singular commendation for it. You (the motioners) in the reading, shall receiue great pleasure by it: the rest of the Gentlemē of this Realme, that of themselfes see what things in their awne coūtries are of gretest fame now, & by that boke shal know, what those things and other things were long a∣gone, must needes with great delight receiue it: and surely, being as he is vnto mee, a very deere freende, for myne awne parte, J meane also (God willing) vpon some fit occasion, with my request to further it. The xvj. of Aprill. 1576. Your Countrey man and very louing friende. J: W:
¶ GVLIELMVS FLETE∣wodus Vrbis Londinen∣sis Recordator, ad candi∣dum Lectorem. EN tibi Lector, adest series dignissima rerū, Canticolûm si nôsse cupis pia stemmata, siue Si tibi sacra placent horum cōmixta prophanis, Siue meare libet per compita, flumina, pontes, Seu reserare velis septem diademata regum: Cuncta Topographia hac Lābardus pingit apertè, Jngenio rarus, grauis arte, labore notandus. Cuius mellifluo debet nunc Cantia libro Plurima, myriades rerum dum ventilat aptè: Quas benè si capias, habet hic cū foenore sortē.
The Saxon Characters, and their values. Characters. values. a a b b c c d d e e f f g g h h i i k k l l m m n n o o p p q q r r s s s s t t u u ƿ w x x y y z z The abbre∣uiations. Their va∣lues. & and {that} that ð th þ th Ð th g ge The pointes. Comma, which is marked after the common periode, thus (.) Periode, whiche is here signed as the Greeke interrogatiue, thus (;)
SVndry faultes (gentle Reader) haue we vnwillingly cōmitted, in this Booke, im∣printed in the absence of the Authour. Of these, some do blemish only the beautie of our owne workmanship: others do offend against the lawes of Orthographie: Some doe shrewdly peruert the sense of the writer, and will stay thee: others doe vtterly euert his meaning, and will muche trouble thee. Suche therefore as be most daun∣gerous, we haue here set before thine eye, beseeching thee to amende them with thine owne pen, before thou enter into the Booke: The whiche labour (we doubt not) but thou wilt the more willingly vndertake in this one copie, when thou shalt haue rightly weighed, what a worke it woulde be for vs, to perfourme it in sixe hundreth bookes. Pag Lin. Error. Correction. 2 4 Sctos. Scots. 7 3 Zenagogus. Xenagogus. 48 6 bropam. Broxam   29 Haniswel. Hamswell.     Southfrith for. Southfrith forest. 54   adde (Wye) to the Scholes there.       Richard Agall. Richard Argall. 56 17 Syr Humfrey Iilbert. S. Humfrey Gilbert.     adde Iohn French to the names in F. there.   57   William Lambade. William Lambarde. 58   adde S. Walt. Waller to the names in W.   60 27 in Latine. into Latine. 64 29 Kenulfus. Kenulfus.     Amend the nūbers of the. 2. pages, folow∣ing nexte after the page. 67.   76 1 take out this (Malm. Couent.)   77 13 partly for the. partly by the. 78 5 ƿaenEt. þaenEt.   22 ƿaenEt. þaenEt. 84 20 Leoswine. Leoswine. 103 27 Symon Barley. Symon Burley. 108 1 then were appoin. that were appointed 109 18 Aulaf. Anlaf. 110 15 Syphinus. Syphnius. 112 34 whiche drewe. withdrewe. 119 1 Dorus. Doris. 121 16 kept till. keepe till.   32 a Captaine. a Captiue. 122 20 and speede. and sped. 123 20 Borieux. Baieux. 124 8 Borieux. Baieux. 126 5 tenure. terrour.   28 contained. continued. 128 32 a newe worke. the newe worke. 130 2 port sayle. portsale.   3 crowne, landes. Crownelandes. 131 18 strengthened. straightned. 135 27 a litle. a title. 136 12 you knowe of. you knowe out of.   34 to edifie. to deifie. 137 22 shriued. shryned. 142 15 had at Rumney. did at Rumney.   21 vpon thē to the laste man. vpon them and slue them to the last mā. 143 16 Badhenham. Hadhenham. 147 3 to the wood. into the wood.   13 in a place stronger. stronger in a place. 150 32 had receiued her. had recouered her. 155 2 then order. then ordered. 156 19 Borieux. Baieux. 159 17 vsed in. haue vsed in.     After the page. 160. amende the numbers of the next eight pa¦ges following.   161 3 to the very end. to the very same end. 162 9 landed in Pontein. landed in Pontieu.   10 angeon, poieton. angeou, poietou.   24 and conuerture. and couerture. 163 15 eight carnes. eight Carews. 166 18 procured the Pope. procured of ye Pope. 167 18 conteined foure. contented foure. 169 8 in weald. in the weald. 174 34 pronounce it of. pronounce of. 177 10 and in a companie. and in the company. 178 3 Augustine. Augustines. 180 15 cydƿitE. cyldƿitE. 181 10 possession. profession. 182 29 take out these foure words. (as it is sure.)   187 25 if you offer. if you offered. 190 11 Kemsley towne. Kemsley downe. 191 18 harted in his. harted to his. 192 7 preachment (after. in which (after. 193 11 exercerentur. exercentur. 195 2 þƿangcEastsE þƿangcEastrE
  15 Thongraster, or Thwangraster. Thongcaster, or Thwangcaster. 209 29 the very first. their very first.     After the page. 211. amende the numbers of the two next pa∣ges following.   214 10 not greatly. not greedely. 219 8 Kings reward. Kings awarde. 220 13 on the otherside. they on ye other side. 222 13 church adioyning. churches adioyning. 228 18 chart of donation. charter of donation. 229 8 the iustice of. the iniustice of. 233 31 hath nowe susteined. hath susteined. 236 6 dissolued the. dissolued there.   13 and like the. and let the. 241 22 Claredowne. Clarendune. 243 19 writeth it. twyteth it. 244 26 not their manner. not the manner. 247 6 was giuen then. was giuen them. 251   in the margine, S. Se∣pulchres. S. Stephans. 252 29 to (maugre his my∣ter) race. (maugre his myter to race. 261 26 gotten by patterne. gotten by periurie. 262 34 with might. with night. 264 18 sufficiently defended. sufficiently defenced. 270 5 and yet loste. and yet lefte. 271 13 recitall of. the recitall of.   22 Gibmandus. Gibmundus. 272 2 Alstanns. Aelsstanus.   15 Gualeramus. Gualerannus. 273 1 and there it is. and there is. 276 28 Cadishe. Achates. 279 16 tythed the number. tythed that number. 282 25 . .   33 displeasure receiued. displeasure cōceiued. 283 4 pountion. pountion.   12 pountion. pountion. 289 2 againe the Britons. against the Britons.   6 stede of Horse. stede of Horsa.     In the margine of ye page: Horstede borne in. Horstede barne, nere. 295 23 lesse worthy. lesse worth. 296 19 Borieux. Baieux. 297 13 strengthened. straightened. 299 29 accomplement. accouplement. 304 8. 9 debet sull. debet. 3. sull.   15 de Althe. de Athle.   24 Nedestane. Medestane.   27 Heyburne. Heyhorne. 313 19 and. 2. Ric. 2. 316 26 wearinesse. warinesse. 317 11 as is in. as he is in. 318 16 put our seales. put to our seales. 325 12 that number of. the number of. 329 16 peucata. Leucata. 341 7 burgHEr. burHEs. 342 10 the word which. the which worde. 344 17 reiected. eiected. 358 27 caelcE. aelcE. 361 23 other uche. other suche. 362 15 Hi ƿHrto. Hi þErto.   18 ƿE Hit. þE Hit. 366 25 three estales. three estates. 370 1 vaginacae. vagniacae.   3 ƿyrHam. ƿyrtHam. 391 32 in feodo. in feoda. 392 10 in feodo. in feoda. 396   in the mar. that call. call that. 399 11 shall entree. shall enter.   12 condtion. condition.   33 exemplfied. exemplified. 400 29 and in case not. and not in case.   30 is iustified. is iustised. 406 25 seiset. seisei. 407 24 may waine her. may waiue her.
Saxones ANGLIAE HEPTARCHIA.
¶ The exposition of this Map of the English Heptarchie, or seauen Kingdomes. TO the ende, that it may be vnderstoode, what is ment by the tearmes of Eastsaxons, Westsaxons, Mercia, Northumberland, and such other, of which there is com∣mon mention in the Treatise folowing: I haue thought good to prefixe a chard of the seauen sundry Kingdomes into the whiche this Realme was sometime diuided. But yet, for the better and more plaine explication of the matter, it shall bee good first to know, that all these Nations following haue had to doe within this our Countrie: The Brittons, the Romanes, the Scottes and Pictes, the Saxons, the Danes, and the Normanes.The Bry∣taines. The Bryttons (after the Samothees, and Albionees, whiche be of no great fame in our history) were the most auncient Inhabitantes of this land, and possessed it in peace, vntil Iulius Caesar (the Romane Emperour) inua∣ded them: for so muche may a man gather of Horace his wordes, where he sayeth, Intactus aut Brytannus, Sacra vt descenderet catenatus via. &c. These therefore weare by Iulius Caesar subdued to the Romane Empyre, and their country made a tributarie Prouince: in whiche case it continued many yeares to∣geather, vntyll at the length they being greiuously vexed with the Pictes and Scottes their neighbours on the North, and being vtterly voide of all hope of aide to bee had from the Romanes their patrons (who also at the same time weare sore afflicted with the inuasion of the Hunnes, and Vandales, like barbarous nations) they weare enforced to séeke for further helpe: And therefore sent into Germanie, from whence they receaued hyred
Souldiours, of the Nations called Saxons, Iutes, and Angles, vnder the conduicte of Hengist and Horsa, two naturall brethren, and both verie valiant Captaines. The Scots & pictes.These Sctos (as them selues do write) weare a people of Scythia, that came first into Spaine, then into Ire∣land, and from thence to the North part of Britaine our Iland, where they yet inhabit: They were called Scots, or Scyttes, of Scyttan, which is to shoote: The Pictes also came from the same place after them, and occupied the parts where VVestmorland and Galoway now be. And they were called Pictes, either for that they vsed to paynte their bodies, to the ende to séeme the more terri∣ble, or els of the word , which signifieth a Champion, by reason of their great courage and har∣dinesse. The Saxons, Iutes, & Angles,The Saxōs, Iutes, and Angles. weare the Germains that came ouer, (as we haue saide) in aide of the Bri∣tons, of which the first sorte inhabited Saxonie: the se∣conde were of Gotland, and therfore called Gutes, or Gottes: The thirde weare of Angria, or Anglia, a coun∣try adioyning to Saxonie, of which the Duke of Saxo∣nie is Lorde till this day, and beareth the name therof in his stile, or title of honour, and of these last we all be cal∣led Angli, English men. These Germaines, for a season serued against the Scots, and Picts: But afterwarde (entised by the plea∣sure of this countrey, and the fraude of the enemies) they ioyned handes with them, and all at once set vpon the Britons that brought them in: and so, driuing them into Fraunce, Wales, and Cornwall, possessed their dwel∣ling places, and diuided the countrye amongst them∣selues. Howbeit, they also wāted not their plague: For af¦ter that they had long warred one vpon another, for the enlarging of their particular kingdomes, and had at the
last so beaten ye one the other, that the whole was by the Westsaxons reduced into one entier Monarchie, sodain∣ly the Danes (a people of Norway, & Denmarke) came vpon them, and after much mischiefe done, in the ende tooke the crowne quite and cleane from them. But they were expulsed after thirtie yeares trouble, and the Englishe and Saxon Nation restoared to the royall dignitie: which yet they enioyed not many yeares after.The Nor∣mans. For straight vpon the death of Edward the Con∣fessor, William of Normandy (whose people at the first came from Norway also, and were therfore called Nor∣mans) demaunded the Crowne, and wan it of Harold in the Fielde, whose posteritie holdeth it tyll this day. Thus muche of the Nations, that haue had interest in this Realme: Now to our purpose, that is,The seuen kingdomes to the diuisi∣on of the same into the sundrye kingdomes vnder the Saxons. And although (by reason of the continuall con∣tention that was amongst them for enlarging their bounds) there can no certaine limits of their kingdomes be appointed, yet wee wil go as neare the trouth as wee can, and folow the best approued authours that haue written thereof. The first Kingdome therefore, was called the King∣dome of the Westsaxons, bicause it was in the West parte of the Realme, and it comprehended the whole Shires of Southampton, Berk, Wilton, Dorset, and Somerset, besides some partes of Surrey, Gloucester, and Deuonshyre: As for the residue of Deuonshyre, and whole Cornwall, the Britons reteyned it, whose lan∣guage is not there as yet forgotten. The seconde, was the Southsaxon Kingdome, (so ter∣med bicause it lay South) and conteined whole Sussex, and the remaine of Surrey.
The thirde, was the Kentish Kingdome, and had for the most part the same boundes, yt the Shyre of Kent yet hath, although at some tyme, and by the prowes of some King, it was extended muche further. The Kingdome of Estsex, or of the Estsaxons was the fourth, which was named of the situation also, and included the whole Shires of Estsex, and Midlesex, with some portion of Hartfordshyre. The fifte, was of the East Angles, or East English∣men, consisting of the Ile of Elye, and the Shyres of Norfolke, Suffolke, and Cambridge. The Kingdome of Mercia, or Mearclande, had the sixt place, which was so called of the Saxon woords Mearc signifiyng a bounde, limit, or marke, as wee yet speake: and that, bicause it lay in the midst of this our Iland, as vpon the whiche al the residue of the King∣domes did bounde, and weare bordered. In this King∣dome weare wholy these Shyres, Lincolne, Northamp∣ton, Rutlande, Huntingdon, Bedford, Buckingham, Oxford, Chester, Derby, Notingham, Stafforde: And partly Hereford, Hartford, Warwick, Shropshire, and Gloucestershire. Northumberlande (so called, because it laye North from the Riuer Humber) was the seauenth Kingdome: and it enuironned Yorkshire, Durham, Northumber∣lande, Cumberlande, and Westmerlande wholy, and so muche of Lancashire besides, as was not in Mercia. This Kingdome was for a season diuided into twayne, that is to say, Deira, and Bernicia, but for as muche as neyther that diuision endured long, nor the actes of their Kings were greatly famous, I wyll not staye vpon them: But to the end it may appeare by what lawes and customes these Kingdomes weare guided (for of them also wee must make mention in this historie) I
will procéede to set foorth the rest of the vse of this chard of the English Heptarchie. As eche Countrie therefore, hath his propre lawes,Three sorts of Lawes, in olde time. customes, and manners of lyfe, so no man ought to doubt but that these peoples, being aggregated of so many sun∣drye Nations, had their seuerall rules, orders, and insti∣tutes. Howbeit, amongst the rest those be moste famous, whiche our auncient writers call the Dane law, West-Saxon law, and Merchen law: The first of whiche was brought in by the Danes: The second was vsed amongst the west Saxons: and the last was exercised in the king∣dome of Mercia: and yet not so exercised amongst them selues alone, but that they spred ouer some partes of the rest of the lande also, being eyther embraced for their e∣quitie aboue the rest, or cōmaunded by suche the Kings as preuailed aboue others. To the Westsaxons law therfore, al suche were sub∣iect, as inhabited the Kingdomes of Kent, Sussex, or Westsex. The Eastsaxons, Estangles, and they of the kingdome of Northūberland (al whiche were muche mingled with the Danes) lyued vnder the Danes lawe. They of Mercia, had their owne law, but not throw∣out: for after some mens opinions, the East and Northe∣parts of it liued after the law of the Danes also.The Lawes of our time Al these lawes, King William the Conquerour collected togea∣ther, and (after a discréet view had) by aduice of his coun∣sel allowed some, altered others, and quite abrogated a great many, in place of whiche he established the lawes of Normandie his owne countrey.
¶ The description and hystorie, of the Shyre of Kent. These thin∣ges be all handeled, in the inducti∣on to the Topogra∣phical Dic∣tionarie.HAuing thus before hand exhibi∣ted in generalitie, the names, scitua∣tion, and compasse of the Realme, the number of the sondrye Nations inhabiting within the same, the se∣uerall lawes, languages, rites, and maners of the peoples, the conuer∣sion of the countrie to christianitie, the diuisions and ly∣mites of the Kingdomes, the beginnings and alterations of Bishoprickes, and such other things incident to the whole: Order now requireth, that I shew in perticular, the boundes of eche Shyre and Countie, the seuerall Regiments, Bishops Sées, Lasts, Hundrethes, Fraun∣chises, Liberties, Cities, Markets, Borroughs, Castles, Religious houses, and Scooles: The Portes, Hauens, Riuers, Waters, and Bridges: And finally, the Hilles and dales, Parkes, and forests, & whatsoeuer the singu∣larities, within euery of the same. And bicause not only the Romanes and Saxons (that weare conquerours of this Realme) but also the Disciples of the Apostle Phi∣lip, and the messengers of Pope Gregory (that were conuerters of the people) arriued firste in Kent: and for that the same by commoditie of the Riuer of Thamise (the chief key of this Iland) first openeth it selfe,The author determined to haue written this treatise, in latine. and to the end also that such guests & strangers as shal vouche∣safe to visite this our Britaine, may at their first entry fynde such courtesie and intertainment, as frō hence∣foorth
they ceasse, either with Horace to cal vs, Hospiti∣bus feros, or with others, Feroces in Aduenas, I wyll be their Zenagogus, or guide, and first shew them our coun∣trie of Kent, the inhabitantes whereof, Caesar himselfe in his Commentaries, confesseth to be of al others the most full of humanitie and gentlenesse. Kent therefore,Scituation of Kent. lying in the Southeast Region of this Realme, hath on the North the Riuer of Thamise, on the East the Sea, on the South the Sea and Sussex, and on the West Sussex and Survey. It extendeth in length, from VVicombe in the frontiers of Surrey, to Dele at the Sea side, fyfty miles: And reacheth in bredth from Sandhirst (neare Robertsbridge in the edge of Sus∣sex) to the Northeast pointe of the Ile of Greane, almost thirty miles, & so hath in circuit. 150. miles, or therabout. It is called by Caesar, and other auncient writers,Kent, why so named. Cancium, and Cancia in latine, which name (as I make coniecture) was framed out of Cainc, a woorde that (in the language of the Britaines, whom Caesar at his ar∣riuall founde inhabiting there) signifyeth, bowghes, or woods, and was imposed, by reason that this Countrie, both at that time, and also longe after, was in manner wholy ouergrowne with woode, as it shall hereafter in fyt place more plainly appeare. The Aire in Kent,The Aire. The Soyle. by reason that the Countrye is on sundry partes bordered wyth water, is somewhat thicke: for which cause (as also for that it is scituate nea∣rest to the Sunne risinge and furthest from the Northe pole of any part of the realme) it is temperate, not so colde by a great deale as Northumberlande, and yet in ma∣ner as warme as Cornwall. The Soile is for the most parte bountifull, consisting indifferently of arable, pasture, meadow and woodland, howbeit of these, wood occupieth the greatest portion
euen till this day, except it bee towardes the East, which coast is more champaigne then the residue. The CorneIt hathe Corne and Graine, common with other Shyres of the Realme: as Wheat, Rye, Barly, & Oats, in good plenty, saue onely, that in the Wealdish, or woody places, where of late daies they vsed muche Pomage, or Cider for want of Barley, now that lacke is more cōmō∣ly supplyed with Oates. Neither wanteth Kent such sorts of pulce, as the rest of the Realme yeeldeth,The Poulse namely beanes, peason, & tares, whiche some (reteining the sound of the latine woord Vi∣cia) call vetches, and which Polydor supposed not to be founde in Ingland. The Pas∣ture.The pasture and meadowe, is not onely sufficient in proportion to the quantitie of the country it selfe for brée∣ding, but is comparable in fertilitie also to any other that is neare it, in so muche that it gayneth by féeding. The woods fruits.In fertile and fruitfull woodes and trées, this country is most floryshing also, whether you respecte the maste of oke, Béeche & Chesten for cattail: or the fruit of aples, Peares, Cherries, & Ploumes for men: for besides great store of oke and béeche, it hathe whole woodes that beare Chestnutt, a mast (if I may so call it, and not rather a fruite, whereof euen delicate persons disdaine not to féede) not commonly séene in other countries: But as for Ortchards of Aples, and Gardeins of Cheries, and those of the most delicious and exquisite kindes that can be, no part of the Realme (that I know) hath them, either in such quantitie and number, or with such arte and in∣dustrie, set and planted. So that the Kentish man, most truely of al other, may say with him in Virgil, Sunt nobis mitia poma, Castaneae molles. &c.
Touching domesticall cattel, as horses, mares, oxen,The Cattel. kine, and shéepe, Kent differeth not muche from others: onely this it challengeth as singular, that it bringeth forth the largest of stature in eche kinde of them: The like wherof also Polydore (in his historie) confesseth of the Kentish poultrie. Parkes of fallow Déere, and games of gray Conyes,Deere and Conyes. it maynteyneth many, the one for pleasure, and the o∣ther for profit, as it may wel appeare by this, that with∣in memorie almost the one halfe of the first sorte be dis∣parked, and the number of warreyns continueth, if it do not increase dayly. As for red Déere, and blacke Conyes, it nourisheth them not, as hauing no great walkes of wast grounde for the one, and not tarying the tyme to rayse the gaine by the other: for, blacke conyes are kept partly for their skins, which haue their season in Winter: and Kent by the nearnesse to London, hath so quicke market of yong Rabbets, that it killeth this game chiefly in Summer. There is no Mineral,No mynes. or other profit digged out of the belly of the earth here, saue only that in certeine places they haue Mynes of Iron, quarreys of pauing stone, and pits of fat Marle. The Sea, and fresh waters,The fishe. yéelde good and wholesome fishes competently, but yet neyther so muche in quanti∣tie, nor suche in varietie, as some other coastes of the Realme do afoorde. And here let vs for a season leaue the Sea and the Soyle, and cast our eyes vpon the men. The people of this countrie,The people consisteth chieflly (as in other countries also) of the Gentrie, and the yeomanrie, of which the first be for the most parte, , go∣uernours, and the other altogether , gouer∣ned:Socage, and Knightes, seruice. whose possessions also were at the first distingui∣shed, by the names of knight fee, and Gauelkinde: that
former being propre to the warriour, and this latter to the husbandman. But as nothing is more inconstant, thē the estate that wee haue in lands and liuing (if at the least I may call that an estate whiche neuer standeth) Euen so, long since these tenures haue ben so indifferēt∣ly mixed & confounded, in the hands of eche sorte, yt there is not now any note of differēce to be gathered by them. The gentlemenThe Gentle¦men. be not héere (throughout) of so auncient stockes as else where, especially in the partes nearer to London, from whiche citie (as it were from a certeine riche and wealthy séedplot) Courtiers, Lawyers, & Mar∣chants be cōtinually translated, & do become new plants amongst them. Yet be their reuenues greater then any where else: whiche thing groweth not so muche by the quantitie of their possession, or by the fertilitie of their soyle, as by the benefit of the situation of the countrie it selfe, whiche hath al that good neighbourhood, that Marc. Cato, and other olde authors in husbandrie require to a wel placed graunge, that is to say, the Sea, the Riuer, a populous citie, and a well traded highway, by the cōmo∣dities wherof, the superfluous fruites of the grounde be dearly sold, and consequently the land may yéeld a grea∣ter rent. These gentlemen be also (for the most parte) acquainted with good letters, and especially trayned in the knowledge of the lawes: They vse to manure some large portion of their owne territories, as well for the maintenance of their families, as also for their better in∣crease in wealth. So that they be well employed, both in the publique seruice, and in their own particular, & do vse hanking, hunting, and other disports, rather for their recreation, then for an occupation or pastime. The yeomēThe yeomanrie, or commmon people (for so they be called of the Saxon word gemen which signifieth com∣mon) is no where more free, and ioily, then in this shyre:
for besides that they them selues say in a clayme (made by them in the time of King Edwarde the first) that the cōmunaltie of Kent was neuer vanquished by the Con∣querour, but yéelded it selfe by composition, And besides that Geruasius affirmeth, that the forward in al battels belongeth to them (by a certein préeminence) in right of their manhood, It is agréed by all men, that there were neuer any bondmē (or villaines, as the law calleth thē) in Kent. Neither be they here so muche bounden to the gentrie by Copyhold, or custumarie tenures, as the in∣habitantes of the westerne countries of the Realme be, nor at all indaūgered by the féeble holde of tenant right, (which is but a discent of a tenancie at wil) as the cōmon people in the Northren parts be: for Copyhold tenure is rare in Kent, and tenant right not heard of at al: But in place of these, the custome of Gauelkind preuayling euery where, in manner euery man is a freeholder, and hath some part of his own to liue vpon. And in this their estate, they please them selues, and ioy excéedingly, in so much, as a man may find sundry yeomē (although other∣wise for wealth comparable with many of the gentle sort) that will not yet for all that chaūge their condition, nor desire to be apparayled with the titles of Gentrie. Neither is this any cause of disdain, or of alienation of ye good myndes of the one sort from the other: for no where else in al this realme, is the commō people more willing∣ly gouerned. To be short, they be most commonly ciuil, iust, & bountiful, so that the estate of the old franklyns & yeomen of England, eyther yet liueth in Kent, or else it is quite dead & departed out of ye realme for altogether. As touching the artificersThe Artifi∣cers. of this shire, they be either such as labour in the artes that be handmaidens to hus∣bandry, or els workers in stone, Iron, & woodfuel, or else makers of coloured woollē clothes: in which last feat they excell, as from whome is drawne both sufficient stoare
to furnishe the weare of the best sort of our owne nation at home, and great plentie also to be trāsported to other forreine countries abroad. Thus muche I had summa∣rily to say, of the condition of the countrie, and countrie men, Nowe therfore (God assisting myne enterprise) I will goe in hande with the hystorie. The first in habitation of England.Wée read in the first booke of Moses, that after suche time as the order of nature was destroyed by the gene∣rall floude, and repaired again by the mercy of almighty God, the whole earth was ouerspred in processe of time, by the propagation of mankinde that came of the loines of Sem, Cham, and Iaphet. By which authoritie, we are throughly certified, that all the nations of the worlde, must of necessitie deriue their Pedegrées from the cun∣trie of Chaldee (or some place nighe vnto it) where the Arke of Noah rested: The errour of those, whiche say, that the Brytons weare Indi∣genae.And therfore, I will not here eyther doubt, or debate to and fro, as Caesar, Cornel. tacit. Polydore, and others doe, whether the first inhabitantes of this Ilande were (Aliunde aduecti, and aduenae) that is, translated and brought out of some other countrie to dwell here, or no: Or yet affirme, as the same Caesar doth, that some, or (as Diodor. Siculus writeth) that all the Britanes weare indigenae, the naturall borne people of that countrie, and that ab origine, euen from the first beginning: for to take the one way of these, or the other, would but leade vs to distrust the infallible Scriptures of God concer∣ning the creation and propagation of mankynde, and to trust the wretched vanitie of opinion that the Gentiles had, and namely the Atheniens, who, the better to ad∣uance their antiquitie, were wont to vaunt, That they only (forsooth) of al the Grecians were , that is to say, Satiui, & indigenae terrae parentis, The very natural seeds, stocks, & ymps, springing out of their good mother ye
same earth where they dwelt, and not brought from els∣where. We reade likewise in the same book of Moses, yt the Iles of the Gentiles were diuided into their King∣doms and nations, by suche as descended of the children of Iapheth, wherevpon, as the Italians in their histories deriue themselues from Gomer the first sonne of Ia∣pheth: the Spaniardes from Tubal his fifte Sonne: and the Germanes from Thuysco (whom as they say, Mo∣ses calleth Ascenas) the eldest sonne of Gomer: Euen so, the late learned, and yet best trauayled in the histories of our countrey, reiecting the fonde dreames of doting Monkes and fabling Frears, do collect out of Herodo∣tus, Berosus, and others the most graue and auncient authors, that one Samothes, the sixth sonne of Iapheth, (whome Caesar in his commentaries calleth Dis, and Moses nameth Mesech) did about 250. yeares after the generall inundation of the world) take vpon him the first dominion of these countreis in Europe, which are now known by the names of Fraunce and Britaine, and the inhabitantes thereof of long time called Celtae, or rather  of the Verbe  for theyr speciall skill in ryding.That is to say Ryders: and to Ride. Of this mans name (say they) the first inhabiters of England weare called Samothaei,An. mundi. 2219. by the space of 300. yeares, or more: About which time Albion Mareoticus (the sonne of Neptune, or rather Nepthuim, as Moses writeth it, and descended of the race of Cham,) inuaded the Ile, conquered the inhabitantes, mixed them with his owne people, and called them all after his owne name Albionees, and the countrey it selfe Albion. Sixe hundreth and eight yeares (or theraboutes) after this also,An. ante Christum 1142. Brutus Iuhus (as all our common histo∣riens haue it) entered this Iland with 324. ships, laden with the remaines of Troye, and he likewise, both sub∣dued
all the former peoples that he found heere to his owne obedience, and also altered their name after his owne calling: So that from thenceforth they were na∣med Britaines, the termes of Samothees, and Albionees being quite and cleane abolished.Kent, the first inhabi¦ted part of England. Now, out of these things thus alledged, I might (as mee thinketh) draw probable coniecture, that Kent which we haue in hand, was the first inhabited part of all this our Iland. For if it be true, that maister Bale in his Centuries confesseth, namely, that Samothes began his dominion ouer this Realme almost. 150. yeres after suche tyme as he first arriued in that part of Fraunce which is called Celtique and had planted his people there, what can be more likely, then that he came out of Fraunce first into Kent? séeing that parte (of all others) was moste neare vnto him, and only of all the Iland might be discerned out of the countrie where he was. And the selfe same reason Caesar vseth, to proue, that the borderers on the South Sea side of this land were Aduenae, and brought out of Fraunce, although he was perswaded, that the dwellers within the midle partes of the Countrie were (Indigenae,) as we haue already touched. But I will procéede in the hystorie. Foure Kings in Kent.Howsoeuer that bee therefore, Caesar himselfe wit∣nesseth, that at the time of his arriuall in this I∣land, the people were by one common name called Britaines: And that Kent was then diuided into foure petite Kingdomes, which were gouerned by Car∣nillus, Taximagul, Cingetorix, and Segonax: who, hauing se∣uerally subiect to their Dominions certain Cities with the territories adioyning vnto them (after the manner of the Dukedomes, or Estates of Italie, at this day) ex∣tended their boundes (as it may be gathered) ouer the whole countries of Kent, Sussex, and Surrey, at the least.
This kind of Regalitie,But one King in Kent. Kent retained not many yeares after, bicause the Britain Kings, succéeding Caesars con∣quest, & yéelding tribute to ye Romanes, reduced not on∣ly these partes, but in manner the whole Realme also, into one entier Monarchie.. So that in course of time, and vnder the reigne of King Vortiger, Kent was ru∣led by a Lieutenant,, or Viceroy, called Guorongus, as William of Malmesbury witnesseth. But it was not long, before these Britaines were so weakned, part∣ly by intestine dissentiō amongst themselues, and part∣ly by incursions of their neighbours the Scots, & Picts, that (the periode of this their estate also drawing on) Vortiger their King was compelled to inuite for ayde the Saxons, Iutes, and Angles, thrée sortes of the Ger∣mane nation: who, in steade of dooing that which they came for, and of deliuering the Britaines from their for∣mer oppression, ioyned with their enemies (Thessala fide, as the adage is) & brought vpon them a more gréeuous calamity and conquest, subduing the people, suppressing relligion, and departing (in manner) the whole land a∣mongest them selues. So that now Kent recouered the title of a seueral Kingdome againe, although not al one, and the verie same in limittes with the former foure, yet nothing inferiour in power, estimation, or compasse. Of whiche this newly reuiued regiment, Hengist the chief leader of the Germanes became the first au∣thor and patrone. For he, finding him selfe placed by King Vortiger for his owne habitation at Thanet in this Shire, and séeing a great part of his power be∣stowed in Garrison against the Scottes vnder Oh∣tha his Brother, and Ebusa his Sonne in the North Countrey, and perceyuing moreouer, that he was arryued out of a moste barren Countrie into this
plentifull Iland (with the commodities wherof he was inestimablie delighted) he abandoned al care of returne to his natiue soyle, and determined to make here a seate for him selfe and his posteritie. For helpes wher∣unto, although he had on thone side, his owne prowesse, the manhode of his warlike nation, their nomber, and necessitie: and on the other side, the effeminate cowar∣dise and voluptuousnes of King Vortiger, the weake∣nes of the Britains themselues, and the aduauntage of the Scottes and Pictes their auncient enemies, so that he might with plaine force haue brought his purpose to passe: yet he chose rather to atchieue his desire by faire meanes, and colour of amitie, a way, though not so hastie as the former, yet more spéedie then that, or any other. Espying therfore, that king Vortiger was muche delighted in womens companie, and knowing wel, that Sine Cerere & Libero, friget Venus, he had him to a solemn Banket, and after that he had (according to the manner of Germanie yet continuing) well plied him with pots, he let slippe before him a faire gentlewoman, his owne daughter, called Roxena, or Rowen, which being in∣structed before handhow to behaue her self, most ami∣ablie presented him with a goblet of wine, saying in her owne language,The first wasseling cuppe. ƿaes Haile Hlaford cynyng; wessail Lord King, that is to say, be merie Lord King: wyth which her daliance, the King was so delighted, that he not onely vouchesafed to pledge her, but desired also to perfourm it in the right manner of her owne countrey. And therefore he answered (as he was taught) vnto her againe, drinc Haeile; drinke merely. Which when she had done, himselfe tooke the cuppe, and pledged her so hartely, that from thenceforth he could neuer be in rest, vntil he had obtained her to wife,The issue of an vngodly mariage. litle weighing, eyther howe déeply he had endaungered his conscience in mat∣ching
him selfe with a heathen wooman, or how greatly he had hazarded his Crowne by ioyning handes with so mightie a forein Nation. At the time of this mariage, Hengist (labouring by all meanes to bring in his owne Countrie men) begged of the King the territories of Kent, Essex, Midlesex, and Suffolke, (then knowen by other names) pretending in woord, that he would, in consideration thereof, kéep out Aurel. Ambrose, (a competitor of the crowne) whose arriual King Vortiger much feared, But meaning in déede, to make thereby a key to let into the Realme multitudes of Germanes, for furtherance of his ambiti∣ous desire and purpose: which thing in processe of time he brought to passe, not onely creating himselfe and his posteritie Kings of a large quarter, but also thereby shewing the way and entrie, howe others of his nation might follow, and doe the like. And thus Kent, being once againe (as I saide) redu∣ced into a Kingdome, continued in that estate, by the space of thrée hundreth thrée score and eight yeares, or thereabouts, in the handes of fiftéene successours, as the moste credible authours do reporte: Some others adde, Edbert, and Alric, and so make seuentéene in all, whose names doe followe. 1. Hengist, the first Germane.The Kings of Kent. 2. Oesc. 3. Occa. 4. Hermenric: or Ermenric. 5. Ethelbert, the first christened. 6. Eadbald. 7. Erconbert, the first that commaunded the obser∣uation of Lent, in this shire.
8. Egbert. 9. Lothar. 10. Eadric. After his death, Nidred and Wibbard vsurped, by the space of seuen yeares, and therfore are not registred in the Catalogue of the lawfull Kings. 11. Wightred, he built Sainct Martines at Douer. 12. Edbert, added by some. 13. Ethelbert. 14. Alric, added also, by some. 15. Eadbert Pren, or Edelbert Pren. 16. Cuthred. 17. Baldred. Now, although it might here séeme conuenient, be∣fore I passed any further, to disclose suche memorable things, as haue chaunced during the reignes of al these forenamed Kings: yet for asmuche as my purpose speci∣ally is to write a Topographie, or description of places, and no Chronographie, or storie of times, (although I must now and then vse bothe, since the one can not ful∣ly be perfourmed without enterlacing the other.) and for that also I shal haue iust occasion hereafter in the particulars of this Shyre, to disclose many of the same, I will at this present, and that by way of digression only, make report of one or two occurrents that happe∣ned vnder Ethelbert, & Eadric, two Kings of this coun∣trey. Ethelbert, the King of Kent.This Ethelbert, besides that he mightely enlarged the boundes of his owne Kingdome, extending the same euen to the riuer of Humber, was also the first King (a∣mongst the Saxons, inhabiting this land) that promoted the kingdome of Christ, as to whome it pleased almigh∣ty
God to break the bread of his holy woord and gospel, through the ministerie and preaching of Augustine the Moncke, that was sent from Rome by Pope Gregorie surnamed the great: amongst the Saxons I saide, least a∣ny man should thinke, that eyther the faith of Christe, was not heare at all, or not so purely preached, before the comming of that Augustine.  For it is past all doubt, by the stoaries of all Countries, and by the testi∣monie of Beda him selfe (being a Saxon) that the Bri∣tons embraced the religion of Christ within this Iland, many hundreth yeares before Gregories time: whether in purer sorte then he sent it hither, or no, let them iudge that knowe, that he was called (worthely) Pater Caeremoniarum, and that may yet sée in Beda, and others, what trūpery crept into the church of God in his time and by his permission,Eadric, the King of Kent. Eadric the other King succéeded in Kent, after Lotharius, who, because he rather reigned by luste, then ruled by lawe, incurred the hatred of his people, and was inuaded by Ceadwalla (King of West∣sex) and Mull his brother: whiche entring the countrie, and finding no resistance, herryed it from the one end to the other: & not thus contented, Ceadwalla, in reuenge of his brother Muls death, (whome the countrie people had cruelly slaine in a house, that he had taken for his succour) entred this countrie the second time, and sleying the people, spoiled it without all pitie. And yet not satis∣fied with all this, he suffered the quarrell to discend to Ina his successour, who ceased not to vnquiet the people of this Shyre, till they agréed to pay him 30000. Markes in golde, for his desired amendes. These be the matters that I had to note in ye reignes of these two Kings: as for the rest, I passe them ouer to their fit titles, as things rather perteining to some peculiar places, then incident to the body of the whole
Shire, and will now prosecute the residue. In the time of this Baldred, that standeth last in the table of the Kings, Kent was vnited by King Egbert (who last of all chaunged the name of the people, and called them Englishmen) vnto the Westsaxon King∣dome,First name of English∣men. which in the ende became Ladie and maistres of al the rest of the kingdomes also: and it was from thenceforth wholy gouerned after the Westsaxon law, as in the Mappe of the tripartite lawes of this Realme hathe appeared, vntil suche time as King Alfred first diuided the whole Realme into particular Shires, vpon this occasion following. Beginning of Shires.The Danes, bothe in his time, and before, had flocked by sea to the coastes of this land in great numbers, some times wasting and spoiling with sword, and fire, where∣soeuer they might arriue: and sometymes taking with them greate booties to their Ships without doing any further harme: which thing (continuing for many yeares togeather) caused the husbandmen to abandon their til∣lage, and gaue occasion and hardinesse to euill disposed persons to fall to the like pillage, and robberie: The whiche, the better to cloke their mischief withall, feig∣ned them selues to bee Danishe Pirates, and would some time come on land in one part, and some time in an other, driuing great spoyles (as the Danes had done) to theire shippes before theim.  The good king Alfred therefore, that had merueilously traueiled in re∣pulsing the barbarous Danes, espying this outrage, and thinking it no lesse the parte of a politique Prince, to roote out the noisome subiect, then to hold out the forein enemie, by aduice of his counsail, and by the example of Moses (which followed the counsaile of Ietro, his father in law) diuided the whole Realme into certein parts, or Sections (being two and thirtie in number, as I gesse)
whiche of the Saxon woorde Scyran, signifiyng to cut, he termed shires, or (as we yet speake) shares, and portions: and appointed ouer euery one shyre, an Earle, or Alder∣man (or both) to whome he committed the gouernment and rule of the same. These shyres he also brake into smaller parts, wher∣of some were called Lathes,Lathes. of the woord gelaþian, which is, to assemble together: others, hundreds,Hundreds. bycause they conteyned iurisdiction ouer an hundreth pledges: and others, Tithings,Tythings. so named, bycause there were in eche of them to the number of ten persons, whereof eche one was suretie and pledge for others good abearing. He ordeined furthermore, that euery man shoulde procure him selfe to be receiued into some Tithing, and that if a∣ny were founde of so small credite, that his neighbours woulde not become pledge for him, he should foorthwith be cōmitted to pryson, least he might do harme abroade. By this deuice it came to passe, that good subiectes (the trauailing Bées of the Realme) resorted safely to their laors againe, and the euil and idle Droanes were driuen cleane out of the hyue of the common wealth: so that in short time, the whole Realme tasted of the swéet hony of this blessed peace, and tranquilitie. Some shadow I do confesse, of this King Alfredes po∣litique institution, remayneth euen til this day in those courts which we cal Leetes, where these pledges be yet named franci plegij, of ye woord freoborgh, which is a frée pledge; But if the very Image it self were amongst vs, who séeth not what benefit would ensue thereby, as wel towardes the suppression of busie théeues, as for the cor∣rection of idle vagabounds, whiche be the very séede of robbers and théeues. But leauing this matter to suche as beare the sworde, I will plye my penne, and goe forwarde.
Thus muche therefore I thought good, nowe at the first to open, the more at large, bicause it may serue ge∣nerally for all Shyres, and shall hereafter deliuer me frō often repetition of one thing. Where, by the way, (least I might séeme to haue forgotten the Shire that I haue presently in hand) it is to be noted, that that which in the west coūtrey was at that time, (and yet is) called, a Ti∣thing,Bosholder, & Tithing∣man. is in Kent termed a Borow, of the Saxon woord, borh, which signifieth a Pledge, or a suretie: and the chiefe of these pledges, which the Westernmen call a Tithingman, they of Kent name a Borsholder, of the Saxon woordes borHes ealdor, that is to say, the most Auncient, or elder of the Pledges, whiche thinge bee∣ing vnderstood, the matter will come all to one ende, and I may go forward. In this plight therfore, both this Shyre of Kent, and al the residue of the Shyres of this Realme, were found, when William the Duke of Normandie inuaded this Realme:Kent kee∣peth her olde cus∣tomes. at whose hands the cominaltie of Kent, obtey∣ned with great honour, the continuation of their aun∣cient vsages, notwithstanding that the whole Realme besides suffered alteration and chaunge. For proofe whereof, I will call to witnesse Thomas Spot, sometimes a Moncke and Chronicler of saint Au∣gustines at Canterbury, who, if he shall séeme to weake to giue sufficient authoritie to the tale, bycause he only (of all the Storiers that I haue seene) reporteth it, Yet, forasmuch as I my selfe first published that note out of his hystorie, and for that the matter it selfe also is nei∣ther incredible, nor vnlikely, (the rather bycause this Shyre, euen vnto this day, enioyeth the custome of giue all kyn discent,Gauelkyn. dower of the moytie, fréedome of birth, & sundrie other vsages muche different from other coun∣tries, I neither well may, ne will at all sticke, nowe eft∣soones to rehearse it.
After such tyme (saith he) as Duke William the Con∣querour had ouerthrowne King Harold in the field, at Battel in Sussex, and had receiued the Londoners to mercy, he marched with his army toward the Castle of Douer, thinking thereby to haue brought in subiection this countrie of Kent also. But Stigande, the Archebi∣shop of Canterbury, and Egelsine the Abbat of saint Au¦gustines, perceauing the daūger, assembled the countrie men together, and laide before them the intollerable pride of the Normanes that inuaded them, & their owne miserable condition, if they should yelde vnto them. By whiche meanes, they so enraged the cōmon people, that they ran foorth with to weapon, and méeting at Swan∣scombe,Meeting  Swanes∣combe. elected the Archbishop and the Abbat for their captaines: This done, eache man gotte him a gréene boughe in his hand, and bare it ouer his head, in suche sort, as when the Duke approched, he was muche ama∣sed therewith, thinking at the first, that it had ben some miraculous wood, that moued towards him: But they as soone as hee came within hearing, caste away their boughes from them, and at the sounde of a trumpet be∣wraied their weapons, and withall dispatched towards him a messenger, which spake vnto him in this manner. The commons of Kent (most noble Duke) are readie to offer thee, eyther peace, or warre, at thine own choyse, and election: peace with their faithfull obedience, if thou wilt permit them to enioy their ancient liberties: warre, and that moste deadly, if thou deny it them. Now when the Duke heard this, and considered that the daunger of deniall was great, and that the thing de∣sired was but smal, he forthwith, more wisely then wil∣lingly, yealded to their request: And by this meane both he receiued Douer Castle, & the Countrie to obe∣dience, & they only of all England, (as shall hereafter ap∣peare (obtained for euer theyr accustomed priuiledges.
And thus then hath it appeared (so shortly, as I could) what hath bene the estate and gouernment of this coū∣trie, from the arriuall of Iulius Caesar, (the first Romane that conquered this Realme) euen to this present day. Now therfore, I will set before the Readers eye in Ta∣ble, a plaine particular of the whole shyre, wherein, to the end, that vnder one labour double commoditie may be reaped, I will not onely diuide it into the seuerall Lathes, hundreds, townes, and borowes, But also set ouer against eche towne and place, suche summes of mo∣ney, (as by reporte of the recorde of the. 13. yeare of her Maiesties reigne) was leuied in the name of a Tenth and Fiftene, vpon euery of the same: which being done, I will haste me to the description of such places, as either faythfull infor∣mation by word, or credible hy∣storie in writing, hath hitherto mini∣stred me.
The Lathe of S. Augustines. Hundreth of Wingham. Borowe of Wingham. lxvij s̄. j. d. Borwe of Rollinge. lxvij. s̄. j. d. Borowe of Nouington. lxvij. s̄. j. d. Borowe of Godestone. lxvij. s̄. i. d. Borowe of Denne. lxvij. s̄. j. d. Borowe of Twytham. xxxiij. s̄. ix. d. Borowe of Wimlingswold. xxxiij. s̄. ix. d. Borowe of Kelington. xxxiij. s̄. vij. d. Borowe of Gythorne. xxvj. s̄. i. d. The parish of Ashe, with the Borow of Wyderton. xxiij. l. xij. s̄. iij. d. Summe. xlvj. l. xiiij. s̄. x. d. Hndreth of Preston. Towne of Preston. v. l. ix. s̄. x. d. Towne of of Elmestone. l. s̄. Sum. vij. l. xix. s̄. x. d. Hundreth of Ringeslowe. Towne of Woode. iiij. l. vij. s̄. viij. d. Towne of Monketon. iij. l. Towne of Mynster. xv. l. Towne of S. Laurence. xvij. l. xiij. s̄. iiji. d. Towne of S. Peter. xv. l. xvij. s̄. Towne of S. Iohn. xxiij. l. xij. s̄. Towne of S. Gyles. xv. s̄. Towne of S. Nicholas. x. l. vij. s̄. Towne of All Sainctes. iiij. l. vi. s̄. iiij. d. Towne of Byrchingstone. viij. l. xv. s̄. iij. d. Sum. Ciij. l. xiij. s̄. vij. d.
Hundreth of Downhāford. The Lathe of S. Au∣gustines.Towne of Staple. iiij. l. vij. s̄. Towne of Adesham. iiij. l. ix. s̄. Towne of Wykham. vij. l. xiiij. .s̄ .x. d. Towne of Litleborne. vij. l. x. iiij. s̄. Towne of Well. vj. l. xix. s̄. vj. d. Sum. xxxj. l. iiij. s̄. iiij, d. Hundreth of Estrye. Towne of Chillenden. xviij. s̄. Towne of Berston. vij. s̄. ij. d. Towne of Nouington. xx. s̄. Towne of Tyluestone. vj. l. vj. s̄. iiij. d. Towne of Wodnesborowe. xv. l. x. s̄. x. d. Towne of Estrye. xiiij. l. xj. s̄. x. d. Towne of Waldershare. xij. s̄. Sum. xxxix. l. vj. s̄. ij. d. Hundreth of Kinghāford. Borowe of Dorme. xxv. s̄. Borowe of Kingstone. iij. l. viij. d. Borowe of Outemeston. xxij. s̄. iiij. d. Borowe of Berham. xlij. s̄. iiij. d. Borowe of Bereton. xxiij. s̄. iiij. d. Borowe of Sheluing. xxviij. s̄. vj. d. Borowe of Brethe. xxiij. s̄. iiij. d. Sum. xj. l. v. s̄. vj. d. Hundreth of Petham. Towne of Petham. vij. l. xij. s̄. vij. d. Towne of Chartham. viij. s̄. x. d. ob. Towne of Waltham. iiij. l. ij. s̄. v. d. Sum. xij. l. iij. s̄. x. d. ob.
Hundreth of Bewsbrough. Towne of Colred. xxxix. s̄. Towne of Shebertswold. lviij. s̄. Towne of Popeshal. l. s̄. Towne of S. Margaret. iij. l. Towne of Oxney. xxvj. s̄. vij. d. ob. Towne of Westclif. xxxj. s̄. Towne of Guston. xxxiiij. s̄. Towne of Beawfield. xxxix. s̄: Towne of Charlton. xlvij. s̄. Towne of Hougham. iiij. l. Towne of Bucland. xxviij. s̄. Towne of Reuer. xl. s̄. Towne of Ewell. lxvj. s̄. Towne of Leden. xxiiij. s̄. q. Towne of Smalhead. xiij. s̄. iiij. d. Towne of Westlangden. xx. s̄. Sum. xxxij. l. xv. s̄. xj. d. ob. q. Hundreth of Cornilo. Borowe of Finglesham. xxxix. s̄. Borowe of Sholdon. xl. s̄. Borowe of Marten. xxx. s̄. Borowe of Eastlangdon. xij. s̄. Borowe of Asheley. xl. s̄. Borowe of Sutton. xxiij. s̄. v. d. ob. Borowe of Mongeham Magna. xl. s̄. Borowe of Rippley. xvij. s̄. Borowe of Norborne. xxiij. s̄. Borowe of Deale. xiij. l. xix. s̄. Borowe of Walmer. iiij. l. v. s̄. viij. d. Borow of Mongeham Parua. xvij. s̄. Towne of Ringwolde. viij. l. x. d. Sum. xl. l. vj. s̄. xj. d. ob.
Hundreth of Blengate. Towne of Sturey. xij. l. xiiij. s̄. Towne of Chistelet, xij. l. xiiij. s̄. Towne of Reculuer. xij. l. xiiij. s̄. Towne of Herne. xij. l. xv. s̄. Sum. l. l. xvij. s̄. Hundreth of Westgate. Borowe of Westgate. ix. l. xix. s̄. ij. d. ob. Borowe of Harbaldowne. iiij. l. Borowe of Hakington. iiij. l. vj. s̄. Borowe of Cokering. iij. l. xiiij. s̄. Borowe of Tunforde. xxxv. s̄. Borowe of Rusheborne. xxviij. s̄. x. d. Borowe of Harwiche. lvij. s̄, j. d. Sum. xxviij. l. j. d. ob. Hundreth of Whitstaple. Towne of Bleane. vij. l. xj. s̄. ix. d. Towne of Whitstaple. vj. l. xv. s̄. Towne of Natington. xj. s̄. iiij. d. ob. q. Sum. xiiij. l. xviij. s̄. j. d. ob. q. Hundreth of Bregge. Towne of Patriksborne. iij. l. xvj. s̄. Towne of Bekesborne. iij. l. xviij. s̄. Towne of Bregge. xv. s̄. Towne of Blackmanbury. xxxiij. s̄. Towne of litle Harden. xxviij. s̄. Towne of Natindon. xxviij. s̄. Towne of great Harden. xxix. s̄. Sum. xiiij. l. ij. s̄, Towne of Sesalter. iij. l. vj. s̄. viij. d. Summe of this whole Lathe of S. Augustines. CCCCxxxvj. l. xv. s̄.
The Lathe of Shepvvay. Hundreth of S. Martine. The towne of Newchurche. xx. s̄. iij. d. The towne of S. Maries. xlix. s̄. The towne of Hope. xij. l. vij. s̄. x. d. ob. The towne of S. Martine. xiiij. s̄. ij d. The towne of S. Clement. l. s̄. iiij. d. ob. The towne of Iuechurche. lxviij. s̄. j. d. The towne of Medley. iiij. s̄. ij. d. Sum. xxij. l. xiij. s̄. xj. d. Hundreth of Langport. The towne of S. Nicholas. xvj. s̄. The towne of Lyd. ix. l. ij. s̄. iiij. d. The towne of Rompney. xiij. s̄. iiij. d. The towne of Hope. xxix. s̄. Sum. xij. l. viij. d. Hundreth of Alowsbredge The towne of Snargate. lvij. s̄. xj. d. The towne of Brenset. iiij. l. ij. d. The towne of Brokeland. lxxvij. s̄. The towne of Fayrefeld xliiij. s̄. ix. d. The towne of Snaue. xxxij. s̄. vj. d. ob. The towne of Iuechurche. xxxj. s̄. iiij. d. The towne of Newchurche. vij. s̄. i. d. ob. Sum. xvj. l. x. s̄. x. d. Hundreth of Byrcholte Franchesse. The towne of Aldington. iiij. l. x. s̄. ob. The towne of Mersham. viij. s̄. x. d. Sum. iiij. l. xviij. s̄. x. d. ob.
Hundreth of Newchurch. The towne of Bylsington. liij. s̄. viij. d. The towne of Newchurche. xxxiij. s̄. ii. d. The towne of Roking. l. s̄. vj. d. The towne of Snaue. viij. s̄. iiij. d. The towne of S. Marie. xxxiiij. s̄. iiij. d. Sum. ix. l. Hundreth of Stowting. The towne of Elmested. lxxij. s̄. ix. d. The towne of Scelling. xix. s̄. ij. d. The towne of Waltham. xxj. s̄. vij. d. The towne of Stowting. xxx. s̄. xj. d The towne of Horton. liiij. s̄. viij. d. ob. The towne of Stanford. xxvj. s̄. x. d. ob. Sum. xj. l. vj. s̄. Hundreth of Louingbo∣rough. The towne of Eleham. xvj. l. xij. d. The towne of Acryse. vij. s̄. viij. d. The towne of Hardresse. xxix. s̄. iiij. d. The towne of Stelling. xxx. s̄. j. d. ob. The towne of Lyminge. ix. l. xv. s̄. viij. d. The towne of Paddlesworth. xviij. s̄. iij. d. ob. Sum. xxx. l. ij. s̄. j. d. Hundreth of Strete. Towne of Limeane. lxxv. s̄. j. d. Towne of Aldington. xxiij. s̄. vij. d. ob. Towne of Sellinge. vj. l. xj. s̄. ix. d. Towne of Bonington. xij. s̄. ix. d. Towne of Herste. xvij. s̄. vj. d. ob. Towne of Westinghanger. xvj. s̄. xj. d. ob. q Sum. xiij. l. xvij. s̄. viij. d. ob. q Hundreth of Oxeney. Towne of Wyttresham. lvj. s̄. j. d. Towne of Stone. lxxviij. s̄. iiij. d. Towne of Ebbene. xij. s̄. vj. d. Sum. vij. l. vj. s̄. xj. d.
Hundreth of Heane. Towne of Saltwood. vj. l. vij. s̄. viij. d. Towne of Lymeane. v. s̄. j. d. Towne of Postling. iiij. l. x. s̄. xj. d. Sum. xj. l. iij. s̄. viij. d. Hundreth of Hame. Towne of Warehorne. lij. s̄. v. d. Towne of Shaddockherst. v. s̄. ii. d. Towne of Roking. xxix. s̄. Towne of Snaue. x. s̄. ij. d. Towne of Orlaston. ix. s̄. ij. d. Sum. Cv. s̄. xj. d. Hundreth of Worthe. Towne of Dymchurche. lxj. s̄. x. d. Towne of Bormershe. iiij. l. viij. s̄. iiij. d. Towne of Newchurche. vj. s̄. ij. d. ob. Towne of Estbredge. xl. s̄. j. d. Towne of Blackmanstone. xij. s̄. Towne of Westheathe. xxiij. s̄. ij. d. q. Towne of Lymen. xxix. s̄. iij. d. ob. Towne of Aldingweke, and Organsweke. xxij. s̄. v. d. Sum. xiiij. l. iij. s̄. iiij. d. q. Hundreth of Folkestone. Towne of Lyden. xxxij. s̄. j. d. ob. Towne of Swyngfeld. Cvj. s̄. ix. d. Towne of Akkam. xiij. l. xvij. s̄. Towne of Folkestone. ix. l. v. s̄. v. d. ob. Towne of Hawking. xxv. s̄. vj. d. Towne of Acryse. xix. s̄. iiij. d. Towne of Newington. viij. l. xiiij. s̄. iiij. d. ob. Towne of Cheriton. iiij. l. ij. s̄. iij. d. Sum. xlv. l. ij. s̄. ix. d. ob. Summe of this whole Lath of Shepway. CCiij. l. xij. s̄. ix. d. ob. q.
The Lathe of Scray, or Shervvinhope. Hundreth of Charte. Ashtisforde. iij. l. ix. s̄. Charte. iiij. l. xvij. s̄. iiij. d. Betrisden. iij. l. ij, s̄. iij. d. Hothefielde. xl. s̄. viij. d. ob. Sum. xiij. l. ix. s̄. ij. d. ob. Hundreth of Longbridge. Willesbroughe. liij. s̄. vj. d. Kenington. iij. l. x. s̄. vj. d. Seuington. xviij. s̄. vij. d. q. Kingsnothe. xxxj. s̄. vj. d. Marsham. xij. s̄. x. d. ob. Hynxsell. xiij. s̄. vj. d. ob. Ashetisforde. lij. s̄. q. Sum. xij. l. xij. s̄. vj. d. ob. Hundreth of Byrcholte. Westbraborne. xxxj. s̄. v. d. Hastingleyghe. xxj. s̄. vj. d. ob. Bircholte. xx. s̄. iiij. d. ob. Eastbraborne. xix. s̄. viij. d. ob. Sum. iiij. l. xiij. s̄. ob. Hundreth of Boughton vn¦der Bleane. Graueney. v. l. viij. s̄. iiij. d. Harnehill. iiij. l. xiiij. s̄. x. d. Sellyng. ix. l. Boughton. ix. l. v. s̄. vij. d. ob. q Sum .xxviij. l. viij. s̄. ix. d. ob. q.
Hundreth of Teneham. Teneham. ix. l. ij. s̄. ij. d.The Lathe of Scray, or Sherwin∣hope. Linstede. ix. l. ix. s̄. iiij. d. Eastchurche and Stonepit. xxiij. s̄. iiij. d. Hedcorne. xix. s̄. Dodington. vj. l. x. s̄. ij. d. Iwade. xj. s̄. Sum .xxvij. l. xv. s̄. Hundreth of Calehill. Nashe. xx. s̄. ij. d. Felde. xxxiij. s̄. viij. d. Hayslathe. xxxvj. s̄. x. d. Sandpit. xxvij. s̄. vj. d. Charte. xl. s̄. x. d. Welles. xviij. s̄. Charing. xlvj. s̄. vj. d. Sandhill. xxvj. s̄. vj. d. Acton. xvij. s̄. x. d. Eastlenham. xxxv. s̄. viij. d. Stanforde. xl. s̄. iiij. d. Pluckley. iij. l. Edisley. xxxv. s̄. Halingarse. xlv. s̄. iiij. d. Senr. xliiij. s̄. ij. d. Halmeste. l. s̄. viij. d. Sainct Iohns. vij. s̄. vj. d. Grenehill. xiij. s̄. iiij. d. Sum. xxix. l. xix. s̄. x. d.
Hundreth of Feuersham. Stone. xxxviiij.s̄. Preston. v.l. viij.s̄. xj.d. Stallisfield. xlj.s̄. Luddenham. iij.l. vj.s̄. viij.d Ore. x.s̄. Hartie. xxij.s̄. xj.d. Dauington. iij.l. ij.s̄. viij.d. Ospringe. iij.l. ij.s̄. v.d. Feuersham. ix.l. xxij.d. ob. Godneston. xxix.s̄. viij.d. Selling. xxxviij.s̄. j.d. Sheldwiche. iij.l. vij.s̄. v.d. Throwly. v.l. xvij.s̄. viij.d. Badlesmere. xxxij.s̄. ij.d. Leueland. vj.s̄. x.d. Neuenham. xlj.s̄. v.d. Norton. xxx.s̄. Boresfield. xiij.s̄. iiij.d. Boughton Malherb. xj.s̄. viij.d. Eseling. iij.l. j.s̄. j.d. Sum. lij.l. iij.s̄. ix. d. ob. Hundreth of Tenterdene. Tenterdene. xij. l. vij.s̄. j.d. Ebnye. xxxvij.s̄. x.d. Sum. xiiii.l. iiij.s̄. xj.d. Hundreth of Roluinden. Roluinden. iij.l. xj.s̄. x.d. Benyndene. lviij.s̄ viij.d. Sum. vj.l. x.s̄. vj.
Hundreth of Barckley. Bedyndene. v.l. Benyndene. xxxix.s̄. Haldene. vj.s̄. Sucardene. xv.s̄. ij.d. ob. q. Hedcorne. xij.s̄. Fryttendene. vij.s̄. viij.d. Cranebrooke. iij.s̄. Sum. ix.l.ij.s̄.ix.d. ob.q. Hundreth of Blackborne. Appledore. xlv.s̄.v.d.q. Kenardington. xl.s̄.x.d. Woodchurch. v.l. xvj.s̄. ob. Warehorne. xvj.s̄.ij.d. Shadockesherst. viij.s̄. Haldene. iij.l. vj.s̄. x.d. Betrisdene. xvij.s̄. Sum. xv.l.x.s̄. iij.d. ob.q. Hundreth of Branfield. Hawkherst. iij.l. xviij.s̄. iiij.d. Cranebrooke. vj.s̄. viij.d. Sum. iiij.l. v.s̄. Hundreth of Cranebrooke. Biddendene. iij.s̄. vj.d. Cranebrooke. v.l. xvj.s̄. viij.d. Frittendene. xxxv.s̄. v.d. Stapleherst. xxviij.s̄. Hedcorne. x.s̄.x.d. Benyndene. xxx.s̄.x.d. Gowdherst. xxiij.s̄. vj.d. Sum. xij.l. viij.s̄. ix.d. Hundreth of Selbritēdene. Newendene. viij.s̄. Sandherst. xxxv.s̄. x.d. Hawkherst. v.s̄. viij.d. ob. Benyndene. xxj.s̄. ij.d. Sum. iij.l. x.s̄. viij.d. ob.
Hundreth of Mardene. Gowdherst. xxxviij. s̄. iiij. d. Stapleherst. xvj. s̄. ix. d. Marden. xix, s̄. viij. d. Sum. iij. l. xiiij. s̄. viij. d. Newendene. xxiiij. s̄. xj. d. . The Balywike of Kay, in the Hundred of Mylton. Hundreth of Mylton. Tong. xliij. s̄. ix. d. Rodmersham. xix. s̄. vj. d. ob. Kingsdowne. vj. s̄. vj. d. Borden. viij. s̄. vj. d. Tunstall. iij. l. xiij. s̄. iiij. d. Bredgar. ix. s̄. Morston. xxvj. s̄. Sum. ix. l. vj. s̄. vij. d. ob The Balywike of Shepey, in the Hundred of Mylton. Hundreth of Mylton. Mynster. xj. l. ix. d. Eastchurche. .xj. l. xiij. s̄. x. d. ob. Wardon. iij. l. vj. s̄. iiij. d. Lesdon. iiij. l. xvij. s̄. ix. d. Sum .xxx. l. xviij. s̄. viij. d. ob. The Balywike of West, in the Hundred of Mylton. Hundreth of Mylton. Raynham. ix. l. xij. s̄. vj. d. ob. Ʋpchurche. vj. l. x. s̄. x. d. Hartlyp. iij. l. iiij. s̄. iiij. d. Newenten. iiij. l. iiij. s̄. iiij. d. Halstone. xvj. s̄. Stokebury. xx. s̄. v. d. Sum. xv. l. xvj. s̄. j. d. ob.
The Balywike of Kay, in the Hundred of Mylton. Hundreth of Mylton. Sedingborne. vj. l. vij. s̄. ij. d Bapchilde. iiij. l. ob. Tong. xlvij. s̄. ij. d. Rodmersham. lv. s̄. v. d. ob. Bredgar. ix. s̄. vj. d. Tunstall, viij. s̄. vj. d. Morston. vij. s̄. viij. d. Elmesley. xxvij. s̄. x. d. Mylstede. xxxj. s̄. viij. d. Kingsdowne. xxj. s̄. ob. Sum .xx. l. xvj. s̄. ob. The Balywike of Borden, in the Hundred of Mylton. Hundreth of Mylton. Mylton. vij. l. x. s̄. vij. d. ob. Stokebury. xx. s̄. Bredgar. iij. l. xv. s̄. iiij. d. Bycnore. xiij. d. Borden. iiij. l. x. s̄. xj. d. Sedingborne Parua. viij. s̄. vj. d Tunstall. xv. s̄. viij. d. Newington. xlj. s̄. ix. d. Bobbing. liij. s̄. v. d. Halstowe. xlij. s̄. iiij. d. Iwade. xxviij. s̄. ix. d. Sum .xxvj. l. viij. s̄. iiij. d. ob.
Hundreth of Felberoughe Cartham. Cxv. s̄. iiij. d. Godmersham. Cix. s̄. Chiltham. x. l. ij. s̄. ix. d. Sum .xxj. l. vij. s̄. j. d. Hundreth of Wye. Bewbredge. vj. l. viij. s̄. iiij. d. Tremworthe. lj. s̄. Socombe. iiij. l. vj. s̄. iij. d. ob. Gotley. xiiij. s̄. ix. d. Bempston. x. s̄. vj. d. Wilmyngton. x. s̄. vij. d. Deane. x. s̄. ij. d. ob. Shotenden. xix. s̄. iij. d. Hellyinge. v. s̄. ob. Eastwell. lv. s̄. iij. d. ob. Towne. xxxviij. s̄. ix. d. ob. Cockliscombe. xlvj. s̄. iij. d. Brompforde. xliiij. s̄. ix. d. Tokingham nothing, bycause it is in decay. Sum .xxvj. l. xij. d. ob. The town of Osprenge. v. l. ij. s̄. ij. d. The Hundreth of Marden. vij. l. vj. s̄. x. d. Summe of this whole Lathe of Scray. CCCCxij. l. xvij. s̄. x. d. ob. q.
The Lathe of Aylesforde. Hundreth of Chetham. The towne of Chetham. viij. l. x. s̄. Hundreth of Gillingham, & Greane. Gillingham & Greane. xv. l. ix. d. ob. Hundreth of Eythorde. Berstede. xvi j s̄. iiij. d. Ʋlcombe. lix. s̄. Otham. xx. s̄. vj. d. Wormesell. xxiij. s̄. viij. d. Thorneham. xlj. s̄. iiij. d. Hedcorne. xiiij. s̄. Charte. xxxv. s̄. j. d. Boughton Maleherbe. xviij. s̄. Boughton Mouchelsey. xliiii s̄. iiij. d. Holingborne. iiij. l. xiij. s̄. iiij. d. East Sutton. xxix. s̄. iiij. d. Frenstede. x. s̄. Leneham. vj. l. vij. s̄. Harryetsham. lxiiij. s̄. Otterinden. xij. s̄. ij. d. Suttō valance. xlv. s̄. xj. d. ob. q Leedes. xlvj. s̄. viij. d. Bromefeld. iiij. s̄. vj. d. Stokebery. xxxvj. s̄. Langley. xv. s̄. iiij. d. Wychelynge. iiij. s̄. xj. d. Aldington. xxv. s̄. viij. d. Bycknore. x. s̄. iiij. d. Sum xxxix. l. xviiij. s̄. v. d. ob. q.
Hundreth of Maydstone. The Late of Ayles∣ford.Maydestone. xix. l. ix. s̄. ij. d. Loose. xxxiiij. s̄. iiij. d. Lynton & Crookherst. l. s̄. viij. d Westre. xliiij. s̄. ij. d. Stone. lxxviij. s̄. ij. d. East Farleyghe. xlv. s̄. j. d. ob. Detlinge. liij. s̄. iiij. d. Boxley. iiij. l. iij. s̄. iiij. d. Sum .xxxviij. l. xviij. s̄. iij. d. ob. Hundreth of Chamell. Chalke. lix. s̄. Hallinge. xij. s̄. Shorne. iiij. l. xvj. s̄. iiij. d Cowlinge. xxxix. s̄. viij. d. Higham. iiij. l. xj. s̄. iiii. d. Denton. xi. s̄. vi. d. Merston. viii. s̄. i. d. ob. Frendsbury. iiii. l. xi. s̄. i. d. ob. Cookistone. lii. s̄. ii. d. Cobham. Cvi. s̄. viii. d. Strode. iiii. l. iii. s̄. vii. d. Clyffe. vi. l. xiii. s̄. x. d. Stoke. xvii. s̄. x. d. ob. Sum .xl. l. iii. s̄. ii. d. ob. The towne of Mallinge. iiij. l. ix. s̄. viij. d
Hundreth of Twyford. Huntington. xv. s̄. Yaldinge. lxxvij. s̄. iij. d. East Peckham. lxviij. s̄. j. d. Netlestd. vij. s̄. vi. d. Watlinbury. vij. s̄. ob. West Farley. vij. s̄. iiij. d. Testan. iiij. s̄. vj. d. Marden. viij. s̄ Brenchesley. iiij. s̄. Tudeley. xvij. s̄. Sum .x. l. xv. s̄. viij. d. ob. Hundreth of Litlefeld. Mereworth. xxiij. s̄. iiij. d. East Peckham. xliij. s̄. vij. d. West Peckham. xxvij. s̄. iiij. d Of the Baro∣nie of Hadlow. xxiiij. s̄. viij. d. Sum .v. l. xiij. s̄. xj. d. The halfe Hundreth of Westbarnsted. Westbarnested. xl. s̄. j. d. ob. Hundreth of Brenchesley. Brenchesley. lxxiij. s̄. iiij. d. Horsmondene. Cxj. s̄. iij. d. Hotbysbroughe. xlviij. s̄. xj. d. Bayham. xxiiij. s̄. vj. d. ob. Lamberherst. xviij. s̄. iiij. d. Beanecroche. ix. s̄. ij. d. Taperegge. ix. s̄. ij. d. Sum .xiij. l. xiiij. s̄. viij. d. ob. Hundreth of Wacheling∣stone. Borden. liiij. s̄. ij. d. Spelherst. xxx. s̄. ij. d. Stoningley in Pepingley .xxxvj. s̄. ix. d. Sheyborne Ruschall. xlij. s̄. ix. d. q. Tudeley. xxxiij. s̄. x. d. ob. Asherste. ij. s̄. Sum .ix. l. xix. s̄. viij. d. ob. q.
The Lowy of Tunbrigge Southe. .iij. l. xiiij. s̄. ij. d. Hilden. iiij. l. v. s̄. Hadlowe. iiij. l. x. s̄. x. d. Tunbrigge. xliij. . s̄. x. d. ob. Sum. xiiij. l. xiij. s̄. x. d. ob. Hundreth of Wrotham. Wrotham. x. l. iij. s̄. j. d. ob. Stansted. liij. s̄. iiij. d. Itcham. lxv. s̄. iij. d. ob. Shibborne. xxiiij. s̄. x. d. Sum. xvij. l. vj. s̄. vij. d. Sum. xvij. l. vj. s̄. vij. d. Hundreth of Larkefeld. Byrlinge. lx. s̄. vj. d. ob. Pedelsworthe. xxiij. s̄. ij. d. ob. q. Layborne. xvj. s̄. xj. d. S. Leonarde. xvj. s̄. ij. d. ob. q. Ryashe. xxvj. s̄. vij. d. ob. q. Addington. xix. s̄. j. d. ob. q. Offam. xiij. s̄. ix. d. Trottysclyffe. xvij. s̄. vij. d. q. Snothelande. liiij. s̄. ix. d. ob. Woldham, with the Parish of S. Margaret. xxviij. s̄. x. d. ob. Allington. x. s̄. ij. d. Dytton. v. s̄. vij. d. Estemallinge. vii. l. ij. s̄. ob. Borham. xliij. s̄. ob. Acleford. Cxv. s̄. v. d. ob. q. Rugmerhyll. xx. s̄. iiij. d. Horswondene. xxiiij. s̄. vij. d. ob. q. Huntington. vij. s̄. ij. d. ob. q. Sum. xxxij. l. vj. s̄. iij. d. ob.
Hundreth of Hoo. The towne of S. Warburge. ix. l. ij. s̄. viij. d. The towne of S. Marie. iiij. l. xiiij. s̄. iiij. d. The towne of All Saincts. Cvj. s̄. iii. d. The towne of Stoke. xxiii. s̄. vj. d. ob. Halsto. lvij. s̄. x. d. ob. West Peckham. xviij. s̄. vj. d. ob. Cobham. xxix. s̄. vij. d. ob. Sum. xxv. l. xij. s̄. x. d. Hundreth of Toltingtrow. Mepeham. vj. l. Luddesdon. xl. s̄. Yelefeld. xlij. s̄. viij. d. Gore. lxiiij. s̄. vij. d. Grauesend. l. s̄. vj. d. Torne. xliiij. s̄. vj. d. Mylton. l. s̄. vj. d. Sum. xx. l. xij. s̄. ix. d. Summe of this whole Lathe of Aylesford. CCC. l. xvj. s̄. xi. d. ob.
The Lathe of Sutton at Hone. Hundreth of Rokesley. The towne of Rokesley. xix. s̄. x. d. Bexley. vj. l. xij. d. North Craye. xx. s̄. Orpington. iiij. l. xiij. s̄. x. d. Fotyscraye. xvij. s̄. v. d. Chellesfeld. lxvj. s̄. viij. d. Farneburghe. xlv. s̄. iiij. d. Codeham. lxij. s̄. ij. d. West Wickham. xxxvij. s̄. iiij. d. S. Marie Craye. ls̄. j. d. Downe. lij. s̄. iiij. d. Hese. xxiij. s̄. viij. d. Keston. xij. s̄. iiij. d. Heuer & Lingell. xviij. s̄. iij. d. Nokeholte. xv. s̄. Pollescraye. xlviij. s̄. viij. d. Chesilhurst. xlv. s̄. iiij. d. Sum. xxxvij. l. ix. s̄. iij. d.
Hundreth of Axston. Towne of Southfleete. iiij. l. xj. s̄. vj. d. ob.The Lathe of Sutton at Hone. Sutton. Cxj. s̄. vj. d. ob. Fawkeham. xxix. s̄. ij. d. ob. Longefeld. xxiij. s̄. vj. d. Harteley. xxx. s̄. vij. d. Ashe. lxxix. s̄. ij. d. ob. Rydley. xvij. s̄. Kingesdowne. xlj. s̄. iij. d. Maplescombe. xvj. s̄. viij. d. Farmingeham. v. s̄. v. d. ob. Stone. lxxiij. s̄. ix. d. ob. Swanescomb. lxj. s̄. ob. Darrent. xxxviij. s̄. ij. d. ob. Horton. iiij. l. ix. s̄. vj. ob. Eynesforde. xxxvij. s̄. xj. d. Lullingstone. xliiij. s̄. ij. d. ob. Sum. xxxix. l. x. s̄. viij. d. Hundreth of Coddeshethe. The towne of Shorham. lxxviij. s̄. Halsted. xiiij. s̄. iiij. d. Otteford xxij. s̄. ij. d. Woodland. vij. s̄. viij. d. Sundrishe. x. s̄. viij. d. Seuenocke. iiij. l. xv. s̄. Kemsynge. xxix. s̄. x. d. Seale. lix. s̄. Cheueninge. xxxix. s̄. viij. d. Leighe. xiij. s̄. Spelherst. v. s̄. Sum. xviij. l. xiiij. s̄. iiij. d.
Hundreth of Somerdene. The towne of Cheuening. xvj. s̄. iiij. d. Spelherste. xxij. d. Coueden. ix. s̄. iiij. d. Leighe. vj. s̄. Penseherste. v. s̄. vj. d. Heuer, with the Borowe of Tunbridge. vj. s̄. Sum. xlv. s̄. Hundreth of Westram. Towne of Etonbridge. xxiiij. s̄. Westram. xlj. s̄. ij. d. Coueden. xij. s̄. Brasted vpland. xiij. s̄. iiij. d. Sum. iiij. l. x. s̄. vj. d. Hundreth of Bromley and Beckenham. Towne of Bromley. viij. l. Beckenham. Cxix. s̄. vj. d. Sum. xiij. l. xix. s̄. vj. d. The towne of Brasted. xxvij. s̄. v. d. ob. Hundreth of Blackheath. Towne of Lewesham. x. l ij. s̄. ij. d. Lee. lj. s̄. x. d. Ketbrooke. xxviij. s̄. vij. d. Eltham. vij. l. xvj. s̄. Chesylherst and Notingham. xliij. s̄. viij. d. Westgrenewich. lv. s̄. x. d. Charleton. xlvij. s̄. vij. d. Wolwyche. xlj. s̄. x. d. Eastgrenewiche. vij. l. iij. s̄. ij. d. Sum. xxxviij. l. x. s̄. viij. d.
Hundreth of Lytle and Lesnes. Towne of Erythe. xiiij. l. iiij. s̄. iij. d. Craford. vj. l. xvj. s̄. Plumsted. vij. l. xix. s̄. Sum. xxviij. l. xix. s̄. iij. d. The towne of Dertford. xiiij. l. iij. s̄. vij. d. Summe of this whole Lathe of Sutton at Hone. Clxxxxix. l. xv. s̄. iij. d.
Fraunchiles. Of the Duchie. Of the Archebishop. Of the Bishop of Roche∣ster. Of the Deane of Canter∣bury. Of Otforde. Of Wye. Of Asheford. Of Wrotham. Of Elfham. Of Osprenge. Knightes fées in olde time, 254. and Di. whereof .27. belonged to the Archebi∣shop, eyght to the Bishop of Rochester, and the rest to the King. Forrestes and Parkes. South Frythe, for Northe Frythe .3. parkes. Otforde, two. Knoll. Gromebridge. Panthyrst, disparked. Penshirst. Brasted dis. Henden dis. Heuer dis. Bropam dis. Wrotham dis. Ightam dis. Cage dis. Postern dis. Sutton dis. Langley dis. Cooling. Byrling. Cobham. Alington dis. Merewood dis. Grenewiche. Eltham. 3. Ashowre. Southparke. Lullingstone. Calehyl. Léedes. S. Augustines. Bedgebury. Westenhanger. Halden. Haniswell. Hungershall. Lye dis. Folkston dis. Shorland.
Stonehyrst, dis. Stowting. Saltwood. Posting. At Ashford. Sissingherst. Glassenbury. Oxenhoth .2. dis. Hilles of name. Shooters hyll Red hyll. Gads hyll. Cockshoot hyll. Shorne hyll. Northdownes. Boxley hyll. Boughton hyll. Byrling hyll. Ryuer hyll. Raynam downe. Myll hyll. Baram downe. South downes. Ryuers. Thamis. Rauenshorne. Cray. Darent. Medwey. Rother. Lymen. Bewl. Genlade. Wantsume. Stowre. Bridges at Depeford vpō Rauens. Lewsham vpō Rauens. Crayforde, vpon Cray. Eatō bridge vpon Med∣wey. Tūbridge. 5 vpon Med∣wey. Brātbridge vpon Med∣wey. Twyford vpon Med∣wey. Yalding. vpon Med∣wey. Teston vpon Med∣wey. Farley vpon Med∣wey. Maydstone vpon Med∣wey. Ailesford vpon Med∣wey. Rochester vpon Med∣wey. Shorham vpō Darēt. Ainsford vpō Darēt. Farninghā vpō Darēt. Dartford vpō Darēt. Chaford. Lamberhirst. Bewl. Hetcorne. Newendene. Ashford. Canterburie.
Cities. Canterburie. Rochester. Markets, vpon. Tuesday, at Wrotham. Wednisday, at Douor. Sandwiche. Canterbury. Grauesend. S. Mary Cray. Thursday, at Maydstone. Fryday, at Sandwyche. Canterburie. Rochester. Tunbridge. Saturday, at Rumney. Hythe. Douer. Sandwyche. Feuersham. Mylton. Asheford. Cranebrooke. Lenham. Mallyng. Sennock. Dartford.
Fayres at Ashford. 27. Iuly, being S. Ruffines day. Bromley. 1. Februarie, being S. Bridgets day: and the .25. of Iuly, being Saint Iames day. Brastede, on Thursday in Rogation wéeke. Charte the great. 25. Marche, being the Anunci∣ation of the blessed virgine Marie. Charing. 23. April, being S. Georges day. 13. October being S Edwards day. 18. Octob. being S. Lukes day. Caunterbury, the tues∣day in Whitsou wéeke. 27. Iuly, being the seauen flée∣pers day. 29. Sept. being S. Michaels day: and. 29. Decem. being S. Thomas Beckets day. Cranbrook 29. May, being S. Corones day: and. 24. Iune, being Midsomer day. Chilham. 25. Iuly, being S. Iames day. Charlton. 18. Octob. being S. Lukes day. Clyffe. 17. September, being S. Lamberts day. Douer. 25. Iuly, being S. Iames day. 24. August, being S. Bartilmews day: and. 11. Nouemb. being S. Martines day. Feuersham. 14. February being S. Valentines day: and. 1. August, being Lam∣mas day. Folkstone. 27. Iune, be∣ing S. Crescents day. Grauesend. 25. Ianuary, being S. Paules day: and 13. October, being S. Ed∣wards day. Hertesham. 24. Iune, be∣ing Midsomer day. Hedcorne. 28. Iune, be∣ing S. Leos day. Hide. 17. Nouemb. be∣ing S. Hughes day. Lenham. 27. May, being S. Béedes day: and. 21. Sep∣tember, being S. Mathews day. Lydde, 11. Iuly: being S. Benets day. Maidstone. 1. May, being Phillip and Iacobs day: 9. Iune, being S. Edmundes day: 6. October, being S. Faithes day. &. 2. Fe being the Purification, or Can∣dlemas day.
Meteworth. 10. August, being S. Laurence day. Malling. 21. September being S. Mathews day. 1. August, being Lammas day. 6. Nouember, being S. Lennards day. S. Margarets neare Dart∣ford. 20. Iul. being S. Mar∣garets day. Northfleete, the Tues∣day in Easter wéeke. Otford. 24. August, be∣ing S. Bartilmews day. Pluckley. 5. Decemb. be∣ing S. Nycholas euen. Rochester. 19. May, being S. Dunstanes day: and. 30. Nouember being S. An∣drews day. Romney. 1. August, be∣ing Lammas day. Reculuer. 7. Septemb. being the Natiuitie of the blessed virgine Marie. Sttingborne. 21. Sept. being S. Mathews day. Strowde. 10. August, be¦ing S. Laurences day. Sandwiche. 23. Nouam. being S. Clements day. Sandhyrst. 7. Decem. be∣ing the euen of the Concep∣tion. Sennock. 6. Decemb. be∣ing S. Nycholas day: and 29. Iune, being S. Peters day. Tunbridge, Ashwednes∣day: 24. Iune, being Midso∣mer day. &. 18. Octob. being S. Lukes day. Tenterdene. 26. Aprill, being S. Cletes day. Wye. 13. Marche, being S. Theodores day. Wrotham. 23. April, be∣ing S. Georges day. Boroughes. Canterburie. Rochester. Maydstone, and the ports townes. Castels at, Canterburie. Rochester. Douer, and the Castell at the Key. Léedes. Tunbridge. Mylton. Grauesend. 2. Quynborow. Cooling. Sandowne.
Dele. Walmer. Saltwood. Alington. Shorham. Ainsford. Tong. Layborne. Vpnore. Honourable houses, belonging to the Prince, at Grenewiche. Eltham. Dartford. Otford. Knoll. S. Augustines. Douer castell. Dele castell. To the Archbishop Canterburie. Wingham. Forde. To the Byshop of Rocchester. Broomley. Rochester. Halling. To men of honour, Berling Cobham. Cooling. Penshyrst. Shorland. Houses of poore people, with prouision of liuing, at Grenewiche. Orpington. Lullingstone. Shorhant. Senuock. Rochester. Great Chart. Canterburie. Sandwiche. Douer. Houses of poore people, with∣out prouision. Dartford. Whitdiche. Chestnut wood. Religious houses, that some∣time were, and their yearely values. Wingham. 84 li. by yeare. Mynster. Wye Colledge. 93. li. Horton Priory. 95. li. Bilsington Priory. 81. li. Newendene.
Folkstone. 41. li. Douor Pryor. 170. li. Meason dieu. Hospitall there. 59. li. Bradsoll Abbay of S. Ra∣digundes. 98. li. Westlangdon. 56. li. Boxley. 204. li. Léedes Pryory. 362. li. Combwell. 80. li. Feuersham. 200. li. Aninton Pryory there. Maydstone col. 159. li. Shepey. 129. li. Motenden. 60. li. Christes Churche. In Can∣ter∣bury. S. Augustines. In Can∣ter∣bury. s. Sepulcres. 29. li. In Can∣ter∣bury. S. Gregories. In Can∣ter∣bury. S. Tho. hos. 23. li. In Can∣ter∣bury. S. Iames hos. 32. li. In Can∣ter∣bury. S. Nicholas hosp. 109. li. In Can∣ter∣bury. S. Maries without Cant. Rochester pryorie. 486. li. Cobham col. 28. li. Strood. 52. li. Malling Abbay. 218. li. Higham pryorie. Tunbridge pryory. Ailcfford. Dartford. 380. Grenewiche. Meason dieu, at Osprenge. Lesnes Ab. Schooles, at Canterburie. Rochester. Sandwiche. Cranbrooke. Great Charte. Bydendene. Tunbridge. Maydstone. Sennock. ¶ The names of suche of the Nobilitie, and Gentrie, as the Heralds recorded, in their visitation. 1574. To the whiche I haue added suche as I called to mynde, and haue set a starre before ech of them, that they may be knowne from the rest. A. * Syr Christopher Allen. * Asheley. * Richard Agall. William Acher. Christopher Abdy. Richard Austyn. * Robart Alcock. Iames Austyn. B. Syr Richard Baker. Nicholas Barham, Serie∣ant at the lawe. * Edward Boyes. * Boughton.
* Iohn Barnes. * Humfrey Bridges. * Bonham. Ralfe Bosseuile. Robert Byng. Danyell Bettenham. Thomas Brent. Iohn Boys. Frauncis Bourne. Henry Brochull. Iohn Barham. * Iames Barham. William Browne. Iohn Barowe. Nicholas Béere. Thomas Blechenden. William Bedingfeld. Michaell Berifford. * Ierome Bret. * Bam. * Nicholas Ballard. C. * Sir William Cobham, Lord Cobhā, and wardein of the fiue Portes. Syr Henry Crispe. Syr Thomas Cotton. * Syr Rowland Clarke. * Syr Alexāder Colpeper. Syr Henry Cobham, George Catlyn. * Barthram Calthrop. * Chowne. William Cromer. George Clifford. Humfrey Clarke. William Clarke. Robert Colwell. William Cheyney. William Claybrook. William Crispe. William Cayser. * Iustinian Champneys. * Giles Crowe. * Thomas Colpeper. * Cranwell. * Crumpton. * Carrell. * Iohn Cobham. Cuttes. D. * Syr William Damsell. * Thomas Darrell. * Robert Deane. * Dalyson. Richard Déering. Delahay. Iames Dalton. * George Darrel. Iohn Delapynd. Gaius Dixon. William Drayner. * Digges. * Thomas Duke. E. Daniell Euering. Vincent Engham. Ralfe Edolf.
Fraunces Eglesfield. F. Syr Thomas Fane. Thomas Fane. George Fogge. * Henry Fane. Thomas Fyneux. Symond Fifeld. Thomas Farby. Alexander Fisher. Thomas Fluyd. Robert Fylmer. Iohn Franklyn. Moyle Fynche. * Thomas Fisher. * Ralfe Fynche. G. * The Lady Golding. Syr Thomas Guldeford. Edmund Gay. George Goldwell. Thomas Gréeke. William Gybs. Henry Gylman. Thomas Godden, * Richard Garthe. * Barnabe Gooche. * Norton Gréene. H. Syr George Howard. * Syr Perceuall Hart. Syr Iames Hales. William Hamon. Richard Hardes. Roger Herleckenden. * Christopher Harflete. * Honywood. * Iohn Heyton. Thomas Honywood. Henry Haddes. Iohn Harper. Martyn Herleckenden. * Edward Hales. * Richard Heron. Ralf Hayman. Abacuk Harman. Thomas Hamon. William Holmden. * George Harte. I. * Syr Humfry Iylbert. Iohn Iden. William Isley. Paul Ihonson. * Martyn Iames. K. Syr Thomas Kempe. * Richard Knatchbull. L. * William Louelace, Ser∣ieant at the Lawe. * Thomas Louelace. Iohn Lennard. Richard Lone. Anthonie Light. Thomas Lewson. William Lewknor. Lée.
* William Lambade. M. * Roger Manwood, Iustice of the common place. George Multon. Edward Monings. Iohn Moyle. William Midleton. Walter Meyny. Anthony Meyny. William Mount. * Edward Martyn. Moore. N. Syr Henry Neuill, Lorde Aburgeuenny. * Alexander Neuill. Valentine Norton. * Thomas Neuill. * Thomas Neuill. O. Henry Oxenden. Iohn Orwell. P. * Thomas Potter. * Payne. William Partridge. Ciriac Petit. Henry Petit. William Petit. William Pordage. Richard Parkar. * Iames Peckam. * Iohn Pet. * Palmer. R. * Syr Iohn Ryuers. * Thomas Randall. Walter Roberts. * Iohn Roberts. William Roper. Robert Rudstone. Richard Rogers. Robert Rychers. William Raynes. S. * Syr Henry Sidney. Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputie of Ire∣land, and Lord Presi∣dent of Wales. Syr Warham Seintleger. Syr Thomas Scot. Anthony Sandes. Iohn and Edw. Sibyll. Vincent S. Nicholas. Iohn Sidley. Christopher Samson. William Swanne. William Swanne. Thomas Stoughton.
* Charles Scot. * Frauncis Sandbache. * Reynold Scot. * Somers. * Frauncis Shakerley. * William Sydney. T. Iohn Tuftone. Thomas Tourney. Roger Twisden. Morice Tichebourne. Iohn Twyne. Thomas Tuttesham. William Tylghman. * Iames Tebolde. Iohn Tebolde. * Robert Thomas. * Frauncis Thynn. * Richard Tomeyo. W. Syr Thomas Walsinghā. Thomas Wootton. * Thomas Watton. * Thomas Whetenhall. * Ralfe Weldon. * George Wyat. * Thomas Wale. Thomas Willoughby. Frauncis Wilford. Iohn Wybarne. Richard Waller. Iohn Wylkyns. Thomas Waren. William Weston. Dauy Wylkyns. Robert Walker. * Edward Wyat. * Robert Wyseman.
The names of the Kentish writers, drawne (for the most part) out of the Centuries of Maister Iohn Bale. Androgeus, Comes. Ethelbertus, Rex. Lotharius, Rex. Eadricus, Rex. Wightredus, Rex. Heddius Stephanus. Tobias Cantianus. Neotus Aldulphius. Serlo. Fridegodus. Haimo. Folchardus. Obsernus. Eadmerus. Aernulphus. Elmerus. Odo Cantianus. Alexander Cantuariensis. Eadmundus Gryme. Radulfus Roffensis. Richardus Pluto. Richardus Douerensis. Sampson Durouermus. Radulfus Maidston. Geruasius Dorobernensis. Solitarius Presbyter. Nigellus Wireker. Alexander, Theologus. Simon Stokius. Ioannes Cantianus. Haimo de Feuersham. Thomas Spottus. Simon Mepham. Petrus de Ikham. Guilielmus Pagham. Ioannes Tanetos. Thomas Chillenden. Guilielmus Starnfield. Thomas Pontius. Simon de Feuersham. Martinus de Clyuo. Thomas de Stureia. Reginaldus Cantuariensis. Radulphus Strodus. Thinredus Douerius. Guilielmus Thorne. Richardus Maidston. Guilielmus Gillingham. Ioannes Wrotham. Ioannes Oldcastle, Dominus Cobham. Ioannes Langdene. Guilielmus Whyte. Guilielmus Beckley. Ioannes Capgraue. Guilielmus Stapilhart. Ioannes Fisher. Ioannes Frithe.
Simon Fishe. Thomas Wiat, Senior. Leonardus Digs. Ioannes Ponetus. Richardus Turnerus. Elizabetha, Re∣gina. Hytherto (almost altogether) out of Maister Bale: to the whiche, these may bee added, that haue written since. Ioannes Colpeper. Thomas Digs. Thomas Harman. Edouardus Deering. Thomas Potter. Reginaldus Scot. Alexander Neuille. Georgius Harte. Guilielmus Darrel. Thomas Twyne. Hitherto of Kent in particularitie, and by way of Table: Whereof some part is drawne out of credible Records: part is spoken of mine owne knowledge, and part is fetched from other men by information. For the first forte I holde my selfe sufficiently warranted: but in the other twaine, if either by want of memorie I haue not taken all, or by too muche credulitie haue mistaken any, I pray pardon for it, and desire the Rea∣der either to correct, or supplie it, by his owne discretion and iudgement. Now a fewe wordes of the Welshe Hystorie, and then to the diuision of the Shyre & Coun∣trie it selfe.
¶ A short counsell, as touching the Bryttishe hystorie. ALbeit that I am iustly occasioned (before I make myne entrie) to speake largely, for confirmation of the credite of oure Bryttishe or Welshe hystorie, (the faith wherof is by William Petite, and Poli∣dore Virgile called into question) for as muche, as I shal be enforced to vse it as a ground worke of my whole frame and building: yet for that I mynde not in any part of this my labour, to handle with many wordes, matters in controuersie, (being otherwise suffi∣ciently charged with things more incident to my pur∣pose, and no lesse fit to be knowne.) And bycause also that matter hath alreadie founde more learned and dili∣gent patrones, I will with fewe wordes passe it ouer, contenting my selfe, if I shall haue added to other mens heapes, one small proofe or twaine, whiche by chaunce I gleaned after them, and referring suche as desire more aboundant testimonies, to the reading of Iohn Leland, and Syr Iohn ap Rese, two learned men, that haue plen¦tifully written therein. The state of the matter is this, whether Geffrey of MonmoutheGeffray of Monmouth be the authour of the Bryttish storie (as William Newborow, and Polydore charge him) or the translatour thereof onely out of the Bryttishe, as him selfe in his booke professeth. Whereof must néedes en∣sue, That if the worke be his owne, it hath no more credite, then he him selfe (being the author) coulde bring vnto it: But if he did only translate that, whiche Wal∣ter the Archdeacon of Oxforde brought out of Normā∣die, and deliuered vnto him, Then doth not ye estimation
depende vpon Geffray, but vpon some other (whsoe∣uer he were) that first wrate it. Now, that it may appeare vnto you, that he was on∣ly the interpreter of that whiche came out of Norman∣die, I will call to witnesse, Henrie the Archdeacon of Huntington, who liued in the time of king Henrie the first, and was somwhat before William Petites dayes, who (as him self confesseth) was borne in the beginning of the reigne of king Stephan, about whiche time Gef∣fray of Monmouthe was on liue also. This Henrie (besides a learned hystorie of the realme) wrate thrée seuerall treatises whiche I haue séene: One intituled, De miraculis Angliae: An other, De serie Regū potentissimorum: And the thirde, De origine Regum Bry∣tannorum. In this latter, he sayth playnly. That at such time as he trauayled towardes Rome, he founde (in an auncient Librarie of the Abbay of Bec) an olde booke, in∣tituled likewise, De origine Regum Brytannorū, the which beginning at the arriuall of Brute, ended with the actes of Cadwalader, and agréed thoroughout (as by collatiō I collected) with this our Bryttishe hystorie, which I doubt whether Henrie of Huntington had euer séene. Nowe therefore, if this were an olde booke in his time, it coulde not be newe in the dayes of Petite, that succéeded him: And if the argument were written before in the Bryt∣tish tongue, it is very probable, that he was not the first author, but only the translator thereof in Latine. For further likelyhoode whereof, I my selfe haue an aunci∣ent Bryttish, or Welshe copy, which I reserue for shew, and doe reuerence for the antiquitie, litle doubting, but that it was written before the dayes of William Petite, who, as he was the first, So vpon the matter recken I him the onely man, that euer impugned the Bryttishe hystorie. For as touching PolydorePolydore. (though he were a
man singularly well learned) yet since hee was of our owne time, and no longer since, his forces must of ne∣cessity be thought to bée bent, rather against the veritie, then against the antiquitie of that writing. Wherein if he shall seeke to discredit the whole worke, for that in some partes it conteineth matter, not only vnlikely, but incredible also: then shall he bothe depriue this Nation of all manner of knowledge of their first beginning, and open the way for vs also to cal into question the origine, and antiquities of Spaine, Fraunce, Germanie, yea and of Italie his owne countrie: in which, that whiche Liuie reporteth of Romulus and Remus, Numa and Aegeria, is as farre remoued from all suspicion of truthe, as any thing, whatsoeuer ye Galfride writeth, either of Brute, Merlin, or King Arthur himselfe. Séeing therefore, that euen as corne hath his chaffe, and metall his drosse, so can there harldly any wryter of the auncient hystorie of any nation be founde out that hath not his propre vanities mixed with sincere veritie: the part of a wise Reader shalbe, not to reiect the one for doubt of the other, but rather with the fire and fan, of iudgement and discretion, to trie and sift them a sun∣der. And as my purpose is for mine owne parte, to vse the commoditie thereof, so oft, as it shall like me: so my counsell shalbee, that other men will, bothe in this and other, obserue this one rule, That they neither reiect without reason, nor receiue without discretion, and iudgement. Thus muche in my way, for assertion of the Bryttish hystorie I thought good to say once for all, to the ende that from hencefoorthe (whatsoeuer occasion of debate shalbe offered, concerning eyther the veritie or antiqui∣tie of the same) I neither trouble my selfe, nor tarrie my Reader, with any further defence, or Apologie.
The Byshops See, and Diocesse, of Canterbury. HE that shal aduisedly consider the plot of this Shyre, may finde thrée diuerse (and those not vnfit) wayes, to deuide it: One, by breaking the whole into the East and West Kent:The order of this de∣scription. An other, by parting it, (as Watling streate leadeth,) into North, and Southe Kent: And a third, by seuering it into the two distinct Dioceses of Canterbury, and Rochester. Of these thrée, I haue de∣termined to chuse the last, both bycause that kinde of diuision hath as certaine limits, as any of the former, & for that, it séemeth to me the moste conuenient seue∣rance, being wrought both by bounde of place, and of iu∣risdiction also. And because the See of Canterbury, is not onely the more worthy of the twaine, but also the Metropolitane, and chiefe of the whole realme: I haue thought good, in the first place, to shewe the beginning and increase of that Bishopricke, and afterward to pro∣secute the description and hystorie of the principal parts belonging to the same. It is to be séene, in the Brittishe hystorie, and others, that at suche time as King Lucius (the first christened Prince of this land) had renounced the damnable dark∣nes of Paganisme,Flamines turned into Bishops. and embrased the glorious light of the Gospel of God, he chaunged the Archeflamines of London, Yorke, and Caerleon, into so many Archebi∣shops: and the Flamines, of other inferiour places, into inferiour Bishops, through out his whole realme. How¦beit, this matter is not so cleare, but that it is encounte∣red by William Petit, whiche (in the Proheme of his hystorie) affirmeth boldly, that the Britons whiche pro∣fessed Christian religion within this Iland, before ye cō∣ming of Augustine, were contented with Bishops only, & that Augustine himselfe was the very first, that euer had the Archbishops Palle amongst vs. As touching Bi¦shops it is euidēt by Beda him self, that both before, & in
Augustines time, Wales alone had seuen at the lest: but as for Archebishops (although for my owne opinion I thinke with William, the rather for yt I suppose, yt the simplicity of ye Britain clergie, was not as thē enamou∣red with the vain titles of the Romane arrogancy) yet to the end that the reader may be therby the more iust∣ly occasioned, to make inquisition of the trueth in that point, it shall not be greatly out of his way, to send him by Siluester Giraldus, Canbrensis, a man (considering ye age (excellently wel learned, & which liued about ye same time wt Williā Petit, or Williā of Newborow) as some cal him. This man, in a book which he entituled, Itinera∣riū Walliae, setteth forth moste plainly the Archbishops, yt in olde time were at Caerleon, their translation from thence to Saint Dauids, their transmigration from Saint Dauids ouer the Sea into Normandie, and the whole Catalogue of their succession in each of those pla∣ces. But here, some man, thinking me more mindful to direct others, thē careful to kepe mine own wai, wil hap¦pely aske me, what pertineth it (I pray you to Canter∣bury, whether there haue ben Archbishops at London, Yorke, & Carleon, or no?Londō spoi¦led of the Archebi∣shopricke. yes (no doubt) it maketh great∣ly to our treatise of Canterbury: for, not onely ye forena∣med Brittish historie, Mathew of Westminster, & Wil∣liā of Malmesbury do shew manifestly, that Augustine by great iniury spoiled Londō of this dignitie of ye Arch∣bishops chaire, bestowing ye same vpon Canterbury: but ye Epistle of Pope Gregorie himself also, (which is to be read in ye Ecclesiasticall storie of Beda) cōuinceth him of manifest presumption & arrogācie, in yt he sticked not to prefer his own fantasie & liking before ye Pope his mais∣ters institution & cōmaūdement. For Pope Gregory ap¦pointed two Archbishops, ye one at London the other at Yorke, whereof either should haue vnder him 12. inferi∣our Bishops, & wherof neither should be subiect to other:
only for Augustines honour) hee willed, that they all should bée vnder him during his lyfe. But Augustine not so contēted, both remained resident during al his life at Canterbury, and before he died consecrated Lau∣rence Archebishop there, least, eyther by his owne death, or want of another fit man to fill the place, the chaire might happely be carried to London, as Grego∣rie the Pope had appointed. Mathew of Westminster saith, that Merlin had pro∣phecied, Dignitas Londoniae adornabit Dorobriniam. Wil∣liam Malmesbury writeth, that he did it, Sedulitate Re∣gis hospitis, (meaning King Ethelbert) & chritate ciuium captus: But I thinke verely, that he ment thereby to leaue a glorious monument of his swelling pride & va∣nitie: wherevnto I am the rather led, by the obserua∣tion of his stately behauiour vsed towards the Bryttish Bishops, and some other of his acts, that sauour greatly of vaineglory, ambition, and insolence. Whatsoeuer the cause were that moued him thus to apparell Canter∣bury with the Archebishop of Londons Palle, at Can∣terbury hath it continued euer sithence, sauing that at one time, Offa the King of Mercia (or midle England) partly of a disposition to honour his owne countrie, and partly of a iuste displeasure conceaued againste Lam∣bright (or Ianbright, as some copies haue it, the thir∣téenth Archebishop,) for matter of treason, transla∣ted the honour of the See, eyther wholly, or partly, to Lichefield: But there it remained not long, for after the death of King Offa, Kenulsus his successour restored E∣thelard to his place at Canterbury againe. The in∣crease of the Arche∣bishop∣ricke,The whole Prouince of this Bishopricke of Can∣terbury, was at the firste diuided by Theodorus (the seuenthe Bishop) into fiue Diocesse only: howbe∣it in processe of tyme it grewe to twentie and one, be∣sides it selfe, leauing to Yorke (which by the first insti∣tution,
should haue had as many as it) but Durham,Conttentiō for the Pri∣macie. Carleil, and Chester only. And whereas by the same ordinance of Gregorie, neither of these Archebishoppes ought to be inferiour to other, saue only in respect of the prioritie of their consecration, Lanfranc (thinking it good reason that he should make a conquest of the Englishe Clergie, since his maister King William had vanquish∣ed the whole nation) contēded at Windsore with Tho∣mas Norman (Archebishoppe of Yorke) for the prima∣cie,  and there by iudgement before Hugo the Popes Legate recouered it from him: so that euer since, the one is called Totius Angliae primas, and the other, Angliae primas, without any further addition. Of which iudge∣ment (one forsooth) hathe yeelded this great reason: that euen as the Kentish people, by an auncient prerogatiue of manhoode doe chalenge the first fronte in eache bat∣taile, from the inhabitants of other countries: So the Archbishop of their shyre, ought by good congruence to be preferred before the rest of the Byshops of the whole Realme. Moreouer, whereas before time,The Arche∣bishoppes place in the generall counsell. the place of this Archebishop in the generall Counsell, was to sit next to the Bishop of sainct Ruffines, Anselmus (the Successour of this Lanfranc) for recompence of the good seruice that hee had done, in ruffling againste Priestes wyues, and resisting the King for the inuestiture of clerkes) was by Pope Vrbane endowed with this ac∣cession  of honour, that hee and his successours, should frō thencefoorth haue place in all generall counsels, at the Popes right foote, who then said withall, Includamus hunc in orbe nostro, tanquam alterius orbis Papam. And thus the Archebishops of Canterbury, by the fraude of Augustine, by the power of Lanfranc, and by the industrie of Anselme, were muche exalted: but how much that was to the greeuous displeasure, and pining
enuie, of the Archbyshops of Yorke, you shall perceiue by that whiche followeth. King Henry the firste, kept (vpon a time) a stately Christmas at Windsore,Wrastling for the pri∣macie. where (the maner of our kings then being at certeine solemne times to weare their crownes) Thurstine of Yorke (hauing his crosse borne vp before him) offered to set the crowne vpon the kings head: But William of Canterbury withstoode it stout∣ly, and so preuayled by the fauoure of the king, and the helpe of the standers by, that Thurstine was not onely disappointed of his purpose, but he (and his crosse also) thrust cleane out of the doores. William of Yorke (the next in succession after Thur∣stine, both in the Sée and Quarell) perceiuing that the force of his predecessor preuayled nothing, attempted by his own humble meanes (first made to the king, and af∣ter to the Pope) to winne the coronation of king Henry  the seconde, from Theobald the nexte Archbyshop of Canterbury: But when he had receiued repulse in that sort of suite also, and found no way left to make auenge∣ment vpon his enemie, he returned home al wrothe, and (mixing poyson in the chalice, at his Masse) wreaked the anger vpon himselfe. After this, another hurley burley happened in a Sy∣node, assembled at Westminster, in the time of king Henry the second, before Cardinal Hugo, (Pope Alex∣anders Legate) betwéen Richard and Roger, then Arch∣bishops of these two Sées vpon occasion, that Roger of York comming of purpose (as it should séeme) first to the assembly, had taken vp the place on the right hande of the Cardinall, which when Richard of Canterbury had espyed, he refused to sit downe in the second roome, com∣playning greatly of this preiudice done to his Sée: wher∣vpon, after sundry replies of speache, the weaker in dis∣putation
(after the maner of shrewd schole boyes in Lō∣don streats) descended frō hote words, to hastie blowes, in which encounter, the Archbyshop of Canterburie (through the multitude of his meiney) obteined the bet∣ter: So that he not onely plucked the other out of his place, and (trampling vpon his body with his his féete) al to rent and tare his Casule, Chimer, and Rochet, but also disturbed the holy Synode therwithal, in suche wise that the Cardinall for feare, betooke him to his féete, the company departed their businesse vndone, and the By∣shops themselues moued suite at Rome, for the finishing of their controuersie. By these, & such other successes, on the one side, the Byshops of Canterburie following, tooke suche courage, that from thencefoorth, they woulde not permit the Byshops of Yorke to beare vp the crosse, either in their presence, or prouince: And on the other side, the Byshops of Yorke conceiued suche griefe of heart, disdaine, and offence, that from time to time, they spared no occasion to attempt both the one & the other. Wherevpon, in the time of a Parleament, holden at Londō, in the reigne of King Henrie the third, Boniface (Archbishop of Canterbury) interdicted the Londoners, bycause they had suffered the Byshop of Yorke to beare vp his crosse whiles he was in the citie. And much to doe there was (within a few yeeres after) betwéene Robert Kylwarby of Canterburie, and Walter Giffard of Yorke, bycause he of Yorke aduaunced his crosse, as he passed through Kent towardes the generall Coun∣sell. The like happened also, at two other seuerall times, betwéene Friar Peckam (Archebyshop of Canterburie) and William Winkewane,The end of the strife for the supre∣macie. and Iohn de Roma (Archby∣shops of Yorke) in the dayes of King Edwarde the firste. At the length, the matter being yet once more set on foote
betwéene Simon Islepe (the Archebishop of this coun∣trie) and his aduersarie (the incumbent of Yorke for that time) King Edward the third, in whose reigne that variance was reuined, resumed the matter into his owne hande, and made a finall composition betwéene them, the which he published vnder his broade seale to this effect: first, that eache of them should fréely, and without empeachement of the other, beare vp his crosse in the others Prouince, but yet so, that he of Yorke and his successours for euer, in signe of subiection, should within two monethes after their inthronization, either bring, or sende, to Canterbury, the Image of an Arche∣bishop bearing a crosse, or some other Iewell wrought in fine golde, to the value of fourtie poundes, and offer it openly there vpon Sainct Thomas Beckets shryne: then, that in all Synodes of the clergie, and assemblies where the King should happen to be present, he of Can∣terbury should haue the right hand, and the other the lefte: finally, that in broade streetes, and highe wayes, their crossebearers should go togeather, but that in nar∣rowe lanes, and in the entries of doores and gates, the crossier of Canterbury should go before, and the other followe, and come behinde. So that (as you sée) the Bishoppes of Canterbury e∣uermore preuayling by fauour and obstinacie, they of Yorke were driuen in the end, to giue ouer in the plain field, for very dispaire, wanhope, and weerinesse. But heare by the way, I woulde faine, for my lear∣ning, knowe of these godly Fathers, or rather (since themselues can not now make answer) of some of their vngodly fauourers, whether this their Helena, this crosse (for the bearing whereof they contended so long, and so bitterly, that a man might doubt with the Poet, Peceat vter Cruce dignius) whether (I say) it were exal∣ted,
as the signe of that Crosse whereon Christ trium∣phed ouer the Diuel, or els but for a flagge and antsigne of their owne pride, whereby they sought to triumphe and insult the one ouer the other? And againe, if it were Christes crosse, then why they did forbid it to bee aduaunced, at any time, by any person, or in any place? Or if it were but their owne, then why they did, and yet doe, commaund vs simple soules, not only with greate humilitie, but with diuine honour also, to prostrate our selues, and to adore it? I am sure they may be ashamed to affirme it to bee the one, & I thinke they wilbe asha∣med to confesse it to be the other. I wil ceasse therfore to vrge it any further, & wil prosecute the Catalogue of the Archebishoppes of this See, since the arriual of Augus∣tine. In the which, the first seuen, be of that number which Pope Gregorie sent hither out of Italie: The next twentie thrée, and Stigande, were Saxons: all the residue, Normanes & Englishmen. And bycause there is some variance as touching the times of their conti∣nuance and sitting, I purpose to shew (vnder one view) the opinion of two sundrie authours, so farre foorth as they haue spoken therof, that is to say, William of Mal∣mesbury, and an auncient Chronicler of Couen∣trie, (whose name I haue not hytherto learned) and in the residue to follow our owne late and receaued writers.
The beginnings of their gouernements, after the Annales of Canterbury. The yeres of their Continuance in go∣uernment, after the opinion of An. Do.   Wil. Malm. Chro. Couen. 599. Augustine, whome our Louanistes call, ye Englishe Apostle. 16. 16. 612. Laurence. 5. 5. 617. Mellite. 5. 5. 624. Iustus. 3. 9. 626. Honorius. 26. 20. 653. Deusdedit, or Deodat the first Saxon. 10. 9.   Wighard, whiche dy∣ed at Rome before his consecration.     668. Theodore a Graecian borne, and the last of those that came out of Italie. 22. 22. 691. Brightwald. 37. 38. 731. Tatwine. 3. 4. 737. Nothelinus, or Iocelin 5. 7. 741. Cuthbert ye first that was buryed in Chri∣steschurche, and that obteined churchyards for England. 17. 17. 759. Bregwine. 3. 3. 774. Lanbright, or Ian∣bright. in his time the See was translated to Lichefield. 17. 17.
790. Aethelwardus, he re∣couered the See to Canterbury againe.   23.   Wulfredus, or Wifred 28. 28. 830. Fegeldus, or Swithre∣dus. thrée monethes. 831. Celnothus, or Eilno∣thus. 41. 41. 890. Etheredus, or Ethel∣dredus. 18. 18.   Pleimundus, one of the learned men, yt in∣structed king Alfred. 34. 34. 925. Athelmus 12. 13. 947. Wulfhenius, or Wul∣fhelmus. 13. 14. 956. Odo, or Odosegodus. 5. 20. 958. Elfsius, or Elfsinus, or Elsinus, whiche dyed before his consecra∣tion, in his iourney towardes Rome, in reuenge (as they say) bicause he came in by Simonie, and sporned at the Tumbe of his predecessor.       Brithelmus, was elec¦ted: but king Edgar reiected him.     970. Dunstanus, the fa∣mous Iuggler.   26.
989. Ethelgarus. 1. 1. 991. Siricius, by his aduice King Etheldred gaue to the Danes a great summe of mo∣ney. 5. 5. 996. Alfricus.     1004. Aelfegus, hee was slaine by the Danes. 6. 6. 1012. Liuingus, or Ethel∣stanus. 7. 7.   Eilwardus.     1020. Egelnothus. 18. 18. 1038. Eadsius, or Edsinus, who for siknes cōmit∣ted ye charge to Siwar¦dus, the Abbat of A∣bingdon, & after Bi∣shoppe of Rochester whiche neuerthelesse vouchesafed not to finde him necessaries. 11. 11. 1050. Robertus Gemeti∣censis, the first Nor∣man, aduaunced by King Edward ye con∣fessor. 12. 12. 1053. Stigandus, deposed by the conquerour. 17. 17. 1072. Lanfrancus, in his time the Bishoppes Sees were first remo∣ued from villages, to Cities. 19. 19:
1093. Anselmus, in his time lawe was first made to diuorce Priestes from their wiues. 16. 16. 1114. Radulphus Roffensis, surnamed Nugax.   9. 1122. Willimus de Corueil, he crowned Stephan, against his fayth giuē to Maude the Em∣presse.   15. 1138. Theobaldus, he was endowed firste, with the title of Legatus Natus, by Pope Inno∣cent the second.   23. 1162. Thomas Becket, the first Englisheman af∣ter the Conquest.   8. Robertus, the Abbat of Bec was elected, but he refused it.     1173. Richardus, the Pryor of Douer.   9. 1183. Baldwinus, the bishop of Worcester: he dy∣ed in the expedition, that king Richard the first made into Syria, & was before at great contention with the Monkes.   7. Reginaldus, he dyed before
consecration.     1193. Hubertus.   13. 1205. Stephanus de Lang∣ton, the cause of the trouble of king Iohn.   21. 1228. Gualterus de Eue∣sham, elected, but re∣fused bothe by the King and Pope, for ye insufficiencie of lear∣ning.     1229. Richardus Magnus.   8. 1233. Iohannes, the Sub∣prior of Christs chur∣che, was elected after the Pope had refused one Ralph Neuel, but this Iohn resigned, in whose place Iohn Blund was chosen, but that election also was repealed.     1234. Edmundus de Abing¦don, the one & twen∣tie Bishop of Cant. that the Popes had canonized. He depar∣ted the realme, & died for anger of a repulse   7. 1244. Bonifacius, vncle to Elenor, the wife of Henrie the thirde.   16. 1270. Willelmus de Chil∣lenden, elected, but
he resigned to the Pope, who chose Kil∣wardby.     1272. Robertus Kilwardby, Friar preacher.   6. 1278. Iohannes Burnel, Bi∣shop of Bathe elected, but the Pope refused him, and appoynted Friar Peckam.     1279. Iohannes de Peckam a friar Minor, born in Sussex.   13. 1292. Robertus de Win∣chelsey, a notable trai¦tor to the King, & true seruant to the Pope.   19. Thomas de Cobham, elec∣ted, but refused by the Pope, he was cōmōly called, Bonus Clericus.     1312. Walterus Reignold.   14. 1328. Symon de Mepham. 5. Thus farre out of the Storie of Couentrie. 1334. Iohānes de Stratford.   29. 1350. Iohannes Offord, or Vfford.     Thomas Bradwardine, he erected the Black fri∣ars in London.     1350. Symon Islepe; he foū∣ded Canterbury Col∣ledge in Oxford.   17. 1367. Symon Langham.   2.
1369. Wilhelmus Witlesey.   5. 1375. Symon Sudbury.   6. 1381. Wilhelmus Courte∣nay.   15. 1396. Thomas Arundel at∣tainted of treason, by Parleament, in the one and twentie yere of Richard the second.   18. Rogerus Walden, in the ex∣ile of Arundel: but de∣posed: Then made Bishop of London, & againe deposed, and dyed in the seuenth yeare of Henrie the fourth.     1414. Henricus Chicheley, built Alsoules, and S. Iohns Colledge in Oxford, and the Col∣ledge of Higham.   29. 1443. Iohannes Stafford.   8. 1452. Ioannes Kempe.   3. 1455. Thomas Bourchier.   33. 1486. Ioannes Moorton, buylded muche at Knol, and repayred Lambeth.   14. Thomas Langton elected, but he dyed before cō∣secration.     1500. Henricus Deane, or Deny.   .
  Willielmus War∣ham, builded Otforde house.   28.   Thomas Cranmer, he was burned for the trueth.       Reginaldus Poole.   3. Mathaeus Parker.     Thus haue you the succession of seuentie Archbishops, in the recital whereof, I doe (of purpose) spare to dispute the variance arising amongst writers, as touching the continuance, & true times of their gouernment, whiche discrepance, groweth partly, for the defaulte of the au∣ctors themselues, not obseruing the due accompte of yeares, and partly by the vnskil of suche as haue vntru∣ly copied out their woorkes: I willingly reserue also for other places, sundrie the hystories of their liues and do∣inges, bothe bicause I thinke it fruitlesse, to reconcile suche manner of disagréements, and also, for that (as I saide before of the Kings) I déeme it impertinent to my purpose, to speake further of any thing, then the very place in hand, shall iustly giue me occasion. It followeth therefore, that according to promise,The ordre of this de∣scription of Kent. I handle suche particular places within this Diocese, as are mentioned in hystorie, in whiche treatie, I will ob∣serue this order. First to begin at Tanet, and to peruse the East and Southe shores, til I come to the limits, be∣twéen this Shyre, & Sussex: then to ascend Northward, and to visits such places, as lye along the bounds of this Diocess & Rochester, returning by the mouth of Med∣wey to Tanet again, whiche is the whole circuite of this Bishopricke: and lastly, to describe suche places, as lye in the body and midest of the same.
Tanet, called in Brytish, Inis Rhuo∣chym, of the Shore Rutupi: it is named of some writers, in Latine (or rather Greeke) Thana∣tos, in Saxon, tenet, in stead of ƿaenet. No snakes in Tanet.IVlius Solinus (in his description of England) saith thus of Tanet: Thana∣natos nullo serpitur angue, & asportata inde terra angues necat. There be no snakes in Tanet (saith he) & the earth that is brought from thence will kill them. But whether he wrote this of any sure vnderstanding that he had of the quality of the soyle, or onely by coniecture at the woord  which in Gréeke signifieth death, or killing, I wote not, & much lesse dare I determine, bycause hitherto neither I my selfe haue heard of any Region hereabout (onely Ireland excepted) which beareth not both snakes and o∣ther venemous wormes, neither am I yet persuaded, that this place borowed the name out of the Gréeke, but rather tooke it of the propre language, of this oure natiue countrie: For ƿaenet, in the Saxon, or olde Eng∣glishe tongue, soundeth as muche as, moysted, or wa∣tered, whiche deriuation, howe well it standeth with the situation of Tanet, being Peninsula, and watered (in manner) round about, I had rather without reasoning, referre to euery mans iudgement, then by debate of many woordes, eyther to trouble the reader, or to in∣terrupt mine owne order. Leauing the name there∣fore, I will resorte to the thing, and shewe you out of Beda, and others, the content and stoarie of this Ile.
There lyeth (saieth Beda, speaking of the place, where King Ethelbert entertained Augustine) in the East part of Kent, an Iland, called Tanet, con∣teining (after the manner of the Englishe accompte) sixe hundred families, or Hides of land (as the Saxon booke of Beda hath) whiche be in deede after the opinion of auncient writers, plough landes: It is diuided from the continent, or mayne land, by the riuer called Want∣sume, whiche is about thrée furlongs broade, and to bee passed ouer in two places onely: Hereunto if you adde the opinion of Polydore, the description wilbe the more euident. It conteyneth (saith he) about nyne myles in length, and not muche lesse in breadth, and it was some time diuorced from the continent, by a water, but nowe it is almoste vnited againe. Thus muche for the de∣scription. As touching ye hystorie, you may read in Geffray of Mō∣mouth, that after such time as the Brytons had deposed Vortiger their King, for that he brought in the Saxons, whiche beganne soone after theyr entrie to shewe themselues in déede, suche as they were in name,For (Seax) in their lan¦guage sig∣nifieth a sword, or axe, or hat∣chet. (not shieldes against the Pictes and Scots, but swords to shead the Brittan bloud) Vortimer his sonne (whome they places in his seate) so streightned the Saxons in this Ile, (the whiche, as William of Malmesbury wri∣teth, Vortiger had giuen them to inhabite, at their first Arriuall) that for a colour they sent Vortiger to treate with him of peace, and in the meane whyle for feare, conueyed them selues into theyr Shippes, and Sayled homewarde againe. The same Au∣thour reporteth, that after this, Cador, (the Duke of Cornewall) by commaundemente of King Ar∣thur, chased the Saxons into Tanet, where he slewe Childric their leader, and receiued many of the residue
to grace and mercy. Howbeit the Saxons themselues, after that in pro∣cesse of time, they had gotten the dominion ouer the Bri∣tons, enioyed not the possession of Tanet in much better quiet then the Britons had done before them. For in the dayes of King Athulf, (the father of Alfred) the Danes fought in Tanet against Ealhere, (the Duke, or captain  of Kent) and Huda, (the Duke of Surrey) & slaying them bothe ouerthrewe their powers, and possessed the Ile.  After this, in the time of the same King, they soiourned with theyr armie a whole wynter in Tanet: and lastly  (in the reigne of King Etheldred) they herried, spoyled, and sacked it in suche sort, that the religious persons were constrained to abandon the place, for I finde, that shortly after, King Canutus gaue the body of Mildred, and all the landes belonging to Mynster Abbay (that thē was in this Ile) to the Monkes of saint Augustines at Canterbury. But, for asmuche as good order requireth, that I should tell you of the foundation, before I speake of the fall, you shall heare out of William Thorne, (one that made an appendix to the hystorie of Thomas Spot, both Monkes of Saint Augustines) the occasion of the first fabulous beginning of this Abbay. The occa∣sion of the building of Minster Ab¦bay.Certain seruaunts, or officers (saith he) of Egbright (the third King of Kent after Ethelbert) had done great iniurie to a noble woman (called Domneua, the mother of Saint Mildred) in recompence of whiche wrongs the King made an Herodian othe, and promised vpon  his honour, to giue her whatsoeuer she would aske him. The woman (instructed belike by some Menkishe coun∣selour) begged of him so muche ground to build an Ab∣bay vpon, as a tame déere (yt she nourished) would runne
ouer at a breathe: Hereto the King had consented forth∣with, sauing that one Tymor (a counseler of his) stan∣ding by, blamed him of great inconsideration, for that he woulde vpon the vncertaine course of a Deare, departe to his certaine losse, with any part of so good a soyle, but the earth (sayth William Thorne) immediatly opened, and swalowed him aliue, in memorie whereof, the place till his time, was called Tymor sleape. Well, the King and this Gentlewoman procéeded in their bargaine, the Hynde was put foorth, and it ranne the quantitie of fourtie and eight ploughlands, before it returned. And thus Domneua (by the help of the King) builded at Mynster (within that precinct) a Monasterie of Non∣nes, vpon suche like discretion, (you may be sure) as Ramsey Abbay was pitched, euen where a Bull by chaunce scraped with his foote, and as Rome it selfe (for whose fauour these follies be deuised) was edified, where the she Woulfe gaue Romulus and Remus sucke.For it was called Ro∣ma, of Ru∣ma, a pappe or dugge. Ouer this Abbay, Mildred (of whome we spake) the daughter of Meruaile, (that was sonne to Penda, King of midle England) became the Lady and Abbasse: who bicause she was of noble linage, and had gotten together  seuentie women, (all whiche Theodorus the seuenth Bishop) veiled for Nonnes, she easily obteyned to be re∣gistred in our Englishe Kalender, & to be worshipped for a Saint, both at Tanet, while her body lay there, and at S. Augustines, after that it was translated: And no maruell at all, for if you will beléeue the authour of the worke called (Noua Legenda Angliae) your self wil easily vouchsafe her the honour. This woman (sayth he) was so mightily defended with diuine power,S. Mildred miracles. that lying in a hote ouē thrée houres together, she suffered not of the flame: She was also en∣dued with suche godlyke vertue, that comming out of
Fraunce, the very stone whereon she first stepped at Ip∣pedsflete in this Isle, receiued the impression of her foote, and reteined it for euer, hauing besides this propertie, that whether so euer you remoued the same, it woulde within short time, and without helpe of mans hande, re∣turne to the former place againe: And finally, she was so diligently garded with Gods Angel, attending vpon her, that when the diuell (finding her at prayers) had put out the candel that was before her, the Angel forth∣with lighted it for her againe. And this (no doubte) was the cause, that the Religi∣ous persons of S. Augustines, and of S. Gregories at Cā∣terbury, fell at great dissention for her, eche affirming, that after the spoyle of Tanet, her bones were remoued to their Monasterie: the one clayming by King Canutus,  as we sayd before, and the other deriuing from Archebi∣shop Lanfranc, who (as they affirmed) at the dotation of their house, bestowed vpon it (amongest other things of great price) the translated reliques of Mildred, and Ed∣burgaes bodyes. Howsoeuer that were, they bothe made marchan∣dize of her myracles, and the Monkes of S Augustines perceiuing, that by the dissolution of the Monasterie, and the absence of the Saintes, their towne of Minster,  in Tanet was falne to decay, of verie conscience, and for pities sake, by the meane of Hughe their Abbat, procu∣red at the handes of King Henrie the first, the graunt of a Market, to be holden there, whiche I wote not whe∣ther it inioyeth to this day, or no. Thus much of the Isle and Mynster Abbay. Now a worde or two touching Ippedsflete, wherof I spake be∣fore, and of Stonor another place within the Isle, and then I will leaue Tanet, and procéede in my iourney. This Ippedsflete,Ippedsflete, is the place wher Hengist and Hors
(the Saxon captaines) came first on lande, and it is of di∣uers Chronicles diuersly termed, some calling it Ip∣pinesflete, others Heoppinesflete, and others Wippeds∣flete, These of the last sorte write, that it tooke the name of one Wipped, (a noble man amongest the Saxons) who onely was slaine on that parte, when Aurel. Am∣brose (the leader of the Britons) lost twelue of his prin∣cipall chiefteins in one conflict. In déede, the name soun∣deth, the place where Wipped, or Ipped swymmed,  whiche I coulde haue agréed to be the same, that is at this day called, Wapflete in Essex, (the rather for that Ralph Higdē writeth, that the Britons neuer inuaded Kent, after the battayle at Craforde, whiche was before this ouerthrowe that I last spake of.) Howbeit since the writer of our holy Legend layeth it in Tanet, I am con∣tented to subscribe. In this Isle lyeth Stonor,Stonor. sometime a hauen towne also: for in the reigne of William Rufus, there arose a suite in lawe, betwéene the Londoners, and the Abbat of S Augustines (then owner of the place) as touching the right of the hauen of Stonor, wherein by the fauou∣rable  aide of the Prince, the Monkes (as Thomas Spot, their own Chronicler reporteth) preuayled, and the Ci∣tizens had the ouerthrowe. Not long after whiche time, they obteined of King Henrie the first, a fayre to be hol∣den yerely at this towne, fiue dayes together, before and  after the feast of the translation of S. Augustine. Nowe woulde I foorthwith leade you from the Isle of Tanet, to the ruines of Richeborow, sauing that the Goodwine is before myne eye, whereof I pray you first hearken what I haue to say.
The Goodwine, or Good∣vvine Sandes. THere liued in the time of King Edwarde (commonly called the Confessour) a no∣ble mā,Earle God∣wine and his sonnes. named Godwine, whose daugh∣ter Edgithe, the same King, by great in∣stance of his nobilitie, (being otherwise of him selfe disposed to haue liued sole) tooke vnto his wife. By reason whereof, not onely this Godwine him selfe (being at the first but a Cowheards sonne, and afterward aduaunced to honour by King Ca∣nutus, whose sister by fraude he obteined to wife) became of great power and authoritie within this Realme (but his sonnes also being fiue in nomber) were by the kings  gyfte, aduaunced to large liuelyhoodes and honourable possessions. For Goodwine was Earle of Kent, Sus∣sex, Hamshire, Dorsetshire, Deuonshire, and Cornwal: His eldest sonne Swane, had Oxfordshire, Barkeshire Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, and Somerset: Harold, helde Essex, Norfolk, Suffolke, Cambridgeshire, & Hun∣tingdonshire: Tosti, had Northumberland: And Gurte, & Leoswine, possessed other places. &c. But as it is hard in great prosperitie to kéepe due temperance, for, Super∣bia est vitium rebus solenne secundis: So this man and his sonnes, being puffed vp with the pryde of the Kings fa∣uour, their owne power, pollicie, and possession, contem∣ned all other, and forgate them selues, abusing the sim∣plicitie of the King by euill counsel, treading vnder foote the nobilitie by great disdaine, and oppressing the com∣mon people by insatiable rauine, extortion, and tirannie. So that immediatly, and at once, they pulled vpon their heades, the heauie displeasure of the Prince, the immor∣tall hatred of the noble men, and the bitter execration
and curse of the common sort. Whereupon the king for a season banished them, the nobles neuer after liked them, and the poore people not onely railed vpon them while they liued, but also by deuised tales (as the man∣ner is) laboured to make them hatefull to all posteritie after their death. And amongst other things, touching Godwyne him selfe, they feygned, that he was choked at Winchester (or Windsore, as others say, for liers can not lightly agrée) with a morsel of bread, and that this his land in Kent sonke sodainly into the Sea. Neyther were these things continued in memory, by the mouths of the vnlearned people only, but committed to writing also, by the hands and pens of Monkes, Frears, and o∣thers of the learned sort. So that in course of time, the matter was past all peraduenture, and the things belie∣ued for vndoubted veritie. But whatsoeuer hath bene heretofore thought of these matters, hauing now iust occasion offered mee to treate of the thing, I wil not spare, to speake that which I haue red in some credible writers, and whiche I doe  thinke méete to be beléeued of all indifferent readers. Siluester Giraldus (in his Itinerarie of Wales) and many others, doe write,The cause of Good∣wyn Sandes that about the end of the reigne of King William Rufus, (or the beginning of Henrie the first) there was a sodaine and mightie inundation of the Sea, by the which a great part of Flaunders, and of the lowe countries thereabout, was drenched, and lost, so that many of the inhabitants (being thereby expulsed from their seates) came ouer into England, and made suite to the same King Henrie, for some place of dwel∣ling within his dominion. The King pitying their cala∣mitie, and séeing that they might bee profitable to his Realme, by instructing his people in the art of clothing, (wherein at that time they chiefly excelled,) first placed
them about Carlile in the North countrie, and after∣warde (vpon cause) remoued them to Rosse and Hauer∣ford in Wales. Now at the same tyme that this hap∣pened in Flaunders, the like harme was done in sundry places, bothe of England, and Scotland, also, (as Hector Boethius, the Scottishe hystoriographer, moste plainly writeth) affirming, that (amongst other) this place, being sometyme of the possession of the Earle Godwine, was then first violently ouerwhelmed with a light sande, wherewith it, not onely remayneth couered euer since, but is become withall (Nauium gurges, & vorago) a most dreadfull gulfe, and shippe swalower. This thing, as I cannot but marueil how it hath es∣caped the penns of our own countrie writers (the rather for that some of them liuing about that time) haue men∣tion of that harme in the lowe countrie: so I sticke not to accept it for assured trueth, considering either the au∣ctority of the writer him selfe, being a diligent and lear∣ned man, or the circumstances of the thing that he hathe left written, beeing in it selfe both reasonable, & likely. And thus I might wel make an end, but because I haue alredy takē occasiō to accuse thē of forgerie, which affirme Godwine to haue bene choked at the bourde, I trust it shalbe no great offence, (though beside purpose, yet for declaration of the trueth) to rehearse shortly, what some credible storiers haue reported of that mat∣ter also. And to the end that the trueth may appeare by collation of the diuers reportes, I will first shewe what the common opinion and tale of his death is, and then afterward what these other men write concerning the same.The death of Earle Godwyne. Ealred, the Abbat of Ryuauxe, (who tooke paynes to pen the hystorie of the same King Edwardes whole life, and of whom all others (as I thinke) lear∣ned this tale, saith: that while the King and Godwyne
sate at the table, accompanied with others of the Nobi∣litie, it chaunced the Cupbearer (as he brought wyne to the bourd) to slip with the one foote, and yet by good strength of his other legge, to recouer him self without falling, whiche thing the Earle earnestly marking, sayde pleasantly, that There, one brother had wel helped an∣other: mary (quoth the King) so might me mine, ne had∣dest thou bene Earle Godwine: casting in his dishe the murder of his brother Alfred, which was done to death at Elie by the counsell of Godwine, as hereafter in fitte place for it shall appeare. Hereat the Earle was sore moued, and thinking it more then time to make his pur¦gation, tooke a morsell of bread into his hand, and praying (with great and vehement obtestation) that it might choke him, if he by any meanes caused ye slaugh∣ter or consēted thereto, he put the bread into his mouth, and was immediatly strangled therewithall. Some write, that this bread was before accursed by Wulstane, the holy Bishop of Worcester, after a certain manner then vsed, & called Corsned,1. Cursed bread. as in the table to ye Saxons lawes is to be séene. But this Ealred affirmeth that after the woords spoken by the Earle, the King him selfe blessed the bread with the signe of the crosse: And therfore these men agrée aswel together, as blessing and cursing be one like to another. But letting that and them passe, heare (I beséech you) what Alfred of Beuerley (a learned man, that liued in the time of King Henry the first, somewhat before this Abbat Ealred) saith, touching this matter. Godwinus gra∣ui morbo ex improuiso percussus, ac Regi ad mensam Wyntoniae assidens, mutus in ipsa sede declinauit, ac postea in camerā Re∣gis a filijs deportatus, moritur. Quidam autem dicunt. &c. Godwine being sodainly strickē wt a grieuous disease, as he sate at ye table with the King at Winchester, fel down
from his stoole, and was carried by his sonnes into the Kings chamber, where he dyed: but some say that he was choked &c. And to the same effect writeth Maria∣nus the Scot. Simeon also, the Chaunter of Durham, whiche liued about the time of this Alfred, or rather before him, treating of this matter, hath these wordes. Godwinus graui morbo percussus, in ipsa sede declinauit, & post horas quinque moritur. Godwyne being taken with a grieuous disease, dropped down from the place where he sate, and dyed within fiue houres after. Thus these men reporte another manner of his death, the one vsing no mention at all of any accursed breade, and the other reciting it but as a tale. And for the more plaine detection of the deceipt of this Abbat, he that wil read the second booke of William Malmes. De Regibus, shall finde, that the occasion, and introduction of this matter (I meane, the slipping of the Kings Cupbearer, and the speache that procéeded therof, namely, that One brother had wel helped another) is woorde for woord stollen from thence, for William (whiche liued before E∣alred) reporteth, that king Ethelstane, by persuasion of one that was his cupbearer, had banished Eadwine his owne brother, for suspicion of treason, and had com∣mitted him to the Seas and windes in an olde, shaken, and fraile vessel, without saile, oare, or companion, (saue one Esquier only,) in whiche exile he perished, and that afterward the King (vnderstanding his brothers inno∣cencie, and sorowing his owne rashnesse) tooke occasion by sight of his cupbearers foote slipping, to be auenged of the false accusation, euen as it is here tolde of King Edward. But Ealred, forsoothe, was so fully disposed to magnifie King Edward (bycause he so muche magnified the Monkishe and single life) that he sticked not at grea∣ter matters then this, affirming boldely that the same
King while he hearde Masse at Westminster,The visions of Edward the confes∣sour. sawe be∣twéene the Priestes handes, Christe blessing him with his fingers: That at another Masse he sawe the seuen sleapers at Ephesus, turne them selues on the one side, after they had sleapt seuentie yeares together on the o∣ther, (which,Epimenides did slepe. 75 yeares. séeing it was within fiue yeares of so many as Epimenides sleapt,) Ealred (in my phansie) is worthy to haue the seconde game at the whetstone.) Fur∣thermore, that S. Iohn Baptist sent to King Edward, a King of Golde from Ierusalem, whiche he him selfe had sometime before giuen to a poore man, that asked almes of him in the name of S. Iohn: And suche other matters of like credite,1. Loue, Ly. or game for the whet∣stone. whiche bothe for the vanitie of the things them selues, being méete to haue place in Philopseudes of Lucian, and for the desire that I haue to kéepe order, I will pretermit, and re∣turne to my purpose.
Richeborowe in Latine, Ʋrbs Ru∣tupina: in Saxon (ReptacHester) the name being forged (as I coniecture) either of the Bryttishe woord (Rwyd) whiche signifieth a net, in token that it stoode by fishing: or of (Rwydd) whiche signifieth speede, bycause from thence (as some thinke) is the moste shorte and speedy cutte ouer the Seas. MAthew (ye Monke of Westminster, & Authour of the woorke called, Flores Hystoriarum) taketh the place whiche Beda, Ptolome, and others call Ru∣tupi, to be Sandwiche, and therefore he applieth to the one whatsoeuer he findeth of the other: but bicause Iohn Leland (a man generally acquainted with the antiqui∣ties of the Realme) affirmeth in his worke whiche hee intituled (Syllabus in Genethliacon Eaduerdi) Rutupi to haue been, where Richeborowe now is (to whiche opi∣nion I rather incline) I thinke good to giue them seue∣rall titles, and to speake of Richeborowe by it selfe, lea∣uing to fit place (for Sandwiche also) suche matter, as of right belongeth therevnto. The whole shoare of Kent therefore, that lyeth ouer against Dunkircke, Calaice, and Boloigne, is of Caesar, Iuuenal, Lucan, Ptolome, Antoninus, and others, called Rutupiae, or Rutupinum littus, and that place of Eng∣land whiche Beda taketh to be nearest to the Morines (a people of Gallia Belgica, whiche at this day compre∣hendeth, Picardie, Boloigne, Artoys, and some parte of the lowe countries) is of Iohn Leland interpreted to be Richeborowe, not paste halfe a myle distant from Sandwiche toward the East. The same man also,
persuaded partly by the viewe of the place it selfe, and partly by the authoritie of one Gotcelinus, supposeth, that Richeborow was of auncient time,Richebo∣row, was sometime a Citie. a Citie of some price, and that it had within it a Palaice, where King Ethelbert receiued Augustine. As for the title of a Citie, I doubt not but that if the ruines of the aunci∣ent walles yet extant, or the remenants of the Romane coyne often found there, did not at all inforce the like∣lyhoode, yet the authoritie of Beda alone (which calleth it plainly a citie) would suffice: But whether it were the Palaice of King Ethelbert, when he entertained Augustine, he that shall aduisedly read the first Chap∣ter of Beda his first boke of the Ecclesiastical storie, shall haue iust cause to doubt, for asmuch, as he sheweth ma∣nifestly, yt the King came from his Palaice in the Con∣tinent (out of Thanet) to Augustine: & Leland himselfe confesseth, that Richeborow was then within Thanet, although that since that time, the water hath chaunged his course, and shut it cleane out of the Island. Now, where some men (as I said) haue taken it to bée Sandwiche, I take them to bee greatly deceaued.Sandwiche, is not Ru∣tupi. For Richeborowe (being corruptly so sounded, for Reptsborowe) hathe remayning in it, the very rootes (as I may speake it) of Reptachester: And Reptache∣ster (saith Beda) and Rutupi Portus, are all one: So then (Chester) being tourned to (Borow) (whiche be in deede two wordes, but yet in manner of one signification and effect) Rept, and Riche, haue ome affinitie the one with the other, but neyther Riche, Repta, nor Ru∣tupi, can haue with Sandwiche any manner of simi∣litude. Thus muche of the name, and antiquitie of this poore Towne, whiche was in tyme of the olde Brytons, of great price, and the common Port or
place of arriuall out of Fraunce, whereof we finde no o∣ther note in latter hystorie, either bicause the same was long since (before the comming of the Saxons) neglected, when as the Romanes had lost their interest within this Realme: Or else, for that soone after their arri∣uall it decayed, by reason that the water chaunged his course, and lefte it dry: So that nowe most aptly, that may be sayde of this towne, neare to the Isle Thanet, whiche Virgil some time wrate of Tened it selfe. Diues opum, Priami dum regna manebant, Nunc tantum sinus, & statio malè fida carinis. A wealthy land, while Priams state, and kingdome vpright stoade, But nowe a bay, and harbour bad, for ships to lye at roade. But nowe I will make towarde Sandwiche, the first of the Portes (as my iourney lyeth) and by the way speake somewhat of the Fiue Portes, in generall.
The Cinque Portes. I Finde in the booke of the general suruey of the realme,The anti∣quitie of the Portes. whiche William the Con∣querour caused to be made in the fourth yere of his reigne, & to be called Domes∣day, bycause (as Mathew Parise saieth) it spared no man (but iudged all men in∣differently, as the Lord in that great day wil doe) that Douer, Sandwiche, and Rumney, were in the time of King Edward the confessour, discharged almoste of all maner of impositions and burdens (whiche other towns dyd beare,) in consideration of suche seruice to bee done by them vpon the Sea, as in their speciall titles shall hereafter appeare: wherevpon, although I might groūd by reasonable coniecture, that the immunity of the hauē Townes (which we nowe cal by a certaine number, the Cinque Portes) might take their beginning from the same Edward: yet for as muche as I read in the Char∣tre of King Edward, the first after the conquest (whiche is reported in our booke of Entries) A recitall of the grauntes of sundrie Kinges to the Fiue Portes, the same reaching no higher, then to William the Conquerour, I will leaue my coniecture, and leane to his Chartre: contenting my selfe to yéelde to the conquerour, the thankes of other mens benefites, séeing those whiche were benefited, were wisely contented (as the case then stoode) to like better of his confirmation or second gift, then of King Edwardes first graunt and endowment. And to the end that I may proceede in some manner of array, I will first shew, which Townes were (at the be∣ginning) taken for the Fiue Portes, & what others be now reputed in the same number: secondly, what seruice they
ought, & did in times passed, & lastly what priuiledges they haue therefore, & by what persons they haue been gouerned. Whiche be the Fiue Portes.If I should iudge by the commune, and rude verse, Douer, Sandwicus, Ry, Rum, Frigmare ventus, I might say, that Douer, Sandwiche, Rie, Rumney, and Winchelsey, (for that is, Frigmare ventus) be the Fiue Portes: Againe if I should bee ruled by the Rolle whiche reciteth the Ports, that send Barons to the Par∣leament, I muste then adde to these, Hastings, & Hyde, for they also haue their Barons, as wel as the other: and so should I not onely, not shewe whiche were the first Fiue, but also (by addition of two others) increase bothe the number, and doubtfulnes. Leauing the verse therefore, for ignorance of the authour, and suspition of his authoritie, and forsaking the Rolle (as not assured  of the antiquitie) I will flye to Henrie Bracton, a man bothe auncient, learned, and credible, which liued vnder King Henrie the third, and wrote (aboue thrée hundreth yeares since) learnedly of the lawes of this Realme. He (I say) in the third booke of his worke, and trea∣tise of the Crowne, taking in hand to shewe the articles inquirable before the Iustices in Eire, (or Itinerant, as wee called them, bycause they vsed to ride from place to place throughout the Realme, for administration of iustice) setteth foorth a speciall fourme of writtes, to bee directed seuerally to the Baylifes of Hastings, Hithe, Rumney, Douer, and Sandwiche, commaunding them, that they should cause twentie and foure of their Ba∣rons for so their Burgesses,i wre led  lde . or Townesmen, and the Cins of London likewise, were wont to be termed) to appeare before the Kings Iustices at Shipwey in Kent, as they accustomed to doe, there to enquire of suche pointes, as should bee giuen them in charge.
Whiche done, he addeth moreouer,Contentiō, betweene Yarmouth, and the fiue Portes. that for so muche as there was oftentimes contention betwéene them of the Fiue Portes, and the inhabitants of Yarmouth in Nor∣folke, and Donwiche in Suffolke, there should be seue∣rall writtes directed to them also, retournable before the same Iustices at the same day and place: reciting, that where the King had by his former writtes som∣moned the Plées of the Fiue Ports to be holden at Ship∣wey, if any of the same townes, had cause to complaine of any (beeing within the liberties of the saide Portes) he should be at Shipwey to propounde against him, and there to receaue according to lawe and iustice. Thus muche I recite out of Bracton, partly to shew that Shipwey was before King Edward the firsts time, the place of assembly for the Plees of the Fiue Portes, partly to notifie the difference, and controuersie that long since was betweene these Portes, and those other townes: But purposely and chiefely to proue, that Hastings, and Hithe, Douer, Rumney, and Sand∣wiche, were in Bractons time, accompted the Fiue prin∣cipall hauens or Portes, whiche were endowed with priuiledge. Neither yet will I deny, but that soone after, Win∣chelsey and Rye might be added to the number. For I finde in an olde recorde, that King Henrie the third tooke into his owne handes (for the better defence of the Realme) the townes of Winchelsey, and Rye, whiche belonged before to the Monasterie of Fescampe in Normandie, & gaue therfore in exchaunge, the Manor of Chiltham in Gloucester shyre, & diuers other landes in Lincolne shyre: This he did, partly to conceale from the Priors Aliens, the intelligence of the secrete affairs of his Realme, & partly bycause of a great disobedience
and excesse, that was committed by the inhabitants of Winchelsey, against Prince Edward his eldest Sonne. And therefore, although, I can easely be led to thinke, yt he submitted them for their correction to the order, and gouernance of the Fiue Portes, yet I stand doubtfull whether he made them partners of their priuiledges, or no,Winchel∣sey first builded. for that had been a preferment, and no punishment: but I suspect rather, that his Sonne King Edward the first, (by whose encouragement and aide, olde Winchel∣sey  was afterward abandoned, and the now Towne buidled) was the first that appareiled them wyth that preeminence. By this therefore let it appeare, that Hastings, Do∣uer, Hithe, Rumney, & Sandwiche, were the first Ports of priuiledge, which (bycause they were Fiue in numbre) bothe at the first gaue, and yet continue, to all the resi∣due, the name of Cinque Portes, although not onely Winchelsey and Rye, be since that time, incorporated with them as principals, but diuers other places also (for the ease of their charge) be crept in as partes, lims, and members of the same. Now therefore, somewhat shalbe saide, as touching the seruices that these Portes of duetie owe, and in déed haue done, to the Princes: wherof the one (I meane with what numbre of vessels, in what manner of furniture, and for howe long season, they ought to waite on the King at the Sea, vpon theyr owne charges) shall partly appeare by that whiche wée shall presently say, and partly by that whiche shall fol∣low in Sandwiche, and Rumney: The other shalbe made manifest by examples, drawn out of good hystories: and bothe shalbe testified by the woordes of King Edward the first in his owne Chartre. The booke of Domesday before remembred, chargeth Douer wyth 20. vessels at the Sea, whereof eache to be
furnished with one and twentie men, for fiftéene dayes together: and sayth further, that Rumney and Sand∣wiche aunswered the like seruice: But nowe whether this (like) ought to be vnderstoode of the like altogether, bothe in respect of the number and seruice, or of the (like) in respect of seruice, according to the proportion of their abilitie onely, I may not hereby take vpon me to deter∣mine, For on the one side, if Rumney, Sandwiche, and the residue, should likewise find twentie vessels a péece, then (as you shall anone sée) the fiue Portes were subiect to a greater charge at that time, then King Edward the first layd vpon them: And on the other side, if they were only chargeable after their proportion, then know I not howe far to burthen them, séeing the Record of Domes∣day it selfe, bindeth them to no certeintie. And therfore leauing this as I finde it, I must elsewhere make inqui∣sition for more lightsome proofe: And firste I will haue recourse to King Edwarde the firste his Chartre, in which I read, that At ech time that the King passeth o∣uer the sea, the Portes ought to rigge vp fiftie and seuen ships, (whereof euery one to haue twentie armed soul∣diers) and to mainteine them at their own costes, by the space of fifteene dayes together. And thus it stoode with the Portes for their generall charge, in the sixte yeare of his reigne, for then was this Chartre sealed: But as touching the particular bur∣then of eche one, I haue séene two diuers testimonies, of whiche the first is a note in Frenche (bearing the coun∣tenance of a Record) and is intituled, to haue bene renu∣ed in the two and twentie yeare of the Reigne of the same King, by Stephan Penchester, then Constable of Douer Castle, in whiche the particular charge is set downe in this manner. The Port of Hastings ought to finde thrée ships.
The lowie of Peuensey, one. Buluerhithe and Petit Iahn, one. Bekisborne in Kent, seuen. Grenche in Kent, two men and armour, with the ships of Hastings. The towne of Rye, fiue. To it was Tenterdene annexed, in the tyme of King Henrie the sixt. The towne of Winchelsey, ten. The Port of Rumney, foure. Lydde, seuen. The Porte of Hythe, fiue. The Port of Douer, ninetéene. The towne of Folkstone, seuen. The towne of Feuersham, seuen. The Port of Sandwiche, with Stonor, Fordwich, Dale. &c. fiue. These Ships they ought to finde vpon fourtie dayes summons, armed and arrayed at their owne charge, and in eche of them twentie men, besides the Maister of of the Mariners: all whiche they shall likewyse mayn∣teine fiue dayes together at their owne costes, giuing to the Maister sixe pence by the day, to the Constable vj. pence, and to eache other Mariner iij. d. And after those fiue dayes ended, the King shall defray the wages. The other is a Latine Custumall of the towne of Hyde, the whiche although it pretend not so great anti∣quitie as the first, yet séemeth it to me to importe as muche, or more likelyhode and credit: It standeth, thus. These be the Fiue Portes of our soueraigne Lord the King hauing liberties, which other Portes haue not: Hasting, Romenal, Hethe, Douer, Sandwiche, the chiefe Townes.
The seruices due by the same. Hasting shal finde .21. ships, in euery ship .21. men, and a Garcion, or Boye, whiche is called a Gromet. To it perteine (as the members of one towne) the Seashore in Seford, Peuenshey, Hodeney, Winchelsey, Rye, Ihame, Bekesbourne, Grenge, Northie, Bulwerhethe. Romenal. 5. ships, In euery ship .21. men, and a Garcion: To it perteine, as members thereof, Promhell, Lede, Eastwestone, Dengemareys, olde Rumney. Hethe .5. ships, as Romenal before. To it perteineth the Westhethe. Douer .21. ships, as Hasting before. To it perteine, Folk∣stane, Feuersham, and Sainct Margerets, not concer∣ning the land, but for the goods and cattailes. Sandwich .5. ships, as Romenal, and Hethe before. To it perteine Fordwiche, Reculuer, Serre, and Dele, not for the soyle, but for the goods. Summe of the Ships. 57. Summe of the men. 1187. and 57. Garcions. This seruice, the Barons of the Fiue Portes do ac∣knowledge to owe to the King, vpon summons yearely (if it happen) by the space of .15. dayes together, at their owne costes and charges, accounting that for the first day of the .15. in whiche they shall spread their sayles to goe towards those partes that the King intendeth: and to serue so long after .15. dayes, as the King will, at his owne pay, and wages. Thus muche out of these auncient notes, whereby your self may easely discerne the difference: but whe∣ther the one or the other, or (by reason of some latter de∣spēsation) neither of these, haue place at this day, I must referre to them that be priuie & of counsell with ye Ports:
and so leauing this also vndecided, holde on the waye, wherein I am entred. The good seruice of the .5. ports.This dutie of attendance therfore (being deuised for the honourable transportation, and salfe conduct of the Kings owne person ouer the narrow Seas, the Portes haue not onely most diligently euer since that time per∣formed, but furthermore also, valiantly behaued them selues, against the enemie from time to time, in sundry exploits by water, as occasion hath ben proffered, or the necessitie of the Realme required. And amongest other feates not vnworthy perpetu∣all remembrance, after such time as Lewes (the French Dolphen) had entered the Realme to ayde Stephan Langton the Archebishop, and the Nobilitie in the life of King Iohn, and had sent into Fraunce for newe supply of souldiers after his death, Hubert of Borough (then  Captaine of Douer) following the opinion of Themisto∣cles,Muris ligne∣is querendam salutem. in the exposition of the Oracle of the wooden walles, by the aide of the Port townes, armed fourtie tall ships, and méeting with eightie saile of Frenchmen vpon the high Seas, gaue them a most courageous encounter, in whiche he tooke some, sounke others, and discomfited the rest. King Henrie the thirde also, after that he came to ri∣per age, had great benefite by the seruice of the Cinque Portes: And King Edward the first in his Chartre, ma∣keth their continuall faythfull seruice, (and especially their good endeuour, then lately shewed againste the  Welshmen) the principall cause and motiue of that his liberall graunt. Furthermore, about the midst of the reigne of the same King, a hundreth sayle of the Nauie of the Ports, fought at the Sea with a fleete of .200. Frenchmen, all  whiche (notwithstanding the great ods of the number)
they tooke, and slewe, and sounke so many of the Mary∣ners, that Fraunce was thereby (for a long season after) in manner destitute, both of Seamen and shipping. Finally, and to conclude this part, in the dayes of  King Henrie the fourth, the Nauie of the Fiue Portes, vnder the conducte of one Henrie Paye, surprysed one hundreth and twentie Frenche Ships, all laden with Salte, Iron, Oyle, and no worse Merchandize. The priuiledges of these Portes,The priui∣ledges of the 5. Ports being first graunted by Edward the Confessour, and William the Conque∣rour, and then confirmed and increased by Williā Ru∣fus, Henrie the second, Richard the first, Henry the third & king Edward the first, be very great, considering either the honour and ease, or the freedome and exemption, that the inhabitaunts haue by reason of the same. For they sende Burgesses to the Parleament, whiche by an honourable name be called Barons: They beare ye foure staues of the Canapie ouer the Kings head at the time of his coronation, and they dyne at the vppermost table in the great hall, on his right hand: They them∣selues be exempted from all payments of subsidie: And theyr Heires fréed from wardship of body, notwithstan∣ding any tenure. They bée empleadable in their owne Townes also, and not elsewhere: They haue amongst themselues in eache Porte, their particular place of iu∣stice, and at Shipwey the general courte of their assem∣blie, where the Lord Warden taketh his othe at his first entrie into the office, & where they ought (of right) to holde all their generall Plées also, although they sit now for the moste part at Douer: They haue power (if iustice be not done them) to take the inhabitaunts of other Townes and Cities in Withernam: to gouerne Yarmouth: by their Baylife for one season of the yeare, to doe iustice vpon criminall offendours: To holde
Plée in Actions reall and personall, to take Conusance by fine, to enfranchise villaines: & sondrie other things, whiche bycause they be to long to be rehearsed at large, and lye not fitly in the way of my purpose, I will omit, and descend to the Wardeins of the Portes, reciting in a short Catalogue, the names of so many of them, as I haue found to gouern, sithence the arriuall of King Wil∣liam the Conquerour. And although it be no doubt, but that the Portes were vnder the gouernement of some, before the tyme of the conquest also, yet bycause King William was the first (so farre as I haue read) that made the office perpetuall, and gaue it the title whiche it now beareth (the name Wardein I meane, whiche came from Normandie and was not at all kno∣wen to the Saxons) I thinke best to begin at his time. Againe, for asmuche as the Constableship of the Ca∣stle of Douer, and this office, haue ben alwayes insepe∣rably matched together, and for that I shal haue fitte place to speake of that hereafter, when I shall come to Douer, I will respit the rehersall of bothe their origi∣nalles til then: and here (in the meane season) set down the race of the Wardeins by name only. The names of the War¦deins of the Fiue PortesIohn Fynes, created by William the Conquerour, War∣dein of the Portes, and Constable of Douer, by gifte of inheritance. Iames Fines, his Sonne, whiche dyed ot Folkston. Iohn Fynes his Sonne. Walkelm, who deliuered it to King Stephan, and imme∣diatly after his death, abandoned the charge, and fled into Normandie. Allen Fynes, restored by King Henrie the second. Iames Fynes, his Eldest Sonne. Mathew Clere (as it should séeme by Mat. Par. & Williā Petite) who imprisoned Godfrey, the Archbyshop of
Yorke in Douer castle, as vnder that title shal appeare. William of Wrotham. Hubert of Burgh, the Earle of Kent, who being deposed Bartram of Cryol succéeded. Richard Gray, appointed by the Barons, that warred a∣gainst King Henrie the third, who was depriued of his office by Hugh Bigot, bicause he let in the Popes legate by the Kings licence, and against the minde of the Nobles. Henrie Braybrooke. Edward the first, in the lyfe of his father, who made Henrie Cobham his deputie, whose Sonne & Heire (called Iohn) founded Cobham College. Roger Leyborne, in the tyme of King Edward the first. Stephan Penchester, in the tyme of Edward the first. Syr Robert Asheton. Hugh Spenser, the younger, in the tyme of Edward the second. Edmund of Woodstock, the Earle of Kent. Reginald Cobham, in the time of Edward the third. Bartholmew Burwhasse, or Burgehersh, one of the first companions of the ordre of the Garter. Iohn Beauchampe, the Earle of Warwike. Syr Robert Herle, in the latter ende of King Edward the third. Edmund the Earle of Cambridge. Syr Simon Barley, whome Thomas of Woodstocke beheaded. Lord Henrie Cobham, the Sonne of Reginald Cobhā. Syr Iohn Enros. Syr Thomas Beaumont. Edward, the Duke of Aumarle and Yorke, whom King Henrie the fourth remoued, and substituted in place Syr Thomas Erpingham, for a season, but afterward, he gaue the office to.
Prince Edward his Sonne, who when he was King in possession, bestowed it vpon Humfrey, the Duke of Gloucester. Iames Fines, Lord Saye, whom Iacke Cade beheaded. Edmond, the Duke of Somerset. Humfrey, the Duke of Buckingham. Simon Mountford, vnder King Henrie the sixt. Richard Neuel, the Earle of Warwike. William, the Earle of Arundel. Richard, the Duke of Gloucester, called afterward King Richard the third. Sir William Scotte. Henrie the Duke of Yorke. Iames Fines, the Lord Saye. Henrie in his Fathers lyfe, afterward the eight King of that name. Arthur Plantagenet, Vicount Lisle, Bastard Sonne to King Edward the fourth. Sir Edward Poynings. Henrie, the younge Earle of Richemond. Sir Edward Guldeford. George Boleyn, Vicount Rocheford. Sir Thomas Cheynie, Treasurour of the houshold. Sir Wiliam Cobham, Lord Cobham. Thus much of the v. Portes, in general. Now of Sand∣wiche, the first of them in the order of my iourney, and then orderly of so many of the residue, as lye within the Shyre that I haue presently in hand.
Sandwiche is called in Latine, Sabu∣louicum, or Portus Rutupinus, in Saxon Sondƿic, that is to say, the Sandie Towne, because the coast ther∣about aboundeth withe Sande. THis Towne (as it appeareth by the report of Leland, and as it may séeme also by the name it selfe, being méere Saxon) began by the Saxons, after the fall of poore Richeborowe, which was in price while the honour of the Britons stood vpright, and was eyther abated dy the furie of the Saxons, when they wonne that coast from them, or els came to ruine, by the alteration and vicissitude of the Sea, whiche peraduenture choked the hauen there∣of with light sande, as it hathe since that time done this at Sandwiche also. King Canutus gaue (as some write) to Christes church in Canterbury,Reliques of great price. Sainct Bartholmews arme (if happely it were not a chaungeling: for Kings & great men were oftentymes after that sort deluded, though they in the meane time bought such reliques dearely, and thought that kinde of gifte moste princely) he gaue also a riche Pall, a Crowne of Golde, and this hauen of Sandwiche, together with the royaltie of the water on eache side, so farre as (a shippe being on flote at the full Sea) a man might caste a shorte hatchet out of the vessell vnto the Banke. The place it selfe grewe in tyme to be wel peopled,The aunci∣ent estate of Sand∣wiche. and of worthynesse to be one of those Portes, that foūd fauour of priuilege, in consideration of their seruice
at the Sea, for it appeareth by the booke of Domesday, that this was the estate of Sandwiche. It laye in a hun∣dreth  belonginge to it selfe, it did to the King suche like seruice by tenure, as Douer did: It was of the possessiōs of Christes Churche, as I haue shewed, and was ap∣pointed for the apparell of the Monkes of that house, to the whiche it yealded fourtie thousand herrings besides certaine money, and had in it thrée hundreth and seuen houses inhabited: And I finde not, but that the Towne continued in the like plight, long after the Conquest, (being somewhat amended also by the Staple, whiche King Edward the first for a season remoued thither) e∣uen vntil the time of King Henrie the sixt, in whose dayes Peter Brice (the Steward of Normandie) lan∣ded at Sandwiche,Sandwiche spoyled, & brent. and with fire and sworde, wasted the Towne in manner to ashes, and slewe the inhabitants almoste to the last man. Since whiche time, part∣ly by the smarte of that wounde, but chiefly by the a∣boundaunce of the light Sande (wherewith the Sea hath glutted the hauen) it is declined to great decay, and were like to fall to extreme ruine, were it not that nowe presently it is somewhat relieued by the re∣paire of suche, as haue abandoned their Countrie for the fréedome of their consciences, whose aboade howe long it will bée, the Lorde onely knoweth, for whose cause they suffer banishment. The schole at Sand∣wiche.There was in this Towne, before the generall sup∣pression, a house of Carmelites, whereof I read none o∣ther good thing, saue that it brought foorthe one learned man, called William Becley, in the reigne of King Hen∣rie the sixt. But nowe lately (to repaire the losse of that dissolution) Maister Roger Manwoode, a man borne in the Towne, and aduaunced by vertue and good learning to the degrée of a Serieant at the Lawe, hathe
for the increase of Godlinesse and good letters, erected and endowed a faire Free Schoole there, from whence there is hope, that the common wealth shall reape more profite after a fewe yeares: then it receaued commodi∣tie by the Carmelites, since the time of their first foun∣dation. This only is that whiche I had to say, ei∣ther of the present, or passed estate of this place: whiche done, I will procéede to the narration of suche other thinges, as long since happened thereaboutes, partly for the illustration of the antiquitie of the towne, & partly for ye setting forth of the cōmoditie of ye hauen, but chief∣ly for the obseruation of the order whiche I haue bee∣gonne: whiche is, to pretermitte nothing (woorthie note) that I finde in stoarie, concerning the place that I take in hand. But bycause that whiche I haue to say, dependeth altogether, (or for the greater parte) vpon the Hystorie of the Danes, whiche many yeares together disquieted this land, it shal bée fitte, aswell for the better explication of the thinges presently in hand, as also for the more easie vnderstanding of other matters, that must hereafter followe, to disclose (so compendiously as I may) the first beginning, procée∣ding, and ending, of the Danishe affaires, warres, and troubles within this Realme. Aboute the yeare after Christe,  seuen hundreth foure score and seuen,The whole hystorie of the Danishe doings in England. thrée vessels of the Northe East Countrie men (whose ancestors had before, within the compasse of one hundrethe and fourtie yeares, sacked Rome in Italie foure seuerall times, and whose ofspring afterward wonne Normandie from the Frenche King) shewed them selues vpon the westerne shoare of Eng∣land, being sent before hand (as it is supposed) to espie the cōmoditie of the hauens, the aduauntage of arriual, the wealthe and force of the inhabitants, & to the end to
prepare the way for greater powers, then were appoin- to followe. These had no sooner set some of their men on lande, but the Reeue, or officer or Beorhtricke, or Brictricke (then King of the West Saxons) had knowledge therof: who came vnto them, and demaunding the cause of their arriual) would haue carried them to the Kings pre¦sence, but they in their resistance slewe him, wherevpon the people of the Countrie adioyning, addressed them∣selues to reuenge, and assembling in great numbers, beate them backe to their ships, not without the losse of some of their company. And this was the first attempt, that euer the Danes (for so our hystories cal by one general name, the Danes Norwais, Gottes, Vandals, & others of that part) made vpon England: after whiche tyme, what horrible inua∣sions, miseries, calamities, and oppressions followed, shall appeare anone. Not long after this enterprise, a fewe ships of them, made the lyke assay in Scotland, and within short space after that also, some other of them entred Tynemouth Hauen in the North parte of England, and taking some small booties, retourned to their vessels. Now by this experiment, they had gained sufficient knowledge of that, for whiche they first came, & there∣fore thinking it fit tyme to assay further, they rigged vp a greater numbre of ships, armed more store of chosen souldiers, entred the Riuer of Thamise with fiue and thirtie sayle, landed in despight of the people, fired, spoy∣led, herried, and preuailed so farre, that Egbert (who  then had the Monarchie ouer all England) was faine to come with all his power to the reliefe and rescue. But suche was the will of God (for the punishement of Idolatrie and superstition, which then ouerwhelmed
this Realme) that the Danes in stead of being discomfi∣ted by the Kings repaire, were merueilously encoura∣ged by his misfortune. For, after that they had once gotten the better in the field against him, they were so embouldened therby, that notwithstanding he after∣ward, and some other valiant Princes following, by great prowesse, abated their furie in parte, yet, adioy∣ning themselues to the Britons (that then were in great emnitie with the Saxons) and swarming hither out of their owne Countrie in such flightes, that the number of the slaine was continually supplied with greate ad∣uauntage, they neuer ceassed to infeste the Realme,The conti∣nuance of the Danes, in England by the space of thrée hundreth yeares and more, during the reignes of fiftéene seuerall Kings, till at the last, they had made Etheldred flye ouer into Normandie, & leaue them his Kingdome. During all whiche time, howe mightely their forces increased vnder Hinguar, Hubba, Halfden, Guthrum, Aulaf and Hasten, (their Nauie be∣ing rysen from thrée ships, to thrée hundrethe and fiftie at the least) howe pitiously the East, West, Southe, and Northe parts of the Realme were wasted (the townes, Cities, religious houses, and Monasteries of eache quar∣ter being consumed with flames) howe miserably the common people were afflictted, (men, women, and chil∣dren on all sides going to wracke, by their tempestuous furie) howe marueilously the Kings were amased, (the arriualles of these their enemies, being no lesse sudaine, then violent) howe barbarously the monuments of good learning were defaced, (the same suffering more by the immanitie of this one brutishe Nation, then by all the warres and conquestes of the Pictes, & Scots, Romanes, and Saxons) and finally, how furiously fire, and swoord, famine and pestilence, raged in euery place, God and men, Heauen and the elements conspiring (as it were)
the fatall destruction of the Realme, I may not here stand to prosecute particularly: but (leauing eache thing to fitte place) I will procéede with King Etheldred, and so to my purpose. This man aboue all other, was so distressed by their continual inuasions, that since he wanted force to make his longer defence, he thought it best to giue money for their continuall peace. And therefore charging his people with importable tributes, he first gaue them, at fiue seuerall payes, 113000. l. & afterward promised thē 48000. yearely: hoping that (for asmuch as they seemed by the manner of their warre, rather to séeke his coyne, then his kingdome, to rob, then to rule) at the least this way to haue satisfied their hunger: but like as the stone called, Syphinus, the more it is moisted, the harder it waxeth: so no giftes could quenche the golden thirste of these gréedie raueners, but the more was brought to ap¦pease them, the more stonie, and inexorable they shewed thēselues, neuer ceassing (euen against promises, othes, & hostages) to execute their accustomed crueltie. The Danes, all slaine in one night.Herevpon King Etheldred, hauing nowe exhausted ye whole treasure of his Realme, and therefore more vna∣ble, then euer he was, either by power, or praier, to help himself, or to relieue his subiectes, determined by a fine policie (as he thought) to deliuer bothe the one and the other. For whiche purpose, by the aduise of one Huna, (the generall of his armie) he wrote letters to eache part of the Realme, commaunding, that vpon S. Brices  day (which is the morowe after Sainct Martins night) the Englishe men should all at once set vpon the Danes,Saint Mar∣tins drunkē feast. before they had disgested the surfaite of that drunken solemnitie, and so vtterly kyll and destroy them. This his commaundement was receaued with suche liking, entertained with such secreacie, and executed with such
spéede and celeritie, that the Danes were sodainly, & in a manner wholly, bothe men, women, and children (like the Sonnes in Lawe of Danaus) oppressed at once in a night: only a fewe escaped by Sea into Denmarke, and there made complaint of King Etheldreds boucherie. For reuenge whereof, Sweyn their King, bothe armed  his owne people, & waged forreigne aide, and so (prepa∣ring a houge armie) tooke shipping, and arriued,Sweyn the Dane. first here at Sandwiche, and after in the Northe Countrie: the terrour of whose comming was suche, that it cau∣sed the Countrie people on all sides, to submitte them selues vnto him, in so muche, that King Etheldred, sée∣ing the cause desperate, and him selfe destitute, fled ouer into Normandie with his wife, and children, friendes, &  familie: After whiche his departure, although both he him selfe returned, and put Canutus (the next King of the Danes) to flight: and Edmund his Sonne also fought sundrie great battailes with him, yet the Danes preuai∣led so mightely vpon them, that thrée of them in successi∣on, (that is to say, Canutus, Haroldus, and Hardicanu∣tus) reigned Kings here in England almoste by the space of thirtie yeares together: so muche to the infamous op∣pression, slauery, and thraldome of the English Nation, that euery Dane was (for feare) called Lord Dane, and had at his commaundement, wheresoeuer he became, bothe man and wyfe, and whatsoeuer else he found in the house. At the lengthe, God, taking pitie vpon the people, tooke sodainly away King Hardicanute: after whose death, the Nobilitie, & Cōmons of the Realme,  ioyned so firmely, and faithfully, both hartes and hands, with their naturall and Liege Lord, King Edward: that the Danes were once againe (and for euer) expulsed this Countrie, in so much yt soone after, the name (Lord
Dane) being before tyme a woord of great awe and ho∣nour, grewe to a terme, and bywoord of foule despight and reproche, being tourned (as it yet continueth) to Lourdaine: besides, that euer after, the common people in ioye of that deliuerance, haue celebrated the annuall day of Hardicanutus deathe, with open pastime in the streates, calling it, euen till this oure time, Hoctues∣day,Hoctues∣day. in steade, (as I thinke) of Hucxtuesdaeg, that is to say, the skorning, or mocking Tuesday. And nowe thus muche summarily being saide, as con∣cerning the trueth of the Danes being here, who ruled in this land almoste thirtie yeares, and raged (without all rule) aboue three hundreth and fiftie: I will returne to Sandwiche, disclosing therein suche occurrents of the Danishe doings, as perteine to my purpose. In the yeare eight hundreth, fiftie, and one, after Christ, Athelstane the Sonne of Ethelwulfe, & King of Kent (whome Mathewe of Westminster taketh, or ra∣ther mistaketh, for a Bishop) fought at the Sea before Sandwiche, against a great Nauie of the Danes, of whiche he tooke nine vessels, & discomfited the residue. Against another Fléete of the Danes whiche landed  at Sandwiche in the yeare one thousand and sixe, King Etheldred made this prouision:Prouision of armour. that euerie thrée hun∣dreth and ten Hydes of Land (whiche Henrie Hunting∣don, Mathewe Parise, and others, expound to be so ma∣ny plowlands) should be charged with the furniture of one ship, and euery eight Hydes should finde one iacke and sallet, for the defence of the Realme: By whiche meane, he made redy a mighty nauie to the Sea: But what through the iniurie of sudaine tempest, and what  by the defection of some of his Nobilitie, he profited no∣thing. King Canutus also, after that he had receaued the the woorse in a fight in Lincolneshyre, whiche drewe to
his ships, that laye in the hauen at Sandwiche, & there moste barbarously behaued himselfe, cutting of the handes and féete of suche as he had taken for hostage, and so departed al wrothe, and melancholike, into Den∣marke, to repaire his armie. The same man, at his returne hither tooke land, with his power at this towne: and so did Hardicanutus, his sonne after him. Furthermore, in the dayes of King Edward the con∣fessour,  two Princes, (or rather principall Pirates) of the Danes, called Lochen, and Irlinge, landed at Sand∣wiche, and laded their ships with riche spoyle, where∣with they crossed ouer the seas to Flaunders, and there made money of it. At this place landed Lewes the Frēch Dolphine, that ayded the Englishe Nobilitie against King Iohn, as we shall hereafter haue cause to shewe more at large. Finally, in the reigne of King Richard the seconde, certeine Frenche ships were taken at the Sea, whereof some were fraught with the frame of a timber Castle (suche another, I suppose, as Williā the Conquerour erected at Hastings, so soone as he was arriued) whiche they also ment to haue planted in some place of this Realme, for our anoyaunce: but they failed of their pur∣pose, for the Engyne being taken from them, it was set vp at this Towne, & vsed to our great safe∣tie, and their repulse.
Eastrye. HAuing somewhat to say of Eastrye, I trust it shalbe no great offence, to turne oure eye a little from the shoare and talke of it, in our way to Deale. It is the name of a Towne, and Hundreth within the Last of Sainct Augustines, and hath the addition of East, for difference sake, from Westrye (cōmonly called Rye) nere to Win∣chelsey in Sussex. Mathewe of Westminster maketh report of a murther done at it, which because it tendeth  much to the declaration of the aunciēt estate of ye town, I will not sticke to rehearse so shortly as I can. After  the deathe of Ercombert, the seuenth King of Kent, Eg∣bert his Sonne succéeded in the kingdome,A Courtlie Sycophant. who caused to be vertuously brought vp in his Palaice (which was then at this Towne) two young Noble men of his own kinred, (as some say,) or rather his owne Brethren, (as William of Malmesbury writethe) the one being called Ethelbert, and the other Etheldred: these Gentlemen so prospered in good learning, courtlike manners, & feates of actiuitie méete for men of their yeares and parentage, that on the one side, they gaue to all wel disposed per∣sons, and louers of vertue great expectation, that they would become at the length men worthie of muche esti∣mation and honour: and on the other side, they drewe vpon them, the feare, mislyking, and vtter hatred, of the naughtie, wicked, and malicious sort. Of the whiche nūber there was one of the Kings owne houshold, called Thunner, who (as vertue neuer wanteth her enuiers) of a certaine diuelishe malice, repyning at their lauda∣ble increase, neuer ceassed to lowe into the Kings eare, moste vntrue accsations against them: And to the end
that he might ye rather prouoke the King to displeasure, he persuaded him of great daunger toward his estate and person by them: and for as muche as the common people (who more commonly worship the Sunne rising, then going downe) had them in great admiration and reuerence, hee desired the King, that either he would send them out of the Realme, or be contented to winke at the matter if any his friends, for the loue of him, and suertie of his estate, should procure to dispatche them. The King, somewhat prouoked by feare of his owne peril, (though nothing desirous of their destruction) euē as a litle water throwen into the fire increaseth the flame, so by a colde denial, gaue courage to the attempt: & therfore, Thunner espying fitte time, slewe the chil∣dren, and buried their bodies in the Kings Halle, vnder the clothe of his estate. But it was not long, but there appared in the house, a bright shining piller, replenish∣ing eache corner with suche terrible and fearefull light, that the seruauntes shriked at the sight thereof, and by their noyse awaked the King: who, as soone as hee sawe it, was touched with the conscience of the murther, wherevnto he had a litle before in hart consented, & cal∣ling in great haste for Thunner, examined him straight∣ly what was become of the children, and when he had learned the trueth, he became moste sorowfull, and pe∣nitent therfore, charging himselfe with the whole crime of their deathes, for that it lay wholly in him to haue saued their liues: Then sent he for Deodat, the Archebi∣shop, and desired to vnderstand by him, what was best to be done for expiatiō of the fault: this good father (thin∣king to haue procured some gaine to his Church, by ve∣neration of ye dead bodies, if happely he might haue gottē them thither) persuaded the King to incoffen them, & to
commit them to honourable buriall in Christeschurche at Canterbury:A right po∣pishe mira∣cle. but (saith mine Author) when the hearse was readie, it would not be moued by any force toward that Church: as truly (I thinke) as the crosse of Wal∣tham with twelue Oxen and so many Kyne, could not be stirred any other way, but toward the place appoin∣ted: or as the Image of Berecinthia, which the Romanes had brought out of Asia, could not be remoued till the Vestal virgin Claudia had set to her hand. Hereupon the companie assayed to conuey it to Sainct Augustines, but that all in vaine also: at the last, they agreed to leade it to the Monasterie of Watrine, and then (forsoothe) it passed as lightly (saith he) as if nothing at al had béene within it. The obsequies there honourably perfourmed, the King gaue the place where this vision appeared to his sister Ermenburga, who (hauing a long∣ing desire to become a veiled Nonne) had a litle before abandoned her housbands bed, and chusing out seuentie other women for her companie, erected there a Monas∣terie, to the name, and honour, of these two murthered Brethren. William of Malmesbury addeth moreouer, that the King gaue the whole Isle of Thanet also to his Mother, to appease the wrathe that she had conceaued for the losse of her Chil∣dren.
Dele. Dela in Latine, after Leland: I coniecture that it tooke the name of the Saxon woord þille, whiche is a (plaine flooer) or leuel, by rea∣son that it lyeth flat and leuel to the Sea. THe Chronicles of Douer (as Leland reporteth, for I neuer sawe them) haue mencion, that Iulius Caesar be∣ing repulsed from Douer, arriued at this place, and arraied his armie at Baramdowne: whiche thing how wel it may stand with Caesars owne re∣porte in his cōmentaries, I had rather leaue to others to decide, then take vpon me to dispute: being wel con∣tented where certentie is not euident, to allowe of con∣iectures, not altogether vehement, Only of this I am well assured, that King Henrie the eight, hauing shaken of the intollerable yoke of the  Popishe tyrannie,King Hen∣rie the 8. fortifieth his Realme. and espying that the Emperour was offended, for the diuorce of Queene Katherine his wife, and that the Frenche King had coupled the Dolphine his Sonne to the Popes Niece, and maried his daugh∣ter to the King of Scots, so that he might more iustly sus∣pect them all, then safely trust any one: determined by the aide of God to stand vpon his owne gardes and de∣fence, and therefore with all spéede, and without sparing any cost, he builded Castles, platfourmes, and blocke-houses, in all néedefull places of the Realme: And a∣mongest other, fearing least the ease, and aduauntage of descending on land at this part, should giue occasion and hardinesse to the enemies to inuade him, he erected (neare together) thrée fortifications, whiche might at all
tymes kéepe and beate the landing place,Sandowne & walmere that is to say, Sandowne, Dele, and Wamere. This whole matter of Dele, Iohn Leland in Cygnea cantione, com∣prehendeth feately in these two verses. Iactat Delanouas celebris arces, Notus Caesareis locus Trophaeis. Renowmed Dele doth vaunt it selfe, with Turrets newly raisd: For monuments of Caesars hoste, A place in stoarie praisd. But what make I so long at Dele, since Douer (the impreignable Porte, and place so muche renouned for antiquitie) is not many myles of? I will haste me thither therefore, and in the sight thereof vnfolde the singularities of the place.
Douer, called in Latine, Dorus, Du∣rus, Doueria, Dubris, and Dorubernia: In Saxon Sofra. All whiche names be deriued either of the Brit∣tishe word (Dufir) whiche signifieth water, or of the word (Dufirha) whiche betokeneth highe, or steepe: for the si∣tuation of the place, (beeing a highe rocke, han∣ging ouer the water) might iustly giue occasion to name it after either. THe treatise of this place, shall consist of thrée speciall members, that is to say, the Towne, the Castle, and the Religious buildings. The Towne, was long since somewhat estimable, howebeit that whiche it had (as I thinke) was both at the first deriued from the other two, and euer since also continually con∣serued by them: But whether I hitte, or misse in that cō∣iecture, certaine it is, by the testimonie of the recorde in the Exchequer, commonly called Domesday booke, that the Towne of Douer was of abilitie in the time of King Edward the Confessour, to arme yerely 20. vessels to the Sea by the space of 15. dayes together, eache vessell hauing therein. 21. able men. For in consideration thereof, the same King graunted to the inhabitants of Douer, not onely fréedome from payment of Tholl, and other priuileges throughout the Realme, but also par∣doned them all manner of suite and seruice, to any his Courts whatsoeuer. The Towne it selfe was neuer∣thelesse  (at those dayes) vnder the protection and gouer∣naūce of Godwine, the Earle of Kent: for I read,The towne of Douer. that it chaūced Eustace, the Earle of Bolloine, (who had maried Goda, the Kings sister) to come ouer ye seas into Englād,
of a desire that he had to visite the King his Brother, and that whiles his herbenger demeaned him selfe vnwise∣ly in taking vp his lodgings at Douer, he fel at variance with the Townesmen, and slewe one of them: But Nocuit temeraria virtus. For that thing so offended the rest of the inhabitants, that immediatly they ranne to weapon, and killing eightéene of the Earles seruauntes, they compelled him and all his meiney to take their feete, and to séeke redresse at the Kings handes. Godwine resisteth the King.The King hearing the complaint, ment to make cor∣rection of the fault, but the Townesmen also had com∣plained themselues to Godwine, who determining vn∣aduisedly to defend his clients and seruauntes, opposed himselfe violently against the King his Leige Lord and Maister. To bee short the matter waxed (within a while) so hote betwéene them, that either side for main∣tenance of their cause, arraied and conducted a great ar∣mie into the field. Godwine demaunded of the King, that Eustace might be deliuered vnto him, the King cō∣maunded Godwine (that armes laide aside) hee would answere his disobedience by order of the Lawe: and in the ende, Godwine was banished the Realme by the sentence of the King and Nobilitie, wherevpon hee and his Sonnes fled ouer the Sea, and neuer ceassed to vn∣quiet the King, and spoyle his subiects, til they were re∣conciled to his fauour, and restored to their auncient es∣tate and dignitie. This towne, was so sore wasted with fire, soone af∣ter the comming in of King William the Conquerour, that it was wholly (saue onely nine and twentie dwel∣ling  houses) consumed, and brought to ashes. And in the time of King Edward the first also, whiles two of the Popes Cardinales were here in the treatie of an at∣tonement, to be made betwéene England and Fraunce
the Frenchemen landed at Douer in a right, and bur∣ned a great part of the towne, and some of the religious buildings. So that in those times, it was muche em∣payred by those misfortunes. But nowe in our me∣morie, what by decay of the hauen (whiche King Henrie the eight, to his great charge, but that all in vayne, sought to restore) and what by the ouerthrowe of the re∣ligious houses, and losse of Calaice, it is brought in ma∣ner to miserable nakednesse and decaye: whiche thing were the lesse to be pitied, if it were not accompanyed with the ruine of the Castell it selfe, the decay whereof, is so much ye more grieuous, as the fame therof is with our ancient stories (aboue al other) most blasing & glori∣ous.Douer Ca∣stell. The Castell of Douer (sayth Lidgate and Rosse) was firste builded by Iulius Caesar the Romane Empe∣rour, in memorie of whome, they of the Castell kept till this day, certeine vessels of olde wine, and salte, whiche they affirme to be the remayne of suche prouision as he brought into it. As touching the whiche (if they be natural, and not sophisticate) I suppose them more like∣ly to haue béene of that store, whiche Hubert de Burghe layde in there, of whome I shall haue cause to say more hereafter: But as concerning the building, bycause I finde not in Caesar his owne Commentaries, mention of any fortification that he made within the Realme: I thinke that the more credible reporte, whiche ascribeth the foundation to Aruiragus (a King of the Britons) of whome Iuuenal the Poet hath mention, saying to the Emperour Nero, in this wise, Regem aliquem capies, aut de temone Britanno Excidet Aruiragus, &c.Iuuenal in the ende of his. 4. Sa∣tyre. Some King thou shalt a captaine take, or els from Bryttishe wayne Shall Aruiragus tumble downe.
And of whome others write, that he founde suche fauour in the eye of Claudius the Emperour, that he obtained his daughter to wife. But whosoeuer were the authour of this Castell, Mathewe Parise writeth, that it was accounted in his time (which was vnder the reigne of King Henry the third) Clauis, & Repagulum, to∣tius Regni, the very locke and key of the whole Realme of England. And truly it séemeth to me, by that which I haue read of King William the Conquerour, that he also thought no lesse of it: For at suche time as Harold, being in Normandie with him (whether of purpose, or against his will, I leaue as I finde it, at large) made a corporall othe, to put him in possession of the Crowne, after the death of King Edwarde: It was one parcell of his othe, that he should deliuer vnto him this castell, and the Well within it. The same King had no soner ouer∣throwne Harolde in the fielde, and reduced the Londo∣ners to obedience, but foorthwith he marched with his armie towarde Douer, as to a place of greatest impor∣taunce, and spéede in that iourney, as is already de∣clared. Not long after whiche time also (when he had  in his owne opinion) peaceably established the gouern∣ment of this Realme, and was departed ouer into Nor∣mandie, of purpose to commit the order of that countrie to Robert his sonne, diuers of the shyre of Kent, know∣ing right well, howe muche it might annoy him to lose Douer, conspired with Eustace, the Earle of Boloine, for the recouerie and surprise of the same. And for the better atchieuing of their desire, it was agréed, that the Earle should crosse the seas, in a night by them appoin∣ted, at whiche time they woulde not faile with all their force to méete him, and so (ioyning handes) soudainly as∣sayle and enter it. They met accordingly, and marched
by darke night toward the Castell, well furnished with scaling ladders, but by reason that the watch had discri∣ed them, they not only fayled of that whiche they inten∣ded, but also fell into that whiche they neuer feared: for the Souldiours within the Castell (to whome Odo the Bishop of Borieux, and Hughe Mountfort, which then were with the King in Normandie, had committed the charge thereof) kept them selues close, and suffered the assaylants to approche the wall, and then, whiles they disorderly attempted to scale it, they set wide open their gates, and made a soudaine salie out of the péece, and set vpon them with suche furie, that they compelled Eu∣stace with a fewe others, to returne to his Shippe, the reste of his companie, béeing eyther slayne by the sworde, destroyed by fall from the Clyffe, or deuoured by the Sea. The same King also, béeing worthely offended with the disobedience, auarice,Odo, the Earle of Kent. and ambition of Odo (his bastarde brother, whome he had promoted to the Bi∣shopricke of Borieux, and to the Earldome of Kent,) for that he had not onely by rauine and extortion, raked together greate masses of Golde and treasure, whiche he caused to be grounde into fine pouder, and (filling therewith dyuers pottes and crockes) had sounk them in the bottomes of Riuers, intending ther∣withall to haue purchased the Papacie of Rome: But also bycause he refused to render vnto him the Coun∣tie of Kent, and was suspected for aspiring to the Crowne of this Realme, consulted with Lanfranc (the Archebishop of Canterburye, and a professed e∣nemie to Odo) howe hée might (safely and without offence to the Ecclesiasticall estate, for that hée was a Bishoppe) bothe conteyne that treasure within the Realme, and also deteyne hys person from
going into Italie, whether warde he bothe addressed him selfe with all speede, and gathered for his trayne, great troupes of valiaunt, and seruiceable men out of euerie quarter: Lanfranc counseled the King, to commit him to safe custodie, and for his defence armed him with this pretie shift: If it be layde to your charge (quoth he) that you haue layde violent handes vpon a sacred Bishop, Say, that you imprisoned, not the Bishop of Borieux, but the Earle of Kent. The King liked well the con∣ceit, and causing Odo to be apprehended, caste him into prison, whence he was not deliuered, during al the time of his reigne. That done, he made diligent inquisitiō for the hourdes of golde, and by feare of torture, caused the Bishops seruants to bewray the whole treasure. Fynes, the first Consta¦ble of Do∣uer Castell, and the be∣ginning of Castlegard.Then also tooke he new order for the gouernement of this Shyre, and bycause he was persuaded, that no∣thing within the same was of more importance, then Douer Castell, he seised it into his handes, foorthwith fortified it, and chose out a noble mā, called Iohn Fynes, (of whose prowesse and fidelitie he had made good tryal) and committing vnto him, not only the custodie thereof, but the gouernment of the rest of the Portes also, by gift of inheritaunce, he named him Constable of Douer, and Wardein of the Cinque Portes. And to the end that he shoulde be of sufficient abilitie to beare the charge of the defence thereof, he gaue him to the number of sixe and fiftie Knightes fees of lande and possession, willing him, to communicate some partes of that gift, to suche other valiaunt and trustie persons, as he should best like of, for the more sure conseruation of that his most noble and precious péece. He accordingly called vnto him eight other worthie Knightes, and imparting liberally vnto them, of that whiche he had receiued of the King, bounde them by te∣nure
of their lande receiued of the King, to mainteine one hundreth and twelue souldiours amongest them: whiche number he so diuided by monethes of the yeare, that fiue and twentie were continually to watche and warde within the Castell, for their seuerall stintes of time: and all the rest ready at commaundement, vpon whatsoeuer necessitie. The names of these eight were, Williā of Albrance, Fulbert of Douer, William Arsicke, Galfride Peuerell, William Maynemouth, Robert Porthe, Robert Creue∣quer (called in the Latine Records, De crepito corde) that is, Crackt harte: And Adam Fitz Williams. Eche of al whiche, had their seuerall charges, in sundry towres, turrets, & bulworks of the castel, and were contented of their owne dispence, to mainteine and repaire the same, in token wherof, diuers of them beare the names and ti∣tles of these newe chosen Captaines, euen till this oure present time. And thus Douer being dispatched of a busie Bishop, fenced by the Kings appointment, furni∣shed, fraught, and planted with a moste faithfull Con∣stable, vigilant Captaines, and diligent warders, gay∣ned and reteined the opinion and name of a most impor∣tant, commodious, and necessarie péece, not only with the natiue Princes and Nobilitie of our owne Realme, But also with suche foreigne Potentates, as had warre and contention with vs: in so muche as in sundry trou∣bles ensuing, at sundry times afterwarde within this Realme, it did plainely appeare, that this Castell was the chiefe marke, whereat eche man directed his shot. For King Stephan,Estimatio of Douer Castell. in the contention that arose be∣twéene him and Maude the Empresse, for the title of the Crowne, thought that no one thing stoode him more in hande, then to get the possession of Douer Castell, and therfore he neuer ceassed to sollicite Walkelm (that thē
had the custodie thereof) till he had obteyned it. Lewes also, the French Dolphine, which by the insti¦gatiō  of the Pope, & inuitating of the Nobilitie, inuaded King Iohn, (vpon such cause as shall hereafter appeare) hauing gained, partly by tenure, & partly by surrender of ye Barons, that were of his faction, almost al the Castels and Holdes, lying on the Southe parte of the Realme, coulde not yet thinke him selfe assured, onlesse he had Douer also. For his Father Philipe, hearing that he had the possession of sundry other strong places, and that he wanted Douer, Sware by Sainct Iames arme, (whiche was his accustomed othe) that he had not gay∣ned one foote in Englande: and therefore, he made thi∣ther with all his power, and besieged it streightly: But that noble Captaine Hubert of Borroughe,Hubert of Brough, a noble cap∣taine. (of whome I lately spake) whiche was in his time, Con∣stable of the Castell, Wardein of the Portes, Earle of Kent, and chiefe Iustice of all Englande, defended it with suche couragious costancie, that it was bothe a comforte to the Englishe subiecte, and a wonder to the Frenche enemie to beholde it: in so muche, as I can not worthely impute the deliuerie of this Realme, from the perill of forreigne seruitude (wherein it then stoode) to any one thing so muche, as to the magnani∣mitie of this man. Of whome also (by the waye) I thinke good to tell you this, that in his time of Con∣stableship  at Douer, and by his meanes, the seruice of Castlegarde there, whiche had contayned (as I she∣wed before) from the time of William the Conque∣roure, was with the assent of King Henrie the thyrde, conuerted into a payment of money, the lande béeing charged with tenne shillings for euerie War∣der, that it was bounde to finde, and the owners thereby discharged of their personall seruice, and at∣tendaunce
for euer: At whiche time also, he caused the same King to release by his frée Chartre, the cu∣stome of Forrage due to this Castell, and that done, him selfe instituted newe lawes amongst the watche∣men, and increased the number of the Warders. But nowe to my purpose againe. Simon, the Earle of Leycester, and leader of the Ba∣rons warre againste King Henrie the thirde, euen at the first wrested the Castell of Douer, out of the Kings possession, and kéeping the same during all his life, vsed to sende thyther (as vnto a place of most assuraunce) all suche as he had taken prysoners. After his ouerthrowe, Edwarde (then Prince, and afterwarde the first King of that name) assayled it with all speede, and (by the ayde of the prisoners within, whiche had taken the great towre to his vse) obteined it: There lefte he prisoned, Guy the sonne of this Si∣mon, but he escaped sone after, by corruption of his  kéepers. To make an ende, the Nobilitie of that time were fully persuaded, that bothe the safetie and daunger of the whole Realme, consisted in this one Castell: And therefore (saythe Mathewe Parise) at suche time as King Henrie the thirde, called ouer from beyonde the Seas his owne brother, Richarde (then King of the Romanes) the Noble men (who had him in some Iea∣louzie) would not agrée, that he, or any of his, should once enter within this Castell. Not without good cause ther∣fore, hath Douer by greate préeminence, béene repor∣ted the chiefe of the Fiue Portes, assigned by lawes of Parleament, as a speciall place for passage and es∣chaunge, and by auncient tenure acknowledged for Lady and Maistresse of many Manors: To it al∣wayes some man of great apparaunce is appoynted
as Captaine and gouernour. To it sundry Gentlmen of the Shyre, paye yet money for the auncient duetie of their attendance and seruice: And to it sinally, the coun∣trey men in all times of trouble, haue an especiall eye and regarde. Reparation of Douer Castell.As concerning the mayntenaunce of this Castell in fortification, and building, I finde not muche more in storie, then I haue already opened, whiche happeneth the rather (as I thinke) for that many priuate persons within the Shyre of Kent, were of long time, not onely bounde by their tenures of Castlegarde, to be ready in person for the defence, but also stoode charged in purse, with the reparation of the same. Onely I reade in Iohn Rosse, that King Edwarde the fourth, to his great expence, (whiche others recken to haue béene ten thou∣sande poundes) amended it throughout: Hauing there∣fore none other memorable thing touching the Castell it self, I will leaue it, and passe to the Religious houses. S. Martines in Douer.Lucius the first christened King of the Britons, buil∣ded a Churche within Douer Castell, to the name and seruice of Christe, endowing it with the tolle or custome of the hauen there. And Eabaldus (the sonne of Ethel∣bert, the firste christened King of the Saxons) erected a College within the walles of the same, whiche Wygh∣tred (a successour of his) remoued into the towne, stored with two and twentie Chanons, and dedicated it to the name of S Martine: This house, was afterward new  builded by King Henrie the seconde (or rather by Willi∣am Corbeil, the Archebishop in his time,) stuffed by  Theobalde his successour with Benedicte Monkes, and called the Pryorie of S. Martines,Contentiō betweene the Rligi∣ous persons for trifles. though commonly af∣terward, it obtained the name of a newe worke at Do∣uer. Betwéene this house and Christes Churche in Canterbury (to the whiche King Henrie the seconde had
giuen it) there arose (as it chaūced vsually amongst hou∣ses  of Religion) muche contention, for certaine superio∣rities of iurisdiction, and for voice and suffrage in the e∣lection of the Archebishop. For on the one side, the Pryor and Couent of Douer, claymed to haue interest in the choice of the Archebishop, whiche the Pryor of Christes Churche would not agree vnto: And on the other side, the Pryor of Christes Churche pretended to haue such a soueraintie ouer S. Martines, that he would not onely visite the house, but also admit Monkes and Nouices at his pleasure, whiche the other coulde not beare: So that they fell to suing, prouoking, and braw∣ling (the ordinarie and onely meanes, by which Monkes vsed to trie their controuersies) and ceassed not appea∣ling, and pleading at Rome, tyll they had bothe weary∣ed them selues, and wasted their money. Howbeit, as it commonly falleth out, that where respect of money and reward guydeth the iudgement and sentence, there the mightie preuaile, and the poore goe to wracke: So the Monkes of Canterbury, hauing to giue more, and the Pope and his ministers being ready to take al, poore Douer was oppressed, and their Pryor in the ende con∣strained to submission. And here, bycause I am falne into mention of controuersie betwéene ecclesiastical per∣sons, of whiche sorte our hystories haue plentie, I will touche in fewe wordes, the euill intreatie that William Longchampe, the iolly Bishop of Elye, and Chaunceller of al England, vsed toward Godfrey the Kings brother, and Bishop of Yorke electe, within this Pryorie. King Richard the first,Longchamp the lustie bi¦shop of Ely. being persuaded by the Pope and his Clergie, to make an expedition for the recouerie of the holy lande, partely for the performaunce of that whiche the King his father had purposed to doe in per∣son, and partly for satisfaction of his owne vowe, (which
he made when he tooke the crosse, as they called it, vpon him) set to port sayle his Kingly rights, iurisdictions, and prerogatiues, his crowne, landes, fermes, customes, and offices, and whatsoeuer he had beside, to rayse mo∣ney withall: and so committing the whole gouerne∣ment of his Realme, to William the Bishop of Ely his Chancellour, he committed him selfe, and his company to the winde and Seas. This Prelate, hauing nowe by the Kings com∣mission the power of a Viceroy, and besides, the Popes gifte, the authoritie of a Legate and Vicar, and consequently, the exercise of both the swordes, so ru∣led and reigned, ouer the Clergie & Laitie in the kings absence, that the one sort founde him more then a Pope, the other felt him more then a King, and they bothe en∣dured him an intollerable Tyrant: for he not only ouer ruled the Nobilitie, and outfaced the Clergie, spoyling bothe the one and the other, of their liuings and promo∣tions, for maintenaunce of his owne ryot, pompe, and excesse: But also oppressed the common people, deuou∣ring and consuming wheresoeuer he became, the victu∣all of the countrey, with the troupes and traines of men and horses (being in number a thousand or fiftéene hundreth) that continually followed him. Amongst other his practises, hauing gotten into his handes, the reuenues of the Archebishopricke of Yorke (whereof Godfrey, the Kings brother was then elected Bishop, and busie at Rome for to obtaine his consecration) and fearing that by his returne, he might be defrauded of so swéete a morsell, he first laboured earnestly to hinder him in his suite at Rome, and when he sawe no successe of that attempt, he determined to make him sure, when soeuer he should returne home. And for that purpose, he tooke order with one Clere, (then Sheriffe of Kent, and
Constable of the castel of Douer, to whom he had giuen his sister in marriage) that he should haue a diligent eye to his arriuall, and that so soone as the Archebishop did set foote on lande, he shoulde strip him of all his orna∣ments, and commit him to safe custodie within the Ca∣stell. Whiche thing was done accordingly: for the Archebishop was no sooner arriued, and entered the Churche, to offer to Sainct Martine, sacrifice for his safe passage (as the Gentiles that escaped shipwracke, were wont to doe to Neptune:) But Clere and his compa∣nie came in vpon him, and doing the Chancellours commaundement, violently haled him and his Chap∣laines to prison. Hereat Iohn (then the Kings brother, but afterward King) taking iust offence, and adioyning to him for re∣uenge, the vttermost aide of the Bishops and Barons, his friendes and alies, raised a great power, and in short time so strengthened the Chancellour, that he not only agreed to release Godfrey, but was fayne him selfe also (abandoning his late pompe and glorie) to get him to Douer, and lye with his brother Clere, as a poore, pri∣uate, and despoyled person. Howbeit, not thus able to endure long, the note of infamie and confusion, whereinto he was falne, he de∣termined within him self to make an escape, and by shift of the place, to shroud his shame, in some corner beyond the Seas: And therfore, shaueing his face, and attyring him selfe like a woman, he tooke a péece of linnen vnder his arme, and a yard in his hand, minding by that disgui∣sing, to haue taken vessell amongst other passingers vn∣known, & so to haue gotten ouer: But he was not at the first, in al his authoritie, more vnlike a good man, thē he was now in this poore apparel vnlike an honest womā:
and therefore being at the verie first discouered, he was by certaine rude fellowes openly vncased, well boxed a∣bout the eares, and sent to the nexte Iustice, who con∣ueyed hym to Iohn his great enemie. And thus was all the gaye glorie of this gallant brought to shame and confusion, his Pecockes feathers pulled, his black féete bewraied, his fraude vnfoulded, his might abated, and him selfe in the ende suffered to sayle ouer with sorowe and ignominie.Religious houses in Douer. Besides this Pryorie of S. Martines, (which was valued at a hundreth fourscore and eight poundes by yeare) there was lately in Douer also an Hospitall, rated at fiftie nyne poundes: An other house of the same sorte, called Domus Dei, (or Maison Dieu) reputed worth one hundreth and twentie pounds: And long since a house of Templers (as they call it) the which (together with al other of the same kind through∣out the Realme) was suppressed in the reigne of King Edwarde the seconde: The foundation of any of these, I haue not hitherto founde out, and therefore can not deliuer therof any certaintie at all:The order of the Tem¦plers, when it began. Onely as touching this Temple, I dare affirme, that it was erected after the time of Conquest, for as muche as I am sure, that the order it selfe was inuented after that Godfrey, of  Bolein, had wonne Ierusalem, whiche was after the cō∣ming in of the Conquerour. To these also may be ad∣ded for neighbourhoode sake (if you will) the Monasterie of S. Radegundes on the hyll, two myles off, valued at fourescore and eightéene pounds by yeare. And here, hauing perused the Towne, Castle, and religious buil∣dings, I woulde make an ende of Douer, saue that Ma∣thewe Parise putteth me in mynde of one thing (not vn∣worthy rehearsall) that was done in this Temple: I meane, the sealing of that submission, whiche King Iohn made to Pandulphe (the Popes Legate) wherin he yeal∣ded
his Realme tributarie, and him selfe an obediencia∣rie, and vassall, to the Bishop of Rome: And bycause this was almost the last acte of the whole Tragedie, and can not well be vnderstoode without some recourse to the former parts and beginning, and for that some men (of late time) haue taken great holde of this matter, to aduaunce the Popes authoritie withall, I will shortly (after my manner) recount the thing as it was done, and leaue the iudgement to the indifferent Reader. After the death of Hubert (the Archebishop of Can∣terbury) the Monkes of Christes Church agréed among  them selues to chose for their Bishop,The Pope and king Iohn fall our for Ste∣phan Lang∣ton. Reginald the Subpryor of their house. King Iohn (hauing no notice of this election, wherein no doubt he receiued greate wrong, since they ought to haue of him their Conge desli∣er) recommended vnto them, Iohn Graye, the Bishop of Norwiche, a man that for his wisedome and learning, he fauoured muche. Some part of the Monkes, taking soudaine offence at Reginalde (for that he had disclosed a secrete out of their house) and being glad to satisfie the Kings desire, elected this Graye for their Bishop also. Hereof grewe a great suite at Rome, betwéen the more part of the Monkes on the one side, and the Suffraganes of Canterbury, and the lesse number of the Monkes on the other side. The Pope (vpon the hearing of the cause) at the first ratifieth the election of Iohn Graye: Howbeit after∣warde he refuseth bothe the electes, and preferreth Ste∣phan Langton, whom the Monkes (bycause the matter was not before litigious enough) elected also. Nowe King Iohn, hearing, that not only the election of Graye (contrarie to the Popes owne former determi∣nation) was made frustrate, but that there was also thruste into his place a man familiarly entertained by
the Frenche King (his great enemie) disliked much of the choice, & forbad Stephan the elect, to enter the Realme: The Pope againe, who (as Mathewe Parise writeth) sought chiefly in this his choice, Virum strenuum, a stoute man, that is (in plaine speache) a man that could exact of the Clergie, kéep in awe the Laitie, and encounter the King and Nobilitie) séeing his champion thus reiected, be¦ginneth to startle for anger: first therefore, he moueth the King by minacing letters to admitte Stephan, & (not so preuailing) he enterditeth him, & his whole Realme: And finally, bothe prouoketh al Potentates to make o∣pen warre vpon him, and also promiseth to the King of Fraunce, full and frée remission of all his sinnes, and the kingdome of England it self, to inuade him: this done, he solliciteth to rebellion the Bishops, nobilitie, and cōmōs of the Realme, loosing thē (by the plenitude of his Apos- to like power) from al duetie of allegiaunce toward their Prince. By this meanes diuine seruice ceassed, the King of Fraunce armed, the Bishops conspired, the nobi∣litie made defection, and the common people wauered, vncertaine to what part to incline: To be short, King Iohn was so pressed with suspition & feare of domesticall & forreigne enemies on al sides, that (notwithstāding he was of great and noble courage, and séemed to haue for∣ces sufficient for resistance also, if he might haue trusted his souldiers) yet he was in the end compelled, to set his seale to a Chartre of submissiō, wherby he acknowleged himselfe to holde the Crowne of England of the Popes Mitre, & promised to pay yerely for the same and for Ire∣land, 1000. Markes, to ye holy father & his successours for euer: this Chartre, because it was afterward with great insultation and triumph closed in Golde,The Gol∣den Bull. was then com∣monly called, Aurea Bulla, the Bull of Golde. Thus, omitting the residue of this storie, no lesse tra∣gical
and troublesome, then that which I haue alreadie recited: I report me to all indifferent men, what cause Paulus Iouius, or any other popishe parasite hathe (by colour of this Bull) to claime for the Pope, superioritie & Dominion ouer the King of this Realme, since Iohn wt∣out the assent of the estates, (I meane his nobilitie and commons) could not (in such a gifte) either binde his suc∣cessours, or charge the kingdome. And for plaine declaration, that his submission pro∣ceaded not with their consent, I read in a treatise of one Simon de Boraston (a Frier Preacher, in the time of King Edward the third) the which he wrote concerning the Kings right to the Crowne of Ireland, that in the reigne of Henrie the third (whiche next of all succeaded King Iohn) there were sent from the King, the nobilitie and the commons of England, these Noble men: Hughe Bigod, Iohn Fitz Geffray, William Cantlowe, Phillip Basset, and a Lawier named William Powicke, to the generall Counsel, then assembled at Lions in Fraunce, of purpose, and with commission, to require that the saide Bull, sealed by King Iohn, might be cancelled, for as muche as it passed not by the assent of the Counsel of the Realme: and the same Authour writeth, that the Pope for that tyme did put them of, by colour of more waightie affaires, whiche the Counsel had then in hand. I know, that it may wel be thought néedlesse, to labour further in confuting a litle, so weightles: (for it is true, that Aristotle saith, Stultum est, absurdas opiniones accu∣ratius refellere) It is but a follie, to labour ouer curious∣ly, in refelling of absurdities. And therefore I will here conclude the treatise of Douer, and procéede particular∣ly to the rest of the places that lye on this shoare.
Folkstone in Saxon, folcestane, Id est, Populi Lapis, or else, flostane, whiche signi∣fieth a rocke, or a flawe of stone. AMongest the places lying on this shoare  (worthy of note) nexte after Douer, fol∣loweth Folkstone,S. Eanswide and her mi∣racles. where Eanfled, or ra∣ther Eanswide, the daughter of Ead∣balde, the sonne of Ethelbert, and in or∣der of succession, the sixte King of Kent, long since erected a religious Pryorie of women, not in the place where S. Peters Churche at Folkstone nowe standeth, but Southe, from thence, where the Sea ma∣ny yeares agoe hath swalowed and eaten it. And yet, least you shoulde thinke S. Peters Parishe churche to be voyde of reuerence, I must let you knowe of Noua Legenda Angliae, that before the Sea had deuoured all, S. Eanswides reliques were translated thither: The author of that worke reporteth many wonders of this woman, as that she lengthened a beame of that building thrée foote, when the Carpenters (missing in their mea∣sure) had made it so muche too shorte: That she haled and drew water, ouer the hilles against nature: That she forbad certain rauenous birdes the countrey, which before did muche harme there abouts: That she resto∣red the blynde, caste out the Diuel, and healed innume∣rable folkes of their infirmities. And therefore af∣ter her deathe, she was by the policie of the Popishe priestes, and follie of the common people, honoured for a Sainct. A popishe policie.And no maruail at all, for it was vsuall in Papistrie, not onely to magnifie their Benefactours of all sortes, but to edifie also (so many of them at the leaste) as were
of noble Parentage, knowing that thereby, triple com∣moditie ensued: the first, for as muche as by that meane, they assured many great personages vnto them: second∣ly, they drewe (by the awe of their example) infinite numbers of the common people after them: And lastly, they aduentured the more bouldly (vnder those honou∣rable, and glorious names and titles) to publishe their pouishe and pelting miracles. And this sure∣ly was the cause that Sexburge in Shepie, Mildred in Tanet, Etheldred at Elye, Edith at Wilton, and sundrie other simple women of Royall blood in eache quarter, were canonized Saincts: for generally the Religious, of those tymes, were as thankfull to their Benefactors, as euer were the heathen nations to their first Kings and founders: The one sort Sanctifying suche, as did either builde them houses, or deuise them orders: And the o∣ther Deifying suche, as had made them Cities, or prescri∣bed them Lawes and gouernement. This was it that made Saturne, Hercules, Romulus, and others moe, to haue place (in common opinion) with the Gods aboue the starres, and this caused Dunstane, Edgar, Ethel would, and others, first to be shryued here in earth, and then to sit amongest the Saincts in Heauen. But let me now leaue their policie, and returne to the Hystorie. The Towne of Folkestone was sore spoyled  by Earle Godwine and his Sonnes,Folkestone spoiled. what time they harried that whole coast of Kent, for reuenge of their banishment, as we haue often before remembred. The HundredThe Hun∣dred. of Folkstone, conteined in the time of King Edward the Confessour, a hundrethe and twentie ploughe landes, it had in it fiue Parishe Churches, it was valued at a hundrethe and ten poundes, & belonged to the Earle Godwine before named. The ManorThe Ma∣nor. was giuen to William Albranc (of
whome, I made mention in Douer) with condition, to finde one and twentie warders toward the defence of that Castle, and it grewe in time to be the head of an honour or Baronie, as in the Re∣cords of the Exchequer, re∣maineth as yet to bée séene.
Saltwood. THat Saltwood was long sithence an Honor also, it may appeare by an aū∣cient writ, directed by King Henrie the second from beyond the Seas, to King Henrie his Sonne, for the re∣stitution of Thomas Becket ye Arche∣bishop, to all suche goodes, landes, and fées, as were taken from him, during the displea∣sure betwéene them: whiche writ bothe for shewe of the auncient forme, and bycause it conteineth the matter of hystorie, I wil not stick to exemplifie, word for woord, as Mathewe Parise hathe recorded it. Sciatis, quod Thomas Cant. Episcopus pacē mecum fecit ad voluntatem meam, & ideo praecipio tibi, vt ipse, & omnes sui, pacem habeant, & faci∣atis ei habere, & suis, omnes res suas, bene, in pace, & honori∣fice, sicut habuerunt tribus mēsibus, antequā exirent Angliae faciatisque venire corā vobis, de melioribus & antiquioribus, militibus, de honore de Saltwood & eorū iuramēto faciatis in∣quiri, quid ibi habetur de feodo Archiepiscopat{us} Cant. & quod recognitū fuerit esse de feodo ipsius, ipsi faciatis habere: valete.The Pon∣tifical ius∣ice, of Wil¦liam Court¦ney the Archbishop But if this Recorde of the Kings, suffise not to proue the honour of this place, then here (I pray you) a woorde of the honourable (or rather the Pontificall) dealing of William Courtney the Archbishop, who taking offence that certaine poore men, his Tenants, of the Manor of Wingham, had brought him rent hay and littar to Can∣terbury, not openly in cartes for his glorie, as they were accustomed, but closely in sackes vpon their horses as their abilitie would suffer, cited them to this his castle, of Saltwood, and there after that he had shewed himself (Adria iracundiorem) as hote as a toste with the matter, he first bound them by othe to obey his owne ordinaūce,
& then inioyned them for penance, that they should each one marche leisurely after the procession, bareheaded & barefooted, with a sacke of hey or strawe on his shoulder, open at the mouthe, so as the stuffe might appeare han∣ging out of the bag to all the beholders. Nowe I beséeche you, what was it els for this proude Prelate thus to insult ouer simple men, for so small a fault, (or rather for no fault at all) but Laureolam in Mustaceis querere, and no better. Thus muche (at this pre∣sent) of the Place, for as touching the first matter, con∣cerning Thomas, that shall appeare at large in Canter∣bury following. And therefore leauing on our right hand, the stately partes of Syr Edward Poynings vnperfect buylding at Ostenhangar,Ostenhan∣gar. let vs sée what is to be said of Hyde.
Hyde, is written in Saxon Hyþe, that is, the Hauen: and called of Leland in Latine, Portus Hithinus, in some Recordes, Hethe. THe name of this place importing (as it should séeme) by ye generalitie ther∣of some note of worthinesse, and the long continued priuileges therevnto belonging (it self being long since one of the fiue principal Portes) at the first led me (and happely may hereaf∣ter moue others also) to thinke that it had béene of more estimation in tyme past, then by any other thing nowe apparant may well be coniectured: Howbeit, after that I had somewhat diligently searched the Saxon antiqui∣ties, from whence (if from any at all) the beginning of the same is to be deriued, & had perused the booke of Domes∣day, wherein almoste nothing (especially that might bée profitable) was pretermitted, and yet found litle, or (in manner) nothing, concerning this Towne committed to memorie: I became of this minde, that either ye place was at the first of litle price, and for the increase there∣of indowed with Priuileges, or (if it had beene at any time estimable) that it continued not long in ye plight. And truly, whosoeuer shall consider, eyther the Vni∣uersall vicissitude of the Sea in all places,The Cause of the decay of Hauens in Kent. or the particu∣lar alteration, and chaunge, that in tymes passed, and now presently it worketh on the coasts of this Realme, he will easely assent, that Townes bordering vpon the Sea, and vpholded by the commoditie thereof, may in short time decline to great decay, and become (in man∣ner) worthe nothing at all. For, as the water ei∣ther floweth, or forsaketh thē, so must they of necessitie, either flourish, or fall: flowing (as it were) & ebbing with the Sea it selfe. The necessitie of whiche thing, is
euery where so ineuitable, that all the Popish ceremo∣nies of espousing the Sea (whiche the Venetians yeare∣ly vse on Saint Markes day, by casting a Golden ring into the water) cannot let, but that the Sea continual∣ly by litle and litle, withdraweth it selfe from their Ci∣tie, and threatneth in time, vtterly to forsake them. Nowe therefore, as I cannot fully shew, what Hide hath béene in times passed, & must referre to each mans owne eye to beholde what it presently is: So yet, will I not pretermitte to declare out of other men, such notes as I finde, concerning the same. From this Towne (saith Henrie Huntingdon) Ear∣le Godwine, and his Sonnes in the time of their exile, fetched away diuers vessels, lying at roade, euen as they had at Rumney also, whereof we shall haue place to speake more hereafter. Before this Towne (in the reigne of King Edward the first) a great fléete of French men shewed themselues vpon the Sea, of whiche one (being furnished with two hundrethe Souldiours) set her men on land in the Hauen, where they had no sooner pitched their foote, but the Townesmen came vpon thē to the last man, wherewith the residue were so afraide, that foorthwith they hoysed vp saile, and made no fur∣ther attempt.Hyde mise∣rably scour¦ged. This Towne also was grieuous∣ly afflicted, in the beginning of the Reigne of King Hen∣rie the fourth, in so muche as (besides the furie of the pes∣tilence, whiche raged all ouer) there were, in one day, two hundreth of the houses consumed by flame, & fiue of their ships with one hundreth men, drowned at the Sea: By whiche hurte the inhabitaunts were so woun∣ded, that they began to deuise, howe they might aban∣done the place, and builde them a Towne else where: Wherevpon they had resolued also, had not the King by his liberal Chartre (which I haue séene vnder his scale)
released vnto them, for fiue turnes next following (on∣lesse the greater necessitie should in the meane time, compell him to require it) their seruice of fiue ships, of one hundreth men, and of v. garsons, whiche they ought of duetie, and at their owne charge without the helpe of any other member, to finde him, by the space of fiftéene dayes together. Finally,The shor∣test passage betweene England & Fraunce. from this Towne to Boloigne (which is ta∣ken to be the same, that Caesar calleth Gessoriacum) is the shortest cutte ouer the Sea, betwéene England and Fraunce, as some holde opinion: Others thinke that to be the shortest passage, which is from Douer to Calaice: But if there be any man, that preferreth not hast before his good spéede, let him (by mine aduise) proue a third way, I meane from Douer to Withsand: for if Edmund Badhenham, the penner of the Chronicles of Rochester, lye not shamefully, (whiche thing you knowe how farre it is from a Monke) then at suche time as King Henrie the second, and Lewes the French King, were after long warre reconciled to amitie, Lewes came ouer to visite King Henrie, and in his return homeward saluted saint Thomas of Canterbury, made a princely offer at his tumbe,Thomas Becket graūteth a petition af∣ter his death. and (bicause he was very fearefull of the water) asked of saint Thomas, and obteined, that neither he in that passage, nor any other from thenceforth, that cros∣sed the Seas betwéen Douer and Withsand, should suf∣fer any manner of losse or shipwracke. But of this Saint (sauing your reuerence) we shall haue fitte place to speake more largely hereafter, and therefore let vs nowe leaue the Sea, and looke toward Ship∣wey.
Shipwey, or Shipweyham, in the Re∣cordes: commonly, Shipwey Crosse. BEtwéene Hyde and Westhanger, li∣eth Shipwey, the place that was of auncient time honested wt the Plées and assemblies of the Fiue Ports: al∣though at this day, neither by good building extant, it be much glorious, nor by any common méeting, greatly frequented. I remember, that I haue read in a book of Priuile∣ges of the Fiue Portes, that certeine principall pointes, concerning the Port townes, be determinable at Ship∣wey only: And likely it is, that the withdrawing of the triall of causes from thence to Douer Castle, hathe brought decay and obscuritie vpon the place. Of this place, the whole Last of Shipwey, (conteining twelue Hundrethes) at the first tooke, and yet continu∣eth the name: At this place, Prince Edward, the Sonne to King Henrie the third, exacted of the Barons of the v. Portes their othe of fidelitie to his Father, against the mainteiners of the Barons warre: And at this place on∣ly our Limenarcha, or Lord Wardein of the Ports,Lord War∣dein of the Portes. recea∣ueth his oathe, at his first entrie into the office. Whether this were at any time a Harborow for ships,Shipwey, sometime a Haun towne. (as the Etymologie of the name giueth likelihoode of coniecture) or no, I dare neither affirme nor denie, ha∣uing neither read, nor séen, that may lead me to the one, or the other: only I remember, that Robert Talbot (a man of our time, and which made a Commentarie vpon the Itinerarie of Antoninus Augustus) is of the opinion,
that is was called Shipwey, because it lay in the way to the Hauen, where the ships were wont to ride: And that hauen taketh he to be the same, whiche of Ptolome is caled , Nouus Portus: of Antoninus, Limanis,The Hauē Limene, & the Towne Lymne. of our Chroniclers Limene Mouthe, and interpreted by Leland to betoken, the mouthe of the riuer of Ro∣ther, whiche nowe in our time openeth into the Sea at Rye, but before at Winchelsey. His coniecture is grounded, partly (as you sée) vpon the Etymologie of the name, partly vpon the considera∣tion of some antiquities that be neare to the place, and partly also vpon the report of the countrie people, who holde fast ye same opinion, which they haue by tradition receaued from their Elders. In déede, the name, bothe in Greeke, and olde Eng∣lishe, whiche followethe the Gréeke, that is to say, Limen and Limene Mouthe, doth signifie a Hauen, wherof the Town of Lymne adioyning, and the whole Deanrie, or limit of the Ecclesiastical iurisdiction, in whiche it stan∣deth (for that also is called Lymne) by likelyhoode tooke the name. This Hauen (saithe he) stoode at the firste, vnder a highe Rocke in the Parishe of Lymne, vnder the whiche there was situate a strong Castle for the defence of the Porte, the ruines of whiche buyl∣ding be yet apparent to the eye. There is ex∣tant also, a faire paued cawsey, some myles of length, leading from Canterbury toward the same Porte: and they of the Towne enioye the Priuileges of the Fiue Portes, and doe reserue a brasen Horne, and a Mace, as ensignes of Castle Garde, and administration of Ius∣tice, in olde time exercised there. Finally they af∣firme, that (the water forsaking them by litle and litle) decay and solitude came at the length vpon the place. For, whereas at the first, ships were accustomed to
discharge at Lymne, the Sea afterwarde (either hinde∣red by the sandes, or not helped by the fresh water) shor∣tned his fludde, and caused the Merchaunts to vnlade at Westhithe: Neither did it yet ascend so highe any long season, but by continuall decreasings, withdrew it self, & at the length compelled them to lay their wares on land at this Hithe, whiche nowe standeth in déede, but yet without any great benefit of the Sea, for asmuche as at this day, the water floweth not to the Towne by halfe a myle and more. These coniectures, & reports, be resonable, but yet, as I am sure that they be vtterly at variaunce with that opinion, whiche Leland would plante of the present course of the Riuer of Rother (as wee will shewe in Newendene, when, wee shall come to the place) so am I in doubt also, what meanes may be found, to reconcile them with the relations of Asserus Meneuensis,The Riuer Limen, now Rother. Henrie Huntingdon, & our olde Saxon Chronicles, al which séeme to affirme, that Aple∣doreApledore. stoode vpon the water Lymen, whiche if it be so, then I sée not (the places considered) howe this Towne of Lymne could euer be situated vpō the same Riuer. Their woordes in effect, be these. In the yeare, after Christ, 893. the great armie of the Danes, lefte the East part of Fraunce, and came to Boloigne, & from thence with. 250. vessels sayled into the mouthe of the Riuer Lymen, in Kent, whiche floweth from the great woode that is called Andred: Thence they towed vp their boates foure miles into that wood from the mouthe of the Riuer, where they found a Castle halfe built, and a fewe Countrie men in it, all whiche together with the Village, they destroyed, and fortified at a place called A∣pultree. By which it may in deed at the first face séeme, that the Riuer Lymen led from Apledore to the Sea, & came not by Lymne: but yet that I may say somewhat
for Talbot, these woordes do not necessarily enforce so muche, for that they be not, that they towed their ships vp to Apledore, but foure miles to the woode, and buil∣ded at Apledore, whiche they might well doe, although they had come in at Hithe. To the whiche sense also the woordes of Asserus Meneuensis (whiche liued in that verie time) do giue somewhat the more place and libertie, whē he saith. They towed vp their ships, foure miles into the wood, where they threwe downe a cer∣taine Castle (halfe built, in whiche a fewe Churles of ye Countrie were placed) & the Towne also, & they raised an other stronger in a place called Apledore: For these words (an other in a place strōger called Apledore) séem to importe, that Apledore was not the Towne foure miles within the Riuers mouthe, whiche they pulled downe, but some other: Whiche, as for the distance it might happely be Lymne yt we haue in hand: so bicause there is no apparant memoriall of any suche course of the Riuer, I will not affirme it to haue béene the same, but referre the decision of the whole controuersie, to the learned and inquisitiue reader, that will bestowe his labour to trie, and trace out the very trueth.
Courtopstrete, commonly: but truly Court at Strete. THe enemie of mankinde, and Prince of darkenesse, Sathan the Deuill, percei∣uing that the glorious and bright shi∣ning beames of Gods holy truthe and gladsome Gospell, had pearced the mi∣stie thicke cloudes of ignorance, & shew∣ed (not onelie to the people of Germanie, but to the inha∣tants of this Islande also) the true way of their deliue∣raunce, from damnable errour, idolatrie, and Popishe superstition: And fearing, that if he did not nowe bestir him busily, he was in peril to lose infinite numbers of his subiects, and consequently, no small parte of that his spirituall kingdome, practized most carefully in all pla∣ces, with Monkes, Friars, Priestes, Nonnes, and the whole rablement of his Religious armie, for the holding of simple soules in wonted obedience, and the vpholding of his vsurped Empire in the accustomed glory, opinion, and reuerence. And for this purpose (amongst sundry fleightes, set to shewe in sundry places, about the latter end and declination of that his reigne) one was wrought by the Holy maide of Kent, in a Chappel at this towne, in deuise as malicious, in déede as mischeuous, and in discouerie as notorious, as any other whatsoeuer. But bycause the midst, and end of this Pageant, is yet fresh in the knowledge of many on liuing, & manifested to al men in bookes abroade: And for that the beginning thereof is knowne to verie fewe, and likely in time to be hid from all, if it be not by some way or other continued in mynde: I will laboure only to bewray the same, and in suche sorte, as the mainteiners thereof them selues
haue committed it to writing. For not long since, it chaunced me to sée a litle Pam∣phlet, conteining foure and twentie leaues, penned I wote not by what doltishe dreamer, printed by Robert Redman, Intituled: A marueilous woorke of late done at Court of Streete in Kent, and published (as it preten∣deth) to the deuout people of that time for their spiri∣tuall consolation: in whiche I founde the very first be∣ginning, to haue beene as followeth. About the time of Easter, in the seuentéenthe yeare of  the Reigne of King Henrie the eight, it happened a cer∣taine maiden named Elizabethe Barton,The holy Maide of Kent. then seruaunt to one Thomas Kob, of the Parishe of Aldington, twelue myles distant from Canterbury, to be touched with a great infirmitie in her body, whiche did ascend at diuers times vp into her throte, and swelled greatly: during the time whereof, she séemed to be in grieuous paine, in so muche as a man would haue thought, that she had suffred the panges of deathe it selfe, vntill the disease descended, and fell downe into the bodie a∣gaine. Thus she continued by fittes, the space of seuen mo∣nethes, and more, and at the laste, in the Moneth of No∣uember (at whiche time also a yong Childe of her Mais∣ters lay desperatly sicke in a cradle by her) she being vexed with the former disease, asked (with great pangs and groning) whether the Childe were yet departed this life, or noe: And when the women that attended vp∣on them bothe in their sickenesse, aunswered no, she re∣plied that it should anone: whiche woord was no sooner vttered, but the childe fetched a great sighe, and withall the soule departed out of the body. This her diuination and foretelling, was the first matter, that moued her hearers to admiration: But
after this, in sundry of her fits following, althoughe she seemed to the beholders to lye as still as a deade body (not mouing any part at all) as well in the traunces themselues, as after the pangs passed also, she told plain∣ly of diuers things done at the Church, and other places where she was not present, whiche neuerthelesse she séemed (by signes procéeding from her) most liuely to be∣holde (as it were) with her eye: She tolde also, of hea∣uen, hell, and purgatorie, and of the ioyes, and sorrowes, that sundry departed soules had, and suffered there: She spake frankly againste the corruption of manners and euill life: She exhorted repaire to the Churche, hearing of Masse, confession to Priestes, prayer to our Lady and Sainctes, and to be short, made in all pointes, confession and confirmation of the Popish Créede and Catechisme, and that so deuoutly and discretely (in the opiniō of mine authour) that he thought it not possible for her to speake in that manner. But amongst other things, this one was euer much in her mouthe, that She woulde goe home, and that she had béene at home, whereas (to the vnderstanding of the standers by) she had neuer béene from home, nor from the place where she laye: wherevpon being (in a tyme of another traunce) demaunded where That home was, she aunswered, Where she sawe and hearde the ioyes of heauen, where S. Michael wayed soules, where Sainct Peter carried the keyes, and where she her selfe had the companie of our Lady at Court of Strete, and had harte∣ly besought her to heale her disease, who also had com∣maunded her, to offer vnto her a Taper in her Chappell there, and to declare boldly to all Christian people, that our Lady of Court of Strete, had receiued her from the verie point of death: and that her pleasure was, that it shoulde be rong for a miracle.
Whiche wordes when her Maister heard, he sayde, that there were no Belles at that Chappell, wherevnto the Mayden answered nothing, but the voice that spake in her procéeded, saying, Our blessed Lady wil shew moe miracles there shortly, for if any departe this life sou∣dainly, or by mischance, in deadly sinne, if he be vowed to our Lady heartely, he shal be restored to life againe, to receiue shrift, and housell, and after to depart this worlde with Gods blessing. Besides this, she tolde them what meate the Heremite of that Chappell of our Lady at Court of Strete had to his supper, and many o∣ther things concerning him, whereat they maruailed greatly. And from that time forwarde, she resolued with her selfe, to goe to Court of Strete, and there to pray and of∣fer to our Lady, whiche also she did accordingly: And was there delayde of her cure for a certaine season, but yet (in the meane time) put in assured hope of recouerie. During whiche meane while, the fame of this maruey∣lous Mayden was so spread abroade, that it came to the eares of Warham the Archebishop of Canterbury, who directed thither Doctour Bocking, Master Hadleighe, and Barnes, thrée Monkes of Christes Churche in Can∣terbury, father Lewes, and his fellowe, two obseruants, his Officiall of Canterbury, and the Parson of Alding∣ton, with commission to examine the matter, and to in∣fourme him of the truthe. These men opposed her of the chiefe pointes of the Popishe beliefe, and finding her sounde therein, not only waded no further in the discouerie of the fraud, but gaue it great countenaunce, and ioyned with her in setting foorth of the same: So that at her nexte voyage to oure Lady of Court of Strete, she entered the Chappell with Aue Regina Caelorum, in pricksong, accōpanied with these
Commissioners, many Ladies, Gentlemen, and Gentle∣women of the best degrée, and thrée thousande persons besides, of the common sort of people. There fell she eftsones into a marueilous passion be∣fore the Image of our Lady, muche like a body diseased of the falling Euill, in the whiche she vttered, sundrye metricall and ryming speaches, tending to the worship of our Lady of Court of Strete (whose Chappell there, she wished to be better mainteined, and to be furnished with a dayly singing Priest) tending also to her owne bestowing in some Religious house, for suche (sayde she) was our Ladies pleasure, and to the aduauncement of the credite, of suche feyned miracles, as myne authour reporteth. This done and vnderstoode to the Arche∣bishop, she was by him appointed to S. Sepulcres, a house of Nonnes in Canterbury, where she laboured sundry times of her disease, and continued her wonted working of wonderous myracles, resorting oftē (by way of traūce onely) to our Lady of Court of Strete, who also ceassed not to shewe her selfe mightie in operation there, ligh∣ting candels without fire, moystning womens breastes that before were drye and wanted mylke, restoring all sortes of sicke to perfect healthe, reducing the deade to life againe, and finally doing all good, to al suche as were measured and vowed (as the manner was) vnto her at Court of Strete. Thus Elizabeth Barton was aduaunced from the condition of a base seruaunt, to the estate of a glorious Nonne. The Heremite of Court of Strete was enriched by dayly offring, S. Sepulchres got the possession of a Ho∣ly Mayden, God was blasphemed, the holy Virgine his mother mishonoured, the silly people were miserably mocked, The Bishops, Priestes, and Monkes, in the meane time with closed eyes wincking, and the Deuill
and his lymmes, with open mouthe laughing at it. And thus the matter stoode sundry yeares together, vn∣till at length, the question was moued about King Hen∣ries marriage, at which time this holy Mayden (not con∣teining her selfe within her former boundes of hypocri∣sie) stepped into this matter also, and feyned that she vnderstoode by reuelation, that if the King procéeded to the diuorce, he shoulde not be King of this Realme one moneth after: Wherevpon, her doings were once againe examined (not by men giuen ouer to beléeue illu∣sions, but by suche as had the prudent power of prouing spirites) and in the ende her dissimulation was deciphe∣red, her Popishe comforters were bewrayed, the decei∣ued people were well satisfied, these daungerous decei∣uers were worthely executed, and the Deuill their Maister was quite and cleane confounded. The circumstances of all whiche doing, I doe of pur∣pose omit (knowing that it is in the statute of .25.Chap. 12. yeare of King Henrie the eight, and eche where else, in man∣ner, to be read, and thinking my selfe to haue per∣fourmed promise, in that I haue disclosed the first attemptes) and will nowe therefore make towardes Rumney.
Bylsington. AFter the deceasse of King Edwarde the thirde, and against the day of the Coro∣nation of King Richarde the seconde whiche succeeded him, Iohn the King of Castile and Lions, Duke of Lancaster, and Earle bothe of Leycester and Lin∣olne, clayming in the right of his Earldome of Leyce∣er, to be highe Seneschall (or Steward) at that solem∣itie, and thereby to haue the authoritie of hearing and determining of the claimes, of al such as by their tenure pretended to haue any office or fée at the Kings inthro∣nization, amongst other suites receiued a petition, exhi∣bited by Richarde then Earle of Arundale and Surrey, in whiche the same Earle claimed the office of chiefe Butler, and recognised him self ready to perfourme the same.Butler the Coronatiō. Wherevpon, foorthwith one Edmund Staple∣gate, exhibited another petition, and likewise made his claime to this effect. That whereas he, the sayde Ed∣mund helde of the King in chiefe, the Manor of Bylsing∣ton in Kent, by the seruice to be his Butler at the Coro∣nation, as plainely appeared in the booke of Fées and Sericancies in the Exchequer: And whereas also by reason of that tenure, the late King Edwarde the thirde had both seised the landes of that petitioner (for so much as he was in his minoritie, at the time of the death of Edmund Staplegate his father) and had also committed the custodie of his body to one Iefferay Chawsier (to whō he payde. 104. l. for the same) he nowe proffered to doe that seruice, and praied to be admitted to the office ther∣of, with alowance of the fées that belonged therevnto. These claimes and the replies also, bothe of the Earle,
and of Staplegate, being hearde and considered, It was then order (partly for the shortnesse of the time, whiche would not permit a full examination of the matter, and partly bycause that on the Earles side it was proued, that his auncestors had béene in possession of that office, after the alienation of the Manor of Bylsington, where∣as on the other part it appeared not, that the auncestors of Staplegate had euer executed the same) that (for the present Coronation) the Earle shoulde be receiued, and the right of Staplegate, and all others shoulde be neuer∣thelesse to them saued. Thus muche of the Manor of Bylsington, (whiche lyeth here on the right hande) I thought méete to impart with you, to occupy vs withall in our way to Rumney:Pryorie at Bylsington. for as touching the Pryorie that there was, althoughe I suppose it to haue begon by the liberalitie of some of the Earles of Arundale, yet can I assure you of nothing touching it, saue onely of the yearely value, whiche you shall finde in the Particular of this shyre, amongst the rest of the suppressed houses.
Rumney, called in Saxon, Rumen ea; that is to say, The large watrie place, or Marishe: It is written in the Records corruptly, Rume∣nal, and Ro∣mual. THE participation of like Priuilege, might wel haue moued me to haue pla∣ced the Portes together, but the purpose of myne order already taken, calleth me another way, and byndeth me to prose∣cute them, as they lye in order of my iourney. There be in Kent therfore, two townes of this name, the Olde and the New Rumney, as touching the latter whereof I minde not to speake, hauing not hitherto founde eyther in Recorde or Hystorie, any thing pertai∣ning therevnto: but that little whiche I haue to say, must be of olde Rumney, whiche was long since a prin∣cipal Port, and giueth cause of name to the new towne, as it selfe first tooke it, of the large leuell, and territorie of Marishe grounde that is adioyning. This Towne (sayth the Recorde of Domesday) was of the possession of one Robert Rumney, and holden of Odo (then Bishop of Borieux, Earle of Kent, and bro∣ther to King William the Conquerour) in the which the same Robert had thirteene Burgesses, who for their seruice at the Sea, were acquitted of all exactions, and custome of charge, excepte fellonie, breache of the peace, and forstalling. It was sometyme a good, sure, and commodious Hauen, where many ves∣sels
vsed to lye at Roade: For Henrie (the Arche∣deacon  of Huntingdon) maketh report, that at suche time as Godwine (Earle of Kent) and his Sonnes were exiled the Realme (vpon suche cause of displeasure, as hathe alreadie appeared in Douer) they armed vessels to the Sea, and sought by disturbing the quiet of the people, to compell the King to their reuocation: And therfore, (among sundry other harmes that they did on the Coast of this Shyre) they entred the hauen at Rum∣ney, and lead away all suche shippes, as they found in the Harborow. Thomas BecketThomas Becket. (the Archebishop) hauing by fro∣ward  disobedience and stuborne pertinacitie, prouoked King Henrie the second to indignation against him, and fearing to abide the triall of ordinarie Iustice at home, determined to appeale to the Popes fauour at Rome, for whiche purpose he secretly tooke boate at Rumney, minding to haue escaped ouer: but he was driuen backe by a contrary wynde, and so compelled to land againste his will. The vnderstanding of whiche matter,The Popes authoritie was aboli∣shed in Eng¦land, in the time of King Hen∣rie the se∣cond. so ex∣asperated the King against him, that foorthwith he sea∣sed his goods, and gaue commaundement by his writte to the Sheriffes of all coastes, to make arrest of al such, as for any cause prouoked to the Pope. He caused al∣so his subiectes (from twentie yeares of age vpward) through out the whole Realme, to renounce by othe, all wonted obedience to the Sée of Rome, and sollicited ear∣nestly the Emperour Frederic, and Lewes the Frenche King, to haue ioyned with him in deposing Pope Alex∣ander, for that he so commonly receaued runnegates, and suche as rebelled against their lawfull Princes. But suche was eyther the enimitie of Lewes the Frenche King, againste King Henrie the second, or his dull sight in discerning the profit of the whole Christian
common weale, that he refused to assist the other twain, by meanes whereof, both Frederic the Emperour, was afterward compelled to yéelde him to the Pope, & King Henrie the second glad (withall submission) to reconcile himselfe to the Archebishops fauour. Rumney MarsheRumney Marhe. is famous throughout the Realme, as wel for the fertilitie & quantitie of the soile & leuell, as also for the auncient and holesome ordinances there vsed, for the preseruation and maintenance of ye bankes, and walles, against the rage of the Sea. It conteineth (as by due computation it may ap∣peare) 24000. Acres: For the taxation of Rumney Marshe onely (not accompting Walland Marshe, Guil∣ford Marshe. &c. amounteth to 50. pounds, after the rate of one halfe peny the Acre) and it is at this day gouerned by certaine lawes, made by one Henrie Bathe, a Iustice and Commissioner for that purpose in the time of King Henrie the third. Of whiche his statutes, experi∣ence in time hath begotten suche allowance, and liking, that it was afterward not onely ordered, that all the lowe groundes betwéene Tanet in Kent, and Pemsey in Sussex, should be guided by the same: But they are also nowe become a paterne, and exemplar to all the like places of the whole Realme, to be gouerned by. The place is not muche inhabited, bycause it is Hyeme malus, Aestate molestus, Nunquam bonus, Euil in Winter, grie∣uous in Sommer, and neuer good. As Hesiodus (ye olde Poet) somtime saied of the Countrie where his Father dwelt. And therefore, very reasonable is their con∣ceite,The three steppes of Kent. whiche doe imagine, that Kent hathe thrée steps, or degrées, of whiche the first (say they) offereth Wealth without healthe, the second giueth bothe Wealth and healthe, and the third afoordeth healthe onely, and no Wealthe. For, if a man, minding to passe through
Kent toward London, should arriue, and make his first step on land in Rumney Marshe, he shall rather finde good grasse vnder foote, then holesome Aire aboue the head: againe, if he step ouer the Hylles, and come into the Weald, he shall haue at once the commodities, bothe Caeli, & Soli, of the Aire, and the Earth: But if he leaue that, and climbe the next step of hilles, that are betwéene him, and London, he shall haue woode, and corne, for his wealthe, and (toward the increase of his healthe) if he séeke, he shal finde, Famem in agro lapidoso, a good stomake in the stonie field. No marueile it is therefore, if Rumney Marshe be not thicke peopled, séeing most men be yet still of Porcius Cato his minde, who helde them starke madde, that would dwell in an vnholsome Aire, were the soyle neuer so good and fertile. And this thing being well vnderstood to the estates of the Realme, they vsed in Parleamentes, to allure men hither, by exemp∣tion from paiment of Subsidies, and suche like charges, wherewith the inhabitants of other places be burde∣ned.
Neshe, called in Saxon (Nesse) vvhiche signifieth a Nebbe, or nose of the land, extended into the Sea. THis Cape lyeth in Walland Marshe. Southe from Rumney, and is of the number of those places, that Earle Godwine aflicted in the time of his banishment: from hence he passed toward Londō, and there (by the help of his confederates) shewed suche an assemblie, that the Bishops, and Noble men (for verie feare) became suters to the King for his peace, and in the ende procured it. Before this Neshe, lyeth a flatte into the Sea, threat∣ning great daunger to vnaduised Saylers. And nowe hauing thus viewed suche places a long the Sea shoare, as auncient Hystories haue put me in remembraunce of: I might readely take occasion, bothe to recommend vnto you, the vigilant studie of our Aun∣cestors, in prouiding for the defence of the Sea Coastes, and withall shewe you a President or two of theirs, conteining the assesse of suche particular Watche and Warde, as they vsed there in the Reigne of King Ed∣ward the third, in whose time also it was first ordered, that Beacons in this Countrie should haue their pitche pots, and that they should be no longer made of wood∣stackes or piles, as they be yet in Wilshire, and else∣where. But because those assesses were not perma∣nent, and alwaies alike (as not growing by reason of any tenure) but arbitrable from time to time, at the discre∣tion of suche, as it liked the Prince to set ouer the Coun∣trie in time, of warres, And for that also we at this day
(God be thanked therfore) haue besides the like watche∣full indeuour of our present gouernours, sundrie stan∣ding platformes (as you haue séene) erected to the very end, & mainteined at the continual charge of the Prince, I will not here stand vpō that matter, but forsaking the shore, betake me Northward to passe along the Riuer Rother, whiche diuideth this Shyre from Sussex:The order of this de∣scription. where after that I shall haue shewed you Apledore, Stone, & Newenden, I wil pearce through the Weald, to Medwey, and so laboure to perfourme the rest of my purpose
Apledore, in Saxon Apul∣tre, in Latine, Malus, that is, an Apletree. IN the time of King Alfred, that great swarme of the Danes whiche annoyed this Realme, and found not here wher∣with to satisfie the hungrie gut of their rauenous appetite, brake their compa∣nie into twaine: whereof the one passed into Fraunce, vnder the conducte of Hasten, and the o∣ther remained here vnder the charge of Guthrune. The Danes doe spoile, Fraunce, & England, at one time.This Hasten with his company, landed in Pontein, ranged ouer al Picardie, Normandie, Angeon, Poieton and passed ouer Loire, euen to Orleance, killing, bur∣ning, and spoiling whatsoeuer was in his way, in so muche that besides the pitifull butcherie committed vp∣on the people, and the inestimable bootie of their goods taken away, he consumed to ashes aboue nine hundreth religious houses, and Monasteries. This done, he sent away .250. of his ships laden with riche spoile, whiche came hither againe, entring into the Riuer of Rother, (thē called as Leland wéeneth, Lymen, at the mouth wherof olde Winchelsey sometime stoode) and by soudaine surprise tooke a small Castle, that was foure or fiue miles within the land, at Apultre (as some thinke) whiche bycause it was not of sufficient strength for their defence and conuerture, they abated to the ground, and raised a newe, either in the same place, or els not farre from it. Shortly after commethe Hasten himselfe also, with eightie saile more, and sailing vp the Riuer of Thamise, he fortifieth at Middleton nowe Mylton, ouer against
the Ile of Shepey: Whiche thing when King Alfred vnderstoode he, gathered his power with all haste, and marchinge into Kent, encamped betwéene the two hostes of his enemies, and did so beare him selfe, that in the end he constrained Hasten to desire peace, & to giue his owne othe and two of his Sonnes in hostage, for ob∣seruation of the same. But howe soone after, Hasten forgot his distresse, and how litle he estéemed either his owne trouth pligh∣ted, or the liues of his children so pledged, it shall ap∣peare when we come to fitte place for it: In the meane while I let you know, that the booke of Domesday speaking of Apuldore, laieth it in the hun∣dreth of Blackburne, and describeth it to conteine eight Carnes, or Ploughlandes.
Stone, in the Ile of Oxney, cal∣led in Saxon (Stana) that is, a stone, or as the Northren men yet speake, A Steane. IN the dayes of King Ethel¦dred, whē almost al parts of the Realme felt the Da∣nishe furie, this place also was by them pitieousely spoyled and brent, whiche done, they departed to Sandwiche, and did there, as hathe alreadie appea∣red.
Newendene, in Saxon, Niƿeldene, that is, The lowe or deepe valley: Leland calleth it Nouiodu∣num, whiche worde is framed out of the Saxon Niƿan∣dune, & soundeth as much as the Newe Hill. THE situation of Newendene is such, as it maye likely enoughe take the name, eyther of the déepe and bot∣tome (as I haue coniectured) or of the Hill and highe grounde, as Le∣land supposed. For it standeth in the valley, and yet clymeth the hill: So that the termination of the name may be Dene, or Dune, of the valley, or of the hill indifferently. How∣beit, I would easily yealde to Leland in this matter (the rather, bicause the common people of that quarter speak muche of a fayre Towne, that sometime stoode vpon the hill.) Sauing that bothe many places there aboutes are vpon like reason termed Denes, and that Iohn Bale (who had seene an auncient hystorie of the house it selfe) calleth it plainly Newendene. It is a frontier, and Marche Towne of this Shyre,The course of the Ry∣uer Lymen, nowe Ro∣ther. by reason that it lyeth vpon the Ryuer, that diuideth Kent and Sussex in sunder, whiche water Leland affir∣meth to be the same, that our auncient Chronicles call Lymene, though nowe of the common sorte, it is kno∣wen by the name of Rother only: It riseth (sayth he) at Argas hil in Sussex, neare to Waterdowne Forrest, and falleth to Rotherfield, thence to Hichingham, and so to Roberts bridge (corruptly so termed, for Rothersbridge) frō whence it descendeth to Bodyam Castell, to Newen∣dene,
Oxney, and Apultree, and soone after openeth into the Sea. The place is not notable for any other thing, then that it harboured the first Carmelite Fryars, that  euer were in this Realme. For about the midst of the reigne of King Henrie the thirde, that order came o∣uer the Sea,The first Carmelites in England. arriued in this lande, and made their neste at Newendene, whiche was before a wooddy, and solita∣rie place, and therefore (in common opinion) so much the more fit for Religious persons to inhabite. They of that profession were called Carmelites, of a hill in Syria, named Carmelus, where at the first, a sort of men that liued solitarily, were drawne into compa∣nies by one Ioan (the Patriarche of Ierusalem) in the dayes of King Henrie the firste: And after that com∣ming into Europe, were by Honorius Quartus, the Pope, appointed to a rule and order, by the name of the Bro∣thers of Mary, whiche title liked them selues so well, that they procured the Pope Vrbane the sixte, thrée yeares pardon, for all suche as would so call them: But certaine merry felowes, (seing their vanitie, and know∣ing how litle they were of kin to Mary the blessed Vir∣gine) called them the brothers of Mary Aegiptiaca, the harlot, whereat the Pope was so offended, that he plain∣ly pronounced them Heretikes for their labour. I read, that in the reigne of King Richard the seconde, one William Starnefeld was Pryor of this house, and that he committed to writing, the originall and beginning of the same, But hi∣therto (though to no great losse) it hath not chaun∣ced me to sée it.
The Weald, so named of  on worde peald, which signifieth A woodie countrie. The Britons called it Andred, of which worde the Sax∣ons called it AnSreSesleag, in Latine, Saltus An∣dred the chase of Andred. This latter name was imposed for the exceeding great∣nesse of it: for Anrhsed in Brit∣tish, is as much as great, or wonderfull. NOwe then we are come to the Weald of Kent, which (after the common opi∣nion of men of our time) is conteined within very streight and narrowe li∣mits, notwithstanding that in times paste, it was reputed of suche excéeding bignesse, that it was thought to extende into Sussex, Surrey, and Hamshyre, and of suche notable fame with∣all, that it left the name to that part of the Realme, tho∣rough which it passed: for it is manifest, by the auncient Saxon Chronicles, by Asserus Meneuensis, Henrie of Huntingdon, and almost all others of latter time, that beginning at Winchelsey in Sussex, it reached in length a hundreth and twentie myles towarde the West, and stretched thirtie myles in breadth towarde the Northe:Kent, why so called. And it is (in mine opinion) moste likely, that in respecte of this wood, that large portion of this Islande (whiche in Caesars time contained foure seuerall Kings) was called of the Bryttish word (Caine) Cancia in Latine, and now cōmonly Kent: Of which deriuation, one other infallible monumēt remaineth, euen til this day in Staffordshyre, where they yet call their great woodie Forrest, by the name of (Kanc) also.
On the edge of this wood (in Sussex) there stoode som∣time a Citie, called (after the same) Andredes Chester, whiche Ella (the founder of the Southsaxon kingdome) after that he had landed with his thrée sonnes, and cha∣sed the Brytons into the wood, raced, and made equall with the grounde: And in this wood, Sigbert, a King of Westsex, was done to death by this occasion following. About the yeare after the Incarnation of Christe,  seuen hundreth fiftie fiue, this Sigbert succéeded Cu∣thred his cousine in the kingdom of the Westsaxons, and was so puffed vp with the pride of his dominion (mighte¦ly enlarged by the prosperous successes of his predeces∣sour) that he gouerned without feare of God, or care of man, making lust his lawe, and mischiefe his minister: Wherevpon one Cumbra, (an Earle and Counselour) at the lamentable suite of the Commons, moued him to consideration: But Sigbert, disdaining to be directed, commaunded him most dispitefully to be slayne: Here∣at the Nobilitie and Commons were so muche offended, that assembling for the purpose, they with one assent depriued him of his crowne and dignitie, and he (fearing worse) fled into the wood, where after a season, a poore Hogheard (sometime seruaunt to Cumbra) founde him (in a place, which the Saxon Hystories cal Prifetsflode) and knowing him to be the same that had slaine his Ma∣ster, slue him also without all manner of mercy. The Weald was some∣time a wil∣dernesse.The Hystorie of this Hoghearde, presenteth to my minde, an opinion that some men mainteine touching this Weald: whiche is, that it was a great while toge∣ther in manner nothing else but a Desert, and waste Wildernesse, not planted with Townes, or peopled with men, as the outsides of the shyre were, but stoared and stuffed with heardes of Deare, and droues of Hogs onely: whiche conceit, though happely it may séeme to
many but a Paradoxe, yet in mine own fantasie, it wan∣teth not the féete of sounde reason to stande vpon: For, besides that a man shall reade in the Hystories of Can∣terbury and Rochester, sundry donations, in whiche there is mention onely of Pannage for Hogges in An∣dred, and of none other thing: I thinke verely that it cannot be shewed out of auncient Chronicles, that there is remayning in Weald of Kent, or Sussex, any one mo∣nument of great antiquitie. And truly this thing I my selfe haue obserued, in the auncient rentalles and sur∣viewes, of the possessions of Christes Church in Canter∣bury, that in the rehearsall of the olde rentes and serui∣ces, due by the Tenaunts dwelling without the Weald, the entrie is commonly after this forme, De redditu. vij.s̄.vj.This Be∣nerth, is the seruice whi∣ch the tenāt doth, with his Carte & Ploughe.d. De viginti ouis. j.d. De gallinis, & benerth. xvj.d. Summa viij.s̄.xj.d. quieti redditus. But when they come to the Tenauntes inhabiting within the Wealdy countrey, then the stile and Intitu∣ling, is first, Redditus de Walda, Then after that followeth, De tenementis Ioāis at Stile in loose. iij.s̄.iiij.d. Without shewing for what auncient seruice, for what manner of custome, or for what speciall cause, the same Rent grew due and payable, as in the first stile or entrie is expressed. Wherevpon I gather, that although the propertie of the Weald, was at the firste belonging to certaine kno∣wen owners, as wel as the rest of the countrey, yet was it not then alotted into Tenancies, nor Manured like
vnto the residue: But that euen as men were conten∣ted to inhabite it, and by péecemeale to rid it of the wood, and to breake it vp with the ploughe: So this latter rent (differing from the former, bothe in quantitie and qualitie, as being greater than the other, and yealded rather as recompence for fearme, then as a quiterent for any seruice) did long after by litle and litle, take his beginning. And hereout also springeth the diuersitie of opinions, touching the true limits of this Weald:The boun∣des of the Weald. Some men affirming it to beginne at one place, and some at ano∣ther, whereas (in my fantasie) there can be assigned, none other certaine boundes thereof, then suche as we haue before recited out of the auncient Hystories: For euen as in the olde time (being then a méere solitude, and on no part inhabited) it might easily be circumscribed: So since (being continually from time to time made lesse by industrie) it coulde not long haue any standing or permanent termes. And therefore, what so euer difference in common report there be, as touching the same, for as muche as it is nowe (thanked be God) in manner wholy replenished with people, a man maye more reasonably mainteine, that there is no Weald at all, then certainely pronounce, eyther where it begin∣neth, or maketh an ende. And yet if question in Lawe shoulde fortune to be moued, concerning the limits of the Weald, (as in déede it maye happen vpon the Statute of Woods, and otherwise) I am of opinion, that the same ought to be decided by the verdite of twelue men, grounded vpon the common reputation of the countrey there∣aboutes, and not by any other meanes. But bycause I wote not, howe the naturall and aun∣cient
inhabitantes of this countrey will beare it, that a young Nouesse, and lately adopted Denizen, shoulde thus boldely deter∣mine at their disputations, I will here (for a while) leaue the Weald, and go foorth to the residue.
Farley, in Saxon, farrlega, and may be interpreted, the place of the Boares, or Bulles. FArley, both the East and West, bor∣dering vpon Medwey, belonged som∣time to the Monkes of Christes Churche in Canterbury, to whom it yealded in the dayes of King Edward the Confessour, twelue hundreth Eeles for a yearely rent. This I exemplifie to the ende that it may appeare, that their re∣seruations (in auncient time) were as well in victuall, as in money, and that thereof the landes so leased, were called Fermes,Fermes why so ter∣med. of the Saxon worde, feormian; whiche is to féede, or yeald victuall. Whiche Etymologie of the worde, although it might suffice to the proofe of that matter, yet to the end, that my coniecture may haue the more force, I will ad vnto it the authoritie of Geruasius Tilberiensis, a learned man, that flourished in the dayes of King Henrie the seconde, who in his Dialogue, of the obseruations of the Exchequer, hath in effecte as fol∣loweth. Vntill the time (sayth he) of King Henrie the first, the Kings vsed not to receiue money of their lands, but victuals, for the necessarie prouision of their house. And towardes the payment of the Souldiours wages, and suche like charges, money was raysed out of the Ci∣ties and Castles, in whiche husbandrie and tillage was not exercised. But at the length, when as the King, being in the partes beyonde the Seas, néeded ready mo∣ney, towarde the furniture of his warres, and his sub∣iectes and farmers complayned, that they were grie∣uously troubled by cariage of victuals, into sundry parts
the Realme, farre distant from their dwelling houses. The King directed comission to certaine discrete per∣sons, whiche hauing regarde of the value of those victu∣als, should reduce them into reasonable summes of mo∣ney: The leueying of whiche summes, they appointed to the Sheriffe, taking ordre withall, that he should pay them at the Scale, or Beame, that is to say, that he should pay sixe pence ouer & aboue euery pound waight of money, because they thought, that the money in time would waxe so muche the woorse for the wearing. &c. Thus farre Geruasius. I am not ignorant, that Geruasius him selfe in an o∣ther place of that Booke, deriueth the woord (Ferme) from the Latine (Firma) Howbeit, for asmuche as I know assuredly, that the terme was vsed here amongst the Saxons, before the comming of the Conquerour, and that the Etymon therof, descended from the Saxon lan∣guage (whereof happely Geruasius being a Nor∣man, was not muche skilfull) I am as bolde to leaue his opinion for the deriuation, as I was readie to cleaue to his reporte for the Hysto∣rie.
Maidstone, contractly for Med∣weys Towne: in Saxon MeSƿegestun, that is, the Towne vpon Medway: it is taken to be that whiche in Antoninus, is called Duropronis. One auncient Saxon boke, which I haue seene writeth it thus, Maegþanstane, whiche is as muche to say, as the mightie, or strong stone: a name (belike) giuen for the Quarrey of hard stone there. THe name of this Towne (being fra∣med, as the moste part thinke, out of the name of the water) might ease∣ly moue a man to iudge, that it had béen long since the Principall towne vpon the Riuer whereon it is situa∣ted: The rather for that the Saxons (in imposing the names of their chiefe places) vsed to bo∣rowe (for the moste parte) the names of the waters ad∣ioyning,Townes named of the Riuers. as Colchester was so by them called, of the wa∣ter Colne: Ciceter (or rather Cyrenchester) of the wa∣ter Cyren, in Latine Corinius: Donchaster of the Riuer of Done: Lyncolne of Lindis: and (to come to our owne Shyre) Eilesford, of Eile, Dartford of Darent, Crayford, of Cray, and suche other. Howebeit, for asmuche as I finde not this place, a∣boue once named in any auncient hystorie, and but sel∣dome mentioned in any Recordes that I haue séene, I dare not pronounce it of any great antiquitie, but speak
chiefly of that whiche it hathe gotten within the com∣passe of late memorie. In the time of King Edward the sixt therefore, this Towne was incorporated, and endowed with sundrie liberties, all whiche soone after it forfeited by ioyning in a Rebellion moued within this Shyre, vnder the Reigne of Queene Marie. Neuerthelesse, of late time the Quéenes Maiestie (that nowe is) of her great clemencie, hathe not onely restoared to the Towne the former incorporation, but endowed it also with great Priuilege, appaireling the Maior with the authoritie of a Iustice of the Peace, exempting the Townesmen from forreigne Sessions, and creating the Towne it selfe a Boroughe, enabled to haue voice in Parleament. In it were foure principall ornamentes of building, the College, the Bishops Palaice, the house of the Brothers of Corpus Christi, and the Bridge:The Col∣lege. Of whiche the first, was built by Boniface (the Archebishop of Can∣terbury, and Vncle to Eleonor, the wife of King Henrie the third) to the honour of Peter, Paule, and Saint Tho∣mas (the Martyr, as they would haue it) and endowed  with great possessions, by the name of an Hospitall, but commonly termed the newe woorke. This had not stoode fully a hundreth and fourtie yeares, but that William Courtney (a successour in that Sée, and a No∣ble man, as the other was) pulled it downe, and erecting a newe, after his owne pleasure, gayned thereby the  name of a founder, and called it, a College of Secular Priestes. The Palaice, that yet standeth,The Palaic was begonne by Iohn Vfford, the Archebishop, but for as much as he died, before he had brought the worke to ye midst, Simon Islepe (ye next in successiō sauing one) took this matter in hand, & not onely pulled downe a house of the Bishops
which had long before stode at Wrotham, but also char∣ged his whole Prouince with a tenth to accomplishe it.  I finde in a Recorde, that Thomas Arundell (an other Bishop of the same Sée) foūded a Chaunterie at Maid∣ston,The Schole which whether it be the same, that was sometime called the house of the Brothers, and but lately conuer∣ted by the Townesmen into a Frée schoole, or no, I will not boldely affirme, but I thinke it rather so, then other¦wise. Of the Bridge I finde no beginning, but I sus∣pect, that it rose by the Archebishops, whiche were not onely owners of the Palaice hard by, as you sée, but Lords and Patrones of the whole Towne, and Church also. The Riuer of Medway and wherof it tooke the name.And thus muche onely of the Town: as touching the Riuer of Medwey, it séemeth to haue beene so named, either because it stood in the midle of the Kentish King∣dome, or els for that it ranne midde betwéene the two Bishopricks: For the woord (Midƿeg) signifieth no∣thing els, but the Midway as (Middeg) dothe noone, or Midday, onlesse happely some man would rather haue it called (Medpoeg) bicause of the meddowe that it maketh all along the course of the same. This Riuer is increased by the foure principall Brookes that runne into it, whereof (to beginne at the West) the first springeth about Crowherst in Surrey (not farre from the head of Darent) it falleth to Eton∣bridge, and taking in the way Heuer, Penshreste, and Tunbridge, ioyneth with the second at Yealding. The second ariseth at Blackbrooks in Waterdown forest, not fully a mile from Eredge, the Lord Aburgen∣nies house, and commeth to Beyham, to Lamberhirst streete, and to a place in Scotney ground, called litle Sus∣sex, where it méeteth with a small brooke called Beaul, (that springeth at Tishirst thrée miles of, and giueth the
name to Beauldbridge) from whence they ioyne in iour∣ney to Horsmondon and Merden, and there mingling with the third, they runne altogether to Yalding. The third Brooke taketh beginning aboute Greate Charte, and descendeth to Hedcorne, Stilebridge, and Merden. The fourthe, and last, breaketh out of the ground at Lineham, washeth the Castle of Ledes, a litle from whence it receaueth the small water of Holingburne, & in a companie of the same passeth toward Maidstone: At whiche place (as I thinke) the name of Medwey, first beginneth, the rather, bycause it hathe there receaued all his helpes, and crossing the Shyre, as it were in the midst, laboureth from thence in one entier Chanel to finde out the Sea.The Riuer Aile, or Eile For otherwise the Riuer it selfe is properly called Egle, or, Eyle, of whiche bothe the Towne of Ailesford, and the Castle of Alington (or ra∣ther Eylington) doe take their names. If I faile in this deriuation, the fault (for the firste part) is his that made the Chart of this Shyre, & then the follie is mine that followe him, but the trueth not∣withstanding is easily to be found out, by any man that wil make inuestigation and examine it, and our trespasse also herein more veniall, for that we go not about to shadowe it.
Piccendene Hothe, commonly, but aunciently written Pinenden, of Pi∣nian, to punishe: and so it soun∣deth the place of Ex∣ecution, or punish∣ment. The name of Harlot, whereof it beganne.RObert, ye Duke of Normandie, had issue by a Concubine (whose name, as the Annales of S. Augustine reporte, was Harlothe, and after whom, as I coniecture, suche incon∣tinent women haue euer since béen called Harlots) thrée Sonnes, that is to say, William that afterward subdued this Realm, Robert, that was created Earle of Moretone, and Odo that was first consecrated Bishop of Baieux, then Earle of Kent, and lastly Lieutenaunt, or Vicegerent of this whole Realme, vnder William his Brother. Odo the Earle of Kent.Robert, was reputed a man of small courage, wise∣dome, and learning, and therefore passed his time in glo∣riously: But Odo, was found to be of nature so bu∣sie, gréedie, and ambitious, that he moued many Trage∣dies within this Realme, and was in the end throwen from the Stage, and driuen into Normandie, as hereaf∣ter in fitte place shal be more amply declared. In the meane while, for this present place, and purpose, I finde that during his aboade in Kent,The aunci∣ent manner of the triall of right. he had so incroched vp∣on the landes and Priuileges of the Archebishopricke of Canterbury, and Bishopricke of Rochester, that Lan∣franc (being promoted to that Sée of dignitie, and fin∣ding the want) complained to the King, and obteined,
yt with his good pleasure they might make triall of their right with him. To the which end also, the same King gaue commission to Goisfrid (then Bishop of Constance in Normandie) to represent his owne person, for hearing of the controuersie: caused Egelric the Bishop of Chi∣chester (an aged man, singularly commended for skill in the Lawes, and Customes of the Realme) to be brought thether in a Wagon, for his assistance in Counsell, com∣maunded Haymo (the Sheriffe of Kent) to summon the whole Countie to giue in euidence: and charged Odo his brother to be present, at suche time and place, as should be notified vnto him. Pinnendene Heathe (ly∣ing almost in the midst of the Shyre, and therefore very indifferent for the assembly of the whole Countie) was the appointed place, and therevnto not onely the whole number of the moste expert men of this Shyre, but of sundrie other Countries also, came in great frequencie, and spent thrée whole dayes in debate of these Bishops controuersies, concluding in the end, that Lanfranc, and the Bishop of Rochester should be restored to the posses∣sion of Detling, Stoce, Preston, Danitune, and sundry o∣ther landes, that Odo had withholden: And that ney∣ther the Earle of Kent, nor the King him selfe had right to claime any thing in any the lands of the Archebishop, sauing only these thrée customes, whiche concerne the Kings highe waies that leade from one citie to an other: that is to say: That if any of the Archebishops te∣naunts should digge in suche a highe way, or fell a trée crosse the same, to the hinderaunce of common passage, and be taken with the manner, or conuinced thereof by Lawe, hee should make amendes to the King there∣fore: And likewise when hee did committe bloudsheade, manslaughter, or any other criminall offence in suche
were deprehended doing the fault, that the amēds ther∣of belonged to the King also: but in this latter case, if he were not taken with the manner, but departed without pledge taken of him, that then the trial and the amends perteined to the Archebishop him self, and that the King had not to medle therewith. On the otherside also they agréed, that the Archebishop had many Priuile∣ges throughout all the Landes of the King, and of the Earle, as namely, the amerciament of bloudshed from suche time as they ceasse to say Alleluia in the Churche seruice, till the Octaues of Easter: the whiche howe long it is, let them sée whiche can turne the Pie and the Por∣tuse: and at the least the one half of euerie amerciamēt, due for the vnlawfull begetting of children, commonly called CySƿite, whiche last thing, I do the rather note, to the end that it may appeare,The Clear∣gie haue in croched vp∣on the Prince, in the punish∣ment of adulterie. that in those dayes the Bishops had not wholy gotten into their hands, the cor∣rection of adulterie and fornication, whiche of latter times they haue chalenged from the Laitie, with suche pertinacie: and whiche they haue punished (bothe in the Laitie, and clergie) with suche lenitie, that not onely the Princes commoditie is thereby greatly decreased, but also incontinencie in his subiects intollerably augmen∣ted. Neither is it to be proued by this testimonie only, that suche was the order in olde time, but by the booke of Domesday it selfe also, where it is plainly said. De adulterio Rex habebit hominem, Archiepiscopus mulie∣rem. In case of adulterie, the King shall haue the man, & the Archebishop the woman. &c. But to returne to Pinnendene: the commoditie of the situation it selfe, and the example of this notable assemblie, haue béen ye cause, that not only the Sheriffes vse to holde their Countie Courtes, but also to appoint the méeting for choise of Knights to ye Parleament, most cōmōly at this place.
Boxley, may take the name eyther of the Saxon word (boxeleage) for the store of Box∣trees that peraduenture sometime grewe there, or of (bucesleag) whiche is as muche to say, as a place lying in Vmbelico, in the midst, or Nauell of the Shyre, as in deede this Box∣ley dothe. AS touching the foundation of Boxley Abbay,Abbaies do beget one another. I finde an obscure note in aun∣cient Chronicles of S. Wereburges in Chester, where it is thus reported,  Anno, 1146. fundata est Boxleia in Can∣cia, filia Clareuallis propria. Whiche I call obscure, bycause it appeareth not to me by the word (filia) whether it be ment, that Boxley were erected by the liberalitie of the Monasterie of Clareualley, or else instituted onely after the possession, rule, and order of the same. For the like notes I finde in the same Chro∣nicle of diuers other houses within England, to whiche the same Monasterie of Clareuale (and others also) were like good mothers: and amongst the rest, that not many yeares after, this Monasterie of Boxley it selfe was de∣liuered of suche another spirituall childe, called the Ab∣bay of Robertsbridge in Sussex. Neuerthelesse, I make coniecture, that the authour ment by (filia) nothing else, but that one Abbay eyther furthered by exhortation the building of another, or else furnished it after the building with Monkes of her own broode: And for more likelyhoode that this shoulde be his minde, Heare (I pray you) what he sayth in another place, Comes Cornubiae fundauit Hayles, filiam Belliloci in
Anglia, whiche his wordes, distinguishe plainely be∣twéene the founder that bare the charge of the buyl∣ding, and the Abbay, after the order and patterne wher∣of it was instituted. But leauing to comment any longer vpon that doubtfull texte, I will take to witnesse the Chronicles of Rochester, whiche (putting the mat∣ter out of doubt) saye plainely, that one William de Ipre (a noble man, and Lieuetenant to King Stephan, in his warres againste Maude the Empresse) founded the Abbay of Boxley, and planted it with a Couent of white Monkes. And so haue you at once, the name of the  Authour, the time of the foundation, and the rule of the profession, at Boxley: wherevnto if you shall adde the yearely value (whiche I reade in the Recorde to haue béene two hundreth and foure poundes) you haue all that I finde written concerning the same. But yet if I shoulde thus leaue Boxley, the fauourers of false and feyned Religion, woulde laughe in their sléeues, and the followers of Gods trueth might iustly crye out, and blame me. For, it is yet freshe in mynde to bothe sides, and shall (I doubte not) to the profite of the one, be con∣tinued in perpetuall memorie to all posteritie, by what notable imposture, fraud, Iuggling, and Legierdemain, the sillie lambes of Gods flocke were (not long since) seduced by the false Romishe Foxes at this Abbay. The manner whereof, I will set downe in suche sorte onely, as the same was sometime by them selues publi∣shed in printe (as it is sure) for their estimation and cre∣dite, and yet remayneth déepely imprinted in the mynds and memories of many on liue, to their euerlasting re∣proche, shame, and confusion. The vngra∣tions Rood of Grace.It chaunced (as the tale is) that vpon a time, a cunning Carpenter of our coutrey, was taken pry∣soner
in the warres betwéene vs and Fraunce, who (wanting otherwise to satisfie for his raunsome, and hauing good leysure to deuise for his deliueraunce) thought it best to attempt some curious enterprise, within the compasse of his owne Art and skill, to make him selfe some money withall: And therefore, getting together fit matter for his purpose, he compacted of wood wyer, paste, and paper, a Roode of suche exquisite arte, and workmanship, that it not onely matched in comely∣nesse, and due proportion of the partes, the beste of the common sorte: but in straunge motion, varietie of ge∣sture, and nimblenesse of ioyntes, passed all other that before had béene séene: the same being able to bowe downe, and lift vp it selfe, to shake and stirre the handes and féete, to nod the heade, to rolle the eyes, to wagge the chappes, to bende the browes, and finally, to repre∣sent to the eye, bothe the proper motion of eche member of the bodye, and also a liuely, expresse, and significant shewe of a well contented, or displeased mynde, byting the lippe, and gathering a frowning, frowarde, and dis∣dainefull face, when it woulde pretende offence: and shewing a most mylde, amyable, and smyling cheare and countenaunce, when it woulde séeme to be well pleased. So that now it néeded not Prometheus fire, to make it a liuely man, but onely the helpe of the couetous Priestes of Bell, or the ayde of some craftie College of Monkes, to deifie and make it passe for a very God. This done, he made shifte for his libertie, came ouer into the Realme, of purpose to vtter his Merchan∣dize, and layde the Image vpon the backe of a Iade, that he draue before him. Nowe when he was come so farre as to Rochester on his waye, he waxed
drye by reason of trauaile, and called at an alehouse for drinke to refreshe him, suffering his horse neuerthelesse to goe forwarde alone thorowe the Citie. This Iade was no sooner out of sight, but he missed the streight westerne way that his Maister intended to haue gone, and turning Southe, made a great pace to∣warde Boxley, and being driuen (as it were) by some di∣uine furie, neuer ceassed til he came at the Abbay church doore, where he so beate and bounced with his heeles, that diuers of the Monkes hearde the noyse, came to the place to know the cause, and (marueiling at the strange∣nesse of the thing) called the Abbat and his Couent to beholde it. These good men seing the horse so earnest, and dis∣cerning what he had on his backe, for doubt of deadly impietie opened the doore, whiche they had no sooner done, but the horse rushed in, and ranne (in great haste) to a piller (which was the verie place where this Image was afterwarde aduaunced) and there stopped him self, and stoode still. Nowe while the Monkes were busie to take off the loade, in commeth the Carpenter (that by great inquisition had followed) and he chalengeth his owne: The Monkes, lothe to loose so beneficiall a stray, at the first make some denyal, but afterwarde, being as∣sured by all signes that he was the very Proprietarie, they graunt him to take it with him. The carpenter then taketh the horse by the heade, and first assayeth to leade him out of the Churche, but he woulde not stirre for him: Then beateth he and striketh him, but the Iade was so restie and fast nayled, that he would not once re∣moue his foote from the piller: At the laste he taketh off the Image, thinking to haue carried it out by it self, and then to haue led the horse after, but that also cleaued so fast to the place, that notwithstanding all that euer he
and the Monkes also, (which at the length were conten∣ted for pities sake to helpe him) coulde doe, it woulde not be moued one inche from it, So that in the ende, parte∣ly of wearinesse in wrestling with it, and partely by persuasion of the Monkes, whiche were in loue with the Picture, and made him beléeue, that it was by God him selfe destinate to their house, the Carpenter was contented for a péece of money, to go his way and leaue the Roode behinde him. Thus you sée the generati∣on of this the great God of Boxley, comparable (I war∣rant you) to the creation of that olde beastly Idol Pria∣pus, of whiche the Poet sayth. Olim truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum. Cum faber incertus SCAMNVM, FACERETNE PRIAPVM, MALVIT ESSE DEVM: Deus inde ego furum. &c. A Figtree blocke sometime I was, A log vnmeete for vse: Til Caruer doubting with him selfe, WERT BEST MAKE PRIAPVS, OR ELSE A BENCHE? resolude at last To make a God of me: Thencefoorth a God I am, of birdes And theeues most drad, you see. But what? I shall not néede to report, howe leude∣ly these Monkes, to their owne enriching, and the spoyle of Gods people, abused this wooden God after they had thus gotten him, bycause a great sorte be yet on liue, that sawe the fraude openly detected at Paules Crosse, and others maye reade it disclosed in bookes extant, and commonly abroade. Neyther will I labour to com∣pare it throughout, with the Troian Palladium, whiche was a picture of woode, that coulde shake a speare, and rolle the eyes as liuely as this Roode did: and whiche falling from heauen, chose it self a place in the Temple,
as wisely as this Carpenters horse did: and had other∣wise so greate conuenience and agréement with this our Image, that a man woulde easily beléeue the deuice had béene taken from thence: But I will onely note, for my purpose, and the places sake, that euen as they fansied that Troy was vpholden by that Image, and that the taking of it awaye by Diomedes and Vlysses, brought destruction (by sentence of the Oracle) vpon their Citie: So the towne of Boxley (whiche stoode chiefly by the Abbay) was through the discouerie and defacing of this Idol, and another (wrought by Cranmer and Cromwel) according to the iust iudgement of God, hastened to vt∣ter decay and beggerie. S. Rūwald, and his mi∣racles.And nowe since I am falne into mention of that o∣ther Image, whiche was honoured at this place, I will not sticke to bestowe a fewe wordes for the detection thereof also, as well for that it was, as very an illusion as the former, as also for that the vse of them was so lincked together, that the one can not throughly be vn∣derstoode without the other: for this was the order. If you minded to haue benefit by the Roode of Grace, you ought firste to be shryuen of one of the Monkes: Then by lifting at this other Image (whiche was vn∣truly of the common sorte called Sainct Grumbald, for Sainct Rumwald) you shoulde make proofe whether you were in cleane life (as they called it) or no: and if you so founde your selfe, then was your waye prepared, and your offering acceptable before the Roode, if not, then it behoued you to be confessed of newe,For none might en∣ter into the Temple of Ceres in E∣leusis, but such as were innocent. for it was to be thought, that you had concealed somewhat from your ghostly Dad, and therefore not yet worthy to be admit∣ted Ad Sacra Eleusina. Nowe that you may knowe, howe this examination was to be made, you must vnderstande, that this Sainct
Rumwald was a preatie shorte picture of a Boy Sainct, standing in the same Churche, of it selfe so small, hollow, and light, that a childe of seuen yeares of age might easi∣ly lift it, and therefore of no moment at all, in the hands of suche persons as had offered frankly: But by meane of a pyn of wood, stricken through it into a poste (whiche a false knaue standing behinde, coulde put in, and pull out, at his pleasure) it was to suche as offered faintly, so fast and vnmoueable, that no force of hande coulde once stirre it: In so muche, as many times, it moued more laughter, then deuotion, to beholde a great lubber to lift at that in vayne, whiche a young boy or wenche had easily taken vp before him. I omit, that chaste Virgines, and honest marryed matrones, went oftentimes away with blushing faces, leauing (without cause) in the myndes of the lookers on, suspicion of vncleane life, and wanton behauiour: for feare of whiche note and villanie, women (of all other) stretched their purse strings, and sought by liberall of∣fering, to make Sainct Rumwalds man their good friend and Maister. But marke here (I beséeche you) their prettie policie in picking playne folkes purses. It was in vaine (as they persuaded) to presume to the Roode without shrifte, yea, and money lost there also, if you offer before you were in cleane life. And therefore, the matter was so handled, that without trebble oblation, (that is to say) first to the Confessour, then to Sainct Rumwald, and lastly to the Gracious Roode, the poore Pilgrimes coulde not assure them selues, of any good gayned by all their laboure: No more then suche as goe to Pa∣risgardein, the Bell Sauage, or some other suche common place, to beholde Beare bayting, Enterludes, or Fence playe, can account of any pleasant spectacle,
vnlesse they first paye one penny at the gate, another at the entrie of the Scaffolde, and the thirde for a quiet standing. I my selfe can not coniecture, what reason shoulde moue them, to make this Sainct Rumwald the Touchstone of cleane life and innocencie, vnlesse it be vpon occasion of a myracle that he did, in making two holy Priestes to lift a greate stone easily, whiche before diuers laye persons coulde not stirre, with all their strength and abilitie: Whiche thing (as also his whole life and death) to the ende that the tale shall want no part of due credite, I will shortly recite, as in the worke called Noua Legenda Angliae, I finde reported. A Pagan or vnchristened King of Northumberland, had married a Christian woman, daughter to Penda, the King of Midle Englande, who woulde not (by any  meanes (be known carnally of her husband, til such time as he had condescended to forsake Idolatrie, and to be∣come a Christian with her.The Nati∣uitie of S. Rumwald. The husband (with much to doe) consented to the condition, and she not long af∣ter waxed great with chylde, and as (vpon a time) they were ryding towarde their Father Kyng Pen∣da, she fell into trauayle of chylde byrthe, and was deliuered by the waye (in a faire medowe) at Sut∣ton of a man childe, whiche so soone as he was come out of his mothers belly, cried with a loude voice, thrée seueral times, Christianus sum, Christianus sum, Christianus sum. I am a Christian, I am a Christian, I am a Christi∣an. And not ceassing thus, made foorthwith plaine pro∣fession of his faith, desired to be baptised, chose his God∣fathers, named himselfe Rumwald, and with his finger directed the standers by to fetche him a great hollowe stone, that he would haue to be vsed for the Fonte: here∣vpon sondrie of the Kings seruaunts, assayed to haue brought the stone, but it was so farre aboue al their
strengthes, that they could not once moue it: when the Childe perceaued that, he commaūded the two Priestes (his appointed Godfathers) to goe and bring it, whiche they did foorthwith moste easily. This done he was Baptised, and within thrée dayes after (hauing in the meane while discoursed cunningly sundrie misteries of Popishe religion, and bequeathing his bodie to remaine at Sutton one yeare, at Brackley two, and at Buc∣kingham for euer after) his Spirit departed out of his bodie, & was by the hands of the Aungels conueied into heauen.
Mylton, in Saxon Midetun, so called of the situation, for it lyeth in the midst betweene two places, the termination of whose names be in tun also, that is to say, Newen∣tun, and Marstun. EVen at suche time as King Alfred diuided this Shyre into Lathes and hundrethes, the Towne of Midle∣ton, or Milton (as we now call it, by our common manner of contraction) was in his owne hands, & therefore set foorth in our auncient Hystories by the name and title of, Regia Villa de Midleton. In whiche respect (of like) he gaue to the hundreth, ye name of the same Towne, as of a place more eminent then any other within that precincte. Kemsley Towne, in the  Parishe of this Midleton, is the verie place, wherein the time and reigne of the same King Alfred,Kemsley Downe. Hasten the Dane (that so muche annoyed Fraunce) arriued and fortified, as we haue at ful disclosed in Apledore before. This Towne, continued of good estimation, vntill the Reigne of King Edward the Confessour, in whose dayes, and during the displeasure betwéene him, and Earle Godwine, suche as were of the deuotion of the  Earle at home, burned the Kinges house at Midleton, while he and his Sonnes abroad ransacked, herried and spoiled the skirts, and out sides, of the whole shyre be∣sides, after whiche time, I haue not read, neither is it likely, that the place was of any price, or estimation.
Sedingbourne, in Saxon Saetungbur∣na; that is, the Hamlet along the Bourne, or small Riuer. One interpreteth it, as if it were, Seething∣bourne, Riuus Feruiens, aut Bulliens, but howe likely let others see. FOr want of pertinent matter, tou∣ching either the beginning, in∣crease, or present estate of this  place, I am driuen to furnishe the roome with an impertinent Ser∣mon, that a Mytred Father of Ro∣chester long since bestowed vpon his auditorie there. In the time of King Henrie the third, and after the death of Richard, the Archebishop of Canterbury (surnamed the great) The Monkes of Christes Churche were determined to haue chosen for their Archebishop, Ralfe Nouille, the Bishop of Chi∣chester, and Chancellour to the King: but Gregorie the Pope, fearing that Ralfe would haue trauailed ear¦nestly for release of the tribute, whiche his innocent pre∣decessour had gained by King Iohns submission (for the storie sayeth, that Nouille was a good man, and true harted in his Countrie) bare the Monkes in hand, that he was rashe in woorde, and presumptious in acte, and therefore muche vnworthie of suche a dignitie: Neuerthelesse, bicause he would not séeme vtterly to infringe the libertie of their election, he gaue them frée licence to take any other man besides him. Where∣vpon, the Monkes agréed, and chose one Iohn, the Pry∣or of their owne house.
The Popish manner of preaching.Now, when this man should go to Rome (as the man∣ner was) for to buie his confirmation, Henrie (then Bi∣shop of Rochester) addressed himselfe to accompanie him to his Ship, and when they were come to this Towne, the Bishop of Rochester stept into the Pulpit, like a pretie man, and gaue the Auditorie, a clerkly collation, and Preachement (after many other thinges) he braste foorth into great ioye, (as a man that had béene rapt into the third Heuen) and said. Reioice in the Lord (my brethren all) and knowe ye assuredly, that now of late in one day, there departed out of purgatorie, Richard (sometime) King of England, Stephan Langton, the Archebishop of Canterbury, and a Chaplein of his, to goe to to the diuine Maiestie. And in that day, thereis∣sued no moe, but these three, out of the place of paines: and feare not to giue full and assured faith to these my woordes, for this thing hathe beene now the third time reuealed vnto me, and to another man, & that so plain∣ly, as from mine owne minde all suspicion of doubt is farre remoued. These fewe words, I haue in manner translated out of Thomas Rudburne, and Mathewe of Westminster, to the end that you might sée, with what wholesome and comfortable bread, the preaching Prelates of that time fedde their Auditories, and that you might hereby consi∣der, that, Si lux sit tenebrae, If the Bishops, the great tor∣ches of that time, were thus dimme, Ipsae tenebrae quan∣tae? What light was to be looked for at the litle candels, the soule Priestes, and séely Syr Iohns. Beléeue me, if his Fatherhood had not plainly confessed,Popish pur∣gatorie, is deriued out of Poetrie. that he came to the knowledge of this matter by reuelatiō, I would easily haue beléeued, that he had béene with Anchises in Hell, as Aeneas sometime was, where he learned, what soules should come next to life, and where he hard
the liuelyest description of Poetical, or Popish Purga∣torie, (for all is one) that is any where to be found. Whiche to the end that you may sée what agréement there is betwéene the olde and the newe Romanes, tou∣ching this article of religion, I will shewe it you, in a fewe of Virgils owne verses. Quin & supremo cum lumine vita reliquit, Non tamen omne malum miseris, nec funditus omnes Corporeae excedunt pestes, penitus{que} necesse est Multa diu concreta, modis inolescere miris. Ergo exercentur paenis, veterum{que} malorum Supplicia expendunt. Aliae panduntur inanes Suspensae ad ventos, alijs sub gurgite vasto Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni: Quis{que} suos patimur manes. Exinde per amplum Mittimur Elysium, & pauci laeta arua tenemus: Donec longa dies, perfecto temporis orbe, Concretam exemit labem, purum{que} reliquit Aetherium sensum, at{que} aurai simplicis ignem. Whiche Thomas Phaer translated after this manner. Moreouer, when their end of life, and light doth them forsake, Yet can they not their sinnes, nor so- rowes all (poore soules) of shake, Nor all contagious fleshly from them voides, but must of neede Muche things congendred long, by won- derous meanes at last out spread: Therefore they plagued beene, and for their former faultes and sinnes, Their sundrie paines they bide: some highe in aire doe hang on pinnes,
Some fleeting bene in floodes, and deepe in gulfes themselues they tyer, Till sinnes away be washt, or clen- sed cleane with purging syer. Eche one of vs our paenance here abide, that sent we bee To Paradise at last: wee fewe these fieldes of ioye do see. Till compasse long of time, by per- fect course hathe purged quite, Our former cloddred spots, and pure hathe left our Ghostly Sprite, And senses pure of soule, and sim- ple sparkes of heauenly light. Nowe therefore, if this Bishops Poetrie may be al∣lowed for diuinitie, me thinketh yt with great reason I may intreate, that not onely this woorke of Vir∣gils Aeneides, But Homers Iliades, Ouides Fastes, & Lucians Dialogues also, may be made Canonicall: for these al excell in suche kinde of fiction.
Tong Castle, or rather Thong Castle, in Saxon þƿangceastse, in Brittish Caerkerry, of (Thwang, and Karry) both whiche woords, signifie a Thong of leather. THe Brittish Chronicle, discoursing ye inuitation, arriuall, & interteinment of Hengist and Horsa, the Saxon cap¦taines, mentioneth, that among o∣ther deuises (practised for their owne establishmēt and securitie) they beg∣ged of King Vortiger, so muche land to fortifie vpon, as the hyde of a beast (cut into thonges) might incompasse, and that thereof the place should bee called Thongraster, or Thwangraster: after suche a like manner, as Dido (long since beguiling Hiarbas, the King of Lybia) builded the Castle Byrsa, conteining twentie and two furlonges in circuit, of whiche Virgil spake, saying. Mercati{que} solum, facti de nomine Byrsam, Taurino possint quantum circundare tergo. &c. They bought the soile, & Byrsa it cald, when first they did beginne, As muche as with a Bul hide cut, they could inclose within. But Saxo Grammaticus applieth this Act to the time of the Danes,Doncaster in the North Coū¦trie. affirming that one Iuarus (a Dane) obtei∣ned by this kinde of policie, at the handes of Etheldred, the Brother of Alfred to build a fort. And as these men agrée, not vpon the builder, so is there variance betwéen writtē storie, & cōmon spéeche, touching ye true place of ye building: for it should seem by Galfrid, Hector Boctius, &
Ric Cirencester, ye it was at Doncaster in the North Countrie, bicause they lay it in Lindsey, whiche now is extended no further thē to the North part of Lincolne shyre: But common opinion (conceaued vpon report, receaued of ye elders by tradition) chalengeth it to Tong Castle in this Shyre: Wherevnto if a man do adde, that both the first planting, and the chief abiding, of Hengist and Horsa, was in Kent, and adioyne thereto the autho∣ritie of Mathewe of Westminster: which writeth plain∣ly, that Aurelius Ambrose, the captaine of the Britons, prouoked Hengist to battaile at Tong in Kent, he shall haue cause, neither to falsifie the one opinion lightly, nor to faithe the other vnaduisedly. And as for mine owne opinion of Doncaster, (which is taken to be the same, that Ptolome calleth Camulo∣dunum) I thinke verely, that it was named of the wa∣ter Done, whereon it standethe and not of Thong, as some faine it. Whiche deriuation, whether it be not lesse violent, (and yet no lesse reasonable,) then the o∣ther, I dare refer to any resonable and indifferent Rea∣der. To this place therefore, of right belongeth the storie of King Vortigers Wassailing, whiche I haue al∣ready exemplified in the generall discourse of the aunci∣ent estate of this Countrie, and for that cause do thinke it more méete to referre you thi∣ther, then here to re∣peate it.
Tenham, in Saxon TynHam; that is to say, a Towne (or Hamlet) often houses, as Eightam, had the name of EaHtHam, a Hamlet (or Towne) of eight dwellings. AT Tenham was long since a mansion house, pertaining to the Sée of Canter∣bury,  where, in the time of King Iohn, Hubert the Archebishop departed this life, as Mathewe Parise reporteth, who addeth also, that when the King had in∣telligence of his death, he brast foorth into great ioy, and sayde, that he was neuer a King (in deede) before that houre. It séemeth, that he thought him selfe deliuered of a shrewe, but litle forsawe he that a shrewder shoulde suc∣céede in the roome, for if he had, he woulde rather haue prayed for the continuaunce of his life, then ioyed in the vnderstanding of his deathe. For after this Hubert, followed Stephan Langton, who brought vpon King Iohn suche a tempestious Sea of sorowfull trouble, that it caused him to make shipwracke, bothe of his honour, crowne, and life also: The storie hath appeared at large in Douer before, and therfore needeth not nowe eftsoones to be repeated.
Shepey, in Latine, Insula ouium, & Oninia, in Saxon, Sceapige, the Ile of Sheepe. SExburga (the wife of Ercombert, a King of Kent) folowing the ensample of Eanswide, the daughter of King Ethelbald) erected a Monastery of wo¦men  in the Ile of Shepey, called Min∣ster, whiche (in the late Iust, and ge∣nerall suppression) was founde to be of the yerely value of an hundreth and twentie pounds. This house, and the whole Ile was scourged by the Danes, whome I may well call (as Attila, the leader of the like people, called him self) Flagellum Dei, the whip or  flaile of God, thrée times within the space of twentie  yeares, and a litle more: Firste, by thirtie and fiue sayle of them, that arriued there and spoyled it: Secondly,  and thirdly, by the armies of them, that wintered their ships within it: Besides all whiche harmes, the follo∣wers of the Earle Godwine and his sonnes (in the time of their proscription) landed at Shepey, and harried it. It shoulde séeme by the dedication of the name, that this Ilande was long since greatly estéemed,The En∣glish shepe and wooll. eyther for the number of the Shéepe, or for the finenesse of the fléese, although auncient foreigne writers ascribe not muche to any parte of all Englande, and muche lesse to this place, eyther for the one respect, or for the other: But whether the Shéepe of this Realme were in price before the comming of the Saxons, or no, they be nowe (God be thanked therefore) worthy of great estimati∣on, bothe for the excéeding finenesse of the fléese (whiche
passeth all other in Europe at this daye, and is to be cōpared with the auncient delicate wooll of Tarentum, or the Golden Fleese of Colchos, it selfe) and for the aboundant store of flockes, so incresing euery where, that not only this litle Isle, whiche we haue nowe in hande, but the whole realme also, might rightly be cal∣led She∣pey.
Quinborowe, called in Latine, Regius Burgus, in Saxon, CyningburH, That is to say, The Kings Castle. King Hen∣ry the eight fortfieth his Realme.AT the West ende of Shepey, lyeth Quinborowe Castle, the occasion of the first building whereof, was this. King Edward the third, determining (aboute the thirtéenth yeare of his reigne) to make demaunde of his right to the Crowne of Fraunce, first quieted Scotland by force, then entered amitie with his neighbours of Holland, Seland, and Brabant, and last∣ly (fortifying at this place for defence of the Thamise) made expedition by Sea, and lande, againste the Frenche King, and moued warre that had long continu∣aunce, wherin, neuerthelesse after sundry discomfitures giuen, before Sluse, Cressey, Calaice, and Poitiers, he was in the ende, right honourably satisfied. During this building, William of Wickam (surnamed Perot) a man not so plentifully endowed with good lear∣ning, as aboundantly stored with Ecclesiasticall liuing,  (for he had nine hundreth poundes of yearely reuenue, fourtéene yeares together, and was afterwarde by de∣grées aduaunced to the kéeping, firste of the priuie, and then of the broade Seale) was Surueyour of the kings workes, whiche is the very cause (as I coniecture) that some haue ascribed to him the thanke of the building it selfe. This platforme was repayred by King Henrie the  eight, at suche time as he raised Blockhouses along the Sea coastes, for the causes already rehearsed in Dele.
Of Quinborowe, Leland sayth thus, Castrum Regius editum recipit Burgus, fulmina dira, & insulanos Tutos seruat, ab impetu vel omni. A Castle highe, and thundring shot, At Quinbrought is nowe plaste: Whiche keepeth safe the Ilanders, From euery spoyle and waste. The name is fallen (as you sée) by deprauation of speache from Kingesborowe, to Quinborowe: howbe∣it, the Etymologie is yet conserued, both in our ancient hystories, & in the style of the Court (or Lawday) there. I may adde, that in memorie of the first name, the Ferrie or passage from the Ile to the maine lande, is yet called The Kings ferrie also.
Feuersham, in Saxon fafresHam; AS it is very likely, that the Towne of Feuersham receiued the chiefe nourish∣ment of her increase from the Religi∣ous house: So there is no doubt, but that the place was somewhat of price long time before the building of that Abbay there. For it is to be séene, that King Ethelstane  helde a Parleament, and enacted certeine lawes at Fe∣uersham, about sixe hundreth and fortie yeares agoe: at which time (I thinke) it was some Manor house belong∣ing to the Prince, the rather, for that afterwarde King William the Conquerour (to whose handes at length it came) amongst other thinges, gaue the aduowson of the Church, to the Abbay of S. Augustines, and the Manor  it self to a Normane in recompence of seruice. But what time king Stephan had in purpose to build the Abbay, he recouered the Manor againe, by exchaunge made with  one William de Ipre (the founder of Boxley) for Lilly∣church: and raysing there a stately Monasterie (the tem∣poralties whereof did amount to a hundred fiftie & fiue poundes) he stored it with Cluniake Monkes. This house, was firste honoured with the buriall of  Adelicia the Quéene, his wife: Then with the Sepul∣ture of Eustachius his only sonne: and shortly after him  selfe also was there interred by them. I reade none o∣ther thing worthy remembraunce touching this place,  Saue that in the reigne of King Iohn, there brake out a great controuersie betwéene him and the Monkes of S. Augustines,Monkes do contend with the King force∣ably, touching the right of the Patronage of the Churche of Feuersham. For, notwithstanding that King William the Conquerour, had giuen it to the Ab∣bay  (as appeareth before) yet, there wanted not some (of whiche number Hubert the Archebishop was one)
that whispered King Iohn in the eare, that the right of the Aduouson was deuoluted vnto him: which thing he beléeuing, presented a Clarke to the Churche, and be∣sides commaunded by his writ, that his presentée should be admitted. The Abbat on ye other side withstoode him, & for the more sure enioying of his possession, not onely eiected the Kings Clarke, but also sent thither diuers of his Monkers to kéepe the Church by strong hand. When the King vnderstoode of that, he commaunded the She∣riffe of the Shyre, to leuie the power of his countie, and to restore his presentée: Which commaundement the officer endeuoured to put in execution accordingly: But suche was the courage of these holy hoorsons, that before the Shefiffe coulde bring it to passe, he was driuen to winne the Churche by assault, in the which he hurt and wounded diuers of them, and drewe and haled the reste out of the doores, by the haire and héeles. Nowe it chaunced that (at the same time) Iohn the Cardinall of Sainct Stephans, (the Popes Legate into Scotland) passed through this Realme, to whome (as he soiourned at Canterbury) the Monks made their mone: and he againe, both incouraged them to sende their Pry∣or to Rome for remedie, & furnished them with his own Letters, in commendation of their cause: In whiche, a∣mongst other things, he tolde the holy father Innocenti∣us plainly, that if he would suffer Monkes to be thus in∣treated, the Apostolique authoritie wold soone after be set at nought, not only in England, but in al other coun∣tries also. Here vpon the Pope sent out his commission, for the vnderstanding of the matter: but the Monks (be∣ing now better aduised) tooke a shorter way, and sending to the King two hundreth marks in a purse, and a faire Palfrey for his owne sadle, they bothe obteyned at his handes resitution of their right, & also wan him to be∣come
from thencefoorth their good Lord and Patrone. But here (I praye you) consider with me, whether these men be more likely to haue béen brought vp in the Schole of Christe, and Paule his Apostle (who teach, Ne resistatis malo: & vincatis bono malum) Or rather to haue drawne their diuinitie out of Terence Comedie, where the counsell is, Malumus nos prospicere, quam hunc vlcis∣ci accepta iniuria, yea, and out of the worste point of all Tullies Philosophie, where he permitteth, Lacessitis in∣iuria, inferre vim & iniuriam, seing they be so ready, not of euen ground onely, but before hande, not to aunswere, but to offer, force and violence, euen to Kings and Prin∣ces themselues. I wis they might haue taken a better lesson out of Terence him selfe, who aduiseth wise men, Consilio omnia prius experiri, quam armis, and therefore I pitie their beating so muche the lesse. But by this and suche other Monkishe partes of theirs, you may sée, Quid otium & ci∣bus faciat alienus.
Genlade, and Gladmouthe. BEda hathe mention of a water in Kent, running by Reculuers, whiche he calleth Genlade: This name was afterward sounded Yenlade, by the same misrule, that geard is nowe Yard, geoc Yoke, gyld Yeeld, gemen Yeomen, and suche other. Henrie of Huntingdon also reporteth, that King Edward (the Sonne of Alfred builded at Gladmouth: This place I coniecture to haue stoode at the mouthe of that Riuer, and thereof to haue béene called first Gen∣lademouthe, and aferward (by contraction, and corruption of speach) Glademouthe. For,The names of Townes framed out of the mouthes of Riuers. The cor∣ruption of our Eng∣lish speach. to com∣pound the name of a Towne, out of the mouthe of a Ri∣uer adioining, was most familiar with our auncestours: as the name Exmouthe was framed out of the Riuer Ex: Dartmouthe of the water Dert: Stourmouth in this Shyre, of Stowre, and such other like: And no lesse com∣mon with vs of later time is it, to corrupt (by contrac∣tion) the true names almoste of al places, but especially of so many of the same, as consisted at the first of thrée sillables, or aboue. For, of Medweys Towne, we make Maidstone, of Eglesford, Ailsford, of Ottanford Otford, of Seuen∣nocke Sennock, and so foorth infinitely bothe through∣out this Shire, and the whole Realme: and that so rude∣ly (in a great many) that hardly a man may know them to be the same: For Maildulphesbyrig we call Malmes∣bury, Eouesham Esham, and Hagustaldsham we cut of by the waste, and nickname it, Hexam: Neyther hath this our manner of abbreuiation, corrupted the names of townes contagion) almoste our whole speache & lan∣guage, calling that which in old time was Heofod; now Head, Kyning King, Hlaford Lord, Sunu Sonne, and in
numerable suche other, so that our spéech at this day (for the moste part) consisteth of wordes of one sillable. Whiche thing Erasmus obseruing, merily in his Eccle∣siast. Compareth the Englishe tongue to a Dogges bar∣king, that soundeth nothing els, but Baw, waw, waw in Monosillable. If this roueing arrow of mine own coniecture, haue missed the marke of Glademouth wherat I directed my shotte, yet will I pricke at Yenlade with an other out of the same quiuer, and happely go nearer it. Beda spea∣keth there of the Northeast mouth of the floud Genlade: whiche speache of his were ydle, if that water had none other mouthe but that one. And therefore, hauing read that the Northwest month of the same water, running betwéene Shepey & Hoo, is called Yenlade also (though our Statute bookes, misplacing some letters, name it corruptly Yendal) I suppose, that Yenlade is a name proper to the whole streame that passeth betwéene Shepey and the maine Land, hauing the two mouths, Eastswale and Westswale, well inough knowne.
Reculuers, in Saxon Raculf Myn∣ster; deriued (as I gesse) of the Brittish woord, Racor, that signifieth forward, for so it stan∣deth, toward the Sea. THe present estate of Reculuers, deser∣ueth not many words: As touching the antiquitie therefore, and beginning of the place, I read, first that Ethelbert, he first King of Kent, hauing placed Augustine at Canterbury, withdrewe himselfe to Reculuer, and there erected a Palaice for him self and his successours: Furthermore, that Ecg∣brighte, (the seuenth King of Kent, in succession after Hengist) gaue to one Bassa, the land at Reculuer,The Riuer called Wāt∣sume. to builde him a Mynster vpon, whiche stoode at the one side of the water. Wantsume, that ranne two sundrie ways into the Sea, and made Tanet an Iland: And final∣ly, that not long after the same time, one Brightwald  (being Abbat there) was aduaunced to the Archebi∣shopricke of Canterbury, & was the first o al the Saxō Nation, that aspired to that dignitie. In which behalf,  Reculuers, (how poore and simple soeuer otherwise) hath (as you sée) somewhat whereof to vaunt it selfe: As it may also, of the body of Ethelbert the second (a King of Kent) whiche (as the Annales of Saint Augustines re∣port) remaineth likewise interred there. Thus haue I walked about this whole Diocoese: now therefore let me cutte ouer to Watlingstreete,The order of this de∣scription. whiche I will vse for my way to Rochester, and tell you of the places that lye on eche side. But first, heare (I pray you) of Stouremouthe, and Wyngham, which be in my way to Watlingstreate.
Stouremouthe, in Latine, Ostium Sturae, that is to say, the mouth of the Riuer Stoure. KIng Alfred, hauing many times (and that with much losse, & more daūger) encountred his enemies the Danes, & finding that by reason of the sundrie swarmes of them, arriuing in diuers parts of his Realme at once, he was not able to repulse them beeing lan∣ded, he rigged vp a royall Nauie, and determined to kéep the highe Seas, hoping thereby either to beate them vp∣on the water, or to burne their vessels if they should for∣tune to arriue. Soone after this, it fortuned his Na∣uie  to meete with the Danish fléete at the mouth of the Riuer Stoure, where at the first enccunter, the Danes lost sixtéene saile of their ships: But, (as many times it falleth out, that securitie foloweth victory) so ye Kings armie kept no watch, by reason whereof the Danes ha∣uing repaired their forces, came freshly vpon the Eng∣lishe Mariners at vnwares, and finding them fast a sléepe, gaue them a great and bloudie ouerthrowe. The likenesse, or rather, the agréement, of the names, would leade a man to thinke, that the true place of this conflict, should be Stouremouthe in this Shyre, the ra∣ther for that it is deriued of ye mouth of the riuer Stoure and that by the circumstance of the storie it appeareth, that King Alfred was in Kent when he made determi∣nation of this iourney. Howbeit, he that shall aduisedly read the storie, as it is set downe by Asserus, shall confesse it to haue béen
in Eastangle, whiche conteined Norfolke and Suffolke, &c. And for the more certeinty, I take it to haue chaun∣ced at the same place, whiche we nowe call Harwiche Hauen. For that Riuer diuideth Essex from Suffolk, and not farre from the head therof in Essex, there stan∣deth a Towne yet called Sturmere, whiche (in my fanta∣sie) sufficiently mainteineth the knowledge of this mat∣ter. Thus muche I thought fitte to say of the name Stowremouth, least otherwise the Reader (whome I would kéepe within the limits of Kent) might be shipped in the boate of this errour, and be soudainly caried from me. Againe, it shall not be amisse (for the better vn∣derstanding of this selfe same Hystorie, penned by Hen∣rie Huntingdon) to note that in this place, he calleth the Danes, not Paganos, as in ye rest of his book he vseth, but by a strange name Wicingas, as the Saxon Chronicles, in report of the same matter, do terme thē: which word (I thinke) he tooke out of some Saxon Chronicle that he followed, and happely vnderstood not what it signified: For if he had, why should he not rather (since he wrote Latine) haue called them Piratas, as the woord in deede meaneth, and as Asserus in the rehersall of the same fight, had done before him. It may be,The decay of the olde Englishe tongue. that he was a Norman borne: but truly I suppose rather, that the Saxon speach was well nighe worne out of vre, in the reigne of King Stephan, (vnder whome he liued) seeing that euen immediatly after the comming in of the Con∣querour, it began to decline. For it is plaine, that the Normans at the very first entrie, laboured by al means, to supplant the English, and to plante their owne lan∣guage amongst vs: and for that purpose, they both gaue vs the lawes, and all manner of pastimes, in the French tongue, as he that will peruse the Lawes of the Con∣querour, and consider the termes of Hawking, Hun∣ting,
Tenise, Dice playe, and other disportes, shall easily perceaue: They reiected also, the Saxons Characters, & all that their wonted manner of writing, as writeth Ingulphus, the Abbat of Croyland (whiche came ouer with them) and as a man may yet sée in the booke of Domesday it self, which (notwithstanding that it was written within a few yeares, after the arriual of the Conquerour) yet being penned by Normans, it re∣teineth very few letters of the Saxon Alphabet. Thus farre by occasion of the water Stoure in Suffolke: as touching the course of our owne Riuer of the same cal∣ing (which bothe giueth the present name of Stou∣rey, & Stouremouthe, and the olde name to Canterbury, also) I will referre you wholy to the Map of this Shyre.
VVingham. BEsides the statelie,The Arche¦bishops were well housed. and Princelike Palaices at Canterbury, Maidstone Otford, Knoll, Croyden, and Lamb∣hythe, which the Archbishops of this Shyre kept in their handes, bothe to perfourme their set solemnities of housekeping, and to soiourne at, with their whole traines, when they traueiled toward the Court, and Parleament, or remained for busines about the same: they had also of auncient time diuers other Manor houses of lesse cost and capacitie, planted in di∣uers partes of this Countrie, in whiche they vsed to breathe themselues, after their great feasts and affaires finished, and to lodge at, when they trauailed the Coun∣trie to make their visitations. Of this number (a∣mongst other) were Foorde, Charte, Charing, Charte∣ham, Tenham, and this our Wingham: at the whiche, Baldwyne (the Archebishop in the Reigne of King Hen∣rie the second) lay, at suche time, as he had contention with his couent of Christes Church, for making a Chap∣pell at Hakington, as in fitte place you shall finde more largely disclosed. In the meane season, I will only tel you, that (as the Annales of Saint Augustines re∣porte) when two of his Monkes came to this house on horsbacke, in great hast to serue the processe of that suite vpon him, he receiued the Processe dutifully, but he cau∣sed them to dismount, and to walke home on foote faire and softly. At this house also,Prouision of armour King Edward the first rested for a seasō, with Robert of Winchelsey (then newly made Archebishop) whilest he tooke order for the defence of the Sea Coastes, charging bothe the spiritu∣altie and commons with horse and armour, according to the quantities of their liuelyhoodes and possessions.
And here was he aduertised, that one of his familie (called Syr Thomas Turbeuille, whom hee had sent into Gascoine with commission) was fallen into ye hands of the French King his enemie, and imprisoned in Paris, and that for his deliuerance he had conspired with the Frenche King, and promised to betraie the King, his maister: wherevpon king Edward caused suche diligent watche to be laide for him, that he was taken, and suche speedie and seuere iustice to be executed vpon him, that he was foorthwith condemned, drawen thorowe Lon∣don, and hanged on liue. Of this man a Poet of that age, alluding to his name, made this verse folowing, and some other. Turbat tranquilla clam, Thomas Turbida Villa. &c. Our things now in tranquillitie, Thom. Turbuill troubleth priuilie. The names of Lathes, and of Wa∣pentakes.It is no small token of the auncient estimation of this place, that it giuethe the name to the whole hun∣drethe in whiche it is situate: for that is moste vsuall, bothe in this Shyre, and elswhere, that the whole terri∣torie, (be it Lathe, Wapentake, or Hundreth) most com∣monly beareth the name of some one place, moste nota∣ble, and excelling other within the same at the time of the name imposed, although happely at this day, some o∣ther place doe muche excéede it. To make an end, here was sometime a religious College, the gouernour whereof was called a Prouost, whiche I suppose to haue béene founded by some of the Archebi∣shops, and I finde to haue béene va∣lued at fourescore and foure pounds of yearely reue∣nue.
Watling streete in Saxon, ƿeatling∣astrete, of one Weatle, whome the prin∣ted booke of Mat. West. calleth vn∣truly Wading. KIng Molmutius, the Brittish Solō, & first Law maker,The Priui∣leges of high waies. decréed amongst o∣ther things: that such as were found praying in the Temple, labouring at the plough, or trauailing in the highe waies should not be impeached by a∣ny officer, but that they should enioy peaceable fréedome and libertie, bothe for their goods & persons: But, forasmuche as he had not (in his life time) described those wayes that he would haue thus priuileged, great contention arose after his death, which wayes should be taken for highe and royall, and whiche not: and therefore, Belinus, (his Sonne and successor) to cease all controuersie, limited in certaine, foure especi∣all highe wayes: whereof the first was called, Erming∣streete, and lead (after the opinion of some) from South∣hampton to S. Dauids in Wales, or (as others write) to Carlile in the Northe: the second was named Fosseway, and extended from Cathnes in the North of Scotland to Totnes, a cape of Cornewall: The third Ikeneled (or as others write it) Rekeneld, and reached from East to West (as Huntingdon affirmeth) but as others will, from Tinmouth to S. Dauides, whiche is from North∣east to Southwest. Watlingstreete, where we nowe are, was the fourth, and it beganne at Douer (after the opinion of Ralfe Higden) passed through the midst of Kent, crossed the Thamise at the West end of London, (howbeit others, to whom I rather incline, thinke that it ranne through London, and there left the name to Watlingstreet there) frō thēce to S. Albons, Dūstable, Stretford, Towcester, Lilburne, & Wrecken, thence ouer
ye riuer of Seuerne to Stretton, & so through the midst of Wales to Cardigan, and to the banke of the Irishe Sea. And this is the common and receyued opinion (although in deede there be diuers) touching the firste beginning and description of this way. But Simon the Chaun∣ter of Durham, and he that made the continuation to the Hystorie of Asserus Meneuensis (both very good au∣thours) ascribe bothe the beginning and the name also of this way, to the sonnes of a Saxon King, whome they called Weatle: which their opinion, as I doe not great∣ly receiue, bycause I finde not that name (Weatle) in a∣ny Catalogue of the Kings that I haue seene: So will I not rashely reiecte it, for the estimation that I other∣wise reteine of the writers them selues: But doe leaue the Reader to his frée choice, to take or leaue the one, or the other. And, as there is difference concerning the first begin∣ning and name of this way: So al agrée not in the trace and true course of the same. For Henrie (the Arche∣deacon of Huntingdon) affirmeth, that it stretched from Douer to Chester. And this Simon reporteth, that it extended it selfe from the East Sea, to the West. Whiche third and laste opinion, may well inough stand, eyther with the firste, or the seconde. But nowe, as touching this priuilege graunted by Molmutius, al∣thoughe it continue not altogether in the same plight, yet some shadowe thereof remaineth euen to this daye, as by the lawes of King Edward the Confessour, whiche confirmed the protection of the foure wayes by name, and by the Statute of Marlbridge, whiche forbiddeth distresses to be taken in any the Kings highe wayes, or common stréetes, and by the Statute (called Articuli Cleri) whiche commaundeth that such as abiured, should not be molested while they be in the highe wayes, may
euidently appeare. I finde in Hystorie, that this Wat∣lingstreete, hath heretofore, not onely serued for the frée passage of the people, but that it hath béen (at times also) a marke and bounder betwéene some Kings, for the li∣mits of their iurisdictions and authoritie: For so it was betwéene Edmund and Anlaf, Alfred and Guthrum, and others. But, bycause these matters reache fur∣ther then this Shyre extendeth,The order of this des∣cription. I will reserue them to fit place, and shew you in the meane while, what I count note worthy on both sides of this way, till I come to the Diocesse of Rochester.
Lyminge. ON the South side of Watlingstreete, and vnder the Downes, Lyminge is the first that offereth it selfe: concer∣ning the which, I haue found a note or twaine, that make more for the antiquitie, then for the estimation of the place: for I reade in the Annales of S. Augustines of Canterbury, that Eadbald (the sonne of King Ethelbert, the firste Christened King of Kent) gaue it to Edburge his sister, who foorthwith cloc∣ked together a sorte of simple women, whiche vnder her wing there, tooke vpon them the Popishe veile of wi∣dowhood. But that order in time waxed colde, and therefore Lanfranc the Archebishop, at suche time as he builded Sainct Gregories in Canterbury (as we haue touched in Tanet before) reckoning it no small ornamēt of his dotation,S. Grego∣ries in Can∣terburi first builded. to bestowe some renouned Relique, that might procure estimation to his worke, translated  the olde bones of Edburge from Lyminge to Sainct Gregories,Reliques. and verefied in Papistrie, the olde Maxime of Philosophie, Corruptio v∣nius, generatio alterius.
Baramdowne, in the Saxon, BarHamdune; That is to say, the hill where the Bores do abide. AS this place is of it selfe very fit (by rea∣son of the flat leuel and playnesse ther∣of) to array an heast of men vpon: So haue we testimonie of thrée great ar∣mies that haue mustred at it: The one vnder the conduict of Iulius Caesar, who landing at Dele (as we haue before shewed) surueyed his hoast at Baramdowne, and marching from thence against the Britons, so daunted their forces, that he com∣pelled them to become tributarie: No lesse infortu∣nate, but muche more infamous to this countrie, was the time of the seconde muster,King Iohn yealdeth to the Pope. whiche happened in the reigne of King Iohn: who hearing that Philip (the king of Fraunce) had by incitation of the Pope (as hath alrea∣dy appeared in Douer) prepared a great army to inuade him, and that he was ready at Calaice to take shipping, determined to incounter him vpon the Sea, and (if that assay succéeded not) then to giue him a battaile on the lande also: For whiche seruice he rigged vp his shippes of warre, and sent to the Sea, the Earle of Salisburie, (whome he ordeined Admirall) and calling together fit men from al the parts of the Realme, he found (by view taken at this place) an armie of sixtie thousande men to incounter his enemies, besides a sufficient number of able and armed souldiours, to defende the lande withal: Now, whilest he thus awaited at Baramdown, to heare further of his aduersaries comming, Pandulph (the Popes Legate) sent vnto him, two Knightes of the or∣der of the Temple, by whose mouthe he earnestly desi∣red
the King to graunt him audience. The King assen∣ted, and the Legate came vnto him, and sayde in summe as followeth. Beholde (O Prince) the King of Fraunce is in armes against thée, not as against a priuate enemie to him self alone, but as an open and common aduersarie bothe to the Catholike Church, to the Popes holynesse, to whole Christendome, and to God him self: Neyther commeth he vpon opinion of his owne power and strength, but is armed with great confidence of Gods fauourable ayde, accompanied with the consent of many great Princes, furnished with the presence of suche as thou haste bani∣shed out of thy Realme, and assured by the faythful pro∣mises of sundry of thyne owne Nobilitie, whiche nowe are present in person with thée. Consider therefore in what daunger thou standest, and spare not to submit thée, while space is: leaste if thou persist, there be no place left of further fauour. The King hearing this, and being (vpon causes knowne to him selfe) more di∣strustfull of Traitours at home, then fearefull of ene∣mies abroade, agréed to serue the time, and taking the Legate to Douer with him, sealed the Golden Bull of submission, whereby Englande was once againe made a tributarie Prouince to the Citie of Rome, and that in so muche the more vile condition, then it was before: as an vsurped Ierarchie, is inferiour to a noble, lawfull and renoumed Monarchie. For it is truely sayd, Dignitate domini, minus turpis est conditio serui. Now when the Frenche King on the other side of the Seas, had worde hereof, he retired with his armie in a great choler, partely for that he was thus deluded, but chiefly bycause he had lost his Nauie, whiche the Earle of Salis∣bury had set on fire in the hauen at Calaice. The Barons warre.Simon Mountfort (the Earle of Leycester,) that was
elected by the Barons of this Realme, general of that ar∣mie which they raysed against King Henrie the thirde, arrayed thirdly a very great hoast of men here, at suche time as he feared the arriuall of Eleonar the Quéene, who being daughter to the Earle of Prouince, and then lefte in Fraunce behinde the King and the Earle, (whiche also had béen bothe there a litle before, to re∣ceiue the Frenche Kings rewarde, touching their con∣trouersie) ceassed not by all possible meanes, to sollicite the King of Fraunce, and to incite other her friendes and allies, to ayde King Henrie against the Nobilitie. But whether it were, that presently they could not, for their owne affaires, or that at al they durst not, knowing that their comming was awayted, they serued not her de∣sire: by meanes whereof, the Lordes waxed strong, and soone after gaue the King a battayle in Sussex, where∣in they bothe tooke him, and his brother Richard, and his eldest sonne prisoners. But as touching the ori∣ginall, procéeding, and euent of these warres, I willing∣ly spare to speake muche in this place, knowing that I shall haue opportunitie often hereafter to discourse them. Nowe therefore, let vs consider, a few other places, and then haste vs to Canterbury.
Charteham. AFter suche time, as King Iohn had made him selfe the Popes tenant of the Crown and Realme of England, (as euen now I tolde you) the Cler∣gie of this countrie was so oppressed with Romishe exactions, that they were become, not onely vnable, but thereby vnwilling also, to relieue the necessitie of the Prince, with any prest of money, as in times paste they had accustomed to do. Wherat the King on the one side taking offence, pressed them many times very hard, not ceasing till he had wroong somewhat from them: And on the other side, appealing to their holy fathers ayde, procured (by their great coste) many sharp prohibitions, and proud menacies against him. So that sundry times in the reigne of King Henrie the thirde, this Balle was busily tossed betwéene the King & the Pope, the Clergie (in the mean while) looking vpon, but nothing laughing at the game.The Popes reuenue in England. Amongst other things done for the manife∣statiō of the Popes rauine, ye same King at one time cō∣maunded a generall suruiew to be made of the Popes  yerely reuenue within this realme, & foūd it to surmoūt the yearely receipt of his owne Eschequer, in very rent, besides innumerable secret gifts and rewardes, wherof no account could be made. Herevpon the Prince, by ad∣uise of his Realme, sent special messingers to the gene∣rall counsell, that was then holden at Lions in Fraunce, with commission to sue for redresse: The like complaint also, was at the same time, and for the same cause, exhi∣bited by the King of Fraunce: Neither was the state of the Empire frée from the heauy yoke of that Popish op∣pressiō:
for M. Parise reporteth that euen thē, the Empe∣rour him self wrote an earnest letter to the King & No∣bility of this realme, solliciting thē to ioyne with him in withstanding ye tyranie of the Romish Sée. Howbeit, all this could not help, but that the Popes (labouring daily more & more with this incurable disease of Philargyrie) cōtinually pilled the English Clergie, and so encountred King Henrie, that in the end he was driuen to vse the meane of the Popes authoritie, whensoeuer he néeded aide of his owne spiritualtie. After Henrie, folowed his Sonne Edward the first: who being more occupied in Martiall affaires then his Father was: And thereby more often inforced to vse the helpe of his subiectes, for the raising of some necessary Masses of money, nowe and then borowed of his Clergie, till at the length, Pope Boniface the eight (treading the path of his predecessours pride) toke vpon  him to make a constitution, That if any Clerke gaue to a lay man, or if any lay person should take of a Clerke, any spirituall goods, he should forthwith stand excom¦municate. By colour of whiche decrée, the Clergie of England, at suche time as the King next desired their cū∣tribution towards his warres, made answere with one assent, That they would gladly,A Parlea∣mēt with∣out the Cleargie. but they might not safely without the Popes licence, agre to his desire. Hereat the King waxed wrothe, and calling a Parlea∣ment of his Nobilitie and Commons (from which he ex∣cluded the Bishops and Clergie) enacted, that their per∣sons should be out of his protection, and their goods sub∣iect to confiscation, vnlesse they would by submitting themselues redéeme his fauour. It was then a world to sée howe the welthie Bishops, fatte Abbats, and riche Pryors, in eache quarter be stirred them, each man con∣tending with liberall offer to make his raunsome, in so much as the house of Saint Augustines in Canterbury
(as the Annales of their own Abbay report) gaue to the King two hundrethe and fiftie poundes in money for their peace, hauing lost before (notwithstanding al their haste) two hundreth and fiftie quarters of their wheat, whiche the Kings Officers had seised to his vse, & ship∣ped to be sent into Gascoin for the victualing of his men of warre. Onely Robert of Winchelsey (then Arche∣bishop of Canterbury) refused to aide the King,The traite∣rous beha∣uiour, of Robert of Winchel∣sey, the Archebi∣shop. or to re∣concile himselfe, in so muche as of very stomacke he dis∣charged his familie, and abandoned the Citie, and with∣drewe himselfe to this Towne: from whence (as mine Author saith) he roade each Sonday, and Holyday to the Churche adioyning, and preached the woord of GOD. Polidore, in his own opinion, giueth him an apt Theme writing that he preached vpon this text,Polidore, was the Popes crea¦ture. Melius est obe∣dire Deo, quam hominibus, It is better to obey God, then men whiche, if he will haue to serue the turne, he must construe it thus, It is better to obey the Pope, then the King, and so make the Pope a God, and the King no more then a common man. But Peter the Apostle of God, from whome the Pope would séeme to deriue, and Polidore the Apostle of the Pope (for he first sent him hither, to gather his Peter pence) were not of one minde n this point: For he inioyneth vs plainly. Subditi esto∣te omni humanae ordinationi propter Dominum, siue Regi, tan∣quam praecellenti. &c. Be ye subiect to all humane ordi∣nance, for the Lordes sake, whether it be to the King as to the moste excellent. &c. making the King the moste excellent vnder God, (who no doubt) if he commaund not against God, it is to be obeyed before the Pope, con∣cerning whome, we haue no commaundement at all in Gods Scripture. Howbeit, since Polydore and the Bishop serued one common Maister, namely, the man of Rome, it is the lesse meruaile, if he commend his en∣deuour in this part, and that is of the lesse credit also
which he writeth of him in an other place, where he be∣stoweth this honourable Elogium vpon him, Quantum in eo fuit, de Religione iuxta at{que} de Repub. promereri studuit, a qua nunquam discessit, nunquam oculos deiecit: ita officio suo at{que} omnium commodis sibi seruiendum censuit. As much as in him was, he studied to deserue well, bothe of reli∣gion, and of the common wealth, from the whiche he neuer departed, ne turned away his eyes: so thought he it meete to serue his owne duetie, and the profit of all men: As concerning his desert in religion, I will say nothing, bycause it may be thought the fault of that age & not of the person only: but as touching his behauiour toward his Prince and Countrie (wherein also consis∣teth no small part of religion and feare of God) since our lawe alloweth of the trial De vicineto, I will bring you one of his next neighbours to depose for him, a man that liued in the same time with him, I meane the writer of the Annales of Saint Augustines, who vpon the yeare 1305. hathe this note following. Eodē an. 7. Kal. Maij, cū saepe dictus Archiepiscopus Rober∣tus, super multis Articulis enormibus (& praecipue super pro∣ditione, quam cū quibusdam comitibus, & proceribus multis, pactus erat in dolo, vt Regem a Regni solio deijcerent, & silium eius Eduardum, ipsius in trono subrogarent, & patrem perpetuo carceri manciparent) a Rege calumniaretur, & inficiari non posset obiecta: vltra quam credi potest timore percussus, ad Re∣gis pedes pronus cadens in terrā, vt eius mereretur assequi cle∣mentiā, sese per singula flens & eiulans, Regis subdidit volun∣tati: Sic igitur humiliatus est ille Deo odibilis & superbus, qui per totum Anglorū orbem, oris sui flatu, more meretricio, Sa∣cerdotium deturpauit, & Clerum: & in populo tyrannidē exer cuit inauditam. Et qui Regem, Dominum suum, literatorie ei scribens, nominare renuit superbiendo, nunc humiliatus, & Regem, & Dominum suum facit, & nominat, obediens factus, sedinuitus ei deuotius seruiendo.
The same yeare, the 25. of April, when as the often na∣med Robert the Archebishop, was chalenged by the King for many pointes of great enormitie, and especi∣ally for the treason whiche he had imagined with cer∣taine Earles and Noble men, to the end that they should displace the King from the seate of his Kingdome, and place his sonne Edward in his throne, and cast the Fa∣ther into perpetuall prison: and when he could not de∣ny the things obiected against him, being stroken with an incredible feare, and falling downe prostrate vpon the earth at the Kings feete, that he might deserue to ob¦taine his fauour, with weeping and wayling he sub∣mitted himselfe wholly to the Kings pleasure: & thus was that proude, & most hateful man to God, brought lowe and humbled, the whiche defiled throughout all England, with the breath of his mouthe, like an harlot, the state of the Priesthode and Clergie, and exercised intollerable tyrannie ouer the people: and he, whiche before writing vnto the King, refused in his letters for pride to call him his Lord, nowe being humbled, both acknowledgethe and calleth him his Lord and King, being made obedient, and to serue him with great de∣uotion, but yet against his will. Againe, when as in the same yeare, he was cited to appeare at Rome (vpon complaint that he had wast∣fully spoyled the goods of his Churche) and came to the Court to sue for licence to passe ouer the Seas, the King as soone as he came to his presence, and had moued his suite, caused the presence chamber dore to be set wide open, willed the standers by to giue eare, and spake a loude to the Bishop in this manner, as the same author reporteth,
Licentiam transfretandi, quam a nobis postulare venisti libenter tibi concedimus, reuertendi autem licentiam nul∣lam damus, memores doli, ac proditionis quas in Parlemento Lincolniae cum Baronibus nostris in Regiam machinatus es Maiestatem, cuius rei litera signo tuo sigillata testis est, & tes∣timonium perhibet contra te euidenter. Sed propter amorē bea∣ti Thomae Martyris, & Ecclesiae cui praees reuerentiam, vin∣dictam hucus{que} distulimus, reseruantes eam Papae, qui nostras iniurias vlciscetur, vtpote speramus. A protectione vero nos∣tra, te prorsus excludimus, omnem gratiam negantes & mise∣recordiam, quia re vera semper immisericors fuisti: Cum{que} Wintoniensis Episcopus pro eo intercederet, & Archiepisco∣pum Dominum suum esse diceret, Rex affirmauit, se omnium Praelatorum regni, & Regem, & Dominum esse principalem. Wee willingly graunt you licence to passe ouer the Seas according as you are come to desire, but to re∣tourne again we giue you no licence at al, being mind∣full of the deceit and treason, whiche you did practise with our Barons, against our Kingly Maiestie in the Parleament at Lincolne, of the whiche thing your let∣ter signed with your owne seale is a witnes, and euidēt∣ly giueth testimonie against you: Howbeit, for the loue of Saint Thomas the Martyr, and for the reuerence of the Church, ouer the which you are set, we haue hither to differred the reuēge, reseruing it to the Pope, which, as we hope, wil make reuenge of our iniuries. But we vtterly exclude you frō our protectiō, denying you all grace & mercy, because in dede you haue alwais ben an vnmerciful mā: And whē as the Bishop of Winchester made intercession for him, & said, that the Archbishop was his Lord, the King affirmed, that he himself was the King and cheif Lord of al the Prelats of the Realm.
This I haue exemplified the more at large, bothe to the end that you may sée how great a traitour to his Prince, howe vnmercifull a tyrant to the Common people,King Ed∣ward the first, clay∣meth su∣premacie ouer the Clergie, and howe foule a blemishe to the Ecclesiasticall order, this Bishop was, quite contrary to that which M. Polydore affirmeth of him: and also that you may vn∣derstand, what authoritie King Edward the first in plaine termes chalenged ouer his Cleargie, not such as Anselme offered King William Rufus, when he tooke Canterbury of his gifte, saying, Summo pontifici debeo obe∣dientiam, tibi consilium. I owe my obedience to the highe Bishop, and my counsel to you. But suche as a true subiect oweth to his Liege King, and lawful souereigne, and suche as differeth no more from that which we at  this day attribute to our Prince, then Principalis Do∣minus, and supremus Gubernator do varie in sunder. And yet (beholde the madnes of the time) after the deathe of this Bishop, the common people forsoothe resorted to his tumbe, and would néedes haue made a Sainct of him, had not the Sepul∣chre béen defaced and their follie staied, by pub∣lique ordi∣nance.
Chilham Castle, in Saxon Cyleham, that is, the colde dwelling. IN the allotment of Landes, for the defence of Douer Castle (whereof we haue before spoken) Chilham fell to Fulbert of Douer, who, in considera∣tion thereof, vndertooke to finde at his owne charge, fiftéene able Soul∣diours, whereof thrée should warde in the Castle, euery moneth, by the space of 20. wéeks in the yeare. I suspect, that it came afterwardes to the possession of the Archebishop: For I remember that I once read, that King Iohn came thither to treate with Stephan Langton the Archebishop, for reconciliati∣on to be had betweene them.
Wye, the word in Brittish signifieth, an Egge. WHat time king William the Conque¦rour endowed his Abbay of Battel in Sussex, he gaue thervnto (amongst o∣ther) his Manour of Wye, conteining at that time, seuen hydes, or ploughe landes, and being (before that time) of the Demeasnes of the Crowne. The Chronicles of Battell Abbay affirme, that there were sometimes two and twentie Hundrethes, subiect to the iurisdiction of this Towne: whiche if it be true, then (as farre as I can reache by coniecture) the territo∣rie of Wye was the very same in compasse, that nowe the Last of Screy, or Sherwinhope describeth, that is to say, the fift part of this whole Shyre, consisting of two and twentie Hundrethes in number. The same King, graunted to his Monks of Battel, wrek of the Sea, falling vpon Dengemarishe a portion of Wye,The olde, and newe manner of wrecke, at the Sea. and wil∣led further by his Chart of donation, that if any fish (cal∣led a Craspeis) that is, Crasse pisse, a great or royall fishe, as whales, or suche other, (which by the Lawe of Pre∣rogatiue perteined to the King himselfe) should happen to be taken there, that the Monkes should haue it whol∣ly: And if it fortuned to arriue in any other mans land, (lying betwene Horsmede, and Withburn) that yet the Monkes should enioy the whole tongue, and two third partes of the rest of the body. Nowe, in the Reigne of King Henrie his Sonne it fortuned, that a shippe laden with the Kings owne goods was wrecked within the precinct of this libertie, which his Officers would haue taken, and saued to his vse: but Geffray, (then Abbat of Battell) withstoode them, & that so stoutly, that the matter by complaint came to the Kings owne hearing: who (to make knowen how muche he valued his fathers graunt) yéelded the matter wholy, into the Abbats owne courtesie,
The same Storie obserueth a thing touching Wreck, (or rather Varech, as the custome of Normandie from whēce it came calleth it) not vnworthy ye recital, that is, that of auncient time, if a ship were cast on shoare, torne with tempest, and were not repaired by suche as esca∣ped on liue within a certaine time, that then this was taken for Wreck, and so vsed along the coast: But Hen∣rie the first (sayth the booke) disliking the iustice of that custome, ordeyned, that if from thēcefoorth any one thing (being within the vessell) arriued on liue, then the ship and goods should not be seised for wrecke. This decrée had force during all his reigne, and ought of congruence to haue endured for euer: Howbeit, after his death, the owners of lande on the Sea shoare, shewing themselues more carefull of their owne gaine, then pitifull of other mens calamities, returned to the olde manner: Which their vnmerciful couetise, (as I suppose) prouoked king Edward the first, by the statute, (that we call Westmin∣ster the first) to make restitution of King Henries lawe, whiche (euen to this daye) remayneth in force, thoughe not altogether so heauie against poore men (afflicted by misfortune of the Sea) as that former vsage was, yet in déede, neyther so easie as Christian charitie would, nor so indifferent as the lawes of other countries do afford, And therfore, I will leaue it, as a thing worthy (amongst other) of reformation, when God shall giue time. There was at this place, a College,The Col∣lege valued in the Re∣cordes, at ninetie thrée pounds of yearely reuenue, In whiche king Edward the seconde (after the buriall of his father, and be∣fore his owne Coronation) helde the solemnitie of a  whole Christ∣mas.
Motindene, of Mod and dene' that is, the proude valley, a name imposed (as I thinke) for the fertilitie. I Haue not hitherto, foūd any thing touching the house of Motindene in Hetcorne, saue onely, that the heade therof was called Mi∣nister, and that the house it selfe was of the yearely value of sixtie poundes: Neyther would I haue aforded it so much as paper, or place here, but only that you might vnderstande, with what num∣ber of buildings, varietie of sectes, and plentie of posses∣sions, Poperie was in olde time prouided for, and fur∣nished. No corner (almoste) without some religious house, or other: Their suites and orders were hardly to be numbred: and as for their landes and reuenues, it was a world to beholde them.The value of the Reli¦gious hou∣ses in this Shyre. I finde, that the yerely extent of the clere value of the Religious liuings with∣in this Shyre, amounted to fiue thousande poundes, Bishoprickes, Benefices, Friaries, Chaunteries, and Sainctes offerings, not accounted, whiche thing also I doe the rather note, to the ende that you may sée, howe iuste cause is giuen vs, bothe to wonder at the hoate zeale of our auncestours in their spirituall fornication, and to lament the coldenesse of our owne charitie, to∣wardes the maintenaunce of the true spouse of Iesus Christ. For, if euer, nowe moste truly, is that verefied, which the Poet long since sayde, Probitas laudatur, & alget.
Canterbury, is called in Saxon Cātparabyrig, that is to say, The citie (or court) of the men of Kent: whiche also agreeth with the Brittishe worde Caer Kent, signifying the Citie of Kent. It is termed in Latine diuersly, of some Doruernum, and Daruernum, of others, Du∣rouernum: of some Dorobernia, and of some Doro∣brinia, All whiche names, Leland coniectureth to proceede, eyther of the Riuer called Stowr (as we haue shewed) or else of the Brittishe worde Dour, whiche signifieth water, bycause the countrey thereaboutes, is plentuously stored therwith. One other late writer, taketh it to be called Daruernum, as if it were, Dour ar guerne, that is, the water neare the Fenne or Marish. TO the ende, that (confusion auoyded) eche thing may appeare in his pro∣per place, it shal not be amisse, to part the treatise of this Citie into twaine, whereof the firste shall conteine the beginning, increase, and declination of the Citie it selfe: The seconde shal set foorth, the erection, and ouerthrowe of the Religious houses and buildings within the same.The Citie, when it be∣gan. The authour of the Brittishe storie affirmeth, that one Rudhurdibras, or (as some copies write it) Lud Rudibras, (a King of the Britons, almost nine hundreth yeares before the Incar∣nation  of Christ) builded a Citie, whiche he called Car∣lem, or (as Henrie of Huntingdon, in his recitall of the cient Brittishe Cities, nameth it) Caer Kent, that is to
say, the Citie (or rather) the chiefe Citie of Kent. For, in the processe of the same Hystorie it appeareth in déed, that at suche time as Vortiger, King of the Brittons in∣tertained the Saxon Captaines, Hengist and Horsa, he soiourned at Canterbury, the heade Citie of all that countrie, and that prerogatiue, it reteined in the time of the Saxons them selues also: For by the testimonie of Beda, and Mathewe of Westminster, it was (when Au∣gustine arriued in Kent) Caput Imperij, Regis Ethelberti,  the chiefe place in all the dominion of King Ethelbert. To this Augustine, the sade King gaue (after a man∣ner, as I coniecture) the Lordship, or royaltie of the same citie: For, I reade (as I haue before shewed) that he gaue him his owne Palaice, and builded another for him selfe at Reculuer: and it is to be séene in the aunci∣ent Saxon lawes, that of olde time the Archebishops had their Coynage within the Citie. I finde also in the booke of Domesday, that King Edwarde the Confessour, had onely one and fiftie Bur∣gesses, whiche yealded him rent within this Citie, and two hundreth and twelue other persons owing him suite, and that the Castle of Canterbury, and the resi∣due of the inhabitauntes were subiecte to the Bishop, and the Religious houses. Howbeit, the Bishops were neuer absolute owners hereof, till the time of King William Rufus, who (as the Annales of Sainct Augustine say) Dedit ciuitatem Cantuariae Anselmo ex solido, quam Lanfrancus tenuerat ex beneficio. This Citie (since the vnion of the Kentishe king∣dome to the West Saxon) hath béene chiefly mayntei∣ned by two things: Firste, by the residence and hospi∣talitie of the Archebishop, and Religious persons, and then by the liberalitie and expence of such, as either gad∣ded to S. Thomas for helpe and deuotion, or trauailed
towardes the Sea side, for their priuate affaires and bu∣sinesse. Amongst the Bishops, Theodore (a Grecian borne, and the seuenth and last of those that came out of Italy) Lanfranc (the first Norman, aduaunced by the Conque∣rour) and Simon Sudburie (that liued vnder King Ed∣ward the thirde) haue béene the most beneficiall vnto it. Of the whiche, Theodore, by licence of Vitelianus (then Pope) founded within the Citie,The olde Schole at Canterbury a Schole (or Col∣lege) wherein he placed Professours of all the liberall Sciences, which also was the very paterne to the schole that Sigbert the King of Eastangle afterwarde builded: but whether that were at Cambridge, or at some other place besides within his kingdome, I leaue to Doctour Caius of Cambridge, and Maister Key of Oxforde to be disputed, and to indifferent Readers to be adiudged. The Reuerend father, Mathew, nowe Archebishop of Canterbury (whose care for conseruation of learned Monuments can neuer be sufficiently commended) she∣wed me not long since, the Psalter of Dauid, and sūdry Homelies in Gréeke, Homer also, and some other Greke authours, beautifully written in thicke paper, with the name of this Theodore prefixed in the fronte, to whose Librarie, he reasonably thought (being thereto led by shewe of great antiquitie) that they sometime belonged. The other two, Lanfranc, and Simon of Sudbury, did cost vpon the gates and walles, bringing thereby bothe strength and beautie to the Citie. Suche was then the firste beginning, and increase of Canterbury: Let vs nowe therefore sée also, what har∣mes it hath now susteined, and to what decay it is falne. Besides sundry particular harmes, done to diuers of the Religious places, the towne it selfe hath often re∣ceiued detriment by casualtie of fyre. For the author
of the additions to the Chronicle of Asserus Meneuensis affirmeth, that about the yeare after Christ seuen hun∣dreth fiftie and foure, it was sore wasted with fire. A∣gaine, in the yeare, nine hundreth and eightéene, Alfleda the mightie Lady of Mercia, besieging and burning the citie it self, spoyled, kylled, & expulsed the Danes, that thē possessed it: In reuenge wherof, they afterward, about ye end of the reigne of King Ethelred, did not only besiege, take, and burne this citie, but also put to moste barba∣rous and cruell death, Alphegus the Archebishop, (for that he refused to charge his farmours and the citizens towardes his raunsome aboue their abilitie) and they siue of the Monkes, Townesmen, and other common people, the whole nynes throughout the multitude, re∣seruing on liue the tenthe man onely: So that they left of all the Monkes but foure, and of the Lay people foure thousande and eight hundreth: Where (by the waye) it is to be noted, that this citie, and the countrie therea∣bouts (the people whereof, be like, fled thether for suc∣cour) was at that time very populous, hauing to loose fortie thrée thousande and two hundreth persons: in whiche behalfe, there want not some (I wote well) whiche doe affirme, that it had then more store of buil∣dings, then London it selfe: And truely it is well knowne, that they were very riche at Canterbury also, for not long before (by the ad∣uise  of Siricius, their Archebishop) they bought their peace at the handes of the Danes, with thirtie thou∣sande poundes of ready money. But let me proceede: fourthly, in the dayes of King Henrie the seconde, euen  streight after the election of Thomas Becket the Arche∣shop, this citie of Canterbury was wholy consumed with fire: And nowe lately and lastly, in the reigne of King Henrie the eight, it was in some partes blasted
with flame, wherein (amongst other things) diuers good bookes, whiche a Monke of S. Augustines had brought from beyonde the Seas, were brought to ashes. I had almoste forgotten a storie in Beda, where he maketh, Mellitum mendacium, (mention of Mellitus, I shuld haue sayde) and reporteth, that when as (vpon a time) a great parte of this citie was touched with fire, and that the flame hasted towarde the house of this Mellitus (then Archebishop there) he commaunded, that they shoulde beare him against it, euen into the greatest furie there∣of. And that whereas before it coulde not be quenched by any water, (though neuer so plentiously poured vpon it) foorthwith at his presence the winde turned, and at the vehemencie of his prayer, the fyre not only ceased to goe any further, but also immediatly went out, and was extinguished. I wote wel, this writer is called, Venerabi∣lis: but when I reade this, and a number of suche, which make the one halfe of his worke, I say with my selfe, as sometime did the Poet, Quodcun{que} ostendis mihi sic, incredulus odi: What euer thing thou shewest me so, I hate it as a lye.The decay of Canter∣bury, and other pla∣ces. To procéede therefore in my former course, and to tell the trueth, litle had all these casualties of fire and flame béene to the decay of this towne, had not the disso∣lution and finall ouerthrowe of the Religious houses also come vpon it. For, where wealth is at commaun∣dement, howe easily are buildings repayred? and where opinion of great holynesse is, howe soone are cities and townes aduaunced to great estimation and riches? And therfore, no maruaile, if after wealth withdrawn, and opinion of holynesse remoued, the places tumbled headlong to ruine & decay: In whiche part, as I can not on the one side, but in respect of ye places thē selues, pitie & lament this general desolatiō, not only in this Shyre,
but in all other places of the Realme: So on the other side, considering the maine Seas of sinne and iniquitie, wherein the worlde (at those dayes) was almost whole drenched, I must néeds take cause, highly to prayse God, that hath thus mercifully in our age deliuered vs, dis∣closed Satan, vnmasked these Idoles, dissolued the Sy∣nagoges, and raced to the grounde all Monumentes of building, erected to superstition and vngodlynesse: And therefore let euery godly man ceasse with me from hencefoorth to maruail, why Canterbury, Walsingham, and sundry suche like, are nowe in these our dayes become in manner waste, since God in times paste was in them blasphemed most: And like the souldiours of Satan, and superstitious Mawmetrie, howle, and crye out with the heathen Poet. Excessere omnes, aditis, aris{que} relictis, Dij, quibus imperium hoc steterat. &c. The Gods eche one, by whose good ayde This Empire stoode vpright Are flowne: their entries and their altars eke abandond quight. For, séeing God in all ages hath not spared to extend his vengeaunce, not only vpon the persons, but vpon the places also, where his name was dishonoured, striking the same with solitude and exterminion, as we reade of Sodome, Ierusalem, and others: Howe then shoulde he forbeare these harborowes of the Deuill, and the Pope, whiche in horrible crimes contended with Sodome, in vnbelief matched Ierusalem, and in folly of superstition, excéeded all Gentilitie. By the iust iudgement of God therfore, Canterbury came soudenly from great wealth, multitude of inhabi∣taunts, and beautiful buildings, to extreme pouertie, nakednes, and deca: hauing at this day, Parishes more
in number, then well filled, & yet in al not aboue twelue, in whiche plight, for pitie I will leaue it, and (referring you to the statutes. 32. and 33. of Henrie the eight, pro∣uided for the reedifying of decayed houses, aswel in this Citie, as also in Rochster, Feuersham, & the Fiue ports) I will tourne me t the Hystorie of the religious buyl∣dings. There was i Canterbury,Continuall contention, betweene the two great hou∣ses in Can∣terbury. within the time of late memorie (besides others) two houses of great estimati∣on and lyuelyhoode, the one being called Christes church, and the other Saint Augustines, the Monkes of the whiche places, were as farre remoued from all mutual loue and societie, as the houses themselues were néere linked together, either in regarde of the time of their foundation, the order of their profession, or the place of their situation: And therfore in this part it might wel be verified of them, which was wont to be commonly said, Vnicum Arbustum, non alit duos Erythacos. For in déede, one whole Citie, nay rather one whole Shyre and Countrie, could hardly suffice the pride and ambitious auarice of such two Religious Synagogues, The which as in all places, they agréeed to enrich them selues by the spoyle of the Laitie: So in no place they agréed one with another: But (eche séeking euerie where, and by all wayes, to aduaunce them selues) they moued continuall, (and that moste fier and deadly) warre, for landes, priuileges, reliques, and suche like vaine worldly préeminences: In so muche (as he that will obserue it, shall finde) that vniuersally the Chroni∣cles of their owne houses, conteine (for the moste parte) nothing else, but suing for exemptions, procuring of re∣liques, strugling for offices, wrangling for consecrations & pleading for landes and possessions: For proofe wherof,
I might iustly alledge inumerable brawles, stirred be∣twéen ye Religious houses of this Citie, wrastling, some∣time, with the Kings, sometime with the Archbishops, & oftentimes ye one with the other, l which be at large set forth by Thomas Spot the Chroniler of S. Augustins: But, for asmuch as I my self deligh litle in that kind of rehersal, & do think that other men (for the more part of ye wiser sort) be sufficiently persuaded of these their follies, I wil lightly passe thē ouer, & labor more argely in some other thing. And bycause that the Monaserie, or Pri∣orie of Christes Churche, was of the more fame, I will first begin with it. Christes-Churche in CanterburyAfter that Augustine, the Monke, whiche was sent from Rome, had found suche fauour in the sight of King Ethelbert, that he might fréely Preache the Gospell in his Countrie, he chose for assembly and prayer, an olde Churche in the East part of this Citie, whiche was long time before builded by the Romanes, and he made ther∣of (by licence of the King) a Churche for himselfe and his successours, dedicating the same to the name of our Sa∣uiour Christ, whereof it was called afterward, Christes Churche. After his death, Laurence his successor, brought Monkes into the house, the head whereof was called a Pryor, whiche woord (howsoeuer it soundethe) was in déede but the name of a second officer, bicause the Bishop himselfe was accompted the very Abbat. For in olde time, the Bishops were for the moste part chosen out of suche Monasteries, and therefore moste commonly had their Palaces adioyning, and gouerned as Abbats there: by meanes whereof it came to passe, that suche Abbies were not only muche amplified in wealth and possessions, but also by fauour of the Bi∣shoppes, their good Abbates, ouerloked all their neere neighbours, as hereafter in further course shall better
appeare. I finde not, that any great coste was done vpn this Churche, till Lanfrancs dayes, who not only bui∣ded  it almoste wholy of newe, and placed Benedict Monkes therein, the number of whiche hee aduaunced from thirtie, to one hundreth and fourtie, but also erec∣ted certaine Hospitals, whiche hee endowed with one hundreth and fourtie poundes by yere, and repaired the walles of the Citie it selfe: And here by the way, it is  to be noted out of Mathewe Westminster, that there were Monkes in this house, euer since the time of Lau∣rence the second Archebishop, although some reporte, that Elfricus, was the first that expulsed the Seculer Priestes, and brought the Monkes in place. Not long after Lanfrancs time, succéeded William  Corboile, during whose gouernment, this lately ad∣uaunced building was blasted with flame, but he soone after reedified it of his owne purse, and dedicated it with great pompe and solemnitie, in the presence of the King and his Nobles. After him followed Theobaldus (whome Pope Innocent the second, honoured with the title of Legatus natus: and then commeth Thomas Bec∣ket, the fift in order after Lanfranc, by whose life, death,Thomas Becket, the Archbishop & his hys∣torie. and burial, the estimation of this Church was aduaun∣ced beyond all reason, measure and wonder. For, not withstanding that it had beene before yt time honoured with the arme of S. Bartholmew, (a Relique that King Canutus gaue) with the presēce of Augustine yt brought in Religion, with the buriall of eight Kentishe Kings,  that succéeded Wightred, and of a great number of Archebishops after the time of Cuthbert: Likewise afterward with the famous assēbly at the homage done by the Scottishe King William, to King Henrie the se∣cond, and at the Coronation of King Iohn: with ye seueral
Mariages also of King Henrie the third, and King Ed∣ward  the first: and finally with the interrements of that Noble Edward (called commonly the Blacke Prince) &  of King Henrie the fourth: yet the death of this one man not martyred (as they feigne, for the cause only, and not  the death, maketh a Martyr) but murdered in his Churche, brought therevnto more accesse of estimation  and reuerence, then all that euer was done before, or since. For after his death, by reason that the Pope had  canonized his soule in Heauen, and that Stephan Lang∣ton had made a Golden shrine for his body on earth, and commaunded the Annuall day of his departure to bee kept solemne, not only the Lay & Common sort of peo∣ple, but Bishops, Noble men, and Princes, as well of this Realme, as of forreigne partes, resorted on Pilgri∣mage  to his tumbe, & flocked to his Iubile for remission: In so muche, that euery man offering according to his abilitie, and thronging to see, handle, and kisse, euen the vilest partes of his Reliques, the Churche became so riche in Iewels and ornaments, that it might compare with Midas, or Craesus, and so famous and renowmed (euery piller resounding Saint Thomas, his miracles, praiers and pardons) that now the name of Christ was cleane forgotten, and the place was commonly called, Saint Thomas Churche of Canterbury. I passe ouer the stately buildings, and monuments, (I meane Churches, Chapels, and Oratories) raised to his name: the lewde bookes of his lyfe, and iestes, writ∣ten by foure sundrie persons to his praise: The blasphe∣mous Hymnes, and collectes, deuised by churchemen for his seruice: and sundrie suche other thinges, whiche as they were at the first inuen to strike into the heades of all hearers and beholders, more then wonderfull opi∣nion of deuotion and holynes: So now the trueth being
tried out, and the matter well and indifferently weigh∣ed) they ought to worke with all men, an vtter detesta∣tion, both of his, and all their, hypocrisie and wicked∣nesse. For, as touching himself (to omitte that which true∣ly might be spoken in dispraise of the former part of his lyfe, and to beginne with the very matter it selfe, wher∣vpon his death ensued) it is euident, bothe by the testi∣monie of Mathewe Paris (a very good Chronicler, that liued vnder King Henrie the third) and by the foure Pseudo Euangelistes themselues that wrote his Iestes, that the chife cause of the Kings displeasure towardes him grew vpon occasion, that he opposed himself against his Prince, Gods lawfull and Supreame minister on earth, in maintenance of a moste vile and wicked mur∣ther. The matter stoode thus. Within a fewe of the first yeares of King Henrie the seconds Reigne, the  Clergie of the Realme had committed aboue a hundreth seuerall murthers vpon his subiectes, as it was infour∣med him: for remedie of whiche outrage, the King (by assent of his Nobilitie and Bishops, of whiche number Thomas Becket himself was one) tooke order at Clare∣downe, that if any Clerke from thencefoorth commit∣ted felonie, or treason, he should first be degraded, and afterward deliuered to the Lay power, there to receaue as to his offence belonged. Not long after, it chaunced one Philip Broic (a Cha∣non of Bedford) to be apprehended for murther, and to be brought before the temporal iustice, where he not on∣ly shewed no remorse of ye wicked fact, but also (in hope of Ecclesiasticall exemption) gaue very euill language to the Iudge: the Iudge complained therof to the King, & the Chanon belike made meanes to the Archebishop.
For the King no sooner endeuoured to put his Lawe in execution, but the Archebishop, (bothe forgetfull of hs duetie to God, and his Prince, and vnmindefull of his owne oth) set him selfe against it, affirming plainly, that he neither could, ne would suffer it. Hereupon the Prince waxed wrothe, and by litle and litle his indignation so kindeled, (by matter that the obstinacie of the Bishop daily ministred) that in the end it was to hote for Becket to abide it: Then speedeth he himself to Rome, and poureth into the Holy Fathers bosome, complaint of moste grieuous oppression, exten∣ded against the Clergie: The Popes Holynesse, sory to discourage so good a Souldiour, as the Bishop was, and withal lothe to loose so mightie a friend, as King Henrie was, by letters and Legates, praieth, commaundethe, persuadethe, and threatneth reconciliation and attone∣ment, whiche after great a doe by the meanes of the Frenche King, and other his instruments, was in a sort brought to passe. Then Thomas Becket retourneth with the Kings fauour into the Realme, from whence he had six yeares before departed without licence, and therefore without, or rather against Lawe, and immediately séeketh to re∣uenge himself vpon suche the Bishops, as had in his ab∣sence assisted the King. Whiche when the King (being then in Normandie) vnderstoode, it chaunced him, in greate griefe of minde to caste out some woordes, that gaue occasion and hardines to Reginald Bere, Wil¦liam Tracy, Hughe Moruill, & Richard Bryton (foure of his Gentlemen) to addresse themselues for his re∣uenge: These foure therefore, passed the Seas, came to Canterbury, found out the Bishop, followed him into his Church, and vpon the Staires of the same, did him very cruelty, and dispitefully to deathe.
This shortly is the chiefe substance, and circum∣stance of all this Tragedie, drawne out of our owne Countriemen, and Thomas his fauourers, howsoeuer otherwise Erasmus (led by some sinister information) hathe reported it, as shall hereafter appeare in Ot∣ford. Wherein, as I can not on the one side allowe this murther, (executed, not by any publique Minister of Ius∣tice, but by a priuate and iniurious arme:) So on the o∣ther side, I report me to al indifferent & Godly Readers, whether suche a lyfe deserued not suche a death, and whether these Popishe Parasites, that haue painted foorth his prayses, make not themselues, thereby parte∣ners of all his pride and wilfull rebellion. I might here rest long, vpon diuerse other thinges concerning the King and this Archebishop, namely, how that he suffered the King to holde his stirup twise in one day in Normandie, but in Prato Proditorum, as Mathewe Parise very pretely writeth it: Howe the King came with bare and bléeding féete to Canterbury, to purge himselfe of the murther: Howe he bared his body to the Monkes of this house, and receaued of euery Religi∣ous Person there, foure, or fiue stripes, in whiche selfe yeare (by the way) their whole churche was consumed with fire: and some other matters besides, which make manifestly for the proofe of great presumption in ye Cler∣gie, and of vile abiection of the Princes of those dayes: But, bicause that I am fearefull that I growe to long, I will leaue Saint Thomas him selfe, and after (a fewe woordes more of this Churche) step ouer to Saint Augustines. After Thomas, this Church found thrée especiall main¦teiners of the building, William Courtney which by his
Testament bequeathed one thousand Markes towards the amendment of the bodie of the Church, the walles,  and the Cloister: Thomas Arundel, which erected one of the Bell Towers, gaue fiue Belles, and Christened them after the Popish manner: And Henrie Chicheley, who both repaired the librarie with books and building, and did great cost vpon one of the Bell Towers also. Nowe to Saint Augustines.Saint Au∣gustines. Augustine, hauing thus established a Sée for him selfe and his successours, obteined further of King Ethelbert (for the better fur∣therance of the seruice, that he had in hand) a Churche, that then stoode betwéene the walles of the Citie, and S. Martines, wherein the King himselfe vsed before to make his prayers, and offer sacrifice to his Idoles: This Church, he purged from Prophane abuse & name (as they say) and dedicated it to the seruice of God, and to the honour of Saint Pancrace: Neither ceassed he thus, but shortly after intreated the same King to build a Monasterie in the soyle adioyning, whiche he also ap∣pointed  to the honour of Saint Peter, and Saint Paule and placed Monkes therein: This Monasterie, in me∣morie of his benefite, lost the first name, and was euer after called Saint Augustines. The deade, in old time were buried out of the Cities.Nowe whereas the true meaning, bothe of the King and Augustine was, that this Church (for so much as bothe then, and long after, it was not their manner to burie their dead within the walles of any Citie, a thing forbidden of olde, by the law of the twelue tables) should be from thencefoorth a common Sepulchre to all their successours, as well in the Kingdome, as in the Archebishopricke, yet suche was the fauour of the Bi∣shops,  folowing Augustine towards their own church, that in the processe of time Saint Augustines was de∣frauded of the Sepultures, bothe of the one & the other.
For in Brightwaldes dayes, the buriall of the Kings was taken from it: and Cuthbert the Archebishop in his life begged of King Eadbert, that for the aduaunce∣ment of Sainct Iohns (a newe Churche, that he had e∣rected for that purpose, and for the execution of iudge∣ments  by the Ordale, and whiche was afterwarde fired with the flame of Christes Churche, wherevnto it was neare adioyning) the Bishops also might from thence∣foorth be buryed there. And for the more suretie to at∣taine that his desire, he tooke order in his life (by othe of all his Couent) that they shoulde suffer his corps to lye thrée dayes in the grounde after his death, before any Bell shoulde be rong, or other open solemnitie vsed, that might notifie his departure to the Monkes of S. Au∣gustines. Onely Ieanbright (the fourtéenth Bishop) whom other copies cal Lambright) was conueyed to the grounde at Sainct Augustines, by this occasion. After the death of Bregwine (the Archebishop) this Ieanbright (then being Abbat of Sainct Augustines, and fearing that he shoulde be deceiued of the bodye of Bregwine, as Aldhun his predecessour had béene begui∣led of Cuthberts before) he came appoynted with ar∣med men, determining to take it awaye by force, if he might not by faire meanes obtaine it. But the craftie Monkes of Christes Church, had buried the body before he came, so that he was driuen to depart home frustrate of his desire, and to séeke his amendes by action in the lawe. Notwithstanding, bycause they perceiued here∣by, that he was a man of good courage, and therfore very méete in their opinion to be their Captaine, they shortly after chose him Archebishop, in hope that he woulde haue mainteined their quarrell: but he neuerthelesse tooke suche order, that he was buried in S. Augustines with the rest of his predecessours.
Popishe braules.Thus you sée, howe soone after the foundation, these houses were at dissention, and for howe small trifles, they were ready to put on armes, and to moue greate and trouble some tragedies: Neyther doe I finde, that euer they agréeed after, but were eyther at conti∣nuall brawling within them selues, eyther suing before the King, or appealing to the Pope, and that for mat∣ters of more stomacke, then importaunce: As for ex∣ample, whether the Abbat of Sainct Augustines should be consecrate or blessed in his owne Churche, or in the others: whether he ought to ring his belles to seruice, before the other had rong theirs: whether he and his te∣naunts ought suite to the Bishops Courte: and suche like, wherein it can not be doubted, but that they con∣sumed inestimable treasure, for maintenaunce of their moste peuishe and Popishe pryde and wilfulnesse. If any man delight to knowe the particulars, let him reade the writing of Thorne and Spot, their own Chro∣niclers, as for my selfe, I thinke it too long to haue sayde thus muche in generall, and therefore will haste me to  the rest. After the death of Ethelbert, Eadbaldus (his sonne) at the instance of Laurence, the Archebishop, buil∣ded a faire Churche in this Monasterie,S. Maries, in Canter∣bury. whiche he called Sainct Maries. In whiche place many yeares after (if at the leaste you will beléeue Thomas Spot) Sainct Dunstane sensibly hearde, and sawe, our Lady Sainct Adryan, and a sorte of Angels singing and dauncing to∣gether.  After Eadbaldus, King Canute (the great Mo∣narch of this Realme) Egilsine (the Abbat ye fled for feare of the Conquerour) Scotlandus (whome the same King  put in Egelsins place.) Hugo de Floriaco (yt was of kin∣red to king William Rufus, & by him made Abbat) were  ye persons that chiefly increased ye building: some bestow∣ing Churches and Chapels: some Dorters and dyning
places, and others other sortes of edefices. The Saincts, whose deade bodies and reliques,The Saints and Reli∣ques, at Cā∣terbury. brought to this church great veneration, and gaine, were these specially, Adry∣an, Albin, Iohn. &c. religious persons: Eadbald, Lo∣thar, Mul, & Wightred, sometimes Kings: S. Sexburg, & S. Myldred of Thanet, (whose body was giuen then by King Canute,) And Sainct Augustine their founder him self. Of this last man (to let slip a many of others) this one myracle they reporte,S. August. that at suche time as the Danes entred Kent, and spoyling this Citie, ransacked almoste euery corner thereof, this house of Sainct Augustines  (onely of all other) was neuer touched, By reason (say they) that when a Dane had taken holde of Sainct Au∣gustines Pall or cloake, (wherewith his tumbe was co∣uered) it stacke so fast to his fingers, that by no meanes possible, he coulde lose it, till he came and yealded himself to the Monkes, and made sorrowfull confession of his faulte. Much like to this, it is written, that at the ouer∣throw of Carthage, the hande of one that woulde haue spoyled the God Apollo of his Mantel, was founde a∣mongst the fragments. This our good felowe was not so cunning (belike) as Dionysius, for he tooke a goldē cloke rom Iupiter, and had no hurt at all thereby. But ey∣ther this our Pall was weaued, Ex auro Tholosano, or els (which I rather beléeue) this Canterbury tale was for∣ged A rabula Romano. Besides all these, the Monkes sée∣ing howe litle their reliques were estéemed, in compari∣son of Thomas Beckets, and beleeuing (as the Romanes somtimes did of Dea Pessenuntia) that their house should be highly aduaunced, if they might get thither so glori∣ous a God as he was, they made a foule shift for a péece of him also. There was a Monk of Christs Church, cal∣led Roger, who had in charge to kéepe the Altar where
Becket was slaine. This man they chose to their Ab∣bat, in hope (sayth mine authour) that he woulde bring somewhat with him: in whiche doing they were not al∣together  deceiued, For he conueyed to them a greate part of Thomas his bloude that was shed, and a péece of his Crowne that was pared off.Thomas Becket had two heads. But here by the way, marke (I beséeche you) the grose iugling that these slow bellyed syres vsed to delude the worlde withal. Erasmus (in his Colloquies) writeth, that the whole face of S. Thomas, being sumptuously set in golde, was religious∣ly kept within a Chapell beyonde the highe altar, and that they tolde him, the rest of the body lay in a shryne of golde, and of great Maiestie, which they shewed besides. But the truth is, that at suche time as the late god∣ly and most Christian Archebishop Cranmer, and the wise and noble counseler Cromwell, were at Canterbu∣ry, in commission for defacing of this Shryne, they foūd an entier body, and complete in all his partes within the same, as some yet on liue, and then present, can testifie: so that eyther this their great God, was a bishop Biceps, and lacked but one head more to make him Cerberus, or Chimaera: or else (whiche is most certaine) these Monks were marueylous and monstruous magnifiers, of suche deceiuable trumperie, and wanted nothing at all to make them, Cretenses or Cecropes. But to my pur∣pose againe, as touching the priuileges, possessions, esti∣mation and maiestie of this house, it were too muche to recite the one halfe, and therefore I will onely let you knowe, that of auncient time the Abbat had allowance of a Coynage, or Mynte within him selfe, by graunt of  King Ethelstane: That he had place in the general coū∣sell, by gift of the Pope Leo: That the house had fiue Couents, conteining in all, sixtie fiue Monkes: And fi∣nally, that (besides iurisdiction ouer a whole Last of thir∣téene
Hundreds (it had possession of liuelyhoode to the value of eight hundreth and eight pounds by yeare. Nowe, besides these two great houses, there were in Canterbury some other also of lesse note:S. Gregories in Canterbu¦ry. As S. Gre∣gories (a Churche of Chanons, belonging to the Hospi∣tal that Lanfranc built) whiche was fired in the time of King Stephan, and valued in the Recordes at thirtie  poundes by the yeare: The Hospital of S. Laurence,S. Laurence Hospitall. edified by Hughe (the Abbat of S. Augustines) for his sicke Monkes, and rated at twentie poundes yearely: S. Iames Hospital, erected by Eleonor,S, Iames Hospitall, S. Sepul∣chers. the wife of King Henrie the thirde: S. Sepulchres, a house of Nonnes, prepared (belike) to serue the necessitie of the hoat Mon∣kes, esteemed at twelue pounds by yeare: The White  Friers translated by one ohn Digge,White fri∣ars. to the Isle of Byn∣white, lately the house of one Rolph: And S. MyldredsS. Mildred in the South side of the Citie, long since (but not lately) an Abbay. There is extant in Canterbury also, the auncient and stately Palaice of the Archebishops,The Bi∣shops Pa∣laice. not that whiche King Ethelbert first gaue to Augustine at Staplegate, for it was but a meane dwelling house, an∣swerable to his smal company, and first beginnings: but the very same which he secondly bestowed on him (whē he left Canterbury, and went to Reculuer) which was  his owne, and his predecessours, the Kinges stately Court and Palaice. This house, by that time Hu∣bert the Archebishop had aspired to the Sée, was decay∣d, either by age, or flame, or bothe: Who therfore pul∣ed downe the most part of it, and in place thereof layde he foundation of that great Hall, and other the offices, hat are nowe to be séene: But by reason that he him∣selfe wanted time, (being preuented by death) and some of his followers lacked money (hauing otherwise, be∣stowed it lauishly) to perfourme the worke, it rested till
the dayes of Boniface, who both substantially, and beau∣tifully finished it. Lastly, a litle without the East wall of the citie stood S. Martines,S. Martines was a Bi∣shops See. where was somtime an auncient Church, erected by the Romanes, in which (before the comming of Augustine) Bertha, the wife of King Ethelbert, hauing receiued the Religion of Christ before him, was accusto∣med to pray. In this smal Oratorie, Augustine (by the Kings permission) celebrated diuine seruice, & admini∣stred the Sacraments, vntil that by further taste of the Kings fauour, he obtained larger roome to build his Mo∣nasterie vpon. And this Church was long time after, euen vntil the comming in of the Normanes, the Sée of a Bishop, who (alwayes remaining in the countrie (sup∣plied the absence of the Metropolitane, that for the most part followed the Court: and that as wel in gouerning the Monkes, as in perfourming the solemnities of the Churche, and exercising the authoritie of an Archedea∣con. Godwine was the last whiche sate in that chaire, after whose death, Lanfranc (being as ielouze of a part∣ner in his spirituall Ierarchie, as euer was Alexander in his temporall Empire) refused to consecrate any o∣ther, affirming plainly, that Two Bishops were to ma∣ny for one Citie. Neuerthelesse, bycause he néeded the helpe of a substitute, he created in place therof, one of his Chaplaines, Archedeacon of Can∣terbury.
Hakington. BAldwine (an Archebishop of Canter∣bury,S. Sepul∣chres by Cā∣terbury. vnder the reigne of King Hen∣rie the seconde) minding to aduaunce the estimation of Thomas Becket, his lately murthered predecessour, and withall to make him self memorable to posteritie, thought this one waye the best for obtaining his double desire, namely, to build some stately Churche Monument, and to matche in the patronage thereof, Thomas that Prototraitour and re∣bell to his Prince, with Stephan the Protomartyr, and true seruaunt of Almightie God. For which purpose, and to the ende that his acte might haue the more coun∣tenaunce and credite, he obtained a licence from Pope Vrban, in this fourme as Mathewe Parise reporteth it. Presentium tibi authoritate mandamus, vt liceat tibi Ecclesi∣am in honorem beatorum Stephani, & Thomae, martyrum, con∣stituere, & idoneis eam ordinare personis, quibus beneficia quae ad eorum sustentationem constitueris, canonicè debeas assig∣nare. Item mandamus, vt quarta parte oblationum, reliquijs Sancti Thomae monachorum vsibus concessa, quarta fabricis ecclesiae deputata, quarta pauperibus deputata, quartam porti∣onem reliquam liceat tibi in alios vsus, pro tuae voluntatis arbi∣trio erogare. &c. This done,The Mon∣kes cōtend with the Archbishop and do pre∣uaile. he pulled downe an olde timber Chapell that stoode at Hakington, and raysed in place therof, a faire Church of hewed stone. But, for as much, as not only the charge to furnish that present buil¦ding, was fetched frō S. Thomas offering at Canterbu∣ry, (much to the decay of the Monkes gaine) but also the yerely maintenāce therof, was to be drawn from ye same Hanaper, & to be bestowed vpon certaine Seculer Cha∣nons, (a sort of religious persons, that ye monks despised)
who yet might happely in time to come, be made equall with the Monkes themselues in the election of the Arch∣bishop, to the generall discredite of their holy order, and vtter violation of their former Priuileges, therefore the Couent of Christes Churche, thinking it fit to with∣stande suche beginnings, complayned hereof to Pope Innocents holynesse (for Vrban was then deade) and were so well hearde in their suite, that the Archebishops building was countermaunded, and he with forced pa∣tience, contented to cease the worke. Neuerthelesse, hauing hope, that if the thing were by great distance of place, remoued out of the Monks eye, he might with bet∣ter quiet bring his desire to the wished effect, he attemp∣ted the like platfourme at Lambhithe, his owne house neare London: But before he had finished that worke, he went into the holy Lande with King Richarde the first, and dyed without returne, in whiche meane while, the Chapell of Hakington, being destitute of her Pa∣trone, was quite and cleane demolished. Hubert succéeded Baldwine in the Sée, and put his hande to perfourme the building at Lambhithe, that his predecessour had begonne, but the Monkes (fearing still the former inconuenience) intercepted the whole profits of Saincte Thomas offering, renued their suite at Rome, and (féeding the Pope with that whiche should haue maynteined the building) made his holy eares so attentiue, that he became wholy of the Monkes deuoti∣on, and compelled Hubert at his owne dispence, and to his great dispight, to (Mauger his Myter) race that Chapell also, and to make it equall with the grounde. And thus you may sée howe the enuious Monkes hin∣dered the felicitie of Hakington, whiche otherwise by this kynde of spirituall robberie, might in time haue proued as famous as Boxley, Walsingham, or any other
Den of Idolatrie, whereas then it was with muche a doe, and great difficultie obteined, that a poore Chapell (serued with a single Syr Iohn, and destitute, both of Font, and Churcheyard) might remaine standing in the place. Howebeit since that time, it is become the Parish Church there.
Harbaldowne, by Can∣terbury. The vanitie of Man, and the subtilty of the De∣uill, be the cause of I∣dolatrie.SVche hathe béene the nature of man, euen from that time (in whiche not contenting himself to abide man, but aspiring by knowledge of good and e∣uill to become God, he defaced the I∣mage of his Creator, to the simili∣tude of whome he was created) that he hath continually euer since, and that in matters con∣cerning God, more trusted his owne witte, then the wisedome of God him selfe, better liked his owne inuen¦tion, then Gods holy institution, and preferred wil wor∣ship, deuised of his own braine, before reuerent religion inioyned by the mouthe of the Almightie. And suche also hathe béen the continual craft of Sathan, his sworn enemie, that (séeing him thus addicted to vanitie and re∣bellion) he hath laboured from time to time to féede his euill humour, suggesting innumerable (and those moste subtile) sleightes to withdrawe him from God, & drawe him to Idolatrie and superstition: So that in time by policie of the one, and pronesse in the other, it was by degrées brought to passe, that not onely the excellent and glorious creatures of God, the Angels, & men (I mean) the Sunne and Moone, the Stars and Elements, were worshipped as Gods, But also, diuine honour and reue∣rence, was transferred from the highest God, to the moste inferiour, and basest partes of all his woorkman∣ship, the world at the length becomming so madde, that it would crouche and knéele, kisse, and knocke, bowe,
bend, and make all signes of honour and reuerence, not only to stockes and stones (that represented the bodies of mortall men) but to whatsoeuer trifle, trumperie, or bagage besides, that the Deuill or his Ministers would haue preferred as a monument, or relique of them. And therefore, no maruaile was it, if God (séeing the world to abuse it selfe after a moste froward and per∣uerse kinde of superstitiō) did by his iust vengeaunce be∣reaue vnbeléeuers of al vnderstanding and iudgement, so that without any further doubt, or inquisition) they sticked not to embrace deuoutly, whatsoeuer was com∣mended, were it neuer so lewdly. For example whereof, beholde here at Harbaldowne (an Hospital builded by Lanfranc the Archebishop, for reliefe of the poore and diseased) the shamefull Idolatrie of this latter age, committed by abusing the lippes (whiche God hath giuen for the sounding foorth of his praise) in smacking and kissing the vpper leather of an olde shoe, reserued for a Relique, and vnreuerently offered to as many as passed by. Erasmus, setting foorth (in his Dialogue intituled,Saint Tho∣mas Bec∣kets Re∣lique. Peregrinatio religionis ergo) vnder the name of one Ogygius, his owne trauaile, to visite our Lady of Walsingham, and Saint Thomas Becket, sheweth that in his retourne from Canterbury towards London, he found (on the high way side) an Hospital of certain poore folkes: of which, one came out against him and his com∣panie, holding a holy water sprinkle in the one hand, & bearing the vpper leather of an olde shoe (faire set in Copper and Christal) in the other hand: This doting fa∣ther, first cast holy water vpon thē, & then offred thē (by one and one) the holy shoe to kisse, Whereat as the most part of the company (knowing the manner) made no re∣fusal: So amongst the rest one Gratianus (as he faineth) offended with the follie, asked halfe in anger what it
was: Saint Thomas Shoe, quoth the olde man: with that Gratianus turned him to the company, & said: Quid sibi volunt hae pecudes, vt osculemur calceos omniū bonorum Virorum? Quin eadem opera porrigunt osculandū sputum, a∣lia{que} corporis excrementa? What meane these beasts, that we should kisse the shoes of al good men? why do they not, by the same reason offer vs their Spittle, and o∣ther excrements of the body to be kissed? This to the wiser sorte, and suche as haue any light, may suffice for the vnderstanding of Erasmus opinion & iudgment tou∣ching such vnreuerēt Reliques: but yet lest some blinde & wilfull worshipper should thinke it but merily spoken of him, and in another mans person, (as in déed Erasmus had many times Dextrū pedem in calceo sinistrum in pelui, according to the old Prouerb) I wil likewise adde a few woordes, vsed in the end of his booke, for explication of his own full minde in that matter. Notantur, qui reliqui∣as incertas pro certis ostendunt, qui his plus tribuūt quam o∣portet, & qui questum ex his sordide faciunt. In this Dia∣logue all suche are taxed, whiche shewe vnto the peo∣ple vncertaine reliques, for true and certaine: or which doe ascribe vnto them more then of right is due: or whiche do raise filthie gaine and lucre by them. But peraduenture the authoritie of D. Erasmus is nowe (since the late Tridentine Counsell) of no weight with them, since by the sentence of the same, his workes without choice be condemned as Heretical. Truly, that Coūsel shewed it selfe, more hastie to sup∣presse al yt good workes of Godly men, then redie to cor∣rect or abolish any of their owne fabulous books, or su∣perstitious follies. And therfore let indifferēt men iudge whether the opinion of any one true speaking man, be not worthely to be preferred, before the determination of suche a whole vnaduised Synode. And as for suche as
in this light of the trueth, wll shewe themselues main∣teiners of such Mawmetrie, I déeme thē like the Sabees, whose senses, (as Strabo writeth) are offended with swéet smelling sauours, and delighted with the filthie smoke of burned goates haire, and therefore I say vnto them, Sordescant adhuc, and so leaue thē.
Norwood, that is to say, the North wood. IN the dayes of King Edward the confes∣sor, one hundreth Burgesses of the Ci∣tie of Canterbury, ought their suite to the Manor of Norwood, as in that part of the booke of Domesday which concer¦neth Kent, may yet moste euidently ap∣peare. The building is nowe demolished, but the Manor was long time in the possession of certaine Gen∣tlemen of the same name, (of whiche race, one lyeth bu∣ried in the body of the church at Adington, in the yeare a thousand foure hundreth and sixetéene. And here∣by it is probablie (as me thinketh) to bee coniectured,The olde manner of nameing men. that in auncient time, men were vsually named of the places of their dwelling: For whereas before the com∣ming in of the Conquerour, places (for the most part) had their appellatiōs, either of their situation, or of some notable accidēt, or noble man, as Northwood in regard of Southwood, Anglefford by reason of the flight of the Englishmen, & Rochester because of Rof. And whereas persons also, had their callings (most cōmonly) eyther of some note of the body, as Swanshalse, for the whitenes of her necke: or for some propertie of ye minde, as Godred, for his good counsel, & that by one single Surname only & no more, now immediately after the arriuall of ye Nor∣manes (which obteined those lādes, & which first brought into this Realme, ye names of Thomas, Iohn, Nicholas, Fraunces, Stephā, Henrie & such like, that now be most vsuall) men began to be knowen and surnamed, not of their conditions and properties, but of their dwellings and possessions: So that the Norman that was before Thomas, and had gotten the Towneship of Norton,
Sutton. Inglefield, or Combe, was thencefoorth called, Thomas of Norton, of Sutton, of Inglefield, of Combe, or such like, al which be vndoubtedly) the names of pla∣ces and not of persons. Neyther did the matter stay here, but in further processe of time, this Thomas of Norton, of Sutton, or of Combe, was called Thomas Norton, Thomas Sutton, or Thomas Combe, leauing out the particle (of) whiche before denoted his dwelling place: And thus (the Norman manner preuailing) the auncient custome of the Saxons and Englishe men va∣nished quite out of vre. This whole thing, is best di∣scerned by auncient euidences, and by the names of our Chesshyre men yet remaining: For, olde writings haue commonly, Ioannes de Norton, Wilmus de Sutton, For such as we call nowe, Iohn Norton, and William Sutton: and amongst the Gentlemen of Chesshyre (euen to this day) one is called (after their maner) Thomas a Bruer∣ton, another Iohn a Holcrost, and suche like, for Tho∣mas Bruerton, Iohn Holcrost. &c. as we here vse it. Thus muche shortly of mine owne fantasie, I thought not vnmeete to impart, by occasion of the name of Nor∣wood, and now forward to my purpose againe.
Leedes, in Latine of some Lodanum, of others Ledanum Castrum. RObert Creuequer, was one of the eight, that Iohn Fynes elected for his assistance in the defence of Do∣uer Castle (as we haue already shewed) who, taking for that cause the Manor of Leedes, and vnderta∣king to finde fiue Warders there∣fore, builded this Castle, or at the least, an other, that stoode in the place. For I haue read, that Edward (thē Prince of Wales, and afterward the first King of that name) being Wardein of the Fiue Portes, and Constable of Douer, in the life of Henrie the third his Father, caused Henrie Cobham (whose ministerie he vsed, as substitute in bothe those offices) to race the Castle that Robert Creuequer had erected, bicause Creuequer (that was then owner of it, & Heire to Robert) was of the number of the Nobles that moued and mainteined warre against him. Whiche, whether it be true, or no, I will not affirme, but yet I thinke it very likely, bothe bicause Badlesmere (a man of another name) became Lord of Leedes shortly after (as you shall anone sée) and also for that the present woorke at Leedes pretendeth not the antiquitie of so many yeares, as are passed since the age of the conquest. But let vs leaue the building, and goe in hand with the storie. King Henrie the first, hauing none other issue of his bodie then Maude (first married to Henrie the Empe∣rour,Maude the Empresse, true Heire to the Crowne. whereof she was called the Empresse, and after coupled to Geffray Plantaginet the Earle of Angeow) & fearing (as it happened in déed) yt after his death, trou∣ble might arise in the Realme, about the inheritance of ye
Crowne, bycause she was by habitation a straunger and farre of, so that she might want bothe force and friends to atchieue her right: And for that also, Stephan (the Earle of Boloine, his sisters sonne) was then of greate estimation amongst the noble men, and abiding within the Realme, so that with great aduauntage, he might offer her wrong: he procured (in full Parleament) the assent of his Lordes and Commons, that Maude, and her heires, shoulde succéede in the kingdome after him: And to the ende, that this limitation of his, might be the more surely established, he tooke the fidelitie and pro∣mise by othe, bothe of his Clergie and Laytie, and of the Earle of Boloine him selfe. Howbeit, immediatly after his decease, Stephan (be∣ing of the opinion, that Si ius violandum est, certe regnan∣di causa violandum est. If breache of lawes, a man shall vndertake: He must them boldly break, for kingdomes sake.) Inuaded the Crowne, and by the aduice of William the Archebishop of Canterbury (who had first of al giuen his fayth to Maude) by the fauour of the common peo∣ple, whiche adheared vnto him) and by the consent of the holy father of Rome (whose will neuer wanteth to the furtheraunce of mischiefe) he obtained it, whiche neuer∣thelesse (as William of Newborowe well noteth) being gotten by patterne, he held not past two yeres in peace, but spent the residue of his whole reigne in dissention, warre, and bloudshed: to the great offence of God, the manifest iniurie of his owne cousine, and the grieuous vexation of this countrie and people. For soone after the beginning of his reigne, sundry of the Noble men, partely vpon remorse of their former
promise made, and partly for displeasure (conceiued by∣cause he kepte not the othe taken at his Coronation) made defection to Maude, so soone as euer she made her challenge to the Crowne: So that (in the end, after ma∣ny calamities) what by her owne power, and their assi∣staunce, she compelled him to fall to composition with her, as in the storie at large it may be séene. Nowe during those his troubles, amongst other things that muche annoyed him, and furthered the part of Maude his aduersarie, it was vpon a time sounded (by his euil willers) in the eares of the cōmon sort, that he was dead: And therewithall soudenly diuers great  men of her deuotion, betooke them to their strong holdes, and some others seised some of the Kings owne Castles to the behalfe of the Empresse: Of whiche number was Robert, the Earle of Gloucester, and bastarde bro∣ther to Maude, who entred this Castle of Leedes, myn∣ding to haue kept it. But King Stephan vsed against  him suche force, and celeritie, that he soone wrested it out of his fingers. King Edwarde the seconde, that for the loue of the two Spensers,Barthol∣mew Ba∣delesmere. incurred the hatred of his wife and Nobilitie, gaue this Castle (in exchaunge for other landes) to Bartilmew Badelesmere (then Lorde Stew∣arde of his housholde) and to his heires for euer: who shortly after (entering into that troublesome action, in whiche Thomas, the Duke of Lancaster with his com∣plices, maugre the King, exiled the Spensers) bothe loste  the Kings fauour, this Castle, and his life also: For, whilste he was abroade in ayde of the Barons, and had committed the custodie thereof to Thomas Colpeper,Thomas Colpeper. and left not onely his chiefe treasure in money, but also his wife and children within it for their securitie: It chaunced, that Isabell the Kings wife, mynding a Pil∣grimage towards Cāterbury, and being ouertakē with
might, sent her Marshal to prepare for her lodging ther. But her officer was proudly denyed by the Captaine, who sticked not to tell him, that neyther the Quéene, ne any other, shoulde be lodged there, without the com∣mandement of his Lord the owner. The Queene, not thus aunswered, came to the gate in person, and requi∣red to be let in, But the Captain most malepertly repul¦sed her also, in so much that shee complained greauously to the king of the misdemenour, and he forthwith leuied a power, and personally sumoned and besieged the peice so straightly, that in the end, through want of rescue and victuall, it was deliuered him. Then tooke he Capitaine Colpeper, and houng him vp: The wife and children of the Lord Badelesmere, he sent to the Towre of London: The treasure and munition, he seised to his owne vse: and the Castle he committed to such as liked him. But, as the last acte of a Tragedie is alwayes more heauie & sorowful thē the rest: so (calamitie & woe increasing vpō him) Badelesmere him self was the yere folowing, in the company of the Duke of Lancaster and others, discomfi∣ted at Borowbrig, by the Kings armie, and shortly after sent to Canterbury, and beheaded. I might here iustly take occasion, to rip vp the causes of those great and tra∣gicall troubles, that grewe betwene this King & his No∣bilitie, for Peter Gaueston, & these two Spensers, the ra∣ther, for that the common sort of our English storiers, do lay the whole burthen of that fault vpon the King, and those fewe persons: But bycause the matter is not so plaine as they make it, & withal requireth more wordes for ye manifestation therof, then I may now afoorde, & for that also there is hope, that a special hystorie of ye reigne (penned by S. Thomas Delamore, which liued in ye very time it self) may be hereafter imprinted & made cōmon,
I will onely exhort the Reader (for his owne informati∣on in the trueth, and for some excuse of such as be ouer∣charged) to peruse that worke, wherein (I assure him) he shall finde matter, bothe very rare, and credible. The Pryo∣ry at Leeds.As touching the Pryorie at Leedes (whiche was a house of Regular Chanons, and valued in the Recordes of the late suppression at thrée hundreth, thrée score and two poundes of yearely reuenue) I finde, that one Ro∣bert Creuequer (the author of the Castle peraduen∣ture, for this was done in the reigne of Henrie, sonne to the Conquerour) and Adam his sonne and heire, firste founded it. Whiche thing might probably haue béene coniectured, althoughe it had neuer béene commit∣ted to Hystorie. For in auncient time, euen the grea∣test personages, helde Monkes, Friars, and Nonnes, in suche veneration and liking, that they thought no citie in case to flourish, no house likely to haue long continu∣aunce, no Castle sufficiently defended, where was not an Abbay, Pryorie, or Nonnerie, eyther placed within the walles, or situate at hande and neare adioyning. And surely (omitting the residue of the Realme) hereof only it came to passe, that Douer had S. Martines, Can∣terbury Christes Churche, Rochester S. Andrewes, Tunbridge the Friars, Maydstone the Chanons, Grenewiche the obseruants, and this our Leedes her Pryorie of Chanons at hande. Howbeit, I finde in a Heralds note (who belike made his coniecture, by some coate of Armes lately apparant) that one Leybourne, an Earle of Salisburie, was the founder of it. In deede, it is to be séene in the Annales of S. Augustines of Can∣terbury, that a noble man (called Roger Leybourne) was sometime of great authoritie within this Shyre, notwithstanding that, in his time he had tasted of bothe fortunes: for in the dayes of King Henrie the thirde, he
was firste one of that coniuration, which was called the Barons warre, from whiche faction, Edwarde the Kings sonne, wonne him, by faire means to his part, and made him the bearer of his priuie purse. Afterwarde they agréed not vpon the reckoning, so that the Prince (charging him with great arrearage of account) seised his liuing for satisfaction of the debt, by whiche occasion Roger once more, became of the Barons deuotions: But after the pacification made at Kenel∣worth, he was eftsones receiued to fauour, and was made Wardein of the Fiue Portes, and Lieuetenant of this whole Shyre. Nowe, thoughe it can not be true, that this man was the builder of this Pryorie (for the same Annales say, that it was erected long before) yet if he did but marrie the heyre, he might truely be termed the Patrone or founder thereof, for by that name, not only the builders themselues, but their posteritie also (to whom the glory of their déedes did descend) were wont to be called, as well as they.
The description, and hystorie, of the, See and Diocesse of Rochester. THE learned in Astronomie, be of the opinion, that if Iupiter, Mercurie, or any other Planet, approche within certain degrées of the Sunne, and be burned (as they terme it) vnder his beames, That then it hath in maner no influence at all, But yealdeth wholy to the Sunne that ouershineth it: And some men beholding the nearenesse of these two Bishoprickes, Cā∣terbury and Rochester, and comparing the bright glory, pompe, and primacie of the one, with the contrarie alto∣gether in the other, haue fansied Rochester so ouersha∣dowed and obscured, that they recken it no Sée or Bi∣shoprick of it self, But only a place of a méere Suffragan, and Chaplain to Canterbury. But he that shall either aduisedly weigh the firste institution of them bothe, or ut indifferently consider the estate of eyther, shall easi∣ finde, that Rochester hath not only a lawfull, and ca∣onicall Cathedrall Sée of it selfe, But the same also ore honestly won and obteined, then euer Canterbury d: For, as touching Rochester, Augustine (whome e Monkes may not deny to be the English Apostle) or∣ined Iustus Bishop there, Ethelbert (the lawfull king f Kent) both assenting thereto by his presence, and con∣firming it by his liberall beneficence.By what meanes the Archebi∣shops chair came to . But, howe Can∣terbury came to haue an Archebishops Chayre, if you thinke that it hath not in that title already so sufficient∣ly appeared, as that it therfore néedeth not now eftsones to be rehearsed, then reade (I pray you) Garuas. Tilberi∣ens. and he (in his booke De otijs Imperialibus) wil tel you,
in Sanguine sanctorum, Dorobernensis ecclesia primatiam obtinuit. The Church of Canterbury obteined the Pri∣macie, by the sheading of the bloud of Saints. Rochester moreouer, hath had also a continuall succession of Bi∣shops, euen from the beginning, whiche haue gouerned in a distinct Diocesse, containing foure Deanries, and therefore wanteth nothing (that I knowe) to make it a compleat and absolute Bishopricke. In déede, the yere∣ly value is but small, the slendernesse whereof (ioyned with some ceremoniall duties to the Archebishop) hap∣pely haue béene the cause of abasing the estimation of it.  But for all that, let vs not sticke with auncient Beda, and others, to saye, that the Bishops Sée at Rochester was at the first instituted by Augustine, That a Cathe∣drall Churche was builded there, by King Ethelbert, to the name of S. Andrewe, and that he endowed it with certaine lande for liuelyhood, which he called Priestfield, in token (as I thinke) that Priestes should be susteined therewithall. This Bishopricke may be sayd to be se∣uered from Canterbury Diocesse (for the most parte) by the water of Medway, and it consisteth (as I sayde) of foure distincte Deanries, namely, Rochester, Malling, Dartford, and Shorham: Howbeit, with this latter, the Bishop medleth not, the same being a peculiar (as they terme it) to the Archebishop of Canterbury, who holdeth his prerogatiue wheresoeuer his lands do lye, as in this Deanrie he hath not only had of olde time certain man∣sion houses, with Parkes and Demeanes, but diuers o∣ther large territories, rentes, and reuenues also. In it therefore are these Churches following. Shorham, with the Chapell of Otford. Eynesford, with the Vicarage there.The Dean¦rie of shor¦ham. Dernth, and the Vicarage there. Fermingham, and the Vicarage.
Bexley, and the Vicarage. Eareth, alias Eard. Northfleete, and the Vicarage. Mepham, and the Vicarage. Clyue. Grean, with the Vicarage. Farleigh, with the Vicarage. Huntington, alias, Hunton. Peckam, with the Vicarage. Wrotham, with the Chapell and Vicarage. Eightam. Seuenocke, with the Vicarage. Penshurst. Chydingstone. Heuer. Gillingham, with the Vicarage. Brasted. Sundriche. Cheuening, Orpington, with the Chapell and Vicarage. Hese. Kestan. Halstede. Woodland. Eastmalling, with the Vicarage. Ifeild. A Popishe myracle.As touching the Bishops of this Sée, Iustus, (one of the same, that Pope Gregorie sent hither from Rome) was the firste, that sate in the chaire, who was afterwarde translated to Canterbury, and of whome they reporte this for a singular myracle: That when his body (many yeares after the interrement) was to be remoued, it yealded a most pleasaunt sauour, in the senses of all that
were present: Whiche thing, howe meruailous it was, when they had (after the common manner then vsed) be∣fore his buriall, enbaulmed his body with moste preci∣ous, delectable, and odoriferous spices, I dare make any man Iudge, if he be not more then a pore blinde Papist, giuen ouer to beléeue al manner (be they neuer so grosse, and beastly) illusions. In the whole race of the Bishops succéeding Iustus in this Sée, thrée amongst others, be read of, moste nota∣ble, Paulinus Gundulphus, and Gilbertus: of which the first after his death was there honoured for a Saint: The second, was in his life the best benefactor that euer their Churche found: The third was so hatefull & iniu∣rious to the Monkes, yt they neither estéemed him while he was on liue, nor wailed him at all, after that he was dead. But of all these, we shall haue place to speake more largely, when we shall come to the Churche and Monasterie: In the meane time therfore, it shalbe fitte to shewe, with what cowrage this churche vpheld her rightes and priuileges, not only agaynst the Monkes of Canterbury (which laboured much to bringe it vnder) but also against the Sée of the Archbishops it self, which was (for the most parte) the chiefe patrone & promose  f it. In the reigne of Kyng Henry the third,Monkes contend for the electiō of the Bi∣shop. and after the deathe of Benedicte. (the Bishop of Rochester) the Monks made choise of one Henrie Sanford (that greate Clearke, which afterward preached at Sedingburne) whearof when ye Monks of Christes Church had gotten vnderstandinge, they resisted the election, challenginge that the pastorall staffe or crosyer of Rochester ought of verie right to be brought to their house, after the decease of the Bishop, and that the election ought to be made in their Chapiter. The Monkes of Rochester maintei∣ned their owne choise and so (the matter waxing warme
betwéen them (it was at the length referred to the de∣termination of the Archebishope: he againe posted it o∣uer to certaine delegates, who hearing the parties, and weighing the proofes, gaue sentence with the monks of Rochester, and yet loste (as they thought) good loue and amitie among them: But (as the Poet saith) Male sar∣ta gratia, nequicquam coit, & rescinditur, Fauour, that is, euill peeced, will not ioyne close, but falleth a sunder againe. And therefore this their opinion fayled them, & that their cure was but patched: for soone after the sore brake out of newe, and the Canterbury Monkes reuiued their displeasure with suche a heate, that Hu∣bert of Borrow (the chief Iustice of the Realme) was driuen to come into the Chapter house to coole it, and to woorke a second reconciliation betwéene them. Nei∣ther yet for all that (as it may séeme) was that flame clene extinguished. For not long after, the Monkes  of Christes Church, séeing that they themselues could not preuaile, intituled their Archebishop Edmund with whom also the Rochester Monks waged law at Rome before the holy Father, (as touching the election of one Richard Wendene, or Wendeouer, whom they would haue had to Bishop) by the space of thrée whole yeares together,Sāint Cuth¦bertes feast why holdē double. and at the length, eyther thorow the equitie of their cause, or the weight of their purse, ouerthrewe him vpon Saint Cuthberts day, in ioye whereof, they returned home withall hast, and enacted in their Chap∣ter house, that from thencefoorth for euer, Saint Cuth∣bertes feast (as a Tropheum of their victorie) should be holden double, bothe in their Churche and Kitchin. And not thus only, but otherwise also, hath the Sée at Rochester, well holden her owne: for during the whole successiō of thréescore and thrée Bishops, which in right lyne, haue followed Iustus, she hathe continually main∣teined
her Chaire at this one place, whereas in moste partes of the Realme besides, the Sées of the Bishops haue suffred sundrie translations,Bishops Sees, are translated from Vil∣lages to Cities. by reason that in the Conquerours time, order was taken, that suche Bi∣shops, as before had their Churches in Coūtrie townes and Villages, should foorthwith remoue, & from thence foorth remaine in walled Townes and Cities: whiche ordinance could not by any meanes touche Rochester, that was a walled Citie long time before King Willi∣ams gouernment. But now, to the end ye I may pursue the order that I haue prescribed, I will set foorth a Ca∣talogue of the Bishops of Rochester by name, referring recitall of their actes and doings, to their peculiar and proper places, as I haue in Canterbury before. Iustus.The Cata∣logue of Rochester Bishops. Romanus. Paulinus. Ithamarus. Damianus. Putta. Cuichelmus. Gibmandus. Tobias. Aldulphus. Duime, or Duno: Eardulphus. Diora. Permundus, alias, Wermundus. Beornmodus. After him, these be inserted in a Ca∣talogue that is before the Chronicle of Rochester. Tathnodus, Batenodus, Guthwulfus, Swithulfus, Bu∣iricus, Chuelmundus, and Kyneferdus.
Burhricus. Alstanus. Godwinus. Godwinus, the second Siwardus. Before, and at the tyme of the Conquest. Arnostus, 1077. Gundulphus. 1108. Radulphus. 1114. Aernulphus. Ioannes. After whome, in the former Catalogue, one other Ioannes followeth. Ascelimus, or Anselimus: and hitherto they were all Monkes. Guelterus. Gualeramus. Gilebertus Glanuille. Benedictus. Henricus Richardus Wendene, or Wendeouer. 1250, Laurentius de Sancto Martino. Gualterus de Merton: Chancellour of England. Ioannes de Bradfield. Thomas de Inglethorp. 1291 Thomas de Wuldham. Hamo de Heth. Ioannes de Sepey. Wilmus Witlesey. Thomas Trelege. Thomas Brynton, or Braton. Richardus Barnet, elected, and not consecrated. Willelmus de Botelesham. Ioannes de Botelesham. elected only. Ghelyndon. elected only. Richardus Young: he made the windowes at Frends∣bury,
and there it is to be seene in picture. 1418. Ioannes Kempe. Ioannes Langdon. Thomas Broune. Willielmus Wellis. Ioannes Lowe. Richardus Peckam. Elected only. Thomas Rotheram. Ioannes Alcocke. Ioannes Russel. Eadmundus Audeley. Thomas Sauage. Richardus Fitz Iames. 1504. Ioannes Fisher. Ioannes Hylsey. 1539. Nicholaus Hethe. 1544. Henricus Holbeache. 1547. Nicholaus Rydley. 1549. Ioannes Ponet. 1550. Ioannes Skorey. Mauritius Griffin. 1559. Eadmundus Allen. Elected only. 1559. Eadmundus Gest. 1571. Eadmundus Freake. And thus much shortly being said, touching the Sée, & Bishops of Rochester in generalitie, it followeth, that I enter into the particular description of the Diocesse, wherein I meane to follow the order that I haue takē in Canterbury before: Namely to begin at the North∣east corner, and from thence (first descending along the bankes of Medwey, and then passing by the Frontiers of Sussex and Surrey, and lastly returning by the Tha∣mise shore to the same point) to enuiron the whole Bi∣shoprick: whiche done, I will peruse what it conteineth in the inner partes also, and then betake me to rest.
Gillingham. The Har∣borowe of the Nauie Royall.EVen at our first entrie into the Dio∣cesse of Rochester, on the Northeast part thereof, the Harborowe of the Nauie Royall at Gillingham presen∣teth it selfe vnto vs, a thing of al other most worthie the first place, whether you respect the richesse, beautie, or benefite of the same. No towne, nor Citie, is there (I dare say) in this whole Shyre, comparable in value with this our Fleete: Nor shipping any where els in the whole world to be found, either more artificially moalded vnder the water, or more gorgeously decked aboue: And as for the benefite that our Realme may reape by these moste stately and valiant vessels, it is euē the same yt Apollo by ye mouth of Aristonice promised to Grece, when his Oracle was consulted against the inuasion of Xerxes, & that his won∣derful armie (or rather world of men in armes) saying, Iupiter è ligno dat moenia facta Mineruae, Quae tibi sola tuis{que} ferant inuicta salutem. Highe Ioue doth giue thee walles of wood. appointed to Minerue, The whiche alone inuincible, may thee, and thine, preserue. And therefore, of these suche excellent ornaments of peace, & trustie aides in warre, I might truely affirme, that they be for wealthe, almoste so many riche treasu∣ries, as they be single ships: for beautie, so many prince∣ly Palaces, as they be seuerall peices: and for strength, so many mouing Castles, as they be sundrie sayling vessels. They be not many (I must confesse, and you may sée) and therefore in that behalfe nothing aunswe∣rable, either to that Nauie whiche fought against Xer∣xes at Salamis, or to many other auncient Fleetes of Forreigne Kingdomes, or of this our owne Iland: how∣beit,
if their swiftnes in sayling, their furie in offending, or force in defending, be duly weighed, they shalbe foūd as farre to passe all other in power, as they be inferiour to any in number. For looke what the armed Hauke is in the aire amongst the feareful Byrdes, or what the couragious Lyon is on the land amongst the cowardly Cattell of the field, the same is one of these at the Sea in a Nauie of Common vessels, beeing able to make hauocke, to plume, and to pray vpon the best of them at her owne pleasure. Whiche speache of mine, if any man shall suspecte as Hyperbolical, let him cal to minde how often, and howe confidently (of late yeares) some fewe of these ships (incertaine of their interteine∣mēt) haue boorded mightie Princes Nauies of a great number of Sayle, and then I doubt not but he will chaunge his opinion. But what do I labour to com∣mend them, whiche not onely in shewe, and all reason, doe commend themselues, but also are lyke in déedes and effect to perfourme more, then I, in woord or wry∣ting can promise for them. Yea rather, I am prouo∣ked, at the contemplation of this triumphant spectacle, first to thanke God our mercifull Father, and then to thinke duetifully of our good Quéene Elizabeth,The bene∣fites that God hathe giuen this Realme in the Reigne o Queene Elizabeth. by whose vigilant ministerie, care, & prouidence, (drawing as it were, the net for vs, whylest we sleepe) not only the drosse of superstition, and base moneis were first a∣bolished, the feare of outward warre remoued, rustie armour reiected, and rotten Shipping dispatched out of the way: But also, in place thereof, religion and coyne restored to puritie, the Domesticall and forreigne af∣faires of the Realme managed quietly, the land furni∣shed with new armour, shot, & munition, aboundantly, & this Riuer fraught with these strong and seruiceable
Ships sufficiently. Whiche so apparant and inesti∣mable benefites, the like whereof this Realme neuer at any one time, (and muche lesse so long time together) hath enioyed, if any man perceaue not, he is more then blockishe: if he consider not, he is excéeding carelesse: and if he acknowledge not, he is to to vnkinde, bothe to God to her Maiestie, and to his owne Countrie. But here againe, for asmuche as it neither standeth with my pre∣sent purpose, to depainte out her Maiesties praises, nei∣ther it lyeth at all in my power, to set them foorth in their true colours (for it requireth an Apelles, to haue Alexander well counterfaited) I will conteine my selfe within these narrowe termes, and tell you the names of these Ships, as they lye in order. The names of the Quenes Maiesties Ships and Gal∣leys. The Bonaduenture. The Elizabeth Ionas. The White Beare. The Philip and Marie. The Triumphe. The Bull. The Tygre. The Antelop. The Hope. The Lyon. The Victorie. The Marie Rose. The Foresight. The Cadishe. The Swift suer. The Aide. The Handmaide. The Dreade not. The Swalowe. The Iennet. The Barke of Bulloigne.
Amongst all these (as you sée) there is but one that beareth her Maiesties name, and yet all these (the Phi∣lip and Marie which beareth her sisters name, onely ex∣cepted,) hath she (as it is sayd) since the beginning of her happy reigne ouer vs, either wholy built vpon the stocks or newly reedified vpon the olde moaldes. Her high∣nesse also knowing right well, that, Non minor est virtus, quam querere, parta tueri: Like vertue it is, to saue that is got: As to get the thing, that earst she had not. Hath planted Vpnor Castle for the defence of the same. But besides these great ships, thrée good Galleys lye here on the side, whiche be thus called, The Speedwell. Trye Right. Blacke Galley. Thus muche of the Nauie: As touching the harbo∣rowe it selfe, I haue heard some wishe, that for the bet∣ter expedition in time of seruice, Some part of this Na∣uie might ride in some other hauen, the rather bycause it is many times very long before a ship can be gotten out of this Riuer into the Sea: Indéede I remember, that I haue reade in Vegetius, that the Romanes diui∣ded their Nauie, and harboured the one part at Miseno (neare Naples) vpon the Tyrrhene Sea, and the other part at Rauenna, vpon the Sea Adriaticque, to the end, that when occasion required, they might readily sayle to any part of the worlde without delay, or windlassing: Bycause (sayth he) in affaires of warre, celeritie dothe as good seruice, as force it selfe. But for all that, whether the same order be necessarie for vs, or no, whoe thoughe we haue the vse of sundrie Seas, yet wée enioy not so large and distant dominions as they helde, it is not our partes to dispute, but their office to determine, whoe for
their great wisedome and good zeale, bothe can and will prouide things conuenient, as well for the safetie of the Nauie, as for the seruice of the Realme. And therefore leauing al this matter to the consideration of them that are well occupied at the helme, let vs apply our oares, that we maye nowe leaue the water, and come to the lande at Gillingham. After the soudaine departure of king Hardicanutus  the Dane, (whiche died of a surfeit of drinke, taken at a noble mans marriage at Lambhith) the English Nobi∣litie thought good to take hold of the oportunitie then of∣fred, to restore to the royall dignitie, the issue of King E∣thelred, which he in his life had for feare of ye Danes, con∣ueyed into Normandie. For which purpose, they addres∣sed messengers to Richard the Duke of Normandie, re∣quiring him to sende ouer Edward the onely sonne (then left) of king Ethelred, and promising to do their indeuour to set him in his fathers seate, So that he woulde agrée to come accompanied with a smal number of strangers: The which condition was deuised, bothe for their owne  excuse and for the yong Princes safetie: For before this time, & after the deth of king Canutus, they had likewise sent for the same Edwarde, & Alfred (his elder brother yt then was on liue) putting them in like hope of restituti∣on, to which request, the duke their grandfather assēted, and for the more honourable furniture of their iourney, gaue them to company, diuers yong Gentlemen, of his own Country, whom he ment to make from thenceforth parteners of theyr prosperitye,A barba∣rous cruel∣tie execu∣ted vpon Straungers. as they had before tyme béen companions of their misfortune: But when they were come into the realme, the Earle Godwine (who sought more the aduauncement of his own house to ho∣nour, then the restitution of the Englishe bloude to the crowne,) perceiuing that by no meanes he could make a
marriage betwéene Alfrede (the elder of the two) and Edgith his daughter, and yet, hauing hope, that Ed∣ward the younger woulde accept the offer, if he might bring to passe to set the garlande vpon his heade, he quarelled at the company which came ouer with them, insinuating to the péeres of the Realme, that Alfrede ment (so soone as he should obtaine the crowne) to place in all roomes of honour, his Normane Nobilitie, and to displace the Englishe, his owne countrey men. Whiche suspicion, he bet so déepely into the heades of many of the Noble men, and especially of his nearest friends and allies, that foorthwith (vpon his persuasion) they fell vp∣on the straungers at Gillingham, and firste killed nyne throughout the whole number of the company, reser∣uing on liue eche tenth mā only: And afterward, (think∣ing the remainer to great) tythed the number also, slea∣ing in the whole, about sixe hundred persons: As for Al∣fred (the elder of the yong Princes) they apprehended, and conueyed him to the Isle of Ely, where first they put out his eyes, and afterwarde, moste cruelly did him to death. But this Edwarde, fearing their furie, esca∣ped their handes, and fled into Normandie: Howbeit, being nowe eftsoones (as I sayde) earnestly sollicited by Godwine, and more faythfully assured by the Noble men, he once againe aduentured to enter the Realme, and taking Godwines daughter to wife, obtained the Crowne, and enioyed it all his life long. I am not ignoraunt, that Simeon of Durham, and diuers other good wryters, affirme this slaughter to haue béene committed at Guylford in Surrey, and some other (of late tyme, and of lesse note) at Guild downe, a place neare Lamberhirst in the edge of this Shyre: but bycause I finde it expressely reported by Thomas Rudborne, and also the authour of the Chronicle of
Couentrie, to haue béen done at Gillingham, Iuxta Tha∣mesim, I sticke not (being nowe come to that place) to ex∣emplifie it, giuing neuerthelesse frée libertie to euery man, to lay it, at the one, or the other, at his owne frée will and pleasure: Onely my desire is to haue obserued, that in this one Storie, there doe lye folded vp, bothe the meanes of the deliuerie of this realme of England from the thraldome of the Danes, and the causes also of the oppression and conquest of the same by the Normanes: For, as touching the first, it pleased the Almightie (nowe at length) by this manner of King Hardicanutus death, (whiche I haue shewed) to breake in sunder the Danish whip, wherwith he had many yeares together, scourged the English nation, and by the meane of drinke (the Da∣nishe delight) to worke the deliuery of the one people, and the exterminion of the other, euen in the midst of all their securitie, and pleasaunce: In which behalfe, I can not but note the iust iudgemēt of God,Excessiue drinking, and how it came into England. extended against those déepe drinkers, and in their example to admonishe all such, as doe in like sort most beastly abuse Gods good creatures, to his great offence, the hurte of their owne soules and bodies, and to the euill example of other men: For, whereas before the arriuall of these Danes, the Englishe men, or Saxons, vsed some temperaunce in drinking, not taking thereof largely, but only at certain great feasts and chearings, and that in one only wassai∣ling cup, or boule, which walked round about the boorde at the midst of the meale, much after that manner of in∣tertainment, whiche Dido sometime gaue to Aeneas, and is expressed by Virgil in these verses. Hic Regina grauem, auro gemmis{que} poposcit Impleuit{que} mero pateram, quam Belus, & omnes A Belo soliti: Tum facta silentia tectis, Iupiter (hospitibus nam te dare iura loquuntur)
Et vos O caetum Tirij celebrate fauentes, Dixit: Et in mensam laticum libauit honorem, Prima{que} libato summo tenus attigit ore. &c. The Queene commaunds a mightie Bolle, Of golde and precious stone To fill with wine: whom Belus King And all King Belus line Was wont to holde: than through them all Was silence made by signe, O Ioue (quoth she) for thou of hostes And gestes both great and small (Men say) the lawes haste put: giue grace I pray, and let vs all O you my Moores nowe do our best, These Troians for to chere, Thus sayd she, and when grace was done, The Bolle in hand she clipt, And in the liquor sweete of wine her lips she scantly dipt. But now after the comming in of the Danes, and af∣ter such time as King Edgar, had permitted them to in∣habite here, and to haue conuersation with his own peo∣ple: Quassing and carowsing so increased, that Didoes sipping was cleane forsaken, and Bitias bowsing came in place, of whome the same Poet writeth, Ille impiger hausit Spumantem pateram, & pleno se proluit auro. And he anon, The fomie bolle of gold vpturnd, And drewe till all was gon. So that King Edgar him self, seing (in his own reigne) the great outrage wherevnto it was growne, was com∣pelled to make lawe therefore, and to ordaine drinking measures (by publique Proclamation) driuing certaine
nayles into the sides of their cups, as limits and bounds, which no man (vpon great payne) should be so hardie as to transgresse. But this vice in that short time had takē such fast roote, as neyther the restraint of law, nor the ex∣pulsiō of the first bringers in therof, could supplant yet. For William of Malmesburie (comparing the man∣ners of the Englishe men,Great trou∣pes of ser∣uing men, came in with the Normanes. and Normanes together) com∣playned, that in his time, the Englishe fashion was, to sit bibbing, hole houres after dinner, as the Normane guise was, to walke and iet vp and downe the streates, with great traines of idle Seruing men folowing them. And I woulde to God, that in our time also we had not iust cause to complaine of this vicious plant of vnmea∣surable Boalling: which whether it be sprong vp out of the olde roote, or be newely transported, by some Danish enemie to all godly temperaunce and sobrietie, let them consider, that with pleasure vse it, and learne in time (by the death of Hardicanute, and the expulsiō of his people) to forsake it: which if they will not, God in time either graunt vs the lawe of the Heluetians, whiche prouided that no man shoulde prouoke other in drinking, or else if that may for courtesie be permitted, bycause (as the prouerbe is,) Sacra haec non aliter constant, yet God (I say) styrre vp some Edgar, to strike nayles in our cuppes, or else giue vs the Gréekishe  Potandi arbitros, Cup Censors, as I may call them, that at the leaste we maye be dryuen to drinke in some manner of measure: For it is not sufferable in a Christian Countrie, that men shoulde thus labour with great contention, and striue, for the maistrie (as it were) to offende God, in so wil∣full waste of his gratious benefits, In this Hystorie is couched also (as I haue already tolde you) the firste cause of the displeasure receyued by the Normanes against this Realme, and consequent∣ly
the cause of their inuasion succéeding the same:The cause of the Con∣quest of En¦lande. For, whereas (after this crueltie, executed by the insti∣gation of Godwine) it happened Harolde (his sonne) to arryue at Pountion, against his will, by occasion of a soudaine perry or contrarie winde, that arose while he was on seaboorde, whether for his owne disporte onely, as some write: or for the execution of the Kings mes∣sage, as others say: or of purpose to visite Wilnote and Hacun, his brother and kinseman (as a thirde sorte affirme,) or for what so euer other cause, I will not dispute: But vpon his arriuall, taken he was, by Guy the Earle of Pountion: and sente to William the Duke of Normandie, where, being charged with his fathers faulte, and fearing that the whole re∣uenge shoulde haue lighted vpon his owne heade, he was dryuen to deuise a shifte for his deliueraunce: He put the Duke in remembraunce therefore of his neare kinred, with Edwarde the King of Englande, And fed him with greate hope and expectation, that Edwarde shoulde dye without issue of his body, by reason that he had no conuersation with his wife: So that, if the matter were well and in season séene vnto, there was no doubte (as he persuaded) but that the Duke through his owne power, and the ayde of some of the Englishe Nobilitie, might easily after the Kings deathe, obtaine the Crowne. For the atchieuing wherof, he both vowed the vttermost of his owne help, and vndertooke that his brethren, his friends, and allies also, should do the best of their indeuour: The wise Duke, knowing wel, Quam malus sit custos diuturnitatis metus, How euil a keper of cō¦tinuance feare is. And therfore reposing much more sure∣tie in a frendly knot of alliance, thē in a fearful offer, pro∣céeding but onely of a countenaunce, accepted Haroldes othe for some assuraunce of his promise, but yet withall,
for more safetie,Harold, the King. affied him to his daughter, to be taken in marriage: And so, after many princely gifts, and much honorable enterteinement bestowed vpon him, he gaue him licence to depart: But Harolde, being nowe retur∣ned into England, forgetteth cleane, that euer he was in Normandie, and therefore so soone as King Edward was deade, he (violating both the one promise and the other) reiecteth Duke Williams daughter, and setteth the Crowne vpon his owne heade: Hereof followed the battaile at Battel in Sussex, and consequently, the Con∣quest of this whole Realme and Countrie. In con∣templation whereof, we haue likewise to accuse the olde , or rather , the inueterate fierce∣nesse,The vncur∣tesie of the English na¦tiō, toward straungers. and cancred crueltie of this our English nation a∣gainst foreignes and straungers: which ioyning in this butcherly sacrifice with bloudie Busyris, deserued wor∣thely the reuenging club of heauenly Hercules: whiche fearing (without cause) great harme, that these fewe might bring vnto them, did by their barbarous immani∣tie,Busyris, was a tirant that sacrificed straungers: and was therefore slaine by Hercules. giue iust cause to a great armie to ouerrunne them: And whiche dreading that by the arriuall of this small troupe of Norman Nobilitie, some of them might lose their honorable roomes and offices, prouoked the wrath of God, to sende in amongst them the whole rable of the Norman slauerie, to possesse their goods & inheritances. It were worthy the consideration, to call to memo∣rie, what great Tragedies haue béene stirred in this Realme, by this our naturall inhospitalitie and disdaine of straungers, both in the time of King Iohn, Henrie his sonne, King Edward the seconde, Henrie the sixte, and in the dayes of later memorie: But, since that matter is parergon, and therefore the discourse woulde proue te∣dious and wearisome, and I also haue beene too long al∣ready at Gillingham: I will rather abruptly end it,
onely wishing, that whatsoeuer note of infamie wee haue heretofore contracted, amongst Forreigne wry∣ters, by this our ferocitie against Aliens, that now at the least (hauing the Light of Gods Gospell before our eyes, and the persecuted partes of his afflicted Church, as Guestes and Straungers in our Countrie) wée so be∣haue our selues towards them, as we may both vtterly rubbe out the olde blemishe, and from hencefoorth staye the heauie hand of the iuste Iupiter Hospitalis, whiche, otherwise, must néedes light vpon such stubburne and vncharitable chur∣lishnesse.
Chetham. Our Lady, & the Rode of Chethā & Gilling∣ham.ALthoughe I haue not hytherto at any time, read any memorable thing recor∣ded in hystorie, touching Chetham it self yet, for so muche as I haue often heard (and that constātly) reported, a Popish illusion done at the place, & for that also it is as profitable to the keping vnder of fained & supersti¦tious religiō, to renew to minde, the Priestly practises of olde time (which are declining to obliuiō) as it is pleasāt to reteine in memorie, the Monuments & antiquities of whatsoeuer other kinde, I thinke it not amisse, to com∣mit faithfully to writing, what I haue receiued credi∣bly by hearing, concerning the Idols, sometime knowen by the names, of our Lady, and the Roode of Chetham, and Gillingham. It happened (say they) that the dead Corps of a man, (lost through shipwracke belike) was cast on land in the Parishe of Chetham, and being there taken vp, was by some charitable persons com∣mitted to honest burial within their Churchyard: which thing was no sooner done, but our Lady of Chetham, finding her selfe offended therewith, arose by night, and went in person to the house of the Parishe Clearke, (whiche then was in the Stréete a good distance from the Churche) and making a noyse at his window, awa∣ked him: This man at the first (as commonly it fareth with men disturbed in their rest) demaunded somewhat roughly, who was there: But when he vnderstoode by her owne aunswere, that it was the Lady of Chetham, he chaunged his note, and moste mildely asked ye cause of her comming: She tolde him, that there was lately buryed (neere to the place where she was honoured) a sinfull person, whiche so offended her eye with his gast∣ly grinning, that vnles he were remoued, she could not,
but (to the great griefe of good people) withdrawe her selfe from that place, and ceasse her wonted miraculous working amongst them. And therefore she willed him, to go with her, to the end that (by his helpe) she might take him vp, and cast him againe into the Riuer: The Clerke obeyed, arose, and waited on her toward the Churche: but the good Ladie (not wonted to walk) wa∣xed wearie of the labour, and therfore was inforced for very want of breath to sit downe in a bushe by the way, and there to rest her: And this place (forsooth) as also the whole track of their iourney, (remaining euer after a gréene pathe) the Towne dwellers were went to shew: Now after a while, they go forward againe, and com∣ming to the Churchyard, digged vp the body, and con∣ueyed it to the water side, where it was first found. This done, our Ladye shrancke againe into her shryne, and the Clerke peaked home to patche vp his broken sléepe, but the corps now eftsoones floted vp and downe the Riuer, as it did before. Whiche thing being at length espyed by them of Gillingham, it was once more taken vp and buried in their Churcheyard. But sée what followed vpon it, not onely the Roode of Gilling∣ham (say they) that a whyle before was busie in bestow∣ing Myracles, was nowe depriued of all that his former vertue: but also ye very earth & place, wher this carckase was laide, did continually, for euer after, setle and sinke downeward. This tale, receaued by tradition from the Elders, was (long ones) both commonly reported & faithfully credited of the vulgar sort: which although happely you shal not at this day learne at euery mans mouth (the I∣mage being now many yeres sithēce defaced) yet many of the aged number remember it well, and in the time of darkenesse, Haec erat in toto notissima fabula mundo.
But here (if I might be so boulde, as to adde to this Fable , or Fabula significat) I would tell you, that (I thought) the Morall and minde of the tale to be none other, but that this Clerkly , this Talewriter, (I say) and Fableforger, being eyther the Fermer, or Owner, of the offrings giuen to our Lady of Chetham, and enuying the common haunte and Pil∣grimage to the Roode of Gillingham, (lately erected Ad nocumentum of his gayne) deuised this apparition, for the aduauncement of the one, and the defacing of the other. For no doubte, if that age had ben as prudent in examining spirits, as it was prone to beleue illusions it should haue found, that our Ladies pathe was some such gréene trace of grasse, as we daily behold in ye fields, procéeding in déed of a naturall cause, thoughe by olde wiues, and superstitious people, reckoned to be the daū∣cing places of night Spirites, whiche they call Fay∣ries:) And that this sinking graue, was nothing els, but a false filled pitte, of Maister Clearks owne digging. The man was to blame, thus to make debate be∣twéene our Lady and her Sonne, but since the whole Religion of Papistrie it selfe, is Theomachia, and no∣thing els, let him be forgiuen, and I will go forward. Alfred of Beuerley, and Richard of Ciceter, haue mention of a place in East Kent, where Horsa (the Bro∣ther of Hengist) was buried, and which euen till their dayes did continue the memorie of his name. Wée haue in this Shyre a Towne called Hor smundene, whiche name resolued into Saxon Orthographie, is Horsgemyndene, and soundeth as muche as, the Val∣ley of the monument (or memoriall) of Horsa. But for as muche as that lyeth in the Southe part of this Countrie toward Sussex, and for that I read that Horsa was slaine at Ailesford, as you shall
sée anone) in an encounter wherein he ioyned with his Brother Hengist again the Britons,Horsted borne in Ailesford. which at that time inhabited Kent, it is ye moste reasonable to affirme, that he was buried at Horsted a place lying in this Parish, toward Ailesford, and nowe yet knowen by the same name, whiche signifieth, the place or stéede of Horse.Hengist & Horsa two famous Ca¦pitaines. This Horsa, and his Brother Hengist (both whose names be Synonuma, and signifie a Horse) were the Capitaines, and chiefe leaders of the first Saxons that came in aide of King Vortiger, as we haue before shewed: And after the death of Horsa, his Bro∣ther Hengist neuer ceassed to warre vppon the Brittons, till he had driuen them out of Kent, and made himselfe King, as here∣after in fitte place we will fur∣ther de∣clare.
Frendsbury, in some Saxon co∣pies freondesbyrig, that is, the Friendes Court: in others, frinondesbyrig. A religious Skirmish betwene the Monkes of Rochester, and the Bre¦thren of Stroude.It befell in the reigne of King Edward the first, by occasion of a great & long drought of the aire, that the Monkes of Rochester were agréed amongst themselues, to make a solemne pro∣cession from their owne house tho∣rowe the citie, and so to Frendsbury on the other side of the water, of a speciall intent and purpose to pray to God for raine. And bycause the day of this their appointed iourney happened to be vehemētly boisterous with the winde, the which would not onely haue blowne out their lightes, and tossed their bāners, but also haue stopped the mouthes of their Synging men, and haue toiled themselues in that their heauie and masking attire, they desired lycence of the Maister of Stroud Hospital, to passe through the Orch∣yard of his house, whereby they might bothe ease theyr company, and saue the glorie of their shewe, whiche o∣therwise through the iniurie of the weather must néeds haue béene greatly blemished. The Maister assented easily to their desire, and (taking it to be a matter of no great consequence) neuer made his brethrē of the house priuie therevnto. But they, so soone as they vnder∣stoode of this determination, called to minde that their Hospitall was of the foundation of Gilbert Glanuille, (somtime a Bishope of Rochester) betwéene whom and the predecessours of these Monkes, ther had béen great heates for the erection of the same: and therfore fearing that the Monkes (pretending a procession) intended to
attempt somewhat against their priuileges (as in déede all orders in Papistrie, were excéeding ielous of their prerogatiues) they resolued with all their might to re∣sist them. And for that purpose, they bothe furnished themselues, and procured certaine companions also (whom the Hystorie calleth Ribaldes) with clubbes & battes to assist them, and so (making their ambushe in the Orchyard) they awaited the Monkes comming. It was not long, but the Monkes (hauing made all things redy) approched in their battell array, and with banner displayed, and so (minding no harme at al) entred bolde∣ly into the house, and through the house passed into the Orchard, merely chaunting their latine Letaine. But when the Brethren and their Ribaldes had espied them within their daunger, they ranne vpon them, and made it raine suche a shoure of clubbes and coulestaues vpon the Monks Copes, cowles, & Crownes, that for a while the miserable men knew not what way to turne them. After a time, the Monkes called their wittes and spi∣rites together, and then (making vertue of the necessi∣tie) they made eache man the best shift for himselfe, that they could: some, trauersing their ground, declined ma∣ny of the blowes, and yet now & then bare off with head & shoulders: others, vsed the staues of their crosses, beha∣uing themselues like pretie men: others made pykes of their banner poles: And others (flying in to their aduer∣saries) wrested their weapons out of their hands: amōgst the rest, one (sauing his charitie) laide lode vpon a mar∣ried Priest, absoluing him (as mine author saith) A cul∣pa, but not A paena: Another, draue one of the Brethren into a déepe diche: & a third (as big as any Bul of Basan) espied (at ye lēgth) ye postern, or back doore of ye Orchyard, wherat he ran so vehemently wt his head & shoulders, yt he bare it cleane downe before him, and so both escaped
him selfe, and made the way for the rest of his fellowes who also, with all possible haste conueyed them selues out of the iurisdiction of the Hospital, and then (shaking their ears) fel a fresh to their Orgia, I should haue said to their former Orisons. After this storme thus blowen (or rather born) ouer, I do not meruail if the Mōkes (as ye reporter saith) neuer sought to carrie thir procession through Stroud Hospital for auoiding of ye winde, for in¦déed it could not lightly blow more boisterously out of ani quarter. And thus out of this tragical hystorie, arose the bywoord of Frendsbury ClubsFriendsbu∣ry clubbes. (a terme not yet forgot∣ten.Eslingham. The land of Frendsbury, was long since giuen by Offa the King of Midle England, to Eardulph then Bishop of Rochester, vnder the name of Eslingham cum appendicijs, although at this day this other beareth coun∣tenance, as the more woorthie of the twaine: The be∣nefice of Frendsbury (togeather with that of Dartford) was at the suite of Bishop Laurence,Appropri∣ations of benefices. and by graunt of the Pope, conuerted to an appropriation, one (amongst many) of those monstruous byrthes of couetousnes, be∣gotten by the man of Rome, in the dark night of super∣stition, and yet suffered to liue in this day light of the Gospell, to the great hinderance of learning, the empouerishment of the ministerie, and the infamie of our pro∣fession,
Rochester is called in Latine, Do∣robreuum, Durobreuum, Dorubernia, and Durobri∣uis, in Brittishe, Dourbryf, that is to say, a swift streame: in Saxon, Hrofesce∣astre; that is, Rofi ciui∣tas, Rofes citie, in some olde Chartres, Rofi breui. SOme men, desirous belike, to ad∣uaunce the estimation of this Citie, haue left vs a farre fetched antiqui∣tie, concerning one péece of the same, affirming that Iulius Caesar caused ye Castle at Rochester (as also that o∣ther at Canterbury, and the Towre at London) to be builded of common charge: But I, ha∣uing not hitherto read any such thing, eyther in Caesars own Commentaries, or in any other credible Hystorie, dare not avow any other beginning of this citie or castle then that which I find in Beda, least if I shuld aduenture as they do, I might receiue as they haue, I meane, The iust note of more reading & industrie, thē of reason or iudgement. And although I must,The Citie. (& wil fréely) acknow∣ledge, that it was a Citie, before that it had to name Rocester (for so a man maye well gather of Beda his wordes) yet seing that by the iniurie of the ages betwéen the monuments of the first beginning of this place, and of innumerable suche other, be not come to our handes, I had rather in suche cases vse honest silence, then rashe speache, and doe preferre plaine vnskill and ignorance, before vaine lying and presumptuous arrogance. For truely, the credite of our Englishe Hystorie, is no one
waye somuche empayred, as by the blinde boldnesse of some, which taking vpon them to commit it to wryting, and wanting (either throughe their owne slothfulnesse, or the iniquitie of the time) true vnderstanding of the o∣riginall of many things, haue not sticked (without any modestie or discretion) to obtrude newe fantasies and fo∣lies of their owne forgerie, for assured truthes, and vn∣doubted antiquitie. As for examples of this kinde, al∣though there be at hand, many in number, and the same most fond and ridiculous in matter, yet bicause it should be both odious for the authors, tedious to the readers, and grieuous for my selfe, to enter into them, I will not make enumeration of any: But staying my selfe vpon this general note, I will procead with the treatise of the place that I haue taken in hand, the which maye aptly (as me thinketh) be broken into foure seuerall portions. The Citie it selfe, The Castle, the Religious buildings, and the Bridge. The Citie of Rochester, tooke ye name (as Beda wri∣teth) of one Rof (or rather Hrof, as the Saxon boke hath it) which was sometyme the Lorde and owner of the place. This name, Leland supposeth, to haue continu∣aunce in Kent till this our time, meaning (as I suspect) Rolf, a familie well inough knowne. What so euer the estate of this Citie was, before the comming in of the Saxons, it séemeth, that after their arriuall, the mayn∣tenaunce thereof, depended chiefly vpon the residence of the Bishop, and the religious persons: And therefore no meruaile is it, if the glory of the place were not at any time very great, Since on the one side the abilitie of the Bishops and the Chanons (inclined to aduaunce it) was but meane, and on the other side, the calamitie of fyre and sworde (bent to destroye it) was in maner con∣tinuall.
For I read, that at suche time as the whole Realme was sundred into particular kingdomes, and eche parte warred for superioritie, and inlarginge of boundes with the other, Eldred (then King of Mercia)  inuaded Lothar the king of this Countrie, and findinge him vnable to resiste, spoyled the whole Shyre, and layd this Citie waste. The Danes also, whiche in the dayes of king Alfred came out of Fraunce sailed vp the ryuer of Medwey, to  Rochester, and (beseiging the towne) fortified ouer a∣gainst it in suche forte, that it was greatly distressed, and like to haue ben yelded, but that the king (Paeonia manu) came spéedely to the reskewe, and not onlye raysed the siege, and deliuered his subiectes, but obtayned also an honourable bootie of horses and captiues, that they besie∣gers had left behind them. The fame people, hauing miserably vexed the whole Realme in the dayes of King Ethelred, came at the laste to this Citie, where they founde the inhabitaunts ready  in armes to resiste them, but they assayled them with suche furie, that they compelled them to saue them sel∣ues by flight, and to leaue the place a pray to their ene∣mies: The whiche was somewhat the lesse worthy vnto them, bycause King Ethelred him selfe (not long before) vpon a displeasure conceiued against the Bishop,  had besieged the Citie, and woulde by no meanes depart thence, before he had an hundreth pounds in ready mo∣ney payd him. And these harmes, Rochester receiued be∣fore the time of king William the Conqueror, in whose reigne it was valued in ye booke of Domesday at .100. s̄. by the yere, & after whose dayes (besides sundry particu∣lar damages done to the citie, during ye sieges layd to the castle, (as shall appeare anon) it was muche defaced by a great fire yt hapned in the reigne of King Henrie ye first,
the King him self, and a great many of the Nobilitie, and Bishops being there present, and assembled for the con∣secration, (as they call it) of the great Churche of Sainct Andrewes, the whiche was euen then newly finished: And it was againe in manner wholy consumed with  flame, about the latter ende of the reigne of King Hen∣rie the seconde, at whiche time that newely builded Churche was sore blasted also: But after all these ca∣lamities, this Citie was well repaired & ditched about, in the reigne of King Henrie the third. As touchinge the castleThe Castle. at Rochester, although I finde not in wryting any other foundation therof, then that which I alledged before, & recon to be mere fabulous, yet dare I affirme, that ther was an old Castle aboue eight hundreth yeres agoe, in so much as I read, that Ecgbert (a king of Kent) gaue certeine landes within the walles of Rochester ca∣stle, to Eardulfe, then Bishop of that See: And I coniec∣ture,  that Odo (the bastard brother to king William the Conqueror) whiche was at the first, Bishop of Bor∣ieux in Normandie, and then afterwarde, aduaun∣ced to the office of the chiefe Iustice of Englande, and to the honour of the Earledome of Kent, was eyther the first authour, or the best benefactour to that which now standeth in sight: and herevnto I am drawne, somewhat by the consideration of the time it selfe, in whiche many Castles were raysed to kéepe the people in awe, and somewhat by the regarde of his authoritie, whiche had the charge of this whole Shyre, but most of all, for that I reade, that about the time of the Conquest, the Bishop of Rochester receiued lande at Ailesford, in exchaunge for grounde to builde a Castle at Rochester vpon. Not long after whiche time, when as William Rufus (our Englishe Pyrrhus, or Readhead) had stepped betwéene  his elder brother Robert and the crowne of this realme,
and had giuen experiment of a fierce and vnbridled go∣uernment: the Nobilitie (desirous to make a chaunge) arose in armes againste him, and stirred his brother to make inuasion: And to the ende that the King shoulde haue at once many yrons (as the saying is) in the fire to attende vpon, some moued warre in one corner of the Realme, and some in another, But amongst the reste, this Odo betooke him to his castle of Rochester, accom∣panied with the best, both of the English and ye Norman nobilitie: This whē the king vnderstood, he sollicited his subiects, & specially the inhabitants of this country, by al faire meanes and promises to assist him, & so (gathering a great armie) besieged the Castle, and strengthened the Bishop and his complices the defendants in suche wise, that in the ende, he and his company were contented to abiure the Realme, and to leade the rest of their life in Normandie. And thus Odo, that many yeres before had béene (as it were) a Viceroy, and second person within this realme, was now depriued of al his dignitie, & driuē to kéepe residence vpon his benefice, till suche time as Earle Robert (for whose cause he had incurred this daū∣ger (pitying the cause, appointed him gouernour of Nor∣mandie his owne countrie. After this, the Castle was much amended by Gundulphus, the Bishop, who (in con∣sideration of a Manor giuen to his Sée, by King Williā Rufus) bestowed thrée score poundes in building that great Towre, whiche yet standeth. And from that time, this Castle continued (as I iudge) in the possession of the Prince, vntill King Henrie the first, by the aduice of his Barons, graunted to William the Archebishop of Can∣terburie and his successours, the custodie, and office of  Constable ouer the same, with frée libertie to builde a Towre for him selfe, in any part therof at his pleasure. By meanes of which cost done vpon it at that time, the
Castle at Rochester was muche in the eye of suche as were ye authors of troubles folowing within the realme so that from time to time it had a parte, almost in euery Tragedie. For, what time King Iohn had warre, with his Barons, they gotte the possession of this Castle, and cōmitted the defence therof to a noble man, called Wil∣liam  Dalbinet, whome the king immediatly besieged, & (through the cowardise of Robert Fitz Walter, that was sent to rescue it) after thrée monethes labour, com∣pelled him to render the péece: The next yere after, Le∣wes (the Frenche Dolphine) by the ayde of the Englishe Nobilitie, entered the same Castle, and tooke it by force: And lastly, in the reigne of King Henrie the thirde, Simon Mountford, (not long before the battaile at Le∣wes in Sussex) girded the citie of Rochester about with a mightie siege, and setting on fire the wooden bridge, & a Towre of timber that stoode thereon, wanne the firste gate (or warde) of the Castle by assaulte, and spoyled the Churche and Abbay: But, being manfully resisted se∣uen dayes together, by the Earle Warren that was within, and hearing soudainly of the Kings comming thitherwarde, he prepared to méete him in person, and lefte others to continue the siege, all whiche were soone after put to flight by the kings armie. This warre (as I haue partly shewed before) was specially moued against strangers, whiche during that kings reigne, bare suche a sway (as some write) that they not onely disdayned the naturall borne Nobilitie of the Realme, But did also (what in them lay) to abolishe the auncient lawes and customes of ye same. In déede, the fire of that displeasure was long in kindeling, & therfore so much the more furi∣ous,  when it brast foorth into flame: But amongst other things, that ministred nourishment therto, this was not
the least, that vpon a time it chaunced a Torneament to be at Rochester, in which the English men, of a set pur∣pose (as it should séeme) sorted them selues against the strangers, and so ouermatched them, that following the victory, they made them with great shame, to fly into the Towne for couert: But I dwel to long (I feare) in these two parts: I will therefore nowe visite the Religious building, and so passe ouer the bridge to some other place. The foundation of the Churche of S. Andrewes in Rochester,S. Andrews Church in Rochester. was first layd by King Ethelbert (as we haue touched before) at suche time as he planted the Bishops chaire in the Citie, and it was occupyed by Chanons, till the dayes of Gundulphus, the Bishop, who bycause he  was a Monke, and had hearde that it was sometimes stored with Monkes, made meanes to Lanfranc the Archebishop, and by his ayde and authoritie, both buil∣ded  the Churche and Pryorie of newe, threwe out the Chanons, and once more brought Monkes into their place, following therein the example, that many other Cathedrall Churches of that time had shewed before. And this is the very cause,Priests had wiues, in England, of olde time. that William of Malmes∣burie ascribeth to Lanfranc, the whole thanke of all that matter, for in déede bothe he and Anselme his suc∣cessour, were wonderfully busied in placing Monks, and in diuorcing Chanons, and Secular Priests from their wiues, the whiche (in contempte) they called, Focalia, no bettter then White kerchiefes, or kitchenstuffe: al∣though bothe the law of God maketh the accōplement honorable amongst al mē, & the law of this countrie had (without any checke) allowed it in priests, til their own time: For Henrie of Huntingdon writeth plainely, that Anselme in a Synode, at London, Prohibuit sa∣cerdotibus vxores, ante non prohibitas Forbad Priestes
their wiues whiche were not forbidden before. And William of Malmesburie affirmeth, that he there de∣créed, Ne inposterum filij presbyterorum sint haeredes ecclesi∣arum patrum suorum, That from thencefoorth Priestes sonnes shoulde not be heires to their fathers benefices. Whiche I note shortly, to the end, that men should not thinke it so straunge a matter (in this Realme) for Priestes to haue wiues, as some peuishe Papistes goe about to persuade. But to return to Gundulphus, from whom I am by occasion digressed: he (as I said) réedified the great Church at Rochester, erected the Pryorie, and where as he found but halfe a dozein secular Priestes in the Churche at his comming, he neuer ceased, till he had brought together at the leaste thrée score Monkes into the place. Then remoued he the dead bodies of his pre∣decessours, and with great solemnitie, translated them into this new worke: and there also Lanfranc was pre∣sent with his purse, and of his owne charge incoffened the body of Paulinus (the thirde Bishop of Rochester, who had left there the Palle of the Archebishopricke of  Yorke, that was not recouered long after) in curious worke of cleane siluer, to the whiche shryne there was afterwarde (according to the superstitious manner of those times) muche concourse of people, and many obla∣tions. Besides this, they bothe ioyned in suite to the King, and not onely obtained restitution of sundry the possessions withholden from the Churche, but also pro∣cured by his liberalitie and example, newe donations of many other landes & priuileges besides. To be short, Gundulphus (ouerliuing Lanfranc) neuer rested buil∣ding & beging, tricking & garnishing, till he had aduaūced this his creature, to the iust wealth, beautie, and estima∣tion, of a right Popish Pryorie. But God (who modera∣ting all things by his diuine prouidence) shewed him
selfe alwayes a seuere visitour of these irreligious Syna∣gogues) God (I say) set fire on this building twise with in the compasse of one hundreth yeares after the erecti∣on  of the same: and furthermore suffered suche discorde to arise betwéene Gilbert Glanuille, the Bishop of Ro∣chester,  and the Monks of this house, that he for displea∣sure bereaued them, not onely of all their goods, orna∣ments, and writings, but also of a great part of their landes, possessions and priuileges: and they bothe tur∣moyled themselues in suite to Rome for remedie, and were driuen (for maintenance of their expences, to coine the siluer of Paulinus his Shryne into ready money  which thing tourned bothe to the great empouerishing of their house, and to the vtter abasing of the estimation and reuerence of their Churche: for that (as in déede it commonly falleth out amongst the simple people, that are muche led by the sense) the honour and offring to this their Saint, ended and dyed together, with the gay Glorie and state of his Tumbs. By this meanes therefore, Gilbert became so hated of the Monkes, that when he died, they committed him obscurely to the ground without ringing of Bell, Cele∣bration of seruice, or dooing of any other funerall Ob∣sequies.  But to these their calamities, was also added one other great losse, susteined by the warres of King Iohn, who in his siege against the Castle of Rochester,  so, spoiled this Church and Pryorie, that (as their owne Chronicles reporte) he left them not so muche as one poore Pixe to stand on their Altar. It was nowe highe time therefore, to deuise some way, whereby the Pryorie and Churche of Rochester, might be, if not altogether restored to the auncient wealth and estimation, yet at the least somewhat relie∣ued from this penurie, nakednes, and abiection. And
therefore, Laurence of Saint Martines, the Bishop of Rochester, perceauing the common people to be some∣what drawne (by the fraude of the Monks) to thinke re∣uerētly  of one William, that lay buried in the Church, and knowing well that there was no one way so com∣pēdious to gain,Saint Wil∣liam of Ro¦chester. as the aduauncement of a Pilgrimage procured at the Popes Court, the canonization of that man, with indulgence to all suche as would offer at his Tumbe, vnderpropping by meane of this newe Saint, some manner of reuerent opinion of the Church, which before, through defacing the olde Bishops shryne, was declined to naught. But to the ende that it may ap∣peare, to what hard shift of Saints these good Fathers were then driuen, and how easily the people were then deluded, you shal heare out of Noua Legenda it self, what great man this Saint William of Rochester was. He was by birth, a Scot, of Perthe (nowe commonly called Saint Iohns Towne) by trade of life a Baker of bread, and therby got his liuing, in charitie so aboundant, that he gaue to the poore the tenthe loafe of his workeman∣ship, in zeale so feruent, that in vowe he promised, & in déede attempted, to visite the holy land (as they called it) & the places where Christ was conuersant on earth: in whiche iourney, as he passed through Kent, he made Rochester his way, where, after that he had rested two or thrée dayes, he departed toward Canterbury: But ere he had gone farre from the Citie, his seruant that waited on him, led him (of purpose) out of the high way, and spoiled him both of his money and life. This done, the seruaunt escaped, and the Maister (bicause he died in so holy a purpose of minde) was by the Monkes con∣ueyed to Saint Andrewes, laid in the quyre, and pro∣moted by the Pope, as you heard from a poore Baker, to a blessed Martyr. Here (as they say) shewed he mira∣cles plentifully, but certein it is, that madde folkes offe∣red
vnto him liberally, euen vntill these latter tymes, in whiche, the beames of Gods trueth, shining in the heartes of men, did quite chase away, and put to flight, this and suche other grosse cloudes, of will worship, su∣perstition, & idolatrie. Besides this Pryorie (which was valued by the Commissioners of the late suppressi∣on, at .486. pounds by yeare) there was none other reli∣gious building in Rochester) onely I read, that Gun∣dulphus (the Bishop before remembred) builded there an Hospitall without the East gate, whiche he called Saint Bartilmewes.Saint Bar∣tholmewes Hospitall Now therfore am I come to the Bridge ouer Medway, not that alone which we presēt∣ly beholde, but an other also, muche more auncient in time, though lesse beautifull in woorke,Rochester Bridge both the olde, & the newe. whiche neither stoode in the selfe place where this is, neither yet verie farre off, for that crossed the water ouer against Stroud Hospitall: and this latter is pitched some distance from thence toward the South, and somewhat nearer to the Citie walle, as to a place more fitte, bothe for the fast∣nes of the soile, and for the breaking of the swiftnes of the streame, to builde a Bridge vpon. That olde worke, (being of timber Building) was fyered by Simon the Earle of Leycester, in the time of King Henrie ye third, as hath already appeared: and not fully twentie yeares after, it was borne away with the Ise, in the reigne of King Edward his Sonne. Wherefore, least that as the Frost and flame, hath alredy consumed the thing it selfe: So the canker of time should also deuoure all me∣morie thereof, I haue thought méete to impart such an∣tiquities, as I haue found concerning that bridge, wher¦of the one was taken out of a booke (somtime) belonging to the late worthie and wise Counselour, Doctor Ni∣cholas Wotton, and whiche he had exemplified out of an auncient monument of Christes Church in Canter∣bury, bearing this Title.
Memorandum de Ponte Roffensi. &c. Episcopus Roffensis debet facere primam peram de ponte Roffensi, & debet inuenire tres sulliues, & debet plantare tres virgatas super pontem. Et hoc debent facere Borstal, Cukel∣stan, Frendsburie, & Stoke. Secunda pera debet habere tres sull. & debet plantare v∣nam virgatam: Et hoc debent homines de Gillingham & de Chetham. Episcopus Roffensis debet facere tertiam peram, & debet sull. & plantare duas virgatas & dimid. Et hoc debetur de Halling, Trockescliue, Malling, Southflete, Stane, Pinen∣dene & Falcham. Quarta pera debet tres sull. & plantare tres virgatas. Et hoc debent homines de Borgham de sex sull. & de Woldham cum Roberto Bisset & socijs suis, & cum Roberto Neue de trib. sull. de Althe vna sull. de Henherst dimid. sull. de Honden quartam partem vnius. sull. de Cusington dimid. sull. de Boneheld dimid sull: De Farleg vnam sull. De Ethles vi∣ginti quin{que} acres: de Theiston vnam sull. De Lose vnam sull. De Lillinton, duas sull: De Stokebury, duas sul: De Gliselard∣land, de Sinelond, de Dalelond: De Lechebundlond, De Hor∣sted. De Chelk. Quinta pera pertinet ad Archiepiscopum. Et debet tres sull: & plantare quatuor virgat. Et hoc debetur de Wroteham, Nedestane, Woteringbery, Netherlestede, Pecham, & altera Pecham, Heselholt, Mereworth, Leyborne, Swaneton, Offehā, Ditone, Westerham. Sexta pera pertinet ad Hundredum de Heyburne. & de∣bet sull: & plantare .4. virgatas: & hoc debent homines de Boxele, scilicet de .7. sull. & dimid sed contradicunt. Di∣mid. sull. de Dethling: vnam sull. & Dimid. & quartam par∣tem vnius Thornham .2. sull. & tertiam, quam contradicunt: De Aldington vnam sull: & aliam, quam contradicunt: De
Stokebery .2. sull. de Eilnothington .2, sull. de Bicknore .i sull. de Widneselle .i. sull, de Holingeburne 6. sull, de quibus Godinton debet 2. sull & Bocton Archiepiscopi dimid sull: de Heberton cum Frensted .i. sull: de Lhed. s 3. sull, de Herietesham cum Li∣tlewrotha 2 sull: de Wrenstede dimid sull, de Wytheling cū Ea∣stelne .i. sull, de Lenham 4. sull. & dimid. de Longele cum O∣tringdene 2. sull & dimid. de Eastlenham 2. sull, de Boctone Bauelingham .i. sull, de Hulecumb 2. sull, & dimid. quam con∣tradicunt. de Farburn dimid. sull, & dimid. quam contradicunt. de Suthone 7. sull, & dimid. de Otteham 1. sull, de Witherinton dimid. sull. Notandum, quod ad 6. sull, de Holingehorne de∣bet Boctone dimid. sull, Godinton 2. sull, Buccherst dimid. Iug. Wibendene & Hokbery dimid. Iug. Wythyherst 1. Iuger, Herindene dimid. Iuger. Hallebroc & Herebertest dimid. Iu∣ger. Bresing 3. Iug. Beauerepair dimid. Iuger. Stanburne & Thrumsted dimid. Iug. Riple dimid. Iuger. Bradestrete dimid. Iuger. Brechedene quartam partem vnius Iuger. Simon de porta 5. acras, Gilebertus de Thrumstede 15. acras. Terra Ospeck 5. acras. Thomas supra montem 10. acras. Sara de Dene, Robertus de Swandene cum socijs 45. acras. Bradherst 4. Iuger. Huking dimid. Iug. Wodaeton. i. Iug. Herst. i. Iuger. Heyhorne dimid. Iug. Lareye dimid. Iug. Grenewey. i. Iug. Southgrenewey. i. Iug. Gerin cum socijs dimid. Iug. Terra Ia∣cobi de Hannye dimid. Iuger. Cotenetun dimid. Iug. Nutema∣nnestowe, & terra Bellardi, dimid. Iug. Sheldesbourn dimid. Iug. Snade quartam partem. Worham 3. acras. Bode 5. a∣cras. Simon Cockel 25. acras. Haeredes Thomae de la Dane. 5. acras. Walterus Larsone 5. acras. Wilhelmus Cliue 10. acras. Sepima, & octaua pera, pertinent ad homines de Hoo. Et debent sex sull: & plantare 4. virgat, & dimid. Nona pera pertinet ad Archiepiscopum, & debet 3. sull & plantare 4. virgat. Et hoc debetur de & Cliue, Heigham, Deninton, Melton, Hlidesdon, Mepeham,
Snodeslond, Bearlinges, Peadelesworthe, & de omnibus hominibus in eadem valle, The other antiquitie I founde in an olde volume of Rochester Librarie, collected by Ernulsus the Bishop, and entituled, Textus de Ecclesia Roffensi: in whiche, that whiche concerneth this purpose, is to be read bothe in the Saxon, (or auncient Englishe) tong, and in the Latine also, as hereafter followeth.
ÐisThis isis þaersthe bricaegeƿeorcBridgewoorke onat Hrofecaestre;Rochester. HerHere syndonbe genamodnamed þathe land.landes, þEfor manthe Hiwhich of scaelmen shall ƿeorcan;woorke. AerestFirst the þaer burgebiscop faeHð onBishop of the Citie taketh on beginneth  þonethat earmend toto ƿercenewoorke þathe landland peran.peere: &and þreothree gyrdayardes toto þillianne.plancke: &and iij. sylla to3. plates to lyccanne;laye: {that}that isis, offrom of borcstealle.Borstall, &and of Cucclestane.from Cuckstane, & ofand from fri∣nondesbyrig.Frendsbyry, & of Stoce;and Stoke, ÐanneThen seothe oþressecond perpeere gebyraðbelongeth toto gyllingeHam.Gyllingham,  & to CaetHam.and to Chetham, & an gyrde toand one yarde to þillianne.plancke, & iij.and 3. syllaplates toto leccanne;laye. ÐonneThen seothe þriddethirde peere per gebyrað eft þam biscope.belongeth againe to the same Bishop,
& þridde Helf gyrdand two yardes and a half, and three yardes lacking a halfe, toto þillianne.planke, & .iii. syllaand 3. plates toto leccenne.laye, ofof from Healingan.halling & of trotescliueand of Trosclif: & of meallingan.and of malling, & of fliote.and of Fleete, & of Stane.and of Stone. &and of pundene.of pyndene, & ofand of falcHenHam;falkenham. Fakham ÐonneThen isis seothe feorðefourth paer þaes cinges.peere the Kinges &and fiorðe3. Half gyrd to þillanne.yardes and a halfe to planke, & .iii. sylla to leccanne.and 3. plates to laye, ofof aeglesforda.Atlesford, &and ofof eallanall þamthat laeþe þe þertothat Lathe Hundreth that therevnto liþ.lyeth, & of ufanHylle.and of the vphille. men vpon the hill, & of Aclea.and of Acley, Okeley, & of þamand of Smalanland.Smalland, &and ofof Cusintune.Cosyngton, & of dudeslande.and of Dudslande, & of Gysleardeslande.and of Gisleardsland, & of ƿuldeHam.and of Woldham, & ofand of burHHam.Burham, &and ofof Acclesse.Acclesse.
&and ofof Horstede.Horstede, & of fearnlege.and of Farley, & of ter∣stane.and of Tes∣ton, & of Cealce.and of Chalke, & of HennHyste.and of Henhyrst, & ofand of Aedune;Edon. ÐonneThen isis seothe fiftefifte per paespeere the Arcebiscopes.Archebishops,  to ƿroteHam.to Wrotham, & to Maegþanstane.and to Maydstone, & toand to ƿoþringebyran.Wateringbyrie, & to Netlestede.and to Nettlested, & to þamand to the tƿam PeccHam.two Peckams, & to HaeselHolte.and to Haselholte, & to Maeran∣ƿyrþe.and to Mere∣worth, & to Lillanburnan.and to Layborne, & to Sƿanatune.and to Swanton, & to OffaHam.and to Ofham, & to Dictune.and to Dytton, & to ƿester∣Ham.and to Westerham, & iiij. gyrda to þillanne.and foure yardes to plancke, & iij. Sylle toand 3. plates to leccanne;laye.
ÐonneThen isis syothe seoxtesixte perpeere toto Holingaburnan.Holingborne, & toand to eallanall þam laeþe.that Lath, & iiij. gyrda to þelliene.And foure yardes to plancke: & iiij. sylla to leccenne;and foure plates to laye. ÐonneThen isis syothe syoueþe.seuenthe, & syo eaHteþe per.and the eight peere to Hoƿaran landto the men of Hoo toto ƿyrcenne.woorke: & fyfteAnd foure Healf gyrd to þillanne.yardes and a halfe to plancke: & vj. sylla toand sixe plates to lyccanne.laye. ÐonneThen isis syothe nigaþanynthe perpeere þaesthe Aercebiscopes.Archebishops, {that} is syo land per aet þamthat is the land peere at the ƿestWest aende;ende: toto fliote.Fleete: & to His clyfe.and to his cliffe: Bishops cliffe & to HeHHam.and to Higham: & toand to denetune.Denton: andand toto Melantune.Mlton: andand toto Hludesdune.Ludsdowne:
andand toto MeapeHam.Mepham: andand toto Snodilande.Snodland: andand toto berlingan.Berling, andand toto peadlesƿyrðe.Paddelsworthe: andand ealla ða daeneƿaru;to all that valley men: and iiij. gyrda to ðillianne.and foure yardes to plancke: andand ðryothree sylleplates to leccanne;to laye; Haec descriptio demonstrat apertè, vnde debeat pons de Rouecestra restaurari, quotíens fuerit fractus. Primum, eiusdem Ciuitatis Episcopus incipit operari in orientali brachio primam peram de terra: deinde tres vir∣gatas plancas ponere, & tres suliuas. 1. tres magnas trabes supponere: Et hoc faciet de Borchastalle, & de Cuclestana & de Freondesbiria, & de Stoche. Secunda pera pertinet ad Gillingeham, & ad Caetham: & vnam virgatam plancas ponere, & 3. suliuas supponere. Tertia pera pertinet iterum ad Episcopum eiusdem ciui∣tatis, qui debet 2. vírgatas & dímid. plancas ponere: & 3. suliuas supponere: & hoc fiet de Heallinges, Trottescliue, Meallinges, Suthfleotes, Stanes, Pinnendene, & Falceham. Quarta pera pertinet ad Regem, & debet 3. virgat. & dimid. plancas ponere: & 3. suliuas supponere: Et hoc fiet de Eilesforda, & de toto illo laesto quod ad illud maneriū pertinet: & de supermontaneis, & de Aclea, & de Smalaland, & de Cusintune, & de Dudesland, & de Gisleardes land, & de Wul∣cham, & de Burham, & de Aclesse,
Horsteda, Fearnlega, Terstane, Cealca, Henhersta, & de Hathdune. Quinta pera est Archiepiscopi, & debet 4. virgat. plan∣cas ponere, & 3. suliuas summittere: & hoc debet fieri de Wrotham, Maedestana, Oteringaberiga, Netlesteda, dua∣bus Peccham, Haeselholt, Maerewurtha, Lilleburna, Swana∣tuna, Offeham, Dictuna, & Westerham. Sexta pera debet fieri de Holingburna, & de toto illo laesto quod ad hoc pertinet: 4. virgat. plancas ponere, & 3. fuliuas supponere. Septimam & octauam peram, debent facere homines de Hou, & 4. & dimid. virgat. plancas ponere, & sex suliuas supponere. Nona pera, quae vltima est, in occidentali brachio, est ite∣rum Archiepiscopi: 4. virgat. plancas ponere: & tres suliuas summittere: Et hoc debet fieri de Northfleta, Cliua, Heah∣ham, Denituna, Meletuna, Hludesduna, Meapeham, Sno∣dilanda, Berlinges, Peadleswrthe, & de omnibus illis homini∣bus, qui manent in illa valle. Et sciendum est, quod omnes illae suliuae quae in ponte illo ponentur, tantae grossitudinis debent esse, vt bene possint sustinere, omnia grauia pondera superiacen∣tium plancarum, & omnium desuper transeunti∣um rerum. By these it may appeare, that this auncient bridge consisted of nyne Arches, or peres, & conteined in length, about twentie and sixe roddes, or yardes, as they be here termed, Toward the reparation and maintenance wherof, diuers persons, parcels of lands, and townships, (as you see) were of dutie bounde to bring stuffe, & to be∣stow both cost & labor in laying it: This dutie grew, ey∣ther by tenure, or custome, or both: & it séemeth, that accor∣ding
to the quantitie and proportion of the Land to bee charged, the carriage also was either more or lesse. For here is expresse mention, not of Townes and Manors only, but of Yokes and Acres also, whiche were contributorie to the aide of carrying, pitching, and laying of piles, plankes, and other great timber. And here (by the way) it is to be obserued, that so muche of the worke as ariseth of stone and earth, is called, Pera, of the Latine word, Petra: that the great ground posts, plates, or beames, be termed (Sulliuae) of the olde Saxon word (Sylle) whiche we yet euery where knowe by the name of a Ground Sille: And that the Tables, or Boordes, whiche are laide ouer them, are named (Plan∣cae) or Plankes, as we yet also in our vulgar language doe sound it. But nowe in our time, by reason that diuers Landes are purposely giuen to mainteine the newe Bridge, all this auncient duetie of reparati∣on is quite and cleane forgotten, although by the statute 21. and 2. the forenamed landes remaine liable, as be∣fore, yea and the newe Bridge it selfe also (for want of the execution of that, or some other suche politique way of maintenance) bothe presently lacketh helpe, and is like hereafter (if remedie in time be not applied) to decline to great ruine and decay: Whiche thing is so muche the more to be foreséene, and pittyed, as that the woorke is to the founder a Noble monument, to this Citie a beautifull ornament; and to the whole Coun∣trie a great benefite, commoditie, and easement. Of this latter woorke (being not muche aboue eight score yeres of age) Syr Robert Knolles (a man aduaun∣ced by valiant behauiour,Syr Robert Knolles a valiant Ca∣pitaine. and good seruice vnder King Edward the third, from a common Souldiour, to a most commendable Capitaine) was the first Authour: who after that he had béene sent Generall of an armie into
Fraunce, and there (in despite of all their power) had driuen the people like sheepe before him, wasting, bur∣ning and destroying, Townes, Castles, Churches, Mo∣nasteries, and Cities, in suche wise and number, that long after in memorie of his acte, the sharpe points and Gable endes of ouerthrowne Houses and Mynsters, were called Knolles Miters: he returned into England, and meaning some way to make himselfe as well belo∣ued of his Countrie men at home, as he had béen euery way dread and feared of Straungers abroade, by great policie maistred the Riuer of Medwey, and of his owne charge made ouer it the goodly work that now stādeth, with a chap∣pel & Chauntrie at the end, & di∣ed ful of yeares in ye midst of ye Reigne of King Henrie the fourth.
Stroude, aunciently called Strodes, of the Saxon worde (Strogd) which signifieth Scattered, bicause it was a Hamlet of a few houses, that lay scattered from the Citie. ABout the beginning of the Reigne of King Henrie the third,The Hos∣pitall. Gilbert Glā∣uille, the Bishop of Rochester, (of whom you haue already heard) foū∣ded an Hospitall at Stroude, whiche he dedicated to the name of the bles∣sed Virgin, and endowed with liue∣lyhode to the value of fiftie and two pounds by yeare. A name, or familie of men,The begin∣ning of this scoffing by word, Ken∣tishe tailes. sometime inhabiting Stroude (saith Polydore) had tailes clapped to their breeches by Thomas Becket, for reuenge and punish∣ment of a dispite done to him, in cutting of the taile of his horse: The Author of the new Legend saith, that af∣ter Saint Thomas had excomunicated two Brothers, (called Brockes) for the same cause, that the Dogges vnder the table would not once take Bread at their handes. Suche (belike) was the vertue of his curse, that it gaue to brute beastes, a discretion and know∣ledge of the persons, that were in daunger of it. Boe∣tius (the Scotishe Chronicler) writeth, that the lyke plague lighted vpon the men of Midleton in Dorset∣shyre: Who, bicause they threwe Fishe tailes in great contempt at Saint Augustine, were bothe themselues and their posteritie, stricken with tailes, to their perpe∣tuall infamie and punishment. All whiche their Re∣portes (no doubt) be as true, as Ouides Hystorie of Dia∣na, that in great angre bestowed on Acteon a Deares head, with mightie browe anthlers.
Muche are the Westerne men bound (as you sée) to Polydore, who taking the miracle from Augustine, ap¦plieth it to S. Thomas, and remouing the infamous re∣uenge frō Dorsetshyre, laieth it vpō our men of Kent. But litle is Kent, or the whole English Nation behold∣ding, either to him, or his fellowes, who (amongst them) haue brought vpon vs this ignominie & note with other Nations abrode, that many of them beleue as verely, yt we haue long tailes, & be monsters by nature, as other men haue their due partes and mēbers in vsual nūber. Polydore (the wisest of the company) fearing that issue might be taken vpon the matter,Angle Queene. ascribeth it to one spe¦ciall stocke and familie, whiche he nameth not, and yet (to leaue it the more vncertain) he saith, that, that fami∣ly also is worne out long since, and sheweth not when: And thus affirming, he cannot tel of whome, nor when, he goeth about in great earnest (as in sundrie other things) to make the world beléeue he cannot tell what: he had forgotten the Lawe wherevnto an Hystorian is bound, Ne quid falsi audeat, ne quid veri non audeat. That he should be bolde to tell the trueth, and yet not so bolde as to tell a lye. Howbeit his Hystorie (without all doubte) in places not blemished with suche folies, is a worthie work, but since he inserteth them many times without all discretion, hee must of the wiser sorte be read ouer with great suspicion, & wearines: For, as he was by office Collector of the Peter pence to the Popes gaine and lucre, so sheweth he himselfe throughout by profession, a couetous gatherer of lying Fables, fained to aduaunce the Popish Religi∣on, Kingdome, and Myter.
¶ Halling, in Saxon Haling, that is to say, the holsome lowe place, or Meadowe. I Haue séene in an auncient booke contei∣ning the donations to the See of Roche∣ster,Many kinges at once, in Kent. collected by Ernulphus the Bishop there, & intituled Textus de Ecclesia Rof∣fensi) a Chartre of Ecgbert (the fourthe christened King of Kent) by the which he gaue to Dioram, the Bishop of Rochester, ten plough∣landes in Halling, together with certeine Denes in the  Weald, or common wood. To the which Chartre, ther is (amongst others) the subscription of Ieanbert the Arch∣bishop, and of one Heahbert, a King of Kent also, as is in that booke tearmed. Which thing I note for two speci∣all causes, the one to shewe, that aboute that age there were at one time in Kent, moe Kinges then one: The o∣ther, to manifest and set fourth the manner of that time in signing & subscribing of Déedes and Charters, a fashi∣on much differēt from the insealing that is vsed in these our dayes: and as touching the firste, I my selfe woulde haue thought, that ye name King, had in that place béen but onely the title of a second Magistrate (as Prorex, or viceroy) substituted vnder ye very King of the countrie for administratiō of iustice in his aide or absence: sauing that I read plainly in an other Chartre, of another do∣nation of Eslingham made by Offa the king of Mercia,  to Eardulfe, the Bishop of the same See) that he proceeded in that his gift, by the consent of the same Heahbert, the king of Kent, and that on Sigaered also (by the name of Rex dimidiae partis prouinciae Cantuariorum) both confir∣med it by writing, and gaue possession by the deliuery of a clod of earth, after the maner of seison that we yet vse.
Neither was this true in Heahbert onely, for it is eui∣dent by sundrie Chartres, extant in the same Booke, that Ealbert the King of Kent, had Ethelbert, (another  Kinge) his fellowe, and partener: who also in his time was ioyned in reigne with one Eardulfe, that is called, Rex Cantuariorum, as well as hée. So that, for this sea∣son, it should séeme, that eyther the kingdome was di∣uided by discent, or els, that the title was litigious, and in controuersie, though our hystories (so farre as I haue séene) haue mencion of neyther.The olde manner of Signing, & Sealing, of deedes. This old man∣ner of signing and subscribing, is (in my fantasie) also not vnworthy the obseruation: wherein we differ from our auncestors, the Saxons, in this, that they subscribed their names (commonly adding the signe of the crosse) to∣geather with a great number of witnesses: And we, for more suertie, both subscribe our names, put our seales, and vse ye help of testimonie besides. That former fashi∣on continued throughout, vntill the time of the conquest by the Normans, whose manner by litle and litle at the length preuailed amongst vs. For the first sealed Char∣tre in England, that euer I read of, is that of King Ed∣ward the confessours to the Abbey of Westminster: who (being brought vp in Normandie) brought into this Realme, that, and some other of their guises with him: And after ye comming of William the Conquerour, the Normans, liking their owne countrie custome (as natu∣rally all nations doe) reiected the maner that they found héere, and reteyned their owne, as Ingulphus, the Ab∣bat of Croyland, which came in with the conquest, wit∣nesseth, saying: Normanni, cheirographorū confectionē, cum crucib. aureis, & alijs signaculis sacris, in Anglia firmari soli∣tam, in cerae impressionem mutant, modum{que} scribendi angli∣cum reijciunt. The Normans, doe chaunge the making of writinges, which were woont to be firmed in Englande with Crosses of golde, and other holie signes into the
printing with wax: and they reiect also the manner of the English writing. Howbeit, this was not done all at once, but it incresed & came forward by certen steps & de¦grées, so ye first and for a season, the King onely, or a few other of ye Nobilitie besides him, vsed to seale: Then the Noble men (for the most parte) and noe other, whiche thinge a man may sée in the Hystorie of Battell Abbie, where Richard Lucy chiefe Iustice of Englande, in the  time of King Henrie the second, is reported to haue bla∣med a meane subiect, for yt he vsed a priuate seale, when as that perteined (as he saide) to the King, and Nobilitie onely. At which time also (as Iohn Rosse noteth it) they vsed to ingraue in their seales, their owne pictures, and counterfeits, couered with a longe coate ouer their ar∣mours. But after this, the Gentlemen of the better sort tooke vp the fashion, and because they were not all war∣riours, they made seales of their seueral cotes, or shéelds of armes, for difference sake, as the same author repor∣teth. At the length, about the time of King Edwarde the third, Seales became very common, so that not onely suche as bare armes, vsed to seale, but other men also fashioned to them selues, signetes of their owne deuise, some taking the letres of their owne names, some flow∣ers, some knots, & flowrishes, some birds, or beastes, and some other things, as we now yet dailye beholde in vse. I am not ignoraunt, that some other manner of sea∣lings besides these, hath béene hearde of amongst vs, as namely that of King Edward ye third, by which he gaue, To Norman the Hunter, the hop and the hop towne, withe all the boundes vp side downe: And in wittnes, that yt was soothe, He bitt the wax withe his fong toothe. And yt of Alberie de veer also, conteining the donation of Hatfield, to ye which he affixed a short black hafted knife,
like vnto an olde halpeny whitle, in stead of a seale: and such others, of which happely I haue séene some, & heard of moe. But all that notwithstanding, if any man shall thinke, that these were receiued in common vse and cus∣tome, and that they were not rather the deuises and pleasures of a few singular persons, he is no lesse decea∣ued, then such as déeme euery Chartre and writing, that hath no seale annexed, to be as ancient as the Conquest: wheras (indeede) sealing was not commonly vsed tyl the time of King Edward the third, as I haue alreadie tolde you. Thus farre, by occasion of this olde Chartre, I am  straied from the hystorie of Halling, of which I fynde none other report in wryting, saue that in the reigne of king Henrie the second, Richard ye Archbishop of Canter∣burie, and imediat successour to Thomas the Archtray∣tour of this Realme, ended his lyfe, in the mansion house there, which then was, and yet continueth, parcell of the possessions of the See of Rochester: The circumstaunce and cause, of which his death and departure, I wyll reserue tyll I come to Wrotham, where I shall haue iust occasion to discouer it.
¶ Ailesforde, or Eilesforde, called in some Saxon copies, Egelesford, that is the Foorde, of passage ouer the Riuer Egle, or Eyle: In others Angelesford, which is, the passage of the Angles, or Englishe men. It is falsly tearmed of some, Alencester, Allepord, Aelstrea, by deprauation of the writers of the sun∣drie copies (as I sus∣pect) and not o∣therwise. WIthin a few yeares after the arri∣uall of the Saxons, the Britons (per∣ceiuing that Vortiger their Kinge was withdrawne by his wyfe from them, and drawne to the parte of their enemies) made election of Vor¦timer his sonne, for their Lorde and leader: by whose manhood and prowesse, they in short time so preuailed against the Saxons, that (sleying Hor∣sa, one of the Chieftaines, in an encounter geuen at this place, & discomfiting the residue) they firste chased them from hence, as farre as Tanet, (in memorie of whiche flight, happely this place, was called Anglesford, that is the passag of the Angles or Saxons) and after that com∣pelled them to forsake the land, to take shipping toward their countrie, and to seeke a new supplie: And tru∣ly, had not the vntimely death of Kinge Votimer im∣mediately succéeded, it was to be hoped, that they should neuer haue returned.
But the want of that one man, both quayled the cou∣rage of the Britons, gaue new matter of stomack to the Saxons to repaire their forces, and brought vpon this Realme an alteration of the whole Estate and Go∣uernment. There landed within the Realme in the time of Alfred, two great swarmes of Danish Pyrates, wher∣of the one arriued neare Winchelsey, with two hun∣dreth  and fiftie sayle of Shippes, and passing along that Riuer fortified at Apledore, as we haue shewed before: The other entred the Thamise, in a fléete of eighty saile, wherof parte encamped themselues at Midleton on the other syde of Kent, and part in Essex ouer against them. These latter, King Alfred pursued, and pressed them so hardly, yt they gaue him, both othes & hostages to de∣part the Realme, and neuer after to vnquiet it. That done, he marched with his army against those other also. And because hee vnderstoode, that they had diuided themselues, and spoyled the Countrie in sundrie partes at once, he lykewise diuided his army, intending (the ra∣ther by that meane) to méete with them in some one place or other, which when they harde of, and perceiued that they were vnméete, to incounter him in the face, they determined to passe ouer the Thamise, and to ioyne with their countremen in Essex, of whose discomfiture they had as yet receiued no tideings. But when they came at a place in this parish, called both now and aun∣ciently Fernham,Fernham. that is the ferny Towne or dwelling, one part of the Kings power couragiously charged them and finding them geuen to flight,The Danes compelled to take the Thamise. folowed the chase vp∣pon them so fercely, that they were compelled to take the Thamise without Boat or Bridge, in which passage there were a great number of thē drowned, the residue hauing inough to doe to saue their owne liues, and to
conuey ouer their Capitaine, that had receiued a dead∣lye wounde. No lesse notable was that other chase, wherein (ma∣ny yeares after) Edmond Ironside, most fiercely pur∣sued  the Danes from Otforde to this towne: in whiche also (as some write) he had geuen them an irreparable ouerthrow, had he not (by fraudulent,The Danes, are chased from Ot∣forde. and trayterous persuasion of one Edric, then Duke of Mercia, or midle England, and in the Saxon speach surnamed, for his co∣uetousnesse Streona, that is to say, the Getter,Earle Edrie an infamus traytour. or gather∣er) withdrawne his foote, & spared to follow them. No doubte, but that it is many times a part of good wisdome, and warlyke policie, not to pursue ouer fierce∣ly thine enemie that hath already tourned his back to∣wardes thée, least thou compell him, to make vertue of that necessitie, and he (turning his face againe) put thee in d unger to be ouercome thy selfe, which before had∣dest in thine owne hande assuraunce to ouerthrowe him: In which behalfe, it was well sayde of one, Hosti fugienti pons aureus faciendus, If thine enemie will flye, make him a bridge of Golde. Neuerthelesse, for as much as this aduice, procéeded not from Eadric, of any care that he had to preserue King Edmonds power out of pe∣rill, but rather of feare, least the whole army of Canutus should be ouerrunne and destroyed: he is iustly taxed for this, and other his treasons by our auncient historians, who also make report of the worthy rewarde, that in the ende he receiued, for all his trecherie. For, this was hee (as William Malmsb. writeth,A noble ex¦ample of Kinge Ed∣munde Ironside though some others as∣cribe it to his sonne) that afterwardes (when these two Kings had by composition diuided the Realme betwene them) most villanously murthered King Edmonde at Oxford, and was therfore done to death by King Canu∣tus: who, in that one act shewed singular argumēts, both of rare iustice, and of a right noble harte: Of iustice, for
that he would not winke at the faulte of him, by whose meanes, hee obteyned the Monarchie of the whole Realme, & of great Nobilitie of minde, in that he plainly declared himselfe, to estéeme more of his owne honour, then of another mans Crowne and Scepter, & to haue digested quietly, that impatiencie of a partener in king∣dome, which great Alexander thought as intollerable as two sunnes in the world at once: and which Romulus could in no wise brooke, since he woulde not suffer one kingdome to content him and Remus, whom one belly had conteyned before. There was sometime at Eilefford, a house of Carmelite Friers: of the time of the foundation, or name of the foun∣der whereof, I haue not yet learned any thing.
Mallinge, in Saxon, Mealing of Mealuing, that is, the Lowe place flourishing with meale, or Corne, for so it is eue∣ry where accōp∣ted. THis Towne,The names of Townes, ending in ing. (the name whereof ha∣uing his termination in, ing, betoke∣neth plainely, that it is situate along the water, euen as Yalding, Berming Halling, and others thereby) was first giuen to Burhricus, the Bishop of Ro∣chester by King Edmund the Brother of Athelstane, vnder the name of thrée Plough landes in Mealinges. About one hundreth and fiftie yeares after whiche time, Gundulphus (a successour in that See, as you haue  read before) hauing amplified the buildings, and mul∣tiplied that number of the Monkes in his owne Citie, raised an Abbay of women here also,The Abbay which (being dedi∣cate to the name of the Blessed Virgin) during all his life he gouerned himself, and lying at the point of death, he commended to the charge of one Auice, (a chosen wo¦man) to whome notwithstanding he would not deliuer the Pastorall staffe, before she had promised Canonicall Obedience, fidelitie, and subiection, to the Sée of Ro∣chester, and protested by othe, that there should neither Abbasse nor Nonne, be from thenceforthe receaued in∣to the house, without the consent and priuitie of him, and his successours. Now, whether this Rus propin∣quum,  and politique prouision,The Sola∣ces, of Sol life. were made of a blinde zeale that the man had to aduaunce superstition, or of a vain glorie to increase authoritie in his succession, or els
of a foresight that the Monkes, (whiche were for the moste part called Monachi, of Sole liuing, by the same rule, that Montes haue their name of remouing) might haue a conuenient place to resort vnto, and where they might (Caute, at the least) quenche the heates, kindled of their good cheare and idlenesse, God knoweth, and I wil not iudge. But well I wote, that this was a very common practise in Papistrie: for as Saint Augustines had Sepulchres, Saint Albans Sopewell, Shene Sion, the Knightes of the Rodes, the Nonnes of Clerkenwel, all adioyning, or subiect to suche obedience: so Sempring∣ham, and some other of that sort, had both Male and Fe∣male within one house, and wall togeather, the world being (in the meane while) borne in hand, that they were no men, but Images, as Phryne said sometime of Xenocrates. This house was valued in the Recordes, at two hundreth and eightéene pounds of yere∣ly reuenewe.
Tunbridge, called of Mat. Par. Thebrugge, corruptly for tonebrycge, that is, the Bridge ouer Tone: but if it be truly written tunbrycge, thē it signifieth, the towne of Bridges, as in deed it hath many. ALthough I find no mention of Tun∣bridge in that copie of Domesdaye booke, whiche I haue séene,The Castle. concer∣ning the description of this Shyre: yet read I in history, that there was a castle at Tunbridge sone after the conqueste, if not euen at the same time when that booke was compiled: For omitting that which Hector Boe∣tius writeth, concerning a battell at Tunbridge, wher∣in the Conquerour (as he saith) should preuaile against Harold, bicause it is euidently false and vntrue, vnlesse he mean it of the continuance of the chase after the fight euen to Tunbridge, I haue read, that at suche time, as Odo (ioyning with others of the Nobilitie) made defec∣tion  from William Rufus, to Robert his elder brother, the King besieged at Tunbridge, one Gilbert, then kée∣per of the Castle, and compelled him to yéelde it. Happely this Odo (being the Kings Vncle, and of great authoritie within the Shyre, as we haue before shew∣ed) had erected this Castle, & giuen the charge to Gil∣bert, but howsoeuer that were, certaine it is, that the Castle was long time holdē of the Archbishops of Can∣terbury, and continued many yeares togeather in the possession of the Earles of Clare, afterwards called of Gloucester.
For, in the dayes of King Henrie the second, Tho∣mas the Archbishop, required homage of Roger, then Earle of Gloucester, for his Castle of Tunbridge, who knowing the King to be halfe angrie with the Arche∣bishop, and wholly on his owne side, shaped him a short answere, affirming stoutly that it was none of his, but the Kings owne, as a Lay Fée. Falcasius, (a hyred Souldiour, that was enterteined by King Iohn, during  the warres with his Nobilitie) toke by force this Castle from the Earle of Gloucester, and kept it for a season to the Kings behoofe: King Henrie the third also, after the death of Gilbert the Earle of Gloucester, scised the Wardship of his  Heire, and committed the custody of this Castle to Hu∣bert of Burghe: But Richard the Archebishop, (surna∣med the great) being offended therat, came to the King in great haste, and made his claime, by reason, that the Earle Gilbert died in his homage: the King gaue an∣swer, that the whole Earledome was holden of him, & that hee might lawfully committe the custodie of the Landes to whome soeuer it liked himselfe. Hereat the Bishop waxed warme, and tolde the King plainly, that since he could not haue right within the Realme, he would not spare to séeke it abrode: & forthwith hasted him to ye holy Father at Rome, where he so vsed ye mat∣ter, that he obteined iudgemēt for his part, but he for all that neuer had execution, by reasō that he died in his re∣turne toward home: yet you may here sée, by the way, that in those dayes,The Clear∣gie was law lesse. there was no Lawe in England to rule the proude Prelacie withall, no not so muche, as in things méere Lay and temporall: To be short, the same  King Hērie, not long before ye battel at Lewes in Sussex, burned the Citie of Rochester, and tooke this Castle by
a soudaine surprise, wherein he found (amongst other) the Countesse of Gloucester: But it was not long be∣fore he stored the Castle with men of warre, and resto∣red the Ladie to her former libertie. There was somtime neare to this Castle a Pryorie,The Pryo∣rie at Tun-Bridge. whereof the Earles of Gloucester, and their Heires, were reputed the first Authors, and Patrones: And in our memorie, there was erected a faire Frée Schoole, by the honest liberalitie of Syr Androw Iudde, a Ci∣tizen, and Maior of London, whiche submitted ye same  to the order and ouersight of the company of Skinners there, whereof himselfe had béene a member. Round about the Towne of Tunbridge,The Low ye of Tun∣bridge. lyeth a territorie, or compasse of ground, commonly called, the Lowy, but written in the auncient Recordes and Hys∣tories, Pencata, or Lenga, and being (in déede) a French League, of ground, whiche (as I finde in the Chroni∣cles of Normandie) was allotted at the first vpon this occasion following. There was in Normandie, a Towne (and land therevnto adioyning) called Bryon∣nie, whiche was of the auncient possession of the Duke∣dome, and had continually remained in the handes of the Dukes there, till suche time as Richard (the second Duke of that name) gaue it amongst other Landes to Godfrey, his natural brother, for his aduauncement in liuing. This Godfrey enioyed it all his lyfe, and left it to one Gislebert his Sonne (whiche happely was Gilbert, the Capitain of Tunbridge Castle, of whom we had mention before) who also held it so long as he li∣ued. But after the death of Gislebert, Robert (the Duke of Normandie, and Eldest Sonne to King Wil∣liam the Conquerour) beeing earnestly laboured to bestowe it vpon on Robert, Earle Mellent, (whose ofspring were sometimes Earles of Leycester within
this Realme) seazed it into his owne hands, pretending to vnite it to the Dukedome againe. But when Ri∣chard (the Sonne of Gislebert) vnderstoode of this, he put to his claime, and making his title by a long continued possession, (euen from Godfrey his graund∣father) so encountred the suite of Earle Mellent, that to stoppe Richards mouthe withall, it was by the deuice of the Earle, and by the mediation of Duke Robert, which he made to his Brother William Rufus, brought to passe, that Richard should receaue in recompence, the Town of Tunbridge in England, and so much land about it, as Bryonnie it selfe conteined in circuit: And to the end that the indifferencie of the dealing might ap∣peare, and his full satisfaction be wrought, they caused Bryonnie, and the land about it, to be measured with a line, whiche they afterward brought ouer with them into England, and applying the same to Tunbridge and the land adioyning, laide him out the very like in quan∣titie: in so much that long time after, it was a common and receaued opinion in Normandie, that the Leagues of Bryonnie and Tunbridge, were all one in measure and compasse. This, together with the Towne and Castle, came at the length (as you haue séene) to the  handes of the Earles of Gloucester, betwéene whome, and the Archebishops of Canterbury,42. H. 3. there arose often∣times contention, bothe for the limits of this league, and for the preeminence of their priuileges. At the last, Boniface the Archebishop (next but one in succession after Richard, of whome we spake before) and Richard the Earle (and Heire to Gilbert) agréed in the reigne of King Henrie the third, vpon a perambulatiō to be made betwéene them, and so the strife for their boundes was brought to an end. But as touching their priuileges, and iurisdiction in the place, it fell out by inquisition in
the time of King Edward following, that the Archebi∣shop had nothing to do within the league, that the Earle had returne of writtes, creation of certain Officers, an especiall sessions in Eire. &c, most of whiche things the Towne hath not these many yeares enioyed: But yet it was agréed, after the perambulation so made be∣twéene Boniface and the Earle Richard, that the Earle and his heires should holde the Manors of Tunbridge, Vielston, Horsmund, Melyton, and Pettys, of ye Arche∣bishop and his successours, by the seruice of 4. Knightes fées, and to be highe Stewardes, and highe Butlers, to the Archebishops, at the great feast of their inthroniza∣tions, taking for their seruice in the Stewardship, seuē competent Robes of Scarlet, thirtie gallons of wyne, thirtie pound of waxe for his light, liuery of Hay and Oates for fourescore Horse by two nights, the dishes and salt which should stand before the Archebishops in that Feast, and at their departure the dyet of thrée days at ye costes of the Archbishops at foure of their next Ma∣nors, by the foure quarters of Kent, wheresoeuer they would, Ad minuendum sanguinem, So that they repaired thither, but with fiftie Horses only: And taking also for the Office of Butlership, other seuen like Robes. 20 Gallons of wyne, fiftie pound of waxe, like liuery for thréescore Horses by two nights, the cuppe wherewith the Archebishops should be serued, all the emptie hogs∣heads of drinke, and for sixe tunne of wyne, so many as should be dronke vnder the barre also.The Arche∣bishop hath an Earle to his Butler. The Articles of whiche their composition, were afterward accordingly perfourmed, firste betwéene Gilbert Earle of Gloucester, and Robert Winchelsey the Archebishop, next betwéene the same Earle, and
the Archebishop Reignoldes: Then betwéene Hughe Audley the Earle of Gloucester, and the Archebishop Iohn Stratford: After that betwéene the Earle of Stafford, (to whome the Lordship of Tunbridge at the length came) and Simon Sudbury Archebishop, in that Sée: and lastly betwéene William Warham the Archebishop, and Edward the late Duke of Bucking¦ham, who also executed the Stewardship in his owne  person, and the Butlership by his deputie Syr Thomas Burgher Knight: ye whole pompe, and Ceremonie whereof, I haue séen at greater length set forth, and described, then is méete for this time & place to be re∣counted.
Asherst, in Saxon, Acsehyrst, that is, the Wood consisting of Ashes. IN the Southwest corner of this Shyre, towarde the confines of Sussex and Sur∣rey, lyeth Asherst,The Roo of Asherst was a gro∣wing Idole a place now a daies so obscure (for it is but a Towne of two houses) that it is not wor∣thy the visiting: but yet in olde time so glorious for a Roode that it had of rare propertie, that many vouchsafed to bestowe bothe their labour and money vpon it. It was beaten (forsooth) into the heades of the common people (as what thing was so absurde, which the Clergie coulde not then make the world to beleeue?) that the Roode (or Crucifix) of this church, did by certaine incrementes continually waxe & grow, as well in the bush of haire, yt it had on the head, as also in the length and stature of the members, and bodie it selfe. By meanes whereof it came to passe, that whereas the fruites of the Benefice weare hardly able to susteine the Incumbent, nowe by the benefite of this inuention (which was in papistrie, Nouum genus au∣cupij) the Parson there was not onely furnished by the offering to liue plentifully, but also well ayded towarde the makinge of a Hoorde, or increase of Wealthe and Riches. But as Ephialtes, and Octus, the Sonnes of Nep∣tune who (as the Poets feigne, waxed nine inches eue∣rie moneth) being heaued vp with opinion, and conceits
ceipt of their owne length and hantines, assaulted hea∣uen, intending to haue pulled the Gods out of their pla∣ces, and were therefore shot through, & slayne with the arrowes of the Gods: Euen so, when Popish Idolatrie was growne to the full height and measure, so that it spared not to rob God of his due honour, and most vio∣lently to pull him (as it were) out of his seate, then this growing Idole and all his fellowes, were so deadly wounded, with the heauenly arrowes of the woorde of God (Qui non dabit gloriam suam sculptilibus) that soone after they gaue vp the ghost, and least vs. Betwéene this Towne and Depeforde (which is the whole bredthe of the Shyre, on the west ende) I finde nothing committed to hystorie: and therefore let vs hast, and take our next way thither.
¶ Depeforde, in Latine Vadum profundum, and in auncient Euidences West Greenewiche. THis towne, being a frontier betwene Kent and Surrey, was of none esti∣mation at all, vntil that King Henrie the eight, aduised (for the better pre∣seruation of the Royall Fléete) to e∣rect a Storehouse, and to create cer∣taine officers there: these he incorpo∣rated by the name of the Maister and Wardeines of the Holie Trinitie: for the building, kéeping,The masters of the nauie Royal. and conduc∣ting of the Nauie Royall. There was lately reedefied a fayre Bridge also, o∣uer the Brooke, called Rauensbourne, whiche ryseth not farre of in the Heath aboue Bromley.
¶ Greenewiche, in Latine, Viridis finus: in Saxon, grenapic; that is to say, the Greene Towne. In auncient euidences, Eastgreenewiche, for diffe∣rence sake from Dep∣forde, which in olde Instruments is cal∣led westgreene∣wiche. IN the time of the turmoyled Kinge Ethelred, the whole fléete of the Da∣nish army, lay at roade, two or thrée yeares together before Greenewich: And the Souldiours, for the moste parte, were incamped vpon the hill aboue the towne, now called Black∣health: Duringe this time, they pearced this whole  Countrie, sacked and spoyled the Citie of Canterburie, and brought frō thence to their ships, Aelphey, ye Arch∣bishop:Alphey, the Archbishop was cruelly slaine. And here, a Dane (called Thrum) whom the Archebishop had confirmed in Christianitie the daie be∣fore, strake him on the head behinde, and slewe him, be∣cause he woulde not condiscend to redéeme his lyfe with thrée thousande poundes, which the people of the Citie Diocesse were contented to haue geuen for his raun∣some: Neither would the rest of the Souldiours suffer his bodie to be committed to the earth,A popish minde. after the maner of Christian decencie, till such time (saieth William of Malmsb.) as they perceiued that a dead stick, being an∣nointed with his bloud, waxed gréene againe, and be∣gan the next day to blossom. But referring the credite of that, and suche other
vnfruitfull miracles (wherwith our auncient monkish stoaries doe swarme) to the iudgement of the godly and discréete Readers, most assured it is, that aboute the same time, such was the storme and furie of the Danish insatiable rauine, waste, spoyle, and oppression,32. Shyres in England. with in this Realme besides, that of two and thirtie Shyres (in∣to which number the whole was then diuided) they her∣ried and ransacked sixtéene, so that the people being mi∣serably vexed, the Kinge himselfe (to auoyde the rage) first sent ouer the Seas his wyfe and children: after∣ward  compounded, and gaue them a yerely tribute: and lastly for verie feare forsooke the Realme, and fled into Normandie himselfe also. They receiued (besides daylie victuall) fourtie eight thousande poundes in ready coyne,Great sūm of money paied to the Danes. of the subiectes of this Realme, whilest their King Swein lyued: & twen∣tie one thousand after his death vnder his sonne Canu∣tus: vpon the payment whereof, they made a corporall oth, to serue the King (as his feodaries) against al stran∣gers, and to liue as fréendes and allies without enda∣maging his subiectes. But how litle they perfourmed  promise, the harms that daily folowed in sundry parts, and the exalting of Canutus their owne countrieman to the honour of the Crowne, were sufficient witnesses. In memorie of this Campe, certeine places within this parishe, are at this day called Combes, namely Estcombe, Westcombe, and Midlecombe almoste for∣gotten: For Comb and Compe in Saxon (being some∣what declined from Campus in Latine) signifieth a field or Campe, for an Armie to soiourne in. And in memorie of this Archebishop Aelpheg, the parish Church at Greenewiche (being at the first, dedi∣cated
to his honour) remaineth knowne by his name euen till this present day. Thus much of the anti∣quitie of the place: concerning the latter hystorie, I reade, that it was soone after the conquest, parcel of the possessions of the Bishop of Lysieux in Fraunce, and that it bare seruice to Odo, then Bishop of Baieux, and Earle of Kent: After that, the Manor belonged to the Abbat of Gaunt in Flaunders, till such time as Kinge Henrie the fift, seising into his handes (by occasion of warre) the landes of the Priors Aliens, bestowed  it, togeather with the manor of Lewsham, and many other lands also,The Priorie of Shene. vpon the Priorie of the Chartrehouse Monks of Shene, whiche he had then newly erected: to this it remayned, vntill the time of the reigne of Kinge Henrie the eight, who annexed it to the Crowne, wher∣vnto it now presently belongeth. The Obseruant Friers, yt sometime lyued at Greene∣wiche (as Iohn Rosse writeth) came thither about the latter end of ye reign of king Edward ye fourth,The frierie. at whose  handes they obteined a Chauntrie with a litle Chapel  of the holy crosse, a place, yet extant in the towne: And (as Lilley saith) Kinge Henrie the seuenth buylded for them that house adioyning to ye Palaice, which is there yet to be séene. But now least I may séeme to haue saide much, of small matters: and to haue forgotten the principall ornament of the towne: I must (before I end with Greenewiche) say somewhat of the Princes Palaice there. Humfrey therefore (the Duke of Gloucester, & Pro∣tectour of the Realme,The Palaice a man no lesse renowmed for approued vertue, and wisdome: then honoured for his high estate and parentage) was the first that layde the foundations of the faire building in the towne, and towre in the Parke, and called it, his Manor of plea∣sance:
After him Kinge Edward the fourthe bestowed some cost to enlarge the woorke: Henrie the seuenthe folowed, and beautified the house with the addition of the brick front, toward the water side: but King Hen∣rie the eight, as he excéeded all his progenitours in set∣ting vp of sumptuous housinge, so he spared no coste in garnishing Greenewiche, til he had made it a pleasant, perfect, and Princely Palaice. Marie his eldest daugh∣ter  (and after Quéene of the realme) was borne in this house: Queene Elizabeth his other daughter, our most gratious & gladsom Gouernour, was likewise borne in this house: And his deare sonne King Edward (a myra∣cle of Princely towardnesse) ended his lyfe in the same house. One accident more touching this house, and then an ende: It hapened in the reigne of Queene Marie, that the Master of a Ship, passing by, whilest the court lay there, and meaning (as the manner aad dutie is) with saile and shot to honour the Princes presence, vnadui∣sedly gaue fyre to a peice, charged with a pellet in sted of a tampion, the which lighting on the Palaice wallranne through one of the priuie lodg∣inges, and did no further harme.
¶ Blackheathe. ADioyninge to Greenewiche, lyethe the plaine, called (of the colour of the soyle) Blackheathe, the which, besides the burthen of the Danishe Camps (whereof we spake euen now) hath borne thrée seueral rebellious assem∣blies:The rebel∣lion of Iack Straw. One in the time of Kinge Ri∣chard the second, moued (as it shal appeare anon in Dartford) by Iack Straw, whom William Walworth,  then Mayor of London, slowe with his Dagger, in Smithfielde: in memorie whereof, the Citie had geuen them (for increase of honour) a Dagger, to be borne in their shield of armes.The rebel∣lion of Iack Cade. Iack Cade (that counterfeit Mortimer) and his fel∣lowes, were leaders of the second: who passing from hence to London, did to death the Lord Say, and others in the time of King Henrie the Sixt. These two (besides other harmes, that vsually ac∣companie the mutinic and vprore, of the common and rascal sort) defaced fouly the Records and monuments both of the law, and Armourie: The parts of Rolles re∣mayning yet halfe brent, doo witnesse the one: And the Heraldes vnskill, (comming through the want of their olde Bookes) is sufficient testimonie of the other. The third insurrection was assembled by Michael Ioseph (the black Smith) and the Lorde Audley,The rebel¦lion of the black smith vnder the reigne of Kinge Henrie the Seuenth: at whiche time they and their complices, receaued their iust deserte, the common number of them being slaine and discomfited, and the leaders themselues taken, drawne and hanged.
Of this last, there remaineth yet to be séene vpon the Heathe, the places of the Smithes Tente, called com∣monly his forge: And of all thrée, the graue hilles of suche as were buried after the ouerthrowe: These hillockes in the West Countrie (where is no smal store of the like) are called Barowes, of the olde Englishe word BurgHer; whiche signifieth Sepulchres, or pla∣ces of burying, which word, (being a spring of that olde stocke) we doe yet reteine aliue. The first and last of these commotions, were stirred of a griefe that the common people conceaued, for the demaund of two subsidies, of whiche the one was vn∣reasonable, bycause it was taxed vpon the Polls, and ex∣empted none, were he neuer so poore: The other was vnseasonable, for that it was exacted, when the heades of the common people were full of Parkin Warber. The third and midlemoste, grewe vpon a grudge, that the people tooke, for yeelding vp the Duchie of Angow, and Maynie, to the King of Sicil: The com∣ming in of whose daughter (after that the King would néedes haue her to wife, notwithstanding his precon∣tract made with the Earle of Armenac) was not so ioy∣fully embraced by the Citizens of London vpon Black∣heathe, wearing their red Hoodes, Badges, and blewe gownes: as in sequele, the Marriage, and whole gouern∣ment it self, was knowne to be detested of the countrie Commons, by bearing in the same place, Harnesse, Bowes, Billes, and other Weapon: But bicause I cannot (without paine and pitie) enter into the conside∣ration of these times, and matters, I will discourse no farther thereof, but crosse ouer the next way to Lesnes, and prosequute the rest of the bounds of this Bishopricke.
Lesnes, mistaken, as I thinke for Lesƿes (Leswes) whiche signifi∣ethe, Pastures. I Could easily haue beléeued, that the name Lesnes, had béen deriued out of the Frenche, and that it had béen first impo∣sed at the foundation of the Abbay, sa∣ying that I finde the place registred in the Booke of Domesday, by the very same, and none o∣ther calling. And therfore I am the rather led to thinke that the name is Saxon, and there miswritten, (as ma∣ny other be, by reason that the Normans were the pen∣ners of that booke) Lesnes, for Leswes, the word whiche (in the Saxon tongue) signifieth Pastures, and is not as yet vtterly forgotten, forasmuche as till this day Pastures be called Lesewes in many places: This is my fantasie touching the name, wherein if I fayle, it forceth not greatly, since the matter is no more weigh∣tie: Concerning the Hystorie of the place, only I finde,  that Richard Lucy a priuie Counselour of the State, and chiefe Iustice of the Realme, in the time of King Henrie the second,Lord Ri∣chard Lucy. founded an Abbay there: the tempo∣ralties wherof amounted (as I finde) to seuen poundes sixe Shillings and eight pence: But as for the extent of the whole yearely va∣lue, I haue not lear∣ned it.
Earethe, in some olde euidences, Eard, deriued (as I gesse) of Aerre Hyðe, that is the olde Hauen. FOr plaine example, that oure El∣ders before the conquest,The ancient manner, of the triall of right to Landes. had their trialles for title of land, and other controuersies, in each shire, before a Iudge, then called Alderman, or Shyreman, of whom there is ve∣ry frequent mention in the Lawes of our auncestours the Saxons, the whiche some yeares since were collected and published in one volume: and for assured proofe also, that in those dayes they vsed to procéede in suche causes, by the oathes of many persons (testifying their opinion of his credit, that was the first swearer, or partie) after the manner of our daily experi∣ence, as in the oath yet in vre, and called commonly Wa∣ger of Lawe, is to be séene: I haue made choice of one Hystorie, conteining briefly the narration of a thing done at this place, by Dunstanc, the Archbishop of Can∣terbury, almost a hundreth yeares before the comming of King William the Conquerour. A rich man (saith the text of Rochester) being owner of Cray, Earithe, Ainesford, and Woldham, and hauing  none issue of his body, deuised the same lands (by his last wil, made in the presence of Dunstane, and others) to a kinswoman of his owne, for life, the Remainder of the one halfe thereof, after her death, to Christes Church at Canterbury, and of the other halfe to Saint Androwes of Rochester, for euer: he died, and his wife toke one Leofsun to husband, (who ouerliuing her) reteined the Land, as his owne, notwithstanding that by the fourme of the deuise, his interest was determined, by the deathe of his wife: Herevpon complaint came to one Wulsie, for that time the Scyreman (or Iudge
of the Countie, (as the same booke interpreteth it) be∣fore whome, bothe Dunstane the Archebishop, the par∣ties them selues, sundrie other Bishops, and a great multitude of the Lay people, appeared, all by appoint∣ment at Eareth: and there in the presence of their whole assembly, Dunstane (taking a crosse in his hand) made a corporal oath vpon the booke of the Ecclesiastical lawes, vnto the Shyreman,Wager of Lawe. (whiche then tooke it to the Kings vse, bicause Leofsun himselfe refused to receaue it) and affirmed that the right of these landes, was to Christes Churche, and to Saint Androwes. For ratification and credit of which his othe, a thou∣sand other persons (chosen out of East, and West Kent, Eastsex, Midlesex, and Sussex) tooke their othes also, vp∣on the Crosse, after him. And thus, by this manner of iudgement, Christes Churche, and Saint Androwes were brought into possession, & Leofsun vtterly reiected for euer. The towne of Eareth, is an ancient corporatiō, but whether it hath béen at any time, of greater accōpt, I finde not: & therfore, hauing alreadie declared in ma∣ner, whatsoeuer it hathe note woorthie, I will set down  this one thing, and leaue it. Toward the latter end of the reigne of King Henrie the sixt, there were taken at this Towne, foure very great and rare fishes, of whiche one was then named to be Mors Marina, an∣other a sword fishe, and the rest were supposed to be Whales.
Crayforde, in Saxon Creccanford, that is, the Ford, or passage ouer the water Crecca, now called Cray. AFter the death of Horsa,Hengist. & Horsa. (of whome we haue spoken in Ailesford before) The Saxons made his brother Hengist their only King and leader. And he, minding foorthwith to shewe himselfe woorthie of his newely attayned Honour, and willing to supplie in himselfe the defect of his deceased Brother, pursued the Britons fiercely, and gaue them sundrie great encounters: in diuers of whiche, although he sped doubtfully, yet at the last méeting with them at Crayford, he slewe foure of their chief capitaines, and  so discomfited the whole number, that the Britons quite abandoned this Countrie, and with great feare fled to London before him. After this fight, the Britons not only neuer inuaded Hengist (as Ralfe Higden wri∣teth) but fled him like fire,The begin∣ning of the Kentishe Kingdome. as the Saxon Hystorie repor∣teth: so that euen then, and not before, it might truely be saide, that he had gained the possession of the Kentish Kingdome. The place is named of the water Cray, whiche beginning at Orpington (vntruely so termed for Dorpendun, whiche signifieth the head,Orpenton, & the course of Cray water. or spring of the Hille water) runneth by Saint Marie Cray, Poules Cray, Fotescray, and Crayford (to all whiche it likewise giueth name) and commeth at length to Dartford, where it mingleth with the Riuer Darent, and so openeth into the Tha∣mise.
Dartforde, in Saxon, Derentford; in latine, Derenti vadūtit signifieth, the ford, or passage ouer the Riuer Derent. Mesopota∣mia signifi∣eth a coūtry encompas∣sed with ri∣uersNOw be we retourned into Mesopo∣tamia, for so me thinketh that this countrie, lying betwene the Riuers of Darent and Medwey may wel be termed. And here you must call to minde that, whiche you heard in Ro∣chester before: namely, that King Iohn wan the Castle of Rochester from William Dal∣byney, through the faint heart and cowardize of Robert Fitzwalter, whom the Nobilitie had sent of purpose, to rescue it: & now (the place so requiring) you shal vnder∣stand the whole maner of the thing, and how it hapned. Rochester castle besei∣gedThe Noble men, that mainteined the warre a∣gainst King Iohn, vnderstanding that he laide siege to the Castle at Rochester, and fearing that William Dal∣biney (or Dalbinet) the Capitaine thereof, could not long defend it without supplie of suche thinges as he wanted, and they could not well minister: determined to giue some aduenture to raise the siege. And for that  purpose, made Robert Fitzwalter generall of a greate armie: This man, when he came to Dartford, mette with a Gentleman of the order of the Temple, of whō he demaunded sundrie questions, for intelligence of the numbre of the Kings campe: Who (finding him to be afraide) tolde him (of set purpose) that the Kings armie was muche greater then his, whereas in déede his pow∣er was thrise so bigge as the Kings: Here vpon Robert, (being with this false terrour stricken into an excéeding great feare, whose companion is flight, as Homer well saithe,) without further inquisition, sought to saue him selfe by the swiftnes of his féete, and so through fainte heart left Rochester to the vttermost aduenture.
If King Iohn had followed, I thinke it would haue become of him, as it sometime chaunced of a certaine white liuered man: who, hearing great praise of Her∣cules strengthe, forthwith conueyed himself into a caue, and when he had spied him (by chaunce) passing that way, he died out of hand for extreame feare. I read,  that in the time of King Henrie the third, Frederic the Emperour, sent hither the Archebishop of Colein,Princes, may wooe by picture and marye by proctor. accom¦panied with sundrie Noble personages, to demaunde Isabell the Kings sister to be giuen him in marriage: the whiche (for asmuche as the Embassadours liked the young Ladie well) was (after suche a solemnization, as in absence may be perfourmed) married vnto him at this Towne, and then deliuered to the Orators to be caried ouer. Whereby I make coniecture, that al∣though there be not in storie, mention of any great buil∣ding at Dartford, before the time of the Abbay, whiche was raised long after this marriage, yet there was some faire house of the Kings, or of some others, euen at this time there: For otherwise I knowe not howe to make it a méete place, for so honourable an ap∣pointment. But leauing all coniecture,The Abbay certaine it is, that afterward King Edward the third, founded there a faire Monasterie for women, which at the gene∣ral dissolution, was founde to be woorth thrée hundreth: and eightie pounds by yeare, and of whiche King Hen∣rie the eight (not without great cost) made a fit house for himselfe and his successours. The same King Edward the third,The old ma¦ner of Tour∣neament. at one time in his returne from Fraunce, proclaimed a generall Tornea∣ment, or Iustes, to be holden at Dartford, whiche he and his Nobles perfourmed moste honourablie. This manner of exercise, beeing then vsed, not at the Tilte (as I thinke) but at Randon, and in
the open field, was accompted so daungerous to the per∣sons hauing to do therein, that sundrie Popes had for∣bidden it by decrée, and the Kings of this Realme (before King Stephan) would not suffer it, to be frequēted with∣in their land: so that, suche as for exercise of that feate in armes, were desirous to proue themselues, were dri∣uen to passe ouer the Seas, and to performe it in some indifferent place in a forreigne Countrie: But after∣ward, King Stephan in his time permitted it: and then after him King Richard the firste, not only allowed it, but also encouraged his Nobilitie to vse it: And so by litle and litle, the danger being sufficiently prouided for, and the men waxing expert, it grewe in the time of the Kings that followed (especially in the reigne af this Ed∣ward the third) to a moste pleasaunt, vsuall, and fami∣liar pastime. But, to returne to Dartford againe: The first mo∣tiue of the rebellious assembly of the Common people of this Shyre,The occasi∣on, of Iacke Strawes his rebellion. that chaunced in the time of King Richard the second (whereof you heard some what in Blackheath before) was giuen at this Towne, by occasion that a naughtie fellowe (being appointed to leuye the groates, that were by Parleament taxed vpon euery Polle) dis∣honestly intreated a young Damosel (Daughter to one Iohn Tyler) that dwelt in Dartford, which thing when the Father heard of, he fell at wordes with the Officer, and from woordes to worse, so that in the end he slewe him: This done, the Cōmon people of the Towne, part∣ly for grudge at the imposition, partly for maintenance of the thing, whiche they thought well done: and partly to eschewe the punishment that by execution of Iustice might fall vpon them, assembled their neighbours, and growing to some number, made this Tyler their Capi∣taine, named him Iacke Strawe: and did further, as you
in part heard before, and may at more large read almost in euerie English Chronicle. This Towne (as Crayford before) hath the name of the water running by, cōmonly called Derent,The cour of the riuer of Derent. but cor∣ruptly, after the opinion of Lelande, who thinketh the true name to be Dorquent, which in Brittish soundeth the Cleere water: It springeth at Titsey in the edge of Surrey, and taketh in the way Westram, where Iohn Frith was borne, Otford, Ainsford, and Darent (wher∣to it leaueth the name) and comming to this Towne, carrieth Craye with it into the Thamise. ¶ Grauesende, in Saxon, Gerefesend: in Latine, Limes Praetorius. THe originall cause of the name of this place, lyeth hidde in the vsuall name of the officer, lately created in the Towne: He is commonly called Portreue, but the worde (aunciently and truely sounded) is Portgereue,The name of Portreue whereof it commeth. that is to say, the Ruler of ye Towne. For Porte (descending of the Latine woorde Portus) sig∣nifieth a Porte Towne, and Gereue (being deriued of the Saxon verbe gereccan to rule) was first called ge∣recfa, and then gerefa, and betokeneth a Ruler: So that, Portreue, is the Ruler of the Towne, and Greues∣end, is as much to saye, as the Limit, Bounde, or Pre∣cinct of such a Rule or Office. Of the very same reason, they of the lowe and high Germanie (whence our language first discended) call
one ruler, Burgreue, another Margreue, and the thirde Landsgreue:The name of Sherife. And of the same cause also, our Magistrat nowe called a Sherif, or (to speake more truely, Shyre∣reue) was at the first called (Shyre gereue) that is to say, Custos Comitatus, the Reue, or Ruler of the Shyre. The head officer of Maydston, long since had this name: yea the chiefe gouernour of the citie of London likewise, before the time, eyther of Maior, or Baylife there, was knowne by the name of Portreue, as in the Saxon Chartre of King William the Conqueroure (sundry ex∣amples wherof be yet extant) may appeare.London had a Portreue. It began thus, pilliam cyng greit ƿilliam bisceop. & godfre∣ges portgerefan. & ealle þa burHƿaren þe on lun∣den beon; William the King, greeteth William the Bishop, and Godfrey the Portreue, and all the Citi∣zens that in London be. &c. To make short, in auncient time, almost euery Ma∣nor had his Reue,The office of a Reue. whose authoritie was, not onely to le∣uie the Lords rents, to set to worke his seruaunts, and to husbande his Demeasnes to his best profit and com∣moditie: but also to gouerne his tenants in peace, and to leade them foorth to warre, when necessitie so requi∣red. And although this name, and so muche of the au∣thoritie as remained, was (after the comming in of the Normanes) transferred to another, whiche they called Baylife: yet in sundry places of the Realme (especially in Copiholde Manors, where old custome preuaileth) the worde, Reue, is yet well inoughe knowne and vn∣derstanded: Neyther ought it to séeme any what the more straunge, bycause I call nowe Reue, that whiche in olde time was Gereue, for as muche as this particle (Ge) was in processe of time, in some places chaunged in sounde to (y) and in some other partes cleane lost and forgotten: As for example, wheras the Saxons vsed to
say, he was Geboren, they of the West countrie pro∣nounce it, he was yborne, and we of the countries nearer London, he was borne. Thus farre the Etymon of the name (Greues end) hath carried me out of the Hystorie, whereto I did the rather yealde, bycause I had not muche to write con∣cerning the place it selfe. Howbeit I reade, that in the beginning of the reigne of King Richarde the seconde,  whilst the Lorde Neuel was by the Kings appointmēt, entred into Fraunce, with a great company of English souldiours, the Frenchmen entred the Thamise with their Gallies, and brent diuers townes, and at the last, (comming to Grauesend) spoyled and set it on fire also: The feare of the like harme to followe, caused the no∣ble King Henrie the eight, to builde a platforme at the same towne, and thrée or foure others, in places ad∣ioyning, euen at suche time as he fortified a∣long al the coastes of the Realme, vpon suche cause as we haue already opened.
¶ Cliffe at Hoo, written commonly in auncient Bookes, Cloueshoo, for CliofesHoo, which is as much to say, as Clifs hoo, or Cliffe at Hoo. THeodore the seuenth Archebis∣shop of Canterburie, and the first (in the opinion of William Malmsb) that exercised the au∣toritie of an Archbishop, which appeared (as others say) in that he tooke vpō him to depose Wil∣frid of Yorke, called together a Synode of bishops at Hereford: in which it was agreed amongst them, that for the more spéedie reformation of abuses that might créepe into the Churche, they should all assemble once euery yeare at Cloueshoo vpon the Kalends (or first day) of August: By vertue of which decrée, Cuthbert, ye eleuenth Arch∣bishop, somoned the bishops of his Prouince to ye same place, and there (amongst other things worthy note) it was enacted, that priests themselues should first lerne, and then teach their parishoners, the Lords prayer, and the Articles of their beléefe in the English tongue:A learned age in which priestes had more latine thē english, and yet al∣most no la∣tine at all. To which decrée, if you list to adde ye testimonie of King Al∣fred, who in his preface vpon the Pastoral of Gregorie, that he translated, saith, yt whē he came first to his king∣dome, he knew not one prieste on the South side of the riuer of Humber, that vnderstoode his seruice in Latine or could translate an Epistle into English. And if you  wil adioyne ye also, which Alfric writeth in his Proeme to the Grammar, that is to say, that a litle before ye time of Dunstane ye Archebishop, there was neuer an english priest ye could other endite, or vnderstād a latine epistle,
Then I doubt not but you shall euidently see, howe ea∣sie it was for the Diuell and the Pope to créepe into the Churche of Englande, when (whole ages together) the Clergie was so well fed, and so euill taught. But to our matter againe. By vertue of the same decrée and ordi∣nance also, two other Councelles were holden at Cliffe at Hoo: one vnder Kenulph, the King of Mercia, or mi∣dle England, and the other in the reigne of Beornwulfe  his successour. This place would I haue coniectured to haue lien in the hart of England, both bycause it séemeth  likely that the common place of méeting should be most fitly appointed in the midst of the Realme, and for that it is manifest by the hystorie, that it was in the domini- of the King of Mercia, whiche I feare not to call midle England. But, for as much as I once read a note, made by one Talbot (a Prebendarie of Norwiche, and a dili∣gent trauayler in the Englishe hystorie) vpon the mar∣gine of an auncient written copie of William Malms∣buries booke De Pontificibus, in whiche he expounded Clouesho, to be Cliffe at Hoo neare Rochester: and for that I doe not finde the expresse name (Cloueshoo) in all the catalogue of that precinct whiche was sometime the kingdome of Mercia (although there be diuers pla∣ces therin that beare the name of Cliffe, as wel as this) I am contented to subscribe to Talbots opiniō: but with this protestation, that if at any time hereafter I finde a better, I will be no longer bounde to followe him. And thus haue I now visited the places of chief note that lye in the skirtes of the Diocese, whervnto if I had added a fewe other that be within the body of the same,The order of this des∣cription. I would no lesse gladly, then I must necessarily, finishe and close vp this winters trauayle.
Swanscombe, called in Saxon, Spegenscomb, that is, the camp of Sweyn, the Dane, that encamped at Grene∣hithe hard by. AS the whole Shyre of Kent oweth to Swanscomb euerlasting name, for the fruition of her auncient fran∣chises obtained there: So I for the more honourable memorie of the place, can gladly afoord it roome, both at the beginning, and towarde the ende of my labour. The matter for the whiche it is especially renow∣med, is already bewrayed in the discourse of the aunci∣ent estate of this Shyre, wherevnto I will referre you: And at this time, make note of a thing, or twaine be∣sides, and so passe ouer to the residue. The ManorThe Ma∣nour. of Swanscombe, is holden of Rochester Castle, and oweth seruice towarde the defence of the same, being (as it were) one of the principall Captaines to whome that charge was of auncient time commit∣ted, and hauing subiect vnto it, sundry Knightes fees, as petie Captaines, or inferiour souldiours, bound to serue vnder her banner there. The church of S. Hilde∣ferthe.The Churche at Swanscombe, was muche haunted in times past, for Sainct Hildeferthes helpe (a Bishop, by coniecture of his picture yet standing in the vpper windowe of the Southe Ile, although his name is not read in all the Catalogue of the Sarons) to whom suche as were distracted, ranne for restitution of their wits, as thicke as men were wont to sayle to Anticyra, for Hellborus.
This cure was perfourmed, by warmth, close kéepe∣ing, and good diet: meanes not onely not straunge, or miraculous, but méere naturall, ordinarie, and resona∣ble. And therefore, as one the one side, they might truely be thought mad men, and altered in their wits, that frequented this pylgrymage, for any opinion of extraordinarie woorking: So on the other side, S. Hil∣deferth (of all the Saintes that I knowe) might best be spared, séeing we haue ye keper of Bethleem, who cea∣seth not (euen tyll this day) to woorke mightely in the same kinde of Myracle. ¶ Mepham, aunciently written MeapaHam. SImon Mepham (the Archebishop that performed the solemnities at the inau∣guration of King Edward the third) had both his name & natiuity of this towne, although Polydore Virgil, hath no mencion of the man at all, in his hysto∣rie, or catalogue of Archebishops, either not finding, or forgetting, that euer there was any suche. It is proba∣ble also, that the same Bishop built the church at Mep∣ham, for the vse of the poore, which William Courtney (one of his Successours) repaired fowre score yeares after, and annexed therunto fowre new houses for the same ende and purpose.
Besides these notes, it hath chaunced mée to sée an antiquitie of Mepham,The aunci∣ent forme of a Testa∣ment. whiche both for the profite and pleasure that I conceiued therof, I think méete to in∣sert, thoughe happely some other man may say, that I doe therein, and in many others also, nothinge els but Antiquiora Diphtera loqui: Neuerthelesse, to the ende that it may appeare, what the auncient forme and phrase of a Testament was, how the Husbande and the wife ioyned in making their Testamentes, how landes were deuisable by testament in olde time, by what wordes estates of inheritaunce were wont to be crea∣ted, how the Lordes consent was thought requisite to the testament of the tenaunt, and how it was procu∣red by a guift of Heriot (which as Bracton sayeth, was done at the first, Magis de gratia, quam de iure) Further∣more, that you may sée how this Towne of Mepham, and sundry others came at the first to Christes church, Saint Augustines, and Rochester: and finally, that you may know, as well what aduauncement to Gen∣trie was then in vse, as also what weapons, iewels, and ornaments were at that time worne and occupied, I wyll set before your eye, the last will and testament of one Byrhtric and his wife, which was a man of great wealth and possessions within this Shire, and had his abideing at Mepham more then sixe hundreth yeares agoe.
ÐisThis isis ByrHtricesBirtricks andand AelfsƿyðeElfswithes Hishis ƿifeswyues niHstalast cƿide. þe Hi cƿaedon on MeapaHam. on Heora magatestament, declaration, whiche they declared at Mepham, in their kinsfolks geƿitnesse;hearing: witnesse: {that} ƿaes ƿulfstan Ʋcca.that was, Wulstan Vcca, andand ƿulfsieWulfsie Hishis bro∣ðor.bro∣ther, andand siredSyred AelfridesElfrides suna.sonne, andand ƿulfsieWulfsie sethe blaca.blacke, andand ƿinewyne preost.the priest, andand AelfgarElsgar onof MeapaHam.Mepham. andand ƿulfeHWulfey ordegesOrdeys suna.sonne, andand AelfeHElfey Hishis broðor.brother, andand byrHtƿaraBirtwar Aelfrices laf.Elfrices widowe, andand bryHtricBritric Hise maeg. &her cousine, and Aelfstan bisceop.Elfstane the Bishop. Aerest His cyne Hlaford aenneFirst to his naturall Lord, beaH on HundeaHto∣tiganone bracelet of foure score mancysenMarkes of goldes.golde, andand aneone Handsecshatchet dagger handknife of onas eal sƿa miclan.muche: andand feoƿer Horse.and foure horses, tƿa geraedede.two of them trapped: andand tƿatwo
sƿrdswordes gefetelsode.trimmed, andand tƿegentwo Hafocas.hawkes, andand ealleall Hishis Heador Hundas;houndes. hedgehoundes And þaereAnd to the Lords wife HlaefdianLadie aenneone beaHbracelet onof þrittiganthirtie mancusanmarkes of goldes.golde: andand aenneone stedan.horse stede palfrey toto forespraeceintreate {that} se cƿyde standan moste.that this testament stande maye. AndAnd forfor Hishis saƿle.soule, andand Hishis yldrena.elders auncestors into Sct. Andree.to Sainct Androes Rochester tƿatwo sulungplowland aetat denetune;Dentun. And Hio for Hire saƿle. and Hyre yl∣drena.And they bothe for their soules and their el∣ders, tƿa aet langafelda;two at Longfield. ploughlande And And þider in for Hy ðrit∣tigto the thither same place, for them thir∣tie mancys goldes.markes of golde, andand aenneone sƿeorcollar neckbracelet beaH onof feoƿer∣tigfourtie mancysan.markes, andand a ane cuppanCuppe seolfrene.of syluer, andand Healfnea halfe head band couered with golde baend gyldenne;bend gilden. AndAnd caelceeuerie geareyeare toat Heoratheir gemynde.mynde yeares mynde tƿegratwo daga feormedayes ferme from rent corne and victuall ofof HaeslHolte.Haselholte: andand
tƿegra of ƿoðringaberan. and ij. of baerlingan,two dayes of from Watringbery: and two dayes out of Berling, and ij. of HaeringeardesHam;and two dayes out of Hertesham. And to cristes cir∣canAnd to Christes church lx.60. mancys goldes.markes of golde, xxx. þam biscope.thirtie to the Bishop Archebishop andand xxx. þam Hirode;thirtie to the Couent: AndAnd aennea sƿeornecke beaHbracelet collar onof lxxx.80. mancys.markes: andand tƿatwo cuppancuppes seolfrene.of syluer, andand þaetthe land aetland at MeapaHam.Mepham, AndAnd toto Sct.Sainct Augustine.Augustine xxx.30. mancysmarkes goldes.of golde, andand ij.two cuppancuppes seolfrene.of syluer, andand Healfnehalfe a baendbend gyldene;gilt, AndAnd þaetthe landland aetat derentanDarnt byrHƿarato Byrware Hisfor daeg;his life dayes: AndAnd aefterafter Hirehis daegedayes intoto Sct.Sainct Andree.Androes, forfor unc.vs, andand uncreour yldran;elders auncetors AndAnd barlngasBerling to ƿulfeHeWulfee,
andand Hehe selle .x.shall giue a Hund peningathousand pence into Sct.to Sainct AndreeAndroes forfor unc.vs, andand uncreour yldran;elders. AndAnd ƿulfsieto Wulfsie ƿoðringabiras.Wateringbyrye, innonwithin {that}that gecynde;kinred. AndAnd syrede HeselHolt innon {that} ge∣cende;to Syred Haselholt, within that And ƿulfege. and AelfegeAnd to Wulfei, and Elfey Hishis breðerbrother Herige∣ardesHamHarte∣sham, innonwithin {that}that gecynde.kinred, toto ƿulfegeWulfee {that}the inland.inland, demeanes andand Aelfegeto Elfey {that} ûtland;the outland. tenancie AndAnd ƿulfstaneto Wulfstane uccan.Vcca. ƿolcnestedeWalkenstede, innonwithin {that}that gecynd;kinred: AndAnd ana Hanðsecshatchet dagger onof ðrymthree pundan;pounds. And þa tyn Hyda on StraettuneAnd those ten plowlands at Streiton intoto þaemthe myn∣stremyn∣ster church toat ƿolcnestede.Walkenstede. And {that} land aet fealcanHamAnd the land at Falcham, af∣treaf∣ter byrHƿaraByrwares daege,dayes, intoto Sct.Sainct Angree.Androes, forfor AelfricElfrices Hiresoule Hlaford.their Lord, and His yldran.and his auncetors, sƿaeuen Heoraas their cƿidewill ƿaes;was.
AndAnd bromleaHBrumley aeftreafter briHtƿaraBritwares daege intodayes to life Sct.Sainct Andree.Androes, sƿaas AelfricElfric Hyretheir HlafordLorde it Hit becƿaeð.bequeathed, forfor Hinehim andand His yldran;his elders. auncetors AndAnd SnodingelandSnodland eacalso intoto S. Andree aeftre Hire daege. sƿa Aelfere Hit becƿaeðSainct Androes, after their dayes, euen as Elfere it bequethed, Aelfrices faeder. and He seoðan on geƿitnesse Ead∣gifebeing Elfrices father, and he afterward in the witnesse hearing presence of Ed∣giue ðaerethe Hlaefdian.Ladie, andand Odanof Odo Aercebisceopes.the Archebishop, andand Aelfegesof Elfey AelfstanesElfstanes sunu.sonne, andand Aelfricesof Elfric Hishis broðorbrother, andand Aelfnoþes pilian.of Elfnothe pilia, and godƿines aet faecHam.and of Godwine of Facham, andand of EadricesEadric aetof Ho.Hoo, andand Aelfsiesof Elfsie the preostespriest onof Crog∣daene;Croy∣den. AndAnd ƿulfstaneto Wulfstane lx.60. mancasmarkes goldesof gold toto daelannedeale forfor uncvs andand uncreour yldran. andelders: and oðerother sƿilesuche, 60. mrkes ƿulfsigeto Wulfsie toto
daelanne;deale, betweene God and them be it andand Haebbanhaue Heomthey ƿiðwith godGod gemaene.together, gifif Hythey Hitit nedo don;not. AndAnd ƿulfsige tydices eg.to Wulfsie, Titaesey, andand ðam boc.the writing innonwithin {that}that gecynde.kindred: & ij. spuran on iij pundā; And ic bid∣deand two spurres of three pound. And I pray forfor godesGods lufanloue, minnemy deere leofanleefe Hlaford. {that} He neLorde, that he doe not þafigesuffer {that} aenig man uncerne cƿide aƿende;that any man our testament doe breake, turne aside AndAnd icI biddepraye ealleall godesGods freond.friendes {that} Hi ƿHrto filstan;that they thereto helpe Haebbe ƿið god gaemaene ƿe Hit brece. & godHaue they it with God together, Betweene them and God be it that it do breake, and God sy Him symle milde þe Hit Healdanbe to them alwayes mylde, mercifull that it holde keepe ƿille;will.
It shall suffice, for the moste parte of the matters (worthy obseruation) in this Testament,The aunci∣ent estate of a Gentle¦man, and by what meanes gentle was obteyned in the olde time. that I haue already poynted at them with the finger (as it were) for that they appeare, and shew themselues manifestly at the firste sight: Onely therefore, touching the estate and degree of this Testator, I wyll (for the more light, and discouery thereof) borrow a few wordes of you. He himself here calleth Aelfric, his Lord, & natural Lord, & saieth further, that Aelfere was Father to this Ael∣fric: Now, what Aelfere & Aelfric were, it is not hard to finde: for all our auncient Hystorians tell vs, that in the dayes of King Edgar, of King Edward the Martyr, & of King Ethelred, these men were by birth, cousines of the bloud royall: by state (Eorles) which word we yet reteine in English, and which we commonly cal (Comi∣tes) in Latine, for that at the first they were parteners and companions (as I may say) with the King, in take∣ing the profits of the Shyre, or Countie: that they were also by dignitie (Ealdormen) that is, Senators, and Go∣uernours of all Mercia, or midle England: And finally that they were of such great power and credit, that Al∣fer the Father, immediatly after the death of King Ed∣gar, restored al such priests thorowout midle England, to their houses, as the King (by aduice of Dunstane the Monke) had in his lyfe expulsed, for the placeing of his Monks: And that Aelfric the sonne, resisted king Ethel∣red in that siege of Rochester, whereof you heard when we were there, For as much therefore, as Aelfric was Hlaford, or Lorde, to our Testator, and that Hla∣ford and Ðegn, that is to say, Lorde and Seruiteur, be woordes of relation, I gather that he was Ðegn, which signifieth properly a Minister, or frée Seruiteur, to the Kinge, or some great personage: but vsually at those times taken for the verie same, that we call now of the Latine woord (Gentilis) a Gentleman, that is () a man wel borne, or of a good stock and familie.
Neither doth it detract any thing from his Gentrie at al, that I said he was a Minister, or Seruiteur: For I meane not thereby, that he was (Seruus) whiche woord (straightly construed) doth signifie a seruaunt, or slaue, whome they in those daies called ðeoƿe: but my minde is, that hee was a seruitour of frée condition, either ad∣uaunced by his owne vertue and merite, or els descen∣ded of suche Auncestours, as were neuer degraded: And that name, the Prince of Wales, or eldest Sonne of our King of this Realme, doth not, in the life of his Father, disdaine to beare: For, out of the very same olde-woord (Ðenian) to serue, is framed his Poesie, or word vpō his armes (ic Dien) I serue. And thus I suppose that it is manifest, that Byrthryc our Testator was by con∣dition a Noble man, or (whiche in common acceptance abroade is all one with it) a Gentleman. Howbeit, to the ende, that bothe this thing may haue the more authoritie and credit, and that it may withall appeare, what degrees of Nobilitie and Gentrie there were in this Realme before the comming in of the Normanes, and by what merites men might ascend, and be promo∣ted to the same, I will reache a litle higher, and shewe you another Englishe (or Saxon) antiquitie, whiche I haue séene placed, in diuers olde copies of the Saxon lawes, after the end of all, as a note or aduertisement. Hit ƿes Hƿilum on Englalagum {that} leod and lagumIt was sometime in the Englishe lawes, that the people and for begeþincðum; And þa ƿaeron leod ƿitan ƿeorðsci∣pesthe lawes were in reputation: And then were the wisest of the ƿyrða. aelc be Hismaeðe. Eorl and ceorlpeople woorship woorshipfull woorthie, euery one after his degree: Earle, and
Ceorl. Ðegn & Ðeoden; And gif Ceorl geþeaH. {that}churle, Thein, and vnder Thein. and if a churle thriued so that He Hefdehe had fullicefully fif Hida agenes lande. Cirican.fiue hides of his owne land, a Churche, & cycenan. belHus. and burHgeat. setl. & sundernote& a kitchin, a belhouse, and a gate, a seate, & a seueral office on Cyngesin the kings Healle.halle, þonnethen ƿaeswas Hehe þanonforð Ðegen∣rigHtesthencefoorth the Theins ƿeorðe; And gif Ðegn geþeaH. {that} He þenoderight worthe. worthie And if a Thein did so thriue, that he serued the Cynge.king, and His radstefneand on his message iourney progresse rad on His Hirede.ryd in his houshold, gif seIf he þonne Hefde Ðaegen ðe Him filigde. ðe tothen had a Thein that folowed him, serued him, the which to the toward Cyngeskings utfareiourney expedition fif Hida Hafde.fiue hydes had, plowlandes and on Cyngesand in the kings setl His Hla∣fordseate his palaice ðenode.Lorde. serued, andand ðriƿathrice midwith His aerendhis errand message gefo rahad gone toto Cynge. Se most siððan mid His foraðe His Hlafordthe king, He might Suche an one afterwarde with his foreothe his Lordes aspelian. aet mislican neodan;part playe at any great neede. And gif Ðegn geðeaH.And if a Thein did thue so,
{that} He ƿearde to Eorle.that he became an Earle, þonne ƿaes He siðð an EorlriH∣testhen was he afterward an Earleswoorthy ƿeorðe;right woorthy. the rightes of an Earle. And gif Massere geþeaH. {that} he ferdeAnd if a Merchant so thriued that he passed þrige ofer ƿid Sae. be Histhrice ouer the wide broad Seas, of his agenumowne craefte.crafte, science cunning se ƿaeshe was þonne syððanthencefoorth Ðegn riHtesa Theins right ƿeorðe;woorthy. AndAnd gifif leornere geþeaH. þurH lare. {that} He Had Haefde. anda Scholer so prospered thriued thorowe learning, that he degree had, & þenodeserued xpe. se ƿaes þonne siððan maeðe and mundeChrist, he was then afterward of dignitie and peace priuilege sƿaso micelremuche ƿyrðe. sƿa þaerto gebyrede.woorthy, as therevnto belonged: butonvnlesse Hehe forƿorHte.forfaited so, trespassed {that} He þaes Had note notian ne moste;that he the vse of his degree vse ne might might not vse By this you sée, first, that in those dayes there were but thrée estales of frée men (for bondseruants,The degres of Freemen Earl, Thein and Churle whiche we now sence call by a strained worde (Villaines) ar not here talked of, that is to say, an Earle, or Noble man, the highest: a Theyn, or Gentleman, the midlemost: And a Churle, or Yeoman, the lowest: for as touchinge that which is héere spoken of the seruant of the Theyn, or Gentleman, I déeme it rather ment for a prerogatiue
belonging to the maister, then mencioned as a seuerall degree in the man. Neither doth it make against me in this diuision, that you shall many times reade, of Eal∣dorman, Scyrmā, Heretoga, Seðcundmā,Alderman, Shiremā &c were names of offices. tƿelfHynd¦man, tƿyHindeman: for these be not names of diffe∣rence in degrées, but doo either denote the offices and dignities, or els the estimation and values of those to whom they be attributed: as Alderman and Shyre∣man, doo signifie that Earle or Noble man, to whom the gouernment and charge of a Shyre, or other Precinct, was committed: Hertoga, that Earle or great man, that was (Imperator Belli) the Lieutenant of the field: Syðcundman, that Gentleman, that had the manred (as some yet call it) or the office to leade the men of a Towne, or Parish: And as for tƿelfHindman, it was geuen to the Theyn, or Gentleman, because his lyfe was valued at Twelue hundreth shillinges (as in those dayes the liues of all sortes of men were rated at cer∣ten summes of mony) And tƿyHindman, to the Churle or Yeoman, because the price of his head was taxed at two hundreth shillings: whiche thinge (if it were not expresly set forth in sundrie old lawes yet extant) might well inough be found in the Etymologie of the wordes themselues, the one called a Twelfhynd, as it were, a Twelfe hundred man, and the other a Twyhind, for a man of Two hundreth. Furthermore, you may héere behold, with what dis∣cretion and equitie, our elders procéeded in bestowing these promotions: for where as all Nobilitie and Gen∣trie, commeth either by Discent, or by Purchase, wher∣of the first, if it be not accompanied with vertue, is but an emptie signe, and none other thing, then (as one well sayed) Nobilitatem in Astragulis gestare.
But the latter (being both the maker and maintener of the first) as it ought by all reason to be rewarded with due enseignes of honour, to the ende that vertue may be the more desirously embraced: So haue they heere appointed thrée seuerall pathe waies to leade men streight vnto it, that is to say, Seruice, Riches, & Lear∣ning, or (to speake more shortly) Vertue and Riches, in which two (as Aristotle confesseth) al the olde Nobilitie consisted,Wisdom is more profi∣table, when it is ioyned with riches. & which two as ye Ecclesiast. or Preacher tea∣cheth) make a good accomplement, for (saith he) Vtilior est sapientia, cum diuitijs coniuncta. And in this parte, you may lastly perceiue also, that out of all those trades of life, which be () that is to say, conuersant in gaine, they admitted to the estate of Gentrie such only, as increased by honest Husbandrie, and plentiful Mer∣chandize: Of the first of which Cicero affirmeth, that there is nothing meeter for a Freeborne man:Merchan∣dize, and Husbandrie And of the other, that it is praise worthy also, if at the lengthe being satisfied with gaine, as it hath often come from the Sea to the Hauen, So it chaunge from the Hauen into landes and possessions. And therefore (in my fanta∣sie) where as Geruas. Tilber. (in his obseruations of the Eschequer) accompteth it an abasing for a Gentleman to occupie Publicum mercimonium, common buying and selling, it ought to be referred to the other two parts of Merchandize, that is, to Negotiatiō, which is retayling, or keping of a standing shop, and to Inuection (which is to exercise Mercerye, or (as some cal it) to play ye Chap∣man: and not to Nauigation, which (as you sée) is the on∣ly laudable part of all buying and sellinge. And againe, whereas in our law it is reputed a Disparagement for a warde in Chiualrie (which in old time was as much to say as a Gentleman) to be maried to the daughter of
one that dwelt in a Borowe, I thinke that it also ought to be restrained to suche onely as professed handicrafts, or those baser Artes of buying and selling, to get their li∣uing by. But of all this matter, my Maisters the He∣raldes can better infourme you, to whome (least I be blamed for thrusting my Sicle into an other mans Haruest) I wil without any more, referre you. Tun∣bridge, Wrotham, this towne, and Northfleete, doe lye Northe and Southe one from another: and it is a com∣mune and receaued opinion amongst the Countrie peo∣ple, that you may be conueyed from the Thamise side, to the edge of Sussex in these foure Parishes: So that the whole Shyre by that reckoning, should be but foure Parishes broade, and yet .19. or 20. myles ouer, on this part. If any man doubt of the trueth, let himselfe make the tri∣all, for I dare not war∣rant it.
Wrotham, in Latine Vaginacae: It is in the Domesday booke corruptly written (Brotcham) for I suppose, that ƿyrHam, is the very right name, giuen for the great plentie of woorts or good hearbs that growe there. THere was in Wrotham, of auncient time, a Manor house, perteining to the Sée of the Archebishops. For Geruasius witnesseth, that one Ri∣chard (the Archebishop that succée∣ded Thomas Becket) lay there: And that after suche time as he had, by great largition and bribery, preuailed at Rome bothe against King Henrie (the Sonne of the second of that name) in his owne con∣secration: against Roger the Bishop of Yorke in the quarel of preeminencie, and against other in other vain suits, (so that it might neuer be more truly said of that Citie in Paganisme it self Romae omnia ire venum, then in that time of Papistrie) he had a moste terrible dreame or vision in in his sléep at Wrotham, the manner wher∣of, (as he reporteth) was this. It séemed to him, that a verie graue and reuerend personage, came to his bed side by night, and demaunded of him in a loude voyce, who art thou? with whiche noyse, when the Archebi∣shop awaked, and for feare answered nothing, it added moreouer, Thou art he that hast scattered the goods of the Churche committed to thy charge, and therefore I will scatter thee: and so with the woord vanished out of sight. The Archebishop arose in the morning, and hauing intended a iourney to Rochester, addressed him
selfe thitherward: but this vision continually presented it selfe before the eye of his minde, and so troubled him, that for ease of his inward griefe, he began to disclose the whole order of it to suche as were in his companie: wherof he had no sooner made an end, but he was forth∣with stricken with such a horrour, and chille colde, that he was driuen of necessitie to alight at Halling in his way, where in great torment he ended his lyfe, the next daye following. This house continued here vntill the time of Simon Islip, the Archebishop: who hauing a desire to finishe the Palaice at Maidston, whiche Iohn Vfford his predecessour had begon, and wanting wher∣with to accomplishe it, not onely pulled downe the building at Wrotham, and conueied the stuffe thither, but also obteined of the Pope, licence to leuie a Tenthe throughout his whole Prouince, to per∣forme his work withall.
Kemsing. 1. The wor∣ship of ma∣ny Gods.IN the late time of the Popish , the Image of Edithe (the Daughter of King Egdar, and sometime Prioresse of Wylton in the West Countrie) was re∣ligiously frequented in the Churcheyarde at Kemsing,Saint Edith, and her offe¦ring. for the preseruation of Corne and Graine, from Blasting, Myldewe, Brandeare, and suche other harmes as commonly annoy it: The manner of the whiche sacrifice was this: Some séely bodie broughte a pecke, or two, or a Bushel of Corne, to the Churche: and (after prayers made) offered it to the Image of the Saint: Of this offering, the Priest vsed to reteine the greatest portion, and then to take one handfull, or litle more of the residue (for you must consider he would be sure to gaine by the bargaine) the whiche after aspersi∣on of holy water, and mumbling of a few wordes of con∣iuration, he first dedicated to the Image of Saint E∣dithe, and then deliuered it backe, to the partie that brought it, who then departed with full persuasion, that if he mingled that hallowed handefull with his séede Corne, it would preserue from harme, and prosper in growthe, the whole heape that he should sowe, were it neuer so great a masse. I remember, that I haue read in Terentius Varro, that the olde Romans (amongst innumerable others) had in great veneration, one God, which (of Robigo, a canker in Corne) they called Robigus, and to whom they made deuoute intercession and solemne sacrifice, for the pre∣seruation and deliuerie of their graine, from the selfe same annoyances, that ours is subiect vnto. Howe muche that God of the Romanes, and our Godesse of Kemsing, differed in profession, let some Popish gadder
after straunge Gods make the accompt, for I my selfe can finde no oddes at all. And truely,The olde & newe Ro∣manes, agre in many points of religion. were it not that I am lothe to anticipate nowe before time, that which I shall (God graunting) haue bothe fit place, and méete time to vtter hereafter, I could easily shew, that the olde Romans, and our newe Romanistes, agréed in manner throughout, bothe in the propertie and num∣ber of their Gods (if at the least they be numerable) in the manner and multitude of their sacrifices, in the times and formes of their solemnities, in the reporte of their false and fayned myracles: and finally, almost in yt whole heape and dunghill of theire filthie and supersti∣tious Idolatries, But I will awayt conuenient sea∣sons, and at this tyme giue to euerie man the same, and none other counsell, then Plautus, (a heathen Poet in deede, and yet in this behalfe more heauenly then any Papiste) sometime gaue in the like case, saying: Vnus dum tibi propitius est Iupiter, tu hosce minutos De∣os flocci feceris. While Iupiter is thy friend, set not thou a straw by these petie Gods.
Otforde, in Saxon, Ottanford. WE haue mentiō in ancient hystorie of two famous battels foughten at Otford, whereof the one happened amongst the Saxons them selues, contending for glory and supreame souereigntie. The other, betwéen ye Danes & Saxons, striuing for lands liues, and libertie. In the first, Offa the King of Mer∣cia (hauing already ioyned to his dominion, the moste  part of Westsex, and Northumberland, and séeking to haue added Kent also) preuailed againste the inhabi∣tants of this countrey, not without great slaughter of his owne subiects, and after the victorie, he transferred (as it were in triumphe) the Archebishops Chaire into his owne kingdome, as you heard in the beginning. In the other fight, King Edmund (surnamed for his great strength, Ironside) obtained against King Canu∣tus  the Dane, a most honourable victorie, and pursue▪ him (flying toward Shepey) vntil he came to Ailesford committing vpon the Danes suche slaughter, and blou¦die hauocke, that if Edric the traytour, had not by fra¦dulent counsel withholden him, (as we haue before de¦clared) he had that day made an ende of their whole ar¦mie. These be the written antiquities that I finde of Otford,S. Thomas Beckets spiteful mi∣racles. whiche happely some men will estéeme lesse, then the vnwritten vanities of Thomas Becket, some∣time owner of the place: And therfore, least any should complaine of wrong, you shall heare what they be also. It was long since fancied, and is yet of two many be∣léeued, that while Thomas Becket lay at the olde house
at Otford, (whiche of long time belonged to the Arche∣bishops, and whereof the hall and chapell onely do now remaine) and sawe that it wanted a fit spring to wa∣ter it: that he strake his staffe into the drye grounde, (in a place thereof nowe called Sainct Thomas Well) and that immediately water appeared, the whiche running plentifully, serueth the offices of the newe house till this present day: They say also, that as he walked on a time in the olde Parke (busie at his prayers) That he was muche hindered in deuotion, by the sweete note and melodie of a Nightingale that sang in a bushe besides him, and that therefore (in the might of his holynesse) he inioyned, that from thencefoorth no byrde of that kynde shoulde be so bolde as to sing there aboutes: Some men report likewise, that for as muche as a Smithe (then dwelling in the towne) had cloyed his horse, He enacted by like autho∣ritie, that after that time no Smithe shoulde thriue within the Parishe. Inumerable suche toyes, false Priestes haue deuised, and fonde people (alas) haue be∣léeued, of this iolly Martyr, and Pope holy man: which for the vnworthynesse of the things them selues, and for want of time (wherewith I am streightned) I neyther will, nor can, nowe presently recount, but muste pursue the residue, that pertayneth to this place. For besides this Thomas,S. Bartil∣mew of Ot∣ford, and his offering. there was holden in great veneration at Otford another Saint, called Bartilmew the Apostle (as I trowe) for his feast daye was kept so∣lemne, bothe with a fayre, & good fare there. This man serued the person as Purueyour of his poultrie, & was frequented (by ye parishioners, & neighbors about) for a most rare & singular propertie yt he professed. For ye ma¦ner was, yt if any woman (cōceiued with child) desired to
foorthe a male, she should offer to Saint Bartholmewe a Cocke chicken, and if her wishe were to be deliuered of a female, she should then present him with a Hen. This Saint, was as good as Manci pera, whereof the common Adage grewe: and he differed not muche from the Priestes of olde Rome, called Luperci: For a litle of the water of the one, and the dooing of a cer∣taine Ceremonie by the other, was (at pleasure) as able as Saint Bartholmew, to make barreine women be∣come fruitefull. Assuredly, through the fraude of this foxe, the Coun∣trie people (as wise as capons) were many yeares together robbed of their Hennes and Cockes: til at the length it chaunced King Hērie the eight (after exchange made with the Archebishop for this Manor of Otford) to haue conferrence with some of the Towne, about the enlarging of his Parke there: Amongst the whiche, one called Maister Robert Multon (a man, whome for the honest memorie of his godly zeale and vertuous life, I sticke not to name) detesting the abuse, and espying the Prince inclined to heare: vnfolded vnto him the whole packe of the idolatrie, and preuailed so farre in fauour, that shortly after, the King commaunded Saint Bartholmewe to be taken downe and deliuered him. Thus haue you heard, the contention of the Saxons, the ouerthrowe of the Danes, the fraude of Popishe Priestes, the follie of simple folkes, and the fal of deceit∣full idolatrie. Now a fewe woordes for example of the prodigalitie of a proud Prelate, and then to the residue. The Palaice at Otford.William Warham the Archebishop, minding to leaue to posteritie, som glorious monumēt of his world∣ly wealthe, and mis begotten treasure, determined to haue raised a gorgious Palaice for himselfe and his suc∣cessours in the Citie of Canterbury, but (vpon occasion
of a difference that arose betwene him and the citizens for the limits of his soyle there) he chaunged his former purpose, and in displeasure towards them, bestowed at Otford, thirtie & three thousand pounds, vpon the house that is now to be séene, notwithstanding that him self, and Cardinall MortonCardinall Morton. his immediate predecessour, had not long before liberally builded at Knolle, a house litle more than two myles from it. For, that house also (so called of the situation, whiche is vpon the knap or Knoll of a hill,) had Cardinall Morton in his time purchased of the Lorde Saye,Erasmus doth misre∣porte the cause of the contention, between the King, and Thomas Becket. and appropriated to the Sée of the Archebishopricke. But nowe before I can depart from Otford, I am to begge licence, for a word or two more, as well for the satisfaction of myne owne promise heretofore made, as also for the direction of my Reader, which otherwise by the countenaunce of a cer∣teine famous and learned writer, might be quight and cleane carried from me. Des. Erasmus taking occasion, in the Preface to Frauncis the Frenche King (prefixed before his Paraphrase vpon S. Markes Gospell) to dis∣course vpō ye great troubles & warres that were in his time betwene the Princes of Christendome, declareth, that it were a laudable labour for some mā of the Cler∣gie (euē with the hazard of his life) to become the instru∣ment of their reconciliation: And amongst other exam∣ples of times passed, he bringeth in Thomas Becket, who (as he speaketh) spared not to exercise the Euange∣licall libertie (meaning excommunication, belike) vpon the King him selfe, and that for a very small matter: wherein, although he profited litle in his life (saith he) yet by his death he purchased both gaine and glorie, to him self, and the whole Clergie. Which sayd, he addeth in effect as followeth: They contended (saith he) not for reconciling Princes one to another, but the controuer∣sie
was only for a certaine withdrawing house, called Otforde, a place more méete for a religious mans me∣ditation, then for a Princes pleasure, with the whiche (sayth Erasmus) I my selfe coulde not haue bene great∣ly in loue, till such time as Willam Warham the Arch∣bishop, bestowed so great cost vpon it, that he might be thought rather to haue raised a new house in the place, then to haue repayred the olde: for he left nothing of the firste worke, but onely the walles of a hall, and a cha∣pell: Thus farre out of Erasmus. Wherein first (by the waye) you may espie the reason that moued King Henrie the eight, to take that house by exchaunge from the Archebishop, namely, bicause Warham (not conten∣ted to continue it a plaine house, fit to withdrawe him selfe vnto for contemplation and prayer) had so magni∣ficently enlarged the same, that it was nowe become méete, to make a Palaice for a Kings habitation and pleasure. But let vs come to our matter. You sée here that Erasmus maketh this house, the matter, and mo∣tiue of all the contention, that was betwéene the King and the Archebishop: whiche if it be so, then haue not I faythfully dealt, in laying the cause thereof to be suche, as appeareth in Canterbury before, and consequently, I haue too too much abused the Reader. But for a short aunswere hereto, I do eftsoones auowe, that not onely William of Newburgh, Roger Houeden, and Mat. Pa∣rise, (whome chiefly I haue followed in this storie, and which al, were, eyther mē liuing when the matter was in hande, or borne immediatly after) do plainely testifie with me, that the ordinaunces made at Clarendune, were the very subiect and motiue of all that strife: but also the whole number of our hystoriens following, yea and the very authours of the Quadriloge it selfe (or song of foure parts, for they yealde a concent, though it
be without Harmonie) do all, with one pen and mouth, acknowledge the same. Amongst the rste, Polydore sheweth him selfe excéeding angry, with some that had blowne abroad some such like sound, of the cause of this great hurley burley: for he sayth plainely, that they were Amentiae pleni, qui deblaterabant, Thomam conser∣uandarum possessionum causà, tantum iniuriarum accepisse. starke madde, which babbled that Thomas did receiue so many iniuries, for sauing of his possessions. But for all this, to the ende that it may fully appeare, bothe that Erasmus hath said somwhat, and also from whence (as I suppose) this thing was mistaken, I praye you heare the Quadriloge or storie of his life it self: for that onely shall suffice to close vp the matter. It appeareth by the authors of that worke, that after suche time as the King and the Bishop had long contended (and that with great heate) about the Statutes of Clarendune, & that the Bishop, vpon great offence taken, had made thrée seuerall attempts to crosse the Seas towarde the Pope, and was alwayes by contrarie winde repulsed, and driuen to the lande againe: The King in his iust in∣dignation, sought by all possible meanes to bridle his immoderate peuishnesse: & therefore, first resumed into his owne handes, al such honors and castles of his own as he had committed to ye Bishops custodie: Thē called he an assembly of al his Nobilitie & bishops to Northāp¦ton castle, where before them all, he first charged Tho∣mas with .500. l. that he had long before lent him: for the repaiment wherof, he ther cōpelled him to giue fiue se∣ueral sureties: This done, he called him to an account for .30000. Markes, receiued of the reuenues of the crown, during the time that he was Chancelour. Now, whiles the Archbishop was much troubled wt this mat∣ter (sometime denying to yeald any account at al, som∣time
crauing respite to make a resolute aunswere, but alwayes delaying the time, and meditating howe to shifte the place) there commeth (on a time) into his lodging, the Bishops of London and Chichester: who, finding him at supper, sayde vnto him (worde for worde of the Quadriloge) as followeth, that is, That they had founde out a way for peace: and when the Archebi∣shop had required, vnder what forme, they answered: There is a question for money betweene you,The Manor of Winghā. and the King: If therefore you will assigne vnto the King, your two Manors, Otford and Wingham in the name of a pledge, we beleue that he being therwith pacified, will not only resigne you the Manors againe, and for∣giue you the money, but also a great deale the sooner receiue you to his fauour. To this, the Archebishop re∣plied, The manor of Heche was somtime belonging to the Church of Canterburie (as I haue hard) which the King now hath in demeane: And albeit that the only challenge of the thing is sufficient cause to haue it re∣stored to the Church of Canterbury, yet I do not loke that it will be doone in these times: Neuerthelesse, rather then I wil renounce the right, which the church of Canterbury is sayd to haue in that Manor, either for the appeasing of any trouble whatsoeuer, or for recouerie of the Kings fauour, I will offer this head of mine (and touched it) to any hazarde or daunger, what soeuer it be: The Bishops being angrie with this, wēt out from him, and tolde the King of all, and his indigna∣tion was sore kindled with it. Thus muche out of the Quadriloge faithfully translated. Nowe, vpon the whole matter it appeareth: first, that the quarell was for the lawes of Clarendùne (whiche yet depended) and then, that, euen as a fire, being once kindled, the flame séeketh all about, and imbraceth whatsoeuer it findeth
in the way: So the King being offended with the rebel∣lion of this Bishop, left no stone vntaken vp, that might be hurled at him, & therefore brought in against him, bothe debts, accompts, and whatsoeuer other meanes of annoyaunce. Moreouer, that this matter of Otford and Wingham (for as you nowe sée it was not Otford alone) was not at all tossed betwéene the King and the Archebishop, but only moued by the pacifiers (these two Bishops) as a méete meane of reconciliation, in their owne opinion and iudgement: or, if it may be thought, that they were sent and suborned by the King himselfe with that deuise: yet is it manifest, that the right of the houses themselues were not desired, but onely that they might remaine as a paine till the account were audi∣ted: Neither if the gifte of this house would haue made an end of the strife, doth it by and by followe, that the contention was moued at the first about it. And ther∣fore as on the one side you may sée, that Erasmus his reporte is but matter of Preface and no Gospell: So yet on the other side it is euident, that of such and so lus∣tie a stomacke was this Archebishop, that if former cause had not béene, yet he could haue found in his hart to fall out with his Prince for this, or a smaller matter. For, what would he not aduenture for a Manor or twaine in lawfull possession, that would not sticke to hazard his head before he would release that right, whi∣che he thought he had to a piece of land, and that but on∣ly by hearesay, or supposition? But it is more thē time to make an end, and therefore leauing Thomas, and his house in the bottome, let vs climbe the Hill toward Sen∣nocke.
Holmes Dale, that is to say, the Dale betweene the wooddie hilles. Reigate Castle in Surrey.THere are as yet to be séene, at Reigate in Surrey, the ruines of an auncient Castle somtime belonging to ye Earles of Surrey, whiche Alfrede of Beuerley calleth Holme, and whiche the Coun∣trie people do yet terme, the Castle of Holmesdale. This tooke the name, of the Dale wher∣in it standeth, whiche is large in quantitie, extending it selfe a great length into Surrey, and Kent also, and was (as I coniecture) at the first called Holmesdale, by rea∣son that it is (for the moste part) Conuallis, a plaine val∣ley, running betwéene two hilles, that be replenished with stoare of woode: for, so muche the very woord (Hol∣mesdale) it selfe importeth. In this Dale (a part of whiche we nowe crosse, in our way, to Sennocke) the people of Kent (being encouraged by the prosperous suc¦cesse of Edward their King (the Sonne of Alfrede, and commonly surnamed Edward the Elder) assembled thē∣selues, and gaue to the Danes, that had many yeares be∣fore afflicted them, a moste sharpe and fierce encountre,  in the which, after long fight, they preuailed, and the Danes were ouerthrowne and vanquished. This victorie, & the like euent in an other battaile (gi∣uen to the Danes at Oxford, which stādeth in this same valley also) begate, as I gesse, the cōmon by word, vsed amongst the inhabitants of this vale, euen till this pre∣sent day, in whiche they vaunt after this manner. The vale of Holmesdale, Neuer wonne nor neuer shal.
Sennocke, or (as some call it) Seauen oke, of a number of trees, as it is coniectured. ABoute the latter end of the reigne of King Edward the third,The Schole. and Almes house. there was foūd (lying in the stréetes at Sennocke) poore childe, whose Parents were vn∣knowne, and he (for the same cause) na∣med after the place where he was ta∣ken vp, William Sennocke. This Orphan, was by the helpe of some charitable persons, brought vp and nour∣tured, in such wise, that being made an Apprentice to a Grocer in London, he arose by degrées (in course of time) to be Maior, and chiefe Magistrate of that Citie. At whiche time, calling to his minde, the goodnes of  Almightie God, and the fauour of the Townesmen, ex∣tended towardes him, he determined to make an euer∣lasting monument of his thankfull minde for the same: And therefore, of his owne charge, builded bothe an Hospitall for reliefe of the poore, and a Frée Schoole for the education of youthe, within this Towne: endowing  the one and the other, with competent yearely li∣uing (as the dayes then suffered) towards their susten∣tation, & maintenance: But since his time, the Schoole was much amended by the liberalitie of one Iohn Pot∣kyn, whiche liued vnder the reigne of King Henrie the eight: & now lately also, in the reigne of our souereigne  Ladie, through the honest trauaile of diuers the inhabi∣tants there, not only the yearely stipend is much in∣creased, and the former litigious possessions quietly es∣tablished: but the corporation also chaunged into the name of two Wardeins, and foure assistants, of the frée Schoole of Quéene Elizabeth in Sennocke.
The present estate of the Towne it selfe is good, and it séemeth to haue béene (for these many yeares toge∣ther) in no worse plight:The Town. And yet finde I not in all hystorie, any memorable thing concerning it, saue onely, that in the time of King Henrie the sixt, Iack Cade, and  his mischeuous meiny, discomfited there Syr Hum∣frey Stafford, and his Brother, two Noble Gen∣tlemen, whome the King had sent to encounter them. Eltham. ANthonie Becke, that Bishop of Durham whiche in the reignes of King Henrie the third, & of King Edward his Sonne, builded Aucland Castle in the Bishop∣ricke of Durham, Somerton Castle in Lincolneshyre, and Durham place at London, was (by the report of Iohn Leland) either the very Author, or the first beautifier, of this the Princes house here at Eltham, also. It is noted of that man, that he was in all his life and Port, so gay & glorious, that the Nobility of the Realme disdained him greatly therefore. But they did not con∣sider (belike) that he was in possession Bishop of Dur∣ham, which had Iura Regalia, the Prerogatiues of a pe∣tie Kingdome, and that he was by election, Patriarche of Ierusalem, whiche is néere Cousin to a Popedome, in whiche respectes he might well inoughe be allowed to haue Domus splendidas luxu Regali, his houses not only as gay as the Noble mens, but also as gorgeous as the
Kinges. To say the trueth, this was not to builde vp the spirituall house with liuely stones, resting on the chiefe corner to Heauen, and to Godward, but with Mammon and Material stuffe to erect warrelyke Cas∣tles for the nourishment of contention: and stately Pa∣laces, for the maintenaunce of worldly pride and plea∣sure, towardes Hell and the Deuill. Howbeit, this was the whole studie of Bishops in the Popishe King∣dome, and therefore letting that passe, let vs sée what became of this piece of his building. King Henrie the third (saith Mat. Parise) toward the lat∣ter end of his reigne, kept a Royall Christmas (as the  manner then was) at Eltham, being accompanied with his Quéene and Nobilitie: and this (belike) was the first warming of the house (as I may call it) after that the Bishop had finished his worke. For I doe not here∣by gather, that hitherto the King had any property in it, forasmuch as the Princes in those days, vsed common∣ly both to soiourne for their pleasures, and to passe their set solemnities also in Abbaies and Bishops houses. But yet I beléeue verely, that soone after the deathe of that Bishop, the house came to the possession of the Crowne: for proofe wherof, I pray you heare and marke what followeth. The wyfe of King Edward the second, bare vnto him a Sonne at this house, who was therof surnamed Iohn  of Eltham. What time King Iohn of Fraunce (whiche had béen prisoner in England, came ouer to visite King  Edward the third (who had moste honourably intreated him) the King and his Quéene lay at Eltham to enter∣taine him. King Henrie the fourth also, kept his last Christmas at Eltham. And King Henrie his Sonne and succes∣sour, lay there at a Christmas likewise, when he was
faine to depart soudainly, for feare of some that had con∣spired to murder him. Furthermore, Iohn Rosse writeth plainely, that  King Edward the fourthe, to his greate cost, repaired his house at Eltham: at whiche time also (as I suppose) he inclosed Horne parke, one of the thrée, that be here, and enlarged the other twaine. And it is not yet fully out of memorie, that king Henrie the seauenth, set vp the faire front ouer the mote there: since whose reigne, this house, by reason of the néerenesse to Greenewiche (whi∣che also was muche amended by him, and is through the benefite of the Riuer, a seate of more commoditie) hath not béen so greatly estéemed: the rather also for that the pleasures of the emparked grounds here, may be in manner as well enioyed, the Courte lying at Greene∣wiche, as if it were at this house it selfe. These be the thinges that I had to remember in Eltham: And (to make an end of all) these be the places, whereof I ment to make note in this my Xenagogie and perambulation of Kent, the first and only Shyre that I haue described: wherin although I haue not spoken of sundrie Towns, not inferiour, at this present, in estimation to a greate many that I haue handled, and happely equall with them in antiquitie also, yet I think I haue neither pre∣termitted many yt be much worthie of obseruation, nor scarcely omitted any, that be mentioned in such bookes of Hystorie, as be easily to be had and obteined: but as for the Feodaries and Tenures of land, Genealogies & Armes of men, Ebbes, Floudes, & Tides of the Sea and Riuers, Flattes, Barres, Hauens, & such other things, although somewhat might haue béen seuerally said con∣cerning eache of them, yet haue I wittingly, and with∣out touche, lept ouer them all: Partly for the incerten∣tie, partly that I scatter not any séede of dissention and
enuie, and partely least whilste by disclosing secretes I labour to serue the curiositie of some fewe, I either of∣fend many of the sadder sort, or deserue euill of the whole estate. Nowe therfore I will deliuer you, and rest me: wishing, that some other man, of greater pro∣fite in reading, deapth in iudgement, and dexteritie in penning, would take in hand to amend the description of this, and to adde the residue. For as I at ye first, assayd it to proue my self, to prouoke some, and to pleasure and profite others: So, hauing nowe atchieued it (according to my slender skill) if any man shall like to take this my base metall (drawne out of a fewe Sowze, into many Sheetes, as you sée) & shall hammar it to some further and finer fashion, I wil not only not enuie it, but most hartely thanke him, and gra∣tulate to our Countrie, that so good a tourne & benefite. And, as touching the description of the rest of ye Realme, knowing by the dealing in this one, that it wilbe harde for any one man (and muche more for my selfe) to ac∣complishe all, I can but wishe in like sorte, that some one in eache Shyre, would make the enterprise for his owne Countrie, to the end that by ioyning our pennes and conferring our labours (as it were) Ex symbolo, wée may at the last by the vnion of many parts and papers, compact a whole and perfect bodie and Booke of our Eng∣lish antiquities.
The Customes of Kent. ALthough good order would haue borne the rehersall of the Auncient Customes of this Shyre, in that generall discourse whiche we had in the beginning as tou∣ching the estate of this whole Countie, the rather for that it was there shewed by what meanes and policie they were conserued: yet, least the recitall of the same (being of themselues large and manyfolde) might haue béene thought too great a Parenthesis, or rather an interruption of the Hystorie, wherein we were as then but newly entred, I thought it better to reserue them for this place, to the end, that bothe the one and the other, might appeare, without breache, or confusion. These Customes, therefore, being (for the most part) discrepant from the common lawes of our Realme, and annexed to suche landes within this Shyre, as beare the name of Gauelkinde, are commonly called Gauel∣kinde Customes, for that they preuaile and haue place, in landes of Gauelkinde nature. In whiche respect, it shall not be amisse to shewe, for what reason those landes were at the first so termed, and why they do yet hitherto continue the name. Two coniectures I haue of the reason of this name, the one grounded vpon the nature of the discent, and in∣heritance of these landes themselues: the other founded vpon the manner of the duetie and seruices, that they yeald: bothe whiche I will not sticke to recite, and yet leaue to eache man frée choice, to receaue either, or to refuse bothe, as it shall best lyke him. The name Gauel∣kind, wher∣of it arose.I gather by Cornelius Tacitus, and others, that the auncient Germans, (whose ofspring we be) suffred their landes to descend, not to the Eldest Sonne alone, but to the whole number of their male Children: & I finde in ye 75. Chap. of Canutus law (a King of this Realme before
the Conquest) that after the death of the father, his heires shoulde diuide bothe his goods, and his landes a∣mongst them. Nowe, for as muche as all the nexte of the kinred did this inherite together, I coniecture, that therfore the land was called, eyther Gauelkyn, in mea∣ning, Giueall kyn, bycause it was giuen to all the nexte in one line of kinred: or Giue all kynd, that is, to all the male children: for kynd, in Dutche, signifieth yet a male childe: Besides this, the Welshmen also (who but now lately lost this custome) doe in their language call this discent, Gwele, and in their Latine Recordes, Lectus, pro∣genies, & gauella, of their owne worde, Gefeilled, whiche signifieth Twyns, or suche as be borne together, bicause they doe all inherite together, and make (as it were) but one heire, and not many. And here (by the way) I cannot omit to shew, that they of this our Kentish cun∣trey,To shift lād is an olde terme. do yet cal their partition of land (shifting) euen by the very same worde that the lawe of Canutus many yeares since termed it, namely (Scyftan) in Latine, Herciscere, that is, to shift, depart, or diuide lande. My other coniecture, is raysed vpon the consideration of the rent and seruices going out of these landes: for it is wel knowne, that as Knights seruice lande, required the presence of the tenant, in warfare and battaile a∣broad: So this lande (being of Socage tenure) cōmaun∣ded his attendance at the ploughe, and other the Lordes affaires of husbandry, at home: the one by manhoode de∣fending his Lords life and person, the other by industrie mainteining with rent, corne, and victuall, his estate and familie. This rent, and customarie payment of works, the Saxons called, gafol, and therof (as I think) they named the lande that yealded it, gafolette, or ga∣folcynd. that is to saye, lande Letten for rent, or of the kinde to yealde rent. In this sense I am sure, that the
rents, customes, and seruices, whiche the tenantes of London pay to their land lords, were wont (and yet are) to be recouered, by a writ, thereof called Gauellet, as by an auncient statute, made in the tenthe yeare of King Edward the second, intituled, Statutum de Gaueleto, in London, and by dayly experience there, it may well ap∣peare. Thus much then, as concerning the Etymon of this word Gauelkind, being said, let vs procéed further. The anti∣quitie of Ga¦uelkind cu∣stome.It hath already appeared, how the Kentishmen, im∣mediatly after the Conquest, obteined the continuation of their customes: and it is very manyfest by auncient writers, that the same (for the more part) haue bene in vre and exercise euer since. For (omitting that which Thomas Spot hath written concerning the same mat∣ter, for as much as it is already recited at large) Glan∣uile, a learned man, that flourished in the reigne of king Henrie the second, in his seuenth booke, and third chap∣ter: Bracton, that liued in the time of King Henrie the third, in his seconde booke, De acquirendo rerum dominio: And Bretton, that wrate vnder King Edward the first, and by his commaundement: haue all expresse menti∣on, of landes partible amongst the males by vsage of the place, and some of them recite the very name of Ga∣uelkind it selfe. But most plainely of all, an auncient treatise, receiued by tradition from the hands of our el∣ders (wherof I my self haue one exemplar, written out as I suppose, in the time of King Edwarde the firste) a∣gréeing with the dayly practise of these customes, pro∣ueth the continuance of them, to stande with good lawe and liking.The diuisiō of this dis∣course. And therefore, forbearing (as néedlesse) fur∣ther testimonie in that behalfe, I will descende to the disclosing of the customes them selues: not numbring them by order as they lye in that treatise, but draw∣ing them foorth as they shall concerne, eyther the lande
it selfe, or the persons that I will orderly speake of, that is to say, particularly the Lorde and the Tenant: The husband and the wife: The child and the gardien, and so after addition of a fewe other things incident to this purpose, I will drawe to an end. As touching the land it self,What lands be of Gauel kind nature in which these customes haue place, it is to be vnderstanded, that all the landes within this Shyre, which be of ancient Socage tenure, be also of the nature of Gauelkind. For, as for the lands holden by auncient tenure of Knights seruice, they be at the common lawe, & are not departible after the order of this custome, except certeine, which being holden of olde time by Knightes seruice of the Archebishop of Canter∣bury, are neuerthelesse departible, as it may appeare by an opinion of the Iudges in the Kings benche .26. H. 8. fol. 4. And that grewe by reason of a graunt, made by King Iohn, to Hubert the Archebishop,Some Knight fee is Gauel∣kinde. the tenor wher∣of (being exemplified out of an auncient roll, remayning in the handes of the Reuerende father, Mathewe, the Archebishop nowe liuing) hereafter followeth. Ioannes dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normaniae, Aquitaniae, & comes Andegauen. Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Iusticiarijs, Vice∣comitibus, Praepositis ministris, & omnibus Balliuis, & fideli∣bus suis: Salutem. Sciatis nos concessisse, & praesenti charta nostra confirmasse, venerabili patri nostro ac Chro. Huberto, Cantuar. Archiepiscopo, & successoribus suis in perpetuum, quòd liceat eis terras, quas homines de feodo Ecclesiae Cantua. tenent in Gauelkind, conuertere in feoda militū. Et quod idem Episcop. & successores sui, eandē in ōnibus potestatē, & liber∣tatē habeant in perpetuū, in homines illos qui terras easdem ita in feodo militum conuersas tenebunt, & in haeredes eorum quā ipse Archiepiscopus habet, & successores sui post eum habe∣bunt, in alios milites de feodo Ecclesiae Cantuar. & in haeredes.
Et homines illi, & haeredes eorum, eandem & omnem libertae∣tem habeant in perpetuum, quam alij milites de feodo Ecclesiae Cantuar. & haeredes eorum habent. Ita tamen, quod nihi∣lominus consuetus redditus denariorum, reddatur integre de terris suis, sicut prius, xenia, aueragia, & alia opera, quae fiebāt de terris ijsdem, conuertantur in redditum denariorum aequi∣ualentem. Et redditus ille reddatur, sicut alius redditus dena∣riorum. Quare volumus, & firmiter praecipimus, quod quic∣quid praedictus Archiepiscopus & successores sui post eum, de terris illis in feodo militum secundum praescriptam formam conuertendis fecerint, ratum in perpetuum & stabile perma∣neat. Et prohibemus ne quis contrafactum ipsius Archie∣piscopi, vel successorum suorum, in hac parte venire praesumat. Teste E. Eliense, & S. Bathon, Episcopis. G. filio Petri, comite Essex. Willmo Marescallo, comite de Penbroc. Roberto de Harocort. Garino, filio Geraldi. Petro de Stoke. Ric. de Re∣uerus. Roberto de Tateshal. Datum per manum S. Archid. Willielmi apud Rupem auriual. 4. die Maij Anno regni no∣stri tertio. But nowe for as muche as it is disputable, whether this Chartre of the King be of sufficient vertue to chaunge the nature of the Gauelkynd lande or no, and for that the certaintie of the landes so conuerted in∣to Knight fee, dothe not any where (that I haue séene) appeare, (saue onely that in the booke of Aide, leuied in this Shire, Anno. 20. E. 3. it is foure or fiue times noted, that certeine landes there, be holden in Knights seruice, Per nouam licentiam Archiepiscopi) I will leaue this, and procéede to proue, that all the landes of auncient tenure in Knights seruice, be subiect to the ordinarie course of discent at the common lawe. And that may I (as me thinketh) sufficiently doe, both by the expresse wordes of a note. 9. H. 3. in the title of Praescription. 63. in Fitzher∣bert: by the resolution of the same Fitzherbert, and Norwiche, Iustices, 26. H. 8. 5. And by plaine recitall in
the acte of Parleament, made. 31. H. 8. Ca. 3. by whiche statute, the possessions of certeine Gentlemen (there na∣med) were deliuered from this customarie discent, and incorporated to the common lawe. For (amongst other things) in that acte it is sayde, That from thencefoorth, such their lands shal be changed from the said custome, and shall descend as lands at the common lawe, and as other lands being in the said coūtie of Kent, which ne∣uer were holden by seruice of Socage, but always haue bene holden by Knightes seruice, doe descend. By whiche wordes it is very euident, that the makers of that estatute, vnderstoode all landes holden by Knightes seruice, to be of their proper nature descendable after the common lawe, and that Socage tenure was the on∣ly subiect in whiche this our custome of Gauelkynd dis∣cent preuailed, and helde place. But when I thus speake of Socage, and Knights fee,Auncient Knight fee, is not of the nature of Gauelkynd. I must alwayes be vnderstanded to meane of a tenure long since, and of auncient time continued, and not now newly, or lately created: for so it may fall out otherwise then is already reported. As for example. If land aunci∣ently holden by Knights seruice, come to the Princes hande, who afterwarde giueth the same out againe to a common person, to be holden of his Manor of Eastgrene∣wiche in Socage, I suppose that this land (notwithstan∣ding the alteratiō of the tenure) remaineth descendable to the eldest sonne only, as it was before: As also, in like sorte, if landes of auncient Socage seruice come to the crowne, and be deliuered out againe, to be holden eyther of the Prince in Capite, or by Knightes seruice of any Manor, I thinke it ought to descende according to the custome, notwithstanding that the tenure be altered. And if this be true, in the graunt of the King him selfe, then much lesse (sauing the reuerēce due to king Iohns
Chartre) may the Archebishop by a newe creation of tenure,The change of Gauel∣kind tenure is no chāge of the na∣ture of Ga∣uelkind. make to his tenants any alteration, of this olde custome and manner. For, as the pleading is, Quod terrae praedictae sunt de tenura & natura de Gauelkind: euen so the trueth is, that the present tenure onely guideth not the discent, but that the tenure and the nature together, do gouerne it. And therefore, as on the one side, the custome can not attache, or take holde of that which was not be∣fore in nature subiect to the custome, that is to say, accu∣stomably departed: So on the other side, the practise of ye custome, long time cōtinued, may not be interrupted, by a bare alteration of the tenure. And this is not my fantasie, but the resolution of all the Iustices (as Iudge Dalison him selfe hath left reported) 4. &. 5. Philippi & Mariae: And also of the Court. 26. H. 8. 5. where it was affirmed, that if a man being seised of Gauelkind lande, holden in Socage, make a gift in tayle, & create a tenure in Knights seruice, that yet this land must descend after the custome, as it did before the chaunge of the tenure. A contrarie vsage, chan∣geth not the nature of Gauel∣kinde.Moreouer, as the chaunge of the tenure can not pre∣uaile against this custome: So neither the continuance of a contrary vsage, may alter this prescription. For it is holden. 16. E. 2. Praescription. 52. in Fitzherbert, that albeit the eldest sonne onely hath (and that for manye discentes together) entered into Gauelkynde lande, and occupyed it without any contradiction of the youn∣ger brothers, that yet the lande remayneth partible betwéene them, when so euer they will put to theyr claime. Againste whiche assertion, that whiche is sayde. 10. H. 3. in the title of Praescription. 64. name∣ly of the issue taken thus, Si terra illa fuit partita nec ne, is not greatly forceable. For althoughe it be so, that the lande were neuer departed in déede, yet if it re∣mayne partible in nature, it may be departed when so
euer occasion shall be ministred. And therefore, euen in the forme of pleading vsed at this day (Quod terra illa, a toto tempore &c. partibilis fuit, & partita) it is plainly ta∣ken, that the worde (partibilis) onely is of substaunce, and that the worde (partita) is but a word of forme, and not materiall, or trauersable at all. Yea, so insepara∣ble is this custome from the lande in whiche it obtey∣neth, that a contrarie discent (continued in the case of the Crowne it selfe) can not hinder, but that (after such time as the lande shall resorte agayne to a common person) the former inueterate custome shall gouerne it. As for the purpose. Landes of Gauelkynde na∣ture come to the Quéenes handes, by purchase, or by eschete, as holden of her Manor of. A. Nowe after her deathe, all her sonnes shall inherite and diuide them: But if they come to her by forfayture in Treason, or by gifte in Parleament, so that her grace is seised of them in Iure Coronae: then her eldest sonne onely (whiche shall be King after her) shall inioye them. In whiche case, althoughe those landes whiche the eldest sonne (being King) did possesse, doe come to his eldest sonne after him (being King also) and so from one to another, by sundry discents: Yet the opinion of Syr Anthonie Browne was. 7. Elizab. that if at any time after, the same landes be graunted to a common person, they shall reuolte to their former nature of Gauelkynde, and be partible amongst his heyres males, notwith∣standing, that they haue runne a contrarie course, in diuers the discentes of the Kings before. But muche lesse maye the vnitie of possession in the Lorde, frustrate the custome of Gauelkynde discent, as it may appeare 14. H. 4. in the long Recordare. Only therefore these two cases I doubt of, concerning this point, and there∣vpon iudge them méete to be inquired of.
That is to say, first, if a tenancie in Gauelkynd eschete to the Lord, by reason of a Ceasser (as hereafter it shall appeare that it may) or if it be graunted vnto the Lord by the tenant,HeaHbe∣org, in Sax¦on, is a high defence: and the customs of Normā∣die that cal fiee or fee, de Haubert whiche ow∣eth to de∣fend the lād by full ar∣mes, that is, by horse, haubert, target, sword, or helme: and it consisteth of. 300. a∣cres of land which is the same (as I suppose) that we cal∣led a whole Knights fee without any reseruation, which Lord hol∣deth ouer by fee of Haubert, or by Serieancie (both which I take to be Knights seruice) whether now this tenancy be partible amongst the heires males of the Lord, or no. For the auncient treatise of the Kentishe Customes so determineth, but I wote not whether experience so al∣loweth. The other dout is this, if it be so that any whole towne, or village in Kent, hath not at any time (that can be shewed) bene acquainted with the exercise of Gauel∣kynde discent, whether yet the custome of Gauelkinde shal haue place there or no. Towarde the resolution of which later ambiguitie, it shal tende somwhat to shew, how farre this custome extendeth it self within this our countrey. The custome of Gauel∣kind, is vni∣uersall in Kent.It is commonly taken therefore, that the cu∣stome of Gauelkind is generall, and spreadeth it selfe throughout the whole Shyre, into all landes subiect by auncient tenure vnto the same, such places only excep∣ted, where it is altered by acte of Parleament. And ther∣fore. 5. E. 4. 18. and. 14. H. 4. 8. it is sayd, that the custome of Gauelkind is (as it were) a cōmon law in Kent. And the booke. 22. E. 4. 19. affirmeth, that in demaunding Ga∣uelkind lande, a man shall not néede to prescribe in cer∣teine, and to shew, That the Towne, Borowe, or Citie, where the landes be, is an auncient towne, borowe, or citie, and that the custome hath bene there (time out of mynd) that the lands within the same towne, borow, or citie, shuld descend to al the heires males. &c. But that is sufficient inoughe, to shewe the custome at large, and to say, That the land lyeth in Kent, and that all the landes there be of the nature of Gauelkynde. For,
a writte of partition of Landes in Gauelkinde (saithe Maister Litleton) shalbe as generall, as if the landes were at the Common lawe, although the declaration ought specially to conteine mention of the Custome of the Countrie. This vniuersalitie therefore conside∣red, as also the straite bonde (whereby the custome is so inseperably knit to the land, as in manner nothing but an acte of Parleament can clearely disseuer them) I sée not, how any Citie, Towne, or Borowe, can be exemp∣ted, for the only default of putting the Custome in vre, more then the Eldest Sonne (in the case before) may for the like reason prescribe against his yonger Brethren. But here, before I conclude this part, I thinke good first to make Maister Litletons aunswere to suche as happely wil demaund, what reason this custome,The reason of Gauel∣kinde Cus∣tome. of Ga∣uelkinde discent hathe, thus to diuide land amongst al ye Males, contrarie to the manner of the whole Realme besides. The younger sonnes (saith he) be as good gen∣tlemen, as the Elder, & they (being alike deare to theyr cōmon auncestor, from whom they claim) haue so much the more néede of their friendes helpe, as (through their minoritie) they be lesse able then the elder Brother to help them selues: secondly to put you in remembrance also of the statute of Praerogatina Regis, Ca. 16. Where it is said, that Faeminae non participabunt cum Masculis, The Females, shall not diuide with the Males: whiche is to be vnderstoode, of such as be in equall degrée of kin∣red, as Brother and Sisters. &c. For, if a man haue issue thrée Sonnes, & the Eldest haue issue a daughter, & dye in the lyfe of his Father, and the Father dyeth: In this case (it is holden) that the daughter shall ioyne with the two other Brethren her Vncles, for that she is not in equall degrée with them, as her Father was, whose heire she neuerthelesse must be of necessitie.
What thinges shal ensue the nature of the land.And nowe, thus muche being spoken, touching the name, tenure, nature, generalitie, necessitie, reason, and order of Gauelkinde, it is woorthie the labour, to shew of what qualitie the Rents, Remainders, Conditions, Vouchers, Actions, and such other things (of the which some be issuing out of these landes, some be annexed vn∣to them, and some be raised by reason of them) shalbe. In whiche behalfe, it may generally be said, that some of them shal ensue the nature of the Land, and some shal kéepe the same course that common Lawe hathe ap∣pointed. But in particular, it is to be vnderstoode, that if a RentRent. be graunted in Fée out of Gauelkinde land, it shal descend to all the Males, as the land it self shall do. And, Ald. and Chart. in 7. E. 3. were of opinion, that albeit a tenancie be of Gauelkinde nature, yet the rent seruice, by whiche that tenancie is holden, might well be descendable at the common Lawe. The like shalbe of a RemainderRemainder of Gauelkinde land: for if it be tayled to the Heires Males, they altogether shall inherite it, as Fitzherb. & Norwiche two Iustices, thought. 26. H. 8. 8. But that is to be vnderstoode of a discent only: for if landes of Gauelkind nature be leassed for life, the Re∣mainder to the righte Heires of I. at Stile. Which hath issue foure Sonnes & dieth, & after the Leassée for life di∣eth nowe the Eldest Sonne onely of. I. at Stile shall haue this land, for he is right Heire, and that is a good name of purchase. 37. H. 8. Done. 42. en Maister Brook: But if the lands had béen giuen to I. at Stile for life, the remainder to his next Heire Male, this had béen an es∣tate taile in I. S. himselfe, and then the Land (as I take it) should haue discended to all his Sonnes, in so muche as in that case the wordes (next Heire Male) be not a name of purchase. Howbeit, it was greatly doub∣ted 3. & 4. Phil. & Mariae (as Iustice Dalison repor∣teth) if a remainder be deuised by Testament (Proximo
haeredi masculo) whether in that case the Eldest Brother only shall haue it, in so muche as (in the vnderstanding of the Lawe, whiche is a Iudge ouer all Customes) he is the next Heire Male: and therefore inquire of it. As touching Vouchers, it appeareth. 11. E. 3.Voucher. that all the Heires in Gauelkind shalbe vouched for the war∣rantie of their auncestour, and not the eldest only. But the opinion of Maister Litleton, and of the Iustices. 22. E. 4. is clearely: that the Eldest Sonne only shalbe re∣butted, or barred, by the warrantie of the auncestour. To be short,Condition. the Eldest Sonne only shall entrée for the breach of a condition: but the rest of the Brethren shal∣be ioyned with him in suing a writte of Attaint,Attaint, and Error. to re∣fourme a false verdit, or errour to reuerse an erronious iudgement: And they all shalbe charged for the debte of their auncestour, if so be that they all haue Assetz in their handes: But if the eldest only haue Assetz remai∣ning, and the residue haue aliened their partes, then he only shalbe charged after the minde of the Book. 11. E. 3. Det. 7. And this also for this part, at this time shal suf∣fise. Now a word or twain, touching the trial of right in this Gauelkind land, & then forward to the rest of my purpose. There be at the cōmō law, two sorts of trial in a writ of Right, by Battaile, and by the Graund Assise:No battail nor graund Assise in ga∣uelkinde of the which two, this Custome excludeth the one, & al∣tereth the other. For, Battail it admitteth not at al, & the Graund assise it receaueth, not by the election of 4. Knights, but of 4. Tenants in Gauelkind, as it may be read in the auncient treatise of the Customes of this Countrie. But whē I speake of the treatise of the Cus∣tomes (you must know) I mean not ye which was lately imprinted, but an other with much more faith & diligēce long since exemplified: a Copie wherof you shal finde, at the end of this Booke.
For, not only in this part, the wordes (Ne soient prises per battail) be cleane omitted in the imprinted Booke, but in sundrie other places also the wordes be mangled, the sentences be curtailed, and the meaning is obscured, as by conferrence of the variations, it may to any skilfull reader moste easily appeare. But all that, I will re∣ferre to the sight and iudgement of suche, as will searche and examine it, and (retourning to my purpose) shewe you, what belongeth to the Lorde of this Gauelkinde land, by reason of this Custome. And, for bicause the Prince is chiefe Lorde of all the Realme, (as of whome all landes within the same be either mediatly or imme∣diatly holden) let vs first sée what right (by reason of this custome) belongeth vnto him. Forfaiture in Felonie.If Tenant in Fée simple, of Landes in Gauelkinde, commit fellonie, and suffer the iudgement of death ther∣fore, the Prince shall haue all his Chattels for a forfai∣ture: But as touching the Land, he shall neither haue the Eschete of it, though it be immediatly holden of him self, nor the Day, Yeare, and Wast, if it be holden of any other. For in that case, the Heire, notwithstanding the offence of his auncestour, shall enter immediatly, & enioye the landes, after the same Customes and serui∣ces, by whiche they were before holden: in assurance whereof, it is commonly saide, The Father to the Boughe, The Sonne to the Ploughe. But this rule holdeth in case of Felonie, and of mur∣der only, and in case not of treason at all: And it holdeth also in case where the offendour is iustified by order of Law, and not where he withdraweth himselfe after the faulte committed, and will not abide his lawfull triall.
For if suche a one absent himselfe (after proclamati∣on made for him in the Countie) and be outlawed: or otherwise, if he take Sanctuarie, and doe abiure the Realme, then shall his Heire reape no benefite by this Custome, but the Prince or the Lorde, shall take their forfaiture in suche degrée, as if the Landes were at the common lawe. Whiche thing is apparant, both by the Booke. 8. E. 2. abridged by Maister Fitzherbert, in his ti∣tle of prescription. 50. And by 22. E. 3. fol. Where it is saide, that this Custome shall not be construed by equi∣tie: but, by a straight and literal interpretation. And al∣so by the plaine rehersal of the saide treatise of the Cus∣tomes it selfe. And in this behalfe also, some haue doubted, whether the Brother or Vncle shall haue the aduantage of this Custome, bicause the wordes thereof extend to the Sonne only: but let vs procéede. There belongeth moreouer, due by the Tenant, to each common person, being his Lord of Land in Gauelkind, Suite to his Court, the oathe of fidelitie, and the true doing and payment, of all accustomed Rents, Dueties, and Seruices. Also if the Tenant dye, leauing his Heire, within the age of fiftéene yeares: the Lorde hathe authoritie to committe the nouriture of the body, and the custodie of the goods, and landes of the infant, to the next of the kinred, to whome the inheritance cannot descend. But, as neither the Lorde ought to take any thing for the custody, neither to tender to the Heire any marriage at all: So must he take good héede, that he credit not the custodie to any person, that shall not be a∣ble to answere therefore. For if the Heire, at his full age of fifteene yeares, shall come to the Lordes Court, and demaunde his inheritance, although the Lord may distreine the Gardien to yeelde his accompt (as it appeareth. 18. E. 2. Auowrie. 220. Yet in de∣faulte
of his abilitie, the Lord himselfe, and his Heires, remaine charged to the Heire for the the same. Furthermore, if the Tenant shall withdrawe from the Lord his due rents, and seruices, the custome of this Countrie giueth to the Lorde, a speciall, and solemne kinde of Cessauit, and that after this manner. Cessauit, in Gauelkind.The Lord, after suche a Cessing, ought by award of his thrée wéekes Courte, to séeke (from Courte to Court, vntill the fourth Court) in the presence of good witnesse, whether any distresse may be found vpon the Tenement, or No: And if he can finde none, then at the fourth Courte it shalbe awarded, that he shall take the Tenement into his handes, as a distresse, or pledge, for the Rent and seruices, withdrawne, and that he shall deteine it one yeare and a day, without manuring it: within whiche time, if the tenant come, and make agréement with the Lord for his arrerage, he shall enter into his tenement againe: but if he come not within that space, then at the next Countie Courte the Lord ought openly to declare all that his former procéeding, to the end that it may be notorious: which being done, at his owne Courte, next following the saide Countie, it shalbe finally awarded, that he may enter into that Tenement, and manure it as his pro∣per demeane. And that ye forfaiture, due to the Lord for this ceasser of his Tenant, was fiue pounds (at the least) besides the arrerages: it doeth well appeare by the olde Kentishe by word, recited in the often remembred treatise of these Customes. Neg he syth seald and Neg he syth geld. And fiue pound for the were, er he become healder
That is to say, Hathe he not since any thing giuen? nor hathe he not sence any thing payd? Then let him pay fiue pound for his were, before he become tenant, or holder againe: But some copies haue the first verse thus. Nigond sithe seld, and nigon sithe gelde: That is, Let him nine times pay, and nine times repay. And here (by the way) it is to be noted, that this word (were) in olde time signified, the value, or price of a mans lyfe, estimation, or countenance: For, before the Conquest, each man in the Realme was valued at a certain sūme of money, hauing regarde to his degrée, condition, and woorthinesse, as is more at large shewed in the Table to the translation of the Saxon lawes, wherevnto for this purpose I will send you. This custome of Cessa∣uit, is set foorth in the treatise of Customes, and hathe béene allowed of (as Maister Frowike. 21. H. 7. 15. re¦ported) in time passed, but whether it be also at this day put in vre, I cannot certainely affirme. But nowe, as these aduantages arise to the Lorde from his Tenant: So on the other side, the Lord also ought to suffer his Tenant to enioy the benefite of such customes as make for his auaile. And therefore, first he ought to let him alien his land at his owne pleasure, without suing to him for licence: He ought also to be contented with one suite to his Court for one tenement althoughe the same happen to be diuided amongst ma∣ny: of verie right also he ought to admit an Essoine, if any be cast for the Tenant, whether it be in a cause of Plainte, or for common suite to his Courte: And lastlie he may not exacte of him any manner of othe, other then that of Fidelitie, whiche groweth due by reason of his Tenure.Tenant by the Courte∣sie. And thus leauing the Lorde and his Tenant, let vs
come to the husband and the wife, and first shew what courtesie the husband shal finde by order of this custome after the death of his wife that was seised of landes of Gauelkind tenure: and then what benefite the wife may haue after the decease of her Husband dying seased of Landes of the same kinde and nature. The Husband (saith our treatise of Gauelkind Cus∣tome) shall haue the one halfe of suche Gauelkind land, wherein his wife had estate of inheritance, whether he had issue by her or no: And shall holde the same during so long time, as he wil kéepe him selfe widower, and vn∣married. For if he marrie, he looseth all. Neither may he committe any waste, more then Tenant by the courtesie at the common lawe, may. So that one way (namely, in that he shall haue his wiues land for lyfe thoughe he neuer had issue by her) this our Custome is more courteous then the common lawe: but an other way, (I meane in that he shall haue but the one halfe, and that with a prohibition of second marriage) it is losse beneficiall. Howsoeuer it be, it holdeth place, and is put in practise at this day. Tenant in Dwer, The diffe∣rence be∣tweene cō∣mon Lawe, and Cus∣tome ther∣in.The wyfe likewyse, after the death of her Husband, shall haue for her lyfe, the one moitie of all such landes of Gauelkind tenure, whereof her Husband was seised of any estate of inheritance during the couerture be∣twéene them. Of whiche Custome also, though it ex∣céede common measure, the common lawe of the Realm (bearing alwaies speciall fauour to Dower) hath euer∣more euen hitherto shewed good allowance: Neuerthe∣lesse, as tenant by the courtesie after this Custome, had his cōditiōs annexed: so tenant in Dower, by the same Custome, wanteth not some conditions following her estate. One, that she may not marrie at all: & an other, yt she must take diligent héede, that she be not found with Childe, begottē in fornicatiō. For in either case she must
loose her Dower: But yet so, that lawful matrimonie is by a meane (contrarie to the Apostolique permission) vtterly forbidden, And the sinne of secret Lecherie (ac∣cording to the Popishe Paradoxe, Si non caste tamen cau∣te) is in a sorte borne and abidden, Seing that by this custome, she forfeiteth not in this later case, vnlesse the childe be borne, and heard to crye, and that of the coun∣trey people, assembled by hue and crye: For then (sayth the custome) Se that his wende, Se his lende: But corruptly, for in true Saxon letters it stādeth thus Se þat Hire ƿende. Se Hire lende. That is to say, He that dothe turne, or wende her: Let him also giue vnto her, or lende her. And thus the custome, making like estimation of both the cases, depriueth her of her liuing, as well for honest marriage, as for filthy fornication. In whiche behalfe, as I must néedes confesse, that the later condition hath reason, bycause it tendeth (though not fully) to the cor∣rection of sinne and wickednesse: So yet dare I affirme, that the former is not onely not reasonable, but meerely leud and irreligious also. For, although the Ethnickes did so much magnifie wydowhood, that (as Valerius re∣citeth) Faeminas, quae vno matrimonio contentae erant, corona pudicitiae honorabant, and although that the common law also (being directed by the Popishe Clergie, whiche ther∣in followed the errour of Ierome) dothe in another case, by the name of Bigamie, dislike of a womans seconde marriage: Yet Sainct Paule sayth plainely, Mulier, si dormierit maritus eius, libera est, vt cui vult nubat, modò in Domino. But yet for all this, séeing that our treatise of vsages reciteth it, séeing also that common experience of the countrey approueth it, and that the common lawe
of the Realme (as it may be read, Praerogatiua Regis Cap. 16. & 2. H. 3. in Praescription. 59.) admitteth it: let vs also for this place and purpose, be cōtented to number it amongst our customes, and so procéed with the residue. It appeareth, by that whiche is already sayde, that the common lawe, and this custome, differ in two things concerning Dower: One, in that the common lawe gi∣ueth but a thirde parte, whereas the custome vouchsa∣feth the halfe: Another, in that this custome giueth con∣ditionally, whereas the gifte of the common lawe, is frée and absolute. Nowe therefore, there remaine to be shewed, certeine other pointes, wherein they varie also. As, if the husband commit Felonie: at the common law, his wife hath lost her title of Dower, but by the custome of this countrey, she shall not loose her Dower for the faulte of her husbande, but only in suche case, where the heire shall loose his inheritance, for the offence of his fa∣ther. Which thing is manifest, both by the treatise of our Kentishe customes, and by the opinion of the Court 8. H. 3. Praescription. 60. At the common lawe also, the wife shall be endowed of a possession in lawe, but (as me thinketh) she shall haue no Dower by this custome, but onely of suche landes, whereof her husband was ac∣tually and really seised. For the wordes be (Des tene∣ments, dount son Baron morust seiset, et vestu,) which word (vestu) being cleane omitted in the imprinted booke, in∣forceth a possession in déede, and not in lawe only. And therefore, if landes in Gauelkinde descend to a married man, whiche dyeth before he make his entrie into the same, inquire whether it be the manner to endowe his wife therof, or no: for vse is the only Oracle that in this case I can sende you vnto. Againe, at the common law, a woman shal be endowed of a faire, or of any such other profit. But, (for as muche as the wordes of this
customarie Dower, be (terres & tenements) and for that all customes shall finde a literall and streight interpre∣tatiō) the opinion of Maister Parkins is, that no Dower lyeth of a faire, by this custome. Furthermore, if the wife recouer her Dower at the common law, she ought of necessitie to be endowed by metes and boundes: But in Dower after this custome (sayth the same authour) she may very well be endowed of a moitie, to be holden in common with the heire, that inioyeth the other half. Lastly, this custome, besides Dower of the one halfe of the husbandes lande,Dower of chattels. prouideth Dower of the moitie of suche goods also, as he dyed possessed of, if he had no chil∣dren, and of the thirde part, though he leaue issue: wher∣as the common lawe (at the least in common practise at this day) hath no consideration of any suche endowmēt. These then be the differences, betwéene the common lawe of the Realme, and the particular custome of this countrey concerning Dower: the comparison whereof, and whether sort of Dower is more beneficiall, I will not now attempt, and much lesse take vpō me, to deter∣mine, least I my selfe might séeme rashly to preiudicate in another thing, wherin I most gladly desire to be iud∣ged by other men: namely, whether a woman, intituled to Dower in Gauelkind, may waine her Dower of the moitie after this custome, and bring her action to be en∣dowed of the thirde at the common lawe, and so exempt her selfe from all danger of these customarie conditions, or no? The Resolution of whiche doubte, will depend chiefly vpon comparison, whether it be more aduaun∣tage to her, to haue the thirde at the common lawe ab∣solutely, or the moitie by the custome conditionally. For if the Dower at the common law be better for her, then it séemeth reasonable that she should stande to the worse, whiche is the custome: euen as tenant by the
curtesie, must take the moitie that the custome giueth, and not aske the whole, as Common lawe appointeth. And yet thereto it may be replyed, that the cases be not like: for so muche as that of Dower is much more to be fauoured. I my selfe once heard two reuerend Iudges of opinion, that the woman was at libertie, to aske her Dower of the Thirde, or of the Moitie: But bycause it was vttered by them in a passage of soudaine speache, and not spoken vpon studied argument, I will not vse the authoritie of their names, to get the matter credite with all, but leaue it at large, to be better inquired of. Partition of chattels.After the husbande and the wife, there followeth next in order of our diuision, the childe and his Gardein, whom also (since they be Relatiues, as the other be, and that their interests carrie a mutuall, and Reciproquè eye, eche hauing respect to other) we will likewise cou∣ple together in one treatise. And bycause the custome was wont to commit the custodie, not of the landes on∣ly (as the common lawe doth) but of the goods and chat∣tels also, we will first shewe, what portion of goods did growe to the childe, by the death of his parent. Partition of chattels.The manner of this countrey somtime was (as it ap∣peareth by our olde treatise) that after the funeralles of the deade man perfourmed, and his debts discharged, the goods should be diuided into thrée equall portions, if he lefte any lawfull issue behinde him: of whiche three, one parte was alotted to the deade, for performance of his legacies: another to the children, for their educati∣on: and the thirde to the wife for her sustentation and maintenance: But if he had no children left on liue, then was the diuision into two partes onely: of whiche, the one belonged to the wife for her endowment, and the o∣ther to her departed husbande, to be bestowed by his ex∣ecutors, if he made a testament, or by the discrtion of
the ordinarie, if he died intestate. The selfe same order is at this day obserued in the Citie of London,London. and the same in effect, was long since vsed throughout ye whole Realme. For it is euident, bothe by the lawe of King Canutus before remembred, by Maister Glanuille in his booke Ca. 18. and by the wordes of Magna Carta, yt ye wyfe and Children had their reasonable partes of the goods by the common lawe of the Realme, howsoeuer it came to passe at the length, that it was admitted for law but in such Countries only, where it was continued by daily vsage (as it is holden. 17. E. 2. and in many other bookes) & that al the writs in the Register De rationabi∣li parte bonorum, Haue mention of the speciall Custome of the Shyre, in whiche the part is demaunded. But as in déede at this day, partition of Chattels is not vsed (though in the meane time it hathe not lost the force of common lawe as many thinke) through out the whole Realme: so is it (so far as I can learne) vanished quite out of all vre within this Countrie also. And therfore, séeing the Gardein is deliuered of this charge, we also wil leaue to speake further of the goods, and come to the partition and custodie of the land of this Infant. If a man die seised of landes in Gauelkinde,Partition, of Gauel∣kinde lands of any estate of inheritance, al his Sonnes shal haue equal por∣tiō: & if he haue no Sonnes, then ought it equally to be diuided amongst his daughters: But yet so, that the el∣dest Sonne or Daughter, hath by the Custome a pree∣minence of election, and the youngest Sonne or Daugh∣ter, a preferment in the partition. For as of auncient time, there ought to be graunted to the eldest, the firste choice after the diuision: so to the parte of the youngest, there ought to be allotted in the diuision, that peice of the Mesuage, whiche our treatise calleth Astre.(Astr) what it meaneth. By whiche
word is ment, (as I coniecture, for otherwise I haue not learned) either the Hall, or chiefe roome of the house, either els the well for water, or the Southe side of the building. For (Astre) being sounded without (s) may come of the Latine woord Atrium, whiche signifieth a Hall, or of Haustrum, whiche betokeneth the Bucket of a well, or of Austrum, the Southe side: euery of whiche haue their particular commodities aboue the rest of the house or tenement. Or otherwyse (if that shal like any man better) being sounded with (s) it may be deduced from the Frenche word (Asistre) by contraction (Astre) whiche is as much, as a site, or situation, and with the Article (le) before it (Lestre) a Churcheyard, or Court a∣bout a house. But whatsoeuer the woord meane, I will not longer labour in it, seing that at this day there is no suche regarde made in the partition, but only con∣sideration had that the partes them selues be equall and indifferent. Now therfore, if the Childe be vnder the age of 15. yeres, the next Cousin, to whō the inheritance may not descend, shal haue the education, & order of his body, & landes, vntil suche time as he shall attaine to that age, euen as the Gardein in socage at the common law shall kéepe his vntill the warde aspire to fouretéene. And in all other things also, this customarie Gardein is to be charged and to haue allowance, in suche sorte, and none other, then as the Gardein in socage at the common law is: Saue only (as it is partly remembred already) that he is bothe chargeable to ye Heire in accompt for his re∣ceipt, & subiect also to ye distresse of the Lord for ye same cause:Gardein, af∣ter the cus∣ome. Yet doe I not heare, that the Lordes take vpon them (at this day) to committe the custodie of these In∣fants, but that they leaue it altogether to the order of the next of the Kinne, the rather (belike) for that they
them selues (if they intermedle) stande chargeable, in default of the abilitie of suche as happely they might cre∣dit therewithall. So that vpon the whole matter, the addes consisteth only in this, that Gardein in Socage at the common Lawe shall keepe the land till the Infant be fourtéene yeares of age, and Gardein by this custome till he haue attained fully fiftéene: whiche diuersitie, a∣riseth not without great reason: For whereas the In∣fant in Socage at the common law,Sale is at 15. year cannot make alie∣nation of his land vntill he haue reached to the full age of 21. yeares (although he be long before that, frée from all wardship) The Infant in Socage by this Custome, may giue and sell his land so sone as he is crept out of this Custodie. And therefore it was expedient (at the leaste) to adde one yeare to the common Lawe, before he should be of power to depart with his inheritance, whi∣che otherwise (being vnaduisedly made away) might worke his owne impouerishment and ouerthrowe. And truly it séemeth to me, that the Custome it selfe hath a watchefull eye vpon the same matter, in so much as it licenceth him at fiftéene yeares, Not to giue his Land (for that he might doe for nothing) But to giue and sell his Land, whiche it meaneth he should not doe without sufficient recompence. Suche like in∣terpretation, the common Lawe also séemeth to make of this custome both by the opinion of Vauasor. 5. H. 7. who said ye it was adiudged that a release made by such an Infant was voide: by the sentence of the Booke. 21. E. 4. 24. where it was said, that an infant cannot declare his will vpon such a Feoffment: and by the iudgement of Hank. 11. H. 4. who also helde, that a warrantie, or graunt of a reuersion made at suche age, was to no pur∣pose
at all, althoughe a lease with release might happely be good by the Custome, bicause that amounteth to a Fe∣offment. And, in my simple iudgement, it is not fit that this Custome should be construed by equitie, for as muche as it standeth not with any equitie, to enable an infant, of litle discretion, and lesse experience, to sell his land, and not to prouide withal that he should haue, Quid pro quo, and some reasonable recompence for the same: for that were, not to defend the Pupill and Fa∣therles, but to lay him wyde open to euery slye deceipt, and circumuention. In whiche respect, I cannot but very well like of their opinion,Sale good at. 15. yeares who holde, that if an In∣fant in Gauelkinde, at this day will sell at xv. yeares of age, these thrée things ought of necessitie to concurre, if he will haue the sale good and effectuall. The firste, yt he be an heire, and not a Purchasour, of the land that he departeth withall: The second, that he haue recompēce for it: and the third, that he do it with liuerie of seison by his owne hand, and not by warrant of Attourney, nor by any other manner of assurance. And these men for proofe of the first and second point of their assertion, doe builde vpon the wordes of our written Custome, where it is saide Del heure que ceux heirs de Gauelkinde, soient, ou ount passe lage de. 15. ans, list a eux, lour terres & te∣nementes, Doner & Vender) in whiche, the wordes (Ceux Heires) doe restraine the Infant that commeth in by Purchase: And (Doner & Vender) in the copulatiue, (for so they lye in déede, though the imprinted booke haue thē disiunctiuely) doe of necessitie implye a recompence, for as muche as, Ʋendere, cannot be Sine precio. And for maintenance of the third matter, they haue on their part, besides the common vsage of their owne Countrie, the common lawe of the whole Realme also: which ex∣poundeth the word (Doner) to meane a Feoffment (as
I haue before shewed) and whiche not onely disaloweth of any gifte made by an infant, but also punisheth the taker in trespas, vnlesse he haue it by liuerie from the infantes owne handes. Thus haue I runne ouer suche customes, as by meane of this Gauelkinde tenure doe apperteine, ey∣ther to the Lorde or the Tenant, the husbande or the wife, the childe or the Gardein: To these I will adde (as I promised) confusedly, a fewe other things, of the whiche, some belong generally to the Kentishe man throughout the whole Shyre: Some to the inhabitants of some particular quarter of the countrie: and some to the tenants in Gauelkinde onely, and to none other. It appeareth,No villains in Kent. by claime made in our auncient trea∣tise, that the bodyes of all Kentishe persons be of frée condition, whiche also is confessed to be true .30. E. 1. in the title of Villenage. 46. in Fitzherbert: Where it is holden sufficient for a man to auoide the obiection of bondage, to say, that his father was borne in the Shyre of Kent: But whether it will serue in that case to saye, that him selfe was borne in Kent, I haue knowne it (for good reason) doubted. It séemeth by the same treatise,Apparance. that suche persons as helde none other lande then of Gauelkinde nature, be not bounde to appeare (vpon Sommons) before the Iustices in Eire, otherwise then by their Borsholder, and foure others of the Borowe, a fewe places only ex∣cepted. The like to this Priuilege is inioyed at this day in the Sherifes Lathe, where many whole Bo∣rowes be excused by the onely apparance of a Borshol∣der, and two, foure, or sixe other of the inhabitants. Furthermore,Cmen. I haue read in a case of a written re∣port at large of .16. E. 2. whiche also is partly abridged by Fitzherbert, in his title of Praescription, that it was
tried by verdite, that no man ought to haue commen in landes of Gauelkinde, Howbeit, the contrarie is well knowne at this day, and that in many places. Chase and driue out.The same booke sayeth, that the vsage in Gauelkind is, that a man maye lawfully inchase, or driue out into the highe way to their aduenture, the beastes of any o∣ther person, that he shal finde doing damage in his land, and that he is not compellable to impounde them, which custome séemeth to me directly against the rule of the common lawe, But yet it is practised till this present daye. Attaint.The Parleament 15. H. 6. 3. minding to amplifie the Priuileges of Gauelkinde, graunted to the tenants of that lande, exemption in Attaints, in suche sort as the inhabitants of auncient demeane, and of the Fiue Ports before had: But within thrée yeares after, vpon the complaint of some of the Gentz of the Countrie (whiche infourmed the Parleament house that there was not in the whole Shyre aboue the number of 30, or 40. per∣sons, that helde to the value of 20. li. land, out of Gauel∣kinde, who in default of others, and by reason of that ex∣emption, were continually molested by returnes in At∣taintes) that Acte was vtterly repealed. The Satute .14. H. 8. Cap. 6. giueth libertie to euery man,Chaunging of wayes. hauing high way (through his Land in the Weald) that is worne déepe, and incommodious for passage, to lay out an other way, in some suche other place of his land, as shalbe thought méete by the viewe of two Ius∣tices of the Peace, and twelue other men of wisedome and discretion. Finally, the generall Lawe, made 35. H. 8. 17. For the preseruation of Copies woodes, tho∣rough out the Realme,Goppies. maketh plaine exception of all woodes within this Weald, vnlesse it be of suche as be common.
Thus muche, concerning the customes of this oure Countrie, I thought good to discourse, not so cunningly (I confesse) as the matter required, nor so amplie as the argument would beare (for so to doe, it asketh more art and iudgement, then I haue attained) But yet suf∣ficiently (I truste) for vnderstanding the olde treatise that handleth them, and summarily inough for compre∣hending (in manner) whatsoeuer the common, or Sta∣tute, lawe of the Realme hath litterally, touching them, whiche is as muche as I desired. Now therefore, to the end that neither any man be further bound to this my discourse vpon these customes, then shalbe warranted by ye Customes thēselues, neither yet ye same customes be henceforth so corruptly caried about as hitherto they haue béene, but that they may at the length be restored to their auncient light and integritie, I will set downe a true and iust transcript of the very text of them, takē out of an auncient and faire written roll, that was gi∣uen to me by Maister George Multon my Father in lawe, and whiche some time belonged to Baron Hales of this Countrie. I wil adioyne also, mine owne inter∣pretation in the English, not of any purpose to binde the learned vnto it, but of a desire to infourme the vnlearned by it.
Kent. CesThese sountare lesthe vsages,vsages, & lesand custumes,customes, lesthe queswhich lethe comunautecomunalty deof KentKent, cleimentclaimeth auerto haue enin the tenementzTenements deof Gauylekende,Gauelkinde, e& enin gentzye men of Gauilekendeys,Gauelkind,These wordes be∣tweene the starres were taken out of an other olde copie. * allowes en Eire Iohn deallowed in Eire before Iohn of Berewike,Berwike, e sos compagnions,and his cōpanions, Iusticesthe Iustices enin Eire,Eire enin Kent,Kent, le.the 21.21. anyeare leof Roy Ed. fitz. le Roy Henrie * Cestascauoir, que toutes lesKing E. the Sonne of King Henrie. * That is to say, that all the corsbodies deof KenteysKentishe seyentmen frācz,be free,Free men. auxiaswell comeas lesthe autresother fraūzfree bodies corsof Dengleterre.England.Esechator. Et que ilz ne duiuent le eschetour le RoyAnd that they ought not the Eschetor of the King to elire,chuse, nenor vnkeseuer enin nulany tempstime ne fesoint, mes le Roy prengne, oudid they: But the King shall take, or face prendre, tiel come luy plerra, de ceo qui soitcause to be taken, suche an one as it shall please him, to serue him mistier a luy seruir. Et quilz pusent lour terresin that which shalbe needeful. And that they may their landes && lourtheir tenementztenements doner & vender,Giue and sell landes without licence. saūz conge demaūder agiue and sell, without licence asked of their lour seignerages: sauues a seignorages les rentzLords: Sauing vnto the Lordes the rentes and e lesthe seruicesseruices
dues des mesmes le tenementz.due out of the same tenements. Et que touz, e chescun,And that al, and euery of them, puseit per Brë le roy,may by writ of the kyng, ouor perby pleynt,plainte,Plede, by writte, or pleinte. pleder pur lourplede for the obteining drou purchaser, auxibien de lour Seignerages, come des autersof their right, as well of their Lordes, as of other men. gentz. Et clament auxi, que la Commune de Gauylekendeys,And they clayme also, that the communaltie of Gauelkind∣mē, que ne tenent mes que tenemenz Gauylekendeys,which hold none other then tenements of Gauelkind nature, ne deiuent venir a la comune Somonse del Eire,oug t not to come to the common Summonce of the Eire, mesbut ke per Borgesaldre,only by the Borsholder, &and iiij.foure homēsmen deof lathe Borghe:Borowe:Appeare by Borsholder. horsexcept pris les villees que deiuent responder per xij. hōmes en le Eire.the townes, which ought to aunswere by twelue men in the Eire. EtAnd they clamentclayme auxi,also,No eschete for felonie, but of goods only. que sil nul tenant en Gauylekend seit atteintyt if any tenant in Gauelkinde be attainted deof felonie,felonie, per quefor the which ilhe suffresuffreth Iuyse de mort,iudgement of death, eit le Rythe King touz ses chateux,shal haue all his goods, e& sonheire eirheire meintenantfoorthwith apresafter sahis mortdeath seitshal enherite de touzbe inheritable to all seshis terreslandes && tenemenztenements quewhich ilhe tientheld enin Ga∣uylekendeGa∣uelkind enin fee,fee, e en heritage, e les tienda per les& in inheritance: and he shall holde them by the same
seruicesseruices et& customes,customes, sicōe ses aūcestres les tyndrōt: dont est distas his auncestors held thē: whervpō it is said enin Kenteis:Kentish: þethe faderfather toto þethe boghe,boughe, and& þethe sonson to þe plogh.to ye plough. And if Ethe si il eithaue a femme,Dower, of the one halfwife, meintenant seit doweforthwt be she endowed by {per}ye le heir,heire sil seit dage,(if he be of age) deof laye meytie,one half de touz les terres e tenemēz que son Baroun tintof al the landes & tenements which her husband held deof GauylekendGauelkind nature enin fee,fee: a auer, e a tener solonc la fourme deto haue & to hold according to ye forme suthdyte.hereafter declared. EtAnd deof tielssuch terreslands leye RoyKing ne auera Anshal not haue ye yere, nenor wast,wast,Flying for felony, cau∣seth forfei∣ture. mes tant soulmēt les chateux, sicome il est auātdit. Et sibut only the goods as is before said. And if any man of nul GauylekendeisGauelkind, either pur felonie,either for felonie, ouor purfor Retsuspitiō deof felonie.felonie, se suthtresA drawe him de la pees,out of the country, e scit en counte demande com il appent,& be demaūded in the countie as he ought, e& puisbe vtlagheou sil se met en scinte eglise, et foriure la terre oneafterward vtlawed: or put him self into ye holy church, & abiure the le Reaume, le Roy auera lan e le wast de ces terres, & deland & ye King shal haue ye yere & yt wast of his lands & of touzall seshis tenemenztenements, ensemblement oue touztogether with all his goods cesand chateus,chattels: issint que apres lan, e le tour, le plus {pro}cheyn Seigou Seigneurs.So that after the yeare the day, the next Lord, or Lordes,
eyentshall leurhaue their eschetesEschetes de celes terres e tenemenz,of those landes and tenementes, chescuneuery SeigneurLorde ceo,that quewhiche deis luy est tenuimmediatly sansholden men.of him. E clamentAnd they claime auxi,also, quethat siif ascunany tenanttenant enin gauylekendeGauelkind murt,dye,Partition, amōgst the heirs males et seitand be an enheriteinheritour deof terreslandes e deand tenemenztenementes dein Gauylekende,Gauelkinde, que touz ses fitzthat all his sonnes shall partentparte celthat heritageinheritaunce perby oueleequall porcioun.portions. EtAnd si nul heirif there be no madle ne seit, seit la partye feit entre les females sicomeheie male, let the partition be made betweene the females, euen entres les freres.as betweene brothers. Et la mesuage seit autreci entre euxAnd let the messuage also be departed departi, mes le astre demorra al pune,betweene them: but the AstreThe Astre. shall remaine to the youngest sonne, ouor al punee,daughter: e la value seit de ceo liure a chescun desAnd be the value therof deliuered to eche of the parcenersparceners deof celthat heritageheritage, a.from xl.fourtie pes de cel Astre, sifeete from that Astre, if lethe tenementtenement lewill peutso suffrir.suffer. EAnd donkzthen le eyne frere eitlet the eldest brother haue la primere electioun, e les autres apres per degree.the first choyce, & the others afterward, according to their degree. EnsementLikewise deof mesonshouses quewhiche serrontshall be trouetsfounde enin tieussuche mesuages.Messuages,
seient departye entre les heirs per ouele porcioun,let them be departed amongst the heires by equal portions, Ceo estthat is asauoir per peies sil est mistier, Sauue le couert del Astre,to weete,Curt, in o∣ther copies. by foote if neede be, Sauing the Couert of the Astre, que remeynt al pune,which shal remain to ye yongest son, ou al punee sicome il est auandist,or daughter, as is before said: issi que nequedont que le punc face renable gre a cesSo neuerthelesse, that ye yongest make reasonable amendes to his parceners de la partye que a eux appentparceners for the part which to them belongeth, per agard deby the award of bonegood gentz.mē.One suite, for all the parceners. E des auaunditz tenemenz dont vn soule SuteAnd of the aforesaid tenements, whereof one only suite tant soulement soleit estre feit auaut, ne seit per la resoun de lawas wont to be made before time, be there not by reason of ye par∣tition partye fors vn soule sute faite sicome soleit auant,but one sole suite made, as it was before accustomed: mesBut que tous les parceners facent contributiun a celui que faceyet let al ye parceners make contribution to ye parcener which ma∣keth la sute pur eux. Ensement seient les chateus de Gauylekendeysye suite for thē.Partition of goods. In like sort let ye goods of Gauelkind persons parties en treis apres le exequies e les dettes rendues, si il y citbe parted into .3. partes, after ye funerals & ye debts payed, if ther be issue multer en vye, issi que la mort eyt la vne partie, e les fitzlawfull issue on liue: So that ye dead haue one parte, & his lawfull e les filles muliers lautre partie, et la femme la tierce partie.sonnes and daughters an other parte, and ye wife ye thirde parte.
Et si nul issue mulier en vye ne seit,And if there be no lawfull issue on liue, eit la mort la meite,let ye dead haue ye one half, e la femme en vye lautre meytie. Et si le heir, ou lez heirs, seit,and ye wife on liue ye other halfe. And if the heire, or heires, shal be ou seyent de deins le age de xv. ans, seit la nouriture de euxvnder ye age of .15. yeares,Custodie of the heire in Gauelkind. let ye nourtriture of them be committed baille {per} le Seig. al plus procheyn del sank a qui heritage neby the Lord, to the next of the bloud to whom the inheritaunce can peutnot descendre,descende, issi que le Seign. pur le bail rem ne prengne.So that ye Lorde take nothing for the committing Et quil ne seit marie per le Seign. mes per sa voluntethereof. And let not ye heire be maried by the Lord, but by his own demeine, & per le conseil de ces amys sil veut. Et quant celwill, and by the aduise of his friendes, if he will. And when suche heir, ou ceux heirs sont de plener age de .xv. auns, seient aheire, or heires, shall come to the full age of fifteene yeares, let their eux lour terres, e lour tenemenz liures, ensemblemēt one lourlands and tenements be deliuered vnto them, together with their chateaux, et oue les enprowemenz de celes terres outregoods, and with the emprouements profits of the same lands, remayning renable sustinance: de quel enprouement, e chateux,aboue their reasonable sustenance: of the which profits and goods, seit tenu a respondre celui qui de luy a tera la noriture,let him be bounde to make aunswere which had ye education of the ou le Seigneur ou ses heires que cel noriture auera baille.heire, or els ye Lord, or his heires, which committed ye same educa∣tion.
Et ceo fet a sauoir que del houre que ceuxAnd this is to be vnderstoode, that from such time as those heirs Gauylekende seient, ou ount passe le age de xv. auns,heires in Gauelkind,Sale at xv. yeres of age be of, or haue passed, the age of fiftene yeares, list a eux lour terres ou tenemenz doner e vendreit is lawefull for them, their landes or tenementes, to giue and sell aat lourtheir volunte, Sauues les seruices au chefz seignorages com ilat their pleasure: Sauing the seruices to the chiefe Lordes, as is est deuant dit. Et si nul tiel tenant en Gauylekend meurt, e eitbefore sayde.Dower, of the one half And if any such tenant in Gauelkind dye, and haue a femme que suruiue,wife that ouerliueth him, seit cele femme meyntenant douwe delet that wife by and by be endowed (of la meite des tenementz dont son baroun morust vestu ethe one halfe of the tenements wherof her husbande dyed vested & seisi, per les heirs sil seient de age, ou per les Seigneuresseised) by the heires, if they be of age, or by the Lordes, if si les heirs ne seint pas de age,the heires be not of age: issi que ele eyt laSo that she may haue the moietie one halfe meite de celes terres e tenemenz, a tener tant com ele seof those landes and tenementes, to holde so long as she keepeth tyent veue,her a widow,Forfaiture of Dower. ou de enfanter seit atteint per le auncienneor shalbe attainted of childbyrth, after the auncient vsage,vsage: ceothat estis to asauoir, que quant ele enfaunte, esay, that if when she is deliuered of childe, the lenfant seit oy crier, E que le hu e le cry seit leueinfant be heard crye, and that the hue and crye be raysed,
e le pais ensemble,and the countrie be assembled, e eyent weue de lenfant ensi faunte,and haue the viewe of the childe so e de la mere,borne, and of the mother, adonks perde son dowere enterement, ethen let her loose her Dowre wholy, and autrement nyent, tant come ele se tient veue,otherwise not, so long as she holdeth her a widowe: dont il estwherof it is dist en kenteys: se þat His wende, se His lende.sayde in Kentish: he that doth wende her, let him lende her.Tenant by the courte∣sie, of the one halfe. EAnd clament auxi, que home que prent femme, que eit heritagethey clayme also, that if a man take a wife whiche hath inheritance deof Gauylekend,Gauelkind, e la femme murge auant luy,and the wife dyeth before him, eit le Barounlet the husband haue le meite de celes terres et tenemenz, tant comethe one halfe of those landes and tenements whereof she died seised il se tient veuers (dont il morust seisei) saunz estrepe∣ment,so long as he holdeth him a widower, without doing any strippe, ou wast, ou exile fere, le quel kil y eit heir entreor waste, or banishment, whether there were issue betweene euxthem, ouor noun.no: Et sil prent femme,And if he take another wife, trestout perde.let him loose all.The discent of Gauel∣kind, chan∣ged. EiAnd si nul tenement de Gauylekend eschete (et ceo eschete seit aif any tenement of Gauelkinne do escheate (and that escheate be to nul seigneur que tiene per fee de hawberk ou per seriauncye)any Lord whiche holdeth by fee of Hawberke, or by Sericancie) perby mort,death, ouor perby Gauelate sicome il est suthdite,is heareafter sayd, ou li itor be to him
rendu de son tenant que de li auant le tynt per quiteclamaūcerendred giuen vp by his tenaunt whiche before held it of him by quiteclaime de ceofete, ou seit sa eschete {per} Gauelate sicome il est de suthditthereof made, or if his eschete be by Gauelate as is hereafter sayed, remeyne cele terre as heirs impartable.let this land remaine to the heires vnpartable: Et ceo fet asa∣uoir,And this is to bee la ou le tenant ensirendant,vnderstood, where the tenant so rendring, nule seruice retentdoth reteine no seruice deuers sey, sauuet nequedent as autres Seigneurages fees fer∣mesto himselfe, but saueth neuerthelesse to the other Lords their fees, e les rentes dont les auant diz tenemenz de Gauyle∣kendefermes, and the rentes wherewith the aforesaide tenementes of ensi rendus auaunt furent charges per ceux, ouGauelkind (so rendred) were before charged, by him, or theim, per celuy,Forfaiture by Ceslauit or Guelate que le charger poent, ou poeyt.which might charge them. Eclament auxi, que siAnd they claime also, that if any nul tenant en Gauylekende reteine sa rent, e son seruice deltenant in Gauelkind reteine withholde his rent, and his seruices of the tene∣ment tenement quil tient de son Seign. querge le Seign. perwhiche he holdeth of his Lorde, let the Lorde seeke by the agard de sa court de treys semeynes en treys semeynes truueaward of his courte from .3. weekes to .3. weekes, to find some di∣stresse destrese sur cel tenement tant que a la quart court, a totefetvpon that tenement, vntill the fourth court, alwayes with per tesmoynage, Et si dedens cel temps ne trusse destresse on cewitnesses: And if within that time he can find no distresse in thē
tenement per queux il puisse son tenant iustiser,tenement, whereby he may haue iustice of his tenant, Donc a laThen at the quart court seitfourth court let it be agard,awarded, quil pregne cel tenement enthat he shall take that tenement in∣to sa mein en noum de destress,his hand, in the name of a distresse, ausi come boef ou vache,as if it were an oxe, or a cow, e le tiene vn an,and let him keepe it a yeare, e vn iour en sa mein sance meynand a daye, in his hande without ma∣nuring ouerir: dens quel terme,it: within which terme, si le tenant vent, e rend sesif the tenaunt come, and paye his arrerages,arrerages, e feit renables amendes de la detenue,and make reasonable amendes for the withholding, a donc eit, e ioise son tenement sicom ses auncestors eThen let him haue and enioye his tenement as his auncetors and ly auant le tyndront. Et sil ne vent deuant lan,he before held it. And if he do not come before the yeare, e le tourand ye day passe, donc auge le Seign. al prochein Counte suiant oue res∣moynagepaste, then let the Lord goe to the next countie court with the wit∣nesses de sa court, e face la pronuncier cel proces purof his owne courte, & pronounce there this processe, to haue tesmoynage auerfurther witnesse. Et per agard de sa court, apres ceo CounteAnd by the award of his court (after that coūtie tenue, entra, e meynouera en celes terres e tenemenz,courte holden) he shal enter, & manure in those lands & tenemēts, sicome en son demeyne. Et si le tenant vent apres, e voillas in his demeanes owne. And if the tenant come afterwarde, and will
ces tenemenz reauer e tener sicome il fist deuaunt, facerehaue his tenements, & hold them as he did before, let him make gree al Seigneur, sicome il est auncyenement dist,agreement with the Lord, according as it is aunciently sayde: NegHe syþe selde. and neg He syþ gelde: and fif pond for þe ƿere. er He bicome Healder. Aussi il cleyment que nul home deit serment sur liure fere,Also they claime,No oathe, but for feal¦tie. that no mā ought to make an othe vpon a booke, per destress, ne per poer de Seigneur,(neither by distresse, nor by the power of ye Lord, ne de Baylif,nor his bailyfe) encountre sa volunte saunz bref le Roy (sinon pur feauteagainst his wil, wtout the writ of the King (vnlesse it be for fealtie. fere a son Seigneur) meske per deuaunt Coronner, ou au∣terto be done to his Lord) but only before the Coroner, or suche o∣ther minister le Roy, qui Real poer eyont de enquerer deminister of the King, as hathe Royall power to enquire of trespas fet encountre la Coronne nostre Seigneur le Roy.Essoignestrespasse committed against the crowne of our Lord the king. E∣cleymentAnd auxi, que checun Kenteys put autre assonier enthey clayme also, that euerie Kentishe man may essoine an other, la court le Roy, en Counte, en hundreth: e en laeither in the Kings court, or in the countie, or in ye hūdreth, or in ye court son Seigneur, la ou assoigne gist, aussi bien de communeCourt of his Lord, where essoine lieth, & ye aswel in case of cōmūe sute, come de play. Estre ceo il cleyment per especial fet le Roysute, as of plea. Moreouer they claime by an especiall deed of king
Henrie, pere le Roy Edward, que ore est, que dieu Garde,No battail nor graun assise, in G¦uelkinde landes. queHenry ye 3 father of King E. which now is (whō god saue) yt of de tenementz que sont tenus en Gauylekende ne scit prise bat∣taille,the tenements which are holden in Gauelkind, ther shal no battail ne graund assise per xij. chiuallers, sicome ail∣loursbe ioyned, nor graund Assise taken by .xii. Knights, as it is vsed in est prise en le reaume: ceo est a sauoir, la ou tenāt e le de∣maūdantother places of ye realme: this is to weet, where ye tenant & demaū∣dant tenēt per Gauylekende: mes en lu de ces grandes as∣sisesholde by Gauelkinde: But in place of these ground assises, seiēt prises Iurees per xii. homes tenātz en Gauylekēd: Issilet Iuries be taken by .xii. men, being tenants in Gauelkind: so ye que quatre tenātz de Gauylekēd elisent .xij. tenātz de Gauylefoure tenants of Gauelkinde, choose .xii. tenants of Gauelkinde to kende iurours. E la chartre le Roy de ceste especiaute est en labe Iurors. And the chartre of the King, of this especialtie, is in ye garde Sire Iohan de Norwode le tour S. Elphegh en Cāterby∣re,custodie of Sir Ihon of Norwood, the day of S. Alphey, in Can∣terburie, le an le Roy Edward, le Fiz le Roy Henrie .xxi.the yere of King Edward the sonne of king Henrie, ye xxi. Ces sont les vsages de Gauilekend, e de Gauylekendeys en Kēt,These be the vsages of Gauelkind, & of Gauelkinde men in Kent, que furent deuaunt le conquest, e en le Conquest, e totes hou∣reswhiche were before the conquest, and at the Conquest, and euer teskes en ca,since till now.
The names of such persons, as pro∣cured their possessions to be altered from the na∣ture of Gauelkinde, by acte of Parleament made .31. H. 8. Cap. 3. Thomas Lord Cromwell. Thomas Lord Burghe. George Lord Cobham. Andrew Lord Windsore. Syr Thomas Cheyne. Syr Christopher Hales. S. Thomas Willoughbie. S. Anthonie Seintleger. S. Edward Wootton. S. Edward Bowton. S. Roger Cholmley. S. Iohn Champneys. Iohn Baker Esquier. Reignold Scot. Iohn Guldeford. Thomas Kempe. Edward Thwaites. William Roper. Anthonie Sandes. Edwarde Isaac. Perciuall Harte. Edward Monyns. William Whetnall. Iohn Fogg. Edmund Fetiplace. Thomas Hardres. William Waller. Thomas Wilforde. Thomas Moyle. Thomas Harlakenden Geffrey Lee. Iames Hales. Henrie Hussey. Thomas Roydon. ¶ The names of suche, as be likewise prouided for. E. 6. Ca. Syr Robert Southwell. S. Iames Hales. S. Walter Hendley. S. George Harper. S. Henrie Isley. S. George Blage. Thomas Colepeper of Bedgebirie. Iohn Colepeper of Ailes∣forde. William Twisden. Tho. Darrell of Scotney. Robert Rudston. Thomas Roberts. Stephan Darrell. Richard Couarte. Christopher Blower. Thomas Hendley. Thomas Harman. Thomas Louelace. Thomas Colepeper.
The names of suche, as be specified in the acte made for the like cause, 5. Elizabeth. Cap. Thomas Browne of Westbecheworthe in Surrey. George Browne. It were right woorthie the la∣bour, to learne the particu∣lars and certeintie, (if it may be) of all suche possessions, as these men had, at the times of these seuerall Statutes, for that also wilbe seruiceable in time to come.
A Table, conteining the principall places, and matters, handeled in this Booke. A Angles, or Englishmen. Page 2 Archebishopricke of Canterbu∣ry. Page 62 Archebishops contend for the primacie. Page 65 Archebishops all named. Page 70 Armour. Page 112. 211. Apledore. Page 146. 162 Aile, or Eile a Riuer. Page 177. Correction of adulterie. Page 180. Appropriations. Page 292 Ailesforde. Page 321. Asheherst. Page 333. Adington. Page 258. Aldington. Page 149. B Brytones, or Welshmen. Page 1. 12. Borsholder, what he is. Page 22 Bridges of stone. Page 49. 303 Boroughes in Kent. Page 52. Brittishe Hystorie. Page 59 Flamines turned into Bishops. Page 62 Barons and Citizens. Page 94. 101. Bull of Golde. Page 134. 218. Thomas Becket Tharchbishop, looke Thomas. &c. Bilsington. Page 154 Beacons. Page 160 Boxeley. Page 181. Baramdowne. Page 217 Barons warre. Page 219. 298 Buriall of the dead. Page 244 Bishop of Saint Martines. Page 250 Bartilmew Badelsmere. Page 262 Bishops of Rochester named. Page 271 Benerth. Page 169 Blackheath. Page 340 Blacksmithes rebellion. Page 340 Saint Bartilmew and his offring. Page 375. Anthonie Becke, an edifying Bi∣shop. Page 384 C Iulius Caesar. Page 1 Customes of Kent. Page 22. 388 Cities in Kent, Page 50. 91 Castles in Kent. Page 52 Crosse of the Archebishop. Page 67 Cursed bread. Page 87 Cinque Portes. Page 93 Cōstableship of Douer castle. Page 102 Contentions betweene religious persons. Page 67. 128, 237. 251. 269. 290. 301. Courtopstreete. Page 148 Carmelite Fryars. Page 166. 324 Contempt of Good Counsell worthily punished. Page 168 Cranmer the Archebishop. Page 186 Lord Cromwell. Page 186 Charteham. Page 220 Chilham. Page 227 Canterbury. Page 231 Thomas Colpeper. Page 262
Feast of Saint Cuthbert. Page 270 Crueltie against Strangers, Page 7, 278 284. Conquest of England. Page 283 Chetham. Page 286 Crayford, and Cray Riuer. Page 345 Cliffe at Hoo. Page 352 D Domesday booke. Page 93 Danes, and their whole Hystorie. Page 107. 162. 322. 337. Dele. Page 117 Douer. 119, the Castle. Page 121 Doncastre. Page 195 Drinking and Carowsing. Page 280 Depeford. Page 335 Dartford, & Darēt riuer. Page 346. 349 E Ethelbert the King. Page 18 Eadric, the King. Page 19 King Edward the confessor. Page 89 Eastrie. Page 114 Saint Eanswyde. Page 136 King Edward the first, claimeth supremacie ouer the Clergie. Page 226. Saint Edith, and her offering. Page 372 Elizabeth our Queene. Page 58. 275. Eslingham. Page 292 Edmond Ironside. Page 323 Erasmus Roterodam. Page 255, 377 Edric the Earle, an infamous trai∣tor. Page 323 An Earle, Butler to the Archebi∣shop. Page 331. Earithe. Page 343 Eltham. Page 384 F Fifteene and tenthe of Kent. Page 25 Fraunchises. Page 48 Forestes and Parkes in Kent, Page 48 Faires in Kent. Page 51 Flamines turned into Bishops. Page 62 Folkstone. Page 136 Farley. Page 172 Fermes, why so called. Page 172 Feuersham. Page 202 Frendsbury. Page 290 Fernham. Page 322 G Gentlemen of Kent by name. Page 54 Geffray of Mounmouth. Page 59 Goodwine Sandes. Page 84 Godwyne the Earle. Page 84. 86. 120 Genlade and Gladmouthe, Page 205 Gillingham. Page 274 Gauelkinde. Page 22. 388. Grenewiche. Page 336 Grauesend. Page 349 Gentlemen, and gentrie, of olde time. Page 363 H Heptarchie of England. Page 1. 3 Hundrethes, how they began. Page 21 Hilles of name, in Kent. Page 49 Houses of honor in Kent. Page 53. 211 Hospitals in Kent. Page 53 King Henrie the eight. Page 117. 200 Hubert of Borough. Page 162
Hyde hauen. Page 141. Hauens, why they decay. Page 141. Hydeland. Page 12. Holy Maide of Kent. Page 149 Harlot, whereof so called. Page 178 Highe waies. Page 213 Hakington. Page 251 Harbaldowne. Page 254 Harold the King. Page 284 Horsmundene. Page 288 Horstede. Page 289 Halling. Page 317 Hengist, and Horsa, two Capi∣taines. Page 15. 289. 345 Saint Hildeferthe. Page 354 Husbandrie. Page 368 King Henrie the second. Page 239. 377 Holmesdale. Page 382 I Iutes. Page 2 Inglishmen. Page 2 Ingland first inhabited. Page 12 Inglishmen first named. Page 20 Indigenae, what they be. Page 12 Ippedfleete. Page 82 Ightam. Page 197 Inglishe speeche corrupted. Page 205 decayed. Page 209 King Iohn of Ingland. Page 133, 203. 217 Iacke Cade. Page 340. 384 Iacke Strawe. Page 340. 348 K Seuē Kingdomes in Inglād. Page 1. 3 Kent, how situated 7. why so na∣med, 7. 167. Her gentrie, 10. 5. Her Yeomanrie, 10. 65. Ferti∣litie. 8. 9. Artificers. 11. First in∣habited part of al Ingland. 14 hath many Kings, 14. 317. One King. 15. 345. her kings names 17. she kepeth her olde Cus∣tomes. 22. particularly set down. 25. hath three steps. Page 158. Knightes fees. Page 48 Kemsley downe. Page 190 Kentish tailes. Page 315 Kemsing. Page 372 Knolle. Page 377 Knightes seruice. Page 9, 368. 389 L Lawes of Ingland. Page 5 Lathes howe they began. Page 21. 212. London spoiled of the Archebi∣shopricke. Page 63 Lymne, and Lymene. Page 145 Lymen, a Riuer. Page 146. 165 Lyming. Page 216 Leedes. Page 260 Ladie of Chetham. Page 286 Liuerie of seisine. Page 317 Lord Dane, and Lourdan. Page 111 Lowy of Tunbridge. Page 329. Lesnes. Page 342 M Marriage. Page 16. 299. 405 Markets in Kent. Page 50 Minster Abbay. Page 80. Saint Myldred. Page 81 Myracles. Page 81. 116. 136. 152.
268. 336. Saint Martines night. Page 210 Saint Martines. Page 128 Maidston. Page 174 Medway, a Riuer. Page 176 Mylton. Page 190 Minster. Page 198 Monkes contend forceably a∣gainst the King. Page 203 Mottindene. Page 230 Maude the Empresse. Page 260 Malling. Page 325 Mepham. Page 355 Merchandize. Page 368 N Nor ans. Page 3 Neshe. Page 160 Newendene. Page 165 Names of townes fetched from Riuers adioyning. Page 174, 205 Norwood. Page 258 Naming of men. Page 258 Nauie, See Ships. Names of Townes in Eng. Page 325 O Order of this description. Page 62. 77 161. 207. 215. 273, 353. 386. Odo the Earle of Kent. Page 123. 178. 297. Order of Templers. Page 132 Orpington. Page 345 Otford. Page 374 P Pictes. Page 2 Parkes, see Forestes. Polydore Virgill. Page 60. 222. 316. 355 Portes, see Cinque Portes. Pope. 133. 217. 220 abolished. Page 157 Passage ouer the Sea. Page 143 Piccendene Hothe. Page 178 Purgatorie. Page 192 Parleament without the Clergie Page 221. Priestes wiues, see Marriage Priestes vnlearned. Page 352 Papisme and Paganisme agree in many points of religiō. Page 373 Portreue, whereof it commeth. Page 349. Partition, of lands .409. of goods Page 408. Q Quinborow. Page 200 R Riuers in Kent. Page 49. Religious houses in Kent. Page 53. and their values. Page 230 Rome whereof named. Page 81 Reliques. Page 82. 105. 216. 247. 255 Richeborowe. Page 90 Rutupi. Page 90 Rother, a Riuer. Page 146. 165 Rumney. 156. and the Marsh. Page 158 Roode of grace. Page 182 Saint Rumwald. Page 186. 188. Reculuer. Page 207 Robert Wynchelsey the Arche∣bishop. Page 222 Religous houses valued. Page 230 Sir Roger Laybourne. Page 263 Bishops of Rochester named. Page 271
Roode of Gillingham. Page 286 Rochester. Page 293, 354 Rochester bridge. Page 303 Sir Robert Knolles Page 313 Rauensborne, a riuer. Page 335 Reue, whereof it cometh. Page 350 Reigate Castle. Page 382 S Scots. Page 2 Saxons. Page 2. 79 Samothees. Page 12 Shyres, how they began. Page 20. 337 Swanscombe. Page 23. 354 Schooles in Kent. Page 54. 233. 383 Stonor. Page 83 Sandwiche. Page 91. 105 Ships. Page 97. 112. 274. 335 Sandowne. Page 118 Stephan Langton Tharchebi∣shop.. Page 133. 197 Saintes in the Papacie. Page 137 Saltwood. Page 139 Shypwey. Page 144 Seawatche. Page 160 Stone. Page 164 Sittingbourne. Page 191 Shepey, Page 198 Sheepe of England, Page 198 Stouremouthe. Page 208 Saint Stephans. Page 251 King Stephan. Page 260 See of Canterbury, looke in Archebishopricke See of Rochester. Page 266 Shorham Deantie. Page 267 Sees of Bishops translated from villages. Page 271 Crueltie against Straungers. Page 7 278. 284. Seruingmen. Page 282 Strowde. Page 290. 315 Sealing and signing. Page 318 Socage tenure. Page 9. 391 Sherif, whereof it commeth. Page 350 Sennocke. Page 383 T Tithings, howe they began. Page 21 Tanet. Page 78 Order of the Templers. Page 132 Thomas Becket Tharchebishop Page 143, 239, 248. 255. 374. 377 Triall of right, Page 178. 343 Tong Gastle. Page 195 Tenham. Page 197 Decay of Townes. Page 236 Townes named, see names. Tunbridge. Page 327 Theeues, how suppressed. Page 21 Torneament. Page 347 Testament, or last will. Page 356 W Wasseling cuppe. Page 1 Wryters of Kent by name. Page 58 Winchelsey. Page 94. 96 Lord Wardeins of the Portes by name. Page 102 Walmere. Page 118 William Longchāp the Bishop of Ely. Page 129 William Courtney Tharchebi∣shop. Page 139 Westenbangar. Page 140 William Warham the Archebi∣shop.
Page 151 Weald of Kent, Page 167 Woole of England. Page 198 Wantsume, a riuer. Page 97. 207 Wingham. Page 211 Wapentakes. Page 212 Wrotham. Page 370 Wyngham. Page 380 Watches at the Sea Page 160 Watling streete. Page 213 Wye. Page 228 Wrecke at the Sea. Page 228 Saint William of Rochester. Page 301 Vniuersitie at Canterbury. Page 233 Whoredome punished. Page 180 Vagaboundes Page 21 Wager of Lawe Page 344 Y Yarmouthe. Page 95 Yeoman, whereof so called. Page 10 Yeomanrie of Kent. Page 10 Yenlade, see Genlade. Jmprinted at London, for Rafe Newbery dwelling in Fleetestreate, a litle aboue the Conduite. Anno Domini. 1576.
