22084A 99898165 133103
ROBERT EARLE OF ESSEX HIS GHOST. Sent from ELIZIAN: TO THE NOBILITY, GENTRY, AND COMMV∣NALTIE OF ENGLAND. Virtutum Comes Jnvidia. Printed in PARADISE. 1624.
TO THE NOBI∣LITY, GENTRY, AND Communalty of England. Nobles, Gentlemen, Commons: ALthough in this most holy and glorious As∣sembly of Angels and Saints, in the most High Starre Chamber Court of Heauen, where Al∣mighty God, and his Sonne Christ Iesus, are King and Prince, wee the Saints do neither partici∣pate nor sympathize of the good or euill condition of yee Mortals on earth: Yet, seeing it is a part of that glory, that God affoordeth vs in Heauen, to haue a measure of knowledge of your condition on earth; and I, particularly taking knowledge of the miserable and distracted present estate, of the whi∣lome flourishing Realme of England, in the dayes of my then dread Soueraigne, (now fellow Saint) Queene Elizabeth, (of blessed and immortall memo∣ry on Earth, and in Heauen,) could doe no lesse then giue you this my Sacred Declaration, and Ad∣monishment,
which I send you, by this my Blessed Genius, written with a pen made of an Angels Pinion; and agreeing with my Apology which I left behind me on Earth, in mine owne defence, and for the good of my Country, after my discease. The lawfull succession of your now King, when I was amongst you on earth, I neuer questioned, but maintayned, and was euer ready to main∣tayne (with dint of my Sword, if neede had bin.) his Title, against whomsoeuer offered to questi∣on the same, as was, and is well knowne to his Maiesty. That he was a prudent, learned, and religious (educated) Prince, I also neuer doub∣ted, But that such a prudent, learned, and re∣ligious Prince, should bee so farre misled, by (some) false hearted Counsellours at home, and fawning Forraine Embassadors from the enemies of God and his Gospell prosessed in England, to the detriment of the Kingdome, That, I say makes me not a little to maruaile, and mourne I should for my Natiue Country, but that here in Heauen, we are not subiect to passion. Vpon my certaine knowledge, notwithstand∣ing all the faire shewe of league and amity, be∣twixt Iames King of Scots, and Philip King of Spaine, the Crowne of Scotland was no longer safe on King Iames his head, then whiles my Soueraigne Lady, and Mistresse Queene Eliza∣beth, by her valiant men of Action, curbed King Phillip, and kept him in awe: For, had his am∣bitious, wicked, and deuilish designe of Englands
inuasion in 88. taken effect, Is there any so chil∣dish to thinke that his inuasion would haue had any Period at Barwick? Sure I am, King Iames had wisedome enough, to know that his Crowne and Kingdome lay then at the Stake, in the se∣cond place, next vnto England. For K. Iames then of Scotland made a sweete Sonet, as a Mo∣nument and Commemoration of his and our de∣liuerance, from that Forraine and godlesse Fleete, as he then termed It: Which Sonet as I then re∣ceiued it, I here present vnto your view and conside∣ration. The Nations banded 'gainst the Lord of might Prepar'd a Force, and set them to the way: Mars drest himselfe in sicke and awfull plight, The like whereof was neuer seene, they say: They forward came in monstrous aray, Both Sea and Land be set vs euery where, Brags threatned vs a ruinous decay, What came of that? the ishue did declare: The Winds began to tosse them here and there, The Seas began in foaming waues to swell: The number that escap'd it fell them faire, The rest were swallow'd vp in gulfes of Hell. But how were all these things miraculous done? God lookes at them, out of his Heauenly Throne. (The same Sonet is extant in Latine by Metel∣lanus L. Chancellor of Scotland.) Matters so standing, the maruaile is, That
vpon the mature shutting in of the euening of your long Summers day of Queene Elizabeths Reigne, King Iames lawfully and peaceably succeeding to the Crownes of England, and Ireland, he so sud∣dainly concludes (as it were) an inviolable league, with that ambitious King Philip of Spaine, that ne∣uer made league with any King, Prince, or State, but for his owne end and aduantage. If I were on earth, I know some of you would an∣swer me, King Iames was a peaceable Prince, and so loued to be at peace, and in amity with other Chri∣stian Princes: Yea, and it seemes your King him∣selfe, is much affected with the very name of PEACE, alleadging, that he hath beene a peaceable King from his Cradle; That BEATI PACIFICI is his happy destined Motto; and with such like selfe-plea∣sing songs, hath a long time sung a Requiem to him∣selfe, &c. I must confesse, it is a happy thing for Christian, and Religious Kings, Princes, and States to be at peace, in vnity, and amity one with an o∣ther. But on the other side, it is as vnhappy and daungerous a thing to haue league or amity with Romane-Catholique Kings, and Princes, who are, I say, sworne and profest enemies to God, and his Gospell, as was, and is this great Catholique King Philip, and his Austrian-Castillian family. When I was a seruant to my Prince and Coun∣try on earth, my affection in nature, was indiffe∣rent, Tam Marti, quam Mercurio, and I was more en∣flamed with the loue of knowledge, then the loue of Fame: which some of yourHenry Earle of Southamton, &c. Men of State, and great place, yet liuing, that knew my heart can beare me witnesse.
But my Noble, and ReligiousHe died Earle Marshall of Ireland. An. 1576. Father, Walter Earle of Essex, vpon his Death-bed, he gaue me in precept three maine and weighty matters, viz. First, To serue God according to his Ordinances in his Word. Secondly, To obey my Prince. Thirdly, To loue and serue my Country, vnto which he added, To beware of and to hate all Popish superstition and Idolatry. All which he religiously enlarged, and pressed vnto me, the more, in regard of my tender, youthfull, and vnripe yeares. Which Swan-like Song of my deare Parent, tooke so deepe an impression in me, that I being called by my Soueraigne the Queene, (and be∣ing but a youth, she was pleased to call me her Boy) to serue her Maiesty and my Country, did the wil∣linger yeeld and obey my Prince her Command, and entred into Action. First, in the yeare of our Lord 1585, and xix. of my Pupill-age, I went with the Earle of Leicester my Father in law into the Netherlands, where I had the Honorable charge of Generall of the Horse, in a faire Army: Where, I aduentured my life, and sub∣iected my selfe to many kinds of wants (disagreeing with my education and yeeres, &c.) Which I did for the Honor of my Prince and Country. Secondly, in the yeare 1589. I enterprized my voyage into Portugall, with a poore distrested and exiled King, Don Antonio, whom I many times (with pitty) heard repeate (with teares) the story of his op∣pressions by Phillip King of Spaine; who by force and tyranny had vsurped his Crowne of Portugall: Also, considering the enemy against whom I went, an in∣solent, cruell, and vsurping Prince, that disturbed
the Common peace, was a generall enemy to the liberty of all Christendome; and in particular aspired the Conquest of my Country; and the cause I went, was to the deliuer the oppressed out of the hands of the Oppressour; and (by giuing the Castillian his handfull at home) to free both mine owne Country and our Confederates from the feare and danger of his attempts: And lastly, a time in which I went, when as mine eyes, full of disdaine, had so lately seene his (falsly called) Invincible Armado sayle by our shore: when all the braue hearts in England boy∣led till they saw that insolent enemy taught, both to know himselfe, and valew Vs. And had the Portu∣gals risen and assisted me, I should haue gone nigh to haue pluckt Portugals Crowne off the Vsurpers head, and placed it on the lawfull Kings head: but they for feare of Philip were faithlesse to Antonio. Yet in that my Voyage, what I attempted to ayde the wronged and banished King, and for Honor of my Prince and Countrey, if you know it not, let your Chronicles resolue you. Thirdly, in the yeare 1591. I conducted and was Generall of her Maiesty, my Soueraignes succours to Henry the French King, a Prince, who for his admirable valour, and often fighting with his owne hands, against his enemies, was not onely the most famous, but the most renowmed and redoub∣ted Captaine of Christendome: And the end of that my seruice, was, to free the maritine parts of Normandy from the hands of the league and power of the Spaniard, that thereby he our enemy should find lesse succour or fauour in those Seas, &c. This
also was done, for Honor of my Prince and Coun∣trey. Fourthly, in the yeare 1596. I vndertooke my Spanish Voyage to Cadiz, where, not only I soone seized on, sacked, and burnnt the Towne, and en∣riched my Followers, and Souldiers, but we burnt his best Shipping, and brought away his Ordi∣nance, and some Ships, destroying his Sea Proui∣sions: Yea, put him to such charge and losse, as he shortly after played Bankerupt, with all his Credi∣tors, &c. And this likewise I did, for Honor of my Prince and Country. Fiftly, in the yeare 1597. my Spanish Voyage towards the Tercera's, was intended with her Maie∣sties leaue, and by her command for Fayall, to assaile the Adelantado there, and thither I shaped my course; and had it beene prosperous, and fortunate, I had made my Soueraigne such an absolute Queene of the Ocean, and disarmed, and disabled the ene∣my at Sea, as that she might eyther haue enforced him to any conditions of Peace, or made War on him, to her infinite Aduantage, and his vtter Ruine. But that my designe was fatally frustrated by vio∣lent and long Tempests, which tooke vs in the heigth of 46. Which scattered our Fleete, disa∣bled and almost drowned most of our principall Ships, and (when we could no longer beare it vp against the Wind) draue vs backe vpon our owne Coast; and to what a desperate case my owne Ship was brought? there witnesses were enow: My attempts and endeauours were neuerthelesse, my dangers, and endurance of hardnesse the more, &c, And
all for honour of my Prince and Country. (When Philip King of Spaine, that mortall ene∣my of my Prince and Country, had made many attempts, and assaults vpon Vs; fayled and was fru∣strated in all, then he begged of the Pope, my Soueraignes Kingdome of Ireland, and sent his Bastard brother, Don Iohn D'Aquila, to take posses∣sion of it. But this Messinger (a Vice-roy in his conceit) was soone sent backe with an English-Flea in his Spanish eare, that made such a buzzing in his head, that eyther with that, or else by a Spanish-figge, the good Don discontentedly departed this life, in short time after his returne into Spaine.) At length, (and it was my last Voyage) by command of my Soueraigne I was made, and sent Lord Generall into Ireland of all her Maiesties Forces. And there, when I had begun to subjugate those head-strong Rebels, and brought their Ring-leader (that notable Rebell Tyr-oen) vpon his knees: I was forced abruptly to returne back into England: and my Commission was conferred vpon an other NobleCharles L. Mountjoy., my inferiour: who was sent ouer to wade against those Rebels, after I had broken the Ice a∣forehand; and hee had the Honor, happily to per∣forme what I had carefully and painefully, projected and intended. In the interim, the fatall threed of my mortall life, was almost spun, and my glasse nigh through run. My enemies laying many hey∣nous crimes vnto my charge, and therewith abu∣sing my Soueraignes eares, and incensing her sacred Maiesty against me.
But, beloued Mortals, it is not my meaning (nei∣ther would I haue you expect it) to touch the injury of the times in that my latter Time, nor the State-faction of men in place, my then enemies: I forbeare to touch, also how by the machinations of men, my gracious Soueraigne was forced to signe the hastning of my Death: For before my head was se∣uered from my Shoulders, (with which stroake my immortall soule was seperated from my mortall bo∣dy) I forgaue them all, and left my cause to God, to whom vengeance is due: And certes, my God hath beene throughly avenged of them all, (my enemies,) to their dishonor and disgrace on earth; yea, before Men and Angels. And all was but like an impetuous storme to hasten my arriuing in the Harbour of Heauen: Here, where there is no roome for reuenge, nor ought else but holy loue: which hath moued me to send you of my quondam Coun∣try this my declaration or discourse (call it what you will:) Wherein, I list not neither to meddle with the Arcana imperij, of your King and State, further then shall beseeme a zealous Patriot, that tendreth still, and wisheth the wel-fare and flourishing State of his once deare and natiue Country. And now, well beloued Englishmen, in the premisses I haue giuen you a briefe accompt of my life, and as it were an Epitome of my time-spending on earth. In which imployments, I empayred my hereditary estate; lost my deare and onelyMr Walter Devreux, slaine at the siege of Rouen. 1591. brother, the halfe Arch of my House, and buried also many of my neerest and dearest friends; subjected my selfe to the rage of the Seas violence, generall plagues,
famine, and all kind of wants; discontentments of vndisciplined and vnruly multitudes, and receptati∣on of all euents: and all, for the Honor and re∣nowme of my gracious Prince, and deare Country, keeping in minde my fathes Charge: Sit tota Britan∣nia Testis. Now beloued Mortalls, let me come more neere∣ly to Counsell and aduise with yon. First, that the Spanish Kings reuengefull humour was insatiable appeared, when, in my time Anno 1597. when he came newly out of a Trance, which was thought would haue beene his last swoune, he asked (the first word that hee spake) whether the Adelantado were gone for England; and if remorse of consci∣ence would haue quenched his thirst of reuenge, he would not, a little before his death, in his deuotions, being all Masse, haue vowed to be reuenged on Eng∣land, though hee sold all those Candlestickes vpon the Altar, before him. Secondly, that all Treaties with Spaine (an idola∣trous and irreligious Nation) were both vnsafe and dangerous, I proued by vn-answerable arguments in my Apology, page 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. And how injurious the zealous peace∣makers of those times, were to the State, I proued page 35, 36. How necessary gainfull, and honorable it was, for the State of England, to haue Warres with Spaine. I proued page 36, 37. and so to the end of my Apology. But some of you haply will how say, That now, The Times are changed, and with the time the Spaniards mind is altered. Indeede, I remember the old Poet sayd,
Tempora mutantur et nos mutamur in illis. But that is quite contrary in the Spaniard: For, although old King Phillip be dead, yet there is a young (Iesuited) Phillip sprung from his loynes. It is an old and homely Proverbe, That which is bred in the bone, will neuer out of the flesh: But it is a true and obseruable saying,Apol. page 19. and in that House aboue all others. For, as I told you in my Apology: when∣euer old King Phillip should die, his sonnes blood would be as hot, and hotter than his Fathers, and his humour of ambition like to be greater, as ha∣uing beene bred in Domo regnatrice, and his mind swolne, vetere & insita Austriacae familiae suberbia. So as, in the Spaniards seeming peaceable proffers there is no hope, &c. Nay, if it chance there be Infancy, or Idiotisme found in any Heire or Offspring of that Race, the state of Spaine are politique enough, as being sworne thereunto, (though by neuer so dishonorable and degenerous meanes and machinations) to promote the enlargement of his Westerne Monarchy. And certes, he hauing of late yeares, since the death of my Soueraigne Lady Elizabeth, gotten such footing in Christendome, by dispossessing off and encroach∣ing vpon some Princes and States their ancient and lawfull Inheritance, Princedomes, and Territories, by which meanes hee hath as it were beguirt France with his Garrisons: Is, I say, his ambition thereby lessened? Surely no, but as his Conquests are inlarged; so his Ambition and Malice are aboundantly increa∣sed towards other Christian Princes and States: Witnesse, his late cruell and bloody attempts, and
perpetuall designes to his Vniuersall Monarchy; and the progresse of his Conquests, with the helpe of his Confederates of the (terrestriall) omnipotent Au∣strian House, in Italy, the Grizons Country, Suitzer∣land, Bohemia, Germany, and I say, the Frontiers of flourishing France, since the Death of Henry the Fourth the French King, of famous memory. And in all these places, he and the Emperour his Confe∣derate and Cousin, do labour to extirpate the Gos∣pell, and persecute the professours thereof, euen vn∣to the Death. It would be knowne, what King Iames sayth to all this: who is Defender of the Faith, and Head of all the Vnited Kings and Princes of the Religion in Christendome. There is here in Heauen secret intelligence, that He, not contenting himselfe with making that League with Spaine, hath also entertained a Treaty of Marriage for the Prince his onely Sonne, with the Daughter of Spaine: And certes, the very Angells haue blushed at this newes, that your King, who is of so profound judgement, learning, and knowledge in Diuine matters, should euer assent to Treat of Matching his onely Sonne, with a wife of a contrary Religion: Especially with an Impe sprung from such an incestuous Generation, as is that of Austria and Spaine, or Spaine and Austria, chuse you whither, which is vnanswerably proued by one of your most accute and ingeniousSandy's Relati∣on of the West parts, pag 26, 27 Writers. Without doubt, King Iames cannot but know in his conscience, that it is directly against the reuealed Will of God in Holy Writ, for Christian Princes and people that professe
the Gospell, to match with Romane-Catholickes; which made himselfe match with Denmarkes Daugh∣ter, a Protestant Princesse, and afterwards hee matched his only Daughter with the Count Palatine, a Protestant Prince; witnesse also his Maiesties owne Pen, in his Basilicon Doron. How comes it then to passe? that hee is so mis∣led, as not onely to entertaine of this Treaty with Spaine, but suffer himselfe to be so baffled and abu∣sed, as that about the sayd Treaty hee hath wasted the Treasure of the Kingdome, in a farre greater measure then his Royall Predecessour Queene Eliza∣beth, my gracious Soueraigne, did to maintaine Warres against Spaine and all his his Adherents? I feare, I feare, you of his Nobility, and Councell (vn∣to whom it belongs) are not so faithfull, true hear∣ted, and stout, as religiously to aduise, and Coun∣sell your King, as you ought, not to suffer him∣selfe to be so abused, his Kingdome to be wel-nigh ruined, and his subiects impouerished. Oh the flourishing State of your Faery-Land, in the dayes of yore, whiles I liued on earth, vnder the Gouernment of that glorious Queene, of eter∣memory: The Christian World did admire her Gouernment, and your flourishing State; Nay, the very MahumetaneSpeed, in Hist. pag. 852, 853. Monarchs did admire and ac∣knowledge the same. But now, the case is altered, (and) I can hard∣ly forbeare to weepe, to see what a piteous Petition that glorious Queene, my now fellow Saint Eliza∣beth, lately receiued from you the Commons of Eng∣land: But thereof I say no more, considering she
according to her Commission from the highest Po∣wer answered that your Petition. Let me now admonish you all, of the Nobility, Gentry, and Communalty: First, seriously and yet submissiuely, to dehort and disswade your King, to leaue off and absolutely dissolue all Treaties of Matches, or whatsoeuer else with that perfidious and daungerous Spanish Nation; and in lieu of the Spanish Match to promote the English March. What though his Maiesties Treasure be drawne deepe into, the poore Country-man by these late hard yeares be impouerished, the Merchandize and trading of your Kingdome much decayed, &c. Yet, if your sumptuous Buildings, your surfetting Diets, your Prodigality in Garments, your infinite Plate, and costly furniture in your Houses, and the pride of your Wiues (especially) be considered, England cannot be though so poore. Can you exceede all Nations in Christendome in wastfull vanities? And can you not arme your selues against one Nation, (which you haue euer beaten) for your necessary de∣fence? Was Rome so braue a State, as that the ve∣ry Ladies, to supply the Common Treasure, and to maintaine the Warres, despoyled themselues of their costly Iewels and rich Ornaments? And is Eng∣land become so base a State, as that the people therein will not bestow some part of their superflu∣ous expences to keepe themselues from Conquest and Slauery? (The onely end of all Spaines Treaties: Witnesse their Treaty of peace in 88. when as, euen at the instant their mighty Nauy came to inuade Vs) Did the godly Kings, and Religious people, which
you may read of in the old Testament, to maintaine the Warres against the enemies of God, sell the Ornaments of the Temple, and things consecra∣ted to holy Vses? And will yee that haue as Holy and as warrantable a Cause of Warre, spare those things that you haue Dedicated to your idle and sen∣suall pleasures? Could your Nation in those former Ages, when the Country was farre poorer then now it is, leauy Armies, maintaine Warres, atchieue great Conquests in France, and make their power∣full Armes knowne as farre as the Holy Land? And is this so degenerate an Age, as you will not be able to defend your owne Land? No, no, I hope there is yet left some seede of that auncient vertue: Remem∣ber with what spirit and alacrity the Gentlemen of England did contribute and put themselues volunta∣rily into Action, in my time on earth. And doubt∣lesse, there will euer be found some VALERII, who (so the State may stand and flourish) will not care thogh they leaue not where with to bury themselues, though other some bury their money, not caring in what estate they leaue the State. You had a Queene, in my time on earth, who was euer open handed to men of desert, yet neuer wastfull in her priuate expences; but maintained Armies and Garrisons, not a few; a well-rigged Na∣uy, assisted and lent money to her Neighbouring States. And why will yee doubt but with your sea∣sonable Counsell, in a Parliamentary-course (the auncient and laudable Course of England) your King will rather sell his Plate, and Iewels in the Tower, which in my time were of inestimable valew, (if yet
they be not sold, nor giuen away,) rather then his people shall be vndefended. And yee his people, I hope will turne your golden and siluer Coates, into Coates of Male, or iron Iacks, and your siluer Plate, into Iron Corslets of Plate, rather then your Soue∣raigne and Country shall bee vnserued. But what neede all this? A free and cheerefull contribution to the Warres according to your abilities will serue the turne. And so, oh Noble Prince, and Valiant People, agree to go on, the one to send forth, the other to lead on Gods Armies, to fight his Battailes, against his and your enemies; lest they suddainly surprize you vnawares by some new Inuasion; and remember that the Almighty, as he is a God of Peace in the consciences of his Elect, so is he a man of War to his enemies; euen so his Maiesty, hath expressed himselfe in holy Writ. Againe, in any wise beware of disuniting your selues from the vnited States of the Netherlands: for it will be to your infinite disaduantage so to do: But rather, assist, cherish, and hearten them: They are the best Confederates you haue. Remember in what steed they stood you in that memorable yeare 88. And they, being firmely knit vnto you, are of more vse vnto you then all the Friends you haue, or can haue in Christendome. In my time on earth, they were able (vpon my certaine knowledge) to find 60. or 80. Thousand fighting Souldiers, 300 Shippes of Warre, besides an infinite number of transporting Vessells and commodious Ports, that are but a daies sayling from the very heart of England: Since my time on earth, they are increased in men, in muni∣tion,
in Shipping and in wealth; and which should make the knot of vnity more strong and fast with you, they were and are of the same true Religion, which you professe: And moreouer, now, which should not be of least consideration, with your King and you: They are of late yeares Harbourers of of the exiled Princes his Maiesties Children, who are beaten out of their lawfull inheritance by Spaine and Austria. And verily, were it not that my condition here, I say, were free from all passions, my very heart would bleede to thinke on the deplorable State of Christendome, how drunke those two Houses of Spaine and Austria haue made themselues in the blood of Christians, professours of Christs Gos∣pell; and the very Angels do wonder to see how they are suffered to go on in their inveterate malice and furious rage against Gods Church, and that other Christian Princes do not stoppe the currant of their fury: Especially, that your King, who is a Professor of the Gospell, and Faiths great Defender on earth, is so backward in the businesse. Which considered, it is your parts, especially that are of his Maiesties Councell and Nobility, with faithfull hearts to perswade and stirre him vp, not to let the Lyon in his Princely Breast, any longer to sleepe and slumber, but to awake and rouze vp himselfe, and to go forth against the Romish wolues, and Spanish Foxes, who haue deuoured so many of Christs Sheepe, and layd his Vineyard so wast: Yea, the blood of the Saints doth continually cry at Heauen gates for Vengeance.
To draw to an end, I wil not ceasse to intercede to the Almighty my euer glorious God, that he ne∣uer denounce the curse against your King, or yee his Nobles, which he once in his word denounced a∣gainst Meros, &c. My Conclusion still is, and shall be: Iustissi∣mum ijs Bellum quibus necessarium, et pia Arma qui∣bus nullum nisi in armis spes est. And for an vlti∣mum Vale, as in my Apology I aduised to Remember how Bernardine Mendoza (the then Ambassadour of Spaine) spent his time here in England: So, I now aduise you, Remember how your late Spanish Embas∣sadors haue spent their times, and behaued themselues here in England, &c. The Peace of God, which passeth all (earthly) vnderstanding be with you, and dwell in your hearts. My Declaration's ended, I must no longer stay, Because Heau'ns Cornets summon me away: The Blessed Quire of Heauen I do heare, Tuning their Voyces to th' Almighties eare. HAL╌LE╌LV╌jAH HAL╌LE╌LV╌jAH. Ha╌le╌lu╌jah.
A POST-SCRIPT, OR, A SECOND PART OF ROBERT EARLE OF ESSEX HIS GHOST. To the Nobility, Gentry, and Communalty of ENGLAND. printer's illustration Printed in PARADISE. 1624.
TO THE NOBILITIE, Gentry, and Communalty, of ENGLAND. THrice Beloued Mortals: I being still Studious of your welfares, and ha∣uing obtained leaue of the Almighty, I am now to giue vnto you and com∣mend vnto your consideration a Ca∣talogue and Commemoration of such cruell Plots, as were practized in my time on Earth, by the King and State of Spaine, against the Queene and State of England: Wherein, I will not meddle with Practises and Cruelties to other Nations; and therefore I omit to tell you how farre their Cruelties extended to the poore naked Indians in America, though I remember, whiles I was on Earth, I haue seene a Booke, as well in English, as in Spanish and Latine, intituled, The Cruelties and Tyrannies of the Spanish Coloni, perpetrated in the West-Indies, commonly called the New-found World, written in the Castilian Tongue by the Reuerend Bartholomew De las Casas, a Frier of the Order of St. Dominick, and Bishop of the Royall Towne called Chiapa; seruing as a warning to the twelue Vnited Prouinces of the
Low-Countries: Translated into English, and Printed, (as I take it,) in the 25 yeare of the happy Reigne of that Virgin Empresse, Queene Elizabeth, my gracious So∣ueraigne: The lamentable Relation whereof, if you would particularly know, I wish you haue recourse vnto the sayd Booke. And of their cruelties and Tyrannies exercised by their Arch-Tyrannous Ge∣nerall Duke D' Alva towards the Netherlanders, if you know them not, looke but into their Chroni∣cles. And for their plots and practises towards England, before my time, looke but into your owne Chronicles. But, before I come to my Catalogue, I must commend vnto your consideration, When I was but an Infant, there came a certaine Bull from Pius Quintus, that impious Pope of Rome, against Queene Elizabeth: The Copy of which Bull is also to be seene in your Chronicles: But the Copy of her Sacred Maiesties Answere vnto the sayd Bull, because you haue not elsewhere seene it, (as most Worthy your reading and obseruation,) I here insert it: The Lord that Reignes on high in Heauens Throne Doth Kingdomes rule below, 'tis He alone That Earth doth gouerne with high thundring might, And moderates the staffe of Kingdomes right: 'Tis H that guides with his Almighty Name, The wheele of all this Vniversall frame: 'Tis He that Kings annointed and Elect, And sacred Captaines strongly will protect.
Why should this Bull-head Bishop therefore, full Of rage, against me roare with Basan Bull, To plucke me from my Sacred Seate and Throne, T'out root the Plant which Christ himselfe hath sowne? Why doth this Pius seeke with impious guilt, To pull downe that which God himselfe hath built? Christ me annointed, and annoint I hope, Will keepe me from the jawes of this proud Pope: His powerfull Hand hath kept me yet from harme, Nor will the Lord make short his out-stretcht Arme. If God be on my side, why doth this Popish wonder Seeke to affright me with his beastly Thunder? Why doth this new-borne Gyant seeke to ride Aboue the Clouds with his prodigious pride? Gainst Heauen why doth this Nimrod make new warrs, And with Iehovah breed these impious jarrs? Pius this Anchor of thy Peters bote Is broake, thy hope and faith doth floate. Yee,An Exhortati∣on to other Princes. in whose hands the Almighty God ordaines To put the peoples and the Kingdomes reines, Do not your selues, and people bring, Vnder the yoake of this vile borbarous King. Away with him that doth for Scepter fight And royall Crowne, that is not Bishops right: What, must the Pope so many States deuoure? Its not Priests part to vse the Carnall powre: To make these madding Buls fits not their names, And set on fire these hote rebellious flames. Their Sword, the Word should be, the words interpretation, Their Key should be, this is the foundation, Whereon Christs Saints do fight, such men Christs sword do weare, Such do his holy keyes and Standard beare.
Oh Kings; the fathers blessed sonne then kisse; Psalme 2.The King of Kings, the Head of Heads he is, Who serues not him, not reignes, a shadow vaine And Cyphar is, learne this all by my Reigne: He'le neuer faile you whom a woman bore, Psalme 24.Away with Popes, to them set ope the doore: Set wide the Gate, shut forth these new made Kings, Let in the Lord, which with him Iustice brings. Deere England, mine owne Bowels, Daughter, Mother, Feare not this bulling Pious, or such other. What haue I done that Thou shouldst angry be? Oh England, cause th'art happy hatest thou me? Cause God by me so many gifts hath giuen, And I these gifts, on earth, God loath'd, in Heauen? Why do my English loue the Egyptian Pot? Why lookes on Sodome backe the wife of Lot? Whiles that my Sister was at Romish call, There was a Stage and Scoene most Tragicall: Religion was corrupted, all your Rite Diuine was stain'd, Faith wrapt in errors night, Home jarrs and strange, my Muse now shall not show, Euen I my selfe dranke cupps of Gall with you. Now Manna raines from Heauen, Heauenly food, Now floweth Peace and Ioy and euery Good: Hee that feedes Rauens makes my Lillyes flourish, Haires of my Head and Diadem doth nourish: Iuda's strong Lyon keepes our Lyons nest, The Romish Leo's but a fearefull Breast; Feare yee the Ensignes of a Mitred Priest? Can we with Sword, Keys, Club be ere opprest? Rather thanke Christ, pray him that he all euill He would resist, all Ambushes of th'Deuill,
Double your prayers to Christ that he would deigne T'assure your good and let no Rhombus reigne: Double your prayers for Church & purest Faith, Powre forth your prayers for Queene Elizabeth. I haue inserted this answere of Queene Eliza∣beth not onely for the worth of it, (though I hold it worthy to be written in Letters of Gold:) nor will I say that Philip King of Spaine was an instigastour of Pius Pope of Rome, to send that cursed Bull: But it was plaine and more then probable, that that Bull was the ground which set on fire the hearts of her Popish Romish-Subjects to rise in Rebellion against her; and sure I am that Spaine soone backed them, and subborned them in their Rebellion and cruell practises against her Sacred Person, and flou∣rishing State: Witnesse the Bead-roll of their cru∣ell Practises here following. In the yeare of our Blessed Sauiour 1583. and 25. of Queene Elizabeth her Reigne, Francis Throk∣morton, being sollicited by Bernardine Mendoza (the then Spanish Embassador Lieger, lying in Londō) vn∣dertook a most dangerous designe against his Dread Soueraigne and Natiue Country, which was to bring in a Forraine (Spanish) Army, and to alter Reli∣gion, with alienation of the Crowne and State: And for the charges of which attempt, the sayd Men∣doza promised that the King his Maister would beare halfe the charge of the Enterprize. In the next yeare, viz. 1584. William Parry, (as he named himselfe) being instigated by Benedicto
Palmio, & Christofero de Salazar, (Secretary to the Catholicke King Philip) vndertooke to mur∣ther her Sacred Maiesty, and one Haniball Codreto a Spanish Priest, approued the same Diabolicall Designe. In the yeare 1586. Babington and Ballard, and their fellowes, complotted with the aforesayd Mendoza, to betray the Land to a Spanish Invasion: Which being discouered, they enter into a new re∣solution to kill the Queene: Whereof they were preuented. But Phillip of Spaine, seeing that all former attempts fayled. In the yeare 1588. hee set for∣wards his long premeditated Invasion of England, sending a mighty Armado, which hee tearmed the Invinsible Nauy, meaning then, as it were, to de∣uoure England at a Bit: But hee found so many bones in the Bit, that in attempting to swallow it, they stucke so fast in his throate, that he was the worse for it euery day of his life after. This great, noble and invincible Army, (as Pope Sixtus termed it,) and Terrour of Europe, (as the Pa∣pals both terme it and tooke it to be) consisting of 134. Sayle of lofty Towring Ships, besides Gallies, Galliasses, and Gallions, threatning, as it were the Heauens; and spreading in the Wind their Flaggs, Streamers, and Ensignes, seemed to darken e∣uen the Sun; and were furnished with this provision following; Bullets for great shot 22000. Powder 40200. Kintalls, (euery kintall an hundred weight;) Lead for Bullets 1000. kintals; Match 10200. kin∣talls; Muskets and Calieuers 7000. Partizans and
Halbert 1000. besides murdering peeces, double Cannons, and Field-peeces for Campe, and store of Mules, Horses, and Asses: so as they were suffici∣ently provided by Sea and for Land: Bread and Bis∣ket was baked, and Wine layd aboord for sixe Moneths provision; Bacon 60500. kintalls; Cheese 3000. besides other flesh, Rice, Beanes, Peas, Oyle, and Vinegre, with 12000. Pipes of fresh water; store they had of Torches, Lanthornes and Lamps, Canuas, Hides, and Lead to stoppe leakes; butcherly kniues, iron ghiues, shackles, wire∣whipps, whips with spurre-rowels, and other tor∣turing instruments, intended to torment vs, old and young, (all such I meane as would not suddainly sub∣mit to the Spanish yoake.) This mighty Nauy thus prepared as you haue heard, loosed Anchor from Lisbone 19. Maij 88. and made to the Groine in Galizia, it being the nee∣rest Haven to England: whence, I say, hoysing sailes, with great hope and no lesse pride, bent their course hitherward: But suddainly the Heauens, hating such hostile actions, powred downe reuenge, by a sore and vnexpected Tempest, which draue the Duke of Medina (the chiefe Generall) backe againe into the Groine; and diuers others were dispersed and driuen vpon the Coast of Bayon in France, and there perished. Not long after, their Nauy neuer∣thelesse appeared in the Narrow-Seas, twixt Eng∣land and France, in manner of an halfe moone (the Arch-enemy of Christ his Ensigne:) where, our English Fleete gaue them such an encounter, (the God of the maine Ocean fighting for vs in the
Narrow-Seas) that we soone defeated and dispersed that Invincible Nauy, and made it Vincible. Now, because the Subject I am vpon is a Cata∣logue of Spanish cruelties, I would faine know whether there was euer inuented a greater Cruelty towards, and against a famous and flourishing State and Kingdome: Surely, in my judgement (which did concurre with the judgement of the Christian World) there was neuer such, and so great a cruelty hatched vnder Heauen as that Spanish Invasion 88. our Deliuerance from the which, hath made the yeare euer sithens famous and memorable; vp∣on my knowledge, when I was on earth, there was a Day set a part, and commanded by my Soue∣raigne, to be kept Holy, for that our great and mi∣raculous Deliuerance from the Iawes of the Spani∣ard; and I wish that your vnthankfulnesse in the neglect of Celebrating that Day, holy, be not requi∣red at some of your hands: And certes, those reue∣rend Divines that doe neuer cease in their publicke Prayers to giue God thankes for that your great De∣liuerance do shew their zeale not a little, and deserue double Commendation: Yea, and let my Posterity no longer liue and prosper, than so long as they haue thankefull hearts to God for that generall Deliue∣rance; and let the posterity of all Religious People say, Amen. For, all men and women, that would not haue bowed the knee to (Spanish) Ball, had then doubt∣lesse beene put to the sword, their children (now haply living, men and women) had beene tossed at the Pikes ends, or else their braines dashed out by
some ill-fac'd Donns or other: Strangers haue not beene wanting to commemorate that Time of Eng∣lands Deliuerance, and amongst others, I remember Reuerend and Religious Theodore Beza (of pious memory) wrote a sweet and patheticall poeme, gra∣tulatory, of the aforesayd Tragy-Comedy in Latine, inscribed to the Queene my Soueraigne, and sent vn∣to me to deliuer vnto her Royall hands: the which is thus excellently rendred in English: Spaines King with Nauies huge the sea's bestrewd, T augment with English Crowne his Spanish sway; Aske yee what caus'd this proud attempt? 'tas lewd, Ambition droue, and Avarice led the way. It's well; Ambitions windy puff lies drown'd By Winds, and swelling hearts, by swelling waues: It's well; the Spaniards who the worlds vast round Deuour'd, deuouring Sea most justly craues. But Thou, ô Queene, for whom Winds seas do warre, Oh Thou sole glory of the Worlds wide Masse, So reigne to God still, from Ambition farre, So stil with bounteous Aids the Good embrace. That Thou, England, long, long may England Thee enjoy, Thou Terrour of all Bad, Thou Good mens Ioy. Oh let the Remembrance of that Time haue an eternall being in the Mindes and Mouthes of Men. I haue beene somewhat long in the commemo∣ration of this part of my Catalogue of Cruelties, I now proceede to the Residue as followeth. In the yeare 1594. Rodericke Lopez Doctor of
Physicke, a Portugall by birth, (and entertained Phy∣sician in Ordinary to Queene Elizabeth) being insti∣gated by Christofero de Moro (a speciall Counsellour of King Philips) couenanted to take away the life of her Sacred Maiesty, by a poysoned Potion, for performance of which deede of darknesse, the said de Moro promised him 50000. Crownes, and hee had earnest giuen him, a Iewell of Gold with a Di∣mond and Ruby of rich valew: but that plot was detected by Gods providence, and Lopez receiued condigne punishment. In the yeare 1595. Edmund Yorke and Richard Williams, being set on worke by one Stefano Ibarra, King Phillips Secretarie at Bruxelles, who promised them the reward of 4000. Crownes vndertooke to kill the Queene by some meanes or other: but that also was detected by the vigilant eye of the English State, and they receiued the reward of their deserts. When King Phillip saw all his practises still fru∣strated, he, as audacious as ambitious, began to tam∣per with my Selfe, and by his Instruments sought out me as a fit man to betray both my sacred Soue∣raigne and deere Countrey: I forb to trouble your eares with the latitude of his large bumbasted Promises of reward vnto me to effect the same: but in lieu of accepting his cursed Proposition and offer, I vowed a further reuenge of him: and with my So∣ueraignes leaue and Gods assistance, I had performed what I vowed and intended, &c. The last publicke Attempter in my time, which in no wise I must forget, was one Edward Squire, who, being taken Prisoner in Spaine, was set on worke by
Walpoole the Iesuite, and other officers of King Phil∣lip to murther her sacred Maiestie, and my Selfe, which he vndertook, and brought ouer a new inven∣ted Castillian Confection: first, to poyson the Pom∣mels of her Maiesties saddle, and then the Pommels of a chayre wherein I vsually sate at sea, both which he fayled not to attempt: But by Gods goodnesse his cruell and treasonable attempts proued also suc∣cesselesse, and this proper Squire had the reward of his Diuellish practises. Of all these cruell Spanish practises, I was more than an ordinary witnesse: And these premisses con∣sidered, what Treason was euer attempted against her Maiesties sacred Person or flourishing State, but the Spaniard was at one end or other of it? Nay, since my time on Earth, and the death of her Maie∣stie, That horrid Gun Powder Plot, hatched in Hell, was it not consulted on and approued of in the Spa∣nish Kings Court? Looke well to the confessions of the Traytors:Speed, in Hist. pag. 1246. And did not King Phillip promise 100. thousand Crownes towards the expedition of that damnable deed of darknesse? Looke into your owne Chronicles. Now, all the Premisses wel weighed and conside∣red; Certes, the Turke ought not to be more hated and abhorred by Christendom than the Spani∣ard deserueth to be detested by Eng∣land, &c. Discite ô Mortales. Iterum in Christo Valete.
