C1567 E100_22 99859153 155869
THE CAVALIERS Catechisme: OR, The Reformed Protestant catechising the Antichristian Papists, Malignants, Incen∣diaries, and other ill-affected Per∣sons under the name of Cavaliers. WITH Their distinct Answer thereunto. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Watson. 1643.May .3.
The Cavaliers Catechisme. Question. WHat is your name? A. Cavalier. Qu. Who gave you that name? A. My seducers and deceivers, in my innocency, wherein I was made a member of the Church of Rome, and consequently a limb of Antichrist, an enemy to all goodnesse, the child of the divell, an inheriter of the king∣dome of darknesse, amongst the infernall spirits that rule in the ayre of this terrestriall globe. Qu. How were your Witnesses denomi∣nated? A. Lack-wit and Ignorance: for if they had wit and knowledge, they would not have gi∣ven the title of a Gentleman to a clowne or Corydon. Qu. What did your Witnesses promise you should perform when you came to maturity and ripe age, when you received your name?
A. That I should forsake all Piety and godli∣nesse, all vertue and purity, the true and Aposto∣lique Religion, grounded upon the verity of Gods word, that I should persecute all profes∣sors of the same, envy all goodnesse and good men, promote the Romish Religion and King∣dome of Antichrist, by any manner of meanes whatsoever, be it by treasonable plots against Princes or States, or by raysing publike Warre and sedition in Common-Wealths, and the like. Qu. Art thou able to doe these things of thy selfe, that were promised for the? A. No verily, but by the helpe of the rest of my fellow members received into that Con∣gregation, I doubt not to be inabled and streng∣thened to performe all that was promised on behalfe. Qu. What is meant by your name Cavalier? A. Knighthood, very unfit for me, for as I am told, it was a name first given to Gentlemen as an augmentation of honour, by the French∣men in the Warres, the word being derived of the French word Chivall, a Horse, by which Troopers or Horsemen in battaile were called Chevaliers, by corruption of speech in the pro∣cesse
of time, called by the English Cavaliers, now Cavallers, or Cavaleers, but by the better sort Cavaliers, by all which these particulars, may be collected, that as the world is now de∣generated from the true pronunciation of the o∣riginall word, so the naturall disposition of men are degenerated to the word now in use, Caval∣lers, or Cavaliers, for in our actions there is no solidity, nor in our speeches sobriety, nor in our hearts integrity, but all our arguments are main¦tained by cavelling, and our actions defended by bestiallity, and rude disorderly behaviour, like unto untamed horses, from whence we re∣ceived the first denomination, whose order is altogether to disorder and confound the warlike Rancks in Battaile, and to bring to confusion and destruction, is the onely sence they have of their present actions. Qu. Doe you conceive that the way you have been trained up and educated in from the time of your birth to this present, is to be defended by those meanes as you have bin taught? A. Yis truely, for these reasons, 1. In respect of the Commandements I have received from the Church▪ wherein I was received a member.
2 In respect of the danger I am told I shall fall into, and punishment I am worthy of, if I desert the service of that cause to which I have been devoted, and which my Witnesses inga∣ged themselves for me in my infancy, that I should uphold and maintain when I should come to age? Qu. What are the commandements you have learned, and that you conceive your selfe bound to observe and keep? A. These following. 1 That I should observe the will and plea∣sure of his Holinesse of Rome in all matters touching salvation, without the use of the Scriptures, they being by him counted defici∣ent, and have not sufficient instructions contai∣ned in them to lead a pious life, and bring to fu∣ture happinesse. 2 To commit treason against Kings that op∣pose his Holinesse, and reject his doctrinall tra∣ditions. 3 To commit fornication, adultery, rapine, and the like. 4 To reject the Christian Sabbath, and pre∣ferre the Jewish.
5. To admit of no lesse then seven Sacraments necessary to salvation. 6. To sweare, and forsweare, for the defence of the Catholique cause. 7. To cozen, deceive, and circumvent, our Neighbours for our own advantage. 8. To acknowledge no god greater, or more to be reverenced, and worshiped, then the Pope of Rome. 9. To worship and adore Images, as much as Christ himselfe. 10. To beare false witnesse against our neigh∣bour, for any occasion whatsoever. 11. For all which the Popes indulgent pardon is sufficient to preserve from damnation. 12. That there is no greater damnation, then the Popes curse, and excomumcation. Qu. Doe you believe all these precepts? A. Yis, and have and will to the losse of my life and fortunes, (if I had any) observe and keep them. Qu. What is a Sacrament according to the in∣struction of your Church? A. It is a signe of a thing signified, which we cannot discern with the Eye, but by the signe.
Q. Explain the same, according to your sence and knowledge? A. Then thus, by the signe of the Crosse is signified the cuncifying of ☞, by the picture of the Virgin Mary, we are taught that she was the Mother of  and queen of heaven, by the picture of the Apostles, we are taught to remember that they were the founders of the Church, & of that sanctity & power, that they are now in heavan able to cure the diseases of living Saints on earth, as they did when they were on Earth, and therefore we are us much bound to pray to them for helpe upon any ocasion, as to God, they knowing our wants, by a fellow feeling of our miferies when they lived with us, many other ex∣amples I could give, by which you may understand what we mean by Sacraments, Q. Then every Image or Picture, whether of Saints departed, Patriarkes, Prophets, or Apostles, are Sacra∣ments, and to be sacredly observed and kept? A. Yis verrily, and as much in esteem as the two Sa∣craments of Baptisme and the Supper. Q. Are these the things you now take up Arms for, against your Country, and seeke to bring the same to ut∣ter confusion and destruction? A. Yis, and will never give over so long as life lasteth till we have restored the use of these things in the Church of England, or loose our bodies in the enterprize, for our soules we have assured hope to have them saved after we have felt some small time of punishment in Purgatory, and his Holinesse, our chiefest hope and defence, come to heaven before us as a great Saint, and by his mediation and intercession, redeem us from that place of pain. FINIS
