C6110 E355_15 99861674 159898
THE COPY OF A Barbarous and Bloody DECLARATION BY THE IRISH REBELS, AGAINST The Supreame COUNCELL of JRELAND. AND The Votes of the Popish Assembly at Waterford against Peace. AND A Proclamation excommunicating the Clergie of Kilkennie, from saying Maskes, or executing any other Church-Offices. SEPTEMBER. the 28. This Declaration and Proclamation is examined, printed and published according to ORDER. LONDON Printed for N. E. Anno Dom. 1646.
A DECLARATJON BY THE Ecclesiasticall Congregation of both Clergies of Ireland, assembled together in the Name of the Holy Ghost at Waterford. Before the most Reverend Lord, the Archbishop Firmans, the Apostolicall Legate residing in Ireland. COncerning the Question between us debated, and disputed on many dayes together, whether they who accepted a Peace, contained in thirty Articles, transmitted to us by the supream Councell, were to be declared perjured, and consequently whe∣ther they should be excommunicated as perjured per∣sons:
The Opinions and the Reasons of every one being first heard, and the Writings of some Doctors of Divinitie read. It is ordered by one generall consent, and voted by all (no man gain saying it,) That all and singular confederate Catholiques, who shall adhere to the said Peace, or consent with the Favourers of it, or after any other manner, shall entertain and embrace it, are ab∣solutely to be accompted perjured, especially, for this reason, Because in those Articles there is no mention made of the Catholique Religion, and the securitie thereof, nor regard had of the conservation of the pri∣viledges of the Countrie, as it was promised by the Oath, But that all things are rather referred to the judgment of our most renowned King (from whom in this present estate, wee can have nothing setled,) And in the mean time, the Armies, Weapons, and For∣tifications, and the said supreame Councell of the con∣federate Catholiques it self, are subjected to the Au∣thoritie and Command of the Councell of the State, and the Protestant Officers of his Majestie, from whom that he might be secure, wee have taken that Oath: From which, and many other causes moved only by our own Consciences, and having God be∣fore our eyes, that it may be known to all and singu∣lar, as well Irish as Stranger, That we have not, nor will give our consent to such Peace, except safe con∣ditions, as well for our Religion, as for the King, and for the Countrie, according to our Oath bee offered unto us, And that our Flockes, and all our Ca holique People, with our confederate Friends, who in these generall meetings, have somtimes asked our advice in
this Spiritual businesse belonging only to a Spirituall Judge, may know certainly what hath been determi∣ned by us; to the end, that the godly and faithfull Catholiques, obeying their Shepheards and Pastors, may concur in the same sentence. We have commanded this Decree to bee written, and published in all places in the English and the Irish Tongue, which we have confirmed with our hands and Seals. But the other Question concerning Excom∣munication, we have referred untill the next Sessions. Given at Waterford the 12. day of August, 1646. Iohn Baptista Arch Epis∣copus Fermanus Nunti∣us Apostolicus. Frater. Thomas Dublin Thomas Cosselences Arch-Episcopus. Frater. Boetious Elpham. Fr. Pr. Waterford and Lis. Iohn Laoneus Episcopus. Frater. Iohn Claufortinsis Richara Ardfertensis, and Acadam Episcopus. Franciscus Aladencis E∣piscopus. Emund Lemerecenciis. Fr. Edm. Laghlen, Epis. Emerus Clog herencis. Frater. Nicholas Formensis. Frater. Iacobus Conald Abbas Benehoram. Frater. Pr. Plunketus, Abbas B. M. Dublin. Frater. Lorentius Fitz. Harris Abbas desunio. Frater. Iohn Cantnell Abbas desancto cruce. Iacobus Tobin Abbas de Kilcole. Robertus Barry Vicarus A∣postolicus Rossensis Do∣naldus;
Frater. Donaldus Agrippá Fuinburences Frater. Gregorus offarel prior provincialis ord: Predicate Dionisius o-Briscoll prior provincialis Eremitarum Sancti Augustini. Edmundo-Teg procura∣tor Illustriff: Armacha in Cornell. Gualter Lincheus Vi∣charius Apost: Tuamen∣sis. Gulielin: Bargat vicar. Apost: Immolacensis. Iames Dempshi: Vicar: Gener: Kilder: Cornel. Gasneas Adensis: Vic. Ge∣ner. Oliverus Deise Vic: Ge∣ner Midencis. Dominicus Roch Vic: Gener Gorcagiencis. Symono-Connory Vic: Gener Cluonensis. Edmund Gerardius Vic: Gener Cluonensis. Carolus Cogham Vic: Gener Cluonensis. Frater. Robertus Nugen∣tius superior societatis Je∣su Barnabas Barnwal Com∣missarius Generalis Ca∣pucinorum.
A Proclamation from the Bishop of Os∣sory, excommunicating the Clergie of Kilkennie, for adhering to the Peace concluded between the Councell, and the Marquesse of Ormond. WHereas wee have in publike and private meeting, at several times declared to the supreame Councell, and others whom it might concern, That it was and is unlawfull, and a∣gainst Conscience; yea, implying perjurie (as it hath been designed by a speciall Act of the Convocation now at Waterford) to do or concurre to any Act ten∣ding to the approbation or countenancing of the pub∣lication of this unconscionable and mischievous Peace so dangerous (as it is now Articled) to both Common-wealths, Syirituall and Temporall, but more particularly to the Spirituall. And whereas, notwithstanding our Declaration of the whole Clergie of the Kingdome to the contrarie, the supreame Councell and Commissioners have act¦ually proceeded to the Proclamation of it, yea, and forced on the Citie by terrour and threates, rather
then by any free consent, or desire of the people. We having duly considered, and taken to heart, as it becometh, how envious this Fact both is, and ap∣pears in Catholiques even against God himself, And what publike contempt of the holy Church it appea∣reth, besides the evills it is like to draw on this poore Kingdome. After mature deliberation, and consent of our Clergie (in detestation of this heinous and scandalous disobedience of the supream Councell) and others who adhere unto them in a matter of Conscience to∣wards the holy Church, and in hatred to so wilfull an abominable an Act, do by these presents (accor∣ding to the prescription of sacred Canons) pronounce and command (from henceforth) a generall Cessati∣on of divine Officers throughout all the City and Suburbs of Kilkennie, in all Churches, Monasteries, and houses in them whatsoever. Given at Our Palace of Nova Curia, the 18. day of August, 1646. FINIS.
