D1447 E522_21 99865389 117629
The Royall Apologie: OR, AN ANSWER TO THE DECLARATION OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, the 11. of February, 1647. In which they expresse the Reasons for their Resolutions for making no more Ad∣dresses, nor receiving any from HIS MAJESTY. AT PARIS, Imprinted in the Yeere, 1648.
TO MY GOOD COUNTRY-MEN of ENGLAND, and fellow-Subjects of SCOTLAND, & IRELAND. I Shall not in this Epistle tell you, that by the Word of God, he that resisteth the Powers or∣dained over us, shall receive to himselfe Dam∣nation; nor that by the Law of the Land, it is High Treason to levy War against the King, to depose Him from the Government, to imprison Him, to adhere to His Enemies, to reforme Him by force, or to doe any thing with intention to alienate the Hearts and affections of the People from Him; neither shall I tell you that it is Perjury, and against our solemne Oathes and Protestations, not to beare unto the King true Faith and Allegeance, and not to defend His Person and Honour, and not to maintaine all His just Rights. I shall onely put you in mind of that, which, if we were no Christians but Heathens, if we had no regard of Lawes or Oathes, yet as Men, would bind us, which is the Law of Nature, by which we are taught, to doe as we would be done unto. Let every man in his owne particular consider, that if he were accused of Tyranny and Oppression, of all sorts of cruelties, of intending bloody Massa∣cres, of mercylesse Torturings, of Perjury, of a continued Track of Falshood, and breach of Vowes and Promises through his whole life, of conniving at his Fathers death, and dishonouring of his Mo∣ther, and in them all, not one word of truth; would he not think it a most barbarous, irrationall, and inhumane proceeding, that he
should not onely be used as if he were guilty of them all, but that he should be rendred odious to the world, and infamous to posterity, without ever being heard or admitted to the means of making any Answer, whereby to cleare his Innocency and Honour? This is your Kings case, who notwithstanding this libellous Declaration, and His great misfortunes, is one of the most pious, temperate, couragi∣ous, and just Princes that our Nation ever had. If He may be affor∣ded no other right, let Him not be denyed that naturall Justice which every man would think due unto himselfe, of not being condemned unheard and undefended; for whatsoever is set downe in this An∣swer, is but one private mans knowledg and information; But when you shall see the Kings owne perfect Answer, I am most confident your hearts will be on fire to see so good a King so ill used.
IN regard that some particulars relating to the same matter, are spoken of in severall places of this Declaration, for the avoyding of confusion in the Answer, they are answered together; so that in some things the place of them is not exactly kept, but sometimes that which is before in the Declaration, is after in the Answer, therefore in this Index each particular is set down, and in what page the answer to it shall be found. THe Introduction. Page 1, 2 That their former Addresses to the King have been fruitlesse. 3 They could have no confidence that words should be more perswasive with the King, then sighs and groanes, &c. 4 That they have made seven Addresses to the King. ibid. In what sort the Scotch Commissioners joyned with them; and the Reasons why they conceal the Scots present dissent from them. 5, 6 That the King never made any offer fit for them to accept. 7 They say, they cannot expect that new ingagements should prevaile more with the King then His Oath of Coronation, and severall other Vowes which He hath frequently broken. 8 That the King in His Speeches and Declarations hath laid a fit maxime for all Tiranny, by avowing that He oweth account of His Actions to none but God. 9 The match with Spain. 10 The Kings having an Agent at Rome. ibid. The passages concerning the death of King James. 10, 11, 12, 13 Touching the betraying of Rochell. 13, 14 The bringing in of German Horse. 15 Torturing of our bodies with rackes and pillories, &c. 15, 16 The Lording over mens souls. 17 Searching of Cabinets. ibid. Monopolies and Ship-money. 18 The Kings summoning this present Parliament to have assistance against the Scots. 19 The King so passionately affected to His malignant Counsellors, that He would rather desert His Parliament and Kingdome, then deliver them to Law and Justice. 19, 20, 21 The bringing up of the Northern Army. 21, 22 The Rebellion of Ireland answered together. 23, 24, 25, 26 The Kings denying of Commissions to the Lord Wharton, & Lord Brook. 26 They say they need not tell the world how the Scots entred the Kingdom. ib.
The Lord Digby's attempting the Country with armed Troops. 26 The Lord Digby's man hiring a Skipper to be Pilot to a Fleet preparing in Den∣marke. 27 The Kings Letters to the K. of Denmark touching the Queen his Mother. ib. That the King sent away with the Qu. the ancient Jewels of the Crown. ib. The King sent a specious Message of renewing a Treaty, but His Messenger was to have managed a bloody Massacre. pag. 27, 28 Touching the Kings march to Brainford. pag. 28 The Kings denying to receive their Petitions. ibid. All things concerning the Queen answered together. pag. 28, 29 Touching the Letters written to the Pope. pag. 30 The Kings offer of the plunder of London, and foure Northerne Counties to the Scots. pag. 30, 31 Fire works found in Papists houses. pag. 31 Of putting the Tower into such hands at the City could not confide in. ib. The Track of open force begun in the Kings coming to the House, and charging some Members of Treason. 32 That the King entred into the Councel-booke, that the calling of them a Parlia∣ment did not make them so. 33 Their standing amazed at the Kings solemne Protestation of having no thought to make War against his Parliament, &c. ibid. That the King endeavoured to get Powder and Cannon out of Hull. ib. That the King proclaimed them Traitors and Rebels, and set up his Standard against his Parliament. 34 That the King called a Mock-Parliament at Oxford. ib. The Kings breach of Trust with the Protestants of France, Scotland, Ireland, &c. and His endeavours to enslave them by German, Spanish, French, Da∣nish, &c. 35 That the King having protested that He would never consent to a Toleration of the Popish Religion, nor taking away the Lawes against Recusants, did yet by His Letters signifie His consent to the taking of them away. ib. That notwithstanding that the Houses and Scotch Commissioners did declare that they held a Personall Treaty not safe, yet the Houses yeelded to it. 36 That they intimate that the signing of the foure Bils was onely for their security during the Treaty. ib. Of the justnesse, honourablenesse, and necessity of the foure Bils. 37, 38 That in refusing this their last Application, the King hath forgot His duty to the Kingdome. 39 That for these reasons they have taken these resolutions and votes, to have no more to doe with His Majesty, and to settle the Kingdom without Him. 40 The Conclusion, setting down the falshood, fraud, and malice of all that is said in this Declaration. 40, 41, 42
The Royall Apology. OR, An ANSWER to the DECLARATION of the House of Commons of the 11. of Feb. 1647. in which they expresse the Reasons of their Resolutions for making no more Addresses, nor receiving any, From His Majesty. WHen the Son of Croesus who had never spoken (being borne dumbe) saw his father ready to be destroyed, nature brake open all those ligaments that had formerly tyed up his tongue, & he cryed out, That his Father might be saved: The King that ought to be the common Father of us all, & is stil of his Loyall Subjects, is upon the point of being destroyed; He is deposed from his right of Governing, close imprisoned, and no Addresses either to Him, or from Him is admitted; and which is more, His honour and Inno∣cency which are dearer to him then his Life, are indeavour'd by this wicked and false Declaration (made by the House of Commons) to be blasted, and Himself rendred to His people and to Posterity, the most odious and de∣testable of Men, and the most tyrannicall of Kings, whilst He himself is de∣tained in close prison, and in likelyhood kept ignorant of what is said, or working against Him; Or if He (for His further vexation) have notice of what He is accused, all meanes of clearing Himself, and vindicating. His honour are debarred Him; His Papers of the Transaction of Affaires kept from Him; the accesse of any of His Secretaries, or His Privy Coun∣sell, or Counsell of Law not admitted. The Houses when they impeach the most capitall Offenders even of high Treason, in such Cases the supposed Delinquents are allowed Tran∣scripts of their Accusations, Counsell in the point of Law, and a convenient time for the publishing of their Answer; and this was afforded unto the Earle of Strafford, the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and is now to the six Lords impeached of high Treason; & is a Justice not denyed to Traitors & Mur∣derers? But how it can be afforded to the King, I cannot see, since He him∣self can make no addresse whereby to obtain it, and no man else may upon
Paine of death make any Addresse unto him to receive his directions. This certainly may be a sufficient motive to any man, nay to all men, as it hath been to me, in this distresse and oppression of the King, to set down what is in their knowledge and reason toward the confuting of those ma∣licious Aspersions cast upon him by this Declaration, untill God shall give the King means by his own full and perfect Answer to blow back the poy∣sonous and infectious vapours into the faces of that prevalent Party (that with Art and Terrour carried this Declaration) to their perpetuall infamy and shame: And in the interim, I shall desire that this may be received but onely as a preparative to keep the mindes of men from being too much carried away with one story untill the other Tale be told. THe Scope of this Declaration is expressed to be, to set down the Rea∣sons for these ensuing Resolutions. 1. That they will make no farther Addresses nor Applications to the King. 2. That no Application nor Addresses be made to the King by any Person whatsoever, without the leave of both Houses. 3. That they will receive no more any Message from the King, & do enjoyn that to Person whatsoever do presume to receive, or bring any Message from the King to both or either House of Parliament, or to any other Person. 4. That the Person or Persons that shall make breach of this Order, shall in∣cur the Penalties of high Treason. So that it may be justly expected that this Declaration shall lay down unto the people whom they intend to satisfie, such Reasons as may justifie the said Votes, with the Consequences and proceedings thereupon. And the way to make plaine the strength of their Argument, is, to set it down plainly, which must run thus; A King having committed those crimes which are set down in this De∣claration, the Houses may remove from the Government, imprison Him, and debar all Addresses to him and from him, as they have done. But King CHARLS hath committed these crimes; and so the Houses may proceed against Him, as they have done. When a clear Answer shall be made unto this Argument, the debate will be brought unto a shorter issue, and the people before whom the seene now lieth, will have an easie way to frame a Judgement, whether they ought to be satisfied with the proceeding of the Houses, [as is pretended by this Declaration,] or whether they shall not have just cause to detest and abo∣minate both their Declaration and their Proceedings. The Answer briefly is, That both Propositions are false; The first, that a King doing those things laid down in this Declaration may be removed from the Government, imprison'd, &c. by the Houses. The second is, That King Charls hath done the things alleadged in this Declaration; But because the second Proposition is that which this De∣claration endeavours cheifly to infer and make good, This Answer shall
first insist upon the truth or falsehood of the matters of fact; viz. Whether the King have done the things suggested? And afterward shew briefly, the Impiety, danger, and Treasonablenesse of the first; viz. That subjects may upon Suggestions, if true as they are false, depose their King. THE entrance into this Declaration is in these Words; How fruitlesse our former Addresses have been to the King, is well known unto the World. It is willingly left unto the Judgement of the World to whom they ap∣peal, whether the Addresses of the Houses [whilst their Addresses were made unto the King in such dutifull and sober manner as Subjects, yea even the Houses themselves ought to addresse themselves unto their King] were fruitlesse, when so many things have by the King been this Parliament con∣descended unto, as have enforced them to acknowledge in some of their Publike Declarations, That the King hath granted more for the liberty and ease of his people, then had been granted by any of his Predecessors; I think with truth it might have been said, then all of them; and it will not be amiss to set down some of them; The high Court of Star-Chamber; The high Commission, and five Courts more of Justice, all established by Law (pre∣tended to be for the ease of the people, but apparently much to the lesse∣ning of the Authority of the Crown) have been wholly abolished; an Act for a trienniall Parliament; another for the taking away of the Kings un∣doubted Power of dissolving this, without the Consent of the Houses; an Act for regulating the power of the Councel Table, according to their own desires; an Act for the taking away the Bishops Votes in Parliament; an Act for the bounding and limiting of Forrests; others for the restraining of the King to lay Impositions, to levy Tonnage and Poundage, or to Presse Souldiers without consent of Parliament. All these with ma∣ny more have been the fruits of their former addresses unto the King; And now if they finde any stop or refusall in what they propound, it is not for that the Kings inclination and readiness to gratifie his people is lessened or alter'd; but it is that they have altered their mannerly and dutifull wayes of their Addresses, and now will force by Armes and Victories what they had wont to petition for. And for the matters desired, whereas before there was in them a pretence of the Kings honour and safety, and of the Subjects ease and liberty, in the Propositions now insisted upon, it is cleerly apparent, That the King is by them unthroned; The Soveraignty taken from Him, and placed in themselves; And the Subject (which if they would have con∣tented themselves with the above specified Concessions, should have been the happiest and freest people of all the Subjects in Christendom) shall (if the King should condescend to their late demands) become Slaves in their Liberties, Lives, and Properties, by being left to the arbitrary and lawless Power of them, their fellow Subjects; and this is so beleived by all men but themselves and their Adherents, even by their brethren of Scotland, which hath administred unto them just grounds of their dissenting from them; as
shall be made apparent before this discourse be ended. Whereas they say next, That they could not have confidence that words should prevaile more with Him then Sighs and Groanes, &c. Let the world judge whether these men at ease and invested with all Power and Authority, are more likely to be moved with sighs and groans, cries of Fathers, & Mothers, & Children, &c. or the King who is debarr'd the society of the Queen his most dear Wife; his Children banish'd or un∣der restraint; His Friends ruin'd, destroyed, and persecuted; and some for their love and Loyalty to His Person, hang'd, drawn, and quarter'd; and all in danger of it, that shall in any sort indeavour to serve him; Himselfe divested of all manner of comfort either for His body or Soul; besides the tender sense that he must needs have of the miseries of his people: must not the World conclude the King not only to be void of all naturall affe∣ctions, and all bowels of compassion, both towards Himself, and all that are nearest and dearest unto Him, but to want also common sense and un∣derstanding, if He should not imbrace all meanes that with honour and conscience He might, for the speediest settlement of the distracted and mi∣serable condition of himself, and His Kingdomes? It is then said, that they were never forced to any Treaty, and yet they have made seven times application to the King, notwithstanding their great success in overthrowing all His forces, so that he fled in disguise to the Scots. It is true, that they so well laid their businesse, that at the first they pos∣sessed themselves of the power of all the Kingdom both by sea and land; of the City of London; and of the Kings Customs; of his Revenue; of His Magazins; and of the abused hearts of his people; whereas the King wanting every thing but a good cause, hath from the beginning only struggled to subsist: But let not Successe against the King be vanted of; Successe is not alwaies a Proof of a good Cause, God hath often punish'd his Church by the power of Infidels, and made wicked men the Scourge wherewith he hath chastised his Children, and then cast the rod into the fire, and lifted up the heads of his afflicted Servants. Whereas they say, That they have made 7. times applications unto the King for Peace, Their own consciences (I mean so many of them as have been be∣hind the Curtain) do tell them, That so many times they have offended God, and abused the World with detestable Hypocrisie, by making shew of that which was never in their thoughts: And all the said Treaties which they speak of, were ever with those unreasonable, unconscionable, & disho∣nourable Propositions, that they well knew that their Intentions of conti∣nuing of a War could run no hazard by such Proposals for Peace; yet who∣soever shall peruse all those severall Treaties which are with great exact∣nesse set down in their own Books (and printed by their own Order) of Exact Collections, will to be able judge of the difference of Spirits then walking; In them instead of Reasons, it will be found that improbable fu∣ture
fears and jealousies, and the advantage of their present Condition, have been the ground of their Proposals; And on His Majesties part there will be clearly seen, a bowing and stretching to a Compliance with them, to the utmost that could stand with his Conscience, Safety, and Honour: To these Volumes of theirs, I refer the Reader, that seeing both sides, he may frame unto himselfe a Judgement where the fault lies, if their Addresses have been fruitlesse. To countenance no more their former Treaties, and the Conditions proposed in them, they further say, That in all their former Addresses the Commissioners of Scotland agreed with them, and joyned with their Commissio∣ners in attending the King. In which Affirmation they do not use the ingenuity and clearness which the House hath in former Parliaments used to do, in that which they pub∣lished unto the Kingdom; for although it be true, that the Commissioners of Scotland agreed to the sending of the Propositions unto the King at Newcastle, yet in their publike printed Declaration of their said consent, bearing date the 25. of June 1646. they declare their want of satisfaction in many particulars; in so much as they say, That some of the particulars are inconsistent with the word of God, and others wherein they remain unsatisfied: yet notwithstanding so great was their desire to see an end of this bloody war, & the easing of those heavy pressures under which both the Kingdoms groaned, that up∣on those Considerations they consented to many materiall parts of those Propositi∣ons; & to make no let, but to give way to the sending of such other particulars, as they were still unsatisfied in the matter, for the reasons formerly presented in their Papers unto the Houses. And this their Assent they declare to be with several proviso's, as will appear by their said Answer; The last of which, is, that it is not their Judgement that every particular of these Propositions is of so great im∣portance to the Kingdoms, that Peace and War should depend thereupon. Now let it be impartially judged, whether it be an ingenious manner of proceeding, to set down a perfect consent, & to conceal the conditions, and proviso's, upon the which the Scots declare their consent, is grounded. But that which is most remarkable concerning the Scots, is, that having thus artificially insinuated to the people their former concurrence with them, now when they make their Declaration to the Kingdome, for the stating truly of the whole businesse, and the reason for having no more to do with the King, grounded upon the Kings last Answer concerning the four Bils, they remember not in this their finall Declaration, the dissent of the Scots; nor their unanswerable Reasons for their said dissent; nor the Protestations of the said Commissioners delivered unto the King in the name of the Kingdom of Scotland, declaring their dissent to those Propositions; for the not yeilding whereunto, the King is not only by these Votes de∣posed in effect, and another government without Him set up by them∣selves, but His Royall Person used with greater severity, & inhumanity, then
theeves, and murderers are in the common gaols; for to them it is permit∣ted to have the comfort of Physitians for the body, and of Divines for their souls, whereas to the King there is no meanes left to aske them. The reason why they conceal this dissent of the Scots, is, for that they would have the Kings refusall of the Bils, to be ascribed only to his wil∣fulnesse, and to his persisting in his wonted wayes (as they call it;) but would not have the people thinke that the King had many of his mind; where∣as if the truth might appear, it would be found, that few besides that pre∣valent party in the lower House, and Army, with the Sectaries depending on them, that hold not their Propositions most unreasonable, and their usage of the King most detestable. Further, if the former assent, and concurrence of the Scots with them, be used as an argument for the countenancing, and better justifying of their former Treatise and Propositions; their present dissent, and their unanswe∣rable reasons set down in their Declaration against the four Bils, against their deniall of the King a Personall Treaty, and against his want of free∣dom, together with their solemn Protestation grounded upon them, in the name of the whole Kingdome, ought in reason at least to put a stand upon mens judgements untill all tales be told; and not be carried away by a Declaration of the single House of Commons, without the concurrance of the Peers; and not passed unanimously in that House, but by the power of a prevalent party. For whosoever shall consider the former brotherhood, and strict union betwixt the Houses and the Scots; and how subservient they have been unto them, and their affaires; how they have twice entred this Kingdom, The first time by their invitement, The second time by their most earnest solicitation and hire; and how the Scots choose rather the adherence to them, then unto their owne native King; how far they gratifie them by delivery of him into their hands; and how they were become brothers in Interests, in Armes, in Covenant; whosoever shall consider this strict conjunction, cannot but thinke that the Scots have some great reason of Conscience, Interest, and Honour, for their present deserting of them in these their new demands, and rigorous way of proceeding with the King. The nation hath seldom been charged with want of prudence or dexte∣rity in their actions; & the Houses have found (as to them) great justness, and punctuality in their proceedings; by comming in according to agree∣ment, and by going out according to promise; but now finding not onely their Covenants and Agreements cluded, but the very grounds and true ends for which they say they entred into Covenant, and joyntly took up Armes, viz. The reformation and conformity in Religion, the defence of the Kings Person, honour, and just greatnesse, with the Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, &c. If they now find that the ways which the now prevalent par∣ty do pursue, are destructive to them all, and diametricall opposite to these
settlements which they have alwayes declared to intend; as if instead of conformity in Religion there shal be brought in, & tolerated a multitude of Heresies and Sects; If instead of the Kings honour, safety, and greatnesse, they that have had more then a hundred Kings, shall see Monarchy inten∣ded to be levelled, and the person of their native King, worse used then a thief, or murtherer in a Gaole; If they shall see all Law, Liberty, & proper∣ty of the Subject, endeavoured to be settled under the arbitrary tyrannicall Power of a prevalent party, and an over-awing Army; If all these things be, who can wonder if the Scots have changed their way, and concurrence, when they find all those Principles upon which they were engaged, to be totally changed. It hath therefore been wisdom in this Declaration, to mention the Scots former concurrence, and to passe by their present dissent, the cause where∣of they knew will not indure the searching. They then say, the King never made any offer fit for them to accept: It seems the Scots are of another mind, who declare their judgements to be, that his offers from Carisbrooke-Castle might have given satisfaction. But since they will never remember any thing, but that which is for their advantage, it will be fit to put them in mind of some petty slight offers, that by the King have been made unto them, leaving aside his generall Request unto them. That they would set down together all such means as would give them satisfacti∣on, whereunto they should recive a gracious and satisfactory answer, to all that they could justly or reasonably desire; but this being in January, 1642. time may have worne it out of memory: But they may remember his offers from Holdenby, from Hampton-Court, and from Carisbrooke-Castle, In them He offered the settling of Religion in the Presbyterian way (which was that which themselves had Voted) for three years, and then to be fully settled as should be agreed on by their owne assembly of Divines, only with the addition of twenty to be nominated by Himself, to the end that before a full and finall settlement all reasons might be heard, yet no doubt might be raised of carrying any thing by plurality of Votes, since those nominated by them∣selves, were four times the number. He hath offered, to put the whole power of the Kingdom both by sea and land into their hands, during the whole terme of His Reigne. And for the civill Government, he hath offred them, the nomination of all those Ministers by whom the Kingdome is to be governed. He hath offred, a generall pardon & an Act of oblivion; which is an impor∣tant point, if that be true which Sir Edw. Cooke, Judge Jenkins, and all the books of Law do tell us; or that the Army have not changed their minds, who a few moneths since did declare, that no Indempnity could be safe with∣out the Royall assent, and that they would not be satisfied with any other. He hath offred 400000. Pounds, to be pay'd in the space of one year and an halfe, for the payment of the arrears of the Army: But all these trifles are not
worthy to be remembred, although their memory doth serve them better, when they come to make up the Catalogue of these false and scandalous reproaches, wherewith they revile their King, the Lords Anointed. But whereas they say, That the Kings offers are not fit for them to accept; in that certainly they declare the truth, if they make their own unlimited aimes, and ambitions, the measure of what is fit for them; for they will no wayes content themselves, with such a narrow and unlimited Soveraignty as our former Kings have had, restrained in our Laws, in our liberties, & in our proprieties; but they pro arbitrio wil levy what forces they please, with∣out limitation of number, or distinction of persons, or quality; raise what moneys they please, for the support of this their military dominion; and make what lawes they list, without any other assent but their own, and remain everlastingly a representative of the people, whether they will or not; so that really making their aimes and intentions the measure of what is fit for them to accept, no offers or conditions can be fit for them, that shall not establish them in a more absolute power and dominion then ever any King of England had; or any King of Christendome hath; or the Grand Seignior himselfe doth practice. They then say, They cannot see how it should be expected, that a new engage∣ment could prevaile on Him, or engage Him more, then the solemn Oath at His Coronation, with severall other vowes, protestations, and imprecations, so fre∣quently broken by Him, during His whole Reign. Let it be calmly considered of, whether this be a modest, and decent way of a House of Commons, thus upon generals to charge their King as a perjured man, whom they have ever professed they would make a glo∣rious King; especially when their said charge is as false in the matter, as shamefull in the manner; for they are not able to fix upon the King any one particular, wherein He hath broken His Oath or Protestation, when the truth of the fact, and circumstances, shall be truly set down on the be∣halfe of the King, as well as their false relations of the said fact, with their inferences, strains, and malitious glosses thereupon, and doubtlesse if the King were not highly punctuall, & religious in the observance of the said Oath, He would not suffer those miseries & hazards which He doth, rather then infringe it. But let the breaking of Oaths & Protestations, be with equality looked upon; let the obligation of their naturall Allegiance, the Oathes of Supre∣macy and Allegeance, without taking whereof they cannot be Members of their House; Let the solemn Protestation taken by them at the beginning of this Parliament, in which they did promise, vow, and protest in the presence of God, with their life, power, & estate, according to the duty of their Allegeance, to maintain, and defend His Majesties Royall Person, Honour & Estate; which, how well it hath been performed, let their own consciences tell them. Let their Solemne League and Covenant taken with their hands lifted
up to God never to depart from that blessed union & conjunction, as they shall answer it in the presence of God, the Searcher of all hearts, at the dreadfull day of judgement, how they have kept it, let their brethren of Scotland tell them; & M. Martin who stiles it, an Almanack of the last year, & out of date; and the Answer of the Scots Declaration, that termeth it absurd, & hypocriticall; humane, & so alterable. Let them remember all these, and their often repeated Protestations of making the King a glorious King, and consider their present usage of His Person, & their endeavours by this Declaration, of rendring Him infamous to the world, and to all posterity. Let them likewise consider that their present animosity against the King, is cheifly because they cannot make Him consent to be perjured. He hath sworn to maintain the Laws; to protect His Subjects; to defend the Church; to maintain the Religion established by the Laws; to uphold the just rights inherent in the Crown, or legally thereunto annexed; and because He will not consent to be perjured in them all, (which He must be, if He should consent to their demands) He must be declared unworthy to governe; and (as hath been said by some among them) not worthy to live; be close imprisoned, and debarred of all comforts of life. God in his due time will be Judge between them and the King, and so will be all sober and disinterested men. Then they say, That the King in His publick Speeches and Declarations, hath laid a fit foundation for all tiranny, by this most destructive maxime or principle, which He saith He must avow, That HE OWETH AN ACCOUNT OF HIS ACTIONS TO NONE BUT GOD ALONE; AND THAT THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT JOYNT OR SEPARATR HAVE NO POWER TO MAKE OR DECLARE ANY LAW. For the first part of this Maxime, the King avoweth but that which the Law of God and the Law of England avoweth; and what all the Mo∣narchs and States of Christendom, that have Soveraign & Supream power will avow; and would punish as high and capitall offenders, any that should avow the contrary. As for the second clause, the King hath often declared, That He doth not pretend to the making of Laws singly of Him∣selfe, but by the advice and consent of the two Houses: neither can the Houses joynt or separate, nor He with the consent of either House alone, make a Law, but there must be a concurrence of all three: The two Hou∣ses first to consent and pray, and then the King maketh it a Law, by his declaring the Royall assent by Le Roy le veut. As for the declaring of the Law, that it is the interpreting of the Law in dubiis & obscuris, vel si aliqua dictio duos contineat intellectus: If the words of the Law be doubt∣full and obscure, or may bear two senses; the Iudges in their Courts may interpret and declare the meaning of the Law, and the same is done in Par∣liament upon Writs of Error; but that is in the high Court of Parlia∣ment
before the King and the Lords, and not before the Commons, who are no Court: But this Declaration must not be understood of plain and cleer cases, nor to the overthrowing of the literall sense, nor of the e∣quity of the Law; otherwise to declare and to make a Law, were all one in effect. But not to enter upon any moot Case, or contestation of a Law point, Let it be judged, whether upon this Maxime, it be a sober or dutifull expression, that the King hath laid a foundation for all tiranny; but especially whether from this charge any just or colourable ground may be laid, for the justifying of their Votes, or their present proceeding with the King. They then speak of the Articles for the intended match with Spain, which were treated of 25 yeers since by King James; And likewise of the Articles of the match with France, which certainly should be without their cognizance, for the Houses of Parliament have declared often, the the making of peace and war, and the marriage of the Kings Children, belong wholy to the King; And it is well known that Queen Elizabeth inprisoned a Member of the House of commons, for presuming to speak in that House concerning Her marriage. And the Articles of the marriage with France, were likewise agreed by King James before His death; but howsoever, it is a great audacity in the House of Commons, singly, (after more then 20. yeers, and many intervenient Parliaments that would never presume to meddle with the Kings marriage, nor the treaty thereupon) now to draw arguments from thence, whereby to dis-affect the people to the King; but that they wil leave no corner unswept, nor action unstrained, whereby they may render the King lesse beloved. And as for keeping a continued correspondency with Rome, or having an Agent of His there (as is alleaged in this Declaration;) it is most false. The Queen perhaps may have had and maintained some person there, for such things as she held necessary for Her, in point of Her devotion; & it is well-known, that concerning the affairs of the Princes of Christendome, from no place so perfect knowledge and intelligence could be got as from Rome; & Q. Elizabeth, and King James (that were wise Princes, & no Pa∣pists) were of that minde, and were at no small charge to hold correspon∣dency from time to time with every eminent person of that Court, with∣out the leave of the House of Commons, being a body not well modell'd for secrecy, consisting of near five hundred persons; But the hatred to the Pope & Rome is such, that it was thought the very naming of them, would reflect with some hatred upon the King, which was that which was only aimed at. Then they come to plant their maine piece of battery, or indeed rather to worke in their Mine, whereby they would blow up the Ho∣nour of His Majesty, in order to the making of Him a glorious King; by calling to minde, and reviving the pastages in the Parliament, the second
year of His Reign, concerning the death of his Royall Father as they terme it; whereas in all their impeachment against the Duke of Bucking∣ham, they did never so, much as accuse him, or lay to his charge the death of King James; but only called that which he had done, an audacious Action; & voted that he should be accused only of a misdemeanor of so high a nature, as might justly be called, & so was deemed by the said Commons to be, an Act of a transcendent presumption, & dangerous consequence; & for such, transmitted it to the Lords. But now conceiving it would be much for their turn, to have it insinuated & let into the people, that amongst the Articles of their Declaration against the King, one was touching the death of His Father, for so they stile it, viz. The proceeding and passages of Parliament con∣cerning the death of His Royall Father, the passages whereof shall be truly related in the subsequent Narration. King James fell sick in the spring 1625. and His sicknesse began with an ordinary tertian intermittant Ague, which is not held mortall, especially in the Spring; but the King having a full body, & hard to be ruled or go∣verned by his Physitians in His sicknesse, His tertian turned into a continu∣all feaver, whereof he dyed. In the time of His sicknesse, certain plaisters and posset-drinks were ap∣plyed & given to Him, such as are ordinarily used to be given by women in the country; for that men seldome apply themselves to Physitians in ordinary Agues, but to such received and known medicins as are common∣ly used; and these were said to be given by the Duke of Buckinghams pro∣curement, and prepared in his lodgings, without the direction or know∣ledge of the Physitians, untill after they had been administred unto the King: After almost two years (there having been in the interim a Par∣liament, and nothing stirred in the businesse) the Duke of Bukingham ha∣ving much distasted the Houses, and they being highly incensed against him, a ready ear was given to all complaints, that might afford any pro∣bability of questioning of him and his actions; And there were severall Articles by way of impeachment exhibited against him to the House of Peers; and among them, one was touching the Dukes administring of drinks and plaisters, without the consent or knowledge of the Physitians; & many Physitians and others were examined, and it was with great vehe∣mency pressed, that there might have been an accusation of Treason drawn up against him thereupon. But when the said Article came to be Voted in the House of Com∣mons, and the case and evidence had been truly stated before them by Sir Dudley Diggs, who, with Master Wansford and others, had the managing of that Article of their charge, the House did hold it fit that he should not be impeached of Treason (the evidence indeed not bearing it) but only of a transcendent presumption, as is truly set down in their Declaration; but if there had been any the least ground, or evidence of any wicked inten∣tion
in the Duke to destroy the King, or any Symptoms that the Kings death had been caused or hastned by those things that were given; or that the said drinkes and plaisters had beene of any noxious or hurtfull quality; it is well known, that the detestation against the Duke at that time was such, that He would not have been forborn, if the evidence would have born an impeachment of Treason; & many pressed it far, alledging that without an accusation of Treason, they could neither remove the Duke from about the Kings Person, nor from sitting in the Houses of Peers, with∣out which it was thought they would hardly prevail against the Duke; but the evidence falling short, it was carryed in the House for an impeach∣ment only of Misdemeanor, & a transcendent Presumption, & not of Trea∣son; And of these particulars some now sitting among them, (if they had had so much ingenuity, or had not been restrained with fear) might have informed them; And they might have been likewise pleased to remember, that it was proved before them, that the King was embowel'd and em∣baumed publiquely, & no Symptomes appeared, but that He dyed natu∣rally of His Sicknesse. And this their Declaration (although it be set out with some strains and aggravations) conteineth little more then is here declared; concluding in these words: That it is an offence and misdemeanor of so high a nature, as may be justly called, and is by the said Commons deemed to be, an Act of transcen∣dent presumption & of dangerous consequence. So that by their own charge nothing is laid down against the Duke, but a misdemeanor & an adventurous Act, unto which they confesse in this Declaration, that he put in His Ans∣wer the 8. of Iune; and the said Answer doth yet remain upon record in the Journall book of the House of Peers: And certainly it had been much more fair and ingenious, to have likewise set down the Answer, and not to have published only the Accusation, and concealed from the world the Dukes Answer, since they doe acknowledge that they knew of the Ans∣wer; but it should seeme that made not for their purpose; If the Answer had been weak and impertinent, doubtlesse they would not have passed by that which would have added strength to their own suggestion; but finding the Answer such as formerly had discouraged them any fur∣ther to stir in the businesse, they have judged it fitter to passe it by; for it must be known, that after the Parliament which they speak of to be dis∣solved, & in which this impeachment was exhibited against the Duke, there was (before the Duke was slain) another Parliament, in the which the Duke fat in the House of Peers; but the House having seen the Dukes Answer, thought it not fit to revive their former accusation, but have let it lie asleep almost this 20. yeers, untill their malice, and desire to blast their King, hath awakened it. In all their Declaration there is not one word reflecting upon the King, but that He caused not (as they say) the Dukes presupposed misdemeanor
(which they, to make the story seeme more odious, call the Kings death) to be legally persecuted; in which many amongst them must needs conceal their knowledge, that upon the breaking up of the Parliament, there was by the Kings then Atturney Generall, a Bill exhibited in the Star-chamber (which is the supream Court where all high crimes and misdemeanors are judged) and that at the instance of the said Duke, who said he would not have that cause which so highly concerned him, to lie buried, but that he would acquit himself of that foul Aspersion, though it should be with ha∣zard of his life; But his imployments to the Isle of Re, and death following not long after, gave an end to any further prosecution. So that having in their own Declaration not charged any thing against the Duke of Buckingham, more then misdemeanor and high presumption; nor the least reflection upon the King, but only of not causing the said mis∣demeanor of the Duke to have been legally prosecuted, which was hindred by the Dukes death, and the impediments formerly set down; the sole end and scope of inserting this particular in their Declaration is evident to be, to make the King odious, as judging that nothing could more incense the world against Him, or make His sufferings lesse commiserable, then to have it insinuated unto the people, that among many Articles against Him, one is concerning the death of His Father; which how groundlesse soever, yet they think that it may in the interim amuse the people, and possesse them with prejudice against the King, and not make them have that sense and compassion of Him, & detestation of His wicked usage, as otherwise they would have. And certainly amongst all those artifices which have been used against Him, to alienate the hearts of His people from Him, & to render Him o∣dious to the world, this is one of the most false, malitious, and subtle; & which can have no other drift, but by the detestableness of this aspersion, to allay the detestablenesse of their proceeding towards Him, which certainly no age can parrallel of Subjects towards their King. Touching the businesse of Rochell, it is true that the King was per∣swaded to lend some of His Ships to the French King; He was newly Married unto that Kings Sister, and entred into a new strict League and Allyance with that Crown, being then at difference with Spain; and cer∣tainly there might be many secret reasons of State, for the Kings obliging the French King at that time, which may be altogether unknown unto the Houses of Parliament, for that it was the doctrine of those times, that all things belonging to peace or warre, or the marriage of his Child∣dren, did solely and singly belong unto the King; neither neede He consult with His people therein, unlesse He craved their assistance in Parliament by way of Subsidy, or supply; and it is strange they should now interpose by way of charge, in businesse passed more then 20. years since; but that they leave no corner unsought, from whence it may be con∣ceived
any think may be raked to make the King odious, as the aime in this particular is to do in two kinds; first, by adding strength unto that false & wicked aspersion of the Kings unfirmnesse in the Protestant Religion: secondly, by nourishing that distast which they have with great industry & artifice raised in those of the Reformed Religion in France, & other places against Him. It is true, that Counsell pleased not many; & the use that was made of those ships was distastfull; which the King, and the Duke of Buckingham (on whom the councell of that action, and the blame was chiefly cast) to shew that there was no intention by the loan of those ships, to lend a hand to the destruction of the Protestants; endeavoured to redeem that mis∣hap, by actually entering into a war with the Crown of France, for which one of the cheif reasons was (although there were likewise other distasts) the wrong imploying of those Ships (which the King had lent) contrary to the Kings intention, and the intimation of the French, how they inten∣ded to make use of the said Ships; & it is fit likewise to be known, that this businesse was first treated in King James his time. And that it was contrary to the Kings intention, may appear by his sub∣sequent actions: for He avowedly sent a fleet, and an Army to the Isle of Re, under the command of the Duke of Buckingham, and to be advised by Mr. de Soubize, how those forces might be best imployed for the releif of Rochell, & those of the Reformed Religion: And although the expedi∣tion to the Isle of Re proved not successefull; yet the intention and not the successe, is to be looked upon; & the Duke of Buckingham pursued this in∣tention of relieving Rochell, and the Protestants; & to that end a new Ar∣my, and a new Fleet was prepared, & he in person was gone to Portsmouth, ready to set sail for the said enterprise, when by the hands of Felton he was suddainly slain; & thereby those succours were retarded; whereby leasure was given to the French so to fortifie & block up all the accesses to Rochell, that the relief thereof was rendred impossible; which yet notwithstanding was attempted by the Kings said Fleet and Army, under the Conduct of the Earl of Lindsey, though without successe. So that certainly no good argument can be drawn from hence, either of the Kings disaffection to those of the Reformed Religion, or to have willingly intended their hurt; much less can there well be drawn from hence any thing to justifie them in their present proceedings against the King, which they themselves set down to be the scope and intent of this their Declaration. Let it be judged of by any sober man, if it be not an audacious expression of Subjects towards their King, to say, we can fully shew how by Him Ro∣chell was betrayed; besides that it is most false, for how could the King betray Rochell, which was not in His Power? Or can it be beleived, that they that have forborn nothing that they could imagine might turne to
His dishonour, would conceal any thing that might cast any Aspersion up∣on Him in this of Rochell? As for that plot presupposed to be many years since designed, of bring∣ing in an Army of German Horse, to have compelled the Subjects to have submitted to an arbitrary Government; they might have remembred, that thinking thereby to have raised a hatred against the King, they have publi∣shed this Aspersion in severall of their Papers, and Declarations; and par∣ticularly upon the breach of the Treaty at Oxford May 18. 164. whereun∣to His Majesty made answer, as appears by His Declaration printed and published by their own Order, in the second volume of their Orders and Ordinances, Pag. 109. wherein He saith, That he esteemes his condition more miserable then any of his Subjects, when he sees a few factious persons have ob∣tained that power, as to publish to all his people in the name of both Houses of Parliament, a charge, which comming forth with a semblance of such Authori∣ty, may much worke with them against Him; and yet do not (which is certainly because they cannot) tell any one proof or particular, either whence, whether, or when, or by whom, or by whose designe those horse should have been brought; they confesse it is many years since, and it seemes it is so many, that these parti∣culars are worn out of the memory of man. Now what a strange Impudency and malice must it appear to all equall men, that being challenged, and provoked by the King, even with scorn and derision, to instance in any one of the above specified particulars if they could, they doe now again revive the same aspertions, without gi∣ving satisfaction, by the producing of any one proof, or giving instance in any one particular; especially when it is well known unto the world, that such persons as they themselves had whispered to be the men that were imployed in the said designe, have been highly imployed in their service, and nothing would have been kept from them, if any thing might have been found to the Kings prejudice; but it was thought fit by them, that this should be now concealed, since it is apparent, that the chief end of this Declaration, is, to accumulate all things that they conceive may asperse the King, or make Him odious; for those men might have told them the mistery of that businesse; for that the Parliament having Decla∣red a war for the recovery of the Palatinate, and given way for the raising of 10000. foot in England to serve Count Mansfeild in that imployment, it was in discourse how to furnish them likewise with horse; which was thought could no where fittingly be done but in Germany; but the King of France denying passage to Count Mansfeid, all that businesse came to nothing. Then they speake of the torturing of our bodies by cruell whippings, cutting off eares, racks and pillories, &c. They might have added hanging, drawing, and quartering, and hanging in chaines; for all these have been done in the Kings Reigne, but executed upon Traytors, theeves, seditious and impious
libellers, by established Courts of Justice, and according to the knowne course of the Laws which were made by former Kings (his Predecessors) with the consent of Parliament; for they are not able to produce any one Law made in the Kings reign, tending to blood or cruelty: how many have been made for the ease and enlargement of the Liberty of the people, they have often themselves confessed them to be more then by any of his Predecessors: And shall the doing of Justice according to the Laws, by his Judges and Ministers of Justice, be charged upon him as acts of cruelty? shal the burning of theeves in the hand, or rogues in the forehead or shoulder, or what Mr. Gregory doth at Tyburn, in the due execution of legall senten∣ces, be stiled cruelty? for such have been all these whippings, rackes, & pillories, which they speake of; And they are challenged to instance in one drop of blood drawn by his Majesty, or any one Act of cruelty committed by Him in his whole raign, or by his Judges or Ministers whom He hath not left to the Justice of the Law. For it will not be denied, that from the 3. of November 1640. untill the 12. of Jan. 1641. when he was driven from London, all His Judges were wholly left unto them; many of them being impeached of Treason; and Judge Berkley, whom they thought the most criminall, arraigned for Treason, who made a defence so honest, and so able, that they were forced to wave their legall Triall of him, and to pick his purse by their arbitrary power. Was there ever so strained a malice, especially if they looke how themselves have proceeded? not to speake of those multitudes that have been slaine in the War, how many of the Kings honest loyall Subjects have they murthered in cold blood, by no Law but their owne arbitrary power? with how many new Treasons have they ensnared the subject, by the single authority of some hasty and angry Ordinances, notwithstanding that the Law telleth us, what shall be Treason and nothing else, but by Act of Parliament? what cruelty hath been used in point of imprisonments, where many have dyed for want, or ill usage? and how many persons of quality, both Divines and others, hath been by them sent a ship-board, and kept under deck? and seeing a person of quality, and a Judge of great years and reverence, out of heat and indignation, sent to Newgate, a prison for Rogues, Thee∣ves, and Cutpurses? how many Gentlemen and Peers did they Vote to death, and losse of their whole estates, and to be excepted from pardon and mercy, without summons, hearing, tryall, or conviction? how many Noblemen, Gentlemen, Judges, and divers of great age, have they forced out of England to begge their bread in strange Countries, not allowing them one penny out of great estates (which they have seized) to keep them from contemptible poverty, notwithstanding that the Law alloweth to the highest Traytors, a conveniency for food and raiment for themselves and family? And yet these men have had the
face to fix upon their King these odious markes of cruelty, when they can∣not deny, but in his reigne there hath been lesse blood by attainder, and fewer confiscations, then in any such space of time since the Con∣quest. As for the lording over mens souls. The Laws for the government of the Church (not established by this King, but by his Father and Queen Eli∣zabeth) were put in execution with so much mildnesse and moderation, that they can scarcely instance in the punishment of any Separatists or Sectary, if his Recusancy (for the Law maketh them Recusants as well as Papists) hath not been accompanied with some crime, or some scandalous or seditious preaching, or writing against the present government; where∣as they may remember, and see in the new book of entries, 5. Paschae, 35. Eliz. fol. 252. that Pendry for publishing two scandalous books against the Church Government, was indicted, arraigned, attainted, and execu∣ted at Tyburn: And let their present lording over mens souls be considered; their sending so many learned and pious men a begging, by depriving them of their livings; imprisoning their persons; their lording over their consci∣ences, by new, illegall, and trayterous Oaths; by forcing of the Covenant, to the ruine of many hundreds, who otherwise were without exception, both Ministers and Lay-men; being consciencious men; men of parts, and great learning, as is set downe in the preceding words of the Answer to the Scotch Declaration of the 4. of Jan. 1648. But nothing can by them be done amisse: that Axiome of the Law le Roy ne fait tort, is now with the Crown and Soveraignty, (which they have usurped) applicable onely to them. But all the Kings actions, though never so legall, just, and gra∣tious, must by them have the appellations of tyranny, cruelty, and op∣pression. They then say that they were worse then slaves, for they were prohibited by Proclamation to speake or hope for another Parliament. They should have done well to have specified the year and date of the said Proclamation, and to have set down the very words contained therin; for it is so un∣likely a thing, that the people should be forbidden by Proclamation, to hops, that no rationall man can choose but suspect it to be that which civility is loath to tearme it, how foule soever their pen be against their King. As for the searching of cabinents, closets, &c. It is set down to be after the dissolution of the Parliament; so that that sin against the Holy Ghost (never to be forgiven) of breaking the Priviledges of Parliament, is not charged, and any other sinne will not be found; for it is lawfull and usuall for the Justice or Councell of the King, to search the closets, and cabinets of such as they have good cause to suspect of practises, and correspondency, to the prejudice of the King or Kingdome; neither have the Kings or Queens letters or cabinets, nor the dispatches of Am∣bassadours,
and forraign States, been free from their inquisition and search; nay some such searches have been made by them for Letters and Jewels upon women not of the meanest ranke, as is indecent to put them in mind of. They then reckon up a long list of Monopolies, and Patents of Soap, Pins, Leather, Sugar, &c. Whether the said Patents were legall, or illegall, there can from thence no just fault be laid upon the King; He is in point of Law to be advised by His Atturney, and His learned Councell; And there cannot in all the particulars specified, any one be instanced in, which He did of Himselfe, without the Certificate of the Referrees, of the legallity of such Grants, wherein never Prince was so pun∣ctuall as He hath been, and it is conceived that it may be with truth aver∣red, that in His whole Reign He hath not passed by Patent any one Mono∣poly, without reference, and certificate in writing, that it might be gran∣ted by Law. But besides, upon complaint this Parliament, all grievances have been re∣dressed; all doubtfull Patents cancell'd; care had for the preventing of the like for the future; all referrees and patentees left to justice; and all punished, but such as the injustice of the Houses have protected. Then they come to that which they call the compendium of all oppression and cruelty, viz. The Ship-money: When Princes are involved in great wants and necessities, they are forced to those things which at other times they willingly forbear to presse; So it was here; The King by His Wars with Spain and France, was brought into great necessitys; and consulting how He might by lawfull wayes releive Himselfe. He was advised to this course of Ship-money by His Atturney Generall Noy, (as is said) who was by all men esteemed a great Lawyer, and had been a great propugner of the Sub∣jects liberty: The King herein asked the opinion of His Judges, and lear∣ned Councell; And both the Judges (the major part of them) & His Coun∣cell, did set it under their hands to be lawfull; these are the Kings proper councel with whom he is to consult in point of Law, & are sworn to advise Him faithfully; But some, and particularly Mr. John Hamden, not satisfied with the extrajudiciall opinion of the Judges, came to a legall tryall upon the Case in the Exchequer Chamber; & after a fair hearing and learned ar∣guments on both sides, Judgement passed for the King. If the said Judges and learned Councel (who are sworn to do equall justice betwixt the King and the Subjects, & to Councell the King faithfully) have erred and done amisse in both, the greater hath been their fault and offence; But herein where lieth the Kings transgression? For did he not leave the Judg∣es upon complaint of the Houses, to their Justice? and were not the said Judges many of them impeached of high Treason? & Judge Berkley arraig∣ned thereupon for high Treason? and made so learned and able a defence, that they were forced to withdraw any further prosecution of their
impeachment against him. It seems they forget that which they declared for Law at the beginning of this Parliament, (viz. that the King can do no wrong, Le Roy ne fait tort) upon the very ground of this Case; And that the reason why the Law supposed that the King could doe no wrong, was, for that the Judges and Ministers that did the wrong, were respon∣sable for the wrong doing; and the persons wronged, were from them to be repaired in point of their dammages: But it seemeth they are of old Ployden's minde, that when the businesse concerneth themselves, the Case is altered. They then say, The King summoned this present Parliament, in hope to have Assistance against the Scots. He had little reason to hope for any assistance against the Scots, know∣ing as he did, who had called them in; and that from some Scots them∣selves from Newcastle, whilst he was at Yorke, He had gotten notice of the particulars, wherewith divers Lords of the English with the King being startled, they sent to the Scotish Lords at Newcastle; to have right done them upon a Secretary of theirs, who had said to some English prisoners whom the Scots had taken at Newborn, That their comming in had not beene, but by the invitation of the English; and had spoken a little too boldly of some truths that should have beene concealed, and this divers at Westminster cannot but remember. They then say, that it was impossible to quash those pernitious Councels without questioning the Authors; Whereupon the King shewed Himselfe so passionately affected to such malignant Councellers & their Councel, that he would sooner desert or forcc his Parliament, and Kingdom, then alter His course, or deliver up his wicked Councellors to Law and Justice. Our passions (especially that of revenge and malice) do not only de∣prive us of our senses and reason, but often bereave us of shame and honesty: For besides that they know that the King hath more then thrice in his publique printed Answers declared, That He would ex∣cept no man of what quality or nearnesse soever unto Him, from any legall Tryall according to the Law; He did leave unto their Justice the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Strafford, all the Judges, and whomsoever they would accuse; insomuch that they examined and committed the Queenes Confessor; and examined the Ladies of Her bed-chamber. And their Sergeant at Armes presumed so far, as to come into the Kings withdrawing-roome next unto His Bed-chamber, to cite and summon Persous of greatest quality and nearnesse unto Himselfe; insomuch that out of shame the King hath bin forced to withdraw Himselfe into his bed-chamber, notwithstanding that the Law saith, that a Lord cannot in the Kings, presence seize his slave or villian that hath rnn from him. And from the third of November 1640 untill the 10. of January 1641. when the King was driven out of London, then
was no man, Counseller, Judge, or Person of what quality soever, exempt from their Justice. And to shew how willing He was to satisfy them; that Hee would not interrupt or hinder the course of Justice, He gave way to that which some Princes would rather have adventured a War then have conde∣scended unto; which was his giving leave to His privy Counsell (that had bin sworn to keep secret whatsoever passed in Councell) to be exa∣mined upon Oath of what had passed in his own Presence & most secret cabinet Counsell, against one of their own fellows in a capitall Cause; which is likely hereafter to cause him to be served with caution; when men shall not know how soon they may be questioned for that which they do advise, which is in effect against themselves; for if one shall be ac¦cused of Treason, the rest likewise may be questioned for Concealment. They speak of some that fled fearing to be questioned; certainly they had great reason so to do, when their proceeding was such, as not to be guilty but only to be accused, was certain ruine, or imprisonment for many yeers, divers having languished two or three years in Prison; & the Arch bishop of Canterbury was almost fonr yeers in prison before he was put to death And such as observed the proceedings with the earl of Strafford would not willingly (how innocent soever) fall into their hands, if it were to be avoyded; for they may remember how by the procurement of some amongst them, tumults & multitudes surrounded the House of Peers, crying Justice, justice, and they would have the Traytors head. They may remember their posting up of 59. Members of the honse of Commons, that would not give their Votes to the Bill of Attainder of the Earl: If they have forgotten it, their own Historiographer Mr. May may put them in minde of it; They may likewise remember that at the same time upon an empty Tun rolled from a Tavern doore, a list of the Lords names whom they called Malignants, was read in the midst of that rabble in the Palace yard; and although the House of Peeres then represented these violences to the House of Commons, they could ne∣ver obtein their assistance to suppresse them, or to declare against them; and they may remember whether it was not said amongst them, that they should doe ill to discountenance their freinds. On the other side, let it be remembred how many Counsellers who have bin Actors in all the pretended Exorbitancies of the Star-chamber, Councel-table, & high Cōmissiion, being once become persons in whom they might confide, were left unquestioned; Let them remember that when they expelled all such Monopolers as they judged affectionate to the King, whether they left not some others of their favorites sitting amongst them untill this day? But for that it would be too long to in∣stance in many things of this kinde, as having imployed the most infa∣mous Projectors and Catchpoles in their service: they shall only be put
in minde of one particular of an eminent Member of their House, who would have presented a Petition aginst a great Counsellour, who was much favored by Mr. Pym and others, who having gotten notice of the Contents thereof, would never permit it to be read in the House; but the said party having worn out three Copies in his pocket, engrossed it in parchment; but ever when he stood up to speake, Mr. Pym or some other appointed to watch him, interrupted him with speaking to the Or∣ders of the House (which are alwayes to have the precedency;) & this for many months together, insomuch as the said petitiō could never be read. As for the Kings deserting of His Parliament, it hath bin so often an∣swered, that it is a shame to repeat it; only this shall be added, that the King did not desert his Parliament, but was forced in great haste to fly for the safety of his Person, which would the next day have bin in great hazard of being seized. And although this present house of com∣mons be not charg'd wth any such intention (such resolutions passing few hands, and that there are very few left there now that were trusted with that secret) yet it hath bin confessed, and is under the hand of a person that hath bin very active in their service, and who should have bin a prin∣cipall Actor in it. Then followeth that thread-bare businesse of bringing up of the Nor∣thern Army, so often objected, and so often scorn'd by those that knew the mistery of it; which if the King had endeavour'd to have won to His service, and full adherence, He had done like a wise and prudent Prince; neither had there bin any cause for the concealing, or not avowing of any such endeavour, if it had bin so; For it is well known by whom that army was endeavour'd to be seduc'd from the kings service & from the Earl of Strafford who was their Generall; nor was the Earl ignorant therof, neither would he have fai'ld in his proofs, having it in his thoughts speedily to have impeached severall persons of high Treason, for tampe∣ring with the said Army; as is well known not to a few sitting still a∣mongst them at Westminster; but they by their diligence got it by the hand, by impeaching him a day or two before his impeachment against them was ready, which cost him his life. Besides, they know the person that started this hare among them hath often clear'd the king, that it was impossible that the K. should know of the proposition of the bringing up the Army, wch was his own motion, & was by some rejected as a thing too high, & not liked by others, for that he would have the cheif command of the Action, which would not be condescended unto; whereupon out of discontent, he went immediately and made his discovery to the lower house, without ever seeing the king; but there had been some speech before of a petition to be procur'd from the Army (which was published) & what knowledge the King might have of preferring such a petition, is not known to the writer of this
answer: but the party that first gave the houses notice of this busines hath often sworn, that all he said concerning the King in this businesse, was in relation to the said petition; but that the King could never have nor had notice of the proposition of bringing up the Northern Amy; for that being his own motion, he presently (seeing it disapproved, especially his having the cheif Command and Conduct of the Action) revealed it, before the King could possibly have knowledge of it, which party is yet living, and certainly will avow as much. But presupposing the King should have gotten knowledge of the mo∣tion (which doth in nothing appear, (the King seeing the great tumults, & the great hazard that his own person was in, as well as the freedom of Parliament; might He not have reason by His own Army, raised by Him∣selfe, and payed by His own moneys. (as it had bin for many moneths) endeavored to have secured His own safety, and the freedom of Parlia∣ment, without cōmitting any such crime, as meriteth to be deposed, or u∣sed as now He is? Let it be compared with that which the now prevalent Party in the houses have don, who seeing themselves like to be over-awed by the pres∣byterian party, & finding no other means not to be overborne, thought it fit to have recourse unto the present Army of Independents & although the then house of Cōmons had voted a petition of the said Army to be burnt, & such to be enemies of the State, as should adhere thereunto; yet the army was drawn up towards London, & the house forced to sequester eleven of their most eminent members; & when the City or Apprentices had restored the said 11 Members, (as they had in former times don the five Members) the Speaker, & all such as had deserted the parliament, & had fled to the army, were by force again reestablished; & the new Spea∣ker M. Pelham was unchaired, and all that party were driven away, some forced to fly, others were impeached; & the now prevalent party possessed themselves again of the houses, & the power they now have of deposing the King, & keeping of Him Prisoner. There is a great dfference betwixt what they have really don by this army, for the turning upside down the Parliament; and what was ever spoken of, of the Northern Army. But Successe and Power will make the same things (though acted) commen∣dable in those that prevail, which they will have capitall in those who never passed further then discourse. They then begin to speak of the tyrany towards Scotl. & Ireland &c. For that of Scotland (which is formerly answered) I shall only ad the ful satisfaction which the Kingdome of Scotland received by their own ac∣knowledgment, expressed by a petition made since the Kings last coming from Scotl. viz.: That Whereas The Kings most sacred Majesty's royall zeal, & constant resolution of maintaining the true Religion & preserving the laws & liberties of these kingdoms is so undoubted, that to call it in que-
&c. could not be construed in any, but an unchristian distrustfulnes & in us his Ma. Subjests of this His aucient & native kingdom the height of disloy∣alty & ingratitude, if we should harbor any scruple or thought to the contrary having so many real & recent evidences of his Royall goodnes, justice & Wis¦dom, in setling & establishing the trne Religion & the Laws & Liberties of this His kingdom, to the full satisfaction of all his good subjects. And never∣theles prerceiving by his Ma'. Declarations & other printed papers, that foul & malicious aspersions are cast on his Ma. tending to be and his sacred person, & deprave his royal Govern', &c. we conceive our selves bound in du¦ty to almighty God (by whom we have sworn to defeud & maintain the person greatnes, & authority of our dread Soveraign, Gods vicegerent, to the utmost with our means & lives, in every cause which may concern his honor, as may apear by that which by the warrant of the Act of the generall Assembly, we have all sworn & signed) & to our king & country, and to that we ow to our honor & reputation, to represent to your Lps. the desires we have to expresse, & make known to his Ma. & all the world, that we are fully satisfied, and perswaded of his Majesties royal zeal & resolution, & that malice & detra¦ction cannot prevail to make the least impression in our loyal hearts, of jealou¦sie, or distrust: And therfore we have taken the boldnes humbly to petition your Lps. That as his Majesty hath graciously condescended (in his letter to your Lps. printed by your warrant) for satisfaction of his good subjects, to ex¦presse his Royal goodnes, & desire, that all grounds of jealousy may be kept and removed out of the hearts of his good Subjects of this Kingdom: So it may please your Lordships to think vpon some course, that his Majesty re∣ciprocally may be cleered, and assured of our constant affection, &c. and that we are not so unthankefull to God, or to his Vice-gerent, nor so little ten¦der of our own honor and credit, as to forget so soone that duty, incumbent to us by so many obligations, and so often promised by us in our foresaid solemn Oathes, which are published to the view of the whole World, &c. As for the Rebellion in Ireland they make use of this to the same end they do of all things else in their Declaration. That knowing that horrid rebellion to be so detestable to all men (as it justly deserveth) they would fain draw part of the hatred of it on the king, although it be with never so improbable or false pretext▪ And they think in the meane time that it will serve the present turn, of making the king odious, till He may have means to cleer it by His answer (which they never intend to afford Him, untill they have established their tyranny) and then they will not care to be fought against with papers. But their Declaration in this point of Ing∣land [besides that the points conteined in it have been so often answered in print] doth so confound all times, all actions, either in the War, or whilest there was a Cessation; and all the circumstances and reasons, which may justify such actions at one time, as might be blameable at ano∣ther; that the answere must be applyed to the generall Scope of the De∣claration, which is, to insinuate unto the world, that the King did abet
and favour the Rebellion; which not only the Kings many Declarations, but his reall and effectuall actions do evince of falsehood, and detestable malice; For He did wholy put the Irish businesse, and the prosecution of the businesse, into the hands & management of the two Houses; and con∣sented to an act of parliament, giving them power to raise men & mony, and all other necessary provision for that war, notwithstanding that they had subtilly inserted into the preamble of the said Act, a clause debat∣ring Him and His successors from the power of levying men by way of presse, without consent of Parliament; although it had beene alwayes used by His Predecessors. But such was their art by the inserting of the said Clause, that they would either gain the disclaiming of that power to presse men or else would render the King odious, by publishing his refusall to doe that, which by the Houses was thought necessary for the suppressing of that horrid Rebellion: This artifice hath been since used by clogging most Bills (which would be plausible to the people) with some clause or parenthesis of great prejudice unto the King which He hath been often forced to passe by, to avoid the distaste which the de∣nying of those plausible Bils would have brought upon Him; & so He did in this. Besides this his concurrence in all that was desired of him; being at Yorke, & having some beginning of power he offered to have passed in person into Ireland, for the subduing of those Rebells; and to let the world see, that He desired rathet ro imploy those forces against the Re∣bels in Ireland, then by them to raise the least jealousie of raising a war in England; But this His Majestyes offer was by the Houses rejected; and the King did then see that the forces and the moneys that were levyed by his consent, and Commission, were in part imployed against Him∣selfe, to strengthen & pay the forces that were designed to march against Him; whereby the War of Ireland, (which had beene most prosperous under the wise and faithfull Conduct of the Marq. of Ormond, for which the Houses sent him publique thanks, & a present) began to be very du∣bious by their neglect, & their applying of the moneys & forces preten∣ded for Ireland, against the King; & so by degrees the English Armies in Ireland, were reduced to those great streights for want of pay & provi∣sion, by the ill Conduct of the Houses; that after many sollicitations both to the King and Parliament, by which little or no releife was obteined; there was a necessity of coming to a cessation of Armes for one yeare; which was done by the advise of the Councell of Ireland; & at the ear∣nest petition of the Lords, & of the cheif Officers of the Army, (of whom the Lord Inchiquin was one) as appeares by their own booke of Exact Collect. page. 344. To. 2. where likewise the necessity of the said ces∣sation is at large set downe: And the King seeing Himselfe much over∣power'd, & like to be overborne by the Rebels in England, was infor∣ced
to make use of the forces offered Him from Ireland, who were there ready to sterve; which certainly would have beene a great imprudence in Him not to have done; and is as great an impudence in them to charge this as a fault or crime upon the King, to assist Himselfe of His own Subjects for His defence: when they (at so great an expence to the king∣dom) have hired in a forraign Nation (the Scots) to subdue Him. Next they alleag concerning the proclamations, That though they decla∣red that the Rebels in Ireland stiled themselves, the King & Queens Ar∣my, yet they could not obtain a proclamation against them in divers moneths; & then also but 40 Copies might be printed &c. The first perfect adver∣tisement of the Rebellion of Ireland, came to his Majesty & Counsell in England from the Lords Justices (Sir William Parsons, and Sir John Bur∣lace) and Councell of Ireland; wherewith they sent the draught of such a Proclamation as they conceived best for the suppressing thereof; and be∣cause those Rebells did pretend that what they had done was for the ser∣vice of the King, and not without some authority from him, it was by the said Lord Justices Letters desired, that 20 copies of those Proclamations might be sent over, signed by the Kings own hand, (whereas the usuall course was to send over only one so signed) that (besides those which they were there to print, and publish after the usuall manner) they might send some of the Originals so signed, to some of the chiefe of the Re∣bells to manifest the falshood of the said traiterous pretence. And though Proclamations which the King Signes either for England or Ireland never use to be printed, yet it was now for better expedition held fit by his Majesty, & the Lords of his Councell, (whereof divers of those now sitting in the house of peers at Westminst. were then present) that those 20 proclamations his Majesty was to signe, should be printed; and the Secretary being directed to cause it to be forthwith dispatched, did accordingly presently send a warrant to the Kings Printer, to print about 40 Copies, and to send them to him for his Majesties service; and to deliver out none to any other, for that those were to be Originals for the Kings signature only, & to be by them reprinted in Ireland, according to the usuall course. And to have any copies of them dispersed in England before they were proclaimed in Ireland, (where they were principally of use) as it was never practised, so it was conceived it might have bin of some prejudice; for that the said Irish Rebels (who had forged the for∣mer false pretence) might (if they had gotten any Copy thereof before they had bin proclaimed in Ireland) have divulged some other traiterous fiction, to have rendred the Proclamation of lesse credit with their par∣ty; & so have frustrated the good which His Majesty and his councell of both Kingdoms did hope that proclamation would have effected. And whereas it is alleaged as a fault, that there were but 40 of those Procla∣mations sent into Ireland; it is well known to the Lords of the Councell
now sitting at Westminster, that it was twice as many as was desired. And whereas they say, that the Irish Rebels called themselves the King and Queens Army; It is the constant practice of all Rebels at the begin∣ing, to countenance their Rebellion with the pretence of the Kings ser∣vice; and that they take Armes against the oppressions of evill Councel∣lours, and Ministers that seduce the King: The like was done by them∣selves at the beginning; who only pretended to remove Malignants and evill Councellors and to bring Delinquents to punishment; and then their war was in the name of King and Parliament, as some of their own have not of late forbore to put them in mind. But now it is to remove the King from the government, and to settle another of their own making, without the King or against Him. For the disbanding the Irish Army, although the King had great reason to demur upon it; yet such was his desire to gratify them, that He condescended unto it; & themselves consented that they should take any forreign imploiment whatsoever; but afterward would not give way to the transporting of them; & by that meanes much strength was added to the Irish Rebellion; all which they themselves cannot deny. And upon such malicious false inferences as these, depend all or most of their in∣stanced Accusations in this their Declaration. They say, the king refused to give Commissions (though often asked by the Houses) to the Lord Brooke, & the Lord Wharton. The king knew well how little reason he had to trust either of them. The Lord Brooke was often so indiscreet, as to professe openly and often, that he was wholy Antimonar∣chicall, and once in the hearing of seaven or eight,) for which he was re∣proved by some of his discreeter friends yet sitting among them) & it may be easily reduced to their memories; besides his other faults, which shall not be remembred, because he hath given an account of them. For the Lord Wharton; the King was not then ignorant of his seditious and mu∣tinous wayes against him, after so many obligations of the Kings put up∣on him & his friends, which he hath ill repaid by his actions; & hath since had a more profitable and gainfull Trade at Westminster, then he could have had in any martiall imployment, to which it should seem his natu∣rall disposition doth not much incline him. They then say, that they need not tell the world how the Scots entred this Kingdom with a powerfull Army. It were indeed much to their honor & loyalty to have it concealed; for it was by their invitations and negotia∣tions; and upon so hard termes and conditions, that the Answer to the Scotish declarati set out the 4 of Ja. 1647 saith, that their Cōmissioners would by no means have brought them, but that they could get no better. They then spake of the L. Digby's attempting the Country with unusuall arguments of armed troops: It was conceived that they had long since bin ashamed of that ridiculous tale of the L. Digby's raising war against the
King (for so their impeachment runneth) with a Coach and six Horses. Next they say, he advised the King to retire Himselfe to some safe place. If he had done so, it had been good and honest Councell; but it was not any ad∣vice to the King, but his opinion only written in a private lettter to his brother Sir Lewis Dives what he judged safest for the King, being forced to fly out of London for feare of M. Skippon's great march, which was to be the next day to convoy the accused Members to Westminster. Now followes the Negotiations with Denmarke, and the story of a ser∣vant of the Lord Digby's hiring of a Skipper to be pilot to a fleet preparing in Den∣marke; which fleet proved to bee the Cow-fleet that useth to bring cattell out of those parts into Holland, And for the Lord Digby's man, as hee never had any name, so the truth is that hee had no man with him at that time, go∣ing out of England only with a Dutch Gentleman in his company; neither is their own word of Truth in the whole story. And for the Kings solliciting for Ammunition and Succours from his Ʋncle of Denmarke, it were to have bin wished that His solicitations had bin as successefull as they are justifiable. And touching the letter said to be written unto the King of Denmarke; it is very likely indeede, that the King would have invented such a scandall to His own shame, and the reproach of His Mother if he had not had some grounds for it; And yet it is true that they may say in the name of the House, that it never entred into their thoughts; Businesses of that nature are secretly laid, and carryed on by a few: But there are some at Westminster that know what passed in that businesse, and by whose loyalty the motion of it was quashed in the bud: And when his Majesty may be heard, or His Accusations may be admitted of, Hee will be easily drawne to give them and the world satisfacti∣on in this point; it were to be wished that they would give as good satisfaction for their malice in inserting this particular in their Declaration, in so unman∣nerly and undecent termes towards their King, stiling it a false and scandalous charge, and such an Act as they beleive was never a more unworthy one done by any Prince, to the shame of His own Mother. They then adde another breach of Trust, That the King had sent away with the Queene the anciene Jewels of the Crowne, Our Saviour saith, may I not dispose of my own as I please? The jewels were His own, bought with His own money, or with the moneys of His Ancestors, and not with the moneys of the Crowne; neither doe they produce any entaile of them upon the Crown; And certainly in the present condition whereunto they had reduced Him, Hee could never have juster cause to sell or pawn them, then that which they themselves set downe, for Armes and Ammunition for His own defence and preservation. The King, they say, once sent a specious Message of renewing a Treaty, but his messenger was instructed to manage a bloody massacre in London, which was desi∣gned by vertue of a Commission of the Kings since published. Hereof they give us no more proof but that they say it; and for the bloody
massacre intended, it is a most false and malicious slander; there being no other Designe but to protect His owne Loyall Subjects in London; and to reduce His Rebels; which certainly was more justifiable for Him to doe, eyther as their King, or as an Enemy in open Warre, then their barbarous murthering of Tomkins, and the rest, only for endeavouring of their duties. And for the Commission they speake of, it was such a one as not only in time of war Hee might thinke fit to doe, but might legally have done it in time of Peace. Touching the Kings march to Brainford, the Reasons thereof have been of∣ten declared in print, to the satisfaction of all indifferent Readers. But those barbarous cruelties they speake of to bee committed by the King, are most false; for there was not one man slaine but in the heate of War, and the King gave to all his Prisoners their lives and liberties, only upon engage∣ment not to take Armes against Him for the future; which engagement they traitrously and falsly broke, being thereof absolved by some of their wicked Ministers, as some of the said Prisoners (being afterwards taken againe) con∣fessed. The reason why the King changed His minde from staying at Windsor, and advanced to Brainford, was for that whilest their Commissioners were sent to him to Colebrooke, that very night information was brought, that they were advanced with their Army and Ordinance towards Him, and they take it very ill that Hee would not stay at Windsor till they came to take Him. For the denying to receive their Petitions, they give no instance of it in any, neither will it bee proved I beleeve, that ever it was done, unlesse the Petition were to be delivered with an Army at the heeles of it, or by such a person as the King, by name, had declared Traitor, and excepted from Pardon. They then begin to speake of the Queen, upon whom (if they could) they would willingly cast some aspersion, as well as upon the King. But because there are many particulars scatteredly set downe in this Declaration concer∣ning her Majesty, they shall in this Answer be set down here together, that the cleerer Judgement may be made of them. They say first, That by that time the queenes pious Designe to advance Popery was ready for the Byrth. That Designe was most industriously examined by them, and they had before them in the House of Commons Sir Kenelme Digby, Mr. Montague, and divers others; and upon the narrowest sifting of that Businesse, they thought it then fit to proceede no farther in it; But now they make use of it to cast Aspersions upon the king and queene, when they could finde no cause to punish the chiefe Actors in the said Businesse. Secondly, they say, That there was a great Designe amongst the Papists for a generall massacre in Ireland and England, and that a great Royall Person had a hand in it.
It is to be wondered at, that they should on a suddain become so modest, as not in plain words to name (the Queen, whom they had formerly impeached by name (with all Her titles) of high Treason, and sought Her life; And now they would slily insinuate into the people, that she had a hand in so execrable a Designe, as to massacre all the Protestants of two Kingdoms; And that upon information given unto the late Lord of Canterbury, without a telling by whom the said information was given, or when; neither set they down by whom the said massacre should have bin acted, or by what Plot; It is to be thought that it should have bin performed by the same hands that so many of the Peers, and of the House of Commons should have bin slain, had it not bin prevented by the Tai∣lors discovery in Moorefeilds. Thirdly, they say That the king confesseth He had sent the Queen to Holland. It seemeth that she was an obedient Wife, and He a carefull Husband of Her, when He saw that most barbarous and inhumane usage of Her, that Her very Bed-chamber could not be priviledged, but her Nurse, and her Confessor must be examined against Her. They adde, That with the Queen He sent the Jewels of the Crown. In whose hands could He better trust His own goods, which He saw likely to be taken from him, as his Houses, Furniture, and whole Revenue, and that of the Queen and Prince had bin by them? Neither could He expect that His Jewels should have bin safer then his liveries for His Guards have bin of late; And certainly his Jewels were better disposed of, if they were pawned for Powder and Ammunition, then His Guard's Coats that are ordered to be sold outright for fire and candles for Souldiers at Whitehall. Then they say, the Queen many moneths before Her voyage to Holland, was going beyond the Seas, had not their Motion to the King stayed Her, It seemeth then that the King was willing to gratify them, although it were with the crossing of the queen's desires; and that the King's sending of Her afterward into Holland, was not untill she could not remain any longer amongst them with Safety or Honour; For they themselves doe beleive that the King could have bin very well pleased to have enjoyed Her Company. These are the particulars that they set downe concerning the queene, in which there is little remarkable but their detestable malice; for were it to bee expected that the queene; bred up a Roman Catholick, and by Capitu∣lations and the Kings Oath, to enjoy the use of her Religion in such sort as was agreed, should not looke to enjoy it? Especially her carriage ever since her coming into England having beene with that Prudence and Mo∣deration, that the great Officers of her Court, and most of the Ladies of her Bed-chamber, have beene Protestants, enjoying daily the use of their Religion in Her Court, without beeing pressed by her to the least
Act, in waiting upon Her or otherwise, that might offend or strain their Consciences. But that a Princesse of so high Extraction as the blood of France, & Daughter of the great Henry the fourth, and their Kings Wife, that never had done any person wrong, but obliged all whensoever it was in Her way, should finde such usage from Subjects; as to have all malicious false Libels countenanced against Her; to be questioned for Her life, only for the assisting of Her Hnsband; to be forced to fly the Kingdom; to have all Her Revenue taken from Her; and now as though she had in∣tended a generall massacre, to be rendred odious by this malicious Libell, authorized by the name of the House of Commons, it cannot but be held a most inhumane and barbarous proceeding, as indeed it is, by all the World but themselves. Touching the Letters written to the Pope, King James sent His Sonne (then Prince) into Spain, being about 20. years of age; and instructed Him, and the Duke of Buckingham that waited upon Him, in all things touching the Ne∣gotiation of the Prince's marriage, which was then in Treaty for a Daugh∣ter of Spain. And of all that passed, the Prince gave the King His Father almost daily advertisment by expresses; and He received from Him like∣wise directions upon all emergent occasion, neither sent He any Letter to the Pope, without His Fathers privity and allowance. King James likewise Himselfe at the same time did write Letters to the Pope, which He publique∣ly avowed, saying, The Pope was a Temporall Prince, and He would write unto Him upon any occasion in secular Affairs, as freely as He did to the great Magor, or to the great Turke, when He wrote against him in point of controversies in Religion, He would then (He said give him those Appellations that the Cause required, but in His letters missive, He would give Him those Respects and Civilities that befitted one temporall Prince towards another. And certainly King James was no Papist, although He were no freind to Sectaries and Separatists but had written more in the defence of the Reformed Religion, and to the displeasing of the Pope, then all the Princes of Christendom had done since the Reformation, and when He dyed, scarcely left a wiser man behinde Him. But they are brought to great streights, when they are driven to take in the Fathers grave (dead 25. years past) to finde matters for their malice against the Sonne. For the Letters spoken of to be written to the Pope, on the behalfe of the Duke of Lorraign, I must confesse I want Information in the point of the fact, But if it were so, He could not have written for a Prince that was nearer allyed to Him. And whereas it is said, that in requitall an Army to invade En∣gland must be raised by Him, It is a very unlikely Story, that the Duke of Lorraign should be in condition to raise an Army to invade England, But if He could afford His Kinsman Auxiliaries, or any other supplyes, He should he much to blame if He did it not. For the Kings offer to the Scots of the plunder of London, if they would advance, or
of 300000. pounds, and foure Northern Counties only to stand neuters: Besides the ridiculousnesse to conceive any such offers could be made, they doe not so much as offer at any kinde of proof but follow their rule held throughout in all this their Declaration; audacter accusare, aliquid haeret, accuse boldly, som∣what will stick. They have all the Kings Letters and Cabinets; and it is not likely that any so great transaction could only have been verball: But if the King should have made this impossible offer, or any other, should He not have done like a prudent and good Prince, to have called His own Subjects from the adherence to His Rebels, to their own Loyalty and Duties, though it should have bin by out-bidding of them? After the Kings returne from Scotland, the great quantity of fire workes found in Papists houses: No naming where, nor when, nor by whom the Papists should have subdued the kingdom, only with granadoes and fire-works with∣out any foote or horse, but those that about that time they had discovered to be kept under ground; O how contemptible is it for a House of Commons to abuse the kingdom with such squibs? Then they say, Morters with great peeces of Battery were mounted against the City; and such Officers placed in the Tower, as were not only suspected by them, but by the whole City, who durst not abide in their houses, as by their severall Pe∣titions is manifest. They doe not say that one gun was ever shot, and they know that no one man did for feare forsake his house: nor any one Act of injury or Ho∣stility committed towards them. As for the Lieutenant of the Tower, they would confide in none but such as a few factious men of the House (who had conspired with a great party in the Citty) did appoint; The King to give them satisfaction removed Sir Tho. Lunsford; then put in a Gentleman of re∣markable honesty and worth, and of great fortune (Sir John Byron) against whom no exception could be taken, but that he was not of their party; against him (when no other pretence could be found) they alleaged, that if a Person were not put into the Tower, in whom the Merchants might confide, there would be no more money brought into the Mint: And although a hundred thousand pounds caution were offered on the behalfe of Sir John Byron, yet nothing would satisfie, unlesse the Tower were put into such hands as they pleased to nominate, and it was publiquely avowed that if it were not speedily done, they would seize it by force; and to that purpose they caused multitudes every day to come to the House whilest that businesse was in agi∣tation. And as for the Petitions, they know that they were all of their owne ma∣king; and whosoever Petitioned without their Order, or not suteable to their sense, were severely punished; as in the Petition of Kent, and many others, only such as they had ordered to be delivered to the Houses; and when they had no reason to uphold their demands, they then made use of tumults, and seditious and threatning Petitions in stead of other Arguments; these they
ever countenanced and supported; as they did in this case of the Tower, when they caused Petitions to be delivered, desiring to know the names of the Ma∣lignant Lords that obstructed the businesse of the Kingdome, and refu∣sed to assent to the Votes of the Commons, and they would right them∣selves by the remedy next at hand (by which they meant their swords and clubs in their hands) and thereby forced the Votes of the Lords, as it is pre∣tended was done by the Apprentices at Pelham's Parliament; insomuch that that which had bin voted by 42. Lords, for the not removing of Sir Iohn Byron from his Lievetenancy of the Tower, was now carryed by 16. or 17. votes only; (contrary ro the orders of the house, that such things as upon the question had beene once setled, might not again that Sessions be put to the question) And by the threats of their Petitions; the noise and tumults at the doores by the multitudes; the intimation of danger from the House of Commons, and from the enraged People, which they feared would not be in their power to prevent: and by the Lords of the Party, who most boldly (contrary to the essentiall freedom of Parliament, relying upon their friends at the doore) voted all such as should continue to dissent from the House of Commons, to be Enemies of the State; whereupon most of the Bishops and Lords (fearing to be reformed by the remedies next at hand) held it wisdome to withdraw themselves: only 14. of above fourty (that had formerly voted the contrary) withdrew themselves; and so the Lords of the Party over-ruled it; And this narration will appeare to be true by the Booke of the House of Peers, if they have not since thought fit to expunge it. So that it is thought very strange, that the wisdome of the House of Commons (by calling to minde the use that they have made of Petitions) should give cause to have the memory of such shamefull proceedings to be revived. They then say that from this time the track of open force began to appeare. They first instance the Kings charging some of both Houses of Treason; the Kings desiring to have some tryed by due course of Justice (never before denyed to any King, and in their owne remembrance practised, and by the House of Peeres allowed) must now be accounted a Crime, and an Act of open force in the King: but forget how many of their Members the Army hath impeached and forced to fly. They then speake of the bloody Tragedy intended by the Kings comming to the House of Commons, if the affections of the City had not prevented it. If there had been any bloody tragedy intended by the Kings coming to the House. it would have been the same day put in execution, before the City could have prevented it. But they may remember if they please, the testimony of Cap. Ashley, taken be fore a Committee of both Houses at Grocers-Hall, if it bee not suppressed; wherein hee declared, That the King at the upper end of Westminster-Hall, before he went up the stayres to the House of Commons, charged all those that accompanied Him (except some few ordinary Servants) not so much as
to come to the staires, nor to offer violence or injury to any Person upon pain of their lives. Further, the King in that point did let himselfe downe so low to give them satisfaction, as was never done by any King towards His Subjects; but nothing but the dis-throning of Himselfe, and leaving the Soveraignty, is fit for them to accept. They say, that the King entred a Protestation into the Councell booke, that His calling of them a Parliament, did not make them so; And therein He said very true, that His calling of them a Parliament doth not make them a Parliament, (that can be only done by His Writ) no more then His calling them no Parliament, doth make them to be no Parliament. But it is true, before His restraining of himselfe, hee could when hee pleased have dissolved them; But if they have committed Treason or Felony; and that that which their Oracle Sir Edw. Cooke, Mr. Solicitor, and that reverend old Eleazar Judge Jenkins doe say, be true, That Treason and Felony do supersede all priviledges of Parliament; And although a Corporation cannot commit Treason, yet every person of the Corporation may; and if one, then ten, if ten, then a hundred, and so all: And if that House have had the ill lucke to commit Trea∣son or Felony, (although the King by reason of His restraint should not dissolve it) yet it may become Felo de se, and may destroy it selfe: And it is much doubted whether the King can raise them from the dead. Then they come to their standing amazed at the Kings solemn Protestation of having never any thought of bringing up the Northern Army; or levying of forces to wage war against his Parliament; or to invade the rights of his Subjects; or bringing in of forreign forces. They should have done well to have set downe the date of the said Declaration; as likewise the particulars wherein He hath satisfyed His said Protestations; and not to have kept themselves still upon the fraud of generalls; nor confounded the times before they had entred into Armes, with the times after the King had proclaimed them Traitors and Re∣bells; times and circumstances, do often justly alter Councells, and make those Actions necessary and good, which without them might have appearance of blame: But if the particulars shall be set down with the times and circum∣stances, the falshood, as well as the malice will appeare, of their so often reite∣rated reproaching their King, with breach of Oaths and protestations. They doe farther then charge the King, that He endeavoured to get out Can∣non, Powder, and Shot out of his own stores; and they have a letter to that effect to Sir Iohn Heyden: They say likewise that Hee did attempt to have forced Hull in an hustile manner. Two such faults in the King as doe marvailously justify their resolutions and usages of him, which they set down to be the Scope of this Declaration: In the one, the King would have imbezel'd His own proper goods; and in the other, He would have come into his own Town, had not the Traitor Hotham kept him out for which they have given him such a reward, as others may justly expect, if their repentance and the Kings good∣nesse doe not prevent it.
It was not long (they say) before the King proclaimed them Traitors and Re∣bels, and set up his Standard against the Parliament, which never King of Eng∣land did before Himselfe. Herein they are mistaken, for the King did not set up his Standard against His Parliament; His Parliament was never named at the setting up of His Standard; but it was set up against those whom Hee had first proclaimed Traitors and Rebels, which hath bin often done by the Kings of England; And so did His Majesty now against an Army marching toward Him, to sur∣prise His Person; and that within few dayes after gave Him a battell, and did their best to have slain Him under the command of the Earle of Essex, with whom they had all sworne and protested to live and dye. But that which they say, that never any King before set up His Standard against his Parliament; it is true, for no King ever needed a Standard against His Parliament; for that at their pleasures they could dissolve it with a breath; and so might his Majesty have done now, had not His goodnesse and unprovident desire of gratifying them restrained Him, by assenting unto that Act for the continuance of this present Parliament: which they them∣selves protested in one of their Declarations, they would never make use of to the Kings disservice, but only to the ends for which it was granted, viz. to be a security for the raysing and paying of moneys; which how they have perfor∣med let the world judge. it is then said, the King called a mock-Parliament at Oxford; It is true that the King having declared the Members sitting at Westminster to be Traitors and Rebels; and Treason, as themselves have often acknowledged, dischar∣ging all Priviledges, Qualifications, Capacitie, or abilities to act as a Parlia∣ment; the King was enforced to call to His Councell and Assistance, His loyall Members of both Houses, that had bin wrongfully, or by force and tumults driven from the Houses at Westminster; and to require of them in His so great distresse their helpe and advice: but it is conceived that they will not be able to shew, that the King ever stiled it his Parliament, but an Assembly of the Members of the Lords and Commons convened at Oxford. And for that which they instance of private letter, intended only for the sight of the Queene His Wife, they will faile of the end for which they produce it, which is, to withdraw the affections of His faithfull Servants (which they call His own Party) from Him by telling them, that they may perceive what reward they may expect, when they have done their utmost, and ship wrack't their faith and consciences to His will and tyranny: But his party (as they terme it) which are His faithfull and loyall Subjects, as they have already most of them lost their Estates and Fortunes for their Conscience and Loyalty to Him; so they will sacrifice their lives willingly for His service and restitu∣tion. And as for that by-name of a mock-Parliament, which they give unto that Assembly; They may remember that there was double the number of Peers more then remained at Westminster; and for the Members of the House
of Commons, they much exceeded in their Estates and Fortunes all those that were left behind them. They may likewise remember that they have not wanted their by-names in print; as the Jugles, & Hocas-pocuses at West∣minster; and by some who have ever adhered to them, have been stiled a Linsey-wolsoy-Parliament▪ and their own Army in their Declaration, have called them a Parliament swayed by a factious prevolent party, that governed by an arbitrary tyrannicall Power. These things I must confesse are set down by me (that have been a Member of the House of Commons) with great grief, remembring the respect and reverence which in former times was born unto that House, and now changed into so great Scorn and Derision as weekly comes forth in print. They then adde, His often breach of trust with the Protestants of France, Scotland, Ireland, and England, with all other His unjust oppressions; and His often endevours to enslave them by German, Spanish, Lorraign, Irish, and Da∣nish, and other forrein forces. Those other forces must certainly be of Turks, Swedes, or Polands; for they have particularly recited almost all other Na∣tions, when now in all this their Declaration, (except such from Ireland who were His own Subjects, and who were bound in duty to come to the succour of their King, being invaded by a forreign Nation, called in by them to conquer Him) they have not been able to instance in so much as one Company of Foot, or Troup of Horse of forreigners, that He hath called in, but they hope by this great noise of reciting so many Nati∣ons, to fill the ears of the People, and to abuse them; as they did by the speaking of the death of His Father; of the reproaching of His Mother: of His bloudy Cruelties, His oppressions, and Tyranny; His breach of Trust, of Oaths, and Protestations; and with those odious names, and a bold Accusation, (to which He should not have means to answer) to make something stick with the people, whereby to alienate their Hearts from Him; and to allay the detestablenesse of their most inhumane and barba∣rous proceeding with Him. They then say, neither do we wonder He should forget His Vows and Prote∣stations, that He would never consent to a toleration of the Popish Religion, or a∣bolition of the Laws then in force against Recusants, yet about the same time He wrote Letters to the Queen, and the E. of Ormond, that He would consent to the taking away of all penall Laws against Papists both in England and Ireland. Touching the Letters to the Queen, and the Marquesse of Ormond, they are all printed by their Order; and according to the information I have credibly received, by those Letters it will appear, that the penall Lawes touching Recusants were not to be taken away; and the favours intended to the Papists were with such limitation, as they think fit to conceal. Besides, there is a wide difference betwixt a toleration of Popery, and the not putting in execution the penall Lawes; and so there is betwixt the abolishing of the penall Lawes, and a temporary forbearance of the ri∣gour
of them, which hath been practised by Queen Eliz. King James, and His Majesty; but never in so high a degree, as by themselves toward the Sectaries and Separatists (who by the Law are Recusants as well as Pa∣pists;) yet they have made use of them in their service, without distin∣ction of any Sect, Schisme, or Heresie; insomuch that at Plymouth they made use of some Turks in their service out of the Gaole, that had been condemned as Pyrats. And let them remember of what a composition their new model'd Army is, by whom they have carried through their Rebellion; and how carefull they are now to uphold the liberty and free∣dom of them, under the name of tender Consciences. Yet it must be a Crime in the King, for the saving of His Crown, to encourage His own Subjects to be loyall unto Him; and to assist Him against his Rebels, by promising them some favour against the rigour and extremity of the Lawes. There is no Religion, or Nation, English, Welch, Irish, Scottish, French, Hol∣landers, Dutch, Germans, Turks, whose service they have not used to depose their Soveraign, as it is now apparent, although at first they all fought for the King and Parliament: And if He should have made use of them for His just defence, or shall do for His just restitution, His doing so, would be much more justifiable before God and man then what they have done. They then say, that notwithstanding that both Houses, and the Scotch Com∣missioners did declare, that they did hold a personall Treaty was not safe, yet the Houses now yeelded to that; that is, to a personall Treaty. They might have remembred that the Scots in their Papers do set down why at that time they held a personall Treaty at London not safe; viz. be∣cause the King had several Armies on foot, & many strong garrisons then; neither was it known what party, or correspondency He might have in London; all which considerations were now ceased; and that therefore at present they held a personal Treaty (and that to be with the Houses them∣selves, and at Westminster) most necessary. And thus with their Art in con∣founding of Times, they labour to abuse the World; and to make shew as if they had yeilded to all that which the Scots now desired; whereas they would not treat with the King but in the Isle of Wight, and not with the Houses, as the Scots Commissioners desired, but with their Commissio∣ners; And whereas the Scots desired that the King might be free and at li∣berty, they would have Him still their Prisoner. They further say, that all this was yeilded unto, upon condition that the King would sign but four Bils, which they judged not only just and honourable, but ne∣cessary even for the present Peace and Safety during such a Treaty. Hereby they would insinuate that they desired the four Bils but for security during the Treaty; whereas they know that those Bils were to be made Acts of Parliament, and so perpetuall Laws; unlesse they intended that the Treaty should be everlasting.
As for the justness, honourableness, and necessity of the said four Bils; If they have vouchsafed to read the Kings Answer (which was not of such impor∣tance whether they did or no, their resolution being taken before; that if the King would not undo Himselfe, they must undo Him, which is said to have been the speech of a Member of that House) if they had read the Kings Answers, they would have found that the King had convincingly made it appear, that this their way of proceeding (besides the unreasonablenesse of the Bils themselves) was irrationall, impossible, and must be ineffectuall to the making of Peace, for which this Treaty was pretended to be; To which might be added, that it would have been invalid. It was irrationall; for that it is contrary to the nature of a Treaty, that the chief Subject matters of the Treaty should be first assumed. It was impossible; because the King was desired to passe these Acts by Commission under the great Seale, and not by His presence in Parliament, whereas there is no such thing as a great Seale, but a mock-Seale of their owne making, of which Sir Edw. Cooke, Mr. Sollicitor, and the above-named reverent Judge, as well as three Statutes, have likewise delivered their opinion. It must of necessity be ineffectuall; for no Peace could be concluded without the Consent of the Scots; and they in the name of that Kingdome protested against their Bils, and manner of proceeding; and like rationall men they declared, that they could not but wonder, that it could be sup∣posed that the King having so often refused the said Bils, for the procuring of a Peace, should now condescend unto them, only for the procuring of a Treaty. Invalid it must needs be; for it is well known, that imprison'd Princes (especially by their own Subjects) can do no valid Act to the prejudice of themselves, much lesse of their Successors; besides it is well known what the doctrine of the above specified Authors and the Law is, touching constraining of the King by force. There shall no more be said of the manner of their condescending to such a condition'd Treaty (which they insinuate to have been a gracious proceeding) only I will set down what a so∣ber man said of it, & then speak to the matter of the Bils by them desired: That the King was used like a man that had had his horse, moneys, sword, cloak, and cloak-bagge violently taken from him; and the men that had rob'd him (so that he would promise not afterward to prosecute them) were content to treat with him about restoring him some part of his goods; but he should first give his consent that they might keep his horse, his money, his sword, and his cloak; but for his cloak-bagge, his nightcap, his slippers, and his shirts, they would treat with him; And because he would not yeild to those conditions, they stript him of his cloaths, bound him, and cast him into a ditch. For the matter of the Bils they say nothing, not so much as to insinuate
what they were, and of them there will be a Tract apart; only two or three words shall be said to let the world see, that there were never so shamefull proposals made by any Subjects to their King; especially upon His refusall to yeild unto them, to lay the ground for His deposing, and imprisoning. 1. If the King should have condescended to the setling of the Militia according to the Bill offered by them, He should have devested himself and the Crown for ever, of the means of protecting his Subjects, the Law, or the Church, and thereby have been absolutely perjured, by breaking His Oath of Coronation; he should have left his Subjects meer Slaves to their absolute power, by giving way that they might levy what men they plea∣sed, without distinction of Persons, Quality, or limitation of Numbers; and under the pretext of paying the men so levyed, might raise what moneys they pleased, without restraint either in the manner or proportion. And having already (as they pretend) the Legistative power in their hands without the King; it is much wonderd that they should presse for any more Bils then this; for hereby alone they should be the most absolute Princes in Christendom, their Wils being the only Laws, and a setled Power to up∣hold their Will. 2. But it should seem being hereby become Princes, they would not want that noble Power of Soveraignty, of conferring of Honours; They had once this Parliament nominated a list of Persons whom they intended to have made Dukes, Earls, and Barons; and now they would hook in that Power by a Bill. It may be said they intend it not without the King: That is but an illusion, for if they shal by Bil make such Persons Peers, as they wil pretend have by their fidelity and courage preserved the State; they have already declared, that the King ought to give His Consent to such Bils as the two Houses offer unto him; and in this rewarding of such Heroes, as have been the preservers of their Country, they will not take a Denyall. And for their supplying their new Lords with Estates and Revenues for their new callings, that is but giving the Estates of some of the loyall Lords (whom they call Delinquents) to those their new Lords; which is done in a morning by an Ordinance, as firmly as if it were by Act of Parliament. 3. In their third Bil, of having all Declarations & Proclamations of their Treason and Rebellion to be revoked, they do not pretend a generall Par∣don or Act of Oblivion; but they wil have a Justification of all their Acti∣ons and proceedings; and all the blame and bloud of the War to rest upon the Kings head, and his Adherents; and that they as Traytors and Rebels have forfeited their Lives and Estates, wherewith they will enrich them∣selves. So that the King must not only pardon, but justifie them whom He hath so often declared to have been Traytors, and in his conscience belie∣veth them to be so (although he be willing to forgive and forget all that is by past) but must leave in the hands of their mercilesse Enemies, those that
His conscience telleth Him have been and are innocent loyall Subjects; and can be charged with no Crime, but that they have served Him faithfully ac∣cording to their Obligations by the Law of God, the Law of the Land, their Oathes, and naturall Allegeance. Insomuch that they are not content that the King should be poor, and without any Power or Authority; but as they labour in this Declaration to render Him odious to His people, so they would make Him infamous to all Posterity, by delivering His faith∣full true servants and Friends (that have suffered so much for Him) to to∣tall ruine and destruction. 4. Their fourth Bill, is, for the further Declaration of the Act for the continuance of this Parliament, as is pretended; but in effect it is a further settling and confirming of it; And certainly if there did any shame remain, they would blush to move the King in any thing concerning this Bill; consi∣dering upon what grounds the King was induced, or rather constrained to grant it; & how they have solemnly protested by their Declaration of the 19. of May 1642. That they would do nothing by vertue of that gracious Act, which otherwise had not been fit to have been done. But what use have been made, and still is, of the said Act, (beyond the Intention in the preamble of the said Bill expressed) to the disservice of the King, and destruction of the Kingdome, let the world judge. Now since the Kings not condescending to these four Bils, is that which they themselves set down in this Declaration to be the formall and reall Cause of their making these Votes, and consequently of deposing and im∣prisoning the King, (For all the other particulars are but Aggravations and Accumulations of faults, which they say they have hitherto borne) but this the Kings present denyall of their Bils, is that which without Scorn and Contempt to themselves, and ruine to the Kingdome, they may not suffer; and therefore have taken their present resolutions, to have no more to do with the King, but to settle the Kingdomes without Him. The case lyeth then plainly before the indifferent Reader, whether the refusing of four such Bils, so destructive in the matter to Monarchy; so enthrawling of the People to all sorts of Slavery; and in the manner so compulsory, so irrationall, and so impossible, be a justifiable Cause for Subjects to depose their King, to imprison His Person, to defame Him to the World, and to deny Him all means of Vindicating His Innocency and Honour. But now they say, having made this last so just and honourable application, they cannot but conclude, that by not assenting unto it, He hath forgotten not only His duty to the Kingdome, but also the care and respect which He owes to, Him∣self and His own Family. How just and honourable the said Application hath been, hath been formerly shewed, of which it may be with truth averred, that leaving aside the wickednesse in the matter, no story ancient or modern can parallel it
(for the undutifulnesse and impudence of it) in Subjects towards their King. To conclude, they say, that for these few of many reasons, they cannot repose any more trust in Him; but have made those former resolutions. Certainly they have done ill to passe by their many reasons; for these few have been much too weak to support so great a weight, as the wickedness of their deposing their King, and the using of Him as they do: and it is to be beleived, that they would make use of the best of those reasons, having so great store out of which to make their choice. In the next place they say, They will notwithstanding indeavour to settle the present Government, as may best stand with the Peace of the Kingdome. It is likely indeed to be a righteous Government, and to last long, that a preva∣lent party in the House of Commons shall settle without the King, and against all Law. WHAT hath been hitherto said, hath been to shew how free the King is from the Aspersions endeavoured to be cast upon him by this Declaration; together with the great malice and falshood of it. First, many things in matter of fact are most untrue; as that the King should have a hand in the Irish Rebellion; That there was a Designe of a generall Massacre of all the Protestants in England; That the Spanish fleet that came into the Downes 1629. was to enslave the Subjects, &c. with many more such ridiculous falshoods. Other things are perverted by false application of the facts, as that the Horse that were spoken to be raised in Germany, were for the enslaving of England; whereas the truth is, that if that designe had gone forward, (as it did not) it had been to recover the Palatinate. In other things were the facts untrue, by concealing part of the truth and the circumstances, which do clearly justifie the said fact; The Malice and Fraud of the Declaration is made most apparent; as when they speak of slitting of noses, branding of faces, cutting off eares, the facts were true; But they conceal that all these things were done by course of Justice against no∣torious Malefactors; And so that which they should have called Justice, they now bring for an instance of Cruelty. Fourthly, it is remarkable that all the greivances complained of through∣out the Kings whole Reigne, though wholy redressed according to their own desires; yet they are recharged, and the redresses not spoken of. So likewise are all the Objections which they have formerly made, either of the passages of the War, or concerning the Treaties; although they have by the King been formerly fully answered, yet they obtrude upon the people all the said objections, and conceale from them the Kings satisfactory An∣swers; and all this in so venomous and spitefull a language, that it is plainly to be seen, that their end is to make differences irreconcileable, and the King odious, that they may have the more colour to destroy Him.
It will now be necessary to speak a few words of their other Proposi∣tion, viz. that a King that should be culpable of those Crimes suggested in this their Declaration, may be proceeded against, as they do now proceed with the King; for to that end they have written this Declaration, as con∣teining the reason of their Resolutions and Proceedings. This position is worse and more dangerous then their present Rebelli∣on, for that by Gods goodnesse may soon have an end, but this Position is a source, a seed-plot and nurcery of perpetuall Rebellions. So much hath been written by all sorts of Christians against this damned Maxime, that here it shall be very briefly spoken of, and onely shewed, that it is full of Impiety, Perjury, and Treason. Impiety, towards God, who hath in his holy word so often commanded obedience to the Powers by him ordained over us, and hath prohibited Resi∣stance upon pain of Damnation; and that to Heathens, Tyrants, and Persecu∣tors of his Church, even to that monster of mankind, Nero. Perjury, by breaking so many Oathes, Protestations, and Covenants, of bearing unto the King true faith and allegeance, of defending His Person and Honour, with all His just Rights and Dignities. Treason, the levying War against the King, the adhering to His ene∣mies, the indeavouring to alienate the hearts of the Subject from the King, to remove the King from the Government, or to imprison His Person, to subvert the Lawes, to indeavour to change the government either Ecclesia∣sticall or Civill, to reforme the King by force, and many other things are by the Lawes, and Acts of Parliament (and not by Ordinances) declared to be Treason, and most of them so confessed by themselves this Parlia∣ment to be so; and for the pretence of some of them, the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and the Earle of Strafford lost their lives. And here I shall leave that damned Position, that Subjects may depose their lawfull heredi∣tary King, (for so the King is in effect) upon suggestions of His failings, or any other cause whatsoever. It remains yet to speak something of the Scope of their so bitter railing, and reviling of the King with so foul a pen, as Tyranny, Cruelty, betraying, breach of Oaths, &c. which is to make Him odious; for answer whereunto there shalbe only offered unto the world and them, such truths of the King and his Deportments, as the fiercest of His enemies shall not deny. He is known to be a Prince of a most pious life, which He daily sheweth by His constant practice of all Acts of devotion, as Prayers, Sermons, and frequent receiving of the holy Sacrament. No blood hath been drawn by his Anger or Revenge; no noble Family dishonoured by His Lust; no Debauchery or Excesse hath received encouragement by His Example; no Oathes or Pro∣fanesse have been heard to come out of His mouth; His prudence, ability & invincible courage and industry, are not unknown to themselves; nor His patience and composedness of minde, in the highest afflictions and wrongs
that have ever almost befallen any King; and lastly, his goodnesse and cle∣mency in desiring to put all by-past Injuries into perpetuall oblivion. Let these His known and undenyable vertues, besides His Royal De, and undoubted Title for six hundred years in England, and of 108 Kings in Scotland, be put into the ballance, against all those malicious and Aspersions that have been raked together against Him; and then let it be judged, whether it will not be an ill change for the people, to leave the subjection and Government of such a Prince, to put themselves under the Tyrannie and Arbitrary Power of such a Parliament, and such an Army. One thing more shall onely be offered to the consideration of the Peo∣ple; whether if the Houses should condescend to a Peace, upon no more then what the King offereth, besides all the Concessions He hath granted this Parliament, and what He hath offered from Holdenby, from Hampton Court, and Carisbrook Castle (before cited,) the English Nation should not be the freest and happiest Subjects in Europe. And whether if they continue under the present usurped Power of the House of Commons, and the Army, (for the Lords serve now onely to be subservient unto them) they shall not be the most miserable of all people; by having their Religion, Lives, Liberties, and Lawes changed, and to be disposed of by the Wils and Arbitrary Po∣wer of their fellow-Subjects. It is againe desired (as it hath been in the beginning of this Answer) that what is herein set down, may onely stay mens judgements, and put them into a deliberation; untill the King (who hath perfect knowledge and in∣formation of all the particulars, which in many things are wanting to the Writer hereof) shall Himselfe set forth His full Answer; which is not like∣ly to be long; for that those who have the worst opinion of the Procee∣dings of the House of Commons, cannot suppose them to be so irrationall and barbarous, as not to let the King have a sight of this their Declarati∣on; and to afford Him all necessary means of making and publishing His Answer. FINIS.
