E1211 99899930 170849
All the severall ORDINANCES DIRECTIONS AND VOTES OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: For the speedy Establishing of the Presbyteriall Government. ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That these Ordinances, Directions, and Votes be forthwith printed and published. Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1646.
DIRECTIONS OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: After advice had with the Assembly of Divines, for the electing and choosing of RULING-ELDERS in all the Congregations, and in the Classicall Assem∣blies for the Cities of London and Westminster, and the severall Counties of the Kingdom: For the speedy setling of the Presbyteriall-Government. Die Martis 19. August 1645. ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That these Directions for electing of Elders in particular Congregations and Classicall Assemblies, be forthwith printed and published. Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1645.
Die Martis, 19 Augusti. 1645. DIRECTIONS FOR THE Election of Elders. 1 THat the Ruling Elders of a Paro∣chiall and congregationall Elder∣ship shall be chosen by the severall Ministers, and members of their Congregation respectively, being such as have taken the Nationall Covenant, and are not persons under age, nor servants that have no families. 2. That notice of such election, and of the day when it shall be given by the Minister in the publique assemby the next Lords day but one before, and on that said Lords day a Sermon be preached preparatory to that weighty busi∣nesse.
3 That no man be chosen for a Ruling-Elder but onely for one Congregation, and that in the place where his most setled dwelling and im∣ployment doth lie. 4. That it shall be lawfull for the Congrega∣tion respectively, or any other persons to exhi∣bite exceptions against any person elected as aforesaid, touching the right of his election, or touching matter of ignorance, or scandall, here∣after mentioned, within fourteene dayes next after the said election to such persons, Ministers, and others, as shall be appointed by Authority of Parliament, to receive the said exceptions, which said persons shall have power to receive, heare, and determine all complaints against any Elder of ignorance and scandall, within the di∣scription of ignorance and scandall hereafter mentioned. And shall have power to approve the person so elected, in case no just exception, as aforesaid shall be proved against him. But if he shall upon just proofe be found ignorant or scandalous, as aforesaid, then to remove him. And if any of the said Elders shall be adjudged to be removed, as aforesaid, then another shall be chosen in his place as aforesaid.
5. That such shall be chosen for Ruling Elders as are men of good understanding in matters of Religion, sound in the faith, prudent, discreet, grave, and of unblameable conversation. And willing to undergoe the said Office. 6. That all parishes and places whatsoever, (as well priviledged places, and exempt jurisdi∣ctions, as others) be brought under the govern∣ment of Congregationall, Classicall, Provinciall, and Nationall Assemblies. Provided, that the Chappels or places in the houses of the Peers of this Realme shall continue free for the exercise of Divine duties to be performed according to the Directory. 7. That the Chappell of the Rolles, the two Serjants Innes, and the foure Innes of Court, shall be each of them a Congregationall Pres∣bytery within themselves, and make a Classicall Presbytery in the whole. 8. That the Province of London shall be di∣vided into twelve Classicall Elderships accor∣ding to the distributions hereafter following: The first Classis to containe: ALhallowes Breadstreet, Andrewes Wardrope, Anne Black Friers, Austins Parish,
Bennet Pauls wharfe, Faiths, Gregories, John Evangelist, Margaret Moses, Martin Ludgate, Mary Aldermary, Mary le Bow, Matthew Fridaystreet, Mildreds Breadstreet, Pauls, Peters Pauls wharfe. The second Classis to containe: Anthomes vulgo An∣thelms. Bennet Sherehogge, James Garlickhithe, John Baptists, Martin in the Ʋintry, Mary Magdalen old fish∣streete, Mary Somerset, Mary Mounthaunt vul∣go Mounthaw, Michael Queene Hithe, Michael Royall, Nicholas old Abby, Nicholas Olives, Pancret Soperlane, Thomas Apostle, Trinity Parish. The third Cassis to containe: Alhallowes the greater, Alhallowes the lesse, Alhallowes Lumberstreet, Edmunds Lumberstreet, Laurence Pountney, Mary Abchurch, Mary Bothaw, Mary Woolchurch, Mary Woolnoth, Nicholas Aron, Stephens in Walbrook, Swithens.
The fourth Classis to containe: Andrew Hubbert, Bennet Grace-church, Buttolph Billingsgate, Clements in Eastcheape, Dionis Backchurch, George Buttolph-lane, Leonard in Eastcheape, Magnus, Margaret New-fish street, Martin Orgars, Maryhill, Michael Crookedlane, Michael Cornhill, Peters Cornhill. The fifth Classis to containe: Anne Aldersgate, Buttolph Aldersgate, Brides, Bridewell, Christchurch, John Zachary, Leonard Fosterlane, Mary Staynings, Michael in the Corne, vulgo in the Querne, Olaves Silverstreet, Peters Cheape, Pedast, alias Fosters. The sixth Classis to containe: Albanes Woodstreet, Alhallowes Honi-lane Alphage, Giles Creeplegate, James Chappell, Laurence in the Jury, Martin in Jremongerlane, Mary Aldermanbury, Marymaudlins Milk∣street, Mary Colechurch, Michael in Woodstreet, Mildred in the Poultry, Olives in the Jewry.
The seventh Classis to containe: Alhallowes by the Wall, Bartholmew Exchange, Bennet Fynck, Buttolph Bishopsgate, Christophers, Margaret Lothbury, Michael Bashinshaw. Peter Poore, Stevens Colemanstreet. The eight Classis to containe: Andrew Ʋndershaft. Buttolph Algate, Ethelburge, Hackney, Hellens, James Duke-place, Katherine Cree-Church, Leonard Shoreditch, Martins Oteswich, vulgo Outwich. Mary Newington, alias Soke Newington. The ninth Classis to containe: Alhallowes Barkin, Alhallowes Stanings, Dunstans in the East, Gabriel Fenchurch, Katherine Coleman, Katherine Tower, Margaret Pattons, Olaves Hartstreet, Peters in the Tower, Stepney, Trinity Minories, Wapping, Whitechappell.
The tenth Classis to containe: George Southwarke, Lambeth, Mary Magdalen, Bermondsey, Mary Overs, Newington Buts, Olives Southwarke, Rotherhithe vulgo Redriff. Thomas Hospitall, Thomas Southwarke, The eleventh Classis to containe: Clements Danes, Giles in the Fields, Knightsbridge, Margaret Westminster, Martins in the Fields. Newchurch, Peters Westminster, Pauls chappell in covent Garden. The twelfth Classis to containe: Andrew Holborne, Bartholmew the greater, Bartholmew the lesse, Charterhouse, Dunstones in the West, James Clarkenwell, Mary Islington, Sepulchers. 9. That all the severall Parishes and Places within the Cities of London and Westminster, and the parts adjacent, according as they are distinguished into twelve severall Classis, shall
be the extent and bounds of the province of London. Concerning the members of the Classicall and Congre¦gationall Assemblies in the severall Counties. THat in the severall Counties certaine per∣sons, Ministers, and others, shall be appoin∣ted by authority of Parliament, who shall con∣sider how their severall Counties respectively may be most conveniently divided into distinct classicall Presbyteries, and what Ministers and o∣thers are fit to be of each Classis. And they shall accordingly make such division, and nomination of persons for each classicall Presbytery, which Divisions, and persons so named for every Divi∣sion shall be certified up to the Parliament. That the Chanchellors, Vice-chancellors, and heads of the Universities shall consider how the Colled∣ges may be most conveniently put into classicall Presbyteries, and doe certifie the same up unto the Parliament. And the said severall Classis respectively be∣ing approved by Parliament within their seve∣rall Precincts shall have power to constitute Congregationall Elderships where a competent number of persons so qualified for Elders, as a∣foresaid,
shall be found. And where no persons shall be found sit to be Elders, as aforesaid, then that Congregation shall be immediately under the Classicall Presbytery, untill that congrega∣tion shall be enabled with members fit to be El∣ders, as aforesaid. The congregationall Assembly shall meet once every weeke, and oftner if occasion shall serve. The classicall Assembly shall meet once every moneth. Concerning members of the Provinciall Assembly. THe Provinciall Assembly shall be constitu∣ted of members sent from every Classis within the Province. The number of the members sent from each Classis shall be so proportioned, as that the Pro∣vinciall Assembly may be more in number then any Classicall Presbytery within that Porvince. And to that end there shall be at least two Mi∣nisters, and foure Ruling Elders out of every Classis. And that where there shall be need, the number may be increased, as to the persons ap∣pointed for the bounding of the Provinciall Assembly shall seeme meet. Provided, that the
number doe not exceed nine of each, Ministers and Ruling-Elders, from any one Classis. And that there alwaies be two Ruling-Elders to one Minister. That the Provinciall Assembly being constituted, shall meet twice every yeere, the first meeting shall be determined by the persons appointed for the bounding of the Provinciall and Classicall Assemblies. Concerning the Nationall Assembly. THat the Nationall assembly shall be con∣stituted of members sent from the severall Provinces aforesaid, the number of the members from each Province to the Nationall Assembly shall be two Ministers, and foure Ruling-Elders. The Nationall Assembly is to meet when they shall be summoned by Parliament, and to fit and continue as the Parliament shall order, and not otherwise. FINIS.
