E2421 E286_7 R200077@R200089 99860881 113008
TWO ORDINANCES OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, The one, For raising Monies out of Delin∣quents Estates, for maintaining Horse and Foote, for the Garrison of Gloucester, and County of GLOƲCESTER, &c. The other, For raising of Forces for the takeing in of OXFORD. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com. Printed by T. W. for ED. HUSBAND, MAY the 29. 1645.
An Ordinance of the Lords & Commons assembled in Parliament for raising moneys out of Delinquents Estates for maintaining horse and Foote, for the garrison of Glo∣cester, and County of Gloucester, &c. WHereas there is great necessi∣ties for providing of moneys for the raiseing and maintai∣ning horse and Foote for the Garrison of Gloucester, and for the Counties of Gloucester, Hereford, Mon∣mouth, Glamorgan, Brecknocke and Radnor. Be it Ordained by the Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament assembled, That the Estates and Debts of such Malignants, De∣linquents, and Papists, not yet sequestred nor discovered, and which shalbe disco∣vered
by the Committees of the aforesaid Counties or any of them, or by such person and persons as they or any of them shall au∣thorize for that purpose, and shall fall with∣in the Rule of the Ordinance directing se∣questrations, shall be allowed by the said Committees, and paid over unto them for advancement of the said service upon Ac∣compt. And that the receipt or accquittance of the said Committee for the same under the hands and Seales of any three or more of them shalbe a sufficient discharge in that behalfe, unto the person or persons so pay∣ing the same, against any the said Malig∣nants, Delinquents or Papists respectively, and be pleaded in Barre in any action or suite, upon and of any bond, specialty, or o∣ther security whereby the same shalbe be∣come due unto the said Malignants, De∣linquents or Papists, or unto any one of them respectively. Provided the said concealed Estates ex∣ceed not the summe of 6000. l. And that the said committee or any person or persons au∣thorized by them as aforesaid, nor any of
them, shall possesse themselves of the said Malignants, Delinquents or Papists Estates, before he or they acquaint the committee of Examinations therewith or any five or more of them (the said committee sitting) to the end they may judge of their Delin∣quency before his or their Estates be seque∣stred and taken away. Provided also, that such Appeales shalbe allowed therein, to the committee of the Lords and Commons for sequestration as in like cases hath beene used and ap∣proved. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.
An Ordinance of the Lords & Commons Assembled in Parliament, enabling the Committee of Oxon, Bucks, and Berks, to take volun∣tary subscriptions for maintaining of additionall Forces under the com∣mand of Major-Generall Brown for the takeing of Oxford. IT is this day Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That the Com∣mittee of the three Coun∣ties of Oxon, Bucks, and Berks, or any two of them, or such persnos as that Committee shall ap∣point for this purpose, shall have authori∣ty, and are hereby enabled to take the vo∣luntarie Subscriptions of any persons what∣soever, both Members of either House of
Parliament and others, for the maintaining of additionall Forces under the Command of Major-Generall Browne, to those Forces he hath already, for four Moneths at the usuall pay, for the taking of Oxford. And what Forces and monie shall be raised by such voluntary contributions shall be imployed for the taking of Oxford, and not diverted or imployed in any other ser∣vice whatsoever. And the said Committee of the three Counties are hereby authorised to Treat and conferre with any Committees or o∣ther persons of the City of London or else∣where, for the better carrying on of this worke; And are to bring in an Ordinance for this purpose. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com, FINIS.
