E2575A E83_12 R9480 99873556 126033
Exceeding Joyfull PROPOSITIONS; Propounded by the Commons assem∣bled in Parliament, to all true Subjects within the Kingdome of ENGLAND, and Dominion of WALES. Wherein they declare the proceedings of the KING OF DENMARKE Also how the Kings Maiesty hath sent two Embassadors to the said King of Denmarke, concerning his present procee∣dings here in ENGLAND. Likewise the King of Denmarkes Answer and Resolution, concerning his Majesties desire. Presented to the Kings Majesty at OXFORD, December 20. 1642. Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that these Propositions be forthwith Printed and publi∣shed. Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parliamentorum. Decemb. 23, Printed for I. H. and William Crumwell 1642.
Exceeding Joyfull Propositions, From the High and Honourable Court of Parliament. To all His Maiesties Subiects in His Dominions of ENGLAND and WALES. WEE the Lords and Commons in this pre∣sent Parliament assem∣bled, doe in the pre∣sence of Almighty God for the satisfaction of all true English Sub∣jects, propound these Our Propositions to
the Subjects of this Nation, to satisfie them in generall of our proceedings, and that there was nor is not the least thought a∣rising among us, of any evill intention toward his Majesty, nor Designe▪ to the prejudice of his just Honour and Autho∣rity, but being ingaged to raise forces, and to take up Armes against the Authors of this bloody and intestine Warre, where∣with this Kingdome, that lately flourished in Peace and prosperity, is now involved in blood and slaughter, the dire effects of Warre,. And we have allwaies desired from our hearts and soules, and manifested in Our actions and proceedings, and in severall humble Petitions and Messages, professed Our loyalty and obedience to his Majesty, with our readinesse and resolution to de∣fend his Person, and support his estate by the hazard of Our lives and fortunes, and that we have been willing for the Peace of the Kingdome, to passe by high incroach∣ments and usurpations, to the prejudice o
Religion and Liberty, and divers bloody trayterous practizes to the utter ruine both of Church and State, so as we might for the present time have been secuted from that wicked malignant party, those perni∣tious and trayterous Councellors, who have beene the authors of these calamities, which have, and doe still distemper this Church and State, and all evidence and inducements maketh us really believe, that the Kings Councell and resolutions, are so ingaged to the popish party, for the extir∣pation of Gods true Religion, that all our hopes of peace are excluded, and his Maje∣sty fully intends to give satisfaction to the Church of Rome, and their adherents, by al∣tering the protestant profession (namely) the true Religion so long professed by the People of this Nation, and maintained by so many Protestant Princes, to their eternall same, that so the malignant Vipers may (by opposing his Majesties good Subjects) gaine power to destroy the wel-affected party of this Kingdome.
Wherefore We have thought fit to de∣clare unto you the resolution and procee∣dings of the King of DENMARKE, and how his Majesty hath imployed divers Persons of ill report, both for Religion and hone∣sty, to Denmarke, and divers other forraine parts, to raise forces there, and to land them in the Northern parts of this King∣dome, to joyne with the Earle of Cumber∣lands Papisticall Crew, and that through his Majesties Embassadors meanes, they have prevailed so farre with foraigne Papists that in divers places beyond the Seas there is great preparation for all Warre-like pro∣vision, to assist his Majesty the King of England, against his great Councell the Parliament, the Protectors and framers of this Warre, having set downe their Reso∣lution and determination to plant Popery & superstition in this Kingdome, and to a∣bollish the true Protestant proffession. Wherefore we have thought it also meet and necessary for the preservation of the Gospell, to declare unto you, that his Ma∣jesty
hath of late dayes received about him divers knowne notorious Papists, being the first authors of these bloody Warres in Ireland, some of which stand impeached of high Treason for the Rebellion there, by the Parliament of England, it beng appa∣rently knowne that they have beene in ac∣tuall Rebellion, as namely the Lord Taffe, Sir John Dungane, proclaimed Rebels, like∣wise Doctor Meare, indited for the Rebel∣lion there, and fled for the same, and yet appointed Phisitian to Prince Rupert. Wee have thought it necessary to declare likewise, that we have received certaine in∣formation, that the King hath sent for the Petition of the Irish-Rebels, which the Ju∣stices had stopt, with evident expressions of favour to them, where that Kingdome is like to become an unfit habitation for the professors of the Protestant Religion, and a seminary or seed-plot of Warre and Treason against this Kingdome, and that the Rebels in Jreland must needs gaine in∣incouragement, and the poore Protestant
party be very much disheartned to see  heavy distractions of this Kingdome,  which meanes the Rebels are very confi∣dent that they shall utterly destroy the Pro∣testant Religion, and plant popery and ¦perstition in its place, for the preservatio of which, wee desire all that would declare themselves true Protestants, to laye their helping hand hereunto, and to assist this Army that now stands for the same, under the Command of his Excellency Robert Earle of Essex. Ordered by the Commons in Parliament as∣sembled, that these Propositions be forthwith printed and published. Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
