E2842 E417_8 R204530 99864014 161317
PROPOSITIONS DELIVERED By the LORDS at a Conference with the House of COMMONS, FOR A Personall Treaty with the KING, upon His Majesties passing foure Bills, for secu∣rity of the peace of the Kingdome. AND The Copy of a Solemne Engagement of the Inhabitants of the North of England, for the Defence of their Rights, Properties, and Liberties, the Authority of Parliament, and the fundamentall Laws of the Kingdome. To Oppose all Foraigne Forces invited or brought into this Kingdome, upon any pretence whatsoever. Signed by many thousand hands, and dayly more Subscribe. Novemb. 26. 1647. Imprimatur Gilb. Mabbott. Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, neer the Queenes-head Tavern, 1647.
Heads of a CONFERENCE Delivered By the Lords, to the House of Com∣mons, concerning a Treaty with His Ma∣jesty, upon the passing of foure Bills. Die Veneris, Novemb. 26. 1647. THe House of Peeres sent Dr. Alit, and the Clerke of the Crowne to the House of Commons to desire a conference this day in the Painted Chamber, where both Houses immediatly met. The right honourable the Earl of Manches∣ter (Speaker of the House of Peeres pro tem∣pore)
declared to the House of Commons, that he was commanded by the Lords to ac∣quaint them, that their Lordships had taken into consideration the desires of the Kings Majesty in His message to treat with the Par∣liament, and also the Scots Papers, delivered in by the Commissioners of the Kingdome of Scotland, pressing for a Treaty with His Majesty. And their Lordships had also considered the desires of the kingdome to be delivered from all burthens and fears, and to have the Government of the kingdom setled, and clea∣red, that the kingdome may be preserved in peace. That their Lordships had commanded him to acquaint them that they do propound to the House of Commons, That foure pro∣positions may be speedily sent to His Ma∣jesty to be passed for the safety and security of the Parliament and Kingdom, and to treat with His Majesty upon the rest. I. That a Bill be drawn up by consent of both Houses for His Majesty to passe into an Act,
for the settling of the Militia of the King∣dome. II. That a Bill be passed for his Majesties cal∣ling In of all Declarations, Oathes, and Pro∣clamations against the Parliament, and those who have adhered to them. III. For passing an Act that those Lords who were made after the great Seale was carried to Oxford, may be made uncapable of sitting in the House of Peeres thereby. IV. That power may bee given to the two Houses of Parliament, to adjourn as the two Houses of Parliament shall think fit. That His Majesty giving the Kingdome security by passing these foure Propositions, there may be a personal treaty with His Ma∣jesty, and the Parliaments of both Kingdoms for the passing of the rest of the Propositions That their Lordships thinke this to be the most probable way for a speedy agreement, betweene His Majesty and the Kingdomes and therefore desire the concurrence of the House of Commons therein,
The papers were delivered by his Lord∣ship to Mr. Lisle, to be, by him, reported in the House of Commons. A SOLEMN ENGAGEMENT OF THE Northerne Inhabitants, FOR The defence of their Rights, Proper∣ties, and Liberties, the Authority of Par∣liament, and the fundamentall Laws of the KINGDOME. VVHereas there hath beene severall Petitions, and Remonstrances pre∣sented to the Parliament, for the oppressed parts of the North-Riding in the County of Yorke, as of the present abuses of Govern∣ment, which as yet have received no re∣dresse, That Pickeringlith is a member of the North-Riding, and hath suffered in many unequall burthens, as relating to the whole Kingdome.
And whereas a late Petition was presented unto his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, pray∣ing his Excellency, that in some of his ad∣dresses to the Honourable houses of Parlia∣ment, he would mediate by some meanes, that Justice might be done unto them, as al∣so to protect them with his Army, they be∣ing a naked people (and to be Armed) all which His Excellency hath promised under His hand and seale to indeavour to doe. In humble acknowledgment of his affairs and to prevent all invasions or any new way upon us or our Country, we whose names are here under listed, do promise and ingage our selves, in and for the defence of our rights properties and liberties, the Authority of Parliament, And the fundamentall lawes of this Kingdome, to oppose all forraigne Forces invited or brought into this Kingdom upon any pretence whatsoever, And to this end wee are and will be ready to rise, and put our selves under such Commanders as we shall chuse, with the approbation of his Excellency and the Commander in cheife for the Northen Assotiation. And with them
to live and dye, For the maintenance of the said Generall, and for the preservation of his Excellency, and Army under his Com∣mand, he and they standing like us for the said principles. This Solemne Engagement is Signed by many thousand hands, and daily more doe Subscribe. FINIS.
