E3684 E364_2 99861767 113912
AN EXACT RELATION OF THE Bloody and Barbarous Murder, com∣mitted by Miles Lewis, and his Wife, a Pi mker upon their Prentice, dwelling in Barnsby-street in Suthwark. WHEREIN IS DECLARED, The manner of his cruell Tortures, shewing how he were whipt with Rods of Wire and put to death with red-hot Irons; the like never heard of before in any Age. ALSO, The Examination of this bloody woman before the Justice; with her Charge and Accusation, laid open against her. Witnesse John Newman, Jury-man of the Chaire. Thomas Walles, All Jury-men. Stephen Robinson All Jury-men. Will. Robinson. All Jury-men. Philip Henson. All Jury-men. London, Printed for J. C. Novemb. 30. 1646.
AN EXACT RELATION OF The most bloudy and inhumane Mur∣der committed by MILES LEWIS and his wife, living in Southwark, upon a poor Father∣lesse Boy of 12. years of Age; the like never heard of before. THE great and manifold Massacres and inhumane Murders that are now dayly compoltted and enact∣ed (by the Instruments of Sathan) in these our latter times, are almost innumera∣ble, and may be a chiefe object to put into the
hearts of every true Christian a me moriall ob∣servation; yes may bee parallel'd with former ages: For who can deny, but that in all ages many bloudy Calmes, and most insolent and barbarous actions have been most inveterate∣ly enacted and executed upon many poore innocent Soules; yet, although we have thou∣sands of Examples, and many fore-warnings dayly and hourly made manifest to us, wee cannot be withdrawn, nor with a bold resolu∣tion fixe our hearts and minds against these allurements of the Divell, but must yeeld and prosecute his ever-confounding designes and projects, as will be too clearly made manifest by these ensuing lines. Therefore, for the generall satisfaction of all people, that desires to have this sad and la∣mentable story communicated to them, I shall begin with the miserable sufferings, and un∣heard of tortures, which were with such inso∣lence and rigour executed upon a poor friend∣lesse boy (about twelve years of age) by his mercilesse Master and Mistresse, who lived in the Burrough of Southwark, in Barnsby-street, in the Parish of St. Mary Maudling; the par∣ticulars whereof followeth:
This Miles Lewis, a Pin-makere, living in Barnsby-street as aforesaid, a man of good re∣putation, and well beloved amongst his neigh∣bours, having entertained and took to preu∣tice a poor Fatherlesse Boy, who after a few weeks past, he began to feel much hardship & cruelty, being kept close to his work, & with most bitter and cruel usage tormented him, not only with his intollerable oppressions of bodi∣ly labour, but also for want of food and nou∣rishment for his supportment; for hardly once in foure or five dayes had he half his belly full of bread, but beat him with cudgels, & broom sticks, sometimes pinching of him, and whip∣ping him with rods of wire, till the verybloud ran down his heeles, hayling him up & down the house by the haire of his head: such mise∣rable and inhumane actions were never heard of before, since the memory of man. All this being so rigorously executed by the aforesaid Lewis and his wife, and having not fully brought to peerfection their most horrid and bloody conspiracy; they began againe to execute their malicious Designes; for his Ma∣ster perceiving, that the Boy began to faile in his work; and not able to performe that which
his wicked and inveterate spirit did thirst after, prepa∣red divers cords, and taking his opportunity, took him by the arme pits, and hanged him up a great distance from the ground, and then with grievous blowes tor∣mented the boy; so that it was impossible for any poor Christian to endure the misery of such stripes. Where∣upon the boy being notable to undergoe the misery a∣ny longer, and striving to get his armes out, his necke slided into the noose, where he hanged a long time, till at the last they could perceive him to draw no breath at all. Then his Master cut the ropes, and let him down, ut∣tering these speeches: Sirrah, I will save you now from death (but with more additionall tortures) for the took four or five hot Irons, which he had laid in the fire, and laid them red-hot to his feet, scorching him so pittiously, that with the very extremity and cruelty of the heat, the boy cast up his eyes, uttering many a sad and wofull groan. Oh the cruelty and barbarousnesse of man! what Villaine or Infidell could do more? But this were not all; for when the Master had pro∣secuted his barbarous designe upon the poor boy, the Mistresse she comes on with a second addition of tor∣tures, taking many hot Irons, and burning his flesh in severall places; so that at the last, he gave up the ghost, having continued a long time under these heavie and oppressed tortures. But, during the time of his great and miscrable affli∣ctions, some of the neighbours hearing his dolefull and lamentable cry, came to his Master and Mistresse, desi∣ring them to mittigate their wrath, and not to deal with
him so barbarously: But all would not serve; for while he had any life, hee were daily and hourly under their heavie oppressions, till at the last, it pleased the great God of heaven to ease him of his heavie burthens, and to take him to himself; and being dead, divers of the Neighbours came in, and having a great suspition of Lewis and his wife, by reason of their former cruelties, and hard usage towards him, they searched the boy, and finding his armes and sides most miserably beaten and bruised, and two mortall wounds in his head, and most lamentably mortified in all parts of his body; for where the flesh was burnt and scorched with the fire, it was most cruelly festered, and in such a manner, that it stroke terrour to the hearts of all the Spectators. Whereupon the Neighbours for feare of being guil∣ty of the least crime, in concealing this suspected mur∣der, went to the Justice, and acquainted him with what had happened. Whereupon the Justice immediatly sent for this Lewis and his wife, and also a little Girle that were their pren∣tice, but the man had made an escape, and were gone, which made their cause so much the worse, and to bee the more suspected. But at the last, the woman and the girle appeared before the Justice, where the girle was examined, and being loath to speake, the Justice began to threaten her; she replyed again, that shee would wil∣lingly declare what she knew, but she durst not, by rea∣son her Dame was there. But being again urged by the Justice, shee replyed, and made answer to this effect; That her Master and Mistresse had beaten him with cudgels, and broome-sticks, and burnt him with hot Irons, and hanged him
up with ropes and cords, and there whipped him; and that her Mistresse kept many rods of wite to whip them, till the blood gushed forth, and dissued down their heeles. This being affirmed, and testified before the Justice, and the rest of the Jury, the woman was presently com∣mitted to prison, and the Girle acquitted, and set free: & no doubt but she will severely suffer fore his misdeed, and barbarous Crime, which she hath so notoriously executed upon this poor prentice. VVitnesse John Newman, Jury-man of the Jury. Thomas Walles, All Jury-men. Stephen Robinson All Jury-men. Will. Robinson. All Jury-men. Philip Henson. All Jury-men. FINIS.
THE whole proceedings of the barbarous and inhumane demolishing of the Earle of ESSEX Tombe, on Thursday night last, November 26. 1646. with a Cronicle of the English Warres. ON Thursday night November the 26. 1646. about 7. of the Clock; His Excellency the Lord Generall Robert Earle of Essex his Hearse in the Chancel of Westminister Abby, with his effu∣ges, and all the Flags, and all things belonging thereto was seen by severall persons to be whole, and nothing thereof spoyled, or demolished. Immediately after which, the doores were all shut, both of the place where the Hearse stood, and also of the Abby: and the Clock Keeper having locked all the outward doores went to bed, who lay (as he useth to do) in a Chamber beyond the Clock house in the Ab∣by, leaving all things safe, and (as he thought secure) till the next morning. On Fryday November 27. The said Clock keeper rose a little after 5. of the Clock in the morning, and o∣pened first one doore, and then another, after which
some men of the Trayne Band, who stood at the doore, as he opened the North doore, (who were to waite on the Parliament House that day) seeing it opened, one of them said to the rest: that if they would go into the Abby, they might see the Earle of Essex his Hearse, may we so said another, yea said he, any man may see the Hearse for the doore is open, which accordingly they did; entering with an expectation to see it, as a∣foresaid. When they came to the place where this Noble Lords Effuges lay, they were much amazed seeing it all broken, and rent in this manner. 1. The head was pulled off, and broken to pee∣ces. 2. His Buffe Coate was slit upon the breast, from one end to the other. 3. The Scarlet Breeches were also cut and split. 4. His Bootes were slit, and cut along the legs of them. 5. His band was thrown downe upon the ground, but not cut nor torne. 6. His Sword was broken in 3 peeces, which was the same Sword that he wore in the field. 7. His Parliament Robes were thrown down, but not cut nor torne. 8. All his Fffages was defased and thrown down, but nothing thereof (at all) missing, done (as is suppo∣sed) with Swords, The Belringer seeing this strange accident was no little astonished, about 6. of the Clock he called up someother Officers of that place; who coming thither found all things in a barbarous disorder as is before ex∣prest;
and the lock of the place (where the hearse stood) broken. They searched about the Church, and made enquiry about the businesse, but could not finde, nor attaine to the knowledge of any that had done this inhumane action. But by search of the other monuments they found the good ould Chambdens monument, (who was King of Armes) defased, the nose of the Effuges cut off, the ruffe about his neck hacked and cut, his Britania (in his hand) hacked and cut, and the end of some of his fingers cut off. It is supposed, that there were a company of villaine (for no honest men can have better thoughts of them that lay in some of the pewes all night, and when the doores were locked, and the bell ringer gone to bed, that then they did this vill any, & when the doores were opened in the morning (it being dark) when hee had o∣pened one door, and was going to another, they might easily escape away. The Abby hath been formerly robbed, and Copes and other things stollen out, and the bell ringer hea∣ring them in the night rung the bell, though hee durst not venture amongst them; yet afterwards they were discovered and taken, and hanged at Tiburn: And per∣haps these also may be discovered & brought to know∣ledge. Many deliver their thoughts what kind of persons they conceive these villaines are: the opinions are such as these. That these were some that did it meerly out of spite and malice, because they spoiled much, but carried no∣things
away. But whether it was done by prelatical per∣son in despite of the Officers profit, or by Jesuite per∣sons in despite of the Patliament, or of some grudge a∣gainst those Families, none can tell. But must probably (it is conceived) that they were Jesuited Cavaliers, that did it out of inveterate malice against the Parliament, and the Cause of the people of God. It was intended within 3 or 4 dayes, that the Hearse should have been taken down, and his Effegies put in a presse amongst the other Tombes, as the Duke of Lenexs and others are. And therefore upon this mischance, the parts of his Effagies and Clothes was the said Friday re∣moved, and locked in the inner roomes amongst the Tombes. From whence, the workmen that made it, have carried it away to rue it compleat againe, and prepare it to stand in a presse as aforesaid, And it will very sud∣denly be set up compleat amongst the Monumeats in Westminster Abby in Souldiers habit, and Parliament Robes. The Hearse hath been taking down Friday and Saturday, and so till finished, and the Flags to hang o∣ver the place where the Corps were buried. Thus much let me tell you (and let the people be assured) that the discoverers of these barbarous villaines that have done this unparalleld, inhuamane, malignant basenesse, will have a very great reward. And the whole Kingdom can acknowledge it no lesse, then a gallant piece of service in bringing such bruit Rascals to a most exemplary pu∣nishment. Read the gallant actions of this noble Peere, and then see if every true Englishman bee not bound in conscience to search diligently (to their power) after these villaines, till they receive their just reward.
A briefe and compendious Narrative of the renowned, ROBERT, Earle of Essex, his pedegree: His valiant acts performed when he was Generall of the Parliaments Army, &c. I Shall not trouble you with the Narrative of the many pious actions of this noble Lord in his minority: he was much beloved of the Commons, he had a publique spirit, his expe∣rience was great: hee travelled beyond the seas, and acted well at home. When times began to be reformed, he was made a Privy Counsellor; and the King raising Forces a∣gainst the Parliament, this good Earle was looked on with great affection, and England had great hopes to be eased by him, for none was more in the effections of the people. Iuly 12. 1642. The Parliament being acquainted that the King had besieged Hull, with many Horse and Foot, that his Forces were trenching themselves, and had 24. peeces of Canon to plant against the Towne, both Houses voted the 22. of Iuly 1642. His Excel∣lency the Earle of Essex to be their Captaine Generall, and to live and dye with him: And the Earle of Bedford was voted Lieute∣nant Generall of the Horse. Before which time, the Earle of War∣wick was made Admirall of the Seas, and then of the Navy: His Excellency having received his Commission from the Parliament, the City of London assisted him in the raising of nigh 10000. men, for his owne Army, they were drawne into Regiments, and daily exercised in the discipline of Warres by Orders from his Excellen∣cy; but in the meane time, those that adhered to the King, labou∣red to set up the Commission of Array in all parts of the Kingdom; but those that adhered to the Parliament, joyned with his Excel∣lency, and laboured to set up the Militin.
The Parliament having placed Deputy-Lieutenants for the se∣verall Counties of the Kingdome, gave Commissions to the Earle of Pembrooke, E. of Stamford, the Lord Say, Lord Brookes, Lord Roberts, Lord Winoughby of Parham, and others. The King pro∣claimed both his Excellency and them Traytors, but the Parlia∣mene published their saithfulnesse. And the 15. of August his Excellencies Army was drawn out of the City of London, August the 20. His Majesty came against Warwicke, and playd against the City with Batteries, and Prince Rupert landed at New∣castle with Armes from beyond Sea, and the Commission of Array was laboured for in Kent, but prevented: a party of Horse & Foot being sent by his Excellency, took Cobham house, the Block-houses at Gravesend, the Bridge at Rochester, and Dover Castle, and se∣cured other parts of the County. August the 22. His Majesty set up his Standerd at Nothingham, Sir Iohn Lucas and divers others were taken prisoners. But the Kings Foote plundred divers Waggons at Litchfield that were loaden with cloathes for the reliefe of the Protestants in Ireland. Aug. 23. The Lord Brooks and Col. Hampden fell on the Kings Forces raised from Coventry, routed 7. Troops of Horse, and 300. the rest Cap. Legge and Cap. Clarke prisoners, the Earle of Carlisle taken prisoner, and committed to the Black-rod. The Earle of Bedford with a party from his Excellency forced the Marquesse of Hartford, the Lord Paulet, Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Iohn Stowell, and others, 500. in number, to retire into Sherburne Castle. The E. of Stamford relieved Leicestershire, and rescued much goods that Col. Hastings had plundered, P. Rupert came to joyne with Hastings. The Lord Admirall came with a Squadron before Plymouth Roads, and took a Merchants Ship and a man of War from Spain, both comming to the King. Septemb. 1. Divers prisoners were taken in Lincolneshire by Col. Sir Anthony Irby (viz.) Sir William Ballardine, Major Lilboway, Major Dollman, Killiguay, and divers others. Col. Lunsfords Sum∣pter Horse was taken in Oxfordshire, himselfe hardly escaping. Sir W. Waller and Col, Norton forced Goring into Portsmouth,
and Southsay Castle was surrendred to them: also in like manner Portsey and Portsmouth were surrendred. Septemb. 9. his Excellency took his leave of the Parliament, and passed through the City guarded in triumph, and many vollyes shot at parting, and prayers for him and his Forces. 46. Cavaliers were taken in Oxfordshire, and sent to London. Sep. 13. the Lord Montagxe was taken Prisoner and committed to the Tower; prince Rupert being joyned with the King, and marched to wards Chester to joyne with Sir Iohn Byron. Sep. 22. the parliament sent a petition to be sent to the King, by his Excellency, from them, with instructions for the ordering of ther Army, under his Excellency, which was sent by Sir Philip Stapleton. And his Excellency marched with his Army to Shrews∣bury, with 300. Horse, and seize on the Magazine. After which the King joyned his whole Army with the Lord Strange, and pos∣sest himself of Chester, his number 10000. Foot and 3000. Horse. But the meane while the E. of Bedford took Sherborne Castle. Col. Fines, with Col. Sands, Col. Browne, with others, consist∣ing of 10. Troops of Horse, and 1000. Foot, engaged with prince Rupert, P. Maurice, and Sir Iohn Byron, killed 30. and lost 28. a∣mongst the rest Major Douglas. But the meane while 200. Ca∣valliers were beaten off at Northampton. And the Lord Fairfax, Generall of the North, did many good services, and took many prisoners in York-shire, many Horse and Foot out of severall Counties came in to joyne with the E. of Essex. His Excellency marched on to Worcester, and took the City. Ma∣lignants had plotted to blow up his Quarters with 11. barrels of Ganpowder, but the plot was discovered and prevented. He sent the Parliaments Petition to the King, and was called Traytor for his labour, yet went on with gallant courage and resolution. Worcester also, and Hereford mere taken by him. And the King retreated to Shrewsbury. and the E. of Derby besieged Manchester. The Lo: Fairfax took Kewood Castle, and Pontfract Castle. Afterwards the King went against Hereford, but was kept out till his Excellency came to relieve them: and followed the King to Worcester, where he received Propositions from the King, which his Excellency sent to the Parliament, and fortifyed Worcester, and se∣cured Bridgenorth: and hearing that the King had appointed P.
Rupert, the E. of Derby, E. of Cumberland, E. of Worcester, Mar∣quesse of Hertford, E. of Cardigan, Lo: Herbert, and the Lo: Co∣ventry with their forces to joyne with him, his Excellency prepa∣red to give them Battaile: And in the meane time a party from his Excellency defeated the Lord Grandison, neere Gloucester, kil∣led 50. took 30. prisoners, and took the towne, and the Lord Wil∣loughby, fell on P. Ruperts Quarters, and killed 30. on the place, but with some losse. The Kings Forces joyning, marched towards Coventry; his Ex∣cellency followed him so close, that they stayd not there. The Parl. secured Windsor Castle, and the Tower of London. Octob. 3. a great battail was fought between Keinton and Edge∣hill, between both Armies; the King in person being in the head of the one, with P. Charls, the Duke of Yorke, with divers Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Viscounts, Lords, and Knights, and the Earle of Essex in the head of the other, with divers Lords and Commons, Members of both Houses of Parl. where his Excellency after a bloody fight, obtained a gallant victory, and took 16. Colours from the King, killed Robert Earle of Lindsey, Lord high Chancel∣lor of England, George Lord D' Aubeny, brother to the Duke of Richmond and Lenox, Sir Edm. Varney Knight Marshall to the King, and divers other eminent men, and took many prisoners. Afterwards the King having taken Banbury, marcht to Reading, his Forces were kept out of Windsor. The Parliament sent a Petiti∣on to the King by Commissioners, but the Kings Forces in a misty night, Novemb. 12. marched to Brainford, and killed many of Col. Hollis his men in their Quarters, yet his Excellency relieved them by the Lo: Brooks, and Col. Hampdens Regiments: many were slaine on both sides. And his Excellency came up so close to them, that they fled to Henly, and brake down the bridge to hinder the pursuit: and the City of London shewed so much willingnesse to assist his Excellency in what they might, as could be expected, as his gallantry had well deserved. 13. peaces of Ordnance were brought downe by water, and discharged against them at Sion house, which did execution, so that the enemy to be revenged plundered the passage boats which they found on the water side. Thursday the 17. in the night the City of London tooke a great Alarum, to Oxford, 3. City Regiments with 12 peeces of Ord∣nance
were drawne out, to releeve His Excellency. A great party of His Majesties Forces were about Charsey, Brainford, Houn∣slos, Hamersmith, and parts adjacent, some Capitulations there was betweene the King and Parliament, but it came to no effect; And therefore His Excellency forced them from their quarters, and drave them from Brainford, Kingston, Hunslow, &c. The King retreating to Oxford, his forces about Abbington, Wallingford, and Redding. And the 25. of November, His Excellency returned to the Parliament, to acquaint them with the state of the Army, and to provide subsistance for his Forces, for winter quarters. In December Sir William Waller took Winchester, the Lord Gran∣deson, and 60. great Officers, 1000. Horse and Foot, and 600. Armes. The Lord Fairfax Routed the Earle of Newcastle neere Tadcaster. Sir William Waller took Arundel Castle. And the city of Chichester. In Ianuary the Lord Fairfax Routed the Earle of Newcastle again neer Bradford. Again, the Lord Fairfax Routed the Earl of Nowcastle neere Leeds. Leeds taken by the Lord Fairfax. His Excellency Routed the Kings Forces neer Henly, and took 200. Prisoners. Sir William Brereton Routed Sir T. Aston by Nampt∣wich, took 100. Prisoners Horse and Foot. In February Sir Iohn Seaton in Lancashire took Preston, Lanca∣ster Town, and Castle. The Western Forces Routed the Cornish neer Madbury, took five piece of Ordnance, 10 Officers, 100. Pri∣soners, and 200. Armes. Sir Th. Aston again routed by Sir W. Brereton at Middlewich. March Sir W. Brereton took Lichfield close. Sir W. Brereton Routed the Kings Army neer Seafford, the Earl of Northamton and many more slain. Lastol also taken. Sir W. Waller tooke Malmsbury by storm. In April, 1643. Col: Massey Routed the Welch in the Forrest of Dean. Col: Massey took Tewksbury. Wiggon taken by Sir Iohn Seaton. Sir W. Waller took three Troops of Prince Mourice's Horse. Sir W. Waller took Monmouth in Wales. Sir W. Waller took Higman, and in it 150 Officers and Gentlemen, 1000. Priso∣ners. Sir W. Waller took Resbridge and Chapstow. And Here∣ford taken by storme by Sir W. Waller, and in it 40. Knights and Officers in Commission, and 600. Prisoners. Sherburne Castle
and Hemster taken by Sir W. Waller. The Lancashire men took Whaley. The Lincolneshire men took Crowland. His Excellency having received recruits, mustered 3 compleat Regiments in the Artillery Ground at London: And His Excel∣lency marched to his Forces to Henly, making preparations against the enemy. And marched with his Army against Redding, in number 12000. Feet and 2000. Horse, where he had some parly with Colonell Aston the Governour; and had releefe sent him from London. A party came to releeve Redding, but were beaten back, and 16. of their men were slaine, and another party gathe∣ring neere Dorchester, where divers were slaine, and 100. taken Prisoners, and a third time, Prince Charles and Prince Rupert, with 45. Troops of Horse and 9. Regiments of Foot, were beaten back by the L. Roberts, 80. killed on the place, 4. taken in the pur∣suit, many prisoners taken, and 200 Arms. And April 20. the Ene∣my being 3500. marched out and delivered Redding, to His Excel∣lency. And the workes about the City of London, were made by the assistance of the Inhabitants, men, women and children. The City sent provisions to his Excellency, which was distributed thus. Victuals distributed to his Excellencies Army. His Excellencies Army 2. load. The Lord Greys Foot 6. load. Major Gen. Skippons 1. load. Colonel Hampdens 1. load. The Lord Roberts 1. load. Sir William Constable 1. load. Sir John Meldrum 1. load. Colonel Bartlet 1. load. Colonel Holborne 1. load. Colonel Holmsted 1. load. Colonel Cholmley 1. load. Rochford, Peterboroug, and Vallard, 2 load. To the Traine 1 load. To the Pioners 1. load. And his Excellency being resolved to march towards the King, came to London, May 11. to acquaint the Parliament therewith. And the Queens was going towards Oxford with 52. waggons of Ammunition, and 44. barrels of Gunpowder. A treaty was be∣tween the King and the Parliament, but took no effect. So his Ex∣cellency returned to his Army to Reading, Iune 8. preparing to march to wards Oxford, and accordingly his Excellency marched through Stoken Church, and so on towards Whateley: and the E. of Donbigh was made Generall of the Counties of Stafford, Wer∣cester, Salop, and Warwick.
In July his Excellency forced the Kings party from Wheatly bridge, where he took 80. Horse. His Majesty put out a Proclama∣tion excepting his Excellency, and divers members out of pardon: Which caused the Parliament to put out a declaration to vindicate them. At which time the sicknesse was very hot about Oxford. And the 9. of July his Excellency sent Sir Philip, and Colonell Goodwin towards Buckingham; who raised the Kings men from their quar∣ters, and killed and took divers. But Thursday, July 16. Sir William Waller being over-powred, receiving losse at the Devizes, the Queen joyned her Forces with the King, neere Edge-hill. All this while his Excellency giving a check to the Kings Army. The Kings Army besieged Glocester; gallantly defended by Co∣lonell Massie: His Excellency marched from Ailsbury Aug. 23. to relieve him. On which day, Colonell Massie (besides divers o∣ther repulses) made a sally upon them, and took 3. peeces of Ord∣nance, and killed many. In September there joyned with the Lord Generall, 2. Regiments of London Train-bands, and 3. Regiments of Auxiliaries; who raised the siege, and brought in Ammunition and provisions. And three dayes after his Excellency marched to Cerencester, where he beat two Regiments of the Kings, tooke the Kings Magazine of bread, and nigh 400. prisoners. After which his Majesty with his whole Army, being again drawn into the field, his Excellency marched up to them: the Queen came up to the Kings Army, and a great Party with her, to streng∣then his Majesties Army against the Earle of Essex: But his Ex∣cellency fought with them neere Newbery, where hee killed five Lords, with divers others of quality. The King with the losse of 500. men retreated to Edge-hill, whither the Queen came to him from the North, and joyned her Forces. In September th Earle of Manchester took Horn Castle, and the Citie of Lincoln. Eccleshall taken by Sir William Brereton, who cau∣sed Lord Capels forces at Lappinton to retreat. In October Lord Capel Forces beaten at Leigh-bridge, and forced into Shewsbury. Holt bridge taken. And in Nouember Colonell Birch routed the enemies forces. Wrexam in Wales taken by Sir William Brereton. The enemy beaten. The Dorsetshire men took Wareham.
In December Sir Tho. Middleton took Flint. Moston taken. Colonel Massie took Woorton. The Plimouth forces routed by the Lord Dig∣by, Sir William Waller routed the L. Craford neere Aulton. Aulton taken by Sir William Waller. Col. Skippon took Grafton-house. Holt-House, Bewly-House, and Haward n castle taken by Sir W. Brereton. In Ianuaay Sir W. Waller took Arundel Castle, and 200 priso∣soners. Colonell Mitton routed Sir I. Biron neere Elsmore. Sir John Gell took Burton upon Trent. Hilson taken, and Laieock House. The Earle of Manchester took Croyland. Burleigh House, Cocket Island taken by the Scots. Gussanna taken by Sir W. Brereton. In February Sir W. Brereton took a fortified house in Wales by storm. Sir W. Brereton routed L. Capels forces, and brought 3000 of the enemy to nothing. The Isle of Axelm taken by Sir John Mel∣drum. Burlington also and Whithy taken, and Milus house by the L. Fai fax. Alnwick and Morpith by the Scots, Milford haven by Captain Swanley, Biddle-house by Sir Tho. Fairfax, where was ta∣ken the L. Brereton, 20. Officers of note and 300 prisoners. Hilsley House and Newbery taken by Sir W. Balfore. In March was taken, Bredport. The Pembrokeshire men with Cap. Swanleys Sea-men took Haverford West. Tinby Castle taken, with 7. peeces of Ordnances, and 400. prisoners and Arms. Carew castle taken, the Earle of Carbery routed, Souderland taken by the Scots. Sir W. Waller routed Hopton at Cheriton, neere Alsford; one Lord, and 100. more slain, 100. Officers, and 500. Souldiers taken priso∣ners. Whitchurch taken by Dorsetshire men. In April 1644. the L. Fairfax took Cawood Castle. Axolm and Crowland taken. Whitchurch in Dorsetshire, and Waltham taken by Col. Brown. Adlington taken in Cheshire by Col. Duckinfield and Major Morgans men. Also Dedington house and Crow. The Earle of Newcastle routed at Selby. Duresme and Lumley taken by the Scots. In May the Earle of Manchester took Lincoln and the Castle, 7. peeces of Ordnances. 200. Kinights, Colonels, and other Officers of note, 300. Armes, and 800. prisoners. In May, 1644. his Excellency desired the Parliament to have a Committee to reside with him in the Army, & his Excellency made preparations to the field, and presently besieged Oxford, where the King then was: and at the beginning of June got away towards
the West, the King and the Prince being gore to Exeter with the Lord Paulet, and others: his Excellency having taken divers priso∣ners, drew his Army after them. The Queen fled over into France; his Excellency took in the West divers persons in severall places, a∣mongst which many of quality, and divers Garrisons. In June his Excell. secured Weymouth, Teunton Deane, Wareham, Bavonestable, Mount Stanford neere Plimouth, Plimpton, Saltash and Lanceston. And in July his Excellency gave a defeat to Greenvill neer Lestithiel in Cornwall, and took 100. prisoners, and killed 300. upon the place, and then took Tadeaster and Foy, and did beat them from Newbridge, still taking more prisoners daily. The Pembroke men took Carnarvan and the Castle. Col. Massie routed Sir John Wner at Newnham, took 9. peeces of Ordnance, 200. Officers, and 500. prisoners. Brereton Castle taken, & Malms∣bury taken with 7. peeces of Ordnance, and 300. prisoners. The Scots took Luly Castle. Bewdly in Worcestershire taken. And Yar mouth, by Sir Iohn Meldrum. Abingdon by the L. Robers, Rus∣sell Hall by the Stafford Forces. In June Col. Mssie took Chippingham, & Tewksbury. Sir W. Wal∣ler took Shudly, took two pieces of Ordnances, 70. Officers and Gentlemen, 40. Horse, 250. prisoners. Compton house taken by the Warwickshire men, 30. Officers and Gentlemen, 60. Horse, and 140 prisoners. Weymouth by Sir W. Balfore, 27. peeces of Ordnance, & 400. Arms. Taunton Dean by him likewile. Oswestree by the Earle of Denbigh. Cholmley house by him likewise. His Excellency took Barnstable and Taunton. The great Battell at Marstone Moore was sought, where all the 3. Generals Armies were engaged on both side: we kiled 4000 and took 1500. prisoners, and the Earle of Newcaffle, and Pr. Rupert both utterly defeated. Greenland house taken by Col. Brown. Wily Ferry by Sir Iohn Gell. York surren∣dred to the 3. Generrls, Tickell to the Earle of Manchester. Mount Stamford neere Plimouth, taken by his Excellency, and Plimpton with 8. peaces of Ordnance, and Saltash also, and Lanceston, Greenhil house taken, and Morpith Castle. In July the Lord Roberts wonted Greenvill neere Listithiell in Cornwall, too 100 Officers and Gentlemen, and killed and tooke 300. more. Nwbridge taken by his Excellency n W. Brereton de∣feated Newcastles Army, going to joyn with the Lord Capels and
Biron about Chester and Wales. Sir. Thomas Middleton surprized the enemy at Welsh-poole, and took 100. horse and prisoners. Sir M. Langdale defeated at Melpesse by S. W. Breretons Forces, and divers prisoners of note taken. Sir W. Breretons Forces beat the e∣nemy at Tarvin and after beat Col. Marrows Forces in Cheshire: and a third time beat the enemy out of Worrall Island. In Aug. his Excellency fell upon the Cornish Brigade neer Salt∣ash, and brake through their Army, slew many of them upon the place, took 300. prisoners and four Drakes. Shelford taken by the Earle of Manchester, and likewise Welbeck House, VVareham by his Excellency, Gateshead at Newcastle by the Scots, VVinkfield Mannor by Sir Iohn Gell, and Redcastle by Sir T. Middleton. The Kings whole Army, Maurices and Greenvils, were erawn into th field in Battalia, in number almost 20000. men neere Lesti∣thiell, where his Excellency daily skirmished with them, killed ma∣ny, took prifoner Col. Champernoon, who was sore wounded, and di∣vers more: many lying 6. and 8. in a heap; and upon desire his Ex∣cellency graneed them leave (at a parly) to bury their dead. On Saturday the 24 of Aug. 1644. his Bxcellency appointed Major Generall Whitt, and Col. Ware to guard the Reare of Le∣stithiel, and make a dam to stop provisions from the Kings Army that way; and his Excellency with a shall party of Col. Gowres Regi∣ment, beat off 3000. Hhrse and foot from Blazy bridge, appointed by the enemy to stop provisions from Millibilly Bay, where his Excellency killed many, and tooke prisoners a Colonell, 2. Cap∣tains, and divers others. In the beginning of September his Excellency notwithstanding he was so over powred by the enemy, yet preserved both himselfe and his men, forced the en my from the Sea-coasts and got safe to the Lord Admirall; his Horse not above 3000. brake through the whole body of the Kings Army; and his Foot not above 6000. though it compassed with 20000 of the Kings, from Gramporond, E∣nedor, and Foy, even to Blazy bridge, who were resolved to give no quarter to our men; yet they fought it out so gallantly, killing two of theirs for every man that we lost, untili at last they got Ar∣ticles from the Kings party to have a safe convoy to Lestithiel, Pool, and Wareham, their fick to remaine at Foy; and none of them be pressed to desert their service to his Excellency.
And his Excellency being recruited in September from the Par∣liament and in December had his randezvous at Titchfield, and fal∣ling on the Kings Reare, took almost an hundred prisoners neere Kingscleare; and with the assistance of the Earle of Manchester, and Sir W. Waller, routed the Kings Army neere Newbery, and tooke 9. peeces of Ordnance, 300. prisoners, and 500. Armes. In September Col. Mosley rented Prince Rupert, tooke 12. Peices of Ordinance, 100. Horse, and 200. Foote. In October the Scots tooke Newcastle by storme, and in it 20. Lords and Knights, 50. Officers of note, 2000, Prisoners 48. peices of Ordinance, and 3000. Armes. The Earl of Manthester and Sir William Waller routed the Kings Army neere Newbery. and tooke 9. pieces of Ordinance, 300. Prisoners, and 500. Armes. Tinmouth Castle surrendred to the Scots Liverpoole taken, & Col. Egerton defeated at Farme in Cheshire by Sir William Brereton, Holt Castle taken by Col. Crooke. In November, Helmsley taken by the Lord Fairfax, the enemy driven from Newbery, Farringdon and Malborough by the Earle of Manchester, and Sir William Waller, the enemy beaten by Captaine Stone nere Ecleshall. Decemb. the Pembroke men tooke Laughorne, the Scots Carlisle, the Lincolnshire men Croyland, Col. Massey Monmouth, and the Lord Fairfax tooke Knaisbrough. In Ian. Russel house taken by E. Denby, Bellasith Garison, neere Abingdon by Col. Browne, the enemy beaten at Christle∣ton neere Chester by fir William Breretons forces, the enemy routed at Eaton in Cheshire, fir william Breretons forces beat Prince Ruperts and Maurices, forces going into the North to joyne with the Northern forces. In Feb. Col. Laughorne routed the enemy in Pembrokeshire, tooke 4. peices o Ordinance, 400. Armes, and 300. Prisoners, Sir Iohn Meldrum tooke Scarborough Towne, 30. peices of Or∣dinance, and 100. Ships, Col. Mytton tooke Shrewsbury, and in it 100. Knights and Esquires, and Officers in Commission, 36. peices of Ordinance, 3000. Armes, and 2000. Prisoners. In the latter end of March, 1645. the Lord Fairfax and the Scots tooke the Castle of Searborough, Weymouth retaken by
Col. Sydnham, Blechindon house taken, and Col. Massey tooke Evisham, 3. Officers and Gentlemeu, 150. Horse, and 400. Prisoners and Armes. His Excellencies Funerall. His Excellency the Earle of Essex his Hearse having been pub∣lickly scene at Essex House in the Strand, (where he hath layne in his Scathe Britches, and Buff. Coate, in his Parliament Robes, Commanders Staff in his hand, and Coronet on his head; in a Hoarse covered with black Velver, and his Cullers, and divers Scutcheons of Armes about him, being attended by the Mem∣bers of both Houses, Essex house being hanged about with mour∣ning) he psh from thence, with divers Regiments of the Trayne Band of the City of London matching with him, and o∣thers standing on each side of the streete, to Westminster; and in the Chancel of the Abbyes another herse prepared for him; where he is to lye during the pleasure of the House, and then to be removed into King Henry the sevenths Chappel. The Earle of Essex his Pedigree. SIR Walter Devoreux Knight, had Issue, Sir Walter Devoreux Knight, who married Agnes Daughter and Heire of Thomas de Chophall, and had Issue, Sir Walter Devoreux Knight, who married Eazabeth Daughter of Thomas Brannock alias Bromwich Knight, by whom he had Issue, Sir Walter Devoreux Knight, which married Elizabeth, Daughter and Heire of Iohn Marbury, and by her had Issue, Sir Walter Devoreux Knight of the Garter, and Lord Ferrers of Charley in right of his wite, Anne, Daughter and Haire of William Lord Ferrers of Chartley. This Sir Walter was slaine at Bosworth field with King Richard the 3. he had Issue, Iohn Devereux Knight of the Garter, and Lord Ferrers of Chartley, who married Cicely sister and Here of Henry Bourchier Earle of Essex, and had Issue, Wolter Devoreux, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Viscount Herford, and Knight of the Garter, married first Mary Daughter of Thomas Gray, Marquesse of Dorcet, he married secondly Margaret Daughter of Robert Garnish of Kendon in the County of Suffolk; b whom  ssue, Edward Devoreux of Castle-Bromewich in Warweckshre &c. he had Issue by Mary Gray his first wife, Sir William Devoreux Knight, 2. Son (who
married Ione, Daughter of Iohn Scudamore, and had Issue by he two Daughters, Barbara, and Margaret,) and Katherine wite to Sir Iames Baskervill, and Sir Richard Devoreux Knight, eldest Sonne (or Walter and Mary Gray,) who married Dorothy Daugh∣ter of George Hastings Earle of Huntington, (he dyed before his Father,) and had Issue, Mary who dyed a Virgin, Anno. 1558. being then 20. yeare old, Anne wife to Henry Clifford, Elizabeth wife to Iohn Vernon, of Hodnet. Sir George Devoreux Knight, se, cond Sonne married — Daughter of—Meverell: And Walter Devoreux the first Earle of Essex of that name, Created by Queene Elizabeth Anno. Dom. 1572. dyed in Ireland 1576. he married Lettice Daughter of Sir Francis Knowles, Knight of the Garter, he had Issue by her, Dorothy 1. married to Thomas Par∣rot and after to Henry Percy Earle of Northamberland she dyed Anno. Dom. 16.9. Penelope wife to Robert Lord Rich, she dyed 1607. Walter Devoreux, second Sonne, slaine at Roome in Normon∣dy the 10. of December Anno. Dom. 1591. And Robert Earle of Essex, and Ewe, &c. Eldest Sonne, he married Francis Daughter and Heire of Sir Francis Walsingham: by whom he had Issue, Dorothy wife to Henry Shirley, Son and Heire of Sir George Shir∣ley of Stanton in Leicestershire, Knight and Baronet: Francis wife of VVilliam Lord Beauchamp Son of Edward Lord Beauchamp Sonne of Edward. Lord of Harford: And Robert Devoreux, Earle of Essex, and Ewe, Vicount Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier, and Lovaine, Lord Geneaall of the forces raysed by, and imployed in the service of the Parliament, who dyed at his house in the Strand on Munday September the 16. Anno. Dom. 1646. He married to his first wife Francis Daughter of Thomas Howard Earle of Suffolk, and by her had no Issue, he after married the Daughter of Sir Iohn Paulet and had no Issue. The Funerall Elegie, of the Obiets of his Excellency Robert Earle of Essex. VVHat dismall accident is fall'n of late. That fills with grief our Kingdome & the State? Sure it must be some universall blow, That makes a Sea of teares the land ore-slow. Or as an Earth-quake had great Brittaine shooke. Men are amaz'd, or else seeme Plannet strooke.
This weeping deluge, this eyes inundation, Bewrayes some mighty blow is given our Nation. T'is so, and such a stroke cannot befall On one the like whom we a Subject call. And therefore reader, if thou knowst not why Sad sorrow hath possessed each mans eye Then know that griefe this Land hath over-spread, Upon distracted thoughts of Essex dead. Oh! 'tis too true: have we not reason then, To mourn untill we have his like again? Two Kingdomes (next unto the King) 'tis knowne, On this good Peere had their affections thrown. But what avails high Eminence and Place, The Kingdomes favour, and the peoples grace? These are supports, but no preheminence 'Gainst Death, to be a Buckler or Defence. For why? If any, or if all of these Could have put by this blow, or given some ease To this lov'd Lord, there's few withiu this Land, But would have lent him both a heart and hand, But he hath made a happy change in this, An earthly Earldome for a Crown of Blisse. He liv'd well, purposely to dye well too. And as his purpose was he so did doe. Death brings good men where good men should abide, If wicked men were good, they should have dy'd. We take our turnes, it skills not where or when, Provided that we dye to live againe. Scotland a friend, London an Interest. In this maine losse is too too manifest. You Souldiers that good Essex did attend, Let these lines to your sorrowes solace send. That though you have a curelesse cause of care, Yet in your griefes, three Kingdom's beare a share. And in sweete peace let rest his noble Dust. uutill the Resurrection of the just. When Soule aad Body both conjoyn'd againe. In never ending glory shall remaine. FINIS.
