F241 E394_11 R201625 99862125 160328
THREE LETTERS From His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, AND The Officers and Soldiers under His Command. Two of them to the Parliaments Commissioners now with the Army, and by them sent up to the Parliament. The third to the Lord Major, Aldermen and Common-Councel of the City of LONDON, Of the farther Answer of the Army, concerning The Charge against the Eleven MEMBERS. AND The Grounds of the Armies nearer Advance to the Par∣liament and City of London. Also the Result of a Councel of WAR at Ʋxbridge, June 26. 1647. about Quartering the Army. BY the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the Councel of War. Barkhamstead, June 25. 1647. Signed JOHN RUSHWORTH. London, Printed for Laurence Chapman, IUNE 28. 1647.
The Result of a Councel of War at Vxbridge, June 26. 1647. about Quartering the Army. IT was last night resolved by the General and Councel of War, for present not to Advance any of the Army nearer London; but whereas the Foot (being all quartered then at Watford, Ʋx∣bridge and Colebrook) were very troublesome and burthensome to those places, It was only Ordered, That the quarters of the Foot should be inlarged for the ease of those places; whereupon (by a mistake of that Resolution in the setting out of quarters) some Regiments had quarters assigned for inlargement at places lying much forwarder towards London, as far as Harrow on the Hill, Hayes, Cranford, Harlington, Bedfont, Feltham and Han∣worth; This morning, so soon as this was understood by the General and the Officers, there were Orders immediately sent out to stop the Regiments, and now none quartered nearer London then Watford, Rislip, Ikeham, Hellindon, Cowley, Dray∣ton, Hamsworth, Stanwel and Stanes, which make a line about fifteen or sixteen miles distance from London: And to avoid any disquieting to the Parliament or City upon future apprehensions, His Excellency and His Officers do promise, That there shall be no farther Advance, either of the Army, or any quarters of it, any nearer to London, without timely notice thereof, and of the Reasons of it, to the Parliament and City. UXBRIDGE, June 26. 1647. By the appointment of his Excel∣lency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Councel of War. JOHN RUSHWORTH.
To the Right Honorable, The Commissioners of Parliament at St. Albans: My Lords and Gentlemen, IN answer to the Letters of the House of Commons which we received from you this day, ex∣pressing their readiness to receive any particulars, and to hear any Witnesses against the Gentlemen impched by the Army; we shall be bold to minde you, That the Remonstrance sent to you the last night, to be presented to the Houses, do ex∣press the Desires of the Army to have the Members charged to be suspended from sit∣ting in the House, which (if not granted to us) we know their interest and prevalency is such, That we can expect but small fruit in a
further proceeding, except the Desires of the Army be answered therein: Nor can we hope for good to the Kingdom, or settlement of an happy Peace, as long as men of their interests and prevalency have power to justi∣fie themselves and practises; who, that they may be able to effect it, do endeavor by all means possible to inflame this Kingdom in a second War; To which we shall be forced to the uttermost of our powers to apply a timely remedy, as being the onely way and means we know of to prevent the involving this Nation again in Blood, then which no∣thing is more odious unto us. St. Albans, June 24. 1647. By the appointment of his Ex∣cellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the Councel of War. JOHN RUSHWORTH.
To the Right Honorable, The Lords and Commons Commissioners of Par∣liament in the ARMY. My Lords and Gentlemen, IN answer to your Desire of a reason of the Armies motion this day, I thought fit to let you know, That our Quarters are more contracted, but not nearer London then they were before, namely, at Watford, Uxbridge, and the Towns about them: We have often said we cannot stand as lookers on, to see the King∣dom ruined by the obstruction and denial of Justice; and therefore we desire you to move the Parliament we may not be held still in doubt, and put upon the disputes of their commands, to which we shall yield ready obedience, when we see the Kingdom in a pos∣sibility of setlement, which we think cannot be, un∣less that the fountain of Justice be delivered from those that corrupt it. Barkhamstead, June 25. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and his Coun∣cel of War. JOHN RUSHWORTH.
To the Right Honorable, The Lord Major, Aldermen and Common-Councel of the City of London. My Lords and Gentlemen, WE have in all things dealt clearly and plainly with you, and hope we shall continue still to do so: As soon as the wor∣thy Aldermen and the other two Gentlemen, your Commissioners, came the last night to us, we acquainted them with our purpose, to draw the Head-quarter to UXBRIDGE, that so we might contract our Quarters, which have hitherto lyen scattered; at which place we hope to receive that which will be satisfa∣ction to the Kingdom, and will remove Ob∣structions out of the way of Justice, where∣in if right were done, we should let you and all the world see, That we would be so far from pressing near your City of London, it should be indifferent to us, to march not only to the distance prescribed, but to any part of the Kingdom we should be commanded to
by the Parliament: We have asked nothing hitherto but right, in the things that are known as if they were proved an hundred times before them from whom they have sought them; which if granted, would not onely be a justice to the Army, but would let the Kingdom see the Fountain in a way to be cleared, without which nothing of Force or Power would be a security to any man. We wish the name of PRIVILEDGES may not lie in the ballance with the Safety of a Kingdom, and the Reallity of a Kingdom, and the Reallity of doing Justice; which as we have said so often, we cannot expect whilest the persons we have accused are the Kingdoms and our Judges, a little delay will indanger the putting the Kingdom into Blood; notwithstanding what hath been said, if it be considered, That in Wales, besides under-hand workings in your City and other places, Men are raised, and that in no small number; and are not those men in the Parliament, who have continued faithful to the Principles of common interest from the
begining of this Parliament to this very day still awed by the concourse of Reformado-Officers and others to their doors; expence of Time will be their Advantage onely, who intend to bring evil purposes to pass. We have written this to you for your satisfa∣ction, that so nothing may be done, without giving you a perfect Account of our Inten∣tions and Ends, and still to continue out As∣surance to you, That should Necessity bring us nearer to the City, our former Faith given you shall be observed inviolably, there being nothing more (next to the good of the King∣dom) in our Thoughts and Desires, then the prosperity of your City. Barkhamstead, June 25. 1647. By the appointment of his Ex∣cellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the Councel of War. Signed JOHN RUSHWORTH. FINIS.
