F474a 99895708 153215
A CALL OUT OF FALSE WORSHIPS. Written by one whom the people of the world call a Quaker, whose name is RICHARD FARNEVVORTH. Arise out of All your false worships, the Lord is comming to beate up your quarters.1 Iohn 2.2.27. Ver 20 YE have an unction, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the Anointing that dwelleth in you teach∣ you all things, and is Truth, and is no Lie. He that draweth you from this Anointing within, to serve any carnall thing whatsoever, as to hold up  Idols Temple,A 24. 1 Cor. 10. 2 Cor. 6 or to sprinkle Infants, which is a mark  the Beast (they that worshipped the Beast that Iohn eaks of in the Revelation, did mark them in their fore∣ds,Rev. 1 16 17, 18 Col. 21, Joh 1 C 19, 2 Rev. 2, 3, 4 Rev but neither Jesus Christ, nor his Apostles, did er marke any) He that draweth to observe any Carnall ng whatsoever, he is a Seducer, 1 John 2.26. Gal. 3.1. And knoweth not the worship that is spirituall, nor  worshippers of the Father, who are borne againe and  Baptised with the Holy Ghost and with fire, and have  names written in the book of life, and worship at the emple in new Ierusalem. Where, the banqueting house  the Lords love is, All the children of the Lord  ght of the Lord, Isa. 54.13. the righteous Law ng ithin written in the heart, to shew sinne, and evill, an  written there to be fulfilled, to Condemne sinne , Luk. 10.26. and 24.44. Thou mayst say, thou art above the Law in the Go∣d, let me aske thee one question, how camest thou to
see this Gospell manifested? what is kild in thee, by the Law? for the Law is pure and spirituall, and hath power over the fleshly man so long as he lives; now he that doth offend or transgresse this new Law of righteous∣nesse written in the heart, in one thing, he offends and transgresseth in all, and the Judgement of the Lord is to be inflicted upon the transgressors. Quaer. What are the Acts of transgression of this new Law written in the heart? Answ. Transgression is lusting after that which is evill, as Pride, Covetousnesse, Anger, Envie, Malice, Backbiting, Oppression, Revenge, Drunkennesse, Hastinesse, Passionatnesse, Peevishnesse and Crosnesse one towards another, Pleasures an Wantonnesse. In a word, all manner of unrighteousnesse; now if thou live in any of these, the Law hath power over thee, for these are fruits of the flesh, transgressions of the new Law of righteousnesse. Cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils,  for where∣in is he to be accounted of? All your hirelings doe deceive you,  for they never were sent of the Lord, they ran but he did  send them, therefore they shall not profit you at all. Jer. 23. Oh, Cease from them, Cease from them, and wait upon the lord for teaching: he hath promised to teach all his himselfe; and now the Lord is fulfilling his promises made by his Servants the Prophets, the Scripture is now in ful∣filling, and to be fulfilled: Away with all hirelings, the Lord is teacher himselfe alone. Friends, minde your Teacher within, the Lord is now teaching his people freely himselfe alone, by his free Spirit of love, according to his promises made  servants the Prophets, which is now fulfilling;  Lords promise made by his servant the Pro∣ , Ier. 31.3, 32, 33 34. verses, saith he there,  Lord will make a new Covenant, and they shall all be  of God, Ier. 31.34. and Isa. 54.13. there it is  that all the children of the Lord shall be taught of the
Lord, and they shall be established in righteousnesse and be srre from oppression; and see the same againe,Joh.  in Iohn 6.45. and they shall all be taught of God: and againe, see Heb. 8.10, and (saith the Lord) I will write my Law in their hearts,Heb. 11. and they shall not neede any man to teach them, for they shall all know me, and I will teach them my selfe. The Lord is now comming to proffer his love to you freely, if you will embrace it; but if you reject it, and harden your hearts against the truth proffered to you, the wrath of God abideth on you. See Iohn 3. &c. And the wrath of God abideth on all the Children of dis∣obedience;Joh. 3.33 34, 35.36. take heede of despising the proffers of the love and mercy of the Lord, to your soules this day, lest your hearts be hardned, and so you treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the right judgement of God; tribulation and anguish to every soule that doth evill, and especially to them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, but obey an righteousnesse, tribulation and wrath: but unto them that obey the truth, glory, honour and peace; for God will render to every man according to his deeds.om. 2.4, , 6, 7, 8, 9. See Rom. 2.4, 5, 6, 7. The Lord is now comming to seeke and to save that which was lost, and to teach his people freely him selfe. See Ezek. 34. For thus saith the Lord God, Behold I, even I, will both search my Sheepe and seeke them out as a Shepherd seeketh out his flock in the y, that he is among them that are scattered; so will I (saith the Lord) seeke out my Sheepe, and will deliver them out of all places where they have beene scattered, in the cloudy and dark day: and I will bring them out from among the people, and gather them from the countries, I will doe , saith the Lord. See it is the Lords good free love; and (saith the Lord) I will feede them in a pasture, I will ed my flock, (see it is the Lord alone) & I wil cause them to lie down, saith the Lord God Almighty, and (saith he)  will seek that which was lost, and bring againe that whi
was driven away: and I will bind up that which was broken, and I will strengthen that which was sick, and I will de∣stroy the fat and the strong, I will feed them with judgment. I will do it saith the Lord. See the Scripture is to be ful∣filled, and it is the Lord alone that will teach, and lead, and guide out of all the waies and works of darknesse. Deare friends, Search the Scriptures, and see how you walke in obedience to them,Mat. 5.17, 18. they are now to be ful∣filled, and (saith Jesus Christ) Heaven and earth shall passs away,Mat. 24.34 35. but not one jot or tittle of my word shall in no wise faile, till all be fulfilled. Now see what one Scripture you can witnesse by experience made manifest in you, from the life and power of the Scriptures, and live not in words, they are but leaves: words without power is as chaffe, and what is the chaffe to the wheat, saith the Lord God? Is not my word like a fire and a hammer?Ier. 28, 29. Heb. 42. Jer. 23.29. that breaketh the rocks in pieces, it is powerfull to break all stony hard hearts to pieces. See which of you can wit∣nesse this, and lay aside all dissimulation, and hypocri∣sie, all your teachers without doe deceive you, away with them, the Lord is against them. Behold, thus saith the Lord, I am against the Prophets that steale my word every one from his Neighbour,Jer. 23.30. as those doe that speake a divination of their owne braine, which they have gathered out of bookes and studies, and not from the mouth of the Lord.  See Ier. 23.16. Behold I am aginst the Prophets, saith the Lord, that use their tongues, and say he saith, and cause my people to erre by their lies, and by their lightnesse, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they shall not profit this people at all; see what you are profitted by them, and hold them not up, the Lord is against them, ver. 32. they are in the same condition that the false Prophets were in among the children of Israel, after they had broken the Co∣venant of the Lord, and the Lord sent his true Pro∣phets to cry out against them, as you may see in Isa.
16.10, 11. saith he, his watchmen are all blinde,Isa. 56.11. and look very one for his gain from his quarter: Do not the Priests so now, look for their gain from their quarter, and place where they are in their Parishes, as the false Prophets did? Obj. You may say, the false Prophets did so in the ime of the Law, but that is past. Answ. But doe not these false Teachers so now? Doe not they looke for Tithes, Gifts, or rewards, as Baals Priests did? and every one for his gain from his quarter, and place where he is in his Parish? doth he not look for the tenth of the yeares increase of Wheat, Rie, and Barlie; Pease, Beanes, and Oats, and Hay, which they have no right to by the Law of God? The Children of Israel after the flesh, they were to pay Tithes to the Levites, that had no part nor portion in the promised Land, but the Levites that received Tithes in the time of the Law, in the first Covenant, which were outwardly, to the Jew outwardly: 9  in  14 Chapter of Deut. 27.28, 29. they had no part of the inheritance with them but the tithes, and with those tithes that they received, they were to feed the poore as well as themselves, they were stewards over them, and their gates were to stand open conti∣nually, that received the tithes, and the poore people, and all the Widdowes, and Fatherlesse-children, and strangers also, were to go in thither, there to be filled and satisfied, out of the tithes. The poore people had as much out of them, as they stood neede of, but these Tithe-mongers in stead of letting their Gates stand open to fill them, and satisfie them, they take tithes of the poore, and so doe oppresse them, and burthen them, which is odious in the Eyes of the Lord, for he sent his Son into the World to fulfill the Law, and all things that were conteined in the first Covenant, and to take off Tithes and Oppressions, and to undoe the heavy burthens, and to set the people free; and then e sent forth his servants to declare his Fathers love to
the people freely, and said, Freely ye have received, free∣ly give, Mat. 10.8. and those whom he sent into the World, see the Commission that he gave them, saith Jesus Christ to his true Ministers, whom he sen forth into the World; after that he came to take off op oppressions, and set the people free from those burthen that they were oppressed and burthened with by the Scribes and Pharisees, which sate in Moses seat, pretend∣ing justice in words, but in actions did not: for Moses was faithfull as a servant to execute true judgement and justice, and to take off Oppressions. But after his de∣cease, proud men got up, and sate in his seat, preten∣ding in words that they would doe justice, but did not, as in Mat. 23. and they were exalted in pride as these Priests are now that fit in their seat. Jesus Christ came to take off the oppression that was up held by the Scribes and Pharisees, and false Prophets that did look for their gaine from their quarters as these do now, looking for their tithes, gifts, and rewards from their Parishes; they have not only tithe Hay, and Corne, but they have tithe Hemp and Flax, Apples, and Cherries, and tithe Pigges, Geese, and Ganders, which is odious in the eyes of the Lord; and they have no Rule in the Scripture for it: these take money for Mares and Foales, Kine and Calves, and money for Eggs, and money for Reeke passing up Chymneys, which never Jesus Christ, nor those that he sent forth did; there is not scarce any thing but these have an end in it, and without money will they do nothing; like those false Prophets, that Mich a the servant of the Lord was sent to cry ou against,. 3. that he spoke of in Mich. 3. when the people pu into their mouthes and gave them money, then they cryed Peace, Peace to them, but when they did not put money into their mouthes, they prepared Warre against them; is it not so now? will your Priests do any thing without money? it is odious, and if the
be not fed with money to satisfie their lust, they pre∣re War against them; they either sue them, and go to Law with them, or else they prepare a Prison for em, and put them there: See if it be not so just now, ith the Priests in England, as it was with the false Teachers in Israel in all things, as the Prophet Mical peakes and saith, put not into their mouthes and the are Warre, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, f∣ said to his whom he sent forth, freely ye have rece∣, freely give, and provide neither Gold nor Silver i  purses; but these must have great Benefices, and ithout money will they do nothing; Micah. 3.11. th he, the Prophets Divine for money, and the Priests  preach for hire, and leane upon the Lord, and say, is not  Lord among us? When as (saith the Lord) they run,  I did not send them, therefore they shall not profit the  at all; is it not so now? Ier. 23. saith the Lord , by the Prophet Ieremy. A filthy and a horrible  is committed in the Land, the Prophets prophesie (false∣d the Priests beare rule by their meanes, and the people  to have it so. Jer. 5.30. but saith the Lord, what  ye do in the end thereof?Jer. 5.50. It was so then amongst  false Prophets, but is it not so now? do not the sts preach for hire,Mat. 5.17, 18. contrary to the Command of  Lord Jesus Christ? after that he came to take off  oppressions, and satisfie the Law, and said to his,Joh. 10.8, 9, 10, 11.  ye have received, freely give, Mat. 10.8. doe not  false Priests beare rule over you by their meanes;  their Wives go in their Hoods, and Vailes,Isa. 16, 17. and , and changeable suits of Apparrell (and the e are in want) to satisfie their lusts? as it was  those that were proud and haughty, and did grind faces of the poor as these do, and if they have not ve them, then they threaten them to go to the Law them, and so are contrary both to Christ and his les; for Christ saith, goe not to Law, Mat. 5.40.Mat. 5.4 ith he, if any man have a quarrell against another,
forgive him freely, Colos. 3.13. And the Apostle who was a true Minister did abide in his Doctrine, and h gave them the same exhortation, see 1 Cor. 6.1, 2. bu those that either goe to Law, or threaten to sue people  Law, are contrary both to Christ and his Apostles  nd he that professeth Christ, and acteth contrary to rist, he is Antichrist. And he that abideth not i  Doctrine of Christ is a Devill, as saith the Scrip∣e. Now these act contrary in all things, and are ords and Rulers over the people; their Wives going  their Silkes, and Scarves, Hoods, and Vailes, and ngs, and gaudy Attire, as those did that the Lord nt his true Prophets to cry out against. Read Isa. 3.11 o the end of the Chapter. See if they be not in that state and condition tha the false Prophets were in.6, 17, 1. Do they not look for their gaine from their quar∣ters, as the false Prophets did? Isa. 56.10. 2. Do they not speak a divination of their own braine, what they have gathered out of bookes and studies as the false Prophets did, and make the people vaine and light, and Run, but the Lord never sent them, a the false Prophets did? therefore they doe not profit th people at all, Jer. 23. 3. Doe they not teach for the fleece, and feed them selves with the fat as the false Prophets did, teaching fo tithe Wool, and Lambes, as those did that Ezekiel wa sent to cry against; but the Lord will feed them with judgement? 4. Do they not preach for hire, as those false Priest did, that Micah was sent to cry against? and doe the not beare Rule over the people, as those false Priest did, that Ieremiah was sent to cry against? Ier. 5.30. 5. Doe not they live in Pride, and Covetousnesse, an Envy which never Jesus Christ nor his did, and so ac contrary to him and his Apostles?1.7, 8. as in Tit. 1.23, 4. 6. Doe they not sit in the seat of the Scribes a
Pharises which were enemiss to Jesus Christ, and hold up those things that he came to throw downe,1 Tim. 3 1, 2. Mat. 23. as Tithes and Oppressions, and to set the people free; and saith he, feed the hungry, cloath the naked, love your enemies, blesse them that curse you, let your love be without dissimulation, Rom. 12. and if any man have a quarrell against another, forgive him freely,Rom. 12. Col. 3.13. and do unto all men, as ye would be done by, and be not ye as the Scribes and Pharisees, neither be ye called of men Masters, but he that is greatest among you, let him be your Servant, and freely ye have received, freely give, Mat. 10.8. and pro∣vide neither bag nor scrip, nor Silver nor Gold in your pur∣ses, nor take no thought what ye shall eate, nor what ye shall drinke, nor wherewith ye shall be cloathed, and into what∣soever City or Towne ye shall enter, enquire in it who is worthy, and there abide till ye goe thence, for the workeman is worthy of his meate. Mat. 10.10, 11. The true Ministers of Christ were not Lords and Masters, neither had they great Benefices as these have,1 Cor. 9.16, 17, 19. but they did abide in his Doctrine in all things, and saith the Apostle, My care is to make the Gospell of Christ free, and my selfe servant to all. But these are Lords and Masters, and act in the same state that the Scribes and Pharisees did, they have the chiefest place in the Assemblies, as they had which were enemies to Jesus Christ; the Priests they goe in long robes as the Scribes and Pharisees did, they love the greetings in Markets as the Scribes and Phari∣sees did, they are called of men, Masters, as they were, they lay heavy burthens upon the people as they did, and so are enemies to Jesus Christ as the Scribes and Pharisees were; and the same woes are to the Priests, they are Kings of pride, and are exceeding co∣vetous, and are evill examples to the people, walking contrary to Iesus Christ and his Apostles in all things. 7. They grinde the faces of the poore, and their
tormenting is comming upon them for it. 8. Doe not their Wives goe in their Hoods, and Vailes, and Scarves, and Rings, and changeable suits of Apparrell as those did, that the Lord sent his ser∣vant the Prophet Isaiah to cry out against? read Isa. 3. and see if it be not so with the Priests wives now, as it was with the Daughters of Ierusalem, and with the Priests as it was with the false Prophets in all things; but their tormenting is comming. Behold thus saith the Lord, a Whirlewinde is comming forth from the Lord,er. 23. even in fury, a grievous Whirlewinde, and it shall fall upon the head of the wicked, the Anger of the Lord shall not returne untill be have executed, and till he have performed the thoughts of his heart, in the latter dayes ye shall consider it perfectly,er. 23.19, 20, 21, 22. see Ier. 23.19, 20, 21, 22. There shall be but one Shepherd and one fold, the Lord is but one, and his name one, he is a holy and a∣pure God,Ezek. 34.23. he is of purer eyes then to behold Iniquity, no uncleane thing shall stand before him, he is now comming to judge the heathen; In righteousnesse, he will gather together all the dispersed ones,Ezek. 34: 12. that have been scattered by the proud Priests in the cloudy and darke day, you had scattered them by your Greeke, Latine, and Hebrew, and your high notions of fleshie wisdome and Imaginations, into Customes and Fa∣shious, Inventions and Imitations, Imitating wayes of Worships according to your wills, but not according to the minde and will of the Lord; for the onely true God is a spirit,. 4.23. and now he will be Worshiped in Spirit and in truth, he is seeking such to worship him, Joh. 4.23. Away with all false ways and worships, the Lord is Ri∣sen, & is a Rising out of all formes, to gather his people by his spirit out of all shadowes and huskes, 2.27, and outside teachings of men, that he alone may teach them him∣selfe, for the teachings without doe but exalt and feed
the fleshly man, and keepe that alive which must be destroyed; the highest forme and gathering without by men, feeds but upon Winde, and Chaffe, they live in Words and high notions, and gilded pretences, but the ground of all their formes is earth, and that which is brought forth is but grasse, high notions and glorious expressions, and the curious mindes are feeding upon novelties, Dives like; partiall mindes, esteeming one man above another,Rev. 17.13, 14, 15. he that is highest in his fleshly wisdome is set up; and there is a running from Moun∣taine to Mountaine, from one man to another, and he that is puft up in pride and braine-knowledge, is in the highest esteeme with the men of the world; because he can make a cover by his imaginations, to cover over all deceits, that the Kingdome of Antichrist may be pheld. There is nothing but Pride, and Oppression, and Covetousnesse, and pleasures,Jam. 5.5. and heady high-mindednesse, and lust, and excesse, amongst the highest formes; living in Pleasures and Wantonnesse upon earth, despising the crosse of Christ, and counting that contemptible and base, because it comes to cut downe all their Pride and Haughtinesse, and earthly delights, and earthly enjoyments. For the first man is of the earth, earthly heart, earthly minde, earthly disposition,Rom. 8.6, 7, 8. earthly affection, earthly enjoyments, and so covets altogether after the earth, to be Great, and Rich, and Honourable, and set up in esteeme, and honoured by the men of the world, but your Kindome is earthly: Oh, men of what forme soever, but the Kingdome of God, is not of this world, and all your glorious notions are but grosse,Rev. 16.2. Rev 8.6, 7. Phil. 3.17, 18, 19. and your heavenly enjoyments are earth∣ly, pride, and vaine glory, and you are xalted up on high, sitting deckt above the Crosse; Jesus Christ is without Forme or Comlinesse, he is not therefore had in any esteeme by the men of the world; his wisdome is counted foolishnesse by you, your curious mindes cannot digest his teachings, his counsell is rejected by
you all ye lustfull ones, he is counted a Blasphemer by you, because he comes to testifie against all your false wayes and worships; the little booke that is sealed to the wisdome of the flesh, is bitter to your strong sto∣macks, you cannot eate it,Rev, 13.6, , 8. Rev. 10.1, , 3, 4, 5, 6. but it will destroy you all that feede upon it; but saith he, my flesh is meate indeed, and my blood is drinke indeed, it is hard to be received by you, which causeth you to be so proud and haughty, for it is so sharpe a bit to eate the passeover, it is sharper to the fleshly man then a Sword, that it will cut him assuder, and make him to dye, and kill him for ever; it is good to be killed, for without death there is no life; you must all come to an account, the Lord is com∣ing to plead with you all, high and low, rich and poore, bond and free, male and female, he is comming to look for fruits; and every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit must be hewn downe and cast into the Eternall fire of Indignation;Thes. 2., 9, 10. Mat. 7.19. sa. 66.15, 6. th Lord is comming to plead with all flesh, by his Sword and by fire, all must now be tryed by fire, the fleshly man must be now cut downe, the glit∣tering Sword is drawn and made ready for the great battell of the Lord;Rev. 19.1, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. oel. 2.1, , 3. the Trumpet beginneth to sound, to forewarne you all of the Judgements; Thus saith the Lord, blow ye the Trumpet in Sion, sound an Alarum in my mount, let all the Inhabitants of the land tremble: Tremble all earthly Carnall earts, be ashamed and confoun∣ded all ye proud and lofty ones, the great day of the Lord draweth nigh, he is comming to beate up all your quarters under what forme soever; the ground of them is earth, and the enjoyments of them are earth∣ly, and all your fruits are fleshly, and fleshly man cannot please God, he is a Spirit, and none knowes him, but they to whom he doth reveale himselfe; pride is a fruit of the flesh, and proud men they can speake much of God and Christ, but you must be tryed now by fire All your glorious notions are but grass, All flesh is grasse, fleshly delights, fleshly pleasures, fleshly
mes, fleshly Enjoyments, fleshly Ordinances, and e fleshly man feeds upon them; all your formes ust be shaken, the Lord is comming to shake ter∣bly the Earth, there shall be Famines, and Earthquakes, d Pestilences in divers places; Nation against Nati∣n, the Kingdom of Antichrist standeth up now against the Kingdom of Christ, he is comming to shine in lory and brightnes, his glory is revealed and revealing, awake, awake and stand up to judgement, the Lord is r at hand to plead with you; all your formes must be nt up, all flesh is Grasse,Mal. 3.1. 2. Pet. 3.10, 11, 12. the Spirit of the Lord is e, fire is comming down from Heaven to burn up he Earth, the Earth shall be burnt, and the Elements hall melt like Wax before the presence of the Lord God Almighty, The Sun must be turned into darknesse,Mat. 24.29, 30. Isa. 2.21. Rev. 18.4.5, 6. ad the Moon into bloud, and the Foundations of the Earth must shake; the Lord is comming to shake ter∣ribly the Earth: Awake, awake out of carnall security, Come out of Babylon, come out of Babylon my people, saith the Lord, lest ye be partakers of her plagues; Come out of the Idols Temple, come out of the beastly worship, come out of all formes whatsoever, the Lord is come o sit as Refiner,Mal. 3.3. Rev. 13.8, 9. for all the World wonders and wor∣ships the beast, but those that have found their Names written in the Book of Life, and they that have their Names written there,Rev. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and their Fathers Name written n their foreheads, they are redeemed to the Lord God, and to the Lamb, to worship him in his holy Temple at new Jerusalem, new come down from Heaven,Rev. 21.2.3. there to worship him in spirit, and in truth, for ever and ever. All that have their Names written in the book of Life,Rev. 20.1 Rev. 14.4 their worship is spirituall, unknown to the World, their food is eternall: those that worship at new Jeru∣salem, are those that are risen from the dead, and have come through great tribulation, and are washed by the blood of the Lamb, covered with the righteousnesse of Saints, and are come out of Aegypt,Rev. 1 through the Sea of
many tribulations, and past through the Wildernesse where were fiery serpents and scorpions, and much drought, and are gone through all the Countries of the Amalekites,Rev. 18.20 and the Hittites, and the Perizites, and all the Kings of the Earth are taken and cut down by the man that sate upon the white Horse, with the glittering sword in his hand, and those that were with him,Rev. 19: 15.16. Rev. 21.3. ver. 5, 6, 7. Rev. 22 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, . Rev. 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and have overcome, are just, faithfull, and true, and are got up to Canaan the promised Land, where there is fulnesse of all things, and there they meet at new Jerusalem, to worship the Lord God Omnipotent, and sing praises to him for ever and ever, who hath made them conquerours, singing Halelujahs to the highest, because the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth. Halelujah to the highest. All friends that are yet uncome up, minde where you are, sit not down by the way, but minde the light that shewes you darknesse, and the vanity of your minds, and your roving thoughts and wandering de∣sires, and wicked imaginations, that which checks you when you speak a wry word, or when you tell a lie, or sweare, or when you are angry, or envy, or hate, or backbite one another; or when you do any wrong to any, see if something within you do not tell you that you should not do so, if you hearken to that, it will ruine your mindes within, and set a watch over all your thoughts, words, and actions; and so it will crosse your earthly wills, when they would go forth into the Earthly delights and vanities, and that light within arising out of the earthly part through into your understanding, it will shew you all how you have spent your time, and it will bring you into the true feare of the Lord, and standing in his feare, there will be a continuall watch kept over all your thoughts, words, and actions; and the righteous Law will passe through you, and the eternall judgement will be set up within you, and all things that arise out of the first nature
will be brought to judgement by this light within you, and loving this light, it will teach you to deny your self in all things, obeying this light within you, it will crosse your wills in all things, and will not suffer you to con∣forme to any thing but that which is pure: and this light leads to the sword, and that will cut down all lusts, and vaine delights, and crucifie the carnall corrupt part in you, and so purity will grow; but disobeying this light within, then your wills will get liberty, and so lead you into the earthly delights, and earthly vanities again, and getting from under the crosse, the carnall part will get strngth again; but being kept in the crosse, this pure light is the crosse to the carnal part in all things, being guided by it, it wil bring you always to stand in the coun∣cell of the Lord, and not suffer you to consult with wis∣dom and reason, and this will lead you out of all the ways and works of darknesse, and it will bring you to be what you speak in all things, it will not suffer you to speak a vaine idle word, being obedient to it; but if you disobey it, it wil condemn you for it; here is your teacher present with you continually, this light within obeying it; here is your condemnation, this light disobeying it, he that loves this light within, that doth convince him of sin and evill, he loves Christ,Joh. 8.12 Know yee not that Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? 1 Cor. 13.5. And (saith he) I am the light of the World, he that followeth me shall have the light of Life, John 8 12. Christ within is this light, obedience to this light leadeth out of dark∣nesse, it will lead you out of all the Worlds wayes, out of all the Worlds customes, out of the Worlds delights, out of all the Worlds vanities, up into purity, to holi∣nesse, to uprightnesse; without which none shall see the Lord, professe what they will, and here is your Teacher, this light obeying it; here is your condemna∣tion, this light disobeying it, John 3.19, 20, 21. FINIS.
