G1698 E629_11 99862665 165861
A great FIGHT IN SCOTLAND BETWEEN His Excellency the Lord Gen: Crom∣wels Forces, and the Scots, upon the advance of Lieutenant Gen. Lesley, and Col. Mssie, from Sterling towards Glasco. WITH The manner of their Engagement, the particulars of the said Fight, the event and success thereof, and the number killed and taken prisoners. Together with the taking of C. Massie, and committing him prisoner to the Tower of LONDON. Also, a true Relation concerning the present state and condition of the Lord Gen. Cromwels Army; and exceeding sad news from the Isle of Guernsey: Comprising the last bloudy fight, and the full particulars thereof. May. 30th. London, Printed for G. Horton, 1651.
A bloudy Fight in Scotland, between his Excellency the Lord General Crom∣wels Forces, and the Scots, upon the advance of Lieu. Gen. David Lesley, and Col. Massie vvith their Horse and Dragoons towards Glasco. Honoured Sir, SInce my last of the sixth instant, somewhat hath oc∣curred very remarkable, in reference to the proceed∣ings of both Armies, which is, That upon the ad∣vance of the Lord Generall Cromwel's forces to Eden∣burgh, Lieutenant General David Lesley, and Collonel Massie took their march (Westward) towards Glasco, with a resolution to fall into the English quarters; and ac∣cordingly attempted a passe called Spaw, where a strong par∣ty of Collonell Sydenhams foot lay intrench'd, who had seve∣rall Reserves of horse (likewise) within half a mile of the said place; but it proved very disputable for the space of one hour, and the conflict maintain'd with great gallantry on
both sides, till at last captain Sanders came in with a fresh Troop of Horse▪ who chargd twice through the Enemies main Body, doing great execution; each man riding knee to knee, and not flinching from each other in the least; which done, he wheeled about, and flanked the Enemy, with a reso∣lution to charge the boots horse onely; but in the mean time so thick was the shot which they received from the English foot, that they thought it convenient to make good their re∣treat, which accordingly they did, leaving about 30 men be∣hind them slain on the place, besides what were wounded, which are supposed to be trebble the number. On our side were Pain and wounded about 20. The great day of Battel we expect suddenly, for both Ar∣mies are preparing for an Engagement, and in order there∣unto eight Regiments of Horse  come on this side Sterling, the body of their Infantry lies in the Park neer the bridge, where they have pitch'd their Tents, and their Captain Ge∣nera issimo (the King) often rides amongst them. Most of their Ensignes are red and white, having this Motto engraven in a large Character, For Religion, King, and King∣dome. They have lately randezvouz'd about Fife, Sterling, Kin∣ross, and Dunbarton, and have muster'd about 20000 hors and foot, though the frequent talk is about 40000. After the last muster at Sterling, divers of the Lord Balcarras's Regiment of foot attempted a flight from their Colours; but were sound∣ly cudgel'd and beaten back by coll. Crawfords Regiment of horse. His Excellency the Lord Generall hath not (as yet) attempted any thing considerable, for when ever we go about to get into Fise, we must expect very hard service: and no question, but they will dispute the passes with us; which we cannot do, unlesse we are furnished with all manner of provi∣sions both for horse and foot: We chearfully wait for the
good season when the Lord shall lead us forth: and we doubt not but our work will be wel timed, if we can wait the Lords leisure: Oely there is an overhasty spirit in us gnerlly, which carries us out to discontents and frowardnesse, which is both sad and grievous to divers. I wish that we may be all wrought up to an even frame of heart, to welcome all dispen∣sations which may befall us here. Lithgow 18 , 1651. By an expresse Letter further from Scotland it  hus certified; That their King having receiv'd intelligence, that Mr Cook was taken, and sent prisoner to the Tower of London, immdiatly commanded L. G. Lesley to dispatch a letter to the L. G. Cromwel, demanding civil usage both for him and others; and that in case of non-performance thereof, that no favour or mercy should be given to Col. Axtel, Col. Lehunt, and Col. Sadler, prioners in the Isle of cilley. Whereupon his Excellency returned a very round and tart answer, signifying, That Mr Cook was no prisoner of war, and that he doubted not but speedily to have the said Colonels a liberty, &c. Their King is again return'd to Sterling, and hath given an expres Order, That all the English throughout his Army; shall be im∣mediatly reduc'd to the power and command of Col. Massie, whose Brigade Increaseth daily, and occasion'd chiefly by his private-alluring letters to the L. G. Cromwels Foot, therein promising in the name of the King, that if they would desert their present employments, and engage for him, that each man should receive both horse and arms, and an ad∣ditional gratuity, which hath wrought upon divers persideous persons. Middleon is marched into Angus with his horse, where the Com. of the Army are furnishing him with Arms. 1500 of his foot are come to Sterling, and he stands much to be an Independent-Army, and distinct of himself. They talk much of coming for England, especially Col. Massey, who is very courteous, and free to the English that go over to him, and promiseth much. Some give out, that the Scottish Army have a design to march by the L. G. Cromwel (if possible) and to make England the seat of war; but there is great danger of putting those projects in executi∣on. Their King is removed to Dumferling; but the Army remain still a∣bout Sterling, where they have intrenched themselves all along the Ri∣ver side: they have likewise raised divers Mounts, and planted great store of Ordnance.
A Letter from the Island of Guernzey, May 16. 1651. SIR, BY yours I understand that the late transactions in Gueruzey are va∣riously and strangely represented in England; therefore I shall give you a true and impartial account of the businesse as briefly as I can. Major Harrison Deputy Governour of this Island, having intelli∣gence that there were but forty two persons in Castle-Cornet, and that eighteen of them were sick, and able to do no service in defending the walls; he was very desirous to take hold of this opportunity, and when the Ammunition was arrived, the ladders fitted, with other things necessarie; he consulted with the Officers concerning the car∣rying on of the businesse, found them armed with courage and cheer∣fulnesse to attempt the said Castle, knowing how acceptable, if succes∣full, the service would be to those who intrusted them in that Island. We likewise had intelligence that some of the Island Captains had given out, that they were resolved to take the Castle by storm, and had taken the subscriptions of several, persons to that purpose; though I am very confident they never intended any such things; but onely a meer pretence to insnare and betray the Souldiers, by animating them by their pretented forwardnesse: But we clearly found their villany afterwards, and that these were the men that most of all opposed the coming of the Parliaments forces into the Island at the first, and since their coming have indeavoured the removeal of them; whereby it is more then probable the Parliament would soon loose their interest in the Island. But to return, Had the intelligence been true which was brought to the Gover∣nour; in all probability the Castle had been ours: For at the first on∣set (which was performed with as great courage and resolution as hath been observed since these wars) thirteen of the Enemy were disabled being wounded or slain, which being added to the eighteen which were said to be sick, there remained but eleven: But we found it other∣wise, and that there was above three-score able men in it, many of them Reformadoes, &c. which is sufficient to keep the Castle against three thousand: Our ladders beaten down and broken with stones, timber, case-shot from the flankers, &c. many of our men wounded, and thirty
two slain; two Captains wounded, one Lieutenant, and one Ensign slain in the place. Major Harison used all the means he could to cause boats to fetch off the party, but could not prevail either by reward or threatnings; and indeed it was equally dangerous to go to and fro in boats, as to abide under the walls; one boat came, and suddenly took in divers wound∣ed men; but going off, was sunk by a shot from the Castle, and two, men killed in the boat: the rest that were living, another boat took up and saved, and it was impossible that such a party of 200 men should be fetcht off in boats, the confusion would be such. An Abstrast from Holland. SIR, LAst Fryday night the Duk of Tork with thirty or forty of his fol∣lowers came to the Hague, and the next day kept a fast with the Prin∣ces Royal his sister, they give out that he is sent for into France, which is not credible, but that they do it out of designe that he should be desired by the Stares to go from hence; for he was afraid before he came, that they would not be pleased with his being here lest some affronts should be offered to my Lord Ambassadors, or those that belong to them, by some of his train, wherefore he thinks he will not speak to him, because he says he intends not to stay. The States have presented Mounsieur Belleur (the French Ambassador) with a golden chain worth 600 li. They have taken into consideration the proposals of the Mar∣chants, to send into the Straights 40 Men of War, to sight the French Pirates. They have also sent a Message to the Queen of Bohemia, and another to the Duke of York, requiring them to keep their Courts in Order, without giving offence or molestation to the English Embassa∣dors and their servants. But yet notwithstanding on Saturday last Her Royall Highnesse the young Princesse of Orange celebrated a Fast for the prosperous successe and issue of the Battle which her brother the King of Scotland intends to fight with Gen. Cromwel.
Since the receit of the last news from Scotland, we are fur¦ther advertiz'd, That the party beyond Sterling have a  devotion to Monarchy, taking a pride to count the succession of 110 Kings from Fergus his Family (above 50 of which they have either capitally or totally condemned and executed, or privately murther'd) and they seem not yet perswaded of a necessity of a change among us, or themselves, though they might be pleased to consider that their Monarchy expired in the rise of Presbytery, which leaves nothing but the name of a King (where it takes place) devouring the substance. As for that strange and incredulous Report, of the revolting of 30 of the Lord Gen. Cromwels Life-guard to the Enemy, it is very absurd and false; for they are both unanimous and faithful, and the Army in an excellent posture and condition. Captain Massie (brother to col. Massie) was lately appre∣hended at Colledge-hill, and sent prisoner to the Tower of London, by Order from the Councel of State. FINIS.
