G1650 E683_8 99865917 166371
A great and famous SEA-FIGHT Between the ENGLISH and DUTCH ON Friday last, between the Coast of Nor∣folk and Essex; With the particulars thereof, the event and success; and the great execution done by Key-shot, long Chains, and Bolts of Iron; divers having their legs and armes torn and rent asunder. Also the number of Holland ships sunk & taken, that came forth with Letters of Mart, to∣gether with the number of prisners; their exa∣mination ad confession; and the strage and wonderful speech of their Admiral upon his engaging of the English. Likewise, the Names of the new Generals chosen by the Parliament; the coming up of the great fleet of Collies & Propositions ther-upon to the Lord Cromwel, in behalf of the poor Citizens of London. Nou. 30th.. London, Printed for C. Hancock. 1652.
A dangerous sea-fight neer the Eastern Coast, on Friday last between the Eng∣lish and the Dutch; with the particulars thereof, and the manner of the engage∣ment &c. Right Honorable, THis morning we received advertisements, of a great engagement (yesterday) neer the Eastern Channel, between the Eng∣lish and Dutch; the manner thus: The States ships that were in this Harbour, having ben supplied with such necessaries which they wated, on the 23 instant, put forth to sea; but they had not long rode upon the Neptune Ocean; but they made a discovery of about eleven sail of Flemmins, who
had Letters of Mart from the States of Holland, to sight any ships whatsoever, belonging to the Re∣publique of England, and to make prize and enjoy all whom they could take, which Pyratical Act, pro∣duced them the Name of Free-booters; but indeed this Title was at last dear-bought; for, the English with a prosperous gale, bearing close up to them, gave them such a Volley, that it made even the wind and waves seem to contest for Victory; yet the Fle∣mins perceiving that they were odds sufficient, be∣ing eleven to two, chose rather to embrace an hono∣rable dispute, then to yield upon ignoble and un∣worthy terms; and truly, to deal plainly, and im∣partially, give the Devil his due, they fought very gallantly, till at last, our undanted English Hectors, seeing nothing would daunt them, and perceiving the Victory somewhat dubious, resolved to fight it out either to Death or Conquest; and thereupon mutually resolved to live and die together; in or∣der whereunto, so close and thick did they ply the enemy with Key-shot, long Chains, and Bolts of I∣ron, tha divers of the Dutch were inforced to make the Sea their Tomb; Others, were made lower by the head, by the matchless force of Powder, and links of Iron; some had their arms and legs shot off; A∣mongst
the rest, their Captain General Myn Heer Galen (son to Admiral Van-Galen in the Streights) is lamentably dismembred; for, as he adventured himself in the greatest heat of action, so did he su∣stain the greatest share and sorrow in affliction, in∣somuch, that most of his wounds are conceived to be mortal. He loss will be much lamented; for 'tis said he was a man of singular knowledge and judgment in Martial Affairs, and the Art of Naviga∣tion; yet many of his own men condemn him for that Heathen-like expression, made use of and se∣conded by Admiral De-witte, as he was engaging lately against the English, I (said he) will lead on the fleet against the English, let the Devil bring them off again. Now whether it was an English or Dutch Devil I know not: I have better thoughts, and hope Al∣mighty God, who hath delivered us in all our straits and extremities, will now give us a good is∣sue of this War, and add further links of his Mercy to those who desire to extoll and glorifie his name; for indeed even in this appears his loving kindness, who was pleased to crown the heads of his servants, with triumphant and prosperous success, by van∣quishing the proud enemy, and taking about 300
prisoners, and 4 ships, with little loss. The rest got off, being much rent and torn; but we hear since that two of them are sunk. Harwich 27 Novemb. 1652. A Letter from Holland. SIR, NOthing but fire and sword will serve to allay the burning Choler of the Princely party, who are grown to such an extreme height of arrogancy, That down with your Parliament now they cry, and say this is the time to set their poor distres∣sed Lord and Master in his Royal Saddle, and restore him to his dis-joynted Throne. But alas, it is not their high Rants, nor their quaffing of full bowls, that can bring to pass such mighty Revolutions, though
they give out, that all Emperours, Kings, and Princes in Europe, will be instrumen∣tal for his Restauration; but indeed by the Eye of Reason, we must conclude this to be incredible, if we seriously weigh and con∣sider the several I inks of his infinite mercy, towards your Parliament and Army, and how he hath sufficiently manifested his own will and pleasure, with that loud Declarati∣on from Heaven, so mightily set forth in the late sudden Revolutions and Actions, before, and at Worcester; whereby he un∣questionably appeares to have given a full and final Decision of the Controversie, and seemes as it were with his own finger, to poiut out to all the World his Resoluti∣ons for England. The Hollander sollicits the French King, for a conjunction between France and the United Provinces, of which endeavors the
issue is like to be fruitless. Yet that which bears up their drooping spirits, is, the with∣drawing the Spanish forces out of France, the leaving of the Prince of Conde onely upon a posture of defence with ten thou∣sand, and the advance of Gen Thuren with the Kings Army against him with eighteen thousand horse and foot. By which means, the Princely party re∣tain some hopes of the advancing of their interest. Amsterdam 27 Novemb. stilo novo. The great fleet from Newcastle is now daly ex∣pected with Coles; some are come up as far as Har∣widge and Ipswich, and care is taken to abate the in∣tollerable and high price. Likewise, some provi∣sions are making for the poor in every Parish, and certain Proposition have been presented to the Ge∣neral, by some members of the Army, for 4000 bu∣shel of Coals to be distributed to the Poor in every Parish. An excellent Work of Mercy and Charity. The Parl. have voted Gen. Blake, Lie. Gen. Monk, and Maj. Gen-Dean, to be Generals of the Fleets for the year ensuing. FINIS.
