G615 E745_19 99862630 114795
The true and perfect SPEECHES Of Colonel JOHN GERHARD UPON The Scaffold at Tower-hill, on Munday last, and Mr. Peter Vowel at Charing-Cross, on Munday last, being he 11 of this instant July, 1654. With their Declarations to the People touching the  of ts▪ their Protestations sealed with their blood; and their praȳes immediatly before the fatal stroke of Death was struck. Likewise, the Speech of the Portugal Ambassadors Brother upon the Scaffold, his Acknowledgment and Confession; And the ga and wonderful Mira∣cle that hapned upon he putting of Mr. Gerard into the Cffin. Taken by an Ear witness, and impartially communicated for general satisfaction. Imprinted at London for C. Horton, 1654.
The true and perfect Speeches of Master Vowel Col. Gerard, and the Lord Am∣bassadors brother, at the places of Exe∣cution on Munday last, at Charing-Cross, and at Tower-Hill. Gentlemen, I Am this day brought hither to suffer as a traytor, upon an Impeachment of high Treason, a thing which I was never guil∣ty of, and in the presence of God I here speak it, never did my thoughts in the least ever center upon any such thing; though the High Court of Justice were pleased to affirm, that I had endeavoured to make the Lord Protector odious to the people, in turning the Design unto him by a Lybel, which was scattered up and down London, that his Highness and the Army had a design to
massacre all but their friends in all parts of Eng∣land; and for endeavouring to bring in my master the King, for whose Case I am here brought to the place of execution, to sffer upon the Cross, as my blessed Lord and Saviou hath done before me. And truly Gentlemen, though my Death be an un∣timely and ignominious Death, yet it seems not in the least either dreadful or terrible; for, blessed be the Name of the Lord, that hath taken away the sting thereof, and inded me with his holy and di∣vine Spirit, whereby I am supported with those inward Comforts, that so soon a I have submitted my neck to the Rope, and received the fatal Turn, I shal then arrive at the Haven of Happiness, there to participate of those eternal felicities, prepared for all those that live and die in Christ Jesus, through whose merits, and by whose passion, I do absolutely believe to have a general remission of all my sins and transgessions. As for those things laid to my charge before the High Court of Justice, I do utterly protest against them, having not in the least acted any thing, and withall being deied that which every free-born English-man may claim as his sole and onely birth right, that is, Magna Charta.
So that being over awed by my Judges, I here dye innocently before my Equals, being leer and free from the guilt of any Treason in the least. And I do her protest in the presence of Almighty God, that it is for no other thing that they thirst after my blood, but my Loyalty to the King, (as it appears to me) whom the great Jhvah preserve, keep, and dfend And truly Gen∣tlemen souldiers, to you I now speak, that I can do no loss then tell you, that you are all deluded, misled, and blind∣ed;— but being interrupted by the Sheriff, he was not permitted to speak any further in that particular. Well then, I have done, 'tis for my Royal Soveraign that I am he to sacrifice my life, therefore I beseech you Gtlemen le no man be dnted or dismayd at my death; for I bless God I have not the least fear of terrour within, but am confident that I shal have a smile in heaven, when some may receive a srown: And so the Lord bless, keep, and preferve you in the pure and unspotted bonds of true friendship and Loyalty After which, the Executioner put the Rope about his neck, and prayers being ended, he did his office. And when he had hung about the space of half an hour, he was then cut down, and carryed to the sign of the Bell, where many friends met him, and from thence carryed him in a Coch likewise to Islington, where a great fune∣ral is prepared for him. His death is much lamented by any, being a Gentleman of exquisite parts, and of singular knowledge, more fit in∣deed for a Councellor, then a Warike Officer.
About five of the clock in the Afternoon, Col. Gerard was guarded from the Tower to the Scaf∣fold on Tower-hill, being accompanied by the Lieutenant, and divers other Gentlemen; but com∣ing to the stairs, he nimbly ran up, and smiling sa∣luted Col. Barkstead with a cup of Sack, and then walked up and down the scaffold with an undauted spirit. After which, he called the Executioner to him, desiring to see the block, which he took in his hand, and saluted it: Then he went to the head of the Scaffold, and putting off his hat to the Auditors spake as followeth: GENTLEMEN, PRovidence having alotted me the time of my death, the manner of my death, and the hour of my death, I am bound out of Christian Duty, and a Loyal Conscience, to acknowledge these singu∣lar favours, and to return all due honour and praise for these his great mercies; but for what I stand impeached for by my Judges, in reference to high Treason, my innocency therein does justly acquit me of the guilt thereof; so that I cannot but make this inference and construction upon the Judgment passed against me in Court, that I was not thought worthy to live, because I liv'd to love the King my
Master. And thus much I do here ingenuously de∣clare, that if I had as many lives as haires upon my head, willingly should I sacrifice them in his Cause; and under his Banner, my Loyalty shall now issue sorth with streams of blood, being assured, that af∣ter my passing through the violent Billows of this raging sea, I shal then arrive at the eternal Haven of happiness, and there sing hallelujah with my glori∣ous father in heaven, who is the most high and om∣nipotent Protector, of all the low and inferior Pro∣tectors here on Earth. And after some conference and prayer with the Minister, with an affable coun∣tenance, he cast off his Doublet, and putting on a white Wastcoat, and a linnen Cap, he then went to prayers, where immediatly after taking leav of his friends, he prostraced himself before the block; and laying his head down, rose up again, and said, Gen∣tlemen, when I am dead and gone, remem̄ber you have a Royal Soveraign; and the Lord unite your hearts and affections unto him After which, he wil∣lingly submitted himself to the block, and the Exe∣cutioner coming to him, to ask forgiveness, and know the sign; He replyed, the Lord forgive thee for I cannot. But when I lift up my right hand, do thy office; and accordingly the sign bg given, the Executioner did his office, and at one blow severed
his head from his shoulders; which being done, the head and the body were both put into a Coffin, & so carryed off the Scaffold. Then the Portugal Ambassadors brother was guarded up to the Scaffold, being extreamly deject∣ed in spirit, and in a mourning Gown, where he endeavoured (by way of speech) to plead inno∣cency; and then by his Interpreter to impute the chief Cause of the Riot and Murder to the Eng∣lish; but this was onely grounded by the way of excuse; so that such circumstances proved super∣fluous; and after his Confession to the Priest, the absolving him of his sins, and the resigning up of the Crucifix, he likewise submitted to the block, & at two blows, and a race, his head was severed from his shoulders. One thing more is observable, that these two Gentlemen, which this day underwent the fatall stroke, were the first that began the dspute at the Exchange; and moreover, that Mr. Gerards hands when he was in the Coffin, were seen to move, and lift up the Lid thereof. FINIS.
