G531 42475463 151145
A LETTER TO THE States General of the United Provinces, FROM Prince WALDECK, Who Commands Their Army in FLANDERS: Giving an Account of the Happy Success they had against the French Army commanded by the Ma∣reschal d'Humieres, on the 15/25 of August instant, 1689. Published by Authority. THIS Morning a good part of your Lordships Army being gone to Fo∣rage, we had news, that the Ma∣reschal d'Humieres with his Army, which he had reinforced some days before with 6000 Men, was on his march, of which we immediately advertised the Foragers by firing several pieces of Canon, as had been agreed on. In the mean time the Enemies Vanguard attackt the Village Forgé, where 800 Men were posted under the Command of the English Colonel Hodges, Lieutenant Colonel Goes, and the Major of the Regiment of Hesse. This attack lasted about 2 Hours, but our Men defended themselves very bravely, till Major de Roo (who was sent to give notice thereof to the Lieutenant Generals Webbenum, the Earl of Marleborough and d'Huby, who were with the Foragers and to bring them back) came to their Assistance with some Horse; whereupon our Men, seeing the whole French Army advanced towards them, retired Fighting till they came to a Hill near the Town of Walcourt, in which was posted a Batallion of Lunenburghers of Lin∣stau's Regiment, who were afterwards reinfor∣ced with the Batallion of Colonel Holle. The French attack'd the said Town very furiously with many Batallions and several pieces of Ca∣non, which lasted two hours and a half. Lieu∣tenant General Aylua advanced with 3 Regi∣ments towards the Town, of which he detached that commanded by Brigadier Talmash, and the Lieutenant General the Earl of Marleborough, followed with the Guard du Corps, and two English Regiments. In the mean time Major General Slangenburg, advanced with a Detache∣ment of Foot to the other side of the Town, which obliged the Enemy to retire in Con∣fusion, leaving behind them their Cannon and Ammunition, and a great many killed and wounded, the number whereof is not yet cer∣tainly known, amongst which are three Captains of the French Guards; and Monsieur d' Artag∣nan Commandant of the said Guards, with se∣veral others, are taken Prisoners. In their Retreat came two Drummers from the Enemy, to desire a Cessation to bury their dead; who said, That Six Battalions of the Guards, who likewise made the Attack, were, for the most part, ruined. On our side none of any Consideration are kill'd, besides Lieutenant Colonel Graham of the English, the Major of the Lunenburgh Dragoons, and a Captain Lieutenant; And a Captain, and some Foragers, were taken: And in the Town there were very few kill'd or wounded. The French retired to their Camp, and our Troops kept their Ground till Night. The Velt Mareschal Count de Nassau, with all the other Generals and Officers, behaved themselves as could be wish'd; and all our Troops shewed a great Courage and desire to come to a Battle, and particularly the English, who were en∣gaged in this Action, behaved themselves very well And a great Success might have been expected had the Scituation of the Country suffered us to follow the Enemy. I Congratulate Your Lordships upon the good Success of this Rencounter, which has fallen out so fortunately for your Arms, and in which the Enemy has been forced to Retire. Praying God farther to Bless Your Lordships Arms and Government; To whose Protection I Com∣mend You, and Remain Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servant, G. Frederick P. of Waldeck. From the Camp near the Castle of Til, Aug. 25. 1689. late at Night. Other Letters from the Army say, That there were 2000 of the French killed and wounded. Printed by Edw. Jones in the Savoy, 1689.
