H3396 36273029 150094
AN HUMBLE ADVISE TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR, THE RECORDER, And the rest of the IUSTICES of the Honorable Bench. To the goodmen of the Jury, and at the Sessions House in the Old-Bayley, London, in behalf of Mr. John Bidle, Pri∣soner in Newgate. SInce with the Aged there is Wisdome, and with grey hairs dis∣cretion, it were a sin to doubt your readinesse to hear, and apt∣nesse to consider, what the meanest hath to offer, by way of clearing your passage in so dangerous a road as you are entering into, if you shall proceed to the Triall of this learned Lamb like Christians, Mr. John Bidle. And though for other causes experience may have fortified your judgements, so as Advise may seem presumption, yet in that you have cause to doubt and to fear, that you are pressed with these or the like snares, through the subtil lyings in wait, by which many holy, in∣nocent, and precious mens lives have (even in this place) been cause∣lesly taken away. So therefore when you read the Books of the Mar∣tyrs of the Primitive times, and of those in the bloody daies of Queen Mary, or of the lesser sanguin daies of Queen Elizabeth, you rejoyce with exceeding joy as you run over these sad stories; finding none of
your Predecessors hands in those bloody Councels or proceedings, and would not for to gain the world be your selves guilty of the like. Let therefore your proceedings be with circumspection, lest afore you are aware, you are intangled past hopes, and do the things you have so much loathed in others. And though you may all stand clear in this matter in the sight of God, both in the present and for all future times be pleased, accord∣ing to your several places, to consider what those things are, wherein persons in the like places, and in the like cases, have been usually misled, and it will appear in all times, as in the present, that the first evil which attends the Magistrates to incite and stir them up against conscientious persons, is the mistaken or unin formed zeal of Prose∣cutors, (of which no time was ever wanting) who having got an or∣dinance, or Act of Parliament, the Decree of a Councell, or Assembly of Divines, declaring such or such opinions to be Blasphemous, Here∣tical, or Schismatical, think they need no more for their warrant, but presently fall to their business, watching and spying over the works and writings of conscientious persons. Thus having by an uncomely or unhandsome kind of diligence gotten something, which they sup∣pose Parliament Laws judg Blasphemy, instantly they run therewith unto the Magistrate, crying out Blasphemy, Blasphemy, never such Blasphemy since the world was created, name the persons, the place, the writings, and cry out for Justice, which in their sense, is a present seizure, and imprisonment of the person thus cried out on. What a strait now in this case is the Magistrate in, if he enquire af∣ter the Justice of the Law, or the nature of the opinion against which Blasphemy is cried, or after the peaceableness of the Party, or his re∣sponseableness or readiness to appear, if he incline to send gently for him, and use not the utmost rigour his authority can warrant; he likewise for his meer ingenuity and humanity herein, incurs the cen∣sure of favouring Heretikes, Schismatikes, and Blasphemers, so as the Magistrate, even against his own inclinations, is as it were surprized, and inforced by importunate elamors, to deal with godly peaceable people oftentimes, as with the most notorious Thieves, Harlots, and Murtherers, sending for them by like Warrants, and no nay, but Bail must be refused, sent to the same infamous prisons, as this Mr. Bidle to Newgate, to be tried for his life as a Blasphemer. This is the first evil the Magistrate is liable to in occasions of this na∣ture, and is the cause of all succeeding evils, and being so, how neces∣sary is it for all Honorable persons in Authority to stand upon their
Guard against such dangerous assaults as these, which if yeelded unto, in the end draweth on them that fearful sentence, James 5. 6. Ye have condemned and killed the just, and he doth not resist you; a heavy sentence, and due to too many of your Predecessors in this place, for want of a timely and conscionable consideration of the dangerness of the thing they had in hand, God evert it from your Honorable Society. All agree that it is best to kill temptation in the bud, and therefore to be provided against these clamorous onsets, is the best part of pre∣vention, to which end it is requisite to be skilful in the conditions of these, (viz. Mr. Thomas Ʋnderhill, Luke Faune, Nathanael Webb, and George Calvert) and the like Informers also in the true nature of Blas∣phemy, and to be able to distinguish of opinions, and to try them by some more certain Touchstone, then by the imperfect Vote of Parlia∣ments, Synods, Councels or Assemblies, al which have most grosly erred, frequently condemned Truth for Error, nay established Error by a Law, and suppressed the most certain Truths, by which the most righ∣teous and godly in this Nation have under pretence of Law, which is grievous injustice been banished, imprisoned, tormented, & murthered. As to the condition of these Informers, how good an esteem soever some may have of them, yet they are very like unto those tumultuous persons in Acts 16.19. who caught Paul and Silas, and drew them into the Market place unto the Rulers, and brought them to the Magistrates, saying, These men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our City, and teach customs which are not lawful for us to receive, nor to observe, being Ro∣mans. Here was a specious pretence, as if the trouble of the City lay heavy at their hearts, and set the men to complain; and it is like enough the Magistrates believed them to be well-meaning people, zealous of the good and quiet of their Country, nor ever had been otherwise un∣derstood, but that it pleased the holy Spirit of God, for discovery of such Hypocrites, and for forewarning all Magistrates against such cla∣morous deceivers, to demonstrate in the 16. v. that the true cause of their complaint was the loss of their gains, which they wickedly made out of the Damsels evil Spirit of Divination, whom Paul cast out. Whereunto agreeable is that also of Demetrius, in Acts 19. where their gain by making shrines being in danger to be taken away by Pauls Doctrine, he and his Accomplices sticks not by his clamors to put the whole City into an uproar; so you see it is no new thing, for fear of loss, and hope of gain, to move the Springs of the heart with a wicked suggestion, when the tongue and face speaks nothing but Religion and publike zeal; and if the ways of Informers in all former Ages were
looked into, even from the Persecution in the Primitive times, to the times of John Huss, Jerom of Prague, William of England, and throughout all the daies of Queen Mary, Qu. Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, (through all which times, more or less, there was persecution for Conscience) it was grosly manifest, that fear of loss, and hope of gain, were the only or chief motives to all the Informers, so as at best it renders these suspected, and they may be as guilty as any of the former, though they themselves perceive it not, for the heart is deceitful above all things, nor doth any thing benum the conscience, and blind the understanding so much, as fear of loss, and hope of gain. And if these mens ways be thought on, it will be more then proba∣ble, that they are not clear in this matter, being for the most part Booksellers; it's known that Books of Divinity are their chiefest sale, both in Sermons and other Treatises, and that they buy, and somtimes pay dear for their Copies. Now the opinions which are charged upon Mr. Bidle, are cross and contradictory to the grounds of their most sta∣ple Copies, and to the main part of their sale, and consequently threa∣tens their gain: Is there not then a strong provocation upon their spi∣rits to withstand such Doctrines, and to take up the same course to do it, by stirring up the Magistrate to imprison and put to death such Blas∣phemers, for less they cannot call him, to have him effectually silenced. If it be not thus, why of all sorts of men that daily have heard and read Mr. Bidles judgment, without trouble or regret of mind, nay (though not of his judgment, yet honoring and highly esteeming of him for his manifest piety of life and great learning) why should the Traders in books be so violent against him, as that nothing but his life will satisfie them? Why have not some of those who often hear him? Why not some of the private Churches, that are most of them oppo∣site in judgment? Why have not they persecuted him, and in detesta∣tion of his opinions forced him before the Magistrates, so to prison and persecute him to the death? Do they all of them, and all other conscientious people want zeal to God, to Christ, and to the holy Spi∣rit, to set them on? Nay, why startle they not, but on the contrary, di∣vers of the gathered Churches, and other well-affected persons, petiti∣on his Highness appear against his molestation, and earnestly press for his liberty; but because they know whatever his judgment is, the way to make him of another belief, is not by imprisonment or fear of death, (Christ nor his Apostles having left any such rule) but by ad∣mitting the points in difference to be freely disputed and examined, and as the noble Bereans, to search the Scriptures, whether those things are
so or no▪ Som what must be the matter that these Booksellers thus bestir themselves above others, wherefore it is the best and safest course for the Magistrate upon such strong presumption, to provide against the worst, and to conclude them at best but dangerous Informers, most pernicious counsellors, and not in the least to be swayed by their spe∣cious pretences of zeal, but to suspect all their suggestions, as pro∣ceeding from covetous and corrupt hearts; for were they indeed so sensible of Christs Honor as they would be thought, certainly you would find them first purging their own shops of all kinds of Popish, and wanton scurrilous books, invented purposely to corrupt and vi∣tiate youth, or if they can excuse themselves herein, which some will not credit, yet they cannot but know such as those are thick and three∣fold sold round about them, and yet their zeal burns not that way at all, the reason whereof, what can it be, but that it opposeth not their way of gain, else would not they offer one Petition more in behalf of the Protestant cause, for the suppressing such Books, and the impri∣soning such persons as writes them, who nautiate youth, and hath no pretence of Conscience from the Word of God to shelter them, but that, I say, it hinders not their way of gain, as they understand M. Bi∣dles Books, Doctrins, or Opinions do, which makes them so maliciously zealous against him, and to let the others go scot-free. Magistrates were they thus rightly informed of the condition of these informers, and thus strongly armed against such clamorous zea∣lots, they would not so suddenly, nor so reproachfully dispose of the persons of men fearing God, as throughout all former times was la∣mentably done, and somwhat too much in Mr. Bidles case; they would then have time to deliberate upon the matter, before they sent a man to prison, they then, no doubt, would exercise their own judgments, as Christians, and see what is alledged against any man, and deal as becometh Christian Magistrates, according to the known and revealed Word of Christ manifested in the holy Scriptures. Which word of Truth, being not yea and nay, as Parliaments, Ge∣neral Councels, Synods, and Assemblies have all proved in the most material points in Religion, as your Honors, the Bench, and Jury cannot but effectually know: For one Councel determining that the Son of God was the most high God, another Councel, as namely that of Ariminum, consisting of no less then four hundred Bishops, decrees point blank ▪as we are wont to say) against the former, that the Son of God was not the most high God, but a distinct Essence from him, and subordinate unto him. This instance, amongst many, have I produ∣ced,
to shew the mutability of Councels, as also to shew how cautious you should be of putting to death a learned man for that opinion, which so many learned and famous men, not only have been, but still are in the world of his opinion, as you shall hear, if you enquire of those who have been in Poland, Holland, &c. This blessed unerring rule, (viz. the holy Scripture) to Conscience, being sincerely looked into, it will impartially discover, both to Judg and Jury, what M. Bidles opinions are, and how he is to be dealt with∣all concerning them, without a single ear given, whereunto the Laws of Parliaments may so on cause you all to be most grievous transgres∣sors of the Laws of God, and to be more guilty in his sight, before whom one day you must all be judged, then those Prisoners you con∣demn. Whatsoever therefore the Law of the Lord sayes to your un∣derstandings in this case of M. Bidles, let none by no arts draw you from enquiring into the Seriptures for satisfaction in every particular. In which enquiry, though your Honor, Mr. Recorder, and the whole Honorable Bench are all highly concerned to look unto it, that you may acquit your selves before the judgment seat of Christ, and be a∣ble to render an account with joy. Yet you good men of the Jury are more neerly concerned to be ex∣act and faithful therein, for it▪s your Verdict, your guilty or not guil∣ty, that saves, or destroys his life, which you are mainly to note, and to lay to heart, and to be all along mindful of it, that if you pronounce him guilty (which God defend) you do not only find him guilty of speaking such or such words, or of writing and publishing such or such Books, but in pronouncing him guilty upon either of the Indictments, you pronounce him a Felon, and deservedly to die; so that unless in e∣very one of your consciences he appears worthy to die as a Felon, you are in conscience bound to pronounce him not guilty, otherwise you may be his destroyers before you are aware, to your perpetual grief and anxiety of spirit, for so it befel the Jury that were the Tryers of M. Ʋdall, a worthy Minister of Gods Word in Queen Elizabeths days, he was Indicted for High Treason, in making and publishing a certain Book against the Government of the Bishops, and though there was no direct, but a scambling shadow of a proof, and though the Books duly considered, contained no colour of Treason or other crime, no more then M. Bidles of Felony, but such as the times since have proved as true as Truth its self, yet the Jury not thinking in pronouncing him guilty, they had pronounced him guilty of Treason, and to die as a Traytor, supposing they had only declared him guilty of making the
Book, hereupon they brought him in guilty; but when after the Judges sentence of death against him, which they never in the least intended, that they found what they had done, they were confounded in them∣selves, and would have done any thing in the world to have revoked their Verdict, when alas it was too late, and therefore you are to be ex∣ceeding careful in this main particular; never to pronounce him guilty, unless your consciences are first satisfied he ought not to live, but to die as a Felon, which is altogether impossible, if you shall seriously and deliberately weigh all circumstances touching the man & his opinions. For first, as to the man, he is so free from being questioned for any the least blemish in his life and conversation, that the Informers them∣selves have been heard to admire his strickt exemplar life, full of mo∣desty, sobriety and forbearance, no ways contentious touching the great things of the world, but altogether taken up with the things of God revealed in the holy Scriptures, wherein his study, diligence, and attainments have been so great, that his knowledg therein is of as ready use as a Concordance, no part thereof being named, but he presently cites the Book, Chapter, and ver. especially throughout the Books of the New Testament, where all the Epistles he can say by heart out of the Greek Tongue, and withal can read the Greek in English, and the English in Greek so readily, as a man can do the meer English, so care∣fully hath he been rightly to understand them. As to the Justice and integrity of his heart, his wayes have manifested, that he would not dissemble, play the Hypocrite, or deal fraudulently with any man to save his life; such is he certainly, as is known to very many persons of worth and credit in London, so as he is far from being such a Monster as many have believed him to be, through the uncomely and unchristi∣an-like clamours of his Accusers. For his opinions you have heard at large, and frequently with what he is charged not to believe, be pleased to be so just to your selves and him, as to give ear, and seriously to note what he professeth, and is known to believe, there being a cloud of Witnesses ready to testifie that he makes it his glory to confess with his mouth the Lord Jesus to be his Lord and his God, according to the Scripture, John 20.28. to be his Saviour, Acts 5.31. and by him doth believe in God, who raised him from the dead, and gave him glory, 1 Pet. 1.21. Having set him at his right hand, Angels, Authorities, and Powers being made subject to him; and that he is made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctifi∣cation and Redemption, 1 Cor. 3.30. That he is the only begotten Son of God, and to be honored as the Father, Iohn 5.23. that it is he that
is ordained of God to be Judg of quick and dead, Acts 10.41. that he is the Author of eternal life to all those that obey him, Heb. 5.9. that there is no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.12. that his Blood is the Blood of the new Cove∣nant that is shed for many for the remission of sins, Mat. 26.18. and that he is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25. How then, or upon what ground can any man justly term him a Blasphemer? he conceiveth to be according to the Scrip∣tures; if further then this he understands not, and for want of under∣standing perceiveth not the Scriptures, do maintain Christ the Son to be coequal, coeternal, and coessential with God the Father, and there∣upon should deny Christ to be the most high God, shall he be put to death for it? Surely none can suppose a man of so much learning, dis∣cretion, and piety, can do this maliciously, with full purpose to disho∣nor the Lord Christ, whom he so much trusteth in, and honoreth, as is before expressed; nay, can it be supposed, but that he who attributes so much honor to him, as those Scriptures forecited manifest, would with all his soul render him all whatsoever by any other Scriptures he understood to be his due? nay, the least measure of charity may very readily admit, that if such a pious man as he is deny him any part of honor, that he doth it, because he conceives that granting of it would be to his dishonor, and that he did believe he would be much displea∣sed to have it attributed unto him; shall this fear, and wariness in him find (admit that it were evidently an Error in his judgment) no lower title then Blasphemy? and for this, will nothing satisfie the Informers but his life? What thoughts have these men of the Lord Christ, that came not to destroy, but to save mens lives? that will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoaking Flax; that called not the Sad∣duces Blasphemers, nor Heretikes, nor denounced judgment upon them, either of imprisonment or death, no though they came to tempt him, though they denied the Resurrection, and said, there was neither Angel nor Spirit; yea so far was our most merciful Lord Christ from so harsh a spirit, that he saith, John 12.47, 48. If any man hear my words, and believe not them, I judg him not, the word that I have spoken, the same shall judg him at the last day: and rebuketh those, Luke 9. 54. who through a rash unadvised zeal, (much like what at best appeareth in these Prosecutors) that would have called for fire from heaven to have consumed the Samaritans, saying, Yo know not what spirit you are of; a sentence worthy to be written in letters of Gold, in every place of Judicature in the world, but especially in the hearts of all men trusted; as you are, with the lives of men.
Turks and Infidels are allowed, in order to their conversion, to ask any questions concerning God, Christ, or the Holy Spirit, to affirm, or deny, as they see cause, without being termed Blasphemers for so doing, yea, rather pity their mistakings; nay the Jews that speak such opprobrious language of Christ, as is not fit to be repeated, denying not only his Godhead, but his most holy and heavenly Conception, yet are they not imprisoned, nor Indicted for Blasphemers, nor molested, but suffered to live quietly amongst us, for which way else shall they ever be converted to the Faith of Christ? Why then is it so hainous a thing in M. Bidle to say he doth deny this or that opinion of Christ, to that end it may be proved by Scripture? Why doth not some zealous person shew him wherein he is mistaken, without calling him a Blasphemer? Will it suffize to quit a man from the guilt of such an ignominious appellation, to believe every ar∣ticle of the Apostles Creed, if it will, it is then most certain this good man Mr. Bidle, believes all and every Article thereof, in every respect, as they are there expressed? If this will not suffize, but that Athenasius his Creed must in every circumstance be believed also, or those that cannot under∣stand it, and consequently cannot believe it in all points, shall be deemed Blasphemers, by most, assuredly it would be thought too harsh a judge∣ment; for do you but observe with what satisfaction, with how much a∣lacrity the conscience closeth with the former saying, I believe in God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and in Jesus Christ his onely Son our Lord, which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Ma∣ry, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, descended into hell, the third day he arose again from the dead, and ascended into heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of God, the Father Almighty, from thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead: I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholique Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the Resurrection of the body, and the life ever lasting. There being no Par∣ticle of this Belief, (as Mr. Bidle useth to affirm) but that even in speak∣ing, it presents a plain place of Scripture to the minde for proofe thereof. Whereas in reciting that of Athenasius, (which was the ground of that Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, in making it Blasphemy to affirm so, and so, concerning Christ and the Holy Spirit) what infinite doubts and scruples do arise? as where it is said, For there is one person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost, but the God∣head of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one, the glory equal, the Majesty coeternal; such as the Father, such is the Son and such is the Ho∣ly Ghost; the Father uncreate, the Son uncreate, and the Holy Ghost uncreate,
the Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible, and the Holy Ghost in∣comprehensible; the Father eternal▪ the Son eternal and the Holy Ghost eter∣nal, and yet they are not three eternals but one eternal; as also there are not three incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated, but one uncreated. and one in∣comprehensible; so likew se the Father is almighty, the Son almighty, and the Holy Ghost almighty; and yet there are not three almighties, but one almigh∣ty, &c. And in this Trinity none is before nor after another, none is great∣er or lesser then another, but the whole three persons be coeternal toge∣ther, and coequal, &c. It is true, most men of years living in this Nation, have through breed∣ing and custome been formerly used to recite this Creed, as what they did believe, but how few there were that did truly understand it, that is, that did truly believe what they said, and seemed to believe, you can now very easily judg; nay how glad would al ingenuous Christians be, that these difficulties might without danger be clearly discussed, by strength of Scri∣pture, that so men might no longer have things run in their mind, as be∣lieved by them, which in deed and in truth they do not understand, nor are able to render a reason of the hope that is in them, touching many of the particulars, which is no better then hypocrisie and gross superstition, for though men may hide their hearts from men, yet from themselves, and from God they cannot hide them. Now because Mr Bidle hath laboured in this work, to enquire how these obscure difficult expressions in this Creed are proved in Scripture, which he taketh for the foundation of his faith; and because he hath not been contented to take up other opinions concerning God, according to the current of Interpreters of our times, but still ground himself upon the Scripture, for this cause only is he now a prisoner, and for no other; for this cause, and none other, doth his Accusers, the Informers, deem him un∣worthy to live. But it is hoped with you he will find a much more charitable and Christian esteem, for what at worst can be alledged against him, or what can warrant the taking away of his life. For admit the words or Books should be fully proved against him, and that you should think such Accusers and Witnesses worthy of belief, when not the glory of God, or of Christ, but their own gain hath set them on. Admit that mens lives may be taken away by an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, out of time of Parliament, which will not be granted, England being to be ruled by Acts, not Ordinances, so as therein also the foundation fails, for he is tried upon no other but an Ordinance. Again, suppose the Ordinance, Law, there is nothing of obstinacy expressed in the
Indictment against Mr. Bidle, without which he doth not offend against it; but were the Ordinance in force, it directs the prisoner to be Indicted the next Goal delivery, but M. Bidle was not Indicted till the second Goal delivery, after complaint and imprisonment, wherefore the Ordinance is not pursued, but the time prefixed elapsed. Yet further, admit there were an Act, and in force, yet that a Parliament can be trusted in matters of Re∣ligion and Conscience, the Scripture never warranted, men cannot trust, because they must obey, not what Parliaments establish, but what the Scripture saith to their particular Consciences; so as if Parliaments under∣stand the Scriptures one way, and you another, whether are you to yeeld to their sense or your own? whether are you to believe and worship as they direct, or as you judg your selves directed by the Word of God? so that the making of Laws by Parliaments in matters of Religion, Faith, and Gods Worship, which God never did, and men cannot trust them withal, so that although this Ordinance were an Act, and were not annihilated by the instrument of Government, as indeed it is in Mr. Bidles case, you could not with innocent consciences find him guilty upon it. If Mr. Bidle be not protected by the instrument, none are; for you will find it evidently intended by the 36. 37. and 38. Articles, which say thus: 36 That to the publique profession held forth, none shall be compelled by pe∣nalties, or otherwise, but that endeavours be used to win them by sound Do∣ctrine, and the example of a good conversation. 37 That such as profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ (though differing in judgment from the doctrine, worship, or discipline publikely held forth) shall not be restrained from, but shall be protected in the profession of the Faith, and ex∣ercise of their Religion so as they abuse not this liberty, to the civil injury of o∣thers, and to the actual disturbance of the Publike Peace on their parts, provi∣ded this liberty be not extended to Popery or Prelacy, nor to such, as under the profession of Christ, hold forth and practise licentiousness. 38 That all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and clauses in any Law, Statute, and Ordinance to the contrary of the aforesaid liberty, shall be esteemed as null and void. Mr. Bidle now professeth Faith in God by Jesus Christ, and that truly, not notionally; and as the compilers of the instrument by their words shew us they did intend: As for Popery, Prelacy, teaching or practising licentiousness, so free is he from these, as none taxeth him with it, How then can it be, that his differing in judgment from the doctrine, worship, or discipline publikely held forth, should exclude him any more then any other man in the Nation from protection in the profession of the Faith, and exercise of his Religion, since he no way abuseth this liberty, to the
civil injury of others, nor doth any thing to the disturbance of the pub∣like Peace on his part, but on the contrary, demeaneth himself peaceably and quietly, as becometh a Christian, and exhorteth others to do the like. The true sense and meaning of these Articles, or of the intention of the Law-makers thereof, you can no otherwise know, from any person or per∣sons whatsoever, so as to be satisfactory to your consciences, but from the words and expressions themselves which do most evidently and plainly af∣ford M Bidle protection from all Laws and Ordinances before made, and from all kinds of trouble and molestation. As for proving any the opinions alledged against him to be Blasphemy in the Scripture sense, is impossible to be made appear. It is true indeed by the Law of Moses, a Blasphemer was to be put to death, and you hear often that Scripture urged, to incite you to judg such to death, as are at any time indicted here for Blasphemy; but you are to be aware of Scripture misapplied, there being no speedier way to misery and destruction, Christians being not to be swayed in their judgments and con∣sciences by the rule of the Law of Moses, but by the precepts and exam∣ples of Christ and his Apostles: Yet if Mr. Bidle were to be tried by the Law of Moses, unless it do appear, that by the Law of Moses, these things, or words, or books in the Indictments are declared to be Blasphemies, or such crimes, as for which men ought to die (which that declareth not) there would be no ground at all from thence to proceed against him. And as for any warrant from the New Testament, you have heard al∣ready how gently Christ himself dealt with the misbelieving Sadduces; as also with those that would not receive his Word, and how he reproved such as would have had fire from heaven to consume the Samaritans; so as from thence nothing will ever justly be raised to endanger his life in your hands, nay, not to countenance his least molestation. For let the utmost that can be urged from these places, by the misap∣plication of which, many a well meaning Judg and Jury man hath been in this place misled, to the sad destruction of many innocent men fearing God, for the daies are still in remembrance, and will never be forgotten, whenas Parliaments were so unchristianlike busie in making Laws in mat∣ters of Religion, touching Faith, and the Worship of God, that amongst other snares laid to intrap good mens lives, they enacted to this effect, That whosoever should deny the very Body and Blood of Christ to be really in the Bread and Wine, after the words of Consecration, should be put to death, as being an Heretique or Blasphemer. Whereupon divers Informers of those times set themselves, and were by the then Clergy secretly put on, to lay in wait, and gather up such words, as rendred enquiring Christians,
which were willing to be satisfied of the truth of so strange a mystery ob∣noctious to their cruelty, most of the Informers being Booksellers, whose trade was sure to fail, in case this mystery, of which their Books were full stuffed, should be proved but a delusion, bestirred themselves to purpose, halling and driving multitudes before the Bishops, who soon sentenced them, and turned them over to the civil Magistrates, to be put to death for Blasphemy and Heresie. Where by the way, your Honor, and the Honorable Bench, and especi∣ally you good men of the Jury, are to observe with what reverence, nay, with what adoration, this error, this the grossest error in all Popery, (as Mr. Bidle useth to call it) was every where believed, and no marvel when∣as Parliament Law had made it death to dispute or deny it; and then how here in England, where liberty of debating and disputing this mysterious point hath been long time admitted; this gross error hath been wrought out of most mens understandings, (which effectually sheweth the real ne∣cessity and benefit of freedome in dispute, and arguing of all points, none excepted; and what enemy to the truth those are, this Christian liberty) yet still to this day, where Laws of State govern in matters of Religion, and where conscience and discourses are overawed with Laws of Imprison∣ments, Banishments, and death, as in most of the Popish Dominions they are, there this grosse error, which now through Gods mercy appears to e∣very considerate person one of the greatest and most palpable mysteries of iniquity, is neverthelesse admitted, and received with the same, if not high∣er respect and admiration then ever, which shews also of what Tribe and Kindred they are, that would have setled here again in this Nation a co∣ercive or constraining power in matters of conscience, belief, and the wor∣ship of God. And truly, whil'st you have this mysterious point of the real presence of Christs Flesh and Blood in the Sacrament, and cannot but wonder how it should enter into mans heart to be believed, it being so expresly contrary to every ones perseverance, tasting therein very Bread, and very Wine, e∣ven after the words of Consecration. whilst you have this in mind, and through how many difficulties, and impossibilities, and wrackings of the understanding by Sophismes and subtil arguments, men were made to be∣lieve, that they did believe the real presence to be there, when it was im∣possible for any, though they said they did so much as to understand it, for so grosse an error did never appear a reality or truth to the understand∣ing. Be pleased, whilst your thoughts are thus imployed, to reflect upon the opinions which are charged upon M. Bidle, which for more easie considera∣tion present themselves in this form, That he is indicted as a Blasphemer, for denying the Ʋnity in Trinity, and the Trinity in Ʋnity, that the Father is the
most high God, the Son the most high God, and the Holy Ghost the most high God, and these are not three most high Gods, but one most high God. This any man may affirm he believeth, and most men do affirm they do believe it, and it is like the Informers would not scruple to swear they do believe it, as those of the former times, no doubt, would have sworn, they both un∣derstood, and believed the real presence in the Sacrament; but dealing clearly and conscientiously with your own hearts, Is not this a mystery most difficult to be understood? Can any thing be more mysterious? Do you i∣magine that one of an hundred understands it, who yet through fear of the Law, and awe of death, sayes he believes it? Is any point in Christianity more obscure in Scripture? Why did not Athenasius affix those places of Scripture to his Creed, upon which he grounds his judgment; whereas in place whereof, he gives you only this for proof, That as we be compelled by the Christian verity to believe, what in this his Creed he affirms ought to be believed, so, saith he, are we forbidden by the Catholike Religion to acknowledg whatsoever he therein denies. Now you know the Real Pre∣sence was a long time here taken for a main part of Christian verity, and men were interdicted and forbidden, under pain of death, to deny it by the Catholike Religion; (for the Church of Rome was thought to be no lesse then the Catholike unerring Church) so as this his Christian verity, and this his Catholike Religion, are in these times of enquiry but slender proofs, and may very well admit of dispute, and a demand of plain Scripture proof to prove them, and it is a very hard case if men for argument sake may not deny any thing Athenasius therein affirms, or affirm any thing he therein denies, the purpose and intention being to see what Scriptures can be brought for full proof of the things disputed; nay, if any conscientious Christian shall really think Athenasius mistaken in his mysterious opinions, what offence is it to declare his thoughts, and to deny them? Every one knows by pro and con truth comes to be established, it is only error that re∣quires no arguments or disputations, but that of Law, and the Sword on its side, unhallowed weapons to combat with error, truth being ever Van∣quisher where those odds are not: It is not denied, that the most mysteri∣ous opinions may be true, but it must be only Scripture that proves them so, and then if freedom of dispute and argument be allowed, the more these truths are opposed or denied, the clearer the truth ever appeareth, truth being like that house built upon the Rock, that stands the firmer for being assaulted; error like the house built upon the Sand, which had need keep opposition far from her by the out works of Law, and threats of death, for so you see it speeds best and continues longest, as that abomi∣nable error of the Real Presence, which whilst hedged about by Authori∣ry and Law, was with the slightest arguments, and even with Scriptures a∣bused,
able, and did even in this place deprive many of Gods dear ones of their liberties, yea of their very lives, by the most cruel tormenting deaths their malicious Prosecutors and Informers could devise. An Heretique he was that denied the Real Presence, that the Parliament Law enacted, and an Heretique or Blasphemer must be put to death, that also the Parliament took care for: They also made the poor besotted superstitious people believe, that it suffized not, except the Scriptures war∣ranted it; and therefore they never failed to urge the Scripture in Titus 3.10 11. A man that is an Heretique after the first and second admonition, re∣ject, knowing that he that is such is subverted and sinneth, being condemned of himself: So then, say they, (as some will not fail to apply it to M. Bidle) the Prisoner at the Bar is an Heretique, why? for he denieth the Body and Blood of Christ to be really and corporally in the Sacrament; so such an one is a sinner, and perverted from the Christian verity, and from the Ca∣tholike Religion, and is condemned of him self: Yes, saith the Arch-bishop, it is impossible but he must condemn himself, his evil is so palpable, only he is obstinate, and will not acknowledg or confesse it: Well then, what is to be done with such an Heretique? Why, the Scripture saith, after the first and second admonition reject. We and our Clergy have admonished him often and again, to forsake his wicked Heresie, yet still he persists, therefore is to be rejected, that is, say they, and the ignorant seduced Ju∣ries of those times believed them, let him be put to death; yea, say they, the Scripture is plain, Gal. 5.12. I would they were even cut off then trouble you: which though every conscientious Christian knew in the Apostles sense never intended more then an Excommunication, as doth also the forecited reject; yet these false counterfeiting Apostles never failed to in∣terpret, a cutting off by death. But to strengthen these further, they urge 2 Pet. 2.1. with great vehemency against the poor innocents, But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. This nail they drive home into the Saints Temples, crying out, These are they that deny the Lord that bought them, for they deny him to be corporally present in the Holy Sacrament, away with them to fire and faggot, for they bring upon them∣selves swift destruction. And this place of Scripture was so violently urged in the late Parlia∣ment against Mr. Bidle, and made, or seemed to make so deep an impressi∣on in the very zealous part of them, that they were even ready to Vote upon a swift and sudden death, and were very hardly with-held from it, nay, had done it, but that the more conscientious amongst them replied so∣berly, that this place of Scripture could not possibly be applied to M. Bidle,
it being evident that he was so far from denying the Lord Jesus Christ to be the Lord that bought him, or from denying him to be the Messiah, the Christ, the Redeemer, that all the writings called his, and his discourses, did manifest that he did believe in his heart, and confesse with his mouth the Lord Jesus to be his Lord and his God (as afore is more largely expres∣sed) which if it shall please you to consider, together with what in the third ver. is said of the false Teachers, viz. and through covetousness shall they with feigned words make Merchandize of you, ye will find it reaches not Mr. Bidle in the least, none in the world being more free from the loath∣some sin of covetousnesse, or from making Merchandize of any, every one that knows him, knoweth that he having food and rayment, is therewith∣all content, and that he (if any one in the world) accounts godlinesse with content, the greatest gain in, so as when all the whole Scriptures are searched for matter against Mr. Bidle, let them be but impartially consider∣ed, and they will appear no more in justification of his molestation impri∣sonment, or further punishment, then they were in approving the barba∣rous cruelties inflicted upon those former sufferers. So that upon your serious consideration of all things, it cannot be doubted, but that Mr. Bidle is as safe, whilst your Christian consciences thus rightly informed, stand between him and death, as if he were at his own disposing, and being so through your godly care of him, you will acquit your selves as wise and discreet Christians in the sight of God, and stanch that innocent Blood, which hath violently been let run formerly in this place upon like occasions, and free both your selves, your posterity, and this Honorable City from Judgments and plagues due for the same. Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Cove∣nant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. FINIS.
