I146 E1182_8 99864386 116614
THE INDEPENDENT CATECHISME PSAL. 11. Verse 105. Thy word is a Lampe unto my feet and a light unto my Paths. ROMANS 8. Verse 13.14: For if yee live after the flesh, ye shall die, but if ye through the Spirit do mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God they are the Sons of God. LONDON, Printed for Richard Burton 1647:
THE INDEPENDENT CATECHISME. WHat is God? A. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in Spirit and in truth. Q. Is the spirit of God limited? A. No, for the Appostle saith his spirit. shall descend upon all flesh. Q. Where was the spirit of God first seen? A. To move on the face of the waters. It seemeth that the Church of God had a small beginning? A. Yea, when there was but eight persons living and not all of them Righteous. Q. When began the Gospell to be so fully preacht? A. It began first to be preached by Iohn Baptist, and afterwards by our gracious Re∣deemer
Christ Iesus, and then by his Dis∣ciples sent out by him, but more abundantly by the Apostles after the death, resurrection and asscention of Christ. Mat. 28. Q. What became of Christ after the Jews had put him to death? A. He was buried. Iohn 19. Q By whom was he buried? A. By Ioseph of Aramathea. Who went to Pilate and begged the Body of Iesus, and said it in a new Sepulcher which he had hewne out for himselfe, Iohn 19.3. Q Did he continue long in the Grave? A. He rose againe the third day. Mat 28.6. Corinthians 15.4. Mathew 29.21. Q Wherefore did Christ rise againe? A. To shew us that he hath overcome all the powerrs of the Divell, Hell, Death, and the Grave, for our Iustification and Salva∣tion. Rom. 5.25. Q To whom did our Lord and Saviour Christ Jesus first shew himselfe after his Glo∣rious tesurrection? A. First to Mary Magdalen, and to the o∣ther Mary. Math 16.9. Secondly, to his two Disciples as they went from Ierusalem to Emaus. Mark 16.12 Luk 24.13. Thirdly to the eleven Apostles, as they sat together. Iohn 20.19. Fiftly and lastly, To more then five hun∣dred
Brethren at once, and also at sundry times he shewed himselfe unto them alive af∣ter his passion by many infallible proofes and testimonies. Acts 1. Q How long did he remaine with them after his glorious resurrection? A. He was seen of them after his Resur∣rection by the space of forty dayes. Acts 3. Q What did he with them all that time? A. He spake unto them of the things per∣taining to the Kingdome of God, Acts 3. Q What speciall promise did he make unto them before his departure? A. Christ answeared and said, that they should be baptized with the Holy Ghost. Acts 1.5. Q What became of him after he had spo∣ken unto them of these things? A. He was taken up into Heaven out of their sight, and a Cloud received him. Acts 9. Q What appeared unto them as they loo∣ked after him? A. He was taken up into Heaven out of their sight, and a Cloud received him. Acts 9. Q What appeared unto them as they loo∣ked after him? A. Two men appeared in white apparell, telling them that the same Iesus which was taken up from them should so come, in like manner as they had seen him go into Heaven. Acts 1.11. Q What became of the Disciples after his Asscention into Heaven? A. They returned to Ierusalem from the
Mount called Olivet. Acts 1.12. Q What did they when they came to Jeru∣salem? A. They continued together with one ac∣cord in supplication and prayer, and did choose another Apostle. Acts 1.14. Q How did they choose him? A. They appointed Ioseph called Barna∣bas, who was surnamed Instus & Matthias, and when they had prayed, they cast Lots, and the Lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbred with the eleven Apostles. acts 1.23.24.25.26. Q When did Christ performe that promise which he made unto them, namely that they should be baptised with the Holy Ghost? A. At the feast of Penticost which was in few dayes after his ascention. acts. 2. Q In what manner was it performed? A. They all being met together in one place, there came a sound from Heaven and filled all the house, and there appeared unto them Cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it sate upon each of them, and they were all fil∣led with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues as the spirit gave them utterance. acts 2.12.3.4. Q What happened thereupon? A. Many were amazed and wondred at that great work, and others mocking said they were full of new Wine. acts 12.13.
Q How did the Apostles cleare themselves of that false accusation? A. Peter stood up with the eleven, prooving that they could not be drunk, because it was the 3d. houre of the day, and also that this was but the fulfiilling a promise which the Lord had made by the mouth of the Prophet Ioell. acts 2.16. Ioel 2.25. Q What did the Apostles after they had thus cleared themselves from that false accu∣sation? A. Peter preached unto them the death, and resurrection of Christ Iesus, telling them that they had taken him, and by wicked hands had Crucified and staine him. acts 2.23. Q What followed thereupon? A. They were pricked in their hearts, and cryed out to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren what shall we do? acts 2.7. Q What Counsell did they give them? A. They exhorted them to repent and be baptized in the man of Iesus Christ for the remission of sins. Q What followes upon this exhortation? A. They that gladly received the word were Baptized, and the same day there were ad∣ed to them above three thousand soules, and hey continued in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of Bread and Prayers. acts 2.41.42:
Q What followed upon the great work wrought upon those men? A. Feare came upon every soule, and they that beleived sould their possessions, parted their Goods to all men, as every man had need. acts 2:44:45: Q Were any great workes done by the A∣postles? A. Yea many wonders, signes, and mi∣racles were done by them: acts 5.12. Q What was the principall end of those miracles? A. God did thereby witness to their Do∣ctrine that it was his which they did preach, by giving them power to work such miracles: Hebrewes 2:4: Q Were the people moved by those mi∣racles to receive their Doctrine? A. Yea very many were moved therewith, & wondring at their Miracles beleeved their Doctrine even as many as were ordained to eternall life. Q Were none moved by their preaching to beleeve their Doctrine, but such as were or∣dained to eternall life? A: Yes certainly, such was the power of their ministry that many others beleeved the truth of their Doctrine and were baptized, as Si∣mon Magus, and doubtless many others which never received the spirituall benefit of
the Gospell which they preached, acts 8:13: Math. 13. Q Do not many of them go on very far in the profession of their faith, and in preaching the Gospell? A. Yea doubtless, many are greatly inlight∣ned by it and retaine it with Ioy, and go on Ioying and reioycing in it, and do tast of the heavenly Guirt, and of the powers of the World to come, and are made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and sanctified by the blood of the Covenant. Math: 13.20 21: Hebrews 5:6.4.6. Heb: 10.29. Q Lastly I pray thee tell me what is faith? A. I must be hold to answer in the Apostls words, that without faith it is unpossible to please God, and that the grounds of faith is a Confidence of things not seen, no not for flesh and blood, Dust and Ashes to compre∣hend, only what Abraham, and Abell, and E∣noch, and Iacob, and Moses, and others did beleive only by faith. Hebrews 11: Q What is the utmost extent of your faith? I beleive that neither height nor depth, nor principalities nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor life, nor death is able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ Iesus. Q VVhat great things hath the Scriptures foretold us, that are yet un-fullfilled, the per∣formance
whereof we are to expect in these latter dayes? A. The destruction of Antechrist, that man of sin, the restoring of the truth from those er∣rors abroad in the world, the coming downe of the spirit upon Christians, and the coming of the Lord unto Iudgement. 2 Thes. 28. Revel. 11.11. Q Is the time of the destruction of Anti∣christ laid down in the Scriptures? A. Yes certainly. Q But is it possible to find out the time of his destruction? A. Yes assuredly, for the Lord hath caused it to be written for that end, that the Church of God might know it, and might reap the greater comfort thereby, in not only knowing that he shall be destroyed, but also in know∣ing the yeare of his destruction, they may have their mind settled of that promise con∣cerning his destruction. Q. But are not times and seasons only knowne unto the Lord? A Times and seasons are knowne also to the Church, when it pleaseth God to reveale them for the comfort of his people as we may see, that the time of deliverance of Israell out of the Captivity in Babylon was revea∣led and made knowne to Daniel, which he found out by the books that were written.
Q.In what place of the Scripture is the time of Antichrists destruction laid downe? A In the book of Revelation, and the e∣leventh Chapter, where he is limited to raigne forty two Moneths, which is month of yeares, which amounteth to 1260. yeares, the end of which time shall be in the yeare 1666. s appeareth in the last verse of the 13. Chapter, where the very period, and finall determina∣tion of Antichrist is laid downe, in which yeare the ddstruction denounced against him shall fall on him. Q Shall there not be a restauration of the truth till the destruction of Antichrist? A The truth hath begun to appeare allrea∣dy, and still shall more and more, and the full restauration thereof shall not be, till all the darkness of Antichrist be removed, and his destruction accomplished, Revel. 11:11: Q Is not the truth fully known, published, preached, and professed now at this time, in those Kingdomes where Antichrists power is abolished? A No certainly, much darkness still re∣maines even amongst them, and great confu∣sion, which shall at that time be more fully discovered, and the truth made knowne, and Errors and Heresies abolisht by such whom the Lord shall raise up, in and about that time, and for that end.
Q Are we not to expect the truth to be more fully discovered, then now it is, before the destruction of Antichrist? A. Yes assuredly, for it is the light of the truth maintained by the saints, which shall in a speciall manner abolish Antichrists dark∣ness, and also shall be the greatest meanes of his destruction, for the people of God shall by the light of the truth more fully discover his abominations, and cause the Princes of the earth to see how grosly they have been delu∣ded and abused by him, and so they shall with one consent, set themselves against this great enemy of Christ to root him out, and to exe∣cute the Iudgment that the Lord hath de∣nounced sgainst him. Revel: 19:11:12:13:15: Revel: 17:16: Q. Shall the Church of God injoy any great prosperity after the destruction of Antichrist? A. Yea truly, for then they shall be treed from their great and violent oppressions, and have free liberty to Profess and practise the holy will of God, and enioy the Communion and Fellowship one of another: Their in∣ward graces shall be great and excellent, their love shall abound one towards another, continually reioycing in the hope of that Crowne which is laid up for them in Hea∣ven: Esas 4:11:46: Chap. 12:34: 2. Tim: 4:8: Revelations 19:1:2:3:4:5:6:7. FINIS.
