l1111a 42475962 151223
His Imperial MAJESTY's LETTER To the POPE: WHEREIN Is offered, his Reasons why he cannot accept of any Of∣fers of Peace with France. Translated from the Original. Most Holy Father, WHAT deep and sorrowful Impressions the great Cala∣mities and Miseries of the present War, which all Chri∣stendom groans under, have made on Your Mind, as also the great and special Care Your Holiness takes to Reconcile the exasperated Minds of all Christian Princes, in order to the promoting of an Universal Peace, has been given Us to understand at large by Your Holiness Letter, from the 8th of the last Month. And truly the great and increasing Mischiefs, attending a War that has been rais'd under so frivolous Pretences, moves no less Our than Your Ho∣liness Fatherly Heart. Yet since We did not take up Arms till We were forc'd to it by an unavoidable Necessity, We have this Consolation left us, that (calling God and Our Conscience to witness) we are wholly free from the Cause of it: Besides Your Holiness, by a long and solid Experience, is so well acquainted with the Remotest Inclinations of Our Heart, that You'll easily conceive, that We can suffer nothing with more Uneasiness and Impatience, than to see the effects of Our Natural Tendency to Peace and Quietness, obstructed by the Ambi∣tious and Envious Endeavours of France. As yet no Obligations, Promises, no not the Most Sacred Oaths could prevail with that Crown to keep it from the breaking of the most Solemn Treaties as soon as they were made; for to pass over all the rest, the Christian World knows it; and future Ages will relate it with Astonishment, that the Most Christian King has caused himself to be seduced so far as to obstruct the Glorious Course of Our Victo∣rious Arms over the Infidels; and when we were relying on his Friend∣ship but so lately renewed, and consequently not at all standing on Our Guards, to invade us upon a sudden the second time with his Hostile Arms, putting all to the Fire and Sword before he had ac∣quainted Us with his having the cause for it; and indeed, all Divine and Humane Laws are Violated, rather than France should let slip any occasion of enlarging her Frontiers, or to hinder Us from the securing of Ours, and to deprive Us and Christendom of all Means to end the War with the Turks with Success and Advantage.
Thus have We been obliged by the Most Sacred Tye of Our high Office, by reason of that most Ignominious League between the most Christian King, and the Sworn Enemy of the Christian name, to u∣nite our selves with Our Friends and Confederates against France, to the defence of Us and Our People; which Union and Confederacy is of so high a nature, that We can do nothing to∣wards the Conclusion of a Peace without their Advice and Counsel But since we are wholly convinc'd that their Inclinations are no less tending than ours to such a Peace, by which all Christendom, accord∣ing to the Wesphalian and Pyrenean Treaty (since violated by France) may be restor'd to its former Quietness and Tranquility, all will be reduced to this point, that Your Holiness will be pleased to employ to the utmost, Your Fatherly care to prevail with the French King as the sole Author of this War, to restore both the abovemention'd Treaties, which he himself has broke. In case Your Holiness can obtain from him these so just Demands, there shall be wanting nothing on our side to render effectual this so Holy Design of Your Holiness, tending to the good of Christendom, and Your proffer'd Fatherly Service for the promoting of a General Reconciliation, so acceptable to Us, and so much wish'd for by all the rest of Our Confederates. This We have thought fit to reply to Your Holiness's Letter according to Our Zeal for Your Person, Praying God Almighty long to preserve Your Holiness to the benefit of Us and the Church. Vienna, Jan. 30. 1691. ADVERTISEMENTS. {inverted ⁂} Truth brought to Light: Or the History of the First Fourteen years of King James I. In Four Parts. Bibliotheca Politica: Or a Discourse by way of Dialogue, whether Monarchy be Jure Divino. Collected out of the most approved Authors, both An∣tient and Modern. Dialogue the First. The Second is now in the Press, which Treats, Whether there can be made out from the Natural or Revealed Law of God, any Succession of Crowns by Divine Right. And will be Published in few Days. Utrum Horum: Or, God's Ways of disposing Kingdoms: and some Clergy-Mens Ways of disposing of Them. The Devout Christian's Preparation for holy Dying. Consisting of Ejacula∣tions, Prayers, Meditations and Hymns, adapted to the several States and Conditions of this Life, and on the four last Things, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell. A New, Plain, Short, and Compleat French and English Grammar; where∣by the Learner may attain in few Months to Speak and Write French Correctly, as they do now in the Court of France. And wherein all that is Dark, Superfluous, and Deficient in others Grammars, is Plain, Short, and Methodically supplied. Also very useful to Strangers, that are desirous to learn the English Tongue: For whose sake is added a Short, but very Exact English Grammar. The Second Edition. By Peter Berault. Sold by Richard Baldwin. LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin. 1691.
