L779 E604_1 99865090 117325
PROPOSALLS FOR AN ACT For prevention of the great trouble and charge which the ho∣nest people of this Nation, have been put to; by wrongfull Arrests and Imrisonments, and for preserving them from such Arrests (being upon feigned great Actions) at the sute of divers to whom they have owed nothing. And also for ANOTHER ACT For the taking away the great trouble and charge, which the people or this Nation have been put to; by Sheriffs, Bayliffs, Serjeants, &c. to procure Arrests and Appearances of their Debtors, &c. in order to the more speedy satisfying of Creditors; For the saving to the people of this Nation, between 4 and 500000. pounds yearly, part of the 1500000. pounds, formerly proposed to be so saved yearly, mentioned in the Proposalls for Creditors and Prisoners. With a short explanation in particular, how those 300000. pounds, and more, by these Proposalls for Creditors and Prisoners, will be saved. Offered to the same consideration, as those for Creditors and Prisoners are. By Will. Leach of the Middle Temple Gent. LONDON Printed by F. Leach, and are to be sold by Lawrence Blaicklock within Yemple-Bar. June 25
Proposalls for an Act, for pre∣vention of great trouble and charge, which the honest people of this Nation have beene pu to; by wrongfull Arrests, &c. FOrasmuch as diverse people of this Nati∣on, of late years have been Arrested and Imprisoned upon divers Processe and Pre∣cepts issuing out of Corporation Courts, &c. where they have been Strangers, and there deteyned, untill they have made great Fines, or paid great summes of mo∣ney, to their malicious, deceiptfull, and unjust Proscu∣tors and Persecutors (though such people so Arrested, have owe nothing at all to such Prosecutors or Persecutors) or otherwise, to release some great sums of money or lawfull demands, which they owed to such persons Arrested; be∣fore any Pledges found, or any summons or attachment awaded, executed and retorned, against such pesons ar∣rested, contrary to the ancient Lawes of this Natin.
For prevention whereof, it is proposed to be desired to Be Enacted THat no person or persons whatsoever, shall make, or sue out, or cause, or wil∣lingly permit or suffer in his name, to be made or sued out, any Writ, Warrant, or Precept, out of any Corpo∣ration Court, or &c. upon any action, bill, or plaint, or, &c. untill the Party Plaintiffe in such action, bill, or plaint, hath or shall first put in or file his bill, plaint, or in∣formation; as large as he will stand to the same, without alteration or amendment afterwards, in any matter of substance; And hath or shall find pledges to prosecute the same, the one so to be found, to be of the value in estate of the Debt or Demand in such bill or plaint, or of some other value to be thought convenient in that behalfe, up∣on and under pain and penalty, that such person or per∣sons, so making or suing out, or causing, or willingly per∣mitting or suffering in his name to be made or sued out, any such writ, warrant, or precept, shall lose and for∣feit to, and pay to the party grieved thereby, some cer∣tain summe of Money, to be thought convenient in that behalfe to be recovered by action of debt, &c. in which, &c. And that such pledges may be liable to pay such costs as shall be given against such Plaintiffe, in such action, bill, plaint, or information, And that such Defendant may have execution for the same against such Pledges. Proposall for Provisoes to be in such Act. Provided, That if any such Plaintiffe hath, or shall have, any debt owing to him by any, who goeth about or
intendeth to depart this Nation, or absent or hide him∣selfe, or usually abide in places privileged, or so called, or secretly to hide or convey away his Estate Goods or Chattals. And that such Plaintiffe or some credible person or persons for him, shall make oath in writing, before any Justice of the peace, or &c. and they be impowred and compelled to take the same; that such person oweth to such Plaintiffe some certaine debt duty or demand, or that he was dampnified by such person to some certaine value or summe of money, and that such person had gi∣ven out in speeches, that he or &c. would or intended, & did goe about to depart this Nation, or absent or hide himselfe, or &c. or that he, or &c. did secretly absent or hide him or &c. selfe from any his, or &c. Creditors or Demandants, or usually abide in places privileged, or so called, or convey away his, or &c. goods, or chattals, to the intent to defraud any. That then processe may be made out by any Officer (having such Affidavit delivered him to keep) to arrest or attach the person, against or concerning whom such oath is or shall be made, for such demand only as is or shall be mentioned in such Affidavit. Or that such Plaintiffe may proceed, according as hath been used by forreyn attachment in London (being a beneficiall custome approved of for many years, and no inconveniency found thereby) and that every Judge, Ju∣stice, &c. Sheriffe or Steward, so may proceed as in such attachment against the goods and Chattals of, and Debts owing to, such Defendant.
Proposalls to take away the great trouble and charge, which the people of this Nation have been put to; to procure Arrests and Appearances, &c. WHereas Creditors of late years have been at more trouble and charges then formerly, to the value of all or a great part of many debts and demands &c. to cause their Debtors to appear, or to have them arrested, by reason of their removing secretly of their goods from one County to another, or from one Town to another, and absenting themselves to, and hiding them∣selves in, at severall times, sometimes in one County or Town, and at other times in an other, whereby their Cre∣ditors could not, nor have been at any time, at any certain∣ty where to find them, nor procure any the publique Offi∣cers for such affaires to come to the view or knowledge of such Debtors, without continuall waiting and attending on such Officers by themselves, to their great trouble, charge; and hinderance in their callings, or by their servants or a∣gents, to their great trouble & charge and long attendance, and sometimes such Debtors have continued in one privile∣ged
place as they have claymed it, and at another time in an other, in a very chargeable manner, and there wasted and consumed their means by divers leud and wicked cour∣ses untill many of such Debtors by so hiding themselves and abiding, and living in excesse and riot; have undone themselves, their wives, and children, and disabled them∣selves to satisfie their Creditors their just debts and de∣mands, which otherwise they might in some measure have contented, or compounded with, to their liking. And whereas divers Sheriffs, when they have had pro∣cess brought them against such parties so hiding themselvs, &c. and Warrants required to speciall Bayliffes to arrest them, when upon former Writs such Sheriffs have retur∣ned that they were not to be found, such Sheriffs have beene so prevailed with by rewards and otherwise, by such fugitive persons, that such Sheriffes have denyed to make Warrants against such persons, (sometime pretending that they have had executions against them, when they have had none) and sometime pretending one dilatory excuse, and some∣times another (though such Sheriffs usually grant and make Warrants against divers honest and sufficient men, for small and triviall occasions.) And many times when Warrants have been granted out, against such fugitive persons, to Bayliffs, Serjeants, &c. they would not arrest them without sums of money gi∣ven
them by the Plaintiffs, and the Plaintiffs or some for them attend upon such Bayliffe, &c. to see arrests done; otherwise divers of them have taken rewards of such fugi∣tive Defendants to spare such arrests. For prevention whereof, and for the more speedy satisfaction of Creditors, &c. desire that it may Be Enacted, That processe of Summons or Attach∣ment by goods or chattals, or scir. fac. to summon, &c. the person, may be awarded and made out of any the foure superiour Courts at Westminster, and at as easie a rate in the one as in the other of them; and no more taken for any such processe than hath been or shall be due, to summon, attach, or warne any Defendant to appear to a∣ny action or actions, which within these 30. yeares last past, have or hath been usually brought or prosecu ed in any such Court to summon or warne any Defen∣dant in such processe to appeare in any such Court: And that upon every personall summons or war∣ning returned by any such Sheriffe into any such Court, the same may stand and bee in the nature of an appearance in Law, for such Defendant, and that the Plaintiff in such action may proceed to judgment, against such Defendant thereupon if such Defendant doth not, nor shal plead to such action within — days next after such personall summons. And that in every such writ of summons there may be a precept, to such Sheriffe, that if he cannot find goods or chattals, or the person of such Defendant, whereby to summon or at∣tach him by his goods or chattals, or warne him per∣sonally within 15. day, or some other time to be thought convenient in that behalfe, next after such processe deli∣vered
to such Sheriffe or his Deputy or Deputies; (and he or they to whom the same shall be so delivered be in the County of such Sheriffe, to whom such processe is or shall be directed) that then such Sheriffe or, &c. shall arrest, or cause to be arrested, the body of such De∣fendant, if he shall be found in &c. within 15. dayes, or some other time to be thought convenient in that behalf, next after such first 15. dayes expired, and shall make an entry upon such processe, or in some booke publique to be seen, at the next County Court of such Sheriffe for such his County, and by the space of 3. or 4. County Court dayes of the same County next after, for every Plaintiffe, or any for him, or, &c. to view and see, whe∣ther or not such Sheriffe had arrested, or caused to be ar∣rested, or summoned or warned such Defendant, or that he was not to be found in, &c. And that (if such Sheriffe, or, &c. had arrested or shall arrest such Defendant) such Sheriffe shall return a cep. corpus, at the return of such processe, into the Court from whence such processe issued, or else be sub∣ject to such Plaintiffe, to an action of debt, for the debt or demand in the said processe. And that such return shall stand and be in the nature of an appearance in Law, and in such manner, as is be∣fore mentioned of the return of a personall summons or warning. And that if any (after Judgment had or obteyned a∣gainst him, and stand in force, without writ of error, at∣taint, or &c. brought to reverse the same) shall absent or hide himselfe, or, &c. by the space of — that then he may be proceeded against, as if he were pri∣soner &c. (summons being given to; or left for him, ac∣cording
as is mentioned in the Proposalls for Prisoners and Creditors, at his house, or, &c. to joyn in Commission and elect Commissioners, &c.) against his; or, &c. per∣son, and all his, or, &c. lands, tenements, goods, and Chattals. And that if such Sheriffe shall nor make it appear, as is before mentioned, t at he had taken the body of such Defendant by the r me before mentioned, to be entred up∣on such processe, or in such book, as before is mentioned or otherwise; That then at the request of the Plaintiffe or his Attorney, a Writ shall or may be granted or made out of any such Court, from whence such processe issu∣ed, to any person or persons especially by such Plaintiffe or his Attorney to be elected, whereof one of such par∣ties so to be elected, to be present at such arrest, to have, in lands or tenements, goods or chattalls, to the value of the Debt or Demand in such processe, or of some other summe to be thought convenient in that behalfe; or to be Coroner or Constable of, &c. And that after such arrest, such person or persons so elected, may have such party arrested to the Sheriffe of the County, where such person shall be so arrested, his or their Deputy or Deputies, or Gaoler, and that such Sheriffe, or, &c. shall be enabled and compelled (upon paine of an action of Debt, against such She∣riffe for recovery of &c. for his &c. refusall thereof) to receive such person arrested, and deteyne him, or, &c. in custody untill he or &c. shall finde suretyes for satisfying, what debt or damages shall be recovered a∣gainst such person arrested, and to be enabled and com∣pelled to take such security by way of recogni∣zance in the name of the Party Plaintiffe or Prosecutor,
and to his use, and that such recognizance may have the full force of a Statute Merchant or of the Staple, and that the same may be returned with such processe by such Sheriffe, into the Court from whence such processe issu∣ed, by which such arrest shall be made, at the day of the returne of such processe, upon paine that such Sheriffe, taking such recognizance, shall be lyable to such action of Debt, to such Plaintiffe as before is mentioned; and that the next Justice of the Peace to the place where such arrest shall be, shall have power, and be compelled, to take and return such recognizance with such processe (if such person arrested doe or shall finde and provide such suretyes as such party Prosecutor shall like of) and that all bonds taken, by such Sheriffs, Justices &c. at any time upon any arrest or otherwise of any Defendants or his Suretyes shall be taken in the same names, and in the same nature, and to the same intents before mentioned, and returned as before, upon and under the same penalty or paine.
A short view of the particulars to be saved, for the benefit of the Common-wealth, by the Proposals formerly published for Prisoners and Creditors, &c. The number of prisoners yearly in England and Wales, and as have been in Ireland, as divers conceive above 20000. The num∣ber of Pri∣soners early. 12000. Waster & consumed by them yearly. Proposed to be saved to the Common-wealth. yearly.     And as all, or most who have taken observation of such things, do esteem there be above 12000.       Estimated as is esti∣mated. By some to so much more, And by Others double so much. Every of which Prisoners one with anothher, wa∣steth and spendeth year∣ly, above 30 li. which a∣mounteth to 360000 li.   360000 li.       Of which is proposed to be yearly saved, for the benefit of the Common-Wealth above 300000 l.     300000 li.     Besides for the preventi∣on of frauds, which have been usually hatched in prisons, by long lyers there, whereby divers have been totally de∣frauded of their just Debts and dammages, amounting as is estima∣ted by some to so much and by others double so much.       600000 li. 900000 li.
The particulars by these proposals, For prevention of wrongfull Arrests, and imprisonments, &c. and for saving the excessive charges of Arrests for just debts, now newly published, to be saved to the honest peo∣ple of this Nation, are drawn ready to be published in convenient time; And that for the Proposalls formerly published for Credi∣tors, &c. be large, and are so drawn for the preven∣tion of fraud in danger to happen, and for the perfect understanding of all the common people, how they have been wronged by permission of things to be acted, therby proposed to be remedied, and for their certain understanding, how they may speedily, and at small charge he remedied, here followeth an abstract of the benefit for he Common-wealth Proposed by the Propo∣sals before mentioned for Creditors &c. 1. That all Creditors may have their due of and a∣gainst al their Debtors and Prisoners out of all their E∣states both reall and personall of what Nature soever; &c that all Prisoners whatsoever (satisfying their Credi∣tors rateably according to their abilities) may speedi∣ly be delivered out of prison, and not lie lingering there in misery and extremity. 2. That all Prisoners of ability may be compelled to discover the truth of their Estates to their Creditors, and out of the same to satisfy their Creditors, and not lie in prison wasting and spending in a riotous way among their keepers, and their agents, as much as would satis∣fie their Creditors. 3. And that such as shall be found faulty in concea∣ling or so wasting their Estates, should be taken from the prison where they so he rioting, and be put to some
place straitly to be held to worke for the benefit of their Creditors; which course will cause those who usually contribute for such their Liberty and riotous and delici∣ous maintenance and living, contribute more large to their Creditors to gaine their favour for the liberty of such Prisoner. And because some destructive Proposalls or Petitions have inconsiderately been often divulged and scattered abroad by some, this following Proviso to those former Proposalls not perfectly expressed in the same, in regard three sheets of more ma eriall things were filled, and no space left to expresse at large provisions against such like inconsiderate Proposalls thereof, this next following Proviso is now expressed more at large, for the more perfect understanding of the inconveniences which in∣evitably would happen, if such inconsiderate Petitions should be granted; which following Proviso is a full answer to, and discovery of, the mischiefs and inconve∣niences which would ensue upon those Petitions, with an Errata in some of the first former Proposalls for Creditors, &c. to the intent that those who have any of them may amend the same for their perfect under stan∣ding thereof. Page 5. line 8. inter &c. and a∣gainst, read there to except, p. 8. l. 13. inter Credi∣tors and upon, read to an action of ejectment, and con∣fesse the ejectment and the outer, p. 21. l. 23. strike out prison, and read person, p. 28. l. 8. put our di∣rection, and read discretion. 4. And that such persons shall be so dealt with, as those so concealing or wasting their estates, which shall be found guilty of outrages, as may hemes, batteries, and other trespasses, conspiracies, scandalls, &c. and such like;
for if such outragious persons should go free and be set at liberty out of prison, in regard of their po∣verty, by vertue of any new act of grace (as some incon∣siderately have propounded and desired) then its feared, that there will be no quiet in the nation, being divers out∣ragious persons of meane estate will then be apt and rea∣dy of their owne mischievous and wicked intents, or by rewards or promises of reward, secretly given by some others, work and act such mischief for a very small reward or promise, so that by the permission thereof, out∣ragious persons so easily to be discharged out of Prison, honest men living by their handicraft art, or labour, by mayhemes, wounds, and such like, may be deprived of their livelihood, and diverse men living by their credit by outragious conspiracies and scandalls may be deprived of their credits, and thereby utterly undone, and many other men besides may by such permission be put to ex∣cessive charge, and have their lives and estates brought into danger of losing, by mischievous actions of such outragious and scandalous persons. FJNJS.
