M1880 E149_34 99871293 156741
AN EXACT RELATION OF ALL SVCH occurrences as have hap∣pened in the severall Coun∣ties of Donegall, London-Derry, Tyrone, & Fermanagh in the North of Ireland, since the beginning of this horid, bloody, and unpa∣raleld Rebellion there, be∣gun in October last. In all humility presented to the Honourable House of COMMONS in England. By Lievetenant Collonell AVDELEY MERVYN, the 4 of Iune, 1642. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Downes and William Bladen, and are to be sold at the Irish-Ware-house in Stationers-Hall. 1642.
Die Sabbathi, 4 Junij, 1642. A Relation of such Concurrences as happened in the severall Counties of Donnegale, Tyrone, Fermanagh, and London-Derry (since the beginning of the Rebellion in Ireland in October last) presented to this House by Lieutenant Colonell Audley Mervyn, was this day read. And it is ordered, that he be desi∣red to print it, And that no man shall re∣print it but such as he shall appoint, without the particular Order of this House. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. I appoint William Bladen to print this Newes.
A Relation of such occurences as have hap∣pened in the severall Counties of Donegall, Ty∣rone, Fermanagh, and London-derry since the beginning of the Rebellion in Ireland, in October last; in humi∣lity presented to the Honourable House of Com∣mons in England, by Lieutenant Colo∣nell Audely Mervin, June the fourth, 1642. Master Speaker, IF my wishes could prevaile against the necessity of the times, or if by hieroglyphicks I could expresse the sense of that trust, in which by a sympathy with my Countrey, and request of my friends I stand now engaged, I should be most unwilling to salute this Scene with a Tragedy, or to present unto the continued, yet unwearied labours of this Honourable Assembly, any out-bred discontents, since too too ma∣ny are unfortunately hatched and nourished within your owne cli∣mate; whilst the Ship saild upon smooth waters, the Disciples luld their Master asleepe, but when the thunder broke forth, the light∣nings flashed, the waves crowded on heapes, then their feares plea∣ded an apology for their want of faith and manners to awaken him. Master Speaker, the times were when the Kingdome of Ireland saild upon smooth waters; Leinster and Munster never disquieted in their estates: Connagh stretcht forth it selfe in the happy assurance of its legall settlement; Vlster, though wounded and in Capite by alte∣ration of her tenures, yet was salved and recovered by the Royall promise for its reparation. Nationall grievances were ready for the sickle (in which let mee never forget the great assistance and respect our Committee received from this Honourable House) and by a favourable digression excuse our Kingdome from a suspitious Lethargy that such a horrid mon∣ster, as this present Rebellion, should be conceived among us, and yet never felt to kick in the wombe, nor struggle in the birth: Since that discontent in the Subject, which is the fore-runner of Rebellion, was so fully banished, that the rest of our life would be to leave off prayer, and fall to praise; to lay downe our requests, and take up
But now (Master Speaker) the thunder roares from the Re∣bels Cannons, the lightning flashes from their fire-workes, the waves of innocent bloud crouds up in heapes, then pardon our just feares if they addresse themselves to this House in these words, si dese∣ris tu, perimus, onely in this I must contradict the application; you have wanted no vigilancie, nor we sense thereof, nor faith therein. Master Speaker, the rolation I shall trouble your patience withall, will be of such particulars as are confined within the limits of the County of Tyrone, the County of London-derry, the County of Fer∣managh, and the County of Donegall, the greater part of the Province of Vister; to all which my eyes have beene the witnesses, or else bal∣lanced with equall credit: for as for such passages that are grounded upon here-saies, I esteeme an unwarrantable discourse for the gravity of this audience: besides all wayes of intelligence from our friends have received such obstructions by our enemies, that from the ninth of November, untill the third of May, we never received one syllable from Dublin, in what condition those parts stood, which I doubt not, though uncertaine to us in the same Kingdome, is but stale and common in this: and by the self-same rule I conceive the state in Ire∣land are as doubtfull of our condition in those parts, and not able to know where our shooe pinches us, except they can say that it wrings the whole foote, which is too manifestly true. Though the poyson of this Rebellion was diffused through the veines of the whole Kingdome, yet it broke the skin with its plague∣tokens in the County of Tyrone, and Fermanagh first. The suddennesse of our surprisall, and the nature of it, was so unexpected, that the Inhabitants could scarcely beleeve themselves prisoners, though in their chaines, and the Irish servant which over∣night was undressing his Master in duty, the next morning was strip∣ping Master and Mistris with a too-officious tyranny. Here in the twinckling of an eye, the Corporations, Townes and Villages proclaimed their scituation a farre off by their fire and smoake; here you might see hundreds of men, women, children, of all conditions and estates, that had lived in most plentifull and secure habitations, exposed to the rocke for shelter, to the Heavens for cloa∣thing, so that many hundreds in a few dayes starved upon the moun∣taines. Where was here any expectation of reliefe? the husband could not relieve the wife, nor both, or either of them their children: the Master could not provide for his family, neither was there any reci∣procall duty or service from these to be performed to the advantage of the other: one and the selfe-same face of misery, was unequally, equally set upon all, one and the selfe-same black complection of fa∣mine
stained every visage; The Land-lords Paramount title over the Tenant, was with himselfe out of doores, and they which former∣ly were, and now should have beene most beneficiall to the distres∣sed, were most burthensome to themselves, and others, as being lesse read, in this hard, and untutored Chapter, of personall and most ne∣cessary wants. Who can remember without griefe, the generall burthen of each expression, Give us bread, or else we perish? and their famishing de∣mands onely satisfyed with a comfortlesse Echo of the same words? But this nakednesse and famine, and their male and female issue (variety of diseases) were adjudged overflow executioners, of the surviving Brittish. Then entred the sword, destroying at the first, with the Scabbard on. The Rebels under a faire and colourable pre∣tence of a Convoy inviting the hidden and scattered Protestants in∣to a body, that so they might (as they most perfidiously did) make each surviving man, an Executor to the last murthered in his pre∣sence, and so the whole line one by one extinguished, the Irish Priest as Ordinary, administred for all. This the Sword acted in a Fox-skinne scabberd, and then flourish∣ed in one of a Lyons skin, seeking whom it might devoure, and de∣vouring all that it sought after; for I can confidently affirme, that out of the County of Fermanagh one of the best planted Counties with English, I could never give an accompt of 20 men escaped, except, wch. is most improbable, they should flye to Dublin; as for the chiefest (my owne estate meering upon the Marches of that County) ha∣ving inquired from prisoners, by name for such and such, they have informed me they were all massacred. The Blackwater in the County of Tyrone, a most fertile soyle, and inhabited with the English, had its streames dyed in blood, there being at one time above 200. soules murthered upon the Bridge, and flung downe the River. I could instance alike in many places, but that we are to allow buryed miserie too timely a resurrection. Master Speaker, in these two last instances, I have onely named the English, not but that I please my selfe better in concluding both En∣lish and Scotch, under the title of Brittish, but that there seemeth to be some reason; for in the Infancy of this Rebellion, the Rebels made open Proclamations upon paine of death that no Scotch man should be stirred in body, goods, or Lands, and that they should to this purpose write over the Lyntels of their doores, that they were Scotch men, and so destruction might passe over their families; nay, I read a Letter that was sent by two of the Rebels titulary Collonels, Co∣lonell Nugent, and Colonell O Gallogher, a quarter of an houre be∣fore my Colonell Sir Ralph Gore▪ encountred with their forces at
Ballyshannon, and there slew out-right 180. of their men, without losse of one man on our side, (praised be God) which was directed to our Honourable Friends, the Gentlemen of the never conquered Scotch-Nation, it exprest, that they were both of one extraction in former times, joynt-assistants, that their quarrell, if aright understood by them, as by the best of Scotland, they would be otherwise advised, then to joyne with us, and many other passages that I may seasonably for∣get here; I onely touch this, not as judging where there is smoake, there is some fire, but to observe their policy, which, though to some that were suddenly surprized, might afford security to retreate into some place of safety, yet it was ridiculously entertained, and as resolutely scorned by the Scottish Nation. Hitherto (with your patience) is rough drawne the generall e∣state, and condition of the Brittish, who were now betaking them∣selves to better resolutions, in opposition to the enemies fury. I shall beginne with the County of Fermanagh, where those that had escaped the fire and sword of Rory Mac Guyre, the Arch-Rebell in that County, brother to the Lord of Eniskellen, drew themselves into Eniskillen, a place fortifyed by nature, under the Command of Sir William Cole, Colonell. The Inhabitants of that County of the other side of the Lughearne, resorted to Master Catheart, then High Sheriffe of the County, and Garrison'd in the Castle of Moneigh, Lilgold, and Tullagh, Mac Guire having without any opposition in that Country, wasted, burnt, killed, and pillaged, betooke him∣selfe, with the united forces thereof to beleagre Eniskillen, which di∣vers times with great bodies, and threates equall, but with fictions exceeding them both, as that all Ireland was taken, which for a great while we might all of us easily, but with griefe, beleeve. Howsoever t pleased God, that Colonell Cole, with great resolution and valour maintained the same, and made divers fallyes in the night, upon his Quarter, doing very good execution, Insomuch that Mac Guirc, thought it an unseasonable aire to Quarter so neare Eniskillen, and then began to adventure his fortunes upon the other side of the Lough, where Master Catbcart, and many brave Scotch Cavillieres, a∣gainst so great a body, though not able to maintaine a field, by di∣vers resolute and discreete Sallies, chased, and slaughtered the enemy. One I will particularize, though not crowned with successe of ex∣ecution, equall to the former, where 800. of the enemies, being drawne up into three bodyes, before their Quarter, they Sallyed out with 60. Horse, routed their Battalions, and killed 35. of their men, further execution being prevented by a contiguous wood. There was two Castles called Tullagh, and Lisgold, which by an o∣ver-weaning affiance in the enemies promises, yet indeed very much
prest by personall wants, delivered themselves upon composition, which taught succeeding Garrisons to sticke unto their old Creed, for after the surrender, they were all massacred. Master Speaker, Having no notes of remembrance, and much prest by my Friends unto this disorderly Discourse, or were it not that the reverence of the place countenanced it, I should esteeme it like a tale, beginning (once upon a time.) I shall a while leave the County of Fermanagh, because these are passages precedent, to the Commis∣sion for raising its Regiment of 500, foot, and recollect my memo∣ry, in what posture the County of Tyrone stood; most part of the Brittish, of the Barony of Omagh, made their escape towards New∣towne, and Strebane, both places being of the Barony of Strebane, in the same County. The Barony of Clogher resorted to the Agber, The remaining Barrony being the Barony of Dongannon, were marcht up by Sir Thomas Staples, and Lieutenant Colonell Saun∣derson, forth of that Barony to New-Towne, nigh twenty miles, through the barbarous Mountaines of Monterlynny, one of the grea∣test fastnesses of Jreland, to joyne with Sir William Stewarts forces there, where they were joyfully entertained, and after 2 or 3 dayes stay there, in a very unseasonable time of the yeare marcht to Agber, being 600. in number, but contrary to the perswasions of that Noble Liev. Colonell, and the High Sheriffe, Captaine Maxwell, a Gent. of singular forwardnesse, were divided by one Master William Stewart, of Fiagh, a man of good parts, but very unfortunately applyed in∣to Dongannon, backe againe, where the greatest part of them were slaine by two and three, without satisfaction of one drop of Rebels blood, in requitall of theirs, and those Gentlemen that remained with Lieutenant Colonell Saunderson, this unfortunate division hap∣pening in the face of Sir Phelomy O Neill, encouraged the numerous Rebell so farre, that he and his Company was forced to retreate to∣wards the Omagh, and so to New-towne, the Towne of Agher being entred by the Rebels, and burnt immediately: Yet I must not here forget the resolute attempt, and manfull defending of the Agber Castle by Master Archibald Aerskin, Clarke, Sonne and Heire to Sir James Aerskin, a Gentleman of 1000. pound per annum, of tempo∣rall estate; who being beleagred a few dayes before by 2000. men, with the assistance of Archibald Hamilton, Esquire, and his Te∣nants, Sallyed out with 80. Horse, and twelve Musketeers upon a bo∣dy of the Rebels, being about 600. and routed them with the execu∣tion of above 100. of which some were considerable as any in those parts, with the losse onely of Captaine Barkley a young Gen∣tleman, much lamented. Master Archibald Hamilton afterward, a zea∣lous Gentleman, both before and during his continuance in the
Kingdome wounded with some others of note. About two dayes after, some twenty horse with Master Archibald Hamilton, a bold Souldier, forraged into the County of Monaghan, where they encountred with a strong party commanded by the great Mac Kenna, which they encountred very fiercely, and at last rou∣ted the Rebell, killed one of the speciall Commanders that had been a Commander in Spaine, slew about 30 horsemen, and 20 foot, and recovered many of the British cattell having received wounds, and dismounted in the skirmish, but recovered both life and horse. Some three dayes before this, Sir William Stewart marcht out with some foote and horse from Newtowne, pursued the Rebell, and so marcht to the Agher, and after some stay, retired home with great stoe of cattell; though both he and wee could have wisht (if wee had the spirit of prophesie) to have kept the fields longer: for the O Neils and Mac Gwires who were then with their forces the leaders of the re∣bellion, discomfited by former service, sought for protections, but ani∣mated by Master William Stewarts division, (and this retiring march though grounded upon warrantable discipline) beleagred the Agher Castle, Sir Phelomy O Neill, and Collonell Rory Mac Gwire being personally present with 4000 men; and though they seconded their attempts by promises of honourable quarter, reinforced it by bloody threats in case of refusall: planted a small field peece to batter, and in a darke night stormd the gate and bawne upon all parts. Yet by the re∣solution of Master Erskin, and the ready fire of Sir Henry Titchbourns old company beate them from their wals and scaling ladders with the losse of 200 of their resolutest men. Sir Phelomy O Neill retired his journey, burning along to Dongannon. Mac Gwire in his retreat assaulted Agbatyan Castle, commanded by Captaine Maxwell, who upon sight of Mac Gwires drawing up, is∣sued out some few musqueteers into the ditches, and beate him off from any further attempt, who in his march burnt all Fermanagh to∣wards Eniskillen. About that time Captaine Thomas Newburgh with a few men he raised in great hazard of his owne person, tooke in Ca∣stle Derrick, a place of great consequence and strength, killed the men, possest their armes: in his absence being gone for ammunition, left the Castle to a young Gentleman Master Durdo; when Sir Phylomy O Neill immediately besieged it with 3000 men, but Master Durdo with great courage having onely 16 men to man the Castle and Bawne, beate him off, and slew more than 80 of his men, and 9 dayes after sallyed out and killed out one prime Gentleman of the O Neils, and tenne more, and tooke two Colours and a Drumme, with losse of three of his owne men; all which and himselfe afterwards for want of ammuniti∣on were forced to leave the Castle in a darke night, and every one shift
for himselfe, where some mis-led upon the mountains happened upon the enemies quarters instead of ours and were killed. Master Durdo with great hazard lying two nights upon the mountaines escaped un∣to us. Sir William Stewart understanding of a partie of the O Neils in the Kerrilrs woods, sent out Captaine Balfour a deserving souldier, with 100 men, who skirmisht with them, killed 50 Rebels, lost four of his owne men, and brought home 400 cowes. Some foure dayes after Sir William Stewart desired Lievetenant Col∣lonell Sanderson, my selfe, and Serjeant Major Iames Galbraith to march from Newtowne to relieve Agher and Aghatyan, with 500 foote and 100 horse, the second night in extremity of weather, we marcht to the Agher, and quartered in Clogher a mile and a halfe distant; the enemy fell that night into one part of our quarters, but upon the alarum of the Sentinels, the maine guard issued out, kild some and chased the rest. The next morning we marcht out into Fermanagh, where in ta∣king 500 cowes, as many sheepe, and 300 horses, we killed 70 Rebels: upon our returne wee besieged Collonell Donnogh, Mac Gwires Ca∣stle, being strongly imbattaild and flanckt, after many shot past on both sides, the wind turning upon the forepart of the house, wee fired some out-houses, in the smoake whereof we approached the gate, set it on fire, entred the Castle, put the men to the sword: and indeed I shall never expect to see more resolution either in Commanders or Soul∣diers: but I shall never insist upon that in this particular, let their acts speake for themselves; in which march wee relieved 6000 women and children, which otherwise had perished. In this service Ensigne Long behaved himselfe as if he had beene bul∣let proofe: at hand whilst we were imployed in this service, the Re∣bels drew downe upon Sir Wiiam Stewarts Newtowne, and the Castle plaid off and kild 50 of their men in the streets, and preserved the towne, except one house or two at the furthermost end. Mster Speaker be pleased I may put you in remembrance these are the particulars that occurred in Fermanagh and Tyrone before wee re∣ceived any Commissions. I shall now present unto you in the same method the occurrences of Donegall County. Collonell Nugent a most seditious instrument, that married the Lord of Eniskillens mother, drew about 600 men about Ballyshannon Castle, a place of great strength and importance, against whom my Collonell Sir Ralph Gore, and Captaine Maxwell a forward Gentleman drew out some 200 men and 60 horse, who encountred them, routed them, kild upwards of 180 Rebels, tooke Collonell Nugents horse who left it and his bootes ript off behinde him, besides many that came downe the river by dozens and tennes which were killed by the foote, and not
one men lost upon our side. Divers sallies were made by Captaine Iohn Follyot a Gentleman deserving much commendations for his courage and discretion, as also by his Lievetenant William Ancktill E∣squire, a bold Comrade, sometime killing 20. 30. in which Captaine Follyot received a sore wound in his hand, being at the sword entred and beset with the Rebels. About a fortnight after their defeat at Ballyshannon, the Rebels mu∣stered new forces, and with assistance of Colonell Manus O Donnell, and Colonell Turlogh, Mac Caffrye O Donnell, they besieged my Co∣lonels Castle, he being gone over the mountaines for Ammunition, the Rebels fired some out-houses, but were beaten off with losse of twenty men, who attempted to burne the gate. In the Barony of Boylagh about two dayes after the Mac Swynes, and the O Boyles, were encountred about Kilbegge by Master Andrew Knox a Minister, who though very unequall in number to the Rebels held them up at push a pike, and killed about 80. of their men, and put the whole body to flight, and brought home a great prey. In which skirmish the best Mac Swyne was killed. These, Master Speaker, are the Occurrences in those three Coun∣ties, that were precedent unto any Commission granted for raising of Regiments, and now I shall according to the rule I propounded unto my selfe, first relate the exploites of every Regiment apart, and then of such service as was done joyntly, and as I began with Fermanagh, in what was performed before any Commission, so I shall endevour the same in these subsequent Occurrences. Tullagh and Lisgold Castles, being formerly surrendred upon promise of quarters, which was performed in this manner, they stript old and young, and bound them, exposing them all night to the frost and snow, and next day killed them, Moneigh Castle joyned to Sir William Cole, and marcht out into the fields to Lowthers-towne, where they had in∣telligence, they were drinking upon their march towards Eniskilling, and surprised them unawares, and pursued them some foure miles with slaughter of above 200. men, tooke foure Colours, some Drums, two Captaines, one Mac Mahoun, another Mac Guire, with store of Armes. After this he marcht out with 400. men, and having burnt the corne and the enemies garrisons, was met in his march homewards, by Mac Guire, with 800. men, with great violence charging his Vanne, and unexpectedly 400. more of the Mac Mahouns, charged him on the Reare, he put them all to flight, kild upwards of a 100 men, got 60. Muskets, and many Pikes, he hath taken all their boates upon Loug∣hearne, sunke their Cotts, and both by Land and water made himselfe a very good passage, though I conceive he is now in much distresse.
This is what I can certainly averre, though we heard many other passages of much credit, but I am certaine he is not a sleepe, when a∣ny opportunity shall require. I shall now leave Fermanagh in this Discourse, and remember it in my prayers, and passe to Sir William Stewarts Regiment and Sir Robert Stewarts, whom though I but now name, have given most brave testimonies of Commanders every way well qualified. After the unfortunate and unworthy losse of Strebane, these Regiments garrison'd upon such frontier places, as might secure the Barrony of Rapho, in which the safety of the City of London-dery was highly concerned, as also the Barrony of Enishoen, in which 2000. able fighting men of the Irish ready then (though we conceive better of them now) to have fallen upon our backs upon the least invitati∣on of any defeat unto us. Sir Ralph Gores Regiment being but 500. foot march'd into the Barronies of Boylagh and Bannagh and Tir∣hugh, being Barronies that had bin wholly wasted by the Rebels, where for 13 weeks we had no sustenance, but what we pul'd out of the Rebels mouths. These two Regiments were for the most part mingled in service, and having so great a scope as 36. long Irish myles to guard in the long winter nights, and every way passable for the enemies entrance, and the charge of so many soules there resi∣ding and following their vocations, as in the time of peace, besides the conflux of thousand of plundered Families, I beleeve in a serious construction it will deserve the title of miraculous service; for few nights, but the enemy attempted in severall places with light-horse to burne the Country, which they never in the least way prevailed in, but many times returned with a weaker master then they went forth. Yet Mr. Speaker, they spared no labour or industry, Sir Ro∣bert Stewart march'd to New-Towne and relieved it, but the Enemy saved all their heads by their heels, but six men; afterwards march'd up to Castle-derge, burnt all the Enemies Country and killed divers, brought 400. Cowes, then march'd up over against Glafin, burnt that Country and kil'd divers, afterwards fell over in the night upon the Rebels Quarters above Strebane, and kil'd about 80. men. Sir William Stewart in the meane time was as busie in the Barrony of Kilmackrenan firing and burning. Captaine Maxwell, and Captaine George Stewart marcht towards Ramalton with 150 men, and killed 90. of the Rebels, and brought home 1800. Cowes. Captaine Basill about the same time being New-yeares day marcht over into the enemies Countrey with 60. men, and encountred 400. men, and killed 36. M. Speaker, I will not trouble you with retailing of Newes thus in small parcels, but I am sure so equally vigilant and difficult was the
preserving of their owne quarters, and scowring the neighbouring quarters of the enemies, that our Regiment on the other side of the mountaines at that present having no intelligence of their continu∣all defeats, having marched 7. dayes and nights upon mountaines, where never horsemen rode in a deep snow, 13. miles the least dayes march, where and when the best Commander never tasted bread, beere, wine, salt, or Aqua-vitae, and at every night fought with the Rebels for his bed-cloathes (God be praised with strange successe) and being in the sight of the enemy, and for the most part upon the Ice (notwithstanding the weather stript in our shirts, upon our marching homewards met such a packe of them drawne out by the other two Regiments, that they beset us in our quarter at night, which we expecting, appointed a near Fort for our Alarum place for two Companies to draw unto, and the other two Companies into a wood, where if by Gods mercy we should have the better of them; we were assured they should passe, all happened accordingly; for our Sentenels giving a timely Alarum, the two Companies tooke the Fort, beat them off untill they fled the right way, where the two Companies unexpectedly met them with sharp fire, and the other two sallyed out of the Fort upon their Reares, and did very terrible execution: Immediately after which we marched away in the night, and surprised many in the neighbouring houses, and lastly, burnt the quarters, and all the corne in the whole march, which was out of command. And truly Sir Ralph Gore his zeale was very ear∣nest, for the most tempestuous nights he would alwayes chuse to fall upon their quarters, which at last were upon every hand of our garrison; for he having placed for the safety of those parts one Com∣pany at Kilbegge, another at Castle Rabin, and one being left to maintaine our owne quarters, we had but two Companies for the Field; yet at divers times we would march out to them, being at the least 13. Colours, and overnight having taken the ditches with Mus∣keteers, drew them in with counterfeit retreats, untill we had dis∣charged at 40. yards distance, sometimes a 100. Musketeers, some∣times more, every Musket charged with 10. Pistoll Bullets. But M. Speaker, our good successe ended with our Ammunition, for all being spent to one Roll of Match, and sending a Letter for some supply, the traytor run to the Rebels, delivered my Letter, and what I had but modestly put into the Text concerning our wants, he being a souldier in the Regiment made a large Comment upon, which heartened the Rebels so much that we were like to perish for want of food, and certainly had, if Sir Robert Stewart with his Re∣giment, and three of Sir Will. Stewarts Companies had not marcht over to our reliefe, who in his march over Barnesmore was assaulted
by some loose Files of the enemies shot, which he beat off, and so without much danger secured the march of the entire Body. But now M. Speaker, the Countrey being wasted by the enemy, and our selves, the dayes beginning o grow longer, we thought best to joyne all three Regiments, leaving Ballishannon, Castle of Done∣gall, and Castle Rahin well manned, and as well as we could provi∣ded otherwise, and so betooke our selves with what strength we could spare unto the Fields. And now M. Speaker, if I can borrow your patience, I presume I shall acquaint you with very good ser∣vice. In our march over the mountaines of Barnesmore homewards to the Barrony of Rapho, this Barnesmore being knowne to every Inhabitant in Ireland to be as dangerous a place as Art and Nature could devise. When the Van-guard of our Army entred the wood, we sent 60. loose shot upon each of our flankes, halfe Calliver shot from our Body through the woods, where they skirmisht with the enemy, having taken the wood overnight, in very hot service upon both sides. The Rebels had placed 13. Colours in a hollow, halfe a mile above us, who when they heard our shot shewed themselves, thinking as they confest to draw us out whilest 13. Colours more lay hidden in another hollow, that should suddenly fall in upon the remaining party, and had likewise placed 9. Colours below to fall in upon the baggage, which was at least 3000. soules, who travel∣led below almost a mile off, in a narrow passe. We drew out (suspe∣cting the worst) onely some commanded Musketeers skirmisht and beat away their first body that appeared, when immediately the other 9. Colours fell in upon the baggage, to which we assigned 48. Musketeers, who held them up couragiously in a strait passe. We that were with the maine body perceiving it, having a wood and bogge under us, drew with more haste then order (as requisite it was) to their reliefe, so that we likewise put them to flight. In the meane time the 13. Colours in ambush all this while fell into our Reare, and all their forces in the twinkling of an eye fell round upon us, which we with countercommanded Musketeers opposed, and during the space of 7. houres and a halfe (by a watch) fought and kild 400. of their men, besides what fell in our march of sixe miles, where having conveighed our baggage between two divisions, were still charged in our Reare, and the extremities of our flankes that had thicke shot returned by 200. Musketeers of ours, so that as by a pri∣soner of theirs taken the next day that was present at the battell, 700. was confest to be slaine, in which we lost but nine men, and some hurt. That night we marcht into our quarters in the Barrony of Rapho. This occurrence happened about eight weeks since. Now M. Speaker, omitting the issuing of severall parties both of
horse and foot into the enemies Countrey, returning home both with the prey and slaughter of the enemy, I shall onely trouble you with what occurrences since the 17th of May, untill the 27th, when I left London-derry. Sir Philim O Nele drew downe to Strebane about 5000. men be∣sides horse, intending to burne Rapho, and to raise Enishoen, and we being as he absolutely conceived deseated, to draw the other forces on the contrary side of Loghfoyle, and to assault the Derry. Our Re∣giments assisted with two strong Companies of Captaine Pitts and Captaine Lawsons of the City of London-derry drew over before day into the Rebels Countrey, where presently the battels were or∣dered upon both sides, and so stood about a quarter of a miles di∣stance, we drew out to them one Battalion, and a 00. commanded Musketeers to try how they would answer them. The Rebels left their ground, and drew out to a wood, which they fil'd with their Musketeers, we likewise by the carnest intreaty of our souldiers, were contented to lose the advantage of our present embattelling, and marcht over to them, beat their Musketeers out of the wood, and to omit circumstances killed about 500. of their men, and put them to their flight, in which day was great circumspection and disci∣pline used by the Commanders, and as much obedience and resolu∣tion by the souldiers, M Cathcart Cornett to Sir Robert Stewarts troop, and Lieutenant Colase one of his Lieutenants, and Lieutenant Galbraith one of our Regiment about 17. years of age, doing very strange service with their commanded Musketeers. In pursuance (by Gods mercy) of this victory, though we re∣turned weary unto our quarters, yet by breake of day the Regiments were upon march, an unusuall way to Strebane, thinking to have be∣set him and his forces which quartered there visibly. To this purpose horse and foot entred the Towne upon all quarters; but Sir Phelomy was newly departed with his forces, onely the Castle he committed to Captaine Hugh Murragh O Devyn a bloudy fellow, and one hun∣dred of his choise Musketeers, and a 100 Pikes to guard much of his owne baggage, and my Lady Strebanes goods; but we easily forced the Castle, put the men to the sword, onely Captaine O Devins life respited, who is now in the Derry Gaole. The Castle we left-a gar∣rison in, commanded by Captaine Wisher a discreet Gentleman under the command of St. Wil. Hammilton, who though formerly a strong rooted Papist (if any root can be in that titular Religion) hath re∣nounced the same, and conforming himselfe unto the Protestant Church, judging upon this reason (as I have heard from himselfe) that neither faith, civill conversation, secure commerce, found loy∣alty, much more Religion ought to be expected where such bloudy,
traiterous & inhumane designes are, or must be the propagators of it. From Strebane we having left 500. men to guard the Barrony of Rapho, we marched up on the ô Canes country on the other side of Loghfoyle, and comming over against Derry, quartered in the fields that night, foure Companies of the Derry joyning with us to relieve Lymmavaddy Castle and Bally Castle, which had beene ten weekes before strongly beleager'd by great forces, and yet had sallied forth and killed many hundred of the enemies, being commanded by a resolute young Gentleman Captaine Thomas Philips, his Elder bro∣ther M. Dudly Philips in the meane time being gone about with 3. Botes for to carry their provision from Derry. That night we were welcome guests to the two Castles, who dispaired of all suc∣cour, and having conducted their provision in, the next Morning assisted with very resolute Horse out of the two Castles, we advan∣ced our march into the Enemies country, where at Magiligan wee encountred the Enemy, the ô Canes, the Magilligans, the ô Hagans and the ô Neales being joyned together for our utter ruine, (God be praised) we killed upwards of 500 of them, and scattered the rest. Though we were now too farre in discretion engaged from our own Quarters, yet having received late Letters from Colrane of their miserable wants and narrow beleagure, we continued our march up towards the Mountaines to find some prey, that we might be the welcomer to almost famish'd Colrane; we met with 3000. Cowes, but with thrice as many men; the Rebell having strengthened him∣selfe from the Army that beleagured Colrane and other parts: Our Commanders cherished the Souldier, and the Souldier the Com∣mander; but the Rebels having that Morning (moved by the vali∣ant preaching of a Fryer) bound themselves by Oath of their Sa∣crament received thereupon, to fight this Battell to the last man, and to hunt us out of their Country, gave us a warme charge and forced our Horse and commanded Musketters to retreat upon the wings of our Battalions, yet after our short, yet earnest Pray∣ers, we advanced towards them, and slaughtered above 800. of them, which being an unusuall sight to them, they forgat the Fryers Doctrine and their owne application and fled, our Horse and Foot chasing them a hundred wayes with great slaughter: From thence with our prey and abundance of Horse, &c. we march'd to Dungevin Castle, one of the Kings Houses, which was kept by Collonell Manus mac quy ballagh, Mac Richard ô Cane, who (though in this battell) had fled thither to his charge, upon parley he delivered up the Castle, and desired the Kings mercy, which upon conditions was afforded; the Armes and Pillage were quickly divided. From thence we marched to Col∣rane,
every Regiment bestowed some upon the Towne, the soul∣diers at easie rates sold the rest, but such as were delivered to the right owners. At Castle Roe a myle from Colrane were lodged seven Co∣lours of the Enemies to secure the band fishing to themselves; we tooke the Colours, put many to the Sword, and the Town of Colrane hath a Garrison there now, and enjoyes the fishing to themselves, being the greatest Salmon-fishing in Christendome. From thence we made our speedy march home, where our Horse kil'd about a hundred straglers, and found our owne Quar∣ters invaded with above 2000. men, which our remaining par∣ty had with good resolution and successe kept off, upon adver∣tisement of our returne, they deputed no longer stay. In all these particulars (all honour to God Almighty who fought our battels) amongst the three Regiments wee lost not a hundred men since the first Rebellion to the last hoare. We have at the present these Garrisons, Castle of Strebane, Lifford, Rapho, Dromboe Castle, Litterkenny, Ramalton, Lyma∣vaddy, Bally Castle, Ballyshannon, Donagall, Castle Rahin, being pla∣ces of great consequence by scituation and strength. Mr. Speaker, this is a briefe Relation of so many passages in such a tract of time; an Epitome of that which was a large volume in our owne sufferings and the construction of our Ene∣mies, which in duty I suppose I was bound to present unto this Honourable Assembly, in the Port and Haven of whose unpara∣lel'd labours we anchor our safety. You may be pleased (Ma∣ster Speaker) to remember our sudden surprisall, our wants of all manner of supplies for preservation of our lives, much more for the defence of a Country, and such places of importance; you may consider the Resolution of men encouraged by exer∣cise of their Armes flesh'd in the bloud of their enemies, imbol∣dened by knowledge of the Country, provoked by the losse of their dearest pledges, wives, children and all; the hazard in transporting men saved, the charges in raising, levying, shipping, demurrage upon winde, and the like prevented; the great ex∣pences of the Commanders amounting to above 3000•b. for armes, victuals, cloaths, &c. their offensive service without losse of a 100 men, their defensive vigilancy of so much ground, the severall Garrisons of consequence maintained, the weake instruments by which the service was effected, and the great Mercy of God by which we were protected; then we doubt not, but the Justice of this House will continue us in our Resolutions, encourage o∣thers to attempt better; all which we shall in our humble Petition more seasonably present. Finis.
