m2885 e107_6 99863116 115298
A MOST EXECRABLE ND BARBAROVS MVRDER done by an East-Indian Devil, or a Native of Java-Major, in the Road of Bantam, Aboard an English Ship called the Coster, on the 22. of October last, 1641. Wherein is shewed how the wicked Villain came to the said Ship and hid himself till it was very dark, and then he mudrdered all the men that were a Board, except the Cooke, and three Boyes. And Lastly, how the murderer himselfe was justly requited. Captain William Minor being an eye-witnesse of this bloudy Massacre. massacre of the men of the Coster LONDON, Printed for T. Banks, Iuly the 18. 1642.
A MOST EXECRABLE AND BARBAROUS Murther, done by an East-Indian devil, or a Native of Java-Major in the Road of Ban∣tam, Aboard an English Ship called the Coster, on the 22. of October last, 1641. THe Blessings of gracious Favours, Mercies and Bounties (which God hath bin pleased from time to time, to pour upon this our undeserving Nation) are innumerable and in∣finite: Of all which happinesses, amogst things Temporall; the knowledge of Building, Shipping, Skill, Strength Ho∣nour and profit of Navigation is not the least, the glory of God, the propaga∣tion of the Gospel, the discoveries of strange Empires, Kingdoms, and mighty Regions, the conversition of many Pagans, Heathens, and Infidels, the Exportation and Importation of native and forraigne Commodities, the great increase of Traffique, the raising of Merchants and Marchandize the great nursery of Marriners and Sea-men, and the strength of this Kingdom. by the multiplicity of goodly ships; all these blessings (or the most part of them) have bin by pains, cares, happy successes & prosperous voyages of many worthy men, Adventurers and skilfull sea-men; by their trading to Moscovie, Turkey, Spain, Barberie, to the West-Indies, the Straits and Levant, but es∣pecially to the East-Indies.
Amongst the many voyages that have bin made into the Orientall Cun∣treyes, (whereof some Ships have been 4. some 3. years in performing the said voyages out and home,) this treatise which followeth is exceeding remarkable, for the speedinesse of departing and returne. On the 7. of Aprill last 1641. Captaine William Minor,) A Gentle∣man whose skill, valour, and industry is well approved,) being commander in the good Ship called the Royall Mary, of the burthen of 1000 tuns, Set saile from the Lizar, (in Cornwall,) and after many variations of windes, weathers, and climates. From the Lizard, he saild for Bantam, a city of Ja∣va Major, where he arived in the Road the 14 of August, it is one of the Easterne Island of the Indies,) and having the Ships lading there and disbur∣thened: He with all cellerity, began to lade again on the third of September and on the 9 of November, being richly laden, weighed Anchor for England, with such prosperous successe (through Gods great goonesse and mercy,) that by the 18. of Aprill, made the Lands-end; and on the 20. he Anchored in Plimouth Rode, Arived at London, having bin in all out but 12 moneths and 11 dayes, of the which he stared 20. dayes by the way; that is 11 dayes, at the Cape Bona Spes, and 9. dayes at St. Hellena. This is one of the short∣est voyages to the East-Indies that ever was performed betwixt England and India. And now I proceed to the Relation of the murderous Masacre which was done by a Pagan or devill, aboard a Ship called the Coster, which Ship was in Burthen 400. tuns, and mand with 100. English men and boyes: But at this Masacre the men were most of them a shore to fetch fresh water, and on o∣ther occasions, by reason whereof those few that were a board the Ship, suf∣fered as followeth. On Friday the 22. of October last 1641. towards night there came aboard an English Ship called the Coster, in a small Prow (or flat Boat with one pa∣dle) a proper young man, (a Java which is as much to say, as a man born or native of the Territory of Java.) This man (or devill in mans shape,) with a pretence to sell some Hews, (hatching mischief in his damnd minde,) did delay and trifle time, because he would have the night more dark for him to do his deeds of darknesse: At last he sold 6. Hews for half a Royall of 8. which is not much above two shillings. There came also another Java a∣board, (with the like small Prow or Boat) to whom he gave the half Royal, sent him away and bad him make haste; he being asked for what the other Java went for, the answer was that he had sent him for more Hews and Goates to sell. Night being come, and very dark, (for it was the last night of the wane
of the Moone,) This inhumane dog staid lurking under the half deck, having 2. Crests (or dangerous waving Daggers) and a Buckler, of which he would have sold one and the Buckler with it, and as he was discoursing, he took off one of the Crests hefts, and put cloath about the tongue of the Blade, and made it sure fast; on the other Crest he roled the handle with a fine linnen cloath to make it also sure from slipping in his hand; these things he did whilsts the Master Robert Start, Stephen Roberts his mate, Hugh Rawlinson Chirurgian, William Perks Steward, James Biggs Gunner, and 3. Boyes or Youths attending. At supper they were very merry, and this Caitiffe took notice of their carelesnesse of him, to suffer him to sit on the quarter deck upon a Cot close by them. Supper being ended about 6. at night; the Master went to his Cabin to rest, the Gunner asked leave to go a shore; (the ship riding but half a mile from landing. Afterwards Robert Rawlinson, and Perks walked upon the quarter deck; and the devillish Java perceiving the Master to be absent, he asked the Boyes where he was, who answerd he was gone to sleepe, this que∣stion he demanded 3 or 4 times of the Boyes, and finding it to be so, he arose from the place where he sate, which was on the starboard side, and went a∣bout the Table next the Mizzen Mast, (where Roberts, Rawlings, and Perks were walking,) with his Target about his Neck for defence against Pikes, or the like; and his 2 Crests in his hand, and upon a sudden yes a Muck, which in that language is, I hazzard or run my death: Then first he stabd Roberts, secondly he stabd Rawlinson, thirdly Perks, all three at an instant. After that, he let drive at the Boyes but they leapd down, and ran forward into the fore castle, where they found the Cooke, to whom the Boyes related what had happened. The Villaine presently went to the great Cabbin door, where the Master being wakened and heard some bustling opened the door, and was no sooner out, but stabd dead. The Gunners Mate hearing some stir, went out of the Gun-Roome, and coming up a Scuttle (where the Master was murdered,) there was he also stabd that he fell down the Scuttle, but making shift to creep into the Gun-Room and was there found dead upon his knees, leaning upon a Chest: The Chirurgian (Rawlinson) gat into the fore Pick, and there sat down and dyed. The Java keeps his stand under the quarter Deck, where he had slain the Master and the Gunners Mate, and never proffered to pursue or assault those in the fore-castle. John Taylor, seeing the danger he was in, made way to give fire to a peece of Ordnance in the Cook-room, and laying a Coal upon the Touch-hole of
the Peece, he foolishly blew the same with his mouth, whereas the Peec took fire, and so violently blew into his mouth, that he dyed of the same blast within 2 dayes after. In this time the Ships Long-boat and Skiffe, had made a turn a shore for fresh water; which returned about 7 in the evening, which they in the fore-castle perceiving, called unto them, telling them there was a Muke aboard who had slain the Mer; and all the men except the Cooke and 3 boyes at which the Long-boat laid the Ship aboard in the Bowe, and took into her the said Cooke and Boyes,) which were all that were left alive in the Ship;) except one John Taylor, who was not yet dead, for they took him into the boat, and he died 2 dayes after; and presently they went aboard the Royall Mary, and certified Captaine Minor of the bloody Masacre committed. The Gunner and Carpenter (as yet) knew nothing of this mischief, for they went ashore together to fetch a bagge of Royalls; and returning, the Gunner first entred, with the bagge under his arme, and going to open a gra∣ting door under the quarter deck, where the Java kept his stand, there the Rogue also stabd him into the left breast, but by the mercy of God in lighted glauncing upon a rib, so that it pierced not into his body; he wondring who it should be that stabd him and there being no light nor any that would speak or answer him; calld to the Carpenter, and bad him stay in the Prowe (or boat,) for I am stabd in the dark (quoth he,) and so the Gunner and the Carpenter left the Ship Coster, and went aboard of the Royall Mary. But it is to be noted, that the Java did not pursue the Gunner after he had stabd him but suffered him to go over the Ships side into the boat where the Carpenter was. Being come to the Mary, there related what had happened to them and likewise there they found their Long-boat, with the Cooke and the 3 Boyes. And presently the Captaine commanded his own Skiffe and the Costers, to be well mand, and because it was very dark, he gave them order that they should keep about the other Ship till it was day, and not to suffer any boats to board her: This charge was given to the Captaines Mate Master Gardner, who performed it discreetly, but by that time the boats got to the Coster, the lights were almost burnt out, and there no more to be had at that time. So the Skiffe being mand well, went and cut away the small Prowe or boat which brought the cursed Cur aboard. The Maries Pinace well furnished, being appointed by Captain Minors command, what to do in boarding the Coster, and that by no meanes they should enter till night was past; but the giddy multitude overswayd Master Gardner, and forced the boats aboard, on each bowe of the Ship, and the Mariners entred with Pikes, Halberts, Swords, Bucklers, and other Wea∣pons
necessary, they cleared the Cook-room, the Waste, and between the Decks, all this while the Java constantly kept his stand in the quarter deck, by the great Cabbin door. Our men (finding no resistance,) our Trumpeter too hastily entred the quarter deck door, would not stay till light came. But he; (poor man) had his fatall portion which the Master and Gunners Mate had in the very same place where they were kild, there fell he wounden mortally: Had he but stayd for light according to order, or for some Pikes they had with them, the Tragedy had been ended without the losse of him: for after the Halberts, Pikes and such Weapons, plyed fast upon the Vil∣laine, that he was forced to retire Abafte the Mizzen Mast, and Bitacle, where they had him at a Bay, as it were in a snare or Net, for over his head was a Scuttle, where one of our men stood with a crosse spit, who gave him a Launching wound into the breast, that the thrust went down into his belly, which made him turne, and then his Buckler did him no good, for he was fastned to the Bulk-head, (as if he had been nayld, and presently he had as many wounds upon him, as would have killd a score of his companions. Divers are the opinions of men concerning this Action, the King and Na∣tives do say, that it was upon discontent; that he could not obtain a woman in marriage, (after their fashion,) and had vowed therefore he would be re∣venged on any whomsoever, he cared not who, and that affront was the period of his revenge, as sable as his soul. Some others do alleadge that Keyradding who is in that Cuntrey a Noble man; (one that is in good esteem with our Nation,) had been aboard the day before, and had seen some gold that the Master had to sell, and agreed with him for the price, and promised to come at that time that this Muck came aboard, and bring the money to pay for it, but it is otherwayes conjectured, that he supposed to have it by the attempt of this Muck, (for the Iava or Muck) had seen the gold and enquired for it after he came aboard; but instead of that money Keyradding promised to send, he brought 2 Crests and a Target, (wherewith he did the mischiefs.) And when the 6 murdred corps were in the boat, to be carried ashore to bu∣riall; the President and Captain Minor were in anothr boat, and met Key∣radding, shewing him the dead Corps, and the Weapons, whereat he was much abashed, he was demanded if he knew the Crests or Target, he pre∣sently answered that it was very easy to be known, being the Picture of a Sea-Devill, with a hand that held a Crest-handle with two blades, (the one forward, and the other backward.) The President sent to the King for Howkame (which is justice,) and did intend to have gone himself after, to have seen the event: But whilst the President was at Dinner, Keyradding came in, and said that the King with his great Counsell and Oronkeyes
(who are as Earls, Dukes, ot Princes) had Prichard (which is concluded that it was for the discontent for the deniall of his love, that he had ran  Muck, and therefore it was but vain to trouble the King any futher in th matter; and this is the Javas Howkam, or strange kinde of justice. Some 2 dayes after, there was a great Orankey confessed that the nigh before, he did tell him that he would run this Muck aboard an Engl Ship: And this Orankey was the Kings favourite, yet he never made th King, or our President acquainted with it; for which neglect of his, the King seemed to be very angry with this Orankey, (who hath a by name, and is cal∣led Turner.) It is observable, that of all these men that were thus Butcherd the Hel-hound did never stab any man twice, so sure did he strike, nor di he pursue any man that kept clear of his stand, under the quarter deck t there dyed in all (in this bloody action, Robert Start Master Stephen Robe his Mate, Hugh Rawlinson Chirurgion, William Perks Steward, Walter ∣gers Gunners Mate, and Francis Drake Trumpeter of the Mary; and  the Muck, Java or Devill, had ended the first part of this bloody Traged there was only left in the Ship, the Cooke, 3 Boyes, and one John Ty that was almost dead with a shott he foolishly made: So tha 7 men were  fortunatly lost, (as you have heard, and the Gunner escaped very narro through Gods mercifull prevention, from the like of these related disas and suddiane mischiefs, Good Lord deliver us. FINIS.
