M479 669.f.26[2] 99869520 163884
The manner of the Solemnity of the CORONATION of His m Sacred MAJESTY KING CHARLES: The Second Charles, Heire of the Royall Martyr, Who for Religion and his Subjects Charter, Spent the best Blood, that un∣just Sword ere dy'de. Since the rude Souldier pierc'd our Saviours side: Who such a Father had'st, art such a Son; Redeem thy people and assume thy own. Ascend thy Ancestors Impe∣rial seat, Of Charles the Good, thou se∣cond Charles the Great, That adds the worth; this lu∣stre to the Crown, Whose solid Glories weighd Usurpers down. Such Majesty as never was profan'd, While Tyrants rul'd twas only Charles that Reign'd. AS the King went from Westminster-Hall toward the Abbey, there went first before, the Alder∣men of the City of London, Usher'd by a Herauld; next the Knights of the Bath in their Robes, each of them attended by his Equire, and Page; after them the Judges, the Serjeants at Law, the Kings Attorney Generall, and the Masters of Request; then the privy Councellors and the chief Officers of the Kings Houshold; next the Barons in their Parliament Robes with Swords by their sides and bare Headed; after the Barons came the Bishops also bare Headed, in their Scarlet Gowns and Lawn Sleeves; next them the Viscounts and Earls in their Coronation Robes, and Coronetted Caps; in the last place went the Officers of State for the day, Viz. The Lord privy Seal the Archbishop of Canterbury; the Earl of Dorset carrying the first Sword, the Earl of Essex the the second Sword, the Earl of Kent the third; the Spurs were carried by the Earl of Moutgomery; the Globe with the Cross on it, by the Earl of Sussex; the Golden Cup and Plate for the Commu∣nion by the Bishops of London and Winchester: the Scepter was carried by the Earl of Rutland; the Sword of State naked by the Marquesse of Hamilton; the Crown by the Earl of Pembroke: among the Serjeants at Armes, went the Lord Mayor in a Crimson Vellet Gown, each of them carrying a short scepter; next, immediately after the King, went the Earl of Arundel, as Earl Marshall of Eng∣land, and the Duke of Buckingham as Lord High-Constable for that day. The King entred into∣the Abbey Church, at the West-Gate, under a rich Canopy of state, carried by the Barons of the Cinque Ports, and was himself supported on the one hand by Doctor Niel, Bishop of Durham, on the the other hand by Doctor Lake Bishop of Bath and VVells; His Train which containted six Yards of Purple-Velvet was held up by the Lord Compton, Master of the Robes, and the Lord Viscount Doncastar, Master of the Wardrope: he was met by Bishop Laud (who supplyed the Deans place) and the Prebends of VVestminster in their rich Robes; who delivered into his hand the staffe of King Edward the Confessor, with which he walked up to the Throne, which was framed from the Quire to the Alter. There were appointed for the King three Chairs: 1. The Chair of Repose. 2. The ancient Chair of Coronation: 3. The Chair of State, which was placed upon a square Ascent of six steps. The King, after he had reposed himself a while, was by the Archbishop of Canterbury presen∣ted bare heded to the Lords and Commons, East, West, North, South; of whom the Archbishop de∣manded, If they consented to the Coronation of King Charls their lawfull Soveraign? To which after they had exprest their readinesse by an Acclamation made four several times, the King betook himself again to his Chair of Repose, during the time of Sermon; which ended, the King, going to the Communion Table, and kneeling down, the Archbishop askt his Majesty, If he was willing to take the Oath usually taken by his Predecessors? To which he made answer, That he was willing, a∣rose, and went to the Altar, where several interogations were rendred to him by the Archbishop to each of which distinctly the King gave his Affirmative Answer. ARchbishop; SIR, Will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the people of Eng∣land, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of England, your lawful and Religi∣ous Predecessors; And namely, the Laws, Customs and Franchises granted to the Clergy, by the Glorious King St. Edward your predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true profession of the Gospel established in this Kingdome, agreeable to the prerogative of the Kings thereof, and the ancient Customes of the Realm? KING, I grant and promise to keep them. A. SIR, Will you keep peace and Godly Agreement (according to your power) both to God, the holy Church, the Clergy, and the People? K. I will keep it. A. SIR, Will you to your power cause Law, Justice, and Discretion, Mercy and Truth to be executed to your Judgement? K. I will. A. SIR, Will you grant to hold and keep the Laws, and rightful Customes which the Commo∣nalty of this your Kingdome have? and will you defend and uphold them to the honour of God as much as in you lyeth? K. I grant and promise so to do. Then one of the Bishops with a loud Voice before the people read to the King this following Admonition. OƲr Lord and King VVe beseech you to pardon, and to grant, and preserve unto us and to the Churches committed to your Charge, all Canonicall priviledges, and to do Law and Justice; And that you would protect and defend us, as every good King to his Kingdomes ought to be Protector, and Defender of the Bishops, and the Churches under their Government. The King answereth with a willing and devout Heart, I promise and grant my pardon, and that I will preserve and maintain to you, and the Churches com∣mitted to your Charge, all Canonicall priviledges, and due Law and Justice: And that I will be your Protctor and Defender to my power, by the Assistance of God, as every good King in his Kingdome in right ought to protect and defend the Bishops and Churches under their Government. Then the King arising was led to the Communion Table, where laying his hand upon the Bible, He, in the sight of all people made a solemn Oath (to observe the premisses) which was as followeth; THe Things which I have promised, I shall perform and keep; So help Me God, and the Contents of this Book. Afterwards his Robes being taken off, and offered at the Alter, the King stood for a while stripped of his Dublet and Hose, of Sattin; then led by the Archbishop, and the Bishop of St. Davids, he was placed in the chair of Coronaiton, having a close Canopy spread over him, and while the Archbishop Anointed his Head, Shoulders, Armes, and Hands with a costly Oyntment, the Quire sung an An∣them of these words; Zadock the Priest Anointed King Solomon.— Thence in his Doublet and Hose, with a white Coif on his Head, he was led back again to the Com∣munion-table, where Doctor Laud the Bishop of St. Davids, who supplyed the Dean of Westminsters place, Vested him with the ancient Habiliments of King Edward the Confessor, and conducting him back to the Chair of Coronation, presented him with King Edwards Crown, which the Archbishop put upon his Head, and in the meantime th Quire sung this Anthem; Thou shalt put a Crown of pure Gold upon his Head. After which, the Earls and Vis-counts put on their Coronetted Caps of Crimson Velvet; then e∣very Bishop came severally to the King, and gave him their Venediction and he rising from his Chair bowed to each of them apart. Next King Edwards Sword was girt about him, which he took off himself, and offer'd at the Communion-table, with two swords more, in relation to Ireland and Scot∣land: His spurs were put on by the Duke of Buckingham, as Master of the Horse; which done he offer'd first gold and silver, then bread and wine, to be used at the Communion. Thus compleatly Crown'd, the King was conducted by the Nobility to his Throne, where he receav'd the Oath of Homage, (the Quire in the mean time singing Te Deum) The Duke of Buckingham, as Lord high Constable for that Day, who also swore the rest of the Nobility at the Kings Knee, to be Homagers to his Majesty; then the Earls and Barons laid their hands upon the Crown, as it was up∣on the Kings Head, making a solemn protestation to spend their blood to maintain it to him, and his posterity: the Bishops took no Oath, but kneeling down the King kissed each of them; then the King taking out of his bosome a scrowl of parchment, the effect of which was a promise of pardon under his broad Seal to all that accept it; gave the scrowl to the Lord Keeper, who read it four times, East, West, North, and South. From the Throne the King went to the Communion-table, and after pray∣ers had been read by the Archbishop, the Nicene Creed sung by the Quire; and the Epistle and Gospel read by the Bishops of Landaff, and Norwich; his Majesty recev'd the Communion, the bread from the Archbishop, the Wine from the Bishop of St. Davids: and at the same time, Gloria Patri was sung; which being ended, the Archbishop reading certain prayers, concluded the Ceremony. After which the King disrobed himself in King Edwards Chappel, and came forth in a short Robe girt of red Velvet; lin'd with Ermins and a lesser Crown upon his head set with pretious Stones, and taking barge with all his Train of Nobles at VVestminster stairs, He returned to VVhitehall. LONDON, Printed by T. C. and are to be sold by W. Gilbertson. 1660.
