n153 e144_7 99871308 156618
NAPIERS NARRATION: OR, AN EPITOME OF HIS BOOKE ON THE REVELATION. Wherein are divers Misteries disclosed, touching the foure Beasts, seven Vials, seven Trumpets, seven Thunders, and seven Angels, as also a discovery of Antichrist: together with very probable conjectures touching the the time of his destruction, and the end of the WORLD. A Subject very seasonable for these last Times. REVEL. 22.12. And behold I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give to every man according as his worke shall be. LONDON, Printed by R. O. and G. D. for Giles Calvert. 1641.
NAPIERS NARRATION: OR An EPITOME of his BOOKE on the REVELATION. ROLLOCK. WEll Sir, sith it hath pleased our Lord JESUS CHRIST to reveale unto you many Mysteries contained in the Revela∣tion of Saint John; I beseech you be plea∣sed to open some of them to me: and first I dsire to know what is meant by the foure Beasts men∣tioned, Chap. 4.6. Nap. The foure Beasts are the foure Evangelists, as it is evident; in that the aces which the Text saith those foure Beasts had, and the beginnings or  foure Evangelists Gospels are alike; as for Exa
The Text saith the first Beast had a face like a man; so Mathew who first of all wrot, and that in Hebrew, be∣gins his first face or leafe, at the genealogie of Christ, as he is Man. The second beast is said to have a face like a Lyon: so Marke, who was the second that wrote, begins his first face or leafe at the voyce, crying like a roaring Lyon in the Wildernesse, Prepare the way of the Lord. The third Beast is said to have a face like a Bullock; so Luke was the third that wrot, beginneth his first face or leafe at Zacharias, offering incense as it were a Bul∣lock at the Altar. The fourth Beast is said to be like a flying Eagle; so John that wrot the fourth Evangell begins his first face at the high and divine essence of Christs God-head flying so high in his Stile, that he is compared to an Eagle. Rol. Well Sir, you have satisfied me in this; where∣fore in the next place, I pray tell me what is meant by the opening of the seven Seales mentioned Revel, 6. Nap, The opening of every Seale must continue the space of seaven years, and that because of removing and gining seven yeares to every seale, you shall finde the effect of every Seale to bee performed within the seven yeares of that seale; and so the Harmony to be perfect betwixt those Seales and the just History. Rol. And when did the first Seale begin to be opened? Nap. This behooved onely to begin at that time that Christ was baptised and began to preach and o∣pen up the sealed doctrine of our Salvation which was in the end of the 29th. yeare of the age of Christ, and a∣bout the beginning of his thirtieth yeare, as Luke te∣stifieth. Rol. Well then Sir, I pray you proceed to shew the
harmony betwixt the Text and the History, that so ac∣cording to your saying, we may see the effect of every Seale to be performed within the space of every seven yeares. Nap. For the clearing of this, I pray take notice, that the precise time of the foure Evangelists writing, and the occasion why they did write agreeth with the History and time of the foure first Seales. As for example, when the word of God passed out on the white horse in the time of the first seale, betwixt the yeare of Christ 29. and 36. then saith the Text, one of the foure Beasts said come and see; that is Mathew the Apostle, who at that time wrot the first Evangell in He∣brew, exhibiting the same to be seene of the Iewes, ex∣pressly for the conversion of them; and as the Text saith, he that sate on the white horse had a bow and a Crowne given him and he went forth conquering that he might overcome: even so at that time Christ by his doctrine, Miracles death and victory over death so touched and moved the hearts of all the faithfull; that sodainly hee with his disciples got the victory over all the world. he in the second sale betwixt the yeare 36. and 43. the Text saith the second Beast said, Come and see, that is Marke the Apostle set out the second Evangel to bee seene of all men, for the comfort of the afflicted Church; for as the Text saith, there was power given to him that sate on the red horse to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another; so within the space of these second seven yeares Saint Sephen suffered Martyrdome for Christs sake: and Iames the brother of John likewise was beheaded. Then in the third seale betwixt the 43. and 50. yeare of Christ the third Beast said, Come an see, and that was
Luke whose Evangel came to light at that time, and as the Text makes mention of a Famine, even so was there one at that time, whereof Agabus prophecied, Acts 11. and Luke in his Booke of the Acts maketh mention. In this dearth the bushell of Wheat was sold for five times the accustomed price, and the bushell of barly for three, as testifieth Suetonius, and Dion. Then in the fourth seven yeares betwixt the yeare of Christ 50. and 57. the fourth Beast said, Come and see; and that was the Apostle Iohn, who at that time wrot the fourth Evangelion; for as the Text saith, His name that sate on the pale Horse was death, and hell follow∣ed after him; even so at that time were there certaine Heretiques arose, as Cerinthus, Nicolaus and Ebion, who held deadly Heresies against the Divinitie of Christ; whereupon in the time of these fourth seaven yeares John wrot the fourth Evangel, and published it, begin∣ning at the description of Christs Divinity, expresly a∣gainst those Hereticks. Rol. As you have shewed the effect of the foure for∣mer seven seales to be performed in the foure first sea∣ven yeares; so I pray proceed to doe the like of the three latter. Nap. Then in the fifth seaven yeares, even the yeare of Christ 57. (as the Text saith) there was seene under the Altar the soules of them that were killed for the word of God, and for the testimony which they main∣tained, even so in that very yeare arose the Tyrant Ne∣ro, on whose bloody seate, the blood of the Saints cry∣up to the heavens to God to revenge their blood. Then in the sixt seaven yeares as the Text saith, there was a great earth-quake, and the Sun was black as sack∣cloth
of haire, and the Moon was like blood; and even so after the yeare of Christ 64. a great change and defecti∣on came in all estates of the Roman Empire, for now Nero raised great persecutions against the true spiritu∣all Professors, to have utterly darkned and extinguished the light of the Gospell; so that the true Church of God was forced to lurk in secret, for the revenge wher∣of, God moved the Kingdomes of France, Spaine, and Ile of Brittaine to Revolt from this Tyrant. Then in the seaventh seaven yeares which was be∣twixt the yeare of Christ 70. and 77. the Text saith, At the opening of this seale, there was silence in heaven a∣bout halfe an hower; even so at that time Gods Church had peace a little while. Rol. Well Sir, now in the next place tell me what you understand concerning the seven Trumpets mentio∣ned in the eighth and 9. Chapter? Nap. I understand those seaven Trumpets mentioned in those Chapters, and the seaven Vials mentioned in the 16. Chapter to be all one. Rol. How doth that appeare? Nap. It appeareth to bee so in that they are both of them the seaven last plagues, as also in that they agree in their principall termes, the second Trumpet with the second Viall, the third Trumpet with the third Viall, and so that thereby wee may assuredly conclude that both those Trumpets, with those Vials, and also the rest of the Trumpets with the rest of the Vials respective in purpose, meaning, time, and in all other circumstances, to be one and the selfe same thing. Rol. And when did the seaven Trumpets or seaven Vi∣als begin? Nap. The last of the seven seales, and the first of the
seaven Trumpets or Vials begin both at once in An. 71. Rol. How doth that appeare? Nap. This appeareth evidently for even by the Text, Chap. 8. the seaventh Seale being opened that very hower the seaven Angels received their Trumpets to blow; for having said in the first verse, and when hee had opened the seaventh seale there was silence in Hea∣ven about halfe on houre, he subjoyneth immediately, (verse 2.) And I saw the seaven Angels, &c. receive their seaven trumpets: and further, after he hath shewed verse 5. how Christ powred out the fiery coales of his wrath in revenge of the blood of his Saints, which doubtlesse was upon Ierusalem which shed it, incontinent he sub∣joyneth verse 6, and 7. that then the seaven Angels pre∣pared themselves to blow, and the first blew his Trum∣pet, &c, so therefore justly at this destruction of Ierusa∣lem in Anno Christi 71. make we both the last Seale and the first Trumpet or Viall to begin. Rol. And how many yeares doth every Trumpet or Viall containe? Nap. Every Trumpet or Viall containeth the space of 245. yeares, which is the just space of 5. Jubilees, and that this 71. yeare of Christ, and consequently the first yeare of every the other Trumpet or Viall was Jubilee, you may consider by the discourse of Josephus Scaliger de emendat temporum. Rol. But Sir, I pray tell me what you conceive these seaven Trumpets or seaven Vials doe signifie? Nap. I doe conceive them to signifie the seaven Ages that were then to come to the worlds end; and I am the more confirmed to believe they do so, for that I find in Histories that great mutations of Empires fol owed the end of these 245. yeares one after another, as for
example: In the yeare of Christ 71. Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus and Vespasian: this was the yeare that Jesus Christ procured the revenge of his blood and the blood of his Saints upon the Synagogue of the Iewes. Secondly, 245. yeares after, which was in the yeare 316. Constantine the Emperour of Rome transported the Imperiall Seat from Rome to Constantinople, and in Rome Pope Silvester began the Papisticall Kingdome, and Italy was left as a prey to the Goths and Vandals who destroyed Rome and subdued all Italy, slaying and spoyling great and small, even every third man. Thirdly, 245. yeares after, that is, in Anno 561. or therabouts, Totila King of Goths burned Rome and usur∣ped the Dominion thereof. Fourthly, 245. yeares after, that is in Anno 806. Char∣lemaigne received the new Empire of Germanes and Romanes. Fiftly, 245. yeares after, that is in Anno 1051. Zadok began the first dominion of the Turkes. Sixthly, 245. yeares after, that is in the yeare 1246. Otoman began the first Empire of the foure Nations Ma∣hometans. 7. Lastly, 245. yeares after, that is in the yeare 1541. arose our true Professors against the Kingdome of An∣tichrist; so then for conclusion you see that every Trum∣pet or Viall endureth 245. yeares. Rol. Then Sir, it seemeth by this account that this seaventh Trumpet or Viall which we are now under, is not to end till the yeare of Christ 1786. shall the world continue so long thinke you? Nap. No, I doe not think that the World shall con∣tinue so long, because it is said, Math. 24.22. that for the Elects sake the time shall be shortened.
Rol How long doe you thinke the World shall con∣tinue; or can you conjecture when the day of Judgement shall be? Nap Although it bee said in Mark 13.32. that the day or Judgement and houre therof none doth know but the Father onely; yet let none be so base of judgement as to conclude thereby, that the yeare or age thereof is unknowne to Christ, or unable to be knowne any wayes to his servants; wherefore I tell you it appeares to me that betwixt the yeare of Christ 1688. and 1700. the said latter day shall fall. Rol. I pray▪ Sir let me heare your grounds for this your conjecture. Nap. In the 14. of the Revelation there is mention made of seaven Angels, which are all one with the sea∣ven Thunders mentioned in the 10 Chapter; and eve∣ry one of the first three thundring Angels (as I may call them) containe a Jubilee, and then the foure last all at once compleateth the day of Judgement, by which it ap∣peares to me that the day of Judgement shall fall about that time. Rol. But I pray you Sir speake more particularly of these things, and first shew how it appeares that the sea∣ven Angels and the seaven thunders are all one. Nap. If wee doe but confer the tokens or the seaven Angels with the tokens of the seaven thunders, we shall find them to agree; for first in Ch. 10. at the comming in of the 7. thunders Christ doth offer the open book of his truth; so Ch. 14. the first of the 7. Angels bringeth the everlasting Gospel, and openly preacheth out the same. Secondly in Ch. 10. Christ by the mighty voyce of his Word as a roaring Lyon in the mouthes of his Preachers proclaimed the truth, then came the 7. thun∣ders:
so also Ch. 14. the voyce of Gods heavenly Elect is here as a mighty souund of Waters, and as thunder; then came the seaven Angels; so that you see in respect of the harmony betwixt them wee may conclude them both to be one. Rol. Well Sir, and how doth it appeare that every one of the first 3. thundring Angels containe a Jubilee? Nap. After the Custome both of the Levits and Pro∣phets, who divide all great dates by Iubilees, and small dates by weeks of yeares, wee judge most apparantly this last Age to bee divided by Iubilees, and so every thunder or Angel of these 3. that are said in the Text Ch. 14. v. 6.8.9. to pretend Gods great Harvest to con∣taine a Iubilee, which is 49. yeares. Rol. And how doth it appeare that the foure last thundring Angels all at once compleateth the day of Iudgement? Nap. In the 14. Chapter, verse 14. and 16. it is said that the fourth thundring Angel which is Christ him∣selfe, enters actually into his great Harvest, to gather up his Elect at the warning of the fifth Angel, even Gods holy spirit ver. 15. like as contrarily the sixt thundring Angel executor of Gods fierce wrath, mentioned vers. 17. and 19. is admonished and warned by the seventh Angel commander thereof to cut downe, and  the Vines of the earth in the winepresse of Gods  and so by these foure last Angels or Thunders,  Christ himself and by his whole ministring Angel  the figure of these last Angels, all the  of Gods harvest and latter Iudgement is accomplis. Rol. And when did the first of the three first  Iubile begin? Nap. Even as I said, before the last of the seven s
and the first of the seven Trumpets began both at once in the yeare of Christ 71. so in like manner the last of the seven Trumpets, and the first of the seven thunders began both at once, in the yeare of Christ, 1541. Rol. What moves you to think it beginneth that yeare? Nap. In the 11. Ch. v. 15. it is said, that at the blast of the 7th. Trumpet, the Kingdome of the World becom∣meth Christ his Kingdome, that is then the Kingdome of Antichrist & all other prophane Kingdoms shall fall, and Christ his Kingdom shall be spred and inlarged over all; and this can no other way come to passe, then by the preaching of the Evangel, which was of new opened up and preached at the comming of the first Angel, whom the Text saith to have an everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell upon the earth, which Angel, as I said before, is manifest to be the first of the seven thun∣ders; therfore it followeth consequently that the new restoring of the Evangell, the seventh trumpet or Viall, and the first thunder, or thundring Angel come all at once even in Anno Christi, 1541. About which yeare God stirred up openly his first Ministers and servants, Luther, Calvin, Melancthon and others, ver. 6.7. to preach out during all this Iubile, the perfect verity of the Gos∣pel publikely, which before was hid and obscured under the Antichristian Reigne; so that now the true Church lurketh no more, but Gods truth to all the world is made apparant by these Ministers teaching them ac∣cording to the Text, to feare God onely, and leaving all other superstitious worshipping to give glory onely unto him. Rol. And when did this first of these 3. Iubiles end. Na. If you reckon, you shall easily find that it ended in Ann. Christi. 1590. And then came the second of the
seven thundring Angels,ver. 8. declaring even presently the horrible fall and decay to become of that figurative Ba∣bylon, and great Antichristian City, about which time, to wit, the end of the first Iubile, and beginning of the second, God hath shewed marvellous indices that the Empire of Rome and Papisticall Kingdome shall short∣ly fall, the Antichristian and Spanish Fleet is destroy'd, the late King of France, Duke of Guize and his Brother, Papists and Committers of the Parisian Massacre, all murthered by other, a Protestant now made King of France; so that before the end of this Iubile (God wil∣ling) Rome and the whole Papisticall Kingdome there∣of shall be ruined. Rol. And what yeare shall this second Iubile end? Nap. In the yeare, 1639. Rol. And what followes upon that? Nap. After that comes the third Iubile, or the third thundring and threatning Messengers openly and loud∣ly threatning, that if any be now that doe worship or reverence that Antichristian Empire, or that receive the old superstitious marks thereof on their foreheads or on their hands, the same shall drinke of Gods wrath; so that in this third Jubile the Ministers and Messengers of God shall (God-willing) have only the latter dregs of that Romish seat▪ to admonish and threaten by open in∣timation, that if any be in whose hearts the reverence of that ruined Empire, or if any now be marked with Chrisme or Crosse on hand or head, he shall be tormen∣ted eternally in the fire of Hell. Rol. Well Sir, now I see plainely that if we add to 1639. 49. yeares, then according to your account the day of Iudgement appears to fall about 1688. I had not thought it could have bin so plainly proved by Scripture.
Nap. I doe assure my selfe that all the prophesies of the latter day shall be knowne, and manifested to Gods Church before Christ come to Iudgement, and if we doe conferre all prophesies and propheticall figures there∣of together, wee shall find them come so neere to that time that verily the matter is wonderfull. Rol. I pray Sir proceed on to doe it. Nap. First as touching the Cimball of the Saboth, it is thought by the most learned, that the six dayes of la∣bour weekly observed, doth meane and beare the sim∣ball of 6000. yeares, that mankind shall endure the tra∣vells and cares of this world, and that is confirmed by Peter, who speaking of the day of Iudgement, noteth that a thousand yeares shall bee as one day in Gods sight, and a day as a thousand yeares, and so consequently the sixe dayes of worke to represent sixe thousand yeares, after the which sixe thousand yeares, of worldly cares and travells, then shall come our eternall Saboth and rest in the glory of Heaven, signified by the seaventh dayes rest, for that truely there is no institution apointed by God to Moses, which besides the civell commodity had not also a spirituall figure, and sure it is that no figure agreeth more consonant with these sixe dayes of work, and seventh day of rest then the present miseries of this world, and eternall Saboth hereafter: secondly agree∣able to the former, there is a sentence of the house of Elias, reserved in all Ages bearing these words, the world shall stand sixe thousand yeares, and then it shall be consumed with fire, two thousand yeares voyd or without Law, two thousand yeares under the Law, and two thousand yeares shall be the dayes of the Messias, and for our offences which shall be manyand great, shall these yeares lacke which shall lack, thus farre saith Eli∣as;
Now the terme of these sixe thousand yeares, doth expire about the 2000. yeare of Christ, which terme both by the said saying of Elias, and by Christs owne say∣ing in Mathew appeareth to be shortned, and therefore thirdly by Daniell wee shall aproach neerer that terme, for he in his 12. chap. intreating both of the first Resur∣rection, which is the Resurrection from the Antichristi∣an errours, and of the second Resurrection which is the generall resurrection from the dead, such an Angell as afterward appeareth to Iohn, Rev. 10. teaching him con∣cerning the latter day, doth here apeare to Daniel, swear∣ing solemly a terme of propheticall dayes to every one of those questions doubled of by the Prophet of which the greatest terme is expressed to be 1335 propheticall dayes, which are so many yeares, whose beginnings are determined in these words, and  the time that he daily sacrifice shall cease, and the Abomination pu to desolation or made desolate, shall be 1290 dayes, bles∣sed is he that awaiteth and abideth to the 1335. day, as if he would say, from that time that both the Iewish day∣ly sacrifice shall uttery cease, and the abominable rites of the Gentiles bee abolish d to the compleating of the great resurrection from the Antichristian errours, and utter decay of his Kingdome shall be 1290. yeares, and then blessed shall hee bee that abideth and remaineth constant in the small ime, tha shall bee betwixt that and the latter day, which shall fall in the 1335. yeare from the taking away of the said Iewish Ceremonies, and Gentils suerstiions, but so it is that these were neither actully taken away by hrists Passion, neither in the de∣struction of Ierusalem, nor otherwaies till miraculously in the dayes of Julian the Apostate. Anno Christi 365. This Apostate having in despite of Christ ordained the
Jewes to build up, and repaire their Temple of Ierusalem on the one part, and on the other part having sent his Legats to offer sacrifice in the chiefe Ethnick Temple of the Gentiles in Delphos, and to consult with that Oracle of Apollo there, God sent his Thunder from above, and Earth-quake from beneath, and thereby overwhelmed both those chiefe Temples about one time so utterly, that to this day all the Iewish daily sacrifice of the one, and the abominable Ethnick superstitions of the other have ceased, and beene put to utter confusion and deso∣lation, but if after the opinion of some learned men, this Text doth meane in the Originall Hebrew, not the abomination, to be put in desolation, but contrarily a desolating and wasting Abomination, to bee set up to∣gether also with the taking away the former, and fore∣said daily sacrifice in this case apearing by the same date is not the lesse established, for who was a more horrible and wasting Abomination then was the aforesaid Iuli∣an that bloud-thirsty Apostate, together with his dete∣stable Idolatrous Magicall decrees, which publickly he acted and set up, to bring Christianisme to utter desola∣tion: so that howsoever this abomination be expound∣ed, either passively to bee made desolate as the Gentiles cheefe abominable, and Idolatrous Oracle of Apollo at that time was made desolate, or actively, that the abo∣mination should make a wasting or desolation, and that that wasting Abomination should be then erected, as the abominable Tyrant and Apostate Iulian was promo∣ted Emperour, and his cruell decrees of persecution at that time set out, even alwaies in that very same yeare, 365. all the foresaid Accidents occurred, for in that one yeare, both first the foundations of the Iewish Temple of daily sacrifice, as secondly (in the passive sense) the said
Temple of the Ethnicks Abominations in Delphos were by Thunder and Earthquake both destroyed, as thirdly in the Active sence, that abominable Iulian and his decrees, for desolating and devouring Gods servants, were then set up; Therefore from this yeare of Christ, 365. wee are commanded to reckon 1335. yeares, which falls in Anno 1700. And then saith Daniel, verse the 6. shall be the end of all wonders, even the wondrous and great day of the Lord, but yet as this prophesie doth abridge the aforesaid prophesie of Elias, so also Christs fore∣said saying in Matthew that came after this prophesie, doth apparantly abridge somewhat of this time, there∣fore as men said before, every thundering Angell of three contained 49. yeares and then comes the great day of the Lord, and we proved that the first thundering An∣gell began in Anno 1541. to which add thrice 49. years, which is 147. yeares, and so by that account the latter day will fall in Anno 1688. wherfore appearingly be∣twixt this 1688. according to the Revelation, and the 1700. yeare according to Daniel, the said latter day should fall, and for further confirmation thereof, there is a number put in the end of the 14. Chapter of the Reve∣lation, which appeares to be a date of the latter day, for that Chapter altogether speaks of the Lords great har∣vest and latter Iudgement, there saith Iohn the blood came out of the Winepresse unto the horse bridles, by the space of 1600. stades or courses, as if appearingly he would meane Metaphorically, as Wine may bee thought to flow from the Presse, or the bloud of slaine men in a Field to ascend to the horse bridles; so eternally shall the torment of the wicked ascend after that a thou∣sand and sixe hundred yeares bee accomplished, for these stades agree well to meane yeares, seeing a stade
is that Race or course, that one may bee thought to run with one breath, before he begin to renew his breath a∣gain, as one yeare is that race or course, that the Sunne maketh in a circuit, before he begin to renew his circuit againe, now counting therefore a thousand and sixe hundred yeares, from the time that this was written, which was about the 97. yeare of Christ, as Eusebius in his Chronicle saith, or in the end of the reigne of Do∣mitian as Freneus saith, which was in Anno Christi 199. the end of the account shall fall about the year of Christ 1697. or the yeare 1699. which is betwixt the said terme 1688. and 1700. and so the difference of these dates is but small, and if the time of Histories were surely written, and observed, it may be thought that the diffe∣rence would be either lesse, or utterly nothing at all. ]Rol. Well Sir, you have fully satisfied me concern∣ing this point, as also concerning the ruine of Antichrist, yet one thing more I desire to be further satisfied in be∣fore we part, and that is, how it is manifest that the Pope is that Antichrist spoken of in Scripture. ]Nap. That is manifest first, in that all the notes and tokens of Antichrist given us by the Scriptures, are most evident properties of the Pope, secondly by the notable contrarieties betweene Christ and the Pope. ]Rol. First then I pray you, shew how the notes of Antichrist in Scripture, and properties of the Pope agree together? ]Nap. First the Apostle saith, 2 Thess. 2. Antichrist must be the head of that Apostacie, or falling away from the truth, and it is well knowne, that Chrysostome, Augustine, Theodoret, Theophalect, and Oecumenius, by that Apostacy understand Antichrist, yea Bellarmine himselfe affirmeth that by Apostacie in that place, Antichrist himselfe may be fitly understood.
Secondly the same Apostle in the same place saith that Antichrist shall exalt himselfe against all that is cal∣led God, and so doth the Pope stile himselfe God, and causeth Emperors and Kings to kisse his feet; yet Pope Alexander the third trode with his feet upon the head of Frederick Barbarossa. Thirdly, in the same Chapter it is said, that Anti∣christ shall come with all deceivablenesse of unrighte∣ousnesse, therefore Antichristianisme is called the My∣stery of iniquity; so that the impietie of Antichrist is mysticall, cloaked under the name of godlinesse; and as in the Popes Myter was wont; so also in the whore of Babylons forehead is written a Mystery, Rev. 17.5. op∣pugning Christ and his truth, under the outward shew and profession of Christian Religion, he must be called most holy when indeed he is most wicked, he cals him∣selfe the servant of servants, when in truth hee makes himselfe the King of Kings. Fourthly, it is said 1 Tim 4.3. that the Antichrist spea∣king lies through hypocrisie shall forbid to marry, and shall command abstinence from certaine meats: and so doth the Pope under hypocrisie and lying pretext of chastitie and abstinence forbid all his Clergie to marry and to eat flesh in Lent, or on Fridayes. Fifthly, it is said 2 Pet. 2. that Antichrist shall denie the Lord that bought them, and through covetousnesse shall with faigned words make merchandiz of Christi∣ans, yea and shall sell their soules, as it is said Revel. 18.13. so hath the Popes Clergie brought in Pardons and Indulgences whereby they promise remission of sinnes and the Kingdome of Heaven privily and in effect ther∣by denying Christ to be their onely Redeemer, and so have they through covetousnesse under faigned pretext
of Religion made merchandize of poore Christians, sel∣ling by such divellish wayes even their soules to the Divell. Sixthly, the Antichrists comming, saith Paul, is by the comming of Sathan, with all power and signes, and lying wonders in all deceivablenesse. So hath the Pope advanced his credit in deceiving the simple sort by his faigned fables, and alleadged Miracles of the Legen∣dary, and by such juglings as they use; and no marvell, when as Platina and others affirme 22. Popes came to the Popedome being abominable Necromancers. And thus have I shewed you how the notes of Antichrist in Scripture, and properties of the Pope doe agree toge∣ther. Rol. I pray likewise shew the contrarieties betwixt Christ and the Pope. First Christ came so soberly and meekly that he would not have broken a bruised Reed, but the Pope came proudly overwhelming the most mighty Empires, hee changed the Kingdome of France from Chilperick the lawfull King to Pipin the Popes Confederate. Secondly, Christ would not worship the Divell to gaine all the Kingdomes of the world; but 22. Popes bound themselves slaves to the Divell for ever to bee made Popes, as testifieth Platina and other unsuspected Writers. Thirdly, CHRIST cast the Merchandize out of the Temple: But the Pope establisheth the Merchandize in the Temple to sell his Pardons, Masses and Indul∣gences. Fourthly, Christ washed his poore Disciples feet; but the Pope maketh the most mightie Emperours to kisse his feete.
Fifthly, Christ honoured Marriage at Cana in Ga∣lile, had some married Apostles, and commanded them to marry that could not live chast; but the Pope forbid∣deth his Clergie to marry though they were never so filthy Whoremongers. Sixthly, Christ forbiddeth Whordome: But the Popes were seven of them Whore-Mungers, and erecters of Brothel houses, and Pope Joane was a Whore, and died with child in open Procession; and these are named in their owne Histories. Seaventhly, Christ paid Tribute to Caesar; But the Pope bereft the Emperour both of Lands and Tributes within Italy. Eighthly, Christ had not so much money of his owne as to pay his Tribute: But the Popes propriety is said to bee eighteene thousand Duckets every day. And Pope John of Anjou left in store 25. Millions of gold. 9. Christ misliketh the observing of dayes, moneths, and yeares: But the Pope commandeth to observe his Festivals and Holidayes. Tenthly, Christ is the onely Mediator betwixt God and Man: But the Pope makes and canoniseth his Saints whom he cals Mediators betwixt God and us. Eleventhly, Christ had not whereon to repose or rest his head: But the Pope hath store of Townes, Castles, and Princely Pallaces. Twelfthly, Christ forbids much babbling and vaine repetitions in our Prayers: But the Pope commandeth to repeat over your Prayers, and to say five Pater No∣sters, and five Ave Mara's. Thirteenthly, Christ teacheth a Religion wholly in spirit, and void of all externall Ceremonies, except his two Sacramentall Seales: But the Pope hath con∣stituted
a Religion consisting wholly in bodily Rites, nd full of externall Superstitions. Fourteenthly, Christ was crowned with a Crowne of Thornes: But the Pope is crowned with a threefold imperiall Crowne. Fifteenthly, to conclude, Christ shed his blood once, that we might reigne spiritually: But the Pope sheds our blood dayly, that he might reigne temporally. Rol. There be some other things which I could de∣sire to be resolved in; but at this present time will not permit: and therefore giving you many thankes for what you have done, I take my leave of you for this time. Nap. The Lord be with you. FINIS.
