P4271 E200_65 99859424 157598
A most learned and Religious Speec spoken by Mr. Pym, at a conference of both Ho¦ses of Parliament the 23. of this instant Moneth of Septem Declaring unto them the necessity and benefit of the union of his Majesties three Kingdomes, England, Scotland, and Ireland in matters of Religion and Church Government. Also certaine Passages at a Committee in the Exchequor Chamber concerning Coyning of Farthings now in the hands of the Lord Mowbray, and Montravers: Together with some remarkable Passages from Chester, and words betwixt Prince Robert and his Excellence Robert Earle of Essex. Sept: 30 1642 Henry Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com. depiction of Mr. Pym London Printed for Iohn Otwell. 1642.
A Learned And Religious Speech spo∣ken by Master Pym at a conference of both Houses of Parliament the 23. of this instant Moneth of Septem. Declaring unto them the necessity and benefit of the Union of his Majesties three Kingdomes, England, Scotland and Ireland, in matters of Religion and Church Government, &c. MY Lords, your Lordships may observe that the Distractions of this Kingdome have beene fomented by the Iesuiticall and Prelaticall Faction, discon∣tented Courtiers, and selfe lovers, and how
that this Iesuiticall & Prelaticall Faction have not only threatned ruine to the Kingdom of Ireland, but to all other the reformed Chur∣ches, as is evidenced by their late practices, how necessary it is therefore for your Lord∣ships, and the reformed Churches to unite your selves together I referre to your Lord∣ships consideration; howsoever according to the trust reposed in me by the House of Commons, I am commanded humbly to present to your Lordships, not onely the sence of these great distractions, but the meanes how to compose them; which as they have taken into their consideration are these. First, that one directory or forme of Prayer should be observed throughout the three Kingdomes of England, Scotland, and Ireland. Secondly, that there should be one Ca∣techisme taught of instruction of youth. 3. That the Assembly of Divines for Re∣formation of Religion and Church Lytur∣gy
should convene (as was formerly inten∣ded) with all speed, and to that end his Ma∣jesty should be petitioned to passe a Bil that so the distractions of this Kingdome concer∣ning Church governement & Liturgy might be semented and united, and the 3. King∣domes being under one government, might agree in discipline and unity of spirit: And for the better effecting of this act of Refor∣mation, it is desired by the House of Com¦mons, that some of the most able and judici∣ous Divines of the Kingdome of Scotland, and of other the reformed Churches should joyn in this Assembly, and that a Remon∣strance of these their desires should be made to their Brethren of Scotland, all which was granted. Then the Lord Mandevill reported the absence of the great Seal being entrusted in the hands of a common person, & from the Lord Keeper, was a great delay in the exe∣cution of Iustice, and that divers things had passed under the great Seal prejudiciall to the Common-wealth since his Majestie had
taken it from the Lord Keeper, which was referred to the consideration of the House of Commons. The L. Moubray and Maltrevers his agent appeared in the Exchequer chamber before a Committee, with his patent concerning the coyning of farthings, & confest that the charge of the coyning of 30. pounds worth of farthings in materialls and servants wages mounted to 6-8 and Sir H. Mildmay and one of the committee alleadged that coy∣ning Was a flower of the crown, howsoever if the Subject could make appear that there was an abuse either in the creation or execu∣tion of the patent, it was to be vacated, and thereupon the informers were left to their further defence. There was lately notice given to the Par∣liament, that his Majestie is neer Chester in∣tending to joyn himselfe with the Forces of the Lord Strange and the Lord Rivers, which they have raysed in Chester, Lancashire, and Wales, and so to march towards Worcester
to rayse the siege, the Parliaments forces have made against Sir Iohn Byron and the Ca∣valliers. That his Excellency the Earl of Essex ha∣ving instructions and directions from both Houses to attend his Majesty with a Petition from them, received a Message from P. Robert to this effect, that for his Petition he might present his Majesty himselfe with it when he pleased, but as for his sword he himself wold answer it when and where he should be ap∣pointed.
More newes from Worcester. WHen Prince Robert came to Worcester about 11, of the clock, Sept. 23. as was thought to fetch away those Forces that lay at Worcester, much endangered by the L. Generalls forces which were come neer the City, about 10. troops, and also 200. dragoneers drawn into an advan∣tagious plot of ground to prevent the Cavalliers flight, were strongly assaulted by Pr. Roberts forces, supposed to bee in number some 6000. horse, they valiently discharged against the Cavalliers, and had a very bloody fight, untill it came to the swords point, Colonel Fines pistole I their chiefe Commanders, Prince Maurice hand cut off and desperately wounded, and Prince Robert is shot through the thigh as it is reported, the Parliaments forces being separated were forced to retreat, the L. Generals forces being not come to assist them Also about 10. of the clock at night, Prince Roberts forces fled over the bridg towards Ludlow with many o the City with them, and forced Captaine Wingat whom they tooke prisoner to ride before them naked. The next day his Excellence possessed himselfe of the Ci∣ty which was almost ruinated by the Cavalliers, but God be praysed they are departed thence, the Cavalliers have done much mischiefe by plundering and disarming persons well affected to the Parliament, and making them to flye for their lives, if a speedy course be not taken, the Kingdom will be in great danger. FINIS.
