P451 E609_19 99860045 112152
THE MYSTERY OF THE VIALLS OPENED: Being a short Exposition upon the pouring out of the four last VIALLS, mentioned in the 16 Chapter of the REVELATION: Wherein divers things relating to times present, past, and to come, are discovered: As the ruine of ANTICHRIST, and the severall degrees thereunto; And the shadowing out these times wherein we live, are generally surveyed. LONDON, Printed for John Sweeting at the Angel in Popes-head Alley, 1651.
The Stationer to the Reader. READER, ALL that I have to say, is, That this brief Exposition of that Religious and Learned Divine Mr. Robert Parker, upon the pou∣ring out of the foure last Vialls mentioned in the sixteen chap. of the Revelations, hath been for this many yeers (before the Palatinat was reduced to a field of blood) in the custody of Sir Iohn Wray, to whose piety thou standest engaged for the publicati∣on: the Author was esteemed pious and learned, a Non-conformist to the Bishops. Happily he may dif∣fer in opinion from Mr. Brightman and other learned men, but that is no wonder; for they could not agree among themselves: I have done my part, the Copy was sent mee to procure a passage into the Publick, the which is performed; and by the way, that as the worthy Gentleman that gave me the Manuscript and the Imprimatur thought it worthy the printing; I cannot think otherway but that it deserves the buy∣ing.
THE MYSTERY OF THE VIALLS OPENED. REVEL. 16.8, 9. And the fourth Angel poured out his viall upon the Sun, and power was given him to scorch men with fire. And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, which hath power over these plagues: and they repented not to give him glory. ALthough I am not worthy to bee named with Mr. Brightman, yet I trust I may crave leave under correction, to differ from him, in the Exposition of this Viall. I prosecute his me∣mory with all the benediction that is due to so great a light in the Church of God, and hold himself (for cleering this Apocalyps) the chief Angell of this Viall, in case it bee meant of Protestant writers (as he would have it) ma∣king the Scriptures as cleer as the Sun, to the confounding and tor∣menting of Papists; howbeit there be some reasons, that lead mee to
interpret it rather of the wasting of some Protestant Princes or Luthe∣ran State not long hence to be accomplished, which I crave liberty to set down. 1. The confounding and tormenting of Papists by the Scripture, is not a distinct particular event, as the event of this fourth Viall seems to be Distinct it is not, but the same with the plague of the first Viall, whose botch, what is it else but an ulcer of mind in Papists to see the growth of the Gospel, and fall of Popery, especially here at home in England by the death of Qu. Mary, and the succession of Qu. Eliz. to the crown? And again it is generall, whereas the Viall is poured on the Sun a particular star in heaven, to note a plague on some speciall State of some true Church, or at least some Church disunited from Popery. 2. The Sun being King amongst stars, Jer. 44.17. he fitly here defineth some King or State even as he doth elsewhere, so Jacob (the most heroicall man in his dayes) is resembled by the Sun, Gen. 37. Da∣vid, 2 Sam. 21.17. and Hezekiah King of Israel, 2 King. 20.9, 10. Who is the Angel standing in the Sun? Apoc. 19.17. out of doubt some great man in power and place; forasmuch as the writing of some bare Divines cannot so effectually draw People and Nations to join in war against the Pope; What is that darkning of the Sunne? Apoc. 6.12. the fall of the persecuting Roman Empire, and the third part of the Sun smitten, Apoc. 8.12. is the wasting of Africa the third part of the world by the Vandalls. 3. In this fourth Viall the Sun himself is first plagued, which cannot be meant of the Scripture, for the text doth say as directly that the fourth Angell doth poure his Viall on the Sun, as the fift doth poure his Viall on the throne of the beast, by which Romes ruine is foreshew∣ed: Howbeit the Sun not extinguished by this Viall but only distem∣pered to scorch with heat, doth seem to imploy that the plague of this Prince or State shall not cast them down so much, as irritate and stirre them up to a heat of revenge, laying waste the men that did hurt them. 4. The men here plagued are not only Papists, for whereas it is ad∣ded to them in the first Viall by way of restraint, that the sore fell up∣on them which had the mark of the beast and who worshiped his image; here is no such limitation; it is only said in generall, power was given to the Sun to torment men, viz. men of the same heaven where the Sun shineth, viz. men in that visible Church where this Prince or State doth governe: Neverthelesse there is hope given that the godly of this Church shall escape in that that being said of the plagued, they gave not glory to God; there is probability that this judgement shall only light on the Papists, or at the least, chiefly, and wicked men mingled with this Estate and Church, who before had no care of Gods glory or the Gospels good, but only sought their own glory, wealth and pleasures. 5. The plague here described is not only by heat, wch yet were sufficient to uphold the allusion of the Sun, but also by fire; this maketh me con∣jecture
that this Prince or State shall lay desolate by fire and burning more then by sword, God girding him or them with such power, as that they shall not need to fight many battails; neither ought it to seem strange, that fire here meant laying all things waste should literally be meant, seeing the Angell that hath power over this fire, Apoc. 14.18. is Cranmer triumphing in the fire of Martyrdom; & the burning of the flesh of the Whore, is the sacking of Rome, Apoc. 17.16. so the Angell of the Waters in the 5th. vers. going before, resembleth the States of the Low Germany seated in a watry Countrey. 6. The effect of this plague in the wicked is boiling in heat, and gnawing of their tongues, and blaspheming the name of God, which contain more then an inward rage of Papists, for the confounding of their Religion by the Scriptures; they must needs shew welneer such a ruine of State as the ruin of Rome comes to: forasmuch as great a plague is described here as in the first Vial, and that in the same terms and words, as appeareth by comparing the 9 vers. with the 11 follow∣ing: add to this, that the plague of this Viall is uttered in the plurall number, they blasphemed the name of God over these plagues, as if it contained many confusions in it; and this answereth to the justice of God, who beginneth judgment at his own house, and at them who make profession to be of his houshold. By this Revelation the Pope shall be destroyed before the Turke, because he professed Christianity, which the Turkes did not. In like manner before God destroy the Pope, hee shall pour out his Viall on some Protestant or Lutheran Church which made profession of the Gospel against Popery, but obeyed it not: by this means it shall come to passe what was done of old; then God afflicted Jewry his own Church, before he destroyed the earthly Babylon; now he shall punish one of his own Churches, before hee proceed against Rome the spirituall Babylon. 7. I conjecture, that this Sun of the fourth Viall punishing a rebel∣lious Church, and the Angell of the fifth Viall sacking Rome, is all one and the same: First, because the fifth Viall is immediately adjoined and expressed with the very same tearms, which probably induceth to think that it shall be wrought by the same means: this conjecture is helped by this, that the rebelling against the Sun of the fourth Viall, shall be procured by the Pope and Papist, which shall be in case that this Sun, so soon as he hath subdued his domesticall enemies, shall addresse himself to an Expedition against Rome: Secondly, the ruin of Rome ariseth from a wilderness, Apoc. 17.3. First, as I conjecture, out of the same Countrey laid waste like a wilderness. This Countrey must be the State wasted by the Sun of the fourth Viall, for we have no Prophecy of any other State to be laid waste, immediately before Romes sacking, but only of that: now that John's carrying into the wilder∣ness to see the ruine of Rome, doth shew that Romes ruine shall arise out of a land, brought to a wilderness, may thus appear. Wherefore is John set on the sea shore, Apoc. 12.18. when he is to see the rising of the Beast,
but because of the beasts rising out of the sea, ergo, in that John Apoc. 17.3. is placed in a wildernesse to see Romes ruine, it is a sign that Romes ruine shall rise out of some Countrey reduced to a wildernesse. So when Iohn is to see the beauty of the Iewish Church, he is carryed to a great high mountain to see it. Apoc. 21.10. i. e. because his Church shall be set up on high like to a mountain, Isa. 22.3. This is the descripti∣on of him which sacketh Rome, Apoc. 18.1. I saw a great Angell come down from heaven, having great power, so that the earth was enlight∣ned with his glory, which agreeth with the Sun of this fourth Viall: he cometh down from heaven; First, suddenly beyond all expectation of man; Secondly, the Sun of the fourth Viall ariseth suddenly out of his plague, when the world thought he could never have recovered, he hath great power given him, this is the power of the Sun of the fourth Viall, both by glory of conquering, and the wealth of the conquered, which he shall get into his hands: he hath light and brightness, which what is it else but the Sunne of the fourth Viall his light and brightness? Lastly, hee replenisheth the earth with his glory; which implyeth the great admiration of the world, and the astonishment of Papists and earthly men; when they shall see the Sun of the fourth Viall arise so extraordinarily out of his plague. Fourthly, and last of all, Apoc. 17.16. it is said, that the ten hornes shall sack Rome: and who shall the States of Christendome sooner choose for their Generall or proclaime their Emperour against Rome, then he that hath been plagued by Papists, and enraged against them, and furnished with greatest authority, power and wealth to subdue them? Thus have I presumed to deliver my conjecture concerning this fourth Viall; I say conjecture, because it cannot certainly be known, till it bee executed: Nevertheless, because the time thereof approacheth it be∣cometh every Christian man to strive by prayer, meditation, study, and all other means for some understanding of it, considering that he hath not writ this prophesie only to instruct us when it is past, but also to forewarn us even aforehand. The Revealer of secrets that unsealed this book to John, open unto us the mystery of it, that we may foresee the evill that is to come, and hide our selves from it: as also keep our selves pure from offences against our Sun, lest we partake of the plagues which this Viall doth denounce against all such transgressions. To God only wise be honor and glory for ever, Amen.
Mr. Parker his Meditations of the Reign of ANTICHRIST, and of severall degrees thereunto. OR, A short and generall Survey of the three last VIALLS, in all probabilities no lesse plainly then admirably shadowing out these times wherein we live, out of REVEL. 6.10. THE extraordinary accidents that happen within the christian world in these our days being without doubt pointed at in that pro∣pheticall history of the Revelation, cannot but inforce a serious musing of the period of these combustions, the truth of which the event will admirably discover, being though somewhat darkly shadowed forth in this Chapter; The desire of the true meaning whereof have made these thoughts legible. You have heard in the opening of the fourth Viall, a preparation to∣wards Romes ruine; the Viall poured upon the sun, i. e. some sharp ca∣lamity and affliction falling upon some Protestant or Lutheran Prince, assuredly some State disunited from Popery. This Sun recovering him∣selfe from his plague, which may last for some yeers in all probability, not above ten, shal make an expedition against his oppressors, scorching the popelings with the heat of misery in the fury of anger. And thus far goes the fourth Viall. This Sun or Prince being recovered from his plague; thinks that not a sufficient revenge to devour and burn the inferiour members of the adverse party, intendeth an expedition, prepareth a warre against the head, the abettors and setters on of the inflictors of his plague, which is plainly shadowed out by the fift Viall, as you shall hear. And the fift Angell poured out his Viall on the throne of the Beast, and his Kingdom was full of darknesse. Here is a more direct striking at the head, then in the former Viall,
for in other things there is a great resemblance betwixt these two Vi∣alls, they both exercise their extremity against men, they both cause blaspheming of God in their adversaries, which doth strongly confirm the conjecture that you heard of in the former Viall, that the Sun of the fourth Viall, and the Angel of the fifth Viall is all one and the same man, in a double warlike expedition; for first, having the Viall poured upon himselfe, he lies for a certain time hidden and obscured, as though his light and heat had been utterly darkned, and cooled; and rising out of his misery, he shall scorch some petty Armies with the heat of his anger, perhaps overcoming that Army, that before gave him the foil, spoiling those neighbour territories that had made a prey of his, during his darkness, and lying in his plague, wch shal cause his adversaries to fret, and curse, and ban, that a halfe dead man should thus strangely arise, and to their everlasting shame and overthrow become potent: But now coming to a higher pitch, attended with greater strength, shall cast his thoughts upon higher things, the effecting of greater matters, even the overthrow of the head of rebells, the Antichristian beast, the Romish whore. We see then who this fift Angell is: In all likelyhood, some Prince or State an enemy to Popery, recovering health after a long sicknesse, peace after many troubles, and strength after great weaknesse, whereinto he was cast, by the cruell tyranny of the beasts members. Having thus found out the party, let us look upon his work: he pours saith the text, his Viall upon the throne of the beast; the pre∣paratives thus far fitly concurring, viz. Romes destroyer, being set on his feet, and made Master of his domesticall enemies, he sends a defi∣ance against the head, and pours out his wrath upon the principall; And here I must crave leave to differ again in my conjecture from the sun of this age Mr. Brightman, as I shall doe in all these three last Vialls, and that not without reason, as in the opening of them shall appear. For whereas Mr. Brightman doth put a full period to Antichrist his reign in this fifth Viall; I cannot see how that can be, forasmuch as there fol∣lows in the next Viall things which must necessarily praecede Romes ruine. We may therefore with more reason, and no derogation of praise due to so worthy a lamp, refer its desolation to the seventh Viall, & make this a more neer and cleer preparative thereunto. This Angel then bearing an inward hatred to the Whore, shall use all means to de∣throne her from her chaire of State, to eclipse her glory, to darken her brightness; but not daring as yet to meddle with the head and principal parts, he shall clip her wings that she dare not sore too high, put bounds to her Dominions, dispossesse her of some parts of her Kingdoms, for in that it is said her Kingdome was darkened, or did wax darke, not was overthrown; it is plaine that this is only an abridging her of her large morsells, obscuring her brightnesse, pulling some fair feathers out of her proud train, making her to view her black legs, the baseness of her rising, that she shall not dare to vaunt her self as the prime darlings amongst the sons of the Children of Pride: This makes me conjecture
that this Angell, this Prince or State shall get some of the temporall Kingdomes of Antichrist out of the claws of this Beast to himselfe; whereby the extent of her rule shall be straightned: And if I should thinke that this Angell of the fift Viall (being that same afflicted Sun in the fourth Viall) shall bee elected the head of the ten hornes that shall sack Rome, of whom we will speak more in the next Viall; the resemblance that is between the probable events of this election, and the effects of this Viall will warrant the conjecture; for weigh them a little; First, if this Angell be chosen Head or Emperour, in all likelyhood, nay without all doubt hee will scorn to receive the Imperi∣all Crown from the paw of the Beast, who is his mortall enemy; and is not this a shroud darknesse to the Beasts vainglorious authority; for without controversie, the Romish Beast doth glory in nothing more then this, that shee hath power to set up, and to pull downe, to in∣throne and dethrone, to crown and uncrown Emperours and Kings at her pleasure, which power all her Worshippers and Flatterers doe give her, as is plain in their writings to be seen: Now then this jug∣ling deceit of hers, or rather tyrannicall usurpation of authority over the Germane Emperours, being discovered and dispelled, neglected and contemned, her esteem will be much diminished, her reputation ble∣mished, her brightnesse obscured, her vain threats, and childish thun∣derbolts of Excommunication derided; and may not this losse of crowning Kings bee well said to bee a darkning of her King∣dome? Moreover, adde hereunto a second degree of darknesse: This An∣gell being chosen Emperour and Head, shall in his own person, or be a means that he that is the Head shal wring the whole German Empire out of this Beasts clutches; for there is no likelyhood, but that hee that in despite of the Beast is recovered out of his plague, shall to spite the Beast draw all his own subjects from the obedience of this Antichristi∣an tyrant, which thing being such a wide gap into the Beasts power, may well be called a darkening of his Kingdome; and in these two things especially the Emperors refusing to be crowned, or to receive his Dominion from the Pope, and the wresting, or rather freeing of the whole Germane Empire from Popish slavery, shall the work∣ing of the fifth Viall be accomplished; for still remember, that this Angell at this time shall darken, not overturn the Kingdome of the beast (which thing Mr. Brightman in part did see) it being as cleare as the sun, that the darkning of the Beasts Kingdom, implies a declina∣tion, not a desolation, a falling a tanto, not a toto, an eclipsing of her glorious lustre, not an extinguishing of her whole body: Neither need this to move any doubt; because the Viall is poured upon the seat or throne of the Beast which is Rome, and therefore ought we to expect the accomplishment of this Viall on that City. For I answer it is plain, and our usuall manner of speech to call the whole Kingdome the
throne of the King, or the seat of the Governour; and so the throne of Antichrist is every where, where he is esteemed and worshipped; for though this Angell shall have a good mind to bee medling with the Beasts person, and in all likelyhood he, or some of his shall be the se∣venth Angell that shall make an end of her, yet shall he not in the time of this fifth Viall dare to attempt so high a designe, but shall for a while content himselfe to have freed himselfe and his Empire from the slavish bondage of Romish tyranny, deferring his expedition against Rome, and the Beast, untill that potent, proper, and mighty upholder, of their ruinous and tottering estate shall be broken and removed, which the sixt angel shal ere long discover and take away, as in the opening of that shall appear. You have seen this angell and his Viall; now let us look what fol∣lowes upon this, how the Beast and his followers take this blow, for surely such a great blemish cannot but move them, at least to some pas∣sionate behaviour against their oppressor; now this effect is the same that followed the scorching of the Sun in the fourth Viall, that differs only in degree, for the nearer the blow comes to the head, and the more eminent that the expedition of this (not long since forlorne man) is, the more is their pain, the greater is their rage; for if they did blaspheme God when the Sun did but scorch the baser, and meanest pillars in the Popes Church: What will they do now when he comes to take away the main pillar whereupon the building of Popery hangs, and the corner stone in their church? Why, the text shews, They gnawed their tongues for paines. These are the Beasts attendants; before they vented their discontent against God in more mild sort; but now they are even mad with rage, and like mad men they tear their own flesh. The Beasts friends and followers shall be so astonished at this wonder∣full alteration, that because they shall want power to give their fury vent against their enemies, they shall wreak that upon themselves, at the consideration of this sudden and unexpected accident; and certain∣ly this is more then probable, that the popelings shall be in this raging fit of madnesse, at this so extraordinary darkning of their Kingdom; for as they exulting over, and trampling upon this Sun, this afflicted State in time of his plague did falsly and fondly flatter themselves with dreams of perpetual rest, because the hater of their tyrany was supprest; even so, they seing this worm (for so he was in their conceits) lift up his head against his adversaries, shall be moved; but when they see him confront their authority, enforce their swelling waves to keep within their owne channell; Oh then they shall bee enraged. The darkning of their Kingdome doth much move them; but that it should be darkned by this State, this beyond measure sets them on fire; here is blaspheming, cursing, gnawing, What not? for assuredly, this so sudden, unlooked for, strange encrease of this angell, shall gall at the very heart all the swarms of Monkes, Friers, Jesuites, Cardinalls, and
the rest of the rabble of this Antichristian crew: For this darkning of their Kingdome is such a pain and sore to them (for these words the Holy-ghost gives it) as nothing can bee greater, and well it may when all the pains that they have taken in masking Antichrist, and co∣vering him under the vaile of their Inventions shall be proved but smoak. But what, doth this discovery of their falsities, these pains drive them to the truth? Nay saith the Spirit, both in the former and in this Viall, they repented not, &c. Whence I conjecture, that few or none, in respect of the generality of the grand and head Papists, not many of the Beasts followers shall be drawn out of their wilfull blind∣nesse in the damnation of this Romish where, but shall receive their reward at one hour, in one manner with the Beast. Thus have wee in spight of the Beast, and without his consent, en∣throned this angell in his place appointed, from which he shall never descend, till he hath executed against Rome the judgement that is writ∣ten: for yet a little while and their destruction shall come as an ar∣med man; which cannot bee, till that which upholdeth her bee taken out of the way, which the sixth angell with his Viall will speedily do; Thus far the fifth Viall. VER. 12. And the sixt Angell poured out his Viall upon the great River Euphrates and the water thereof was dryed up. Wee mentioned in the former Vyall, a certain potent prop that did uphold the Beast, and kept the fift angell a while from bringing a finall desolation to the Romish Beast, which obstacle, both what it was, and the means of its removall, wee have here plainly discovered. And here though I take Mr. Brightman to be under God a principall angell in this Vyall also, in case it be meant of the conversion of the Jews as he would have it, in that he hath set the pens, tongues, and hearts of many on work, in the opening of this opinion, which is so plainly and firmly grounded on the Word of God, that I think it impossible to be infringed, and doe also without all question beleeve it shall be effected in its time; yet notwithstanding, I neither doe nor can think that this eminent worke was aimed at any whit at all in this verse; my reasons are these: First, this drying up of Euphrates comes in the time of Romes decli∣nation, but before her finall desolation, but the man of Sinne shall bee utterly abolished, at the brightnesse of Christs coming to call the Jews. Secondly, the end of this Rivers drying up, is to make a way for the Kings of the East; implying, that these Kings shall come up all one way together, about one businesse; and the originall , the way, imports as much, which way was barred up to all these Eastern Princes
alike, by the current of this River: but the Jews shall be converted from all the four winds; so that this River can onely hinder one part of them, What comfort can the Western Jews have from hence? Thirdly, the conversion of the Jews is described in whole Chapters afterwards; it is not likely then the Spirit of God would either include that so briefly and darkly here, which in more words he doth plainly open afterwards, or that he would insert it here in the midst of the Vi∣alls, and after without any method come back again: I rather think that from hence to the end of Revelation is an orderly and methodicall de∣scription of things that shall happen to the end of the world, some few digressions only excepted. Fourthly, if the conversion of the Jews be here meant, then is the drying up of Euphrates literally meant, which is not usuall in this book, especially in such passages of note and eminencie; to say no∣thing of this, that the truth of this miracle hath no sure foundation I think in the Book of God, but only some propheticall allusions, and the prophesie of the counterfeit Esdras in the Apocrypha. This interpretation therefore not holding water, wee must see for some other; I conjecture then by the drying up of Euphrates is understood the removall of that obstacle which is an impediment to the Expedition of the fifth angell against the Beast himselfe: Now what this impe∣diment was, we shall find out, if we seriously consider the thing it selfe under which it is shadowed. What is then Euphrates? for this being once known, we shall the more easily gather who shall be this angell that poures out his Viall upon Euphrates. Euphrates then is a River (to say so much of it as concerns our purpose) in Caldea that runs through that great City Babylon, and per∣formes to that City a double office, the one of maintenance, for upon that River is brought all kind of merchandize, whereby the State of the City is upheld, the other of defence, being as a wall to the City, and a sure safeguard to the Citizens, insomuch that the inhabitants had a certain confidence (which for the sure beleef thereof some have termed a Prophesie) that they should never be overcome till the River prove their enemy. Now when Cyrus King of Persia came against the City, and besieged it a long time, but in vain, he did by divers new made channells divert the course of the water, and through the old channell being now made drie, he entred the City, and got Babylon; and so was their confidence or Prophesie made true, the River became their enemy, and made a way for this Persian Prince. Thus wee see what Euphrates was, by which wee may be warranted to think, that by Euphrates here is meant some State or Kingdome, which is to Rome as Euphrates was to Babylon, a supporter and defence:
Now when I thought of all the States and Princes in this Western world, I see none a greater supporter to the seat of Antichrist, or more stands for him, then doth the Catholique King (as the Popelings call him) I conjecture therefore, that by Euphrates in this verse is meant the King∣dome and State of the King of Spain, for doe but weigh them, and you shall see how fully they agree. First, Euphrates is a great River in Caldea, and Spain is a great Kingdome in Europa. Secondly, Euphrates did convey maintenance to Babylon, and so did uphold the City, and it is notoriously remarkable, that Spain is the sole nourisher and upholder of the Popish Kingdome. Thirdly, Euphrates was a defence to Babylon, and who knowes not that the Beast of Rome doth acknowledge the Spanish forces to be the only supporters of his credit, the bar that keeps his enemies from trampling his triple crown in the dust. Fourthly, Babylon could not be won, nor Cyrus have any way into that City, till the water of this River was dryed up, and may wee not well thinke, that the only cause that stayes the fift Angel, and other Easterne Princes from an Expedition against Rome, is the power of Spain, for they shall stand waiting till this current of suppor∣tation that runs from Spain to Rome bee dryed up, and Spain enfor∣ced to bestow their strength elsewhere, perhaps in their owne de∣fence. But who shall bee this sixt Angell that shall poure his Viall upon Euphrates? Why surely I think this will give a great probability to my former conjecture; To poure out the Viall, in all this Revela∣tion, doth signifie to lay affliction upon, and bring misery unto, and most usually the plague of War; some Prince therefore, or State shall fall at oddes with Spain, and hold her play at home, that shee shall not attend to succour her ancient friend, the Beast, and his fol∣lowers. And if I should think that this State or sixth Angell shall bee the Kingdome of England, or the Low countreys, or both jointly with their friends; one peradventure would think it unlikely, and yet the next age, or perhaps this will (it may he) make it ap∣pear, that they shall have a principall hand in pouring out this sixth Viall. But who are those Eastern Kings whose way by this meanes shall bee prepared, and what is this preparation of their way to doe? I answer, Even the same men, that are afterwards called the Ten hornes prepared in a readinesse to sack Rome, who are both here and there called Kings; and yet chap. 17. are said to have no crownes, which in my conceit doth most admirably shadow out the German Princes, every of which is an absolute Prince in his owne
territory, and therefore may well be called a King, yet are not crown∣ed; they have not the name of Kings, but have a head, as these horns had, which bears the crown, the name over them all, even the Emperour, which at this time shall bee Angell of the fifth Viall; for these Princes and their head is it, that this way is prepared; for they seeing that Romes Euphrates, her supporter is dryed up, shall presently joine in an Expedition, which shall bee the finall desolati∣on of this purple Whore, wee see now the meaning. The sixt Angell poured out his Viall upon Euphrates, and the wa∣ters thereof were dryed up, that the wayes of the Kings of the East, might be prepared, i. e. England, or the Low countries, or some other Prince enemy to Spain, doth fall at oddes with Spain, by which Spain is enforced to imploy his forces for his own defence, and suffereth his aid, which he was used to send to Romes help to bee dryed up; which occasion the Germane Princes, and their Head laying hold upon, and finding their way fitly prepared, because Rome is now left destitute of forrain help, execute that for which they were kept to be ready at a day or an houre, when the Lord should call; where by the way we may note, how the Lord makes all things admirably concurre to his own ends. The Jars betwixt this sixt Angell and Euphrates is for this end, to make a way open for the Germane Princes to sack Rome; Whereupon I conjecture and verily think, that all the troubles that shall happen in this Western world in these times, are only to make way, for the ruine of Rome, upon whose head, and in whose ruine they shall at the last all fall and end now: let us in a word look upon that which followes. And I saw three unclean spirits, &c. That which remains of this Viall in the three next verses is only thus much: That the Pope per∣ceiving his estate to decline, his Kingdome and authority to totter, himselfe left destitute and forsaken of his dearest and only son the King of Spain, his fierce enemies now, sometimes his vassalls, plotting, ima∣gining, affecting his overthrow, shall by the instigation of the great dragon, the devill, and the perswasion of the false Prophets his flatte∣ring crew of Cardinalls, Friers, and the rest of that Antichristian building, send forth his croaking Jesuites, who shall by their crafty sub∣tilnesse goe forth unto the Kings of the earth, incite and stir them up to take in hand the defence of their master Antichrist, whose ruin then is coming, and shall fall unexspectedly and suddenly upon him, as by that sudden digression and exclamation, Behold I come as a thiefe, &c. may be gathered; when these frogs have gathered what Kings they can together, by whose strength their master this beast expects a restau∣ration, at least a prolongation of his former glory, hee shall unlooked for receive his fatall wound, which shall make him irrecoverably ex∣pire; for then, Vers. 17. The seventh Angell pours out his Viall upon the aire, and a
great voice comes forth of the Temple, saying, It is done, &c. Here is the utter desolation of Rome, and the tyranny thereof presaged, and not of Constantinople, which shall come to his finall period in the overthrow of Gog, not now; In the mean space let us with our prayers cry mightily unto God, that this Man of Sinne may not long oppresse; Which God grant. FINIS.
