R1568 E136_15 99860757 112882
STRANGE NEVVES FROM FRANCE OR, The Copie of a Letter which was sent from thence to the Ordinary Ambassador for the King of France, unto his Majesty of great Brittaine, who lyes in Lincolnes Inne-Fields, Febr. 8. 1641. Wherein is set downe a true Relation of a most Wonderfull Apparition and terrible Spectacle that was seene upon a Mountaine in Province, February, 4. 1641. Vnot the Amazement of all the Spectators, to the number of above two thousand. Faithfully translated into English, according to the French Copie. By W. V. Gent. London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.
Strange NEVVES from France. MY LORD, AFter I have done acquainting your Lordship with the affayres of Spaine and Italy, as farre as my weake intelligence is able to en∣forme you, pray give mee leave to write your Lordship some∣thing concerning your own Coun∣trey (France) and verily my Lord, although Histories both moderne & ancient are copious enough in setting down not onely the Acts of Chivalry, and Warlike guests of the people and French Nation, but also the strange Accidents and supernaturall events that have happened in the Realme: Yet a more conspicuous then this whereof J am now going to enforme your Lordship, which happened Febr, the 4. New stile, nor more worthy of the remembrance of posterity, J think is not mentioned in our Chronicles or annuall records, for ought yet that J could ever reade; not to hold your Lordship in further expectance, or to raise your admira∣tion with attendance, which without doubt will be suffi∣ciently
affected with the nature of the Relation: The Wonder following was this: IN the Province of Avignon, two leagues from St. Vincents neere the Mountaine and Plaines called De Varra cavill, being the Demeanes and Heredi∣tary of the late possession of the late unhappy Monsieur Memoran, betwixt seaven and eight in the morning, the day above mentioned, it being a great Gloome of Must not seldome seene with us, were sensible heard, the call of divers Drums beating to Armes, after that the Trumpets, distinctly sounded but a sella; after that both Drums and Trumpets, clearely and terribly, the one by beating, the other by his tantaraing gave e∣vident notice of marching, the Neighbours and In∣habitants thereabouts to the number of some two or three thousand people fit for Armes, presently flew unto their Weapons, thinking that some power of Spaine had beene comming to invade them through the Grisons Countrey, but going to use and aslay their Armes, they found themselves so possessed and ceased with a pale and ghastly feare, that little sto∣macke they had to goe to meet these supposed Ene∣mies: The Priest of the Parish caused the Bell to be toled to Prayers, assuring the people that by the effects he felt in himselfe, and those he perceived in them; this was not the Army of any Earthly power, but of the King of Heaven: The people gave of the course of Ar∣ming and followed his advice, went to their Church, and to their devotion, all the Drums in a very great number sounded most distinctly divers distinct marches, as of severall Nations: and as did the Drums for the Jnfanterie, so did the Trumpets for the Caval∣lery, some sounding deeper, some shriller, the voices of Commauders was plainely heard but not understood. This
This continued some an houre and a halfe of therea∣bouts: all which time the Mist never seene before lay upon the Mountaine and plaine in a very dismall man∣ner, th Priest did his Office in exhorting the people to trust in God, and to pray unto him, shewing himselfe more Man, then all his Parishioners besides. At the last, it brake up a most cleare day, the Mist was dispersed, and the Sunne shined, as for this time of the yeare in his full strength, and with the appearing of the Sunne, the Inhabitants tooke, at the Priests perswasion some better en∣couragement to behold the wonders of God be∣ing then assured, as well they might, that it was a Message from Heaven, the Sunne thus clearely shining, appeared two marshalled Armies upon the Mountaine, the Ensigne of one being white, and a Sable Crosse, of the other the Ensigne red, and the Crosse white, in direct forme of Battalia one against another, their Horse Marshalled in the Wings in a very perfect way Cavallarie, at last the Cannons ratled on both sides for the space of halfe an houre, during which time the two Armies were seene to draw on softly, not onely the noyse and smoke of Cannons were evidently seene; and heard, but the very forme of Cannons with their Cariages, Gunners, and Fire-sticks, was apparently perceived, and discried, by above three Thousand People, who have deposed it and sworne it some of them, being of no small quantity, after the play of Cannon on both sides the Armies drew neare, and the horse delivered charges
ceived charges very siercely on both sides, the Lan∣ces were both seene and heard to shiver, men as they appeared, fell from horse, and horse fell un∣der men, with great noyse, groanes and piteous clamours, at last the grosse of both Armies met, and fought in a maine body, two whole houres most pittifull ejaculations being all the while heard, men fell evidently on both sides to all mens view, but more on the side that had the white Ensignes and Crosse sable, then on the O∣ther, at last the Mountain was all covered againe with the smoake of Powder, the sent whereof came hot into the noses of the Inhabitants be∣low. At length some halfe an houre after the shooting and clashing began to cease, then againe most gloriously appeared the Sunne, and onely appeared the Army that bore the red colours with the White-Crosse, vaunting, tryumphing, and with great joy shooting, and ecchoing as well with Voice, as with Drum, Fife, and Trum∣pet, on the side of the white Ensignes, and Sa∣ble-Crosse, were by them discryed abundance yea, an innumerable multitude of dead Carkasses, both of horse and men, broken Artillerie, shive∣red Lances, and all other miserable tokens of a vanquisht party, the other Army faire marched away into the Ayre to all their thinking, but the other lay in the posture as is written, some peo∣ple would have gone up that very day unto the Mountaine; but were otherwayes advised by their Popish Priests, and the rest of the Cler∣gie in those parts, the morrow they went up, but
saw nothing, nor any broken weapons, or dead Corps whatsoever, as did appeare in that num∣ber the day before, save onely upon the top of the Mountaine, there being a great plaine, they went in that plaine up to the knees in blood, yea ingore-blood: Sir, what this may pretend God knoweth, but you have the Relation as here it was delivered unto his Majesty by the said Parish Priest: And the Gentry, Inhabitants of the place, with a Testat signed with above a thousand hands more of those that were Spectators the first day, and went up the Mountaine to view; on the next, I my selfe (as my place it is) have spo∣ken with divers of the Gentlemen that came up, and tooke the paines of purpose to enforme his Majesty, who all averre it in that worthy serious manner that here we are forced to believe it, as I know your Lordship will take it for no other from him that would be heartily sorrie to en∣forme you otherwise. Your Lordships servant to command. P. Riville. Paris. Febr. 7. 1641. FINIS.
