S5351 E1072_2 99867182 119479
TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY THE Parliament of the Common-wealth of ENGLAND, His Excellency the LORD GENERAL CROMWELL, And his Councell of OFFICERS: THE HUMBLE REMONSTRANCE OF Sir JOHN STAWELL, Setting forth The Reason of his first engaging on the late KINGS Part, and his deportment therein. His desisting from further action upon the Articles of Exeter. The Benefit which he claimes by vertue of the said Articles. The meanes by which that Benefit hath been retarded. His several Tryals, both by Indictment at Common Law and in the High Court of Justice, for high Treason, Murder, and other Felonies in relation to actions com∣mitted in the late unhappy Warre; And his almost seven yeares Imprisonment. The Sequestration of his Estate, and sale of the greatest part thereof. The Proceedings and Judgement of the Honourable Court of Articles thereupon: And his present State and Condition. LONDON, Printed by T.R. for Henry Twysord, Anno Dom. 1653.
The humble REMONSTRANCE of Sir JOHN STAWELL. IT was but of late that by the blessing of Almigh∣ty God, and your exceeding great Justice and favour, I was freed from some of those many afflictions and calamities which attend a sad condition, into which the practise, misinfor∣mations, and ill-grounded apprehensions of some men, had throwne me; And that I be∣gan to look back upon my miseries already past, with that con∣tentment and security, which men enjoy in viewing Rocks, and raging Seas, when they themselves are safe in Harbour, desiring nothing more then to spend the residue of my dayes (which by natures proscription cannot be many) in such peaceable obedi∣ence to this Commonwealth, as by your Faith and Honour made good unto me, I hold my selfe obliged unto: But now finding, that the restlesse proceedings of such as hate me without a cause, doe tend to nothing lesse, then to reduce me to my former mise∣rable condition, and consequently to ruine both me and my po∣sterity; I have presumed in all humility, and I hope free from offence, To declare and remonstrate this my Case, to the end, That as my duty to heaven bindes me, I may evidence unto the world, Gods most remarkable mercies towards me, vin∣dicate your Honour and Justice, and undeceive the whole Nati∣tion, whose Faith likewise is most highly concerned in these my sufferings: And in so doing I will fix my selfe upon that truth which shall be avowed upon the faith of a Christian, and honour of a Gentleman. And because my undertaking under the late King have had the ill luck to be stained and aspersed with too much forwardnesse, as acting beyond the moderate and sober limitations of a contrariant; and as if my nature had prompted me to the delight of cruelty in those imployments: I shall begge your patience in suffering truth to be fetcht from its Fountaine, and hence to derive it to my present state and condition. In the yeare 1640. by vertue of the late Kings writ of summons, I was chosen by the County of Somerset one of the Knights to sit in Parliament, and did accordingly attend that service for the space of eighteen moneths or thereabouts, at which time some
unhappy differences arising betwixt the late King and the two Houses, I did receive signification of his pleasure by a Letter (un∣expected) from Beverley, and sealed with his privy Signet, which followeth in these words. CHARLES REX. TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well. Whereas we have issued forth our Commission of Array for the County of Somerset under our great Seal of England unto our right trusty and right entirely belo∣ved cousin and councellor, the Marquis Hertford, And with him have named you a Commissioner, In the execution whereof (and such other publike services as we have and shall intrust unto you, your presence, care, and utmost circumspection is most necessary. We doe therefore hereby re∣quire you with all convenient speed to repaire unto the said County, and to attend that service, wherein we doubt not you will so demeane your selfe as may be sutable to the good opinion we have of you, and as may most promote the due execution ef this Commission. Which at this time is of so high a consequence, not onely to the security of our said County, but to the peace of this Kingdome in generall. And because this Commission (by such who declare all things illegall which suit not with their desires or designes) is declared to be contrary to the Lawes, and thereupon you may be summo∣ned by one or both Houses of Parliament as a Delinquent, for the execution thereof. We require you upon your alleageance not to intermit or in any sort to neglect our said service upon any such summons, by going on remo∣ving to London or any other place, save to us, or where it is fit for you to be in the prosecution of our said service, and such further command as you shall receive under our own hand. And we doe hereby require and com∣mand all Sheriffes, Majors, Justices, Officers, Ministers, and loving Sub∣jects whatsoever, not onely to be assisting and ayding unto you in case of need in your free passage from place to place. But also that they presume not to attach your person, or serve you with any warrant, Order, or sum∣mons whereunto we have not consented, nor deteine or seize any of your goods or servants, or any thing to you belonging without our speciall li∣cense first obtained, as they and every of them will answer the contrary at their utmost perills. For which this shall be to you and them sufficient war∣rant and authority. Given at our Court at Beverley the eleaventh day of July, in the eighteenth yeare of our Raigne. To our trusty and welbeloved Sir John Stawell, Knight of the Bath. This Command caused me within few dayes after to repaire to my house in the Country, where I received another Letter dire∣cted unto me from the Lord Marquis Hertford dated at Bath, who was then Lord Lieutenant of that County, and recommen∣ded to the late King by the House of Commons as a fit person for that command, and was as followeth.
SIR, I Am come by command from his Majesty, with Commission to muster the Forces of this County, of which Commission you are one: I intend to be on Wednesday next at Wells, where I shall desire your presence, that I may impart the Commission unto you, and advise further about the exe∣cution thereof. In the moan time I rest, Your assured friend and Servant: HERTFORD. Bath July 24. 1642. Upon this Summons I waited upon my Lord Marquis at Wells, together with two of my Sons, and some servants: And my Lord shewing me his Commission, in which I found my selfe together with divers other persons of honour and quality named Commis∣sioners, (which Commission was produced and read in the high Court of Justice upon my Tryall) And in few dayes after, and before my removall from Wells, his Lordship had notice that some parts of that Country had put themselves in Armes, and were mar∣ching towards him, without his order, or any knowledge of their designe, whereupon it was concluded, that some of the Commis∣sioners, namely, the now Lord Paulet, Mr. John Digby, Sir Francis Hauley, Mr. Windham and my selfe, who were best acquainted with the Country, should with some horse move towards them, upon which we went from Wells, and not farre from thence, we had in∣telligence that some of the Trained Bands of the Country were in a body under the command of Captaine Preston, comming to∣wards a place called Marshalls Elme; whereupon we went towards them, and when we came within view of them, after some con∣sultation amongst our selves, we thought it fit to deal friendly and civilly with our Neighbours and Country-men, and that our good inclination to preserve the peace of the Country might the better appeare, we sent a Gentleman unto them to pray a capitulation and Parley; lest that upon dislikes grounded upon misappre∣hensions, we might unhappily come to blowes: Hereupon foure of the Commissioners, of whom I was one, met with Mr. Pine, Mr. Sandys, Captaine Preston, as I remember, and one more, in an indif∣ferent place betwixt the Forces on both sides, and it was the plea∣sure of the Gentlemen then with me, that I should speake to Mr. Pyne and the rest to this purpose: That the Lord Marquesse Hert∣ford the Kings Lieutenant, did much wonder, that his comming into that Country should be understood to be rather in the nature of an Enemy, then a Friend: That he was come with the Kings Commission to command the Militia of that County, and to set∣tle the peace thereof: And forasmuch as he heares, that you have put your selves into Armes, and are comming towards him, for which he understands not well the occasion; He hath comman∣ded us to let you know, that if you thinke fit to send some Gen∣tlemen
unto him, and in the meane time to retreat to Somerton; and there to attend the returne of such as you shall so send: We doe promise you, as we are Gentlemen, those whom you shall thinke fit so to imploy, shall have free liberty both to come and returne at their pleasures, and a friendly reception while they are there. And that we would joyne with them in the promoting of any thing which might stand with his Lordships honour, and trust to grant, and might be for the peace and welfare of the Country: Mr. Pine replyed, That he would make the Gentlemen acquain∣ted with what I had delivered, and that we should receive an an∣swer, which accordingly was sent unto us by Mr. Emanuell Sandys, to this effect; That they with their companies as they made their appearance, did resolve that night to march to Glasenbury. And accordingly they began to match up the Hill, which was an advance towards us being directly in their way, and made many shots first at us, and did wound a Gentleman, and killed his horse under him, which we perceiving, in our owne defence, put our selves into such a posture as might secure us; and upon that, be∣gan the unhappy engagement, in which there was one Osborne kil∣led, some others were hurt, and some taken prisoners, amongst which was Captaine Preston and Mr. Sandys, to whose certificate hereafter mentioned, I crave leave to referre you. In this skirmish one Nicholas Ward a Drummer had many wounds by some of the Troopers, who made pursuance after him and some others who had fled into the Corne to save themselves; at which time I my selfe, and some of the Kings Commanders then present were do∣ing our utmost endeavours to stop our horse from further prose∣cution of Mr. Pyne and others of that party, who were fled: Yet this imployment of mine, at some distance of place from that where it seemes the Drummer was hurt, hath not been sufficient enough to cleer me from the loud and false aspersions of some, who uncssantly made it their businesse against me, that I with my own bloudy hands, and in cold bloud, did carbonade (as they call it) that Drummer Whereas I doe protest before the Almigh∣ty God, that I did not cut or draw bloud on any man that day, but made it my care to preserve any of that party, and to rescue as many as I saw any violence offered unto, and to such Gentlemen as were taken prisoners, and had suffered by the Souldiery, I shewed all the civillity that possibly lay in my power, of which some of them have made very honourable testimonies and ac∣knowledgements, as by the said Certificate under the said Mr. Sandys his hand, to doe me Justice, directed to the Honourable Commissioners for Articles, together with the Depositions of the Lord Paulet and some others hereafter mentioned may appeare. But Ward the Drummer having once sworne, and obtained a Judgement at Law for the dammages of a hundred pounds and upwards against me, findes himselfe now bound to make good
this shamelesse untruth, being obliged to secure one mischiefe by acting of another. And therefore being made a Defendant to my Petition exhibited to the Honourable Court of Articles, in re∣gard of his Judgement so obtained, he did upon his appearance together with one Cady preferre a most scandalous and false Pe∣tition against me to that Court which followeth in these words. To the Right Honourable the Commissioners appointed by Act of Parlia∣ment to give reliefe to persons upon Articles made in time of Warre. The Humble Petition of William Cady of Taunton, and Nicholas Ward of Chard in the County of Somerset, together with their answers to so much of the Petition of Sir John Stawell, exhibited to your Honours as concernes them. Sheweth, THat they have faithfully served the Parliament from the first begin∣ning of the troubles against the publike enemy, with the expence of their bloud and estates, and particularly opposed Sir John Stawell and his bloudy adherents: Wherein your Petitioners (besides the losse and plunder of their estates by that party) have received wounds and May∣hemes in their bodies, whereby they are utterly disabled to worke at their Trades; your Petitioner Cady having lost three sonnes in the Parliaments service who were the staffe of his age, and himselfe fourteen moneths im∣prisoned in a loathsome Goale, where he was laid in Irons by the imme∣diate command of Sir John Stawell for no other cause but his faithful∣nesse to the Parliament. And your Petitioner Ward for the same cause had his nose, and one of his fingers cut off, and one of his eyes was cut out, by Sir John Stawells owne cruell hand, and that in cold bloud, your said Petitioner Ward being unarmed, and all without any provocation on the Petitioners part, whereby they are both of them utterly undone with their wives and children. That they heretofore brought their severall Actions against Sir John Stawell, wherein they have Judgements against him: namely your Peti∣tioner Cady hath a Judgement against Sir John Stawell for 212 l. And your Petitioner Ward hath a Judgement against him for 107. l. 10. s. which Judgements are so farre from proving a benefit to them, that they are an addition to their misery; for they have spent as much money by their Judgements and attendance, and otherwise, as those Judgements a∣mount unto in seeking after the fruits of them, and can receive none at all, and are reduced to very great want and misery. And being now sum∣moned to appeare before your Honours in this Court, upon Sir John Sta∣wells Petition, They are come out of their country, being seaven score miles from London in obedience to your command, and have attended for three weeks last past, their poor wives and children being like to starve at home, and themselves no longer able to subsist. They therefore humbly begge this honourable Court to take their lamen∣table
estate into your pious and tender consideration, so that they may be dismissed with their costs and charges (which they have been unjustly put unto by the said Sir John Stawell) and put to no further attend∣ance. And that in regard of their extream sufferings, even to their utter un∣doing, by the said Sir John Stawells means as aforesaid, your Honors will be pleased to recommend their sad estate to the Parliament, to the end they may have some relief; For they having nothing left them where∣by to live, and must undoubtedly perish with their distressed Families, unless the Lord shall move the heart of the Parliament and your Honors to pity their sad estate, and to provide some present help for them. William Cady. Nicholas Ward. Now in respect the truth of this Petition did never come to any proof, and rests as a grievance upon me, I have thought it fit to remove it at this time, and upon this occasion, by the testi∣mony of such persons as were there present, and of the other party, who as friends to Truth, do upon their Oaths and Certi∣ficates say as followeth. To the Honorable Commissioners of the Court of Articles. Emanuel Sandys of Burrough in the County of Somerset, Gent. doth hereby declare and certifie, that he will upon his Oath say and depose, that heretofore he being with Mr. Pyne and Captain Preston, and others, desired, in behalf and for the good of the Country, to march to Glastonbury and so to Wells, where the Marquess of Hertford and others then lay, as they went from Somerton towards Glastonbury, going up the hill towards Marshfills-Elm, they discovered a company of armed men and horse at the top of the hill, whereupon they made a stand, and shortly after Sr Joh. Paulet, now Lord Paulet, with Sr Joh. Stawell Knight, and some others, came down the hill towards us, and sent a messen∣ger to us, desiring to speak with some of us; whereupon the company desired me Emanuel Sandys to go and speak with them, with I did accordingly; when it was demanded, wherefore so many men came armed, and whither they meant to go; to which demand Sandys answered, they hearing that the Marquess of Hertford and others were at Wells, and intended to set up the Commission of Aray in the County of Somerset, they with many others had agreed that night to meet at Glastonbury, and the next day to go to Wells to speak with the said Marquess Hertford: When the said Sir John Stawell and others desired that the company should go back to Somerton, and appoint some men to go and speak with the Marquess, and they would promise that whosoever would come to them, and go with them to the Marquess, they should come, go, and return freely and quietly, and in the mean time they at Somerton should rest there in safety; wherewith Sandys acquainted Mr. Pyne, Captain Preston,
and others then there, who then sent again Sandys with Mr. Sanders, to tell Sir John Stawell and their company, that they intended not to return, but to go on to Glastonbury that night; when they replyed, we should do what we pleased; and thereupon Sir John Stawell and the rest of that company rode up the hill to their company, and Sandys and Sanders returned to their company, and afterwards Captain Preston and the company offering to march up the hill in two bodies, the company on the hill shot at us several times, and we at them; and thereupon some of the company and Mr. Pyne flod, and a Troop of Souldiers coming down the hill, took Captain Preston and Sandys, and hurt Sandys; and took from them their moneys, horses and weapons, and presently after came the now Lord Paulet and Sir John Stawell, and took from the Souldiers Preston and Sandys, who else had been killed, and the same night carried them to Wells, where they had fair quarter, and for that the Souldiers had taken their mony from them, Sir John Stawell Gentleman-like delivered to Sandys forty shillings, which Sandys took for a civil respect, and shortly after his enlargement payd him again, and thanked him for his favor and kinde usage, and doth verily believe that many lives and much blood was that time saved, by the onely means of the said Sir John Stawell, who then and at other times ever behaved himself as a lover of his Country. Your Lordships, &c. most humble Servant, Emmanuel Sandys. The Examination of John Lord Paulet of Hinton St. George in the County of Somerset, of the age of seven and thirty years or thereabouts, produced on the behalf of Sir John Stawell this twentieth day of June, 1653. by vertue of the Order of the Commissioners for Articles, and upon his Oath taken the fifteenth of the said Month. TO the 21. Interrogatory he saith and deposeth, L. Paulet. that he was at Marshals-Elm, in the Interrogatory mentioned in the year 1642. which, as neer as he can remember, was on the fourth day of August in that year, where the late Kings forces, under the command of the Marquess of Hertford, and the Forces of the Parliament, under the conduct of John Pyne, Esq; and Captain Preston, did engage: And saith, that Sir John Stawell in the In∣terrogatory mentioned, was in the said engagement on the be∣half of the King, and did continue very neer this Deponent du∣ring all the time of that Action and Engagement, and for a great part of that day; And that he doth remember that the said Sir John did not in all that service and fight, either discharge his pistol, or hurt or strike at any man, but doth very well remember, that after the first charge made, and the flight of the Forces for the Parliament down the hill there into a lane at the foot thereof,
he the said Sir John Stawell, together with this Deponent, and di∣vers other Gentlemen, did make a stand at the entering into the the said lane, and did there stop the further pursuit of the Horse then charging on the behalf of the King, & stayd there for almost half an hour before he and they retreated to the top of the hill: And saith, that he did not see the said Sir John Stawell at any time of the day leave the way, or go out of the same, to search the Corn on either hand for such who were hid there after the charge of the Horse, as aforesaid: And saith, that the aforesaid Captain Preston, and one Mr. Sandys, was that day and upon that charge taken prisoners, and as this Deponent conceiveth, and to the best of his remembrance, the said prisoners were by the advice, and at the desire of the said Sir John Stawell, and other the Gen∣tlemen in that Action, released and set at liberty by the said Marquess of Hertford, in a short time after their being taken prisoners as aforesaid, and had their Horses and Arms, and what ever they could claim as belonging unto them, and could be found, delivered unto them; and further saith, that during their restraint they were used with very fair respect and civi∣lity. To the 22. Interrogatory this Deponent saith and deposeth, that he doth not know the Drummer in the Interrogatory men∣tioned, neither did he see him during the fight in the precedent Interrogatory mentioned; but saith, that he hath since heard, that the said Drummer was hurt and wounded by one Crocker, a Trooper in the service of the King in that fight: And saith, that he doth believe in his conscience that the said Drummer was not hurt by the said Sir John Stawell, which he doth with the more confidence depose, for that the said Sir John and this Deponent kept together all the time of that Action, and did never stir out of the high-way, there being a Ditch or a small fence on each side thereof, and Corn-fields, into which many did fly for shelter; and further to this Interrogatory cannot depose. The Examination of Robert Knight of Hill-Bishop in the County of Somerset, Gent. of the age of thirty years, or thereabouts, pro∣duced on the behalf of Sir John Stawell, according to the Or∣der of the Commissioners for Relief upon Articles of War, upon his Oath before the said Commissioners the 21 of this instant June, took the 27 of the said Month. TO the 21 Interrogatory he saith and deposeth, Robert Knight. that he was at Marshals-Elm in the Interrogatory mentioned, and as neer as he can remember about the time therein set forth; And saith, that he was there in the Troop of Sir Francis Hawley, who was ere in command, together with Sir John Stawell and the now Lord Paulet; and upon his Oath saith, that he doth very well re∣member
when the said Sir John Stawell, with the rest, first came to the top of the Hill neer Marshals-Elm, they discovered some For∣ces at the bottom of the Hill, and that after some message be∣tween them, there was a direction given to fall on, which being done, the Parliaments party immediately fled, and some of them were taken prisoners; but by whom any were killed or taken prisoners, he cannot expresly set forth; but saith, that he be∣lieveth in his conscience that the said Sir John Stawell did not that day hurt or wound any man, for that he this Deponent doth very well remember, that the said Sir John Stawell, with the now Lord Paulet, then Sir John Paulet, did stop the Souldiers in the entrance of the lane, into which the said Forces fled, from pur∣suing of them; And is very confident, that the said Sir John did not stir out of the high-way into the Corn on either side of the way all that day; which he knoweth the better to depose, for that he kept still very neer him: And saith, that such who did not retreat into the said lane, did hide themselves in the Corn in the side of the way: And further to this Interrogatory he cannot depose. The Examination of William Stucky of Chillington in the County of Somerset, yeoman, of the age of three and thirty years, or thereabouts, produced on the behalf of Sir John Stawell, and taken the 27 of June, 1653. by vertue of the Order of the Commissioners for Relief upon Articles of War, of the 16 of February last past, and upon his Oath taken the 24 of June last past. TO the 21 and 22 Interrogatories this Deponent saith and deposeth, that he, in the beginning of the late Wars, William Stucky. was a Trooper under the command of Sir Francis Hawley, and marched with him in his Troop from Wells to Marshals-Elm in the Interro∣gatories mentioned; And saith, that being come thither, they were ordered to charge some forces of the Country, which were there under the command of Captain Preston; and that the said Sir John Stawell was in the first Rank of the said Troop: And he this Examinant upon his Oath saith, that upon the first charge the said Forces fled, being routed, and some fled into the Corn∣fields in the side of the high-way; And that so soon as the said Forces were so routed, and fled, the Troop was commanded by the said Sir Francis Hawley and Sir Iohn Stawell to stop in their pursuit, and rally again, and march back up the Hill, which was accordingly done, Sir Iohn Stawell being then in the head of the Troop, having with him Captain Preston and one Mr Sandys, pri∣soners that day taken; And saith, that as the said Troop march∣ed back, as aforesaid, he this Examinate, with some of the Troop then in the Reer, rode into the Corn-fields by the way side, to
search after such as were thought might be hid in the Corn; And that there was one Thomas Crocker of the same Troop amongst us, who found in the corn one Nicholas Ward a Drummer of Chard, and with his sword gave him divers wounds and cuts, and as this Deponent believeth would have killed him, if he had not begged for his life: And this Examinate faith, that he saw the said Crocker so wound the said Ward; and that before the said wounds so given, as aforesaid, this Deponent did not perceive any hurt or wounds the said Drummer had, he having left his Drum in the high-way, and was hid in the corn as aforesaid: And he this Deponent lastly saith, that he did not at all that day see the said Sir Iohn Stawell either discharge his Pistol, or hurt any man with his sword, or go out of the road-way upon the charge or Retreat; but when he returned out of the corn-fields as a∣foresaid, he found the said Sir Iohn with the said Troop on the top of the Hill, ready to march back to Wells; and further de∣poseth not. Robert Vax of Westham in the County of Essex being deposed, maketh Oath, and saith. THat this Deponent, being formerly a servant unto Mr. Emanuel Sandys of Petherton in the County of Somerset, was with his said Master in the party commanded by Captain Preston of the said County, and marching, as this Deponent verily be∣lieveth, towards Glastonbury, they descryed a party of Horse on the top of an Hill called Marshals-Elm, the which party was un∣der the command (as this Deponent hath been since informed) of the Marquess of Hertford, in which party was Sir John Stawell, and divers other Gentlemen, which this Deponent did then see. And further this Deponent maketh Oath, and saith, that before the Engagement he both saw Sir John Stawell come down the Hill, and also heard him call unto & demand of Capt. Preston, with the Officers of our party, whither they were marching; unto whom Captain Preston replyed, that he intended to march to Glastonbury that night: whereupon the said Stawell desired him to march back with his company to Somerton, promising him that if he would send any person or persons of his company to Glastonbury, Wells, or to the Marquess of Hertford, that they should be permitted to pass without any molestation: to which the said Captain Preston replyed, that he resolved to march that night to Glastonbury aforesaid; and as he was marching up the Hill, called Marshals-Elm, heard one of the party under the com∣mand of the Marquess to say, that if they advanced any further they would fire on them: And further this Deponent faith, that at the time of the Engagement he was then present when the said Sandys was taken prisoner, and that he heard the said Sir
John Stawell to call and say unto some of that party then about the said prisoner, desiring them to hold their hands, in that he knew him to be an honest Gentleman; further saying, that it was Mr Sandys of Petherton: And this Deponent further saith, that immediately after the taking of the said Sandys Prisoner, he this Deponent did see Sir Iohn Stawell ride down to the foot of the Hill, and did then and there, in the view of this Deponent, fall about and endevor to prevent the pursuit, causing many of that party to return back from pursuing the said party then with Captain Preston: And this Deponent maketh Oath and saith, that being encompassed and amongst the Enemy, and endeavor∣ing to make his escape as he thought towards Somerton, and riding through a corn-field, he saw Nicholas Ward, then Drummer to Captain Preston, encompassed by two Souldiers on horseback, and that this Deponent did see one of the said Souldiers to give him the said Ward several blows with his sword: And further this Deponent saith, that Sir Iohn Stawell was not the party, nor then present when the said Ward was wounded, for as much as the said Sir Iohn Stawell was at that instant time standing at the foot of the Hill: And this Deponent saith, that one of the Soul∣diers, then present at the wounding of Ward, was named Crocker, which formerly was a Retainer to the Lord Paulet: And further this Deponent maketh Oath and saith, that as he was making his escape, was overtaken by three Horsemen within half a mile of Somerton, who gave him several wounds, leaving him in the high-way; but that any or either of the aforesaid wounds were given him by the said Sir John Stawell, this Depo∣nent saith not: And further this Deponent saith, that being wounded, he was brought to Somerton; and not being able, by reason of his wounds, to march with his company, was with divers others maimed and wounded men left behinde in the said Town: And this Deponent saith, that within three days after this Deponent's being there, the said Sir John Stawell, with several others of that party, came into the said Town to quarter; and that the said Sir John Stawell, with divers others of that party, did give several sums of Mony unto many of the wounded and maimed Souldiers so left be∣hinde, whereof this Deponent received a part (to the va∣lue, as neer as he this Deponent can remember, of about four pounds:) And further this Deponent saith not. Septemb. 28. 1653. Sworn ROBERT VAY. THO. BENET.
And as concerning the charge of Cady that he was kept a priso∣ner for the space of fourteen moneths, and laid in Irons by my immediate command, the truth is, I found him a prisoner in the Castle of Taunton when I first took that command upon me, and did by my Mitimus to the Keeper of Ivelchester onely remove him from Taunton thither as I did one England, who was likewise sent by the same Mitimus, and after that some others for the ease of the Castle of Taunton, where they were improperly kept, England a lit∣tle after upon his request unto me was discharged, but Cady could not have the like favour, for that he was a prisoner at Law upon an Action of Debt laid upon him at his first comming thither. And this will be testified by Mr. Browne the Keeper of the Goale, who did then receive him. As also that I never gave him (who hath been the Keeper of that prison many yeares) either as touching Cady or any prisoner else, sent unto him directions for the put∣ting him or any other in Irons, neither doth the Mitimus by which he was so sent give any such directions, onely I required the safe keeping of them till their Deliverance according to Law. All which I humbly submit to your judgements and these proofes considered, whether it is possible for me to be guilty of so much bloud and cruelty as is mentioned in the Petition. After which about the beginning of June, in the yeare of our Lord 1643. waiting upon the Marquesse of Hertford by the late Kings command from Oxford into the West, with such Forces as then were under his Lordships command, we marched towards the Towne of Taunton, and comming with considerable For∣ces neer the Towne, whereby they in the Towne and Castle deli∣berating their own safety and welfare, and finding by the result of their consultation (as it seemes that they were not of any equiva∣lent strength to stand out, they sent two of the Townsmen, viz. Mr. Chapline (as I remember their then Major) and one Mr. Powell an Apothecary, to my Lord Marquesse to make their conditions, but as the truth did after appeare, it was for no other end but that in that space of time the Souldiers and Forces might quit the Towne, and save themselves and what they had there by flight, which the Lord Marquesse and his party perceiving, did present∣ly enter the Towne without any concession at all. Whereupon it was my humble request to the Marquesse and Prince Maurice then his Lieutenant Generall, that in regard there had been an over∣ture by the Townesmen of a Fine to be paid to preserve their Towne from plunder, and their persons from violence, that they would be pleased that a reasonable Fine might be imposed, and the Towne kept free from any such violence or hostile mo∣lestation (as they had just reason to feare, as the case then stood with them) at which request of mine my Lord Marquesse was pleased to make a publike Proclamation throughout his Army to prohibite all the Souldiery of what degree soever, that they
should not offer any violence to their persons or take their goods or in any manner doe them dammage upon paine of death. The Fine which was afterwards agreed upon betwixt my Lord Marquesse, his Councell of Warre, and the Towne, was 8000. l. as I have heard, which they promised should faithfully be satisfied without delay, upon which the businesse being thus setled, the Marquesse and the Prince his Lieutenant Generall, and the rest of his Councell consulted about the deputing a Governour, such a one as should answer the expectation of the Marquesse, and with all should be well pleasing to the Towne and Country adjacent; during which deliberation the Townsmen of Taunton conceiving themselves concerned, in the conclusion thought fit to preferre their Petition to have such a Governour as was of birth and ho∣nour, of their own Countrey, from whom as it seemes they sup∣posed they might have ease and favour; which Petition as it was exhibited by the then chiefest Inhabitants, is in very words thus: To his Highnesse Prince Maurice, and to his Excellency the Lord Mar∣quesse and Earle of Hertford, Generall of his Majesties Forces in the West. The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the Town of Taunton. BEing very sensible of the great oppressions we have suffered, and the miseries to which we are reduced under that government, and by rea∣son of those Governours, to whom necessity hath of late times enforced our subjection, and yet with some comfort resenting those happy times wherein the Lawes and Justice of this Kingdome were by the hands of the noble Gentry of these parts so dispensed amongst us that every man enjoyed his owne, his liberty, his property, and lived a most happy people under a most gratious Soveraigne, and being desirous to be againe brought as neere as may be to the same happy condition, doe in all humillity beseech your High∣nesse and Excellency will vouchsafe to assigne some Gentleman of birth and honour neere adjoyning to us, to be our Governour, (who to your Highnesse and your Excellency shall seeme fit, and under whose protection we may enjoy the almost forgot felioities of former times, our liberties and safeties. And we shall account our selves most happy, and will ever thankefully ac∣knowledge your graces and favours to us, and pray for your Highnesse and Excellencies prosperities with increase of happinesse and honour. After which Petition preferred, the Townsmen did become earnest suiters to the Marquesse, that he would be pleased to as∣signe me in particular and by name their Governour, (notwith∣standing they had left it indefinitely to the Marquesse his discre∣tion to appoint any of the Gentlemen of that Country so quali∣fied as they expressed in their Petition, whereupon the Marquesse willing to give them such satisfaction as might oblige them, did
desire me to take the government up on me. But I very well ap∣prehending the nature of the people, and how that Towne had dealt with me for my good will towards them (who had never in all my life been wanting in any thing wherein I might in all neigh∣bourly manner befriend them.) In the third yeare of the late King, at which time they preferred Articles grounded upon scandalous and false suggestions against me unto the Parliament. The dan∣ger of any one of which in case they could have made them good against me might have cost me my life. Nor was their violent prosecution of the said Articles (by mo∣ving for a Serjeant at Armes by whom I was commanded to at∣tend the House at that time) to be forgotten, although they were not able in the least manner to fasten any thing upon me that might justly demerit so much as the rebuke of the house or com∣mittee to whom it was referred. All which or to the like effect, I urged unto the Marquesse, hum∣bly and heartily desiring his Lordship that he would be pleased to excuse me, their former practices administring good reason for my refusall; Insomuch as the Marquesse holding himselfe satisfied did place the government upon a person of honour and quality of the county, who had the deputation for some time, during which the Towne continued very Incessantly to importune his Lordship that I might be the man who should have the command over them, and thinking it then a considerable part of their inte∣rest, did make use of very many Gentlemen and persons of quali∣ty to mediate for them, and to perswade me to entertaine it, and in their own persons did often sollicite me to accept of a commis∣sion to that purpose: Yet these their endeavours notwithstan∣ding I did refuse. But his Lordships importunity growing to that height that I could not with good manners withstand him, I did humbly pray his Lordship, that he would lay aside his request unto me, as im∣porting a latitude or scope to my denyall, and to command me to it, and I should obey him as my Generall, upon which my Lord replyed, if you will excuse the terme, I doe command you: And thus I accepted my commission, the chiefest of the Towne being then present and importuning the same, the commission follow∣eth in these words: WIlliam, Marquesse and Earle of Hertford, Viscount Beauchampt Lord Seymor, one of his Majesties most honourable Privy Coun∣cell, and Lieutenant Generall of his Majesties Forces in the West: To Sir John Stawell, Knight of the honourable order of the Bath greeting. By vertue of the authority and power given from our Soveraigne Lord King Charles, under the great Seal of England, as Lieutenant Generall as a∣foresaid, I doe hereby constitute and appoint you the said Sir John Stawell to be Governour of the Towne and Castle of Taunton, and the Parish of
St. James thereunto adjoyning, scituate in the County of Somerset, and the Garrison therein, and Forces thereof, and doe give unto you full power and authority in his Majesties name and for his service, the said garison and Forces as Governour to command, arm, discipline, traine, and order in warlike manner, and with them to fortifie the said Towne, Castle, and Parish, and defend and preserve the same against all his Majesties enemies whatsoever to the utmost of your abilities, and further exercise Marshall Law within the said Towne, castle, and parish upon all offenders deser∣ving the same, and to doe, performe, and execute all such act and acts, thing and things, as to the Office of a Governour of a Towne, castle, and Parish doth of right appeartaine and belong, willing and commanding all Officers and Souldiers of the said Garrisen, together with the Inhabitants of the said Towne, castle, and Parish to obey you as their said Governour according to this your commission, as also all such Officers as you shall appoint under your hand and seal for the furtherance and advancement of his Majesties service: And you your selfe to observe and follow all such orders and di∣rections as you shall from time to time receive from his Majesty, my selfe, or my Lieutenant Generall according to the occasion and discipline of Warre. Given under my hand and seal at Taunton this eighth day of June in the 19. yeare of his Majesties Raigne. HERTFORD. Together with this Commission I had two other Commissions, the one for the raising of a Regiment of Horse and Dragoones, the other for the raising of a Regiment of 1500. Foot, which I forbeare to insert for brevities sake. That very morning I received my Commission my Lord Mar∣quesse marched out of the Towne, leaving me to the ordering of my Garrison, upon which I thought fit to take a view of the Castle, to the end I might dispose and regulate matters as might answer my charge and trust, where when I came, I found to the number of 60. prisoners or thereabout, whose imprisonment in that place I did not thinke convenient: And therefore did pray the assist∣ance of Sir William Portman and Mr. John Symes, two of the Deputy Lieutenants of the County and Justices of the peace, and were neighbours, to advise about the disposing of them, who did at my request come unto me to the Castle, where we called all the pri∣soners before us, and examined the reasons of their severall com∣mitments, and for so many as we found committed by Mittimus, & their offence of such a nature as that they could not be delivered without a due course of Law, those were detained, amongst which was Mr. Chaplaine, Mr. Powell the Apothecary, and the aforenamed Cady, for which they and some others have brought their severall Actions against me, and recovered great sums of money; And for so many as we found, who were not committed by Mittimus, or for slight offences, or by persons of no sufficient authority for that purpose (who were as I remember the greater part) we dischar∣ged,
and the rest were sent to Ivelchester and other places. The prisoners being thus disposed of, I began to consider of such things as might best conduce to the maintenance of the Gar∣rison, for the payment of those Souldiers which the Lord Mar∣quesse left me for making good the Garrison untill I had levyed Souldiers of my own: And having no contribution at that time assigned me, I was enforced to call upon the Town to proportion a rate for the collecting of the Fine afore-mentioned and agreed upon for a composition with the Marquesse upon his entry, and for the receipt of which he gave me order upon his departure, which is as followeth: Ordered at Taunton the ninth day of June, Anno Dom. 1643. IT is ordered that Sir John Stawell shall receive of the Inhabitants of this Towne of Taunton and the Parish of St. Somerset. James, the sum of eight thousand pounds, being the sum set downe and imposed upon them by his Highnesse, his Excellency, and the councell of Warre: And if it shall ap∣peare unto him that any person or persons shall be overcharged with the said Taxe or payment in respect of their estates or quality, the said Sir John Stawell hath power by this to Assesse any other man who is omit∣ted and not already rated, for the ease of such parties as shall have just cause to have reliefe. HERTFORD. Upon which I called upon the Towne for no make payment of the same, in regard the necessity of my occasions did so require. But they having, as I found by their notes and Acquittances which they produced, paid my Lord Marquesse the sum of 500 l. or neer thereabouts, did excuse themselves as not able to raise any more at present, so that I was constrained to take such payment as they would make, and I did receive of them in all at severall times the sum of 500. l. more or thereabout as I remember, which was to rest upon account; yet before I could receive any I was constrai∣ned to commit some of them, for which they likewise have brought their Actions. Yet it is true, that when the late King was come to the City of Bristoll shortly after his Forces had taken it, he being acquainted with the sum of 8000. l. imposed upon Taunton, did send unto me for to require 2000. l. of it, and send it, unto him with all speed, whereupon I acquainted the Towne with it, and they excusing themselves with the losse of Trade which was that they lived by, did seeme very unwilling to raise any more above the 1000. l. already paid, Insomuch that I according to my then duty to the late Kings commands, did acquaint them, that if they did not pro∣cure the money he sent for, I must take some course with them of compulsion, upon which they departed, and did by the next mor∣ning
collect the sum of 850. l. which was all that I could get or receive from them, and this being short of what the late King was pleased to command, I did borrow of one Mr. Porter a Scrivener, upon my own account, the sum of 100. l. for which I gave Bond, and of Doctor Byham I had 50. l. more to make up the sum col∣lected 1000. but in respect it did not answer the late Kings com∣mand, I did my selfe in person carry that sum unto Bristoll, and did acquaint the late King with the difficulty that I had in raising of that sum, and with the present condition of the Towne, and made that an excuse for the rest, insomuch as when the late King was satisfied from me of their inability, he was pleased to leave the remainder of the 8000. l. to my discretion, so as to give such an abatement as I should think fit. After which I continued in my command, as I remember, by the space of six moneths; and although I had power and authority sufficient to have required the rest, yet I was so friendly unto them, that they paying their contribution in proportion with the rest of the Country, I never pretended any occasion for the en∣forcement of the rest; so that of the whole sum of 8000. l. impo∣sed, by my mediation to the King for his favor, and my Kinde∣nesse and good will to that Towne, I saved unto them the sum of 6000. l. or thereabouts, besides the 150. l. lent them of my own, which is to this day unpaid, for which they have made me since a very ill requitall: for after that I had raised part of my Regiment, which I was to raise by my Lord Marquesse his commission, and had sent to the Army the 500. Foot which my Lord Marquesse had left me at my first taking the command of the Towne upon me, and had supplyed that want with part of my own Regiment raised, I received orders from the late King to send unto the Lord Paulet, who then lay before Lime, 100. of my Garrison Souldiers for his assistance, and hereupon I gave order to Captaine Robert Clarke with his Officers and company to march accordingly: but the Captaine not liking his march, took occasion to goe to his own house not farre from the Towne, so that by reason of his absence some of his Officers grew likewise out of temper, which dange∣rous infection did at length spread through the whole company, so that there was not a man but was tainted, unlesse it was the Captaines brother, who was his Lieutenant and a stout Gen∣tleman, who in his Captaines absence willingly took the com∣mand upon him, and received orders accordingly; but (as I re∣member) the morning that they were to begin their march the whole company did mutiny for want of a fortnights pay that was then behinde; And in regard that such demands were unseasona∣bly made at such a time as they were to performe their duty, I did commit some of the Officers and Souldiers who were most faulty, amongst whom was one Christopher Ʋiccary, and had an intent to have proceeded against him as the principall mutineer at a Court of War.
The first day being spent in this disorder, many of them who were committed did that night make suit to me for their release∣ment, promising that they would readily march with the rest of their company the next morning, and be thenceforth obedient to command: thereupon for their better encouragement, I gave their Lieutenant then Captaine 50 l. in the head of his company, and did remit both imprisonment and the offence committed the day before: But as they marched through the Towne they tooke occasion to complaine that their Armes were not fixt, and in the middle of the Street, I following them in the Reare to see them out of Towne, before my face they threw downe all their Armes and would not march unlesse they might have such Armes as might secure their lives by doing service, and Viccary who was pardoned as I have said before, and released of his imprisonment, when I told him I would see him hanged for this mutiny, he cryed out one and all, and after him the whole company did the like. Hereupon I commanded Viccary the second time to prison, and had a full purpose (as by Lawes military I might well justifie) to have made him an example. But that night also the whole com∣pany did sue to me for his release and pardon, promising that the next morning they would all march most willingly, upon which I was contented once more to enlarge him and remit his offence. And to take away all causes which might countenance such disor∣der, I did on the next morning before their march deliver ten or twelve muskets, out of the Magazine for so many as I found in any kinde defective, and being thus satisfied (as I supposed) I marched with them againe to the utmost Gate of the Towne, but after I had left them, and before I was returned to my Quarters, I under∣stood by the Lieutenant that they had throwne downe their Armes within halfe a mile of the Towne in the Highway, and re∣solved to march no further; and stealing back into the Town that night few of them could be found, but on the next morning perceiving the mutiney to be growne to a very great height, I commanded strict guardes to be kept upon the gates and out-lets of the Towne, and Ensigne Atherton having command of one of the Gates, and seeing Viccary, and knowing him to be the ring∣leader in the severall mutinies, did as he offered to go through the Gate with twenty more of the Souldiers or thereabout, whom he had seduced accuse him for the mutiny in refusing to march being thereunto commanded, to whom the said Viccary made answer in these words (by god I will not go) stirring up divers of his fellow Souldiers to the like mutiny; whereupon the Ensigne going about to lay hands on him, he presented his Musket at him, but being prevented by the Souldiers upon the Guard, he was brought to the Castle and there secured. But because the proceedings against him might be with the better advice, I prayed Captaine Dyer to request Sir. William Port∣man
and Mr. Syms, two of the Deputy Lieutenants of the County to be present and assistant, who came accordingly, and did sir in the Court of warre, which I called for that purpose, consisting of fifteen or sixteen Officers, at which time the Articles for muy and refusing to goe upon command according to the late Kings military orders were read against the said Viccary, and was upon the oath of the Ensigne and others made good against him, where∣upon he had sentence of death passed upon him by a generall con∣sent, and was shortly after executed accordingly. For this long relation I must humbly crave your pardon for pre∣suming upon your patience, which I have done the rather for that I may remonstrate my proceedings concerning the said Ʋiccary, which the Towne of Taunton hath so much pressed against me to the hazzard of my life, notwithstanding my kindenesse sundry wayes shewed towards them: and that during all the time that I was their Governour, which was fully a yeare, I never received for my own use any one farthing of them, either in money or in any other acknowledgements, but did make it my whole endea∣vour to protect them and all that was theirs from any violence. And it is also true, that I had as friendly a respect unto the Coun∣try, and having the sequestration of Mr. Alexander Pophams Estate at Wellington, Colonell Ceelyes Estate neer Taunton, and Colonell Wens Estate in the Parish of Laurence Liddiard, assigned me by way of Sequestration towards the maintenance of my Garrison, and before any contribution of the Country were allotted unto me, I doe averre, that for the space of a whole yeare that these severall Estates were in my possession, there was not taken by my com∣mand (more then seaven or eight Loades of Hay in a time of great necessity (which was on Colonell Ceelyes Estate) and the rateable contributions with the rest of the County) the value of six pence but did protect their Tenants and servants by them appointed for the management thereof for their use and best advantage. Yet this faire usage notwithstanding Mr. Ceely hath commenced and prosecuted an Action against me, and obtained a Judgement for 157. l. dammages, whereas intruth I did upon his wives re∣quest in his absence suffer her to enjoy the whole benefit, except the Hay above mentioned without any substraction save the ra∣table contribution. Two other particulars I shall presume to relate to wipe off the calumny that is thrown upon me, and to leave it to your judge∣ment, the first was this, Prince Maurice succeeding my Lord the Marquesse of Hertford in the command of the Westerne Forces, there came unto his hands (by what meanes I know not) a Bond for the payment of 200. l. which of right did belong unto one who he was pleased to call a Delinquent, and was due from Mr. Chaplaine of Taunton, which Bond he sent in a Letter inclosed unto me, and gave me order either to receive the mony for the late
Kings service, or to commit him to prison untill he should satisfie the same: I made Mr. Chaplaine herewith acquainted, and shewed him the Princes Letter, together with the Bond, he acknowled∣ged the Debt, but made many protestations to me touching the weakenesse of his estate at that time, insomuch that he could not possibly pay the money, and did leave it unto me as touching his Imprisonment. I did very much pity the old man, and did be∣thinke my selfe how I might in the best manner befriend him. I told him the Prince would expect to have his orders obeyed, and if I could not give him satisfaction as to the mony or to the im∣prisonment, happily he might be sent for and put into the custo∣dy of the Marshall of the Army, and so his dayes by hard usage might be shortned; wherefore I wished him that he would give me leave to imprison him (for without his consent I would not doe it) which the old man thought well of as his case stood, and gave me his thanks, and I forthwith wrote my Letter unto the Prince, that Mr. Chaplaine having no mony, had submitted himself unto his Imprisonment. That he was a very aged man, and could not brook his imprisonment long, and that as I was the Gover∣nour of the place, it was my duty to protect every man in his pro∣perty as farre as I could, and since it was contrary to right to en∣force that from him (who was admitted to his composition with the rest of that Towne upon the Marquesse his entry) which he was lyable to repay unto his Creditors, I besought him to be fa∣vourable unto him; whereupon the Prince did returne me this answer (as I doe remember) That he was a stranger here, and did not know the Lawes of the Country, and therefore did wholly referre the matter to my discretion; which expresse I did no soo∣ner receive but I went immediately in person to him, and set him at liberty. And for this imprisonment, which was but during the space of a night or two at the most, untill my messenger returned, and was so successefull unto him as to save his 200. l. he hath brought hsi Action and recovered 313. l. in dammages against me. The other is this: The Prince having by some intelligence un∣derstood that one Mrs. Treagle of Taunton had some Plate of Sir Samuel Rolles in her custody, he sent Sir Samuel Caswarth a Comish Gentleman for it, with an expresse to me, that I should cause it to be delivered unto him, whereupon I sent for Mrs. Treagle (whose husband was at that time in the Parliaments Quarters) The Gen∣tlewoman at first would willingly have concealed the Plate, but Sir Sa. Casworth urging much to have the Princes order observed, I praid her to fetch me the Plate, otherwise I would send for it my selfe: hereupon she brought it unto me in a basket, and as I did then judge it was worth about 100 l. which being set before Sir Sa. Caswarth upon the Table, I prayed him to present my very humble service to the Prince, and this request; that he would command my service in such things as might be agreeable to my trust and
command, and that I might not be made instrumental in a service of that nature, and I willed the woman to take back the Plate a∣gaine and secure it according to her trust. Mrs. Treagles Testimo∣ny followeth. I Frances Treagle, wife of George Treagle of Taunton, doe testifie that when Sir. John Stawell was Governour of Taunton, about the yeare of your Lord 1645. there came a Gentleman unto me, whose name I did afterwards understand was Sir Samuell Caswarth, who told me, that he came by authority from Prince Maurice to demand such Plate and Jewels, as Sir Samuel Rolle his Lady had left with me, whereupon I did use means to acquaint Sir John Stawell therewith, who willed me to keep the plate which I had in my custody, for he saw no cause why the same should be delivered away, and thereupon the Gentleman was dis∣missed, and the plate preserved, which I did afterwards send to Lon∣don, to Sir Samuel Rolle by one Mr. Budd of this Town. And this I am ready to testifie upon my oath, and have hereunto subscribed my name the third day of October 1653. FRANCES TREAGLE. I will not say that the Prince was herewith displeased, but it was not long after that I did receive this order of discharge, as followeth: For Sir John Stawell, Governour of Taunton: ALthough I cannot be satisfied that the Castle is tenable dgainst a strong siege, yet I would have it mann'd, and in order to that I would have you draw out of your Garrison, a good Captaine, Lieutenant, and En∣signe, with fourscore men, to maintain the same, and to victuall it for three moneths, and the rest of your Garrison to be sent to Bridgewater. You are to reserve four pieces only of Canou, and to send the rest with bullet to Bridgwater. And in respect (as I am informed) you have great store of provisions already in the Castle, I would have you after the victualling of the Castle for the said fourscore men for three moneths, to send the rest of your store to Bridgwater. I am Sir, Your loving friend, MAURICE. Ʋpon the march toward Honington, June 15. eleven a clock. POSTSCRIPT. I hold not the command of the fourscore men fit for you. I doe conceive it a very great vanity for any man to boast of his own good works, and should, with reflection upon my selfe soon have reprehended what is now written, did not a necessity enforce me to say something of the forementioned particulars; and as I have been governed through the whole course of my life by that divine rule and principle in humanity, Doe as you would be done unto; this being a law unto me, when no obligation or pro∣mise
did rest upon me, to serve such who did in those days differ in judgment with me; so let me beseech you to favor me in like manner, and the rather for that the highest security the whole world affords is engaged for my Indempnity, of which I shall make no manner of doubt, when these shall have the happiness rightly to inform you. After the discharge sent me by the Prince, for the security of my person, I lived in the City of Bristol, and such other Garisons and places of strength as were then in the late Kings hands: at length about June 1645, I came unto the City and Garison of Exeter, where I did abide, until such time as the Parliaments Army, under the conduct of Sir Thomas Fairfax, then General, came and layd siege unto it; And his Excellency summoning the Town, the Governor and his Councel of War did resolve upon a Parley, and did bethink themselves of such terms and conditions as might be safe and honorable. Upon which Commis∣sioners were assigned to treat with the Officers and Gentlemen commissionate for that purpose by the General; the conclusion of which Treaty was the several Concessions, Articles, and Conditi∣ons, which were by Order of Parliment printed and published, commonly known by the name of the Articles of Exeter, which were concluded and agreed upon the eighth of April, 1646. and were read and approved by the then House of Commons the sixth of May, 1646. and afterwards by both the Houses of Lords and Commons the fourth of November, 1647. in these words. THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do approve of the Articles of Exeter, and order this Approbation be published, to the end all people concerned may take notice thereof; And that the Committees, Judges, Officers, and other persons concerned therein, do take notice thereof and observe the same, any Orders or Ordinances to the contrary notwithstanding. By the 12 of the said Articles it is agreed, That no Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Chaplains, (excepting those who are by name excepted by Parliament from Pardon and Composition) Officers, Citizens, and Souldiers, and all other persons comprized in these Articles, shall be questioned or ac∣countable for any act passed by them done (or by any other done by their procurement) relating unto the unhappy Differences betwixt his Majesty and the Parliament; they submitting them∣selves to reasonable and moderate Composition for their Estates, which the General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall really endevor with the Parliament, that it shall not exceed two years value of any mans real estate respectively; and for personal, according to the ordinary rules, not exceeding the proportion aforesaid: Which Composition being made, they shall have Indempnity for their persons, and enjoy their Estates and all other Immunities, with∣out
payment of any fifth or twentieth part, or any other Taxes or Impositions, except what shall be hereafter charged upon them in common with other Subjects of this Kingdom, by au∣thority of Parliament. By the 21 of the said Articles it is agreed, That no Oath, Co∣venant, Protestation, or Subscription relating thereunto, shall be imposed upon any person whatsoever comprised within these Articles, but onely such as shall binde all persons aforesaid, not to bear Arms against the Parliament of England now sitting at Westminster, nor wilfully to do any act prejudicial to their affairs, whilest they remain in their Quarters; except the persons afore∣said shall first render themselves unto the Parliament, who shall cause them to be secured if they think fit. The 14 of April, 1646. the said Lord General Fairfax gave a Certificate under his Hand and Seal, signifying that I was in the said City at the surrender, and was to have the benefit of the Articles then agreed upon, which Certificate is in these words. SƲffer the Bearer hereof Sir John Stawell, Knight of the Bath, who was in the City of Exeter, and is to have the benefit of the Articles agreed unto by me at the time of the surrendering thereof, with his Ser∣vants, Horse, Arms, and Goods, to pass quietly unto their several homes, and other parts in the Parliaments quarters, and from thence to Lon∣don, and to enjoy and dispose of all his and their Goods, Debts and Movables (allowed by the Articles) during the space of four Months next after the ninth of this instant April, without any interruption or molestation: And if he shall not make any Composition with the Parlia∣ment during that time, and shall be resolved to depart the Kingdom within the said four Months, to go into any part beyond the Seas. Given under my hand and seal at Excester, the 14 day of April, 1646. FAIRFAX. To all Officers and Souldiers under my command, and all others whom it may concern. The 15 of July, 1646. I came to London, and according to an Order of Parliament, of the second of July, 1646. and within the time therein limited came before the Committee for the Militia, and there undertook, by a subscription under my hand, not to bear Arms against the Parliament, according to the mean∣ing of the said 21 Article, and the said Order of Parliament; which Order, and the subscription thereupon, follow in these words. THat all persons, of what degree or quality soever, comprised within the Articles of Oxon, Exon, and all other Garisons, that are already come to the Cities of London and Westminster, and places within the Lines of Communication, shall before Thursday next, being the ninth day of this instant Month of July, repair to Guildhall, London, and shall there, in presence of any three of the Committee of the Militia of
the City of London, produce their Passes, and shall according to the Articles engage themselves by promise, not to bear Arms against the Par∣liament, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to their affairs, so long as they remain in their quarters. And that all persons, of what degree or qua∣lity soever, comprised within any of the said Articles, as shall hereafter come within the said City and Lines of Communication, shall within four days after their coming repair to Guildhall, London, and shall there likewise produce their Passes, and make the like engagement. And the Committee of the Militia, or any three of them, are hereby authorized to receive the said engagement, and take the respective subscriptions of the persons; and for this purpose are to sit constantly three days in the week; viz. Mundays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, between the hour of three and seven in the afternoon. And lastly it is ordered, That such of the persons, comprized within any of the said Articles, as shall neglect or refuse to observe this Order, or do any thing contrary to the said Articles, shall forfeit the benefit of the said Articles: And this to be printed, and published by sound of Trumpet and beat of Drum; and the Committee of the Militia of London is desired to take care that this be so published accordingly. HEN. SCOBELL, Cleric. Parliamenti. The Subscription is thus certified. I Am commanded by the Committee of the Militia of London, to cer∣tifie, That Sir John Stawell, Knight of the Bath, did promise be∣fore the said Committee, that he would not bear Arms against the Parlia∣ment, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to their affairs, whiles he re∣mains in their Quarters; and thereunto subscribed his name, accord∣ing to the Order of Parliament in that behalf. Dated at Guildhall, Lon∣don, the 18 of July, 1646. ADAM BANCKES, Clerk to the said Committee. Mr Ash having the next day after my coming to London given me a friendly visit (as I then understood it) I did a day or two before I presented my Petition to the Committee at Goldsmiths∣hall, where he was Chair-man, wait upon him at his Brothers House in Fanchurch-street, and did acquaint him with my purpose to petition, and pray'd his furtherance therein: He did then make me acquainted with the day that the Committee sat, at which time he would not fail to be there himself, and would in all friendly manner further my business: upon my return from him that night I drew up my Petition; and I had the favor of Mr Duke Stonehouse, my Kinsman, who was then with me, and writes a better hand then my self, to write it for me, which Pe∣tition followeth in these words.
For the Honorable the Committee for Compositions sitting at Goldsmiths-Hall: The Humble Petition of Sir John Stawell; SHEWETH, THat your Petitioners Estate hath been for a long time sequestred, and himself reduced to very great wants, which being supplied by the help of his Friends, hath added much to his former Debts and Engage∣ments. He humbly prays, That ye will be pleased to admit him to his Compo∣sition, according to the Articles of Exeter, and Sir Thomas Fair∣fax his Certiflcate, which renders him capable of that Agree∣ment. And your Petitioner shall &c. The next day, being the 24 of July, Mr Stonehouse did me the favor to accompany me to Goldsmiths-Hall; and when I came to the door where the Committee sat, I desired the Door-Keeper to acquaint Mr Ash that I was without, and had a Petition to de∣liver; who brought me this Answer, That as soon as Sir Henry Berkleyes business was over, I should be the next: about half an hour after I was called for, and none admitted who were with∣out to come along with me: When I came in, I tendered my Petition to the Committee, and put it into Mr Ash his hands, who when he had read it, threw it down upon the Table, and said that it was a Remonstrance, and not a Petition; and put it from him with his hand towards me, as far as he could reach, for me to receive it again: whereupon I told him that I had brought that for him, and for my self I had a copy, and so left it there upon the Table. He told me that I must confess my Delinquency before I could be admitted to Composition: I told him that I came thither to compound for my Estate, and not to confess De∣linquency, for that my Articles did require no such thing, and that by them my Delinquency was remitted. I did withall tell him, that I had born Arms for the King, and that I did so by his command; and I said [by his command] not that I stood upon my justification, but to entitle me to the Articles of Exeter, which do excuse me for acts done, relating unto the unhappy Differences. Then he asked me, if I had taken the Negative Oath and Covenant; I told him, no; whereupon he told me, that before I could be admitted to Composition, I must take them both: I replyed, that by my Articles I was freed from taking of any Oaths; and, I well remember, that pressing upon me to take those Oaths, and to acknowledge in my Petition my De∣linquency, I made him at last this Answer; Mr Ash, I have known you long, and my good Friend, and do desire to preserve you so; and for these Gentlemen that are of the Parliament (for I did not know then but that they had been so) there was very great reason that my judgment and opinion should subscribe
unto theirs: but as for my Estate, it was my servant, and I had a power to command it; but my Conscience was my master, and had power to command me, and to it I must yield obedience: and since those Oaths, which you offer me, are contrary to my Articles, and repugnant to those which formerly I have taken, I desire you will excuse me, if I refuse them. Whereupon Mr Ash willed me to withdraw; And being called for again, Mr Ash told me that I was but lately come to Town, and it might be that I had not taken notice of the Negative Oath and Covenant, and therefore they would afford me some time to consider of it; but my Answer was, that I did not desire any time to consider of what was a Right which did belong unto me by my Articles, and of which if I should accept, and make them the same Answer now I do, they would say, that by the acceptation of time I had a∣bused their expectations, which I was unwilling to do. Hereupon I was willed to withdraw, and did again attend without the door, until the Committee rose, not knowing whether they might have any thing more to say unto me; but at that time heard nothing more from them, nor at any time after, until April 12. following, at which time I received a Ticket from a messenger sent unto me, which was to appear the next day at Goldsmiths-Hall, at two of the clock in the afternoon: I did then appear, and I well remember that when I came into the room where the Committee sat, Mr Ash had left the Chair unto Mr John Stephens, and then told Mr Stephens that I had been formerly before them, and had prefer∣ed a Petition, desiring to be admitted unto my Composition; but that I had refused both to confess my Delinquency by my Petition, and to take the Negative Oath and Covenant; and that the Committee had given me time till then to consider of it: Whereupon Mr Stephens asked me, what I did say to it; I made him this Answer, That there was nothing in what Mr Ash had delivered which had the nature of a question to me, but was spoken to inform him, who was not there the day before: where∣unto Mr Stephens replyed, Say you so? Then Sir, by your leave I will put you a short question; Will you take the Negative Oath and Covenant or no? To which I answered, that usually Sir, to a short question I do return a short answer; but Sir, I shall not do so unto you, but make you the same Answer which I made unto the Commit∣tee the last time I was here; That I have the benefit of the Ar∣ticles of Exeter, which do exempt me from taking of Oaths; and in regard they are not agreeable to such Oaths as I have for∣merly taken, I desire to be excused: And this was all that did at that time pass betwixt us. And hereupon they willed me to withdraw, and about half an hour after two of their messengers came to me as I was sitting without the door, and shewed me a Mittimus, directed to the Sergeant at Arms, which followeth in these words.
By the Committee for compounding with Delinquents, &c. 13 Aug: 1646. WHereas Sir John Stawell Knight of the Bath, was summon∣ed to appeare before this Committee, and there deman∣ded whether he would take the Covenant, and Negative Oath, and he absolutely refused to take either of them: These are there∣fore by vertue of the Ordinances of Parliament, of the fifth of A∣prill, 1645. and of the first of November, 1645. to require you to take into your custody the person of the said Sir John Stawell for his said refusall, and him safely to keep till he conform himselfe thereunto, and for so doing this shall be your Warrant. To the Serjeant of the House of Commons, or his Deputy. AFter I had seen and read the Mittimus, and found my selfe a prisoner, I desired to speak again with the Committee, and one of the Messengers signifying so much unto them, I was ad∣mitted and spake unto them, to this effect. Gentlemen, I finde by your Mittimus that you have made me a pri∣soner: I had very little before left me but my liberty, my reall Estate ha∣ving been under sequestration for a long time, and my personall little more then what you see. As long as I had my liberty I did communicate my wants unto my friends, and I have been helpt and relieved by them: But now that you have taken my liberty from me, I desire you to consider of some maintenance that may be necessary for me. Ʋnto which Mr. Stephens made answer, that my request was very just and reasonable, and that there should be consideration had of it; and Mr. Ash told me, that though Mr. Stephens should forget it, he would not; and so with my thanks unto them for that promise, I left them: In all which severall times both of my first and second coming before them, my behaviour was no otherwise then might become a modest man, and persons of their place and quality, as is testified hereafter by the testimony of Gentlemen of honour and worth of the same Committee, and the rest: Notwith∣standing the Committee made this order. At the Committee for compouning, 13 of Aug: 1646: Goldsmiths Hall. SIr John Stawell appeared, and refused to take the Negative Oath, and Covenant. Ordered that Mr. Stephens report his carriage to the House, and that he be committed to the Serjeant at Armes, and Mr. Ste∣phens to report his desire for an allowance of maintenance. John Leech: Mr. Stephens within few daies after makes his report, and it
may easily be gathered from a testimony under Mr. Ash his hand, what it was, and from whom he received his instructions, being not present himselfe the first time that I appeared before the Committee, as he doth confesse by his Deposition taken in the high Court of Justice; which testimony of Mr. Ash followeth in these words. THat I do not remember the precise day of the month when Sir John Stawell first appeared before the Committee at Gold∣smiths Hall; But this I well remember, that it was about foure daies before the foure moneths limited by the Articles of Exeter were expi∣red. That I do not remember the precise words contained in that paper, which Sir John Stawell then presented to the Committee for his Petiti∣on; but I do remember that the Committee did reject the said paper, telling Sir John Stawell, that it was a Remonstrance, not a Petition, wherein he rejected the Parliaments mercy offered him in the Articles, and did put a contempt upon the Authority of the Parliament. That I do not remember the very words contained in the said paper, and which Sir John Stawell then spake at the delivery thereof unto the Committee; yet I do remember that the sense and substance of both was to this effect; viz. THat the Parliament had seised and sequestred his Estate, or had taken it away by force, for doing his duty to the King, as by the Law, and severall Oathes which he had taken, he was bound to do; and that he could not have his Estate again, unlesse he gave that Committee money to redeem it. That he was a person in debt, and his debts were much increased since his Estate was taken from him by the Parliament, by which means he was disabled to pay the Committee much money. Not∣withstanding, if they could accept of what he could procure, he would then compound with them for the redemption of his E∣state. That the Committee did then advise Sir John Stawell to sub∣mit unto the Authority of Parliament, and to petition for his composition as others had done, and not to expose his person and his estate to the will and pleasure of the Parliament, and not to reject their mercy contained in the Articles of Exeter, to which he had a right, in case he did submit thereunto; and there∣upon the Committee advised Sir John Stawel to take further time of consideration, hoping that at his next appearance he would be better advised, and yeild submission to the Authority of Par∣liament, and conform to the rules of that Committee.
That when Sir John Stawell next appeared before the Commit∣tee, which was about three daies after the foure moneths limited by the Exeter Articles were expired, instead of submitting to the Committee as was expected, he was higher in his expressions then at the first; upon which the Committee, upon his refusall of taking the Negative Oath, committed him to the custody of the Serjeant at Armes, untill the whole matter and manner of Sir John Stawells behaviour should be reported to the Parliament. That in short time afterward Mr. John Stephens, a Member of that Committee, did report the same unto the House of Com∣mons, and in that report informed the house that the opinion of that Committee was, that Sir John Stawell had slighted and con∣temned the Authority of the present Parliament, and forfeited their mercy contained in the Articles of Exeter. That the Parliament, upon this report made by Mr. Stephens, ordered Sir John Stawell to be brought to the Bar, to heare and receive this charge, and the sense of the House thereupon. That when Sir John Stawel came into the House, being brought in by the Serjeant at Armes, he was told by the Speaker, that he was a Traytor, or a Delinquent, and therefore was required to kneele at the Bar; Sir John Stawell made him some crosse grum∣bling answer, what the words were I do not remember; but re∣fused: But the Speaker having three times required him to kneele, and Sir John Stawell still refusing, the Serjeant at Armes was required to take him away, which he did accordingly, and thereupon the Speaker did not then give him his charge. That Sir John Stawell having contemned the Authority of Parliament, the House committed him to Newgate as a Traytor, and in shorttime after, ordered that he should be proceeded a∣gainst as a Traytor. John Ash. This is a true Copy. Tracy Pauncefote, Register THese Contents were signed by Mr. Ash, and sent to the high Court of Justice as evidence against me, and are now remaining in the Court of Articles in the same individuall paper which he subscribed. So that from hence it may easily be infer∣red, that all my wrongs and sufferings have flowen from Mr. Ash his construction of my Petition to be a Remonstrance, and that therein I had refused the Parliaments mercy, and put a contempt
upon the Authority of Parliament: and from Mr. Stephens his report, the substance of which he took upon credit, that it was the sence of that Committee, that I had slighted and contemned the Authority of the present Parliament, and forfeited their mercy contained in the Articles of Exeter, Upon this no man but will say, that the Parliament had good cause to send for me to their Bar, and to question me for my former Ingagements, since they were told that I was in contempt of their Authority, and had forfeited their mercy contained in the Articles, which were my onely security: And being brought unto the Lobby about nine of the clock in the morning, I was put into a little dark corner upon the left hand of the entring in of the outermost door, my two Keepers attending without the door, and suffer∣ing none to come in unto me, but Mr. Ash; who during the time of my being there, which was betwixt nine and three in the afternoon, was with me foure or five severall times, and seeming in all his discourse very much to condole the sadnesse of my condition. I very well remember that the last time that he was with me, he spake to me in these words. Master, you told me the other day when I was with you, that your Com∣position would go hard with you for that Deans and Chapters lands are exposed unto sale, at tenyeers value, you having not money in your purse to pay your composition, must sell your Fee-simple lands according to that rate. If it please you for to take 4000 l. for Aubury, I will help you to a Chapman that shall give you the money. Whereupon I told him, that he did not offer me halfe that it cost me; he told me that he did, for that I had told him that the purchase did stand me but in 8000 l. I told him that it stood me upon the point of 9000 l. ready money: But now I understand from whence all my troubles do arise, and of those command∣ments which God had made, he that did break the least did break them all; and therefore in coveting what did belong to another, he was a very great sinner. But I told him that herein I would befriend him, that however he might covet Aubury, yet I would promise him he should never have it; whereupon Mr. Ash reply∣ed, nay, you were best to say that I spake to you for Aubury; if you do, I protest I will deny it: unto which I replyed, Sir, be as∣sured that if I shall think fit at any time to charge you with it, I will aver it with so much considence and truth, that you shall not dare to deny it; then he said unto me, Sir, I perceive you grow angry, and it is time to leave you, and so went, as I suppose into the house: and within a quarter of an houre after I was cal∣led to the Bar, which was upon the 18th day of August, 1646. And being commanded to kneele, I prayed, that before I recei∣ved any mark of their displeasure, I might know my offence; and was thereupon committed to Newgate, and prosecution was or∣dered to be made against me at the next Assises in Somersetshire,
in the years 1647. & 1648. and afterwards at the Upper Bench, as by these following Resolves, and the Order for my Commit∣ment, appears. Die Martis 18. Augusti 1646. Sir John Stawell being brought by the Serjeant to the Bar, and by Master Speaker commanded to kneel, refused, desiring first to be informed what was his offence. He was thereupon com∣manded presently to withdraw. Resolved, THat Sir John Stawell be forthwith committed prisoner to New∣gate for High Treason for levying War against the Parliament. Ordered that the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex be required to take special care, That Sir John Stawell committed by warrant of this House Prisoner to Newgate for high Treason for levying war against the Parliament, be kept in sure and safe custody. Upon which Order a Mittimus was drawn up under the Speakers hand, which followeth in these words. BY Vertue of an Order of the House of Commons, These are to require you to receive from the Serjeant at Arms, or his Depu∣ty, the Body of Sir John Stawell Knight of the Bath into the Prison of Newgate in London, and him there to deteine in safe Custody as your Prisoner, until the pleasure of the House be signified to you to the con∣trary; He being committed for High Treason for levying War against the Parliament: And for so doing this shall be your warrant, dated 18. Augusti 1646. William Lenthall Speaker. To the Keeper of the Prison of Newgate in London. Ordered, THat Master Palmer, Master Walker, Master Harrington, Master Serle, Sir Thomas Wroth, Master Blague, and Co∣lonel Popham, or any two of them, doe take care that there be a Prose∣cution and an Indictment prepared against Sir John Stawell at the next Assises to be holden for the County of Somerset for High Treason, for his levying War against the King, Parliament, and Kingdome of England.
Die Lunae, 28 Feb. 1947. Ordered, THat Master Maynard, and Master Hill doe take care of the In∣dictment against Sir John Stawell at the next Assizes for So∣merset. Die Mercurii 14. Martii 1648. REsolved by the Parliament, That Sir John Stawell Knight be pro∣ceeded against for life in the Ʋpper Bench. Hen. Scobell Cler. Parliamenti. And now having nothing left me to save either life or estate, but by way of Petition to make my cause knowne unto the Par∣liament, and having told Master Ash when I came out from the Bar, that I hoped that in regard they did not admit me to speak, they would not be displeased at my address by petition: Upon this hint of my purpose, Master Ash came unto me three or foure dayes (as I remember) after my commitment to Newgate: And after that he had expressed seemingly a great deal of sorrow and trouble that his good Master (for so he called me) was in so sad a condition, he offered me his service to doe what possibly lay in his power; and sithence there was nothing more seasonable for me then good advice, he did earnestly desire me to apply my selfe very humbly to the Parliament by Petition. I told him that his advice & my own resolutions did very well agree, and that I did intend to doe so. Whereupon he told me that he had a very earnest request unto me, and prayed me that I would not deny it, which was, that he might have the honour to prefer my Petition for me; And if it were so that I would trust him with it, if he did not give me a very speedy account thereof, and that he did not use his utmost endeavors to accomplish so much as I should therein desire, he would give me leave where∣soever I saw him, or spake of him, to say, My servant Ash was an arrant knave. I told him, that although I did intend to deliver a Petition, yet it was not my purpose to have troubled him with it; but since he had so friendly invited me thereunto, he should have it. He prayed me speedily to draw it. I told him that I would. He told me then he would come the next morning to me for it, and accordingly he did so; but not liking the Peti∣tion, for that I had expressed therein, That I had the benefit of the Articles of Exeter; and that I had accordingly submitted unto my composition; and that I was refused only for denying to take the Negative Oath & Covenant, and thereof re did pray that I might be referred unto my Composition, and restored to my Liberty. He told me that this Petition did too much ex∣postulate
with the Parliament (for so he termed it) that was highly displeased with me; and that I should not petition in that way, but draw up an humble Petition, that should shew that I was very sorry that I had incurred their displeasures in refusing to kneele when they commanded me, and to excuse that offence in the best manner that I could, and to beg their pardon for the same. And this he told me would be sufficient to take off the Prosecution of my Indictment, which was the first thing in order to be done, the Assizes being so near at hand in the Countrey. Wherupon I sent another Petition to him, which by his Letter written to me he seemed very well to approve of; but yet although I did very often sollicit him by my Wife and Friends, to put him in minde to prefer the same, he never deli∣vered it to this day, nor did ever come neer me after that time: which Petition followeth in these words. To the Right Honourable the Commons as∣sembled in Parliament. The Humble Petition of Sir John Stawell, Prisoner in Newgate. WHereas your Petitioner by Command lately attended this Honou∣rable House, and being brought to the Bar, was enjoyned to kneel, which your Petitioner forbore to doe, not of any will to lessen the great Respect and Reverence due to that Honourable Assembly, but conceiving he might first have spoken. But now finding he hath committed an Error, for which he holds him∣self obliged to make an humble acknowledgement, and by this Petition to crave a favourable interpretation of his offence: Your Petitioner humbly begs your pardon, being very sorry that he hath given you so just cause of displeasure, And shall account it, (in these his sad misfortunes) a very great happiness to be restored to a capacity of your favours, And that you would not look back upon what he prayes may be forgotten, but be pleased in the midst of judgement to remember mercy. And your Petitioner shall pray, &c. John Stawell. But Master Ash not willing to make me happy in the fruit of this Petition, insomuch as the Parliaments former displeasure according to the said severall Orders for my Indictment and Ar∣raignment for High Treason was put in execution upon me: And I was Indicted first at Taunton Assizes, where the Bill of high Treason was found; next at the Sessions at Bridgewater, where there was an Ignoramus; and lastly at Chard, where three In∣dictments,
as I have heard, were found, one for High Treason, and two for Murther, for the killing of Osborne at Marshals Elme, and the other for the Execution of Viccary, when I was Gover∣nour of Taunton, many of the Grand Jury being the Inhabitants of Taunton, & such who had recovered judgments for great sums of money against me, and have since purchased a good part of my Estate, which Indictments were afterwards removed by Certiorart into the then Kings Bench, where the 12. & 13. of May 1649. I was Arraigned upon the indictment of High Treason, in levying war against the King upon the Statute of 25 E. 3. And upon my moving to plead specially, the Court ordered accord∣ingly that I should bring in my special pleading the first day of the next Term, and did assign me Counsel for that purpose. But I was never brought to plead further to that Indictment. The 18. of June 1649. An Act was printed & published, Enti∣tuled, An Act for releif of all such persons as have been, or shal be sued, molested, or any way dampnified, contrary to Articles or Conditions gran∣ted in time of War; In which Act Commissioners were nominated hear and determine Cases concerning Articles according to the powers of the said Act. Whereupon I did address my self to that Court by Petiti∣on, which was read the 10th. of July 1649. And was in these words. To the Right Honorable, the Lords, and others the Commissioners appoin∣ted by an Act of Parliament for relief of such as have been, are, or shall be sued, molested, or any wayes dampnified, contrary to Articles or Conditions granted in time of War. The Humble Petition of Sir John Stawell, Prisoner in Newgate, Sheweth, THat the Articles made upon the Surrender of Exeter, da∣ted 8. Aprilis 1646, and a Pass from the Lord Generall Fairfax, dated the 14th. of the same moneth (declaring accor∣ding to truth, that your Petitioner was comprised in those Ar∣ticles) he repaired to London to make his Composition, and ac∣cording to an Order of Parliament of the 2d. of July 1646. re∣paired to the Committee of the Militia of London, within the time limited by that Order, and there undertook by a subscrip∣tion under his hand not to bear Armes against the Parliament, as by that Order, and the Intention of his Articles was re∣quired. That the 24th. of the same Moneth of Iuly, he preferred a Petition in person to the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall for com∣pounding
with Delinquents, desiring to be admitted to his com∣position, according to the said Articles, but was not admitted thereto, in regard he refused to take the Covenant and Negative Oath. And the 13th. of August 1646. was by Order of the said Committee sent Prisoner to Ely-House for such his refusall. That the 18th. of the same August he was sent for as a Delin∣quent to the Bar of the House of Commons, and was from thence committed to the Prison of Newgate, during the pleasure of that House, for High Treason, in levying War against the Parl. All which will appear by true Copies annexed of the Lord Fairfax his Pass, The Order of the second of Iuly 1646. The Certifi∣cate of the Clerk of the Committee of the Militia of London, The Petition to the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall, and the se∣veral Warrants to the Serjeant at Arms, and Keeper of the Pri∣son of Newgate. That during his imprisonment in Newgate, which hath been neer three years, he hath been indicted severall times for Trea∣son, and other crimes, and two severall mornings arraigned for his life. And many Actions have been prosecuted against him, and Judgments had upon divers of the same, to the value of 6380 l. 10 s. A Schedule of which Actions is also hereunto annexed, and is threatned with many more. And all these for Acts done by him, relating unto the unhappy differences betwixt his late Ma∣jesty and the Parliament, before the date of the said Articles, and his Estate continued all this time under Sequestration; whereby, and by waste and spoile of his Woods and Timber, and taking away by the Committees in the County of Somerset, all that little of his goods which the Fate of War had left him, (and the Articles preserved unto him) he hath suffered neere the loss of 20000 l. in his Estate, beside the hazards of his life by the aforesaid Indictments, and what he hath suffered in his Liberty and Good name, which with good men is pretious and unvaluable. That he hath not since the Articles granted unto him taken up Arms, or otherwise been ingaged in any new Hostility against the Parliament, or by his own default forfeited or lost the be∣nefit of the said Articles or Conditions thereby granted unto him, but hath in all things within his power conformed to the said Articles, by submitting to a reasonable and moderate Com∣position, and a timely Petition to that purpose, and a Subscrip∣tion and Engagement not to bear Arms, or Act against the Par∣liament. That by the 21. & 22. of the said Articles, No Oath, Cove∣nant, Protestation, or Subscription relating thereunto, was to be imposed upon him, but only such as should bind him not to bear Armes against the Parliament, and not wilfully doe any act prejudicial to their Affaires whilest he remained in their Quar∣ters,
which your Petitioner hath punctually performed by his aforesaid Subscription before the Committee of the Militia of London, and hath really observed that Engagement. That by the 12th. of those Articles your Petitioner was not to be questioned or accountable for any Act past by him done, or by any other by his procurement relating unto the unhappy differences betwixt the late King and the Parliament; He sub∣mitting to a reasonable and moderate Composition for his E∣state, which the Generall undertook to endeavour really with the Parliament, that it should not exceed two years value of any mans reall Estate; and for personall, according to the ordina∣ry rules, not exceeding the proportion aforesaid: which Com∣position being made, he was to have Indempnity of his Person, and enjoy his Estate and all other Immunities without payment of the fifth or twentieth part, or any other Taxes or Impositions, except what should be hereafter charged upon him in Common with other Subjects of this Kingdome by Authority of Parlia∣ment, as by a Copy of the said Articles hereto annexed may ful∣ly appear. That he humbly conceives that the pressing of the Covenant and Negative Oath upon him in manner before expressed, and stop of his Composition for refusall of the same, and imprison∣ment for that cause, and all the aforesaid proceedings against him are contrary to the said Articles, and the Conditions and En∣gagements of the Army made unto him: And he doth not conceive how the Orders of Parliament of the fifth of April, and the first of November 1645. mentioned in the Warrant of the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall, for their Authority, doth give them any power against your Petitioner, who came in by Arti∣cles upon the faith of the Army, and the Generals Pass declaring so much, and those Articles approved and confirmed by the Commons assembled in Parliament, 6. May 1646. being in time after the said Orders of the fifth of April, and first of November 1645. were made. That according to the said Act, he humbly prayes you will be pleased to appoint a speedy time for the hearing of the Peti∣tioners complaint, and that the Keeper of the Prison of New∣gate may by your Order bring your Petitioner then before you, and such causes as are against him for his Commitment and de∣teiner in that Prison. That your Petitioner by your Order may be freed of his a∣foresaid imprisonment, and from all Votes, Indictments, Char∣ges, Judgements, and Executions against him, for the matters before mentioned, and that satisfaction may be acknowledged upon the said Judgements. That he may be restored to the present possession of all his E∣state, without taking of Oathes or Covenant, and be freed from
Sequestration, in regard the profits of his Lands, the benefit made of his Woods and Timber, besides his other losses, have been received and imployed to the use of the Parliament neer three yeares since his Petition for Composition was preferred, which far exceeds two yeares value of his Estate (which was the utmost penalty the said Articles charged upon him for a Composition. That all such Goods as have been taken from him by the a∣foresaid Committee, Sequestrators, and others, contrary to the Articles granted unto him, and since the Date of them, may be restored either in Specie, or in value, according to the equity of the said Act. That by your Order a stop may be given to all proceedings, hereafter to be had or prosecuted against him for any act by him done, or any other by his procurement relating unto the un∣happy differences betwixt the late King and the Parliament; And that for the prosecution of his Complaint, he may (as in Cases of like nature, have liberty upon Bayle to attend and fol∣low his business from time to time whilest it depends before you. By all which, the Faith of the Army will be preserved and vindicated, and your Honours and Justice will appear to a languishing Prisoner. John Stawell. Upon this Petition no proceedings were made by that Court, whose Authority determining by the said Act, The 10th. day of June, 1650. the same was renewed by Act of Parliament for six moneths, and then ended by expiration onely. The 20th day of March, 1650. the high Court of Justice was established, and the 9th. day of July following, there was pub∣lished a speciall Act for tryall of me, amongst others, for my life before the high Court; It being therein declared, that I was a person not admitted to composition. The 20. of Iuly 1650. I was by order of the said high Court re∣moved from Newgate to the Tower of London, in order to my tryal. Tuesday the 17th. of December, 1650. I was brought to the Bar of the high Court of Justice, and a charge of high Treason exhibited against me, which followeth in these words:
A Charge of high Treason, Murther, Felony, and other high Crimes and Offences exhibited to the high Court of Justice, by Edmund Pri∣deaux, Esquire, Attorney Generall of the Common-wealth of Eng∣land, for and on the behalfe of the Keepers of the liberty of England by Authority of Parliament, against Sir John Stawell, alias Sto∣well, late of Higham in the County of Somerset, Knight of the Bath, by him perpetrated and committed; that is to say. THat he the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell, out of a trayte∣rous and wicked design to destroy the Parliament and peo∣ple of England, and to subvert the fundamentall lawes and go∣vernment of this Nation, hath severall times in severall yeers of our Lord, one thousand six hundred forty two, one thousand six hundred forty three, one thousand six hundred forty foure, one thousand six hundred forty five, and one thousand six hun∣dred forty six, in divers and sundry places trayterously and ma∣liciously levied and prosecuted a cruell and bloody war in this Land, on the behalfe of Charles Stuart, late King of England, a∣gainst the Parliament and the Forces raised by authority of the same; and hath been voluntarily aiding and assisting to the said late King & his party in the late wars against the Parliament and people of England, and the forces raised by authority of Parlia∣ment: And particularly he the said Sir John Stawell, alias Sto∣well, on the first day of March, in the yeer of our Lord one thou∣sand six hundred forty and two, did in an hostile manner at, or neer a place called Marshalli Elme in the said County of Somer∣set, with many armed men horse and foot, rebelliously and trayterously levie actuall war against the Parliament of England, and did with the said war-like Forces commit divers and sundry Murthers, Outrages, Cruelties, Burnings, and Destructions, upon the persons, goods, houses, and estates of divers of the people of England; and he the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell, at the time and place last before mentioned, and divers other times and pla∣ces did with the said war-like Forces trayterously levie war, fight, and joyn battell against the Forces of the Parliament and people of England; In which said fight, or fights, battell, or bat∣tels, he the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell, with the said war∣like Forces did trayterously and maliciously kill, slay, and mur∣ther many of the people of England; and particularly on the said first day of March, in the said yeer of our Lord one thousand six hundred forty two, at Marshals Elme aforesaid, did trayterously, feloniously, and of his malice forethought, kill, slay, and mur∣ther one Robert Oseborne, late of Taunton in the said County of So∣merset Gentleman, and divers others: And further, that he the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell, the last day of Aprill, in the yeer of our Lord one thousand six hundred forty and foure, at,
or neer the Town of Taunton in the said County of Somerset, feloniously and of his malice forethought, did kill and murther one Christopher Viccary, late of Taunton aforesaid, in the said Coun∣ty of Somerset, Yeoman. All which Treasons, Murthers, Felonies, Crimes, and Offences of him the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell, were and are against the publike peace, the Parlia∣ment and people of England. And the said Attorney Generall by protestation saving to himselfe, on the behalfe of the said Kee∣pers of the liberty of England, Liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter any other charge against the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell: And also of replying to the answers which he the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell shall make to the premisses, or any of them, or to any other charge that shall be so exhibited, doth for the said Treasons, Murthers, Felonies, Crimes, and Offen∣ces, on the behalfe of the said Keepers of the liberty of England, impeach the said Sir Iohn Stawell, alias Stowell, as a Traytor, Mur∣therer, Felon, and publike enemy to the Parliament and people of England; and prayeth that he may be put to answer all and singular the premisses, that such Examinations, Tryals, Sen∣tence, and Judgment may be thereupon had, as shall be agreeable to Justice: Edmund Prideauxs. To which I pleaded, 1. That I was not lyable to that Charge read against me by the said Act directing my tryall; being a person admitted to Composition. 2. That by the Articles of Exeter confirmed by Parliament, I ought not to be questioned for the offences laid to my charge. Hereupon the said high Court gave me leave to plead the said speciall matter; and if that should have fallen out against me, They likewise gave me liberty to plead the generall Issue: and after many daies solemne hearing and debate thereupon, the said high Court did not think fit to proceed to Sentence, but to cer∣tifie my case to the Parliament, which Certificate was in these words. Tuesday the 6th of May, 1651. To the supream Authority the Parliament of the Com∣mon-wealth of England. IN obedience to an Act of this present Parliament, 9 July, 1650. This Court hath proceeded in the tryall of Sir John Stawell for Treason and other offences, and upon hearing all the evidences and witnesses
produced on the behalfe of the Common-wealth, and of the Prisoner; It was agreed by the whole Court that he was guilty of the Treason and o∣ther high Crimes and Offences charged on him. But upon his speciall pleading of right to the Articles of Exeter (confirmed by Parliament) by which no person therein compri∣sed, and submitting to reasonable composition for their Estates, should be questioned, or accountable for any Act passed by them done, relating to the unhappy differences. The Court findeth that the said Sir Iohn Stawell was compri∣sed within the said Articles, and that in pursuance thereof he did subscribe before a Committee for the Militia of London, accord∣ing to an order in Parliament of the second of Iuly, 1646. And did also personally appeare within foure moneths after the said Articles, and present a Petition to the Committee of Gold∣smiths Hall for composition in relation to the said Articles of Ex∣eter. And this Court conceiveth, and hath so resolved and declared upon severall debates, that his tender of that Petition (in the manner proved before this Court) was a submission to compo∣sition, according to the said Articles of Exeter. But because we finde some Resolves of Parliament, that (af∣ter the said Articles and his submission as aforesaid) do order that he should be tryed for Treason; And the said Act of Par∣liament for his present tryall doth declare him not admitted to composition: We therefore do not proceed to Sentence, but do thus humbly certifie his case to this honourable Parliament. At the high Court of Iustice in the Painted Chamber,  the 29th. of Aprill, 1651. Richard Keeble, Francis Thorpe, Iohn Green, William Rowe, William Steele, Iohn Sadler, Iohn Harrison, William Ʋnderwood, Thomas Cooke, Samuel Sheffeild, Iohn Hurst. Georg Manley, Iohn Blackwell, Iohn Parker, Thomas Ayres, Owen Rowe, Cornelius Cooke, John Berners, Samuel Moyer, William Weston, John Stone, Georg Langham, Nathaniel Whetham.
This Certificate was inclosed in a Letter to Mr. Speaker, da∣ted the 29th. of Aprill, 1651. Tuesday 6th. of May, 1651 For the right honourable the Speaker of the Parliament of England. SIR, THe high Court of Justice at their meeting upon the businesse of Sir John Stawell, who stands referred to them by the Parliament to be tryed, which have held severall debates which have produced the Re∣sult contained in the paper inclosed; And it is our desire it may be by you humbly presented to the Parliament. Painted Chamber, 6th. Maii, 1651. Sir, Your most humble Servants.Signed by the same hands as are to the abovesaid Certificate. And the said Certificate was read in Parliament the 10th. of Iune, 1651. The 16th. of Iuly, 1651. my Estate was adjudged by Act of Parliament to be sold, and my name accordingly inserted in that Act for sale, intituled an Act for sale of Lands and Estates forfei∣ted to the Common-wealth for Treason. In February after the passing of this Act I did addresse my selfe unto the Parliament by Petition, for my reliefe, which I put into Mr. Garlands hands, and followeth in these words. To the Supream Authority the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England. The humble Petition of Sir John Stawell, Prisoner in the Tower. Sheweth, THat your Petitioner was comprised within the Articles of Exe∣ter, and was to enjoy those benefits which were agreed on at the rendition thereof. That he hath really performed all things within his power, which were by the said Articles required on his part. Notwithstanding he hath for the space of almost six yeers lain under the weight of your dis∣pleasures,
not onely by the sequestration of his Estate, and a long and sad Imprisonment, but by the prosecution of his life upon severall Indict∣ments; and lastly, by a tryall before the high Court of Justice. Your Petitioner humbly praies that you will be pleased to cast your eye upon the annexed Certificate of that high Court directed unto you, and that as by the blessing of God, the Justice of that honourable Court, and the benefit of the said Articles his life hath been hither∣to preserved, so the liberty of his person and the possession of his E∣state may be granted unto him by the mediation of your favours, discharged of such Iudgments, Sales, or Incumbrances, as are contrary to the intent and true meaning of the said Articles, in regard that the profits of his Lands, the benefit made of his Woods and Timber, besides his other losses, have been received and imploy∣ed to the use of the Common-wealth, neer six yeers since his Petiti∣on for Composition was preferred, which far exceeds two yeers va∣lue of his Estate, which was the utmost penalty the said Articles charged on him for a Composition. Lastly, though principally intended, he humbly praies that himselfe, together with his two Sons, John Stawell, and Edward Stawell, may be restored to your favours and good opinions, having not act∣ed any thing to your disservice since the date of the said Articles. And however though some unhappy mistakings when he first pre∣ferred his Petition for Composition, have been the occasion of all his sufferings, yet he hopes the effects of them will not be permit∣ted in your wisdome and Iustice absolutely to ruine him. And your Petitioner shall ever pray, &c. John Stawell. THe 29th. of September, 1652. an Act was printed and pub∣lished, entitled an Act for renewing of a former Act for re∣liefe of persons upon Articles, and Commissioners nominated therein for that purpose. At the time of the passing of this Act, there were tendred two Provisoes, the one of the 28th. of September, 1652. the other the day following, which were in these words. Tuesday the 28th. September, 1652. An Act for reviving a former Act for reliefe of persons up∣on Articles, was this day read the third time. A Proviso was tendred to this Act in these words; viz. Provi∣ded that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend,
nor be construed to extend to prejudice, alter, or make void any resolu∣tion, votes, or judgments given in the Parliament touching any the Ar∣ticles aforesaid, or any persons claiming thereby. Which Proviso was read the first and second time, and the Question being put that this Proviso be part of this Act, it passed in the Negative: Re∣solved that the Proviso be rejected. Vera Copia. Henry Scobell Clerk of the Parliament. Wednesday the 29th. of September, 1652: The house resumed the debate upon the Bill for reviving the former Act for reliefe of persons upon Articles. ANother Proviso was tendred to this Bill in these words. Provided alwaies and be it hereby enacted and declared, that no reall or personall Estate which hath been setled, conveyed, or assured to any person, or persons, by vertue of any Act, Ordinance, or Order of this present Parliament shall be made null, vacated, or otherwise determined or disposed of by the Commissioners named in this Act, or by their Au∣thority, but that if they shall see cause of restitution by vertue of Articles subject unto their Cognizance, they make a Ward not in Specie against the particular person or persons upon whom such Estate or Estates be set∣led, conveyed, or assured, but in value to be satisfied by such other Lands or Revenew, as the Parliament shall direct any, thing in this Act, or the former which is hereby revived, to the contrary notwithstanding. And the Question being put, that the Proviso be read a second time, It passed with the Negative. Vera Copia. Henry Scobell Clerk of the Parliament. BUt these Provisoes, tending to the limitation of that benefit which the house was most honourably pleased to grant and allow to such persons as should claim reliefe by Articles, were both rejected: And it was resolved upon the Question in the Negative; which I humbly pray may be specially observed. The 14th. of October following, I exhibited my Petition to the said Court, which followeth in these words.
To the Honourable the Commissioners for reliefe upon Articles of War. The humble Petition of Sir John Stawell, Prisoner in the Tower, Sheweth, THat he was in the Garrison of the City of Exeter, and was com∣prised in the Articles made the 8th. of April 1646. and after∣wards confirmed by the Parliament for the surrender of the same. That by the 12th. of the said Articles it was agreed, that no person comprised in the said Articles, excepting those who were by name exce∣pted by Parliament from pardon and composition (under which excepti∣on he was not) shall be questioned or accomptable for any Act passed by them done, or any other done by their procurement, relating unto the un∣happy differences betwixt the late King and the Parliament, they sub∣mitting themselves to reasonable and moderate Composition for their e∣states, which the then Generall Sir Thomas Fairfax was really to en∣deavour with the Parliament that it should not exceed two years value of any mans reall estate respectively; and for personal, according to the or∣dinary rules, not exceeding the proportion aforesaid; which Composition being made, they should have indempnity for their persons, and enjoy their estates and all other immunities without payment of 5th. or 20th. part, or any other Taxes or Impositions, except what should hereafter be charged upon them in common with other Subjects by authority of Par∣liament. That by the 21th. Article it was further agreed, That no Oath, Cove∣nant, Protestation, or Subscription relating thereunto, shall be imposed upon any person whatsoever comprised within the said Articles, but one∣ly such as shall binde all persons aforesaid not to beare Armes, or Act a∣gainst the Parliament of England sitting at Westminster, or willfully doe any Act prejudiciall to their affaires whilest they remain in their Quarters. That he had a Certificate under the hand and scale of the then Gene∣ral, dated the 14th. day of April 1646. signifying that he was in the said City at the time of the surrendring thereof, and was to have the be∣nefit of those Articles. That upon the 15th. day of July 1646. he came to the City of Lon∣don, to make his Composition, and according to an Order of Parliament of the 2d. of July 1646. repaired to the Committee of the Militia of London within the time limited by the said Order, and before them undertook by a subscription under his hand not to beare Armes or act a∣gainst the Parliament, as by that Order and the intention of the said 21th. Article was required. That upon the 24th. of the same moneth of July he preferred his Pe∣tition in person to the Committee of Gold-Smiths Hall for compound∣ing with Delinquents, desiring to be admitted to his Composition accord∣ing
to the said Articles; But was not admitted thereunto in regard he refused to take the Covenant and Negative Oath; And on the 13th. day of August 1646. was by Order of the said Committee, for such his refusall only, committed to the custody of the Sergeant at Armes, and kept prisoner in Ely House; And on the 18th. day of the same August being sent for as a Delinquent before the House of Commons, was from thence committed to the prison of Newgate during the pleasure of the House for high Treason, and levying of war against the Parliament, where he continued prisoner almost for the space of four years before his remo∣vall to the Tower. That during his Imprisonment in Newgate he hath been indicted several times for Treason and other crimes, and two several mornings ar∣raigned for his life at the then Kings Bench Barr; And many Actions have been prosecuted against him, and Iudgments had upon divers of them, to the value of neer 7000 l. in damages; And all these for Acts done by him relating to the late unhappy differences betwixt the late king and the Parliament, and before the date of the said Articles. That in July 1650. he was by Order of the High Court of Iustice re∣moved from Newgate to the Tower of London, and there kept in close custody for some moneths; And on the 17th. day of December 1650. and divers dayes after brought before the said High Court, and tryed for his life, and after many dayes tryal, the examination of seve∣ral Witnesses, and a very strict search and enquiry into all actions, and the performance of the Articles on his part, the said High Court did not think fit to proceed to sentence, but to certifie the Parliament of their pro∣ceedings, as by the Copy of the said Certificate hereunto annexed may ap∣peare. That ever since the said Tryal he hath continued prisoner in the Tow∣er, and from the time of granting the said Articles (being almost seven years since) his estate hath been kept under Sequestration, whereby, and by the encrease of his Debts, the waste and felling of his Woods and Tym∣ber, and spoyling his Houses, and the taking away of all that little that the War had left him, and which was by the said Articles preserved unto him, He hath suffered the losse of neere 30000 l. in his estate, out of which he hath not been allowed any thing towards his subsistance, besides what he hath suffered by a sad and tedious Imprisonment, and hazard of his life by the aforesaid Indictments and Prosecutions. That by an Act of Parliament passed on the 16th. of July 1651. his Estate amongst divers others was declared and adjudged to be forfeited by him for Treason against the Parliament, and the same hath been since sold accordingly. That he hath not (neither any of his sonnes or Servants have) since the granting of the said Articles, taken up Armes, or otherwise been en∣gaged in any Act of hostility against the Parliament, neither hath he by any default of his forfeited or lost the benefit of the said Articles, or Con∣ditions granted unto him, but hath in all things within his power con∣formed
to the said Articles, by submitting to Composition in due time, and by a subscription and Engagement not to bear Armes, or Act against the Parliament. Wherefore your Petitioner humbly prayes, that you will be pleased to cast your eves upon the annexed Certificate of the High Court of Justice, attested un∣der Master Scobells hand: And that, as by the blessing of God, the Justice of that Honourable Court, the be∣nefit of the said Articles, his life hath been hither unto preserved, so the Liberty of his person, and the pos∣session of his estate may be granted unto him, dischar∣ged of such Judgements, Sales, Executions, or Incum∣brances, as are contrary to the intent and true mean∣ing of the said Articles; And also that by the media∣tion of your favours, he may enjoy his Estate free from Composition, in regard that the profits of his Lands, the benefit made of his Wood and Timber, and much of his other Losses, have been received and im∣ploied to the use of the Common-wealth almost seven years since his Petition for Composition was prefer∣red, which farre exceeds two years value of his Estate (which was the utmost penalty the said Articles char∣ged on him for a Composition;) And if this his hum∣ble request shall not finde favour in your sight, Then he further prayes, that he may receive from this Ho∣nourable Committee such justice and right as shall be agreeable to his Articles, and the several Acts of Parli∣ament established for his reliefe. And your Petitioner shall, &c. To this Petition the Counsell for the Common-wealth atten∣ding the said Court, and the Counsell for the Trustees for Sale of Delinquents Lands, put in their severall Demurrers, which follow in these words. The Plea and Demurrer of Edmund Prideaux, Esquire, Attorney Generall for the Common-wealth of England, to the Petition of Sir John Stawell. THe said Attorney Generall (not confessing any the mat∣ters in the said Petition contained to be true, in such manner and forme as the same are therein set forth; The whole Scope of the said Petition of the said Sir John Stawell be∣ing
to seek releife upon the Articles made the eighth of April 1646. upon the Surrender of Exeter; (within which Articles, as by the said Petition is supposed, he the said Sir John Stawell was and is comprised) as to the Liberty of his Person, and Pos∣session of his Estate) for Plea thereunto saith, That inasmuch as in and by the said Petition it doth appeare that he the said Sir John Stawell was committed by the House of Commons (thereby mea∣ning) as is conceived) the Commons of England assembled in Parlia.) to the Prison of Newgate, during the pleasure of the House (ther∣by again meaning) as is also conceived) the said Commons of En∣gland assembled in Parliament) for High Treason in levying war a∣gainst the Parliament: And for that it also appeareth in and by the said Petition, That by an Act of Parliament passed the sixteenth day of July 1651. The Estate of the said Sir John Stawell (amongst divers others) was declared and adjudged to be by him forfeited for High Treason against the Parliament; And the said Estate so adjudged forfeit∣ed, hath been since sold and disposed of, in pursuance, and by vertue and authority of the said Act of Parliament: Thereupon the said Attorney Generall doth demurre in Law upon the said Petiti∣on, and doth demand the judgement of this Court, if this Court hath Jurisdiction, or may or ought to hold Plea, or take conu∣sance of the said matters in the said Petition contained; And the rather for that it doth not appear in or by the said Petition, that the said Commons of England assembled in Parliament have declared their pleasure as touching the imprisonment of the said Sir John Stawell for the Treason aforesaid; And the Parliament of England having by the aforesaid Act (in which all the people of England, and their consents thereunto, are involved and in∣cluded) adjudged the said Sir John Stawell to have forfeited his Estate for High Treason, and for that the same is forfeited as aforesaid; And the said Judgement being now fully executed, and the Estate of the said Sir John Stawell in fact sold and dispo∣sed of by, and according to the said Act of Parliament; The said Attorney Generall further saith, That no Subordinate, or Delegated Court or Authority whatsoever, hath power to ex∣amine the cause of the aforesaid Judgement; Nor is the said Judgement to be reversed or annulled, but by immediate pow∣er and authority of Parliament, and is not, nor can be trans∣mitted to any other Judicature whatsoever; Nor can, nor ought it to be supposed that the aforesaid Judgement is or hath been given in breach or violation of any Articles confirmed by Parliament, in the observation, or violation of which Articles, the Faith of the Army, and Honour and Justice of the Nation of England is so highly concerned; Neither ought this Court (as the Attorney Generall humbly offereth) to admit the a∣foresaid Act of Parliament, and the proceedings thereupon had, to be drawne into examination; for that were to sit in Judge∣ment
upon the Parliament, and to judge their Actions; For all which Causes, and other apparent insufficiencies and imperfe∣ctions in the said Petition contained, the said Attorney General doth likewise demur in Law, and doth demand judgment of the Cou, if any further proceedings shall be had upon the said Petition, as to the imprisonment of the said Sir John Stawell, and the restitution unto him of his Estate so forfeited by him, and sold and disposed of as aforesaid, or any part thereof. Delivered into the Court by Mr. Hurst the 10th. of Novem. 1652. Edmund Prideaux, Tho: Widdrington, Iohn Green, Barth. Hall, Iohn Hurst. A true Copy Tracy Pauncefote Registr. To the Honourable the Commissioners for Releife upon Articles in time of Warre. WHereas by your Orders of the sixth and tenth of Novem. instant, the Trustees appointed by Act of parliament of the sixteenth of Iuly 1651. for Sale of Estates forfeited to the Common-wealth for Treason, were to shew cause in writing why all further proceedings touching the Sale of Sir Iohn Stowells Estate (if any thing remain to be done concerning the same) should not be stayed till further order and direction from you. In answer whereunto by their Counsell, they return this for cause, That by the aforesaid Act of Parliament, the Estate of Sir John Stowell amongst others is declared and adjudged to be justly forfeited by him for his Treason against the Parliament & Peo∣ple of England, and is thereby vested and setled in the said Tru∣stees and their heires in order to be sold for the benefit of the Common-wealth: That accordingly and in pursuance of their trust they have sold all Sir John Stowells estate; some part to the tennants themselves (who thereby have drowned their estates) other parts to others upon doubling their Publick faith Bills, & most of the Purchasers are in possession. That this being done by Act and Authority of Parliament, ought not (as they humbly conceive) to be questioned or reverst by any derivative Autho∣rity whatsoever. And therefore the said Trustees do demurre in Law, and pray the Judgement of this Court, if this Court hath Jurisdiction, or may hold Plea of this cause: For Plea they say, that by the last proviso in your Act, power is given you to stay sale of estates of such persons as have not Articles confirmed by Parliament, whereas the Articles which Sir John Stowell claimes benefit of, are confirmed, as in his Petition is alledged. They further say, for that it appeares that the first Act autho∣rizing
this Court to give relief upon Articles, did determine the twentieth of June One thousand six hundred and fifty, and that the Parliament of England, by an Act passed the ninth of July fol∣lowing, did direct the triall of Sir John Stowell by the High Court of Justice for Treason: And also by the aforesaid Act of the 16th. of July 1651. did adjudge his estate to be sold, which Judgement is fully executed by the sale thereof, accord∣ing to the said Act. Therefore it shall be presumed, the Parlia∣ment did the same upon most just grounds, and the cause of their Judgment is not to be examined; Nor is their said Judgement to be reversed or annulled but by immediate power & authority of Parliament; for all which causes the said Trustees by their Counsell doe demurre in Law, and demand Judgement of the Court, if any further proceedings shall be had therein Delivered by Master Graves, 24to. Nov. 1652.  J.W. Rich. Graves, Counsel for the said Tru∣stees. A true Copy. Tracy Pauncefote Registr. These Demurrers were solemnly argued before the said Court and overruled, as appeares by this following Order; at the making whereof 26. Commissioners were present. Exchequer Chamber, Westminster. Friday the 31th. of December, 1652. By the Commissioners appointed for Reliefe upon Articles granted in time of War. UPon large and deliberate debate of the Petition of Sir John Stawell, prisoner in the Tower, wherein he claims the be∣nefit of the Articles made upon the surrender of Exeter, and con∣firmed by Parliam. contrary to which Articles (as he alledgeth) he hath not onely suffered a long Imprisonment, and undergone severall tryals for his life, but Judgments are obtained against him to a great value, for things done in time of, and in relation to the late War, and before the date of the said Articles; And his Estate since sold by the Trustees for sale of Lands forfeited for Treason: Whereupon he praies reliefe, having no way (as he saith) lost or forfeited the benefit of the said Articles; unto
which Petition severall Pleas and Demurrers have been put in by the Counsell for the Common-wealth, and for the said Tru∣stees, the effect whereof is; It appearing that the Parliament hath interposed in the case of the Petitioner, both in respect of his Imprisonment, and in appointing tryals for his life, and the selling of his Estate, as by them judged to be confiscated for Treason: Therefore to his Imprisonment and possession of his Estate, it is pleaded, that this Court could not take Cognizance of the Complaint, or examine or give any reliefe thereupon; which Pleas and Demurrers remaining upon record in this Court, with the debates had thereupon: The Court having taken into their serious consideration, and the power and trust committed to them by the Parliament, in and by their severall Acts for doing Justice in cases of this, and the like nature, after mature deliberation had and taken of the premisses, are of opi∣nion, that the said Pleas and Demurrers which for present admit the state of the Fact to be such as in the Petition is declared, do not contain in themselves sufficient matter to preclude this Court from proceeding in this cause, and do therefore resolve and adjudge that the said Pleas and Demurrers be overruled and set aside. And it is further ordered, that Mr. Nuttley, the Sollici∣tor attending this Court, do acquaint the Councell for the Common-wealth, and the said Trustees with this resolution; to the end they may set forth such other cause as they have to alledge (if there be any on the States behalfe) by way of Plea or answer to the said Petition, which the Court holds fit to be done, and delivered into Court by, or before Friday, being the four∣teenth day of this instant January, that such further proceedings may be had in the said cause, as shall appertain to Justice. Tracy Pauncesote, Register. IN pursuance of this order the Councell for the Common∣wealth and for the Trustees put in their several answers, and al∣so divers of the Purchasors; and Replications put in by me there∣unto: the answers of the Common-wealth, the Trustees, and the severall purchasors were in these words.
The Answer of Edmund Prideaux Esquire, Attorney Generall for the Common∣wealth of England, to the Petition of Sir John Stawell. THe said Attorney Generall saving and reserving to him∣selfe now and at all times, hereafter all and all manner of ad∣vantage by way of exception, or otherwise to the uncertain∣ties, untruths, and insufficiencies in the said Petition contained, For answer thereunto, saith, that he the said Attorney Gene∣ral knoweth not that the said Sir John Stawell was comprised within the Articles in and by his said Petition mentioned and alledged, to have been made upon the surrender of the City of Exeter, the eighth day of Aprill, in the yeer of our Lord one thou∣sand six hundred forty and six, as in the Petition is set forth. Nor that he the said Sir John Stawell was in the said City of Exeter at the time of such surrender thereof, or that he was an Inhabitant within the said City seven moneths before the date of the said Articles; and the said Attorney Generall further saith, that if in truth he the said Sir John Stawell was so comprised within the said Articles, as in and by the said Petition is alledged; yet the said Attorney Generall knoweth not that he the said Sir Iohn Stawell did submit unto, or make composition for his Estate, ac∣cording to the purport and true intent and meaning of the said Articles, and as he ought to have done: with this also, that here the said Sir Iohn Stawell hath not well and truly performed such of the said Articles as on his part and behalfe were and ought to have been performed, according to the tenor, purport, and true intent and meaning of the said Articles, but hath wilfully bro∣ken and infringed the same, whereby he hath through his own default forfeited and lost the benefit of the said Articles. And further, that since the time of the said Articles so granted as a∣foresaid, he the said Sir Iohn Stawell hath been engaged in secret Counsels against the Parliament of England, and hath done and committed other Acts subsequent to the date of the said Ar∣ticles, whereby he hath also lost and forfeited the benefit of the said Articles through his own default, in case he was so compri∣sed within them, as in and by the said Petition is alledged. And the said Attorney General further saith, that by the said Sir John Stawels own shewing in and by his said Petition it doth appeare, and the truth so is, that he the said Sir Io: Stawell after the making
of the said Articles was committed by the Commons of England assembled in Parliament to the Prison of Newgate during their pleasure, for high Treason in levying war against the Parlia∣ment. And the said Attorney Generall further saith (which al∣so appeareth by the said Sir Iohn Stawels own shewing in and by his said Petition; that by an Act of this present Parliament, passed on the sixteenth day of Iuly, 1651. the Estate of the said Sir John Stawell by the name of Sir John Stawell late of Cudderston in the County of Somerset Knight of the Bath, amongst divers o∣thers was and is declared and adjudged to be by him and them forfeited for his and their Treasons against the Parliament and people of England, as by the said Act, relation being thereunto had, appeareth. And the said Attorney Generall further saith, that the said Estate of the said Sir John Stawell so adjudged for∣feited, hath been since sold and disposed of in pursuance, and by vertue and Authority of the said Act of Parliament. And the said Attorney General further saith, that the Parliament of Eng∣land have not hitherto declared their pleasure as touching the Imprisonment of the said Sir John Stawell for the Treason afore∣said: And the said Parliament having by the aforesaid Act, in which all the people of England and their consents thereunto are involued and concluded, adjudged the said Sir Iohn Stawell to have forfeited his Estate for high Treason as aforesaid; and for that the same is forfeited, and the said Judgment of Parliament now fully executed; And the said Estate of the said Sir Iohn Stawell in fact sold and disposed of, by vertue of, and according to the said Act of Parliament as aforesaid. The said Attorney Ge∣nerall further saith, that it neither can, nor ought to bee supposed, that the aforesaid Judgment is, or hath been given in breach or violation of any Articles confirmed by Parliament, in the observation or violation of which Articles, the faith of the Army, and the honour and justice of the English Nation are so highly concerned, as by the Petition is set forth. Neither hath the Parliament declared what the said Treason was, nor when committed, for which they have adjudged him the said Sir Iohn Stawell guilty, and his Estate to be forfeited as aforesaid. And the said Attorney Generall neither can, or ought to under∣take to ascertain the same: Neither can this Court bee in∣formed of the same without consulting the Parliament, or un∣till their sense and pleasure be known therein; without that, that any other matter or thing in the said petition contained, mate∣riall or effectuall in the Law, to be answered unto, and not there∣in sufficiently answered unto, confessed, and avoided, traversed, or denied is true; all which matters and things the said Attor∣ney Generall is, and will be ready to aver, justifie, maintain, and prove, as this honourable Court shall award. And therefore
humbly prayeth, that the said Petition may be dismissed, &c. Delivered by Master Nutley January 28. 1652. Th. Widdrington. Edm. Prideaux. Barth. Hall. John Green. The Answer of the Trustees appoint∣ed by Act of Parliament for sale of Delinquents Estates, to the Petition of Sir John Stawell. THe said Trustees (saving and reserving to themselves now and at all times hereafter all and all manner of Advan∣tages by way of Exception or otherwise, to the uncertainties and Insufficiences in the said Petition contained, for a clear and full Answer to the said Petition) say, that by Act of Parliament of the sixteenth of July One thousand six hundred fifty one, The Estate of the said Sir Iohn Stawell (amongst others) is therein mentioned to have been, and is thereby declared and adjudged to be justly forfeited by him for his Treason against the Parlia∣ment and People of England. That by the said Act of Parlia∣ment his Estate is vested and settled in the said Trustees, their Heires and Assignes, upon trust and confidence to sell and con∣vey the same, as in and by the said Act is directed, limited, and appointed. That upon the security of the said Sir Iohn Stawells Lands (and other the Traytors Lands by the said Act appointed to be sold) The said Act doth direct, that the summe of two hundred and fifty thousand pounds should be borrowed for the necessary carrying on the service of this Common-wealth. That for the encouragement of such persons who should be the Pur∣chasors of the said Lands or any part thereof, It is further en∣acted, that they, their Heires and Assignes, shall have and enjoy the Lands which shall by them be so purchased, discharged of all Trusts and accompts whereunto the said Trustees are or may be lyable by the said Act, and all other claimes and demands what∣soever. That in pursuance of the said Act, and according to the Trust thereby reposed in the said Trustees, They have sold to severall persons all Sir Iohn Stawells Estate: And they are confi∣dent, and do verily believe, a great part of the purchase money is paid, according to the said Act of Parliament to the Treasu∣rers
thereby appointed to receive the same, and that the said monies have been since paid out by the said Treasurors, as the Parliament and others authorized by them have Ordered the same. And therefore the said Trustees further say, That they claime not any manner of Interest in the said Sir Iohn Stawells E∣state, otherwise then as persons intrusted by the said Act of Par∣liament, as before is declared; Nor do they know, nor doth it concern them to know why the Parliament did enact his Estate to be sold (as aforesaid.) Wherefore they humbly pray hence to be dismissed. Richard Graves, Counsell with the said Trustees. IN humble obedience to an order of the honourable Com∣missioners appointed by Act of Parliament, for reliefe of per∣sons upon Articles granted in time of War, which Order is dated the seven and twentieth of November, 1652. and served a∣bout six daies since, whereby Matthew Coker of Lincolnes Inne Gent: is required within 7. daies after service, to make answer in writing to the matter of complaint exhibited against him, touching breach of Articles by Sir Iohn Stawell, whose petition as is informed is now depending before the Commissioners afore∣said, according to which the said Sir Iohn Stawell desires to bee releived against him concerning a Messuage in Everchreech and Presley in the County of Somerset. I therfore the said Matthew Coker do for answer say, that whereas the Trustees at Drury house, according to the power given them, had given notice of their resolutions to make sale of Sir Iohn Stawells Estate, and amongst the rest of the Mannor of Presley, part of which Mannor being bought by the Town of Taunton, and the remaining part which was and is Tennanted by my Brother-in-Law William Smith of Presly Gent. being also about to be sold; I therefore at the in∣stance and request of my owne Brother, and other kindred and friends, and by vertue of an Assignment of Tenant-Right from my said Brother-in-Law William Smith, became a Purchasor of all that Right and Estate that had been in Sir Iohn Stawell upon the Land Tenanted by the said William Smith, some great induce∣ment to which Purchase, amongst the rest was chiefly the na∣turall affection I beare to my Sister and her Children, who as I had reason to suspect might have very much suffered, if a stranger had bought over their heads; whereupon I confesse without the least intimation of Sir Iohn Stawell, or any Agent from or under him, I did with the said Trustees contract for, and buy the same; notwithstanding the Articles of Exeter, which I thought would
not have concerned me being a private person to look into or judge of; and I the rather did the lesse heed them, having then as I still have an assured confidence in the Justice of the Parliament, that if at any time they being rightly convinced that the said Sir Iohn Stawell should have the benefit of the Articles of Exeter, and accordingly admitted him, that care would be taken for giving reasonable satisfaction for my purchase-money, and o∣ther charges I have been at; and now for that I have made my first payment, and have a conveyance from the said Trustees of the premisses sealed and inrolled, therefore though it shall never so much appeare that Sir John Stawell is comprised in, and ought to have benefit of the said Articles, and be admitted into a capa∣city of enjoying the same; yet for that I have paid money, and am invested as aforesaid, I think it altogether consistent with the justice of the Parliament and the honourable Commissioners aforesaid, first to put me in a sure condition or way of having that reliefe as is proper and necessary in a case of this nature, before I surrender back to the State, or part with any Interest I have in the premisses: But when I shall be assured of satisfacti∣on as aforesaid, I shal, being lawfully required, be alwaies ready in obedience to any Parliamentary power to part with my Inte∣rest as aforesaid, which I confesse I should have been the more unwilling to have done; but that I have by much experience found, that by reason of the doubtfulnesse whether Sir Iohn Sta∣well should have benefit by the said Articles or no, doth make for the disadvantage of the Purchasor in severall respects, and there∣fore I hope the honourable Commissioners aforesaid will bee gratiously pleased speedily to decide and put some certain peri∣od to the businesse one way or other. Wrote and signed with my own hand. Matthew Coker.
To the Right Honourable the Committee for Articles. The humble Answer of Iohn VVarr, and Iohn Borradale, Gentlemen, to the Information and Complaint of Sir Iohn Stawell. THat we did joyntly Contract with the Trustees appointed by Act of Parliament for sale of severall Lands and Estates forfeited to the Common-wealth for Treason of the Demesnes of Bewly, in the County of Somerset, being late parcell of the E∣state of the said Sir John Stawell, appointed to be sold by the said Act. That we were incouraged to the said Contract by the said Act of Parliament; by vertue and authority whereof, we hope and expect to be protected, and to enjoy our said Purchase. That how farre the said Sir John Stawell is concerned in the pretended breach of the Articles of Exon, concernes not us to look at, The Parliament of the Common-wealth of England ha∣ving (as we humbly conceive) sufficiently weighed and deter∣mined the Interest of the said Sir John Stawell in the said Articles, before they exposed his Land to sale. John Warr. John Borradale.
To the Right Honourable the Commissi∣oners for reliefe of persons upon Arti∣cles of VVarre. The Answer of Iohn Fare∣well to the Complaint of Sir Iohn Stawell, Knight. THat he was altogether ignorant of any Articles Sir John Stawell had; but he Contracted for the Lands mentioned in a Subscription of Sir Iohn to your Honours Order of Sum∣mons of the eighth of December last, with those who (as he con∣ceived) had authority to doe the same; And shall freely sub∣mit to what Authority shall do therein: By the direction of the said John Farewell. Delivered 23. of February 1652. Nicholas Batteley. The said Nicholas Batteley Answers in the same words. Edward Bushell Answers likewise in the same words. Both delivered 23. of February 1652.
To the Honourable the Commissioners for releife upon Articles of VVarre. The Answer of Iohn Gorges Esquier to the Complaint of Sir Iohn Sta∣well Knight. THat he was altogether ignorant of any Articles Sir Iohn Stawell had. But he contracted for the Lands mentioned in a Subscription of Sir Iohn to your Honours Order of Summons of the eighth of December last, with those who as he conceived had authority to do the same, and shall freely submit to the like Order for himselfe, as shall be made in the Case of other the Purchasers on Friday next come seavenight. Iohn Gorges. I do authorise Thomas Sherwood Gent. to deliver this as my Answer. Iohn Gorges.
The replication of Sir John Stawell Knight, unto the answer of Ed∣mond Prideaux, Attorney Generall. HE the said Sir John Stawell averreth and saith all as in his Pe∣tition is alleadged and said, and that he was and is a person comprized within the Articles in his Petition set forth, and at the making of the said Articles and surrender of the City of Exon in the said City, and submitted unto his composition, and did all o∣ther things that are requisite to inable him to the benefit of the said Articles, nor hath broken or infringed the same, nor ingaged himselfe since the said Articles in any counsels or Actions against the Parliament, nor done other act to forfeit or make him lose the benefit of the said Articles without that that any other mat∣ters or things alleadged in the said answer of validity to debarre this Petitioner is true, all which he averreth, and prayeth as in his Petition he hath already prayed. JOHN STAWELL. The Replications made unto the severall answers of the per∣sons abovesaid, are the same as is before expressed to Mr. Attor∣ney Generals answer, and are omitted for brevities sake. The cause being thus at perfect issue, witnesses were appointed to be examined. The 24th of February 1652. these following Resolves were made in Parliament. Thursday, Febr. 24. 1652. REsolved by the Parliament, That all such persons as have purchased of the Trustees at Drury-house the Lands of any Delinquent clay∣ming, or who shall claime the benefit of Articles, shall hold and enjoy the lands and estates so by them purchased, according to the rules, limitations, and directions contained in the respective Acts for sale, notwithstanding any such Articles. Resolved by the Parliament, That the case of Sir John Stawell, upon his pretence of Title to Articles be resumed to the consideration and de∣termination of the Parliament. And that the Commissioners for giving reliefe to persons upon Articles doe forbeare to proceed any further therein untill the Parliament take further Order. Hen. Scobell, Cler. Parliament. The late Parliament being dissolved: The 18 of May 1653. I
exhibited a Petition to the Commissioners for Articles, in these words: To the Honourable the Commissioners for reliefe of persons upon Articles of Warre. The humble Petition of Sir John Stawell, Prisoner in the Tower. Sheweth, THat your Petitioner is advertized (as by the annexed Letter may ap∣peare) of waste intended to be made upon his estate, which if not timely prevented, will very much increase those losses he hath already re∣ceived by the breach of his Articles. That of late he hath discovered the disposure of part of his Estate, viz. The Prebend and Rectory of Wilscombe, and the impropriate Parsonage of Halse, which are now in the hands of the Committee for plundered Ministers. And Mr. Nicholas Bond, who hath purchased the Gleab lands thereunto belonging, to whom none of your former Orders have been dire∣cted for want of such information and helps as might have guided him in this particular. That by the Interpretation he makes of your late Orders, He humbly conceives leave is given to him to sollicite this Honourable Court for his reliefe, and that an especiall favour is granted unto him for that purpose, of which he is not yet made a partaker. Wherefore your Petitioner humbly prayes, that your Order or Injunction may be granted for the stopping of waste, till his cause now depending before you receive a determination. That such like Orders may be granted unto the Committee for plundered Ministers, and to Mr. Nicholas Bond, as have been directed to the Trustees at Drury-house, and others in the like case. And lastly, that by your favour and leave he may proceed to the examination of Witnesses, and to the proofe of his petition. And your petitioner shall ever pray, &c. JOHN STAWELL. Upon which Petition, the Commissioners having heard the Councell for the Commonwealth, and for the Petitioner, this fol∣lowing Order was made. Star-chamber Wistminster. Wednesday, June 9. 1653. By the Commissioners for reliefe upon Articles of War. Upon consideration had of the petition of Sir John Stawell, ex∣hibited unto this Court the 18 day of May last past, praying thereby amongst other things, that he may have leave to proceed to examination of witnesses, and proofe of his petition; and upon reading the Order of this Court of the first of this instant
Jane, whereby it was ordered in the presence, and at the desire of the Councell for the Commonwealth, that Councell on both sides should be heard unto that point this present day, Now upon the hearing of Mr. Maynard, Mr. Latch, and Mr. Harrison, on the behalf of the said Sir John Stawell: and of Mr. Attorney Generall, and the Attorney of the Dutchy, for the Commonwealth: And upon consideration of what hath been offered by either party, and mature deliberation had thereupon, Are of opinion, and doe finde it just to order, that the said Sir John Stawell have li∣berty to proceed in the examination of such witnesses as have been produced, and are already sworne in the cause, according to the Order of this Court of the sixteenth day of February last past, and to bring on his cause in due course to hearing, and do order the same accordingly. tracy Pauncefote, Register. Hereupon Witnesses were examined by me, to prove my complaint, upon Intergatories, and in their severall deposi∣tions did cleerly testifie the matters in issue which did arise out of my said Petition which are too long here to be inserted yet in respect that some mis-representations have been made concerning my deportment and carriage at Goldsmiths Hall at the time of the tendering of my Petition for compoun∣ding, I shall make bold for my justification against those as∣persions to insert the testimony of Sir Anthony Erby, and Sir David Watkins, two worthy persons and members of that Com∣mittee, and then present when I delivered the said Petition, which though it be but a Letter from Sir Anthony Erby, yet it relating to his Oath which hee had formerly taken in the Court of Arti∣cles to speake his conscience, and he being a person of honour, and free from all exception, I presume it will gaine that credit which I hope in your judgements will very much cleer me, which followeth in these words. To my much respected friend Tracy Pauncefote Esq. at his house in the little Amory, Westminster. Sir, YOu may remember that some time since I was summoned in by Sir John Stawell to the commissioners for Articles, sitting in the inner Exche∣quer chamber as a witnesse, and was then sworne but as yet not examined, I have been by severall Letters from Sir John Stawell requested to come up to London to be now examined, but the truth is my businesse is such here, having been absent from my estate now above twelve yeares, I cannot come up as he desireth, upon which he desireth me to certifie in writing what I can say in his businesse, which I am willing to doe, and have di∣rected this Letter to you, that if there be any thing wherein I may doe him Iustice, you may make use of it at his hearing; I being upon my oath shall
set nothing under my hand but what is truth, which I dare not otherwise doe if I were not sworne. To the first I know he delivered in a Petition in∣to Goldsmiths Hall, desiring to compound for his Estate, comming in as I remember upon the Articles of Exeter, and I know he delivered his Petition within the time according to the Articles. Some of the Commit∣tee that were then present gave me and the rest a character of him that he was one of the violentest enemies the Parliament then had, That he was one of the very first that raised Forces against the Parliament, and some other such speeches of the disposition and nature of the man; upon which we were resolved to shew him no favour, but found fault that in the first place in his Potition he had not acknowledged himselfe a Delinquent, to which as I remember he answered, he came to compound according to his Articles; and desired the benefit of them. Then we asked him if he had ta∣ken the oath and covenant, or if he had not, we asked him if he would take it; he replyed that by his Articles he was to take no oath; we told him we were commanded that all such as compounded before us should take the oath and covenant, and take the Negative Oath, which he refused to doe: we gave him time for eight or ten daies, or a fortnight; I doe not certainly remember, but it was to my certain remembrance, that by that time his time given him by his Articles would be out that we might deale with him the better. For his deportment to us at that time, and the other that he was before us, for my par I took no offence at it, neither doe I think justly there could be any. He is of himselfe of a blunt carriage, but for uncivility I saw none at the times he was before us, either in gesture or lan∣guage. For my part, I would have had him admitted to composition, know∣ing money would have done the Parliament service; besides, by his Arti∣cles we ought: but I was but one, others were not of my mind, but height∣ned his offence high, took exceptions at his carriage and language, and would have it reported to the House; for my part, then I thought there was more in it then was outwardly expressed: but the truth was, by the order of the House we were bound up from admitting him to compound, unlesse he took the covenant, except the House would dispence with it, which they did when they approved of those Articles. But since (I must confesse) I have heard from some of the then Members of Parliament, that one of our Society would have bought a Mannor of Sir John Stawell, which lay neere him, but I knew nothing of it then, but took notice of some tartnesse in the party, which being neighbours and Countreymen, I something wondred at, thinking that Sir John Stawell might have ex∣asperated him by some action in the time of war. Sir, if J might know to what the commissioners would have me examined, and send me the inter∣rogatories, I shall give them as full an answer, as if I were present. I am confident M. Leech must say the same as J doe about the delivery of the Petition, and the reasons why we then respited him, and went not on to his composition. Sir J am 1 July 1653. Your assured friend and servant, ANTHO. IRBY.
THese are to certifie whom it may concern, That I, Sir David Watkins, being in the yeere 1646 one of the Committee for compounding with delinquents, then sitting at Goldsmiths-hall, doe well remember that Sir John Stawell Knight of the Bath came to the said Committee with a faire and civill respect, and presented his petition to them within the time limited by the Articles of Exeter, Thereby desiring that he might compound for his Estate according to the said Articles granted to him and others of the Kings party. He had omitted to acknowledge Delinquency in his said Peti∣tion, neither had he taken the Negative Oath and Covenant, as others in his condition had done before their admittance to composition; nor was he willing to submit to either, affirming the same to be contrary to the said Articles, and against his consci∣ence, to take the Negative oath and covenant. Therefore his Pe∣tition was laid aside, and not received. In witnesse whereof, I have hereunto, at the request of the said Sir John Stawell, subscribed my name, this third day of October in the yeere of our Lord God 1653. David Watkins. The Court of Articles were likewise pleased (the Councell of the Commonwealth consenting thereunto) to give leave that the whole evidence taken before the High court of Justice should be made use of at the hearing by either party. The Commissioners for compounding with Delinquents also returned their answer to an Order of Court, which followeth in these words. By the Commissioners for compounding, &c. 11 August. 1653. Haberdashers-Hall, London. IN answer to an Order from the Commissioners for reliefe of persons upon Articles granted in time of warre, bearing date the tenth instant in the case of Sir John Stdwell, who claims the Benefit of Exeter Articles. We doe hereby signifie unto the said Court, that upon search made by our Register, he findes not that there are any papers in his custody which concernes Sir John Stawell, save onely an Order of the High Court of Ju∣stice of the 26 of Novrmber 1650, requiring Mr. Leech our late Register to certifie unto that Court the proceedings had in relation to the said Sir Johns composition; and we are informed that his petition to compound, with such other papers as con∣cerned him were there left before the said High court of Justice, and not sithence delivered back to our Register, so that we know no further matter against the said Sir John Stawell, then what hath been already signified to the said High court upon the said Sir John Stawels Triall. Here remaines with our Regi∣ster
severall petitions of the Lady Stawell, which we conceive not pertinent to the case of the said Sir John, and therefore think not fit to trouble the court of Articles therewith. Sam, Moyer. Edw. Cary. Rich. Williams. Ric. Moores. T. Bayly. The 15 of August 1653. the cause came regularly to be heard, and Councell as well on behalfe of the Commonwealth and Trustees, and of me the petitioner, having been fully heard, and averring they had nothing further to say; and in regard none of the Defendants who had answered did attend, nor any for them, although Oath was made that they were sum∣moned to that purpose, the Court took time to advise upon the whole matter. But in the interim, whilst the Court was deliberating, and advising upon their judgement, the Trustees of Drury-house, and the petitioners, to impede the judgement of the Court, per∣ceiving that I had fully proved the severall assertions of my petition, whereupon I prayed their reliefe, they preferred two severall petitions to the Committee constituted for the recei∣ving of petitions, which follow in these words: To the Honourable the Committee for Petitions. The humble Petition and Representation of the Trustees for sale of lands forfeited for Treason. Sheweth, THat by Act of Parliament, bearing date the sixteenth of July 1651. Sir John Stawell, and other Delinquents therein men∣tioned were adjudged and declared Traytors, and their Estates forfeited by them for their severall Treasons against the Par∣liament and people of England; and the said Estates were by the said Act vested and setled in us as Trustees for the sale thereof to the use and benefit of the Commonwealth. And whereas we have according to the trust reposed in us, made sales of the said Estates, and thereby raised very conside∣rable sums of money, which have been and are daily disposed of for the Navy and other publique uses. And whereas divers of the said purchasers doe come daily unto us with complaints, that they are interrupted by Sir John Stawell his Agents, in the quiet enjoyment of their Estates so by them purchased, according to the Law. And whereas the late Parliament, upon a petition made unto them by divers of the said purchasers (a copy whereof is here∣unto annexed) did upon the 24 of February last make an Order and a Resolve in the case, a copy whereof is hereunto annexed. And
notwithstanding which Order and Resolve, we are certainly in∣formed that the Commissioners appointed to give reliefe upon Articles of Warre have since proceeded in the case of Sir John Stawell, and are ready to give judgement against the Common∣wealth. We therefore humbly pray your Honours to review the an∣nexed petition and vote of Parliament, and that the same may he forthwith presented to the consideration of the Parlia∣ment, together with your opinions therein, to doe as shall seem meet to their grave judgements and wisdomes, and so the honour and credit of Acts of Parliament may be preser∣ved, and the purchasers setled in their undoubted rights; and your petitioners encouraged in the execution of their trust, And your petitioners shall pray, &c. Arthur Samuel. Samuel Goodkin. William Robinson. William Skinner. William Lisle. Houry Sealy. Mat. Ʋalentine. To the supream Authority of this Nation, the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND. The humble petition of severall Purchasers of the late Estate of Sir John Stawell, on the behalfe of themselves and other purchasers of the same Estate. Sheweth, THat your petitioners esteeming Acts of Parliament the highest Law, and greatest security to rely upon, did purchase se∣verall parcels of Sir John Stawels Estate, not imagining any de∣rivative power from you would or could question why you exposed it to sale. Notwithstanding which, your petitioners are daily summoned up to shew cause why Sir Iohn should not have his lands, according to Articles of warre. And although the Councell for the Commonwealth on their behalfes have demurred in law, yet is the same overruled, and your peti∣tioners left in a strange uncertaine undone condition, unlesse re∣lieved by your justice. That your petitioners have incurred great Debts for their respective purchases, and some of them being Tenants have drowned their mean estates by purchasing the Fee; and through their constant adhearing to the Parliament, have exposed them∣selves to the mercy of an inveterate implacable enemy. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray your speedy consi∣deration of the premises, and the engagement of your own ho∣nour
and justice therein, that so your petitioners may peaceably enjoy their Estates according to their severall purchases. And they shall pray, &c. Upon which the Committee ordered that Colonel Rous should report the said petitions to the house; which Order is thus: Tuesday, the 2 of August. 1653. At the Committee for receiving Petitions. VPon reading the petition of severall purchasers of the late Estate of Sir Iohn Stawell, on the behalfe of themselves and others the purchasers of the same Estate. Together with the pe∣tition and Representation of the Trustees for sale of Lands for∣feited for Treason; and upon serious debate and consideration had thereupon, It is ordered that Colonel Rous, who had the chaire of this Committee, doe with all convenient speed report the said petition to the Parliament, and withall offer it as the sence of this Committee, That the purchasers ought to have and enjoy their severall purchases, according to their severall contracts. And in case that Sir John Stawell shall be found within and ought to have the benefit of Articles of war, the Parliament may be pleased to give him satisfaction, which they humbly sub∣mit to the consideration of the House. This Report being made, it pleased the Parliament to make these Resolves. Munday, the 8 of August. 1653. COlonel Rous reports from the Committee for petitions the humble petition of severall purchasers of the late Estate of Sir Iohn Stawell, on the behalfe of themselves and other purcha∣sers of the same Estate, and the severall Votes of Parliament of the 24 of February 1652. which were now read. Resolved by the Parliament, That this businesse be taken into conside∣ration on Friday next. Ordered by the Parliament, That it be referred to the Committee for petitions to take care that there be good Councell for the Commonwealth, to attend the commissioners for Articles. Hen. Scobell, Cler. Parliament. After which Resolve, viz. the 22 of August 1653. abovementio∣ned, the Court of Articles did solemnly give their judgement, as followeth.
Monday the 15 of August, 1653. By the Commissioners constituted by Act of Parliament for Relief of persons upon Articles, Conditions and Engagements made in time of War, sitting in the Exchequer-chamber, Westminster. WHereas Sir John Stawell hath exhibited his Petition into this Court, thereby (amongst other things) setting forth, That he is comprized in the Articles made upon the surrender of the City and Garison of Exeter, bearing date the eighth of April, 1646. and afterwards confirmed by Parliament: By the the twelfth of which said Articles it was agreed, That no person therein comprized should be questioned or accountable for any act past by them done, or any other done by their procurement, relating unto the un happy Differences betwixt the late King and the Parliament, they submitting themselves to reasonable and moderate Composition for their Estates, which the then General Sir Thomas Fairfax was really to endevor with the Parliament, that it should not exceed two years value of any mans real Estate respectively, and for personal according to the ordinary Rules, not exceeding the proportion aforesaid: Which Compositi∣on being made, they should have Indempnity for their per∣sons, and enjoy their Estates and all other Immunities, with∣out payment of fifth or twentieth part, or any other Taxes or Impositions, except what should hereafter be charged upon them in common with other Subjects, by authority of Parliament. And by the 21 Article it was further agreed, That no Oath, Co∣venant, Protestation, or Subscription relating thereunto, shall be imposed upon any person whatsoever comprised within the said Articles, but onely such as should binde all persons aforesaid, not to bear Arms against the Parliament of England sitting at Westminster, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to their affairs, whilest they remain in their Quarters. That he had a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the then General, dated the 14 of April, 1646. signifying, that he was to have the benefit of the said Articles. That the 15 of July, 1646. he came to London to make his Composition, and according to an Order of Parlia∣ment of the second of July, 1646. and within the time thereby limited undertook by a subscription under his hand, not to bear Arms against the Parliament, according to the intention of the said Order and 21 Article. And upon the 24 of the same July, 1646. he preferred his Petition in person to the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall for compounding with Delinquents, desiring to compound according to the said Articles; But was not admit∣ed, because he refused to take the Negative Oath and Covenant: And was the 13 of August, 1646. for such his refusal only, commit∣ed first to Ely-House, afterwards by Order of the then House of
Commons to Newgate, for High-Treason, in levying War against the Parliament, where he continued almost four years, and in that time was several times indicted for Treason, and twice ar∣raigned for his life at the then Kings Bench Bar: And that Judg∣ments are obtained against him in personal Actions for seven thousand pounds in Damages; And all this for acts relating to the Differences between the late King and the Parliament, and before the Date of the said Articles. That in July, 1650. he was by Order of the High Court of Justice removed from Newgate to the Tower, and there kept in close custody: and the seventeenth of December, 1650. and divers days after, tryed for his life before the said High Court, who after many days tryal, examination of witnesses, and strict enquiry into his actions, and the performance of the Articles on his part, did not pro∣ceed to sentence, but certified their proceedings to the Parlia∣ment: A copy of which Certificate was annexed to this Petiti∣on: That ever since the said Tryal he was a prisoner, and from the Date of the said Articles his Estate sequestred, by which, to∣gether with his Debts, and felling his Woods and Timber, he hath lost neer thirty thousand pounds in his Estate, besides his imprisonment, and hazard of his life. That his Estate, by an Act of the 16 of July, 1651. is (amongst others) declared for∣feited for Treason, and hath been since sold accordingly. That neither he, nor his sons, or servants, have engaged against the Parliament in any act of hostility since the said Articles, nor hath he lost the benefit thereof, by any default of his; and therefore prays, That the said Certificate of the High Court of Justice may be considered, and the liberty of his person, and the pos∣session of his Estate, may be granted to him, discharged of such Judgments, Executions, Sales and incumbrances as are contrary to the meaning of the said Articles, and free from Composition, in regard the profits of his Estate for seven years have been re∣ceived to the use of the Commonwealth. Unto which Petition several Pleas and Demurrers were put in by Mr Attorney Gene∣ral on the behalf of the Commonwealth of England, and by the Councel for the Trustees for sale of Estates forfeited for Trea∣son, on the behalf of the same Trustees; the effect whereof was, It appearing that the Parliament had interposed in the case of the Petitioner, both in respect of his imprisonment, and in appoint∣ing Tryals for his life, and the selling of his Estate, as by them ad∣judged to be confiscated for Treason; Therefore that as to his im∣prisonment, and possession of his Estate, the Court could not take cognizance of the complaint, or examine or give any relief there∣upon, as by the said Pleas and Demurrers, reference thereto being had, may more at large appear: Which Petition, Pleas, and Demurrers coming regularly to hearing before this Court, after long debate and mature deliberation had of and upon the
same; this Court, upon the 31 of December last past, declared their opinion. That the said Pleas and Demurrers (which for the present admitted the state of the Fact to be such as is set forth in the said Petition) did not contain in themselves sufficient matter to preclude this Court from proceeding upon the said Petition; and did therefore resolve and adjudge the same to be over-ruled and set aside: and appointed the Solicitor for the State, attending the Court, to acquaint the Councel for the Com∣monwealth, and the said Trustees with this Resolution, to the end they might set forth such other cause as they had to alledge (if there were any) on the States behalf, by way of Plea or An∣swer to the said Petition: And the Court also, at the prayer of the Petitioner, issued forth summons to such persons as were by the Petitioner named Defendants, and certified by the Trustees aforesaid to have been Purchasers of the Lands and Estate of the Petitioner, to plead or answer to the Complaint of the said Pe∣titioner. Hereupon the Councel for the Commonwealth put in an Answer, wherein they say, they know not that the Petiti∣oner was comprized in Articles, nor that he was in the City of Exeter at the surrender, nor an Inhabitant there seven Months before the said Articles: and that if he were comprized, he knew not that the said Petitioner did submit unto, or make Composition for his Estate, according to the true meaning of the said Articles, and as he ought to have done: and avers, that the Petitioner had not performed such of the said Articles as on his part were to be performed, but had wilfully broken and infrin∣ged the same. That he hath been engaged in secret counsels since the said Articles, against the Parliament, and committed o∣ther acts since the Articles, whereby he hath forfeited the benefit of the same Articles through his own default: And by way of Answer, further also sets forth the same matters of Law former∣ly insisted upon in his said Plea and Demurrer, whereupon this Court had formerly delivered their Judgments as aforesaid. The said Trustees also put in their Answer, and say, That by the said Act of the 16 of July, 1651. the Petitioners Estate was setled in them upon Trust, to convey the same as the said Act directed: and that in pursuance thereof they have sold to several persons all the said Estate, and do believe that a great part of the pur∣chase Mony is payd; and claim no other interest in the said Estate, then as persons intrusted as aforesaid; neither know, nor are concerned, why the Parliament have enacted the Petitioners Estate to be sold. Several persons, named Defendants by the said Petitioner, did also appear, and put in Answers to the said Petition: In particular Matthew Coker of Lincolns Inn, Gent. saith. That he hath purchased from the said Trustees part of the Manor of Priestley, being parcel of the Lands of the said Petiti∣oner, and hopes to have back his mony and charges before he
surrender: and then he says he shall be always ready to do the same. John War and Iohn Borradale say, That they have joyntly contracted with the said Trustees for the Demeasnes of Bewley in the County of Somerset, part of the Estate of the said Petitioner. That how far the Petitioner is concerned in the pretended breach of the Articles of Exon, concerns not them to look at; the Parliament having, as they conceive, sufficiently weighed and determined the interest of the said Petitioner in the said Articles before they exposed his Lands to sale. Nicholas Batteley, Iohn Farwell, Edward Bushell, and Iohn Gorges, by their several Answers severally say, That they have contracted for the Lands respec∣tively mentioned in the subscription of the Petitioner to the Order of this Court of summons of the eighth of December last, with those who they conceive had authority to do the same; and each of them freely offers to submit to what authority shall do therein. Unto which Answers of the Councel for the Common∣wealth, and the said Trustees, and of the said other Defendants, the Petitioner Sir Iohn Stawell replyed, averring the truth of his said Petition: and the cause being at perfect issue, witnesses were examined, and their Depositions published, and by the consent both of Mr Attorney General, and of the Councel for the Petitioner, the whole evidence taken before the late High Court of Justice, upon the Tryal of the said Petitioner before them, was agreed to be made use of by either party at the hear∣ing of the cause. The Court having also received the Answer of the present Commissioners for compounding, &c. sitting at Habberdashers-Hall, London, certifying, That they have no fur∣ther matter against the Petitioner, then what hath been already signified to the said High Court upon his Tryal, by vertue of their Order in that behalf; did appoint this day for the hearing of the whole cause. Now upon full hearing of Mr Latch, Mr Harrisen, and Mr Amhurst, on the behalf of the said Petitioner, and of Mr Attorney General, Mr Attorney Hall, and Mr Hurst, on behalf of the Commonwealth, together with Mr Graves on the behalf of the said Trustees; and upon reading of the said An∣swers of the said other Defendants, purchasers of part of the Petitioners said Estate, they, nor any of them appearing, nor any for them, although due notice had been given unto each of them of the time appointed for the hearing of this cause (where∣of Oath is made) the Court proceeded therein: and upon the hearing of the evidences and witnesses, produced on the behalf of the said Petitioner and of the Commonwealth, and consi∣deration had of what stands admitted and proved before this Court; they do finde, and are clearly of opinion, That Sir Iohn Stawell is within the Articles of Exeter confirmed by Parliament; by which no persons therein comprized, and submitting to rea∣sonable Composition for their Estates, are to be accountable or
questioned for any act past by them done, relating unto the un∣happy Differences between the late King and the Parliament. That the Petitioner personally appeared before the Committee of the Militia of London, and subscribed according to an Order in Parliament of the second of Iuly, 1646. not to bear Arms a∣gainst the Parliament, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to their affairs, whilest he remained in their Quarters: which we finde to be agreeable to the 21 of the said Articles. That he also per∣sonally appeared the 24 of Iuly, 1646. being within four months after the said Articles, and presented a Petition to the Com∣mittee of Goldsmiths-Hall for Compositions, mentioning therein his Estate to be sequestred, and humbly praying they would please to admit him to Composition, according to the said Ar∣ticles, and the then Generals Certificate, rendering him capable of that agreement; but his said Petition was rejected. That Sir Iohn Stawell's tender of that Petition in the manner proved before this Court, was a submission to Composition according to the said Articles of Exeter. That he was afterwards by Warrant of the said Committee of the 13 of August, 1646. committed to Ely. House, for refusing to take the Negative Oath and Cove∣nant, enjoyned by the Ordinances of Parliament of the fifth of April, 1645. and first of November, 1645. That since that com∣mitment he hath been continued prisoner in several Goals, and during that restraint hath been several times indicted and brought in question for his life, for acts relating to the unhappy Differences, supposed by him to be done before the granting of the said Articles. That it appeareth not to this Court, that he hath by any act or default of his lost or forfeited the benefit of his said Articles, which we finde to be approved by the then House of Commons the sixth of May, 1646. and by both Houses of Parliament the fourth of November, 1647. who ordered that Approbation of theirs to be published, and all Committees, Judges, Officers, and other persons concerned, to take notice thereof, and observe the same, any Orders or Ordinances to the contrary notwithstanding. That since his said submitting to compound, the profits received forth of his Estate being ever since until the late sale under Sequestration, and the Damages thereby by him sustained appear to amount to above 25000 l. That by the Trustees Answer in this case, it appears they have sold all his Estate, by reason of the Act for sale, wherein he is included: And the Defendants, Matthew Coker, John Warr, John Borradale, Edward Bushell, John Farwell, Nicholas Batteley, and Iohn Gorges, ac∣knowledge they have bought of them the said Trustees several parcels of the said Estate. That the said Petitioner Sir Iohn Stawel, being tryed for his life before the late High Court of Justice sitting in the years 1650, and 1651. that Court finding him with∣in the said Articles, and that he had submitted to Composition,
thought not fit to proceed to sentence, but to certifie his Case to the Parliament: Upon which Articles this Court finds not any Judgment to be since given; but discern themselves impowered, authorized, and required by Parliament, to give relief to per∣sons wronged through breach of Articles, in such sort as is ex∣pressed by the Acts made in that behalf. All which this Court having taken into their serious consideration, and how far the Faith of the Army, and Honor and Justice of the Parliament and Nation are concerned in this, and the like cases, That right be done, and no violation of Articles permitted, after many de∣bates and mature deliberation had thereupon; and being sa∣tisfied in their judgments and consciences, that the Petitioner Sir Iohn Stawell is fully capable of the Relief intended to persons within Articles, by the Acts directing and authorizing the same, and constituting this Court; Do in order thereto, and in pur∣suance of the power and trust to them committed in that be∣half, Resolve, Declare, and Adjudge, That the Petitioner Sir Iohn Stawell hath good right, and by his said Articles ought to be ad∣mitted to compound for his whole Estate, real and personal, according to the tenor of the same Articles, notwithstanding any the Settlements, Sales, or Contracts before-mentioned, at such rates, and in such manner, as others comprized within the said Articles have done: and the Commissioners for com∣pounding with Delinquents, are hereby enabled, authorized, and required, to permit the said Sir Iohn Stawell to compound for his whole Estate, as aforesaid: And in respect of those great Losses and extreme Damages which the said Petitioner hath sustained by the Sequestration and Detention of his Estate, and the profits received out of the same for above seven years last past, and by the felling of his Woods and Timber, and other∣wise, for want of being admitted to a timely Composition; This Court doth order and direct, That the said Commissioners for compounding do cause an exact account to be made of the Rents, Issues, and profits, received for, or out of the Petitioners Estate, since he first submitted to Composition, and was not admitted thereunto: and do recommend to their consideration the proofs thereof already taken in this cause, Copies whereof, attested by the Register of this Court, are for that purpose to be present∣ed to them: And if the said Commissioners shall finde the same to amount unto, or exceed the Fine or Composition which the said Petitioner ought to pay, according to the rates prescribed, and allowed by the said Articles of Exeter, That then the same be allowed, accepted, and taken in lieu and full satisfaction of such Fine or Composition so imposed upon, or to be satisfied by the said Petitioner Sir John Stawell, according to his Articles; otherwise the defect (if any happen to be) is to be supplyed by him the said Petitioner: and if any surplusage or overplus
remain, the said Commissioners for compounding are hereby ordred and desired to certifie the same unto this Court. And upon such computation, & satisfaction made as aforesaid, the said Com∣missioners are hereby directed and authorized to give their Order for such acceptance of the Petitioners Fine and Composition, and to give the Petitioner a Discharge accordingly: and they are desired to give him all fitting expedition in the premisses. And it is further ordered, adjudged, and declared by this Court, That after the making of the said Composition as aforesaid, the said Petitioner Sir John Stawell shall have the Liberty and In∣dempnity of his person free from any further restraint or im∣prisonment, according to the true meaning of his said Articles: and that all Bayl, or other security, entred into by the said Petitioner, or any other persons with or for him, touching his true Imprisonment, be thereupon delivered up to the said Pe∣titioner, and vacated and discharged: and that he be in the mean time permitted, upon the Bayl already by him given, to prosecute and attend the perfecting of his said Composition without let or molestation. And that the said Petitioner Sir Iohn Stawell, from and after such Composition as aforesaid, shall have the possession of his Estate, freed and discharged from all Sequestrations and Seizures whatsoever, and shall enjoy the same without any claim, demand, impediment or molestation of the said Trustees, or of the Survivors and Survivor of them, their or any of their heirs. And this Court doth further award, order, and judge, That the Trustees for Sale of Lands and Estates forfeited to the Commonwealth for Treason, do upon sight of this Order and Award, stay and forbear all further proceedings in the Sale or Disposal of any the Land and Estate of the said Pe∣titioner Sir Iohn Stawell, remaining unsold (if any such be:) and if any part of the Monies remain unpayd, for any Lands belong∣ing to the Petitioner already contracted for and sold, that they likewise forbear to demand or receive the same, or to make any further proceedings touching the same, or intermeddle any fur∣ther therewith. And it appearing unto this Court, by the An∣swers of the said several Defendants, Matthew Coker, Iohn Warr, Iohn Borradale, Nicholas Batteley, Iohn Farwell, Edward Bushell, and Iohn Gorges, that they have contracted for, and purchased some parts and parcels of the Petitioners Lands and Estate, menti∣oned and referred to, in and by the Answers afore mentioned, the detention whereof is to the prejudice, and tending to the disherison of the said Petitioner, and contrary to his said Articles; This Court do order and adjudge, That from and after the per∣fecting of the Composition aforesaid, and notice given thereof, and of this Order and Judgment, the said Matth. Coker, Iohn Warr, Iohn Borradale, Nicholas Batteley, Iohn Farwell, Edward Bushell, and Iohn Gorges, do forthwith restore unto the said Petitioner Sir Iohn
Stawell, and his heirs, the full and peaceable possession of all and every the premisses by them purchased, as aforesaid: And that after the making of the said Composition, the said Petiti∣oner, and his heirs, shall and may peaceably and quietly hold and enjoy the same Hereditaments, with their and every of their members and appurtenances, freed and discharged of and from all claims, charges, and incumbrances, in any wise occasioned by or under them the said Defendants, purchasers respectively. And the said Trustees, and the Survivors or Survivor of them, or any of them, their, or any of their heirs, or any person or persons, claiming by, from, or under them, or any of them, in as free and ample manner, as if the said last mentioned premisses had not been sequestred, or vested, or setled in the said Trustees and Purchasers, or any of them; and as if no such Settlements, Con∣tracts, or Sales, had been had or made. And the said Trustees at Drury-House, and also the said Matthew Coker, John Warr, Iohn Borradale, Nicholas Batteley, Iohn Farwell, Edward Bushel, and Iohn Gorges, and every of them, and all others, who are or may be any way herein concerned, are upon notice hereof, to give their ob∣servance hereunto accordingly. And it is lastly Ordered and Declared, That the Petitioners bringing the present Cause to hearing against the aforenamed Defendants, shal be no bar to him to proceed further upon his said Petition against other Defendants already named, or who shall be hereafter made Defendants to the said Petition; but that he may prosecute such persons upon the ground of his said Complaint, so far as he shall see occasion, and be advised: And upon the same Petition, if cause be, bring those causes also to Issue and Judgment, in order to his just Re∣lief; The now Award and Judgment given in this Cause, or any other matter or thing herein contained to the contrary, not∣withstanding. Jo. Bradshaw Edw. Whalley Edward Cook William Bosvile Anth. Samwell Owen Rowe John Hayes Clem. Oxenbridge.
This Judgment being given and declared by the honourable Court of Articles, after they had ten moneths most judiciously ordered and directed the proceedings in the cause, to the end that there might be left no scruple in any Interest unsatisfied, Mr. At∣torney Generall and the rest of the Counsell for the Common∣wealth, and the Counsell for the Trustees being heard at large, I did not conceive but that all such who were concerned would have rested in it. But after all this I finde the endeavours of the Trustees and severall Purchasers of my Estate do tend directly to render my proceedings for the gaining of my right unsuccesfull; for upon the 29th. of August seven daies after this Judgment, the Parliament resumed the debate of the Purchasors Petition and Representation of the Trustees, and did resolve as followeth. Monday the 29th. August, 1653. THe house took up the former debate upon the Petition of the Pur∣chasers of the Estate of Sir John Stawell. The humble Petition and Representation of the Trustees, for sale of Lands and Estates forfeited to the Common-wealth for Treason was this day read. Resolved B the Parliament, that this Petition of the Purchasers of Sir Iohn Stawells Estate be referred back to the same Committee, to consider what is fit to be done for the reliefe of the Petitioners, and report to the house withall speed. Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament. Hereupon Mr. Pauncefote the Register of the Court of Articles was commanded to attend the said Committee with the Judg∣ment of that Court, together with the severall Acts of Parlia∣ment constituting that Court, and all the pleadings and procee∣dings which had passed in my Cause. UPon which reference of the House to the Committee, to consider what was fit to be done for the reliefe of the Pur∣chasers, it seemes they have thought fit to report, that the Pur∣chasers of my Estate ought to enjoy it; And upon that report you have been pleased to make this Resolve. Tuesday the 15th. of September, 1653. Resolved, THat this House doth agree with this Report of the Committee, that the Purchasers of Sir John Stawells Estate shall quietly possesse and enjoy the same, according to their severall Contracts made with the Trustees. Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament. From this it may appeare that the Committee for receiving of Petitions not pursuing (as I humbly conceive) the intention of the order of Reference which did refer to their considerations, (after I had the Judgment of the Court of Articles for part of my Estate) what was fit to be done for the reliefe of the Petitioners,
they did resume the matter which formerly they had offered, and instead of proposing a way how the Purchasers should be relieved, it was reported as a thing agreeable to their Iudgments, that their Estates should be confirmed; upon report of which as their sense and opinion, it hath pleased the Parliament to make the last mentioned Resolve. This being shortly my case, and surely my ruine, if by your favour not prevented, I beseech you in the next place to consider what power you have reserved unto your selves, by the expresse words of the Act of sale of the six∣teenth of July, 1651. fol. 1373. and how the Trustees stand limi∣ted in the execution of their Trust; the words are these. Ne∣vertheless upon trust and confidence that the said William Skinner and others the persons above named, or any five or more of them shal have, hold, and enjoy, all and singular the Premisses, and every of them (mea∣ning the Lands and Estates of the persons in the Act named of which I am one) subject unto such trusts and uses as by this Act, or in and by Authority of Parliament shall be hereafter further directed and appointed, and shall dispose of the same accordingly. The reason of this Clause and Limitation, I humbly conceive to be, for that the Parliament having confirmed and ratified divers Articles and Conditions granted in time of war, to the making good of which, their Honour and Justice as well as the faith of the Army and Nation was eminently concerned, and for that at the time when this Act did passe they neither did nor could possi∣bly take notice of such as had right or claim to the same, they reserved unto themselves this power, and did provide that the Trustees should order and dispose of the same accordingly. And by their Act of the 29th. of September, 1652. for reviving of the Act of the 18th. of June, 1649. which upon just and ho∣nourable grounds gave reliefe to all such persons who are or shall bee arrested, sued, impleaded, imprisoned, or sequestred, contrary to any Articles given or granted, &c. a Court for that purpose being con∣stituted to do right in all the particulars of both the said Acts, according to the tenor and meaning of Articles, any Law, Or∣der or Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding: By which Act and Declaration the Parliament doth make use of their for∣mer power, expresly reserved unto them. And if any mans estate or part thereof be sold contrary to the Right of Articles, it is no wrong unto the Purchasers, if it be by Judgement restored to the right Owner; for the Decree or Judgment that shall so re∣store it, is given by Authority of Parliament, and is in order to the Power in the Act of sale reserved unto the Parliament so to do. And the Purchasers have no cause to complain (so as recom∣pence be assigned unto them) for that their bargaines and con∣tracts made with them could not be absolute and direct, in re∣gard
the said clause of Limitation had debarred the Trustees themselves, from whom they clayme in the case of Articles, from any such absolute estate: And therefore it seemes, that some of them taking notice of this reserved power, upon passing the Act of Revivour, preferred the two Provisoes afore-mentioned to the Parliament. That that Act which was then to passe, should not extend, or be construed to extend to prejudice, alter, or make void any Resolution, Vote or Judgement given in Parlia∣ment touching any the Articles aforesaid, or any person claim∣ing thereby. As also that no Reall or Personall Estate, which hath been settled, conveyed, or assured to any person or persons by vertue of any Act, Order or Ordinance of the then Parlia∣ment, should be made null, vacated, or otherwise determined or disposed of by the Commissioners named in that Act, or by their Authority, &c. But the Parliament, reflecting upon their Ho∣nour in the case of Articles, upon the question rejected both the Provisoes. And whereas if they had been approved, I had been ruin'd and undone; so by the same reason, being rejected, I may with the help of your favour and justice, be preserved and resto∣red to what is properly and of right belonging unto me. Thus in all humbleness I have Remonstrated and faithfully declared unto you to the best of my remembrance by what meanes I came to take up Armes in the behalf of the late KING in those most unhappy distractions (my Judgment at that time being satisfied of the KINGS reall intentions and unfeigned con∣stancy thereunto, for the sure establishment of Religion, and the Lawes, the safety and wellfare of the People, as also to declare how, and in what manner I proceeded during all the time of my service and imployment, And upon what Termes, Articles, and Concessions I ceased from further action on the KINGS Part, and that by those Articles I was to have had my person freed and unmolested, and my Estate restored upon a moderate Composi∣tion, which now at length by your Judgment (as is aforesaid) and Decrees grounded upon your Lawes and Acts of Parliament are awarded unto mee. And I am very confident that had it not been for the ill Offices of some particular persons begot by a de∣signed prejudicie, and nursed by the heat of their passions against me, I should long ago have been set at liberty from a tedious Im∣prisonment, and have been in the actuall possession of my Estate by the Justice of the late Parliament, to whom I cannot impute any Injustice, or report any thing that is dishonourable. But since they were but men, and by the necessity of their humanity they were enforced to take reports from others of such matters as were Acted at a distance from them, and perhaps by such (though altogether unknown to them) as might so present things as their private interest might lead them, by which means my Right hath been much retarded; so in like manner I make
it no question, that when you who are their Honourable Succes∣sors shall be truly informed of the state of my condition, having cast your cies upon this Narrative, where you may perceive up∣on the whole deduction, that notwithstanding the utmost dili∣gence and disquisition that either the malice or interest of my Adversaries could promote and project against me for my ruine and destruction, I have had the Judgement and resolution of two great and honourable Courts; the one for the safety of my life, and the other for the restitution of my estate; which Judgments, considering the ability and integrity of the persons, & gravity & equanimity of their proceedings in their pleadings, debates, and consultations, I hope are fully satisfactory; And the rather be∣cause the result of them is but the affording of me that Justice which is so eminently grounded upon that indisputable law of Nature, without which the foundation of no government what∣soever can be sure or lasting, the law of Contracts being recipro∣cally the obligation of protection from the supreme Power and subjection in the People who ought to obey, and that aswell in military as civil Order; which the noble Army taking into their serious consideration, have made it by publick Petition to the late Parliament of Aug. 12.1652. one of the weighty Clauses of their requests, viz. That the Articles of War made unto the Enemy may be made good, according to the intent of them. Which Petition by Order of the Councell of Warre was pre∣sented by six honorable Officers of the Army, and had a very fa∣vourable and gracious Answer. Now forasmuch as there doth not appeare by any proof a∣gainst me (though no stone hath been left unturned under which any thing might be found for that purpose) that I am in the least guilty of any Act tending to the non-performance of all such things as on my part I was bound unto by the said Articles, ei∣ther at the time of the rendition of the said city of Exeter, nor that I have acted any thing since contrary to my subscription made at Guild-Hall; I do make it my humble sute, that the Justice and Honour of the Parliament and Nation, and the Faith of the Ar∣my may be made good unto mee in restoring of me to the benefit of my Articles, the afore-mentioned Judgement, and such fur∣ther right and Justice, as is extended unto me by the severall Acts of Parliament established for my relief. And as it is my humble and frequent prayer to that great God, who hath for many yeares miraculously fed me, to bestow upon me my dayly bread; so let it not I beseech you be a thing dis∣pleasing unto you, if I pray (in a time when neither Estate or Credit is left me) for so timely a consideration hereof as may stand with the rest of your weighty affaires. John Stawell. FINIS.
