t1101 99898075 133209
THREE LETTERS SENT FROM ROME TO Some of the principall Actors of the Rebellion in IRELAND. Dated 4. of Ianuary. 1642. After the Romane Account. Shewing their zealous affections and advice to their Rebellious proceedings, whereof the two first were written in Irish and translated into English accor∣ding to the Originall Coppies. DVBLIN: Printed by VVilliam Bladen. 1642.
To my honoured friend Phelim Roe ô Neale with my welwishes in IRELAND. My honoured Lo. THe great God help you. I would have of∣ten written unto you, since I received St. Francis his habit, & especially during these six yeares I have lived in Rome, had not the Lord, which lately died, and Hugh Roe my brother charged me to keep no correspondencie with you, or with any other friend there, to avoid all suspition and damage, which might happen unto you thereby. Now if that which is written unto us, and which we hear from all parts be true, to wit, that the thing which we long de∣sired, whereof our hope was in God, and in you hereto∣fore, be come to passe: The time of writing and keeping correspondencie with you touching such matters, as are best, and most needfull unto you in the present opportuni∣tie, is now at hand. Therefore I could not chuse, but write (above all things) these few lines unto you in my mothers tongue, as being most safe. The holy father, and his two nephews, Cardinall Anthony Barberinus prote∣ctor of Ireland, and Cardinall Francis Barberinus, who hath all the power here in such matters as concerne the Pope, have heard of the warre and confederation, which you make for your religion and libertie. And truely I can∣not expresse the greanes of the joy (no wonder) which they onceive thence, in such manner, that if they had received Letters, if you had sent an Agent unto them with authity to expresse your will, or designe  should
want no help for your better proceedings. Wherefore send without delay some able man with a Declaration of your grievances in forme of Law. My brother Owen Roe ô Conny the priest is in Spaine, except he begon into Ireland before this, he hath finished very well his study of Philosophie, Theologie and Law, and is well spoken in the Latin, Spanish and Dutch: He is (as I know well) sober, discreet, learned, and bred according to the man∣ner of severall Nations to treat with any Prince of what matter soever: Furthermore, he is (as you know) faithfull and naturall to the other Lords your confederats; which qualities are most requisite in any man to be sent hither, or to any other place upon the like Embassage. I protest unto you before God, that I commend him not in that he is my brother, but that I am not acquainted with any man of better ability and faithfulnesse to be imployed here in your service, and in the service of the Countrey, then he, since Hugh Roe my brother died through the great miserie and paines he hath taken in his last travells: I am teacher here, teaching in the Colledge of the Irish these six yeares, and imploied all that time about the affaires of the late slain Lord. I might doe you some service, if I had some intelligence from you, and some help of him whom you intend to send hither. There is nothing I de∣sire more then to return to my Countrey, though I be set∣tled here to my own contentation: I pray use me and the rest of my function after such manner, as shall seem best un∣to you for your own service. Father Arthur mac Genis is in Madrill, and so are many other, who would performe any service, wherein you would be pleased to imploy them. Father Francis mac Genis is in Germany, so like∣wise is father Francis ô Farrell, who loves and honours you, and is very intimate with the Emperour, who might well help you now, since you have eased him of the trou∣bles of the Palatinate, whom only he feared. There is here also a priest from the County of Tyrone, Edmund mac Grana a learned man having of late commene'd Dr. In France there is a Divinity Professor Patrick ô Connor, descended
from the Connors of Leinster, who did much service unto the late deceased Lord. He is of nature loving, constant, of audacitie guided with discretion, as is his Couzin Bran∣don ô Connor, who (I doubt not) will doe any service for you, Michael ô Gormbey is in the Low Countries, Guar∣dian of Lovain, and many more of the like sort. See your self, what is best to be don with Owen ô Neale, who is in Flaunders, and with Conn mac Cormack, who is Sergeant Major in Spaine, but (more is the pitty) a man of no great policie or wisedome: I would all the old trained Souldiers were there. I will write to my brother Murtagh ô Con∣ny, who was ancient to the deceased Lord, and is now Captaine, and to the rest of the Nobility of Ulster, that they repaire unto you without delay, you may write to the King of Spaine, among other things to give them leave to come unto you. I know not what will the Earle of Tirconell doe upon this occasion, his Regiment is disbanded, & he himself gon to the Court to Madrill. I feare much that if he should goe into Ireland, he would doe more hurt then good. Noble Sir, Fear God above all things in prosecuting wisely the fortune, which God offers unto you. Let love & unani∣mity be among your selves, shew all possible kindnes to the old Irish of Leinster, & oblige unto your self all men as near as you may. Beware of the tricks of the Munstermen, who at this houre shew no candid dealing towards you in Rome as you shall soon understand, except you send your Agent to prevent it with all speed, for they ascribe unto them∣selves without any ground the praise and glory of all your Heroicall deeds, as you may learne of Evir that lives with your self. Be sure to have a great heart, and make some chief Head among you, but reserve the Crown for Conn his side. 1. the Neales. Remember the old Slavery, where∣in you have lived of long time, and the destruction which will generally come upon you, except you get the upper hand: You will prevaile, if you joyne together as you ought, God send it. I would advise every chief Officer among you, to have a Secretary along with him to write a diurnall of your passages and overthrowes which your Ene∣mie
receive, which will redound much to your glory. Spoile not the Countrey for feare of Famine. I will not faile to write according as I shall heare from you. We would send unto you a Bull after the forme of the Bull which Hugh mac Baron got, if we had received your Let∣ters. If the Church doe wisely, they will turne over the Election of Prelates there to the Nobility, and will give them authority in that point. Your faithfull Servant Bonaventura ô Connye. Rome from Isiodor's Coll. 4. January. After the Romane Account. The Superscription. Deliver this to Connor mac Guyre Lord of Iniskillin, or in his absence to his brother Roory mac Guyre in IRELAND. My honoured Lo. THousand Commendations unto you, to Bri∣an, Roory, and the rest; I have heard of yours, and Hugh Oge his imprisonment, and truly I never heard worse newes in my life: but I was comforted by some men wiser then my sel, who esteeme, that it is  much good, then any hur which  redound to  the whole Nation from  your rles. Truly
(my Lord) if you be dead through that attempt, the which God forbid: it is a most glorious and everlasting name which you have added to your self. The Pope, and the two Cardinalls his nephews are acquainted with your case, and heard likewise how valorously Phelim and Roory, and the rest of the Gentlemen their assistants have behaved themselves, and rejoyced greatly thereat, so that I make no question he will help you, if you demand his aid as becomes you. Therefore Bonaventura ô Conny brother to Eneas ô Conny, who is Lecturer here, thought sit to write unto the Generall Phelim touching this matter, and I advise you to see wisely into the reasons which he writ, and into the good which will arise from them in time, and that you and Phelim be guided and directed by them, and rather, that Bonaventura is a wise, prudent, and learned man, and as loving and faithfull unto you, as I am. If you be not pre∣sent, Roory will supply your place. I beseech you, above all things, and for the love of Iesus Christ, let true love be esta∣blished among you all, and let not the temptation of the de∣vill, or man divert your mind from cherishing all possible love and amity between your self and Brian mac Cogho∣naght and his Children, as I doubt not you will. Endeavour to draw unto you, not onely your owne kindred; but also all the ancient roots of the Irish wheresoever dispersed, or distant, and all to the glory of God, and the defence of your Religion, and I will be bound, God will be your help. If you beare out one yeare. Beleeve me. The Pope, and all the Catholike Kings will be glad, that you crave their as∣sistance. The mercifull God grant it, and defend you from the outrage of your Enemies, so will he pray night and day who is. Your poore Kinsman. Francis mac Guyre. Rome from Isiodor's Coll. 4. January. 1642. After the Roman Account. Were it not, that I have not finished my studies, there is
nothing in the world I had rather, then to live with you, to doe for you any service, even to my death, though I want nothing where I am: And seeing I am not pre∣sent with you, let none be your Counsell, but such as be wise and conscionable men, and acquainted with the customes of other Nations. I commit you to Gods prote∣ction, and behave your self nobly for your religion: Com∣mend me to Hugh mac Mahon and his children: seeing the way is very long, I will be so bold as to send unto you no more paper at this time. Malachias is Lecturer in this Countrey, an excellent Italian: as you thinke best, either send for him to go over, or else let him tarry here. To Sir Phelim ô Neale. Right Honourable, YOur honour and worth doth embolden me, though unacquainted, to present unto your honour herewith my hum∣ble duty and service, which shall be al∣wayes at your Lordships Command, if in ought your Lordship may be pleased to make use thereof. I have received of late some letters out of London, wherein they write that your Lordship have taken Armes in Ireland against the King of England, of this I have informed our old Father, who received much comfort thereby, and promised to give his helping-hand to all your ex∣ploits, which our Munster men here understand∣ing,
doe offer to make his Holinesse beleeve, that if any such businesse or alteration be in IRELAND, is rather begunne by my Lord Roch or Woormouth, then by you, or any in your Province, being very poore, and wanting the ability or meanes to main∣taine, or make up any such Armie, this with other sinisterly informations, doth this Munster Agent (whom in Gods name Master Riley nominated for Ulster) offer to diminish the Fame and Credit of those who ventures their lives and health for the common good of their Countrey and Church. It is most necessarie that your Lordship doe write with all speed, by severall wayes, both to this old man with his Nephew Cardinall Francisco, and also to our owne Protector Cardinall Anto∣nio, or send some naturall Prelate that may informe them at large of all your proceedings and minde, in the meane time, what I or Father Bonaventurae Conneo can doe, shall not be wanting; observe al∣wayes good correspondencie with the ancient Ca∣tholike houses of both England & Scotland, as your predecessors (the defunct) did, and also with those here and elsewhere, Father Francis Farrell is in Viena to serve us, and Father Francis Magnesius in Madrill, so as nothing may be wanting, if due Correspondencie be observed, trust and make use of old Rosse de Cruce, who knowes how to see your letters directed unto me, see that you live all in a generall Union, and not have any Contradi∣ction among you, otherwise can hardly arrive to what we desire you, if any service I can doe you either here or elsewhere, be sure to command me as your owne, in the meane time my daily prayers
shall not be wanting for your happie and prospe∣rous successe in all your proceedings, desiring the mightie Majestie to lend you his helping hand, and so will take leave, wishing your Honour a most happy new yeare. Your Lordships most humble Servant, and Cousin to Command Francis Farrell. Rome the 4. Ianuary 1642. Here I send your Honour a letter from Father Bo∣naventura Conneo a most good and discreet friend of yours.
