T2321 E199_35 99873620 157533
SIR FRANCIS SEYMOR HIS HONOURABLE, AND WORTHY SPEECH, Spoken in the High Court of PARLIAMENT SHEWING What Dangers doe insue by want of Priviledge of Parliament. And how the Splendor of His Majestyes Glory is Eclipsed With toleration of Iesuits, Seminary priests, and bad Ministers who still have abiding amongst Us. As also, such who have betrayed the King unto himselfe, to bring the Subjects under slavery. Whereby the King can neither be preserved in Honour, nor the Common-wealth in safety Whereunto is annexed, Sir Walter Earle his Paraphrase, concerning Bishop WHITE. London, Printed for W. H. 1641.
An Honourable SPEECH Spoken in the high Court of Parliament. THis great Counsell (as Tully said of the Senate of Rome) is the soule of the Common-wealth; wherein one may heare & see all the Greevances of the sub∣jects and in the Multitude of such Counsellors is safety. Amongst whom, the greatest priviledge, is liberty of speech. And therefore, J humbly offer it unto you, to take into consideration, what wrong hath bin done herein, what Judg∣ments hath bin against the Members of this House, for speaking nothing, but what con∣cerned the good of the Commonwealth. Which said Judgments hath beene against Law and Reason, and without president. What Law or Reason is there, that a Par∣liament,
which is the highest of all Courts, should be questioned by inferiour Courts, and Iudges: as if the Common-pleas should question the Kings bech, or the Chancery be questioned by either of them. Perhaps the Authors of it, have nature to pleade for themselves, which indeed teacheth every man to preserve himselfe. This perhaps, makes them advance that, & those members which otherwise must con∣demne themselves. And such things have bin done, to maintaine their proceedings, as not only trench upon the liberties of Parliament, but also upon the liberties of the whole Com∣mon-wealth: wherein I had rather suffer for speaking the truth, then the truth should suf∣fer for want of my speaking. Where was ever more Piety in a Prince, and more loyalty in Subjects, and yet what Common-wealth ever suffered like this. His Majesty is the Sunne, which though it ever shines alike in it selfe gloriously; yet by reason of Clouds, many times it doth not so appeare, and if his Majesty, by reason of bad members may not appeare in such splendor, let us labour to cleere those Clouds: what will it availe us, if the Fountaine be cleere, if the streames that issue there-from be not so also. I will instance in some particulars. If we looke into the face of Religion, that is
out-faced, and such as heretofore durst not appeare, come boldly into our houses, as if they had a concealed toleration, I meane the Seminary Priests, who though they have lesse power, yet have they not lesse malice, but more, so long as the Pope hath his Agents a∣mongst us. See we not how they go to Somer∣set house, and to S. James with too much coun∣tenance? These are the enemies of the church, without the church; I wish we had none with in it: who pull down churches, and I am sure they build none up againe: Amongst which are out Non-residents, who o're-sway all by worldly preferments, and many livings. Christ made it the Touch-stone of Peters love unto him, to feed his sheepe and lambes; but these men looke at their owne private gaines not taking pains for their own double honours, which are daily gotten. What thing is there more against Reason and Nature, then for one man to have above one wife, and for one shepheard to have more then one sheepefold. These are dumbe dogs, that cannot speak a word for God, of whom the people may seeke spirituall food, but can find none. Others there are that preach, but it is not the Gospell▪ but themselves, that the King hath an unlimited power, and the Subject noe propriety in their goods.
These are bad Divines, and worse, and more ignorant States-men; who under the name of Puritans, condemne all, who truly professe Religion. There are surely many, who under a fo me of godlinesse, cloake impiety: but to teach, that a man can be too holy, is the Do∣ctrine of Divels. And now, for feare I have bin over-long, I will speake of the Subjects Liberties, where∣in J remember, what was confirmed unto us by the word of a King; and God forbid, that I, or any other should imagine, that the King did otherwise, then he granted us. But some there be, that have betrayed the King unto himselfe, and so committed worse treason then those, who betray him to others, who tell him his Prerogative is above all Lawes, and that his subjects are but slaves: whereby the King is neither preserved in Ho∣nour, nor the Common-wealth in safety. FINIS.
Sir Walter Earle. His Paraphrase fitly spoken concerning Bishop White. in a former Parliament. QVi color albus erat, nunc est con∣tarius albo. In English thus, The colour that was white, is now turn'd blacke. For Bishop White hath sold his Orthodox Bookes, and bought Iesuits: that Bishop White may goe arme in arme with Mountague. FINIS.
