W338 E584_9 99863733 165485
THE TRIALL, Of Lieut. Collonell JOHN LILBURNE, By an extraordinary or special Commis∣sion, of Oyear and Terminer at the Guild-Hall of LONDON, the 24, 25, 26. of Octob. 1649. Being as exactly pen'd and taken in short hand, as it was possible to be done in such a croud and noyes, and transcribed with an indifferent and even hand, both in reference to the Court, and the Prisoner; that so matter of Fact, as it was there declared, might truly come to publick view. In which is contained all the Judges names, and the names of the Grand Inquest, and the names of the honest Jury of Life and Death. Ʋnto which is annexed A necessary and essential Appendix, very well worth the Readers, carefull perusal; If he desire rightly to understand the whole body of the Dis∣course, and know the worth of that ner'e enough to be prised, bul∣work of English Freedom, to be tried by a Jury of legall and good men, of the Neighbour-hood. Published by THEODORUS VARAX. Esther 4. vers. 13. and Isa. 12. v. 2, 3, 4. Then Mordecai commanded to answer Esther, Think not with thy self that thou shalt escape in the kings house, more then all the Jews. Behold, God is my Salvation: I will trust and not be afraid, for the LORD JEHOVAH is my strength, and my song, he also is become my salvation. Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. And in that day shall you say, Praise the LORD, call upon his Name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his Name is exalted. Printed by Hen. Hils in St. Thomas's Southwark.
THE TRYALL Of Leiut. Colonell JOHN LILBƲRNE. At the Guild-Hall of London the 24, of Octob. 1649. being Wednesday. THe Commissioners Names of the extraordinary Commission of Oyer and Terminer, for the Tryall of Lieut. Col. John Lilburne, thus followeth. Thomas Andrews Lord Mayor. Richard Keble, L: Commissioner. Phylip Jermyn, Justice of the upper Bench. Tho. Gates, Baron. John Puleston, Justice of the Com∣mon Pleas. Francis Thorpe, Barron & Member. Rob. Nicolas, Member Justices of the upper Bench. Richard Aske, Justices of the upper Bench. Peter Warburton, Justice of the Common Pleas. Alexander Rigby, Barron, but absent. Sir Thomas Fowler. Sir Henry Holcroft. Sir Will. Row. Sir Richard Saltonstall. Sir Richard Sprignall. Sir John Wooliston. Sir William Roberts. John Green. Sergeants at Law. John Clarke. Sergeants at Law. John Parker. Sergeants at Law. William Steele, Recorder. John Fowke, Aldermen. Thomas Foote, Aldermen. John Kendrick, Aldermen. Thomas Cullum, Aldermen. Simon Edmonds, Aldermen. Samuell Avery Aldermen. John Dethicke, Aldermen. Rob. Titchburn, Aldermen. John Hayes, Aldermen. Henry Proby, Common Sargeant. Thomas Brigandine. Nathaniell Snape, Edward Rich. Owen Roe. Tobias Lisle. Austin Wingfield. Richard Downton. Daniell Taylor. William Wihend. Silvanus Taylor.
At the Guild-Hall of London the 25. of October 1649. being Thursday, at the Tryall of Lieut. Col. John Lilburne. O Yes made, All persons that were adjourned to the Court required to make their appearance. The Lieutenant of the Tower of London Col. Francis West called, to bring forth his prisoner according to the precept. Whereupon Col. West Lieut. of the Tower, brought up the prisoner out of the Irish Chamber, where he had been some time before the sitting of the Court, and was guarded by the said Lieutenant, and a speciall Guard of Souldiers besides. And being brought to the Barre, the Sheriffs of Lon∣don were directed to take the prisoner into their Custody. Silence Commanded. Cryer. John Lilbnrne, hold up thy hand. Lieut. Col. Lilburne Directed himself to Mr. Keble one of the Keepers of the great Seal as the President of the Court, and said to this purpose, Sir will it please you to hear me, and if so, By your favour thus. All the priviledge for my part that I shall crave this day at your hands is no more, but that which is properly, and singly the Liberty of every Free-borne Englishman; viz. The benifit of the Lawes and Liberties thereof, which by my Birth-right and Inheritance, is due unto me; the which I have fought for as well as others have done, with a single and upright heart; and if I cannot have and injoy this, I shall leave this Testimony behind me, that I dyed for the Lawes and Liberties of this Nation; and upon this score I stand, and if I perish I perish. And if the fact that I have done, cannot be justified by the Law of England, let me perish; I mention none of this for the gaining of mercy, or by way of merit, no I scotne it; for mercy I crave from none but from the hands of my God alone, with whom I hope, and am assured one day to rest; whom I have set before my eyes, and so walked, as believing I am alwaies in his presence, in whose power my confidence is fixed, whom I take and own to be my stay, my stafe, my strength and support, and in whom I rest as the life of my life, and whom I hope to meet with joy, when this fading and uncertaine life shall have an end, to live with him in glory and blessednesse for evermore. And there∣fore, because I would not willingly trouble you with many words, to cause you to spend your time impertinently; therefore Sir, in reference to the Court, I shall crave but so much liberty from you as was given to Paul, when he pleaded for his life before the Heathen Roman Judges, which was free liberty of speech to speak for himself, the which I now humbly crave
as my right, not onely by the Law of God and man, but also by the Law & light of Nature; And I shall do it with that respect, reason and judgement, that doth become a man that knows what it is to plead for his life. I hope God hath given me ability to be master of my own passion, and indowed me with that reason, that will dictate unto me what is for my own good and benefit. I have severall times been arraigned for my life already. I was once ar∣raigned before the House of Peers for (sticking close to the Liberties, and Priviledges of this Nation, and those that stood for them) being one of those two or three men, that first drew their Swords in Westminster-Hall against Col. Lunsford and some scores of his associates. At that time, it was supposed, they intended to cut the throats of the chiefest men then sitting in the House of Commons; I say for this, and other things of the like nature, I was arraigned by the Kings speciall Command and Order, the 1. of May 1641. I mention it to this end, that when I came before the House of Peers, where was about three or fourescore Lords then sitting at the beginning of the Parliament; (who then were supposed the most arbitrary of any power in England) yet I had from them free liberty of speech, to speak for my life at their Barr, without check or controll in the best manner, all those abilities God had given me would inable me; and when I was at Oxford, I was again arraigned as a Traytor before the Lord Chief Justice Heath, for levying Warre at the Command of the then Par∣liament against the person of the King; and when I came before him in the Guild-Hall of Oxford, he told me (there being present with him (as his fellow Judge) Mr Gardiner (sometimes Recorder of the City of Lon∣don) now Sir Thomas Gardiner, and others that sat by a speciall Commissi∣on of Oyer and Terminer from the King; the which Commission I did not so well then understand, as I hope I do now. And my Lord Chiefe Justice Heath stood up, & in the face of all the Court, & in the face of all the Coun∣try present there told me, Capt. Lilburne you are brought here before us for High Treason, for leavying Warre in Oxfordshire against your Soveraigne Lord and King; and though you be now in a Garrison, and were taken in Armes in open hostility against the King (yea Sir, and I must now tell you in such hostility, that we were but about 700. men at Branford that withstood the Kings whole Army in the field, about five houres together, and fought it out to the very Swords point, and to the Butt end of the Musket; and thereby hindred the King from his then possessing the Parliaments Train of Artillery, and by conse∣quence the City of London, in which very act I was taken a prisoner, with∣out Articles or capitulation, and was by the King and his party then lookt upon, as one of the activest men against them in the whole company) yet
said Judge Heath, we will not take advantage of that, to try you by the rules of arbitrary Marshall Law, or any other arbitrary waies; but we will try you by the rules of the good old Lawes of England; and whatso∣ever Priviledge in your Tryall the Lawes of England will afford you, claim it as your Birth-right and Inheritance, and you shall injoy it, with as much freedom and willingnesse, as if you were in Westminster-Hall, to be tryed amongst your own party; and this we will do for that end, that so at Lon∣don your friends shall not have any just cause to say, we murdered you with cruelty, or denied you the benefit of the Law, in taking away your life by the rules of our own Wills. Nay, further said he, Capt. Lilburn, it is true, I am a Judge made by my Soveraigne Lord the King, ac∣cording to his right bySee the 27. of Hen. 8. chap. 24. Law, and soin a speciall maner am his Servant and Councellor, and am to act for his good, benefit and advantage; And yet not∣withstanding, it is by the known Laws of this Land my duty, to be indiffe∣rent and free from partiallity, betwixt my Master and you the prisoner, and I am specially bound unto it also by my Oath; and therefore you shall have the utmost Priviledges of the Law of England, which is a Law of mercy, and not of rigor, and hath the life of a man in ten∣derest, and highestSee the 2. part Inst. fo. 28. 30. 42, 43. 53. 315. 316. 591, & 3. part, fo. 34. estimation; and therefore, it is the duty of a Judge by Law, to be of Councell with the Prisoner, in things wherein by his igno∣rance, he falls short of making use of the benifit of the Law, especially when he is upon the tryall of his life. Yea, & to exhort him to answer without fear, if he perceive him daunt∣ed, or amazed at the presence of the Court; yea it is my duty, to carry my self with all fairness and evenness of hand towards you; And wherein that there shall seeme any mistakes to appear, in circumstances or formali∣ties, to rectifie you; For it's my duty to help you, and not to use any boisterous, or rough language to you in the least, to put you in fear, or any wayes prevent the freedom of your defence: and according to the Lawes of England this is my duty, and this is the Law. And accordingly he gave me liberty to plead to the errors of my Indictment, before ever I Pleaded not Guilty, yea and also became willing to assigne me what Councell, I pleased, to nominate, freely to come to prison to me, and to consult and advise with me and helpe me in point of Law; This last he did immediatly upon my Pleading to the Indictment before any fact was proved; all which is consonant to the Declared Judge∣ment of Sir EDWAD COOKE, that great Oracle of the Laws of ENGLAND, whose Bookes are Published by speciall Or∣ders
Which Orders are dated May 12 1641. & Iune 3. 1642. you may at large read at the last end of his 2. part. Institutes.and Authority of Parliament for good Law, who in his 3. part In∣stitutes, Chapt. Of high Treason, fol. 29. 34. compared with fol. 137. 230. asserts the same. Truly, Sir, I being now come before you to answer for my life, and being no professed Lawyer, may through my own ignorance of the pra∣ctick part of the Law, especially in the Formalities, Nisities and Puntillios thereof, run my selfe with over-much hastinesse, in snares and dangers that I shall not easily get out of. And therefore being all of a sudden bid to hold up my hand at the Barre, I cannot chuse but a little demurre upon it, and yet with all respect to you, to declare my desirablenesse to keep within the bounds of Reason, Moderation and Discretion, and so to carry my selfe as it doth become a man that knowes what it is to answer for his life. And therefore in the first place, I have something to say to the Court about the first Fundamentall liberty of an Englishman in order to his tri∣all, which is, that by the Lawes of this Land, all Courts of Iustice alwayes ought to be free and open for all sorts of peaceable people to see, behold, and heare, and have free accesse unto: and no man whatsoever ought to be tried in holes or corners, or in any place where the gates are shut and bar'd, and guarded with armed men: and yet, Sir, as I came in, I found the gates shut and guarded; which is contrary both to Law and Iustice. Sir, the Lawes of England, and the Priviledges thereof, are my Inhe∣ritance and Birth-right: And, Sir, I must acquaint you, that I was some∣times summoned before a Committee of Parliament, where Mr. Corbet and severall others have had the Chaire; and there I stood upon my right by the Lawes of England, and refused to proceed with the said Commit∣tee, till by speciall order they caused their Dores to be wide thrown open, that the people might have free and un-interrupted accesse to heare, see, and consider of what they said to me, although I think the pretence that I am now brought before you for, be the very same in substance, that I was convened before Mr. Corbet for, which was about Bookes: and I am sure there I did argue the case with him and the rest of the Committee soundly out in Law, proving that they were bound in Law and Iustice, freely to open their Dores, for the free accesse of all sorts and kindes of auditors: And I did refuse (as of right) to proceed with them, till by speciall order they did open their Dores. For no triall in such cases, ought to be in any place, unlesse it be publick, open and free; and therefore if you please that I may enjoy that Legall Right and Priviledge which was
granted unto me by Mr. Miles Corbet, and the rest of that Committee, (when I was brought before them in the like case that now I am brought before you:) which priviledge I know to be my right by the Law of England, I shall, as it becomes an understanding Englishman, (who in his actions hates deeds of darknesse, holes or corners) goe on to a triall. But if I be denied this undoubted priviledge, I shall rather die here than pro∣ceed any further. And therefore foreseeing this before hand, and being willing to provide against all jealousies of my escape, the feare of which I supposed might be objected against me as a ground to deny me this my le∣gal right; and therefore before hand I have given my engagement to the Lieutenant of the Tower, that I will be a faithfull and true prisoner to him. And I hope the Gentleman hath so much experience of my faithfulness to my word, that he doth not in the least question or scruple it; I am sure he hath often so declared to me that he doth not. Nay, I have not onely ingaged to be a true prisoner in the Tower to him, but I have also solemnly ingaged to him, that I will come civilly and peaceably with him; and that I will go civilly and peaceably back with him again. And that if any tumult or up-roare shall arise in the croud, of which I lose him, and he me; or in case I should be any wayes by force & power rescued from him, I have also faithfully ingaged to him, that I will come again to him (by the assistance of God) as soon as ever I can get a∣way from that force or rescue. And all this I intreated him to acquaint you with, that all jealousies and disputes might be avoided. Iudge Keble. Mr. Lilburn, look behind you and see whether the Dore stands open or no. L. Col. Lilb. Well then, Sir, I am satisfied as to that. But then in the next place, I have read the Petition of Right, I have read Magna Charta, and a∣bundance of Lawes made in confirmation of it; and I have also read the Act that abolisheth the Star-chamber, which was made in the yeare 1641. which last recited Act expresly confirmes those stratures that were made in Edward the thirds time, which declares all Acts, Laws and Statutes that were made against Magna Charta, to be null and void in Law, and holden for error. In the reading of which Lawes I doe not find a speciall Commission of Oyer and Terminer, to be Legall and warrantable. I beseech you Sir, doe not mistake me; for I put a vast difference betwixt an ordinary and com∣mon Commission of Oyer and Terminer, for holding ordinary and com∣mon Assises and Sessions, and betwixt an extraordinary and special com∣mission of Oyer and Terminer to try an individuall person or persons,
for a pretended extraordinary crime; the Lawes I last recited; and the fundamentall or essentiall Basis of freedome therein contained, knowes no such names or Commissions of speciall Oyer and Terminer. And those Statutes in Edward the first, and Edward the thirds time, that doth erect those special and ex∣traordinary Commssions, and war∣rant the usage of them are meerly irrationallAnd excellent to this purpose is Lieutenant Colonel Lilburnes Argument, in his second Edition of his Picture of the Councel of State, page 8. against the erection of ex∣traordinary Courts, which thus fol∣loweth: He granting that the Par∣liament hath power to erect a Court of Justice to administer the Law, provided, that the Judges confist of Persons that are not Members of Parliament; And provided, the pow∣er they give them be universall, that is to say, to administer the Law to all the people of England indefinitely, who are all equally borne free alike, and not to two or three particular Persons solely: the last of which for them to do is unjust, and altogether out of their power, &c. which Ar∣gument or Reason is most notably il∣lustrated and inlarged in the second Edition of the legall fundamentall Liberties of England, revived of the 8. of June, 1649. page 72. innovations upon our indubitable Rights contained in Magna Charta, and meere Court and Prerogative devices to destroy the best of men, by extraordinary Court appointed and prejudge pro∣ceedings that should manfully stand in the way of the Prince, or any of his great favourites, for sure I am from the Petition of Right, no ground or foundation for any ex∣traordinary or special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, upon any pretended, speciall, or great occasi∣on cannot be founded; but rather the absolute quite contrary, as to me clearly appeares by the very plain letter of that most excellent Law, and therefore such a speciall Commission upon any pretended speciall occasion, being expresly a∣gainst our undubitable Rights con∣tained in Magna Charta, And the Petition of Right,, viz. that no Eng∣lishman shall be subjected to any other Tryall, but the ordinary universall and common Tryalls at ordinary Assies, Sessions, or Goale-deliveries, and not in the least to be tryed by extraordinary and speciall prejudged, packed, over-awing Commissions of Oyer and Terminer: and therefore all such extraordinary and dangerous Tryalls are absolutely abolished, by the late excellent cts that confirmes the Petition of Right, and all and e∣very of the Clauses therein contained, and abolisheth the Star-Chamber, both made Anno. 1641.
And Sir, with your favour, the then Parliament that made the lastre cited Lawes, were so farre from countenancing any special Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, upon any special or pretended great occasions whatsoever that I can read of, That I rather find and read the Parlia∣ments proceedings in the year 1641. An extream Out-cry of the House of Commons, against special Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, with a great deal of bitterness and vehemency, as may fully and clearly be read in that excellent Argument of Mr. Hide, April 1641. Printed and pub∣lished in a Booke, called Speeches and Passages of Parliament, page 409. to 417. which I have here at the Barre to produce which Mr. Hide, was then the special and appointed mouth of the House of Commons before the Lords, who unto them in conformity to his Commission from the then House of Commons, complaines to the house of Lords extreamly of a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, that was exercised in the five Northern Counties of England, and earnestly in the name of the house of Commons, craves the special assistance of the house of Lords, to pluck up that Court by the very rootes, founded upon a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, being so illegall and unjust in the very foundation of it, as it is inconsistent with the peoples liberties, and as that which de∣stroyed and disinherited all the people that were tryed, both of their Birth-right and Inheritance, viz. Their Liberties and Freedoms contain∣ed in Magna Charta; And this Sir, was the declared and avowed judge∣ment and opinion of the house of Commons in April 1641. in their pri∣mitive purity and none-defilement, when they acted bravely and gallant∣ly for the universall Liberties and Freedom of this Nation (and not selfe-interest) when they were in the Virginity of their Glory and Splendor, as he there fully and most excellently declares, and yet he there gives an extraordinary reason for the original erection of that Court founded up∣on a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, as can be rendred. The originall reason or occasion of which he there declares to be thus, that by reason of the suppression of the Abbies in the 27. of Henry the eights time; In the North of England (through discontent thereat) there did arise from the said 27. yeare to the 30. no fewer then six grand insurrections, most of them under the Command of some eminent man of those Countries, which Insurrections & Rebellions occasioned the leavying of great Armies which had like to have set the whole Kingdom in an uni∣versall flame; for the suppressing and preventing of which in future times
King Henry the 8. caused a special Court to be erected, by a special Com∣mission of Oyer and Terminer, which Court also continued in Edward the sixt time, Queen Maries, and first and se∣venth of K. James; The Basis of which Com∣mission, was founded upon those fore-mention∣ed innovating Statutes, made in Edward the second, and Edward the third's timeWhich were Westmin∣ster, the second being the 13. of Ed. 1. c. 29. & 2. Ed. 3. c. 2. & 34. Ed. 3. c. 1.; which special Commission of Oyer and Terminer was several times renewed by the late K. Charles, as in the fift, eighth, and thirteenth yeer of his Reign. And the said M. Hide there in his Argument or Speech which I have here in print, names several of the Presidents of that illegal Court of special Commission of Oyer and Terminer; and he there also declares in what an extraordinary manner, and upon what an extraordinary occasion it was granted, which was so great, as that a greater could not be imagined, and yet notwithstanding he declares, that this extraordinary Commission, which being granted to suppress and quiet those many extraordinary In∣surrections and Rebellions, which do not admit of so long delay as times of ordinary Tryal, in times of Peace, when the Ordinary, Legal, and common Courts of Justice are open and free will do, when peace and quiet is in the Nation, as now it is; and yet for all that he condemns it for illegal. And therefore Sir, admit my actions in their tendancy to be as dan∣gerous and hainous as any of my adversaries can imagine or declare them to be, yet they are but in the ashes, but in the harth, they are not broke out into visible and violent hostile actions; and therefore I say, if special Commissions of Oyer and Terminer granted in such special and transcen∣dent cases as those in Henry the 8. time were illegal, much more must a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer granted to try me barely for words, or at most, for pretended Writings or Books, at such a time when there is no burning flame of Insurrections or Rebellions in the Kingdom, but all in visible peace, and all the ordinary Courts of Justice open, and I and my Friends have often sought to enjoy the benefit of the Law in a Legal Trial, from first to last, but could never enjoy it in the least mea∣sure, although many Sizes and Sessions have past over my head since my first Commitment, now seven moneths ago, at the first of which, in the County where my pretended crime was committed, I ought by Law and Justice either to be tryed or acquitted; so that Sir, by what I have already said, you may see the judgement and opinion of the House of Commons upon special Commissions of Oyer and Terminer in their first purity, when
as a full House, there being constantly 400 or 500. of them siting in the House as the deputed and chosen Trustees of the People of England, whose opinion was to dam them, and pluck them up by the roots, as unjust and illegal in their original Institution, which they have accordingly done, and declared to the whole Nation in the Act that abolished the Star-chamber; where that Court spoken against by M. Hide, is totally dam∣med and pulled up by the roots: So that now in Law I cannot see how special Commissions of Oyer and Terminer can be legal at this present, ad∣mit the Power never so just from whom it comes, but abundantly much more seing there is no actual Wars, nor popular Insurrections; which if lately there had bin any, and yet were over∣come,Of which judgment Sir Edw. Cook is positively, in part 2. Instit. f. 48. and part 3. f. 52. in Th. Earl of Lancasters case, which is singular well worth the reading. See also part 1. Instit. f. 13. a. there is no pretense of ground by the good old Laws of England, for any extraordi∣nary proceedings against any man, although he had bin in Arms against you, but he ought to have the benefit of the ordinary accustomed and common tryals at the Common Law, as cleerly appears by the express words of the Pe∣tition of Right. * But I was never in any ho∣stile manner against those that are the present Governors of the Nation, but have bin under their command in several battels in the Nation, and have hazarded my life for them, and never yet in the least changed my original or first Principles, nor never was engaged in the least in any ho∣stility against them, but have alwaies, since I five yeers ago gave over my command, lived in peace and quietness in mine own house and aboad, and was the same day at the House of Commons dore, that their Votes passed against me, declaring me in general (which in Law signifies nothing) to be a Traytor; and spake with a Gentleman that is now a Judge amongst your selves (viz. M. Rigby) at the House dore, who in some great Ones names proffered me large matters if I would do as I should be directed by them; after this I went home to mine own house in Southwark, where I stayed in peace and quietness, well enough knowing the Votes that that day past against me, without either particular accusation, or accuser, or any such thing; where I stayed, when as I might easily have escaped the hands of mine enemies, and bin gone; but having the sweet peace of a good Conscience within me, which did assure me that I had done nothing that was against the Welfare of the Nation of England in general, nor against the welfare of any one particular man in England, but really wisht it well, and all its well-wishers.
I say that notwithstanding my certain knowledge of all that at the House had past against me, and although I also knew that the further de∣signe against me, which was, that the Councel of State (as they are called) would take me away thereupon with armed force the next morning; yet notwithstanding all this, I stirred not out of my House, but remained there till about five a clock the next morning, at which time 200 or 300. armed Horse and Foot (without so much as one Civil or Magisterial Offi∣cer with them) came by force of Arms, and haled me out of bed from my Wife and Children, not according to the Law of England, as is expresly provided in two several Statutes, viz. the 1. of Edw. 6. Chap. 12. and the 5. & 6. of Ed. 6. Ch. 11. by which rules of the Law, and no other, they ought to have proceeded against me from first to last; and I am sure they both expresly provide, that if any man be accused of Treason, that he shall be accused first to one of the Kings Councel, or to one of the Kings Justices of Assize, or else to one of the Kings Justices of the Peace, being of the Quo∣rum, or to two Justices of the Peace within the Shire where the same offence or offences shall happen to be done or committed.See also to this purpose part 3. of Cooks Instit. Ch. High Treason, f. 26. 27, 28. and part 1. Parl. Declar. in the case of the L. Kimbolton, and the 5. members, p. 38, 39, 76, 77 But contrary to these and other wholsom and good Laws (although there hath bin an eight yeers War in England (pretendedly) for the pre∣servation of the Laws and Liberties of England, yet I say, contrary to the express Tenor of these Laws, as also of the Petition of Right, yea and also of the express Letter of that excellent Law that abolished the Star-chamber this Parliament) was I by force of Arms (that never fortified my House against the present Power, nor never disputed any of their Sum∣mons, though sent by the meanest man that ever appertained to them, and who if they had sent their Warrant for me by a child, I would have gone to them) I was fetched out of my bed in terror and affrightment, and to the subversion of the Laws and Liberties of England, and led through London streets with hundreds of armed men (like an algier captive) to their main-Guard at Pauls, where a mighty guard stayed for the further conducting me by force of Arms to White-hall: Now Sir, if I had com∣mitted Treason, I ought not to have bin apprehended and proceeded against by armed mercenary Soldiers, but by Civil and Magisterial Offi∣cers, and no other; according to those excellent priviledges that the Par∣liament themselves in the yeer 1641. in their own book of Declarations, p. 36, 37, 76, 77. did claim for those six Members, viz. the Lord Kimbol∣ton,
M. Pym, M. Hollis, M. Stroud, Sir Arthur Hasleridge, and M. Ham∣den; I say and aver, I ought to have had the process of the Law of England, due Process of Law according to the fore-mentioned Statutes and Presi∣dents, for I never forceably resisted or contended with the Parliament, and therefore ought to have had my Warrant served upon me by a Con∣stable, or the like Civil Officer, and upon no pretense whatsoever, ought I to have been forced out of my bed and house by Mercenary armed Officers and Souldiers. But Sir comming to White-hall, I was there also kept by armed men, contrary to all Law and justice, and by armed men against Law, I was by force carryed before a company of Gentlemen sit∣ting at Darby-house, that look upon themselves as Authorized by the Parliament, to be a Committee or Councel of State, (who by the Law I am sure in any kind had nothing at all to do with me in cases of preten∣ded Treasons) where I was brought before M. Iohn Bradshaw, sometimes a Councellor for my selfe before the House of Lords against my unjust Star-chamber Judges; who there in my behalfe Feb. 1645. did urge against the Lords of the Star-chamber as the highest Crime against the liberties of the people that could be, as being Illegal, Arbitrary, and Tyrannical, that the Lords in Star-chamber should censure me to be whip'd, pillared, &c. for no other cause but for refusing to answer their Interrogatories against my selfe; and when I was brought before the said Councel of State, I saw no accuser, no prosecuter, no accusation, nor charge, nor indite∣ment; but all the Crime that there was laid unto my charge, was M. Bradshawe's very seriously examining me to questions against my selfe; although I am confident he could not forget, that himself and M. Iohn Cook were my Councellers in Feb. 1645. at the Barre of the House of Lords, where he did most vehemently aggravate, and with detestations condemn the Lords of the Star-chambers unjust and wicked dealing with English freemen, in censuring them for their refusing to answer to questi∣ons concerning themselves, and yet notwithstanding, walked with his dealing with me in the very steps that formerly he had bitterly condemn∣ed in the Star-chamber Lords; yea and there for refusing to answer his que∣stions, (for any thing he declared to me to the contrary) committed me to Prison for Treason in general; and you know very well, better then I do, that by your own Law, generalls in Law signifie nothing. Judge Jarmen. M. Lilburne you very much abuse and wrong your selfe, for you very well know M. Bradshaw is now denominated by another name, namely, Lord President to the Councell of State of England, and it would well become you in your condition so to have styled him.
Lieut: Col. Lilburne. And although no crime in Law (which ought to be particularly expressed) was laid unto my charge, yet when I was first imprisoned, there were thousands of my friends (well wishers to the freedomes of England, and to the common cause in which they had been ingaged in for these eight yeares together) both old and young, both masters of families, young men and apprentises, and abundance of others of the feminine sex too, with abundance of cordiall honest men in seve∣rall Countries, joyned in severall rationall and fair petitions, and delive∣red them to the House in the behalfe of my selfe and my three fellow Prisoners; in which they most earnestly intreated them, that they would not prejudge us before we were heard, and knew our accusers and accusations; but rather that they would release us, and take off their prejudgeing Votes against us, which they had caused to be proclaimed in all the publique places of the Nation against us, and let us have a fair and Legall Triall according to the Lawes of England, and according to the undenyable Priviledges of the due processe of the Law from first to last, and they would put in any security that they would require of them, that we should be forthcomming at all times, to answer whatsoever in Law could be laid to our charge; unto all which petitions which were very many, they could get no manner of satisfying answer, but slights, abuses, and scornes. But besides this Gentlemen, that you may see that I am rationall, and that you may see I have an innocent and quiet Conscience within me, that does not accuse me nor rerrifie me, therefore I must acquaint you that I again and again proffered my chiefest Adversaries, and sent often to them, being earnestly desitous to chuse two Members of the House of Commons, and let them chuse two more whom they pleased, and I would withall my heart freely refer all manner of difference betwixt them and me, to the finall determination and judgement of four of their fellow Members; but all this would do no good, and yet they would not in the least let me understand what was the thing they desired of me, but by their Power and Will, I had my pockets and Chamber searched to find out advantages against me, and also lock'd up close Prisoner, with Centi∣nells night and day set at my door, and denyed the accesse and sight of my Wife and Children for some certain time, and for about twenty weeks together in the heat of summer, kept close Prisoner, and denyed the li∣berty of the Prison, and my estate with a strong hand taken away from me, without any pretence (or due process) of Law, to the value of almost three thousand pounds, that was Legally and justly invested in me, and in my
possession, but being I will avoid (at this time especially) provocations as much as I can, I will name no person by whose Power and Will it hath been done, although he be notoriously known, but the Gentleman that took it away by his pleasure, without all rules of Law or justice, told my Father to this purpose, that I was a Traitor and under the Parliaments displeasure, and therefore he would secure it from me, although I were not in the least convicted of any crime, neither in Law, then, or for ma∣ny months after, had I the least pretence of crime laid unto my charge: And although my own estate by force against Law was taken from me, yet was I also denyed in my close imprisonment that Legall allowance that should have kept me alive; for in all this miserable condition I never yet received a penny of my Legall allowance, but was positively denyed that restimony and Legall Right that the late King constantly allowed to all the Members of the Parliament that were committed in the third of his Reign, and severall other times; unto whom for their diet he allowed three, four, and five pounds a week, according to their quality, although they had great and large estates peaceably in their possession: And one of them that is now beyond the Seas, a Colonell, I have forgot his name, (but it was Colonell Long) confessed in the Lieutenant of the Tower's own Chamber the last year, that the King was so bountifull to him and the rest of his fellow Prisoners, that he let them injoy the allowance of a∣bout four or five pounds a week for diet, and that while he was Prisoner in the Tower, he spent the King about 1500l. for his own particular self in provision; but notwithstanding I was denyed all this, and to fill up the height of the insufferable provocations put upon me, abundance of my own and ancient acquaintance were set upon me to callumniate, bespat∣ter, and reproach me; yea, and to indeavour to become instruments to take away my life, some of them confessing they were underhand set on by some Parliament men; all whose base and wicked petitions, papers, and books preferred and published against me, were hugged and imbra∣ced, althongh for my own part I do not know of any man in this world that can justly tax me with any action, or maintaining any principles or tenents but what doth becom a man that doth believe all that is contained in the Law and the Gospel, and does believe the Resurrection of the dead and life Erernal; nay, that does believe that I my selfe shall arise and go to the Lord of Glory: Yet notwithstanding all these unparaleld provocati∣ons put upon me, especially by divers of my old acquaintance, whom I had upon all occasions faithfully served, but never wronged, injured, nor provoked; being instigated (as they themselves confesse in some of
their owne Congregations) by Parliament men so to do. Truly sirs, I appeal to your own judgements and to your Consciences, and to all the people that hear me this day, whether all these provocations laid upon a poor man which is but dust and ashes, as well as other men, be not too insupportable a burden, and too much for the causers of them to take advantage of the fruits produced by them, to destroy me, and take a∣way my life. And therefore Sir, in the first place I shall humbly crave that favour and right, seeing I am brought before you by a piece of parchment that truly I could not read, neither could he do it that shwed it me, (I mean the Lieu∣tenant of the Tower) for admit that if I did well understand Latine, as in∣deed I do not, onely some ordinary words, yet was it in such an unusual strange hand that I could not read it; and therefore being I am brought before you implicitly, and not as I conceive an Englishman ought to be, who ought to see and read the Authority by vertue of which he is conve∣ned before any power: Its true, I know some of you Gentlemen that I see sit before me, yet not many of you, and truly I have nothing but a piece of un-legeable Parchment, which cannot satisfie my understanding of the Legalnesse of my convention before you, but being I am not able to dispute that Power that compulsively brought me, but here I am, and therefore in order to the declaring of my self to be a true Englishman, I most humbly crave (and that I think is consonant to reason, and I hope to Law too) that I may see and hear read, the Commission by vertue of which you sit here this day, and convene my Person before you, that so I may compare it to the Law, and consider whether or no that by my pleading before you by vertue of it, I do not betray my liberties; and rherefore I humbly crave that you would let me hear your Commission read; for this Court is no ordinary and common Assizes, Sessions, or Goal∣delivery, the onely proper Courts for trying me for all criminal faults, yea and those also ought to sit where the Crimes are committed; and I was im∣prisoned for a pretended Crime, pretended to be committed in the Coun∣ty of Surry; where by the common Law of England, and expresse Sta∣tutes, I ought to be tryed therefore, and no where else. And therefore being brought in an extraordinary manner to such an ex∣traordinary place as this, which is no ordinary Assizes nor Sessions, no nor yet in mine own County, therefore I again humbly desire that you will be pleased to let me see and hear your extraordinary Commission, that so I may consider whether the extent or latitude of the Commission be con∣sonant or no to the Petition of Right, and other the good old Laws of England, for those that now sit at Westminster, exercising the Supreme
Power, by two special Declarations, the one dated the ninth of February last, and the other the seventeenth of March last, have positively decla∣red, and called God to witness, that they will maintain, preserve, and defend that excellentest of Laws, the Petition of Right, as in the seventh page of the last Declaration they call it; and that the people of England shall enjoy all the benefit therein contained, whether to Life, Liberty, or Estate, with all things incident thereunto; and therefore I humbly beg and crave that favor from you, that seing to me you appear to be sent in an extraordinary manner, not according to the ordinary Customs of the Lawes of England, that you will be pleased to let me hear your Com∣mission read, that so I may consider of the consonancy thereof to the Pe∣tition of Right, and other the good old Lawes of England; and after the reading of it, I hope I shall return you such an answer as doth become a rational and ingenious man; who though he hath right to all the Privi∣ledges of the Laws of England, and hath read all the declared and plain Laws of England, that are to me the fundamentals of all, yet the practick part of the Law, which are in other Tongues besides the English, I can∣not read, know, nor understand; and in the Petition of Right, and other the good old Fundamental Lawes of England, I can find no Foundation or Bottome for such an extraordinary Court as this before my eyes seems to be; and therefore I again make it my most humble suit to hear your Commission read. Judge Kebell, M. Lilburn you are fully heard. M. Prideaux Atturney Gen. My Lord, the Prisoner at the Barre nor none else have cause to complain that he hath wanted your patience in be∣ing fully heard. My Lord, that which at the begining of his Arraignment you expected from him, which was to hold up his hand, he denyed, and upon his denyal, desired liberty of speech to speak, and he hath injoyed it: But my Lord, how pertinent his discourse is, to what was proposed to him, the Court and all that hear him will judge; My Lord, I am not here to justifie the act∣ings of those that here he hath complained against; but they are a Court, they are a Councel, and my thoughts are (and so ought his to be) honorable of them, and what they have done (my Lord) towards him in ordering this Court to try him, is but justice: My Lord, there is no speciall Commission of Oyer and Terminer but a generall Commission, and upon that general Commission, here is a special presentment of M. Lilburn here at the Barre, the general Commission is according to the Law of the Land, and upon that special presentment it is expected he may be proceeded against according to Law. And for your Commission, my Lord, that hath been read and pub∣lished
to the Court, before M. Lilburn came to the Court, and the Court is satisfied with it, that it is in the ordinary way, and I hope the judgement you will give, will declare it to be according to the Law, in the ordinary way: And as for the Commission it self in the form of it, it is not a tittle varied from the ordinary accustomed form. But my Lord, the Petition of Right, Magna Charta, the Statutes, and all Declarations that have been spoken of, they are all confirmed in this, and all do confirm it, for in that or∣dinary tract that hath been practised in this Nation for five hundred years is M. Lilburn now to be tryed, and that by the old good Lawes of England, M. Lilburns Birth-right and every mans else; he has his Triall, the begin∣ning of which hath been M. Lilburns present∣ment, which is already found by the Grand in∣quest, who are men of Integrity, men of ability, men of knowledge. My Lord, he is now to come to his Tryal, not in an extraordinary way, but by a Jury of good and Legal men of the Neigh∣bour-hood, by men that do know my Lord, and understand what is fact, what is LawMark that well, for Judge Jermane cal∣ed it a damnable Do∣ctrine, when Mr. Lilburn declared, the Jury were Judges of Law as well as of fact., and to do justice indiffer ently between both. And my Lord, I do know, and publish to all that now hear me, that the Commission for Triall of M. Lilburn this day, for those differences that arebetween the State and M. Lilburn is free in Law from all those excep∣tions that he is pleased to put upon it, and is unquestionably Legal, and used for these many hundred yeares together. And as for M. Lilburns decla∣ring the fact for which he was Originally imprisoned, for to be committed in Surry, and therefore there in Law he ought to be Tryed, and not here in London, being another County: As for M. Lilburns Crimes committed in Surry, his own Conscience best knows what they are; but M. Lilburn at most can but yet guesse at what we intend to Try him here for, or lay un∣to his charge. But my Lord, if M. Lilburn will please to put himself upon his Trial, according to Law, my Lord I hope the Court, and all that hears and sees their proceedings will receive full satisfaction in the legality and fairness of their proceedings against him, and himself the benefit of justice and Law. Lieut: Col. Lilburn. Sir, by your favour, in two words, I shall not be tedious; I now perceive who is my accuser and prosecuter, the Gentle∣man that is a very inequal one, for he is one of the Creators (being a Mem∣ber of the House) of you that sit here this day to be my Judges, and there∣fore an overawing and unfit accuser or prosecutor.
Lord Keeble. M. Lilburn, I pray you hear me a word, for now you speak not Rationally nor discreetly, you have had a fair respect and hearing, what you speak of liberties and lawes, we come here to maintain them for all, and for you too; and we also come for to vindicate our actions; and as for that you speak of in reference to the Commission, I must let you know, the Commission is warrantable by the lawes of England for this five hun∣dred years, nay and before five hundred years in substance: The second thing that you speak to, is, that you were apprehended in such an hostile manner, understanding by law you should have been taken in an ordinary way by an ordinary Officer: But M. Lilburn, in all apprehensions of Traitors, Fellons, and Murderers is not the Power of the County to be raised, and the Sherife is to call and take what Power he pleaseth. Lieut: Col. Lilburn. By your favour Sir, not unlesse I resist, which I did not, and besides, there was no Sherife nor no other civil Officer at my Apprehension. Lord Keeble, M. Lilburn spare your felf, it is as they are informed of the danger of the man, they may do it before ever they see him. The next thing you are upon, is the wrong and injustice that you received by the proceedings in the Star-chamber against you, you see the proceedings there have been questioned, and you justified; if there be any thing else that hath been by others in the North or elsewhere acted, there is no man here that will justifie them in their evil, but for a private man as you are to tell us of them here, and to come and tell us to our faces that we are Created and constitu∣ted by the Atturny General, we will not suffer it, nor further hear of it; and therefore M. Lilburn although you have spoken fair words, (and happily more then your friends expected from you) I must tell you that words are but words, and it were well that you would do as well and as Rationally as becomes a Rational man, as you have declared you will. Lieut: Col. Lilburn, With your favour but one word more. Judge Jerman. M. Lilburn, pray spare a word, and hear the Court, this Court sits here by lawful Authority, and that is from the Parliament, that are the Supreme Authority of England, so that our Power is not deri∣ved from those that have no Rightful Authority to constitute us, but our Power is from the Publick Authority of England, which is now by an Ad∣mirable act of Gods providence, lately, but truly revived, and settled by God upon them. By that Authority this Court doth now sit, and you are brought here before them that are most of us Judges of the Law, and we are sworn to do you and every man justice and right according as his cause requires; according to Law, Judgement, equity, and reason. And it was
said truly, that which my brother Heath (who now is dead) did say, Its the the duty of the Judges to be of Councel with the Prisoner, at the Bar before him, and to do that which they are sworn to do, and that you shall have; and accordingly you have received more favour then ever I heard, of a Priso∣ner that was accused of Treason in my life ever had. And as for the Commission, I must tell you, it is usual to have Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, and that even in Terme time for high offences, and such as tend to the destruction of the Nation, as Overburies did; and those that tend to Capital Treason, whereof you are now accused by a Grand-jury of Lon∣don, that are Free-men of London, Citizens, able men, men of Religion, men of Estate, men of Conscience, men of quality, these are your accusers; who have found you upon their Oaths guilty of Treason, and cry out to us the Judges for justice against you; and it is they, not we that proceeds a∣gainst you: And as for our Commission, it is according to the good old Laws of the Land, founded upon the Statute made in Edward the firsts time, cal∣led Westminster the second: That Statute Authorizeth Commissions, ac∣cording to that Commission we sit by here this day; and Edward the first was a wise and a good Prince, and consented to the People, to let them have such Commissions as ours we sit by is, which the People had fought stoutly for, in the Barrons wars in his Fathers time, and also in his, for he himselfe was taken Prisoner at Lewes in the County of Sussex; and being a wise Prince, he knew that the love of the people was not more to be got then by wholsome and safe lawes; that every mans life, and every mans estate, and every mans liberty might be preserved by, and not be subject to any Arbitrary Will or Power, but that the sober and discreet and wise Lawes of the Kingdome, which our Ancestors won by their swords, might be their pro∣tectors; a speciall, one of which was this Statute of Westminster the second made in Edward the Firsts time; by vertue of which Statute is this Com∣mission directed to the Justices of the one Bench and the other, and they be all here this day; but onely those that of necessity must attend at West∣minster, onely to preserve the Terme. Nou you are come to answer to that Charge, which hath been the greatest opposition to the settlement of Government that can be, I mean, the settlement of the Supreme Authority of the Nation, in the Commons now assembled in Parliament, not newly erected but revived into the right place and hands, for it is the Law of England revived, that the Supreme Authority is in theBut by his favour ne∣ver before practised nor used without both King and Lords, a president of which he is desired to shew and produce out of any of his Law Books. Commons assembled in the Parliament
of England: For so it was in the Saxons time, and in the Romans time, and in all timesBut there was before the Con∣quest neither Innes of Court, Lawyers, nor Term Iudges in England, but onely twelve good and legal men, chosen in each Hundred, finally to decide all con∣troversies; which lasted till Wil∣liam the Conqueror subdued that excellent Constitution, and instead thereof, introduced by His Will and Sword (contrary to His So∣lemn Oath three several times ta∣ken) the intolerable bondage of Westminster Hall, or Term Judg∣es, and their Outlandish or Nor∣man Law Practise in the French Tongue; as all the English Chro∣nicles universally and truly de∣clare. it hath bin as it is now; which will suf∣ficiently justifie our present Pro∣ceedings against you; and there∣fore I say, for the Commission it self, it is in general for the Try∣al of all Treasons what-soever: But the grand Inquest have found out no other Traytor that they may accuse, but Master John Lilburn, who is now here at the Bar; But it is not a bare accusation, but it is the solemne Verdict of almost a double Iury that hath appeared up∣on the Roll, and upon their Oaths do conceive those crimes of Trea∣son that are laid against you, to be of so dangerous consequence a∣gainst the State and Common-Wealth, that they do call for Iu∣stice against you as a Traytor, already found guilty: And therefore I do require you as you are an Englishman, and a rational man, that you do conform your self, and tell us plainly what you will do, as in reference to the putting your self upon your Tryal by the Law, and hear with Patience those Offences of Treason that are laid to your Charge. Lieut. Col. Lilburn. May it please you Sir, by your favor, I shall not now trouble you with many words. Lord Keeble. You go improperly to work. Lieut. Colonel Lilburne. That Gentleman I do not know his Name, (pointing to Judge Iarmen) you were pleased to say that I have had more Favour then ever you have heard of any before ever had in the like case: But Sir, by your Favour, I shall tell you of some that in the like case have had as much, if not more, and that was Throgmorton in Queen Maries time, who was impeached of higher Treason than now I am, and that in the daies of the com∣monly accounted bloudiest and cruellest Prince that this many hun∣dreds of years hath reigned in England; and yet Sir, I am sure in
this very place, and that by special Commission of Oyer and Ter∣miner; who was accused for be∣ing one of the chiefest Confede∣rates with Wyat in his Kentish Rebellion; which Wyat marched with an Army against the Queen to London, for which actual War or Rebellion, Throgmorton was in this place arraigned as a Traytor, and enjoyed as much, if not more favor then I have now enjoyed, although his then Judges and Pro∣secuter were bent to take awayWhose remarkable and excellent Defence, you may at large read in Hollingsheads Chronicle, in the life of Q. Mary, which discourse is ex∣cellently well worth the speedy Re∣printing, especially seeing men are made Traytors for words; which cruelty Q. Mary abhorred, as may cleerly be read in that excellent Statute of his, made in the first yeer of Her Reigne, Chap. 1. his life, right or wrong; and therefore Sir, by your favor, it is no ex∣traordinary favour that you have afforded me, it is but onely my right, by law, Justice, and common Equity: But Sir, I shall be short, and put my business to a plain issue, which is this. I have here at the Bar given in many strong Arguments against the validity and legality of a special Commission of Oyer and Ter∣miner, and supposing that to be such an one by vertue of which you sit, and intend to try me for my life; and therefore I have humbly desired (as in reason, and I think in law I may justly do) to hear your Commission read; But you have positively de∣nyed me that, and therefore I desire all my Friends, and all the people that hear me this day, to bear witness and take notice, that you contrary to Reason and common Equity, denyed me to let me hear read your Commission by Vertue of which you go about to take away my life; which I cannot chuse but desire them to take notice, I declare to be very hard measure. But Sir, to save my self from your fore-lay'd shares, and desired advantage against me, I will come a little closer to the business: You demand I should hold up my hand at the Bar, and I know not what it meanes, neither what in law it signifies; Its true, I have read the most part of the lawes that are in English, which I take to be the Foundation of all our English legal Priviledges, and in them I cannot find any thing that doth cleerly declare unto me the full signification or meaning of a mans holding up his hand at the Bar; Therefore if you please but to explain what the
meaning and signification of holding up the hand at the Barre is, I shall seriously consider of it, and I hope returne you a Ra∣tional and discreet answer; for truly in those lawes which are in the English Tongue that I have read, although I find mentioned maid of holding up the hand, yet I cannnt finde much of the full signification of it, onely I finde it to be of a large extent; and as for those lawes, or rather the practick part of the law, that are in French and Lattin, I cannot read them, and therefore much lesse understand them; in which regard, for me to hold up my hand at the Barre, before I understand the true signification of it in law, (which tells me it is in it selfe a ticklish thing) were for me to throw away my own life upon a puntillio or nicity, that I am ignorant of; and therfore truly I think I should be a very fool in my own ignorance to run that danger, & therefore Sir., I humbly desire the clear explination of the meaning of it in law, & after that I shal give you a fair & rational answer. Lord Keeble. M. Lilburn, you shall see we will deal very Ratio∣nally with you, (and not insnare you in the least manner) if that be all. The holding up of your hand, we will tell you what it meanes, and signi∣fies in Law; the calling to the party to hold up his hand at the Bar, is no more but for the special notice that the party is the man inquired for or called on, and therefore if you be M. Iohn Lilburn, and be the man that we charge, do but say that you are the man, and that you are there, and it shall suffice. Lieut. Col. Lilburn. I am Iohn Lilburn, son to M. Richard Lil∣burn of Lord Keeble, M. Lilburn, what you have to say we will hear pre∣sently, onely take notice, that we will take your acknowledging of your name to be sufficient, if you will say that you are the man; you are called by your name, you have come and answered to your name, in order to your answering, the Charge to be read against you; do but this and it shall suf∣fice, without holding up your hand: therefore let us have no more dis∣course as to that. Judge Jerman. M. Lilburn, pray spare me a word, for you have been heard with patience, you have desired to have the Right of the Law of England, and yet you do question a Fundamental thing that hath been alwayes used in case of Criminal offences. By the Law of England, that you desire to have the meaning of it, is but just but you must know that the Law of England is the Law of God, and if there be any thing in the Law
of England but what was by admirable Constitution and Reason, we would not meddle with it; but I pray know this, that the Law of England is no written Law, it is the Law that hath been maintained by our Ancestors, by the tryed rules of Reason, and the prime Lawes of Na∣ture; for it does not depend upon statutes or written and declared wordsBut saith M. Hyde in his fore-mentioned Argument, a∣gainst the Northerne special Commission of Oyer and Ter∣miner, pag. 411. Misera servitus est, ubi jus est vagum aut incog∣nitum. That is to say, It is a mi∣serable servitude, where the law is uncertain or unknown: And the very same saith that great Oracle of the law, Sir Edward Cook, in the Proem to the third part of his Institutes; and in the fourth part fol. 332. and in se∣veral places besides. But the peo∣ple may easily see hereby, that these present Judges drives to have no other law in being in England, but what is in their own and their masters brests, (that so by pretence of law, they may give away all the liberties and propri∣eties of the people of the Nation, as their brother Judges did late∣ly to the King, in the case of Ship money) and then woe and woe to the people to be brought back again to that Faith, that ignorance is the Mother of devo∣tion or obedience., or lines; and this is our Lawes that have been maintained by our Ance∣stors, and is subordinate to the law . Wil of God; therefore I say again, the Law of England is pure, Pri∣mitive Reason, uncorrupted and unpolluted by humane humors, or humane corruptions, Wits, or Wils; thats the Law of Eng∣land. There be two reasons why holding up the hand hath been used alwayes. First for notice that those that are called for Capital and Criminal offences, that they hold up their hands, is, to declare that they are the men. My Lord hath given you this one reason already, which I say is, hat he be notified by holding up thet hand to all the be∣holders and those that be present & hear him, that he is the man; but besides this, there is more in it, thats thus; a pure innocent hand, does set forth a clear unspotted heart, that so the heart and hand put together might betoken Inno∣cency. And therefore hold up your hand, that thereby you may declare you have a pure innocent heart; if you refuse to do this, you do wilfully deprive your self of the benefit of one of the main proceedings and customes of the Lawes of Eng∣land: Now for this do what you think fit.
M, Lilburn. Well then Sir, (applying himselfe to M. Keeble as the President of the Court) I take your Explanation of it, and lay hold of that. Lord Keeble. You must answer Positively Sir, for you have had ad∣vice enough, yea good advice if you imbrace it, it is good advice to you, but the Court doth not expect an answer from you to what hath been alrea∣dy said to you, but they expect that without any more dispute you apply your selfe to answer according to that which you are advised unto, do it if you will, and if you will but answer to it so as hath been declared to you, it shall suffice; but so farre you must go to this, as to declare whether you be the man or no before you go away; and therefore dispute it no more, lest you deprive your selfe of the benefit of the Law. Leut. Col. Lilburn. Well then Sir, according to your own expla∣nation, I say my Name is John Lilburn sonne to M. Richard Lilburn, of the County of Durham, a Free-man of the City of London, and some∣times Lieutenant Colonel in the Parliaments Army; and if you will not believe that I am the man, my Guardian the Lieutenant of the To∣wer there (pointing to him) will aver that I am. Lord Keeble. So then you are the man. Judge Jarmen. Ask him again, hearken M. Lilburn, hearken what he saies, and use that moderation, and temper, and discretion that you have promised. Lieut. Col. Lilburn. One word more, and I shall have done, and that is by the law of England, (but being interrupted he cryed out) with your favour Sir, I will come to the main thing, I hope you do not go about to Circumvent me, therefore heare me I beseech you. Lord Keebel. Hear the Court M. Lilburn, there shall be nothing of Circumvention or interruption, but as you have professed to be a Rational and understanding man in words, let your deeds so declare you. Lieut. Col. Lilburn. Sir, I beseech you do not supprise me with puntilios, or nicities, which are hard things for me to lose my life upon, I tell you again, my Name is John Lilburn, son to M. Richard Lil∣burn. Lord Keeble. Talk not of puntilios with us, nor talk not of Iudges made by the lawes, you shall not want law; but if you talk of puntilios here in this room, we will stop that language.
L. Col. Lil. Truely, Sir, I am upon my life, and shall my ignorance of the formalities of the law in the practicke part thereof destroy me, God forbid! therefore give me but leave to speak for my life, or else knock me on the head, and murther me where I stand, which is more righteous and just then to doe it by pretence of Justice. Sir, I know that Mr. Bradshaw himselfe, President to the high Court of Justice, as it was called, gave Duke Hamilton (a hostile enimy) leave to speak to the punctilltos of the law; yea, and to my knowledg again and again made an engagement unto him and the rest tryed with him, that the Court nor he would not by vertue of their ignorance of the meeties or forma∣lities of the law, take advantage against them to destroy them; but did declare again and again that all advantages of formalities should be to∣tally laid aside, and not in the least made use of against them to their pre∣judice, and I hope you will grant me, that have often beene in Armes for you, but never against you, as much favour and priviledge as was granted to Duke Hamilton, never of your party, but a Generall of a nu∣merous Army against you. Lord Keble. Take it as you will, we have had patience with you, and you must and shall have patience with us; wee will passe over all that is by past, but take heed by your surly crosnesse you give not advantage in the face of the Court, to passe sentence against you, without any further proceedings, or proofe of your actions, but what our own eyes see. The ceremony is for your advantage more then you are aware of: but if you confesse your selfe to be Mr. John Lilburn, we have done as to that. Judg Jarman. Mr. Lilburn, at the beginning you talked of moderation, and that you would cary your selfe with rationality, which methinks in your actions you fall short of, for you have said that Mr. Atturney generall was a very unequall prosecutor of you, because you say he was the creatorMr. Lilburn here endeavoted to speak, & shew the Judge his mistake, for he did not say that Mr. Prideaux was the creator of the commission, but that hee was one of the creators of all the Judges, & thereby was judge of his Judges, & in that regard he was no compotent accuser or prosecutor, but they would not suffer him to speak but cryed out, hear the Court, which thing also they frequently did after∣wards. of our Commission. Pray heare me, I heard you; and do not you think to put affronts upon us undisserv'd: And as for that man that you call M. Brad∣shaw, I tell you again he is L. Pre∣sident of the Councell of State of the Common-wealth of England, and why you should so much neglect him, doth not so much savor of rati∣onality and moderation, as you pre∣tend your selfe to bee possessed with.
Lord Keble. Come, will you read the Indictment? Mr. Broughton reads. Hold up your hand John Lilburn, and hearken to your charge. Thou standst indicted of high Treason by the name of John Lilburn, late of London, Gentleman, for that thou as a false Traitor, not having the fear of God before thy eyes, but being stirred up and moved by the instigation of the Devill, &c. as it followeth verbatim, in the second dayes proceedings, to which the Reader is referred. Mr. Broughton. What saist thou John Lilburn, art thou guilty of this Treason whereof thou standest indicted, or not guilty. L. Col. Lilb. Gentlemen, I require the favour that I may be heard, and I shall desire nothing but that which may stand with reason and justice. Lord Keble. Mr. Lilburn, We shall deale with you according to reason and justice, and after such a manner as you your selfe shall judge rationall and right. L. Col. Lilburn. Gentlemen, I shall speake but a few words, I be∣seech you hear me, for it is upon my life. Lord Keble. You say you will deale rationally in those wayes; that is to be expected from you the first in reason, is to answer, and plead, and before you so doe, you cannot be heard. L. Col. Lilburn. Give me leave to speak, and I shall not speak 6 lines (whic with much strugling being granted, Mr. Lilburn went on and said to this effect.) Then Sir, thus, By the laws of England I am not to answer to questi∣ons against, or concerning my selfe. Lord Keble. You shall not be compeld. Another Judg. Mr. Lilburn, is this to answer against your selfe, to say you are not guilty, by the lawes of the Land you are to plead to your charge, and it is no accusing of your selfe to say guilty, or not guilty. L. Coll. Lilb. Sir, by your favour.— Judg Keble. To answer that you are not guilty, is no great matter, nor definit in law. ☞ L. Col. Lilb. By the law of England I am to be tryed by a Rule, but I do not know by the rules of the law, what benefit, in reference to my exception against the illegality of my Indictment, I may deprive my selfe of, in case I should answer before I except. Lord Keble. The law is plain, that you are positively to answer, guilty or not guilty, which you please. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, By the Petition of Right, I am not to answer to a∣ny
Questions concerning my selfe; therefore I humbly entreat you to af∣ford e the priviledges of the laws of England, and I will return a po∣sitive answer to it, if you will but please to allow me Counsell, that I may consult with them, for I am ignorant of the formalities of law in the practick part of it, although I here declare I own the good old laws of England, and a legall Jury of 12. men, yea, and a tryall by a jury of legall men: and I doe humbly crave (Sir) a copy of the Indictment, or so much of it as I may ground my plea upon it, and reasonable time to consult with my Councell, although it be but 8. or 9. days. Lord Keble. You speak well, but you must doe well, 'tis that we come for, the rationablenesse of it is this, that you should shortly answer (Sir) to that question, and in a rationall legall way: when you have answered it, you shal have liberty to make your defence, to maintain that you say; but this that we speak now of, is a thing in your own breast, in your own knowledge, whe∣ther you be guilty of this that is laid to your charge, or no: And if you be clear, you cannot wrong your selfe, nor your conscience; for in saying not guilty, you know better what you say then any other doth. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I am ignorant of the formalities of the Law, ha∣ving no bookes in English wherein I can read them: and as for other tongues I understand none, and therefore for you to take away my life for my ignorance, when the practick part of the Law, or the formali∣ties thereof is lockt up in strange language, that it is impossible for mee to read or understand, is extream hard. It is true, in those English plaine laws which I have read, I find something spoken of it; but must aver that I find there is a great deale of nicity and danger in locking a man up to single formalities, in answe∣ring guilty, or not guilty, and therefore I beseech to assign me Councel, to informe my ignorance, and give mee but leave to consult with my Councell, and I will returne you an answer according to your desire, without any demurre, as soone as it is possible for mee to know what gronds I goe upon. Mr. Broughton. John Lilburn, what saist thou, art thou guiltie of the Treason laid unto thy charge, or art thou not guiltie. L. Col. Lilb. But under favour thus, for you to come to ensnare and entrap me with unknown nicities and formalities, that are lockt up in the French and Latine tongue, and cannot be read in English bookes, they being not exprest in any law of the Kingdome, published in our owne English tongue: it is not faire play according to the law of Eng∣land, plainly in English exprest in the Petition of Right, and other the good olde statute-Lawes of the Land: Therefore I again humbly desire
to have Councell assigned to me to consult with what these formalities in law signifie, so that I may not throw away my life ignorantly upon formes. Lord Keble. Mr. Lilburn, we cannot grant you that favour, it is not consistent to the law, whatsoever you say to the contrary? L. Col. Lilb. I hope you will not goe about to ensnare me, and take away my life for punctillios. Another Judg. Well then, you will not plead? L. Col. Lilb. Yes, if I may be allowed that which I conceive to be my birth right and priviledge, to consult with counsell, or that you please to make the sameengagement to me that Mr. Bradshaw, as the Pre∣sident of the high Court of justice made to Duke Hamilton, which was, that the Court would take no advantage at all at his ignorance in the nicities and formalities of the law in his pleading; let me but enjoy this engagement from you, and I will plead. Lord Keble. You shall have that which is according to the law, therefore Mr. Lilburn I advise you for to plad, and you shall have faire play, and no advantage taken against you by your ignorance of the formalitie of the law? L. Col. Lilb. Well then, Sir, upon that engagement, and because, I see you are so positive in the thing—This is my answer, that I am not guilty of any of the Treasons in manner and form, as they are there laid down in that indictment, pointing to it, and therefore now Sir, having pleaded, I crave the liberty of England, that you will assigne me coun∣sell. Mr. Broughton. By whom wilt thou be tried? L. Col. Lilb. By the known laws of England, and a legall jury of my equals, constituted according to law. Mr. Brought. By whom wilt thou be tried? L. Col. Lilb. By the known lawes of England, I meane by the liber∣ties and priviledges of the laws of England, and a jury of my equalls legally chosen: and now Sir, I again desire Counsell to be assigned me to consult with, in point of law, that so I may not destroy my selfe through my ignorance; this is but the same priviledg that was granted at Oxford unto me and the rest of my fellow prisoners arraigned with mee. One of the Clerks. You must say by God and your countrey, that's the forme of the law? L. Col. Lilb. Why must I say so? Another Judg. This is the form and law of the Land, will you plead Mr. Lilburn, according to the lawes of England?
L. C. Lilb. Truly I ver read it Sir, in the lawes of England, what it is to plead in this nature. Lord Keble. You say you will be tried by the lawes of the Land, then it is by the Countrey, and so you may plead and doe your selfe no harme; for by the Countrey is meant a Jurie of your equalls? L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I am doubtfull of my ignorance in the Lawes, yet I will returne you an answer, you making good your already engaged promises, that you will take no advantage against me, if through my ignorance, and your importunitie, I plead in any forme, that in stri∣ctnesse of acceptation may deprive me of any reall benefit the law will afford me. Judg Thorp. Mr. Lilburn, you will be tried by the law, and by the rules thereof, when you say so, you doe reallie declare it to be by your countrie, so that the true signification of being tried by the law, is the same thing in sub∣stance with being tried by the rules of the law. L. Col. Lilb. Then I hope my answer is cleare and fair, Sir. Judg Jermin. The formalitie is shortly this, to be tried by God and your countrie, no more is meant by it but thus, by God, as God is everie where present, yea, in all Courts of Justice, and sits and knows all things that are acted, said, and done; the other part of it by your countrie, that is, by your countrie or neighbourhood; the Countrie is called Patria, because your neigh∣bour and your equals which you are willing to put your self upon the triall of; by force of that word, the Countrie, a Jurie of the neighborhood for triall of you are summoned, now doe what you will. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, under your favour thus, then in the negative, I say God is not locally or corporally here present to try me, or passe upon me; but affirmative I returne this answer, that I desire to be tryed in the presence of that God, that by his omnipotent power is present eve∣ry where, and beholds all the actions that are done upon the earth, and sees and knows whether any of your hearts be possessed with a preme∣ditated malice against me, and whether any of you come with so much forethought of malice against me, as that in your hearts you intend to do the utmost you can, right or wrong to destroy me, and before this alseeing God I desire to be tryed, and by my Countrey, that is to say, by a jury of my equalls, according to the good old lawes of the Land. Justice Thorp. You have spoken very well. Lord Keble. You have done like an English-man so far as you have gone, and I doe assure that in any formalities (as you expresse, orcall them) there shall be no advantage againsty ou, if you mistake in them. Now what you have the next to thinke upon, is your Jurie of your countri-men, or neigh∣bours
of your equalls, and I promise you we will take are of that, that they shall be good and lawfull men of England? L. Col. Lilb. I thank you Sir, but under your favour thus, your indictment is extream long, and of aboundance of particulars, it is impossible that my memory, or of any one mans in England, can con∣tain it, or carry it in our heads, and therefore that I may make my de∣fence so as becomes a rationall English man: I earnestly entreat you that now you wil be pleased to give me a copy of my indictment, or so much of it, as you expect a plea from me upon, or an answer unto, and Counsell assigned me, and time to debae with my Counsell, and sub∣poena's for witnesses. Lord Keble. For ouncell you need none, Mr. Lilburn, for that not guilty which you have pleaded, is that which lies in your own breast, which rests in your owne counsell, and you know how it is, and can best plead that your self, Councell lies in matter of law, not of fact. L. Col. Lilb. Vnder favour I desire Councell, for matter of law, and not for matter of fact: My indictment I believe in law, is all matter of law, and I have something to say to it in law. Lord Keble. If matter of law doe arise upon the proofe of the fact, you shall know it, and then shall have Councell assigned to you. L. Col. Lilb. I my selfe have before this been upon some trialls, and never before this was denyed Councell, no nor so much as ever dis∣puted whether I should have it or no. I also was at a great part of the Earl of Straffords tryall, who was supposed a most notorious Traytor, and yet if my observation and memory doe not exceedingly faile mee, he had Councell assigned him at his first desire, and they were continu∣ally with him, not only at the Bar when he was there, but also had con∣tinuall and free accesse to him in prison. Besides Sir, I being accused of Treason in such an extraordinary man∣ner, and being but an ordinary man my selfe; no eminent experienced Lawyer, dare well meddle with my businesse, no nor so much as bestow a visit upon me; but he runs a hazard of being undone: and truly my estate is in an extraordinary manner taken from me, so that I have not money to send messengers up and downe privately to their chambers, and therefore that I may be freely and allowedly able, without danger of ruine to any man that shall advise me, I shall humbly crave as my right by law, and I am sure by common equity and justice, that I may have Councell and Soliciters also assigned me. Lord Keble. Mr. Lilburn, speake rationally for your selfe, when there comes a matter of law, that you are able to say, this is for matter of law,
arising from matter of fact, that hath been proved or endeavoured to be proved, when you come beyond that, you shall have it as willingly as you can desire, and withall, this that you say concerning your Memory, which you say is not able to carry away, or containe the particulars of this Inditement. The Inditement so much as will charge your memory will be very short, for it is the publishing of those books charged upon you in the Inditement, that will be the matter which will stick, and that matter will be very short, which we must prove against you, which is only mat∣ter of fact, and not of Law, And therefore for fact of Treason you can be allowed no Counsell, but must plead it your selfe. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, under favour, you expect from me impossibili∣ties, for seeing I have been seven moneths in prison for nothing, and could not in the least know perfectly what would be laid to my charge, nor after what manner I should be proceeded against (considering all proceedings against me hithertoward) have been so absolutely ar∣bitrary, that it was impossible for me in Law exactly to come provi∣ded) and therefore seeing I am now here, and you pretend to proceed with me according to the due course of Law, and seeing the forme of the proceedings in this manner with me is not expresly and ex∣actly declared in print in English, which tongue only I can read and understand, and seeing by the Law which is in English, which I have read, and clearly understand, that there are a great many snares, and a great many niceties in the practick, that are formall proceedings of the Law, and seeing I know not certainly, whether if I proceed to matter of proofe, before in Law I make my exceptions against your Inditement, as to matter, time, and place, I be not in Law deprived of that benefit, which I principally aime at for the preservation of my life, therefore I beseech and most earnestly entreat you, to assigne me Counsell to consult with, before I be too farre insnared, and if you will not doe it, and give me some reasonable time to prepare my plea and defence, then order me to be knock'd in the head immediately in the place where I stand without any further tryall, for I must needs be destroyed if you deny me all the meanes of my preservation. Judge Jermine. Mr. Lilburne, It were reasonable to give you satis∣faction, if you would receive it, you say you were present at my Lord of Straffords Triall, and you say he had Counsell assigned him, not only to stand by him at the Barre, but to repair to prison to instruct and advise, but that was not a Tryall in such a way as this is: It was a Triall by way of Impeachment before the Peers assembled in Parliament, and his At∣tainder was made up into an Act of Parliament, but that is not a Triall
at the common Law, per pares, which is, that which your self have desired, a Tryall by lawfull men according to the Liberties of the Lawes of England, After your Answer to your first question, that is to say, whether you be guilty or not guiltie of the things whereof you are accused, no Counsell in the world can follow till the Fact be proved, and matter of Law doe arise thereupon. So that the first thing that must be done, the matter of Fact must be pro∣ved against you, and then if it shall appear thereupon to the Court, that matter of Law doth arise, and you doe expect Counsell, we must and will performe it, the Court are of your Counsell so farre as to fact. And then in that case, that Law arise thereupon, you may and ought to have other Counsell assigned, and doe not you doubt but the Court will be as carefull of you, as you can be of your selfe, and allow you more favour, it may be, then your friends doe expect. L. Col. Lilb. Vnder your favour, and by your good liking; I was once Arraigned at Oxford for my life, upon the matter of Treason, for leavying war in Oxfordshire against the King, as their Indictment then said, and my Arraignment was by vertue of a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, that was (and in Law I am sure of it) as legall and as just as yours is, and my Lord Chiefe-Justice Heath, the chief Commissioner or President who was in the eye of the Law, as legall a Judge as any of you, and yet he— Lo. Keble. Mr. Lilburne, we doe remember it. L. Col. Lilb. I beseech you give me leave to speake for my selfe, and to goe on, for my life lies upon it. Lo. Keble. Heare me one word, and you shall have two. This that you did speake but even now, doe not you thinke that we have such bad memories, as that we have alreadie forgot it, your life is by Law as deare as our lives, and our soules are at stake if we doe you any wrong. L. Col. Lilb. I wish you may be sensible of that Sir. Judge Jarman. Mr. Lilburne you need not to say so, our soules are upon it, and we are to stand or fall by Justice and righteousnesse as well at your selfe is. L. Col. Lilb. I say my Lord Heath, and the Court at Oxford, pro∣fered me Counsell before any one witnesse was produc'd to my face, or any matter of fact came to the proofe, yea, and gave me Liberty to make my exceptions to the insufficiencie of the Indictment, which was very short in comparison of yours; I crave the same priviledge from you (the nations pretended friends) that I found at Oxford, a∣mongst its declared pretended enemies, against whom in severall bat∣tells I had fought; And I hope you that pretend to be the preservators
of the Liberties of England will not be more cruell, and unrighteous then the declared destroyers of them, if you will not allow me Coun∣sell as I had there, I have no more to say to you, you may murder me if you please. Judg Jerman. You were pleased to mention some presidents of those that have been accused of high Treason, that have had Counsell assigned to them, and for one you mention, that of my Lord of Strafford, whose Tiall I told you was Parliamentarie before the House of Peers, upon the impeachment of the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, and so it went on in a Parliamentarie way, their proceeding is in an ordinarie course of the ordina∣rie qundam Court of Justice according to the common law. Now for my L. of Strafford, give me leave to observe this; he had no Counsell assigned him untill such time as questions of the law did arise, which required Councell, and then he had Counsell assigned him, but not before; for that my Lord doth not say, that you shall have no Counsell, but that you shall have that which the law allows: and as for that which you speake of counsell at Oxford, it could not be; but when upon the proose of matter of fact, it appears to the Court, that there is any Question or matter of law arising upon the fact: And when it doth so appear unto us, then you shall have Councell for that; but (I beseech you) hear me on, You are now come before us according to the common law, to be tried by your Countrie, there is now nothing in question, but whether that matter, that thing, those words contained in the Indict∣ment read to you, be true, yea, or no; that is, whether they be done, or no, for wee will not give Counsell to plead to the matter of fact contained in your owne bookes, which you remember very well. L. Col. Lilb. Those books supposed mine: pray let me have sair play, and not be wound and scru'd up into hazards and snares. Lord Keble. If they be not yours upon good grounds proved before you, you are in no danger: and if upon the proofes of the words and deeds done, there doe appear matter of law, you must and shall have counsell; stay till that be done, in the meane time the Court will take care that a Jurie shall be returned of honest and sufficient legall men to judge of the proofes. L. Col. Lilb. There was arraigned with me at Oxford Collonel Vi∣vers of Banbury now alive, and Capt. Catesby who is dead: I will bring Coll. Vivers to depose here upon his Oath, that my Lord Heath & the rest of the Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer proffered me Counsell, and allowed me and him Counsell before ever so much as any witnes∣ses were produced, to prove the least matter of fact: and if you wil not be so just towards me as the Cavalliers were, and allow me Counsell as they did. I have no more to say, but resolve upon this score, to stand,
and here to dye upon the principles of an Englishman: If you will not be so just as the Cavalliers were, with whom you and the Parliament set us together by the eares to fight with, pretendedly for their injustice, let God and all righteous men judge betwixt you and me. Judg Nichols. If you will not be led by the proceedings of law, it will be worse for you, and you are to know this is not Oxford. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, by what better rules of the Law can I be led by, then those that I have before my eyes: I am sure at Oxford, as my right by Law, I was, before any fact was proved, proffered Counsell by my Judges which were my Lord Heath, & Mr. Gardiner. Now Sir Tho∣mas Gardiner, who is now in London, if you please I will produce him to this Barre, to justifie it upon his Oath, that the Lord Chiefe Justice Heath in his presence proffered me Counsell upon my Arraignment for Treason there, as my right by the priviledges of the lawes of England, before the fact came to be proved; yea, and also gave mee liberty to al∣sign the errours of my indictment. He is now in London, and I will produce him here at this Barre (if you please) to justifie what I say, if you will give me time, and enable me with ability to summon him in. Judg Nicolls. Mr. Lilburn, whether Mr. Gardiner will justifie it or no, it is nothing to us, for we are not to walke by Oxford presidents, but by the rules of the law, and the law will afford you no Counsell, but in points of law arising upon proofe of the factWhat a lying Judge is this Mr. Nicols, when as he himselfe with Mr. John Minard the Lawyer, was assigned by the President, Lord chief Baron Wild, to be of the Councell with Major Rolph upon his desire, & that before e∣ver the grand Jurie found his in∣dictment of Treason, as is fullie declared in the next daies follow∣ing plea of Mr. Lilburn.. L. Col, Lilb. Vnder favour thus: I conceive the presidents at Oxford, so far as they are righteous, are fit for your imitation, and whether it be a righteous thing for you, when I am tryed for Treason before you, to bee more cruell towards me, who have fought for you, then the Cavalliers at Oxford, in the like case were, a∣gainst whom I fought: and I must tell you, I further conceive it the most unequall and unjust thing in the world, for me to have to doe, upon the tryall of my life, with all the Judges of the Land (who are all engaged men) that have had above 6. months time to beat their brains together, with the assistance of divers of my Adversaries, who are Parliament-Men, that were the creators of their power, and for one of them to be my prosecutor: And in this sxtraordinary case, for me to be denyed to consult with Councel, I tell you Sir it is most unjust, and the most
unrighteous thing in my apprehension that ever I heard of, or see in all my life. O Lord! was there ever such a pack of unjust and unrighteous Judges in the world? Sir, in plain English let me tell you, if I had thought you would have bound me up to a single plea, and not have given me in my plea the just latitude of law, equity & reason, but hold mee thus close to your single formalities contrary to your promises, I would ra∣ther have dyed in this very Court before I would have pleaded one word unto you, for now you goe about by my owne ignorance and folly to make my selfe guilty of taking away my own life; and therefore, unless you will permit mee Counsell, upon this lock, I am resolv'd to dye. Lo. Keble. This is not the rationall way you said you would goe in. L. Col Lilb. Sir, my life is before you, you may murther me, and take away my blood if you please. Lo. Keble. I will not be out-voiced by you, our lives and our soules are upon it, therefore you shall have equity and Justice, yea, such as you desire your selfe; but you are now going to flie into extravagancies & heats, wch will manifest the rancour of the distemper'dnesse and invenom'dnesse of spirit which is within you: And besides, if we should enter into it, we might agra∣vate your crimes by your own words at the Bar. Take heed of it, that you give not advantage against your selfe to your own ruine. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I am in no heats, I am but with earnestness plea∣ding for my life, when you deny me all the just means of my preservati∣on, which is my right and due by your own law. Judg Thorp. Mr. Lilburn, I desire to correct a mistake of yours in the law: You were pleased to condemn it as unjust; for the Atturney Generals speaking with me, when your Indictment was a reading, you are to know, he is the prosecutor for the State here against you, and he must confer with us upon severall occasions, and we with him, and this is law. L. Col. Lilb. Not upon the Bench (Sir) by your favour, unlesse it be openly, audibly, and avowedly, and not in any clandestine and whispe∣ring way: And by your favour, for all you are a Judge, this is law, or else Sir Edward Cooke in hisWhose words there fol, 29. 30. are so plain & expresse to prove what Mr. Lilb. said to be good law, as nothing in the world can be plai∣ner, see also to the same purpose the 2d part Inst. fol. 49. 03. 104. 3d. part Inst. Cap. high Treason or petty trea∣son, hath published falshoods, and the Parliament have licenced them; for their stamp in a speciall manner, is to that booke. Judg Thorp. Sir Edw. Cook is law, and he says the Atturney generall or any other prosecutor may speak with us in open Court, to inform us about the businesse before us in open Court.
L. Coll. Lilb. Not in hugger-mugger, privately or whisperingly. Judg Thorp. I tell you Sir, the Attourney Generall may talke with any in the Court by law, as he did with me. L. Col. Lilb. I tell you Sir it is unjust, and not warrantable by Law, for him to talk with the Court, or any of the Judges thereof in my ab∣sence, or in hugger-mugger, or by private whisperings. Lord Keble. No (Sir) it is no hugger mugger for him to doe as he did: spare your words, and burst not out into passion, for thereby you will declare your selfe to be within the compasse of your Indictment without any further proofe; looke to it, that you behave your selfe according to the bounds of rea∣son and law, and heare me, for we must cause the Jurie to be returned. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, under favour I crave but one word more, heare mee out; I know very well, and I read in your own law books such a pre∣rogative, as that in cases of Treason no Counsell shall plead against the King, hath been sometime challenged to be the Kings Right by Law; but let me tell you, it was an usurpt prerogative of the late King, with all other arbitrary Prerogatives and unjust usurpations upon the peoples rights and freedoms, which has been pretended to be taken away with him: And Sir, can it be just to allow me Counsell to help me to plead for my estate, the lesser, and to deny me the help of Counsell to enable me to plead for my life, the greater. Nay, Sir, can it be jst in you Judg∣es, to take up 7 years time in ending some suits of law for a little Mo∣ney or Land, and deny me a few dayes to consider what to plead for my life? Sir, all these pretences of yours, were but all the prerogatives of the Kings will, to destroy the poore ignorant and harmlesse people by, which undoubtedly died with him, or else only the name or title is gone with him, but not the power or hurtfull tyrannie or prerogative in the least. Therefore, seeing all such pretended and hurtfull preroga∣tives are pretended to be taken away with the King, by those that took away his life, I earnestly desire I may be assigned Counsell to consult with, knowing now especially no pretence why I should be denied that benefit and priviledge of the law, of just and equitable law of Eng∣land, having put my selfe upon a Triall according to the priviledges thereof: And it was declared to me at Oxford, upon the Triall of my life there, after I was taken prisoner, fighting against the King and his partie, even almost to handigripes, and to the sword point, and to the but end of our Musquets, being in person one of that little number that for many hours together at Binford fought with the Kings whole Ar∣mie, whers in the manner, without any Articles or composition I was taken a prisoner, and immediatly thereupon arraigned at Oxford, where
notwithstanding all this, it was declared to me by Judg Heath to be my right by the law of England to have Counsel assigned me to help me in point of law, & I had it granted: I confesse he is my best Authority that I have, and I am sure he was a Judg of the law, or else I had never plea∣ded to him, & he was upon hisoath to doe justice and right, and he was an able and understanding Lawyer, and yet did allow me (an hostile e∣nemie) counsell to help me army right by law, before ever any proofe to matter of fact was produced and I beg but the same legall priviledg from you, from whom I have more cause to expect it Lord Keble. Were you there indicted for Treason? L. Col. Lilb. Yes, that I was, & for the highest of Treasons by the let∣ter of the law, for actuall levying war against the King. Judg Thorp. And yet for all that you know it was no Treason, & so did he too, for you know that you had committed no Treason at all in obeying the Parliaments command; for what you have done, was done by the Parliaments speciall authoritie and command, and you had your commission to justifie you in your hostile actions, and he knew it well enough your Act was no Treason, though he did offer you counsell, or else he durst not allow you counsell. L. Col. Lilb. I had nothing to justifie me in that Act but the equitable sense of the law, the letter of it being point blank against me, and on the Cavalliers side, by which if they had prevailed, they might have hang'd both you and me for levying War against the King, notwithstan∣ding ou Parliament Commissions: and this I know Sir, you know to be law in the letter or punctillioes of it. Judg Thorp. It was no Treason in you, and he that assigned you coun∣sell knew it was no Treason, and this arraignment of you was as illegall as his assigning you counsell. L. Coll. Lilb. Sir by your favour, he was a Judge of the law by legall Authority, being made by the King, in whom by law that power was invested, and he looked upon himself as a legall Judg, and so did I too, and as a legall Judg he arraigned me for doing that act, that by the ex∣presse letter of the law was Treason, and as a legall and honest Judge ac∣cording to his duty in law he allowed me Councell. Judg Jerman. For that matter that you talke of, they knew it was no Treason, and therefore gave you more priviledges thn was their right by law, very well knowing, that whatsoever was done to any of you that did fight for the laws, religion, and liberties of their Country, there might be the like done to others that were prisoners in the Parliaments power, and this was the truth of it, and you know it very well, and therefore it is nothing to us, nor in law his willingnesse.
L. Col. Lil. Vpon my letters after the first day of my Tryall, that De∣claration of lx tal ois was made, as clearly appears by the words and date of it now in print, which the Reader may peruse in the 1. part of the Parliaments Declarations, p. 802, 803. Judg Thorp. I wonder they did not proceed in the prosecution of the In∣dictment, and find you guilty of Treason, and so to execution. L. C. Lil. Vnder-your favour thus, I appeared at the Bar, I pleaded to my indictment not guilty, I made exceptions against my indictment, and my selfe and the other 2 Gentlemen arraigned with me had Coun∣sell assigned us as our right by law: And the Judges most fairly & ratio∣nally further told us, Because we will not surprize you, wee will give you a weeks time to consider (with what Counsel you please in Oxford to choose to come unto you) what to plead for your lives, & whatsoever other priviledges you can claim by the liberties of the law of England, you shall enjoy them to the utmost: Vpon which premise I spoke in o∣pen Court to the Judg, shewing him the irons upon my hands, in wch I was arraigned, and told him: My Lord, by the lawes of England, no prisoner for any crime soever, that behaves himselfe civilly and peace∣ably in his imprisonment, ought to be put in irons, or to any other pain or torment before he be legally convicted: and therefore I desire as my right by law, that my irons may be taken off. And I said further, My Lord, I am shut up a close prisoner in my chamber, denyed the use of pen, ink, and paper, which is contrary unto law, especially in the time of my Triall. Why sayes he, you shall be released from your irons, from your close imprisonment, and have the use of pen, inke, and paper, and Capt Lilburn, I tell you, you shall enjoy whatsoever other priviledge you can challenge as your right by law; for the law of England is a law of mercy, and I hope we shall appear just Judges of it: and therefore you shall freely have either Lawyer, or whom you will in Oxford, to come unto you to help you and advise you. And says he, because you shall see that law and justice is of the Kings side against the Parliament, and because they shall have no cause to calumniate us at Westminster, and to say we are unrighteous and unjust Judges, that surprize you, and thereby goe about to murther you, the Court is freely willing to give you a weeks time to consider with your Counsel in the mean time what this day sev'ight to plead for your life, in which time being freed of my irons, and of my close imprisonment, & enjoying pen, ink, and paper at my pleasure, by speciall order from the other 2. Gent. I writ a letter to my wife, & in it enclosed another to your Speaker & another to yong Sir Henry Vane, then my familiar acquaintance, all which I sent in post hast away to my wife by the hands of Capt. Primroses wife, which Cap.
Primrose was prisoner there; & his wife who brougt up the letter to my wife, is now in London, which letter my wife delivered to the Speaker, &c. and by her importunate solicitation, procured the Declaration of lex talionis, the substance of which, in a letter from Mr. Speaker, my wife brought down to Oxford, and delivered to the Lord Heaths own hands, upon the Sunday after the first day of our arraignment, and the 3d day before we were to appear again, my Wife arrived at Oxford with the Speakers letter which she delivered to Judg Heath himself, which letter taking notice of our tryall, threatned them with lex talionis, to doe the like to their prisoners that they did to us, or any of us: and they having many of their great eminent men prisoners in the Tower, and in War∣wick Castle and other places, did induce them to stop all further prose∣cution of Col. Vivers, Capt. Catesbie, and my selfe. And if it had not been for this threatning letter, in all likelihood we had all 3. been con∣demned by a commission of Oyer & Terminer, & executed; for my wife did heare Judge Heath say to some of his Associates at his reading of the letter, that as for all the threatning part of it, as to his particular selfe, I value it not; but said he, we must be tender of the lives of the Lords & Gentlemen that served the K. & are in the custody of those at Westmin∣ster, and that clause of lex talion is put a stop to our proceedings and fur∣ther tryals at law. L. Keble. It was well for you, by your storie that you do tell, that you had so fair play; you shall have with us, who are upon our lives & oaths, as much as the law will afford you, & so much as our judgement and consciences can lead us to, without doing injustice in granting more then the laws of England wil afford: what was done there, is nothing to us here, for we are not to walke by their president, but by our owne Judgments, according to the aules of the law: & here tis thus far just, that upon the proof of matter of fact, if law do arise you are to have counsell, if not, you are to have none. By your allega∣tion, you say, you had counsell assigned you before any matter of fact came to be proved, when as a Judg of the law he could not but do it; but if he did it is nothing to us, we cannot do it; yet we have in this place proceeded legally hi∣therto with you, & when that matter of law doth arise from the fact, as you had counsell there assigned you, so shall you have here, & you shal have faire dealing, & fair play according to law, which is absolutely as I tell you. L. C. Lil. Sir, by your favour I crave but one word more, and that is this; here is a Gentleman that is a by-stander, a friend of mine, and my Solliciter, who by law as wel as any other by stander mayCook in his Inst. 3. part. c. petty treason, fol. 29. is ex∣presse in this particular, so is he in c. 63. being his cp. of counsell, learned in pleas of the Crown, fol. 137. speak for the prisoner at the Bar, in case he perceive things urged against him contrary to law, and therefore I desire he may speak two or three words. (Mr. Sprat beginning to speak.)
Lord Keble. Spare your selfe, when your time comes you shall speak. Mr. Sprat. He asked leave for me first: And Sir it is easie to prove the whole indictment to be matter of law. Judg Jerman. What impudent follow is that, that dare be so bold as to speak in the Court without being called. Mr. Lilburn, by your own words you say you were told at Oxford, that by law you were to have counsell: that is as true, that the Court is of counsel for the prisoner arraigned at the Bar, & so we ought, & shall permit you other counsell, if matter of law upon the proof of the fact do arise; but for any other counsell to be assigned you before that appear, is not by law warranted, we shal tread the rules of justice: and we shall doe wrong to the whole common-wealth, if we should allow you counsell before matter of law doth arise from the proof of the fact, and to allow coun∣sel in any other case, the Court commits injustice. Lord Keble. And this Mr. Lilburn I will promise you, that when there comes matter in law, let be a Lawyer or your selfe, he shall speake in your behalfe, but before he cannot. L. C. Lil. Sir, the whole indictment under favour is matter of law, & the great question that will arise (admit the fact should be true, and ad∣mit it should be granted) is, whether the words be Treason in law, yea, or no, & also it is matter of law in the indictment, whether the matter in the indictment be rightly alledged, as to matter, time and place. And it is matter of law in the indictment where there divers several preten∣ded treasons committed in divers and severall Counties, put into one and the same indictment, be legall yea, or no. Lord Keble. Vpon proof of the matter of fact, you shall hear & know whe∣ther matter of law will arise, and till the words be proved, wee cannot say whether that be the law that you suppose. L. C. Lil. Truly Sir, you promised me a faire Tryall, & that you would not take advantages of my ignorance in the laws formalities; but the Lord deliver me, and all true hearted Englishmen from such unjust and untighteous proceedings as I find at your hands, who goe about I now clearly see, by my ignorance in holding mee to a single & naked plea, which is purely as bad, if not worse then all the prerogatives: & for the worst & grossest of his prerogatives in a more rigorous manner then they were used in his life time, to be thus prest upon me at this day, after bee hath lost his life for pretended tyranny and injustice, liberty and freedom in publick Declrations de∣clared to the Kingdom, I say if there be justice and equity in this I have lost my under∣standing, & the good Lord God of heaven deliver me from all such justiciaries. L. Keble. M. Lilb. you have bin arraigned before us for high Treason, & we bid you forbear those tearms of yours, long agoe, speak that you doe ratio∣nally, and you shall have fair and christian answers and replies, as ever any man-had at a Bar, & goe on, you shall have it still, if you will be fair and rationall, & not break out into extravagancies and bitternesse of spirit.
L. Col. Lilb. For my part, Sir, I must look upon my selfe as a lost and dead man, if I have not counsell to help my ignorance to pitch upon those things that tend to my preservation: and therefore if you willl not assigne me Counsell to advise and consult with, I am resolved to goe no further, though I die for it, and my innocent blood be upon your heads. Justice Jermin, You have alledged part of the Law of England for your own advantage; but every one that says so, does not prove it to be so: you have sayd you will be tried by the Lawes of England, and yet against the Lawes of England you have utterly refused, in that you would not hold up your hand, which I doe not know any English that ever refused so to doe, but your selfe: you have been told by the Court what the Law of England is, and yet you will not be satisfied. We are upon our Oathes, and therefore will discharge our con∣sciences, and that in, or more eminent manner than my brother Heath did, although we doe not deny your liberty to speak for your self. But now you who would have Counsell assigned before any matter of Law doth appeare upon the proofe of the fact, which we cannot doe: for it were to doe injustice, and to dee against the Law, which the Court cannot justifie. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, under favour, whether or no I have transgrest the Law, I will not judge; but I am sure the Law in the equity and intention of it, would have all trials to be equall, and not prejudicial. My prose∣cutors have had time enough to consult with counsell of all sorts and kinds to destroy me, yea & with your selves, and I have not had any time at all, not knowing in the least what you would charge upon me, and therefore could provide no defence for that which I knew not what it would be: And if by the law of England I cannot have counsell, then up∣pon your own grant, which is, That the Lawes of God are the Lawes of England, I desire to have the priviledge of the law of God; which you your selfe said is the law of England; and I am sure the law of God is, that you should doe as you would be done to: now it cannot be according to the law of God, for my adversaries to have the helps of all manner of councels, by snares, tricks and provocations to take away my life, and for me to be denied the benefit to consult with any to preserve my inno∣cent life against potent Malice. L. Keble. You say well, the law of God is the law of England, and you have heard no law else but what is consonant to the law of Reason, which is the best law of God. and here is none else urged against you. Another Judge. The Lawes of God, and the Lawes of Reason, and the Lawes of the Land, are all joyned in the Lawes that you shall bee try∣ed by.
Iustice Iermin. The question is but this, Whether the Law of God and the Law of Reason, and the Law of Man may be consonant to each other, and whe∣ther the Court or Iohn Lilburne shall bee Judges thereof, that is the que∣stion. L. Keble. And that which you said Mr. Atturney hath had so much time against you, and opportunity to consult with all manner of Counsell to destroy you, your secret actions, though they are now come to publick view, are so hey∣nous, as that they doe require time to put them into the most sure way of tryall, we have proved the clandestinesse of them; you did this in secret, now it is come to the face of the world. Now this being matter of fact, no matter of law can appeare till proofe passe upon it; you have had times to complot your treasonable venomous Bookes, which shall be proved upon you, and till this bee done there is no matter of law to be lookt at. This is the law of God, when a man hath done such treasonable things, he shall answer directly and positively, whether he be guilty of them or no; and if he answer, Not guilty, and they be not fully proved against him, there needs no more to be said. Iustice Thorp. Mr. Lilburne, there fell some words from you even now, wherein you think you have this hardship put upon you, when you say the Judges & your persecuters have had 6 moneths time to meet together and consult together how to destroy you: First, I would not have you to beleeve, nor the rest that heare it, That that is true that you say: for I speake it for my owne particular, that I never saw your Indictment till this time that I came here, and yet you say we have had six moneths together to frame it. These are your words, this was not rightly done of you: for it is not true, I speake in my own particular. L. Col. Lilb. I am sure the substance of it you might see many mhs agoe, and though all you Judges have not at one time met about  yet the greatest part of you have that commonly carry the domination of the whole, and at Serjeants Inne with Mr. Attorney Generall, the most of the Judges of England have had severall meetings, 6.5. and 4. months agoe, for I have had friends there that have seene it, and who have en∣quired into the Cause of such solemn meetings, and your own Servants have told them it hath been about me and my Tryall. Justice Thorpe. I speak as for my own particular that I was never there, and that I never see your Indictment till this time. Iustice Termin, Why Mr. Lilburne, might we not have such meetings as those, your businesses being a matter of this importance as this is, through the haynousnesse of your offence, and that it might be so grounded as the Warrant of
the Law is, the Judges did meete, and they ought to meeteBut Cooke in his Chapter of petty Treason, in 3. part. instit. fo. 29. expresy saith, and to the end, that the Tryall may be the more indifferent, seeing the safety of the Prisoner, consisteth in the indiffe∣rency of the Court, the Judges ought not to deliver their opinions before hand of any criminall case that may come before them judicially, and he there cites Humphery Stratfords Case, that arch Traytor, in which Hussey chief Justice, besought H. 7. not to demand of them their opinions before hand, and in 4. part. institutes, Chapt. High Court Parliament, fo. 37. he fully shewes the evill of asking Judges Opinions before hand. to con∣sider of it, that nothing should be done against you, or any man else, contrary to the Law; but-yet for my part, my dwelling is out of London, I heard not of it so soone as you speak of, but after I came to Town, I confesse I heard of it, and have been present about some debates about it. L. Col. Lilb. Onely this I say, if by your prerogative you will destroy me as Nebuchadnezer did endeavour to destroy Dani∣el by his prerogative, I am as willing to dye, as he was to be throwne into the Lyons Denne, and if you will not allow me Councel to consult with, what Plea to make for my life, I have no more to say, Sir, it is but a vaine thing to spend any more words. L. Keble. These are but words, and flourishes Sir, that you are so willing and ready to die as you declare you are; but if you be, it is the better for you: And also it is well you have not to do with Judges, that would be austeare up∣on you, for you to terme us to be men that come hither to destroy you as Nebu∣chadnezzar went about to doe Daniel, you may judge of what is within you, but of us, what is within us, you cannot judge; you shall have justice here in the face of the Countrey, and of all that heare us, these shall be Judges of our pro∣ceedings towards you: take heed, Mr. Lilburn, this language is but the sparks of that venemous heat that is within you, and they may burst out to prove you guilty before us, and in our presence, of that you are charged with, without any further proofe or proceedings; for you may doe it, you may do it where you stand, and therefore be advised, and take heed what you say. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I have cast up my Account, and I know what it can cost me, I blesse God I have learned to dye, having alwayes carried my life in my hand, ready to lay it down for above this 12. yeares together, having lived in the favour and bosome of God, and I blesse his name, I can as freely dye as live. L. Keble. You shall not now lay it down, if you do not destroy nor cast away the Common-wealth; but if you go about to destroy the Common-wealth, the
Common-wealth will spue you up and destroy you. L. Col. Lilb. I desire nothing but Councell, and a little time to con∣sult with them, and to produce my Witnesses, and a Copy of my In∣dictment; if not, I am willing to die as the object of your Indignation and malice, do your will and pleasure. L. Keble. We are willing to die too. Mr. Attorney. What is agreeable to the Law of England, the constant setled practice of trying Prisoners, will not be denyed Mr. Lilburne; but as for that priviledge that was granted unto him at Oxford, is no tye in Law to us, neither was it ever heard of in England, that any that did understand the Law, did ever as Mr. Lilburne now desires, allow Councell to a Prisoner for such an Act as this is, or had the Copy of the Indictment, it shall not be de∣nyed Mr. Lilburne, which is his right by Law in its due place: But to make new Presidents and new Lawes, which my Lord when done by such a Bench as this is, most of the Judges in England being present, runs to all crimminall cases whatsoever, whether in treason, murther, or other fellonies; its true, Mr. Lilburn is now onely concerned in it, but if granted to him, it would be a pre∣sident to all future times, by meanes of which, there would never be an end of Tryalls in crimminall Cases. And it is a wonderfull strange thing to me, That when the Prisoner hath pleaded the usuall way, you proceed not immediately to tryall, its true Mr. Lilburne hath pleaded his own ignorance, and therefore desires longer time; but my Lord, to make a President of this nature that ne∣ver was known by the Lawes of England is very dangerous, very perilous. My Lord, the things that I presse is not in relation to time, but in relation to the publique Justice; for by the same reason its granted him, it ought not to be denyed to any man that asketh it, neither for Treason or Felleny, and of what evill consequence it would be, I leave your Lordship and the Court to judge. My Lords, I do humbly desire that Mr. Lilburn may be dealt with all le∣gall, just, and faire proceedings from the Court. My Lord, I do desie accor∣dingly, that proceedings may for the Common-wealth be so too, and that Mr. Lilburn may be without delay according to Law, proceeded against for his no∣torious treasons. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, with your favour I shall crave but one word, this Gentleman declares unto you what an evill President it would be to give me a little time to consult with Councell, to frame a Plea for my life, and yet that Judge was pleased to say the Law of England is founded upon the Law of God, and the Lawes of Reason, unspotted, uncorrupted, or undefiled, I am sure the Law of God, and the Law of uncorrupted Rea∣son is to do as you would be done to, and not to lay snares for your Neighbours life, I am sure the Law of God would have all Tryalls indif∣ferent
and no mans life surprized or taken away by nisities or formali∣ties, though never so notoriously accused. And Sir, for Mr. Prideaux and others of you, so often to call me notorious Traytor as you do: I tell you Sir, you reproach me, for though I am never so notoriously accused, yet in the eye of the Law of England, I am an innocent man, yea as in∣nocent as any of those who call me Traytor, till such time as I be legally convicted of the fact or crime laid unto my Charge, and therefore Sir, I beseech you cease your calumniating of me, for you thereby deale not fairly nor segally with me. And Sir, I confidently hope, I shall appear in the eye of the Law, in the eyes of you, and in the eyes of all men that hear me this day, an innocent, a just, and a true English-man, that really loves the welfare of his native Country, if I may have faire play, and the scope of the Law. And therefore Sir, blemish me not in the eares of the auditors, till the Law, and a conviction by it do blemish me; for I tell you, I am in the eye of the Law, as innocent as any of your selves till I be justly convicted; and therefore I pray cease the calling of me Traytor in this manner. L. Keeble. What need we any more when we are of your opinion, we wish you may come as lerly off as you say you hope to do? Mr. Atturney. My Lord, and that it may be so declared, and that the world may know whether Mr Lilburne be an innocent man or no, I pray put it to the finall issue, and let the Law udge. Leiut. Col. Lilburne Vnder favour, for me to be denyed Law, which I conceive is done unto mee, when I am denied Councell, and to put the nicities and formalities of the Law upon me, the signification of which are writ in such language and tongues as I cannot read, much lesse under∣stand; and would you destroy me for the not knowing of that which it is impossible for me to know. Sir, I beseech you be not so extreame to∣wards me, that Gentleman saith, the Law of God is the Law of England, and it would have no snares laid to take away a mans life; I pray let me have the benefit of that? Mr. Atturney. Once you had, and it is but just you should, and I am sure it will be granted unto you. L. Keeble, Mr Lilburne you say well, the prisoner loth not know the Law, you do not, and many others do not; but I tell you againe, you know so much of the Law as is sutable to this Plea, you your self know, whether your Conscience accuse you guilty of the fact laid unto your charge or not; for our parts, we say no more then 21 men upon their Oaths have informed us, upon sufficient testi∣mony of Witnesses, that what they had said, we should further informour selves of, before your life be taken away; yea such is the Law of England, the ten∣derest
Law in the world of a mans life. I say againe, that no such tryalls for life, is to be found in the world: as in England — in any place but in Eng∣land. A mans life may be taken away upon two or three Witnesses, but in England two or three witnesses do not do it; for there is two Juries besides, and you have 24 men returned, you have 21 men upon their Oaths and Conscien∣ces that have found you guilty; and yet when you have don that, it is not enough by the Law of England, but you are also to have 12 rationall vnderstanding men of your Neighbours to heare all over againe, and to passe upon your life. This is not used in any Law in the world but in England, which hath the righ∣teousest and mercifullest Law in the world, and this we sit here to maintaine, and let all the world know it, that according to the rules thereof we have pro∣ceeded against you. Iudge Michel. Mr. Lilburne, you were speaking of the Lawes being in o∣ther Tongues, those that we try you by, are in English, and we proceed in Eng∣lish against you, and therefore you have no cause to complain of that. L. Col. Lilb. By your speeches you seem to bind me up to a single plea. Truly I conceive that is not equitable by the law of God and the Lawes of Reason: No mans life is to be destroyed by nicities and forma∣lities; yet contrary to your solemne promises, you take all advantage against me by them, (and make my ignorance in the ticklish formalities of the law, to be the means of my own destruction,) although before I plea∣ded you ingaged unto me you would take no advantage by my igno∣rance in your formalities, and my mistakes in them, should be no disad∣vantage unto me, and yet now I have pleaded, you seem to hold me close to a single plea. Truly, Sir, I think that is not just nor faire so to break your promises, and by faire words to smooth me on into nets and snares, and to make use of my willingnesse to be tried by the Law of England, to drill me on to my own destruction: Truly, Sir, had I ever thought or be∣lieved, I should have been denied counsell, I would have died before e∣ver I would in any manner have pleaded to your charge, or have yeelded to your smooth insinuations. Iustice Iermin. Those men that know the Lawes of England, know well, that it taketh away no mans life but upon clean proofe, and upon manifest con∣tempts of the Law: The Law is, Whosoever shall goe such a way in a Court as evidently gives affront to the Law, that such one takes away his owne life; The facts that you are charged with, if they had taken effect, would have taken away the innocent lives of many. Therefore you are now before us charged with the fact, and every mans conscience knowes whether he commit∣ted the thing charged upon him, or no, and your selfe does know whether you be guilty of that you are accused of, or no. But the Court must not spend any fur∣ther
time: For Mr. Atturney Generall hath returned the Writ of Veneri facias For the calling or summoning of a Jury of life and death. L. Keble. Mr. Lilburn, you say you well understand your self: you knew of your comming, and you knew of the fact that you have committed. Leiut. Col. Lilburne Truely Sir, six moneths a goe I heard much of my Tryall, and I longed for it, but could not have it, but was stil kept in prison, and abundance of provocations put upon me, to make me cry out of my oppressions and then to hang me, therefore by a Law made after my pre∣tended crime was committed is not just; and truly Sir, I heard by un∣certaine common fame of my Tryall now. But Parliament men told my wife and friends, that my chiefest crime was corresponding with the Prince; and to defend my self against that, I fitted my self, never dreaming that onely books should be laid to my charge; and therefore I could not, as to that come prepared; and therefore do humbly desire Councell, a Copy of my Indictment, and time to bring in my Witnesses. L. Keeble. Heare what is said to you, for your Witnesses, you should have brought them with you, we'll give you leave to send for them, we will give you time to do, to consider with your self, what to say for your self, you shall, till to morrow 7 a clocke. Leiut. Col. Lilburne Sir, some of my witnesses lives, abides 100. or 80 miles off, and yet I must bring them to morrow morning, how's that possi∣ble; and therefore I desire time to bring them in, and also Subpeanas, for some of them are Parliament men, and some of them Officers of the Ar∣my, and they will not come in without compulsion. L Keeble. That's the time, we will give you no longer, you knew of your com∣ming long agoe, and therefore ought to have come provided. Leiut. Col. Lilb. Sir, I beseech you give me a convenient time 8 or 10. dayes that so I may get them together, for how could I be provided be∣fore hand for any thing, but for that for which I was at the first imprison∣ed for, nothing of which is now laid to my Charge. Could I devine upon what you would proceed against me; but Sir, I have that within me I blesse God, that will be a portion of comfort to me, to carry me through all your mallice and injustice. L. Keble. Never talk of that which is with you; God is in us as well as in you: never make a flourish of what is in you; for the feare of God is before our eyes as well as yours, and what we doe we shall have comfort in, in that it is according to the Lawes of England, the Rules of which we are sworne to observe, and every man will doe righteous things as well as you. L. Col. Lilb. Pray will you give me but 8 dayes time then. L. Keble. We will give you no more, you ought to have brought them with
you, you knew of it long agoe; and the Court cannot, nor will not wait upon you. L. Col. Lilb. By your favour, Sir, thus, then let me have a little time to consult with counsell. L. Keble. I tell you, That if the matter bee proved, there needs no counsell. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I shall not much insist upon that, but the question is, whether the matter be treason in Law or no, and whether in Law it be rightly expressed in the Indictment, as to time and place, with other cir∣cumstances thereunto belonging; and I question the legality of the In∣dictment, and that ought in Law to be disputed before the matter of fact come to be spoken to. L. Keble. Sir, you sayd at first, you would speak as a rationall and mo∣derate man, and yet you will not bee answered. If matter of Law doe arise out of your fact, that we have told you again and again, you shall hnue coun∣sell and time. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, by your favour, it may be too late to desire counsell after the fact is proved. And besides, having legall exceptions against the Indictment, why should you run me upon the hazard of my life, by tick∣lish Nicities and Formalities; and as my prosecutor Mr. Prideaux saith, —(but being interrupted, cried out) Sir, I beseech you, doe but heare me. L. Keble. Your distemper will break out, your heart is so full of boyling malice and venome, you cannot contain your selfe. L. Col. Lilb. Mr. Prideaux is pleased to urge, thar the granting of me of my defire in reference to counsell, will be so inconvenient a president, as will destroy the Common-wealth, therefore to avoid the danger of such a destroying president, as he is pleased to call it, I desire to have some time assigned me to get my witnesses together, and then I shall, I doubt not, but convincingly shew you the hazard and destroying misciefe of that desperate president in denying men liberty to consult with counsell, when they are upon trials for their lives. For my owne judgement, my own conscience doth tell me, that it is my undoubted right by the Law of England, by the Law of God, and the Law of Reason; and if it bee totally denied me, I can but die, and upon that score, by the assistance of God, I am resolved to die. L. Keble. You speak great words of your own judgement, your own consci∣ence, your own zeale, and the like: And I tell you, our Consciences, and our Religion, and our Zeale, and our Righteousnesse, I hope shall appeare as much as yours: you would make your selfe Judge in your own cause, which you are
not, and so make Ciphers of us, but all your high words of Conscience and righ∣teousnesse is but a flourish, to make the pleople believe or be apprehensive as though we had none, you had all; but you shall know, here we sit with as much tendernesse and integrity as you stand there, and to do that uprighty which is according to Law and justice. L. Col: Lilb: I shall not in the least make any comparisons, nei∣ther do I in that particular, I onely speak of my own particular, in reference unto that God in whom I have believed, and in whom I enjoy content, peace and quietnesse of mind, and yet for my part I shal rather die then willingly go any further, except I have Coun∣cel first. L. Keeble. Well Mr Lilburne, the Court is very tender not to take up any of your time, you have heard what was declared to you there, that Mr At∣turney hath made processe against you returnable, to morrow at seven of the clock, and therefore to spend more time will be but your losse and damage, the Sheriffs of London are to take care to returne the Jury to morrow morning, and therfore the Court doth adjurne til seven a clock to morrow in the morning, and in the mean time they do commit the prisoner at the Bar, to the Lieute∣nant of the Tower againe. L. Col: Lilb: Sir, I did not hear you the first words. L. Keeble. You shall not be denied to hear it againe, the Court desires to be good husbands of time for you, we could have sat long enough, to have trifled away your time that you may spend your meditations, and take your friends advice, do not stand upon and destroy your self by words; Mr Lilburne, all that are here, areJust Jermin take notice the Judge stood up and spake out an appeal to the people. to take no∣tice of it, that the prisoner at the Bar tath had more favour already, then ever any prisoner in England, in the like case ever had; for by the Laws of England, in the matter of Treason, whereof you are indicted, you ought to have been tried presently, imediatly; but because all the world shall know with what cander and Justice the Court do proceed a∣gainst you, you have till to morrow morning, which is the Courts extraordi∣nary favour, and the doors are wide open, that all the world may know it. L. Col: Lilb: Sir, I can shew one hundred Presidents to the con∣trary in your owne Books, to disprove what you say. L. Keeble. Adjurne the Court. L. Col: Lilb: I humbly thanke you for what favour I have alrea∣dy received. The Court adjurned till the next morning, and the Prisoner remand∣ed to the Tower.
Guild-Hall, 26 of October, 1649. being Friday. At the Triall of Lieut: Col: JOHN LILBURNE the Second day. THe Prisoner being brought to the Bar, spake as followeth: Sir, I pray hear me a word or two. L. Keeble, Mr Lilburne, I am afraid something trou∣bles you, I will have no body stand thereThat was in the Bar, where his brother Col: Robert Lilburne, his Solicitour Mr Sprat, and other of his friends stood. let all come out but one man. L. Col: Lilb: Here's none but my Brother and my Solicitor. L. Keeble, Sir, your brother shall not stand by you there, I will only have one hold your papers and books, and the rest not to trouble you, wherefore the rest are to come out. L. Col Lilb: Sir, I begge of you but one word, though I doe not know any reason why of my self I should not have the privi∣ledge of the Law, as well as any man in England; yet besides, what yesterday I alledged for my self, for to have Councel assigned, yet to day give me leave to mention an unquestionable President for my purpose, and that is Major Rolfe, who being an Officer in the Army, and being lately indicted for High Treason (before the Lord Chief Barron Wilde, that now is at Hampshiere Assizes, for conspiring to poison and pistol the late King, which by Law was the highest of Treasons) did conceive himselfe in regard of his ignorance, unable to defend himself singly, against his enemies designe, which was to take away his life; whereupon he becomes an humble suitor to the Lord Chief Barron Wilde, that he might have Councel assigned him, and the Court before ever the Grand Jury received any testimony against him to find the Bill, assigned him Councel, who as I understand were one Mr Nichols, now a Judge of this Bench, and sitting there; and Mr Maynard of the Temple, they were both assigned his Councell, and from Mr Maynard himself I have it, yea, from his own mouth: who being as∣signed his Councel, they came into the court, where the grand Jury was called before the Judge: M. Maynard and M. Nichols, now a Judge here, had liberty there to be in the open Court, where the witnesses before the Indictment was found, was called and in open Court was sworn, and in open Court gave in their Evidence before the
Grand Jury, Major Rolfes Councell being by in open Court, to hear all the Evidence that was given against Major Rolfe, who in his Indictment was Indicted for two matters of fact, the first was that he had declared that in such a moneth, and at such a place, he had an intent to Pistoll the late King; which by the letter of the Law of the 25 Edw: 3. chap: 2. was Treason: then there was ano∣ther Charge, that such a day he had so said or declared to Poison Him, in the presence of such a one, and they were both put into one Indictment; whereupon Mr Maynard, being assigned by the L: Chief Barron Wilde, that now is, to be of Councel for Rolfe in the same Case (but with abundance of more advantage to him, that I am now in) Mr Maynard was then of Councel to the prisoner, and had liberty to hear what the witnesses swore against him, and to make his best advantage of it, and that in open Court, before the Indictment was found by the Grand inquest; and although there were two expresse witnesses against him, yet but one of them swore to one thing, and another to another; Mr Maynard being one that knew the Law better then Major Rolfe did himself, he applied the two Statutes of Edward the sixth, viz. the 1 Edw: 6. chap: 12. and 5. and 6. of Edw: 6. chap: 11. to Rolfes Case, which Statutes doe expresly declare. That no man ought to be convicted of Treason, but by two sufficient witnesses upon plaine and clear evidence to each fact of Treason, which evidance, as Sir Edward Cook saies in third part of his Institutes, ought to be as clear as the Sun at noon∣day, and not upon one single witnesse, and upon conjecturall pre∣sumptions, or inferences, or straines of wit: Now Sir I am an English-man as well as Major Rolfe, and I have been an Officer in the Parliament Army as well as he, and there fought for them as heartily as ever he did in his life, and he was accused for the high∣est of English Treasons; and therefore I humbly crave that in regard there are many particular errours in the Indictment, as to matter, time & place: that therefore in reference to the illegality of the In∣dictment according to this President, by one of your own fellow Judges, that you would according to my birth-right, declared in Major Rolfes Case, assigne me Councell as he had, to help my igno∣rance, that so I may not be destroyed by surprisall, and illegall, and unjust prerogatives. L. Keable. You see with what a great deal of favour, in stead of a few words, we have heard you many, this is a priviledge; but this that you say up∣on it, it may be it was done, but that we doe, shall be according to that, you
and we, shall find to he according the Laws of the Land, and our conscience, and the priviledge of the Subject: that that they did before the Grand Jury, and the witnesses, the witnesses are here sworn in Court in presence of the Grand Jury, so far we goe with them; that of M. Maynard and M. Justice Nicholls, being assigned Councell, for what cause it was then they best know, it is nothing that doth now concerne us, though the Treason was against those Laws that then were in being; we must come to proof, it may be he confest his fact; if you will doe so too it alters the case. L. Col. Lilb. No Sir, he never confest it, for if he had, he had been found guilty; but he was saved meerly by the skill and ho∣nesty of his Councel M. Maynard, and his Indictment nuld an e∣vaded, before ever the Grand Jury found it, and that upon this point of Law, because by the two Statutes of Edward 6. there ought to be two plain and clear witnesses, to every part of Treason; and though Rolfe, was accused by two witnesses, yet there was two facts, and but one witnesse to the proof of each of them. L. Keable. When you come to tryall, if we see there be need of Counsel, the Court will be instead of Counsel to you; nay, the Court if they see any matter of Law for Counsel, though you doe not ask it, they will give you it; and therefore set your heart at rest, for if there be any thing rationall in Law that we can spie out, as well as your Counsel, we will help you in it. L. Col. Lilb. Sweet Sir, I crave but one word more, I am upon my life, and if you deny me what the Law affords me, and that which hath been granted to be Law, by Cavalier Judges, yea, and by your fellow Judges, who are now in power at this day; the Lord deliver me from standing in need of you to be my Counsel. Iers. L. Keable. We are upon our lives too as well as you. L. Col. Lilb. No, by your favour, not in so iminent a manner as I am. L. Keable. We are upon our lives and our souls to all eternity. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I beseech you hear me one word. L. Keable. I will hear no more. M. Pridiaux, My Lord, I desire the Court would proceed, and not pro∣long time, seeing he has pleaded not guilty, and confessed something. L. Coll. Lilb. No Sir, you doe me wrong, and abuse me, I ne∣ver confessed any thing, neither did I plead not guilty; for my Plea was conditionall, grounded upon your promises, not to take any advantage of my ignorance in your formalities. L. Keable, Go on, be silent M. Lilburn.
L. Coll: Lilb: If you take away my life without affording me the benefit of the Law, my innocent bloud be upon your heads. L. Keable, Sir, These passionate words will doe you no good, you had better forbear them. L. Col. Lilb. Pray hear me then. L. Keable, Doe you say that we doe offer to take away your life, Sir, if we doe take it away contrary to law, we are liable to smart for it; but we shall judge what you have done (the Lievtnant Collonell pressing to speak was not suffered, but bid be silent) Sir, I advise you, Sir spare your self with patience and hear the Court. Just. Jermin: Be quiet Sir. L. Col. Lilb. I beseech you Sir, let me hear but the grand Jury speak, for I understand from some of themselves, they never found me guilty of Treason, but doe conceive themselves wronged by some words yesterday, that passed from some of the Judges; I pray let me hear them speak. L. Keable, M. Lilburn, You said you would be rationall, you would be moderate; you doe break out, you will doe your self more hurt then any here can doe you; you must be silent and hear the Court, we can lose no more time to hear you: Cryer call the Jury. Cryer— The Iury called (and M. Lilburn earnestly pressed to be heard, but could not) Cryer—Miles Petty. William Wormwell. L. Col. Sir, I beseech you let me but see these gentlemens faces. L. Keable, You Master Sprat, you must not talk to the Prisoner; you may stand and hold the Books; you did offend yesterday, but you shall not doe so to day, for you shall not stand near the Prisoner to talk to him. L. Coll: Lilb. My Lord, the Law saies a stander by, may speak in the prisoners behalf at the Bar, much more whisper to him, but especially if he be his Sollicitor. Cryer —John Sherman, Thomas Dainty, Ralph Ely, Ed∣mund Keyzer, Edward Perkins, Ralph Packman, Francis woodall William Commins, Henry Hanson, Roger Jenkenson, Josias Ha∣mond, Richard Allen, Richard Nevill, John Mayo, Henry Jooley, Arther Due, Roger Sears. Clerke, You good men of the City of London appear. Steven Ives, Iohn Sherman, Ralph Ely, Roger Ienkinson, Io∣fias Hamond, Richard Allen, Richard Nevill, Roger Seares, Iohn Mayo, Nicholas Murren. Clerk. You prisoner at the Barre, these good men that are here presented
before the Court, are to be of your Iury of life and death, if therfore you will challenge them, or any of them, you must challenge them before they goe to he sworn, and then you shall be heard. Cryer, Every man that can inform my Lords the Iustices, and the Attor∣ny Generall of this Common-wealth, against Master Iohn Lilburn pri∣soner at the Barre, of any Treason or fellony committed by him, let them come forth, and they shall be heard, for the prisoner stands upon his deliverance; and all others bound to give their attendance here upon pain of forfeiture of your Recognisance, are to come in. L. Col. Lilb Sir, I beseech you give me leave to speak. Lord Keable, You cannot be heard. L. Coll: Lilb Truly Sir, I must then make my protest against your unjust and bloudy proceedings with me, before all this peo∣ple, and desire them to take notice, that yesterday I pleaded to my Bill, conditionally, that no advantage should be taken against me, for my ignorance in your formalities, and you promised me you would not. L. Keable, We give you too much time; you will speak words that will undo you; is this your reason? you shall talk in your legall time, and take your legall exceptions, we will hear you till midnight. L. Coll. Lilb. Then it will be too late Sir. Justice Jermin, You have given a great slander, and that doth not be∣come a man of your profession; you speak very black words. L. Col: Lilb. I beseech you doe but hear me one word; I doe not know the faces of two of the men that were read unto me, I hope you will give me time to consider of them. Lord Keable, No Sir, you ought not to have it. L. Col. Lilb Will you let me have some friends by me that are Citizens of London, that know them, to give me information of their qualities and conditions, for without this, truly you may as well hang me without a tryall, as to bring me hear to a tryall and deny me all my legall priviledges to save my selfe by. Lord Keable, If you be your own judge you will judge so, go on. M. Sprat, or Col. Robert Lilburn, Whispers to the prisoner, to challenge one of the Jury, which the Judge excepted against. L. Col. Lilb Sir, by your favour, any man that is a by-stander may help the prisoner, by the Law of England. Lord Keable, It cannot be granted; and that fellow come out there, with the white cap, pul him out. L. Col. Lilb You goe not according to your own law in dea∣ling thus with me.
Iustice Iermin. Your words were never a slander, nor never will be, hold your peace Cryer go on. Cryer. Stephen Blyth, look upon the prisoner. Abraham Seal, Iohn King, Nicholas Murren, (Thomas Dariel) the prisoner excepted against him) Edward Perkins, Francis Peale. Iustice Iermine, was he recorded and sworn before he spake or no? Cryer, No my Lord. Iustice Iermin, The let him continue if he be right recorded. Cryer, The Oath was not given quite out. Iustice Iermin, Then he hath challenged in time; let him have all the lawfull favour that may be afforded him by law. William Comins sworn, Simon Weedon sworn. L. Col. Lilb. Hee's an honest man, and looks with an honest face, let him go. Henry Tooley sworne, Arther Due (excepted against.) L. Keeble, Take away Mr Due, let him stand a little by. Henry Hanson put by being sick, one that could not hear excepted against, John Sherman, Ralph Head, Roger Jenkinson, Josias Hamond, Richard Allen, John Mayo, Roger Seares, Henry Hanson, ex∣cepted against, Edmund Kinyzer sworne. The Jury Called. Clerk, Twelve good men and true, stand together and here your Evi∣dence. Just: Jermin, Cryer of the Court, let the Jury stand six of the one side and six of the other. Clerke, 1 Miles Petty 2 Stephen Iies 3 John King 4 Nicholas Murrin 5 Thomas Drinty 6 Edmund Keyzer 7 Ed: Perkins 8 Ralph Packman 9 William Comins 10 Simon Weedon 11 Henry Tooley 12 Abraham Smith. of the Jury, six lives about Smithfield, one in Gosling-street, two in Cheap-side, two in Bred-street, and one in Friday-street. Just: Jermin. Its well done. Cryer, The Lords, the Justices, do straitly charge and command all man∣ner of persons to keep silence, while the prisoner is in tryall. Mr Broughton, John Lilburne, hold up thy hand. L. Col: Lilb: As I did yesterday, I acknowledge my selfe to be John Lilburne Free-man of London, son to Mr Richard Lilburne, of the County of Durham, and sometime Lieutenant Collonel in the Parliament Army.
Just: Jermin. You refuse to hold up your hand, and though you break the Law of England, the Court will not break it. L. Col: Lilb: I do what the Court declares what is my right and duty to do, I do no more then declare my name to be so as it is. L. Keeble, Read the Indictment. Mr Broughton Reads, Hold up thy hand John Lilburne, thou standest here indicted of high Treason by the name of John Lilburne, late of London Gentleman, for that thou as a false Traytor, not having the fear of God before thine eies, but being stirred & moved up by the in∣stigation of the Devil, dist indeavour not only to disturbe the peace and tranquility of this Nation, but also the Government thereof to subvert: now established without King or house of Lords, in the way of a Common-wealth, and a free-state, and happily Esta∣blished, and the Commons in Parliament assembled being the su∣preame authority of this Nation of England, to disgrace, and in∣to a hatred, base esteeme, infamy and scandall, with all the good true and honest persons of England, to bring into hatred, That is to say, that thou the said John Lilburn, one the first day of October in the year of our Lord 1649. and in diverse other daies and times, both before and after, in the parish of Mary the Arches, in the ward of Cheap London aforesaid, of thy wicked and devilish mind and imagination, falsely, malitiously, advisedly, and trayterously, as a false Traytor, by writing and imprinting, and openly declaring that is to say, by a certain scandalous, poysonous, and traiterous writing in paper intituled A salva libertate; and hy another scan∣dalous, poysonous and trayterous Book, intituled An impeach∣ment of high treason, against Oliver Cromwell, and his son in law Hen∣ry Ireton, Esquires, late members of the late forcibly desolved House of Commous, presented to publike view by Lieutenant Colonell John LiIburn close prisoner in the Tower of London, for his reall, true and zealous affe∣ctions to the liberties of this Nation; and by another scandalous, poy∣sonous and traiterous Book, imprinted, and intituled, An out-cry of the young men and apprentices of London, or an inquisition after the lost fundamentall laws and liberties of England, directed August 29. 1649. in an Epistle to the private soldiers of the Army, especially all those that signed the sulemn Engagement at Newmarket-heath, the fifth of Iune 1647. but more especially the private Soldiers of the Generals Regiment of Horse, that healped to plunder and destroy the honest and true hearted Eng∣lishmen, traiterously defeted at Burford, the fifteenth of May 1649. and
also by another scandalous, poysonous, and traiterous Book, in∣tituled The legall fundamentall liberties of the people of England, revi∣sed, asserted and vindicated, did publish that the Government afore∣said, is tyrannicall, usurped, and unlawfull; and that the Com∣mons Assembled in Parliament, are not the supreme Authority of this Nation: and further that thou the said John Lilburn as a false Traitor, God before thine eies not having, but being moved and led by the instigation of the Devil, endeavouring, and maliciously intending, the Government a∣foresaid, as is aforesaid, well and happily established; thou the said John Lilburn, afterwards (that is to say) the, the aforesaid first day of OctoberNote, that Mr. Lilburn was im∣prisoned by the Counsel of State as a Traytor, the twenty eight of March 1649. and they there came and after arraign him as a Traytor, for actions done above five months after, waving all the pretended crimes for which they first imprisoned him. in the year of our Lord 1649. aforesaid, and diverse other daies and times, as well be∣fore as after, at London aforesaid, that is to say, in the parish and ward aforesaid, London aforesaid, maliciously, advisedly, and traiterously didst plot, contrive and en∣deavour to stir up, and to raise force, against the aforesaid Go∣vernment, and for the subverting and alteration of the said Go∣vernment, and to doe those wicked, malitious and trayterous ad∣visement to put in execution; &c. and thou the said Jo. Lilburn, after∣wards, that is to say, the aforesaid first day of October in the year of our Lord 1649. aforesaid, and divers daies and times as well be∣fore as after, at London aforesaid, that is to say, in the parish and ward aforesaid, of thy depraved mind, and most wicked imagina∣tion, in and by the aforesaid scandalous, poysonous, and trayte∣rous Book, intituled An Impeachment of high Treason against Oliver Cromwell, and his son in law Henry Ireton, Esquires, late members of the late forcibly dissolved House of Commons; presented to puhlike view by Lieutenant Colonell Iohn Lilburn, close prisoner in the Tower of London, for his reall, true and zealous affection to the liberties of his native Country; falsely, malitiously, advisedly, and trayterously, didst publickly declare, amongst other things in the said Book, those false, scan∣dalous, malitious and trayterous words following: but my true friends (meaning the friends of the said Iohn Lilburn) I (meaning the foresaid Iohn Lilburn) shall here take uponThis passage you may read in that Book page 5. me the holdnesse, conside∣ring the great distractions of the present
times, to give a little further advice to our friends aforesaid, from whose com∣pany or society, or from some of them, hath been begun and issued out the most transcendent, clear, rationall and just things for the peoples liberties and free∣domes, That the foresaid John Lilburn, had seen or read in this Na∣tion, as your notable and excellent Petition of May the 20th 1647. burnt by the hands of the common-hangman, recorded in my Book called Rash Oaths unwarrantable, page 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. with divers petiti∣ons of that nature, and the Petition of the 19th of January 1648. recor∣ded in the following discourse, page 45, 46, 47, 48. and the Mas∣culine Petition of the eleventh of September 1648. so much owned by Petitions out of severall Counties, yea, and by the Officers of the Armies large Remonstrance from Saint Albones, the sixteenth of November 1648. page 67, 68, 69. the substance of all which I (thou the foresaid Iohn Lilburn meaning) conceive is contained in the printed sheet of paper, signed by my fellow prisoners, Mr Willi∣am Walwin, M. Richard Overton, and M. Thomas Prince and my selfe, dated the first of May 1649. and intituled the Agreement of the free People of England; which false, scandalous and traiterous Book, called the Agreement of the people of England, tends to the alteration, and subversion of the Government aforesaid; the prin∣ciples of the foresaid Agreement, I (meaning your selfe the said John Lilburn) hope and desire you (the friends of the foresaid John Lilburn meaning) will make the finall centre, and unwavering standard of all your desires, hazzards and endeavours, as to the future settlement of the Peace and Government of this distressed, wasted, and divided Nation, the firm establishing of the principles therein contained, being that only which will really, and in good earnest marry, and knit that interest, what ever it be that dwels upon them, unto the distressed or oppressed Commons of this Nation. But the principles of the foresaid Agree∣ment, being so detestable and abominable to the presentThese lines are in pag. 7. ruling men, as that which they know will put a full end to their tyranny and usurpation, and really ease and free the People from oppression and bondage; that it is somthing dangerous to those that goe a∣bout the promotion of it; yet I shall advise and exhort you, (meaning the friends of him the aforesaid John Lilburn vigo∣rously to lay all fear aside, and to set on foot the promotion of it (meaning the said Agreement) in the same method we took
for the promotion of the foresaid Petition of the ninth of Ianuary 1647. laid downe in the following discourse, page 23, 24, 25. and write to all your friends in all the Counties of England, to chuse out from amongst themselves, and send up some agents to you (two at least, for each County, with money in their pockets to bear their charges) to consider with your called and chosen A∣gents, of some effectuall course, speedily to be taken, for the set∣ling of the principles thereof (meaning the aforesaid false Agree∣ment (devised by your self, the aforesaid Iohn Lilburn) and to set up the promoting of (the aforesaid fained Agree. meaning) as that only which in an earthly Government can make you (the afore∣said friends of the said Iohn Lilburn) happier, at least to know one anothers minds, in owning and approving the principles of the foresaid false Agreement, that so it may be come to you (meaning the foresaid friends of the foresaid Iohn Lilburn) and all your friends, your centre, standard and banner, to flock together to, in time of those forraign innovations, and domestique insurrections, that are like speedily to bring miseries enough upon this poor distressed Nation (the aforesaid Nation of England again meaning) and uanimously resolve and engage one to another, neither to side with, or fight for, the chimaera's, fooleries, and pride of the present men in power (the aforesaid Parliament of England meaning) nor for the Prince his will, nor any other base interest whatsever, the which if you (the aforesaid friends of the said John Lilburne meaning) should fight for, it would be but an absolute murther of your brethren and Country-men you know not wherefore) un∣lesse he or they will come up to those just, righteous, and equi∣table principles therein contained, and give rationall and good security, for the constant adhering thereunto. And upon such termes, I doe not see but you may justifiably before God or man, joyne with the Prince himselfe, yea, I am sure, a thousand times more justly, then the present Ruling men (upon a large and serious debate) joyned with Owen-Roe-Oneale, the grand bloudy Rebell in Ireland; who, if we must have a King, I (meaning he the aforesaid Iohn Lilburne) for my part I had rather have the Prince (meaning CHARLS STUART, Son to the late KING, then any man in the world, because of his large
pretence of Right, which if he come not in by conquest, by the hands of forraigners (the bare attempting of which, may apparently ha∣zard him the loss of all at once) by glewing together the now divi∣ded people, to joyne as one man against him, but by the hands of English-men, by contract upon the premisses aforesaid (which is ealy to be done) the people will easily see, that presently thereup∣on they will enjoy this transcendent benefit (he being at peace with all farraign Nations, and having no Regall pretended compe∣titor) viz. The immediatly disbanding of all Armies, and Gari∣sons, saving the old Cinque-ports, and so those three grand plagues of the people will cease, viz. Free-quarter, Taxations, and Ex∣cise, by meanes of which, the people may once againe really say, they enjoy something they can in good earnest call their owne; whereas for the present Army to set up the pretended false Saint Oliver, (or any other) as their elected King, there will be nothing thereby from the beginning of the Chapter, to the end, thereof, but Wars, and the cutting of throats, year after year; yea, and the absolute keeping up of a perpetuall and everlasting Army, un∣der which the people are absolute and perfect slaves and vassals, as by wofull and lamentable experience they now see they perfectly are, which slavery and absolute bondage is like dayly to increase, under the present Tyrannicall, and Arbitrary new erected, robbing Government, and therefore rouse up your spirits before it be too late, to a vigorous promotion, and setling of the principles of the foresaid Agreement, as the only absolute and perfect meanes to carry you off all your maladies and distempers. Here Lieutenant Collonel Lilburne in the first dayes reading the Indictment, taking notice of the Judge Thorpe, and Mr Prideaux to whisper together, cryed out and said to this effect. L. Col: Lilburne, Hold a while, Hold a while, Let there be no discourse but openly, for my adversaries or persecutors whispering with the Judges, is contrary to the Law of England, And extreame foule and dishonest play, and therefore I pray let me have no more of that injustice. Mr Atturney, It is nothing concerning you (let me give him sa∣tisfaction) it is nothing concerning you Mr Lilburne.
L. Col: Lilburne, By your favour Mr Prideaux, that is more then I do know, but whether it be or not, by the expresse Law of England, it ought not to be, therefoe I pray let me have no more of it. Mr Broughton, And further, thou the said John Lilburne stands In∣dicted, for that thou the aforesaid first day of October, in the year of our Lord, 1649. and divers daies and times, as well before as after, in London aforesaid, and in the Parish and ward aforesaid, didst maliciously, advisedly, and trayterously publish another false poysonous, trayterous, and scaudalous Book, Intituled, An out∣cry of the Young-men and apprentices of London, Or an inquisition after the lost fundamentall Laws and Liberties of England: having these Trayter∣ous and scandalous words (amongst other things) following; that is to say, we (meaning the Young men and Apprentices of Lon∣don) considering what is before premised,Which words are in pag: 11. are ne∣cessitated and compelled to do the utmost we can for our own preservations, and for the preservation of the Land of our Nativity, and never (by popular Petitions) addresse our selves to the men sitting at Westminster any more, or to take any more notice of them, then as of so many Tyrants, and Usurpers; and for the time to come to hinder as much and as far as our poor despised interest will extend to) all other whatso∣ever from subscribing or presenting any more popular Petitions to them, and only now as our last Paper refuge, mightily to cry out to each other, our intollerable oppressions, in Letters and Remonstrances signed in the behalfe, and by the appointment of all the rest, by some of the stoutest and stiffest amongst us, that we hope will never apostatise, but be able by the strength of God, to lay down their very lives for the maintaining of that which they set their hands to: And further, that thou the aforesaid John Lil∣burne afterwards, that is to say, the aforesaid first day of October, in the year of our Lord, 1649, and divers other daies and times as well before as after, not being an Officer or Souldier, or member of the Army aforesaid, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, as a false Traytour did maliciously, advisedly and Tray∣terously indeauour to stir up a dangerous mutinous, & Trayterous distemper, Mutiny and Rebellion in the Army, now under the Command of Thomas Lord Fairfax, and didst indeavour to draw Thomas Lecoies, Iohn Skinner, and John Toppe from their obedience
to their superiour officers, &c. and further, didst deliver unto the three Souldiers before named, the said Book, intituled an Out-Cry of the Young men and Apprentices of London; having these words following contained therein; Surely all sense and compun∣ction of conscience is not totally departed from you, hear us ther∣fore in the earning bowels of love and kindnesse we intreat and beseech you with patience, and doe not abuse us, for complaining and crying out, for the knife hath been very long at the very throats of our liberties and freedomes, and our burthens are too great and many for us, we are not able to bear them and contain our selves; our oppressions are even ready to make us dispair (or forthwith to flie to the prime lawes of nature, viz. the next vio∣lent remedy at hand, lite where it will, or upon whom it will) they are become as devouring fire in our bosomes ready to burn us up, rendring us desperate and carelesse of our lives, prising those that are already dead, above those that are yet alive, who are rid of that pain and torment that we doe and must indure, by sensiable seeing and beholding, not only the dying, but the daily buriall of our native liberties and freedomes, that we care not what become of us, seeing that we are put into that originall e∣state or Chaos of confusion, wherein lust is become a law; envy and malice are become laws, and the strongest sword rules and go∣verns all by will and pleasure; all our ancient boundaries and land∣marks, are pulled up by the roots, and all the ties and bonds of humane society in our English Horizon totally destroyed and ex∣tirpated; Alas for pitty we had rather die then live this life of a languishing death, in which our Masters possesse nothing (to buy themselves or us bread to keep us alive) that they can call their own, therefore its no boot for to serve out our times, & continue at our drudging and toylingtrades, whilst these oppressions, cruelties, and inhumanities are upon us, and the rest of the People, exposing thereby the Nation, not only to domestique broyles, warres and bloud-sheds (wherein we are sure our bodies must be the principall buts) but to forraign invasions by France, Spain, Denmark, Sweth∣land, &c. as was well observed by an endeared and faithfull friend of the forementioned late treacherously defeated party at Burford, in their Book of the twentieth of August 1649. Intituled the Le∣vellers vindicated, or the case of the twelve Troopes truly stated;
Page eleven and twelve, which we cannot but seriously recom∣mend with them, to your serious perusall and judgement, and de∣sire to know of you (but especially the private Souldiers of the Gen. Regiment of horse, who we understand, had a hand in seising upon and plundring our true friends at Burford) whether you doe own the abominable and palpable treacherous dealings of your Generall, and Lieutenant Generall Cromwell, and their perfidious Officers with them or no? (that so we may not condemn the in∣nocent with the guilty, and may know our frinds from our foes) as also to tell us, whether you doe approve of the totall defection of your Army, under which it now lieth, from their faith and falne Engagement, made at Newmarket-heath, June the fifth 1647. not one of those righteous ends, in behalf of the Parliament and people, on which your Vow was made, being yet fulfilled or ob∣tained, but on the contrary (as we have before rehearsed) a whole floud-gate of tyrannies are let in upon us, and over-whelme us, and whether you (the aforesaid private Souldiers meaning) ju∣stifie all those actions done in the name of the Army, upon your account, and under the pretence of that Engagement, since the Engagement it selfe was broken, and your Councell of Adjutators disolved? And whether you will hold up your Swords to mai∣tain the totall dissolution of the People choysest interest of free∣dome; viz. Frequent and successive Parliaments, by an Agreement of the People, or obstruct the annuall succession? Whether you doe allow of the late shedding the bloud of Warre in time of Peace, to the subversion of all our lawes and liberties? And whe∣ther you doe countenance the extirpation of the fundamentall freedomes of this Common-wealth; as the revocation and nulli∣ty of the great Charter of England, the Petition of Right, &c.? And whether you doe assent to the erection of Arbitrary preroga∣tive Courts, that have or shall over-rule, or make void our an∣cient way of tryals in criminall cases, by a Jury of twelve men of the neighbourhood? And whether you will assist or joyne in the forcible obstruction of this Martiall and tyrannicall rule over us? Also, whether you will fight against and destroy those our friends that shall endeavour the composure of our differences together, with the procurement of our freedomes and settlement of our peace (your plenty and prosperity) according as it was offered by
the fower Gentlemen prisoners in the Tower of London, upon the first day of May 1649. as a peace offering to the Nation, by the Agreement of the People, (the aforesaid fained Agreement mea∣ning) lastly, wee (the aforesaid young men and Apprentices of London meaning) earnestly beseech you, (the aforesaid private Souldiers again meaning) to acquaint us whether from your hands, to your power, we may expect any help or assistance in this our miserable, distressed condition, to the removall of those Iron bonds and yokes of oppression (the aforesaid Government in way of a Common-wealth and Councel of State meaning) that have thus enforced us to complain and addresse our selues thus to your consideration; for we (the aforesaid young men and Appren∣tices again meaning) cannot chuse but acquaint you (the aforesaid private Souldiers againe meaning (that we are seriously resolved through the strength and assistance of God, with all the interest wee have in the world, to adhere to the righteous things, contained in our treacherously defeted forementioned friends vindication, (the aforesaid traiterous Book, intituled, The Levellers vindica∣ted, or the case of the twelve Troopers truly stated again mea∣ning) And further, thou the said Iohn Lilburn as a false Traytor, by most wicked trayterous conspiracies, designes and endeavours of thine aforesaid, afterwards, that is to say, the aforesaid first day of October in the year of our Lord 1649. above said. And diverse other daies and times, as well before as after, didst in the parish and ward of London aforesaid, in and by the aforesaid scandalous, poysonous and traiterous Book, intituled An Im∣peachment of high Treason against Oliver Cromwell, and his Son∣in-law Henry Ireton, &c. most falsly, maliciously and traiterously publish, and openly declare amongst other things, in the said Booke, these following, scandalous, treacherous, tumultuous and traiterous clauses and words following, that is to say, But I (meaning thy self the said Iohn Lilburne) and many other persons (meaning the foresaid friends) inteat you seriously to consider that I cannot advise you to make addresses to him (meaning the aforesaid THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, Captain General) as the Generall of the Nations forces (the Forces of this Natieon of England meaning) for he (the aforesaid Captain Genrall
meaning) is no Generall, but is meerely a great Tyrant (meaning the a∣foresaid Capt. Generall) standing by the power of his owne will and a strong sword, borne by his vassels, slaves, and creatures (the Souldiers of the Army aforesaid meaning) having no Commission to be Generall, either from the Law or the Parliament, nor from the prime lawes of Nature & reason. For first, when he was made Generall by both houses of Parlia∣ment, it was expresly against the letter of the Laws. And secondly, when he refused to disband &c. he hath rebelled against his Parliament Com∣mission, and thereby destroyed, and annihilated it, &c. The Reader is desired to take notice, that in the Indictment it selfe, there was a great many other things then in this is expressed, as parti∣cularly, divers passages out of a book called Mr. Lilburnes, Intituled, The Legall Fundamentall liberties of England revived, &c. as also out of another book Intituled, A preparative to an Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur Haslerigg, &c. as also out of The Agreement of the People of the first of May 1649. with severall other remarkable things in matter and forme, that was more neglected to be taken then the pleadings, be∣cause it was not supposed, but the Indictment (being a Record) a true Copy of it might easily be had, considering that by Law, all Records ought freely to be used by any free-man of England, and Copies of them to be denied to none that desire to take them; but that Priviledge being already in this Cause disputed and denyed, in which regard, the Reader must at present accept of the best imperfect notes the Publish∣er could pick up, but to go on. And further, that thou the said John Lilburne, as a false Traytor, all and singular the clauses and English wordes abovesaid, and many other tray∣terous, poysonous and malicious expressions, in and by the aforesaid writings, and by the aforesaid severall books, as aforesaid recorded, and by thee the aforesaid John Lilburne, published and openly declared in the severall books so as aforesaid printed, and by the aforesaid wrightings, and by thee the aforesaid John Lilburne, in manner and forme aforesaide, published, and openly divusged and declared divers other scandalous, ma∣licious, tumultuous and treacherous clauses, and words in the said  contained, falsely, maliciously, advisedly and trayterously, hast publ and openly declared, to the intent to stir up, and raise forces against  Government aforesaid, in the way of a Common-wealth, and free  as aforesaid established, and for the suppressing and alteration of the  Government, and to stir up mutiny in the Army aforesaid, and also  withdraw the said John Tooke, Thomas Lewis and John Skinner, and  other Souldiers from their obedience to their superiour Officers and
Commanders, and to set them in mutiny and rebellion against the publick peace, and to manifest contempt of the Lawes of this Common-wealth, and free State, and against the forme of the Statutes in this Case made and provided. The Indictment being reading, and the noise of the people in the Hall great, the Prisoner said he could not heare, and had some few lines before read over to him. L. Col. Lilb. Pray hold your Peace Gentlemen, I beseech you, be quiet. (speaking to the people) L. Keeble. Quiet you your self, we will quiet them for you. Braughton. Which Country are you? so that you are to finde whither he is guilty or no, he having already pleaded, Not Guilty. If you finde that he is Guilty of any of the high Treasons laid to his Charge, then you are to enquire what goods, Lands, or Chattels he stood possessed of, when he committed the said high Treasons; but if you finde him not Guilty, you shall then enqnire whi∣ther he did not fly for it, and if he did not fly for it, Then you are to say so and no more, therefore hearken to your evidence? L. Col. Lilb. May it please your Honour, Cryer. If any man can give any Evidence to my Lords the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, against Mr. Iohn Lilburne, let him come in and he shall be heard. L. Col. Lilb. I desire to be heard to speak two or three words. I humbly desire the favour to speak two or three words. I humbly desire the favour to be heard two words. L. Keeble. It is not a fit time, you shall be heard in your due time, but hear what the Witnesses saith first. L. Col. Lilb. I conceive I am much wronged, in saying that I pleaded not Guilty, for I pleaded no such Plea, I appeale to the Court, and to all that heard me, whether I pleaded any such Plea; for before I pleaded, the Court became engaged to me, to take no advantage of my ignorance of the formalities of the Law, and promised to give me as much priviledge as my Lord Duke of Hambleton, and others injoyed, before the Court of . L. Keeble. We know all this. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, by your favour, I pleaded conditionally, and now I  my absolute Plea to the Indictment, which is this; That I except  the matter, and form of it in matter, time & place, and humbly crave  to assigne and plead to the errors thereof. L. Keeble. You must hear us, we hear you, a word is a great deale, these things we have taken perfect notice of, the Court is not ignorant of them.
Therefore they need not so suddainly be repeated to us againe, you need not repeate these things; for I tell you agan, they are all fresh in our memories, and that we have done we must maintaine, or we have done nothing. L. Col. Lilb. Truly, it is requisite for me to say, that I am wronged, I had no such single Plea; I plead a Plea at large to the errors of the Indict∣ment, and first now crave liberty of the Law of England, to have time and Councell assigned me. L. Keeble. You shall have the Lawes of England, although you refuse to own them, in not holding up your hand; for the holding up of the hand hath been used as a part of the Law of England these 500 yeares, go on. My Lord,Mr. the Coun∣cell that was an assistant to Mr. Prideaux. The prisoner at the Barstands Indicted as a Traytor, for that he contriving, and malici∣ously intending not only to disturbe the publicke Peace; but also to bring the Government of the Nation happily setled in a free State, or Common-wealth, without a King, or an house of Lords, and the Com∣mons in Parliament assembled, to bring in disgrace and contempt amongst all good men, he did the first of this instant October, and divers times before and since in this City, falsly and maliciously, advisedly and trayterously by writ∣ing, printing and openly derlaring, in and by one Paper of his called, A Salva libertate, and by divers other papers and books, whereof one he calls, An Im∣peachment of high Treason against Oliver Cromwell and his sonne in law Henry Ireton, and another book of his Entituled An Out-Cry of the young men, and Apprentices of London, directed to all the privat Souldiers of the Army, &c. a third, A preparative to an Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur Haslerigg, and a fourth The legall fundamentall liberties of the people of England revived, that he did in these bookes publish, that the said Governe∣ment is tyrannicall, usurped and unlawfull; and that the Commons in Par∣liament assembled, are not the Supream authority of this Nation; he stands further indicted, that he as a false Traytor did maliciously, advisedly and trayterously plot, and contrive, to raise force against the present Government, and for the subversion and alteration of it, and for the fulfilling of his most ma∣licious and trayterous designes, he did in and by the said trayterous Books, fals∣ly, maliciously and advisedly, utter and declare severall most false and scan∣dalous, malicious and trayterous words and writings, that in the Indictment are particularly named and expressed. And thirdly, that as a Traytor not being an Officer, nor a Souldier, or a member of the Army under the Command of the now Lord Generall Fairfax, he did most maliciously and trayterously en∣deavour, to withdraw certaine Souldiers of that Army from their obedience to their superiour Officers, which are particularly named in the Indictment, and that for the full accomplishment of his contrivances and endeavours, he
did maliciously, advisedly and trayterously publish, and deliver the poysonous booke called An Impeachment, and in particular directed by the Title of the booke, to all the people of England, being for that end published by him to pub∣lick view; in which Book are contained, most false and scandalous, malicious, mutinous and traiterous expressions as in the Indictment are set forth; And further that in the said book which he called An Impeachment, that the pre∣sent Government is tirannicall and usurped, and that the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, are not the Supream Authority, And he further stands indicted, and the Jury further finds, and presents, that all these and o∣ther expressions written by him, and published by him in written Papers and printed books, he hath falsly, maliciously and trayterously stirred up strife on purpose, and to the intent, to stir up and raise force against the present Govern∣ment, setled in the way of a Common-wealth and free State, without King and Lords, on purpose, it to subvert and destroy. And further, he hath also most trayterously endeavoured to withdraw the privat Souldiers from their obedi∣ence and subjection to their superiour Officers; and all this in manifest con∣tempt of the Lawes of this Common-wealth, in that behalf made and provid∣ed, and to the hazzard of the overthrow, and utter subversion of the said Go∣vernment. To this Indictment the Gentleman hath pleaded not guilty, and hath put him∣self upon his Conntry, and if we can prove this against his Plea, it is at an issue. L. Col. Lilb. I deny that Sir, I never pleaded any such single Plea as not Guilty, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I beseech you take notice be ex∣treamly wrongs me in saying so, for my Plea was a conditionall Plea, as a Plea at large. Mr. Atturney. My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, You have heard the Indictment read unto you, and you have heard it opened unto you, and you have heard what Mr. Lilburne saies, that he did not plead not Guilty, and I hope he is ashamed of his Plea, now he heares the Indictment opened unto him. My Lord, in this Indictment there is contained these severall Grand Trea∣sons. The first is, that he hath advisedly, traiterously, and maliciously published, that the Government that is now established, by way of a free State or Common-wealth, without either King or house of Lords, is tirannic all, usurped and un∣lawfull; and further, that the present Parliament now assembled, arr not the Supreame authority of the Nation. The second is this, that he hath plotted, contrived and endeavoured, to stirre up, and raise forces against the present Government, and for the subversion and alteration of the same.
The third is this that relates to the Army, you have heard what his expres∣sions have been, and they have been read unto you, concerning them and the rest, that he, not being an Officer or Souldier or member of the present Army, hath offered to stir up mutiny in the Army, and to withdraw the Souldiers from their obedience and subjection to their superiour Officer, and thereby to stir them up to mutiny and discontent. These are the maine parts, and substance of what I intend to Charge him with in the evidence, to prove that which was contained in the Indictment. My Lord, you have heard in what hath been read out of the Indictment, what ex∣pressions they are, those that are traiterous to the publicke, and have been so declared, so judged, so executed, these are here Mr Lilburns engaged true friends; the Parliament, the Government, the Authority, of both Parliament and Army, they are Tyrants, Vsurpers, Mercenaries, Janisaries, Murderers, Traytors, standing by their own power and swords, and ever-ruling all by their Wills; these are the expressions that he hath used. My Lords, I shall not trou∣ble you with any thing of agravation; for my Lords, I do conceive, that the reading of the Bookes themselves aggravates every thing against him; and I thinke there is no English-man (as Mr. Lilburn so often stiles himself to be) will own such words or acts as these are. And truly my Lord, if I had read the Books, and not known the person, I should not have thought he had been either a Christian, or a Gentleman, or a Civill man, to have given such base and bitter language; but my Lords, and you of the Jury, I stall hold you no longer the evidence being so plaine, and the matter so foule, that it will not admit ouer much stand in need of any dispute, and to make it plaine and cleere to your judgements, and Consciences, there is Witnesses in the Court evidently to prove every thing that will stand in need, to be proved for the Indictment. My Lords, the words are maliciously, advisedly and traiterously, I shall not catch at words, but as himself sayes, what he prints is of mature, and deli∣berate consideration, and such are his books in print; that himself hath either printed, or caused to be published. The first that he is Charged withall, is that which is called An Out-Cry, it hath a very dangerous Title, and in the Direction especially to the Souldiers of the Army, but especially to the privat Souldiers of the Generalls Regiment of horse, that helped to plunder the true hearted English-men, traiterously defea∣ted at Burford, so that the Rebels at Burford were Mr. Lilburns deare friends. My Lord, it hath not only a dangerous Title, but was published at a dangerous time; yea and for a dangerous end, which was to stir up the great mutiny that was in the City of Oxford. My Lord for the proof of this, we shall offer this, That Mr. Lilburn himself was Capt. Iones associate in the publish∣ing
that Booke; For Mr. Lilburn and this Capt. Iones brought this Booke to the presse to be Printed, we shall offer unte yon where he hath published it to Souldiers of the Army, to engage them in a mutiny, and discontent against their superiour Officers; therefore in the first place call Thomas Newcombe. Thomas Newcombe sworne. Iust. Iermin Before you speak look upon the prisoner first, whether you know him or not. Mr. Atturney. My Lord, if you please, he may take the booke in his hand, and see whether he printed it, and when he printed it, and who brought it to the presse? Mr. Newcombe. I Printed of this Booke onely the last sheet, not knowing where the former part of it was done, which Booke was brought to me by Leiut. Col. Lilburn, and Capt. Iones, which Capt. Iones did agree with me in the price, I was stopt in the proceedings in it: I say, that Capt. Iones together with Leiut. Col. Lilburn did bring it to me, and that Capt. Iones did agree with me in the price, but I was taken before I did perfect it, but Capt. Iones did indent with me for the price; but this I must say, Leiut. Col. Lilburne came alone with the Copy, and afterwards at night he came againe, and had a proof of it, and that he was present when it was corrected. Mr. Atturney. And when the first sheet was printed, then they came at night again, and examined the proof with Capt. Iones, and his Corrector. L. Keeble. And he brought the Copy of the whole draught of the Booke un∣to you. Leiut. Col. Lilb. Sir by your favour, if Mr. Prideaux have done with the Witnesse, I crave my right by Law to aske him some questions. In the first place, I desire he may be asked, whether I was either reader of the Originall Copy, or the over-looker of the printed proof? Mr. Newcombe. You had a printed sheet of it and that was all. Leiut. Col. Lilb. I desire to know, whether I was either the reader of that he printed, or the looker upon the written Copy? Mr. Newcombe. You look't upon the sheet that was printed, Capt. Iones read the manuscript. Leiut. Col. Lilb. Aske him the question thus, whether was I the Cor∣rector of the thing printed, or the looker on upon the printed Copy? And whether or no he can sweare, That that printed sheet that he saies I had, was corrected and revized, and was a true and perfect sheet accord∣ing to the Originall? Mr. Newcombe. It was a Copy of the sheet before it was corrected or revized.
Mr. Atturney. And Mr. Iones did read the Originall, and Leiut. Col. Lilburn corrected the Copy. Leiut. Col Lilb. Vnder favour you are mistaken, he saies, that I cast my eye upon the Copy; but doth not in the least say, that I corrected it; and therefore Sir, you do abuse me, in going about to make him say more then his own Conscience tels him is truth. L. Keeble. While the examination was, he saith you read the proof. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, he says no such thing by your favour. L. Keeble. Mr. Newcombe, was not Mr. Lilburne there the second time at night, and did he not look upon the Copy? Mr. Newcombe. That he did my Lord, but my Lord I shall tell you the manner of our Trade in this particular, the manner is, that after we have set a forme of the letter, we make a proof of it, which proof we have a Corrector does read, my Corrector he had one being he Corrected it, and Capt. Iones lookt upon the Manuscript, and L. Col. Lilburne had a Copy of the same sheet uncorrected, but he did not correct it, nor read to the Corrector; there was two pul'd off, the Corrector had one, and Mr. Lilburne had the other, and Capt, Iones look't upon the Manuscript, and read it to the Corrector. Leiut. Col. Lilb. He has declared unto you, That he was taken print∣ing the thing before it was perfected, I desire to knw, whether I was at his house to give any further directions at all after it was taken? Mr. Atturney. That's no thanks neither to you nor him. Leiut. Col. Lilb. I pray let him answer the thing, let me have faire play above board. Sir, I beseech you let me hold him close to the question, he saies he was taken before the sheet was perfected, truly I think they are his very words. Mr. Newcomb. I said in my examination, that it was a proof of that print∣ed which you had. Leiut. Col. Lilb. I desire again to know this of him, whether before he had printed or perfected that sheet, he had doing, he was not taken, and both the formes? L. Keeble. Mr. Lilburn, you must desire to aske him the question, and not you to demand it of him your self. Mr. Lilb. I shall Sir, Mr. Newcombe. It was before the formes were taken. Leiut. Col. Lilb. I ask you, whether before the things were compleat and perfect, your formes were not both taken, and your person seized upon? Mr. Newcombe. There were onely some few Copies printed, and then I
was seized upon, and the formes taken away before I had perfected the sheet; but this I say, he did not indent with me for the price, neither had I the Copy from Mr. Lilburns hands, but from Capt. Iones his hands. Iust. Jermin. You say that he had one proof, and Iones another, when was this you speak of? give us the time as near at you can? Mr. Newcombe. I can not say justly the time, but as I remember, it was about 7 or 8 weeks since. Mr. Atturney. Stand you aside, and call Iohn Tooke, Iohn Skinner, Tho∣mas Lewis, Iohn Hawkins and Iohn Merriman, Witnesses sworne. Mr. Atturney. Iohn Tooke, Do you declare now your knowledge. That which I call him for, is to this purpose, that Mr. Tooke being a Souldier of the Army, one of them mentioned in the Judictment, Mr. Lilburne delivered him one of the Outcries, on purpose to draw him from his obedicence to his su∣periour Officers. L. Keeble. Shew him the Book. Mr. Tooke. I have seen the Booke, but I had not the Booke in my hand before. Mr. Atturney. Tell what you know, that's all we ask you. Mr. Tooke. About seaven weeks ago, being at dinner with Thomas Lew∣is and Iohn Smith, all Souldiers, after dinner we met with Leiut Col. Lil∣burn in Ivy-lane, and Thomas Lewis knowing of him, tooke acquaintance of him. Iust. Iermin. All Souldier under my Lord Generall Fairfax? Mr. Tooke. Yes Sir. Iust. Iermin. Goe on. Mr. Tooke. Mr. Lilburn asked me to go and drinke a cup of beere; we did so, and so when we went in, he asked, whether we had seene such a booke as the Apprentizes Out-cry? And Mr. Lewis answered, that he had seene it in a mans hand, then Leiut. Col. Lilburn, said, he had one in his packet that was given him, and if he pleased to accept of it he would give it him; so told him he had thought to buy one of them; for he heard they were sold in the City, but he would accept of his; So Mr. Lilburn delivered it to Mr. Lewis. Mr. Atturney. What did Master Lilburne say further unto you? Mr. Tooke. He saide, that you Souldiers keepe us all in sla∣very. Leiut. Col. Lilburne I beseech you, let me aske him one Que∣stion. Mr. Tooke. There was some to be sould, bat I forgot the place.
Mr. Aturny. Did hee name a place and person to you where you might have some of them. Mr. Cook. He did name a place, but I have forgot it, where there were more bookes to be sold. L. Col. Lilb. Sir I beseech you let me aske you one question. — Lord Keble. Mr. Lilburn, for your direction you must make your questi∣on to us, and require us to aske him the question, and then if your question be faire, it shall not he denied you.— L. Col. Lilb. Then thus: whatsoever this Gentleman sayes of mee∣ting him in Ivy lane, and desiring him to goe to drinke with me, yet I desire you to aske him whether I did take notice or cognizice of any of them first, or whether they did speak to me before, before ever I said any thing unto them.— Lo. Keble. To what end doe you aske this.— L. Col. Lilb. Because in your Indictment I am charged that I went among the Souldiers to seduce them from their obedience to their supe∣rior Officers, when I have made it my endeavour to shun them as much as I can, and not to come nigh the place where I know they are, if I can avoid it, no although I meet with them, not to discourse with any of them, unlesse they begin first.— Lord Keble. I tell you this which may direct you afterwards, whosoever began to discourse first, if you did give them the booke afterwards, it is all one. L. Col. Lil. But shall please you I am upon my life, and by law I ought not to be denyed, to aske the witnesses that swear against me any question that I please, that I my selfe judge pertinent for my advan∣tage. Mr. Aturney. Call Thomas Lewis. Thomas Lewis. And it shall please you, I am upon my oath to speake the truth, and I shall desire by the hlpe of God so to doe, and no more. One day which I conceive to my remembrance, was the 6. day of Septemb. last, we being upon a Guard at Pauls, went to an house to refresh our selves, & when I came forth, I met with Lieut. Coll. John Lilburn, whom I had for∣merly known, and sometimes visited in his imprisonment, and whom I was very glad to see, having a little before heard as though some sudden accident or mischance had befaln him, and I did aske of him how he did, he said unto me he was wel; and so with that sayes he, what are you upon the guard, to my best remembrance this was his expression, yet see whether it was he, or a∣nother that said it, as I take it. These were his words, sayes e, I have almost forgotten you: Sir, I was known to you formerly, having sometimes
been with you in the Tower; sayes he, will you goe drinke? if you please we will, and so upon that we went to a place called the Red Crosse in Newgate∣market: and there were sitting down to drinke, having not much discourse for the present, we sitting still, he asked me at length, have you heard of a booke called the Out-cry of the Apprentices? Sir said I, I have heard of it, and have a louging desire to buy one of them to rend it, and my reason why I so said, was because I did underst and it was to be sold at the Exchange, there I intended to go to get one of them: Says he, I had one given to me, & if you will, I will give it unto you, so I received the booke with thankefulnesse, and further expressing, which was something meane, it would save me a penny in buying of it. And I further entreated him, if he could direct me, where I might buy some more of them: I have a friend sayes be in such a place, if you would goe to him, and tell him that I am here, I should thinke my selfe beholding to you; Now the places name was Martins lane, bub the man's name whether I went, I have forgot, and the man too, I never heard of the man before nor since, so I told Mr. Lilburn. Now he said to me, peradven∣ture when you find that man, you may have some more of the bookes; now these were the words to my best remembrance and knowledge, as I desire to speake with a pure conscience. Mr. Aturny. Mr. Lilburn gave you one of those bookes. Mr. Lewis. Yes Sir, and I put it into my pocket, and when I had done, Mr.— he will deliver him.— Whether there was any Bookes or passages betwixt them; and upon which he told him, yes, There is a booke that Mr. Lewis has, that has such a title. Mr. Atturny. What did you with the booke.— Mr. Lewis. I delivered it to the Lieutenant.— Mr. Atturn. The same booke that you received from Mr. Lilburn, you delivered to the Lieutenant. Mr. Atturny. What did L. Col. Lilb. say to you concerning your pay, did not he aske you, &c. L. Col. Lilb. I pray Sir doe not direct him what to say, but leave him o his own conscience and memory, and make him not for fear to swear more then his own conscience freely tels him is true. Mr. Lewis. The discourse was thus; sayes he, you souldiers (to my best remembrance) are the men that keep us all in slavery; now what to conceive of that expression I must leave that unto you: And as concerning our pay, he asked us, how is your pay? these were the words, or to that effect, but there was money come for us, and ready to be delivered out unto us. Mr. Atturn. Call John Skinner,  was one of those that was in compa∣nies and can speake to it.
Mr. Skinner. To my best remembrance, & it shall please you, 'twas the beginning of Septemb. I cannot justly tell what day, that I met with Mr. Lilburn in Ivy-lane, neare unto Pauls, and meeting with him, I was going towards the Guard, and so was Mr. Lewis with me, being walking forth of the Lane, having been refreshing our selves; and neere the end of the Lane, wee met Lieu. Col. Lilburn, which Lieut. Col. Mr. Lewis very well knew, and knowing of him, asked him how he did, and how it went with him, in regard he had heard before he was in prison; and so I did not take any heed what he said further, neither doe I know whether Mr. Lewis asked Mr. Lilburn to goe with him to drinke, or Mr. Lilburn asked him; but to the Red Crosse in Newgate-market we went to drinke, and Mr. Lilburn did aske Mr. Lewis whether or no he had seene the booke which was called the Apprentices Out-cry: Mr. Lewis answered him that he had not seene the booke (as I remember) but he had heard of that booke that it was forth, & he did intend to buy one of them in regard they were publiquely sold abroad; sayes Mr. Lilburn, I have such a booke in my pocket, which was given mee even now, and I will give it you if you will. L. Col. Lilb. I pray let me heare two or three lines before. Mr. Skinner. Whereupon you answered, and said, I have the booke in my pocket, and it was given me, and I will give it you, and Mr. Lewis recei∣ved it, and that was all, and presently I went away. Mr. Atturny. You hear Gentlemen of the Jurie, that it is the same book that he received from the hands of Lieut. Col. John Lilburn. L. Col. Lilb. My Lord, I beseech you heare me before the Witnesses goe, and he that was sworn before, I desire to aske him this question, whether or no that this is the very booke that is mentioned in the In∣dictment, and whether or no they have examined the words of it with the Indictment. Mr. Prideaux. You need not, that shall be proved presently. Mr. Atturny. That booke which Mr. Lilburn gave you, what did you with it Mr. Skinner: It was delivered unto my Lieutenant, who stands there. Lieut. It was delivered unto my Captain upon the Guard. Capt. Meriman. Tooke the booke in his hand, and said, this individuall booke, signed in severall places by me, I delivered to Mr. Frost, Secretary to the Councell of State, and Mr. Frost caused me to signe it in severall pla∣ces, whereby it could not be mistaken, and that is the very individuall book. Mr. Atturny. My Lords, and you Gentlemen of the Jurie, we have thus far gone in the Evidence, that Mr. Lilburn brought the last sheet of it to the Presse, the first time he came with Captain Jones, and he came the second
time with him to examine it, that is, he had a printed Copy that was then printing, to be printed, and was the Corrector for the Presse, reading the O∣riginall copie: so farre he is privy to the printing of the booke. In the next place three witnesses, (Souldiers of the Arm) swears, he gave them one of these bookes, and one of them gave it to his Lieut. and the Lieut. to the Cap∣taine, and the Captain sweares this individuall booke is that which Master Lilburn gave into the hands of Mr. Lewis; what can be more plaine then this, I pray you Judge; for here is plain testimory of Mr. Lilburns delive∣ring this Oery to the 3. Souldiers, & one of them to his Lieut. & his Lieu∣tenant to his Captain, and his Captain to Mr. Frost, with maks upon it, so this is by consequence proved unto you, this is the individuall booke, that Mr Lilburn, prisoner at the Barre gave to the 3. Souldiers, and which is to be made use of, when you have occasion upon the evidence, to read it as now it is in the Court with you. L. Col. Lilb. By your favour I have had no answer to the question that I humbly craved an answer to, whch is, whether the Souldiers are positively able to sweare, that this is the individuall booke which they say they had from my hands, and whether they are able to sweare that this individuall booke is a true and exact copy without addition or subscription of that originall manuscript that the Printer saith Captain Jones delivered to his hands, which hee saith I had an uncorrected sheete of. Mr. Attur. We shall cleare that to you, when we come to make use of it. L. Col. Lilb. I beseech you Gentlemen of the Jury to take notice of my question, and what I am denyed. Mr. Prideaux. The next thing that is charged upon him, is a paper writ∣ter, and irtituled, a saly & libertate, my Lord shall open the thing to you being direct a (my Lord) for the prosecution of Mr. Lilburn: and having things of very high concernment that are charged against him, I did by word of mouth send to have him come to me, which I understood he did decline, because he had no warrant; The Liut. of the Tower was pleased to acquaint me with it, and I thereupon directed my warrant to the Lieutenant to being him before me: and Mr. Lilburn, &c. L. C. Lilb. MyThis was the first or second time that Mr. Lilburns tongue slipt in calling him Lord. Lord, and please your honours, thus, if we be upon matter of fact, let us come to it, let us have no introduction to teach the witnesses what to say, beyond what their own consciences dictates unto them. Mr. Atturny. I shall goe no further in it, let the Lieutenant of the Tow∣er speake himselfe.
The Lieutenant of the Tower sworn. Mr. Atturny. Lieut. of the Tower you are questioned about the falvo li∣bertate that Mr. Lilburn delivered unto you, have you the originall? Lieut. Tower. Yes Sir, I have. Mr. Atturny. How come you by it? Lieut. Tower. I shall be short in what I say, because I will not trouble the Court. L. Coll. Lilb. Let me heare you then. Lieut. Tower. Being abroad, there was a message left with my servants, that I should bring up Lieut. Col. Lilb. to Mr. Atturneys chamber in the Temple, and when I came in, I had notice of it: I did then send to Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, to let him know what command I had reciived from the At∣turney generall, the next day to carry up Lieut. Col. John Lilburn to the Atturney Generals chamber: But Lieus. Col. Lilburn not well under∣standing whether I had a written warrant or no; but before he came at home he recalled himself, and came back, and desired the sight of my warrant, I told you before I had no warrant, but by word of mouth; why sayes he, doe you thinke I will goe upon a verball Warrant? saith he, I will not goe unlesse you force me; but the next day Mr. Atturney Generall was acquainted that he refused to come without a warrnnt. When the Warrant was made, I met with Lieut. Col. Lilburn about 10. of the clocke in the Tower, who intrea∣ted me to let him see it. I shewed it him, he read it, he desired a copy of it, takes it; which when he had, he went from me, and about two hours after hee came to me about one of the clocke, and said I — pray receive this from mee, for saies he I doe intond not to own the Authority and power of that Gentle∣man that sens me the Warrant, whereupon I told him I would shew this same to the Aturny Generall, why sais he, I give you it to that purpose. When the time came, Lieut. Col. Lilourn did goe along with me in an or∣derly civill way: I had no body but my man, for I told him I will take no body but my man, if you will engage your selfe to me that you will returne peaceably, which be did, and so we went very orderly to Mr. Atturnies Chamber, which is all for that I can say. Mr. Aturny. If you please that the Lieutenant may upon his oath declare whether that be the true Originall he had from Mr. Lilburn's owne hands or no? Lieut. Tower. It was never out of my custodie since he gave it me. Lord Keble. Mr. Lilburn, you doe acknowledge it to be your own hand∣writing, shew it him. Lieut. Col. Lilb. Sir. I am too old with such simple ginnes to bee
catch'd, I will cast mine eyes upon none of your papers, neither shall I answer to any questions that concern my selfe; I have learned more law out of the Petition of Right, and Christs pleading before Pilate, then so. Mr. Atturny. Would you had learnd more Gospell. Judg Jermin. You may answer a question whether it be true or false, and confesse, and glorifie God. L. Col, Lilb. I have said, Sir, prove it, I am not to be catcht with such fooleries. Lord Keble. You see the man, and the quality of the man, this is the pa∣per that he delivered into his owne hand, & that is sufficient, as well as if it was of his own hand-writing. L. Col. Lilb. Good Sir, your verball Bench-law is far short of your written Text in your own law-books. Judge Jarman. Put it into the Court. Lo. Keble. Your writing or not writing is nothing, you delivered the booke. L. Col. Lil. Sir, I desire to know in what place, whereabouts in the Tower of London, the Leiut. of the Tower saith he received this paper. Lord Keble. Let him name the place where it was delivered. Lieut. Towr. The place was at the steps, at the bottome of the narrow passage at my Garden end, in the Cart way where the carriages comes up. L. Col. Lilb. Whether is that place in the Liberties of London, or is it part of the County of Middlesex. Lieut. Tower. The Tower is inBut it is sure that place is in Middlesex, as was resolved in Sir Thomas Overburies case, see Cooks 3d. part Inst. fol. 130. Chap. Indictment. Lon∣don some part of it, and some part in Mid∣dlesex; but unto which place that part of the Tower belongs, I am not able certainly to say, but it hath commonly been reputed in Middlesex. Mr. Atturny. My Lord, you may see the valiantnesse of this Champion for the peoples liberties, that will not owne his own hand although I must de∣sire you Gentlemen of the Jury to observe, that Mr. Lilburn implicitely confesseth it. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I deny nothing: & what now can be proved mine, I have a life to lay down for the justification of it, but prove it first. Mr. Atturney. My Lord, the next thing to prove the charge against him is a very high one, it is stiled Master Lilburnes, and his name is to it: It is intituled, An Impeachment of High Treason against Oliver
Cromwell, and his Sonne in law, Henry Ireton, Esquires, late members of the late forcibly dissolved House of Commons, presented to publique view by Lieut. Coll. John Lilburn, close prisoner in the Tower of London: My Lord, I doubt he will not owne it, but yet my Lord he may be asked the que∣stion. L. Coll. Lilb. I shall deny nothing I doe: And yet I have read the Petition of Right, Sir, that teacheth me to answer to no questions a∣gainst, or concerning my selfe, and I have read of the same to be pra∣ctised by Christ and his Apostles. Mr. Atturny. You will not own it, the booke you have read? L. Col. Lil. You may make your advantage of it. Mr. Atturny. We shall prove it, call Witnesses. Thomas Daffern, Richard Lander, Marshall, Major Hawks∣worth, Governour of Warwick-Castle, all sworn. Mr, Atturney. Mr. Daffern, if you please, he may be asked where hee met Mr. Lilburn, the time when, what booke was given him, and to what purpose it was given him. Mr. Daffern. Why, it was upon the 12. of August last; having beene in Southwark, I met with Lieutenant Col. Lilburn upon the Bridge, I went backe with him to his house at Winchester-house in Southwarke, he had leave to visite his Family at that time, being very sicke, and I told him I was going into Warwick-shire the next day: and hee having heard that Coll. Ayres was then removed from Oxford to Warwick-Castle, he gave me a book to carry to him, and I delivered it to him at Warwick-castle. Mr. Aturny. The booke that he gave you, you gave to the Governour, did you see any more of them. Mr. Daffern. I never saw any of them but that, which was both the first and the last I have seen of them. Mr. Atturny. Lander the Marshall was present at that time, was hee not? Mr. Lander That I was, and I had it from him, and I delivered the book to Major Hawksworth the Governour. Mr. Atturney. Major Hawksworth, what did you doe with the book? Major Hawksw. I sent it to Colonell Purfrey, in a paper sealed with three or four seales. Mr. Atturney. Call Col. Purfrey: Col. Purfrey sworn. L. Col. Lilb. I heate not one word; under favour but one word, I crave but one word, I have an exception. First, Col. Purfrey is one of those that call themselves the Keepers of the Liberties of ENG∣LAND, and for committing crimes against them I am indicted,
and he i one of them, and therefore a party, and in that respect, in law he can be no witnesse against me; it would have beene very hard for the King to have bin a witness against that man that was indicted for com∣mitting crimes against him; such a thing in all his Reigne was never knowne. Col. Purfrey. I received this booke, sealed in a letter from the Gover∣nour of Warwick-Castle, Major Hawksworth, I know his hand, and I know the day he sent me this very individuall Booke, and my hand is at it, & the Governour who sent it up to me, which I declare to be the very individu∣all booke that I received from him. Mr. Atturny. Mr. Lilburn, you are mistaken, Col. Purfrey is a mem∣bee of Parliament, he is none of the Keepers of the Liberties of England; but why will you put us to all this trouble, to prove your bookes, seeing your hand is to them; my Lord, I had though the great Champion of England would not be ashamed to own his owne hand. L. Col. Lilb. I have answered once for all, I am upon Christs terms, when Pilate asked him whether he was the Sonne of God, and adju∣red him to tell him whether he was or no: he replyed, thou sayest it: so say I, thou Mr. Prideaux sayest it, they are my bookes; but prove it, & when that is done, I have a life to lay downe to justifie whatsoever can be proved mine. Judg Jerman. But Christ said afterwards, I am the Son of God, confess Mr. Lilburn, & give glory to God. L. Coll. Lilb. I thank you Sir for your good law, but I can teach my selfe better. Mr. Attur. Here Mr. Lilburn makes a booke which was given to the hands of Mr. Daffern, by Mr. Lilburn himselfe, Mr. Daffern he sweares that the same booke he gave to Col. Aires: Mr. Lnder the Marshall of the Garrison of Warwicke, swears that the same booke Daffern gave to Coll. Eyres, he had from him, & gave to Major Hawksworth the Governour; the Governour swore that that booke he received from the Marshall, he sent sealed up in a letter to Mr. Purfrey, who also swears that that same booke he set his hand to it to know it again by, and that the individuall booke that is now given into your hands, is the same booke that was delivered to him; The Title is an Impeachment of high Treason against Oliver Cromwell, Esquire. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I wonder you are not ashamed so farre to press the testimony beyond that they themselves sweares, Mr. Daffern doth not name the book at all that was given to him, neither doth he swear it to be mine, and therefore Sir you abuse your selfe, the Court, the witnesse, and me too.
Mr. Atturny. Master Lilburn, I have done you right in it, and no wrong at all; for Colonell Purfoy doth name it; The next is a very dange∣rous booke of his, called A preparative to the Hue and Cry after Sir Ar∣thur Haslerig. Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, you are upon your Oath, I pray you speake your knowledge to that. Lieut. of the Tower. My Lord, it is true, Lieutenant Colonell Lil∣burne gave me in the Tower such a booke, but I cannot say, whether that be the same Booke that he delivered to me, or no, I have such a booke al∣so at home, but I am not able to say that is the very Booke hee gave mee, and whether this be the same booke, I know not. Mr. Prideaux. Call Mr. Nutleigh and Mr. Radney. Master Nutleigh sworn. L. Col. Lilb. I pray let the witnesses stand here, the Jury say they cannot heare them. Edward Radney called and sworn. L. Col. Lilb. I pray you let me know what these Gentlemen are, I doe not know them, neither can I remember at present that ever I saw them before. Lord Keble. You see they looke like men of quality. Mr. Prideaux, They are my sorvants Mr. Lilburn. Mr. Nutleigh. My Lord, andBut Mr. Lilburn hath been heard to profes, he see not those Gentlemen in the Chamber that hee discoursed with Mr. Prideaux in, although hee looked divers times about him. please your Lordship, the 14. of Septemb. last, the prisoner at the Bar, Lieutenans Col. John Lilburn, being before Mr. Atturny Generall: And I being by in the chamber, I did see him deliver this Booke to Master Atturney Generall, this specificall booke, and he did owne it, and called himselfe the Author of it, save only the Er∣rataes of the Printer. L. Gol. Lilb. The last Clause, I beseech you Sir, the Jury desires to heare the last Clause. Mr. Nutleigh. My LordThat is an errant lye; for divers that heard the words, aver them to be thus: it is my booke, and I will  it, and so it might be, al∣though he had bought it., he said he was the Author of that Booke, the ERRATAES of the PRINTER excepted. Lieut. Col. Lilburne. Let him bee asked this question, whether in
that expression, saving the Errataes of the Printer, there did not follow these words, which are many: I desire to know whether there were not such words or no. M. Radney. I was present, my Lord, when the prisoner at the Bar pre∣sented this booke to Mr. Atturney, and owned it, saving the Errataes of the Printer. L. Col. Lilb Were there no more words? Mr. Radney. Not to my remembrance, and so said they both. Lieutenant of the Tower. My Lord, I was present at the same time, wh. Lieutenant Colonell Lilburne did present a booke to Mster Atturney Generall, with such a Title as this: And truly if I be not much mista∣ken, there was used by him these words, which are many: Thus it was in the whole; Sayes hee, here is a booke which is mine, which I will owne, the Errataes or Errours of the Printer excepted, which are many, if I mistake not very much, those are the very words Master Lilburne said. Mr. Atturney. My Lords, and you Gentlemen of the Jurie, you see that here are the Witnesses, and they doe all agree, and they doe all agree in this, that Master Lilburne the prisoner at the Barre did deliver this Booke to me, owning it as hisSo is an Oxe, a man buyes with his money, it is his owne, and so is a gold ring hee findes, after he ath found it, it is his owne, and yet it doth not follow, that the owner either begot the Oxe, or made the gold ring. owne, the Errours or Errataes of the Prin∣ter only excepted: And as for that Clause which are many, only the Liev∣tenant of the Tower sweares to that singly, and therefore I desire it may remaine in Court, as that individu∣all Booke that thy see Master Lilburne give me. But my Lord, there is another Booke in the Indictment, intituled the legall fundamentall Libertie of the people of ENGLAND  and asserted: Or, An Epistle written the eight of June, 169, by Lieutenant Colonell JOHN LILBRN, to Mr. WILLIAM LENTHALL, Spea∣ker to the reer of those few Knights, Czns, and Burgesses, that Colonell THOMAS PRIDE at his late purge thought convenient to leave sitting at Westminster. My Lords, for this Booke it ownes Master Lilburn, if be will owne it, it hath his  to it; but I have my lesson from him: My Lord, he will owne nothing, hee will publish e∣nough, but my Lord e will not owne it  qstioned for it; that is not the true principle of a true Christian, nor an English∣man, nor a Gentleman.
L. Col. Lilb I deny nothing by your favour. Mr. Atturney. And confesse as little: My Lord, for this you have two bookes in proofe before you: The preparative to the Hue and Cry and the Salva Libertate ownes these very individuall bookes; for the Preparative to the Hue and Cry in the Marginall note, at the second page, ownes and avowes this booke, called The Lagall Fundamentall, &c. to be Master Lilburns: And Master Lilburn himselfe did owne the Preparative to the  Cry before three Witnesses to be his: and therefore the Salva Libercate, M. lieutenant of the Tower hath sworn that he received it from his owne hnds. My Lords, as for this booke, the Salva, which he does not acknow∣ledge, Wee shall read the words in the Indictment, although it had beene as ingneuous for Master Lilburn to have confest it, as for us to have proved it, and for the proofe of it read the Title. Clerk. The Title read. A preparative to an Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur Haslerig a late Mumber of the forceably dissolved House of Commons, and now the present wicked, bloody, and tyrannicall Governour of New∣castle upon Tyne. Mr. Prideaux. Read the Marginall note in page 2. Clerk. Page 2. in the Margent. That those men that now sit at Westminster are no Parliament, ei∣ther upon the principles of law and reason; see my argument or reasons therefore in my second Edition of my Booke of the 8. of June, 1649. Intituled, The legall fundamentall liberties of the people of ENGLAND, revived and asserted, page 48, 49. to 63. Mr. Atturney. This Booke hath Mr, Lilburns name to it, and here in this his Hue and Cry he ownes it, and the third page in the mar∣gent hath it again. Clerk. Page 3. Peruse carefully I entreate you, the quotations in the 6. and 8. pages of my formentioned Impeachment of High Treason against Cromwell. At. also the 12. and 15. pages of the se∣cond Edition of my forementioned Booke, dated the eighth of June, 1649 Intituled, The legall fundamentall liberties, &c. Mr. Atturney. Read the  in the body of the booke. Clerk. Page 4. At which Tryall by strength of arguments, I for∣ced the Judges openly to confesse, that Generalls were nothing in Law, see also the second Edition of my booke of the eighth of
June, 1649 Intituled, The legall fundamentall liberties of the peo∣ple of England, revived, asserted, and vindicated, page 49. L. Col. Lilb. Let him speake whether it be 29. or 49. Clerk. Forty nine (but there is not so many pages in the booke.) Mr. Atturny. My Lord, here is a Salva Libertate, which is his owne Booke, though he will not owne it. My Lord, I had thought the great Champion of England for the peoples liberties, would never have beene so unworthy as not to have owned his owne hand; but read in the 24. page of the Salva in his owne written hand. Clerk. Page 24. I have by almost 8. years dear-bought experience, found the interest of some of my forementioned Judges to be too strong for mee to grapple with, and the onelyThis was brought in by head and shoulders. cause to my apprehension, that all this while keepe me from my owne: and in the Margent he saith; see also the second Edition of my forementioned booke, intituled, The legal fun∣damental liberties of England revived, &c. Mr. Aturny. Now my Lord, there is the Salva Libertate that was given from his owne hand that ownes it, I meane this Booke, called The legall fundamentall liberties, &c. Mr. Aturney. Read the Title of it. Clerk. A Salva Libertate sent to Colonell Francis West, Lieute∣nant of the Tower of LONDON, on Friday the fourteenth of Septemb. 1649. by Lieut. Col. John Lilburn. Mr. Prideaux. Read where it is marked. Clerk. But if you would produce unto me a written Warrant which hath some more face of legall Magistracy in it, then verball command, and according to my right and priviledge let mee read it, I would goe with you either by land or water, as you please, because I was in no capacity to resist you, although I then told you I judged a paper-War∣rant (although in words never so formall) comming from any pre∣tended power, or Authority in England now visible, to be altogether il∣legall, because the intruding Generall, Fairfax, and his Forces, had broke and anihilated all the formall and legall Magistracy of England; yea, the very Parliament it selfe, and by his Will and Sword (abso∣lute Conquerour like) had most tyrannically exected, set up, and imposed upon the free people of this Nation a Juncto, or mock power sitting at Westminster, whom hee and his Associates call a Parlia∣ment, who like so many armed Thieves and Robbers upon the high way,
assume a power by their owne will, most traiterously to doe what they like. Mr. Atturny. That's not the place, look towards the latter end. Clerk. Then here it is; sure I cannot chuse but acquaint you that I have long since drawne and published my plea against the pre∣sent power, in my second Edition of my Booke of the 8. of June, 1649. intituled, The legall fundamentall liberties of the people of England, revived, asserted, and vindicated, which you may in an especiall manner, read in the 43, 44, 45. to the 49. page, which by the strength of the Lord God omnipotent, my large experienced helpe in time of need, I will seale with the last drop of my blood. Mr. Aturny. My Lord, for the Book, called the legall fun∣damentall liberties of England, his name is to the Booke; but I shall not put much weight upon that; but in others of his books, as in his Preparative to an Hue and Cry, which he owns, and which is proved he owns by 3 witnesses. In severall places of that book he owns this as his book, viz. The legal fundamental liberties of Engl. revived, &c. He calls it mine, and his ferementioned booke: and in his Salva Libertate, he owns it again, gives it the very date, and the very Title that is in this Booke: my Lords, we have done with this. My Lords, now I shall goe on to make use of it, and to shew my Lord out of these books, his words and language, to make good the Charge that hath been read in the indictment against Mr. Lilburne. My Lords, if you please for that I shall begin first, in reading to the Jury the very Act it selfe, which makes the fact to be Treason. My Lord, for that, here is the Act, that doth declare the Com∣mon wealth for the future to become hereafter a free State, and the other declaring that fact to be Treason, that shall say it is tyrannicall or unlawfull, these are generall Acts which need not be proved; but if the prisoner does desire it, we shall prove it.
Clerk. Die Lunae, 14. of May, 1649. Ordered by the Commons assem∣bled in Parliament. L. C. Lilb. Hold Sir, prove your Act first, whether it be an Act of Parliament. Mr. Atturney. My Lords, I shall not struggle with Mr. Lilubrn in plaine termes; but I thought when Acts were published, the Courts of Justice were bound in duty to take notice of them; but if it be so he will have it proved, we will, although it be but a slender cavill, for this is one of the published copies. L. Col. Lilb. But under your favour Mr. Prideaux, as there may be counterfeit money (which wee see there is every day) so there may be counterfeit Statutes too, and this may be one for any thing I know, therefore I desire it may be proved to be a true Statute or Act of Parlia∣ment. Mr. Nutleigh. This is a true copy of the Act of Parliament, which I ex∣amined with the Record. L. Col. Lilb. The record, where is that to be found? Mr. Nutleigh. At Westminster, with the Clerk of the Parl. L. Col. Lil. Is this Gentleman able to depose it to be a . Law in all the parts of it; for by the Lawes of England, the people are not to take any notice of Acts made, but by a Parliament: neither are they to take notice of those Acts that are not proclaimed: Sir, I beseech you let me know where the Record and Rolls are, and where he examined this, and whether he is able to sweare whether they have been proclai∣med in every Hundred and Market-towne, according to the old, and not yet repealed law of England. Lo. Keble At Westminster he tels you. L. Col. Lilb. I beseech you where, at Westminster. Lord Keble. The Clerks of the Parliament are known to the City of Lon∣don here, you know it well enough. L. Col. Lillb. That is no answer to my questions, I pray let me have fair play; for it is a question to me whether the bookes of the Clerk of the House of Commons be aAnd wl might he for Mack∣wel—in his manner of pas∣sing of statutes, in his preface therunto, saith, that the Com∣mons had no journals at all be∣fore Edward the sixths time. record in law or no. Lord Keble. Read, Cerk.
Clerk. An Act of the 14. of May, 1649. Declaring what offences shall be adjudged Treason. WHereas the Parliament hath abolished the Kingly Office in ENG∣LAND and IRELAND, and in the Dominions and Ter∣ritories thereunto belonging, and hath resolved and declared that the people shal for the future b governed by its own Representatives, or Natio∣nall meetings in Councell, chosen and intrusted by them for that purpose, hath setled that Government in the way of a Common-wealth and free State, without KING or House of LORDS. Be it there∣fore enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, that if any person shall maliciously, or advisedly publish, by writing, printing, or openly declaring, That the said Government is tyrannicall, usurped, or unlawfull; Or that the Commons in PARLIAMENT assembled are not the supreame Authority of this Nation, or shall plot, contrive, or endeavour to stirre up, or raise force against the present Government, or for the subversion or alteration of the same, and shall declare the same by any open deed; That then every such offence shall be taken, deemed, and adjudged by the Authority of this present PARLIAMENT to be High Trea∣son. And whereas the Keepers of the Liberty of ENGLAND, and the Councell of state constituted, and to be from time to time constituted by Authority of PARLIAMENT, are to be under the said Representatives in PARLIAMENT. entrusted for the main∣tenance of the said Government, with severall powers and Authori∣ties limited, given, and appointed unto them by the PARLIAMENT. Be it likewise enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that i any person shall maliciously and advisedly, plot, or endeavour the subversion of the said Keepers of the Lebertie of ENGLAND, or the Councell of State, and the same shall declare by any open dd, or shall move any person or persons for the doing thereof, or  up the people to rise against them, or either of them there, or either of their Au∣thorities, that the every  and offs shall be taken, dee∣med and declared to be  Treason, And whereas the PARLIAMENT  their just and lawfull defence,  under the Com∣mand of THOMAS, LORD PAIRFAX, and are at present ne∣cessitated by reason of the manifold distractions within word Com∣mon-wealth,
and invasions threatned from abroad, to con∣tinue the same, which under God must be the instrumental meanes of preserving the wel-affected people of this Nati∣on in peace and safety. Be it further Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, that if any person, not being an Officer, Souldier, or member of the Army, shall plot, contrive, or endeauour to stirre up any mutiny in the said Army, or withdraw any Souldiers or Officers from their obedience to their superiour Officers, or from the present Govern∣ment as aforesaid, or shall procure, invite, aide, or as∣sist any Forreigners or Strangers to invade England or Ire∣land; or shall adhere to any Forces raised by the Enemies of the PARLIAMENT, or Gommon-wealth, or Keepers of the Liberties of ENGLAND. Or if any person shall counterfeit the great Seale of England (for the time being) used and appointed by authority of Parliament: That then every such offence and offences, shall be taken, deemed, and declared by the authority of this Parlament, to be high trea∣son: And every such person shall suffer paine of death, and also forfeit unto the Keepers of the Libertie of England, to and for the use of the Common wealth, all and singular his and their Lands, Tenements and hereditaments, goods and Chattels, as in case of high Treason, hath been used by the Lawes and Statutes of this Land, to be forfeit and lost, provided alwayes that no persons shall be indicted and ar∣raigned for any of the offences mentioned in this act, un∣lesse such offenders shall be indicted or prosecuted for the same within one yeare after the offence committed. Mr. Prideaux. Read the other statute. Clerk. Tuesday, 17. July, 1649. Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament that this Act be forthwith printed and published. Hen. Scobel Cler. Parl. An Act declaring what offences shall be adjudged Treason.
Whereas the Parliament hath abolished the Kingly Office in Eng∣land and Ireland, and in the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, and having resolved and declared, that the people shall for the future be governed by its own representatives, or nationall meetings in Counsel, chosen and entrusted by them for that pur∣pose, hath setled the Government in the way of a Common-wealth, and free State, without King or House of Lords; Be it enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, that if any person shall maliciously or advisedly publish by writing, prin∣ting, or openly declaring, that the said Government is tyrannicall, usurped, or unlawfull, or that the Commons in Parliament assem∣bled are not the supreame Authority of this Nation, or shall plot, contrive or endeavour to stir up, or raise force against the present Government, or for the subversion or alteration of the same, and shall declare the same, by any open deed, that then every such of∣fence shall be taken, deemed and adjudged by Authority of this Parliament to be high Treason; and whereas the Keepers of the Liberties of England, and the Counsel of State, constituted, and to be from time to time constituted, by Authority of Parliament, are to be under the said representatives in Parliament, entrusted for the maintenance of the said Government with severall Powers, and Authorities limited, given and appointed unto them by the Parliament; Be it likewise enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person shall malliciously, and advisedly, plot or endea∣vour, the subversion of the said Keepers of the Liberties of England, or the Counsel of State, and the same shall declare by any open deed, or shall move any person or persons for the doing thereof, or stir up the people to rise against them, or either of them, their, or either of their Authorities, that then every such offence and of∣fences shall be taken, deemed and declared to be high treason. And whereas the Parliament for their just and lawfull Defence, hath raised and leavied the Army and Forces now under the Command of THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, and are at present neces∣sitated by Reason of the manifold distractions within this Com∣mon-wealth, and invasions threatened from abroad, to continue the same which under God, must be the instrumentall meanes of preserving the well affected people of this Nation, in peace & safe∣ty; Be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person not being an Officer, Souldier or Member of the Army, shall plot contrive or endeavour to stir up any mutiny in the said Army,
or withdraw any Souldiers or Officers from their obedience, to their superiour Officers, or from the present Government as afore∣said; Or shall procure, invite, aid or assist any Forraigners or Strangers to invade England, or Ireland, or shall adhear to any Forces, raised by the Enemies of the Parliament, or Common-wealth, or Keepers of the Libertie of England; Or if any person shall counterfeit the great Seal of England, for the time, being used and appointed by Authority of Parliament, that then every such offence and offences shall be taken, deemed and declared by Autho∣rity of this Parliament to be high Treason; And every such per∣sons shall suffer paines of death, and also forfeit unto the Keepers of the Liberty of England, to and for the use of the Common-wealth all, and singular, his and their Lands, Tenements and He∣reditaments, Goods and Chattles as in case of high Treason hath been used by the Lawes and Statutes of this Land, to be forfeit and lost, provided al∣wayes, that no persons shall be indicted and araigned, for any the offences mentioned in this Act, unlesse such offenders shall be in∣dicted & prosecuted for the same within one year after the offence committed; And be it further enacted by the Authority afore∣said, that if any person shall counterfeit the money of this Com∣mon-wealth, or shall bring any false money into this Land, coun∣terfeit, or other like to the money of this Common-wealth, knowing the money to be false, to marchandize or make payment in deceit of the people of this Nation; Or if any person shall hereafter falsly forge, and counterfeit any such kind of Coyn of Gold or Silver, as is not the proper Coyn of this Common-wealth, and is or shall be current within this Nation, by consent of the Parliament, or such as shall be by them authorised there∣unto; or shall bring from the parts beyond the Seas into this Common-wealth, or into any the Dominions of the same, any such false and counterfeit Coyn of money, being current within the same, as is above said knowing the same money to be false and counterfeit, to the intent to utter or make payment with the same, within this Common-wealth, by merchandize or otherwise; Or if any person shall impair diminish, falsifie, clip, wash, round or file, scale or lighten, for wicked lucre or gaines fake, any the pro∣per moneyes or Coynes of this Common-wealth, or the Domi∣nions thereof, or of the moneyes or Coyns of any other realme, allowed and suffered to be current within this Common-wealth, or the Dominions thereof, that then all, and every such offences
above mentioned, shall be and are hereby deemed and adjudged high Treason; and the offenders therein, their Councellers, Pro∣curers, Ayders and Abetters, being convicted according to the Laws of this Nation, of any of the said offences shall be deemed and adjudged Traytours against this Common-wealth: and shall suffer and have such pains of death, and forfeitures, as in case of ligh Treason is used and ordained. Provided alwayes and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that this Act touching the moneyes and Coyns aforesaid, or any thing therein contained, nor any at∣tainder of any person for the same, shall in any wise extend or be judged to make any corruption of bloud, to any the heir or heirs of any such offender, or to make the wife of any such offender to lose or forfeit her dower, of, or in any Lands, Tenements or He∣reditaments, or her Title, Action or Interest in the same. Mr Atturney, My Lords, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, you have heard these laws read unto you, the clauses that we are to make out in proof against Mr Lilburne are these, That if any person shall maliciously or advisedly publish by writing, Printing, or openly declaring, that the said Govern∣ment is Tyrannicall, usurped or unlawfull, or that the Commons in Parlia∣ment assembled are not the Supreme authority of this Nation, are Traytors; these we shall joyne together with his books; My Lord you are here in Court, and have received the proofs against him, and we shall now make it out, that he hath done what this Statute forbids out of his own books that have come from himself, as the Author of them; My Lord, we shall begin with that charge against him, in declaring the government Tyrannicall, usurped and unlawfull, and for that end, see his Impeachment of Lieut: Gen: Crom∣well, &c. page. 8. Just: Jermin. Mr Lilburne, Doth your Paper of the 17 of May agree with that which was read, or no. L. Col: Lilb: No. Sir, I conceive Sir, you ask'd me whether this Act I have in my hand do agree with that which was read. Just: Jermin. Yes Sir I do. L. Col: Lilburne, It does not. Just: Jermine, Then you will make use of it by and by. Lieut. Col: Lilb: I Sir, I intend so, if you will let me. Mr Atturn: My Lord, The first is, that Mr Lilburne hath declared the present Government to be tyrannicall, usurped and unlawfull, and that in ipsis∣simis verbis, that he hath so declared, in a very high way, in the very words; so his book intituled, an impeachment of high treason against Oliver Crom∣well, and his Son in law, Henry Ireton, &c. Read fol:
Clerk. Fol: 8. Yea and the absolute keeping up of a perpetuall & everlasting Army, under which the people are absolute & perfect Slaves and Vassals, as by woefull and lamentable experience, they now see, they perfectly are, which slavery and absolute bondage, is like daily to encrease, under the present Tyrannicall and Arbi∣trary, new erected, robbing Government. Mr Attur: And so My Lord, it is here exprest to be a tyrannicall and ar∣bitrary Government, which are expresly within the word of the Law, for they are a tyrannicall Government. My Lords, we shall not stick, here with him, but you shall see the whole Course of all his pens writing, hath been to this purpose, that goes very far, My Lord, see the Title page of the last book. Clerk. Title page. Before a legall Magistracie, when there shall be one in England, which now in the least there is not. Mr Prideaux. See fol: 1. Clerk. Pag. 1. I have fully both by Law and Reason, undenia∣bly and unanswerably proved, that the present Juncto sitting at Westminster, are no Parliament at all in any sence, either upon the Principles of Law or Reason, but are a Company of usurping Ty∣rants and Destroyers of your Lawes, Liberties, Freedoms and Pro∣prieties sitting by Virtue of the Power and conquest of the Sword. Mr Prid: Read the Title page of the same book. Clerk. An impeachment of high Treason against Oliver Cromwell, and his Son in Law Henry Ireton Esquires members of the late forcibly dis∣solved House of Commons, presented to publick view, by Lieut. Col: John Lilburne, close Prisoner in the Tower of London, for his reall, true and zealous affections to the Liberties of his native Countrey. In which following Discourse or impeachment he engageth, upon his life, either upon the Princi∣ples of Law (by way of indictment, the onely and alone legall way of all Tryals in England) or upon the Principles of Parliaments Ancient Proceedings, or upon the Principles of Reason, (by pretence of which alone they lately took a∣way the Kings life) before a legall Magistracy, when there shall be one again in England, which now in the least there is not. Mr Att: Indeed, My Lord, and you of the Jury, Mr Lilburne is a very great Rooter, not a Leveller, but a Rooter, to root out the Laws of England by the Rootes. J: There is not. Lieut. Col: Lilb: By your favour, Mr Prideaux, I knew the time, when others said it as well of you, and it is not long since, you were penned down, in a black bill to my knowledge, as unsavory Salt, with many others to be thrown out of the House of Com∣mons;
I pray, Sir, whether were those Rooters, that went about to roote up that House, by force of Armes, or Mr Prideaux and o∣thers to give them cause, at least in their apprehensions. Mr Att: My Lord, A legall Magistracy in England as now, he saith in the least there is not, if there be no Magistracy, I will conclude, there is no Propriety, My Lord, left in this Nation, but Mr Lilburne saith, there is no Magistracy, and if so then no Propriety. Lieut. Col: Lilb: It would be a very strange Argument, that you would inferre, I wish, you and I were to dispute that in point of Law for our lives, that to deny a Magistracy legally constituted, according to the Formalities of the Law, does not destroy Pro∣priety, for indeed Sir, propriety is an antecedent to Magistracy, and is first in being before it, but Sir to end the dispute, he that ownes the Law of England, (as I do) that distinguisheth meum & tuum, can never be a Destroyer of Propriety; I wish your practise were as consonant to Propriety as my Principles. Mr Prid: Read the 2 Page at the marke. Clerk. Now I say considering that which is before declared, I cannot upon any tearms in the world, either with Safety, Justice, or Conscience, as things stand with me at present, give my con∣sent, but hinder (as much as I am able) all addresses from me or any other, that shall own the usurping Tyrants, as a Parliament, especially by Petition, (which was a course, (saith the pretended Parliament Sollicitour, against the King, in his case stated pag. 24.) which Gods people did not take with Reboboam, for they never pe∣titioned him (although he was their lawfull supreame Magistrate) but advised him, he refusing their Counsel, and hearkened to young and wicked Counsellours, and they cry out, to thy Tents O Israel, and made quick and short work of it. Mr Prid: My Lord, here is words again to make good as aforesaid, that the Parliament are usurping Tyrants, read also Page 28. Clerk. Read on. Page 23. in the margent of the said book: And if those very things should now be judged Treason, as they are and were in the Earle of Strafford; I wonder what should become of all our present Juncto at Westminster, and their new thing called a Councel of State, undoubtedly, the most if not all of them, must go to Tiburne, or Tower-hill, there by a halter, or axe, to receive their just deserts, Amen. Mr Att: There is an Amen pronounc'd to us, let him have it that de∣serves it, but to go on: Read the 11. page of his book, called the Appren∣tices Outcry.
Clerk reads 11. page. We say, considering what is before premised, we are necessitated and compel'd to do the utmost we can, for our own Preservation, and the Preservation of the Land of our Nati∣vity, and never by popular Petitions, &c. addresse our selves to the Men sitting at West-minster, any more, or to take any more notice of them, then as of so many Tyrants and Usurpers; and for time to come to hinder, (as much and as far as our poor despised in∣terest will extend to) all others whatsoever from subscribing, or presenting any more popular Petitions to them. And onely now as our last Paper refuge mightly cry out to each other, of our intol∣lerable Oppressions in letters and remonstrances, signed in the be∣half, and by the appointment of all the rest, by some of the stoutest and stiffest amongst us, that we hope will never apostatize, but be able through the strength of God, to lay down their very lives for the maintaining of that, which they set their hands to. Mr Prid: Read page 2. Clerk reads on, page 2. But even our Parliament (the very marrow and soul of all the peoples native Rights) put down, and the name and Power thereof transmitted, to a picktparty of your forcible selecting: and such, as your Officers (our Lords and Riders) have often and frequently stiled no better then a mock Parliament, a shadow of a Parliament, a seeming Authority, or the like, preten∣ding the continuance thereof, but till a new and equall representa∣tive, by mutuall agreement of the free people of England, could be elected, although now for subservancy to their Exaltation, and Kingship, they prerogue and perpetuate the same, in the name, and under colour thereof, introducing a privy Counsel, or as they call it a Counsel of State, of Superintendency and Suppression to all future Parliaments for ever, erecting a martiall Government, by bloud and violence, impulsed upon us. Mr Prid: Read page 3. at the marke. Clerk. Page 3. Trade is decayed and fled, misery, poverty, cala∣mity, confusion, yea, and beggery, grown so sore and so extreame upon the people, as the like never was in England, under the most Tyrannicall of all our Kings, that were before these in present Power, since the dayes of the Conquerour himself, no captivity, no bondage, no oppression like unto this, no sorrow and misery, like unto ours, of being enslaved, undone and destroyed by our large pretended friends. Mr Prid: Read page 4.
Clerk. pag. 4. And yet nothing, but the groundlesse wills and humours, of those forementioned men of bloud rageth and ruleth over us, and is this all the returne and fruit, that people are to expect from your hands? Mr Prid: Take his preparative to an hue and cry after Sir Arthur Has∣lerigge, and read page 2. Clerk reads on. The Preparative to the hue and cry after Sir Ar∣thur Haslerigge at pag. 2. in the margent, that those men that now sit at West-minster, are no Parliament, either upon the Principles of Law or Reason. Mr Prid: Read pag. 3. Clerk pag. 3. They promise to amend, and to proceed according to the forme of the Law, as fully appears in their last fore-men∣tioned Declaration, and severall others, as particularly the present Declaration, of this present Juncto against Kingship, dated the se∣venteenth of March, 1648. Mr. Prid: Read pag. 4. Clerk. pag. 4. But the said Sir Arthur Haslerigge &c. more arbitra∣rily, and more trayterously the Strafford, having no pretence of regall, legall, or Parliamentary Commissions, or Authority, no not so much as from the present nothing, or illegall Juncto, or the present illegall thing called the Councel of State, Mr John Ior∣dan now member. Mr Att: My Lord, he doth declare who he meanes by Juncto: Mr Jur∣don, a member of the present Juncto, the pretended House of Commons, in the third place, for the proofe of this first particular, I shall produce his book intituled, the legall and fundamentall Liberties of England revived, &c. Read pag. 41. Clerk reads, pag. 41. But Sir, I say, no wonder, all the things foregoing rightly considered, they do own you now (as Thomas Pride hath made you) for the supreame Authority of the Nation, although before they would neither submit to, King nor Parlia∣ment, when (it was a thousand times more unquestionable, both in Law and Reason then now you are, but fought against both King and Parliament, their setters up, conquered them, repelled them, subdued them, and brok them both: and so pull'd up by the Roots, all the legall and visible Magistracy and Authority in the Nation, and thereby left none but themselves, who stand in pa∣ralell to none (as they have managed their businesse) but to a com∣pany of murderers, theeves and robbers, who may justly be dispos∣sessed,
by the first force that are able to do it, no pretended Autho∣rity, that they of themselves, and by their Swords can set up, having in the fight of either God or man, either in Law or Reason, any more just Authority in them, then so many Argier Pirats, and Robbers upon the Sea have. L. Col: Lilb: You read as I take it a second Edition, whether is that a second Edition or no? Mr Att: No No: It is not so in the Indictment, it is no second Edition, but the first. Read page 56. Clerk. pag. 56. To which I answer, first, That, that Company of men at Westminster, that gave Commission to the High Court of Justice, to try and behead the King, were no more a Parliament by Law, nor a representative of the people, by the Rules of Justice and Reason, then such a Company of men are a Parliament, or representative of the people; That a Company of armed theeves chuse and set a part, to try judge, condemn, hang or behead any man, that they please, or can prevaile over by the power of the sword, to bring before them by force of armes, to have their lives taken away upon pretence of Justice, groun∣ded upon Rules meerly flowing from their wills and swords. Mr Prid: Read the Title page. Clerk. The legall fundamentall Liberties of the people of England, re∣vived, asserted and vindicated, or an Epistle written the eigth of June 1649 by Lt. Col: John Lilburne, (Arbitrary and Aristocraticall prisoner in the Tower of London,) to Mr Will: Lenthall Speaker, to the remainder of those few Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, that Col: Thomas Pride, at his late purge, thought convenient to leave sitting at Westminster, (as most fit, for his and his Masters designes, to serve their Ambitious & Tyrannicall ends, to destroy the good old Laws, Liberties and Customs of England, the badges of our Freedome (as the Declaration against the King of the 17 of March, 1648. page 23. calls them) and by force of armes, to rob the people of their lives, estates and properties, and subject them to perfect vassalage and slavery, as he clearly evinceth in his present case, &c. they have done) and who (in truth no otherwise then pretendedly stile themselves, the Parliament of Eng∣land. Mr Prid: Read page 2. Clerk. Sir, For distinction sake, I will yet stile you Mr Speaker, although it be but to Col: Prides Juncto or Parliament sitting at Westminster, (not the Nations, for they never gave him Authority, to issue out writs to elect or constitute a Parliament for them,) and a little below in the same second page, I accused Oliver Cromwell for a wilfull murderer, and desire you there to acquaint your House therewith, (who then had some little hand of a Parlia∣ment stamp upon it.)
M. Prideaux, Read page 28. Clerk, page 28. The like of which Tyranie the King never did in his Reigne, and yet by S. Olivers means lost his head for a Tyrant; but the thing that I principally drive at here, is to declare that Oliver and his Parliament now at Westminster (for the Nations it is not) having plucke up the House of Lords by the Roots. page 44. So that if it be Treason to call this a—a Mock Parliament, yea and to say- and if this be true, for true it is,These words cannot be found in page 44. but are in the Book it self, which time will not permit to read all over, and therefore at pre∣sent it passeth lame and imperfect. then there is neither legal Iustice, nor Iustice of peace in England. M. Prideaux. Read page 37. Clerk page 37. For if they ever had intended an Agreement, why do they let their own lie dormant in the pretended Parliament ever since they presented it; seing it is obvious to every knowing eie, that from the day they presented it, to this hour, they have had as much Power over their own Parliament now siting, as any School-master in England had over his boies. Clerk page 45. Four Yor Interest and the Kings, both being Interests of Trust, as your Declarations do plentifully and plainly declare; but especially your present Iuncto's late Declaration against the late be∣headed King, and Kingly Government. M. Prideaux, Read page 58. Clerk page 58. And let the present generation of swaying men, that under pretense of good, kindness, and friendship, have destroyed and trod under foot all the liberties of the Nation, and will not let us have a new Parliament, but set up by the Sword their own insufferable, insup∣portable, tyrannical Tyranie. Lieut. Col. Lilburn, I pray Sir, are all these quotations in the In∣dictment verbatim? I do not remember that I heard them there. M. Atturney. No, We do not offer any Book but what is charged in the Indictment; for we do say, that he published those things among other clauses and things in those Books; so that we bring in no Book that is not contained in the Indictment. Read page 64. Clerk, page 64. That so that might rule, direct and counsel their mock-Parliament. M. Prideaux, Read page 68.
Clerk. page 68. That that High Court of justice was altogether un∣lawful, in case these that had set it up, had been an unquestionable Re∣presentative of the people, or a Legal Parliament; neither of which they are not in the least, but as they have managed their businesse in opposing all their primitive Declared ends, are a pack of Trayterous self-seeking Tyrannical men, usurpers of the name and Power of a Parliament. M. Atturney. Read page 72. Clarke page 72. Then with much more confidence say I, this that now sits is no Parliament, and so by consequence, the High Court of ju∣stice no Court of justice at all. M. Atturney. My Lord, that which we shall offer you next, is the salva libertate, which the Lieutenant of the Tower had from M. Lilburn himself, read at the mark. Clark †. A salva libertate, although I then told you I judged a paper warrant, (although in words never so formal) comming from any preten∣ded Power or Authority in England now visible, to be altogether Illegal; because the intruding General Fairfax and his Forces, had broke and an∣nihilated all the formal and legal Magistracy of England, yea the very Parliament it self; and by his will and sword (absolute Conqueror-like) had most Tyrannycally erected and set up, and imposed upon the free peo∣ple of this Nation, a Iuncto or mock-Power sitting at Westminster; whom he and his Associates call a Parliament, who like so many Armed Theeves and Robbers upon the High-way, assume a Power by their own wills, most traterously to do what they like; yea and to fill the land with their mock or pretended Magistrates, amongst the number of which is the pretended Aturney General; in perfect opposition of whom; to the utmost of my might, Power, and Strength; I am resolved by Gods graious assistance to spend my Bloud and all that in this World is dear unto me, supposing him not really and substantially worthy the name of an English free-man, that in some measure in this particular is not of my mind. M. Atturney My Lord, in the case of this Charge what M. Lilburn is pleased to say concerning me, I shall say no more but onely this, I shall not do so by him, I shall not spend my bloud against him, you see what he saith; that the present Government is Tyrannical usuped, and unlaw∣ful; that the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, are not the Supreme Authority, but a Iuncto, a mock-Power, a mock-Parliament, a company of Traytors that rule meerly by the dictates of their own will; I could alledge more of his books unto you, which have words in them very notorious, and very publique, he doth in expresse words say, that the Go∣vernment
is Arbitrary, Tyrannical, and a new erected ruining, infla∣ving, robbing Government: To style them Tyrants, Ʋsurpers, Traytors, paralel to none but Murtherers, Robbers, Theeves, no Parliament at all, but Thomas Prides Iuncto and Scool-boyes, destroyers of the lawes and and libertyes of the Nation, the present Iuncto (Chimaeraes, fooleries, and the like) all these expressions and many more, which I am sorry I have occasion to repeat to you, that so much dirt should be throwne into the face of any Magistrates of England, My Lords, these are now the best which do rule; My Lords, I hope you and the Gentlemen of the Iury will take notice of it, as to be very clear, pregnant, evident proof, that M. Lilburn hath thus published; and thus faid; and besides this you see what he does go too, he denyes all MagistracyThats false, he doth no such thing, but at most saith the Army, hath de∣stroyed all the legal Ma∣gistracy of the Nation, & they are the men that thereby are the real level∣lers and rooters., so that now we are all alike, a Chaos, a confusion and this he hath brought us too, or would have endea∣voured it; My Lords, I shall not aggravate, and if I did say no more it were enough, but I come to the second general head of the Charge, which is; That he hath plotted and contrived to levy or raise Forces to subvert and over∣throw the present established Government, in the way of a free State or Common-wealth; My Lords, if I should say nothing more to the Jury, this that hath been already read is evident proof of that, for certainly those that shall say that the Governours be Tyrants, that the Parliament is Trannical, that they are men of bloud, destroyers of lawes and liberties; this cannot be of any other use, but to raise force against them, for subverting and destroying of them, as he himselfe saith, as so many Wesels or Pole-catsIn calling Tyrants Wesels and Polecats, he hath said no more but what he hath learned out of Saint Iohns owne Argument, of law a∣gainst the Earl of Straford; at which you have no cause to be angry, be∣cause they are the words of one of your own brother lawyers., especially if you consider to whom these words were declared, to the Army in Ge∣neral, especially to the Generals Regiment of Horse, that helped to plunder and destroy M. Lilburns true Friends defeaetd at Bur∣ford, and some of which were most justly as Traytors execu∣ted. My Lords, if I would say nothing more to the Jury but this, there is full and pregnant proof already; but yet my lord further to shew
the malice of M. Lilburns heart, and that he did intend to raise Force, to incite and invite them to help him to subvert and destroy the Parlia∣ment, and for the proof of this, read the fifth page of his impeachment of high Treason against Oliver Cromwel. Clerk reads page 5 †. But my true friends, I shall here take upon me the boldnes (in regard of the great destractions of the present times) to give a little further advice to you, from whose company or society (or from some of them) hath begun, & issued out the most transcendent, clear, ratio∣nal, and just things for the peoples liberties and freedomes, that I have seen or read in this Nation; as your notable Petition of May 20. 1647. burnt by the hands of the common hangman, recorded in my Book called Rash Oaths unwarrantable, page 29, 30, 31. 32, 33, 34, 35. with divers other Petitions of that nature, and the Petition of the nineteenth of Ian. 1647. recorded in the following discourse page 45, 46, 47, 48, &c. and the Masculine Petition of the eleventh of September, 1648. so much owned by Petitions out of several Countyes, yea and by the Officers of the Armyes large Remonstrance, from Saint Albans of the sixteenth of of November, 1648. page 67, 68, 69. The substance of all which, I con∣ceive is contained in the Printed sheet of paper signed by my fellow Priso∣ners M. William Walwyn, M. Thomas Prince, and M. Richard Over∣ton, and my selfe, dated the 1 of May, 1649. and intituled, An agree∣ment of the Free people of England &c. The principles of which I hope and desire you will make the final Centre and unwavering standard of al your desires hazards, & indeavours as to the future settlement of the Peace and Government of this distracted, wasted, and divided Nation; the firme establishing of the Principles therein contained, being that onely which will really and in good earnest marry and knit that interest what e∣ver it be that dwels upon them, unto the distressed and oppressed Com∣mons or people of this Nation; yea, the setling of which principles, is that that will thereby make it evidient and apparent unto all understanding people in the World, that the real and hearty good and welfare of this Na∣tion, hath Cordially and in good earnest been that, that their soules have hunted for, and thirsted after, in all the late bloudy civil Wars and con∣tests, all the contests of the Kings party for his will and Prerogative, be∣ing meerly selfish, and so none of the peoples interest, and the contest of the Presbyterians, for their make-bate dividing hypocrytical Covenant no better in the least, and the present contest of the present dissembling inte∣rest of Independants; for the peoples libertyes in general, (read the follow∣ing discourse page 27, 28, 29. meerly no more but self in the highest) and
to set up the false Saint, & most desperate Apostate, Murderer, & Traitor Ol. Cromwel, by a pretended election of his mercenary Souldiers, under the false name of the Godly interest, to be King of England, &c. (that being now too ap∣parently, all the intended liberties of the people that ever he fought for in his life) that so he might rule and govern them by his will and pleasure, and so de∣stroy and envassalize their lives and properties to his lusts, which is the highest Treason that ever was committed or acted in this Nation in any sense or kind; either 1. in the ey of the Law, or 2. in the ey of the antient (but yet too much Arbitrary) proceedings of Parliament; or 3. in the ey of their own late de∣clared principles of reason (by pretence of which, and by no rules of Law in the least) they took away the late Kings head, which if there were any law or ju∣stice in England to be had, or any Magistrates left to execute it (as in the least there is not) &c. M. Prideaux. Read page 7. Cler. pa. 7. But the Principles of the foresaid Agreement being so detesta∣ble and abominable to the present ruling men, as that which they know will put a full end to their Tyranny and usurpation, and really ease and free the people from oppression & bondage; that it is somthing dangerous to those that go about the promotion of it; yet I shall advise and exhort you vigorously, to lay all fear aside, and to set on foot the promotion of it, in the same method we took for the promotion of the foresaid Petition of Jan. 19. 1649. laid down in the following discourse, p. 23, 24, 25. and write to your friends in every Country of England, to chuse out from among themselves and send up some Agents to you, (two at least from each County, with money in their pockets to bear their charges) to consider with your culled and chosen Agents of some effectual course speedily to be taken, for the setling the principles thereof, (as that only which in an earthly Government can make you happy) or at least to know one anothers minds in owning and approving the principles thereof; that so it may become to you and your friends, your Center, Standard, & Banner to flock together too, in the time of these forraign invasions and domestick Insurrections, that are like speedily to bring misery enough upon this poor and distressed Nation; and unanimously resolve and ingage one to another, neither to side with, or fight for the Cameroes fooleries and pride of the present men in Power; nor for the Princes will, or any other base interest whatsoever (the which if you should fight for, it would be but an absolute murdring of your brethren and Country-men you know not where∣fore) unless he or they will come up to those just, Righteous, and equitable Prin∣ciples therein contained, and give rational and good security for the constant adhering thereunto; and upon such terms I do not see but you may justifiably be∣fore God or man, joyn with the Prince himself; yea, I am sure a thousand times more justly than the present ruling men (upon a large and serious debate) joyn∣ed with Owen Ro Onale, the grand bloudy Rebel in Ireland; who if we must
have a King, I for my part had rather have the Prince, then any man in the world, because of his large pretense of Right, which if he come not in by conquest by the hand of Forreigners (the bare attempting of which may apparently ha∣zard him the loss of all at once, by gluing together the now divided people, to joyn as one man against him) but by the hands of Englishmen, by contract upon the Principles aforesaid (which is easie to be done) the people will easily see, that presently thereupon they will enjoy this transcendent benefit (he being at peace with all forreign Nations, and having no regal pretended competitor) viz. the imediate disbanding all Armies and Garisons, saving the old Cinque ports, & so those three grand plagues of the people will cease, viz. Freequarter, Taxations, and Excise, by means of which, the people may once again really say they enjoy somthing they can in good earnest call their own, whereas for the present Army to set up the false pretended S. Oliver (or any other) as their elected King, there will be nothing thereby from the begining of the Chapter to the end thereof but wars, and the cuting of throats yeer after yeer, yea, and the absolute keeping up of a perpetual and everlasting Armie, under which the people are absolute and perfect slaves and vassals, as by woful experience they now see they perfectly are; which slavery and absolute bondage is daylie like to encrease, under the present tyranical and arbitrarie new erected robbing Government. M. Att. He hath blown the Trumpet for all that will to come in, he hath set up his Center, he would have it to be a Standard for all his friends to flock to him, and to make them the more quick in betaking them to their Arms, he hath falsly and maliciously there said, that the Parliament had joyned with Owen Roe Oneale, which I can assure all that hear me this day, the Parliament al∣waies detested, abominated, disavowed, and declared against, and never had any thoughts that way My Lord, the false imputations of his laid upon the Parlia∣ment, are almost numberless. But in the second place, I come to that pretty bau∣ble thats of his own making, The Agreement of the People, dated at the Tow∣er, 1 of May, 1649 and shal desire your Lordships to judge whether this Agree∣ment of the People which he made, and his friends then in the Tower, and enti∣tuled it, The Agreement of the People, as signed by them, for they called it, An Agreement of the Free People of England: strikes not at the very root of all Government. Lieut. Col. Lilburn. Pray Sir look whether it be licensed or no, accor∣ding to the Law of the Nation, and if it be licensed by publique Authority, how comes it to be Treason, thats very strange. M. Atturney. It is so. Lieut. Col. Lilburn. Pray Sir go and question the licenser then. M. Atturney. We must question the Author, the licenser will not excuse it, read page 2.
Clerk reads page 2. This agreement being the ultimate end and ful scope of our desires and intentions concerning the Government of this Nation. And a little below after the long and tedious prosecution of a most unnatural, cru∣el, home-bred War, occasioned by divisions and distempers amongst our selves, and those distempers arising from the uncertainty of our Government, and the exercise of an unlimited or Arbitrary Power, by such as have been trusted with Supreme and subordinate Authority, whereby multitudes of grievances and intellerable oppressions have been brought upon us; and finding after eight yeers experience and expectation, all endeavours hitherto used, or remedies hitherto applyed, to have increased rather then diminished our distractions; and that if not speedily prevented, our falling again into factions and divisi∣ons, will not onely deprive us of the benefit of all those wonderful victories God hath vouchsafed against such as sought our bondage, but expose us first to po∣verty and misery, and then to be destroyed by forraign enemies. M. Atturney. Read page 3. Clerk page 3. Agree to as∣certain our Government, to abolish all Arbitrary Power, and set bounds and limits, both to our Supreme and all subordinate Authority, and remove all known grievances, and accordingly do declare & publish to all the World that we are agreed as followeth. pag. ibid. That the Supreme Autho∣rity of England, and the territoryes therewith incorporate, shal be and reside henceforward in a Representative of the People, consisting of four hundred per∣sons, but no more. M. Prideaux, The manner of the choise of whom, &c. they leave to this Parliament. Read a little below. Clerk, All things concerning the distribution of the said 400. members proportionable the respective parts of the Nation, the several places for cle∣ction, the manner of giving and taking, of voices, with all circumstances of like nature, tending to the compleating and equal proceedings in elections; as also their salary is referred to be setled by this present Parliament, in such sort as the next Representative may be in a certain capacity to meet with safety, at the time herein expressed; and such circumstances to be made more perfect by future Representatives. We agree this present Parliament shall end the 1 wednesday in Aug. next, 1649, thenceforward to be of no Power or Authority; and in the mean time shal order and direct, the election of a new and equal Representative, ac∣cording to the intent of this our agreement; and so as the next Representative may meet and sit in Power and Authority, as an effectual Representative up∣on the day following; namely, the 1 Thursday of the same August, 1649. Page ib. We agree, if the present Parl. shal omit to order such election or meeting of a new Representative, or shal by any meanes be hindred from per∣formance of that trust, that in such case we shal for the next Representative
proceed, in electing thereof in those places, and according to that manner and number formerly accustomed in the choise of Knights and Burgesses; obser∣ving onely the exceptions of such persons from being electors or elected, as are mentioned before in the 1, 3, and 4th. heads of this agreement; it being most unreasonable, that we should either be kept from now frequent and successive Representatives, or that the Supreme Authority should fall into the hands of such as have manifested disaffection to our common freedome, and indeavour∣ed the bondage of the Nation. And for preserving the Supreme Authority from falling into the hands of any whom the people have not or shal not chuse. we are resolved and agreed (God willing) that a new Representative shall be upon the 1 thursday in August next aforesaid, the ordering and disposing of themselves, as to the choise of a Speaker, and the like circumstances, is hereby left to their discretion; but are in the extent and exercise of Power, to follow the direction and rules of this agreement; and are hereby Authorized and re∣quired according to their best judgements, to set rules for future equal distri∣bution and election of Members, as is herein intended and injoyned to be done; by the present Parliament. M. Atturney. Read page 8. Clerk page 8. And all Lawes made, or that shal be made, contrary to a∣ny part of this Agreement, are hereby made nul and void. M. Atturney. My Lords, heare by this agreement of the People, that M. Lilb. hath published to the World, in which my L. he hath designed how many the Supreme Authority shal consist of the time when the Parl. shal dissolve, as also the time when his own Parl. shal meet; this Parl. to be dissolved the first wednesday in Aug. 1649. all Lawes contrary to this to be nul and void; and in it you shal find some expressions of Treason in the height, that whosoever shal do contrary to it, shal be most severely punished: In the next Book before this, it is desired by him, that this agreement of the People may be the Center the Banner and Standard of all his friends, and that they go on vigorously with it; which is my Lord, to dissolve this Parliament, and to put on this new one of M. Lilburns appointing: This we conceive which is of M. Lilbs. appointing, would (if effected) be an absolute subversion of this in being, and this is high Treason. My Lord, we shal go on with more yet, and that is, with his out∣cry; my Lord, if you please to see the title, and see to whom it is directed, what was intended to be done with it; it is intituled, An out-cry of the young men and Apprentzes of London, directed (August 29. 1649.) in an Epistle to the Private Souldery of the Army, especially all those that signed the solemne in∣gagement at New-market-heath the 5 of June, 1647. but more especially, to the private Souldiers of the Generals Regiment of Horse, that helped to plun∣der and destroy the honest and true-hearted Englishmen, traiterously defeat∣ed at Burford the 15 of May, 1649.
Mr. Atturny. A good incouragement, they were Traiterously defeated at Burford; but we are Rebells and Traitors, and our Army murderers, & Butchers, for giving some of those declared Traitors their due deserts, but that you may see his tendency by this booke read, page, 11. Clarke, page 11. We say, considering what is before premised, we are necessitated, and compelled to doe the utmost we can for our owne pre∣servation, and for the preservation of the land of our Nativity, and never (by Popular particulars) addresse our selves to the men sitting at West∣minster any more, or to take any more notice of them then of so many Tyrants, and Usurperes, and for time to come to hinder (as much and as farr as our poore despised interest will extend to) all others whatso∣ever from subscribing or presenting any more Popular petitions to them. And only now as our last Paper-refuge, mightily cry out to each other, of our intollerable oppressions in letters, and Remonstrances signed in the behalfe and by the appointment of all the rest, by some of the Stoutest & stiffest amongst us that we hope will never apostatize, but be able through the strength of God to lay downe their lives for the maintaining of that which they set their hands to. You our fellow-Countrymen (the private Souldiers of the Army) a∣lone being the instrumentall authors of your own slavery & ours; There∣fore as there is any bowels of men in you, any love to your Native Coun∣try, Kindred Friends or relations, any sparke of Conscience in you, any hopes of glory or immortality in you, or any pitty, mercie, or compassi∣on, to an inslaved, undone, perishing, and dying People; O help, help, save and redeem us from totall vassalage and slavery, and be no more like brute beasts, to fight against us, or our friends, your loving and dear brethren after the flesh, to your own vassalage, as well as ours. And as an assured pledge of your future cordialness to us (and the true and reall liberties of the Land of your Nativity) we beseech and beg of you (but especially those amongst you that subscribed the Solemn En∣gagement at Newmarket-Heath, the 5. of June, 1647.) speedily to choose out amongst your selves two of the ablest, and constantest faithfull men amongst you in each Troop and Company, now at last (by corresponding each with other, and with your honest friends in the Nation) to consider of some effectual course (beyond all pretences and cheats) to accomplish the reall end of all your Engagements and Fightings, viz. the setling of the Liberties and Freedom of the People, which can never permanently be done, but upon the sure foundation of a popular Agreement; who (viz. the People) in justice, gratitude, and common equity, cannot choose but voluntarily and largely make better provision for your future sub∣sistance
(by the payment of your Arrears) then ever your Officers, or this pretended Parliament intends, or you can rationally expect from them; witness their cutting off three parts of your arrears in four, for free quar∣ter; and then necessitating abundance of your Fellow-souldiers (now ca∣shiered, &c.) to sell their Debenturs at two shillings six pence, three shil∣lings, and at most four shillings per li. Mr. Atturney. See my Lord, here we are stil'd Tyrants, Vsurpers, in∣troducing Government, oppressions of the people, and Mr. Lilburn is resolved with his friends to joyn together, and to lay down their very lives for this: This I think is a Trumpet blown aloud for all the discontented people in the Nation, to flock together, to root up and destroy this Parliament, and so the present Government: but reade also in the same book, pag. 9. Clark. pag. 9. For the effectual promotion of which said Agreement, we are necessitously compelled to resolve in close union to joyn our selvs, our Commissioners (chosen for that end) in Councel, with our foresaid Burford-friends, or their Commissioners, and to resolve to run all hazards to methodize all our honest Fellow-prentices, in all the Wards of London, and the Out-Parishes, to chuse out their Agents to joyn with us, or ours, to write exhortative Epistles to all the honest-hearted free-men of Eng∣land, in all the particular Countries thereof, to erect severall Councels a∣mongst themselves; out of which we shall desire (and exhort them) to chuse Agents or Commissioners (impowered and intrusted by them) spee∣dily to meet us, and the Agents of all our (and the Agreement of the people) Adherents at London, resolvedly to consider of a speedy and effec∣tual method and way how to promote the Election of a new and equall Representative, or Parliament: by the Agreement of the free people, see∣ing those men that now sit at Westminster, and pretendedly stile them∣selves the Parliament of England; and who are as they say (although most falsly) in the Declaration for a free State, dated March 17. 1648, pag. 27. intrusted, and authorized by the consent of all the people of Eng∣land, whose Representatives they are, make it their chiefest and principal∣lest work, continually to part and share amongst themselves, all the great rich, and profitablest places of the Nation; as also, the Nations publique treasure and lands, and will not ease our intollerable oppressions; no not so much as of late receive our popular petitions, having upon Thursday last, Aug. 23. 1649. rejected that most excellent of petitions ready at their door to be presented to them by divers honest men (our true-hearted Neighbours of Surrey) the true Copy of which, for the worth of it, al∣though it be at large already printed in Friday Occurrences, and the Tuesday Moderate, we desire here to insert.
Mr. Atturney. My Lord, this is a loud one, whom does he joyne us withall, but onely with those very men that justly suffered death, many of them for it? My Lord, now its resolved that these men shall be closely joyned with them, and what to do? still to promote The Agreement of the People, that which Mr. Lilburn hath hatched, and that must be the baby that those declared open Traytors and Rebells, that Mr. Lilburn will joyne with, must nourish up. My Lord, we shall go on further to shew what Mr. Lilburn drives, at which is not much diff∣ering from us, for he would have a free State, but, my Lord, this that is now in being, it doth not go in Mr. Lilburns way, and therefore it must be overthrown by force and Armes, that so way may be made for his newAnd yet a few dayes before his Tryal, severall principall leading members of the house and Councell of State told his wife, and severall other of his friends, that Mr. Lilburne was turned Cavalier, and had joyned with the Prince, and they had severall letters un∣der his own hand to prove it. Common-wealth, we shall go further on my Lord, and in the next place quote his book entituled, The legall Fundamentall liberties of the people of England revived, asserted and vindica∣ted, &c, Read pag 57. Clark reades pag. 57, And the present setters up of this Tyrannical new Common-wealth, considering their many Oaths, Covenants, Promises, Declarations and Remonstances to the contrary, (with the highest Pro∣mises & pretences of good for the people and their declared liberties, that ever was made by men) are the most perjured, perfideous, false, faith and trust-breakers, and Tyrants that ever lived in the World, and ought by all rationall and honest men, to be the most detested and abhorred of all men that ever breathed, by how much the more under pretence of friendship and brotherly kindnes, they have done all the mischief they have done, in destroying our lawes and liberties. Mr. Atturney. My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, you see Mr. Lilburne hath been pleased very often to give the name of Tirants to the Par∣liament; I would give no other instance, nor shew no other example but Mr. Lilburn himself, to disprove himself, and with much confidence affirm it, that never State had before (neither King nor State) since the foundations of it: so much enmity, nor have endured with so much patience any man whatsoever, as they have done Mr. Lilburn, who notwithstanding all his trayterous provocati∣ons, and trayterous designes, undertaken against them, is yet alive at this day and now hath faire play to plead for his life, I would take him for his own con∣futer, and see by all that has been done by him, and see if he could make good his actings, and make good the Parliaments dealing with him therefore, can be demonstrated by him, to prove them Tyrants. My Lord, I can hardly for∣bear
to see, & hear his dangerous & desperate expressions, to invite all people for to take up Arms against the Parl. to cut their throats like Pole-cats and We a∣sels. My Lords, here to stile them the most perfideous, perjured, false, faith, and trust-breakers, and Tyrants that ever lived in the world; and to be the most abhorred and detested of all the people, above all men that ever breathed, O insufferable, and the highest of Treasons! Leiut. Col. Lilb. Sir, all the wit of all the Lawyers in England, could ne∣ver bring it within the compasse of high Treason, by the old and just laws of this nation, that abhors to oppress men contrary to Law, & then if they seem but to cry out of their oppressions to make them traytors for words. Mr. Atturney. I am confident the least Lawyer in England, would have brought this within the Statute of Treason of the 25. Ed. 3. chap. 2. My Lords, you shall see there is none escapt, the Parliament with him are Tyrants Traytors and Ʋsurpers; and therefore he stirrs up the people to destroy them. But in the third place, you shall see what Titles he gives to my Lord Generall Fairfax, and his chief Officers, that, my Lord, he that reads the books & doth not know the parsons, he would think that they were monsters and not men, although they are so famous & glorious, that all the world have rung of them to their praise But, saith he, never was there more glorious Declarations made by men than by them, and yet never performed any of them; Nay, he doth not only call them also Covenant & engagement-breakers; but he calls the Lord Generall, Tyrant, Murtherer, and what not: and the Officers, perfideous Officers. My Lords, what I observed in the last clause of the Act is, that whosoever goes a∣bout to draw the Souldiers from their obedience to their superiour Officers, or from their obedience to the present Government, that is high Treason, and this likewise we shall finde him guilty of, in his Legall fundamentall liberties of England inserted and vindicated, it is in the first side of the Epistle that in the first place I pitch upon, read it. Clark. pag 1. of the Epistle, I positively accuse Mr. Oliver Cromwell, for a wilfull murtherer, (and desire you to acquaint your house there∣with) for murthering Mr. Richard Arnold neare Ware Mr. Atturney. Which man my Lord was condemned for a mtinier by a Counsell of Warre, where the Lord Leiut. of Ireland was but one member, and the Parliament gave him, and the rest of that Councell thanks, for shooting that mutinous Souldier to death. and yet Mr. Lilburne calls him murtherer therefore; and this is laid to my Lord Leiuts. charge for his part, L. Col. Lilb. Doth not the Petition of Right absolutely condemne all such acts in time of Peace; when the Courts of Justice are open, and the judgment of the Earle of Strafford doth abundantly condemne it, who lost his life for a Traytor, for doing the very same act in kind and like∣nesse,
at that time, when he in the eye of the law, was as legal a General, as the General was that condemned that man. Mr. Atturney. My Lords, — L. Col. Lilb. I pray Sir, hear me out; and sure I am, the Declarati∣ons of all the powers extant in England, ever since, hath been to maintain the Petition of Right inviolably; yea, even those that are now in present power; and if the Petition of Right be true, to shoot souldiers, as Arnold was, is absolute murder: Nay further, if the judgment of the Parl. upon the Earl of Strafford for such an act be legal; then all those that had a hand in shooting that Souldier, are Traytors, and ought to die for it, as well as Strafford. Clark reads on the second side of the Epistle, Of all which crimes and charges, and all your others against the King, contained in your foresaid Declaration, I know not three of them, but Cromwel and his confederates, in your pretended House and Army, are as guilty of the like in kind, though under a new name and notion, as the King was of the fore-men∣tioned, if not more guilty. Mr. Prideaux, Read pag. 35. Clerk. pag. 35. But alas poor fools! we were meerly cheated and co∣zened, it being the principal unhappiness to some of us, as to the flesh, to have our eyes wide open, to see things long before most honest men come to have their eyes open; and this is that which turns to our smart & reproach, and that which we Commissioners feared at the first, viz, that no tye, promises, nor engagements were strong enough to the grand-jug∣lers and leaders of the Army, was now made clearly manifest; for when it came to the Councel, there came the General, Cromwel, and the whole Gang of Creature-Colonels, and other Officers, and spent many dayes in taking it all in pieces, and there Ireton shewed himself an absolute King, if not an Emperour; against whose will no man must dispute: and then Shuttlecock, Roe their Scout, Okey, and Major Barton (where Sir Hardress Waller sate President) begun in their open Councel, to quarrel with us, by giving some of us base and unworthy language, which procured them from me a sharp retortment of their own baseness and unworthiness in∣to their teeth, and a challenge from my self into the field; besides, seeing they were like to fight with us in the room in their own Garrison, which when Sir Hardress Waller in my ear reproved me for it, I justified it, and gave it him again, for suffering us to be so affronted; and within a little time after, I took my leave of them for a pack of dissembling jugling knaves: amongst whom in consultation, ever thereafter I should scorn to come (as I told some of them;) for there was neither faith, truth, nor
common honesty among them; and so away I went to those that chose and intrusted me, and gave publikely and effectually (at a set-meeting ap∣pointed on purpose) to divers of them, an exact account how they had dealt with us, and cozened and deceived us; and so absolutely discharged my self; from medling or making any more, with so perfideous a Genera∣tion of men, as the great Ones of the Army were; but especially the cun∣ningest of Machavilians, Commissary Henrie Ireton. Mr. Atturney. Reade pag. 37. at the mark. Clark. pag. 37. Which the General and his Councel knew well e∣nough: and I dare safely say it upon my conscience, that an Agreement of the People, upon foundations of just freedome, gone through with, is a thing the General, and the chiefest of his Councel, as much hates, as they do ho∣nesty, justice, and righteousness (which they long since abandoned) against which, in their own spirits, they are absolutely resolved (I do verily be∣lieve) to spend their heart-bloud, and not to leave a man breathing in English ayr (if possibly they can) that throughly and resolutely prose∣cutes it; a new and just Parl. being more dreadful to them, then the great day of judgment, so much spoken of in Scripture; and although they have beheaded the King, yet I am confidently perswaded, their enmity is such at the peoples liberties, that they would sooner run the hazard of setting the Prince in, to reign in his Fathers stead, then further really a just Agree∣ment, or endeavour a new Parliament rightly constituted. Mr. Atturney. Read pag. 38. Clark. pag. 38. When as alas! it is as visible, as the Sun when it shi∣neth in its glory and splendor, that Korah, Dathan, and Abyram, of old, were never such rebels against authority, as the General and his Councel are; nor the Anabaptists at Munster, with John of Leyden, and Buperdul∣lion, were never more contemners of Authority; nor Jack Straw, nor Wat Tyler; nor all those famous men, mentioned with a black pen in our hi∣stories, and called Rebels and Traytors, can never be put in any skale of e∣qual ballance, for all manner of Rebellions and Treasons, against all sorts and kinds of Magistracy, with the General and his Councel. Mr. Atturney. See my Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jurie, you see Mr. Lilburn gives the General and his Officers, as bad titles, as he can give the worst of Rebels and Traitors, or the worst of men; but we go on to his Out-crie, reade the Title of it. Clark. An Outcry of the Young men and Apprentices of London, pag. 8. where it is thus: Sure all sence and compunction of conscience is not totally departed from you. Mr. Atturney. If it please you, my Lord, because the Jurie may observe it,
The book is directed to the Souldiers of the Armie, and that in an Out-crie, &c. now read pag. 8. Pag. 8. Sure all sence and compunction of conscience is not totally de∣parted from you; hear us therefore, in the earning bowels of love and kindness, we intreat and beseech you with patience, and do not abuse us for complaining and crying out; for the knife hath been very long at the throats of our liberties and freedoms, and our burthens are too great and too many for us; we are not able to bear them, and contain our selves; our oppressions are even ready to make us despair, or forthwith to fly to the prime laws of nature, viz. the next violent remedy at hand, light it where it will, or upon whom it will: they are become as devouring fire to our bones ready to burn us up, rendring us desperate and careless of our lives, prisoning those that are already dead, above those that are yet living, who are rid of that pain and torment, that we do and must endure, by sensibly seeing and beholding not only the dying, but the daily buriall of our Native liberties and freedoms; that we care not what becomes of us, seeing that we are put into that original state, or chaos of confusion; wherein lust is become a law, envie and malice are become laws, and the strongest Sword rules and governs all by will and pleasure; all our anci∣ent bondaries and bondmarks are pul'd up by the roots, and all the tyes and bonds of humane Society in our English Horizon totally destroyed, and extirpated; Alas for pitty! we had rather dye, then live this life of languishing death, in which our Masters possess nothing (to buy them∣selves or us bread, to keep us alive) that they can call their own: there∣fore its no boot for us to serve out our times, and continue at our drudg∣ing Trades, while these oppressions, cruelties, and inhumanities are upon us, and the rest of the people; exposing thereby not only the Nation to domestick broyls, wars, and bloud-sheds (wherein we are sure our bodies must be the principal buts) but to forraign invasions, by France, Spain, Denmarke, Swethland, &c. as was well observed by our endeared and faithful friends, of the fore-mentioned late treacherously defeated party at Burford, in their book of the 20. of August, 1649. entituled, The Level∣lers vindicated, or, the case of their 12. Troops truly stated, pag. 11, 12. which we cannot but seriously recommend (with them) to your serious perusall and judgment; and desire to know of you (but especially the private soul∣diers of the Generals Regiment of horse, which we understand had a hand in seizing upon, and plundering our true friends at Burford) whethet you do own the abominable and treacherous dealings of your Gen. and Lieu. Gen. Cromwel, and their perfidious officers with them, or no, that so we may not condemn the innocent with the guilty, &c. Mr. Attorney. Read pag. 11.
Clarke pag. 11. You our fellow Country-men (the private Souldiers of th Army) alone, being the instrumentall Authors of your own slave∣ry and ours; therefore as there is any bowells of men in you, any love to your native Country, kinred, friends, or relations, any sparkes of con∣science in you, any hopes of glory or immortallity in you, or any pitty, mercy or compassion to an enslaved, undone, dying, perishing people; O help, help, save and redeeme us from totall vassalage and slavery, and be no more like bruite beasts, to fight against us or our friends, &c. And as an assured pledge of your future cordialnesse to us, (and the true and reall liberties of the Land of your nativity) we beseech and begg of you (but especially those amongst you, that subscribed the solemne engagement, at New-market the 5. of June 1647.) speedily to chuse out from amongst your selves two of the ablest, and constantest faithfull men amongst you, in each Troop and Company, now at last (by correspond∣ing each with other, and with your honest friends in the Nation) to con∣sider of some effectual course (beyond all pretences and cheats) to accom∣plish the real end of all your Engagements and fightings, viz. the setling the liberties and freedoms of the people, which can never be permanently done, but upon the sure foundation of a popular Agreement, who (viz. the people) in justice, gratitude, and common Equity, cannot chuse but voluntarily and largely make better provision for your future subsistance, then ever your Officers, or this pretended Parliament intends, &c. Mr. Atturney. Real the Title of his Impeachment. Clarke. An Impeachment of High Treason against Oliver Crum∣well, &c. Mr. Atturney. Read page 2. Clark pag. 2. But I shall rather desire and advise you, by letter like your selves, to addresse your selves to the Lord Fairfax, by the sword of whom and his Souldiers, I am now in prison for my honesty and innocency, and nothing else, and demand my liberty of him; if he refuse, print it, and do as God and Reason shall direct you; for it was his and his Souldiers force, that fetcht me out of my bed the 28. of March 1649. without all shad∣dow of Law or justice; and against the tenour of all their owne Decla∣rations, the particular pages of which you may read in my following let∣ter to Mr. Holland, pag. 5. and by force of Arms carried me to White-hall, and then to Darby-house, before a Company of men that in Law had no more power to commit my body to prison, then so many theeves and rob∣bers upon Suiters hill have, who by the Rules of their own wills, (as in the second edition of the picture of them, I have fully declared) sent me by force of Armes to the Tower: for all my short eternity in this world.
But I entreat you seriously to consider, that I cannot advise you to make ad∣dresse to him as the General of the Nations forces, for he is no such thing: but is meerly a great Tyrant, standing by the power of his own will, and a strong Sword, born by his vassals, slaves and creatures, having no Commission to be Generall, either from Law, the Parliament, or from the prime Laws of nature and reason. Mr Att: Read. An out-cry of the young men and apprentises, page 3. Page 3. Your heart seems to us as obdurate, as the flinty Rock, as savage and inhumane, as if the flesh and bloud, the bones and marrow of the people were become your meate. Mr Attur: Stay, Mr Broughton: The Jury will take notice, that this is directed to the Souldiers of the Generals Regement, this speaks to them. Clerk reads on. Directed (August 29. 1649. in an Epistle to the private Souldiery of the Army especially,) all those that signed the solemne Iugagement at newmarket heath the fifth of June 1649. but more especially to the private Souldiers of the Generalls Re∣giment of horse. Mr Att: Now read page the 3. Clerk page 3. Your hearts seem to us as obdurate, as the flinty Rock, as savage and Inhumane, as if the flesh and bloud, the bones and marrow of the Peopple were become your meat, as already it is in effect, and instead of Incouragement and support to our true friends, and reall relievers, (as least in faithfull desire and endea∣vour) as shall stand in the gapp betwixt out destroyers and us, al∣wayes and means are used to impoverish destroy & suppresse them, and in them to break and vassalage the spirits of all the English, which in all ages have had the preheminencies of other Nations, that their may not be so much of gallantry or courage left amongst the people, that one amongst them shall dare to assert or maintaine their Freedoms. And a little below, if any do but murmer and complain, presently their houses as with furies, are beset, with armed mercinary Jannisaries, Guards and Centinels set upon their doors and passages. Mr Att: My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, you hear, what stuff this of Mr Lilburns is, yea, such stuff as that it would make any man loath to hear it: The last clause of the Act is, if any person not being an Officer, Soul∣dier, or Member of the Army, shall plot, contrive or endeavour to stir up any mutinies in the Army, or to withdraw any Officers or Souldiers from their Obe∣dience to their superior Officers, or to the present Government; It is high Trea∣son, you have here the severall books read to you, and the Calumniation laid upon the chiefest of them to stir the rest up to mutinies against them, but
they are very well known, and therefore nothing that Mr Lilburn can say will stick upon them, to their prejudice. But my Lord, you see here and you of the Jury, how he appeals from the Officers to the Souldiers interrogates, to know what they could do, and whether they will acknowledge they will own them, & not fight against them, and what aid and assistance they will give to him and his friends, against their own General, and the rest of their Superiour Officers; You see also what he calls that noble Generall, that all the world doth honor, & his fame wrings through the world, and yet he cals him a grand Tyrant, stand∣ing by the power of his own will, and a strong sword, a destroyer of the Parlia∣ment, of the Laws and Liberties of England, you see what he cals the com∣mon Souldiers: Furies and Mercinary Jannizaries, which none but Turks have. You have heard the severall charges proved unto you, for my part I think it is as clear as noon-day. We have not raised any advantage upon any slipping words that have slipt from him, which we might have done, and I could I have urged some more witnesses, to have proved his books, published by him, to publick view, though when he comes in the face of the publick Court of Justice, he will not own them, which shewes his design to be the more dangerous; he will writ, print, publish be sputter, and reproach: yea, and raise Tumults and Rebellion in a Clandestine way, but if we chance to question him therefore, he will not own it, you see we have been fain to fetch it out of the fire, and yet this is one of Englands and its Liberties valiant Champions. L. Col. Lilb. You have done no more to me then the Scribes and Pharisees did to Jesus Christ, and in my dealing with you, I have but walked in the steps of my Lord and Master, Jesus Christ and his Apostles. For I am sure of it Jesus Christ, in his pilgramage on earth, freely, openly and publickly taught and declared himself to be the Son of God, the Messias or Saviour of the world, that was prophe∣sied of, and yet when he came amongst the Scribes and Pharisees, & Pilate the Roman Governour, who by questions went about to in∣snare him, he confesseth nothing but saith, I speak openly to the world, I ever taught in the Synagogues and in the Temple whether the Jews alwayes resort, and in the Secret have I said nothing, why askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them, behold, they know what I have said; and when Pilate adjured him to answer him, whether he was such a one or no, well saith he, thou sayest it: So say I, thou Mr Prideaux sayest it, they are my books, but prove it. Mr Att: But I think here are enough, and to many, and therefore Gentle∣men of the Jury, if you respect the Government of the Parliament, the Honour of the Counsel of State, the Honour of the Nation, or of the Army, or the pre∣servation of the Law of the Nation, you cannot say but that the prisoner is
guilty of such Crines and Treasons, as he is now accused of and accordingly find him so; for it cannot be supposed that you will lay him in a single Ballance, against the Honour of all the powers in the Nation, and also the peace thereof. Fore-man. We desire the Act of Treasons to make use of. L. Col: Lilb: I beseech you, hear me a few words, they desire to have it along with them. Sir, with your favour, I shall humbly crave Liberty to speak a few words, I shall keep me close to that, which is my right and my duty, and that is to the matter of Law in my Indictment, there are many things put into the Indictment by the Testimonies of Witnesses now sworne, that are pre∣tended to be acted in severall Counties, whether that be according to Law or no, I do not know, whether you will judge it so or no, but sure I am, if either those expresse Statutes, that I have already cited to the Jury, or the third part of Cooks Instituts be Law, I ought not to be tryed for Treason, but by a Jury of the next Neigh∣bour hood, in the self-same County, the fact is pretended to be committed in, and therefore it is very questionable to me, whether my Indictment be legall, for that it chargeth me with facts of Trea∣son, committed in three severall Counties, and that being matter of Law, I desire Counsel to argue that point in the first place, there are also a great many other exceptions I have to make against the Illegallity of the Indictment, and having particularised one, I humbly crave that which is my Right by Law, that I may have Counsel assigned unto me, you have said, you will do what shall become ingenious and understanding men, and just Judges in it, and therefore I crave leave according to my undoubted Right, to have Counsel assigned to plead in matters of Law to the insuffi∣ciencie of the Indictment, and particularly, to that point I have nominated. There are also a great many things arises out of the matter of act, that will be points of Law likewise, and some of them appear to be so, there was never two clear and positive wit∣nesses to one fact sworne against me, but to most of the particular Treasons, there is but one a piece, and I cannot yield that to be le∣gall but questionable in Law which I desire Counsel to dispute: I know not any of all the books fixed upon me, but the out-cry that hath two plain witnesses to it, & yet it is not sworn that I am the Authour of it, the State of the first is this, that I was at the Printers before the Copie was taken away, & that I gave one of those books to a souldier: to sum up the Notes of the matter of fact, that there∣on hath been indeavoured to be proved, is to hard a task to be done by me imediatly, & therefore I conceive is but just for you, to assign and
me counsel, to agree with the Counsel against me, what are the points of fact upon the proofe, from which the points of law are to be deducted, and whatever you, that call your selves my Judges, may think of this, yet I hope and verily believe, that these my ho∣nest fellow Citizens, that are the Gentlemen of my Iury, who have (there by) as men, the the issues of my life and death in their hands, and will think it but a just and rational motion and request, and therefore before them again, I desire to have Counsel assigned to plead in Law, to the errors of the Indictment, and also to the law arising upon the fact; this with a larger priviledge, was gran∣ted by one of your own brother Judges, to Major Rolfe last year, as his right by law; and I doe again appeal to Mr justice Nichols, then one of Rolfs Counsel for the truth of this, I pray speak Sir, is it not true? but the Judge sitting as if he had neither life nor soul, Mr Lil∣burn further said, I hope Sir, it doth not enter into your thoughts presently to put me to an undigested, extemporary answer, to so large an Indictment as that is that hath been read against me, that it is impossible for any mans brain, if it were as big as the biggest Magazine in London, to carry it in his head; and Sir, I hope you doe not conceive that my memory is of a greater largenesse then the greatest Magazine in this City; you engaged unto me when I plea∣ded first to my Indictment, that you would not take exceptions nor advange against me, for my ignorance in the fomralities of the law; I desire you to make good your promise now unto me, and assign me Counsel to help my ignorance, that so the Counsel a∣gainst me and my Counsel may agree, as I have seen it done here∣tofore in the case of Duke Hambleton, upon the points of fact, from which law is to be deducted; and if you please to grant me this le∣gall and equitable favour, I shall think my selfe very much obliged unto you; without which justice, I cannot conceive upon what ground it can be apprehended I can go on, for my time and strength now it is so far spent, that I conceive you cannot thinke my body is made of steel, to stand here four or five hours together spending my spirits to answer somany as I have to deal with, and be able after all this, to stand to return an answer to above five hours charge, and that upon life, when it seems you will suffer me to mend no blots; I hope you doe not lie upon the catch to weary and tire me out, by putting more upon me then a horse is able to endure, and then goe about to hange me, because I through tired∣nesse, want bodily strength and abilities to make and pronounce my defence.
Sir, to my apprehension, there does arise upon the matter of fact divers disputes in law; I beseech you therefore allow me my right in law, by assigning me Counsel to help me where I am ignorant, and you shall see I shall doe that which shall become an ingenuous and rationall man, and I will put my self clearly upon the Tryall of the Country or my Iury according to the law. Lord Keeble. Lilburn, This that you have heard, and that we have patiently sat to hear, and prepared a stool for you to have sat upon, to have gi∣ven you that liberty that no body should interrupt you more then us, you have heard the fair course that hath been taken in it; the Books, the charges upon the matter they are but three, they are not hard for your memory; the particu∣lars of those we doe not expect that the Jury should remember them; the Books are here, they have of them; but amongst them there are many more, but free your selfe from the matter of fact, if you can, and these Books, and when you have freed your self from the matterof fact charged upon you, and then make it appear that from the matter of fast law arises, and then if you can when the matter of fact is clear, and law doth arise, you shall have Counsel; and you shall have no defact in us to interrupt you, but to help you in what we may properly know as our right to doe; but if you doe not first clear and make out this which is the issue upon the point, to answer the matter of fast; we cannot allow you any Counsel: the thing that is to be disputed cannot possible be much one your side, it will be but very short; for it is not possible I say, to be much in time, or confusion of your memory, to give an answer to this particular matter of fact: the first is the publishing of those Books, and the owning of them; and the next is the Books of themselves; but this must be first cleared, before you can have any Counsel assigned you at all. L. Col. Lilb I must confesse it is a very hard task for me to contest with the present power, whose Agents have free liberty to say against me what they please, and I am denied and that upon my life, all the priviledges of an English man, and with your insi∣nuations and great words, drawn on by my ignorance to ensnare my self; and notwithstanding all your promises to take no advan∣tage against me for my ignorance in the formalities of the Law; yet are the punctillioes and nicities thereof, more urged against me then they have been against hostile enemies; and yet for my part, no man can tax me for being in hostility at any time against them in present power; & yet opon my life, I am deni'd that which I had from
these as my right by Law against whom I have been in armes, and fought against in the field, yea, and that which in a higher nature then I desire, hath been acknowledged just and legall, by some of your own brother Judges, but the last year, which they have gran∣ted to some of my own Countrey-men, Free-men of England, but this last year in a higher nature by many degrees, then I plead for; There is Judge Nichols, that I understand was one of Major Rolphes Counsell, and I understand from Mr Maynards own mouth, that he and Mr Maynard was by Baron Wild, assigned of Rolphes Counsel in case of the highest Treason, that the Law of England ever knew, and that before the grand Inquest found the Indictment, and that Mr Maynard &c. had Liberty as Major Rolphs Counsel by Baron Wilds or∣der, to stand in the Court, not onely to hear the witnesses sworne, but also to hear the words of their Testimonie, then caused by the Judge to be given in open Court, and there being but two wit∣nesses to two Fact contained in the Indictment, Mr Maynard upon the Allegation of the two Statutes, of Edward the sixth, that re∣quires two witnesses to the proofe of every Fact of Treason, and that to be plain and clear, overthrew Rolphs Indictment in Law, that it was never found, and so saved the poor Mans life, who in likely hood had perished, had it not been for the Ability & Integri∣tie of his Counsel: And all this Mr Justice Nichols knowes, is very true, and that I have told you nothing about it, but what is just; It's true, I have read part of the plain Law of England, that is in Eng∣lish; but I am ignorant of that part of your Law, which is three times so much, as that which is in English, and that Law, or the pra∣ctick, part of the Law is in French and Latine, which I have truly told you, I can neither read nor understand, therefore I humbly crave my priviledge and undoubted Right by the Law of England, (which in a higher nature was granted to Major Rolph as his un∣questionable Right) to have Counsel assigned me, to help me in those things, I am ignorant of, I meane the Formalities and bot∣tom of your Law. I beseech you Sirs, do not put me upon Extre∣mities, and upon extraordinary things, but consider among your selves, that righteous Rule of Jesus Christ, and of the Scripture, to do as you would be done to: and do not put Impossibilities upon me, by overruling by your power all my just Claimes and pleas in Law, and require more of me then I am capable to performe. And therefore I beseech you, as you would approve your selves, to be as righteous Judges before the eye of that God, that sees your heart, & knows whether malicious & fore thoughts of malice harbers thein
against me his faithfull servant: do not cuningly and designedly de∣stroy me for my Ignorance, in the essential or circumstantial mat∣ter or forme of that huge Indictment, that has so much matter of Law in it, as it hath, and to take away my life by denying me, that which is the unquestionable legall Right of the Free-men of Eng∣land, the which if you will but allow me, I do not doubt but to come off clearly and freely. Lord Keeble. Mr Lilburn, You are now at a full point, and this you have said now, you have said often and we have heard it, and that which you say now was answered before. L. C. Lil. Sir, It's your own Law, Sir Edw. Cook declares, I ought to— Lord Keeble. Mr. Lilburn, I shall add this more to it, that you at this time, have here such a Court, which never any of your condition ever had in Eng∣land, so many Grave Judges of the Law. L. Col. Lilb. Truly I had rather have had an ordinary one Sir, I mean a legall and ordinary Assisses or Sessions. L. Keeble. But this you have, & this is to take off or prevent, that which you would do now, if there had been one Judge & no more, and if you had not had this great presence of the Court, you would have been malepart, and have out talked them, but you cannot do so here. L. Col. Lilb. Truly Sir, I am not daunted at the multitude of my Judges, neither at the glittering of your scarlet Robes, nor the Ma∣jesty of your presence and harsh, austere deportment towards me, I blesse my good God for it, who gives me courage and boldnesse. L. Keeb. That your Tryal is so publick, as your offence, is for this end, that all men may take notice, that you have fair play, & therefore according to Law, you ought to make your case in matter of fact clear, for that I must tell you againe and once is as good, as if I had told you a thousand times over, unlesse you can clearly do that, you say nothing to it, if you will take that for clear proofe that hath been alleaged against you, you may shorten your self: but otherwise make that defence that you judge most sufficient to disprove the Fact, for till that time, you are clear gone in Law, and no Councel must or can been assigned you. L. Col. Lilb. I have been a great while yesterday pleading my Right by Law, for Councel, and now I have stood many oures to hear your proofes to the Indictment. I hope you will not be so cruell, to put me to a present answer, when bodily strength is spent. Lo. Keeble. We know it as well as your self, you were here and stood di∣vers hours yesterday, and to day you have done the like, but we came before you, and stand after you. L. C. Lilb. Sir, will you put a man to more then a horse is put to, or is able to go through with, therighteous man is mercifull even to a very beast.
Lo. Keeble. We have been as long as you have. L. Col. Lilb. But under favour, you have sat. Lo. Keeble. You had that Liberty to, dispute no more, we must go on. L. Col. Lilb. I desire but a weeks time, to return you n answear to your large Indictment: and if not so long, then give me leave but till to morrow morning, to consider of my answer. I am up∣on my life. Lo. Keeble. No you must dispatch it now. L. Col. Lilb. Then give me leave but to withdraw into any pri∣vate roome, for an hour to recollect my thoughts, peruse my notes, and refresh my spirits: and here abouts Judg. Jermin did whis∣per the Lo. Keeble in the eare, and presently said Judg. Jermin, It's against the Law to allow you any more time, the Jury stand here charged, the Evidnce is given, you must immediatly go on, or yield that for truth which hath been proved against you L. Col. Lilb Well then, if it must be so, that you will have my bloud right or wrong, and if I shall not have on houres time to refresh me, after my strength is spent, and to consider of that which hath been alledged against me, then I appeale, (which he utter∣ed with a mighty voice) to the righteous God of heaven and earth against you, where I am sure, I shall be heard and find access, and the Lord God Omnipotent, and a mighty Judge betwixt you and me, and requier and requite my bloud upon the heads of you and your posterity, to the third and fourth generation: immediatly af∣ter the uttering of which the Scaffold fell down, which was on the left hand, which occasioned a great noise and some confusion by reason of the peoples tumbling, but silence being made, the Priso∣ner was buisie at his Papers and books, being invited by Sheriffe Pack to come out of the Barre, for fear he should have faln with the rest, and so he might have lost his prisoner. Lo. Keeble. How came the prisoner there? L. Col. Lilb. I went not thither Sir of my own accord, but by Mr Sheriffs Invitation, and if I am in a place where I ought not to be, blame Mr Sheriff, and not me. Lo. Keeble. Dispatch Sir. L. C. Lilb. Sir, if you will be so cruell as not to give me leave to withdraw to ease and refresh my body: I pray you, let me do it in the Court. Officer, I entreat you to help me to a chamber-pott; which whilst it was fetching, Mr Lilburne followeth his Pa∣pers and books close, and when the pott came, he made water, and gave it to the Foreman.
Lord Keeble. Proceed Mr. Lilburn; but he pressed for a little rspit, which was granted him with much ado, as also a chaire to sit down upon, but within a very little space the Lord Keeble said: Lord Keble. The Court cannot stay for you, proceed on to answer. Li. Col. Lilburn. Good Sir, Would you have me to answer to im∣possibilities, will you not give me breath? if you thirst after my blood, and nothing else will satisfie you, take it presently, without any more to do. But the Prisoner strugled out a little respit. Lord Keeble. The Court can stay no longer, take away his Chaire, for I cannot see the Bar, and plead what you have to say, for it growes ve∣ry late. Lieutenant Colonell Lilburne. Well, seeing I must to it, the will of God be done; but his brother being next to him, was heard to presse him to pause a little more, No brother, saith he, my worke is done, I will warrant you by the strength of God, I will knock the Nayle upon the head; and so he went into the Barre, and set the Chaire before him, and laid his Law Books open upon them, in or∣der as he intended to use them, and being ready, said, Sir I humbly crave the favour, since it is my hard lot and fortune, at least in my owne apprehension, to have so much hard measure and injustice as I have, to know whether or no you will permit me, after that I have pleaded to a matter of Fact, according to the Law of ENG∣LAND, that has beene allowed to the highest Traytors in all the Bookes that I have read of, that I may speake in my owne hehalfe unto the Jury, my Countrymen, upon whose consciences, integrity, and honesty, my life, and the Lives and Liberties of the honest men of this Nation now lyes, who are in Law Judges of Law as well as Fact, and you onely the pronouncers of their Sentence, Will, and Minde, I say, I desire to know when I have pleaded to matter of Fact, whe∣ther you will be pleased to give me leave to speake to them a few words besides. Lord Keble. Master Lilburne, quietly expresse your self, and you do well, the Iury are Iudges of matter of Fact altoge∣ther, and Iudge Cooke sayes so, but I tell you the opinion of the Court, they are Iudges of matter of Law.
Lieutenant Colonell Lilburne. The Jury by Law are not onely Jud∣ges of Fact, but of Law also, and you that call your selves Judges of the Law, are no more but norman intruders, and indeed and in truth, if the Jury please, are no more but Cisers, to pronounce their Verdict. Judge Jermin. Was there ever such a damnable blasphemous heresie as this is, to call the Judges of the Law Cifers? Sir, I entreat you give me leave to read the words of the Law then, for to the Jury I apply, as my Iudges both in the Law and Fact. Lord Keeble. We will not deny a tittle of the Law. Judge Jermin. Let all the hearers know, the Iury ought to take notice of it, That the Iudges that are sworne, that are twelve in number, they have ever been the Iudges of the Law, from the first time that ever we can reade or heare that Law was truly exprest in England, and the Iury are onely Iudges, whether such a thing were done or no, they are onely Iud∣ges of matter of Fact. Lieutenant Colonell Lilburn. I deny it, here's your owne Law to disprove you, and therefore let not me but read it; it is a hard case when a man is upon the triall of his life, that you will not suffer him to reade the Law to the Iury, for his owne defence; I am sure you have caused to be read at large those Lawes that makes against me. Lord Keeble. But I shall pronounce to cleare the righteousnesse of that Law, whatsoever others will pretend against it, that know it not. Lieutenant Colonell Lilburn. Sir, under favour I shall not trouble my self with any thing, but what is pertinent to my present purpose; here is the first part of Cooks Institutes, it is owned by all the Lawyers that I know, or ever heard of in England, for good Law. Lord Keeble. If you can canvince us, that matter of Law does con∣cerne you the Iury, you say something. Lieutenant Colonell Lilburn. Sir, I have been shuffled too much out of my Liberties already, give me leave to reade but the Law to the Iury, I will make use of nothing now to them, but your owne words, and when I have done, I will leave my self to them, and the guidance of God upon their conscience; and having the book open in his hand, he said in the first part of Cooks Institutes, sect. 366. fol. 226. 227. 228. in his Exposition of Ployden, hath these words.
Lord Keeble. Have we dealt so fairely with you all this while, Pray be confident, those that are quotations there, are not for your purpose; but I thought how good a Lawyer you were, for to set Cooks Commentaries upon Ployden; when there is no such Booke or Commentary: go to your matter of Fact, which is cleare, but for this, let it fall downe, and spare your selfe, and trouble your selfe no more with Cooke; he has no Commentary upon Ployden. But Master Lilburne prest to speake. Justice Jermin. Hold Sir. Lieut. Col. Lilburn. What will not you allow me liberty to reade your Law? O unrighteous and bloody Judges! Judge Jermin. By the fancy of your own minde, you would puzzle the Jury, we know the Book a little better then you do, there is no such Booke as Cookes Commentary upon Ployden. Lord Keble. Sir, you shall not reade it. Judge Jermin. You cannot be suffered to reade the Law, you have broa∣ched an erronious opinion, that the Jury are Judges of the Law, which is enoughYes but there was at Red∣ding, when Colonell Martin after they were sworne, cau∣sed all the Jury before the Judges sitting upon the bench, to put on their hats, as their right; being they were then the chief Judges in the Court, and the other inferiour to them. to destroy all the Law in the Land; there was never such a damnable heresie broached in this Nation before. The Cryer, Cries out, Heare the Court. Lieutenant Colonell Lilburne. Do your pleasure, then here Ile dye; Jury take notice of their injustice; but seeing they will not heare me, I appeale to you, and say, It is an easie matter for an abler man then I am, in so many interruptions as I meet with, to mistake Ployden for Littleton; I am sure here is Cookes Commentaries upon Littleton, and these be his words, In this case the Recognitors of the Assiz may say and render to the Justices their Verdict at large upon the whole matter, which I am sure is good Law, forasmuch as we see it continually done in all actions of trespasse or assault, where the Ju∣ry doth not onely judge of the validity of the proofe of the Fact, but also of the Law, by assigning what damages they thinke is just.
Lord Keeble. I am sure you are in an errour, in a grosse one, as possible a man can be in, this is so grosse, that I thought it could not have come from Master Lilburne, that professeth himself to be a ra∣tionall and knowing man. Lieutenant Colonell Lilburne. And in another place he saith: For as well as the Jurors may have Cognizance of the Lease, they also as well may have Cognizance of the Condition. And further there Cooke saith, Here it is to bee observed, that a speciall Verdict, or at large, may be given in any Action, and upon any Issue, be the Issue Generall or Speciall. And in Section 368. Littleton hath these words, Also in such Case, where the Inquest may give their Verdict at large, if they will take upon them the knowledge of the Law, up∣on the matter they may give their Verdict generally. Cookes words upon it are fully to the same purpose, who saith, Although the Jury, if they will take upon them (as Littleton here saith) the know∣ledge of the Law, may give a generall Verdict. I am sure this is pertinent to my purpose, and now I have done Sir. Lord Keble. You have spent a little time, but you have done your selfe no good, I thought you had understood the Law better then I see you do. Lieutenant Colonell Lilburne. Now Sir, as to matter of Fact, according to your owne desire, seeing you will have broke your promise, and will allow me no Counsell, but lye at catch with me, I shall come to it without any Pre∣amble. The Statute of the 1 Edward 6. Chap. 12. (I de∣sire the Jury may take notice of the Statutes) and the 5. and 6. of Edw. the sixth, Chap. 11. here's the Statute Book, which doth expresly declare, That no man shal be condem∣ned for Treason, petty Treason, nor any such like Crime, but by the Evidence and cleare proofe of two legall and suffi∣cient Witnesses. Sir Edward Cooke in his third part Institutes, Chapter of High Treason, is absolutely of the same opini∣on, fo. 12. in this branch, saies he, 4 things are to be observed.
First, this word (provablement) proveably, that is upon direct and manifest proofe, not upon conjecturall presumptions or inferen∣ces, or straines of wit, but upon good and sufficient proofe of two Witnesses, and this is Folio 12. And here in the adverb, (proveablement) provebly hath a great force, and signifieth a direct and plain proofe. And secondly, This word (attaint) necessarily implyeth, that he be proceeded with, and attainted, according to the u course and proceedings of Law, and not by absolute power, or by o∣ther meanes, as in former times it hath beene used, And Folio 24. Chap. Pety Treson, he saith, It hth beene holden, that upon the Tryll of misprision of Treason, there must be two lawfull Witnesses as well upon the Tryall as the In∣dictment, as it was resolved by the Justices in the Lord Lumeyes case. Hill, 14. Eliz. reported by the Lord Dier under his own hand, and in the margent hee hath this note upon it, That this is the last resolution of the Judges upon it: And a little below, in the same folio, and folio 25. hee saith, Therefore upon the In∣dictment, which is in manner of an accusation, by the Statutes of 1. Edward 6. Cap. 12. & 5. & 6. Edward 6. Cap. 11. Two lawfull Witnesses are requisite. And in follio. 240. hee hath the same, his words are these: Attainders of TREASON &c. ought to bee upon plaine and direct evidence (as before is said) for if the party be executed, restitution may bee had of his lands, but never can be had of his life: now I have done Sir. Lord Keble. I hope the Jury hath seene the Evidence so plain, and so ully, that it doth confirme them to doe their duty, ad to find the Psner guilty of what is charged upon him. Judge Jermane. This that you have said makes much for the Jury. Lieutenant Colonell Lilburne. Wee shall see that by and by; but I shall proceede on to answer your proofe to the Indict∣ment, and that in the same method that your Witnesses swore: And therefore Sir, in the first place, to the first, which is THOMAS NEWCOME, the PRINTER, hee sweares in these words: That I was present with CAPTAINE JONES, from whose hands hee
he sayes he received the last sheete of the Booke, called the Out∣cry of the Young men and Apprentices of LONDON; but hee saies Captaine Jones agreed with him for the printing of it, and not I; for in that particular hee doth not in the least accuse me, neither doth hee in the least accuse mee in any man∣ner in the world of being the Authour of it: and that I did any more at his house, but take away a single sheete of it before it was corrected, which sayes he, I brought away with me: In answer to whose Testimony I returne this, and I earnestly entreate you, Gendemen of the Jury, to observe it well, and therefore in the first place hee is but a single Testimony to this: But secondly I answered, that hee confesses moreover, that before hee had compleated that sheete that hee received from Captaine JONES, he was taken, and not onely hee, but his Formes also was taken from him: so that by his owne confession, that Copy that was brought by Captaine JONES when I was present with him, proved abhortive, it was never wrought. For hee sayes it was taken before hee had perfected it, and to my knowledge they had it in their possession: so that it clearely appeares, it was never perfectly wrought off, and therefore the bookes were never per∣fected; Therefore I hope that it will not be Treason in mee, bee∣ing a free man of ENGLAND, to walke the streetes with my friend, and to goe into a house with him where hee hath busi∣nesse to doe, admit it bee a Printing house, where hee intends to have a sheete of paper printed, his affaires, businesse, or acti∣ons are nothing to mee, neither are they now in the least laid unto my Charge: And if they were, as they are not, yet that sheete miscarried, and was taken before is was perfected: so that truly Sir, you may goe seeke the Printer of it, for you see that miscarried that Captaine JONES delivered to the Printer in my company, and that sheete which hee saith I had away, was an uncorrected one, which could serve mee for no other use, but wast paper, and cannot bee adjudged to be a true Copy of that which was contained in the Indictment; neither doth hee or any other sweare, that at the Printers they see, or know where was done the Tule of that OƲT-CRY, contained in the Indict∣ment: So that for any thing the Jury knowes, the first part of that Booke hath no dependance upon the sheete that was spoyled, and not brought to maturity in Master Newcomes hand, as he him∣selfe
upon his Oath declares: so that truly Sir, in Law Mr. New∣comes Testimony proves nothing at all against me, as to that book mentioned and contained in the Indictment, and therefore you Gentlemen of the Jury, my life is in your hands, I beseech you take notice, that in all his Testimony, there was not one word that he declared to accuse me to be the Author of that Booke, or that my name was to it; for you shall finde the names of tenne that own it, so that I think his Testimony is gone, and is not worth a straw. In the next place there were three Souldiers, viz. John Tooke, Thomas Lewis, and John Skinner, that sweares against mee, the substance of all their Testimonies centers in one: and John Tooke in the first place saith, about seven weekes agoe he met with Lieu∣tenant Colonell John Lilburne in Ivy-lane, where Lewis knowing of him, gave him a salute: and they being glad to see him that he was well in health, and the like, out of friendship went to drink a cup of beere together at the Red Crosse in Newgate-market, where he saw a Booke called the Apprentices Out-cry, given un∣to Master Lewis, and he heard these words uttered by Lieutenant Colonell Lilburne, You souldiers are those that keepe us in slave∣ry. The second witnesse being Thomas Lewis, saith, That the 6. of December, or September, for so was his words, he met me in Ivy-lane, and tooke acquaintance of me, asked me how I did, and I thank'd him: and hee further declares, that hee was very much refresht to see me, that I was well, and in health, and was glad to see that those things that were given out of me, by common fame, (that I was killed or dead, that they were not true, there∣fore he being my old acquaintance as he saith, we went to drinke a cup of beere together; and sayes hee (as hee remembers) Lieu∣nant Colonell Lilburn asked him if he had seene a Booke called the Apprentices Out-crye, and he said no, he had not seene it, but he had heard of it, and was thinking to goe and buy one of them, for that he longed to read it, and heard it was publiquely sold, and sayes , Lieutenant Colonell Lilburn said, he had one which was given him, and if he pleased hee would give it me, which hee thankfully received, and afterward we staid a little time to drink a cup of bee, and had some discourse; but hee doth fixe no evill upon mee, that fell from me in that discourse, neither doth he say, that I did stirre him up to mutiny, or to make division in the Ar∣mie,
onely hee saith, I told him, that if hee went to such a man, whose name hee hath forgot, it is possible hee might buy some more of them, for they were publiquely sold all over the City; so that you Gentlemen of the Jury may take notice that hee declares the things by common same wre publiquely sold, and one of them hee ayes was given to me, and I gave it to him. Truly I hope the Jury hath more conscience in them, thn to goe about to take away my life for giving away a single sheete and an halfe of paper, tha no man sweares In was the Author of, or the causer of it to be Printed and Published; Bt the most that can be fixed upon mee, is, that I had one of them given mee, and I gave it to a Souldier, my familiar friend, who had a great desire to see it, and was going to buy one of them, being publique up and downe LONDON at that time, which is all that hee doth charge upon mee; onely hee sayes further, that there was a little dis∣course: but his Testimony doth not reach to accuse mee of any e∣vill or malicious Counsell given them, or any aggravations of spirit, as though I did incense him of them against their Offi∣cers or fellow-souldiers, thereby to stirre them up to muti∣ny and Rebellion. For truely I have made it my werke, for to be as sparing in my discourse as could be, in the com∣pany of any belonging to the ARMIE; yea, and to shun comming nigh the place, if I can avoid it where they are: and hee saith I had no aggravating spirit within mee, nor uttered any provocations to make them rise in mutiny a∣gainst their Officers, and there is none of them all that does in the least fixe that Booke upon mee, to bee mine, as the Author of it. Only he saith further, that upon his declaring hee longed to see the Booke, that Lieutenant Colonell LILBƲRNE told him that such a man, whose name hee hath forgot, might possibly sell them some of them if they had a mind to them or to get some of them, and truely I dee not believe that Treason. Further he sayes, all the worst discourse I had with them, was, that I asked them a question, which was, when they had any pay, and they told me they had not had any pay in 5. weekes, and that was the worst of all; there proceeded from me no aggrava∣ting expressions upon it, or mutinous provocations, but truely
that this discourse should come within the compasse of Treason, to ask my old acquaintance a question, that had often times visited me, when I was the Lords prisoner in the Tower, or to drink a Cup of beer with him, or give a sheet and a half of paper, that was publickly sold; Truly I hope there will be no righteous Jury in the world, that will give a Judgement against me for Treason therefore, no, I hope for more righteous Justice, from a Jury of Citizens of London, whom I hope to find men of Consciences and Judgement, yea, of such righteous Judgement, as that they will abhorre to go about, to take away my life, and my bloud, and lay the blemish and staine of Treason upon — me and my posterity for ever, upon such a thing as this is, and this is all, and the ut∣most of all, that the Evidence doth witness against me. Then in the third place, there was Iohn Skinner, who was the third: and he sayes the same in effect and no more, and therefore I need not to go upon that any further, but shal leave it I hope to the inlivened Con∣sciences of my Jury, my fellow Citizens of London: in the next place, the second thing layd to my charge, is the Salva Libertate, de∣livered to the Lieutenant of the Tower as he sayes;The Lieute∣nants of the Towers Testi∣monie. Now truly the Lieutenant of the Tower is but a sin∣gle witnesse to this, and the Law saith positively, there shal be two legal witnesses, to prove every Fact of Treason, whose Testimonie or evidence ought to be as clear and evident as the Sun at noon-day, without any con∣jecturall presumptions or inferences, or straines of witt, and truly the Lieutenant is but a single witnesse at most. I should be loath to reproach or bespatter the man, yet I must say this, being upon my life, that he is not onely a single witnesse, but a Gentleman, in whose Custody I was prisoner contrary to Law; who kept me pri∣soner in times by-past, above 12. moneths together at the house of Lords illegall command, contrary unto Law and Justice, for which above a year since, I did commence at the Common Law an Action of four or five thousand pound against him, as I did also against Collonell Tichbourn, that I have seen upon this bench, sitting as one of my Judges which I think, is not equall nor just, nor legall that he with whom I have a suit of four or five thousand pound depen∣ding, when thereby my profest adversary should be one of my Judges, and therefore I desire he may be commanded off the bench, and withdraw as being my professed adversary, and therefore in Law uncapable to be my Judge, and truly having the same Action
depending still against the present Lieutenant of the Tower, before the Judges of the Kings Bench, for his detaining me in prison, a∣bove a year together, contrary to Law, he is thereby in the eye of the Law, my proefssed Adversary, and therefore in Law cannot be admitted, as a compitent witnesse against me, upon my life, yet the Lieutenant of the Tower doth not in the least swear that the hand is mine, or that he did see me write it; but onely he saith that I did deliver such a Paper to him, but he is but a single wit∣nesse, and so I say by the Law of the Land, not vallid or good, but his Testimony is clearly gone, and wiped off, as also all things that doth depend thereupon; There is besides five or six witnesses produced to severall charges; but the Law expresly saith, that there must be two plain and clear witnesses to every particular Charge, or Fact of Treason, that must take away my life, and this is your own Law, and therefore he is but a single one, and therefore invalled and altogether not satisfactory, or binding; and then beside, which is considerable, truly I think the Tower of London, in the place where he saith, I gave him those Papers, is not within the Jurisdiction of the Citie of London, and how I should come to be arraigned by a Jury of fellow Citizens here in London therefore, against whom I must confesse that for my part, I have nothing for their Honesty and Integrity to object, I know not, for I know not the faces of any two of them, and there∣fore impossible for me to say any thing against them; I say, I know not how by a London Jury I can be tried for a Fact fixed upon me, to be committed in Middelsex. I beseech you Gentlemen of the Jury, mistake me not: for I have nothing to accuse you of, and I hope you will be so conscientious and tender in the Trial of me for my life, that you will put your case as my case, and do by me as you would be done unto by me, if you were in my case and condition. And the righteous God of heaven and earth direct you so to do: and therefore the Lieutenant of the Tower being but a single witnesse at most, and in Law not a compitent, one neither, being my pro∣fessed Adversary, that hath most illegally kept me in prison, for which I have commenced long sence my action at law for my legal reparations against him; I say, therefore in the eye of the Law, his Testimony sticks not; and I pope in the righteous Opinion of my Jury, can do me no harm; and if so his Testimony be invalled, then the Salva Libertate can not reach me, to do me any hurt, but it and all those my pretended books called by my name, are all
washed away and gone, and my Adversaries must go seek new Au∣thours for them, or at least procure new and better Testimony to prove them mine, for that which they have produced hither to, is worth nothing. Then the next is Thomas Dafferne, and he sayes that the twelfth of August 1649.Thomas Daf∣ferns Testi∣mony. he met with Lieut. Col. Lilburne upon the Bridge, as he was going home to visit his sick and distressed Family, and he went back with him, to his house in Southwark, at Winchester House, which I am sure is not in London; And therefore at Guild∣hall in London, by a London Jury in Law cannot be tried; for he po∣sitively saith, that at Winchester house in Southwark, which is in the County of Surry. Lieut. Col. John Lilburne gave him a book, to carry to Coll: Aires, a Prisoner at Warwicke Castle; but he does give in no Testimony at all that it is mine, or that that book was Lieut. Colonell Lilburnes book, of his making or penning: but a Book he gave him: and that is all he sayes, which is no more but that he received a Book at Winchester House in Southwark, from the hands of Lieutenant Colonell Lilburne, so carry to Colonell Ayres, now a prisoner at Warwick Castle. Now truly he is but a single Testimony, and he sweares nothing particularly as to me, and besides, what he sweares is to a Fact done in another County, and therefore his Testimony is not worth a straw; it's gone, it's in∣vallid in Law, it signifies nothing, it is not so good as a spiders webb; by Viritue of which the Marshals Testimony and the Go∣vernours of Warwick Castle, as also Col. Purfroyes need no other an∣swer from me, but to pitty them for the long journey, they have made to no purpose. The next thing charged upon me is the Pre∣parative to an Hue & Cry after Sir Arthur Hasle∣rige,The Lieutenant of the Towers se∣cond Testimony. to which the Lieutenant of the Tower sayes, that Lieut: Col: John Lilburne gave him one of those Books in the Tower: which truly I am confident is in Middle∣sex, and truly I conceive under favour, it will be a point disputable in Law, that I should betried for my life in this place, admitt there were a thousand witnesses to make it good, that the Lieute∣nant of the Tower had one of them from me, either in the place he formly named, or at his own house: for that Fact was done in the Tower, that is out of the County of London, and so not tryable by a Jury of Citizens of London; but he further saith, whether the Book that he now has, be the same that he received from the
hands of L. Col. Lilburne, that he is not able to depose. Then the rest of the wittnesses that do depose against me in relation to the Hue and Crie, and James Nutley, and Edward Raddon, both of them Mr Prideaux servantts; and the most that they say,The Testimony of James Nutley, and Edward Raddon. is that when I was before their Master, upon the 14. of Septemb. 1649. at his chamber in the Tem∣ple to be examined by him, they say, they saw me deliver a preparative to an Hue and Crie after Sir Arthur Haslerige to this masters hands, and tell him, that that was mine, and I would own it, saving the Printers Errata's, which sayes the Lieutenant of the Tower upon his oath, I expressed to be many. In answer so which I say, I do not know whether the Temple be with in the Liberties of London or no, and if it be not, I know no ground in Law, wherefore a London Jury should try me here: but more fully, I say, for any thing the Jury knowes, or for any thing the witnesses swear, the Printers Errata's, which are many, are all and every of those clauses that offence or exceptions are taken against, for not one of those clauses which you except a∣gainst, are not proved to be the Prinetrs Errata's, and therefore there is no validity or weight in those Testimonies also, for they do not prove in the least that any six lines of the Book is mine, all of them say that I owned no more of the Book then was free from the Printers Errata's. And the Lieu∣tenant of the Tower sweares that the clause was added, which are many: And therefore you the Gentlemen of the Jury, I I appeal to your Consciences, and to your Judgements, and the Lord set it home to your understandings, that you may not be guilty of the bloud of an innocent man, by partiality, fear or off∣rightment of spirit, for in law, Equity and Justice all their three Testimonies put together, has no validity, no strength, nor force in them, and so much for that. The next thing fixt upon me, is the legall fundamentall Liber∣ties of the people of England, revived, asserted and vindicated, and truly all that's brought to prove the legal fundamental Liberties of England to be mine, is but mearly the relations that are in the fore-mentioned Books, for I do not remember, (nay I am sure of it,) that there is so much as a single Testimony that does give in a∣ny Evidence against me that it is mine, and therefore I can answer to that nothing, more then what I have said already. The Testi∣monies all being invalled at least in the eye of the Law; and there∣fore that's gone too, and blown away as chaff before the wind.
Lastly, for the Agreement of the people, truly that's dated the first of May, 1649. And truly for ought I know, and I am sure of it too, it is before the date of any of those Acts upon which I am indicted for my life, & therefore not within the compasse of it: for Paul that great Apostle said, and he that spoke by the spirit of God that dwelt within him, & to whom it was given in an extrarordinary manner, that so he might thereby be enabled to write the infallible truths of God, said where there is no law, there can be no transgression, but that Agreewent was in being & publickly abroad with a legal Im∣primatur to it, before any of the Acts, upon which I am arraigned, had a being, and therefore admit it should be granted to be mine, yet it can be no transgression or any thing prejudicial in the eye of the Law unto me, but besides, there is not any Testimony at all, that so much as layes it to my charge to be mine, and therefore it pinches me not, nor does any of all the rest of your charges, and besides all that I have already said in my owne behalf, to shew in Law the invalidity, and insuffiencie of all the Testimony, you have produced against me; I add this, by way of addition to it, that there hath not been so much as one single witnesse or Testimony to prove that the Books laid to my charge, are rightly and truly dated, and not post dated, which if any of them or all of them should be, admit the proofes were sufficient in law, yet unlesse the dayes of them be firmly proved to be exactly according to the original copies, and not post dated, for any thing the Jury knows, they might be made and write before ever the Acts, they are said to transgresse, had a being. And therefore if there were so many Testimonies in Law, to prove the books mine, (which there is not in the least) yet, I say admit, there had been a thousand witnesses to the proofe of every one of those books, yet not withstanding in the eye of the Law: I leave it to the Consciences of my Jury, whether I be not free in that particular, seeing there is none sweares punctu∣ally and positively to the dates of them, but to put all out of danger, as I denie nothing, so in that particular, I do not own a jott, a line, a word, a sillable, of any of them. Now Sir having done so far as I have, and clearly discovered to the Jury, and all that hear me this day, that all the proofes alledged against me, does not stick in the least any guilt upon me, truly I have clearly answered, & invallodated all the verball proofes, according to the clear letter and true intention of the Law, I have no more to say to all the evidences, that have been read in books against me, I leave
it to the consciences of my Jury, believing them to be a gene∣ration of men, that believe in God the Father, and believes they shall have a portion in the resurrection of the dead, and stand before the tribunall of the Lord Almighty, to give an account unto him the Lord of life and glory, and the Judge of all the earth, of all there actions done in the flesh; I leave it to their judge∣ments and consciences to judge righteously, between me and my adversaries; and the Lord of life and glory, to judge right be∣tween me & you, that in all those things in your long scrowl you pretend me guilty of; I hope I have so clearly and fully answered all and every of your proofs, that not any one thing sticks; and to their consciences I cast it; hoping that they doe look upon them∣selves, as standing in the presence of him that sees their hearts, and knows now whether there be any malice in them towards me or no, which for my part I doe not believe there is, for I professe I know no wrong I have particularly done them as men, or gene∣rally as English men; my conscience is free and clear as in the sight of God, and I hope of all unbiassed men; and to my knowledge I never see the faces of any two of them before this day, and there∣fore intirely as an English man, that loves and honours the good old laws of England, and earnestly desires and endeavours, and struggles for the preservation of justice and just Magistracy, which I wish with all my soul may be preserved; and therefore having suffered much for the preservation of the common, and, just liber∣ties of England, to their consciences, and to their judgements, I lealve both this matter, and the constant series of all my actions in this my pilgrimage, and vail of tears here be∣low. Lord Keeble. Mr. Lilburn. L. Col. Lilb. Your pleasure Sir? Lord Keeble, Nothing Sir but this, our consciences are befare God as well as yours, and therefore you need not speak thus. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I have only two or three words more, which I have spoken to you, but these men that are my Jury and judges, in whose hands only are the issues of my life, have not as yet heard them, I pray you give me liberty according to your promise, to
go on without interruption: You Gentlemen of the Jury, I have many materiall things to produce witnesses unto for my justifica∣tion, but no time in the least will be allowed me, as you see, to produce them, which I ought by law to have had, especially consi∣dering I have been lockt up so long close prisoner, and have no∣thing for which I was first imprisoned laid unto my charge; and have so high, potent and mighty advarsaries as I have; that truly every man is shy of me, for fear he may come in trouble for com∣ming near me; and therefore I have but two or three words more to speak to the Jury, I beseech you let me freely go on. Lord Keeble. Make them thirty to your defence, and you may speake them. L. Col. Lilb. I shall by Gods assistance, I shall keep close to my defence: Now Gentlemen of the Jury, I think I have suffici∣ently pleaded for my self at this present, and that to clear up ful∣ly unto your judgements, and to your understandings, that by the law of England there is not so much as any one fact proved a∣gainst me; for the law is expresse, that to every particular fact of Treason, there must be two sufficient witnesses, not by constructi∣ons or the like, upon which score and plea, that Gentleman Ma∣ster Nichols that sits there as a Judge, and Master John Maynard, sa∣ved Major Rolphs life, being to be arrained for the highest of Eng∣lish Treason, before Barron Wild: Now Gentlemen, if notwith∣standing what I have said, any thing shall yet stick upon your spi∣rits, I shall intreat you to consider the intention of the law of England, it is repeated severall times in Sir Edwards Cooks Institutes, it is a maxim in the Law, I have it here in the third part of his Institutes fol. 6. & actus non facit reum, nist meus sit rea; Sir, if you please to doe me the favour but to English it, and explain it for the Jury; for though I understand the substance of it, yet I am not exactly able to English the latine, but onely to understand the sense of it; I conceive the sense of it is this, it is not the act, but the intention of the mind, that declares guilt; but therefore as in reference unto that I shall say no more but only this to them, that the constant series of all my actions from my youth hitherto, have manifested that I have with an affectionate and compasionate Eng∣lish spirit within me, that hath put me forth for many years to∣gether,
really to endeavour the prosperity and good of the land of my nativitiy; and not its mischiefe and destruction: and that hitherto-ward, in all my contests, I have had the law, and the de∣clared publique justice of the Nation of my side; having never done any mischiefe to my Country, unlesse it be a misChief to op∣pose great mens wils; I have now been seven moneths in prison I know not wherefore, although originally I was committed to prison pretendedly for Treason; and both the Acts upon which now I am indicted, hath been made long since my first commit∣ment, there is not any one sillable of all those things for which I originally in generall, without accuser or prosecutor was Voted a Traytor by the present power, and for which I was proclaimed a Traitor throughout all the Market and great Towns in England six months a goe; there is not now J say, any one of those things laid to my charge; but truly J have been laid inito prison for no∣thing; as by this daies work clearly appears, by the men in present power, unto divers of whom J have often sent to know what it is they require at my hands, and have also from time to time, de∣clared my readay willingnesse to compose and end all differences that concerne me, having proffered again and again, to reer my selfe unto the finall determination of four of their own Members, finally to end and determine all differences betwixt them and me, whereof J was willing that Judge Rigby should be one of them, a Gentleman (though now a Judge) I have found very honest and faithfull, and to whom I have been much obliged to, for many hearty favours I have from time to time received from him; I say I have sent to him and Collonel Martin and aboundance of the members besides, from time to time; to some of whom I have written, with some of whom I have spoken to; I say, I have sent many messages with the earnestes desire in the world, that if I had offended any man in the House, that if he would be pleased fairly and friendly, to refer it to the finall judgement and determination of four Members of their own House, and would stand to it; and let all the world judge whether or no this proposition was not su∣table to a Christian, and sutable to an honest man, yea, to a man that judged himselfe in the strictest scrutiny of is own conscience to be free and innocent in his owne soul, and in his owne con∣science, from all guilt, crimes or Treasons, or else if I had not, I would not have put my felfe upon the judgement of those
that were engaged in interest and selt-preservation against me; and yet for the things that they imprisoned me for as a Traytor in general which I bear nothing of this day, which is wonderful strange law and proceed∣ings to my understanding: But besides Sir, under favour, I have not one∣ly done this, but I have e thousands of my friends: I will undertake, I could produce ten thousand of old and young, Males and Females, Citi∣zens and Country-men, men of honesty and integrity, that have in the common cause always adhered to the freedoms of the Nation, that have petitioned the Parliament several times; yea, from time to time, with a∣bundance of rationall and fair Petitions, and truly stated my case to them, and acquainted them with my condition, and with the rest of my Fellow prisones, and earnestly begged and intreated of them that they would not be hasty in condemning and destroying me, before they heard me and afforded me a legall tryall, from first to last, according to the due forms and process of the law of England; and yet for all this, till I came before you, I never saw accuser, or prosecutor, nor Indictment, nor Charge, nor nothing in all the earth, legally to demonstrate me so much as a supposed offender; and yet for all this, no satisfaction in the world would be recieved; notwithstanding in one Petition they desiring, that they would be pleased, seeing they were incensed against us, and that they had taken indignation against us, they did not desire to justifie us in any thing we had done; but in regard to their own knowledge, we had been all four faithfull, zealous, and setviceable Instruments in the common Cause of the Nation; in which to the hazard of my life an hundred times over, I have ingaged for them, with my sword in my hand, with as much resolution, and as much faithfulness, as any man on earth ever served a Generation of men, having never betrayed my trust, or ever given any suspition in the least that I would, or ever so much as staggered in my principles, nor ever so much as disputed any Commands, though never so desperate that was laid upon me; no, nor ever turned my back in the field of their enemies in any of their services, so long as it was possible for a man that had any brains left him to stand; but was one of those 700 men at Brainford (my self being there a voluntier without any particu∣lar command) that with dint of sword stood it out against the whole bo∣dy of the Kings numerous Army for many hours together, and never stir'd off the ground, till both horse and foot had as it were incompast  round, and till we came to a readiness to beat out one anothers brains with the but end of our muskets, where I was taken a prisoner, and led captive in a most barbarous and disgracefull manner to Oxford, where I
suffered abundance of unexpressable hardships, and underwent the shock and rid the storm as stouly as any man there; although I believe I was as much courted by messages from the King himself, as any, or all the Parliament men that were there my fellow-prisoners; for there I have had no less then four Earls and Lords in one day sent unto me, by Him, to draw me over unto them; but I bless God that kept me upright, and in∣tire unto my integrity and principles, and suffered me not to turn my back upon them: But Sir, notwithstanding all this (I say) our friends desired of the Parliament, that they would be pleased to take sufficient security according to the law, for our forth-coming at all times, to an∣swer such things as shall be laid to our charge; but their Petitions were contemned, themselves slighted and abused, and by no means could get a∣ny satisfactory answers to them. Sir, I speak here to you, and to my fellow-Citizens the Jury, as in the sight and presence of God, that knows I lye not: and if you find me to be in a lie, in the least, in what I have said, then never credit man of my profession again for my sake: Truly Sir. I say they desired them, that we might be released from our impri∣sonment, putting insecurity to answer whatsoever legally could be char∣ged upon us, onely they craved, that we might have the same legall pri∣viledges, that they demanded at the hands of the King, when he im∣peached the Lord Kimbolton, and the five members of High Treason; which priviledges is easily and plainly to be read, in their own first pri∣mitive Declarations, pag. 38, 39. and 76, 77. Now abundance of the free people of this Nation, in my behalf, having craved the same priviledges that was demanded for the L. Kimbolton, & in the behalf of the five mem∣bers, and the like, all that they desired was no more, but the same privi∣ledge that they craved for them, which was, that I might have the due process of the law, from first to last; and I and my accusers come face to face at the beginning before an ordinary Magistrate; and if they had any thing to lay to my charg, that they would legally according to law pro∣ceed with me; but I say none of these would be granted, although them∣selves in several of their Declarations, have declared all these things to be the common right of all or any of the people of England, as well as Par∣liament men; yet notwithstanding all this, they continued in their incen∣sed condition against me, and would come to no legall nor fair Issue with me; nor let me in the least know what was the end or thing they requi∣red of me; or what was the thing that would satisfie for the extenuation of their indignation against me; but contratiwise dealt harder and har∣der with me, in laying new and fresh insupportable burthens and provo∣cations
upon me: For after all this they caused me to be lockt up close prisoner in the heat of Summer, set Centinels night and day at my door, denyed me the access of my wise and little babes; for a certain season nei∣ther wife nor child could so much as set their feet within the Caes of the Tower, to see me, or comfort me in my distress. L. Keable. Mr. Lilburn is this your defence? L. C. Lilburn. I beseech you, as either the law, or fear of God, conscience or common honesty dwelt within you, let me have a little fair play to go on to speak for my life without interruption, I shall not trouble you long, for I have almost done. L. Keable. When your matter of fact is to defend your self, and to answer the proof upon that, and that is it we are to hear, and not to hear you tell the story of all your life; and then if we should reply to these particular things, they will be such as most of them will vanish, and do you no service, but take up a great deal of time: do not tell us a story, but go on to finish the matter of fact. L. C. Lilburn. It has been your favour to give me leave to tell it over to you, I pray give me leave to declare it to my Jury, who hath not heard it before, and it is very material to my preservation, and my life lies upon it; therefore do not deal with me as Proctors. and ingaged men, with those that thirst for my bloud, and laying aside that evenness of hand betwixt both parties, that ought to be in all just and righteous Judges. L. Keable. 'Tis nothing to this; if it be any thing in the world to do you good, in the way of your course of defence, you should have it. L. C. Lilburn. Well if you let me go on no futther to make my de∣fence, I cannot over-rule you, though you over-rule me, my bloud be upon your heads, and the Lord God of heaven and earth reward you for all your bloud-thirsty cruelty towards me his innocent Servant this day; and so I have done with it; and what I have said I have done with it, & leave it to the Jury, earnestly begging and intreating them to take notice of your cruell and unjust dealing with me, in denying me all the priviledges of an English-man, when I am upon my life. L. Keable. What is materiall, you shall not be debarred in it. L. C. Lilburn. O Lord Si! What strange Judges are you, that you will neither allow me Counsel to help me to plead; nor suffer me my self to speak for my own life? Is this your law and Justice Sir? I have no more to say but this, seeing you straiten me; although you said you would hear me till midnight: I hope I have made it evident to all rati∣onall men, that all or any part of the testimony given in against me, does
not in the exact eye of the law, in the least, touch me; although I have been most unjustly imprisoned, and most barbarously used and tyranni∣zed over; yea, and my estate by will and power taken from me, that should have kept me and mine alive; and the legal and customary allow∣ance of the Tower denyed me to this day; and although I have used all Christian and fair means, to compose my differences with my Advers∣ries; but nothing would serve their turns, but I must have oppression upon oppression laid upon me, enough to break the back of a horse; and then if I cry out of my oppressions in any kind, I must have new Treason∣snares made to catch me, many moneths after their oppressions were first laid upon me, that if I so much as whimper or speak, in the least, of their unjust dealing with me, I must dye rherefore as a traytor: O mise∣rable servitude! and miserable bondage, in the first year of Englands Freedom! I have now no more to say unto you, but onely this; your own law tels me, Sir Edw. Cook speaks it three or four times over, in his 3 part instituts, That it is the Law of England that any by stander may speak in the prisoners behalf, if he see any thing urg'd against him, contrary to Law, or do apprehend he fals short of urging any material thing that may serve for his defence and preservation. Here's your own Law for it, Sir, Cook is full and pregnant to this purpose, in his 3. part Institutes, fol. 29, 34, 37. But this hath several times been denyed me, in the case of Mr. Sprat my Soliciter; and now I demand it again, as my right by law, that he may speak a few words for me, according to his often desire, both to he, and the Court: I have almost done Sir, onely once again, I claim that as my right which you have promised, that I should have Councel to matter of law; and if you give me but your own promise, which is my undoubted right by your own law, and I fear not my life: But if you again shall deny both these legal priviledges, I shall desire my Jury to take notice, that I aver, you rob me of the benefit of the law, and go about to murther me, without and against law; and therefore as a free-born English man, and as a true Christian, that now stands in the sight and presence of God, with an uprighs hear and conscience, & with a chear∣full countenance, cast my life, and the lives of all the honest free-men of England, no the hands of God, and his gracious protection, and into the care and conscience of my honest Jury and Fellow-Citizens, who I again declare by the law of England, are the Conservators and sole Judges of my life, having inherent in them alone, the judicial power of the law, as well as fact; you Judges that sit there, being no more, if they please, but Ciphers to pronounce the Sentence, or their Clarks, to say Amen, to
them, being at the best, in your Original, but the Norman Conqueours, Intruders; and therefore, you Gentlemen of the Jury, my sole Judges, the Keepers of my life; at whose hands, the Lord will require my bloud, in case you leave any part of my indictment to the cruell and bloudy men: And therefore, I desire you to know your power, and consider your duty, both to God, to Me, to your own Selves, and to your Country; and the gracious assisting Spirit, and presence of the Lord God omnipotent, the Governour of Heaven and Earth, and all things therein contained, go along with you, give counsell, and direct you, to do that which is just and for his glory. [The People with a loud voyce, cryed Amen, Amen, and gave an extra∣ordinary great hum, which made the Judges lok something unto∣wardly about them, and coused Major Generall Skippon to send for three more fresh Companis of Foot Souldiers.] Mr. Atturney. Gentlemen of the Jury, You have heard the Evidence, in behalf of the State; You have heard the insinuations of the prisoner upon them, as calling you his Fellow-Citizens, and the like: He hath said, and spo∣ken; we have proved, and it is in your consciences to believe proof, before say∣ing: the prisoner begun to cite you two Acts of Parliament: the one in the 1. of Edw. 6. and the other the 5 and 6. of Edw. 6. and by those two Acts he would signifie to you, that you should have two plain and evident Witnesses to every particular fact; yet he did forget to cite another Statute, made in the first and scond year of Philip and Mary, that overthrows and annihilates those two Statutes that would have two plain witnsses to every fact of trea∣son, and in all cases of treason will have them freed, according to the common course of law the common-law for the try all of them: if that must s materi∣all, or if that stick with you, that you cannot determine it, my Lords the Judges will direct you in it, and in all other points of law: But certainly that excep∣tion was a little vain too; for we did not insist with one particular witnesse in nothing at all: For that of Newcome, the prisoner did not repeat fully what he said: for I remember he said this, that Mr. Lilburn, and Capt. Iones, came together, and brought the Copy of the last sheet that was to be printed: if one come with him, and the other delvered it to the Printer, they are both equal∣ly guiltie alike: they came again the same day at night, and when the first sheet was printed, to be sure, it was true and right, that Mr. Lilburn did take the pains to take one of the Copies into his hand, and corrected it. Lieu. Col. Lilb. By your favour Sir, he urg'd no such thing; by your favour fir, they are the express words of the testimony, to the quite con∣trary; and I wonder Mr. Pidaux you are not ashamed, to aver such
notorious falshoods, as you do, in the open face of the Court, before thousands of Witnesses; for Newcome said no such thing, as you fasly af∣firm; neither is there any such Statute in Queen Mary's time that doth abolish those two Statutes of Edw. 6. that I insist upon for two Witnes∣ses; name your Statute if you can, her's the Statute-book, let the Jury hear it read, and do no abuse them with your impudent falshoods. Mr. Atturney. Well Sir, I leave it to the judgment of the Jury Sir: My Lord, as for all the rest, and particularly for that of the salva libertate, it is true, there is but one witnesse which is sufficient enough by the fore-mentio∣ned Act of Queen Mary; but my Lord, it is under Mr. Lilburns own hand, he will not deny it. Lieu. Col. Lilb. By your favour, there is no man so swears, in the least, that it is my hand, Jesus Christ denyed none of his accusation; yet when they went about to ensnare him by questions, he answered Pilate, &c. Thou sayst so, go to those that heard me, they know what I said, why ask you me? Sir, I beseech you, produce your Act of Parliament in Queen Maries time, to prove, in cases of Treason, there ought to be but a single Wit∣ness. Mr. Atturney. Do not interrupt me Mr. Lilburn. L. C. Lilburn. I pray you then do not urge that which is not right nor true, but notoriously false; for if you persevere in't, I will interrupt you, and tell you of it to the purpose. Just. Jermin. Though you do recite many things; yet I must tel you, the Law of the Land saith, the Councel for the Common-Wealth must be heard. L. C. Lilburn. I beseech you then, let there be no more added to the restimony, then right and truth; for my life lyes upon it, and I must and will declare the business, and the falsness of it. Mr. Atturney. I would not do the tenth part of the hair of your head wrong; but being intrusted, I shall do my duty, and discharge my consonce in my place, which is fully and plainly to open that unto them, which in my con∣science I think is right and just. L. C. Lilburn. I do repeat it thus, as in my conscience, that he did say, when the Copy was first brought, Capt. Jones gave him the Copy, and Cap. Jones did agree with him for the printing of it, and Cap. Jones did read the Original to his Corrector; which Correctar amended the Prin∣ters faults, and that I had an uncorrected sheet away, and that his forms were taken before he had perfected that. Mr. Atturney. And Mr. Lilburn came the second time.
L. C. Lilburn. Will you spend all day in vain repetitions? you would not give one leave to breath, nor freely to speak truth, without interrup∣tion, although you were laying load upon me for 5 hours together: I pray sir, do not now go about to tire the Jury with tedious repetitions, nor to sophisticate o adulterate their understandings with your fal∣hoods and untruths. Just. Jerm. Mr. Lilburn, the law of the land is, that the Councel for the State must speak last. L. C. Lilburn. Sir, your law is according to the law of God, you said, and that law I am sure, it will havo no man to bear false witness; why doth Mr. Prideaux tell the Jury such falshoods, as he doth, and takes up six times more time to take away my life, then you or he will allow me to defend it. Mr. Atturney. For the Salva, that it was delivered in the Tower which is not in London, I hear not one witness to prove that. L. C. Lilburn. That is a disputable point in law, whether it be in Lon∣don or Middlesex. Mr. Atturney. And then, my Lord, as for the Agreement of the People, Mr. Lilburn sayes it was dated the first of May, 1649. and it was before the Act was made; that is dated May, 1649. and it is before the law was made in July, 1649. We do not question him for that; but when he comes to bring in those books in August last; then he does new publish that Agree∣ment of the People, he incites them to set it up, as their Center, Standard, and Banner. L. C. Lilburn. Let me not thus be abused; that book was never fixt upon me, I was never taxt to be the Author of it, or so much as the dis∣perser of one of them; what baseness is this in you Mr. Prideaux thus falsly to use me. L. Keeble. He does you no wrong, but all the fair play that can be; he doth fix that Agreement no otherwise upon you, then by your bookes it is. Mr. Atturney. I do acknowledge the Agreement of the people that you are charged with is dated the 1. of May, 1649 and that the evidence may allow this; as also, that that Agreement of the People that was then published, and which you in your books did own, was and is signed by Mr. Walwit, Mr. Prince, and Mr. Overton, your fellow-prisoners, as well as your self. L. C. Lilburn. There is no book yet proved mine, and if that Agree∣ment were mine, yet it is dated before both your Acts, and was in print before they had a being; and therefore in the eye of your own law, can
be no transgression; and you your selfe doth not so much as accuse me for publishing or dispersing one of them, since your Acts were publikely declared. Mr. Atturney. That which you owned and signed Mr. Lilburn. L. C. Lilburn. By your favour sir, I never owned or signed any book that is proved against me yet; and no book in the eye of the law can be accounted it mine, untill it be legally proved mine, or voluntarily con∣fessed to be mine by my sef. Mr. Atturney. My Lord, that is own'd to be so printed, when he must come and incite the people, and stir them up upon those particu∣lats therein contained, to insist with particulars, are the dissolving of the Parliament, the having of anew, and such other particulars therein con∣taind; and that this Agreement shall be the Center, the Banner, and the waved Standard, unto which they shall flock, and to send A∣gents into several Countries to put this into execution.Note that the Indictment chargeth no such thing up∣on Mr. Lilburn; neither was there any proof at all brought so much as to ac∣cuse him of any such thing. Now my Lords, for this book it is not doubted, but that there are two Wit∣nesses, that the Preparative to the Hue-and Cry was owned by Mr. Lilburn to be his own, the Errataes of the Printer onely excepted, and that the Lieutenant of the Tower likewise joyns in it. My Lords, I think there was not a clause read to you out of it, but what is ful & home to the purpose; and as for the Out-cry, the Printers test imony is compleat, and the legal funda∣mental liberties, is owned by him in his Impeachment of High Treason against Lieut. Gen. Cromwel, and his Son in law, Commissary Ireton; and he doth there also sufficiently own the Agreement of the first of May: And my Lords, I do not know there was any thing, that was effered here in that book, but was first proved in the Court: We do not offer any thing of errour that was past, to take Mr. Lilburn upon any speeches that fell from him unawares, although he hath sufficiently done it; but in much speaking, there wants not effence; it fals out here in this: Mr. Lilburn hath been very free in his writing, in his speaking, in his printing, and it now riseth in judgment against him, and the law must now give him his due, which you my Lords, are sole Judges of, and from whom the Jury, and the Prisoner both must receive, for all that which Mr. Lilburn hath said to the contrary. And the Jury answers to the matter of fact, and they are upon their Oaths sworn to do the things that are just and right. My Lords, I shall leave the Evidence to them, with this note or observation
upon it, that notwithstanding all Mr Lilburn hath storished and said; I will not say as he hath done, and seeke by glossing speeches or insinuations, to wind into the affections of the Jury, as he cunningly and smoothly hath done, by cal∣ling them his fellow Citizens and the like; you Gentlemen of the Jury, you are to answer now according to your own consciences, betwixt God and you; your oath is that you are not to respect, favour or affection, nor to meddle with him upon any respect, then in justice; and as it is already clearely witnessed and proved before you: My Lords, you have heard the severall charges he is ac∣cused upon, you have heard a great deal of foul matter and dirt, that is fit for nothing but to be cast upon the ground, and returnes to Mr Lilburn again; for truly wen he cast it upon the purest Marble or Brasse, it fals off again; God he thanked that it returnes to Mr Lilburn the right owner; the prisoner hath cast these accusations, and these blemishes upon others, but now they are upon the ground they will fall off, & doth retort and return upon his own face; he hath ta∣ken a great deal of pains to digge deep for mistakes, nay for notorious & gross calumniations, had he the ingenuity to remember the words of the Scripture, that the pit he hath digged for others, he is falne into himself, he would have some remorse of conscience in him; but all the mischiefs and all the evils that, can be thought upon, which he imagined to heap upon others, is now most justly falne upon himselfe: It is said of those slies, whose matter is cor∣ruption, they alwaies light upon sore places, upon galled backs, upon carrion, other birds when they slie upon faire meadowes, will not touch these: Certain∣ly the Parliament of England, the Army, all the Officers of it (whose fame both as Parliament and Army, all men know in an extraordinary manner) are now put in a ballance against Mr Lilburn; but for the Army and the Offi∣cers of it, no man can say but they have been faithfull and true to their trust, gallant and couragious, and extream succesfull, to the peace and happinesse of this Nation; and God is pleased at this instant to own them, and blesse them in a miraculous manner. L. Col. Lilb. And yet notwithstanding did not you help to vote them Traytors once? I am sure I was in a chamber in White-Hall last year, when their Commissioners (now Members of your House) put your name down in their black bill, for a Malignant; but it seems you have recanted your errors, and engaged to be a good acquiessing creature, or else you had not been here this day in the condition you are in; but for all their faithfulnesse &c. have they not rebelled twice against their Creatours, Lords and Ma∣sters? M. Att. Never Army hath done greater things, and yet they have not seaped Mr Lilburns tongue and pen, they have not scap'd it my Lords, but
he hath lashed them to the purpose: I shall be as good as my word, not to ag∣gravate the offences, for they are fo vile, they aggravate themselves enough, and therefore I leave it thus, the naked truth, and the worth of it, as the Books themselves have offered themselves; but I shall say thus much more, the honour of the Parliament of England, all the Magistracy therein, the honour of the Government; the honour and renown of the Army, that hath done such great and wonderfull things, is now at stake against Mr Lilburn; and there being a law published that did give warning; and Mr Lilburn had been tried for his life sooner, upon my knowledge, I say, Mr Lilburn had been sooner tried, & sooner condemned and executed, if the law had been sooner made & published; but as he saith right well, where there is no law, there is no transgressi∣on, and therefore there being a law against which he hath offended, he must smart for it. L. Col. Lilb. I am sure I was imprisoned most unjustly, with∣out any the least shadow or couller in law, many moneths before your Acts were made, and extreamly oppressed; and now you goe about to hang me as a Traytor, for at most, but crying out of your oppression: O unrighteous men, the Lord in mercy look upon me, and deliver me and every honest man from you, the vi∣lest of men. M. Att. And that law was published and proclaimed in this City, by means of which Mr Lilburn and others, had timely notice that they should not doe such things as are there forbidden; it also told them the penalties of it, which are those that are due for the highest high Treason; and yet notwithstanding you see with what boldnesse, with what confidence, in despight of all Law and Authority, these Books have been made and published by Mr Lilburn; and whereas he is pleased to say many times that many men have petitioned for him to the Parliament; he will not affirm to you, that ever he petitioned himselfe; but in all his discourse here, he cals them, the present men in power, the Gentlemen at Westminster; nay my Lord, he hath not so much as owned the power of the Court since he came before you; but hath often called you ci∣phers and the like. L. Col. Lilb. That's no Treason Sir, they intitle themselves the present power; and would you hang me for not giving them a better stile, then they themselves give to themselves? I think the stile of present power or present Government, is a very fit stile for them. Mr. Att. My Lord, I have told you long, it is the Jury that are Judges up∣on the fact; and to you I must appeal for law, if you doe believe, the evidence is plain and full against him, for which he stands indicted, and so Gon direct all your judgements, I have don.
L. Col. Lilb Sir, by your favour, I shall desire to addresse my self in one word to you, which is to defire that the Jury may read the first chapter of Queen Mary, in the Statute book, and the last clause of the Chapter of the thirteenth of Elizabeth, where they shall clearly see, especially in the Statute of Queen Mary, that they abhorred and detested the making of words or writing to be Treason, which is such a bondage and snare, that no man knows how to say or doe, or behave himselfe; as is excellently declared by the Statute of Hen. 4. v. 2. I have done Sir. Lo. Keeble. Gentlemen you of the Jury, you are sworn, you are men of conscience, gravity and understanding to tell you of the duties of your place, that have gone through it so often, is a vain thing, the sacrednesse of an Oath which a man must not transgresse in the least, not to save the world; you have gone so often through it, and understand it, that I need say no more, the charge you have heard, and the proofs; but for proofe single or double, or treble, as some of them doe amount unto a witnesse in this, yea, that doth double another mans witnesse; if I swear this thing, and another swear the same, a third the same, that is doubled upon all their testimonies: Mr Lilburn hath cited two Statutes of Ed. the sixt, to prove there must be two witnesses; but I must tell him, were there but one to each fact, it were enough in Law; for as for that which was cited of King Ed. the sixt, you have had it fully answered by a later Law of Queen Mary, which doth over-rule that, and also in acts that the common Law of England shall be the rule by which all Treasons shall be tried, which reacheth to this case too, that there need no more but one witnesse, and this is Law; and therefore Gentlemen of the Jury that must not stick with you; that which you have heard, to concern you of the truth of the matters is this, you are not bound affirmatively to have two witnesses, but in that one witnesse with the circumstances concurs, that is sufficient; that which should prevail with you, is to consider the strength of the accusation, which rests in the Books, and doth consist of three heads, which are laid down in the Books themselves, which doth in the first place, so firmly expresse, and so farre vili∣fie the Parliament and state as it is now established in England; the second, doth look unto the Counsels and incitations of him for the stirring up of tu∣mults, commotions and wars in this Nation; and the third, are the things cited in his Books to that end and purpose to divide the Army; and then the otherwill take the better effect: these are the three main charges, and these the Books that come from him, doe so plainly testifie; that the Books are pro∣ved to be his, you are fit Judges of; but it clearly appears by those his Bookes that these things were in his intention.
For that he sayes, it is mens that does make a man guilty, the mind, that is intended as it is exprest: Actus non faci reum nisi mens sit rea. Now that mind is rea, when there is faith published, but I tell you this, these Books being admitted true; I say that never man, that acted the highest of Treasons as he hath done, hath had so much liberty as he hath had, and as I said before, never man of his condition nor any condition in England, that was indicted in such a case, ever and a Tryall in such a Court, in such an Au∣ditory, such a presence as he has had. Lieut. Col. Lilb. The mores my sorrow. L. Keeb. The mores your sorrow indeed, you have good cause to be sorrowfull indeed, for this Act of yours thus declared, if your intentions had taken effect, your plot was the greatest, that ever England saw, for it struck at no less then, the subversion of this Common-wealth, of this State, to have laid, and put us all in bloud, your plot was such, that never such was seen in the world before, to proceed from a private man as you are, therefore it must needs be heavy up∣on your Conscience, therefore my Masters of the Jury, look into your Consci∣ence, & see what that saith unto you, which he stands so much upon the witnesses Testimony, are now plain and good in Law, in this cause they are multiplied, I do not know in one particular, that there is a Testimony single, but it is ag∣gravated with many Circumstances, therefore let not that trouble you, you are the proper Judges of the matter of Fact, being of the Countrey, and if you have fully apprehended, the dangerous things plotted in those boooks of Mr Lil∣burns, you will clearly find, that never was the like Treason hatcht in Eng∣land, and so in Gods name, as the Prisoner doth lead to your Consciences, so go and do. Lieut. Coll. Lilb. I desire your favour, that there may be a course taken, thot neither my Prosecutours, nor any belonging to them, may have accesse unto the Jury, till they have done. Just. Jermin. You Gentlemen of the Jury, I did expect it, it was expe∣cted by the Court, that some matter of Law, or some question of Law, might arise upon the evidence, which if it had, it was the duty of the Court, to have cleared it, but there does not appear, and therefore there is an end, as to the dispute of the Law. Fore-man. We are no Lawyers indeed my Lord. L. Col. Lilb. I have beg'd it, and you have promised it, that I should have Liberty to plead in Law, to the Illegallities of the In∣dictment, but you have denied me that legall right, yea, you will not permit my Sollicitour, to speak a few words for me, I dare un∣dertake, there was never such a Trial upon English ground as this hath been, where a man hath been denied, all the legall Rights of
an English man, as I have been; You Gentlemen of the Jury, who now are my sole Judges, I pray, you take notice of it. Just. Jermin. There was never any such kind of abuse offered to a Court as you have given, nor never was such Language used to any Court of Justice before, that I did hear of as you have given, and certainly, the Behaviour at the Barre, doth set forth what the humours and character of the man is, for in this case, if any such dangerous thing of Acting of Commotion or Mutiny in the Army or in the Nation should have followed, it had been too late then, to have thought of the remedy; therefore the wisdom of the Parliament hath de∣clared, that whosoever shall by writing, prenting, or by openly declaring, pu∣blish, that the present Government of England is usurp'd or tyrannicall, it is Treason, there is the Fact, upon which all the evidence does depend, and you are to judge, whether in all those books there be not by Mr Lilburne, a tray∣terous Fact committed, and how clearly this does appear unto you, withall Cir∣cumstances thereunto belonging, I leave you to judge, and how short his preten∣ded replyes are to be seen, or invalidate the strength of the witnesses, I also leave you to judge. I say, I might easily shew you, how short his prevented answers are of reall satisfaction, but I leave it to your Judgements. L. Col. Lilb. Sir, my answers are reall answers, not pretended ones, as you are pleased to call them. Just. Jermin. But in this businesse the evidences are sufficient to make a man guilty of Treason, for here was not simply a passionate Act, or inconside∣rate speech, but what he hath done, he hath done deliberately, and advisedly, which is sufficient to make him or any man, that so doth, guilty of Treason. All this that was published was in August, the Act is in July preceding. Now it is very true, and I will english it. For Mr Lilburne, Actus non facit reum nisi mens rea: The Act of a man does not make him guilty, unless his mind be guilty; But I pray, how shall any man know the guilt of a mans mind but by those polluting and poysonous words that comes out of his mouth? that's the mind, what I hear a man say, I may lawfully say, he thinks; and it is a rule in Law, that the outward Acts do shew forth inward intentions, that very rule I will not speak it in Latin, because I speak to one that does say, he does not understand Latin; otherwise I could speak more Latin; now here is the matter, whether or no upon the whole Evidence that you have heard, there does not appear sufficient matter to make this Prisoner guilty, not of rash but of advised and deliberate Treason, and as plainly of plotting and contriving to raise Mutiny and Sedition in the Army, thereby totally, to subvert and de∣stroy the present Government, and truly, I have not heard more of skill has been used, and more Attempts made then I think you have heard, and do re∣member, I doubt not, but as you will take care of the life of a man, that you
must not take away the life of an innocent, so you will be as carefull of your own Souls, and the publick Safety, and that's all that I desire, and I pray God to di∣rect you for the best. L. Col. Lilb. If you will not let me have Counsel, let my Solli∣citour speak matter of Law for me. Just. Jermin. Mr Attorny, you must take some care to suppresse this, he will not be answered by us, I pray demand Justice of the Court against him. L. Col. Lilb Well Sir! then I have done. [The Fore-man desires the Act for Treason, and one of the Jury desired to drink a Cup of Sacke, for they had sat long, and how much longer the debate of the business might last, he knew not, and therefore desired, that they might have amongst them a quart of Sacke to refresh them.] Just. Jermin. Gentlemen of the Iury, I know for my part in ordinary Iu∣ries that they have been permitted to drink before they went from the Barre, but in case of fellony or Treason; I never so much as heard it so, or so much as ask'd for, and therefore you cannot have it. But one of the Judges moved, they might have it. Iust Jermin. I may not give leave, to have my Conscience to erre. I dare not, and thus if the rest of the Iudges be of Opinion, you shall have a light if you please, the fellow that keeps you shall help you to it, but for Sacke you can have none, and therefore mithdraw about your work. L. Col. Lilb Sir, I understand the Officer that is to keep their door hath declared some thing of bitternesse of spirit against me, I desire therefore, he may have some indifferent man joyned with him to see, I have fair play, which was granted, and he sworne. The Jury go forth about 5 a clocke, the Court adjourned till 6 a clock, and the Court commands the Lieutenant of the Tower, and the Sheriffs to carry the Prisoner into the Irish Chamber, which they did. The Prisoner stayes a∣bout 3 quarters of an houre, and the Iury being come into the Court again, the Prisoner was sent for, and after the Cryer had caused silence, the Iuries names were called, viz. 1 Miles Petty 2 Stephen Iles 3 Abraham Smith 4 John King 5 Nicholas Murren 6 Thomas Dainty 7 Edmond Keysar 8 Edward Perkins 9 Ralph Packman 10 William Commens 11 Simon Werdon 12 Henry Tooley.
Clerk. Are you agreed of your verdict? Iury. Yes. Clerk. Who shall speak for you? Iury. Our Fore-man. Cryer. Iohn Lilburn, hold up thy hand, what say you, (look upon the Prisoner, is he guilty of the Treasons, charged upon him: or any of them, or not guilty? Fore-man. Not guilty of all of them. Clerk. Nor of all the Treason, or any of them that are layed to his charge? Fore-man. No, of all, nor of any one of them. Clerk. Did he fly for the same? Fore-man. No. Which No being pronounced with a loud voice, immediatly the whole multitude of People in the Hall, for joy of the Prisoners acquittall gave such a loud and unanimous shout, as is beleeved, was never heard in Yeeld-hall, which lasted for about halfe an hour without intermission: which made the Iudges for fear, turne pale, and hange down their heads; but the Prisoner stood silent at the Barre, rather more sad in his countenance then he was before, but silence being made. Clerk. Then hearken to your verdict, the Court hath heard it, you say, that Iohn Lilburne is not guilty of all the Treasons, laid unto his charge, nor of any one of them, and so say you all, and that he did not flie it. Iury. Yes, we do so. Clerk. Gentlemen of the grand Inquest, the Court doth discharge you. And you Gentlemen of life and death, the Court doth discharge you also. Lieutenant of the Tower, you are to carry your Prisoner to the Tower a∣gain, and Major General Skippon is to guard you, and all whom you shall desire, are to assist you. The Prisoner withdrawn, and the Court adjourned till Wed∣nesday following.
And extraordinary were the acclamations for the Priso∣ners deliverance, as the like hath not been seen in England, which acclamations, and loud reioycing expressions, went quite through the Streets, with him to the very gates of the Tower, and for joy the People caused that night abundance of Bonfires to be made all up and down the Streets; and yet for all his acquitall by the Law, his adversaries kept him after∣wards so long in Prison, that the People wondered and began to grumble, that hee was not descharged, and divers of his Friends went to the Judges, the Parliament, and Councell of State, by whose importunities, by the seasonable helpe of the Lord Gray of Groby, Col. Ludlow, Mr. Robinson, and Col. Martin, his Discharge was procured, a Copy of which thus followeth. Whereas Lieutenant Colonell John Lilburne, hath been Com∣mitted Prisoner to the Tower, upon Suspition of high Treason, in Order to his Tryall at Law, which Tryall hee hath received, and is therebyThe Jury justified in their Verdict by the Councell of State. aquitted. These are there∣fore to will and require you upon sight hereof to discharge and set at liberty the said Lieutenant Colonell John Lilburn, from his imprisonment, for which this shall bee your sufficient warrant. Given at the Councell of State, at White-Hall, this 8. day of November, 1649. Signed in the name and by the Order of the Councell of State appointed by Au∣thority of Parliament. JOHN BRADSHAW President. To the Lievtenant of the Tower of London, or to his Deputy.
An Appendix annexed by the Publisher. JUdicious Reader, I have been as upright, and indifferent in writing and transcribing of the foresaid discourse, as possibly I could, without malici∣ously, designedly, or wilfully, wronging either the Court, or Mr. Lilburne the Prisoner, as possibly a man could be, at least in my apprehension, and if any thing be amisse, the second Edition may peradventure mend it, if more ex∣acter Copies can be got: then I was necessitated to go by many more notable observations in the eye of Law and Reason, by way of marginall notes might have been made, then are, but time streightned me much, and feare of giving too much distaste, which might much prejudice the Printers and Book-sellers, in vending of the Copies, and also I do desire all honest men, that have any inte∣rest amongst the able and knowing Lawyers of this Nation, by what name of distinction soever they are distinguished, that they would improve their inte∣rest in them, to get them to write their observations and opinions in Law, of the legality, or illegality of every particular of the whole proceedings of the Judges with Mr. Lilburne, that so when he hath been ignorant of his right by Law, the next that comes after him, may be helpt by their information: there is come unto my hands in print, two Copies of two of his own Letters, sent a∣broad a little before his Tryall, as also a Petition of divers of his friends, and two Copies of his Wives, and his Brothers Petitions, which have divers rati∣onall remarkable and faire Propositions in them within their Orders, according to the day of their dates, I thought good here to insert for that end, that he and his friends abroad, may see the height of that malice that was intended towards him, and so the more be engaged to blesse God, for his miraculous deliverance from the jawes of death, and the hands of uel and mercilesse men, who by the rejecting of all his and his friends faire proffers, very much consirme me in the belief of that common report, that he was judged and condemned, before he was tryed or heard, and that the next morning after his Iuries saving of him, should have been the time for hanging, drawing, and quartering him as a Traytor; in order unto which my Belief tlls me, was Major Gen. Skippons fetching three fresh Companies of mercinary Souldiers, after the peoples first m, who were to guard him to Newgate (in case he had been condemned, which his Judges never doubted) the Jaylor whereof was sent for by Col. Whaley, &c. to come and take charge of the prisoner, and he accordingly came into the Court, and stood by the prisoner, being ready to receive him, in case the honest true∣hearted English Jury had brought him in guilty: But now to the things them∣selves, the first of which thus followeth:
The innocent Mans first Proffer. OR. The Proposition of Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, Prerogative-prisoner in the Tower of London, made unto his present Adversaries, and to the whole Nation of England, Octob. 20. 1649. For William Hevenningham Esq. of Hevenningham, in Suffolk, these present. Honoured Sir, HAving sometimes the opportunity to discourse with you, there appeared that in you unto me, that gives me in∣couragement to pick you out above all men that now remain sitting in your house, to write a few lines unto in as moderate a way, as my condition and provocati∣ons will permit me; I have now within very few days bin 7. moneths a prisoner, the legallity or illegallity of which I shall not now discourse, having already of late said so much in my own DefenceSee my Salva Liber∣tate sent to the Lieute∣nant of the Tower in Septemb. last, and my Discourse with Mr. Prideaux, intituled, Strength out of Weakness. grounded upon the Law, your own Declarations, and the Armies; which with other things (it seems) hath occasioned your house to pass a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, to try me, which whether such a special Commissi∣on, made by never so unquestionable Authority, be not contrary to the Petition of Right (which you have so often sworn, and particularly decla∣red to maintain inviolably) I shall for brevities
suke not now dispute; onely give me leave (and I hope without any of∣fence) to put you in mind of that excellent and printed Argument (in speeches and passages of Parliament, 1640, 1641. page 409, 410, 411, to 417.) of Mr. Hides, your quondam fellow-Member, before the Lords in Parliament, as the then Mouth of the Commons-house, in April, 1641. up∣on the special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, that was exercised in the five Northern Counties at Yorke, in which argument, besides many excel∣lent & observeable passages about the midst of it, he interrogates & saith; What hath the good Northern people done, that they onely must be disfranchi∣zed of all their priviledges by Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right; for to what purpose serve these Statutes, if they may be fined and imprisoned with∣out Law, according to the discretion of the said Commissioners (of speciall Oyer and Terminer) what have they done? that they and they alone, of all the People of this (then) happy Island, must be dis-inherited of their Birth∣right, of their Inheritance? I shall at present make no application for my selfe, onely I shall adde a few more of his lines toward the conclusion of his Argument, in page 415. which I hope cannot be offensive, being spoken by him that was so eminently authorized thereunto, where he saith to the Lords: Truly my Lords, these vexed worne people of the North, are not suitors to your Lordships, to regulate this Court (of Oyer and Terminer) or to reforme the Judges of it, but for extirpating these Judges, and utterly a∣bolishing this Court: They are of Catoes mind, who would not submit to Caesar for his life, saying, he would not be beholding to a Tyrant for injustice; for it was injustice in him to take upon him to save a mans life, over whom he had no power: which Court of speciall Oyer and Termi∣ner, was absolutely and totally abolished, by that excellent Act that abo∣lished the Star-Chamber, being the 17. of the late King. Anno. 1641. But Sir, if it shall be objected against me, that you are necessitated to take such an extraordinary course with me, as a speciall Commission of Oyer and Terminer is, because I will not own your Authority: yea, and if you so continue, to deale with me as you dealt with the late King. Un∣to which at present I answer, first, the Kings Case and mine is different; for he refused to answer to his Charge, principally out of this conside∣ration, because he had inherent in him an old received principle (as ap∣peares in his Answer to the Petition of Right, Anno. 1627. and in many of his Declarations made since the beginning of the late Warres, and by his Speeches at his death; by vertue of which, he judged himself as not lyable or capable of being judged by any power on earth, but onely by God alone, and as being in any sence not in the least for any action he
did (though in it selfe never so vile) subject to the punishing part of the Law. Now for my part, I do not in the least refuse to be tryed out of that consideration, for I acknowledg my self but a bare Englishman, subject to the Lawes thereof, as well in the penall, as in the directive part of them; unto the ordinary rule of which, with all my heart, I am willing to stoop, and I wish my adversaries would do the same, and then I believe the con∣troversie would not long last betwixt us. But seeing, betwixt my adversaries and my selfe, there is a difference a∣bout the legality and justnesse of power, which in some late printed pa∣pers and popular discourses, is made use of against me, as though I had a selfe conviction in mine own Conscience, of my own guilt, and therefore do ayoid, as much as in me lies, a Tryall. To take off which, and to lay my selfe and my adversaries nakedly, and fully open, to the judgement and censure of all ingenuous and rationall men in England, I do hereby under my Hand and Seale (for that end it may be shewed to your house) proffer you, beside what I lately proffered Mr. Prideaux, which is contained in the 18. and 19. pages of the substance of that discourse now in print, and here inclosed, that I am willing and ready, if they please, to chuse one of your own twelve Judges, that sit in one of the three publick Courts at Westminster, and all or any of my adver∣saries shall chuse which of the eleven remaining they please, and I will freely and voluntarily oblige and bind my selfe under my Hand and Seale, before Witnesses, to stand to their finall and absolute determination, (upon the principles of Law, for all differences betwixt them (or any of them) and me, although it reach to banishment, losse of estate, limb or life; so my adversaries will do the like. Provided, the hearing may be open, publique, and free, indifferently for both parties, and that the Judges give their judgment in writing un∣der their Hands, with their reasons for their so doing, to every point of their judgement. And provided, I may for my own benefit, use, or ad∣vantage, choose two friends freely to take, as well as their pens will ena∣ble them, all that passeth pro and con, without danger to their persons, li∣berties or estates; or without hazard of having their papers (by force or Authority) taken from them, and this I think is as faire as any rationall man under Heaven can desire, and which I cannot believe, you can judge to the contrary; especially considering it is so consonant, to that righte∣ous rule of the Sonne of God, (Jesus Christ) contained in the Scripture (the volume of truth) viz. to do as you would be done to, which is the summe of both the Law and Gospel, and of all righteousness amongst men.
And I hope this is so fair, that those that most thirst after my bloud, cannot, nor will not, refuse it; but to make it more fair, if they judg it inconvenient, to fix upon two of your own Judges (who in inte∣rest are positively engaged against me) I will be content they shall chuse one Schollar, commonly called a Clergy-man, and I will chuse another; or a Citizen, or a Country-man, (which they please) and I will do the like. So with my humble service presented to you, craving pardon for my boldness in troubling you, with whom I have had so little face to face ac∣quaintance, earnestly intreating your utmost interest, speedily in acquain∣ting your house herewith, in the publikest manner you can: I commit you to the Lord my God, my Protector and Preserver, and rest, Yours (desirous particularly to be engaged yours to serve you,) JOHN LILBURN. From my captivity, and bodily bondage, in the Tower of London, Octob. 20. 1649. The Postscript, to the Reader. SInce I sent the fore-going Epistle, I understand that Wednesday next being the 24. of Octob. 1649. is positively resolved by my Adversa∣ries, to be the day of my tryall; and therefore I cannot chuse but publish this in Print; and because a late Pamphlet-scribler, and pretended Vin∣dicator of Sir Arthur Haslerig, said to be Mr. Thomas May, the Councel of States Pensioner, renders me in his late false and lying book to be an Atheist, a denyer of God and the Scripture, and given up to all licentiousness, and an absolute Confederate with Prince Charles, to set up his absolute Will and Prerogative in this Nation; And therefore not knowing whether my life will be mine so long, till I am able to publish a vindication at large, against his base calumniations, I shall desire you to take this at present, and if I dye before more come, let the constant Series of my Actions and Writings be my future Testa∣tors, That if to believe constantly all that is contained in the Law and the Go∣spel, and to have confident hope of the resurrection of the dead, and the life to
come, and particularly of my own, and to live conscienciously in all good con∣science, as in the sight of that God that searcheth and knoweth the hearts of all the Sons of Men, both before God and Men, be sufficient cause to be judged an Atheist, then I am one; and if to oppose with all my might and strength all in∣terests whatsoever that would set up a single man, or more, to rule and govern by Will and Pleasure, without bounds, limits, check or controul, be sufficient cause to be judged a Cavalier, and for Prince Charles, then must I ingeniously coufess, I am such a Cavalier, and I hope so to dye; for which I bless God, I am ready and fitted, let it be by what butcherly hands it will. JOHN LILBURN. The second thing in order, is his brothes, and his wifes Petition; the Copy of which thus followeth: To the right honourable the supream Authority of this Nation, the Commons of England, in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of Col. Robert Lilburn, and Eliz. Lilburn, in the behalf of Lieu. Col. John Lilburn, prisoner in the Tower of LONDON. Sheweth. THat although Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, your Petitioners brother and husband, by his late actings hath incur'd the displeasure of this hono∣rable house; yet since God hath so ordered humane affairs, that 'tis inci∣dent to his people, though of reall integrity, and of hearty desires of good to the Nation, to differ about the means, times, and seasons requisite, for the accomplishing thereof, we hope your wisdomes will put the most favourable interpretations to such differences, and not to attribute them to any evill intention or design, but an over-earnest longing for such a perfect settlement of this Common-wealth, which time onely, and further opportunity can afford us. We humbly conceive, he hath formerly given sufficient proof of his faith and fidelity to his Country, by his former sufferings, both before this Parliament when he bore testimony against Regal and Episcopal tyranny, and since also, in the frequent exposing his life to the utmost of dangers in your service; in all which, he did manifest, that the temptations of this world were not able to shake his integrity, and that for the enjoyment of any outward emoluments, he could not forsake the dictates of his own conscience; and though we could heartily wish he had forborn those
things, which have drawn upon him his late sufferings, yet are we well assured, and that upon the neerest and strictest scrutiny we can make into his heart, that no indirect ends, or worldly allurements, have engaged him therein; a manifest argument whereof, we humbly conceive to be, for that neither the urgency of his necessities, which have been very great, and which are usually very perswasive to men not guided by conscience; not yet the importunity of dear friends, which have not been wanting, and yet not any whit restrained there-from; and therefore we hope this honourable house will distinguish betwixt weakness and design, and think of some way of moderation towards such, as instigation of conscience, and errour of judgment, have brought into your displeasure. And though the obligation of our particular relations, cannot but move us to this address on his behalf; yet we humbly conceive, it will not only occasion much sadness to many of your friends, but much more joy to the common enemy to see his ruine: Yet considering his principles are a burthen to this State, We do therefore most humbly present our assurance and confidence of his purpose, to withdraw himself into some forraign Country, desiring he may have his money, which is necessary to his and his Families subsistance in their transplantation, and convenient time to prepare himself to go, and he will wholly betake himself to his particular duty and Calling, and that those of his judgment who are free to go along with him, & have arrears due to them from the Parliament, may have their arrears paid unto them, and be permitted accordingly to transplant themselves, humbly im∣ploring this honourable house to take the premises into speedy and seri∣ous consideration, and laying all his former merits, faithfull services, per∣secutions, stripes, bonds and imprisonmets, with hazard of life, and loss of estate, in opposition to Regal and Episcopal tyranny in ballance to his late miscarriages, to do therein (out of your wonted mercy and clemency) as may be most for the glory of God, frustrating the longing desires of the com∣mon enemy to see his ruine, rejoycing and satisfying the Spirits of many of your friends; and for answering the humble and most earnest request of your Petitioners, whereby they shall be for ever engaged This was delivered the 22. of Octob. 1649. but was altogether fruitless; the next thing in order thus fol∣loweth. To pray, &c. Robert Lilburn, Eliz. Lilburn.
The innocent Mans second Proffer, Made unto his present Adversaries, Octob. 22, 1649. and communicated un∣to them, by his loving Brother Col. Robert Lilburn. BROTHER, IN answer to your late Letter, I can make no other Proposition, besides what is in my Letter to Mr. Hevenningham of the 20 present, then this; That seeing my self, and the principles I profess, are a burthen to the men in present power, therefore (for peace and quietness sake only) I will engage (enjoying my money and my immediate liberty) that I will within 6 moneths time trans∣plant my self into some part of the West-Indies; provided, that all those that are free and willing to go along with me of what quality soever, may have free liberty at their pleasure to go, and provided, seeing many of those I know wil∣ling to undertake the Journey are made very poor by reason of their sufferings in the present distractions, may have all such monies justly paid unto them, as is owing them, either upon arrears, for faithful service already done, or for mo∣nies lent to the Publique, that so they may be the better inabled for their Jour∣ney, they engaged thereupon to go; and provided, that other that are willing to go, and are so very poor, that they cannot transplant themselves, may have from the Publique some reasonable allowance for that end, this being the Land of their Nativity, where by the Law of Nature, they may challeng a subsist∣ance; and therefore it is but just, seeing their company and principles are a burthen and trouble to the men in present power, that they should make their willingness (for peace sake) able to transport themselves inte a Desart, where, with industrie, and the blessing of God thereupon, they may expect a lively hood, and this, with the engagement of the present Power, for a peaceable protection while we stay here in England, and for their assistance for a reason∣able Convoy in some part of our Journey, I will engage in security, I will not act against their Power, during my stay in England, directly or indirectly; but for me to engage singly to go alone, seeing I know no Plantation already plant∣ed; but I would sooner chuse, to be cut in pieces in England, then engage to go to it: therefore particularly I shall not engage, without the tearms abovesaid, come life, ome death, to which I shall stand: Witness my hand, Tower, Octob. 22. 1649. JOHN LILBURN. This was sent to Col. Rob. Lilburn, who shewed it to several Parlimen, but all in vain, for nothing would serve their turn but his bloud. The next in order, is that notable Petition of his Whalebone friends, already in Print; the Copy of which, for its worth, I judge fit here to insert, which thus followeth.
To the Commons of England, Assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of the wel-affected, in and about the City of Lon∣don, Westminster, and parts adjacent; Presenters, and Approvers of the late Petition of the 11. of September, &c. SHEWETH, THat as the Wisdom and Goodnesse of God is the best example to all Au∣thorities in the World; so those in Authority can in nothing more resemble God, then in their readinesse to heare and receive the complaints and Petiti∣ons of any that apply themselves unto them: And who in cases of dissatis∣faction willingly condescend to a reasoning out of all doubts and differences, for so his goodnesse daigned to commune with his Servant Abraham, and even to a sinfull and gainsaying People he saith, come let us reason together. And surely, if ever here were need of such a goodnesse, now is the time, when not onely complaints and distractions abound in all places, but multitudes of cordinall friends to the Parl. are exceedingly grieved and sadned in their spi∣rits, as not seeing the Common-wealth in a condition of freedom, or exemption from grievances and burthens (in any measure) answerable to the many pro∣mises of the Parl. to the affections of those that have assisted them, or to the en∣deavours, engagements, intentions, and desires of the Army. Every one believing, That in a very short time after the expulsion of the greater number of the Members of this honourable House (as betrayers of their trust) A new Representative should immediatly have been ordered, according to that Moddell of an Agreement of the People, tendered by the Councel of the Army, or in some other way: And that because that honourable Councel in their Declaration of December last, Declared, That they should not looke on the remaining part as a former standing power to be continued; but in order unto, and untill the introducing of a more full and formall Pow∣er in a just Representative to be speedily endeavoured, by an Agreement of the People. And we were the more confident hereof, because they had formerly declared also, That where the Supream Authority was fixt in the same Persons du∣ring their own pleasure, it rendered that Government no better then a Tyranny, and the People subject thereunto, no better then Vassals: That by frequent Elections men come to taste of subjection as well as Rue (and are thereby oblieged for their own sakes to be tender of the good of the People) so that considering those expressions, and those extraordinary things done (de∣claredly) for a speedy new Elected Parliament; how it should come not onely to be wholly deferred, but to be matter of blame for us, or any of our friends earnestly to desire what is so evidently just and necessary in it selfe, and so es∣sential to the liberties of the Nation, perplexeth us above measure; and we in∣treat some satisfaction therein.
And truly when you had voted the People under God to be the originall of all just Power, and the chosen Representatives of the People, the Supream Au∣thority, we conceived that you did it to convey those Righteous Principles (which we and our friends long laboured for) to the next full and formal Re∣presentative, and not that you intended te have exercised the supream Law∣making Power. Much lesse, that such ensnaring Lawes should ever have issued from a house of Commons, so often and so exceedingly purged, (intentionally by the Army) for the freedom of the Common-wealth, as is your Act against Treason, where∣in contrary to the course of former Parliaments, and to Magna Charta, so ma∣ny things are made Treason, that it is almost impossible for any to discourse with any affection for performance of promises and Engagements, or for the liber∣ties of the Nation, but he is in danger of his life, if Judges and Juries should take it for good Law, which God forbid. Also your Act for continuance and receipt of Excise (which every one hoped upon the prevailing of the Army, would have had a finall end) to Trade more oppressive then all the Pattents, Projects, and Shipmoney put together. Also your Act for continuance and strict receipt of Customs was exceeding crosse to expectation, that and the other for Excise, being esteemed most de∣structive to all kind of Commerce, Shipping and Navigation, and are so charge∣able in the Receipt, as that if what is disbursed to Offices and Collectors were raysed in an ordinary way of Subsidies, it would go very farre towards the publique charge, which it was hoped you would have seriously laid to heart, and have prepared a way to have eased the Nation of both, and to have raised all publique moneys by way of Subsidies. It was hoped also, That you would have done something towards easing the People of the long complained burthen of Tythes, rather then to have en∣forced the same upon treble dammages. It was also expected upon the prevailing of the Army, and the reducement of this honourable House, That the Printing-Presses should have been fully o∣pened and set at free liberty, for the clear Information of the People, the stop∣ping of them having been complained of as a great oppression in the Bishops times, and in the time of the late unpurged Parl. rather then such an Act a∣gainst all unlicensed Printing, Writing or Publishing, as for strictnesse and se∣verity was never before seene in England, and is extreamly dissatisfactory to most People. And truly when you had declared so highly & resolvedly for the maintenance of the Law of the Land, as to the defence of every mans Liberty and Property according to that excellent Law of the Petition of Right, you may soone con∣ceive what heart-breaking & torment of spirit was occasioned by, your seizing in an hostile manner such constant cordial Promoters of those excellent Max∣imes forementioned, by the commitment of them in an extrajudicial manner to
an Arbitrary Prison, where they have been long time Prisoners, and most of that time close prisoners, their Chambers and Pockets search'd more then once, to find matter against them (things altogether unparliamentary) yea, denied a legal Tryal, no legal Crime being laid to their Charge, nor Accuser or Witnesse ever seene by them face to face, as Law requires; and this to the Ruine of themselves and Families, as to temporall subsistance: We professe we are not able to express the grief and amazement that seized on us thereupon, and which is daily renewed upon us, in that, now after extream provocations, you seeme Resolved to take away the life of our dear friend Mr. Lilburn, and others, not by any ordinary way of Trial at the usuall Assizes, but by a speciall Commission of Oyer and Terminer, the Judges being composed of such as whose interest he hath long opposed; a way much complained of in the corrupt times before this Parliament, and which we hoped we should have heard no more of in this Nation And although this is too too lamentable, yet would this were all; but if we understand the Petition of Right truly, the putting of Souldiers to death, or to other reproachful and painful punishments, by Martial-Law, in time of Peace, is not agreeable thereunto, and if we are deceived therein, the express words of that Law have deceived us. But that such as have ventured their lives for you, and thought nothing too deere to be spent in defence of a just Parliamentary-Authority, should yet be imprisoned (as some such there are) in remote Castles, and used more barba∣rously then Mr. Burton, Mr. Prinne, and Dr. Bastwick, in the Bishops time, and how soone intended to be proceeded against, by special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, (we cannot but feare:) This makes our very hearts to bleed, and our Bowels to earne within us; insomuch as if no Reason, Conscience, feare of God, or sence of Religion will put a speedy stop to these proceedings, but our most deere Friends (because ever faithful to their Countrey) must thus be ru∣ined and slaughtered, under pretence of Tryalls; we shall not desire to breath longer in this World, as seeing nothing but misery and slavery like to follow af∣ter them. What a sad thing, we beseech you is it, that it should be thus in this Nation, in the first year of Englands liberty (as you would have it esteemed) which in our apprehension exceeds in misery and thraldome, the worst of Englands bondage. For besides what hath been mentioned, what is more frequent then to txa∣mine men against themselves, to imprison men by Votes of Committees, to seize upon mens persons by Pursuivants & Messengers, to sweare men against them∣selves; Taxes and Impositions never so high, and Souldiers (not civill Officers) set to gather them, to the terror of the people; and upon the least deniall, either violence or an Imprisonment certainly ensueth: Lawyers in effect are said to
rule all, the Lawes are trod under foot by them, and wrested to what sence they please, and Law suites extended beyond all reason, in respect of time and charge, then (as is verily supposed) having mdded the clear intentions of this House, and perverted the just intentions of the Army, poor impotent Pri∣soners for debt, and (mall offences abound, and starve in prisons, through po∣verty & the cruelty of Lawyers and Goalers, and the poor abroad even perish for want of imployment, and through the excessive price of foode, and few or none lay these things to heart: And if any do, and become passionately af∣fected there with, and but speak their mindes freely thereof, or (as hath been usual and commendable) endeavour to get People together in meetings, and propose Petitions for redresse, the Puritans were never more reproached in the Bishops times, nor the Independents and Anabaptists in the late de∣fectiou of Parl. then now all such are, with more odious Titles (or the same in a more odious forme, as Atheists, Levellers, Libertines, Introducers of Monarchy, Anarchy, and Confusion; which are poysoned Arrowes shot prin∣cipally at us and our Friends, though must unjustly, none hating or abhorring either the Principles or the Practice more then we or our Relations. To our understandings, this is truly our mise rable condition, and the sad condition of the Common-wealth, and which is the more grievous, (because in a time when upon promises made in the presence of God and with appeales to his mst righteous judgments, we justly expected the cleaest and largest Freedoms, with even a totall redresse of all grievances, and which is no small addition to our sorrow, that we are wounded thus sorely, by the hands whence we expected our most perfect Cure. So that what to say or do, either to help our selves or our Friends that are both in misery and danger, and the Common-wealth that lyeth in no small degree of thraldom, we are exceedingly to seeke, and therefore as in fit con∣dition for his help only, that is a present help in time of trouble, and who ma∣keth mans extremity his oppertunity, we most humbly and ardently beseech his divine goodnesse to vouchsafe you a true Christian like Spirit of Conde∣scention, whereby you may be inclined to appoint some impartial persons to in∣forme our understandings aright, of many things here complained of, that if we be, we may appear to have been mistaken, professing from our Consciences, that as yet we are confirmed in these our apprehensions of things, not onely from our own Reasons, but from the Declarations, Promises, and Engage∣ments of Parliaments; and we trust, this way of reasoning out of differences will appear more like unto the wayes of God, then by force or threats to stop our mouthes, or suppresse our understandings. Also that he will both test fie and moll fie your hearts, that you may in∣stantly look back from whence you are fallen, To the just ends, for which the Army reserved you together, and then not despairing, but the hand that
may heale (it being Gods way) we would beseech you to render up unto the People their long detained right of new Elections, and a new elected Parl. To fulfill your promises concerning Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, to unbind every burthen, and to break every yoake; to give bread to the hungry, when you see the naked to cover him; and not to hide your selves from those of your own flesh (your present humble Petitioners) though never so much scandalized and reproached: To deliver the Captive and set the op∣pressed free, and if for a testimony of your reall intentions herein you shall re∣lease unto us ours and the Nations true Friends, though pointed unto death or continuance in bonds, we shall rejoyce above measure at so blessed an alterati∣on, and then shall your light break forth as the morning; you shall finish your Course with joy, all we have shall be ever ready to preserve you; and we shall ever pray that the Lord our God may be your exceeding great reward. REader. This foregoing Petition was (Octob. 23. 1649.) offered un∣to the House, with most earnest and importunate solicitation to have it received, but such a face of denial and opposition appeared amongst them, that neither the Serjeant at Armes, nor any Member would so much as touch it, telling the Petitioners that the House would not receive any Petition in L. C. Lilburnes behalf, Notwithstanding they have Declared, That it is the Right of the People of England to petition, and their duty to receive Petitions, though against Lawes established, part book declar. pag. 720. The fift and last of which in order is his Brothers single Petiti∣on, the Copy of which thus followeth. To the Right Honourable, the supream Authority of this Nation, the Commons of England, in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of Col. Robert Lilburn. Humbly sheweth, THat although of late presenting an humble Petition to this Honorable House, in my own and my Sisters name, in behalf of my dear brother, I had not the happiness to have the same considered; yet so strong are my affections towards him, not onely as a brother, but as confident of his integrity, and that he hath been very serviceable formerly in his Generation, though possibly accompanied with humane fraties, but also exceedingly afflicted with the long continuall sufferings of his faithful, dear, and now almost distracted wife. Hereupon, and for that it grieves me above measure, that he whom all former powers sought to destroy for his affection to the present members of this honorable house (which powers you have abolished) and out of whose hands he (as it were) miraculously escaped, should come to receive his sad doom under your Authority, when as I verily believe, that upon good grounded assurance, that could I but obtain so much favour of this honourable house, as to suspend, all proceedings a∣gainst him for some reasonable time, I should be able to convince him of the evill, of a∣ny thing that is really evill of it self, and whereby possibly upon a mistaken conscience, he may unwillingly have incur'd your displeasure: or if I should fail thereof, yet then that I should prevail with him to betake himself to some foraign habitation, and whilesthe shall remain under your government, or else-where, for my engagement
sake, not in the least measure to disturb you in any your proceedings. And therefore as an humble Servat and faithful Souldier of yours, for whose safety and preservati∣on, I have often readily adventured my life, I have taken the boldness again to presume upon your serious affairs, and most humbly and earnestly to intreat, as the onely fa∣vour, that ever you intend towards me, that you would be pleased to vouchsafe upon this my humble suit, that my said dear brothers tryal, may for some reasonable time be yet suspended. In which time, I do hereby become bound unto this honourable house, upon all the tyes and bonds of Christianity and sincerity, to prevail with him, to do what shall be in one respect or other to the full content, satisfaction and honour of this honourable house, and cannot but be full of hope, that you will yet incline unto, and grant this my humble Petition, whereby I shall ever be more strongly obliged, to Pray for your eternal peace and prosperity, ROBERT LILBURN. This was delivered the 23. of Octob. 1649. Vpon the delivery of all which, Mrs. Lilburn perceiving that nothing would serve their turn, but absolutely her husbands life; and being extreamly abused by the reviles and threats of several of the me ubers, but especially old Mr. Valentine, that used her most unworthily and basely; in a distemperd and half-distracted condition, she came home to the Tower to her husband, and with much opportunity in the bitterness of her spirit, besought her husband to stoop as low as possibly he could for the safety of his life: in the preservation of which, hes was lockt up, who upon her bitter mourning and crying, and the beholding the anguish of spirit of her that had been so faithful and hazardous a yoak-fellow to him in his above 7 years sorrow, wrung from him with much ado the copy of these lines following. To the Honourable Wil. Lenthal Esq Speaker to the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses assembled in Parliament, to be communicated to the House. Honoured Sir, AS a man being somwhat at present confounded in my self, through a strong confi∣dence of my own innocency (having sustered above measure, but intentionally done injury unto none) and prest under with the importunity of friends, especially with the heart-breaking sighs of my dear but even half-distracted wife, as when my late children lay in a most disconsolate condition (which ended their lives) your house did me the favour to grant me my liberty to visite them, which I think was the saving of her life: So now greater importunities lying upon me from divers, and her that is dea∣er to me then many lives, I as earnestly intreat you to move your house in the most effectual manner you can, that my tryal (so suddenly intended) may for some reasona∣ble time be suspended, that so I may have time to hear and consider what many of them say they have to offer by way of reason and argument, to persvvade me to what at present my conscience is not convinced of. And I should likewise be desirous, if your house should judge convenient, that some competent number of Gentlemen of your house might be permitted to debate with me those particulars, wherein I have appeared most to differ with other mens judgments: whereby possibly rational argu∣ments may be so strongly urged, as peradventure may give such satisfaction as may tend to the reconciling many differences and distractions: upon the knowledg of the acceptance of which during all that time of suspension of Tryal, I do hereby faithfully promise, not in the least to disturb those that shall grant me this favour, being not so apt to make disturbance, as is conceived: and herein you will exceedingly obliege From the Tower of London, this 24. of Octob. 1649. Sir, Yours to serve you, JOHN LILBURN.
Which yet availed nothing at all, but added to her sorrow; which being very great, he got his friends to intice her into the City, under pretence to go look af∣ter his Jury, and there to keep her, till his intended bitter portion were over; but although many have said, he used foul play towards his Jury, which was of his Adversaries own calling, viz. Col. or Sheriff Wilson, who is both a member of the House, and also of the Councel of State, & who had not a dram of affection or compassion towards him in the least, in the pannelling either of his Juries, whose affection to his life may easily be discerned, by his pannelling the grand Inquest, a copie of whose names by an extraordinarie strange providence, is within these few hours come to my hands, after all the ordinary ways were de∣spaired of, as being impregnable by the forceable Engines of Gold or Silver; which Inquest are most of them, if not all, engaged persons, the names of which as they are come to my hands, thus followes. 1. Robert Manwayring. 2. Alexand. Bormington. 3. Simon Greenhil. 4. Thomas Landal. 5. John Stone. 6. John Allen. 7. Anthony Webster. 8. Francis Woolly. 9. John Hinde. 10. Rob. Kendish. 11. Rich. Young. 12. John Brett. 13. Robert Swete. 14. Jesper Clayton 15. Francis Ashhurst. 16. Philip Meade. 17. Thomas Smith. 18. Matthew White. 19. William Rowel. 20. Samuel Ravenscraft. 21. Rich. Gibbs, bro to Al. Gibbs. A little time vvill produce very notable things about some of  principall engaged men of the aforesaid grand inquest, that may be very fit for publique view, as also a∣bout Mr. Prideaux, the Atturney Generalls Carriage towards them in the Businesse, vvhich may prove good soundations for able and fthfull Lawyers,  draw their re∣sults in Law against them, as the foundatione of good and sound actions in Lavy for Mr. Lilburn to render good dammages against them for their illega unjust malicious and blood-thirsty prosecuting him for his life. And also there is more then bare hopes of the publishing an exact Copy of the Lord Kebles Charge to the grand inquest, vvhich I understand just now is compleat in Short hand, and hath as many remarkable things in it, as is in either of the two dayes Passages that followed it, all vvhich rightly considered, might make ingenuous men blush by force to take from, and by force et to detain Mr. Lilburnes Estate from him, as he avowedly yet saith, Sir Arthur Hazdeg hath done and yet doth, considering so much injustice and malice hath been used towards him as hath been done: the de∣tention of which can be upon no other grounds, being his all; but to necessitate the honest man again to cry out of his oppressions, by meanes of which Sir Arthur, &c. might either by a Councell of VVar, or a pretended leislative ill of attainder, take away his life without any more Tryall, by a sury, and so accomplish that which many letters out of the North declares, was Sir Arthurs avovved and declared end o his last jurney from Nevvstly, and if this vvere not still the design against Mr. Lilburn, vvithout doubt Sir Arthur vvould not suffer a day to psse over his head before he had put Mr Lilburn in the full possession of his money, as by Lavv and equity he ought to do vvithout any more outcries from him, or any of his friends for him. Nec lex est instior ulla, Quam nens artificem arte perire sua. Tis just he should be tangled in the snare, Which for another man he did prepare, November, 1649. FINIS.
