W391A 669.f.11[78] 99871626 162730
A VVord in the KINGS Eare. REPRESENTED To His MAJESTIE to be taken into Consideration, with the Propositions of both KINGDOMES for PEACE. Dread Soveraigne, GIve leave, great King, unto your Subject here Now, to approach your Royall presence neere, To begge your heart unto your Parliaments. To end your troubles, and their discontents. Lustre Your Crowne, and doe three Kingdomes good: And them recover from a Gulph of blood. Your Subjects long, from their darke Cells, to see The glittering beames of your bright Majestie: In splendor shine, of Brittaine Great the King. Great Charles in Honour through the World to ring The glory admired every where will be, When King and Kingdomes shall in one agree. Your Royall selfe, first placed in the front, Shining to us, like Moses in the Mount, Antiquity of greatnesse, by discent Of Kingly race, fixt in the government, Of England, Scotland, Ireland Soveraigne Lord. What Nation dare attempt to breake this Cord? A monument of glory may you then On your right hand, with comfort reare agen; The Royall Progeny of valient dust; Whose Fathers Acts no time can ever rust: Your Royall Consort, and our noble Queene, That from your bed, so long hath absent been. And on the other side, wee shall (with joy) Have future hopes, in your posterity; Those O live branches which from you proceed: To rule our Children, that shall us succeede: Long may the Crowne with you and yours remaine. Even till the time that Shilo come againe. Your Luster in the Houses then will shine, As if the heavenly powers did all combine To make you great, beset with lights about Both England, Scotland, Ireland, (eke) throughout. All Courts and Officers will be content, To borrow splender from your Government. Vnto the Parliament, great Charles unite. There is the Royall Throne, your Chaire of right. There is the true state of Nobility, Prowesse figur'd with magnanimity: By long contracted honour in their blood, Fitted for councell for a Princes good. From all parts of the Kingdome, there by summons, Sit at your Royall feete, the House of Commons. Englands great body, representative, Contracted so, to keepe the head alive: Compel'd to contribute, with heart and hand, Our Soveraigne, to preserve, and save the Land. Those Messages of grace which you have sent, To both your Houses of the Parliament. The Kingdomes sad distempers to compose: Brought to your Royall hand, what they propose: To begge your Majesties assent, O then! Let them returne with Peace and joy agen. Looke on our Army (prostrate at your feete,) With brave deportment, Englands King to greete: Your Subjects liberties safe to defend, They for the Land, their dearest blood will spend. To make you glorious in all Your Stations, Your kingdomes terrible to other Nations. May King and Parliament, and Army eke, Joyne hearts in one triangle as they speak, Treat, write, and Act, with great alacrity, May all their hearts be wrapt into an extasie: That those retirements which were made by spight, May re-inforcements be, now to unite. May every one endeavour in his place By some sweet violence, (in such a Case.) Each other to surprise, by Acts of love; So firmly settled that no blast can move, Devide, or separate your Throne from you, Or you from us: so prayes. VALKRUE FINIS. Printed in the YEARE, ·MDCXL VII.
