G1616 R177630 52528824 178801
THE MYSTERY OF FAITH OPENED UP. Or some SERMONS concerning Fa two whereof were not formerly printed. Wherein the Nature, Excellency, and Use∣fulness of that noble Grace is much clea∣red, and the practice thereof most powerfully pressed. Whereunto are added three other Sermons, two concerning the Great-Salvation, one of these not formerly printed, and a third concerning Death. By that pious and worthy Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. Andrew Gray, late Minister of the Gospel in GLASGOW. All these Sermons being now carefully revised and much corrected. John 3.18. He that believeth not, is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. Glasgow, Printed by ROBERT SA, and are to be sold at his shop,
CHRISTIAN READER. AMongst many weighty and soul pier∣cing sentences that ye will find in these following Sermons, this is one; That the professors of this age, whether they go to Heaven or Hell, they will be the greatest debtors that shal be in either place: the one to the free grace of God, and the other to his Justice. And certainly, if we speak of these in this time, whose blessed lot it shal be to inherit the Kingdom, they cannot but acknowledge themselves indebted to his love, above all that have gone before them, for washing them from such ugly pollutions, as this generation hath been defiled with; for bringing thē through such great tribulations, pre∣serving them in the midst of so great tentations, and dangerous snares, and have encompassed them; yea, and still keeping in the light before them, notwith∣standing of so many blasts (if we may so speak) from all the four winds of Hell to blow it out. And on the other hand, if we shal speak of these who in this gene∣ration shal perish, assuredly their debt unto Divine Justice must be exceeding great, above all who are gone down to the pit before them; because the rod of
their mercies will be found to have been many Cubits longer, and many Cubits broader, then theirs who li∣ved in the preceeding ages, and the great things that the Lord hath wrought in our days, have born a grea∣ter testimony against the wickedness, hardness, and atheism of this time, then of many former. But above all, the great measure of Gospel light that he hath no less plentifully offered then wonderfully preserved to this generation, beyond all our Ancestors, hath un∣doubtedly made the sin of these who shal utterly reject their own mercy so out of measure sinful; and their unbelief so exceedingly inexcusable, that their guilt must needs justifie Corazin and Bethsaida, or So∣dom and Gomorrah, in that day when every man shal give account of himself to God. And amongst the many preaching-witnesses, that (alace! we are afraid) shal compear in that day against many yet li∣ving in their pleasures, and dead while they live; This now glorified Author cannot but be one, whose testimony must be very condemning, especially to the vain, loose, negligent, and time wasting youth in this age: For when he was first drawn forth to the Mini∣stry, he was but a youth indeed, scarce twenty years compleat; for within that age, that by the Constitu∣tions of this Church (except in case of more than com∣mon abilities, which indeed he had) is required for entring in that great and holy Calling: And for the space of two years after (which was all the time that the Church enjoyed his labour) he was helped to press the truths and threatnings of God so home upon the consciences of his hearers, that as it was observed
of him; by one of his most learned and pious Collea∣gus, Master Durham, who is now in glory with him, he did many times cause the hair of their head to stand up: The Lord not only hereby verifying his Word, that he can take the weak things of the World to confound the strong; and out of the mouths of babes can perfect his own praise: but designing also (as would seem of purpose) to send a boy out of the school for a reprover of the sluggishness of his people, that thereby the aged might be the more ashamed, and the younger more afraid. Neither do we think that this was all; but truly when we consider what mea∣sure of graces, gifts, and experiences the Lord did be∣stow upon so young a person: and then with what hu∣mility, self-denial, gravity, prudence, diligence, au∣thority and moderation, he was helped to manage these Talents, during that short time of his Ministry. It may be justly conceived that the Lord brought him forth to be a great conviction, even to many of us in the Ministry, who came into our Masters Vineyard long before him and will go out behind him. And in∣deed to us it looketh somewhat like the Lords taking up of the little child, and setting him amongst the midst of his contending Disciples, in thse times, that even they who would be greatest amongst us, might be the least, and see somewhat of their own weakness. As to the little Piece, whatever ye shal find in it, it hath this to say for it self, that whereas many wri∣tings in the World do intrude themselves upon the Press, yet this the Press hath violently thrust into the
world: For some young Student, from his good af∣fection to the edification of the Lords people, and (no doubt) from his high esteem of the precious Author his memory, having given into the Press a copy of some of these Sermons, being only notes taken from his mouth when he preached them; no sooner were they seen a∣broad, but all the Presses in the Nation fell a labo∣ring about them, so that (if we mistake not) in less then two or three months time, three or four Im∣pressions were cast of, yet all of them so imperfect and maimed, that howbeit the excellency of the matter, and the fresh remembrance of the worthy Author, his name made him very sweet to many (especially those who had heard him preach) yet the unsuitable dress wherein they appeared, and their mistakes of the first Writers (they being hard lyable to take up every thing as it was spoken) occasioning diverse mate∣rial failings in the sense, besides lesser faults, could not but be a trouble to those who were acquainted, not onlie with the singular graces, but parts also of the eminent Youth. This gave occasion to some friends to speak a little what way these prejudices, which both the Truth and the Authors name might ly under, by these uncorrect Impressions. And finding that the Copy which by providence the worthie young Gentle∣woman, who was his wife, had lying by her, though it was but Notes taken from his mouth, yet was the most correct that could be found: And that it also did contain the whole purposes that had been preached upon the Texts; Yea, the whole purposes concer∣ning Faith that he had preached, according to that
method proposed in the first of the Sermons formerly published. This was undertaken to be revised by some, who albeit none of the fittest for the imploy∣ments, yet rather or nothing should be done in the bu∣siness, were content to bestow some hours upon it, ac∣cording as other necessary employmēts would permit. And now having sought out all the Notes of these Sermons, which we could find from other hands, and compared them with the Copie above mentioned, we do again present them unto the Lords people, not with anie confidence that our pains hath put anie new lustre upon them; onlie we have some hopes that the whole subject being now before them, and these things in the way of expression helped, which either might seem to be somewhat unpleasant, or lyable to mistakes, they shal not now be less edifying, nor less acceptable then formerlie they were. We did not think fit to make anie considerable alterations, as to the method, or other things of that kind, lest haplie by straining his excellent purposes too much, to shape them to the ordinarie rules, or to reduce them to that order which might best have pleased our selves, vve should have vvronged the matter it self, at least have put them to a loss vvho did hear him preach, and it may be now upon their reading things in that same order as they heard them, vvill be the more readilie brought under the impressions of that liveliness, power and vveights which (it may be) formerly they felt upon their heart∣vvhen he vvas speaking. If the method do not altogether satisfie some spir, rits, or the explication seem not so full; or if they firse
some introductions which possibly lead not in so close, or seem not so sutable to the subject of the Sermons; or haply now and then there be some little digressions from the main purpose, we shal desire that this may not at all be constructed to be the Authors ignorance of rules and method, or his want of abilities in hu∣mane learning it being well known to those who were best acquainted with him, that he had a scholastick spirit, and was in reading far beyond his age and op∣portunities for studying; but as to all these, we shal intreat you rather to consider: 1. His age, and that his gift was but in the very moulding and breaking (as we speak) in the point of order and method, when the Lord was pleased to call him home from his work. 2. That every man hath his proper gift of God; who in his great wisdom, and certainly for the good of the Church, doth so order, that there is somewhat sin∣gular and peculiar almost in every mans way, as to these things. 3. For any thing we know, he had ne∣ver that high esteem of this, or any other of his la∣bors, as to design any of them for publick view, and these are but Notes taken from his mouth. 4. We are perswaded he studied more his hearers then himself. Ye will easily perceive when ye have but read a little, that he hath been a man of a very zealous temper; that the great benfil of his spirit, and that which he did wholly spend himself about, was to make people know their dangerous condition by nature, and by all means to perswade them to believe and lay hold upon the great salvation: And truly that a man in such a frame should less attend to these lesser things, is not
to be wordered at. And indeed though these things be good in themselves, and worthy to be looked to in their own place; yet for a Minister of the Gospel, in all Auditories, and upon all occasions, to pin upon every purpose to such a method, and insist unto such a measure of explications and criticismes upon words, it is but to setter himself, and to starve his people. 5. Consider the dulness of the most part of hearers in this age, and how hard a thing it is to awake a sleep∣ing world, and to get them but to think that it doth concern them to hear in earnest; and possibly it was not a small piece of spiritual wisdom in him (and it may be not unfit to be imitated by others) to bgin or end all his Sermons with an awaking word concern∣ing Heaven or Hell, or Judgement, and the danger of choosing the evil, and refusing of the good. 6. For digressions, the truth is, that his soul was so filled with such longings after Heaven and Glory, and so inflamed with the love of Christ, especially toward the latter end of his race, that when he fell upon those subjects, upon which you will see most of these di∣gressions are, he could not well contain himself, nor easily bring off his own spirit, a thing not unusual to the Saints in Scripture: And howbeit such things might seem somewhat singular in the time, and not so coherent; yet now we have grounds to apprehend, that they were often strong influences of the Lords Spirit, stirring up a lamp, as it were, into a sud∣den blaze. that was not to burn long in his Church. But now we shall detain you no longer, only this we may assure you of, that although these
Sermons are neither so exact, nor so full, as doubt∣less they would have been, if they had come from the Authors own pen; yet, as I dare say, they were stu∣died with prayer, preached with power, and backed with success; so also if ye shal read them with con∣sideration, meditate with prayer, and practise with diligence, ye shal never find your time nor pains ill bestowed; but shal have cause to bless the Lord for this, amongst other helps that he hath given, for ma∣king you meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light. That it may be blest to this end, is the earnest desire and prayer of your servants in the work of the Lord, RO. TRAIL. JO. STERLING.
THE MYSTERY OF FAITH OPENED UP. SERMON I. JOHN 3.23. This is his Commandment, that ye should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, &c. THIS everlasting Gospel, in which there are drawn so many precious draughts and divine lineaments of the transcendent beauty of a cruci∣fied Saviour, and of the riches of his unsearchable grace, is a most pre∣cious and excellent thing; not only because it doth contain most absolute & sublime precepts & com∣mands, in the exercise and obedience of which, we do not only attain unto the highest pitch in holi∣ness; but likewise, because it containeth most rich and precious promises, in the possession and frui∣tion of which, we are advanced to the highest pi∣nacle of eternal blessedness; this is clear in the grace of Faith; for what doth more purify the hearts and stamp it with the Image of the invisible God, then
this grace of Faith? And what richer promises are annaxed to any duty, then to this duty of believing to wit, everlasting life, and fruition of God; so that if we had dwelt forty dayes at the foot of Mount Sinai, and had been under the greatest discovering and condemning power of the Law, we may yet come with boldness to Mount Sion, and there em∣brace Jesus Christ, who is the end of the Law for righteousness to such as believe: Upon which Mount he standeth, holding forth the golden Scepter of his peace, desiring us to embrace him, and is crying out that word in Isai 65.1. Behold me, behold me, O may we not summon Angels, and those twenty four elders about the Throne, to help us to wonder that ever such a command as this came forth, that we should believe on the name of the Son of God, after that we had broken that first and Primitive command, That we should not eat of the forbidden tree! VVas not this indeed to make mercy rejoice over judgement? And, O may we not wonder at the precious oath of the everlasting Covenant, where∣y he hath sworn, that he delighteth not in the death of sinners? What (suppose ye) were poor Adams thoughts when at first the doctrine of free∣grace, and of a crucified Christ Jesus a Savior, was preached unto him in Paradise? What a divine sur∣prisal was this, that Heaven should have preached peace to earth, after that earth had proclaimed war against Heaven! Was not this a low step of conde∣scendency, to behold an offended God preaching peace and good-will to a guilty sinner? What could
self-destroying Adā think of these morning & first discoveries of this everlasting Covenant; Christ, as it were, in the morning of time, giving vent to that infinite love, which was resting in his bosome & precious heart before the foundatiō of the world was laid? We know not whether the infiniteness of his love, the eternity of his love, or the freedom of it, maketh up the greatest wonder: but sure these three joyned together, maketh up a matculess and everlasting wonder. Would any of you ask that question, what is Christ worth? We could give  answer so sutable as this; It is above all the Arith∣metick of all the Angels in Heaven, and all the men on earth, to calculate his worth; all men here must be put to a divine non plus. This was Jobs di∣vinity, Job 28.13. Man knoweth not the price of wis∣dom; and must not Jesus Christ, who is the precious object of faith, and wisdom of the Faither, be a su∣pereminent & excellent One, who hath that name of King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, not only en∣graven on his vesture (which pointeth out the con∣spicuousness of his Majesty) but even also upon his thigh, to point out that in all his goings & motios, he proveth himself to be higher than the Kings of the earth? And howbeit the naked proposing of the object doth not convert; yet if once our souls were admitted to behold such a sight, as Christ in his beauty and Majesty, and to be satisfied with the di∣vine rayes of his transcendent glory, then certainly we should find a blessed necessity laid upon us of closing with him: for Christ hath a sword pro∣ceeding
out of his precious mouth, by which he doth subject & subjugat his own to himself, as well as he hath a sword girded upon his thigh, by which he judgeth and maketh war with his enemies. We confess it is not only hard, but simply impossible; to commit an hyperbole in commending of him; his worth being always so far above our expressions, & our expressions alwayes so far beneath his worth, therefore we may be put to propose that desire un∣to him; Exalt thy self, O Lord, above the Heavens. But now to our purpose, being at this time to  discourse upon that radical and precious grace of Faith, we intend to speak of it under this twofold notion & consideration. First, we shal speak of it as it is justifying, or as it doth lay hold upon the righteousness of a crucified Savior, making applica∣tion of the precious promises in the Covenant of free grace, which we call justifying Faith. And in the se∣cond place, we shal speak a little unto Faith, as it doth lay hold upon Christs strength; for advancing the work of mortification; and doth discover the per∣sonal excellencies of Jesus Christ by which we advance in the work of Holiness and divine conformity with God, which we call sanctifying Faith. However, it is not to be supposed that these are different habits of Faith, but different acts flowing from the same saving habit, laying hold and exercising themselves upon Christ indifferent respects, and for diverse ends. Now to speak upon the first, we have made choise of these words. The Apostle John in the former verse had been pointing out the precious
advantages of the grace of Obediēce, & of keeping of his Cōmands, that such an one hath, as it were, an arbitrary power with God, & doth receive many precious returns of prayer: As likewise, that one who is exercised in the grace of Repentance, is Gods delight; which is included in this, that he doth those things that are well pleasing in his sight. And now in these words he doth, as it were, answer an objection that might be proposed about the im∣possibility of attaining these precious advantages, seeing his commands were so large, and that hardly could they be remembred. This he doth sweetly answer, by setting down in this one verse a short compend or breviary both of Law & Gospel, viz. That we should love one another, which is the com∣pend of the Law, and that we should believe on the Name of his Son, which is the compend of the Go∣spel; & by this he showeth the Christian that there are not many things required of him for attaining these excellent advantages; but if he exercise him∣self in the obedience of these two comprehensive commandments, he shall find favor both with God and man. And as concerning this precious grace of Faith, we have, 1. The advantages of it implyed in the words, & clear also from the scope, as no doubt all the cōmands have infinite advantages infolded in their bosom; which redoūds to a believer, by his practising of them. And 2. the excellency of it hol∣den forth in the words, in that it is called his com∣mand, as if he had no other command but this. And the Greek particle is here prefixed, which hath a
great deal of emphasis and force in it, and this is his Commandment. But 3. there is this also, the abso∣lute necessity of this grace, holden forth here in this word, his Commandment; as if he had said by pro∣posing of this command, I do set life and death be∣fore you, and that you would not conceive that it is an arbitrary & indifferent thing for you to believe or not; but be perswaded of this, that as an infinite advantage may constrain you to the obedience of it, so absolute necessity must perswade you to act that which is of your everlasting concernment. And last∣ly, ye have the precious object upon which Faith (which is justifying) doth exercise it self, and that is upon the name of the Son of God: and no doubt faith is that excellent grace which doth elevate the soul unto a sweet & inseparable union with Christ, and is that golden & precious knot that doth eter∣nally knit the hearts of these precious friends toge∣ther. Faith is that grace that draweth the first draughts of Christs precious image on our hearts, & by love doth accomplish and perfect them. No, Faith taketh hold not only on the faithfulness of God, that he is a God of truth, & that in him there is no lie: but likewise it taketh hold on the Omni∣potency of God, that he is one to whom nothing is too hard; and on the infinite mercy & love of God, that he is one who doth delight to magnify this at∣tribute above all his works; and these are the three great pillars of justifying Faith. From the first, it answers all the objections of sense, which doth or∣dinarily cry forth; Doth all his promise fail for ever∣more?
And that with his one word, If he hath once purpo∣sed it, he will also do it; and if he hath once spoken it, he will also make it come to pass. From the second, it answereth all these objections that may arise from carnal reason, and probability, which tendeth to the weakning of his confidence. And these do oftentimes cry out; How can these things be? But Faith laying hold upon the Omnipotency of God, it staggers not at the promise, but is strōg in the faith giving glory to God. And it is the noble and divine exercise of this heroick grace of Faith, that these objections of reason and probability, which it can∣not answer, it will lay them aside, and yet close with the promise; which was the practice of believing Abraham, who considereth not his own body being weak, nor the barrenness of Sarahs womb. As like∣wise it was the commendable practise of that wo∣man, Matth. 15. who not being able to answer the second trial of her faith from reason; yet notwith∣stāding, Faith made her cry out, Have mercy on me, O Son of David. And from the last, a Christian doth answer all the arguments of misbelief, which doth arise from the convictions of our unworthiness and sinfulness; which makes us oftentimes imbrace that Divinity of Peters, Luke 5.8. Depart from me, for I am a sinful man. But Faith taking hold on the infinite mercy and love of Christ, it answereth all with this: He walks not with us according to that rule of merit, but according to that precious and golden rule of love and boundless compassion. But before we shal speak any thing unto you of
these things, we would a little point out some few things to be known as previous to these; we shal not dwell long in pointing out the nature of justifying Faith: It is that grace whereby a Christian being convinced of his lost estate, & of an utter impossi∣bility to save himself, he doth flee to the righteous∣ness of Jesus Christ, and unto him who is that pre∣cious City of refuge, and there doth abide till our High Priest shal die, which shal not be for ever. Or if ye will, it is a sweet travelling of the immortal soul betwixt infinite mercy, and infinite love; be∣twixt an utter impossibility to save our selves, and a compleat ability in him to save to the uttermost; betwixt abounding sin, & superabounding mercy: hence Faith is often holden forth to us in Scripture under that notion of coming, Isai. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters. Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come to God by him. And we may say by the way, that if once a sinner could be brought to this, to count all his own righteousness but filthy rags, and to believe that a man is as re∣ally justified before God by imputed righteousness, as if it were by inherent holiness; surely such an one were not far from the Kingdom of God. Neither shal we stand long to point out this unto you, that it is your duty to believe; for it is clear, not only from this place, but likewise from Isai 45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all ye ends of the Earth, Matth. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. John 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Isai. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come, buy without money, and without price. But oh! it is a great misery of many (and that which may be a subject of a perpe∣tual lamentation) that we can neither be subject to the Law, as commanding to obey it, or as threat∣ning to believe it: Nor to the Gospel, as promi∣sing to embrace it, and sweetly to receive it. O but that primative temptation and delusion whereby Satan did deceive our first father, is that whereby he yet seeks to catch and delude many souls, viz. That though we eat of the forbidden fruit, & walk in the vain imaginations of our own hearts, yet he doth suggest this to us; that we shal not die, but shal once be as God; this is Satans great and deluding Divinity: And therefore to inforce this great and precious command a little further, we shal propose these considerations. First, that the Gospel hath laid no obstruction in our way of closing with Christ, and partaking of the effects of the Gospel; but on the contrary, sho∣weth that the great impediment is our want of wil∣lingness, which we lay in our own way, as is clear from John 5.40. Ye will not come to me that ye may get life; as likewise from Revel. 22.27. where the Gates of the Gospel are cast open, and whosoever will, are commanded to enter in: So that although you may father your misbelief upon your inabili∣ty, or that your spot is not the spot of his people, yet
know that the rise and original of it is want of wil∣lingness. But to make this more clear, we would have you knowing this, that all the qualification annexed to this commandment of Faith, as that i Math. 11.28. speaketh out the qualifications ra∣ther of these that will come, then of all these that ought to come: Or he inviteth these that through the Spirit of discouragement and misbelief, have the greatest reluctancy to come; and may not that cardinal and soul-refreshing promise, John 6.37. stop the mouth of misbelief, so that it should have nothing to say? He that cometh unto me, I will in no wise cast out; ye may reduce your misbelief ra∣ther to the sinfulness of your will, then to the sin∣fulness of your walk, and if once ye could come to the length of willingness to embrace Jesus Christ, all other objections and knots should be sweetly loosed and dissolved. Secondly, consider that though we should pray the one half of our time, and weep the other, yet if we want this noble grace of Faith, the wrath of God shal abide on us. VVhat are all the works of these hypocrits, & those glistering acts of Law-sancti∣fication, but a plunging of our selves in the ditch, Until our own cloaths abhor us? Therefore it is that after the Prophet Zachary hath made mention in the twelfth Chapter of this Prophesie, of making bitter lamentation for him whom we have pierced, as for an only Son, yet in the beginning of the 13. Chapter, he maketh mention of a Fountain opened to the house of David, for sin and for uncleanness;
which may intimate unto us, that although we have washed our selves with our own tears, yet there is use of the blood of Christ, and that we must be washed in that fountain even from our own righ∣tousnesses, which are but as filthy rags. Thirdly, consider that great and monstrous sin∣fulness that is in this sin of unbelief; we will strain at a gnat, but many will easily swallow down this Camel: We will tithe mint and annise, and fast twice in the week, but neglect faith and love, and judgement, which are the weighter things of the Law. And indeed there are these things which speak out the sinfulness of unbelief. 1. That when the holy Ghost is sent to convince the world of sin, John 16.9. he pitched upon this sin, as though there were no other sin of which the World had need to be convinced: He will convince the world of sin, be∣cause they believe not on the Son of God: & no doubt there is more sinfulness in that sin, then in many breaches of the Moral Law, it being a sin against matchless love, and against that which is the reme∣dy of sin. 2. That it is called by way of eminency, disobedience, as is clear from Heb. 4.11. Lest any of you fall under the same example of unbelief; or as the word may be tendred, lest any of you fall after that example of disobedience, Eph. 2.2.3. That amongst all these that shal be eternally excommunicate from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, those that are guilty of this sin of unbelief, they are put in the first place, Rev. 21.1. And 4. That unbelief doth contradict & deny these three
precious and cardinal attributes of God. 1. Doth not unbelief contradict his faithfulness, and make him a liar? 1 John 5.10. 2. Doth it not contradict the infiniteness of his power? And 3. the infinite∣ness of his love, and supposeth that there is some∣thing too hard for him which his power cannot reach, nor his infinite love overcome? We may reduce many of our questions and disputings of his good will to this original, viz. to the disputing of his power. No doubt, if we belong to him, we shal once sing that note of lamentation over our unbe∣lief; This is our infirmity, for changes are from the right hand of the most High. And lastly, to inforce this precious command of Faith, consider that it is his command which spea∣keth forth this, that we must not take an indulgence or dispensation to our selves to believe, or not to be∣lieve at our pleasure: and is it not a strange thing that Christians are less convinced of the breaches of the Commandment of Faith, then of other com∣mands? They think misbelief to be but a Zoar, a little sin; and it proceedeth either from this, that the convictions of other sins (as the neglect of pray∣er, or the sin of swearing, or committing adultery) do arise from a natural conscience; for there is som∣what of natures light to make us abominate and hate them; when yet the light of nature will not lead us, to the convictions of the sinfulness of mis∣belief, it being a Gospel & more spiritual sin. Or it proceedeth from this, that unbelief doth ordinarily pass vail'd under the vizard of some refined vertue,
as humility and tenderness, though that rather it may be said, that it is pride and ignorance, cloath∣ed with the garments of humility. And no doubt, Christ doth account obedience to this commande∣ment of Faith, the greatest act of humility, as is clear from Rom. 10.3. where it is called submissi∣on; they submitted not to the righteousness of God. Or else it proceedeth from this, that we conceive that the commandement of Faith is not of so large extent as other commands, and so doth not bind us to the obedience of it; but know this, that it shall be the condemnation of the world, that they have not believed on the Name of the Son of God; and no doubt but it is Satans great design and cardinal pro∣ject, to keep us back from obedience to the com∣mandment of faith, & that we should not listē to the precious promises of this everlasting Gospel, but should reject the counsel of God against our selves, and refuse his precious and divine call. The second previous consideration that we would give, shall be to show you what are the causes that there is so much disputing of our interest, & so lit∣tle believing; that we are unstable as water, mar∣ring our own excellency, spending so much of our time in walking under a cloud, and are so seldome admitted to read our names in these precious and eternal records of Heaven. No doubt, these things have influence upon it, viz. 1. That we are more judging of God by his dispensations, then by his Word, supposing ever the change of dispensatiōs to speak for the change of our state; this is misbeliefs
Divinity, that when sense cannot read love in hi face, but he appeareth to frown, and to cast a clou over it, then it is presumption (saith sense) to rea love in his heart, or in his Word; but know it was self-denying practice of believing Job, to cry out, Though he should kill me, I will believe in him: ther∣fore make not dispensatiōs your Bible; otherwise ye will stumble at the noon tide of the day, & shal halt in your way; knew you never what such a thing as this meaned, to ascend in overcoming thoughts of his love, notwithstanding any thing that his dispen∣sations might preach? We conceive, that if the eyes of our faith were opened, we might see infinite love engraven on the darkest acts, and most dismal-like dispensations of his to us, though it be often-times written in dark and dim characters to sense. 2. There is this likewise which hath influence upon our so much disputing and misbelieving, viz. a guilty conscience, and the entertainment of some predominant lust, which oftentimes occasioneth our walking in darkness, and having no light, This is clear from 1 Tim. 1.19. where that precious jewel of Faith can be holden in no other place but in a pute conscience, that is that Royal place wherein it must dwel; and no doubt, if once we make ship∣wrack of a good conscience, we will erre concerning our Faith. A bosom-Idol when it is entertained, doth exceedingly mar the vigorous exercises of these graces, which are evidences of our faith; and certainly Grace rather in its degrees, then in its sincerity, or simple being only, is that which
giveth the clear evidence of Faith. Therefore when we find not love in its high and eminent actings, we hardly win to make it any clearly-con∣cluding demonstration of our Faith. 3. As likewise a bosom idol when it is entertai∣ned, maketh us to lose much of our high esteem & reputation of Jesus Christ, which doth exceeding∣ly interrupt the sweet and precious actings of faith. For it is certain, that if once the immortal soul be united to Jesus Christ by the bond of love and re∣spect, then our faith will increase with the increase of God, Our entertainment of a bosom idol is or∣dinarily punished with the want of the sensible in∣timations of his peace, and of our interest in him: so that sometimes his own are constrained to cry out; God hath departed from me, and he answereth me not, neither by dreams nor visions. 4. There is that likewise that hath influence up∣on it, our not closing absolutely with Jesus Christ, but upon conditions and suppositions. We make not an absolute and blank resignation of our selves over to Christ, to hold fast the Covenant, not∣withstanding he should dispense both bitter and sad things to us? but we conceive that Christs Cove∣nant with believers, is like that Covenant that God made with Noah, that there should be Summer and Winter, seed time and harvest, night and day unto a Christian. A Christian must have his night as well as his day: he must once sow in tears, before he reap in joy: he must once go forth, bearing his precious seed, before he can return bearing his
sheaves in his bosom: and that this hath influence upon our instability, may be seen from this, that often a Christian after his first closing with Christ, he meeteth with desertion in point of tenderness, in point of joy, and in point of strength, so that his corruption seems now to be awaked more then for∣merly, that he wants those seeming enjoyments of him which formerly he had: and that much of his softness of his heart hath now evanished, which is clear somewhat from Heb. 10.32. And after they were enlightened, they endured a great fight of afflicti∣ons. For the word that is there rendered afflictions, signifieth inward troubles through the motions of sin, as well as outward afflictions, Gal. 5.24. And God useth to dispense this way to his own, not only to take tryal of the sincerity of your closing with him, but to make our Faith more stedfast and sure. And no doubt, if we close not absolutly with Christ (when under these temptations and tryals) we will reject our confidence as a delusion, and suppose it to be but a morning dream: therefore it were a noble and divine practise of a Christian, to close with Christ without reservation, seeing he doth dispense nothing but that which might tend to our advan∣tage. And we would say to such as are under these temptations, that if ye endeavor to resist them, it is the most compendious and excellent way to make your hearts, which now are dying as a stone, to be as a watered garden, & springs of water, whose waters fail not, and to make you strong as a Lyon, so that no temptation can rouse you up; but ye shall be
enable to tread upon the high places of the earth, and to sing songs of triumph over our idols. 5. There is this likewise which hath influence on it, our building of our Faith more upon sense then upon Christ or his word; and therefore it is that Faith is so unconstant and changeable as the Moon, we not knowing what such a thing means; To hope against hope, and to be strong in Faith, gi∣ving glory to God. And we would only say unto you that erect your cōfidence upon so sandy a foun∣dation, that when the wind and storm of temp∣tation shal blow, that house shal fall to the ground. As likewise, building of your Faith upon sense, doth not abate much of your joy, and much of your precious esteem of Jesus Christ: It being Faith exercising it self upon an invisible object, that ma∣keth the Christian to rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. 6. There is this last that hath influence upon it, even our sloathfulness in the exercise of our spiri∣tual duties, by which Faith should be entertained. Faith is a tender grace, and a plant that must not be rufled, but nourished through the sap of other precious graces: but we grow remiss in our spiri∣tual duties, and do turn our selves upon the bed of security, as the door upon the hinges. And doth not our drowsiness cloath us with rags, and make us fall into a deep sleep, while as, if we were diligent, our souls should be made fat and rich? Yea, sloathfulness doth not only imped assurance of this, that it hin∣dereth the divine communications of his love and
respect, by which assurance may be kept in life, Cant. 5.2. but also, it maketh our poverty come on us as an armed man, and our want as one that travelleth. And withal it letteth loose the chain by which our corruptions are tyed, and maketh them to lift up their head, by which our assurance is much dark∣ned and impaired, and our hope is much converted into diffidence and despair. And we would only say this, it is the diligent Christian that is the belie∣ving Christian; and it is the believing Christian that is the diligent Christian: there being such a sweet reciprocation betwixt these two precious graces, that they die and live together. Now thirdly, we shal shut up our discours with this, in pointing out a little what are those things that do obstruct a Christians closing with Christ, and believing in his precious Name. I. We conceive that this woful evil doth spring and rise from that fundamental ignorance of this truth, that there is a God, as is clear from Heb. 11.6. where that is required as a qualification of a Co∣mer, That he should believe that God is: and assured∣ly, till once this precious truth be imprinted upon our souls, as with a pen of iron, and point of a dia∣mond, we will look upon the Gospel as an Uopian fancy, and a deluding notion, to teach unstable souls, who know not the way to attain unto real blessedness. And truly it is a fault of many, that they begin to dispute their being in Christ, before they know there is a Christ; and do dispute their interest in him before they believe his being, and
that there is such an one as is called Christ. II. Our coming unto Christ is obstructed from the want of the real and spiritual convictions of our desperate and lost estate without Jesus Christ, and that our unspeakable misery is the want of him: which is clear from Jer. 2.31. We are Lords, we will come no more to thee. And it is evident from Revel. 3.16.18. that such a delusion as this doth overtake many, that they can reign as Kings with∣out Jesus Christ; and that they can build their hap∣piness, and establish their carnal felicity upon ano∣ther foundation: But, O that we could once win to this, to believe what we are without Christ, and to believe what we shal be in the enjoyment of him: with the one eye to descend and look upon these deep draughts, that the mystery of iniquity hath imprinted upon our immortal souls; and withal, to reflect upon the wages of sin, which is death, and be constrained to cry out, Wo is me, for I am undone: and with the other eye, to ascend and look to that help that is laid upon one that is mighty, and to make use of the righteousness of a crucified Savior, that so what we want in our selves, we may get it abun∣dantly made up in him. III. There is this likewise that obstructeth our closing with Christ, our too much addictedness to the pleasures and carnal delights of a passing world, which is clear from Luke 14.18.19.20.21.22 Mat. 22.5.6. where those that are invited to come to the feast of this Gospel, they do make their Apologie, and with one consent do refuse it, some pretending
on impossibility to come, and some pretending a unavoidable inconveniency in coming. And, O! what a ridiculous thing is that poor complement that those deluded sinners used to Christ, I pray you, have us excused? And is not the world the great plea and argument that they make use of, when they will not come and make use of Christ. IV. There is this lastly, which doth obstruct ones coming to Christ, their unwillingness to be de∣nied to their own righteousness, which is clear from Rom. 10.23. & we conceive, if once these two were believed (which are the great Tropicks, out of which all these arguments may be brought, to per∣swade you to imbrace Christ) to wit, the infinite ex∣cellency of his Person on whom we are to believe, & the infinite loss that those do sustain who shal be eternally rejected of him: we might be preswaded to entertain a divine abstractedness, & holy retire∣ment from all things that are here below, and to pitch our desires alone upon him, who is the everla∣sting wonder of Angels, and the glory of the higher House. O! did we once suppose the unspeakable happiness of those whose Faith is now advanced unto everlasting felicity & fruition, and hath ente∣red into that eternal possession of the promises, might not we be constrained to cry out, It is good for us once to be there? Christ weepeth to us in the Law, but we do not lament; & he pipeth unto us in the Gospel, but we do not dance: he is willing to draw us with the cords of men, and with the bonds of love, and yet we will not have him to reign over us.
May not Angels laugh at our folly, that we should so undervalue this Prince of love, and should con∣temn him who is holden in so high esteem & reve∣rence in these two great assemblies that are above of Angels, and of the souls of just men made per∣fect? Christ hath now given us the first and se∣cond summons: the day is approaching when the sad and woful summons shal be sent against us, of departing from him into those everlasting flames, out of which there is no redemption: and this shal be the cap-stone of our misery, that we had once life in our offer, but did refuse it: And though there were four gates standing open toward the North, by which we might have entered into that everla∣sting rest, yet we choosed rather to walk in the paths that lead down to death, and take hold of the cham∣bers of hell. O! but there are many that think the Gospel cunningly devised sables and foolishness, (they being unwilling to believe that which sense cannot comprehend, nor reason reach) and this is the ground why the Gospel is not embraced, but is rejected as an humane invention, and as a morning dream, &c. SERMON II. JOHN 3.23. This is his Commandment, that ye should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, &c. THere are three great and cardinal mysteries, in the unfolding of which, all a Christians
time ought to be spent. First, there is that precious and everlasting mystery of Christs love and con∣descendency, which those intellectual Spirits the Angels, are not able fully to comprehend. Secondly, there is that woful mistery of the desperate deceit∣fulness and wickedness of the heart, which no man was ever yet able to fathom and comprehend. And thirdly, there is that precious mystery of that eter∣nal felicity and blessedness that is purchased unto the Saints, that once they shal reign with Christ, not a thousand years only, but throughout all the ages of everlasting & endless eternity: so that there is this difference betwixt this garden of everlasting delights, that Christ hath purchased to the Saints, and that first Paradise and Eden wherein man was placed. There was a secret gate in the first, thorow which a man that had once entered in, must go out again: But in the second and precious Eden, there is no access in going out; and all that is to be known of these three mysteries, is much comprehended in this, to know that they cannot fully be known. Paul was a blessed proficient in the study of the first my∣stery, and had almost attained to the highest class of knowledge, and yet he is constrained to profess himself to be ignorant of this. Hence is that word, Ephes. 3.19. That ye may know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge. And is it not a mysterious command, to desire people to know that which cannot be known? The meaning whereof we con∣ceive to be this in part, that Paul pressed this upon them, that they should study to know that this my∣stery
of Christs love could not be known. Jere∣miah was a blessed proficient in the knowledge and study of the second mystery; he had some morning and twi-light discoveries of that; and yet though in some meaure he had fathomed that deep, yet he is constrained to cry out, chap. 17. vers 9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? And indeed that which Solomon saith of Kings, Prov. 25.3. may well be said of all men, in this respect: The Heavens for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of man are unsearch∣able. The Apostle Paul also was a blessed profi∣cient in the study of the third mystery, having some morning and twi-light discoveries of that pro∣mised rest, and was once caught up to the third heavens, and yet when he is beginning to speak of it, 1 Cor. 2.9. he declareth all men to be ignorant of the knowledge of this profound mystery of mans blessedness, and cryeth out; Eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither have entred into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. And if there be any thing further to be known in these mysteries, the grace of Faith is sound wor∣thy amongst all the graces of the Spirit, to open the seven seals of the great depths of God. Is not the grace of Faith, that whereby a Christian doth take up the invisible excellency and vertue of a dying Christ? Is not Faith that precious grace by which a Christian must take up the spots and blemishes that are within himself? And is not the grace of Faith, that precious grace that placeth a
Christian upon the top of mount Pisga, and there letteth him see a sight of the promised Land; and doth open a door in heaven, thorow which a Chri∣stian is admitted to see Christ sitting upon his Throne? And faith hath not only a kind of Om∣nipotency, as is clear, that all things are possible to them that believe; but it hath a kind of Omniscien∣cy, and all knowledge, that it can take up and com∣prehend all the greatest mysteries of Heaven, ac∣cording to that word, Prov. 28.5. He that seeketh the Lord shal understand all things: As if he had said, there is nothing dark to a believing Christian, as there is nothing impossible to a believing Christi∣an. As likewise Faith is that grace that must take a∣side the vail that is spread over the face of a cruci∣fied Christ: and Faith is that precious Spy that∣goeth forth, and taketh up these wonderful excel∣lencies that are in him. The grace of Love, as it were, is born blind, and it hath nothing wherewith to solace it self, but that which is presented unto it by this noble and excellent grace of Faith. Now before we shal speak any thing to these things that we did propose to speak of at last occasi∣on, we shal yet speak a little unto some things which are necessary to be known for the distinct uptaking of the nature of justifying Faith, which is the great commandment of this everlasting Gospel; and that which we would first speak to, shall be this: What is the reason and ground that the Gospel conveyance of righteousness and life (and of the excellent things of this everlasting Covenant)
should be thorow the exercise of the grace of Faith; for it is not said in the Scripture that Repentance justifieth, that Love justifieth, or that Mortifica∣tion justifieth; but it is Faith only that justifieth, and it is Faith by which a Christian inheriteth the promises? So that is clear that Faith is that con∣duit-pipe thorow which are conveyed to us the great blessings of this everlasting Covenant. I. And the first ground of it is this, it is thorow Faith, that all our blessing may be known to be by love, and by free and unsearchable grace, as is clear, Rom. 4.16. while the Apostle is giving a reason why the inheritance is conveyed to a Christian through Faith: It is of Faith, saith he, that it might be of grace; for if the inheritance were conveyed to a Christian thorow a covenant of works then these spotlesse draughts of infinite love, and of unsearch∣able grace, should not be written on our inheri∣tance, as it is clear, Rom. 4.25. And it is that geat design of Christ to make his grace conspicious, in conveying salvation to us through Faith. II. There is this second ground likewise of it, that all the promises and blessings of this everla∣sting Covenant might be sure and stedfast to us; therefore they are conveyed to us through the ex∣ercise of the grace of Faith; as is clear, Rom 4.6. They are of Faith, saith he, that they might be sure: or as the word is, that they might be setled. When the promises of life and of eternal salvation were conveyed to us through mans obedience, were they not then most uncertain and unstable? But is not
Heaven your everlasting crown now, stedfast unto you, seeing ye have that golden pillar of Christs everlasting righteousness, to be the foundation of your Faith, and the strength of your confidence in the day of need. III. There is this third ground why the promi∣ses & excellent things of this Gospel are conveyed to a Christian through the exercise of Faith, that all boasting and gloriation might be excluded, accor∣ding to that word, Rom. 3.27. By what law is boa∣sting excluded? Not by the law of works, but by the law of faith. And certainly, seeing Chirstians have all the great things of heaven conveyed to them through the exercise of Faith, think ye not that this shal be your first song when ye shal be within the gates of that new Jerusalem: Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thee doth belong the glory of our sal∣vation. O what a precious dignity were it but for an half hour, to be admitted to hear those spotless sōgs that are sung by those thousād times ten thou∣sand, & thousands of thousands of holy angels that are round about this throne! Doth not David, that sweet singer of Israel, now sing more sweetly then he did while he was here below? Doth not deser∣ted Haman now chant forth the praises and everla∣sting songs of him that sitteth upon the Throne? And doth not afflicted Job now sing sweetly after his captivity is reduced, and he entered within that Land where the voice of joy and gladness is continual∣ly heard? Would ye have a description of heaven? I could give it no term so sutable as this, Heaven
is a rest, without a rest: for though there remain a rest for the righteous, yet Rev. 4.8. These four beasts that stand before the Throne they rest not night nor day, crying, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God Almighty; yet there is much divine quietness in that holy unquietness that is above. IV. There is this last ground, why the blessings of the Gospel, and life and righteousness are con∣veyed to us through the exercise of Faith, that the way to attain to these things might be pleasant and easie? We ae certainly perswaded that the way of winning to heaven by a covenant of works, was much more unleasant and difficult; but it is not an easie way of entring into the Holy of Holies, to win unto it through the exercise of Faith. Are not all wisdoms wayes pleasantness? And are not all her paths peace? Was not that just self-denial in one that said, he would not take up a Crown though it were lying at his foot. But, oh! that cursed self-de∣nial doth possess the breasts of many, so that though that Crown of immortal glory and eternal blessed∣ness be lying at your feet, yet ye will not imbrace it, nor take it up: Is not the hatred of many to Christ, covered with deceit? And therefore your iniquity shal be declared before the Congregation. Now that what we have spoken upon this might be more clear, and that the nature of justi∣fying Faith be not mistaken, we would have you take notice of these things. 1. That the grace of Faith doth not justifie a Christian as it is a work, or because of any inherent
excellency and dignity that is in this grace above any other graces of the Spirit; but faith doth alone justifie a Christian, instrumentally and objective∣ly; that is, it is that by which a Christian is just, by laying hold on the precious object of it, the righ∣teousness of Christ. And to clear this, we would only have you knowing this, that saith doth justifie as it closeth with Christ; but not because it closes with Christ, which some vainly are bold to assert, because there is not any dignity or worth in the act of Faith, inclosing with Christ, that can be the foundation of our justification; else it were to con∣found that precious degree of free grace. 2. There is this that we would have you all kno∣wing that faith is not the instrument of justificati∣on (as justification is taken in an active sense) though it is the instrument of justification. as it is taken in a passive sense; & the ground of this con∣clusiō is this, because it is impossible that any actiō in man can be an instrument of any action in God, and therefore that phrase that you have so ordinari∣ly spoken of, that faith justifieth, it is thus to be re∣solved, that we are justified by faith. 3. There is this that we would have you kno∣wing, that betwixt a Christians clossing by Faith with the righteousnesse of Jesus Christ & the justi∣fication of a sinner: I say, there is no natural & in∣dispensible connexion between these two; but only there is a connexion of divine appointment, & of free grace; though we once conceive there is a na∣ural aptitude in the grace of Faith to lay hold on
the righteousness of Christ, more then there is in any other grace of the Spirit, as ye may see there is a more natural aptitude and fitness in the hand to receive then in any other organ of the body. 4. There is this also that we would have you knowing, that a Christian in his first closing with Christ, Christ (considered as crucified) is the im∣mediate object of his Faith, and not Christ consi∣dered in his personal excellencies. Hence it is often in Scripture, that Christ as crucified, is holden forth as the immediate object of justying Faith; as is clear, Rom 3.5.24 25. And the ground of this assertion is this, because that it is the formal object of justifying Faith which doth formerly justify the sinners, and on which Faith doth immediatly lay hold, as a ransome to satisfy Justice, and as a righ∣teousness in which the soul dare venture to be found, when it shall stand before the Judgement Seat of God: and certainly this is Christ, as obe∣dient to the death of the cross. And it is likewise clear, that the thing which doth engage the foul to Christ, is not only because he is good in himself, but because he is good to us. 5. And there is this lastly, that we would have you knowing, that though Faith doth alone justifie yet Faith doth not justify being alone. Hence is that which we have often in Schools, Fides justifi∣cat solum; licet non solitariè; that Faith justifieth alone, though not being alone, as James doth speak Faith without works is dead, and is of no effect. Now that which secondly we shal speak to, shal
be this, to point out to you some differences be∣twixt justifying Faith which is in a real believer, and temporary Faith which is in an hypocrite, and one that is destitute of that everlasting hope, though he do pretend to have it. And first, that there is such a thing as temporary Faith, as is clear from Luke 8.13. it is said there of some, that they believed for a season; yea, in Acts 1.13. it is said of Simon Magus (who was in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity) he belie∣ved. And those in John 2.23. When they did behold the miracles, they believed on Jesus Christ; and yet we conceive that their Faith was not sincere, and so this was not saving faith. And indeed ye may see a difference betwixt these two in the very name tem∣porary; for this is such a faith as doth not continue long with him that hath it, but doth evanish and pass away: for as this is certain, that an hypocrite will not alwayes call upon God, Job 27.10. so that is also certain, that an hypocrite will not always be∣lieve in God. I tell you, that the longest time an hypocrite doth keep his faith, Job hath set down in his 18. chapter, vers. 14. Their hope, saith he, shall bring them to the King of terrors, and then it shall be rooted out of them and their tabernacle; their faith will bring them no further then the gates of death, and then their faith will flee away as a dream, and evanish as a vision of the night. II. There is this difference likewise betwixt them, that temporary faith it closeth with Christ as a Savior, and for righteousness; but it closeth not
with Christ as a Prince, and for sanctification: but justifying faith taketh Christ as well for a Prince, as it taketh him for a Savior: and if Solomon did discern who was the true mother of the child, by that that she who would have had the child divi∣ded, was not the mother of the child; so we may say, that they who would divide Christ in his Of∣fices, it is an evidence that they are not amongst those who are actually made partakers of the adop∣tion of children: there is some what of this pointed at in John 6.66. where that which made many who were his Disciples (and did once believe) desert him, was because of the hardness of his command. This is an hard saying, who can hear it? And it is certain that it is a greater difficulty for a Christian to take Christ as a Prince, then as a Savior, for by that he must make an absolute resignation of him∣self over to Christ, never to be reduced. O! when saw you such a sight of Christ, that ye were con∣strained to cry out (without a complement) to him: Truly, I am thy servant, I am thy servant. O! were ye never ravished with one of his eyes, nor overtaken with one chain of his neck? Believe me, they who see him thus, do believe that his com∣mands are grievous. III. There is this difference, that temporary faith is attained unto without the exercise of the Law; but justifying faith is not attained to with∣out some measure of the exercise of the Law: this is clear, Mark 4.5. where speaking of these tempo∣rary believers, it is said of them, That the fruit did
imediately spring up, &c. Are there not some (i may be here) who think they do believe, and yet were never in any measure trembling under the discovering & condemning power of the Law? Is not that a mystery, that one should bing forth with∣out travelling? And is not this a mystery in Chri∣stianity, that one should believe before he hath found the pangs of the New birth? I am afraid of this, that many of us have taken up our Religion at our foot; for there are many who take up Religion, before Religiō take them up. But would you know the properties of a Christians Faith? It is a begot∣ten faith, 1 Pet. 1.2. and not a Faith that is taken up at our pleasure. And I would only say these two things to you, be perswaded of this, that hypocrisie may be soon with a very smal threed, so that the most discerning Christian cannot take up that de∣sperate enmity that is in them. How long did Judas lurk under the name of a Saint, even with those that were most discerning? And there is this that we would say, that amongst all these that shal be eternally excōmunicate from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, hypocrites in Zion shal have the bitterest cup of divine indignation presented unto them. Hence it is that Christ when he would tell the worst company that one shal have in hell, it is alwayes this, ye shal go to that place where hypocrites and sinners are; and so it would be of your concernment, that by the candle of the Lord ye would search the inward part of the belly, before ye go down to the grave with a lie in
your right hand, a deceiving heart having turned you aside. We confess, it is sad to consider those anxious disappointments that many in these days shal once meet with. IV. But there is this last difference betwixt ju∣stifying Faith and temporary Faith, that there are three precious effects of justifying Faith, which a temporary believer cannot win to. 1. To be denyed to all his enjoyments and at∣tainments, and to walk humbly under them; for we may say that it is impossible for an hypocrite to be denyed to his enjoyments, he maketh such a Deity of them, and worships them, or rather he worship∣peth himself in them. There are three great Graces that an hypocrite doth pursue after (though he ra∣ther seeketh them as gifts, then as Graces) know∣ledge, prayer, and humility: And though it be but little, he can attain of any of the three, (or ra∣ther nothing, in a saving way) yet least of all can he attain to the last; yea, we may judge that there is always within his bosom a standing conviction, that he could never win unto that gracious Grace of Humility. O! could ye never win to this, to count your own righteousness as filthy rags, and to rejoyce alone in the righteousness of a crucified Savior? I would press this upon you by the way (O Christians of this generation) forget your perfections, and remember your imperfections: have an holy oblivion of your attainments, but have a divine remembrance of your short-co∣mings: look more to what is before unperfected,
then to what is behind, and thus shal you evidence true justifying Faith. 2. It is an effect of justifying Faith, to be under some constant and divine impression of the preci∣ousness of Jesus Christ, according to that word, 1 Pet. 27. To you who believe, Christ is precious. It is not said, that Christ was precious, or shal be pre∣cious; but it is said, he is precious, which doth im∣port (as we use to speak) a continued act. Did ye never know what it was to dwell twenty four hours under the impression of the matchless excellency, and precious worth of a crucified Savior? I will pose you with this; Are there not some here (and else where) that pass under the notion of Saints, that never knew what it was to dwell half an hour under these high and elevating thoughts of the precious∣ness of Jesus Christ? So that we profess we cannot tell wheer we shal call him precious or underva∣lued; but we may conjoin these two together, that he is a precious, and yet undervalued Christ. 3. By justifying Faith, a Christian winneth to mortification of his invisible & predominant lusts, which is impossible for a temporary believer to win to. And is there not a great difference betwixt an Idol when it is cast out, and an Idol when it but goeth out? I will tell you the great mortification of hypocrites, the devil was living in them as one that was a black one, and now he cometh again and transformeth himself into an Angel of light. He was living in them before by his spirit of propha∣nity, and now he liveth in them by the spirit of
hypocrisy, and counterfeiting of those things that were never clear attainments, while it is the noble dignity of Faith, Acts 15.9. to purifie the heart: but are there not many here who never knew what it was to mortify one lust for Christ? Can such a delusion overtake you, O Atheists! that ye shall reign with Christ, if ye die not with him? There is an opinion vented in these dayes, that there may be repentance in heaven; & I think it would seem that the Christians of this age have much of that opinion, we are so little in repentance while we are here below: but know that Faith and Sanctificati∣on are two inseparable companions: And let me tell you, if you will know the compend of the precious exercise of Faith, it is this: Faith hath three great things that it perpetually contemplates and views. 1. Faith looketh to the promise, and there it doth rejoyce and rest upon it. 2. Faith looketh to the duties that are commanded, and there it cryeth out: Here am I, I will obey and hearken unto the voyce of the Word. And 3. Faith looketh to the crown, and there it doth exult and sweetly rejoyce in di∣vine expectation. And O what a sight is that, to behold that everlasting Prince standing at the end of our race, having a crown in his right hand, with this Motto engraven on it, He that persevereth to the end, shal be saved! And what a Faith, suppose ye, it shall be thought, when we shall get on that im∣mortal crown of blessedness? What think ye is the exercise of those that are above? O Heaven! Heaven! if we did know it! would we not be in
an holy extasie of desire, till we were there? And blessed be he eternally, that hath purchased that precious felicitie to us. Now we shal at this time shut up our discourse, by speaking a little to those things in which a Chri∣stiā doth ordinarily meet with assurāce of this inte∣rest in God, and is put to the divine actings of the Grace of Faith; for there are some sealing times to a Christian. I. The first time of the sealing is, after the morti∣fication of some predominat lust and Idol; then they are admitted to read their names in the pre∣cious and ancient records of Heaven, and to see in these books their unworthy names written by the hand of that everlasting Prince. This is clear Rev. 2.17. To him that overcometh wil I give a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, that no man knows saving he that receiveth it. And from that 2 Tim. 4.8. Believe me more mortification would make more believing; but would ye know the original of misbelief? It is the want of exercise of spiritual mortification of our lusts. I know not where the most part of us intendeth to lodge at night, but this is certain, that we live with much contentment with our lusts, and these predominat Idols that do so much possesse us. II. It is secondly, a sealing time to a Christian; when he is admitted to the divine enjoyment of these satisfying delights that are to be found in Christ: When was it that the Spouse cryed out so often, My beloved is mine, and I am his? Was it
not when she was brought to the banquetting and his banner over her was love? Believe me, more com∣munion with an absent Christ would make more intimation (in a divine manner) of our peace with him. We desire to bless those that are above the reach of all these disputings and questions that we are so much subject unto. III. This is a sealing time to a Christian, when he is much in the exercise of secret Prayer, and of much conversing, and corresponding with God in that duty, as is clear in that word from Dan. 2.21. When Daniel was praying at the evening oblation, n the 23 verse, he meets with a divine intimation of his peace with God; O man, greatly beloved of God, as the Original hath it, O man of great de∣sires; for he was desireable indeed, and precious to him who holdeth the Saints in his right hand. IV. This is also a fealing time to a Christian, when he is called to the exercise of some great work, and is to be put upon some eminent holy im∣ployment; this is clear, Jer. 1.5. where Jeremiah being called to preach the Gospel unto such a rebel∣lious people, then he hath his eternal election de∣clared unto him: Before thou wast formed in the womb, I knew thee. Christ, as it were, giveth them that, to be meat to them for fourty dayes, and that in the strength of it, they may go many a days journey. V. There is also another sealing time, when a Christian is first begotten to a precious and everla∣sting hope; for when at first Christians begin to be
acquainted with Christ, even then sometimes  declareth to them his boundless & everlasting love. And this is the ground why some of those who a but babes in Christ, are so much in the exercise  diligence, so much in the exercise of the grace  love, and so much in the exercise of the grace  tenderness; it is even because of the solemn impre∣sion of their interest in Christ, that, as it were they are dayly taken in to read their own names  legible letters in the lambs book of life. VI. And there is that last time, that is a sealing time to a Christian, and that is, when he is p under some sad and afflicting dispensation: Wh the furnace is hot seven times more then ordinary. Then doth God condescend to manifest himself  his own. When was it that John met with mo of the revelations of heaven? Was it not wh he was in the Ile of Patmos, for the testimony  Jesus Christ his Kingdom, and patience of our ble∣sed Lord? Rev. 1.9. And that place, 2 Cor. 4.1 Though our outward man decay; yet our inward man is renewed day by day. Now we would press you to be more serious  the exercise of this precious grace. And I shal  you the cōpend of Christianity in these few words 1. By faith to solace your selves in Christs invisible vertues and excellencies. And 2. by hope, to b viewing that precious crown, and those everlasting dignities that are to be given to the Saints. And  by mortification, to be crucifying your idols. And 4. by patience, to be possessing your souls, unti
once ye shall pass through that dark land, to the valley of everlasting delight. And as for those that contemn and undervalue the blood of this ever∣lasting Covenant (and I would have all those that delight not in closing with Christ, and those who have not misbelief, as their cross, to consider this) The wrath of the living and eternal God doth, abide upon them who do not believe; according to that word, John 3.36. He that believeth not, the wrath of God abideth on him. It is a remarkable phrase; because of this the wrath of God will not be a pil∣grim to a misbeliever, that will turn aside to tarry but for a night; but the wrath of God (to them who will not believe) shal be their houshold com∣panion, and shall dwell with them: And wo, wo to them eternally, who have this sad and everla∣sting companion to abide with them, the wrath of a living God. There is one thing we would have those knowing, that amongst all those who are eternally to be debarred from Jesus Christ, mi∣believers are put in the formost rank, Revel. 21.8. There he is to put away the the fearfull and unbe∣lieving. And from 2 Thess. 1.18. When Christ shall come from Heaven with ten thousand of his Saints: What to do? It is even to execute ven∣geance on those that obey not the truth of the Gospel. That is, who do not believe: and I pose your own hearts with this, whether or not your names be written there in that roll, amongst those who shall be cut off? And that word, 2 Thess. 2 12. That they might be damned wh be believed not, but took plea∣sure in unrighteousness. O but the wrath of a
dying Christ, and of a crucified Saviour, is drea∣ful! It is more sad and terrible then the wrath  God should have been, if Christ had not die I will tell you (O hypocrits in Zion) the wor news that ever was published in your ears, and  is this, Christ died and rose again, and to tho that are begotten to a lively hope, they are gla∣tyding of great joy, and therein they may comfo themselves; but ye may wear a rough garment  deceive, and go to heaven in your own apprehen∣sions? but, O the sad disappointments that is wa∣ting on many such. And to close with this, w would obtest you, as you would answer to you terrible and dreadful Judge, that shal stand o day upon his Throne, which he shal fix in th clouds; we obtest you by all the joyes of heave and we obtest you by all the everlasting pains  hell, and we obtest you by all the curses that a written in the volume of this book, and by a the sweet and comfortable promises that are i the everlasting Gospel; and by the love that yo own to your immortal souls; and as you would not crucifie Christ afresh, believe and embrac the offers which are presented now unto you Know ye whether or not this shall be the las summons that you shal get to believe? That so if ye do reject it, Christ shal come from heaven and pronounce that sad and lamentable Sentence to you, Depart from me ye cursed, I know you not. Now to him that can bless these things unto you, we desire to give praise.
SERMON III. JOHN 3.23. This is his Commandment, that ye should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, &c. IT was a command that Solomon gave unto his son, Prov. 22.26. That he should not be surety for debt, nor be one of those that striketh hands. But, O! what spotless breaches of that command hath our blessed Lord Jesus committed, when he did condescend to be surety for our debt, and to pay that which was impossible for us to satisfy? Hath not Christ made a precious exchange with sinners? He wreathed about his own precious neck, that bond and yoke of our iniquities, and hath given to us that unweariable, easie and por∣table yoke of his commandments, amongst which this is one, That we should believe on him: spotless Christ was made sin for us; that sinful, we might be made the righteousness of God in him. And is not this the condemnation of the World, that we will not believe on him? That we will not delight our selves in loving of him? And I would say this to you, that though ye should weep the one half of your dayes, and pray the other half, yet if ye want this noble grace of Faith, your righteous∣ness shall be but like a monstruous cloath, and filthy rags before him. For what is praying without be∣lieving, but a taking of his blessed Name in vain? What is our conferring upon the most divine and precious truths of God without believing?
it is not a lying to the Holy Ghost, and a flatte∣ring of God with our mouth? And we would have you knowing this, that there is a sweet harmony that is now made up betwixt Moses and Christ, be∣twixt the Law and the Gospel. The Law brin∣geth us to Christ as a Savior, and Christ bringeth us back again to the Law, to be a rule of our walk, to which we must subject our selves. So then, would ye know the compend of a Christians walk? It is a sweet travelling betwixt Mount Si∣nai, and Mount Sion, betwixt Moses and Christ, betwixt the Law and the Gospel. And we con∣ceive, that the more deep that the exercise of the Law be in a Christians conscience, before his closing with Christ, there is so much the more precious and excellent advantages waiting for him. I. There is this advantage that waiteth on the deep exercise of the Law, that it is the way to win to much establishment in Faith, when once we begin to close with Christ. O Christians! would ye know that which maketh the superstru∣cture and building of grace to be within you, as a bowing wall, and as a tottering sence? (of that oftentimes ye are in hazard to raze the foundation) it is this, ye were not under the exercise of the Law before your believing in Jesus Christ. There are some who do not abide three days at Mount Sinai, and these shall not dwell many days at Mount Sion. II. There is this advantage that waiteth on the deep exercise of the Law, it maketh Christ
precious to a mans soul. What is that which fil∣leth the soul of a Christian with many high and excellent thoughts of Christ? Is it not this, to have the Law registrating our Bond, and putting us (as we use to speak) to the Horn? That is, to have the Law cursing us, and using the sentence of condemnation against us. That which ma∣keth us have such low and undervaluing thoughts of precious Christ, is, because the most part of us are not acquainted with the deep and serious exercise of the Law; that is a mystery to the most part of a Christians practise. Ye know that there were four streams which went out from the Paradise of God, into which man was first placed; and so may we say, that there are four gol∣den streams, by which lost and destroyed, man is brought back again to this Eden and Paradise of everlasting delights. First, there is the precious stream of Christs righteousness, by which we must be justified. And secondly, there is that stream of his Sanctification, by which we must be purified. Thirdly, there is that stream of the wisdom of Christ, by which we must be conduct∣ed through this wilderness wherein we have lost our way. And fourthly, there is that stream of Christs Redemption, by which we must be delivered from the power of our enemies; and must turn the battel in the gate, it is by the Re∣demption of Christ, that we shall once sing that triumphant song: O Death! where is thy sting? O Grave! where is thy victory? O, but all these streams will be sweet and refreshing to a soul
that is hotly pursued by the Law; So long as we see not the ugliness of our leprosie in that glass of the Law, we have our own Abana and Par∣pher, that we think may do our turn; but when once our case is truly laid open to us, then will we be content to wash our selves in Jordan se∣ven times. III. There is this advantage that waiteth on the deep exercise of the Law, that it maketh a Christian live constantly under the impression of the sinfulness of sin. What is it that maketh sin exceeding sinful to a Christian? Is it not this, he hath been fourty dayes in Moses School? And we conceive that the ground why such fools as we make a mock of sin, is, because we know not what it is to be under the power of his wrath, and the apprehensions of the indignation of God. But now to come to that which we intend to speak of, we told you at the first occasion that we spake upon these words, that there were many ex∣cellent things concerning the grace of Faith hol∣den forth in them: The first thing which was holden forth concerning this radical grace of Faith, was the infinite advantage that redoun∣deth to a Christian through the exercise of Faith, and giving obedience to this command; which we cleared, to be holden forth not only from the scope, but also from the nature of this command. And now to speak a little to the point, we shall propose these cosiderations that may abundantly show how advantagious a thing this excellent grace of Faith is.
I. The first consideration that speaketh it, is this, that Faith maketh Christ precious to a soul, according to that word, 1 Pet. 2.7. To you that believe, Christ is precious. And we would have you knowing this, that Faith maketh Christ more precious to a soul, then sense, or any other thing can make him. And first, Faith maketh Christ more precious then sense, because the estimation which the grace of Faith hath of Christ, it is builded upon the excellency of his Person; but the estimation of sense, it is builded upon the ex∣cellency of his actings; so that because he is such to them, therefore they love and esteem him: But that heroick grace of Faith, it taketh up the excellency of Christs person, and that maketh him precious to them. Secondly, Faith makes Christ more precious then sense, because sense looketh to that love which Christ manifesteth in his face, and in his hands, and in his feet: But Faith looketh to that love which is in his heart. Sence will cry forth: Who is like to thee, whose countinance is like Lebanon, excellent as the cedar; whose hands are as gold rings set with beril, and whose legs are like pillars of marble, set in sockets of gold? Sense will look to the smilings of Christ, and will wonder; it will look to his dispensations and actings, and will be constrained to cry out, Who is like unto thee? But the grace of Faith sola∣ceth it self in the fountain from whence all these springs and sweet inundations of love do flow. Thirdly, Faith maketh Christ more precious then sense; because Faith looketh not only to
what Christ is presently, but unto what Christ is from eternity before time, and what Christ shall be unto eternity after time; but sense only doth look to what Christ is presently. And ye must conceive that the sweet travelling of Faith betwixt infinite love from eternity before, and infinite love unto eternity after; must make Faith to fall in a sea of wondering, & raiseth the thoughts to the highest pitch of desire and estimation. Fourthly, we may likewise add, that the impres∣sion of the preciousness of Christ, which sense maketh upon the soul, is not so constant, nor so single, as that which Faith doth make. O, but the grace of Faith giveth the Christian a broad look of Christ, and letteth him see Christ cloath∣ed with ornaments of glory and divine Majesty. Sense followeth Christ, rather that it may see his miracles and love, that it may be fed with loaves; but Faith follows Christ, for himself, above all. II. The second consideration, to speak the ad∣vantage of it, is, that the grace of Faith, it hath, as it were, an arbitrary power with God; so that whatsoever a Christian shall seek in Faith, he shall receive it. It was the noble gift that was once gi∣ven to Faith, that it never should seek any thing and be denied, according to that word in Matt. 21.22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer believing, ye shall receive it. And that word in John 15.7. Abide in me, that is, believe; and the pro∣mise, is annexed to this: Whatsoever ye shall ask ye shall receive. And it is clear likewise from the
preceeding verse to our Text, that if we obey this command of Faith, Whatsoever we shal ask of God, we shal receive it. And I would speak these two things to you from this. First, that oftentimes Christ putteth a blank in a Christians hand, who is much in the exercise of Faith, according to that in Matth 20.32. Is there not an ample blank put into that mans hand? What wilt thou that I should do unto thee? Christ desireth him to fill up the blank with what he would. And secondly, there is this, which is one of the greatest steps of Christs matchless condescendency, that often∣times when his own have sought in their presum∣ption a blank to be put in their hand, Christ con∣descendeth to give it, according to that strange passage in Mark 10.35.36. the two Disciples who present this desire to Christ, We desire, say they, that whatsoever we ask, thou shouldest give it unto us. And presently that is answered: What will ye that I shal do for you? Christ hath an infinit good will to satisfie the desires of his own: and that which yet more speaketh out Christs boundless good will to satisfie the desires of all that belong to him, it may be decared in that word, John 16.24. where he chargeth his Disciples with this: Hither to, saith he, have ye asked me nothing: ye must not suppose that Peter, James, and John, never sought a suite of Christ; but the meaning of that expression is this: Ye sought nothing in comparison of that which I was willing to give, and which your necessity did call for at my hands, which ye should have sought.
III. There is this third consideration, to poin out the advantage of Faith: it is that grace tha keepeth all the graces of the Spirit in life, & exer∣cise. Faith is that higher wheel, at the motion o which, all the lower wheels do move: if so we may speak, Faith is that Primum mobile, that first moves and turns about all these lower graces of the Spirit, according to that, 2 Pet. 1.5. Add to your faith, vertue, and to your vertue, patience, and to your patience, brotherly kindness. First, the grace of Faith keepeth in exrcise the grace of love, as is clear, Eph. 3.17. where these two gra∣ces are conjoined. As likewise from Rom. 5.1. compared with verse 5. Being justified by faith. Then this leffect followeth upon it, the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts. And so it is cer∣tain, that Faith keepeth love in life. Faith being the spy of the soul, and that intelligencer and pre∣cious messenger: it goeth out and bringeth in ob∣jects unto love. Faith draweth and bringeth in ob∣jects unto love. Faith draweth aside the vail, and love sitteth down and solaceth it self in the disco∣veries of Faith. Secondly, the grace of Faith likewise it keepeth the grace of mortification in exercise, as is clear, not only from Eph. 6.9. but from 1 John 5.4. This is our victory whereby we overcome the world, even our faith. And it is cer∣tain that Faith keepeth mortification in exercise, and advanceth holiness, not only because of this, that Faith is that grace that presenteth to a Chri∣stian the absolute purity and spotless holiness of Jesus Christ; but also because it maketh them esteem their idols taste less as the white of an egg,
and they become unto them as their sorrowful meat. The best principle of mortification is this, the discoveries of the invisible vertues of Jesus Christ: that mortification which ariseth from the lovely discoveries of the excellency of Jesus Christ, is most real and abiding; as those waters which rise from the highest springs, are not only constant, but likewise most deep and excellent. Thirdly, Faith likewise hath influence upon mor∣tification as it doth take hold of that infinite strength that is in Christ, by which a Christian is inabled to mortifie his coruptions. Fourthly, Faith likewise maketh application of the blood of sprinkling, by which we are purified from dead works. Fifthly, likewise the grace of Faith kee∣peth in exercise the grace of Humility, as is clear, Rom. 3.27. By what law, saith he, is boasting ex∣cluded? It is not by the law of works, but by the law of faith. Sixthly, Faith keepeth in exercise the grace of joy, as is clear, Rom. 15.13. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in belie∣ving So that ye see the proper fruit of Faith, is joy in the holy Ghost. And certainly, did we be∣lieve more, we should rejoice more. Seventhly, and lastly, Faith keepeth in exercise the grace of Hope, for it is impossible for hope to be in lively exercises, except Faith once be exercised, which may be a shame unto you; for how can we hope to attain the thing that is promised, except our Faith first close with the promise? So there is this difference betwixt the grace of Faith, and the grace of Hope? the grace of Faith closeth with
the promises; but the grace of Hope, it close with the thing that is promised. IV. There is this fourth consideration, th may speak out the excellency of the grace  Faith. It is that grace by which a Christian doth attain to most divine fellowship, and con∣stant correspondency with heaven. Would y have that question resolved and determined What is the best way not to stir up our Beloved nor awake him until he please? It is this, be much in the grace of Faith; this is clear from Ephes. 3.17. That Christ may dwel in our hearts by faith▪ By the exercise of all other graces, Christ is bu a sojourner, that turneth aside to tarry but for  night: but by the exercise of this grace, he cometh to take up house with us. I will tell you what Faith is, it is a ladder that reacheth betwixt hea∣ven and earth, by the steps of which, a Christian doth dayly go up to heaven, and converse with the higher House. Faith is that grace, as the Apostle speaketh, by which we have access to the Throne of his grace. Faith ushers in the believer to the Throne; and without it, he can have no access there, nor joy when he is there. V. Here is this advantage that attendeth the exercise of Faith, a believing Christian is a pray∣ing Christian according to that word in Mark 9.24. where these two are conjoined together Lord, I believe; and then he falleth to his prayer presently, after that confession, Help thou our un∣belief. And it is clear from Psal. 63.1. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul
Christeth for thee. And sometimes Faith is a most impatient grace; but we may alwayes say of it that it is a most diligent grace. Oh! is not the neglect of this precious exercise of Faith, and of the duty of secret prayer, that makes our lean∣ness testifie to our face, and maketh our souls as a barren wilderness? I am perswaded of this, that sinc0e Ch ist had any followers, and since ever this everlasting Gospel was preached in Para∣dise, the exercise of secret prayer was never so much neglected; we have turned over all our prayers into complements with God. We know not what it is to rise at mid-night, and call upon God, and to enquire after our Maker under the si∣lent watches of the night. O, but it is a sweet di∣version from sleep, to retire our selves, in the si∣lent seasons of the night, from all thoughts about worldly matters, and to converse with that in∣visible Majesty. IV. There is this sixth consideration, to point out the advantage of Faith, that Faith is that grace that doth facilitate a Christians obedience, and maketh it most pleasant and easie: this is clear from Heb. 11.8, By faith Abraham when he was commanded to go to a strange land, obeyed, and went out, not knowing whether he went. The word may be rendered, he did chearfully obey. And vers. 17. By faith he offered up his only son. Would ye know the reason why his commands are your burden? And why his preceps are your cresses? It is because of this ye do not believe. And so it is most certain, that it is impossible for a Christian
to attain to a pleasant way of obedience without the exercise of faith. Faith holdeth up the crown to a Christian, and this crown maketh him to obey. Faith gathereth strength from Christ, and that strength maketh obedience very easie. Faith taketh up the excellency of Christ, and this ma∣keth a Christian to look upon his duty, more as his dignity, then his duty. And we are perswa∣ded of this, that our chariot-wheel should move more swiftly (like the chariots of Aminadab) if we were more in the exercise of the grace of Faith. Would ye know an answer to that que∣stion, what is first more requisite for a Christian while here below? Faith. And what secondly, is most requisite? Faith. And what thirdly, is most requisite for a Christian? Even Faith. Faith above all things, and above all things, Faith. VII. There is another advantage of it, that by Faith our services and prayers are accepted of God. Would ye know what is the prayer of a Christian that is not in Faith? It is a smoak in his nostrils, and a fire that burneth all the day. The unbelivers sacrifice is an abomination to the Lord. This is clear from Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel offe∣red up unto God a more acceptable sacrifice then Cain. And we conceive, that there are many unanswered prayers which we do put up, be∣cause we want that noble exercise of Faith. VIII. And lastly, we shal likewise add this, that faith is the grace by which a Christian hath that pefect and immediate sight, as is were, of great things that are promised to him. Faith
bringeth a Christian within sight of Heaven, and Faith bringeth a Christian within sight of God, according to that word, Heb. 11.1. Faith is the evidence of things not seen. And that noble Para∣dox that is said of Faith, Heb. 11.27. By faith Moses saw him that is invisible. Is it not an im∣possible thing to see that which cannot be seen? But the meaning of it is this, that Faiths discove∣ries of God are as certain and sure as the discove∣ries of our bodily eyes are. Faith is an intelligent grace, yea, it is a most sure and infallible grace. What will Faith not do? And what can you do who want Faith? Now to enforce the advantages and excellencies of Faith a little more, we shal propose to you the disadvantages of that woful sin of unbelief. 1. There is this disadvantage of the sin of un∣belief, that all the actions that proceed from an unbeliever, they are impure and defiled, accor∣ding to that in Tit. 1.15. But unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled, their prayer is unclean; yea, as Solomon speaketh, their plowing in sin; yea, their going about the most excellent duties (for matter) is an abomination to God, according to that word, Rom. 14.23. What ever is not of faith, is sin. So the want of Faith is the great polluter of all our actions, and of all our per∣formances. 2. There is this second disadvantage of misbe∣lief, that it is impossible for one in the exercise of unbelief, to mortifie a lust or idol; and we may
allude unto those words in Matth. 17.20. when his Disciples came to him, & asked him this que∣stion, Why could not we cast out this devil? Tha was given as an answer, Because of your unbelief. Unbelief is that which taketh up arms for out idols, and doth most strongly defend them; for there is nothing that will kill corruption so much as the exercise of Faith: and when that is laid aside, we have laid by our weapons, and have in a manner, concluded a treaty of peace with our idols that we shal not offend them, if they do not offend us. 3. There is this disadvantage that waiteth upon the sin of unbelief, that such an one cannot win to attain to the grace of establishment, but is alwayes as the waves of the sea tossed to and fro, until once he win to the exercise of Faith, as is clear from Isai. 7.9. Except ye believe, ye shal not be established. 4. There is this disadvantage that waiteth on it, is the mother of hardness and stupidity of heart, according to that word in Mark 16.14, where he upbraideth them because of their un∣belief; and then that danger followeth, to with hardness of heart, this is clear also from Acts 19 9. where these two sister-devils are conjoined and locked together, unbelief and hardness of heart; because it is unblief indeed that hindereth all the graces, by which the grace of Tenderness must be maintained. 5. There is this disadvantage in the sin of un∣belief, that it is big with child of apostasie from
God, and of defection from him according to that word, Heb. 3.12. Beware lest their be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief (and there the fruit of it) to depart from the living God. And certain∣ly it is no wonder that unbelief travels in birth, till that cursed child of apostasie be brought forth; not only because of this, that an unbeliever loo∣seth the thought of the excellency of Christ, but also because he increaseth in his thoughts of love towards his Idols; for Christ doth decrease in those who misbesieve, and their Idols do increase in their love, and in their desires, and in their estimation. 6. There is this sixth disadvantage in the sin of unbelief, it hindereth the communication of many single workings and tokens of the love and favor of the most High, according to that sad word that is in Matth. 13.58. at the close, He could not do many mighty works there, because of their unbelief. Unbelief, as it were, laid a restraint on Christ, that he could not effectuat those things which he was willing to perform. And to shut up our discourse at this time, I would only add these two aggravations which may somewhat enforce what we have spoken. I say, there are these two aggravations in the sin of unbelief, even in his own who have a right (& also his call) to believe. 1. That after that Christ hath given most sensible discoveries of himself (Wherein we have seen him, as it were, face to face) yet ye will not believe. This is clear from John 6.36. Though ye have seen me, saith Christ, yet ye do not belive in me. There
is not a manifestation of Christs presence, but it i a witness against you of your unbelief: Woul you hear the voyce of sense that is rectified? It i this, believe on the Son of God. 2. That not∣withstanding of the signal demonstrations of the power of Christ, yet though it were the mortify∣ing of some lust and Idol within them, yet they will not believe, but upon new temptations will doubt of his love to them. Christ preacheth Faith by his Word; he preacheth Faith by his sufferings; he preacheth Faith by his dispensa∣tions; he preacheth Faith by his promises; he preacheth Faith by his rods: and if these five in∣struments will not ingage your hearts to believe, who can move them? Doth not his two wounds in his precious hands, preach out this point of Faith, Believe him? Doth not that hole ope∣ned in his side, preach this doctrine, That we should believe in him? And these two wounds that he received in his precious feet, do they not preach this, That we should believe on a crucified Saviour? And we would only say this, that some∣times it is the cae of his own, that after the con∣victions of this, that it is their duty to believe, and also after some desires to close with Christ, yet they find inability to close with him. Is it not certain, that to will (to believe) is sometime pre∣sent with you; but how to perform, you know not? And I would have a Christian making this four∣fold use of such a dispensation as that (which is most ordinarily) when convictions of our duty to believe, and some desires to close with Christ,
is not followed with actual performances. 1. To study to have your convictions more eeply rooted within you, for it doth sometimes llow, that resolutions and mints to believe, are ot blest with actual believing, because the con∣iction of our duty to believe, is not deeply im∣rinted upon our conscience. 2. Be convinced of that desperate enmity (and hat mystery of iniquity) that is within you, that e can have some will to do, without ability to erform. We confesse, it is not an ordinary dis∣ase in these dayes, to have such a contrariety betwixt a Christians will and his practice, our will or the most part being no better than our pra∣stice, but somtimes it is, which may make you ry forth, O wretched man that I am, who shall de∣iver me from this body of death? 3. That ye would be much in the imploying of Christ, that as he hath given you to will, so also he might make you to do. Christ is about to convince his own in such a dispensation as that, That Faith is the gift of God; Faith is so noble a grace that it cannot be spinned out from our re∣solutions, not from our endeavors, Faith is such a divine plant, as the Fathers right hand must plant in our souls. 4. Let it convince you of the excllency of the grace of Faith (for the difficulty of the attain∣ing to any thing may speak out the excellency of that thing) there is no sin but it may be easily win at, there is an easinesse and facility to over∣take the paths of our Idols, but the graces of the
Spirit are so excellent things, that we must figh before we attain them. And you who are stra∣gers to Christ Jesus (and have never know what it is to close with him) we would reque you in Christs name to be reconciled to him. What know ye, O men (or rather Atheists) be this shall be the last summons that ye shal get  believe? And that because ye disobey this pre∣cious summons, there shal be one presented t you, that ye cannot sit. I remember of one ma who looking upon many thousands that we under his command, weeped over them whe he considered, how that within a few years all these should be laid in their graves, and should be in eternity. O but it were much of our con∣cernment to be trying our selves how it is with us; we are not afraid that it is a breach of cha∣rit, to wish, that but one of each ten that are within these doors, were heirs of the grace of life, and had the solide and spiritual expectation of heaven. I think, if Christ were to come pre∣sently to speak to us, He might not only say to each twelve that are here, One of you shal betray me, but we are afraid that he should say to each twelve that are here Eleven of you shal betray me, and but one only shall passe free. O doth it not concern you to enquire where you shal rest at night; when the long shadows of everlasting evening shal be stretched out upon you? I think there are some that are so setled upon their lees, that if they were one day in hell, and saw
all the torments that are there, and were brought from it the next day to live on earth, they would ot repent: And more, there are some that take hem up on day to see the joyes of Heaven, and bring them back again, they would not pursue after these blessed and everlasting enjoyments. O is not Christ much undervalued by us? But I must tell you this, One wo is past, but behold a∣nother wo is coming. O the searchings of those spirits who are entered into their everlasting pri∣on house, out of which their is no redemption. What shal be your choise, when Christ shall come in the clouds? I am preswaded there are many, to whom at that day, this Doctrine would be ravishing, viz. That there were not a death, that there were not a God, and that there were not an eternity. O! will you believe, That the sword of the justice of God is bathed in heaven, and shall come down to make a sacrifice, not in the land of Idumea nor in the land of Bezra; but he is to make a sacrifice amongst his people, who seemed to make a Covenant with him by sacrifice. Ah, ah, shall we say that if that argument were used to many; that within fourty dayes they should be at their long and everlasting home, they would yet spend thirty nine of those dayes in taking pleasure up∣on their lusts. I am perswaded of this; that there are many who think that the way betwixt hea∣ven and earth, is but one dayes journey; they think they can believe in one day, and triumphant night. But, O it shal be short triumphing that such Believers as those shal have. Therefore, O
dy to close with a crucified Saviour; rest on hi by Faith, delight your selves in him with lo and let your souls be longing for the day whe that voyce shall be heard in Heaven, O ho sweetly will it be sung! Arise, arise, arise, my lov my dove, my fair one and come away; for beh your Winter is past your everlasting Summer is com and the time of the singing of the birds is ne When Christ shall come over these Mountains  Bether, he shall cry, Behold, I come, and the sow shall sweetly answer, Come blessed Lord Jesu come. O what a life shall it be, that with those two arms you should eternally incircle Christ, an hold him in your arms, or rather be incircled by him? Wait for him for he shall come, and his reware is with him, and he shal once take home the we∣ried travellers of hope. SERMON IV. JOHN 3.23. This is his Commandment, that y should believe on the Name of his Son Jesu Christ, &c. THere are two great and excellent gist, which God in the depth of his boundlesse love hath bestowed on his own. First, there i that infinite gift, and royal donation, his own beloved Son Jesus Christ, which is called, The gift of God, John 4.10. And secondly, there is that excellent gift of the grace of Faith, which God hath bestowed upon his own, which is also called, The gift of God, Ephes. 2.8. Faith is the
gift of God. And is it not certain, that these two gracious gifts ought to engage our souls and hearts much unto him? Infinite Majesty could give no gift greater then his Son, and infinite poverty could receive no other gift so sutable as Christ; It was the most noble gift that Heaven could give, and it is the greatest advantage for earth to receive it. And we could wish that the most part of the study and practise of men (that is spent in pur∣fuit after these low and transient vanities) might be once taken up in that precious pursuit after Christ. We could wish that all the questions and debates of the time, were turned over into a soul-concerning question, What shal we do to be saved? And that all the questions, controversies, and con∣tensions of the times, were turned over into that divine contention, and heavenly debate. Who should be most for Christ, who should be most for the exalting of the noble and excellent plant of renown? And that all our judgings and searchings of other mens practises and estats, might e turned over into the useful search, to prove and examine our selves; whether we be in the faith or not? And I would ask you this question, What are your thoughts concerning precious Christ, seeing he is that noble object of Faith? We would only have you take along these things, by which Christ may be much commended to your hearts. First, there was never any that with the eyes of Faith did behold the matchless beauty and transcen∣dent worth of that crucified Saviour, that re∣turned his enemy. There is soul-conquering
vertue in the face of Christ: and there is hea captivating, and overcoming power in the beauty Jesus Christ. This first sight that ever persecution Saul got of Christ, it brought him unto an endle captivity of love. Secondly, there is this that w would say of precious Christ, which may engag our souls unto him, that for all the wrongs belie∣vers do to Christ, yet hath he never an ill word  them to his Father, but commends them; which is clear from that of John 17.6. where Christ do commend the Disciples to the Father, for the grac of obedience: They have kept thy word. And for th grace of Faith, vers. 8. They have believed that the didst send me. And yet were not the Disciple most defective in obedience both in this, The they did not take up their cross, and follow Christ and also that they did not adhere to him in the da that he was brought to Cajaphas Hall? And we they not most defective in the grace of Faith, as  clear from Matth. 17 17. and likewise from John 14.1. he is pressing them to believe i him, and yet he doth commend them to the Fa∣ther, as most perfect in those things? Thirdly, there is this that we would lastly say of him who i the noble object of Faith; look to the eminent depths of Christs condescendency, and then you will be provoked to love him. Was it not in∣finite love that made Christ to ly three dayes in the Grave, that we might be through all the ages of eternity with him? Was it not in∣finite condescendency that made his precious head wear a crown of Thorns, that we might
eternally wear a crown of glory? Was it not in∣finite condesendency that made Christ wear a purple robe, that so we might wear that precious rob of the righteousness of the Saints? And was it not matchless condescendency, that Christ who know no sin, was made sin for us, that so we might become like unto him, and be made the righ∣teousness of God in him? But to come to that which we intend mainly to speak upon at this time, which is that second thing that we proposed to speak of from these words, and that is concerning the excellency of this grace of Faith, which we cleared, was hol∣den out in that, that Faith was called his com∣mandment, which is called by way of eminency and excellency. There are many things in Scrip∣ture, which may sweetly point out the precious excellency of this grace of Faith, and we shal only speak to these things? I. The first thing that speaketh out the excel∣lency of Faith, is this, it exerciseth it self upon a most noble object, to wit, Jesus Christ; Faith and Love being the two arms of the immortal soul, by which we do imbrace a crucified Savior, which is often pointed at in Scripture, and we shal point at these three principal acts of Faith, which it exerciseth on Jesus Christ, as the object of it. 1. The first is, to make up an union betwixt Christ and the believer (Faith being indeed an uniting grace, and that which knitteth the mem∣bers to the head) and to make this more fully ap∣pear, we would point out a little what a sweet
harmony and correspondency there is betwixt these two sister-graces, to wit, Faith and Love. Faith is that nail which fasteneth the soul to Christ, and Love is that grace which driveth that nail to the head: Faith at first taketh but a tender grip of Christ, and then love cometh in, and maketh the soul take a more sure grip of him. Secondly, ye may see their harmony in this, Faith is that grace which taketh hold (as it were) of the garment of Christ, and of his words; but Love (that ambitious grace) it taketh hold of the heart of Christ, and (as it were) his heart doth melt in the hand of Love. Thirdly, it may be seen in this, Faith is that grace which draweth the first draught of the likeness and Image of Christ upon a soul: but that accomplishing grace of Love, it doth compleat these first draughts, and these imperfect linea∣ments of Christs Image, which were first drawn on the soul. Fourthly, by Faith and love, the heart of Christ and of the believer are so united, that they are no more two, but one Spirit. 2. There is this second act that Faith exerci∣seth on Christ, and it is in discovering the match∣less excellencies, and the transcendent properties of Jesus Christ. O what large and precious cōmen∣taries doth Faith make upon Christ! it is indeed that faithful spy, which doth alwayes bring up a good report of him: Hence it is, that Faith is cal∣led understanding, Coloss. 2.2. because it is that grace which revealeth much of the precious truth of that noble object. 3. And there is this third noble act of Faith,
exercising it self upon Christ, viz. It maketh Christ precious to the soul, according to that word 1. Pet. 2.7. unto you which believe, he is pre∣tious. And if there were no other thing to speak forth its worth but that, it is more then sufficient; for no doubt this is the exercise of the higher House to be dwelling on the contemplation of Christs beauty, and to have their souls transpor∣ted with love towards him, and with joy in him. Reason and amazement are seldom companions, but here they do sweetly join together, First, a Christian loveth Christ, because of Christs actings; and then he loveth all these actings, be∣cause they come from Christ. 2. Now secondly, this pointeth out the pre∣cious excellency of the grace of Faith; it is that grace which is most my sterious and sublime in its actings; it hath a more divine and sublime way of acting then any other grace; hence it is called The Mystery of Faith, which speaketh this, that the actings of Faith, are mysteries to the most part of the world: and I shall only point at these things, which may speak out the mysterious actings of the grace of Faith. 1. Faith can believe, and fix it self on a word of promise, although sense, reason, and probability, seem to contradict the accomplishment of that promise. Faith it walketh not by the low dictates of sense and reason, but by a higher rule, to wit, The sure word of prophecy, which is clear from Rom. 4.19. where Abraham believed the promise, notwith∣standing that sense and reason seemed to contradict
it; He considered not the deadness of his own body neither the barrenness of Sarahs womb, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God. And it is cle from Heb. 11.29.30. where Faith believed their passing through the Red sea upon dry ground, which was most contrary to sense and reason. Faith be lieved the falling down of the walls of Jericho, b the blowing of rams horns: which things are most impossible to sense and reason; for sense will of tentimes cry out, All men are liars; and reaso will say, How can such a thing be? and yet that he roick grace of Faith, cryeth out, Hath he spoke it? He will also do it. Hath he said it? Then  shal come to pass. 2. Faith can believe a word of promise, not∣withstanding that the dispensations of God seem to contradict it; as was clear in Job, who pro∣fessed he would trust in God though he should ki him. And no doubt but this was the practice o believing Jacob, he trusted that that promise should be accomplished, that the elder should serve the younger: though all the dispensations of Go which he did meet with, seemed to say that pro∣mise should not be accomplished. 3. Faith can believe a word of promise, even when the commands of God seem to contradic the accomplishment of that promise; this is clea in that singular instance of Abrahams Faith, that notwithstanding he was commanded to kill his promised seed (upon whom did depend the accom∣plishment of the promises) yet he believed that the promises should be performed. And though
there were indeed extrordinary and strange try∣ls of his Faith, as he had natural affections to wrestle with, yet over the belly of all these, be∣lieving Abraham he giveth Faith to the promise, and bringeth his son Isaac to the Altar (though he did receive him back again) this is clear from Heb. 11.17.18.19. 4. Faith can exercise it self upon the promise, notwithstanding that callenges and convictions of unworthinesse and guilt do wait on the Christi∣an; this is clear, 2 Sam. 23.5. that although his house was not so with God as did become, yet he believed the promise; as likewise it is clear from Psal. 65.3. Iniquities prevail against me, and yet that doth not interrupt his faith; but he saith, As for our transgressions, thou shalt purge them a∣way. And certainly it were a noble and precious act of Faith to believe, notwithstanding of unan∣swerable challenges of guilt; the best way, both to crucifie our Idols, and to answer those chal∣lenges, is believing, and hoping against hope, and closing with Christ, this is clear from Isa. 64.6.7. compared with ver. 8. where after strange chal∣lenges, the Prophet hath a strange word, but now, O Lord, thou art our Father. There is an Empha∣sis in the word (now) for all this, yet thou art (now) our Father. 5. And lastly, this pointeth out the myste∣rious acting of the grace of Faith, that it exer∣ciseth it self upon an invisible object, even upon Christ not yet seen, according to that word, 1 Pet. 5.8. Whom having not seen, yet ye love, in
whom though now ye see him not, yet believing,  I pose the greater part of you who are here, wh∣ther or not these be two of the greatest parado and mysteries unto you? For is not this a m∣stery to love him whom we never saw? Whom ha∣ving not seen, yet ye love. To love an absent a unseen Christ, is a mystery to the most part of th world; and is not this a mystery to believe on his whom we never saw? In whom, though ye see hi not, yet believing. And I shal add this, that Fai can hold fast its interest with God, notwithstan∣ding the most precious Christians should call  hypocrits, and not acknowledge us: this is clear is the practice of Job, and most clear from th word, Isai. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Fa∣ther, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Isra acknowledge us not. III. Thirdly, this pointeth out the excellence of the grace of Faith, that Faith (when it is i exercise) is that grace by which a Christian dot attain unto most sensible enjoyments. There is great question that is much debated among Christians, what is the way to win to this happy length, to be always under the sweet and refreshing influence of heaven, and to have his dew alway coming down upon our branches? I can give  answer to it but this, Be much in the exercise  Faith; this is clear from that notion and name pu upon Faith, Isai. 45.22. it is called, a look to Christ, which is a most sensible act. If ye would know a description of Faith, it is this, The divin contemplation of the immortal soul, upon that divin
excellent and precious object Jesus Christ: for God never made Faith a liar, and therefore its eye is never off him that is the noble object of Faith, Jesus Christ manifested in the Gospel: and it is clear, Eph. 1.13. After ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which preacheth out the excellent enjoyments these had after their closing with Christ who is invisible. Our Faith is called a seeing, which speaketh out this, that Faiths sight of God is as certain as if it did be∣hold him with our eyes; as is clear, Heb. 11.27. Moses saw him by faith who is invisible. And we conceive that the ground which maketh the most part of us have such complaints, How long wilt thou forget us for ever? It is this, the want of the spiritual exercise of Faith; and are there not some here who may cry out, It is more then thirty days since I did behold the King: Yea, there are some who go a greater length, and cry out, I have lived these two years at Jerusalem, and yet I have not seen the Kings face: Yea, there are some here whose complaint may go a little higher, and cry forth, These three years and six-moneths it hath not rained on me: but the clouds have been restrained, and bound up, and the heavens have become brass. And would ye know the rise of these complaints? It is this, ye are not much in the spiritual exercise of faith. And to you, I would only say these two words. First, it is easier to perswade a reprobate that he is defective in the fear of God, and in his love to God, then to perswade some such, that they are wanting to God in their saith; for they
hold fast that piece of desperate iniquity till they die. Secondly, we would say to those of you wh have the valley of Achor for a door of hope, an have tasted of the sweetness of Christ, some  you will be less convinced for the neglect of th duty of faith, then for the neglect of the duty o prayer, or of the duty of keeping the Sabbath day. But I am perswaded of this, that if the no∣ble worth of that transcendent object were known, we would have a holy impatience unt once we did believe. IV. Fourthly, this also pointeth out the ex∣cellency of the grace of faith; it is that grace by which a Christian is advanced to the highest and most inconceivable pitch of dignity, and that is to be the child of the living God; as is clear, John 1.12. To as many as received  believed in him, he gave power or prerogative to become the sons of God. And certainly that noble prerogative of adoption is much undervalued by many: And I will tell you two grounds whereon the most part of men undervalue that excellent gift of adoption. First, they do not take up the infinite highness of God, and what a one he is, otherwise they would cry out with David; Seemeth it a smal thing in your eyes, to be a son to the King of Kings? Secondly, we do not take up, nor understand those match∣less priviledges which are given to them who are once in this estate. I am perswaded, if this were believed, that he who is a servant doth not abide in the house for ever, though he that is a son doth; it would stir us up to more divine zeal in our pursuit after Christ.
V. Fifthly, this likewise pointeth out the ex∣cellency of the grace of saith; it is that grace by which all othere actions are pleasant to God & are taken off our hand; as is clear, Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice then Cain: which must be undestood even to all other duties. And that word, vers. 6. Without faith it is impossible to please God, speaketh this also, that by faith we do exceedingly please him. And this is a most sad and lamentable reproof unto many who are here, that their actions do not please God, because they are not in faith. Would you know a description of your prayers? (ye who are hypocrites, and destitute of the knowledge of God) It is this your prayers are the breach of the third command, in taking the Name of the Lord in vain, for which he will not hold you guiltless. And would you know what is your hearing of Ser∣mons? It is an abomination to the Lord; accor∣ding to that word in Tit. 1.15. To the unbelie∣ving and impure, is nothing clean. And as Solo∣mon doth speak, The plowing of the wicked is sin; so that all your actions that ye go about, are but an offence to the Majesty of the Lord. Now we would speak to these two things, be∣fore we proceed to the evidence of faith, to wit: First, that there is a difference betwixt the direct act of faith, and the reflecting act of faith: for there may be a direct act of faith in a Christian, when he is not perswaded that he doth believe; but the reflecting acts of faith, are these which a Christian hath when he is perswaded in his con∣science
that he doth believe. And we would se∣condly say, that there are many that do go down to their grave under that soul-destroying delusi∣on, that they are in the Faith, and yet never did know what Faith is. I am perswaded there are many whom all the preachings in the world will never perswade that they did never believe: their Faith being born with them, and it will die with them without any fruit; but faith being such an excellent grace, and so advantagious, whereof we have spoken a few things, we shal speak a little further of it: First, in pointing out some evi∣dences by which a Christian may know whether or not he be in the Faith. Secondly, I shal give you some helps whereby Faith may be keeped in exercise. I. Now there is this first evidence of Faith, that a Christian who doth believe, he account∣eth absence and want of fellowship with Christ, and communion with him, one of the greatest and most lamentable crosses that ever he had; as is clear, Psal. 13.3. Lighten mine eyes, said David, that is, let me behold, and be satisfied with thy face, and the motive that he backeth it with, is this, Lest I sleep the sleep of death. David thought him∣self a dead man if Christ did withdraw his pre∣sence from him, also it is clear, Cant. 3.1. com∣pared with the following verses, where absence from Christ, and want of communion with him, was the greatest crosse the Spouse had; and it is clear from John 20.11.12.13. where Mary had a holy disdain of all things in respect and com∣parison
of Christ. But I will tell you what an hypocrite doth most lament, and that is the want of reputation amongst the Saints; that is the great god and Idol amongst hypocrites, and thee which (when not enjoyed) hypocrites, and A∣theists lament most; the world, and the lust of their eyes, when they want these then they cry out, They have taken away my gods, and what have I more? They think heaven can never make up he losse of earth. And certainly if many of us would examine our selves by this, we should find our selves most defective: I would pose all you who are here, who have taken on a name to be fol∣lowers of Christ, whether or not ye have been content to walk thirty days in absence from Christ, and yet never to lament it: Hath not Christ been thirty dayes and more in heaven without a visite from you? And yet for all this, you have not cloathed your selves with sackcloath: I will not say that this is an undeniable evidence of the to∣tall want of the grace of faith; but it doth eminent∣ly prove this, that the person who hath come this length, hath lost much of his primitive love, and much of that high esteem, which he ought to have of matchlesse Christ: what can you find in this world, that maketh you converse so little with heaven? I think that it is the noble encou∣ragement of a Christian, when he is going down to his grave, that he hath this where with to comfort himself, I am to change my place, but not my company. Death to the believing Christi∣an being a blessed transition and transportation to
a more immediat, constant, and uninterrupted enjoyment of God: But I believe, that if all who have the name of Believers in this genera∣tion should go to heaven, they might have, this to say, I am now not only to change my place but also my company: For these seventy years I have been conversant with my Idols, but now I am to converse with more blessed, divine and excellent company. O that ye might be perswa∣ded to pursue much after an absent Christ! Were it not a sweet period of our life, to breath out our last breath in his arms, and to be living in the faith of being eternally with him, which might be founded upon his Word. II. There is this second evidence of one that is in the Faith: They do endeavor to advance that necessary work of the mortification of their Idols, according to that word 1 John 3.3. Every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure. Acts 15.9. Faith it purifieth the heart. And concerning this evidence (least any should mistake it) I would say these things to you. First the mortification of a Christian, as long as he is here below, it doth more consist in resolutions than in attainments, it is certain, that there are high attainments of a Christian, in the mortification of his Idols; but his resolutions go far above his performances. Secondly, we would say this. That those Christians who ne∣ver came this length in Christianity, to make that an universal conclusion, and full resolution, What have I to do any more with Idols? They
may suspect themselves, that they are not in the Faith: For a Chrstian that is in Christ, he is universal in resolutions, though he be not so in practice, but defective in performances. A Chri∣stian may have big resolutions with weak per∣formances; for resolutions will be at the gate of heaven, before practice come from the border of hell; there being a long distance betwixt reso∣lution and practice, and the one much swifter then the other. And thirdly, We would like∣wise, say that ye who never did know what it was to endeavour (by prayer and the exercises of other duties) the mortification of your lusts and Idols, ye may be afraid, that ye have not yet the hope of seeing him as he is. And I would say this to many who are setled upon their lees, and who never did know what it was to spend one hour in secret prayer for mortifying an Idol, that they would beware, lest that curse be past in hea∣ven against them. I would have purged you, and ye would not be purged, therefore ye shall not be purged any more till ye die. That iniquity of re∣fusing to commune with Christ in the work of ;ecret mortification, I say; that iniquity shall not be purged away. And we would once seriously desire you by that dreadfull sentence that Christ shall passe against you, and by the love you have to your immortal souls, and by the pains of those everlasting torments in hell, that ye would seri∣ously set about the work of spiritual mortification, that so ye may evidence that ye have believed, and that ye have the soul-comforting hope of eternal
life. I would only speak this one word to you, and desire you seriously to ponder it: What if within twelve hours hereafter a summons were given to you, without continuation of dayes, to compear before the solemn and dreadful Tribu∣nal of that impartial Judge, Jesus Christ? what suppose ye, would be your thoughts? Will you examine your own conscience, what you think would be your thoughts, if such summons were given unto you: I am perswaded of this, That your knees would smite one against another, and your faces would gather paleness, seeing your con∣science would condemn you, That you had been weighed in the ballance and found light: O think ye that ye can both fight and triumph in one day? Think ye that ye can fight and overcome in one day? Think ye your lusts and unmortified cor∣ruptions so weak, and faint-hearted an enemy, that upon the first appearance of such imaginary champions (as most part of us are in our own eyes) that your idols would lay down arms, and let you trample on them? Believe me, mortifica∣tion is not a work of one day, or one year, but it is a work will serve you all your time, begin as soon as you will; and therefore seeing you have spent your dayes in the works of the flesh, it is time that now you would begin and pursue after him, whose work is with him, and whose reward shall come before him. III. Now there is this third evidence, by which a Christian may know whether he be in the faith or not; & it is, that Christ is matchless and incom∣parable
unto such an one, according to that word, 1. Pet. 1.7. To you that believe, Christ is precious. And that word that Luke hath in his 7. chap. at the close: That she to whom much was forgiven, loved much. Now lest this likewise should prove a discouragement to any, I would only have you take notice of this, that a Christian may be a be∣liever, and yet want the sensible discoveries of this, that Christ is matchlesly precious to him: but this is certain, that when they are in the live∣ly exercise of Faith, it is impossible then for them not to esteem Christ matchless: and I would speak this likewise to many who are here; Have you not been living these ten years in Faith? And I would pose you with this: Esteem you not your Idols more matchless then Christ and more of worth then he? It is impossible that there can be any lively exercise of faith, and not esteem Christ matchless. It is not to say it with your mouth and contradict it with your heart, will do the business: for if your heart could speak, it would say, I would sell Christ for thirty pieces of silver; but mine idols would I sell at no rate. Are there not many of you who love the world and its pleasures, better then eternity of joy? O! know you not that word, O ye desperately ignorant of the truths of God! That he who loveth the world, the love of the Father is not in him? And yet notwithstanding of the light of the Word, yet you would sell your immortal souls, with Esau for a moss of pottage. O! but it is a poor bargain, when you have sold the eternity of joy, for a passing world, and for its
transitory delights! I would earnestly know what shal be your thoughts in that day, when you shall be standing upon the utmost line betwixt time and eternity? O! what will be your thoughts at that day? But you are to follow on to endless pain, by appearance, and then you are to leave your idols. I shall only desire that you may read the word, Isai. 10.3. What will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shal come from far? To whom will ye flee for help? And where will ye leave your glory? You shall then preach mortification to the life, though all the time of mortification shall be then cut off. O but to hear a worldly minded man, when eternity of pain is looking him in the face, preach out concerning the vanity of this world, might it not preswade you, that the world is a fancy and a dream that shal flee away, and shal leave you in the day of your greatest strait? IV. And there is this fourth evidence of faith, that a Christian who doth truly believe, he is that Christian who entertaineth a divine jealousie, and a holy suspition of himself, whether or not he doth believe. I love not that faith which is void of fear: this was clear in the practice of believing Noah, that though by faith he built the Ark yet he had fear mixed with his faith. I know that there are some who are ignorant concerning this, what it is to doubt concerning eternal peace? and more, it is not every one that doubteth, that certainly shal get heaven, fore I think an hypocrite may doubt concerning his eternal salvation; how∣ever, I think the exercise of an hypocrite under
his doubtings, it is more the exercise of his judge∣ment then the exercise of his conscience. And I may say, that if all the exercise of the Law, which is preached in these dayes, were narrowly sear∣ched, it would be more the exercise of light, then the exercise of conscience. We speak these things as our doubt, which was never our exercise, and we make these things our publick exercise, which was never our private and chamber-exercise. And I think that if all that a Christian did speak to God in prayer, were his exercise, he would speak less, and wonder more. We would be speechless when we go to God; for often if we did speak no∣thing but our exercise, we would have nothing to say. And certainly it is true, that often we fall in∣to that woful sin of desperate lying against the holy Ghost, by flattering God with our mouth, and lying unto him with our tongue. And I shall only say these two words, there are some who have this for their great design, viz. they would be at peace with their conscience, and also they would beat peace with their idols: they would gladly recon∣cile conscience and their idols together. That is their great design. And there are some whose de∣sign is a little more refined; they study rather to be reconciled with their conscience, then to be re∣conciled with God: Their great aim they shoot at, is this, to get their conscience quieted, though they know not what it is to have the soul-com∣forting peace of God to quiet them. V. Now there is this last evidence of Faith, that justifying faith is a faith which putteth the
Christian to be much in the exercise of those du∣ties by which it may be maintained; for we must keep faith as the apple of our eye: and for that end, I would only give you these three things, by which faith must be kept in exercise; and a real Christian will be endeavoring, i some measure, to attain unto these. 1. It keepeth faith much in exercise, to be much in marking and taking notice of the divine exercise, and proofs of the love of God, wherewith a Christian doth meet, as is clear from that word in Rom. 5.4. Experience worketh hope. I durst be bold to charge the most part that are indeed in Christ with this, that they are too little in remar∣king, and taking notice of the experiences of his love. You should mark the place of your expe∣rience, and much more you should mark the expe∣rience it self, as is clear from Scripture, that the very place where Christians did meet with ex∣perience in such an enjoyment of God, they mar∣ked it, Ezech. 1.1. By the rivers of Chebar the hea∣vens were opened, and I saw the visions of God. And Gen. 32.30. Jacob called the place Penil, The place of being, after seeing of the face of God, it was so remarkable unto him. And we conceive that you would mark these two things mainly in your practice. First, you would mark, if you can possibly, the first day of your closing with Christ, and your coming out of Egypt: and we may allude unto that command (if not more then allude to it) in Deut. 16.1. Observe the mo∣neth of Abib, and keep the Passeover unto the Lord
thy God; for in the moneth of Abib, the Lord thy God brought thee out of the land of Egypt. And second∣ly, we would have you much in marking these ex∣periences which have encreased your faith, and which have strengthened your love, and which have made you mortifie your idols. These are ex∣periences especially to be marked. 2. Faith is kept in exercise, and we win to the lively assurance of our interest in God, which we would press upon you, by being much in the ex∣ercise of secret prayer O! but many love much to pray when abroad, who never loved to pray when alone; and that is a desperate sign of hypocrisie, according to that Matth. 6.5. it is said of hypo∣crites; They love to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the street, that they might be seen of men. But it is never said of these persons, that they love to pray alone, only they loved to pray in Synagogues; but is is secret and retired prayers by which faith must be kept in exercise. 3. And there is this likewise that we would press upon you, that you would be much in stu∣dying communion and fellowship with God, that so your faith may be kept in life. And, O what a blessed life were it, each day to be taken up to the top of the Mount Pisga, and there to behold that promised land, to get a refreshing sight of the crown every morning, which might make us walk with joy all along the day! The heart of a Christian ought to be in heaven, his conversa∣tion ought to be there, his eyes ought to be there; and I know not what of a Christian ought to be
out of heaven (even before his going there) save his lumpish tabernacle of clay, which cannot in∣herit incorruption till he be made incorruptible. And I shal say no more but this, many of us are readier to betray him with a kiss, and crucifie him afresh, then to keep communion with him: but wo eternally be to him by whom the Son of man is betrayed, and that doth crucifie Christ afresh: I were better that a milstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the depth of the sea. I remember an expression of a man, not two dayes ago, who upon his death-bed, being asked by one, what he was doing? did most stupidly, though most truly, reply, That he was fighting with Christ. And I think, that the most part of us (if he prevent us not) shal die fighting with Christ. But know and be perswaded, that he is too sore a party for us to fight with: He will once tread you in the wine-press of his fury, and he shall return with dyed garments from treading such of you as would not imbrace him: He shal destroy you with all his heart. Therefore be instructed (least his soul be disjointed from you) as that word in Jer. 6.8. And least your soul eternally be separated from him. Be instru∣cted, I say, to close with him by faith. Now to him who can make you to do so, we desire to give praise. In the two Sermons next following, you have the rest of these sweet purposes which the worthy Author preached upon the same Text.
SERMON V. JOHN 3.23. This is his Commandment, that ye should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, &c. THere are two great rocks upon which a Christian doth ordinarily dash in his way and motion toward his rest. 1. The rock of pre∣sumption and carnal confidence, so that when Christ dangleth them upon his knees, and satis∣fieth them with the breasts of his consolations, and maketh their cup to over-flow, then they cry out, My mountain standeth strong, I shall never be mo∣ved. And 2. the rock of misbelief and discou∣ragement, so that when he hideth his face, and turneth back the face of his Throne, then they cry out; Our hope and strength is perished from the Lord. We know not what it is to bear our en∣joyments by humility, nor out crosses hy patience and submission. O! but misbelief and jealousie are bad interpreters of dark dispensations: they know not what it is to read these mysterious cha∣racters of divine providence, except they be writ∣ten in the legible characters of sense: misbelief is big with child of twins, and is travelling till it bring forth apostasie and security: and no doubt, he is a blessed Christian that hath overcome that woful idol of misbelief, and doth walk by that Royal law of the Word, and not by that changea∣ble rule of dispensations. We conceive that there are three great Idols and Dagons of a Chri∣stian,
that hindereth him from putting a blan in Christs hand, concerning his guiding to Hea∣ven; there is pride, self-indulgence, and securi∣ty. Do we not covet to be more excellent then our neighbors? Do we not love to travel to hea∣ven through a valley of roses? And do we not ambitiously desire to walk toward Sion sleeping, rather then weeping, as we go? Are there not some words that we would have taken out of the Bible? That is sad Divinity to flesh and blood: Through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, we love not to be changed form vessel, to vessel, that so our scent may be taken from us. There are three great enemies of Christ, mis∣belief, hypocrisie, and prophanity. Misbelief is a bloody sin, hypocrisie is a silent sin, profanity is a crying sin, those are mother evils. And I shall give you these differences betwixt them: Mis∣belief crucifieth Christ under the vail of humi∣lity, hypocrisie crucifieth Christ under the vail of love, and profanity putteth him to open shame. Misbelief denieth the love and power of God, hypocrisie denieth the omniscience of God; and profanity denieth the justice of God: misbe∣lief is a sin that looketh after inherent righteous∣nesse, hypocrisie is a sin that looketh after exter∣nal holinesse only, and profanity is a sin that looketh after heaven without holinesse, making a connexion between those things that God hath alwayes separat, and separating those things which he hath alwayes put together, so that their faith
shal once prove a delusion, and flee away as a ream in the night: but let us study this excel∣ent grace of true and saving faith, which shall be  precious remedy against all those Christ-de∣troying and soul-destroying evils. But now to come to that which we did pro∣ose thirdly, to be spoken of from the words, which was the sweetness of this grace of faith; no oubt it is a pleasant command, and it maketh all ommands pleasant: it is that which casteth a ivine lustre upon the most hard sayings of Christ nd maketh the Christian to cry forth, God hath oken in his Holinesse, I will rejoice. We need ot stand long to clear that faith is a sweet, and efreshing command; for it is oftentimes recor∣ed in Scripture to the advantage of this grace, hat unspeakable joy and heavenly delight, are e hand-maids that wait upon it. But more articularly to make it out, we shall speak to these hings. The first is, that this grace giveth a Christian a broad and comprehensive sight of Christ, and maketh to behold not only the beau∣y of his actings, but the beauty of his person? And there are these three precious sights that Faith giveth to a Christian of Christ. First, t letteth the christian see Christ in his absolute nd personal excellency, taking him up as the eter∣all Son of God, as the Ancient of dayes, as the ather of Eternity, as the expresse Image of his Fathers person, and the brightness of his glory, and his filleth the soul with divine fear and admira∣ion. Hence is that word, Heb. 11.28. That we
see by Faith, him that is invisible. As if he h said, faith is that grace that maketh things th are invisible, visible unto us. It letteth the so see Christ in his relative excellencies, that is what he is to us. Faith taketh up Christ as husband, and from thence we are provoked  much boldnesse and divine confidence, and with all to see those rich possessions that are provide for us by our elder brother, who was born for a∣versity. Faith taketh up Christ as a blesse days man that did lay his hands on us both. And fro thence it is constrained to wonder at the conde∣scendency of Christ: It taketh him up as dying and as redeeming us from the power of the grave and from the hands of our enemies; and th provoketh Christians to make a total and absolu resignation of themselves over unto Christ, I serve him all the dayes of their life in righteousne and holiness. And thirdly, Faith maketh the so behold those mysterious draughts of spotless lov those divine emanations of love that hath flowe from his ancient and everlasting love, since th world began. Would you know the great grou why we are so ignorant of him, who is the study  Angels, and so all that are about the Throne?  is this, we are not much in the exercise of fait. And if we would ask that question, What is th way to attain the saving knowledge of God  Christ? We could give no answer to it but thi Believe, and again believe, and again believe Faith openeth those mysterious seals of h boundless perfections, and in some way teache
he Christian to answer to that unanswerable question, What is his Name? And what is his ons Name? There is this secondly, that poin∣eth out the sweetnesse of Faith, that it giveth an xcellent relish unto the promises, and maketh them food to our souls. What are all the promi∣s without faith (as to our use) but as a dead let∣er hath no life? But faith exercised upon the promises, maketh a Christian cry out, The ords of his mouth are sweeter unto me then the ho∣ey and the honey comb: as is clear from Heb. 11.12.13. It is by faith that we embrace the promi∣es, and do receive them. Thirdly, the sweetness of faith may appear by his, that it enableth a Christian to rejoyce un∣der the most anxious and afflicting dispensations hat he meeteth with whilst he is here below; as  clear from Rom. 5.1.3. where his being justi∣ed by faith hath this fruit attending it, to joy in ibulation, and likewise from Heb. 10.34.35. oth, not faith hold the crown in its right hand, nd letteth a Christian behold these infinite dig∣ities that are provided unto them, after they ave as a strong man run their race? And when  Christian is put into a furnace hotter seven imes more then ordinary, it bringeth down the on of man Jesus Christ, to walk with them in he furnace, so that they walk safely, and with joy through fire and water, and (in a manner) they an have no cross in his company. For would e know what is the description of a Cross? It  want Christ in any estat. And would you
know what is the description of prosperity? It is to have Christ in any condition or estate of life. What can ye want that have him? And what can you have that want him? He is that all, so that all things beside him are but vanity. But be∣sides this, faith doth discover unto a Christian that there is a sweet period of all his trials and af∣flictions that he can be exposed unto; so that he can never say that of faith which Ahab spoke of Micajah, He never prophesieth good things to me; but rather he may say alwayes the contrary, faith never prophesieth evil unto me, it being a grace that prophesieth excellent things in the darke night, and sweetly declareth, that though weeping do endure for the evening, yet joy commeth in the morning. And that though now they go forth wee∣ping, bearing precious seed, yet at last they shal re∣turn reioycing, having sheaves in their bosome. And this may bring in the fourth considerati∣on, to point out the sweetness of Faith, that  giveth a refreshing sight of that land which is a∣far off, and maketh him to behold that inheri∣tance that is provided for the Saints in light: It goeth forth to the brook Eshcol, and there doth pluck down those grapes that grow in Em∣manucls land, to bring up a good report up∣on that noble Countrey we are sojourning to∣wards, and the city, the streets whereof are pa∣ved with transparent gold. And howbeit it may be a perplexing debate between many and their own souls, whether or not these eyes that have been the windows through which so much un∣cleanness
hath entered, and those species of lust have been conveyed into the heart, shal once be eyes of a dove washed with milk, and fitly set, and be admitted to see that glorious object, the Lamb that sitteth upon the Throne? Or whether ever these tongues that have been set on fire of hell, and these polluted lips that have spoke so much a∣gainst God and heaven, and all his people, and interests shall ever be admitted to sing, these hea∣venly Halelujahs amongst those spotless quire of Angels, and that assembly of the first-born? Or if these hands or feet that have been so active to commit iniquity, and so swift to run after vanity, shal ever be admitted hereafter to carry those Palm branches, and follow the Lamb where ever he goeth? Or whether ever these hearts that have been indeed a Bethaven, a house for Idols, may yet notwithstanding be a dwelling for the Holy Ghost? Though these things, we say, and such like, may be the subject of many sad debates to some weary souls, and cause many toffings to and fro till the morning; yet faith can bring all these mysteries to light, and looking within the vail, can let us see thousands of thousands, who were once as ugly as our selves, yet now having washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, admitted to stand before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night. Now there is that fourthly, which we promi∣sed to speake of, concerning this grace of Faith, from these words, and it is the absolute necessity that is of the exercise of this grace, which is hol∣den
forth in that word, His Commandment which doth import these three things. 1. Th all the commands that we can obey without th commandment of Faith, it is but a polluting  our selves, and a plunging of our selves in th ditch till our own cloaths abhor us. 2. Th God taketh greater delight in the exercise of th grace of Faith, then in the exercise of any other. And lastly, that as to the many imperfections which we have in our obedience, there is a sweet act of oblivion past of them all, if we make con∣science seriously to obey this command of Faith which is indeed the sweet compend of the Go∣spel: all these things doth most clearly appear, i that believing here is called, His Commandment by way of excellency, as if this were his only commandment. But that we may yet a little more particularly point out the absolute necessity of Faith, there are these things that speaketh it forth to the full 1. That though rivers of tears should run down our eyes, because we keep not his Law; though we should never rise off our knees from prayer and should all our lifetime speak to God with the tongue of Angels; and though we should constantly obey his commands, yet without faith we should never escape that eternal sentence of excommunication from the presence of the Lord, there being no action that doth proceed from  which can please the Majesty of the Lord, unless it hath its rise from this principle of faith; as i clear from Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it is im∣possible
to please God. And though we should offer nto him ten thousand rivers of oyl, and thou∣sands of rams, and should offer up in a burnt sa∣crifice all the beasts that are upon the mountains, and the trees that are upon many hills, this should e the answer that God should return to us: Who th required these things at your hands? I take no cleasure in these solemn sacrifices; because there is no way of attaining peace with God, but through he exercise of faith, making use of the spotless ighteousness of Jesus Christ. 2. Let us do our tmost by all the inventions we can, to bring own our body, and let us separate our selves from ll the pleasures of the flesh; yet all our Idols shal eign without much contradiction, except we do nce attain unto this grace of faith, which is that ictory, whereby we must overcome the world, and the hand that maketh use of infinite strength, for bduing of coruptions, making the Christian weetly to take up that song, Stronger is he that is with us, then he that is in the world. Form all this that we have said, both of the sweetness of Faith, and the necessity thereof, we would propose these few considerations, to two or three sorts of persons. 1. There are some who live in that vain ima∣ginary delusion of attaining to heaven through a ovenant of works, and do neglect to seek salva∣tion by Faith in the righteousness of Christ; and o those who build upon this sandy foundation, I hal say but these two words. First, how long shal e labor in the fire for very vanity? Do ye ever
think to put on the cap-stone? Know you  that the day is approching, when your house shal fall about your ears, your confidence shal be rejected, and your hope shal evanish as a dream and flee away as a vision in the night? Secondly, what a monstruous blindness, and what an un∣speakable act of folly must it be, to say that Christ was crucified in vain? which yet ye do practically assert, when ye go about to purchase a righteous∣ness through the works of the Law. 2. There are some who are secure in their own thoughts concerning their faith; they never que∣stioned the reality of it, they never examined it. O ye whose faith is as old as your selves, ye say y never knew what it was to dispute; and I may say, ye never knew what it was to believe. Thou pro∣fane hypocrite, let me tell thee, a strong faith, and yet strong idols, must needs be a strong delusion: Thou wilt not obey the Lord: Thou wilt no pray: thou wilt not believe a threatning in all the word: Thou wilt count all Religion madness and foolishness, and yet thou wilt perswade thy self thou believest in Christ. Oh! be not deceived: God is not mocked; and why will ye mock your selves  Shal I tell you that reprobats have a sad Reli∣gion? One day they must believe, and obey, and pray, and give a testimony to godliness; but, alace too late, and little to their advantage, Shal no he whom all the Ministers on earth could scarce ever perswade to believe so much as a Heaven o Hell, or one threatning in all the Book of God, at last be forced to believe their own sense, when they shal see the Ancient of dayes upon the
Throne, and shal hear the cryes of so many thou∣and living witnesses come out both from Hea∣ven and Hell, bearing testimony to the truth, of threatnings and promises, that not one jot of them s fallen to the ground, and he would never be erswaded to bow a knee to God in earnest all his fe? Shal he not then pray with greatest ferven∣y, That hills and mountains might fall upon him, o cover him from the face of the Lamb? And he that would never submit to a command of God, must he not at last obey that dreadful command, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting tor∣ments? &c. Yea, he who was the greatest mocker n the world, shal then confess, that they are blest who put their trust in the Lord; as they are ex∣cellently brought in, though in an Apocryphal ook, Wisd. chap. 5.4. crying out with great ter∣or while they behold that unexpected sight of he glorious condition of the godly: O here is the men, say they, whom we mocked, whose life we ac∣counted madness, and their end dishonorable. Be wise therefore in time, and do that willingly which ye must do by constraint; and do that with sweetness and advantage, that ye must do at last with loss and sorrow. Thirdly, there are some who certainly have some hope of eternal life, but content themselves with a smal measure of assurance; & these I would befeech, that ye would be more endeavoring to make your calling and election sure, and would be endeavoring to see your names written in the ancient Records of heaven. And this we shal press
upon you by several arguments. 1. Those strong and subtil; and soul-destroying delusions that are amongst many, who conceive they do believe (as we were saying) and are pure in their own eyes, who yet are not purged from their iniquities. O, are there not many of us that are in a golden dream, that suppose we are eating; but when we awake, our soul is empty; whose faith is a Meta∣physick notion, that hath no foundation, but mans apprehension? And this shall never beare us through the gates of death, nor convey us in unto eternity of joy. 2. May not this press you to fol∣low after assurance, that it is the compendious way to sweeten all your crosses, as is clear from Hab. 3.17.18. where the conviction of this made Habakkuk to rejoyice in the God of his salvation though the fig tree did not bear fruit, and the labor of the olive did fail, and there were no sweetness to be found in the vine. And from Heb. 10.34. when they take joyfully the spoiling of their goods knowing within themselves that they had a better and an enduring substance. This is indeed that tree, which if we cast into the waters of Marh, they will presently become sweet: for is it not be∣low the child of hope to be much anxious about these things that he meets with here, when he sincerely knoweth that commandment shal come forth: Lift up your heads, for the day of your eternal redemption draweth near; even the day when all the rivers of his sorrows shal sweetly run into the Ocean of everlasting delight? 3. A Christian that is much in assurance, he is much in commu∣nion
and fellowship with God; as is clear from the Song 1.13.14. and Song 2.3. where when once she cometh to that, to be perswaded that Christ was her beloved, then she sate down under his shadow, and his fruit was pleasant unto here taste; for the assured Christian doth taste of these crums that fall from that higher Table; and no doubt, those that have tasted of that old wine, will not straightway desire the new, because the old is better. And then, fourthly, it is the way to keep you from apostasie, and making defection from God: Faith is that grace that will make you con∣tinue with Christ in all his temptations; as is clear from 2. Pet. 1 10. where this is set down as a fruit of making our calling and election sure, that if we do these things, we shall never fail. Faith maketh a Christian to live a dependent life: For would you know the Motto of a Christian? It is this self diffidence, and Christ-dependence; as is clear from that word in the Song 8.5. that while we are walking through this wilderness, we are leaning upon our well-beloved. 5. This assurance will help a Christian to overcome many tempta∣tions. There are four sorts of temptations that assault the Christian: There are temptations of desire, temptations of love, temptations of hope, and temptations of anxiety, all which a Chri∣stian through this noble grace of assurance, may sweetly overcome. He that hath once made Christ his own, what can he desire but him? As Psal. 17.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord. What can he love more then Christ, or love besides
Christ, all his love being drowned, as it were, in that Ocean of his excellencies, and a sweet complacency found in the enjoyment of him. And as to hope, will not assurance make a Chri∣stian cry forth, Now, Lord, what wait I for  mine hope is in thee. And when the heart is an∣xious, doth not assurance make the Christian to hear the indignation of the Lord, and partiently submit unto the cross, since there is a sweet con∣nexion between his cross and his Crown? Rom. 8.35.36. If he suffer with him, he shal also reign with him. And lastly, there is this argument to press you to assurance, that it sweetneth the thoughts of death. It maketh death unto a Chri∣stian, not the King of terrors, but the King of desires: And it is upon these grounds that assu∣rance maketh death refreshful unto a Christian. 1. He knoweth that it is the funeral of all his miseries, and the birth-day of all his blessed and eternal enjoyments. 2. That it is the corona∣tion day of a Christian, and the day when he shall have that marriage betwixt Christ and him sweetly solemnized: and that when he is to step that last step, he knoweth that death will make him change his place, but not his company. And O that we could once win unto this, to seal that conclusion without presumption, My Beloved is mine, and I am his; We might without presum∣ption, sing one of the Songs of Sion, even while we are in this strange land! And taking Christ in our arms, might sweetly cry forth: Now lettest hou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have
seen thy salvation. Comfort your selves in this' that all your clouds shall once pass away, and that that truth shal once come to pass which was con∣firmed by the oath of an Angel, with his hand lifted up towards heaven, that time shal be no more. Time shal once sweetly die out in eterni∣tie, and ye may be looking after new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness. O! long to be with him, for Christ longeth to have you with him. SERMON III. JOHN 3.23. This is his Commandment, that ye should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, &c. THere are three most precious and cardinal graces which a Christian ought mainly to pursue; there is that exalting grace of Faith, that comforting grace of Hope, and that aspiring grace of Love: And if once a Christian did take up that heavenly difference that is betwixt these si∣ster-graces, he might be provoked to move after them most swiftly, as the chariots of Aminadab. And there is this difference between these gra∣ces; Faith is a sober and silent grace: Hope is a patient and submissive grace: Love is an ambi∣tious and impatient grace. Faith cryeth out; O my soul! be silent unto God. Hope cryeth out, I will wait patiently for the Lord, until the vision shal speak. But Love, it cryeth out, How long art thou a coming? And it is waiting to hear the sound
of his feet coming over the mountains of separa∣tion. That is the Motto of Hope, Quod defertur, non aufertur; that which is delayed, saith Hope, is not altogether taken away, and made void: And that may be the divine embleme of the grace of Love. It is Sight, infolding Desire in  arms, and it is desire cloathed with wings, trea∣ding upon Delay and Impediments. There is this second difference between these graces; the grace of Faith, it embraceth the truth of the pro∣mises: the grace of Hope, it embraceth the good∣ness of the thing that is promised: but that exal∣ting grace of Love; it imbraceth the Promiser. Faith cryeth out, Hath he spoken it? he will also do it. Hope cryeth out, Good is the word of the Lord, be it unto thy servant according to thy pro∣mise. And Love it cryeth out in an higher note, As is the apple tree amongst the trees of the wood so is my well-Beloved amongst the sons. Thirdly, there is that difference between these graces; Faith, it overcometh temptations: Hope, it over∣cometh difficulties; but Love stayeth at home, and divideth the spoil. There is a sweet corre∣spondence between those graces, in this, Faith it fighteth and conquereth: and Hope, it fighteth and conquereth, but Love, it doth enjoy the tro∣phies of the victory. And fourthly, there is this difference, the noble grace of Faith, it shal once evanish into sight. That noble grace of Hope, it shall once vanish into possession and enjoyment, but that constant grace of Love, it shal be the eter∣ companion of a Christian, and shall walk in
with him unto the streets of the New Jerusalem. And I would ask you that question, What a day shal it be when Faith shal cede to Sight? What a day shal it be when Hope shal yeeld its place to Love; and Love and Sight shal eternally fit down and solace themselves in these blessed my∣steries, these everlasting consolations of heaven, world without end? And fifthly, there is this difference, less will satisfie the grace of Faith, and the grace of Hope, then will satisfie the grace of Love. Faith it will be content with the promise, and Hope will be content with the thing that is promised; but that ambitious grace of Love, it will be only content with the Pro∣miser. Love claspeth its arms about that precious and noble object Jesus Christ. Love is a suspi∣cious grace, it oftentimes cryeth forth, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. So that Faith is oftentimes put to resolve suspicions of Love. I can compare these three graces to nothing so fitly, as to those three great worthies that David had: These three graces they will break thorow all difficulties, were it an host of Philistins, that so they may pleasure Christ, and may drink of the well of Bethlehem, that well of everlasting consolation that floweth from beneath the throne of God. Love is like Noahs dove, it never findeth rest for the sole of its foot, until once it be within that Ark, that place of repose Jesus Christ. And sixthly, there is this last difference between them, Faith taketh hold upon the faithfulness of Christ.
Hope taketh hold upon the goodness of Christ; but Love it taketh hold upon the heart of Christ. And think ye not it must be a pleasant and soul∣refreshing exercise, to be continually taken up in embracing him that is that eternal admiration of Angels? Must it not be an excellent life, dayly to be feeding upon the finest of the wheat, and to be satisfied with honey out of the rock? O, but heaven must be a pleasant place! And if once we would but taste of the first ripe grapes, and a cluster of wine that groweth in that pleasant land, might we not be constrained to bring up a good report of it? But now to come to that which I purpose mainly to speak of at this time. The last thing concerning Faith that we proposed from the words, was, the object upon which Faith exer∣ciseth it self, which is here set down to be the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. And that we may speak to this more clearly, we shal first speak a litle to the negative, what things are not the fit object of Faith: And then to the positive, showing how this Name of God, and of his Son Christ, is that sure ground upon which a Christian may pitch his faith. For the first, ye must know that a Christian is not to build his faith upon sense, nor sensible enjoyments. Sense may be an evidence of Faith, but it must not be the foundation of Faith. I know there are some that ofttimes cry out, Except I put my fingers into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into the hole of his side, I will not believe. And indeed it is a mystery unto
the most part of us, to be exercising Faith upon a naked word of promise, abstracted from sense: to love an absent Christ, and to believe on an ab∣sent Christ, are the two great mysteries of Chri∣stianity. But that sense is no good foundation for Faith, may appear. 1. That Faith which is buil∣ded upon fense, is a most unconstant, a most flu∣ctuating and transient Faith. I know sense hath its fits of love, and as it were, hath its fits of faith. Sometimes sense is sick of love, and sometimes sense is strong in faith; but ere six hours go about, sense may be sick of jealousie, and sick of misbe∣life, as ye will see from Psal. 30.6.7. Sense that bold thing, it will instantly cry out, My moun∣tain standeth strong, I shal never be moved: but behold how soon it changeth its note, Thou hidest thy face, and I was troubled. At one time it will cry forth, Who is like unto him that pardoneth ini∣quity, and that passeth over transgressions? But ere many hours go about, it will sing a long upon another key, and cry out, Why art thou become unto me as a liar, and as waters that fail? 2. That Faith which is built upon sense, it wanteth the promise of blessedness; for this is annexed to be∣lieving, that is founded upon the word, according to that in John 20.29. Blessed are those that have not seen, and yet have believed. Nor hath that Faith that is built upon sense, such a solide joy waiting on it, as Faith that is built upon the na∣ked word of promise; as may be cleared from that word, 1. Pet. 1.8. where Faith exercising it self upon Christ not seen, maketh a Christian to
rejoice with joy unspeakeable, and full of glory:  joy that doth not attend believing founded upon sense. 3. That Faith that is built upon sense,  giveth not much glory to God: for Faith that is built upon sense, it exalteth not the faithfulness of God, it exalteth not the Omnipotency of God. I will tell you what is the divinity of sense; Let me see, and then I will believe, but it kno∣weth not what it is to believe upon trust, and be∣cause the Lord hath spoken in his Holiness. And in effect, Faith that is built upon sense, is no faith; even as Rom 8. Hope that is seen, is no hope: and therefore when the Lord seeth a Christian making sense an Idol, that he will not believe but when he seeth or feeleth, this doth often provoke the Majesty of the Lord to withdraw himself from that Christian, and to deny him the sweet influences of Heaven, and those consolations that are above, so that in an instant he hath both his sense and his faith to seek. 2. A Christian is not to make his graces the object of his Faith; that is, when a Christian doth behold love burning within him, when he doth be hold influences to prayer increasing, and mortification waxing strong, he is not to build his faith upon them: this was condemned in the Church, Ezek. 16.14. compared with the 15. verse: I made thee perfect with my comliness? but the use that thou didst make of it, thou didst put thy trust in thy beauty, and then thou didst play the harlot. It is certain that grace when it is the object of our Faith, it doth provoke God to
blast the lively exercise thereof, and to make a Christian oft times have that complaint; Wo to me, my leanness, my leanness testifieth to my face. I will tell you three great mysteries in Christia∣nity about grace. The first is, to ride marches between these two; not to deny what they have, and yet to be denyed to what they have: Many times there is grace-denying, and not self-de∣nying; but this is that we would press upon you, to be denyed to grace, according to that which is recorded of Moses, His face did shine, and he knew it not: He did misken it, as it were, and was not at all puffed up with it: for so the words, we con∣ceive, may run. Secondly, it is a great difficulty for a Christian to be denyed to his self-denyal, to be humble in his being humble: for if pride can have no other foundation, it will build it self upon humility; and a Christian will grow proud in this, that he is growing humble. Thirdly, it is a difficulty for a Christian to examine his gro∣wing in grace, and not to be puffed up. It is certain a Christian ought to examine his growth in grace humbly, according to that Psal. 63.8. My soul followeth hard after thee, thy right hand upholdeth me, He doth not only take notice of this, that his soul did follow after God; but of the measure of that pursuit, my soul followeth hard af∣ter thee; and yet sweetly acknowledgeth it was not his own feet which carried him, nor his own hand that kept him from falling. 3. Ye are not to build your faith upon your works, and upon the righteousness of the Law.
I need not stand long to refute that practical Po∣pery that is amongst us, that thinketh we can go to heaven through a covenant of works. I told you, not long since, what your going to heaven through a covenant of works speaketh, even this horrible blasphemy, that it was an act of mon∣struous folly to send Christ to die for sinners: for if you can go to heaven without him, was not then Christ crucified in vain? And I would tell you now, that this speaketh out your damnable ignorance of the weakness and deceitfulness of your own hearts. O ye that are so great defen∣ders of Salvation by the covenant of works, I be∣seech you, what is the reason that ye break the covenant of works oftener then any? For there is none that thinketh they will go to heaven this way, but those that are the greatest breakers of the covenant of works. And is not that inconsi∣stent, and contradictory Divinity, your faith con∣tradicting your practice, and your practice telling you that your faith is a lie? 4. We must not mix our own righteousness with Christs as the object of our believing: This is indeed an evil that often lodgeth in the bosom of the most refined hypocrite, when Satan can∣not prevail to exclude Christ altogether, then he is content with that whorish Woman to divide the child; and let the object of our Faith be half of Christ, and half of self: And the truth is, many of these poor unwise sons, who stay long in the place of breaking forth of children, do willingly hearken to this overture, for fear it be presum∣ption
for such poor wretches to meddle too bold∣ly with the riches of Christ, but it were good such weak ones would consider that word, Rom. .2, where the holy Gost calleth the making  of his righteousness an act of submission, they  not submitted, saith he, unto the righteousness of Christ. O will ye not lay this to heart, that our Lord will take your believing, or your put∣ting on his righteousness for an act of great hu∣mility, and will take your misbelief as a marve∣lous act of the highest pride and presumption? 5. We are not to make providence the object of our faith. I know there are some that ask the ground of their right of heaven, they will tell us that God hath been kind to them all their dayes; I would only say to such, He may be feeding you unto the day of slaughter, and no man knoweth love or hatred by any thing that is before him. Thus much of the object of Faith negatively. And now to speak to it positively, we see the Text hol∣deth out Christ himself as that excellent and com∣pleat object of Faith, This is his Commandment, that we believe on the Name of his Son: And thus Faith closeth with Christ under a fourfold con∣sideration. First, it closeth with God in Christ, not with God immediatly and nakedly, for he dwelleth in light inaccessible, that no man can ap∣proach unto; He is higher than the Heaven, what can we do? and deeper than hell, what can we know? Job 11. Therefore we must approach unto him thorow a vail, even the vail of Christ his flesh; Heb. 10. God is a consuming fire, and
of purer eyes then that he can behold iniquity, a therefore we must first cast our eyes upon tha blessed Dayes-man that laid his hands upon us both; and look unto God as in Christ, reconciling  world to himself, and so draw near unto hi through a Mediator, who is the first and the last, and he that liveth and was dead, and is alive fo evermore, able to save to the uttermost all th come unto God by him, seeing he liveth for e∣ver to make intercession for them. Secondly, Faith closeth with Christ, as tendered freely in a covenant of promise: we would have had nothing to do with Christ, if he had not been given of the Father, and offered himself in a free covenant of promise; but he being thus holden forth upon terms of free Love, which doth utterly abomi∣nate hire, and so noble a proclamation issued forth under the great seal of Heaven, That who∣soever will, may come and drink of the water of life freely. Upon this the poor creature draweth near by vertue of a right, and stretching out the arm of most enlarged affections, doth run upon him with that joyful shout, My Lord, my God: and then maketh an absolute resignation of it self to him, which is holden out in the Scripture, by that sweet expression of kissing of the Son. And there are three parts of Christs blessed body that the Christian must endeavor to kiss and em∣brace; the mouth of Christ, the hand of Christ, and the feet of Christ. The kissing of his feet importeth the exercise of love, the kissing of his hands, the exercise of subjection, and the kis∣sing
of his mouth, the exercise of communion and fellowship with him. Thirdly, Faith clo∣seth with Christ, as the purchaser and meritori∣ous cause of all the good we receive. He is the person that hath purchased all these things unto us, and there is not one blink of love, there is nor the smallest enjoyment that a Christian meeteth with, but it is the price of the blood of Christ; Christs precious blood was laid down for it. Fourthly, Faith closeth with Christ as the efficient and worker of all our mercies; all our enjoyments are from him as the efficient cause; that is, he is the worker of all things in us, it is his preciouss fingers that must ac∣complish that blessed work of grace, and they are from Christ as the dispenser of these things. Christ is the great steward of heaven that doth communicate unto believers all the treasures of the higher House; For him hath God the Father sealed. O! but that word that Christ once spake, is much verified by himself, It is more blessed to give, then to receive. Christ is that fountain and treasure in whom all our gifts and graces are reasured up; for before the blessing come to be∣lievers, they come to Christ as the head, accor∣ding to that word, 2 Tim. 1.9. Which grace was given to us in him, before the foundations of the world were laid. It was given to Christ before the world was made, and for that end, that it might be communicated unto all his members, and so out of his fulness we shal receive, and grace for grace.
But, secondly, the Text holdeth more part¦cularly this excellent object of Faith, to be t Name of his Son, That ye believe in the Name  his Son. And here indeed we may be at a stand▪ It is long since Agar did non plus all the wo with that question, What is his Name, and wh is his Sons Name, if thou canst tell? O how little a thing can be known of him? And, O how brutish is this generation that knoweth so much lesse, then might be known of him in such a day of the Gospel. But that we may speak a little ac∣cording to our weak measure of Faith, as closing with the Name of Christ. His Name is his glo∣rious attributes, by which he revealeth so much of himself in the Scriptures, as poor mortals can take up. We did show you before, that there was three of these that were the main pillars  justifying Faith, Faithfulness, Omnipotency, a his infinite Love and Mercy. And how from the may be answered all the objections of sense, o carnal reason, and of misbelief, arising from con∣victions of unworthiness. And certain it is, tha faith in all its conflicts, maketh much use of th Names of Christ. And there is not an object tha a poor tempted soul can make, but faith can fram an answer to it, out of some of these excelle Names of God, or of his Son Christ. It woul be a more long-some work, than I intend, to le you see this in all; But I shall only instance tha in One glorious Name of God, by which he pro∣claimeth his glory, Exod. 34. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth: keeping mercy for usands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and , and that will by no means clear the guilty, &c. think there are seven ordinary objections which ay be answered from that place. First, it is an dinary objection which misbelievers do make, hat they are under the strength of their corrup∣ion: that they are black as the Tents of Kedar, and not beautiful as the Curtains of Solomon: And doth not the first letter of that Name an∣ner this, that he is a merciful Lord, the one im∣orting his ability to save, and to bring down e∣very high imagination: The other importing is infinite delight to help those that have no rength, and are under the power of their adver∣ries, the power of God being of no larger ex∣nt then this love? There is that second ob∣ection of misbelief, that we have nothing to com∣end us to Christ; but all that we have to boast of, are infirmities and imperfections: and this s abundantly answered from that second letter  his name, that he is Gracious, which impor∣th the freedom of the dispensations of his love, hat he walketh not with us, according to that le of merit; but according to that golden and ex∣ellent rule of love. It is a great dispute whether Mercy or Grace be the greatest wonder, whether he love of Christ, or the freedom of it, be the reatest mystery, sure both these put together ake up a matchless wonder? Thirdly, misbelief will object that we have forsaken him dayes
without number, and that we cannot trace b our apostacy unto the first day of its rise: and not that abundantly answered from that letter  his Name, that he is long-suffering? This be that glorious attribute in God, the glory of wh he defireth to magnifie above all his Name. Fourth∣ly, misbelief doth ordinarily propose this obje∣ction, that we have multiplied our transgression and have committed whoordome under every gr tree; and have given gifts to our lovers, even ∣ring our idols, so that we may take up that  mentation, Is not our sin great, and our transgre∣sion infinite? And is not this also answered  that letter of his Name, that he is abundant goodness? That though sin abound in us, y grace doth much more superabound in him. W confess indeed, that there are some that may w under that condition, that if they had no oth exercise throughout eternity, but to make con∣fession, they might confess, and never ma any needless repetition. And truly in some  spect it is a mercy that we are mysteries unto  selves: for if we did know compleatly the sev abominations of our hearts, and these mysteri actings of the body of death, we would be in  zard to choose strangling and death, rather  life. Yet may not one glimpse of that abunda goodness satisfie us, and calm the storm? Fift∣ty, saith misbelief, we know that we have brok our vowes and covenants with God, and that  these things that we have taken on, have be but as flax before the fire of temptation; so t
e have no hope that he will have mercy upon hose that have broken wedlock, and have not seen stedfast in his covenant: But is not that undantly answered from that letter of his Name, That he is abundant in truth; which spea∣eth that, That though we deny our selves, yet he abideth faithful, and doth not alter the words that hath gone out of his mouth. It is the infi∣nie blessedness of man, that though he be chan∣geable, yet they have to do with one that is an unchangeable being. Sixthly, there is that obje∣ction, That notwithstanding all these things are matters of encouragement to some, yet they know ot whether or not the lot of everlasting love hath fallen upon them, and whether their names e in the ancient records of heaven. But this is answered from that letter of his Name, He kee∣eth mercy for thousands; which showeth us that great number of those upon whom the lot of ever∣asting love shal fall. And if there were no other entence in all the Scripture, this might be a suf∣icient matter of a song, and might make us cry ut, Who is like unto him, whose compassions have o end? And who desires to magnifie his mercy ove all his works. And lastly, misbelief maketh his objection, They have sinned not only against ight, not only against vows, not only after much njoyment of God, but even after the application  threatnings, so that they conceive, that their aker will not have mercy upon such. Yet this is ally answered likewise from that letter of his Name, He forgiveth transgression, iniquity and
sin which three words do abundantly speak forth that there is no transgression which he will no pardon; there being but one particular among all that innumerable number of sins which lo∣geth in the heart of fallen men, that he declared unpardonable: and there is none of our disease  that is above the infinite art of love; and concer∣ning which, we can take up that complaint, There is no balm in Gilead, and there is no I hysician there. And though providence may muster up many impossibilities; yet let Faith take the pro∣mise in the one hand, and impossibilities in the other, and desire God to reconcile them; That if we cannot see any connexion between provi∣dence and the word, yet may we reflect upon the Omnipotency of God, that can make things that are seeming contrary, sweetly agree together: the Commentary will never destroy the Text, no providence will never destroy the faithfulness of God. And let me give you this advice, that those objections of misbelief which you cannot answer, and in a manner putteth you to a non plus; and when ye have looked over all the Names of God, ye cannot find an answer to them: slight them and cover them, as we have often told you, w the practice of believing Abraham, Rom. 4.19. where that strong objection of misbelief appea∣ring before his eyes, the deadness of his body, a the barrenness of Sarahs womb; it is recorded  him, he confidered not these things; as it were,  had a divine transition from the objections  misbelief to the acting of faith: and this is cle
from Matth. 15.25.26. where that strong obje∣ction of misbelief being proposed against that woman, that she was not within the compass of Christs commission, she hath a noble way of an∣swering with this; Lord, have mercy upon me. And (if so we may speak) Faith hath a kind of divine impertinency in answering the objections of mis∣belief; or rather a holy slighting of them that gaineth the victory, when cavelling with temp∣tations will not do it. The like also may be in∣stanced in his Sons Name: O how glorious ti∣tles are given to that Prince of the Kings of the earth, and to that Plant of renown, upon which the weakest faith may cast anchor, and ride out the greatest storm. I shal not detain you long on this subject; but this we would have you know, that there is no straint or difficulty that a Chri∣stian can be exposed unto, but there is some name or attribute of Christ that may sweetly answer that difficulty, and make up that disad∣vantage. Is a Christian exposed unto afflictions and troubles in a present world, let him comfort himself in this, that Christ is the shadow of a great rock in a wearied land. Is a Christian un∣der inward anxiety and vexation of mind, let him comfort himself in this, that Christ is the God of peace, and of all consolation. Is a Chri∣stian under darkness and confusion of spirit, let him comfort himself in this, that Christ is the Father of lights, and is the eternal wisdom of God. Is a Christian under the convictions of this, that he is under the power and dominion of his lusts.
let him comfort himself in this, that Christ is re∣demption; yea (that I stay no longer) if it were possible that a Christian could have a necessity that he could not find a Name in Christ to an∣swer it, he may lawfully frame a Name to Christ out of any promise in all the book of God, and he should find it forth-coming for the relieving and making up of that necessity, God would not dis∣appoint his expectation. There is yet one thing further, in reference to the object of Faith, which we shal desire you to take notice of; and it is the way of Faiths clo∣sing with its noble object, and its resting on him; and this we conceive may be excellently taken up by our considering of the many several Names that Faith getteth in Scripture, beyond any other of the graces of the Spirit. It is called looking, Isai. 45.22. Looking unto me. It is called, abi∣ding in Christ, John 15.4. Abide in me. It is called, a keeping silence unto God, Psal. 37.7. My soul, trust in God: or as the word is in the original, My soul, be silent unto God: and that in Psal. 62.1. My soul waiteth: or as the word is, Truly my soul is silent unto God. Likewise Faith is called a leaning, Psal. 7.15. I have leaned upon thee from my mothers womb. Faith it is called, an eating of Christs flesh, John. 6.53. Faith it is cal∣led, a casting of our burden upon God, Psal. 55.22. Cast your burden upon God. And Faith it is cal∣led, a coming unto God, Matth. 11.28. And ac∣cording to these different names, there are seven noble properties and matchless differences of this
grace of Faith. The first is, that this is the grace by which a Christian doth enjoy much commu∣nion with God: hence it is called a looking, which importeth that Faith is a continual con∣templation of the immortal soul upon that pre∣cious and excellent object Jesus Christ. There is that second property of Faith, that it is that grace by which a communion with God is main∣tained; hence it is called, an abiding in God. It is that grace which maketh Christ and the belie∣ver to dwel together. The third property of Faith is, that it is a most submissive grace; hence it is called, a keeping silence unto God. Faith as it were, knoweth not what it is to repine. It is the noble excellency of Faith, it never knew what it was to misconstruct Christ. It is the noble ex∣cellency of Faith, it never knew what it was to pass an evil report upon Christ. Faith it will promise good things to a Christian in the darkest night: for when Love asketh Faith that que∣stion, Isai 21.11.12. Watch-men, what of the night? Watch-men, what of the night? Or, when shal the morning break? Faith answereth it with the words that follow (only a little inver∣ting the order) The night cometh and also the mor∣ning. The morning is approaching that admit∣teth of no following night. There is that fourth property of Faith, it is the grace that keepeth a Christian in perseverance, by its building upon the Rock: hence it is called, a leaning upon God: for a Christian by faith, doth perpetually join himself to Christ, so that whatever trouble he
be cast into, by Faith he cometh up out of that wilderness, leaning upon his Beloved: and by Faith he is led up to the Rock that is higher then he, where he may sit in saftey, and even laugh at death and destruction, when assailing him. There is that fifth property of Faith, that it is the grace that bringeth satisfaction: to the spiritual senses of a Christian, by a close and particular application of Christ, as the nowrishment of the soul: hence it is called, an eating of the flesh of Christ. There are three senses that Faith satisfieth; Faith satis∣freth the sense of sight, it satisfieth the sense of taste, and it satisfieth the sense of touch. Faith will make a Christian handle that eternal Word of life. Faith will make a Christian see that noble plant of renown: and Faith will make a Christian taste and see how gracious the Lord is. And, no doubt, those that have once satisfied their sight, they will be longing to satisfie their taste. There is that sixth property of Faith, it is that grace which giveth rest unto a Christian: hence it is called, a casting of our burden upon him. It is, as it were, the soul giving unto Christ that unsup∣portable yoke of our iniquities, and taking from Christ that easie and portable yoke of his com∣mandments. And seventhly, there is that last property of Faith, it is that grace by which san∣ctification is promoved: hence it is called, a co∣ming to Christ. It is the soul in a divine motion, and travelling from the land of Egypt, unto th land of Canaan. Faith, it is the soul in a pleasant motion from the land of the North, the land o
our captivity, unto the land of perfect liberty, all along going out by the footsteps of the flock, and walking in that new and living way, even in him who is the way, the truth, and the life. And now for a more full application of this, we shal speak but two things further. 1. We would have it considered, that there are some that come unto the covenant of promise with less dif∣ficulty, and after a more divine and Evangelick way; and there are some that close with Christ in a more difficult and legal way: There are some that before they can come to Mount Sion, they must dwel fourty dayes at Mount Sinai: There are some before the decree of heaven shal be gi∣ven to them, they must roar as an ox, and must cover themselves with sackcloath, having ashes upon their heads: We must be a Benoni, before we be a Benjamin; that is, we must be a son of sorrow, before we can be a son of consolation. But this is certain, that Christ leadeth sometimes some to himself through a valley of roses. And I would only have you take notice of these two, which though we conceive they be not infallible in the rule, yet oftentimes experience maketh them out to be truth. 1. That there are three sorts of persons who are most ordinarily brought under great terror ere they close with Christ. First, those who have committed some gross and abominable sin that is most contradicting unto the light of nature. Secondly, that person that sinneth much against light before conversion: Hence it is observed in all the Books of the
Gospel, and in the Book of the Acts, there was a more Gospel and love-way of converting the Gentils, then was of converting the Jews: See Acts 2.37. there is a sharp law exercised amongst them who had crucified the Lord of life: and Acts 9. Paul that had been a grievous persecu∣ter, at his conversion, he is first stricken dead to the ground, before he be made a captive of the love of Christ, and constrained to cry out, What wilt thou have me to do? But look to Acts 8. and chap. 19. and there ye will find a more fair and smooth way of begetting sons to Christ. And thirdly, that person that is much in conceit of his own righteousneses, he useth to be brought to Christ through much terror and exercise of the Law; that is clear in Paul, his condition also, Phil. 3. and Asts 9. compared: and certainly whoever thinketh to come that length in self-abasement, and will count, as the Apostle doth in that Chapter, must dwel many days at Mount Sinai, and learn his Arithmetick there. 2. We would have you take notice of this, that though the person that is brought to Christ in a more smooth and Evangelical way, may have the pree∣minency of the person that is brought to Christ, after a more legal and terrible way in some thing; yet we conceive that a Christian that is brought to Christ through much of the exercise of the Law, and through many of the thunderings of Mount Sinai, after he hath won to see his righ in Christ, he is more constant in the exercise of Faith; and the reason of it is, because that a
ordinary ground of misbelief, is our not distinct ptaking either of the time of our conversion, which is oftimes hid from those persons that are converted in a more Evangelick way; as likewise this, that those persons that are brought to Chirst in a more Gospel chariot, are sometimes put to debates whether ever they were under the exer∣cise of the Law; and this maketh them often (as it were) to raze the foundation, and to cry forth, My hope and my strength is perished from the Lord. And now to shut up our discourse; we shal add this one word of exhortation, that ye would care∣fully lay hold upon that noble object, and exer∣cise your faith upon him; and I shal say but this, that all these that have this noble grace of Faith, and that are heirs of that everlasting inheritance, there is a fourfold crown prepared for you: there is a crown of life that is prepared for him that shal fight that good fight of Faith: but what may you say is a crown of life, except we have joy waiting upon that life? For what is life without joy, but a bitterness and a burden to it self? therefore ye shal have a crown of joy; but what were a crown of life, and a joy, except we had the grace of holiness, and were compleat in that? therefore ye shal have also a crown of righteous∣ness: but what were life, joy and righteousness without glory? therefore ye shal have likewise a crown of glory: but what of all these, if that crown should once fall from our head, and we should be deprived of our Kingdom? therefore
take this to make up the rest, it is an eternal crown of glory. That word in Prov. 27. near the close, the crown (saith Solomon) doth not endure for ever; but this precious crown that the hands of Christ shal fix upon the head of an overco∣ming Christian, this is the motto that is engra∣ven upon it, Unchangeable and Eternal, Eternal and Unchangeable. And, O what a day suppose ye that shal be, when that precious crown shal be put upon our heads? What think you will be the difference betwixt Christ and believers in heaven? They shal have these four crowns, which are indeed one; but Christ shal have upon his head many crowns, according to that word, Rev. 19.12. But let me say one word also to you who are strangers from God, and are destitute of the grace of Christ, and will not by faith close with this excellent object, there is a four-fold crown that once shal be put upon your heads: but do not mis-interprete the vision, there is a diffe∣rence betwixt the Butler and the Baker: ye may prophesie good things to your selves, but there is a crown of death which ye shal once have put upon your heads, ye shal be always dying, and ne∣ver able to die: There is a crown of sorrow that ye shal have put upon your heads, when ye shal eternally sigh forth that sad lamentation; O to be annihilate and reduced unto nothing! When the reduction of you unto nothing would be a hea∣ven, when ye shal be tormented in those everla∣sting flames. And I would say this by the way,
ye will be all miserable and comfortless one to another: there will be no ground of consolation that ye shal reap, for the community of your sor∣row shal increase the degrees of that sorrow. And there is another crown also that ye shall put on, and that is a crown of sin, in stead of that crown of righteousness. Would ye know your exercise, O ye that are predestinate unto these everlasting pains? would ye know your exercise? It is this, ye shal eternally blaspheme and curse the God that made you. I am perswaded of this, that the ter∣rots of hell will afflict you more, and doth, then that of the sinning prepetually in hell. You would think nothing, many of you, to be in hell, if there were no pain there; for the exercise of sin, it would be your delight and life: but be perswa∣ded of it, that when your conscience is awaked, the exercise of sinning shal exceedingly aggravate your pain. And there is this crown, lastly, that ye shal put on, and that is, the crown of shame: The Prophet Isaiah maketh mention of a crown of pride; but you that have put on that crown of pride, you shal once put on that crown of everla∣sting confusion and shame, when you shal not be able to lift up your eyes to him whom you have pierced. I would fain desire you to know what would be your exercise at these three days, what will be your exercise when death shal be summo∣ning you to remove, and you shal first be entered heirs unto those everlasting pains. I am perswa∣ded you will reflect much: Will ye not reflect
upon many Sermons that you have heard, where∣in you have been invited to partake of the sweet offers of salvation? I remember of one that upon his death bed cryed forth, A world for time, a world for one inch of time! Onethat perhaps did hold his head high, and no doubt was greater then the greatest here: His crown would not purchase one inch of time, but dying with this, Call time again, call time again, that petition was denyed: and so shall it be, I fear, to the most part that are here. I think it was a pretty Hie∣roglyphick of the Egyptians, they painted Time with three heads: the first head that painted out Time that was past, was a greedy wolf gaping; which imported this, that our Time past was mispent, & there was nothing left, but like a wolf to gape for it again. And there was that second head of a roaring lyon round, which imports the Time present, and for this end was so painted, that people might lay hold upon their present op∣portunities, otherwise it would be the matter of their ruine, and their eternal undoing. And there was that last head, which was of a deceit∣ful dog fawning, which signified that people they deceive themselves with the Time to come, thinking they will be religious at their death; and that they will overcome at their death. But this is a flattery no better then the fawning of a mad dog. I think we may learn much of this, even to be provoked to lay hold upon our golden opportunities, that we sell not our Time, but
that we buy it. There are two things that a Christian must not sell; that is, sell not the Truth, but buy it; and sell not your Time, but buy it. I am perswaded of this, that one moment of time is worth ten thousand worlds, if impro∣ved. And I would ask you, What advantage shal you have of all things that you have tormen∣ted your selves about, when Time shal be no more? I suppose indeed this is an ordinary evil amongst the people of this age, of which we have our own share and portion. There are ma∣ny that envy godliness and the godly, the excel∣lent ones that are in the earth, and think it is pleasure to vent their malice against such. I know that ordinary practice it is older, by a thou∣sand years, then themselves, that they presecute godliness under the name of hypocrisie: They call godliness hypocrisie, and upon that account, they begin to speak maliciously against it. Only I would ask you this question, What will you say in that day when Christ will ask that que∣stion of you, that Gideon asked of Zeba and Zal∣munna, Who are those that you killed with your tongue? Must it not be answered, Every one did resemble the person of a King? O! will you not believe? Will you not close with Christ? I know it is ordinary that we run upon these two ex∣treams; sometimes we do not believe the threat∣nings of the Law, & sometimes we will believe the promises of the Gospel. But I would only desire to know, what if it had been so ordered in the
infinite wisdom of God, and that all the letters of this book should have been threatnings, what should have been our lot, if all the promises should have been scraped out of it? But certainly this must be your lot, all the promises of the book of this covenant shall be taken from you, and all the curses thereof shall be a fleeing roll that shal enter within your houses, and there shal eternally remain. Know this, O you that are enemies to Christ, know it, and think upon it: Every battle of the warriour is with confused noise, and with garments rowled in blood: but that war which Christ shal have against the hypocrites in Zion, and those that are ignorant of him, and will not close with him, it shal be with fewel of fire, and eternal indignation. O! what will be your thoughts, suppose you, when Christ shal come with that two-edged sword of the fury of the Lord, to enter to fight with you? It is no delightsome exercise. O that you were not al∣most, but altogether perswaded to be Christians; and that once Christ might conquer you with that two-edged sword that proceedeth out of his mouth, that so you might subject your selves to him, and make him the object of your faith. Now to him that hath engraven upon his ve∣sture, and on his thigh, that he is the King  Kings; and the Lord of Lords, we desire to give praise.
A SERMON Concerning the GREAT SALVATION. Heb. 3.2. How shal we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him? THis everlasting Gospel which is preached unto you, is that glorious Star, which must lead us to the place where blessed Christ dothly. This Gospel and glad tydings of the great Salvation, is come near unto you: And Christ is standing at the everlasting doors of your hearts, desiring that ye would open unto him. There is that one great request, which heaven this day hath to present unto you, and it is, that ye would at last embrace this great Sal∣vation freely offered by him. It is the thing for which ye are called to mourn this day, that since the dayes of your fathers, and since the beginning of your own dayes, ye have stopped your ears from the sweet and chanting voice of this blessed Charmer. Ye would never dance to Christ when
be piped; Neither would ye weep to him when he lamented. But to come to the words which we have read unto you: The Apostle in the former Chapter, had been discovering most divinely of the match∣less and incomparable excellencies which are in our Lord Jesus. And in the first verse of this se∣cond Chapter, he draweth forth an exhortation from his former doctrine, which in short is this, That they would take heed to the blessed do∣ctrine of the Gospel, and not at any time to let it slip out of their minds; and that they would keep this Gospel as a Jewel of great price, and would not sell it, but that they would be induced to buy it. And this exhortation he presseth by two ar∣guments. The first argument is in the second verse, where he saith, If the word spoken by angels was stedfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompence of reward, &c. That is, if the transgression of the Law which was deli∣vered but by the ministry of angels, and every disobedience to it was so severely punished; let that provoke you to take heed that ye transgres not the precious Gospel which was spoken by the Lord himself. The second argument in the words which w have read unto you, & it is taken from the certa and infallible stroke of the justice of God, which shal come upon those who slight this great Salv∣tion: It is impossible; saith he, that there
be a City of refuge for those who slight this great Salvation. Now in the words which we have read, there are these six things to be considered. I. First, that it is an evil incident to the hea∣rets of this precious Gospel and great Salvation, to flight and undervalue it: This is clearly pre∣supposed in the words; otherwise there had been no ground or access for the Apostle to threaten so terrible things against the slighters of it. II. The second thing to be considered in the words, is, that the stroke and ruine of those who flight this great Salvation, is certain and infalli∣ble, it will surely come upon them: This is clear from these words, How shal we escape? As if he had said, There is no imaginable way for us to escape, if we neglect (this) so great salvation. We may have a city of refuge when we are pur∣sued by the Law, or when we are pursued by af∣flictions; and we may escape when we are pur∣sued otherwayes by the Justice of God: but if once we slight this great Salvation, there remai∣neth no city of refuge (no door of escape left open) unto us: for where will the person flee that slighteth this great Salvation? III. There is this third thing whereof we shal take notice from the words, that the stroke of the Justice of God cometh justly upon them who flight this great Salvation: and truly it is a most equal and reasonable stroake, which is also clear from the words, How shal we escape, if we neglect o great salvation? Where he puts it home to
their consciences, as if he had said: think ye not that it is just and righteous, that if ye slight this great salvation, there should not be a door of escape left open unto you. He putteth the que∣stion home to their conscience, to answer, yea, or no. IV. The fourth thing to be considered in the words, is this, that the slighting this great Salva∣tion is a sin that hath many aggravations which attend and wait upon it. And it hath two great aggravations from the words which I have read; the first great aggravation in that word of the Text, great salvation; as if he had said, If it were not a great Salvation, you might have some cloal or excuse for your slighting of it: but seeing it is such a great and eternal Salvation, there is now no cloak left for your sin. The second aggrava∣tion is from the certainty of this Salvation, in these words, which at first began to be spoken b the Lord, and was confirmed vnto us by those tha heard him, viz. his Apostles; whereby he telleth them, this great Salvation is no notion nor fan∣cy, but a most certain, sure and real salvation which yet they slight. V. The fifth thing whereof we shal take no∣tice from the words, is this, That there are no persons (be who they will, Minister, or people) who slight this great Salvation, that shal have a door of escape. Hence is it that the Apostle put∣teth himself amongst the rest, saying: How sh we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? th is, How shal I Paul escape, if I neglect so grea
alvation, and so srustrat the grace of God? VI. Sixthly, we would take notice of this rom the words, that not only heart-despising of is great Salvation, but even also the very negle∣ing of it, hath a certain infallible and unspea∣able ruine attending upon it. Now before we begin to speak to any of these ix things (which we have observed from these words) there are these two things whereunto we shal speak a little for clearing of the words. First, what is meant here by great Salvation. Second∣ly, how it is said that Christ was the first prea∣her of it. First, we conceive that by the great Salvation  understood the Gospel, as is clear, Eph. 1.13. where it is called, the Gospel of our salvation; and Acts 13.26. it is called, the word of this salvation; o that by the word of this salvation, is under∣ood the Gospel, and those precious offers which re contained in it. And we conceive it may be alled a great salvation, in these eight respects. I. First, it is called the great Salvation in re∣pect of the price which was laid down for it; here being no less price laid down to purchase his great Salvation, then the blood of the Son of God. From whence then doth Salvation flow nto you? It comes running to you in a stream f the blood of the Son of God: This is clear, Heb. 9.12. Neither by the blood of goats and calves, ut by his own blood he entered in once unto the holy lace, having obtained eternal redemption for us. II. Secondly, it is called a great Salvation in
respect of the many difficulties and oppositions which ly in the way of bringing it about. What great impediments, suppose ye, lay in Christs way before he could accomplish and bring about this great salvation? Was not the justice of God to be satisfied? Was he not to die, and to be made like unto one of us? Was he not to ly in the grave? And was he not to bear the torment of hell before this great Salvation could be ac∣complished and brought to pass? There were such impediments in the way of bringing about this great salvation, that if all the Angels in hea∣ven had been set to work, they had been all cru∣shed under it; had it been but that one great im∣pediment to satisfie the justice, and pacifie the wrath of God, even that was a pass, through which none could go but the eternal Son of God. It was so guarded, that none durst adventure to en∣ter it (much less could any win through it) sav he only who was mighty to save. III. Thirdly, it is called a great Salvation,  respect of that high estimation which the Sain have of it. O what an high estimation have th Saints of this Gospel-salvation! There is no mer∣cy which they think comparable to this; all othe mercies are but little Zoars, in comparison of th great mercy and Gospel-salvation. IV. Fourthly, it is called a great Salvation,  respect of those noble effects which this Salva∣tion bringeth about and produceth. Some of  great effects of the Gospel, David hath cleared Psal. 19.7.8 9.10. Is not this a great effect
this Gospel-Salvation, to bring us out of nature into an estat of grace? And that is an effect of this great Salvation. Is not this a great effect to make us who were enemies, become friends? And that is an effect of this great Salvation. Is not this a great effect to make us who were mo∣ving in the way to hell, move in the way to hea∣ven? And that is an effect of this great Salva∣tion. Is not this a great effect, to make us who were so far off, to be now made near? And yet that is an effect of this great Salvation. And is not this a great effect, to make us who were dark∣ess, become light in the Lord? And that is the great effect of this Gospel-Salvation. Yea, I may y time would fail me to tell of all the great ef∣fects of this great Salvation. But, O will ye come and see, and that will best resolve the que∣stion unto you, what the noble effects of this great Salvation are. V. Fifthly, it is called a great Salvation, in re∣spect of the great advantages which doth redound to the person who embraceth it. First, is not hea∣ven a noble advantage? And that is the gain which attendeth the embracers of this great Sal∣vation. Secondly, is not Jesus Christ a notable dvantage? And yet he is the advantage which ttendeth the embracers of this great Salvation. Thirdly, is not eternal communion with God a oble advantage? And that advantage attendeth e embracers of this great Salvation. Fourthly,  not eternal liberation from the body of death a reat advantage? And that attendeth the em∣bracers
of this great salvation. Fifthly, is  eternal singing in the enjoyment of God a grea advantage? And that attendeth the embracers o this salvation. Sixthly, is not eternal seeing o God, as he is, a great and noble advantage? And yet this (as all the former) attendeth the embra∣cers of this great salvation. Yea, would ye be rich? O then embrace this great salvation Would ye be honorable? Come and embra∣this great salvation. Would ye be eternall happy? O come then and partake of this gre salvation. VI. Sixthly, it is called a great salvation, i respect of all other salvations that ever were ac∣complished. There was never a salvation or ∣ctory obtained by any General or Captain (un a land or people) that could have the name great salvation, in comparison of this. VII. Seventhly, it is called a great salvatio in respect of the authority of it: We have sp∣ken of the greatness (as to the meritorious caus of it, and how great things it doth effectuate; a also in respect of the authority of it, it is a gr salvation. Would you know who is the Auth of this great salvation? It is Christ, Heb. 5. He became the author of eternal salvation to  them that obey him. And must not this salvat be sutable to him who is the Author of it? T is one of the most noble and irradiant beams the majesty of the Son of God the Mediator, t he is the Author of this great salvation. VIII. Eightly, it is called a great falvat
respect of the continuance and duration of it. It is not a salvation which is but for a day: but it is an eternal salvation, Heb. 9.12. He obtained eternal redemption for us. Now the second thing whereunto we shal speak for clearing of the words, is this, viz. How it is said that Christ was the first preacher of this eternal salvation. We do not think that the words are to be understood, that the Gospel and this great salvation was never preached before Christ came in the flesh: but we think the mea∣ing of the words may be one of these three, if ot all of them. I. First, that all the preaching of this great lvation under the Law, did come very far short  the point of fulness, in comparison of Christs reaching of it; therefore is Christ said to be the first preacher of this great salvation: as if he had said, I know Adam he preached of this great sal∣vation, and Enoch he preached of this great sal∣ation, and the twelve Patriarchs they preached f this great salvation; and all the Prophets who ent before Christ, and are now in heaven, they reached of this great salvation: but all their reaching deserved not the name of preaching, in mparison of Christs: for never man spake as he ike. Thus Christ was the first great preacher  this great salvation. II. Secondly, this may be the meaning of it, at Christ was the first preacher of this great sal∣tion, in respect of his clear way of preaching  it: for he was the first preacher of it without
types and shadows: He was the first preacher  it clearly and fully, with so much demonstration and power of the Spirit. III. Thirdly, the meaning of this (th Christ was the first preacher of this great salva∣tion) may relate to his appearing to Adam in Paradise, when he became the first and great preacher of this salvation, when he did speak that word unto him, The seed of the woman sh tread down the head of the serpent. The first glo∣rious preaching of this great salvation was wh Christ preached to Adam in Paradise. And th was the first and glorious morning of this bless Gospel. Now we shal speak a little to the first of the six things which we have observed from the words, viz. That there are many within the ∣sible Church who are neglecters and slighters this great salvation: (Do ye not all take w it?) it is clear, Matth. 23. towards the close,  chap. 22.5. where those persons being invited come to the marriage, or feast of the Gospel, it said of them, they made light of it; which are th same words in our Text. And Luke 14. where they were invited to come, it is said, Th all with one consent began to make their exc And Isai. 28.2. This is the rest wherewith ye s make the weary to rest, this is the refreshing,  they will not hear. Now is there a person h who dare deny this charge, that he is a slighte this great salvation? I confess, I am afraid  you will not take with it; therefore I shal prop
these eight sorts of persons who are slighters of this great salvation: and charge you, as you will answer to God one day, that you search your hearts whether you be amongst the number (in the catalogue) of the slighters of this grea sal∣vation. I. The first sort of persons who are slighters of this great salvation, are those persons who go about to establish their own righteousness, and will not submit to the righteousness of Christ: in a word, it is that sort of persons who think they may win to heaven by a covenant of works, and will not take the Gospels way of travelling to heaven in the covenant of grace. And surely there is not a person here who hath not that cursed in∣lination to be as little obliged to Christ for his salvation, as he can: We would go to heaven without the way, which is Christ. And, believe me, there are many in this Congregation who go thus about to establish their own righteous∣ness. And I shal propose six sorts of persons who all under this first rank. 1. The first sort, are those who trust on their own civility, and think that will carry them to eaven: those are the persons who go about to stablish their own righteousness. Say they, I de∣y the world to say any thing to me, I was ever∣ore an honest man, and I trust therefore that I hal go to heaven. But I say to thee, O Atheist I hat thou art, thou shalt never win to heaven by ose means, till thou come to Christ with this, ll my righteousness are as filthy rags.
2. The second sort, are those who build their confidence upon their denyal of their good works, but yet never come this length to make use of Je∣sus Christ. 3. The third sort, are those who build their confidence upon their duties: they think they will come to Heaven by their good prayers, by their reading, and by their fasting, like unto that Phatisee, Luke 18 11. I thank God, I am not like other men, for I fast twice in the week: I pay titer of all that I possess. But I say unto thee, thy dutie will never bring thee to Heaven, if Christ be not the end of all thy duties, nor can you perform a duty without him. 4. The fourth sort of persons who fall under this first rank of slighters of the great salvation, are those who trust on their convictions. If the have once been convinced of their sin and misera∣ble estate, they think there is no more to d Christ will never reject them; so they sit dow and build their hope upon these convictions. 5. The fifth sort of persons, are those wh build their confidence upon their resolutions;  they, oftentimes have I resolved to be a bette man then I am; therefore I think (which is  first delusion of many) that God will accept  will for the deed: but it had been good for ma such a word had not been in the Bible, or th their cursed eyes had never read it. But kn this, that though thou hadst as strong resoluti as Peter, or as good wishes as Balaam had, if th never labor to bring them to practise, God sh
say to thee, Depart from me, I know you not. Any of you who build upon your resolutions, you will build upon a sandy foundation, these being many times a goodness, but like the morning dew. 6. And the sixth sort of persons who fall under this first rank of slighters of this great salvation (and wherein the evil is most subtil) are those who build their salvation upon their graces; these also go about to establish their own righ∣teousness. But I say to such, their graces cannot be the foundation of their hope, although they may be as evidences to strengthen their hope. Now, are there none here who fall under this first rank of stighters of the great salvation? Or are there none here who will confess they have gone about to establish their own righteousness? I say to thee who wilt confess, put a rope about thy neck, and come to Christ; for he is a merciful King. I say to thee, come to Christ with this, All my righteousness is like filthy rags. And if thou wilt come with this in sincerity, he shall say, Bring forth the white robe, and put it upon him. If thou canst be brought to speak that in sinceri∣y to Christ, there shal be no more betwixt Christ and thee, but, Come and cloath him with the white obe. II. Secondly, those persons slight the great Salvation, who delay their taking hold of the recious offers of the Gospel: for there are many when we preach this Gospel, and when we old out the great Salvation unto them, who ay, I will follow Christ, but I must first go home
and bury my father; and so they delay to take hold of this great Salvation. But I say to you, who∣ever you be, that thus delay to take hold on this great Salvation, you are the slighters of it. Is there a person within these doors, who dare but acknowledge that he hath slighted this great Sal∣vation, and delayed to embrace it? O! tell me, what do your consciences speak? Are there any but they must acknowledge they come under this second rank? And I say to you who have thus delayed, will you yet embrace it? I say even unto you who are old men, now past sixty years, and have slighted this great Salvation so long, yet this day this great Salvation is offered unto you. What say you to it? O! what do you say to this offer? Are ye saying, I must now delay and not receive this great Salvation, till min harvest be by and over? I say unto thee, th the harvest of the wrath of God is ripe, and  shal put in his sickle, and cut thee down. I sh say no more to those who thus slight this gre Salvation, but this, Why stand ye all the day  the market place idle, and doing nothing?  will you be at last induced to take and embra this great Salvation, before it be hid from you eyes. III. Thirdly, those persons are the slighte of this great Salvation, who complement w Christ when they are invited to come and pe take of it, and say silently to the Mioister, or ∣ther to their own conciences: I pray you, have  excused at this time; as those, Luke 14.18.
I would only ask of such, Have you any lawful excuse why you will not come and partake of this great Salvation? Is there any person here that hath any lawful excuse to present? I shal never take that off your hand, Have me excused. But be sure of this, I shal never excuse you, but accuse you: therefore I desire that those persons who have slighted the great salvation, by com∣plementing with Christ, that they would complement no more with him at all, but now embrace it. IV. The fourth sort of persons who slight this great Salvation, are those who give way to iscouragements and unbelief, so that they will not come and partake of this great Salvation: I say, such of you are slighters of it, and Christ ill esteem you such. Oh, if ye knew the worth nd vertue of this great Salvation, there would not be a temptation you could meet with, that would hinder you from embracing it! But if hou couldst not answer these temptations, thou couldst not own them: I say unto such under∣aluers and slighters of the great Salvation, as dis∣uraged persons (And those who stay long in the ace of the breaking forth of children) that when ou cannot answer your objections, which hin∣ereth you from closing with Christ, I intreat ou, disown them, as if ye heard them not. Say , Think ye this lawful? I say, it is both lawful nd expedient; for it was the practice of belie∣ing Abraham; He considered not his own body ing dry as an old stick, nor the deadness of
Sarahs womb. He did not consider these things, which might have been objections to keep him from believing. He might have started at these two objections; Alace! I am old: and that ob∣jection could he not answer: And my wise is past child-bearing; neither could he answer that ob∣jection. What then did he with them? He sligh∣ted them both, and considered them not. Second∣ly, I would say this to you who thus slight it, be∣cause of discouragements: If ye did know the worth of the great Salvation, which is in this Go∣spel-redemption that is offered to you, although ye had an army of objections to go through, ye would go through them, to get a drink of the water of this Well of Bethlehem. V. The fifth sort of persons who slight this great Salvation, are those who will not do so much as take care and give pains to hear this great Salvation offered unto them: For there are some persons, who (if they come to the Church) desire to fit farthest off, and so never take care to hear a word of this great Salvation; and such are dreadful slighters of it. Like unto these mentio∣ned, Jer. 6.10. To whom shal I speak, and give warning that they may hear? Behold their ear is un∣circumcised, and they cannot hearken. Isai. 28.12. But they would not hear. Jer. 7.10. Who say, we an delivered to do all these abominations: Yet they di come and stand before him, in the house which i called by his Name. VI. Sixthly, those persons are slighters of th great Salvation, who, when they hear it, are
more (nay not so much) affected with it, then if  were telling unto them the most senseless hi∣sony of Thom as the Rymer, or some other old ble. Like unto these mentioned, Jer. 6.10. The word of the Lord is unto them a reproach, they have no delight in it. I would pose you all, as in the sight of the Author of this great Salvation, hen of women, did you ever see your selves; or ook ye ever pains, to bring up your hearts to he love of this great Salvation? Was it ever the ejoycing of your hearts, that Christ died and ose again? I do certainaly believe it, and I am rswaded, that there are decrees past in heaven ainst many of you, That in hearing ye shal hear, at not understand; and in seeing, ye shal see, and l not perceive. For God hath made your hearts rder then the flint or adamant, so that ye shal esuse to return when he doth exhort you. Be∣eve me (if I may so speak) I think there is as such probability that the stones in the wall would hear (if we would speak to them) as on as many of you. VII. Seventhly, those persons are slighters, of is great Salvation, who never did complain at they wanted a right to this great salvation, hope some of you are now convinced, that y ver came within the compass of this great sal∣ion. I say yet unto you, if ye did never spend e hour in secret weeping and lamenting, be∣ase ye had not a right to this Gospel redemp∣tion, it is but too probable you had never yet a he to it. Yea know it, that such of you would
little care to let precious Christ depart without any grief of heart. I think, if this were voiced within this house to day, Whether or not shal Christ go and depart? I doubt if there would be many heart-dissenters, though many tongue∣dissenters. Oh! I fear there would be many hearts here, saying: O Christ! depart, and go thy way: Yea, there are many Gadarens here, who prefer their kine and swine to precious Christ, and would beseech him to go out of their coasts. VIII. Eightly, those persons slight the great Salvation, who never took pains to engage their hearts to take hold of Christ and the Gospel. Christ is near to you this day; The great Salva∣tion is near to you, and is now, even now offered unto you; therefore are there any who will take pains to lay hold on it? I obtest you all who are here, by the beauty and excellency of him who is the Author of this great Salvation, that ye come and partake of it. I obtest you by all the joyes heaven, that ye embrace this great salvation. I obtest you by all the terrors in hell, that ye em∣brace it. I obtest you by the promises of the ever∣lasting covenant, that ye embrace it. I obtest you by all the curses that are written in this book o the covenant, that ye embrace it. I obtest you by the love you owe to your immortal souls, that  will once be wise, and come partake of the gre Salvation. May I now have it, sayest thou? Ye I say unto you all, ye may have it to day; ye ma be partakers of it before ye go hence. And so b fore I proceed any further, I do in the Name a
authority of him who sent me here to day, and is the Author of this great Salvation, freely offer it unto you to day. But I know there will be eight sorts of humors within this house to day, in relation to this great Salvation which is now of∣fered unto you. 1. I think there will be some of Gallios dispo∣sition here to day, that will care for none of these things: yea, there are many here that will not give a fig for the rich offer of the great Salvation. But I say, cursed be that person who putteth on Gallios temper to day, that will care for none of these things. 2. I fear there wil be many of Pilats humor here to day, who will say, they find nothing against the man, yet will cry forth, Take him, and cruci∣fie him. They find no fault with Christ, and yet will be content that he be crucified. Now can ye say any thing against Christ, who is the Au∣thor of this great Salvation? Produce your strong arguments. Are there any here who have any thing to say against him? I am here to an∣swer in his Name. I hope there is not one here who hath any thing to say against the Author of this great Salvation: And why then do ye not take him? See unto your selves that there be none of Pilats humor here to day, that will cry out, Ye find nothing in Christ why he should not be recei∣ved, and yet will be content that he be crucified. 3. There will be many of the Jews humor here to day, who cry forth, Away with Christ,
away with Christ, and give me Barabbas. But, oh! what a hellish word is that, Away with spot∣less Christ, away with transcendent Christ, and give us the world? Now are there any here who will be so gross slighters of this great salvatio? Will ye slight this great salvation, and embrace your idols, which shal once prove a crown of thorns unto you. 4. There will be some of Felix humor found here to day, that will say, O Christ, go away at this time, and I will hear thee at a more convenient season. But I say unto you, who will not hear me to day, nor embrance this great salvation, I shal defy all the Ministers in Scotland to assure you, that ye shal get another offer, if ye send me away to day. There is not one that can or dare engage that the great salvation shal be in your offer any more. Therefore, I say, let none of Felix tem∣per be here to day, that will say, They will hear Christ at a more convenient season. 5. There wil be some of Balaams temper to day, who will desire to die the death of the righ∣teous, and to have their last end like his; yet they desire not to live the lise of the righteous. But I say unto you, ye shal never die the death of the righteous, if ye live not the life of the righteous. 5. There will be some of you here to day, who, I hope, at least will be of Agrippas humor, that will say, Thou hast almost perswaded me to be a Christian. I say unto thee, O wilt thou quickly out with that word almost, and put in that word
altogether and say, O precious Christ! thou hast altogether perswaded me to be a Christian. How∣ever, if thou come no greater length, I intreat thee come this length, that so thou mayest cry out, I am almost perswaded to embrace Christ the great Salvation; and may be ere long ye will come further. 7. There will be some of Judas temper here to day, who will betray Christ for thirty pieces of silver; yea, some would sell Christ, heaven, their idols and all, for less then thirty pieces of silver. 8. I think there will be many of Esaus pro∣fine temper here to day, who will sell their birth∣ight for a mess of pottage. Now will ye enquire at your selves, Am I the person that will give my birth right for a mess of pottage? Doth mine heart say, I will sell my birth-right, because I am hungred, and ready to die? What will it profit me, give me a moss of pottage, and I will quite my birth-right? I know there are not a few such here to day: therefore I intreat you, enquire at your selves what is your humor. Oh! shal the great Salvation that ye have slighted so long,  slighted this day also? And shal there be none to embrace it? Oh! enquire, and stand in aw, lest the wrath of the most High pursue you. Now I shal give you these seven considera∣tions, which may provoke you not to slight, but mbrace this great Salvation. 1. The first consideration, that the not em∣bracing this great salvation; is one of the greatest
acts of folly that can be, Jer. 8.9. They have re∣jected the word of the Lord: and immeditatly it is subjoyned, And what wisdom is in them? And so Solomon doth assure you, they cannot be wise who neglect this great Salvation, Prov. 1.7. Fools despise wisdom and instruction. Therefore may I not say unto you, be ye who ye will, though ye were the greatest heads of wit in all this place, ye are but stark fools, as long as ye neglect this. But would you be wise indeed, and wise unto eternal life? Then I intreat you, come and embrace this great Salvation. 2. The second consideration to provoke you not to slight the great salvation, is this, that the ruine and destruction of the slighters of it, is most certain and infallible, Jer. 11.11. where speaking of slighting the covenant, which is indeed the same great salvation, there is a therefore, put to the threatning. Therefore thus saith the Lord, I will bring evil upon them, which they shal not he able to escape. I defy you all, who are the sligh∣ters of this great Salvation, to find a back-door, when Justice shal pursue you; for there is no door to escape, if ye embrace not this great Salvations but the earth will disclose your iniquity, and hea∣ven will declare your sin. 3. Thirdly, let this consideration provoke you not to slight this great Salvation, that Christ is exceeding serious and earnest that ye should embrace it: And I think that Isai. 28.23. spea∣keth out his exceeding seriousness, where so
times he beggeth of his hearers, that they would give ear and hear his voice, saying: Give ear, and hear my voice: hearken; and hear my speech. What needeth all these exhortations, but that Christ is most serious that they would embrace the great Salvation? And, O that there were a person here to day, as serious to the bargain as Christ is! But be who ye will, that slight this great Salvation, believe me, the day is coming wherein ye shal cry out: Alace, for my slighting of it! Wilt thou therefore think presently with thy self, O thou slighter of this great Salvation! What wilt thou say of thy slighting it? When the devil shal be leading thee in thorow these dark gates of hell, O slighter of the Gospel! how many alaces wilt thou cry, when thou shalt be passing thorow these dark gates into thy everla∣sting prison? Wilt thou not then cry out, O me, a slighter of the everlasting Salvation! whether am I now going? Alace, now for my slighting of the Gospel! And as thou passest thorow, thou shalt meet with numbers of miserable comfor∣ters. There is not one in that prison, who can comfort thee; but many dreadful alaces shalt thou then both cry and hear, if thou embrace not this great Salvation. 4. Fourthly, let this provoke you not to slight the great Salvation, that ye will get it for a very look. O ye within this house to day, ye will get this great Salvation for one look, Isai. 45.22. Look unto me and be saved, all the ends
of the earth: For a very look ye will get this great Salvation: and do ye ever think to get heaven at a lower rate? 5. The fifth consideration to provoke you not to slight this great salvation any more, is this, There is not one of you who is a slighter of is, but your slighting it shal increase your immortal bonds. Man or woman, be who thou wilt, when thou art slighting this great Salvation, thou art but platting a cord wherewith to bind thy soul eternally in these unquenchable flames, Isai. 28.22. Be ye not mockers, lest your bonds be made strong. I say therefore unto you, old men, mock not, lest your bonds be made strong. Old women, near unto your graves, mock not, lest your bonds be made strong. Young men, be ye not mockers, lest your bonds be made strong. Young women, who are in the flower of your time, mock not, lest your bonds be made strong. But now, alace I will there for all this, be a person here to day who will be a mocker of this great salvation. 6. The sixth consideration to provoke you not to slight this great salvation any more, is this: Ye know not but that your days may be near, unto a close. I say you know not but the day of the preaching of this great salvation may be neat unto a close. What knowest thou, O man, or woman! but this shal be the last Sermon that ever thou shalt hear concerning this great salvation? And yet for all this, shall we be sent away with∣out one consent to embrace or receive it? O wil ye
be perswaded to look to Christ, and so to take him? 7. The seventh consideration to provoke you not to slight the great salvation, is this, That there is a five fold salvation comprehended un∣der this great salvation. 1. The first is this, Come and partake of this great salvation, and thou shalt have salvation from thine idols: And hereby I do proclaim li∣berty this day unto captives: I am sent forth this day with the keyes of your prison house, to open your prison doors unto you, if ye will em∣brace this great salvation. I say unto you, O ye prisoners, come forth and show your selves; for the keyes of your prison-house are with us, to open your prison-doors unto you; therefore, O come forth, and embrace this great Salvation! Will there be any (shal I think) here; that will refuse to come forth? O go forth and flee from the land of your captivity, and from the house of your bondage. 2. Thou shalt have salvation from thy dark∣ness and from thine ignorance. I say unto you who understand no more of God nor the stones of the wall, I command you come forth, and par∣take yet of this great salvation, and unto you shal light arise, even the day-spring from on high shal visite you. 3. If ye will come and partake of this great Salvation, ye shal have deliverance from all your fears. Dost thou fear that thou shalt be poor? Come and partake of this great salvation, and hou shalt be delivered from it. Art thou
afraid of hell? Come and partake of this great Salvation, and thou shal be delivered from that fear. Art thou afraid at the wrath of God? Then come, I say, and partake of this great Salvation, and thou shalt have redemption from that and all thy fears. With him is plenteous redemption and he can make thee quyet from the fear of evil. 4. If thou wilt come and partake of this Sal∣vation, thou shalt have deliverance from all thine anxieties, and from all thy cares. Ye are now careful and anxious about many things; come, and partake of this great Salvation, and it will make you careful, but only for the one thing necessary. 5. If ye will come and embrace the great Sal∣vation offered unto you this day, ye shal be hel∣ped before ye go hence, to sing that Song, O death! where is thy sting? O grave! where is thy victory? Now, O will ye come and embrace this great Salvation, And ye shal be more then conquerors thorow Christ who loveth you? Are there therefore anie here to day, that would have victorie over the devil, and over their own heart? Then come and embrace this great Salvation and then your victorie is certain. But now to press home this great Salvation upon you a little further, there are nine sorts o persons who are invited to come and partake  this great Salvation offered this day. And  charge you, answer to your names when ye  called, and delay not to come.
1. First, I invite and call here to day, all who are willing to come and embrace this great sal∣ntion. Now, are there anie of you here to day, who are called willing? Then I invite you to come and embrace this great salvation. Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will, let him come. But, oh! are there none here to day, who are named willing? I intreat you, if there be anie, do not denie your name, but come when you are called, and em∣brace this great Salvation. 2. Secondly, those persons who thirst for it, are invited to come, and partake of this great salvati∣on, Rev. 22.17. Let him that is athirst, come. Now If there be any here who are named thirsty, let them come and partake of this great salvation, and they shall be satisfied. 3. Thirdly, are there any money-less folk here to day? Let them come and partake of this great salvation. Are there no money-less folk here to day? I mean not that money or coin in your purses, but want ye money? That is, want ye righteousness? Then I pray you come and par∣take of this great salvation. I say, are you so poor that ye have nothing but the fear of hell? Then I pray you come. If there be any here who hath nothing to commend them to Christ, but neces∣sity? I say unto all such, O come, come, come, and partake of this great salvation. 4. Fourthly, those persons are invited to come, (and I wish there were many such) who are weary: but oh! Are there none here to day who are called weary? Are you not weary in pur∣suit
of your sins? If there be any such here to day, I say unto you, O weary folk, Come, come, come, and partake of this great salvation, and of this excellent Gospel-redemption that was pur∣chased at so dear a rae. 5. Fifthly, Those who are heavy loaden are in∣vited to come, (and I think all of you may an∣swer to this name) are you heavy loaden? O then come! But are there none here who are heavy loaden with sin, with misery, and estrangement from God? If there be any such here, I say unto thee, old men, or young-man, be who thou wilt, O come and partake of this great salvation. 6. Sixthly, Are there any here to day who are called blind? I say, if there be any of you who think you want eyes to see the precious excellen∣cies of Christ, I invite you to come and partake of this great salvation. 7. Seventhly, Are there any who are called lame here to day? I say unto such, O come, come, come, and partake of this great salvation; for we are sent forth to day to call in the blind and the maimed, and the lame, that they may come and embrace this great salvation; therefore are there none here to day who may be called such? A you neither blind nor lame? I hope many of you will not deny that you are such; therefore I say unto you, O blind, halt, and maimed, Come, come, and partake of this great salvation. 8. The eighth sort of persons invited, are those who are sick; therefore if there be any sick folk here to day, be who you will, I say unto you, O
come and partake of this great salvation; for the whole need not the Physitian, but the sick. 9. Ninthly, Are there any here to day who snow not their name, or their condition? I say unto you, O nameless folk, come and partake of this great salvation; Come to Christ for the knowledge of your souls condition: Come as a meless one, and he shal not reject thee; though by cause were so evil that thou couldst not give it  name; for of all that come unto him, he sendeth none away. Now where do you find your name and sur∣ame? O do you not know it? I hope now you may know; therefore I intreat you answer to it, & so come away, and partake of this great salvation. But I am afraid there be many strong iron bars in the way of some of you, which you cannot win over. Ah, how fast are some souls locked in Satans snare! And therefore I shall speak a little for dis∣covering of those bars that hinder from embracing his great salvation, that so you may be the better helped to remove them. I. The first great iron bar which keepeth folle rom embracing this great salvation, is the bar of gnorance; and I am afraid that this (as a mighty bar) hindereth many of you: You are ignorant of your selves, and of the condition of your souls; you are ignorant of the Law, and of its severity, and you are ignorant of the precious Gospel in its ondescendency. O pray unto God, that for Christs sake, he would break that great bar of ig∣orance; for till that be done, Christ may take
up that complaint, Jer. 5.4. Surely they are foolish, they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God. I say this bar of ignorance keepeth you from embracing this great salvation. II. The second bar which keepeth many from closing with Christ, is, the bar of presumption; for some will cry out, What need have I to embrace the great salvation? Have I it not already? But I say unto thee, O fool, thou art, by all appea∣rance, yet in bondage. O that this evil bar of pre∣sumption were put away; for it is one of the grea∣test impediments which lieth in the way of our embracing this great salvation that is in your offer to day: Therefore I say unto you, if you will come no further, I intreat you, come this length, to confess that you want this Gospel-salvation, and that you are indeed strangers to this Redemption purchased by Christ. III. The third bar that keepeth persons from embracing this great salvation, is the bar of unbe∣lief: you believe not what we say to you about this great salvation. I know that some of you are of the Stoicks and Epicures humor, who cry out▪ What meaneth this man? He seemeth to be the setter forth of some strange God. But I say unto you, I am not the setter forth of any strange God, but it is Jesus of Nazareth whom I preach unto you▪ Alace! some of you think this great salvation to be some morning dream, or some golden fancy▪ But I say unto you, it is neither a dream, not fan∣cy; but a real truth that we preach unto you.
IV. The fourth bar that keepeth persons from embracing this great salvation, is the bar of dis∣couragement; this strong bar keepeth many so fast, that they cannot embrace this great salvation, though it be freely offered unto them. I shal say no more to you who are such, but counsel you to do as those four Lepers did, 1 Kings 7.4. who sate at the gate of Samaria, who said; Why sit we here till we die? If we say; we will enter in the City, then the famine is in the City, and we shall dye there: and if we sit still here, we dye also. Now therefore come, and let us fall into the Host of the Syrians; if they save us alive, we shall live; and if they kill us, we shall but dye. Even so say I unto you, that if you abide in the state of unbelief, you shall surely be undone; therefore go forth, for you know not but God may work a great sal∣vation for you: and if you will quite your unbe∣lief, and close with Christ in the offer of this great salvation (by Faith) you shall have no more to do, but eat and drink, and divide the spoil. V. The fifth bar that with-holdeth persons from embracing this great salvation, is the bar of lingness: Ye will not come to me that you may have life. And alace! This is an Iron bar in∣deed, by which all that are in hell have barred themselves out of Heaven. Alace! shall you be such wretches also? O what a dreadful sound is that, Wo unto thee, O Jerusalem! Wilt thou not be made clean? When shal it once be? Ah! Turn you, turn you, why will you dye? Why will
you slight this great Salvation? O will none of you this day embrace it? VI. The sixth bar that with-holdeth persons from embracing this great salvation, is the bar o worldly-mindedness: Many of you are so fixed to the world, that you cannot come and close with this great salvation. I may allude to that word spoken of Saul, 1 Sam. 10.22. That he hid himself amongst the stuff; for many have buried and ne∣sted themselves in the midst of the world, that they cannot embrace this great salvation. VII. The seventh bar which keepeth many from embracing this great Salvation, is the bar of hard-heartedness: there hath such a stupidity and hardness of heart seised upon many, that let Christ preach as he will to them (by his Word, or by other dispensations) they are no more moved, than if his Word and dispensations were a thou∣sand miles from them. O that strong bar of hard∣ness of heart, when shal the Omnipotent hand o God break it? VIII. The eighth bar that hindereth many from embracing this great Salvation, is the ba of sloathfulness: Many of you cannot be at th pains to embrace it: but I say unto you, thee  but small pains in the way of godliness: I  unto you, it may so easily be had, that it is i your offer to day; and if you will, you may p forth your hand and take it. Consider therefore what you will do. O will you despise it? I say will you still neglect and despise it? Will you but read that dreadful word, Acts 13.40.41.
Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish. Tell me freely, Would you have us to return this answer to him who sent us, that you are despi∣sers of the great Salvation? Say to it, are there none of you who (for all this) will consent to partake of this great Salvation? O captives and prisoners, and you who are in the bonds of Sa∣tan, will you come and partake of this great salva∣tion, and you shall be made free? I have an act of release for you to day, if you will come and make use of it, you shal be set at liberty. But oh! shall the prison doors be cast open, and yet none come forth? But that I may come to a close, I say yet unto you, O poor Prisoners, go forth, go forth, and partake of this great salvation. Oh! will you not come forth? What holdeth you in? the foundation of your prison-house is shaken to day, therefore if you will but come forth, and cast a look to Christ, your very shakels shall fall off your hands, and you shal be as those who were never bound. Now I leave this with you, and to make you think upon it, I shall speak these five words to you, and I intreat you think upon them. 1. First, I have excellent tidings to tell you; (I hope some of you will give ear to them) viz. there is a great Person come here to day, and that is the Mighty Author of this great salvation, who hath brought everlasting righteousness with him, desiring you to make use thereof; it is his desire that you would take his excellent gifts at his hand. These I say are the tidings that I have
to preach unto you: and I hope never to be de∣clared a lyar for what I preach unto you: I say yet unto you, that Christ the Author of the great Salvation, desireth to give it freely unto you, if you will but take it. But, O will you not take it? I think if you did see an hundred men lying in prison or dungeon without all light, bread or water, and a great Prince coming to them; saying, I desire you all to come forth, and partake of this great liberty, which I bring unto you; and every one of them should an∣swer, I scorn to come forth at this time: would you not think them exceeding great fools? And yet I fear this act of great folly falls out in many of your hands to day; that when Christ hath gi∣ven us the Keys of your prison doors, and they are opened, you will not come forth: But I must intreat you yet to come forth and shew your selves. For who knoweth but we may be com∣manded to shut your prison doors again, and to seal them with seven seals, with an unalterable de¦cree from Heaven, never to be recalled? Where¦fore, O ye Prisoners, go forth, go forth, from you prison-house. 2. Secondly, I would say this to you,  is not without much ground that this Salvatio (offered to you) is called a great Salvation.  know a little paper of two or three sheets mig contain all the salvations that ever man obta¦ned, but the World would not be able to conta all the books which might be written to the co¦mendation of this great salvation: Yea, (unto
who will embrace it.) I say, First, if thou find not this salvation above thy faith, then go thy way when thou art come: But I know thou wilt find it both above thy faith and hope. Secondly, if thou find it not above thy desires when thou art come unto it, then go thy way again; but were thy desires as the sand upon the Sea shore, thou shalt find always more in this Salvation than ever thou couldst desire. Thirdly, if this Salvation be not above what thou canst conceive; then go thy way when thou art come to it; but think of it as thou canst, it shal always be above thy thoughts of it. Fourthly, if this Salvation be not above thy opinion of it, then go thy way when thou art come unto it; but I know thou wilt find it far above thy opinion of it. There∣fore seeing it is so great a salvation, as that all the World could not contain all the books that might be written in the commendation of it: O! will you embrace it, even to day, while it is in your offer? 3. Thirdly, I would say this unto you, Be perswaded that there is no sin that will more pro∣voke the Majesty of God to punish you than the sin of slighting this great salvation. Bring forth these Murderers, saith the Lord, (of the slighters of this invitation) and slay them before me. I in∣treat you enquire at your own hearts, what you will answer when you are reproved for flighting of it. Old men, will you ask at your own hearts what you will answer to Christ when he shall propose that question to you, why slighted you
the great salvation? Old women, what will you answer when he shall say to you, why slighted you the great Salvation? Young men, and young women, inquire at your own hearts what you will answer, when Christ shall say to you, why slighted you the great Salvation? Can ye ima∣gine any answer to that question? O dread∣full shall the Wrath of God be, that shall be executed upon the slighters of this great salva∣tion! 4. Fourthly, I would say this unto you, that Heaven is waiting to hear what acceptation the offer of this great Salvation doth get among you. Here is the great Salvation, here is the offer of it, and here is the commendation of it; what say you to it? Is it not an excellent Salvation? Is it not a free Salvation? Is it not a great Sal∣vation? Is it not an eternal Salvation? Why then do ye not welcome it? Can any of you say any thing to the discommendation of it? I know you cannot: Yea, I dare say, your own hearts are admiring it as most excellent; and therefore, O will ye accept it! Alace, shall there be none here who will be found accepters of this great Salvation, so freely offered  day. 5. Fifthly, I would say this to you, let all the Angels praise him who is the Author of this great Salvation. All the Saints round about the Throne praise him who is the Author of this great Salvation. All those who are expe∣ctants of Heaven, praise him who is the Author
of this great Salvation. All ye to whom this offer is made, praise him who is the Author of this great Salvation. O Heaven, praise him who is the Author of this great Salvation. O all ye Fowls of the Air, praise him who is the Author of this great Salvation. O Fire, Hail, Snow, Vapors, stormy Winds, and Tempests, praise him who is the Author of this great Salva∣tion. All the Tribes of the earth, praise him who is the Author of this great Salvation. Our own Souls, praise him who is the Author of this great Salvation: And all that is within us, bless him who is the Author of this great Salvation. O! who would not praise him, who is the Au∣thor of this great Salvation? Are there any here that will refuse to commend him? O! Think upon him, and let not this be a day of slighting him. Now, where are your hearts at this time? I will tell you where many of your hearts are, they are thinking upon the World: But I am sure, there are not many of them thinking upon this great salvation. Now, what resolution mind ye to go away with to day? Oh! have ye  resolution beyond what ye had when ye came hitherto to day? Are there any here who have his resolution, To whom shall we go, but unto him who is the Author of this great salvation, who alone hath the words of eternal life? Even the Lord breath it upon you. Or is this your reso∣lution, that through Christs strength, forsake im who will, ye will never forsake him? O! ave ye this resolution, That ye will esteem more
highly of the great salvation then ever ye did? O that the Lord would keep these in the imaginations of the thoughts of your hearts forever. But as for you who have no resolutions to embrace this great salvation: O! wherewith shall I commend it unto you? Do not your own necessities com∣mend it? But if nothing can perswade you to come away and embrace it, then this place shal be a heap of witnesses against you; for it hath heard all the words of the Law which he hath spoken unto you, Josh. 24. Oh! cast your eyes upon these pillars of the house and stones in the walls: I take them as so manie witnesses, that they may speak and testifie against you in the great day of the Lord, if ye ne∣glect this great salvation to day. Therefore, as ye go away, be thinking upon it, and whether or not ye mind to embrace it now while ye may have it. This day I set life and death before you: I have set before you both the great salvation, and the great damnation: And, O that ye had un∣derstanding in all these things, that ye being wise might be provoked at last to embrace this great salvation; the which we do yet again entreat you to think upon. Is not Heaven looking upon  at this time, to see what ye will do with this great offer of salvation, which I have this day from th Lord presented unto you? Now to him that  perswade you to embrace this great salvation this Gospel-redemption, this blessed Myst∣rie into which the Angels desire to pry: T him who can bring you back from the pit, a
can enlighten you with the light of the living: To him who hath the keys of your prison, Who can open, and none can shut; and can shut, and none can open: To him, who hath all power in Heaven and in earth communicate. To him, who can de∣liver you from the power of the grave, and can set you free from all your enemies, we desire to give praise. SERMON II. Heb. 2.3. How shal we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him? THere are two great and most ordinarie complaints in these days. First, there are many who complain, that their estats and per∣sons are in bondage, and that they are sold for slaves to the hands of strangers: But, O that we could turn over the complaint to this, that our souls are in bondage, and that we are yet in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, that so we might be provoked to long for the great Salvation that is in our offer! 2. There are many complaining, and not without much cause, that there is now such a toleration of errors; But, O wilt thou complain also of this, that within thine heart there is a toleration of lusts: is there not an act of toleration concluded in thy breast, that the devil & all his company may reign in thee t pleasure? Oh! have ye not need of great salva∣tion?
Shal I tell you, that Christ is courting you to embrace it; and that he putteth on all his most glorious robes, and manifesteth himself unto you, as a suiter, making offer of himself, and of his great salvation? O! tell me, have ye seen him? Or do you think to see him this day? What robes hath he on? There are five glorious robes where∣with he cloaths himself, when he condescendeth to manifest himself to his people. First, he cometh to his own with the garments of salvation, according to that word, Zach. 9.9. Rejoyce, O daughter of Sion, greatly: shout, O daughter of Jerusalem; for behold, thy King cometh unto thee: he is just, and having salvation. Ay, your King is come here to day, and will ye not fall in love with him, when he is cloathed with the garments of Salvation? Can ye ever have a more conquering fight of Christ, then when he is cloa∣thed with such an excellent robe, and offering you salvation? Secondly, he appeareth to his own sometimes in garments dyed in blood, according to that word, Isai. 63. vers 1.2 Who is this that cometh up from Edom, with dyed garments in blood, as one that treadeth the wine fat? And now I say to you  will not look to Christ when he appears in the garments of salvation, have ye a heart to refuse him who hath fought such a combat for you, who hath trod the Wine-press alone, and hath stained all his garments with the blood of thy ene∣mies? Or, is there any here, who dare refuse his salvation, when they see how he treadeth his ene∣mies
in anger, and trampleth them in his fury, and thus, sprinkleth their blood upon his garments. O! tremble at this sight, and seek quarter from him in time, or he shal dye his garments with the blood of thine immortal foul. Thirdly, Christ appeareth unto his own, be∣ing cloathed with these humble robes of condes∣cendency, when he came in the similitude of sinful flesh. O! what a sight was that, to behold the Prince of heaven cloathed with our nature? What a sight was that, to behold him that was cloathed with light, as with a garment, to be cloathed with our infitmities; yet he condescended to cloath himself thus, that we might have access unto him, and be partakers of his gifts? O! can we refuse him, when love hath thus pressed him to put on the beggers weed, that he might say to worms, ye are my brethren, and my sisters? Fourthly, Christ sometimes manifesteth him∣self, being cloathed with the garments of beauty and ravishing majesty such was the sight that the Spouse got of Christ, Song 2.3. As the Apple-tree amongst the trees of the wood, so is my Beloved amongst the sons. And Song 5. when she saw him  and ruddy, and the standard-bearer of ten thousand. And such was that joyful sight of him, when his garments was as the light, and white as the snow, which he had at the Transfiguration, when these glorified ones did come, as it were, Ambassadors from that higher House, to make him a visit. And fifthly, Christ he sometimes appeareth
to his own in robes of dreadful majesty, and terri∣ble highness and loftiness, when the foul upon the first sight of him remains dead, and there remai∣neth no more life in them: such was the sight Da∣niel got, in the tenth chapter: and such was the sight that John got of Christ, Rev. 1.17. And I would ask of all that are here, What a sight have ye gotten of Christ to day? In which of all these robes have ye seen him? It is true, we are not to look to the extraordinary sights of him; but yet if ever thou hast seen him in any of his wooing robes, sure he hath appeared matchless; and how then shal ye then refuse him? But now to come to the words I was speaking unto you of; The first thing in the words; to wit, that there are many who live under the offer of this great Salvation, that do slight it, and do not embrace it. And now I shall only adde a few things further unto you. 1. Let me propose a few considerations, to perswade you to embrace this great Salvation. God forbid we go away be∣fore we embrace this Gospel-salvation: and there∣fore I charge you in his Name, go not away be∣fore ye embrace it. And to press it home upon you, there are these eight or nine properties  this great Salvation that is offered unto you th day. And first, it is a free salvation; ye have n more ado but to put forth you hand and take it O! come and take it. Christ hath foughten for this Salvation, and there is no more required o you, but to come & reap the fruits of his victory
Whoever will, let him come; there is nothing that should move you to stay away. O captives, bond∣slaves to satan! O prisoners of hope! will ye come and partake of the great Salvation? What holds you from coming away, and partaking of it? It is freely offered unto you. Ay, believe it: Christ requires no more of you, but that ye should come and take it out of his hand: If ye consent to obey, the bargain is ended; ye shal eat the good of the land, Isai. 1. Secondly, this great salvation is a compleat salvation that is offered unto you to day: this is clear, Luke 1.71. That we might be saved from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us. There is not an enemy that is in the way; but if thou wilt come and partake of the great salva∣tion, thou mayest have victory over it; so com∣pleat a salvation is it that is in your offer this day. O! shall we pass away, and not embrace it? O! shall our cursed hearts undervalue this com∣pleat salvation, that is come to our door? Be∣lieve it, salvation is near unto you, if ye will take it. Thirdly, it is a wonderful salvation: it is such a salvation as the Angels desire do pry into it: and it is such a salvation, that all the Prophets desired to pry into it. It is almost six thousand years, since all the Angels of heaven fell into a sea of wonder at this great salvation. It is almost six thousand years since Abel fell into a sea of won∣der at this great salvation. And what think you
is his exercise this day? He is even wondering at this great salvation. Would ye ask at all the An∣gels in heaven, would they not all say, O! embrace the great salvation? Would ye ask all the Saints that are above, would they not advise you to em∣brace the great salvation? Should ye ask at Adam, would he not say, O! embrace this great salva∣tion? Could ye ask at Abel, would he not say, O! embrace the great salvation? And would not all the Patriarchs say unto you, O! embrace the great salvation? And do not all that have tasted of the sweetness of it, cry out unto you, Come and em∣brace the great salvation? The fourth property of this salvation is, that it was bought at an exceeding dear rate: it is a dear salvation. Would you know the difference between Christs coming to this salvation, and your coming to it? It is this: Christ was forced to travel through all the armies of the Justice of God. He was forced to drink of the cup of the wrath of God, before he could come to purchase this great Salvation; and now what is required of you to obtain this? We may say no more, but put out our hands and take it. Will ye look to the price that was laid down for this Salvation? There is not a wound in the body of Christ, but it saith, This is a dear salvation. There is not a re∣proach Christ met with, but it saith, O! is not this a dear salvation? There was not a necessity that he was put into, but it saith, Is not this a great and dear salvation? O Sirs! will ye not
come and take this great salvation, this dear salva∣tion? What must I give for it, say ye? I say, ye must give nothing for it: come, and take it with∣out money, and without price. It was dear to Christ, but it shal be cheap unto you. O! is it not cheap unto you? I assure you, if ye will come to the market to buy the great salvation, there is none of you that needeth to stand for the price of it. O! come and take it, and have it, and there shall be no more pricing. Fifthly, it is an everlasting salvation, that ye shal enjoy the fruits of throughout eternity, as is clear, Heb. 9.13. He became the author of eternal redemption unto us. It is a salvation that the devil can never be able to get out of your hand: if ye take it, ye shal never be robbed of it again. O come, and partake of this great salvation, whereby the gates of hell shal never prevail against you. Sixthly, it is a noble and honorable salvation: it is not to be taken out of one slavery to another, but it is to be taken out of prison, that we may reign, Luke 1.71. compared with verse 74. it is, That we being saved, may serve him without fear, in holi∣ness and righteousness all the days of our life. I say, ome, come, and partake of this great salvation, that your glory may be increased, and that ye may be exalted above the Kings of the earth. Seventhly, it is a most advantageous Salva∣tion: What are the advantages of any Salvation, that are not to be found in this? Is there not peace to be found through this salvation? Is
not liberty to be found through this Salvation? Is there not eternal enjoyment of God to be found through this Salvation? Yea, all Salvations are in this one Salvation. Lastly, it is a Royal Salvation, for it cometh to us from and through the Son of God: Christ is the Author of it: and we conceive Christ may be said to be the Author of this Salvation, in these respects. 1. He is the meritorious cause that did procure it: It was the price of his blood that was laid down for to purchase this great Sal∣vation. 2. He is the fountain from whence it floweth, according to that word which we have cited, Heb. 5.9. He became the Author of eternal salvation. 3. He is the person that fitteth out spirits for the partaking of it: and it is he that re∣moveth mountains out of the way, that we may have fair access unto the great Salvation. 4. It is he that must perswade our hearts to embrace, and to take hold of it. He standeth without, and cryeth to the heart to embrace this great Salva∣tion: and he standeth within, making the heart to cry out: Content, I will embrace the great salva∣tion: He is indeed the person that commendeth and doth point forth this great Salvation unto us. He is that noble Minister of it. It began first to be preached by him. Now is there any of you that have fallen in love with the great Salvation, that ye may try your selves? I shall give you some evidences of the persons that are near unto this great salvation.
1. Is thine estimation of the great Salvation in∣creased, be what it was in the morning when thou camest hither? Is thine estimation of the great Gospel-salvation a foot higher then what it was in the morning? I say unto thee, thou art not far from the great salvation; come away. 2. Is thy desire after the great salvation increased, be what it was in the morning? Hast thou stronger de∣sires after the great salvation, then before thou camest hither? That is an evidence thou art not far from it. 3. Is thy thoughts of the necessi∣ty of the great salvation greater then they were? Thinkest thou that thou hast more need of the great salvation, then ever thou thoughtest be∣fore? And is thine opinion and thoughts of sa∣ving thy self, less then they were before thou ca∣mest hither? Art thou forced to cry out. None but Christ can save me? I say, thou art not far from the great salvation: wilt thou come away! O that you would once seal this conclusion with much heart-perswasion, I am undone without Christ, I am undone without Christ, who is the Author of this great salvation. Are there any of you that are sensible that ye are in the fetters of sin, and in the bonds of iniquity? Are you brought to the conviction of this, that you are yee in the gall of bitterness? I say, if thou be brought to this length, to be sensible of thy bonds, and art crying out, O Redeemer? hasten, and come away: I say, If thou be sensible of thy bonds and impri∣sonments, and crying out; O thou that wast
anointed from eternity to proclaim liberty to the ca∣ptives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound! O hasten, and come away, and redeem me, even poor me, sinking, sinning, perishing, self-destroying me? thou art not far from the great salvation. 4. Art thou a person who beginneth to weep, because thou hast been so long a stranger to Christ, and the great salvation? Old men that are here, How long have you been strangers to the great salvation, and to the Author of it? Now will you shed one tear for your estrangement; and cry out; Wo is me, that Christ and I have been so long asunder. I say, if thou hast come that length, thou art not far from the great salvation: Come away. O pity yourselves: make haste, make haste, and come away. But now in the third place, let me give you some evidences, by which you may know more clearly, whether or no you have embraced this great salvation, that you may know your selves, and that you walk not down to your grave with a lye in your right hand. The first evidence of a person that hath em∣braced the great salvation, is, that he will have an high esteem of the Savior and Author of  great salvation. Hast thou a matchless esteem of matchless Christ the Savior of the World? Tha is a speaking evidence unto thee, thou art a par∣taker of the great salvation. Art thou come  this length, that thou criest out: None but Christ none but Christ; it is a speaking evidence, th
thou art come to be a partaker of the great salva∣tion, when thou canst cry out that word, Exod. 15.3. The Lord is my strength and my song, he alone is become my salvation. If Christ hath be∣come thy salvation, then it is like he hath become thy long. I would ask this of you, Were you ever brought this length, that you durst not adventure to praise Christ alone, but was forced to call in all the creatures, and say: O magnify the Lord with me? O that is an evidence that you have embra∣ced his salvation. Secondly, those who have embraced the great salvation, will study to maintain and keep their grips of it; they will study to hold fast so precious a jewel: this is prest, Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free: Yea, they will study to walk sutably to this noble mer∣cy; at least, they will strive and endeavor to do it, as is also prest in that same verse. I say, if thou hast been made a partaker of the Gospel of Sal∣vation, thou wilt strive to keep thy self from the power of those things that once triumphed over thee. Thirdly, a person that is a partaker of the great salvation, he will have a high esteem of this mercy and salvation: So Paul, when he speaketh of it here, he cannot but put some note of excel∣lency to it, calling it, the great Salvation; there∣fore, I say, if thou hast embraced the great salva∣tion, thou wilt have so high esteem of it, that not to be so subjected to it as thou shouldest, or
to be in subjection to the power of thy lust in any measure, will be thy burden and affliction: The man will be sory when he is brought forth from the House of his bondage unto the red Sea: He will be sory, that when he should have songs of triumph over his idols put in his mouth, that they should sing songs of triumph over him. Fourthly, a person that hath embraced the great Salvation, he will be longing sometimes for the day when this Salvation shall be compleat, when he shall sing that song with that numerous multitude which cannot be numbred, Revel. 7.9. O what a day shall it be, when thou shalt begin to sing that song? After this, saith he, I beheld, and lo a great multitude of all people which no man could number, of all people, nations and languages, stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb, cloathed with white robes, and palms in their hands, and they cryed: And how cryed they? They cryed with a loud voice. They would not mutter the song, not sing silently; but cryed with a loud voice: And what did they cry? They cryed with a loud voice, salvation unto our God who sitteth upon the Throne and to the Lamb. I would only ask of you  partakers of the great Salvation, what songs shall be put into thy mouth, when the waters of Jor∣dan shal divide themselves, that the ransomed o the Lord must pass thorow? When thou shalt sin that song, Psalm 115.1. Not unto us; not unto  but unto thee belongs the glory of our salvation▪ O what a day shal that be, when that excellen
song shal be put into thy mouth! Yea, what a day shal it be, when thou shalt be cloathed with these excellent garments that are made mention of, Isai. 6.10. so he hath cloathed thee with the gar∣ments of salvation; and he hath covered thee with the robe of righteousness. O what robes are these! Did you ever see such excellent robes as these must be? I think, we will misken our selves. O do you not think, we will misken our selves, when we shal put on these excellent robes! Now therefore is the bargain closed, or will ye go away before ye take this great salvation? Dare ye go out at these doors, and neglect the great Sal∣vation? I would ask this of you, think ye it will not be most sad, that Christ should tell this in Heaven of you to night; I was preached to a pack of stones; that none of them would love me? Will ye not be feared that this report shall be car∣ried back to Heaven of you? For what report can Christ carry back but this? Now is the cord of this great salvation let down unto you: is there none of you that will take a grip of it? Will ye flighter after it: Will ye make this a rejoycing day in Heaven, that is a fasting day unto you: and the way to make it so, is, to embrace the great sal∣vation. Now what say ye to it, old men? Let me speak to you, and ask your thoughts of the great salvation, Gray hairs should be a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness, Old men, speak your minds, that young men may not have your bad examples: What say ye of this salvation? Is it not a most glorious salvation?
Is it not a most excellent salvation that is in your offer? I intreat you, speak your minds: tell Christ ye are content to take the great salvation; otherwise, whoever he be that will not partake of this Gospel-Salvation, I in the Name and au∣thority of Christ our Master, denounce eternal and irrevocable war against him: Put on your harness, ye shal not boast when ye put it off a∣gain: The wrath and fury of God shal come upon you to the uttermost, if ye embrace not this great salvation. Other wars are but for a time: the greatest Captains that ever the earth did carry; are now laid down in the sides of the pit, and their swords broken under their head. Armies of ten hundred thousand, an hundred years time have laid them all in their graves, and ended all their contests; but there is no discharge of this war that shal be concluded betwixt Christ and you: It shal become an eternal and most terrible war, which shal be but beginning when time is ended. Now peace or war, which of them will ye choose? Dare ye send a charge to Christ, and say, Ye will defie him? I am afraid there will be two things that many of us will report to day. First, I am afraid there be many that will give Pharaohs report to the offer of the great salvation, and say: Who is the Lord that I should obey him? I tell you who he is, He is glorious in holiness, fearfull in praises, doing wonders. O embrace him before he go hence, and give not Pharaohs report, lest ye be drowned in the sea of his wrath, whence there shall be no recovery. Secondly,
I fear there will be many here to day, that will give Demas report to his precious offer: I will go and forsake Christ, and embrace this present World. O bad exchange! Cursed be he that shall make it: will ye be of Demas humor. I fear there hath been many of that humor of a long time: but, I intreat you, once be wise before you dye. I confess that Proverb, Old fools, are twice fools. I think, old men that will not em∣brace the great salvation, I think ye are triple fools. What wait ye for? Is there any thing can afford you any satisfaction but this great sal∣vation? Now are ye convinced, old men, that Christ is waiting for your answer. I intreat you, before ye go hence, speak your minds what ye think of the great Salvation. Is it not a lovely Salvation? Is it not lovely now? What say ye to it? I am to go away, and the offer is to be taken up at this time; and it is hard to say, if ever ye shal have an offer again. I would only say this to you, and be sure of it; though I should never be a partaker of this great salvation, yet I shal be a wit∣ness against you that are not partakers of it. I tell and declare unto you, I shal be a witness against ; if ye embrace not the great Salvation. Now, old men, are ye perswaded to embrace it? Let me obtest you by the beauty of Christ, come and partake of the great salvation, ye that are tra∣valling upon the borders of eternity. Now, if ye will give no more, give this, will ye go home and think upon it? I shall not be uncharitable, nor enter to judge your thoughts. I fear there shal be
many declared and found guilty amongst us, t we have declared unto Heaven, we will not c∣brace the great Salvation, but have troden t blood of the Son of God under foot. Now I i treat you, every one of you, ask of your selves ye be the persons that will presume in your hea to do so. Now I shal leave it with you, let it b witness against you. I shal leave it with this;  come away, old men, young men, old women a maids, come and embrace this precious Gospe Salvation. Ye may say, ye bid us come, but w cannot come: I desire no more of you, but w come with this, Lord, I am content to come, but cannot come. Come once to that; for if once  be content to receive it, it will not be long before ye be able to receive it. Now shal Christ d part, and will none of you say, ye are content  take him? Will ye charge your own conscienc with this: am I content to take Christ and th great Salvation! O blest, blest, blest be he that  the Author of this great Salvation, and blest b he that gets any of the ends of the cord of th great Salvation, that we sink not under the wra and fury of the Lord! Come and embrace th great Salvation: and again, I say, come, and  brace it: for what can ye have, if ye want it▪ And what can you want, if you have it? I sh say no more, but close with that word, Isai. 6 verse 21. Behold, the Lord hath proclaimed to  ends of the World, to those that are far off. W hath he proclaimed? Say ye to the daughter Sion: Behold thy salvation cometh behold it com
I say to you that are the ends of the World, Salva∣ion is brought near to you: Stout-hearted, and ar from righteousness, the great Salvation is rought near unto you, and will ye send it away? Oh! consider what ye are doing. And to him hat can perswade you to embrace the great Salva∣tion, we desire to give praise. A SERMON Concerning DEATH. Psal. 86.48. What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death? &c. IT is very hard to determine where all that are here, shall be within thirty years: for even ere that time come, many (if not all) of us who are here, shal have taken up our eternal odging. And whether we shall take it up in the eternity of joy, or the eternity of pain, is also hard to determine: Only this one thing I am sure of, that all of us shal shortly be gone: And ere long the shadows of death shall be fitting upon ur eye-lids, and our eye strings shal begin to reak. Therefore I would the more seriously nquire of you, What would you think if death
were approaching this night unto you? Thin you that Jesus Christ is gone up to prepare place for you, even for you? Surely, I think w are all near to eternity: and there are some hea∣ring me to day, whom I defie the World to assure that ever they shal hear another Sermon: There∣fore I intreat you all to hear this preaching, as i it were the last preaching that ever you should hear: and, O that we could speak it, as if it were the last Sermon that ever we would preach unto you. Believe me, Death is another thing then we take it to be: Oh, what will many of us do in the day of our visitation, when desolation sh come from afar? Where will we flee for rest? and where will we leave our glory? Old rich men where will you flee when death assaults you? Old poor men, where will you flee wher death assaults you? Old women, where will ye flee when death assaults you? Young men where will you flee when death assaults you? Young women, where will you flee when death assaults you? It was an ancient observation o David, Psalm 39, 5. That God had made  days as an hand-breadth; which either may relate to the four-fold estate of man, viz. his infancy his child-hood, his man-hood, and his old age Or it may relate to the four-fold time of his life viz. his morning, his fore-noon, his after-noon and his evening; yet all our lifetime is but a day. And, O think you not that our day is near unto close? Now before that I begin to speak to any thi
from the words, I shall speak a few things to these two questions, which I conceive may not altoge∣ther be unprofitable. Quest. 1. Whether it be lawful for any to desire to dye, and to return unto their long and endless home? Whether it be lawful for one to cry out, O time, time, flee away, and all my sha∣dows let them be gone, that so long eternity may come. Answ. I say, it is lawful in some cases for one o desire to dye: For it was Pauls desire, Phil. 1.3. I am in a strait betwixt two, having a defire to epart, and to be with Christ which is far better. And 2 Cor. 2.2. We groan earnestly, defiring to e cloathed with our house which is from Heaven.  long greatly till the twentieth one year of my Age come, when my minority shal be overpast, hat I may be entred Heir of that matchless inhe∣itance. But to clear in what cases it is lawful to esire to dye. 1. I say it is lawful to desire to dye, when it oweth from a desire of uninterrupted fellowship nd communion with Christ, and conjunction ith him; this is clear, 2 Cor 5.6. Knowing at whilst we are present in the body, we are ab∣nt from the Lord; therefore verse 8. We are illing rather to be absent from the body and to be esent with the Lord. As also it is clear Phil. 1.. I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to part, and to be with Christ, which is far bet∣. It was his great end to have near and un∣ixed communion with Christ: What aileth
you Paul? might one have said, may you not  content to stay a while here: Nay, saith Paul,  desire to be gone, and to be with Christ. Wa thou never with him here, Paul? I have bee with him, saith he; but what is all my be in with him here, in comparison of my being with him above, While I am present in the body, I am but absent from the Lord. Therefore I will never be at rest, saith he, get what I will, untill I get Christ, untill I get those naked and immediat embracements of that noble plant of renown the flower of the stalk of Jesse, who is the light of the higher house, the eternal admitation o Angels. 2. It is lawful to desire to die when it flowe from the excellencies of Heaven, and from a de∣sire to partake of those excellent things that a there; this is clear, 2 Cor. 5.4. We groan bein burdened, or as the word is, We groan, as they  are pressed under a heavy burden, that we may  eloathed upon, &c. What aileth you to groan so Paul? O! saith he, I groan that mortality may  swallowed up of life. 3. It is lawful to desire to dye when it flowet from a desire to be freed from the body of Death and from those temptations that affault us, a from those oppressions whereunto we are ma subject by it. Doubtless Paul desired to dye  this account, when he cryed out, Rom. 7.24.  wretched man that I am, Who shall deliver  from this body of death! He longed greatly for  day, wherein he should be made white like
wings of a Dove, covered with silver, whose fea∣ers are of a yellow gold. O! Christ, saith Paul,  am as one impatient till I be above, where I shal be cloathed with those excellent and cleanly obes, the righteousness of Christ. Oh! saith Paul, I think every day a year, till I shal be pos∣sessed of that Kingdom where satan cannot tempt, and the creatures cannot yield, and where I shal e free from all my fears of sinning. Now in all hese respects who would not desire to dye? But o guard these, I would give you these four Cau∣ions. 1. Caution, Your desires to dye should not be peremptory, but ye should desire to die with sub∣mission to the will of God; so that although he would fill up fifteen years more to your life, you should be content to live it out. 2. Caution, When your desires are hasty, and off hand, suspect them; for some when they meet with any outward cross (without all deliberation) will cry out, O to be gone, O if I were dead! But your desires to dye should be deliberate, but not hasty or rash. 3. Caution, It is not lawful to desire to dye be∣cause of personal affliction. Many when they meet with bitter afflictions, will cry out, O to be gone! They long for death, even upon that account: such were Jobs desires, Job 20.21.22. and chap. 6. vers. 7.8. O that I might have my request, even that it would please God to destroy me, &c. This desire was very unlawful. 4. Caution, It is not lawful to desire to dye,
when thy predominant idol is taken away fro thee, yet such was Jonahs desire, chap. 4.23. Jon thought his credit and reputation (which was h idol) was gone, and could never be regained therefore he wished to dye. But I would say th to you, that some will have ten desires for death, when they have not one desire for Heaven. And what moveth Christians to be desirous to dye? It is not so much because of their hope, as because of their anxiety; it is not so much because of their confidence, as because of their impatience. But I say unto you, when your desires of death are not accompanied with desires of Heaven, suspect them. I would say this, that there are some who will have ten desires for death, when they will not have one for the death of the body of death: But it were good for thee who art such, to be desiring the death of the body of death, then shouldest thou be in a more suteable frame to desire to dye. 3. Some will have hearty desires to dye, and yet when death cometh they will be as unwilling to dye as any: It hath been observed, that some who have much desired to dye, when death came, have cryed out, O spare a little that I may recover strength, &c. There is a great difference between a desire to dye, and death it self. It is an easy thing to desire to dye, but it is a very great busi∣ness to meet with death, and to look it in the face when it cometh. We think death ere it come near to us, to be but childrens play, but when we meet with it, it maketh us change our thoughts: for it is a great business to dye.
Quest. 2. Is it lawful for a Christian to desire to live when he is summoned to dye? Answ. In some cases is it lawful for a Christian to desire to live, even when he is summoned to dye; which is clear from the practise of David, Psal. 39.13. where he prayeth that the Lord will spare him a little: it is also clear from the practise of good Hezekiah, Isai. 38.3. when he was com∣manded to set his house in order: for he should dye, and not live; he cryed forth, Remember now, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which was good in thy sight; and Hezekiah wept sore. Or as the word is in the Original, he wept with great wee∣ping: but to guard this, take these two Cautions. Caution 1. Thy desires to live (when thou art summoned to dye) should not be peremptory, but with submission to the will of God, that if it be his pleasure to remove thee presently out of time, thou shouldst be content to dye. Caution 2. Thy desires to live should have gra∣cious principles, and also a very gracious end, as is most clear from David, Psalm 39.13. where he saith, O spare me a little that I may recover my strength, before I go from hence, and be no more: his desire to live, was that he might have victory over his Idols; as if he had said, my desire to live, is, that I may have strength to wrestle with, and overcome my idols: and without all con∣troversy, Hezekiahs desire was a most preci∣ous and well-grounded desire: However, I would say this unto thee, that thou shouldest
examine thy desires to live, as much (if not more) as thy desires to dye; for we are ready to shun death, if we could; but he is that universal King, unto whom all of us must be subject ere long. Now in the words that are read unto you, there are these six things which may be clearly obser∣ved from them. First, that it is a most true and infallible truth, that all persons shal once see death; as is clear in these words: VVho is he that liveth, and shal not see death? Secondly, that this truth, that we shal once see death, is not much believed, or thought upon by many; therefore it is that the Psalmist doubleth the assertion: VVho is he that liveth, and shal not see death? Shal he deliver his soul (that is, his life) from the hand (that is) from the power of the Grave? Thirdly, that sometimes a Christian may win to the solid Faith of this truth, that once he must dye; this the Psalmist wan unto, as it is also clear in that word (who) VVho is he that liveth, and shal not see death? Fourthly, that the certainty of this, that once we shal dye, should be kept in our mind; there∣fore that note of attention, Selah, is put to it, as if he had said, Take heed that there is none living that shal not dye. Fifthly, that howbeit some persons put the evil day far away, as if they were not to see death; yet is the day coming when they shall see death,
and death shal take them by the hand. Sixthly, we shal take notice of this from the context, that the Christian who is much in min∣ding the brevity of his life, will believe the cer∣tainty of his death. The Psalmist was speaking of the shortness of his life in the preceeding verse, and in this verse he speaketh of the certainty of death. Now as for the first of these things observed, viz. That it is certain and most sure, that we must all once dye: I hope there are none of you here who will deny it, although I confess some few of you believe it: yet said the woman of Tekoah, 2 Sam. 14. VVe must all dye, and be like water spilt upon the ground, that cannot be gathered up again; and God doth not accept the person of any. And Job 30.13. I know thou wilt bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all living. And it is very clear, Eccles. 8.8. There is no man that hath power over the spirit to retain the spirit, neither hath he any power in the day of death; and there is no dis∣charge in that war, neither shal wickedness deliver those that are given to it. It is also clear, Heb 9.27. It is appointed unto all men once to die. So it is most clear that we must dye. I remember of one Philip King of Macedonia, who had one substitute for this very end, to cry at his chamber-door every morning, Memento mori, memento mori, momento mori: Remember thou art to dye. And it is re∣ported to have been the practise of the Nobles of Greece, that in the day wherein their Emperor was crowned, that they presented a marble ston
unto him, and he was enquired after what fashion he would have his Tomb-stone made? Which practise speak this unto us, that although these were most destitute of the light of the Scriptures, they were very mindful of death. Believe me, death may surprise us before we be aware: for it is most certain that we must dye; but there is no∣thing more uncertain then the way how, and the time when we shal dye. Death will surprise some, as it did Abel, in the open field, Gen. 4.8. Death will surprise some, as it did Eglon, in his parlour, Judges 3.21. And death will surprise some, as it did Saul and Jona∣than, in the flight, 1 Sam. 31. Now in speaking unto this point, I shal first speak a little to those advantages which attend those that live within continual fight of death. Secondly, I shal give you some considerations to press you to prepare for death. Thirdly, I shal give you some directions to help you to prepare for death. And then we shal proceed unto the se∣cond point of doctrine which we observed from the Text, and shal speak a few things from it unto you, and so come to a close for this time. First then, we conceive there are these seven ad∣vantages which attend those who live within the continual sight of this truth, that they must dye. First, the faith of approaching death, will make a soul exceeding diligent in duty: This was our blessed Lords Divinity, John 9.4. I must work the work of him that sent me, while it is day: the night meth when no man can work: That i, death is
approaching, therefore I must work. It is clear also, 2 Pet. 1.12. compared with verse 14. In the 12. verse, Peter is exceeding diligent in his duty, and the ground of his diligence is in the 14. verse: Knowing that shortly I must put off this my taber∣nacle, &c. Yea, it is even the Epicures argument, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shal dye. And should not the Christian much more cry out, Let me watch, and pray, for to morrow I may dye. I say, if the Epicures did make use of that no∣tion, to make them vigorous in the pursuit of their pleasures; O how much more should a Christian improve it, for making him vigorous in the pur∣suit of his duty? Therefore, I say unto you all, O! be diligent, for your night is drawing near. O Christians, and expectants of heaven, are you not afraid lest you be nighted before you have walked the half of your journey? For if you be nighted on your journey to Heaven, before you come to the end of your race, there is no retiring place whereunto you may turn aside to lodge; therefore, O work, work, work, while it is day; for behold death is approaching, and then shal we all be called to an account. 2. The faith of approaching death will make a Christian exceeding active in his duty: he will not only be diligent, but also exceeding serious and zealous in the exercise of his duty: This is clear from that notable exhortation, Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might: and the reason is, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
whither thou goest. Wherefore, O be active while you are alive; for you shal never work any more after you are dead: and if ye leave but one work undone, there is no doing of it after death: There is no work, saith Solomon, in the grave, therefore, O be active. 3. The faith of this truth, that we must all dye, will help a Christian to be exceeding mortified to the things of a present World. Oh, covetous men and women! would you shake hands with cold Death but once every morning, I should defie you to pursue the World so much as you do. Paul was much in the meditation of his change, which made him, 2 Cor. 4.18. to overlook those things that are temporary: VVhile we look not, saith he, to the things that are seen, which are temporal; but to the things which are not seen, which are eternal. Therefore chap. 5.1. Knowing that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens; therefore in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be cloathed upon with our house which is from Heaven. What aileth you, Paul, might one have laid, may you not take a look of the World? No, saith he, for I know that if this earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, I have a house with God, not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens. That is, I know that ere long the pins of my Tabernacle will be loosed, and it will fall down about my ears, therefore I must look for another dwelling house. And 1 Cor. 7.24. The fashion of this world passeth away; there∣fore,
saith he, verse 32. I would have you without carefulness, caring to please the Lord. And Phil. 4.2. Let your moderation be known to all men; the Lord is at hand. As if he had said, death is ap∣proaching, and at hand; therefore, I intreat you, be sober. But I think many of us will be found, like Saul hid amongst the stuff; that is, we will be lying amongst the midst of the pleasures of this passing World. But I say to thee who art such an one, that death will break the strings of thy harp, and thy musick will quickly cease. O! but death will make thee have a low esteem of the World. O! blessed is the person who hath those thoughts of the World all along his way, which he shal have of it at his death! Have not the most cursed wretches been forced to cry out: Oh! I would give ten thousand worlds for Christ? Have not some persons (who have had the Moon upon their head, and that have made their belly their God) being forced to cry forth at death: O cursed person that I am, that ever I made the world my God! Alace, that I contented my self with the World! Therefore, I say unto thee who art such an one, O! stay thy pursuit after the World, for death is approaching, that will cause all thy world∣ly comforts to evanish. 4. When a Christian believeth this truth, that he must dye, it will be an exceeding great restraint to keep him from sinning, as is clear, Job 31.13. compared with verse 14. where Job reckoning over many good deeds done by him∣self,
saith: What then shal I do, when God riseth up? And when he visiteth, what shal I answer him? As if he had said, Sirs, mistake me not, I am not boasting much of my self, for I could not have done otherwise; else what should I do when God riseth up: How could I answer to God, if I had done otherwise? I think it were a notable pra∣ctise for each of you, when temptations begin to assault you, to say: O temptation! what shal I an∣swer to God when he riseth up to reprove me, if I should yeeld unto thee. Likewise Eccles. 11.9. where Solomon disswading young men to pursue after va∣nity, bringeth this as a reason: Know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee to judge∣ment? Therefore, I say unto thee who art often tempted to sin, let death and reckoning with God be still in thy sight, and I defie thee then to em∣brace half so many temptations as now thou dost. I intreat you, to answer all your temptations with that one word: What shal I do, when he riseth up? And what shal I answer, when he visiteth me? 5. When a Christian liveth within the sight of this truth, that he shal once see death, it shal make him exceeding patient under every cross wherewith he meets: Such a Christian will hardly meet with a cross, but he will quiet him∣self with this; Death will put me beyond this cross: This is but a cloud that will quickly pass away. And for this cause did David so compo∣sedly put up that desire, Psalm 39.4. Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days. He was sure that the knowledge of his end
would put him in a sober and patient frame. The sixth advantage is this, The faith of ap∣proaching death, will teach the person that hath it, to study saving wisdom; this is clear Psalm 90.12. where David putteth up this request: So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. As if he had said, I will never think my self wise, till I know that blessed piece of Aithmetick, How to number my days. I would desire every one of you all, to think with your selves every morning when you arise. Now we are an hour nearer unto eternity then we were be∣fore: and at the end of every hour, Now we are a day nearer unto eternity, then we were before. I say, think often, yea always thus, We were never so near death as we are now; for oh! are we not all nearer to eternity to day, then we were ye sterday? The seventh advantage attending the faith of approaching death, is this, That it will make a Christian very careful in preparing for death: it is impossible for one to believe really that death is approaching, and not prepare for it. Say what you will, if you be not careful in preparing for death, you have not the solide faith of this truth, that you shal dye. Believe me, it is not every one that thinketh he believeth this truth, that believeth it indeed. And, O how dreadful is it for an unprepared man to meet with death? He desireth not to dye; yea, he would give a World for his life; but dye he must, whether he will
or not; for death will not be requested to spare a little when he cometh: and therefore, I say unto you: Set your house in order, for you shal surely dye. Old men and women, Set your house in order, for surely ye must dye. Young men and women, Set your house in order, for to morrow ye may dye, and be cut off in the flower of your age. Think not that there are any who can sell time: for I say, you shal never get time sold unto you. Alace! I feat the most part of persons that dye now, death fin∣deth them at unawares: for indeed the persons that dye amongst us, when we come to visite them, we may give you a full account of them; for we think they are all comprehended under these four sorts. First, when we go to visite some persons on their death bed, they are like unto Nabal, their heart is dying and sinking, like unto a stone within them: they are no more affected with death, then if it were a fancy. Alace, for the great stupidity that hath overtaken many! Therefore, I intreat you, delay not your repentance till death, lest the Lord take away your wit, so that you cannot then repent, for your senslesness and stupide frame of spirit. A second sort we find in a presumptuous frame, saying, They have had a good hope all their days, and they will not quite it now: they will go down to the grave with their hope in their right hand, or rather they will go down to the grave with a lye in their right hand: they live in a persump∣tuous
frame, and they dye in the same delusion: for when we tell them that by all probability they are going down to hell: they answer, God forbid! I was all my time a very honest man, or woman. But I love not that confession; for there are many such honest men and women in hell this day. The third sort we find have some convictions, that they have been playing the fool all their days; but we can get them no further: I shal only say to such, To go down to the Grave with con∣victions in their breast, not making use of Christ, is to go down to hell with a candle in their hand, to let them see the way: and truly the greater part that dye, dye in this manner. Fourthly, there are some whom we find in a self-righteous frame, trusting upon the covenant of works, and their own merits, and trusting by these to go to heaven; yet neglecting the offer of Christs righteousness: But, alace! we find not one of a thousand in this frame, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, that is best of all. And scarce∣ly do we find any in such a frame, O wretched man that I am! who shal deliver me from the body of this death? Therefore I say unto you who are all here; O will you mind death before it take hold on you! Oh, mind your work now! for you will find that death shal be work enough for it self, though you leave no work till then. The eighth advantage that attendeth the Chri∣stian believing this truth, that once he must dye, is this; Death will not be so terrible to him; as it
is to many when it cometh. What think you, ma∣keth death a King of terrors? What maketh many to shake like the leaf of a tree, when they are summoned to appear before Gods Tribunal? It is even because of this, they have not been thin∣king on death before it came, so as to prepare for it: and I fear many in this place may be feared for death; and that when it cometh to them, they will say unto death, as Achab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy! Surely, death will take you, and bring you to the Judgement-seat of Christ: therefore study by all means to think of∣ren upon it, and make ready for it; for, believe me, death is a very big word; for it will once make you stand with horror in your souls, if your peace be not made up with God. I know not a more dreadful dispensation, then death and a guilty conscience meeting together. The second thing that I shal speak unto from the first observation, viz. That it is a most certain and infallible truth, that all persons shal once see death, shal be to give some good considerations for pressing you to prepare for death. The first consideration is this, that to dye well, and in the Lord, is a most difficult work; therefore I intreat you, prepare for death. It is a difficult work to communicate aright: it is a difficult work to pray aright; and it is a difficult work to confer aright. But I must tell you, it is a more difficult work to dye aright, then any of these: it is true, it is more difficult to communicate aright, then to
pray aright; yet it is much more difficult to dye aright, then to communicate aright; for it is a most difficult work to dye in the Lord. Death will put the most accurate Christian that is here to a wonderful search; and therefore I will tell you nine things that death will try in thee. 1. Death will try both the reality and strength of thy faith; it may be easy for thee to keep up faith under many difficulties, but death shal put thy faith to the greatest stress that ever it did meet with. Yea, know this, that the faith of the strongest believer may get, and ordinarily doth get, a set at death, the like whereof it never got before; therefore pre∣pare for death. 2. Death will try thy love to God; some persons pretend much love to him, but death will propose this question to such a person, Lovest thou him more then these? Lovest thou him more then thy wife? More then thy house? More then thy friends? But your unwillingness to dye, giveth us much ground to fear that many have little love to Christ, but much to the World, and so dare not answer the question, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. 3. Death will try thy enjoyments; some of you may be ready to think that you meet with many enjoyments, so that you might reckon, as you think, to fourty enjoyments, and sweet out∣lettings; but beware that death bring them not down to twenty. I have known some who thought they had met fourty times with God; but when death came, it made them take down the count to the half: therefore seeing death will try the
reality of thine enjoyments, O prepare for it. 4. Death will try thy patience: thou mayest seem to have much patience now, but when death co∣meth (thou art put to dye) it will put thy patience to a great tryal; therefore prepare for it. 5. Death will try the reality of thy duties, yea, even those duties wherein thou hadst most satisfaction, as thy communicating aright in such a place, thou hopest that is sure; thy reading the Scripture at such a time aright, thou hopest that is sure; thou prayedst at such a time aright, and hopest that is sure, thou meditatest in such a place aright, and thou hopest that is sure. But, believe me, death may make thee change thy thoughts: for there are some persons who have communicated and prayed, &c. as right as any in this genera∣tion, who, for all that, will not find six duties wherein they can find satisfaction at death. 6. Death will exceedingly try thy sincerity when it cometh: An hypocrite may go all along his whole way undiscovered, yet death may bring him to light, and make it appear what a man he is. 7. Death will discover unto thee hid and secret sins, of which thou never had a thought before; yea, albeit thou thoughtest these had been forgot∣ten, death will let thee see them standing between thee and the light of his countenance. 8. Death will accurately try thy mortification: Some think they have come a great length in mortification; but, believe me, death will try it, and put it to the touch-stone. 9. Death will try thy hope whe∣ther
it be real or not. I shal only say this, that all the other graces must low their sails to faith, and so it is, faith must carry us thorow, being that last triumphing grace which must fit the field for us, when all the other graces will faint and ly by. It is faith that must enter us fairly within the bor∣ders of eternity. It is faith must gainstand all the temptations of death; yea, all the other graces, as it were, stand by, and see faith strike the last stroke in this war. The second consideration to press you to mind death, is this: That ye are to dye but once. O! labor to do that well which you are to do but once, and the wrong doing of which can never be helped: If ye pray not aright, ye may get that mended; and if ye communicate not aright, ye may get that also mended: but, alace! if ye dye not aright, there is no mending of that: There∣fore, O prepare for death, that ye may dye well, seeing ye are to dye but once. The third consideration to press you to mind death, is this: That ye are pronounced blessed who dye in the Lord, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord. O let that provoke you to prepare for death, that so ye may dye in the Lord, that is the only way to make you eternally happy. I confess, it is a question difficult to deter∣mine, whether it be more difficult to dye well, or to live well? I shal not answer it, but rather desire you to study both. The fourth consideration to press you to pre∣pare for death, is this; viz. That though thou
put all thy work by thy hand before death, ye shalt thou find that death shal have work enough for it self, yea as much as thou shalt get done. It will then be much for thee to win to patience, it will be much for thee to win to the sight of thy justification, and it will then be much for thee to win to assurance: O then, is it not needful for thee to put all thy work by thy hand before thy latter end come? Wherefore I may say to you, as Moses said in his Song, Deuter. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end! O that ye had this piece of divine wisdom! I pray you, consider that sad word, Lam 1.19. She remembered not her last end: and what of it? Therefore she came down wonderfully. So will the down-coming of many in this generation be wonderful, who consider not their last end. The fifth consideration for pressing you to pre∣pare for death, is this, viz. That their labor shal end, but their works shal not be forgotten, as is clear from that fore-cited place, Rev. 14.13. They rest from their labors, and their works follow them; and is not that a glorious advantage? The sixth consideration to press you to prepare for death, is this, viz. That death may come up∣on you ere ye be aware: ye know not but death may surprise you this night, before ye go home to your houses: and therefore let that press you to study a constant preparation for death. The seventh consideration to press you to pre∣pare for death, is this, viz. That as death leaveth
you, so will Judgement find you: If death shal leave you strangers to Christ, ye shal appear be∣fore his Judgement-seat strangers unto him, therefore, I intreat you all, to prepare for it. I think that noble practise of Paul, exceeding wor∣thy of imitation, 1 Cor. 15.31. I dye daily, which I think doth comprehend these three things. 1. That Paul had death always in his sight. 2. It comprehendeth this, that he labored to keep such a frame as that every moment he should be ready to dye, so that whensoever death should put the summonds in his hand, he should be content to answer. 3. It comprehendeth this, that he labored to lay aside and remove all things out of the way, that might detain him from laying down his ta∣bernacle. O saith Paul, I labor so to clear my self of all hinderances, as that when ever I shal be summoned to remove out of time, I may willingly lay down my life. Therefore I would ask you this question, viz. When did you make your last te∣stament? I think it were suitable for us to be re∣newing our latter-will every day, for in so doing, Paul made an excellent testament, the better of which none that died since have made, 2 Tim. 4.7.8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; these are very sweet articles: and then he addeth, Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, that the Lord the righteous Judge shal give me at that day. And think ye not that very sweet that he would leave something unto you in Christs Name? viz. And not for me only, but for all them that
wait for his appearance. Now I come to the third thing proposed, viz. To give some directions for helping you to prepare for death. Direct. 1. I intreat you, be much in prepara∣tion for death every day: for it is even a prepa∣ration for heaven, to be taking a fight of your grave and latter end every day. Direct. 2. I intreat you, be much in these du∣ties. First, in self-examination, that your comp may be clear with God; for many a ragged compt shal we have when death and we shal meet. Se∣condly, be much in the exercise of repentance, that so ye may have every fault and corruption in you mourned for, before death and you meet. Thirdly, be much in the exercise of faith, making your calling and election sure. Fourthly, be much in the exercise of mortification, and that will help you to keep a loose grip, not only of the World, but also of your other idols: and if ye be much in these, ye shall undoubtedly be prepared for death. Direct. 3. Be much in minding the excellent things of heaven: a Christian that would be pre∣pared for death, should have all his thoughts and conversation there. I think it would be an excel∣lent help, in preparation for death, to take a sight of the crown every day. Direct. 4. Labor always to keep a good con∣science, void of offence toward God and man. I say, labor to keep thy conscience clear, and that shal be a continual feast unto thee. Direct. 5. Slight not any known duty, do not
crucify any conviction, neither break any resolu∣tion: put these three together, and that will ex∣ceedingly help you to prepare for death: I say, see that ye adventure not to slight any known duty: see that ye adventure not to crucify any convi∣ction: and see that ye adventure not to break your resolutions. Now we come to the second thing which we observed from the words, viz. That this truth, that we shal once see death, is not much believed by many of us: and to make this ap∣pear, we shal only give some evidences unto you, to prove that we are not as yet prepared for death. 1. Evidence. Doth not the unspeakable stupi∣dity that hath overtaken many, say, that we are not people prepared for death? Alace! many of us would find our selves in a most stupid temper, if we were presently to dye: for many of us are no more moved with the threatnings and terrors of God, then if they did not belong unto us: and this saith, We are not as yet prepared for death. 2. Evid. That we are not prepared for death, in our pursuing so much after the vain and pas∣sing delights of a present World. Many of us rise up early, and go to bed late at night, and eat the bread of sorrow all the day, and load themselves with thick clay. And I am sure, that such a per∣son (being night and day taken up with the World) is not prepared for death. I remember a word recorded of such a wretched one who was
exceeding rich; said he, I would give so many thousands of money, if death would but give m one day; yet he got it not. And, O how sud∣denly will death surprise many of you, as it did him. 3. Evid. Which speaketh forth our unprepa∣redness for death, is our impatience under every petty cross that we meet with: for the prepa∣red Christian will be patient under very sharp crosses. 4. Evid. That we are not prepared, is our not endeavouring to live within sight of our interest in God: Oh, if we were prepared for death, durst we live in so much incertainty of our interest in God, and of our assurance of heaven! 5. Evid. Some of us can let our idols lye in our breast six years without repentance, and will ne∣ver study to mortify them, nor repent for them; and surely such are not prepared for death. Now I intreat you seriously, to mind what hath been said, and that ye may the more seriously think upon it, I will tell you some material challenges, that your conscience at death will present unto you; therefore take heed that ye may know how ye will answer. 1. Challenge, Is the slighting of much precious time, and sinning away the precious offers of grace. O what will ye answer to that challenge when death shal present it to you! Death will say (or rather thine own conscience at death) what ailed thee to sin so many hours, without either praying, reading, or meditating? Now
have ye any thing to answer when death shal present this challenge to you? I intreat you, pre∣meditate what ye will say: I intreat you, pre∣vent death by presenting it first seriously to your selves. 2. Challenge. That death will present unto you, will be for the killing of many precious convicti∣ons which ye have had. What will each of you answer at death, when your conscience proposeth this challenge unto you? Thou metst with such a challenge at such a time, and went home and crucified it. And at another time thou metst with another challenge, and went home and crucified it. These challenges will be laid home to thy door, therefore think on them. 3. Challenge. Death will charge you for a for∣mal hypocritical way of going about duties: I say your conscience will then tell you, that ye went to such a communion with a selfish end; and  another time, ye prayed hypocritically and for∣mally: And what will ye have to answer when ye meet with these challenges? I confess, I know not what ye can answer to these. But I charge you, be thinking what ye will answer: for it may be that these convictions shall ly on your consciences, that even this day you have heard two searching Sermons, and did meet with some convictions, but made no good use of them; yea, nd it may be ye did sleep all that time. O! hat will ye answer, when it will be said to you,  went to such a Sermon, and sleeped all the one: and ye went to such a Communion, but
had no other end before your eyes, but to be see of men? I intreat you, consider presently wh you will answer to these. 4. Challenge. Will be for your breaking many precious resolutions. It will be said to some of you, that at the Communion in this place, ye took on vows, and did break them: I am sure y connot question the Justice of this challenge therefore see what ye will answer. 5. Challenge. Ye slighted many precious offers of the Gospel. O men and women in this City! what will ye answer to this? I was often exhor∣ted to take Christ, and yet would never take him. What will conscience say to that, when death shal table it before you? I tell you what you must then answer: O cursed I, that ever re∣fused Christ in the Gospel! And ye shal then b confounded, because this is your sin. Believe me, there was never an offer of this everlasting Gospel, and of Christ in it, made unto you, that shal not at death (before or after it) be brought to your remembrance. And, O how sad and doleful will it be to you, when Christ shal open the Book where your sins are written, and begin with the sin of slighting the great Salvation! Thus I invited you, when you were twelve years old, but ye would not come. I invited you when you were thirty years old, but ye would not come. I invited you when you were sixty years old, and ye would not come. What will ye answer to this? Have ye any thing to say? Or must ye not stand speechless before your Judge, when
he shall put home this challenge unto you? Therefore think seriously upon it, how ye will answer to it. 6. Challenge. Will be for your sinning often∣times against light: And, O how painful and sad a challenge will that be at the day of death, when it will be said, Thou sinned with a witness in thy bosom, that thou wast doing wrong. Thy con∣science will say, Oftentimes I did tell thee this is sinful, yet wouldest thou not abstain from it: And what will ye answer to this? 7. Challenge. Oftentimes ye sinned upon very small temptations, and what will ye answer to that? Must ye not then confess it, and say, Oh, how often have I deserted Christ, and embraced my idols upon a small temptation! Now, I in∣treat you, be thinking what ye will answer to these seven most material challenges, which certainly shal be presented to you at death. I assure you, ye must either answer all your challenges in Christ, else ye will not get them well answered: There∣fore, I would exhort you, to embrace the Gospel, and Christ in it; that so let death propose never so many challenges unto you, ye may answer them all, as David did, viz. God hath made with me an everlasting covenant: And that will answer all your challenges: Though my house be not so with God, yet I have the everlasting covenant to il my salvation upon. Now to press you to make use of Christ, I shal give you these four considerations.
Consideration 1. If ye embrace not Christ now, death will be very unpleasant to you. O what else can comfort thee, when going through the region of death, but this, I am Christs, I am Christs? Is there any other thing can comfort thee in that day, but only this, I am Christs and he is mine? Consideration 2. If ye embrace not Christ and the great Salvation now, it will be an hundred to one if ever ye get time or liberty to do it, when ye are going to dye. For although many delay their closing with Christ till death, yet scarcely one of a hundred getteth favor to grip Christ at death▪ Therefore think on it; for you will not get your mind so composed at death, as ye imagine, nor all things done, as ye suppose: therefore now em∣brace the great Salvation. Consideration 3. If ye delay your closing with Christ till death seize upon you, ye shal never be able to make up that loss. For will the dead rise and praise God? Or shal any one come from the Land of forgetfulness, to take hold upon a crucified Savior? Therefore, O will ye take him for your Salvation. Consideration 4. If ye will take Christ now, he shal be your guide when ye are going thorow the valley and shadow of death. And, O how blessed is the person that can sing that word, Psalm 48.14. This is my God, he will be my guide even unto death. If ye can sing that pleasant song, O how may ye be comforted when your eye-strings shal begin to
break! O how happy is he who can say, Though I walk thorow the shadow of death, yet will I fear no ill; for I know that the Lord is with me! Now this is the acceptable day, and the year of Salvation: therefore, do not delay, but embrace Christ, lest death surprise you ere ye be aware, and so the ac∣ceptable day be lost. But unto these who think they may delay till death, I say, surely there are many damned Atheists in hell that (sometimes) did think as ye think, I will make all wrongs right when death and I shal meet: I hope that three days repentance will satisfy for all my wrongs; for I am sure there are many in hell, who did never get three days to think upon their former wayes. Therefore, O come, come and embrace Christ presently. Now are ye all perswaded of this truth, that ye shal once see death? Then study a ten∣der walking; for, believe me, there are many of us that shal go thorow death with many bruised bones, because of untender walking before God: We know it is not the multitude of words can perswade you to embrace Christ, for many of you never minded the thing; but believe me, death will preach these things unto you in a more terri∣ble manner then we can do at this time. There∣fore I say to each of you, O prepare to meet thy God, for if death find you in an estranged estate from God, I defie the Angels in Heaven to free you out of that estate; and the day is coming, wherein thou shalt cry out, O slighter of the great Salvation that I am, I would give ten thousand
worlds for one Sermon again that I once he wherein Christ was freely offered to me, when th shalt be tormented without hope of remedy therefore while it is to day harden not your heart for your late wishes shal not be granted when are gone, if ye make not haste. O therefore has haste in time, and come out from the land of your c∣ptivity, and from the house of your bondage, a take Christ for your Redeemer, the guide of yo youth and old age. Now unto him who can le you thorow all these steps betwixt you and He∣ven, be eternal praise. Amen. FINIS.
